
PCCN
Certification 
Review
Ann J. Brorsen, RN, MSN, PHN, CCRN, CEN
Keri R. Rogelet, RN, MSN, MBA/HCM, CCRN, RNC-NIC
T H I R D  E D I T I O N

Jones & Bartlett Learning books and products are available through most bookstores and online booksellers. To contact Jones & 
Bartlett Learning directly, call 800-832-0034, fax 978-443-8000, or visit our website, www.jblearning.com.
Copyright © 2018 by Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC, an Ascend Learning Company
All rights reserved. No part of the material protected by this copyright may be reproduced or utilized in any form, electronic or 
mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system, without written permis­
sion from the copyright owner.
The content, statements, views, and opinions herein are the sole expression of the respective authors and not that of Jones & 
Bartlett Learning, LLC. Reference herein to any specific commercial product, process, or service by trade name, trademark, 
manufacturer, or otherwise does not constitute or imply its endorsement or recommendation by Jones & Bartlett Learning, 
LLC and such reference shall not be used for advertising or product endorsement purposes. All trademarks displayed are the 
trademarks of the parties noted herein. PCCN Certification Review, Third Edition is an independent publication and has not been 
authorized, sponsored, or otherwise approved by the owners of the trademarks or service marks referenced in this product.
There may be images in this book that feature models; these models do not necessarily endorse, represent, or participate in 
the activities represented in the images. Any screenshots in this product are for educational and instructive purposes only. 
Any individuals and scenarios featured in the case studies throughout this product may be real or fictitious, but are used for 
instructional purposes only.
The authors, editor, and publisher have made every effort to provide accurate information. However, they are not responsible 
for errors, omissions, or for any outcomes related to the use of the contents of this book and take no responsibility for the use of 
the products and procedures described. Treatments and side effects described in this book may not be applicable to all people; 
likewise, some people may require a dose or experience a side effect that is not described herein. Drugs and medical devices are 
discussed that may have limited availability controlled by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for use only in a research 
study or clinical trial. Research, clinical practice, and government regulations often change the accepted standard in this field. 
When consideration is being given to use of any drug in the clinical setting, the health care provider or reader is responsible for 
determining FDA status of the drug, reading the package insert, and reviewing prescribing information for the most up-to-date 
recommendations on dose, precautions, and contraindications, and determining the appropriate usage for the product. This 
is especially important in the case of drugs that are new or seldom used.
13409-4
Production Credits
World Headquarters
Jones & Bartlett Learning
5 Wall Street
Burlington, MA 01803
978-443-5000
info@jblearning.com
www.jblearning.com
VP, Executive Publisher: David D. Cella
Executive Editor: Amanda Martin
Acquisitions Editor: Teresa Reilly
Editorial Assistant: Emma Huggard
Director of Vendor Management: Amy Rose
Marketing Communications Manager: Katie Hennessy
Product Fulfillment Manager: Wendy Kilborn
Composition and Project Management: S4Carlisle 
Publishing Services
Cover Design: Michael O’Donnell
Rights & Media Specialist: Wes DeShano
Media Development Editor: Troy Liston
Cover Image: © Chen Ping Hung/Shutterstock
Printing and Binding: Edwards Brothers Malloy
Cover Printing: Edwards Brothers Malloy
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Brorsen, Ann J., author. | Rogelet, Keri R., author.
Title: PCCN certification review/Ann J. Brorsen, Keri R. Rogelet.
Description: Third edition. | Burlington, MA: Jones & Bartlett Learning,
   [2018] | Includes bibliographical references.
Identifiers: LCCN 2016031312 | ISBN 9781284111187 (pbk.)
Subjects: | MESH: Critical Care | Nursing Care | Critical Illness--nursing |
   Nursing Assessment | Examination Questions
Classification: LCC RC86.9 | NLM WY 18.2 | DDC 616.02/8076--dc23 LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2016031312
6048
Printed in the United States of America
20  19  18  17  16     10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1
Substantial discounts on bulk quantities of Jones & Bartlett Learning publications are available to corporations, professional 
associations, and other qualified organizations. For details and specific discount information, contact the special sales de­
partment at Jones & Bartlett Learning via the above contact information or send an email to specialsales@jblearning.com.

Contents
About the Authors. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . iv
Contributors. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . v
Reviewers. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . vi
Acknowledgments. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . vii
Preface . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . viii
Section 1:	
History of the PCCN Credential. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Section 2:	
Registering for the PCCN Certification Exam. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . 3
Section 3:	
Test-Taking Strategies. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
Section 4:	
Cardiovascular. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Section 5:	
Pulmonary. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89
Section 6:	
Endocrine. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 129
Section 7:	
Hematology/Immunology. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 153
Section 8:	
Neurology. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 183
Section 9:	
Gastrointestinal. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 211
Section 10:	
Renal. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 237
Section 11:	
Multisystem. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 269
Section 12:	
Behavioral . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 311
Section 13:	
References. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 345
❙
  iii 
❙

Ann J. Brorsen, RN, MSN, PHN, CCRN, CEN
Ann is a nationally known speaker and has presented certification review courses for 
the PCCN, Adult and Pediatric CCRN, CEN, and trauma. She has helped thousands of 
nurses attain certification. Ann has authored multiple texts about advanced certifica­
tion and physiology. Ann is a member of Sigma Theta Tau, the American Association 
of Critical-Care Nurses, the Society of Critical Care Medicine, and the Emergency Nurses 
Association. Ann also works as a consultant for educational program development 
and management training for healthcare facilities. She presents programs as diverse as 
advanced hemodynamics to best practice models for hospital corporations. She continues 
clinical practice in the ICU, ED, and critical care transport. Ann is also currently the COO 
and Director of Clinical Applications for Pro Ed in Menifee, California.
Keri R. Rogelet, RN, MSN, MBA/HCM, CCRN, RNC-NIC
Keri has presented national programs for adult health issues, the Neonatal CCRN, 
Pediatric CCRN, and Developmental Care. Keri is a regional NRP mentor/trainer for 
the American Academy of Pediatrics and a lead instructor for the S.T.A.B.L.E. program. 
Keri’s professional associations include Sigma Theta Tau, the American Association of 
Critical-Care Nurses, and the Academy of Neonatal Nursing. In addition, she works as 
a consultant for pediatric and neonatal product applications. Keri is currently attending 
Rush University College of Nursing’s DNP Neonatal Clinical Nurse Specialist program. In 
addition to working full-time bedside, she is the CFO and Director of Clinical Development 
for Pro Ed in Menifee, California.
About the Authors
❙
  iv 
❙

Contributors
Melissa R. Christiansen, RN, MSN, NP-C, CCRN, CNRN
Melissa has over 25 years’ experience as a critical care nurse in neurological, cardiac, 
and trauma ICUs. She is currently working as a family nurse practitioner in Southern 
California. Melissa has presented programs on neurologic and neuroscience topics, adult 
critical care, and emergency nursing certification reviews, as well as courses in postan­
esthesia nursing. Melissa is a member of Sigma Theta Tau, the American Association of 
Critical-Care Nurses, the American Association of Neuroscience Nurses, and the American 
Academy of Nurse Practitioners.
Jacque E. Jackson, RN, PhD, APRN
Jacque has over 30 years of clinical nursing experience. In addition, he has been an 
educator, manager of cardiovascular and surgical ICUs, CNO, and a multi-hospital 
administrator. He has been a staunch advocate of certification for nurses and utilization 
of clinical ladders and best practice models for health care.
❙
  v 
❙

Brian N. Ingram, MD
Fairfax, Virginia
Randall C. Jackson, RN, MSN, CNS, CCRN
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
Reviewers
❙
  vi 
❙

Mary Margaret Forsythe, RN, and Nancy O. Roberts, RN
Mary Margaret and Nancy were two instructors who were ultimate professionals 
and who believed in their students and the profession of nursing. These women were 
incredible individuals and will live in the hearts of hundreds of nurses. They passed 
before their time and are desperately missed.
Karen S. Ehrat, RN, PhD
Karen saw potential in a new grad and made education a joy and a privilege. 
Her untimely death stole a piece from every soul she touched. 
A.J.B.
Damien, Minerva, & M’Leah
Angels that taught me every life touches another and remind me why I do what I do. 
K.R.R.
The Editorial Staff at Jones & Bartlett Learning
We would also like to express our gratitude to the editorial staff at Jones & Bartlett 
Learning. Thank you for years of support and expertise in publishing so that we 
can help nurses attain certification, improve patient care, and build individual and 
professional self-confidence.
•  • •
We are so grateful to all the nurses who provided suggestions for content of this book 
and to the contributors worked unselfishly and through many a long night. Thank 
you to the reviewers who gave their time, effort, and suggestions to ­enhance the 
content of this manuscript.
A.J.B. and K.R.R.
Acknowledgments
❙
  vii 
❙

Congratulations! You have embarked on a journey to achieve certification as a Progres­
sive Care nurse. Research studies have shown that simply by studying for certification, 
nurses improve patient care. Achieving certification helps you grow professionally and 
personally by increasing self-confidence and knowledge, while refining your skills.
This textbook is an invaluable resource to help you successfully pass the PCCN 
certification exam. This text is actually two books in one. This written text contains over 
1100 questions which cover the topics from the new, 2017/2018 and beyond, PCCN Test 
Plan. This new Test Plan is somewhat condensed and groups some of the major topics 
together. The questions in this text are representative of the type of questions you will 
find on the actual examination.
The current trend for item writers is to present a question in such a way as to not state 
any identifiable characteristics, such as a name, age, or gender (if possible). Any name 
or patient condition presented here is for educational purposes only. Any resemblance 
to any person, living or dead, is purely coincidental.
A brief introduction to the PCCN credential and test-taking strategies are presented 
to help you study effectively.
All of us who contributed to the content of this book are dedicated to helping you 
successfully pass this exam and achieve recognition as a progressive care nurse. Please 
feel free to contact us if you have any questions or if you would like to schedule a PCCN 
review course for your facility or group.
Ann Brorsen and Keri Rogelet
Contact: Pro Ed
Website: www.forproed.com
Email: info@forproed.com
Facebook: Pro Ed Healthcare Education
Preface
❙
  viii 
❙

❙
  1 
❙
Section 1
History of the PCCN Credential
Traditionally, nurses have worked in a variety of roles and environments. For most of the 
20th century, when nurses graduated from their programs, they had spent many hours 
in clinical situations and were prepared to practice in any area. Nursing eventually had 
to adjust from the general practitioner to a nurse who would concentrate practice in one 
area. Nurses worked in emergency rooms, operating rooms, recovery rooms, obstetrics, 
and medical–surgical units. Only those nurses who worked in operating rooms or who 
administered anesthesia were considered specialized. With the advent of emerging technol­
ogy, the post-World War II population boom, and a trend toward increasingly more acute 
patients, nursing and hospitals adjusted by placing patients in more sub specialized areas.
One critical issue that arose in the 20th century related to patients with poliomyelitis, 
who were increasing both in number and special needs. The “iron lung” had been around 
for years. In the 1930s, the machine cost $1,500, which was also the median cost for a 
home at that time. Patients who could afford such treatment began to recover, only to 
develop sequelae that required specialized care. Tilt beds and hot pack treatments were 
initiated. At one time, even curare was used to combat the severe muscle spasms suffered 
by polio victims. All of these treatments required time and resources, including larger 
numbers of nurses.
In 1931, the American Association of Nurse Anesthetist (no “s” on the end) formed. 
On June 4, 1945, the organization held the first-ever certification examination for a 
nursing specialty. In 1952, the first accredited program for nurse anesthetists was started.
In 1955, Jonas Salk announced the discovery of a vaccine for polio. The vaccine 
would help prevent spread of the disease, but thousands of victims still required care. 
Technology in general was improving and becoming more broadly available. Although 
the first EKG machines were available in the United States as early as 1909, they were 
not widely used until the late 1950s.
In the 1960s, many patients required around-the-clock specialized care that required 
resources and practitioners who were experts or who had a great deal of experience with 
the particular condition or disease process. Veterans of previous wars and the escalating 
Vietnam War required increasingly more medical resources. Hospitals began placing 
cardiac, trauma, burn, and acute medical patients in areas of the hospital designated 
as providing more “intensive” care. Patient survival rates improved, so the numbers of 
specialized areas increased.
In 1967, nurses from Nashville Baptist Hospital were frustrated at the lack of 
educational opportunities for continuing education for intensive care nurses, so they 
sent inquiries to other nurses to see if interest existed to form an association to provide 
education to other intensive care nurses. At that time, most of the ICUs served cardiac 
patients. A year later, more than 400 nurses attended a symposium and affirmed the 
need for an organization. In 1969, the American Association of Cardiovascular Nurses 
was formed. In 1971, the name was changed to the American Association of Critical Care 
Nurses (AACN) in recognition of the broad area covered by critical care.

2  ❙  Section 1
AACN is now the largest specialty nursing organization in the world. In 1975, the 
AACN Certification Corporation was established and began offering the CCRN examina­
tion. The need for a separate examination for acute care nurses was recognized and the 
PCCN examination was developed and given in 2004 for the first time at the National 
Teaching Institute in Orlando, Florida.
We invite you to visit the AACN website at http://www.aacn.org to learn more about 
the PCCN credential. Thousands of nurses have successfully attained the PCCN credential 
and we are here to help you become successful. The next section will explain the registra­
tion procedure for the examination. You can do it!
REFERENCES
American Association of Critical-Care Nurses [AACN]. (2016). Homepage. Retrieved from http://
www.aacn.org
American Association of Critical-Care Nurses [AACN]. (2016). History of AACN. Retrieved from http://
www.aacn.org/WD/publishing/content/pressroom/historyofaacn.content?menu=AboutUs
Smithsonian National Museum of American History. (n.d.). Polio: How polio changed us. Retrieved 
from http://americanhistory.si.edu/polio/howpolio/index.htm 
http://www.anesthesia-nursing.com/wina.html

❙
  3 
❙
Section 2
Registering for the PCCN Certification Exam
We have included this section to help simplify the registration process for the PCCN exam.
Please note that you do not have to be a member of the American Association of 
Critical Care Nurses to take this examination. However, at this time there is a discount 
for members.
First, go to http://www.AACN.org.
Click on “Certification” then “Select Your Program”. On the next page, select PCCN 
under “Specialty Certifications”. 
Next, select “Initial PCCN Certification” The site will guide you to any topic for the 
PCCN.
Make certain you download the information in the Handbook. Pay close attention 
to the Test Plan - it is an outline of the test content.
You may register online.
After your application is accepted, you will be given the address of a testing center 
nearest you, based on your zip code. You do not have to take your exam there. Many 
nurses have traveled to other states to take the exam. You simply have to take the initia­
tive and set up your appointment at the testing center of your choice.
Make sure to follow all directions from the testing center and arrive early. You can 
do this!


❙
  5 
❙
Section 3
Test-Taking Strategies
When preparing for the PCCN exam, the first thing to do is be absolutely honest with 
yourself about how you study. If you have good study habits and plenty of time, you are 
very fortunate. If you are a procrastinator, studying a little bit at a time might help. Nurses 
have to juggle so many roles that take up their time: parent, child, employee, student, 
teacher, and so on. One of the biggest struggles is simply finding the time and a place to 
study. Discovering your learning style will help you find a better way to absorb informa­
tion. Three types of learners are commonly identified: visual, auditory, and kinesthetic. 
There is no perfect strategy for learning because every person is unique. Not everyone 
has a single style of learning; you may use a mix of styles depending on your situation.
Visual learners learn better from reading and writing than from hearing and talking 
about information. Background noise, such as music or television, is distracting to these 
types of learners. Finding a quiet space is a problem for some people. You may have to 
stay awake after family members have gone to bed. Flashcards often work, and some 
people use colored markers to highlight important information.
Auditory learners learn information effectively by listening and talking. Playing 
music, listening to audiotapes, or being part of a study group often works.
Kinesthetic learners prefer to learn via a “hands-on” approach. Nurses often learn 
this way because we have to listen to lectures and then demonstrate skills. This approach 
focuses on the use of models, manikins, or patients and works well for many healthcare 
providers. Kinesthetic people are often “antsy” and cannot sit still for long periods of time, 
so lectures may be difficult for them without frequent breaks. If you are a kinesthetic 
learner, some of the things that might help while studying include taking frequent breaks, 
walking around, or riding a stationary cycle.
No matter what your personal learning style, your test-taking skills can be improved. 
How? Practice! That is why this book was written in a question-and-answer format. Keep 
practicing the questions until you can answer at least 80% correctly. Research has shown 
that two-thirds of study time should be spent taking sample tests and only one-third of 
study time should be spent reviewing content.
Studying, like regular exercise, is good for the brain. As nurses, we must always keep 
abreast of the professional literature and spend time studying to keep our knowledge 
and skills up-to-date. In addition, many states require continuing education to renew a 
professional license. Anything worthwhile takes time, effort, and sacrifice.
There is no way around studying for this certification. There are no shortcuts! If you 
have been out of school for a while, don’t despair! It may be slow going at first, so take 
things a little at a time. Just like going to the gym, you should make a plan to study 
in one particular place and at the same time, if possible. This is your space and your 
time—claim it. Have all your books, tapes, and other study materials handy. If you need 
snack food, make sure it is not all sugar and include some salty food. Caffeine tends to 
make people jittery, but if you need it, it may be right for you.

6  ❙  Section 3
The PCCN Test Plan is a blueprint of the exam’s content. The major sections are 
broken down into subheadings and topics. If you study only a little at a time, you will be 
fine. One day you may feel like studying right-sided EKGs; the next day you may want to 
focus on chest tubes. You may download the current content outline at http://www.aacn
.org. The current content outline is not included in this book because the exam changes 
frequently; as such, you should have a copy of the current information.
If you study with a group, you can save a lot of time and effort by breaking up 
the topics for that study period and having each person present his or her topic(s) and 
provide handouts and practice questions for the rest of the group. When you can make 
up a test question about a subject, you really will be prepared. Study for short periods of 
time, say 30 to 45 minutes, and then take a break. Set small goals, and after you have 
accomplished each one, reward yourself!
EXAM CONTENT
The PCCN certification exam consists of 125 multiple-choice test questions. Twenty-five 
of those questions do not count; they are there to be validated. Every question is tried first 
to see if it is written well and if a certain percentage of people answer it correctly. At this 
point in the process, those 25 questions can still be “tweaked” for use on future exams, 
depending on how the test-takers performed on these questions.
Your results are determined by how many answers you get correct and the version of 
the examination used. Some questions are a bit more difficult than others. If you do not 
know an answer, take your best guess, because you have at least a chance of guessing 
correctly. You get points only for questions answered correctly.
STUDY TIPS
A multiple-choice test question consists of three parts: an introductory statement, a stem 
(question), and options from which you must select the correct answer. The introductory 
statement provides information about a clinical issue, pathophysiology, or a nursing 
action or duty.
Stems are worded in different ways. Some stems are in the form of a question; others 
are in the form of an incomplete statement. Additionally, a stem usually requests one of 
two types of responses: a positive response or a negative response. The questions you will 
practice from in this book may have an occasional negative stem to facilitate learning. 
There are no longer any multiple-multiple-choice questions on the exam!
Key words are important words or phrases that help focus your attention on what 
the question is asking. Examples of key words include always, most, first response, earliest, 
priority, first, on admission, common, best, least, not, immediately, and initial.
You should always be looking for a therapeutic response, as the nurse is always 
therapeutic. In other words, your initial response as a nurse is always the therapeutic 
response—you must acknowledge and validate the patient’s feelings. Communication 
skills learned in Nursing 101 are important components of successful test-taking strategies. 
More than one option may contain a therapeutic response. When in doubt, validate, 
validate, validate. Always validate feelings before you present information. A medical 
emergency would, of course, take precedence.

Test-Taking Strategies  ❙  7
Who is actually the focus of the question? You need to be able to identify this person. 
Sometimes questions are asked about a friend, a relative, or a significant other instead 
of a patient. A lot of information in the question may be deliberately distracting. Also, 
you must, when applicable, validate that person’s feelings first.
WHEN IN DOUBT
When answering questions on the examination, remember Maslow’s hierarchy of needs 
and the ABCs (airway, breathing, circulation). When these goals are met, then safety is 
the priority. After safety, the psychological needs are a priority. Assessment always comes 
before diagnosis and treatment (intervention). Learning takes place only if the learner 
is motivated.
Eliminate incorrect options. This gives you a 50% chance of guessing the correct 
answer. Here are some hints:
• 
Select the most general, all-encompassing option.
• 
Eliminate similar options or those that contain words such as “always” or “never.”
• 
If two options say essentially the same thing, then neither is correct. If three of the 
four options sound similar, choose the one that sounds different.
• 
Look for the longest option. It is usually the correct answer.
• 
Watch for grammatical inconsistencies between the stem and options.
IT’S TIME TO TAKE YOUR CERTIFICATION EXAM!
Well, you are finally ready! The night before the exam, get a good night’s sleep. Do not 
cram the night before, although that is easier said than done. Do something relaxing 
and enjoyable, like going to a movie or out to dinner. Try to avoid caffeine or any other 
stimulant. Please email or call when you pass the exam so you can be congratulated.
REFERENCES
Kobel Lamonte, M. (2007). Test-taking strategies for CNOR certification. Association of 
periOperative Registered Nurses Journal, 85(2), 315–332.
Ludwig, C. (2004). Preparing for certification: Test-taking strategies. Medical-Surgical Nursing, 
13(2), 127–128.


❙
  9 
❙
Section 4
Cardiovascular
SECTION 4: CARDIOVASCULAR QUESTIONS
1.	
When the heart begins to fail and cardiac output is insufficient, several 
neurohormonal compensatory mechanisms are activated. If the patient also 
suffers from hypertension, the patient may develop ventricular hypertrophy. The 
process of reshaping the ventricle is known as
A.	 Reduced ejection fraction
B.	 Ventricular remodeling
C.	 An autonomic anomaly
D.	 Brugada syndrome
2.	
The most common clinical symptoms of restrictive cardiomyopathy are
A.	 Thrombotic lesions, ventricular dilation, and supraventricular tachycardia
B.	 A noncompliant left ventricular septum, restricted aortic valve outflow, and dia­
stolic dysfunction
C.	 Valvular dysfunction, hypertension, and syncope
D.	 Engorged liver, orthopnea, and dyspnea
3.	
Your patient has been diagnosed with mitral valve regurgitation (insufficiency). 
As a progressive care nurse, you know a frequent cause of this condition is likely 
to be
A.	 Retrograde blood flow into the left atrium
B.	 Progressive reduction in size of the aortic valve
C.	 An underdeveloped left atrium
D.	 A dysfunction of one or more valve components
4.	
When using a temporary pulse generator, the dial that regulates the amount of 
electrical current that is measured in milliamperes (mA) and delivered to the 
heart to initiate the depolarization impulse is called the
A.	 Synchronization dial
B.	 AV interval control
C.	 Pulse width
D.	 Output dial

10  ❙  Section 4
5.	
You have just received a patient from ICU who underwent a CABG three days 
ago. On initial assessment, you note the patient has wires that exit subcostally 
to the left of the sternum. The position of these wires indicates that the wires are 
attached to the heart
A.	 In the right atrium
B.	 In the ventricles
C.	 In the left atrium
D.	 In both atria and ventricles
6.	
Your patient suffered a cardiac arrest and has achieved ROSC but is comatose 
(lacking meaningful response to verbal commands). Which of the following TTM 
interventions is recommended for this patient?
A.	 Maintain a constant temperature between 32°C and 35°C (89.6°F and 95.2°F) for at 
least 24 hours
B.	 Maintain oxygen saturation levels of at least 93%
C.	 Waveform capnography reading of 10
D.	 Transport to Cath lab immediately
7.	
While participating in a cardiac arrest on your unit, you note a colleague 
is performing chest compressions at a rate of approximately 90 per minute. 
According to the 2015 American Heart Association Guidelines for CPR and ECC 
Update, the correct rate for performing chest compressions is
A.	 80–90 per minute
B.	 80 per minute
C.	 100–120 per minute
D.	 At least 100 per minute
8.	
When performing CPR on an adult, it is optimal to target your compression depth 
from
A.	 1.5 to 2.5 inches
B.	 2 to 2.4 inches
C.	 2.5 to 3 inches
D.	 A minimum of 1.5 to 2 inches
9.	
Determine the pulse pressure for a patient who has a pulse of 78, a BP of 115/85, 
and a respiratory rate of 12.
A.	 42
B.	 37
C.	 30
D.	 103
10.	
Which of the following percentages would be considered a normal value for an 
ejection fraction (EF)?
A.	 35%
B.	 28%
C.	 42%
D.	 63%

Cardiovascular  ❙  11
11.	
Your patient exhibits ST segment depression on his EKG along with moderate, 
substernal chest pain. These findings indicate a possible
A.	 Anteroseptal MI
B.	 Myocardial ischemia
C.	 Lateral wall MI
D.	 Pericardial tamponade
12.	
Which of the following statements is true about events that occur during a 
normal cardiac cycle?
A.	 Metabolism in the heart is unchanged during diastole
B.	 Metabolism in the heart is decreased during diastole
C.	 An increase in cardiac output increases diastole
D.	 The mitral and aortic valves are open during diastole
13.	
What is the mean arterial pressure (MAP) for a patient with a blood pressure of 
134/60 and a heart rate of 70?
A.	 64
B.	 52
C.	 85
D.	 47
14.	
Which of the following statements is true regarding the cause of chronic mitral 
valve regurgitation (insufficiency)?
A.	 The left atrium dilates to accommodate the regurgitated blood volume
B.	 Chronic mitral valve insufficiency is caused by infective endocarditis
C.	 Chronic mitral valve regurgitation is caused by papillary muscle rupture
D.	 The left ventricle atrophies in patients with chronic mitral regurgitation
15.	
Phosphodiesterase inhibitors are inotropes that can also cause vasodilation and 
are referred to as inodilators. Which of the following medications is classified as 
an inodilator?
A.	 Nitroglycerin
B.	 Cardizem
C.	 Milrinone
D.	 Labetalol
16.	
Epinephrine and norepinephrine may be used in a progressive care unit to treat 
hypotension. Which of the following actions of these vasopressors will increase 
blood glucose?
A.	 Lower peripheral insulin resistance
B.	 Increase insulin secretion
C.	 Decrease lipolysis
D.	 Increase liver glycogenolysis

12  ❙  Section 4
17.	
Patients using Pradaxa may develop spinal or epidural hematomas. Which of the 
following conditions should not be a consideration for the use of Pradaxa for a 
patient undergoing a spinal procedure?
A.	 History of asthma
B.	 Use of a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory (NSAIDS)
C.	 History of a spinal deformity
D.	 Use of an indwelling epidural catheter
18.	
Aortic regurgitation is likely to result from which of the following conditions?
A.	 Left atrial enlargement
B.	 Marfan syndrome
C.	 Left ventricular dilation
D.	 Radiation therapy
19.	
Calculate the cardiac output for a patient with a heart rate of 76 and a stroke 
volume of 65 ml.
A.	 57%
B.	 4.94 L/min
C.	 1285 ml/min
D.	 2.85  Liters
20.	
Unstable angina usually associated with left anterior descending (LAD) coronary 
artery lesions is known as
A.	 Prinzmetal’s angina
B.	 Wellen’s syndrome
C.	 Crescendo angina
D.	 Ludwig’s angina
21.	
Stroke volume is comprised of which of the following factors?
A.	 Viscosity, blood volume, and impedance
B.	 Cardiac output, heart rate, and compliance
C.	 Contractility, preload, and afterload
D.	 Systemic impedance, heart rate, and compliance
22.	
During evaluation of CVP pressure monitoring tracing, the c wave represents
A.	 Mechanical atrial diastole
B.	 The decrease in RA volume during relaxation
C.	 Emptying of the right atrium into the right ventricle
D.	 Increased RA pressure from closure of the tricuspid valve
23.	
The control on a temporary pacemaker that regulates the ability of the 
pacemaker to detect the heart’s intrinsic electrical activity is known as the
A.	 AV interval
B.	 Sensitivity control
C.	 Rate control
D.	 Stimulus control

Cardiovascular  ❙  13
24.	
The reversal agent for Pradaxa is
A.	 Vitamin K
B.	 Recombinant factor VIII
C.	 Idarucizumab
D.	 Protamine sulfate
25.	
Which of the following conditions would not be considered a contraindication for 
the use of Pradaxa (dagbigatran)?
A.	 To reduce the risk of stroke in patients with nonvalvular atrial fibrillation
B.	 A mechanical heart valve
C.	 A known hypersensitivity reaction
D.	 Active pathological bleeding
26.	
Exceptional and extreme mental stress, anger, and resentment in a 
postmenopausal woman may cause
A.	 Takotsubo cardiomyopathy
B.	 Postpartum hemorrhage
C.	 Dilated cardiomyopathy
D.	 Increased dopamine release
27.	
A low CVP reading may represent
A.	 Pulmonary hypertension
B.	 Increased contractility
C.	 Biventricular failure
D.	 Cardiac tamponade
28.	
Right ventricular preload in the heart is measured by the
A.	 Left atrial pressure
B.	 Pulmonary artery systolic pressure
C.	 Central venous pressure
D.	 Pulmonary artery occlusive pressure
29.	
Your patient was admitted to the progressive care unit (PCU) for chest pain that 
occurred while he was sleeping and has not resolved. The patient was diagnosed 
with Prinzmetal’s angina. This form of angina
A.	 Is caused by a blockage of the circumflex artery
B.	 Is a benign form of angina
C.	 Is usually caused by a coronary vasospasm
D.	 Will always resolve with administration of nitroglycerin
30.	
You are using the PQRST method of pain assessment for your patient complaining 
of chest pain. The “S” in this mnemonic stands for
A.	 Sensitivity
B.	 Severity
C.	 Standard
D.	 Symptoms

14  ❙  Section 4
31.	
You are caring for a patient who was admitted for observation for a pulmonary 
contusion sustained from a bicycle accident. While ambulating, the patient 
suddenly complains of chest pain. You note that while describing the pain, the 
patient clenches his fist over the sternal area. This gesture is commonly associated 
with ischemic chest pain and is known as
A.	 Prinzmetal’s sign
B.	 Frazier’s sign
C.	 Homans’ sign
D.	 Levine’s sign
32.	
The physician orders a patient’s blood pressure to be taken both at the level of 
the heart and when the arm is raised. The systolic pressure obtained when the 
arm is raised is 15 mmHg lower. This finding usually indicates the patient is 
suffering from
A.	 Aortic insufficiency
B.	 Endocarditis
C.	 Rheumatic fever
D.	 An abdominal aneurysm
33.	
The normal range for a serum amiodarone is ___ to ____ mcg/ml.
A.	 2.5 to 3.5
B.	 1 to 2.5
C.	 1.0 to 3
D.	 1.5 to 3.5
34.	
How does STEMI differ from NSTEMI?
A.	 Only STEMI involves myocardial cell death
B.	 NSTEMI has no ST elevation
C.	 The cardiac enzymes are elevated only in STEMI
D.	 The cardiac enzymes are elevated only in NSTEMI
35.	
Which of the following parameters is considered diagnostic of a STEMI on the 
12-lead EKG?
A.	 A STEMI must be diagnosed by the cardiac enzymes results, not an EKG
B.	 A STEMI has a 1-mm ST elevation with or without a pathologic Q wave
C.	 A STEMI must have a 5-mm ST elevation of the affected coronary artery
D.	 A STEMI does not have a pathologic Q wave
36.	
While the physician is examining a patient, you note the physician presses on the 
thyroid cartilage and displaces it to the patient’s left. The physician is most likely 
determining the possibility the patient has
A.	 Thyroid cancer
B.	 A bruit
C.	 An aortic arch aneurysm
D.	 Angioedema

Cardiovascular  ❙  15
37.	
During inspiration your patient has a paradoxical rise in jugular venous pressure. 
This phenomena is commonly associated with
A.	 Mitral stenosis
B.	 Right heart failure
C.	 An anterior wall MI
D.	 Increased ventricular compliance
38.	
Your patient is suffering from restrictive cardiomyopathy. During your initial 
assessment you note the patient is demonstrating Kussmaul’s sign. As a 
progressive care nurse, you know this finding indicates
A.	 Development of pulmonary emboli
B.	 An attempt to decrease CO2 buildup in the lungs
C.	 A paradoxical rise of jugular venous pressure on inspiration
D.	 Indication of mitral valve disease
39.	
Calcium channel blockers act primarily on
A.	 Serotonin uptake
B.	 Arteriolar tissue
C.	 Lung receptors only
D.	 Reduction of cardiac output
40.	
Decreased preload may result from
A.	 Hyperthermia
B.	 Hypothermia
C.	 Sympathetic stimulation
D.	 Vasoconstriction
41.	
If a patient becomes tachycardic, what happens to the QT and RR intervals?
A.	 No change occurs
B.	 The QT interval lengthens-and the RR interval remains constant
C.	 The QT interval shortens-and the RR interval lengthens
D.	 The QT and the RR intervals shorten
42.	
Your 54 year old patient with asthma has been started on Plavix after a 
newly diagnosed non-Q-wave MI. Which adverse drug reaction would you advise 
this patient to report immediately to the physician?
A.	 Bronchospasms
B.	 Pneumonia
C.	 Apnea
D.	 Hemoptysis
43.	
When should you suspect a patient has suffered a right ventricular MI?
A.	 When the patient has right arm pain or paresthesias with substernal chest pain
B.	 When the patient has an inferior wall MI with suspected posterior involvement
C.	 When angina is pain unrelieved with sublingual NTG
D.	 When EKG changes are seen in leads V5 and V6

16  ❙  Section 4
44.	
Your patient has been on dofetilide for a week while being treated for unstable 
atrial fibrillation. Which of the following electrolyte levels should be monitored 
closely?
A.	 Potassium and sodium
B.	 Sodium and magnesium
C.	 Potassium and magnesium
D.	 Magnesium and chloride
45.	
Your 60 year old patient is being monitored poststreptokinase administration for 
a thrombolytic stroke 2 days ago and current anticoagulation therapy. You are 
called to the room by his family after he complained of a severe headache due to 
“someone is trying to drill into my head.” You would suspect these symptoms are 
an adverse effect to which of the drugs listed below?
A.	 Aspirin
B.	 Angiomax
C.	 Plavix
D.	 Lovenox
46.	
Your patient suffered a myocardial infarction with resultant cardiopulmonary 
resuscitation 3 days ago. Which of the following medications would most likely be 
contraindicated at this time?
A.	 Lidocaine
B.	 Amiodarone
C.	 Potassium chloride
D.	 Dofetilide
47.	
On an EKG, upright QRS in leads V1 and V2 indicate which of the following types 
of bundle branch block?
A.	 Right
B.	 Left
C.	 Dual bundle branch block
D.	 Only leads aVF and III diagnose bundle branch blocks
48.	
Your patient had an MI with second-degree heart block. She just had a VVI 
pacemaker inserted. What does the first V indicate?
A.	 Paced, ventricular
B.	 Paced, inhibited
C.	 Ventricular inhibited
D.	 Ventricular
49.	
What does the second V in a VVI pacemaker indicate?
A.	 Ventricular paced
B.	 Ventricular inhibited
C.	 Ventricular sensed
D.	 Ventricular programmed

Cardiovascular  ❙  17
50.	
Quinidine and hypomagnesemia can both lead to which of the following 
conditions?
A.	 Monomorphic ventricular tachycardia
B.	 Torsade de pointes
C.	 Ventricular fibrillation
D.	 Atrial tachycardia
51.	
When your patient’s calf muscle is pressed forward against the tibia but not when 
compressed side to side, pain is elicited. This finding
A.	 Is called Homans’ sign
B.	 Indicates an arterial occlusion
C.	 Is a positive finding for gout
D.	 Is called Moses’ sign
52.	
You are attempting to obtain a blood pressure on your new admission, an elderly 
patient. After obliterating the radial pulse, an attempt is made to palpate the 
radial pulse. The area feels like a firm tube. This finding
A.	 Is not significant
B.	 Indicates hypotension
C.	 Indicates pseudohypertension
D.	 Means the radial pulse was not obliterated
53.	
Your patient was diagnosed with SVT. He will be discharged on oral amiodarone 
to control his SVT. Which of the following discharge instructions is most 
appropriate?
A.	 Continue normal outside activities without restrictions
B.	 Continue original theophylline regimen
C.	 Avoid grapefruit
D.	 Expect an increase in urine output
54.	
A 47 year old male was transported to the ED, held 4 hours because of a 
shortage of beds, then admitted to your unit because of changes in mentation, 
development of ascites, orthopnea, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, and excessive 
fatigue. On physical examination, you note S3 and S4 gallops, basilar crackles, 
and the EKG shows sinus tachycardia. These symptoms are usually indicative of 
which of the following types of cardiomyopathy?
A.	 Restrictive cardiomyopathy
B.	 Dilated cardiomyopathy
C.	 Alcohol-induced cardiomyopathy
D.	 Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
55.	
Your patient requires an infusion of dobutamine. Dobutamine improves cardiac 
output primarily by
A.	 Increasing afterload
B.	 Increasing heart rate
C.	 Decreasing preload
D.	 Improving contractility

18  ❙  Section 4
56.	
Your patient suffered an episode of bradycardia that resulted in a heart rate 
decreasing to the 20s. The patient had just been deeply suctioned. The low heart 
rate was unresponsive to oxygen support and a dose of atropine, so assisted 
ventilation via a bag-valve mask was provided. The heart rate finally improved to 
prebradycardic levels. Which of the following potential complications of atropine 
administration may now occur?
A.	 Diuresis
B.	 Hypertension
C.	 Rebound bradycardia
D.	 Headache
57.	
Your patient with recurrent VT was started on intravenous amiodarone today. 
Which of the following signs should the PCU nurse monitor closely during 
administration of the initial loading dose?
A.	 Urine output and parathyroid levels
B.	 Urine output and liver function tests
C.	 Thyroid levels and hypertonicity
D.	 Observe for greenish discoloration of the skin and change in thyroid levels
58.	
In addition to heart rate and urine output, which of the following laboratory 
values should be monitored closely for a patient taking diazoxide and furosemide 
for hypertension?
A.	 Glucose levels
B.	 Bilirubin levels
C.	 Calcium levels
D.	 INR levels
59.	
A complication of high-contrast mediums used for cardiac catheterizations is
A.	 Hypoglycemia
B.	 Hypernatremia
C.	 Polycythemia
D.	 Seizures
60.	
Which of the following statements is true about pericardial effusions?
A.	 Diastolic filling is increased
B.	 On CXR, a “water bottle” silhouette is noted
C.	 The voltage of the QRS complex is increased
D.	 This is a painless, hard-to-diagnose condition
61.	
A blunt cardiac injury is most likely to affect which of the following chambers of 
the heart?
A.	 Right ventricle
B.	 Left ventricle
C.	 Right atrium
D.	 Left atrium

Cardiovascular  ❙  19
62.	
Yesterday, your patient was shoveling snow when he became short of breath and 
felt diffuse chest discomfort. When he went inside for lunch, the pain disappeared. 
He later resumed shoveling snow and felt more fatigued than ever. Today, he was 
admitted to your unit with orthopnea and profound dyspnea. He is constantly 
saying, “I’m not even 58 years old and have been outside all my life. I’m not 
sick enough to be in here.” His girlfriend reports that over the past 3 weeks, 
the patient has been more tired than usual, even when performing small tasks 
around the house. His assessment findings are as follows:
EKG: Borderline ST at 100 with rare PACs
Manual cuff BP 142/74
Skin warm, pale
Capillary refill 4 seconds, 2+ pitting edema (pretibial)
RR 20, breath sounds: crackles in posterior lobes
O2 2 L/min via NC
ABGs were drawn, but results are unavailable
Mentation: Alert, oriented 3 4
This patient has probably developed
A.	 Mild pericarditis
B.	 Pulmonary edema (noncardiac)
C.	 Chylothorax
D.	 Left ventricular failure
63.	
Your new patient was directly admitted to your unit from her physician’s office. The 
patient has a history of COPD. Today, she was admitted to the PCU with a possible 
inferior wall MI. About 30 minutes ago, the patient complained of increasing 
shortness of breath. When she changed her position, the dyspnea abated. She is 
again complaining of dyspnea, and you perform a 12-lead EKG because your unit 
monitor allows monitoring of only leads II and MCL1. The EKG shows lead V1–V4 
ST-segment depression. Other physical and laboratory findings are as follows:
EKG: Sinus arrhythmia at 93
Manual cuff BP: 102/60
Skin pale, cool, clammy; sacral, pedal, and pretibial edema
RR 22, breath sounds: bilateral crackles
O2: 2 L/min via NC
ABGs: pH 7.38, pCO2 48, PaO2 66, HCO3 34
Mentation: Alert, oriented 3 4
What is the interpretation of the ABGs?
A.	 Uncompensated metabolic acidosis
B.	 Compensated respiratory acidosis
C.	 Uncompensated metabolic alkalosis
D.	 Compensated respiratory alkalosis

20  ❙  Section 4
64.	
Your new patient was directly admitted to your unit from her physician’s office. 
The patient has a history of COPD. Today, she was admitted to the PCU with 
a possible inferior wall MI. About 30 minutes ago, the patient complained of 
increasing shortness of breath. When she changed her position, the dyspnea 
abated. She is again complaining of dyspnea, and you perform a 12-lead EKG 
because your unit monitor allows monitoring of only leads II and MCL1. The EKG 
shows lead V1–V4 ST-segment depression. Other physical and laboratory findings 
are as follows:
EKG: Sinus arrhythmia at 93
Manual cuff BP: 102/60
Skin pale, cool, clammy; sacral edema, pedal and pretibial edema
RR 22, breath sounds: bilateral crackles
O2: 2 L/min via NC
ABGs: pH 7.38, pCO2 48, PaO2 66, HCO3 34
Mentation: Alert, oriented 3 4
Based on the information provided, this patient is probably developing
A.	 Pulmonary effusion
B.	 Left ventricular failure
C.	 Pericarditis
D.	 Congestive heart failure
65.	
Your patient is an ironworker admitted for “cardiomyopathy.” His initial ejection 
fraction was 21%, and he has been confused most of the time since his admission 
yesterday. On admission, his EKG showed ST depression in leads V1–V4. He has 
been more dyspneic and is getting restless. Current vital signs and parameters are 
as follows:
EKG: ST at 116
Manual cuff BP: 102/70
Skin pale, cool
Temp: 99°F
Bilateral pretibial and pedal edema
Sacral edema also present
RR 30, breath sounds clear, slightly diminished RLL
O2: 4 L/min via mask
Mentation: Oriented to self, confused at times
From which condition does this patient appear to be suffering at this time?
A.	 An anterior MI
B.	 Inferior wall MI
C.	 Biventricular failure
D.	 Right ventricular failure
66.	
The type of myocardial infarction that involves the entire thickness of 
myocardium in a region is known as a ____________________ infarction
A.	 Subendocardial
B.	 Anteroseptal
C.	 Transmural
D.	 Inferior wall

Cardiovascular  ❙  21
67.	
Your patient with an implanted cardiac defibrillator should have thresholds 
checked frequently during administration of which of the following drugs?
A.	 Amiodarone
B.	 Nesiritide
C.	 Nitroglycerin
D.	 Anisindione
68.	
Increased preload may be caused by
A.	 Hemorrhage
B.	 Hyperthermia
C.	 Renal problems
D.	 Vomiting
69.	
Which of the following statements about innervation of the heart is true?
A.	 Beta-1 adrenergic receptors are located only in the atria
B.	 Beta-2 receptors are located in both the atria and the ventricles
C.	 Beta-1 receptors cause an increase in conductivity, heart rate, and contractility
D.	 Alpha-1 adrenergic receptors affect the tone of the ventricular walls
70.	
Stimulation of the parasympathetic nerve fibers in the heart will result in
A.	 An increased heart rate
B.	 An adrenergic response, causing a decreased blood flow to the extremities
C.	 An increase in conduction and a major effect on the force of ventricular 
conduction
D.	 The release of acetylcholine
71.	
Nesiritide is an appropriate drug to help treat which of the following heart 
conditions?
A.	 Constrictive pericarditis
B.	 Acute decompensated congestive heart failure
C.	 Chronic obstructive cardiomyopathy
D.	 Pericardial tamponade
72.	
Dofetilide (Tikosyn) should not be administered to any patient with the following 
cardiac abnormality
A.	 Atrial flutter
B.	 Prolonged QT interval
C.	 Ventricular tachycardia
D.	 NSR after conversion to  atrial fibrillation
73.	
Which of the following medications is used to specifically treat atrial fibrillation?
A.	 Dofetilide
B.	 Mexiletine
C.	 Sotalol
D.	 Flecainide

22  ❙  Section 4
74.	
Which of the following statements is true regarding routine application of cricoid 
pressure during cardiac arrest?
A.	 Cricoid pressure is not recommended as a routine action
B.	 Cricoid pressure should be applied whenever possible during cardiac arrest
C.	 Cricoid pressure must be used when there are two or more rescuers
D.	 Cricoid pressure must be applied only by a paramedic, MICN, or a physician
75.	
The most reliable method of confirming and monitoring correct placement of an 
ETT is by use of
A.	 Auscultation
B.	 Visualization of the cords
C.	 Use of an end tidal CO2 monitor
D.	 Continuous wave form capnography
76.	
The single most important component of a successful outcome for a patient 
requiring advanced cardiac life support is
A.	 Early defibrillation
B.	 Use of epinephrine in place of vasopressin
C.	 Therapeutic hypothermia
D.	 High-quality CPR
77.	
According to the 2015 American Heart Association Guidelines for CPR and 
Emergency Cardiovascular Care, which of the following medications is no longer 
recommended for routine use in the management of PEA or asystole?
A.	 Epinephrine
B.	 Adenosine
C.	 Atropine
D.	 Vasopressin
78.	
Passive filling of the left atrium is through the
A.	 Superior vena cava
B.	 Pulmonary veins
C.	 Tricuspid valve
D.	 Mitral valve
79.	
Which of the following conditions would decrease afterload?
A.	 Use of nitrates
B.	 Hypothermia
C.	 Aortic stenosis
D.	 Hypertension
80.	
The most sensitive cardiac marker is
A.	 CK-MB
B.	 Creatine kinease
C.	 Troponin T
D.	 Tropinin IIa

Cardiovascular  ❙  23
81.	
If your patient has a CK-MB concentration greater than 5% of the total CK, this 
finding is indicative of
A.	 Large muscle damage
B.	 Tissue ischemia
C.	 Mild muscle injury
D.	 Myocardial necrosis
82.	
Which of the following substances is released when the myocardium is stretched?
A.	 Brain natriuretic peptide (BNP)
B.	 Myoglobin
C.	 C-reactive protein
D.	 Troponin T
83.	
A biomarker that is not cardiac-specific but can be elevated by falls, 
cardiopulmonary resuscitation, and injections is
A.	 C-reactive protein
B.	 Myoglobin
C.	 INR
D.	 BNP
84.	
To monitor the effectiveness of anticoagulant therapy, the international 
normalized ratio (INR) is frequently used. For a patient with atrial fibrillation, a 
therapeutic range for INR would be
A.	 3.5–4.5
B.	 1.5–3.0
C.	 2.0–3.0
D.	 5.0–6.1
85.	
A biomarker that indicates an inflammation is present is
A.	 C-reactive protein
B.	 CK-MB isoenzyme
C.	 White blood count
D.	 Troponin 1
86.	
During ventricular diastole, the atrial kick provides approximately what 
percentage of the cardiac output for a patient?
A.	 35–40%
B.	 20–22%
C.	 14–18%
D.	 32–36%
87.	
Your patient suffered an MI but is now in stable condition in your progressive care 
unit. Nine family members arrive at the PCU demanding to see the patient. Your 
best response would be to
A.	 Notify social services
B.	 Identify a responsible family spokesperson and contact him or her
C.	 Refuse to admit more than one person
D.	 Call security to remove the visitors

24  ❙  Section 4
88.	
After you have identified the patient’s significant other, his estranged wife arrives 
at the PCU. The patient tells you he does not want contact with his estranged wife. 
He even writes a note to that effect to be placed on his chart. He also states he 
wants no information given to the estranged wife. She became belligerent when 
told of the patient’s wishes and threatened the staff with a lawsuit. The most 
appropriate nursing action would be to
A.	 Request an ethics/multidisciplinary care conference to discuss communication and 
dissemination of the patient’s medical status and to review the visitation policy
B.	 Immediately call the hospital attorney to speak with the wife
C.	 Give the wife any information she wants, but do not inform the patient that you 
have done so
D.	 Request that the patient’s physician write a non-visitation order for the wife
89.	
The major advantage of using an internal mammary artery for cardiac bypass 
would be
A.	 Greater ease of harvesting
B.	 Better postsurgical patency
C.	 A lowered infection rate
D.	 A lower rate of reperfusion rhythms
90.	
Your patient just underwent a percutaneous intervention for stent placement, 
after which he was returned to your telemetry unit. You note a rash over the 
patient’s trunk and arms. This is probably due to
A.	 An allergic reaction to contrast dye
B.	 Petechiae from a fat emboli
C.	 A reaction to the indwelling stent
D.	 The underlying endocarditis
91.	
A sign of necrosis seen on an EKG would include
A.	 Acute ST elevation
B.	 A right BBB
C.	 A left BBB
D.	 A Q wave in Lead III
92.	
The most common major impediment to family education regarding placement 
of a ventricular assist device is
A.	 Language
B.	 Technology
C.	 Time
D.	 Physician availability
93.	
The physician has just informed your patient that she needs an LVAD. The patient 
is crying and says, “I just know I am going to die. What’s the point? It must be 
my time.” The patient is obviously quite stressed. The priority for the nurse at this 
time is to
A.	 Tell the patient she will not die
B.	 Explore possible suicidal ideation
C.	 Immediately place the patient in a single room
D.	 Notify the hospital’s spiritual advisor

Cardiovascular  ❙  25
94.	
In response to stretch of the myocardium, a peptide is secreted by the myocytes in 
the ventricle. This peptide will cause vasodilation and sodium and water loss via 
the kidneys by inhibiting the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system. High levels of 
this peptide will help confirm the diagnosis of acute heart failure This peptide is 
called
A.	 Atricor
B.	 Pepsinogen
C.	 ANP
D.	 Brain natriuretic peptide
95.	
While caring for your patient on nesiritide, you note a decrease in urine 
output. Which of the following lab results should you immediately report to the 
physician?
A.	 BUN/Creatinine ratio > 20
B.	 Serum bicarbonate 25 mEq/L
C.	 Urine osmolality of 1,000 mOsm/L
D.	 Urine specific gravity of 1.005
96.	
Integrilin (eptifbatide) is indicated for which of the following conditions?
A.	 DVT
B.	 Pulmonary embolism
C.	 Acute coronary syndrome (ACS)
D.	 Occlusive cerebrovascular accident
97.	
You overhear your patient discussing his aortic stenosis with his family. He states, 
“It can’t be that bad, because the murmur isn’t that loud.” Your best response is
A.	 Do not say anything; it would be considered eavesdropping
B.	 Interrupt and say that nothing has been confirmed yet
C.	 Give the patient an iPad and tell him to search the Internet
D.	 Use the opportunity to teach the patient by asking if you can clarify his under­
standing of his disease process
98.	
A male patient was admitted to your unit to rule out myocardial infarction 2 days 
ago. He has a history of GERD and stomach ulcers. He is due to be discharged 
today on digoxin and oral antacids. You review his A.M. labs prior to beginning 
your physical assessment. Lab results are as follows:
WBC 11,000/mm3	
RBC 5.2 mil/mm3	
PLT 350,000/mm3
Hgb 13 g/dl	
Hct 48 mL/dL
Potassium 4.5 mEq/L	
Total calcium 13.5 mg/dL	
Magnesium 1.87 mg/dL
Sodium 140 mEq/L	
Chloride 104 mEq/L
You would probably expect to see which of the following signs and symptoms 
­during your assessment of this patient?
A.	 Hypotension, prolonged QT interval, junctional tachycardia
B.	 Bradycardia, confusion, hypertension, decreased grasp strength
C.	 Muscle spasms, hypertonicity, ventricular tachycardia
D.	 Second-degree Type 2 heart block, shortened QT interval, hypotension

26  ❙  Section 4
99.	
You are caring for a 7-day postoperative CABG patient. He remains severely 
hypocalcemic despite calcium supplementation. Which of the following 
complications is this patient at greatest risk for developing?
A.	 Bleeding
B.	 Muscle tetany
C.	 Flattened T waves
D.	 Deep vein thrombosis
100.	
Peripartum cardiomyopathy is a form of
A.	 Restrictive cardiomyopathy
B.	 Hypertropic cardiomyopathy
C.	 Viral cardiomyopathy
D.	 Dilated cardiomyopathy
101.	
Your patient was admitted for ascites, orthopnea, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, 
and excessive fatigue. On physical examination, you note S3 and S4 gallops, 
basilar crackles, and the EKG shows sinus tachycardia. These symptoms are 
usually indicative of which type of cardiomyopathy?
A.	 Dilated
B.	 Restrictive
C.	 Alcohol-induced
D.	 Hypertrophic
102.	
Your patient has a newly placed stent. You overhear the cardiologist state that 
ticagrelor (Brilinta) is going to be started. What order do you expect to see when 
you check the chart?
A.	 Begin Brilinta 180 mg PO once per day immediately
B.	 Begin Brilinta 90 mg IV once per day in 3 days
C.	 Give Brilinta 180 mg PO now, then begin 90 mg PO BID in 5 days
D.	 Begin Brilinta 90 mg PO BID in 10 days
103.	
Your patient is on ticagrelor (Brilinta). What other drug should always be taken 
concurrently with ticagrelor (Brilinta)?
A.	 Aspirin
B.	 Nitroglycerin
C.	 Digoxin
D.	 Plavix
104.	
You are preparing to give your patient her 0900 dose of Coumadin as part of 
her atrial fibrillation management. You are reviewing her A.M. labs prior to 
administration of the medication. Which of the following lab results would cause 
alarm?
A.	 PTT 72 seconds
B.	 PLT 180,000/mm3
C.	 APTT 38 seconds
D.	 PT 28 seconds

Cardiovascular  ❙  27
105.	
When auscultating the heart, a common area for hearing murmurs and ectopic 
beats is
A.	 Erb’s Point
B.	 Pulmonic area
C.	 Aortic area
D.	 Mitral area
106.	
Adverse effects of procainamide include
A.	 Depressing the excitability of cardiac muscle
B.	 Junctional tachycardia
C.	 Slowing conduction in the atria
D.	 Severe hypotension
107.	
A patient received 4 mg of morphine IV and now is unresponsive; his respiratory 
rate and depth are diminished. The antagonist for morphine is
A.	 Naloxone
B.	 Atropine
C.	 Regitine
D.	 Epinephrine
108.	
Your patient has changes in mentation, development of ascites, orthopnea, 
paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, and excessive fatigue. On physical examination, 
you note S3 and S4 gallops, basilar crackles, and the EKG shows sinus tachycardia. 
These symptoms are usually indicative of which of the following types of 
cardiomyopathy?
A.	 Restrictive cardiomyopathy
B.	 Dilated cardiomyopathy
C.	 Alcohol-induced cardiomyopathy
D.	 Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
109.	
The type of echocardiography used to evaluate the motion of the cardiac valves 
and detect pericardial fluid is known as _____________ echocardiography
A.	 M-mode
B.	 Two-dimensional
C.	 Contrast
D.	 Continuous-wave Doppler
110.	
The type of echocardiography that shows the quantity of flow across an 
obstruction is called
A.	 Two-dimensional echocardiography
B.	 Continuous-wave Doppler echocardiography
C.	 M-mode echocardiography
D.	 Contrast echocardiography
111.	
Dobutamine is used to improve cardiac output primarily by
A.	 Causing profound peripheral vasodilation
B.	 Acting on alpha-adrenergic receptors in the heart
C.	 Acting on beta1 adrenergic receptors in the heart
D.	 Acting on both alpha- and beta-adrenergic receptors in the cardiovascular tissue

28  ❙  Section 4
112.	
Alpha-adrenergic effects of norepinephrine include
A.	 Increased force of myocardial contraction
B.	 Peripheral arteriolar vasoconstriction
C.	 Increased AV conduction time
D.	 Central venous vasodilation
113.	
Your patient is on lisinopril (Zestril) for hypertension after suffering a septal MI. 
A vial of epinephrine 1:1,000 is kept at the bedside should the patient exhibit 
which of the following symptoms?
A.	 Angioedema
B.	 Pyelonephritis
C.	 Cholestatic jaundice
D.	 SIADH
114.	
Nifedipine is classified as a
A.	 Calcium channel blocker
B.	 Beta-blocker
C.	 MAO inhibitor
D.	 Catecholamine
115.	
You are preparing to give adenosine to a patient in SVT. Why is it important that 
adenosine be given rapidly?
A.	 If given slowly, the adenosine will probably fail to convert the SVT
B.	 Adenosine is incompatible with adrenalin
C.	 If given slowly, adenosine may cause systemic vasodilation and reflex tachycardia
D.	 If given slowly, adenosine may cause blurred vision
116.	
A nursing student is learning about heart sounds. The student asks you where the 
point of maximal impulse is located on the chest. As a progressive care nurse, you 
know the PMI is located in the apical area, located at
A.	 The 2nd intercostal space, right sternal border
B.	 The 2nd intercostal space, left sternal border
C.	 The 3rd intercostal space, left sternal border
D.	 The 5th intercostal space, mid clavicular line
117.	
Tachyarrhythmias that are refractive to conventional therapies may have to be 
treated with radio-frequency ablation. This treatment is usually successful on 
reentry tachyarrhythmias. The radio-frequency destroys myocardial tissue via
A.	 Radiation
B.	 Heat
C.	 Cold
D.	 An overriding signal to ablate the pacemaker
118.	
Your patient has atrial fibrillation and needs to be cardioverted. The patient was 
medicated for pain and anxiety with morphine and versed. Which additional 
medication will help the process of cardioversion from atrial fibrillation to a 
normal sinus rhythm?
A.	 Digitalis
B.	 Amiodarone
C.	 Pronestyl
D.	 Ibutilide

Cardiovascular  ❙  29
119.	
During insertion of a CVP catheter, your patient has a short run of V-tach and the 
EKG monitor shows unifocal PVCs. Your immediate response should be to
A.	 Administer lidocaine 1 mg/kg
B.	 Hang an amiodarone drip
C.	 Notify the physician who is inserting the catheter
D.	 Immediately have the physician completely withdraw the catheter
120.	
During shift report, you are told that your patient has a 90% occlusion to the 
circumflex coronary artery. Which type of myocardial infarction is this patient at 
greatest risk of developing?
A.	 Lateral wall infarction
B.	 Anterior wall infarction
C.	 Posterior wall infarction
D.	 Septal wall infarction
121.	
Your patient suffered a myocardial infarction as a result of 100% occlusion 
of the left anterior descending and circumflex artery. Although cardiac 
catheterization returned some blood flow to the left side of her heart, you note a 
new murmur at the fifth intercostal space, midclavicular line. You suspect this 
patient is suffering from
A.	 Tricuspid valve stenosis
B.	 Mitral valve regurgitation
C.	 Pulmonic stenosis
D.	 Aortic regurgitation
122.	
Which of the following nursing actions would be important in the care of a 
patient with occlusive disease of the terminal aorta and a nonhealing wound on 
the left foot?
A.	 Elevate the legs
B.	 Place the patient in high Fowler’s position
C.	 Maintain normothermia
D.	 Fluid restriction
123.	
A 30 year old  male who lost control of his motorcycle while riding in the 
rain was admitted to your unit. At the time of the accident, he was wearing a 
helmet and protective gear. He suffered a fractured left femur, a fractured rib, a 
cervical sprain, and road rash on his face and neck. He is admitted with a blood 
pressure of 86/46, HR 102, RR 24 and shallow, T 98.4°F. His 12-lead EKG shows ST 
elevation in the anterior leads. His CXR shows a normal cardiac silhouette and no 
infiltrates. His Hgb is 9.0, and his Hct is 32. MB is 18%. The patient is restless and 
complains of pain in the chest and left leg. Which condition would you anticipate 
the patient is developing?
A.	 Systolic dysfunction
B.	 Hypovolemic shock
C.	 Pulmonary hypertension
D.	 Pulmonary edema

30  ❙  Section 4
124.	
Four days ago, your 70 year old  patient was admitted to your unit status post 
laparotomy for an unknown abdominal mass. During the surgery, she had 
minimal blood loss and an uneventful course. The patient’s history includes 
smoking since she was 15 (unknown number of packs per day), Type II diabetes, a 
permanent pacemaker, an anterior MI, and a right-sided stroke 21 years ago with 
no deficits.
Three days ago, this patient had a hypotensive episode; her BP dropped to 82/48, 
and her heart rate was 70. The hospitalist ordered dobutamine, and the blood 
pressure increased until the MAP was 72.
Today, the patient remains on the dobutamine at 2 mcg/kg/min. Her BP is 108/60, 
MAP 76, heart rate 70. Attempts at weaning dobutamine have failed—her blood 
pressure drops precipitously if the dobutamine dosage is lowered. What do you 
think is the cause of this patient’s initial hypotensive episode?
A.	 Hypovolemic shock
B.	 Previous MI
C.	 Rapid rewarming postoperatively
D.	 Cell mediated response
125.	
Which physical finding is significant for carotid stenosis?
A.	 Heberden’s nodules
B.	 Systolic murmur Grade IV/VI
C.	 Carotid bruit
D.	 Broussard’s nodules
126.	
Which 12-lead EKG changes would you expect to see in a patient with COPD?
A.	 Low-voltage P waves, tachycardia
B.	 Tall P waves, left ventricular hypertrophy
C.	 Tall, peaked P waves, right ventricular hypertrophy, low-voltage QRS
D.	 Low-voltage QRS, left atrial hypertrophy
127.	
A pericardial friction rub would be best heard at
A.	 The 3rd intercostal space, on the left sternal border
B.	 The 2nd intercostal space, right sternal border
C.	 The 5th intercostal space, mid-clavicular line
D.	 The 5th intercostal space, mid-clavicular line
128.	
Your patient is middle-aged and is being discharged to the care of his primary 
healthcare provider following treatment for a small pulmonary embolus. The 
patient will be continuing anticoagulant therapy. You are reinforcing previous 
teaching about his medication. Your patient takes numerous herbal remedies 
daily. Which ones should the patient avoid while he is taking an anticoagulant?
A.	 Dong quai, gingko biloba, saw palmetto
B.	 Aloe extract, bilberry, broccoli
C.	 Calendula, clove, allspice
D.	 Fenugreek, licorice, leeks

Cardiovascular  ❙  31
129.	
Cardiac glycosides are often used in the treatment of heart failure. A major effect 
of this classification of medications is
A.	 Increased conductivity
B.	 Positive chronotropism
C.	 Its usefulness as a ventricular antiarrhythmic
D.	 Inotropism
130.	
Which drug listed below contains a high concentration of iodine?
A.	 Lidocaine
B.	 Amiodarone
C.	 Aminophylline
D.	 Digoxin
131.	
A pansystolic murmur is audible with which of the following conditions?
A.	 Pulmonic insufficiency
B.	 Tricuspid insufficiency
C.	 Atrial stenosis
D.	 Mitral stenosis
132.	
A reflex tachycardia caused by stretch of right atrial receptors is known as the
A.	 Herring–Sines law
B.	 Bainbridge reflex
C.	 Starling’s law
D.	 Renin–angiotensin system
133.	
Your 25 year old  patient has been consuming large quantities of power drinks 
and has been having intermittent episodes of SVT. Today she was admitted to 
your unit because she had a syncopal episode at dance class and requires therapy 
for the SVT. Which of the following medications is specific to the treatment of 
sustained supraventricular tachycardia?
A.	 Atropine
B.	 Theophylline
C.	 Amiodarone
D.	 Adenosine
134.	
The most commonly used type of ventricular assist device is the
A.	 RVAD
B.	 VAD
C.	 BIVAD
D.	 LVAD
135.	
Indications for use of a ventricular assist device include
A.	 Extensive organ damage
B.	 As destination therapy
C.	 Prolonged cardiac arrest
D.	 Dysrhythmias

32  ❙  Section 4
136.	
Which of the following statements is true regarding the fourth heart sound (S4)?
A.	 S4 occurs just after the first heart sound
B.	 The fourth heart sound occurs with ventricular contraction
C.	 The fourth heart sound is benign
D.	 The fourth heart sound is always pathologic after 24 hours of life
137.	
Your patient has Wolff–Parkinson–White syndrome. She has experienced 
increasing bouts of tachycardia over the past few weeks. Her cardiologist has 
decided to use overdrive pacing. How would you explain this type of pacemaker 
to a new orientee you are precepting in the PCU?
A.	 The pacemaker or AICD is set on demand mode and is asynchronous
B.	 The pacemaker is at a set constant rate of 80 bpm and is synchronous
C.	 The pacemaker or AICD is set on demand mode and is synchronous
D.	 The pacemaker or AICD is set on inhibit mode and is synchronous
138.	
Your new patient sustained an inferior wall MI and, after an unremarkable 
recovery from two-vessel bypass, was transferred to your PCU 3 hours ago. The 
patient has been stable until now. When attempting to walk this patient across 
the room, he complains of chest pain and respiratory difficulty. While assessing 
the patient you auscultate a harsh, holosystolic murmur that is loudest along 
the left sternal border. As a progressive care nurse, you realize this patient has 
probably sustained a life-threatening condition known as
A.	 A pericardial tamponade
B.	 A papillary muscle rupture
C.	 A ventricular septal rupture
D.	 A posterior MI
139.	
A patient was admitted to the PCU with aortic insufficiency. During the patient’s 
initial assessment, you note the popliteal BP is higher than the brachial BP by at 
least 40 mmHg. This phenomenon is known as
A.	 DeRoge’s sign
B.	 Hill’s sign
C.	 Holmes’ sign
D.	 Rochelle’s sign
140.	
A fellow nurse and her family just returned from a vacation in Europe. She 
has been complaining to her husband about leg cramping for the past 3 days. 
The hospital’s nurse practitioner sent her to the ED for further evaluation and 
subsequent admission to the PCU. During your initial assessment, you found the 
patient sitting on the side of the bed, leaning forward. She states the position 
relieved her newly developed chest pain. She also states that the pain is worse on 
inspiration. You notify the PCU hospitalist, and he orders a CXR and lab work. 
The sed. rate and WBCs are elevated. This patient most likely is suffering from
A.	 A thoracic aneurysm
B.	 Pericarditis
C.	 Pulmonary hypertension
D.	 A pulmonary embolus

Cardiovascular  ❙  33
141.	
Your patient is in fulminant CHF. What is the purpose of administering vasoactive 
and inotropic medications to this patient?
A.	 Decrease preload, decrease afterload, increase contractility
B.	 Increase preload, increase afterload, decrease contractility
C.	 Increase myocardial oxygen demand, decrease contractility, increase afterload
D.	 Decrease myocardial oxygen demand, decrease contractility, increase preload
142.	
Your patient was found in his room in full arrest. After starting CPR and placing 
the patient on a monitor, you discover the patient is in ventricular fibrillation. 
Your next priority is to
A.	 Cardiovert the patient with 200 Joules
B.	 Administer 1 mg of 1:10,000 epinephrine IV
C.	 Administer 300 mg of amiodarone IV
D.	 Defibrillate the patient with 200 Joules with a biphasic defibrillator
143.	
Which of the following drugs is classified as both a negative chronotrope and a 
positive inotrope?
A.	 Amiodarone
B.	 Digoxin
C.	 Pronestyl
D.	 Epinephrine
144.	
Your patient just had a temporary atrial pacemaker placed. On the EKG you 
note pacemaker spikes that are not followed by P waves. Which of the following 
nursing actions should be performed at this time?
A.	 Turn off the pacemaker
B.	 Make certain the pacemaker is in the demand mode
C.	 Increase the milliamperes
D.	 Do nothing—the pattern is normal
145.	
Which of the following statements is true regarding a type I aortic aneurysm?
A.	 Type I aneurysms are the rarest form of aneurysm
B.	 Type l aneurysm tears begin in the ascending aorta
C.	 Type I aneurysm tears are in the intimal lining
D.	 Type I tears are in the descending aorta
146.	
Type III aneurysms
A.	 Begin in the thoracic arch
B.	 Are the rarest form of aneurysm
C.	 Involve intimal tears
D.	 Occur in the descending aorta
147.	
A risk factor for an aortic aneurysm would not include
A.	 Connective tissue disorders
B.	 Medial necrosis of the aorta
C.	 Hypotension
D.	 Coarctation of the aorta

34  ❙  Section 4
148.	
Your patient was admitted to the PCU for an intractable cough about an hour 
ago. He is now complaining of diffuse abdominal pain. On assessment you notice 
a pulsatile mass in his abdomen. The next action you should take is to
A.	 Palpate the mass to determine its size
B.	 Immediately report this finding to the physician
C.	 Auscultate the mass
D.	 Prepare the patient for a biopsy of the mass
149.	
Your patient has pericarditis and the physician has prescribed colchicine. Your 
patient teaching should include dietary restrictions. Which of the foods listed 
below should the patient avoid if taking colchicine?
A.	 Diet Coke
B.	 Pears
C.	 Grapefruit
D.	 Bananas
150.	
When central venous pressure monitoring is desired, the access site with the 
lowest infection rate for an anticipated dwell time prolonged more than 5 days is 
likely to be
A.	 The internal jugular vein
B.	 The femoral vein
C.	 The subclavian vein
D.	 The external jugular vein
151.	
When assessing your new patient, you auscultate a blowing, high-pitched 
murmur at the apex and it appears to radiate to the left axilla. This murmur is 
probably indicative of
A.	 Tricuspid stenosis
B.	 Mitral insufficiency or regurgitation
C.	 Aortic stenosis
D.	 Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
152.	
A cardiac murmur that has maximal intensity at the base of the heart (commonly 
at the second intercostal space, right sternal border) and radiates to the apex and 
neck is the murmur of
A.	 Mitral stenosis
B.	 Pulmonary insufficiency or regurgitation
C.	 Aortic stenosis
D.	 Tricuspid stenosis
153.	
An early diastolic murmur with maximal intensity at the 4th intercostal space, 
left sternal border, is a murmur of
A.	 Mitral stenosis
B.	 Pulmonary insufficiency or regurgitation
C.	 Aortic stenosis
D.	 Tricuspid stenosis

Cardiovascular  ❙  35
154.	
Which of the following statements about angina is true?
A.	 If the patient is to undergo a PCTA, it is not necessary to inquire about allergies
B.	 Troponins and CK-MB isoenzymes are not elevated in patients with stable angina
C.	 Angina that has not increased in frequency or severity over time is known as vari­
ant angina
D.	 Stable angina is a resting, nonsymptomatic angina
155.	
The S2 heart sound is created by
A.	 Opening of the aortic and mitral valves
B.	 Closure of the pulmonic and aortic valves
C.	 Opening of the pulmonic and mitral valves
D.	 Closure of the pulmonic and tricuspid valves
156.	
Diuretics are used in the treatment of CHF. A diuretic that reduces urinary 
calcium losses is
A.	 Diamox
B.	 Chlorothiazide
C.	 Furosemide
D.	 Spironolactone
157.	
The primary use of nesiritide (Natrecor) would be
A.	 To depress cGMP production
B.	 To cause smooth muscle constriction
C.	 To depress cellular transport
D.	 To cause vascular smooth muscle vasodilation
158.	
What are the most valuable pieces of information evaluated with a 12-lead EKG?
A.	 Rate, rhythm, and arrhythmias
B.	 Rate, rhythm, axis, hypertrophy, and infarction
C.	 Rate, arrhythmias, and infarction
D.	 Rhythm, ischemia, and axis
159.	
During your assessment of your patient on IV amiodarone, you note weakening 
bilateral hand grips, increased patient fatigue, and the patient reports muscle 
aches. After reporting your findings to the physician, which of the follow lab tests 
should you expect to be ordered?
A.	 Urine analysis
B.	 Hemogram
C.	 T3 and T4 levels
D.	 None, these findings are normal and expected
160.	
ST elevation in EKG leads V1–V3, syncopal episodes and a RBBB may indicate your 
patient is suffering from
A.	 Takotsubo syndrome
B.	 Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
C.	 Brugada syndrome
D.	 Alcohol-induced cardiomyopathy

36  ❙  Section 4
161.	
Pulsus alternans is most often noted with which of the following conditions?
A.	 Mitral stenosis
B.	 Constrictive pericarditis
C.	 Left ventricular failure
D.	 Aortic stenosis
162.	
Stimulation of the right vagus nerve in turn stimulates the
A.	 Sinoatrial (SA) node
B.	 Mandibular branch of the trigeminal nerve
C.	 Acetylcholine reabsorption
D.	 Chemoreceptors in the carotid arch
163.	
Cyanosis of the skin, mucous membranes, and nail beds can occur when 
deoxygenated hemoglobin is present within the circulation. This cyanosis may 
be observed when which of the following levels of deoxygenated hemoglobin is 
reached?
A.	 5 g/100 ml
B.	 50 g/500 ml
C.	 50 g/250 ml
D.	 1.5 g/150 ml
164.	
Your patient was diagnosed with left-sided heart failure. On an EKG, left-sided 
heart failure results in
A.	 Tall, peaked P waves
B.	 Wide, notched P waves
C.	 Changes in ST segments
D.	 A prolonged Q wave
165.	
Your new patient has been diagnosed with acquired valvular heart disease. The 
primary cause of acquired valvular heart disease is
A.	 Heredity
B.	 Drug abuse
C.	 Rheumatic fever
D.	 Fetal alcohol syndrome
166.	
When removing a central venous catheter, if the patient’s condition permits, 
the patient should be placed flat or in reverse Trendelenburg position. 
Contraindications to this position would not include
A.	 Heart failure
B.	 Pulmonary disease
C.	 Neurologic conditions
D.	 Prolonged coagulation times

Cardiovascular  ❙  37
167.	
Your patient has just transferred from the ICU to your unit. The patient had an 
abdominal aortic aneurysm repair 2 days ago. He is somewhat restless, and his 
vital signs are stable. He keeps pointing at the lumbar area of his back and saying 
that he has discomfort in that area. This behavior and statements may indicate
A.	 A blister from the surgical ground pad
B.	 Need for repositioning
C.	 Irritation from the dressing
D.	 Retroperitoneal bleeding
168.	
The definitive invasive diagnostic procedure to diagnose an aortic dissection 
is a(n)
A.	 Left lateral recumbent CX
B.	 Computerized tomography (CT) scan
C.	 Transesophageal ultrasound
D.	 Aortogram
169.	
You are discussing EKG interpretation with your nursing student. She asks you 
why there is such a difference in the size of the P and QRS waves. You tell her
A.	 “The P wave represents repolarization of the atrium, and the QRS the depolariza­
tion of the ventricles; the size difference is related to lead placement.”
B.	 “The P wave represents repolarization of the atrium, and the QRS the repolariza­
tion of the ventricles; the size difference is related to the muscle mass involved in 
the polarization.”
C.	 “The P wave represents depolarization of the atrium, and the QRS the depolariza­
tion of the ventricles; the size difference is related to the muscle mass involved in 
the polarization.”
D.	 “The P wave represents depolarization of the atrium, and the QRS the repolariza­
tion of the ventricles; the size difference is related to the lead placement.”
170.	
Your patient with obstructive jaundice has no prior history of cardiac 
arrhythmias. He asks why he is on a cardiac monitor. Your best response is
A.	 “You may develop a slower heart rate. This monitor will alert staff to any danger­
ous drop in your heart rate.”
B.	 “You may develop sinus tachycardia, and the monitor will alert staff to any in­
crease in your heart rate.”
C.	 “You will develop atrial flutter, and the monitor will alert staff to changes in your 
heart rate.”
D.	 “You may develop ventricular tachycardia, and the monitor will alert you to 
changes in your heart rate.”
171.	
Your patient was admitted for pneumonia. He is 2 years post heart transplant. 
When you place the EKG monitoring leads, you note sinus tachycardia with PVCs 
and a 2-mm ST elevation. The patient denies pain. This finding is
A.	 Impossible
B.	 Normal
C.	 Indicative of an RBBB
D.	 Indicative of an inferior MI

38  ❙  Section 4
172.	
A patient who is status post heart transplant may have significant bradycardia. 
The drug of choice in such cases is
A.	 Atropine
B.	 Isuproterenol
C.	 Apresoline
D.	 Adenosine
173.	
Your patient is 36 hours status post right femoral bypass graft. The patient 
complains of pain with even slight movement of the limb. You suspect
A.	 An arterial obstruction
B.	 A DVT
C.	 A venous obstruction
D.	 A leg cramp from prolonged bed rest
174.	
Your patient received streptokinase about 30 minutes ago for a lateral wall 
STEMI. You would expect which of the following events to occur?
A.	 Lowered CPK isoenzymes
B.	 Reperfusion rhythms
C.	 Transient increased chest pain
D.	 Mild CHF
175.	
A quadriplegic patient has undergone a CABG and has had no complications. You 
are about to teach his wife how to change the chest dressings and the graft site 
dressings on the legs. Principles of teaching include
A.	 Teaching all the information at once
B.	 Teaching the information as fast as possible
C.	 Explaining the rationale for the procedure, and then demonstrating it
D.	 Speaking slowly so that the patient can hear
176.	
Your patient had a cardiac arrest. You are doing CPR near his implanted ICD 
generator. If the ICD defibrillates, you would feel
A.	 A powerful shock
B.	 Nothing
C.	 Mild tingling
D.	 A mild shock
177.	
When you receive report on your patient, you are told his ICD was reset. You 
notice a large round magnet on the table outside the room. What is the purpose 
of this magnet?
A.	 It inhibits all output from the ICD
B.	 It inhibits the shocking portion only of the ICD
C.	 It inhibits the pacemaker function of the ICD
D.	 It allows timing of the ICD to be set

Cardiovascular  ❙  39
178.	
Which of the following conditions should only minimally alter BNP levels in a 
patient presenting with dyspnea due to pulmonary edema?
A.	 Decompensated heart failure
B.	 Septic shock
C.	 Mitral stenosis
D.	 Kidney failure
The following three questions are about Levophed. We asked about 100 PCCN review attendees to 
write down names of medications they think should be included on the PCCN exam because they 
frequently are used in the progressive care unit. We were very surprised when a large percentage of 
nurses suggested Levophed. Levophed is usually administered only in ICUs and CCUs. We do not 
know if the audience was comprised of a lot of nurses who also work in an ICU/CCU setting or if they 
were just curious. It never hurts to learn something that will help a patient, regardless of whether or 
not it may be on an exam. So far, no questions about Levophed have been reported on a PCCN exam.
179.	
Which of the following statements regarding norepinephrine bitrate (Levophed) is 
correct?
A.	 The maximum adult dose of Levophed is 40 mcg/min
B.	 The intravenous duration of action is 10 minutes
C.	 Dosage > 2 mcg/min causes negative inotropic and chronotropic effects
D.	 Initial dosing of Levophed begins at 0.5 to 1 mcg/min
180.	
Hyperpyrexia is a potential life-threatening adverse reaction if Levophed is 
administered concurrently with which of the following classifications of drugs?
A.	 Alpha blockers
B.	 Beta-blockers
C.	 MAO inhibitors
D.	 Nitrates
181.	
You are explaining to a new nurse why there is a physician order to keep 
phenotolamine mesylate (Regitine) at the bedside of a patient receiving Levophed. 
Which of the following statements is true regarding the use of Regitine?
A.	 Regitine causes vasodilation in tissues damaged by extravasated IV fluids to correct 
and prevent necrosis and sloughing
B.	 Regitine is given only once by IV around the extravasation site
C.	 Regitine is used for vasoconstriction in patients given excessive nitroglycerin
D.	 Reconstituted Regitine is stable at the bedside for 48 hours
182.	
An 18 year old  football player was admitted to your unit following an episode 
of chest pain. The EKG monitor now reveals PVCs and runs of tachycardia. 
Lidocaine is ordered. Which of the following symptoms of lidocaine toxicity 
requires immediate intervention?
A.	 A respiratory rate of 7
B.	 A narrowing QRS
C.	 A heart rate of 70
D.	 Hypertonicity

40  ❙  Section 4
183.	
Today you are precepting a student nurse. You are preparing to administer Lasix, 
40 mg IV. The student asks you how fast the IV dose may be administered. You 
explain that Lasix must be given slowly because
A.	 Lasix may cause nausea
B.	 A rash may develop
C.	 Hyperkalemia may occur
D.	 A rapid infusion can lead to hearing loss
184.	
Your patient with an implanted cardiac defibrillator should have thresholds 
checked frequently during administration of which of the following medications?
A.	 Amiodarone
B.	 Nesiritide
C.	 Nitrogylcerin
D.	 Anisindione
185.	
Symptoms of right-sided heart failure include
A.	 Orthopnea
B.	 Elevated left atrial pressure
C.	 Hepatomegaly
D.	 Pulmonary edema
186.	
A 56 year old  female was initially admitted to your PCU for severe dyspnea 
and has been diagnosed with congestive heart failure. After further study it 
was determined that she has restrictive cardiomyopathy. A common cause of 
restrictive cardiomyopathy is
A.	 An unknown viral infection
B.	 Glycogen storage disease
C.	 A history of diabetes
D.	 Unknown
187.	
You are mentoring a new nurse in the PCU. The patient you will be caring for 
is receiving lidocaine via a continuous infusion. The nurse must be taught that 
lidocaine may cause adverse effects such as
A.	 Hyperexcitability
B.	 CNS toxicity
C.	 Ventricular tachycardia
D.	 Premature atrial complexes
188.	
If the inferior wall of the heart is infarcted, the leads that will most directly reflect 
the injury are leads
A.	 I and aVL
B.	 II, III, and aVF
C.	 V1–V2
D.	 V5–V6

Cardiovascular  ❙  41
189.	
You are teaching your patient about her Coumadin (warfarin) therapy. Part of 
your teaching must include foods to avoid. Which of the following foods should 
be avoided?
A.	 Broccoli, soybean oil, spinach
B.	 Olive oil, peanut butter, kale
C.	 Avocado, broccoli, peas
D.	 Broccoli, green beans, spinach
190.	
Right-sided congestive heart failure signs and symptoms include
A.	 Respiratory distress and hepatomegaly
B.	 Rapid capillary refill and absent jugular venous distention
C.	 Mitral stenosis and abdominal tenderness
D.	 Decreased CVP and strong femoral pulses
191.	
Increased afterload would be present in a patient with which of the following 
conditions?
A.	 Polycythemia
B.	 Aortic insufficiency
C.	 Hypovolemia
D.	 Sepsis
192.	
Your patient was diagnosed with left ventricular failure. Early signs of left 
ventricular failure are
A.	 Central cyanosis and dry cough
B.	 Tachypnea and tachycardia
C.	 Diffuse chest pain and diaphoresis
D.	 Pedal edema and ascites
193.	
While auscultating heart sounds on your new patient, you hear an S3 heart sound. 
The third heart sound generally occurs as a result of
A.	 Active atrial contraction
B.	 Aortic stenosis
C.	 Closure of the aortic and pulmonic valves
D.	 Increased blood flow across the AV valves
194.	
Which of the following levels of B-type Natriuretic Peptide levels supports a 
diagnosis of definite decompensated heart failure?
A.	 BNP < 100 mg/ml
B.	 BNP 420 pg/ml
C.	 BNP > 600 mg/mm3
D.	 BNP 200 mg/mm2
195.	
Which of the following EKG leads is best for monitoring for a RBBB?
A.	 Lead II
B.	 Lead I
C.	 Lead V1
D.	 Lead V6

42  ❙  Section 4
196.	
With regard to stable angina, which of the following statements is true?
A.	 A positive treadmill test will indicate CAD
B.	 A thallium test will not diagnose LV dysfunction
C.	 The treadmill test will miss as many as 20% of cases of single-vessel disease
D.	 CK-MB isoenzymes and troponins will not increase
197.	
A fellow nurse from your unit underwent CABG surgery 4 days ago and was 
transferred to your care yesterday. Today she complains of dull aching around 
the sternum. You note increased tenderness to touch along the sternal edge and 
contracted intercostal muscles. Your next nursing action should be to
A.	 Contact the physician for an order for a 12-lead EKG, cardiac enzymes, and 
morphine
B.	 Culture-swab the wound for bacterial infection
C.	 Do nothing; her pain is normal
D.	 Administer morphine and diazepam as ordered
198.	
The drug of choice to treat AV nodal and atrioventricular reentrant 
arrhythmias is
A.	 Amiodarone
B.	 Clonidine
C.	 Quinidine
D.	 Adenosine
199.	
Your patient was admitted to your unit for observation after falling 10 feet into a 
ravine. She was diagnosed with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) 2 years ago. 
She suffered a concussion, three fractured ribs, a fractured radius, and a sprained 
ankle. She is on a Holter monitor and is receiving IV fluids and antibiotics. Which 
of the following conditions would be exacerbated by the SLE?
A.	 Hypotension
B.	 Constipation
C.	 Pericarditis
D.	 Polycythemia
200.	
If the international normalized ratio (INR) is greater than 5.0, the patient is at 
significant risk of bleeding. A drug that can cause a significant rise in the INR is
A.	 Ethacrinic acid
B.	 Penicillin
C.	 Amiodarone
D.	 A statin
201.	
A drug that will significantly decrease the INR would be
A.	 Naficillin
B.	 Vitamin K
C.	 High-dose vitamin C
D.	 Cyclosporine

Cardiovascular  ❙  43
202.	
Your patient is a middle-aged dockworker who was admitted with a non-STEMI 
inferior wall MI. He is complaining of dyspnea, weakness, bilateral crackles, and 
demonstrates orthopnea. He has developed an S3 heart sound. You suspect he has 
also developed
A.	 A pulmonary embolus
B.	 Pulmonary hypertension
C.	 A fat embolism
D.	 Cardiogenic shock
203.	
Your patient suddenly complains of chest pain. You auscultate a new holosystolic 
murmur at the lower left sternal border. Your patient has probably experienced a
A.	 Dissecting thoracic aneurysm
B.	 Pulmonary embolus
C.	 Ventricular septal rupture
D.	 Lateral wall MI
204.	
Your patient has been diagnosed with pericarditis secondary to blunt chest 
trauma and cardiac contusion after a motor vehicle accident. She asks you how 
long the pericarditis may last. Your answer will be formulated based on the fact 
that
A.	 Acute pericarditis will self-resolve in 1 week
B.	 Acute pericarditis should self-resolve in 2–6 weeks
C.	 Acute pericarditis will always result in chronic pericarditis
D.	 Chronic pericarditis is reoccurring and not associated with any other cardiac 
symptoms
205.	
A patient is at high risk for ventricular septal defect or rupture or even a 
ventricular aneurysm if an infarct occurs in the
A.	 Left anterior descending artery
B.	 Left main coronary artery
C.	 Left circumflex artery
D.	 Right coronary artery
206.	
Auto-regulatory control of cardiac vessels becomes impaired if the coronary 
perfusion pressure drops below
A.	 35 mmHg
B.	 40 mmHg
C.	 50 mmHg
D.	 60 mmHg
207.	
If blood pressure is lower by at least 10–11 mmHg on inspiration than on 
expiration, this is known as
A.	 Pulsus alternans
B.	 Pulse pressure
C.	 Pulsus paradoxus
D.	 Pulsus parvus

44  ❙  Section 4
208.	
You are providing discharge instructions to your patient with angina. The 
physician  has ordered nitroglycerine translingual spray, use 2 sprays every 5 
minutes as needed for chest pain and use 1 spray prior to strenuous activity. 
Which of the following statements is true about the use of nitroglycerine 
translingual spray?
A.	 The nitroglycerine spray must be administered only under the tongue to be 
effective
B.	 Each nitroglycerine spray administers 0.2 mg
C.	 Effects may last up to 2 hours
D.	 Prophylactic administration should be taken 5 to 10 minutes before activity
209.	
Your patient will be discharged to home on transdermal ointment nitroglycerin 
to control angina symptoms. During your care, the patient informs you that he 
is looking forward to sitting in his hot tub after he is discharged. What is the best 
action you should take as a result of the patient’s statement about the hot tub?
A.	 Tell him that due to his condition he should never use his hot tub again
B.	 Notify the physician and request a change from transdermal to an extended re­
lease tablet or capsule
C.	 Advise the patient to increase the amount of transdermal ointment to compensate 
for medication lost while in the water
D.	 Do nothing
210.	
The cardiac marker most closely associated with cardiac risk factors such as 
hypertension, diabetes and weight gain is
A.	 Troponin II
B.	 Hyperlipidemia
C.	 A1C
D.	 C-reactive protein
211.	
On a 12-lead EKG, an anterior wall infarction may be seen in leads
A.	 V4, R
B.	 V5–V6
C.	 V7–V9
D.	 V2–V4
212.	
Which of the heart valves is most rarely affected by infective endocarditis?
A.	 Tricuspid
B.	 Pulmonic
C.	 Mitral
D.	 Aortic
213.	
Which of the following medications should be monitored for cyanide toxicity and 
avoided in patients with renal problems?
A.	 Propranolol
B.	 Sodium nitroprusside
C.	 Dopamine
D.	 Verapamil

Cardiovascular  ❙  45
214.	
Your patient had a syncopal episode at work. When he arrived in the PCU, he 
became apneic and bradycardic. After a dose of atropine and one minute of 
assisted ventilations, he resumed a normal sinus rhythm and normal respirations. 
At first, it was thought the patient had the flu. When an IV was started for fluid 
replacement, excessive bleeding was noted at the IV site. Further examination 
and tests revealed slight hepatomegaly and hepatitis. Labs showed high numbers 
of bands and an elevated platelet count. A diagnosis of myocarditis was made. A 
likely causative agent for this condition is
A.	 Group B Streptococcus
B.	 Escherichia coli
C.	 Coxsackie B1 virus
D.	 Halothane toxicity
215.	
You are treating an elderly woman with suspected sepsis. Her blood pressure is 
92/50, heart rate is 126, respiratory rate is 22, and O2 saturation is 87% on room 
air. Before initiating an infusion of dopamine, which of the following actions is a 
priority for the nurse?
A.	 Obtain consent for a central line
B.	 Prepare to infuse dobutamine and dopamine together
C.	 Verify the number of isotonic crystalloid boluses already given to the patient
D.	 Ensure phentolamine mesylate is at bedside
216.	
You are mentoring a new nurse in your progressive care unit who is caring for a 
patient receiving a dopamine drip. The order is to titrate the dopamine to keep 
the systolic blood pressure over 80 mmHg. You note that the nurse is titrating the 
drip every 2 to 3 minutes. You should
A.	 Praise the nurse for her diligence
B.	 Verify the order for systolic blood pressure
C.	 Suggest that titrations be done only in 15-minute increments
D.	 Advise the nurse to wait at least 5 minutes between titrations
217.	
Your patient has had an AICD for 8 months. He has come to the hospital after a 
syncopal episode during work today. You note his pulse is very irregular, and he is 
complaining of getting “zapped” often. The patient says he is exhausted from the 
repeated shocks and asks for pain medication. His EKG shows sinus bradycardia 
with numerous pacemaker spikes. As a progressive care nurse, you suspect
A.	 The AICD has a faulty lead
B.	 The patient has been in the proximity of a large magnetic field
C.	 The battery in the AICD is losing power
D.	 The patient has a generator failure of his AICD
218.	
Your patient had a DDD pacemaker inserted 3 years ago. His college schoolwork 
has been declining, and he has not been participating in activities with his 
friends. He now has Pacemaker syndrome. What symptoms do you expect to see 
with this condition?
A.	 Fatigue, agitation, forgetfulness
B.	 Fatigue, dizziness, confusion
C.	 Fatigue, agitation, dyspnea
D.	 Fatigue, dizziness, syncope

46  ❙  Section 4
219.	
The most common infection in patients with a ventricular assist device is
A.	 Septicemia
B.	 Pericarditis
C.	 Pneumonia
D.	 Pericardial effusion
220.	
Quincke’s sign is usually observed in patients who have a diagnosis of
A.	 Mitral stenosis
B.	 Endocarditis
C.	 Aortic insufficiency
D.	 Pericarditis
221.	
Which of the following hemodynamic changes will occur in a patient with a 
cardiac tamponade?
A.	 Cardiac output increases
B.	 Stroke volume increases
C.	 Stroke volume decreases
D.	 Heart sounds are easily auscultated
222.	
Beck’s triad is a combination of symptoms useful in diagnosing a cardiac 
tamponade. These symptoms include
A.	 Increased pulse pressure, increased JVD, and tachycardia
B.	 A pericardial friction rub, hypertension, and RV failure
C.	 LV failure, tachycardia, and hypertension
D.	 Distended neck veins, muffled heart sounds, and hypotension
223.	
If a dopamine infusion infiltrates, the suggested treatment is to inject which of 
the following medications into the affected area?
A.	 Epinephrine
B.	 Phentolamine
C.	 Lidocaine
D.	 Atropine
224.	
Your patient has developed diffuse chest pain and tachycardia. Upon auscultation 
you hear muffled heart sounds and note an increased JVD. You suspect the 
patient has developed a cardiac tamponade. If your patient does have a cardiac 
tamponade, which of the following findings would you expect on a chest X-ray?
A.	 A dilated superior vena cava
B.	 A pneumothorax
C.	 Narrowed mediastinum
D.	 Delineation of the pericardium and epicardium
225.	
Today your patient was diagnosed with left ventricular failure. Early signs of left 
ventricular failure include
A.	 Hypoxemia and peripheral cyanosis
B.	 Tachypnea and tachycardia
C.	 Dyspnea and profuse sweating
D.	 Central cyanosis and paradoxical respirations

Cardiovascular  ❙  47
226.	
A patient was started on esmolol for severe hypertension refractive to other drug 
regimens. Esmolol is incompatible with which of the following medications?
A.	 Cimetidine
B.	 Furosemide
C.	 Penicillin G potassium
D.	 Midazolam
227.	
Dilated cardiomyopathy is characterized by dilation of the ventricles and 
impaired systolic function. Common causes are valvular heart disease and 
ischemic heart disease. Other causes are idiopathic. The most common cause of 
idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy is
A.	 Autoimmune
B.	 Alcohol
C.	 Genetic
D.	 Familial
228.	
The physician ordered Ofirmev to help with pain control on your post-CABG 
patient. Which statement is true concerning the use of this medication?
A.	 Ofirmev can be given IVP
B.	 Ofirmev should be diluted prior to administration
C.	 Ofirmev dosing for a patient weighing < 50 kg should be calculated at 10 mg/kg
D.	 The maximum daily dose of Ofirmev is 4,000 mg for a patient weighing > 50 kg
229.	
Which of the following is considered an end effect of CHF?
A.	 Atrial fibrillation
B.	 Increased renal perfusion
C.	 Pulmonary venous shrinkage
D.	 Systemic venous engorgement
230.	
The type of cardiomyopathy that is characterized by replacement of normal cells 
by fatty tissue is known as
A.	 Restrictive cardiomyopathy
B.	 Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
C.	 Arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy
D.	 Dilated cardiomyopathy
231.	
Your patient has been experimenting with multiple drugs. She was admitted 
to your unit after a cocaine overdose. The patient has had an anterolateral 
myocardial infarction. Where do you expect to see changes on the 12-lead EKG?
A.	 Leads V1, V2, I, and AVL
B.	 Leads V2, V3, V4, I, and AVL
C.	 Leads V2, V3, V4, II, III, and AVF
D.	 Leads V1, V2, II, III, and AVF
232.	
A patient is receiving propranolol intravenously for SVT and hypertension. Which 
of the following are life-threatening side effects of propranolol administration?
A.	 Laryngospasm and bronchospasm
B.	 Complete heart block and dizziness
C.	 Respiratory depression and cardiovascular collapse
D.	 Polymorphic VT and dyspnea

48  ❙  Section 4
233.	
Regurgitation systolic murmurs are associated with
A.	 Aortic stenosis
B.	 Pulmonic valve disease
C.	 Ventral septal defects
D.	 Atrial septal defects
234.	
A 65 year old  female was admitted to the PCU for treatment of intermittent chest 
pain and severe hypertension. A nitroglycerin drip was ordered. Which of the 
following statements is true regarding nitroglycerin administration?
A.	 Use only plastic IV tubing
B.	 Nitroglycerine may be piggy-backed to Isolyte P
C.	 Nitroglycerine should be filtered prior to delivery
D.	 Have normal saline or other volume expander available at bedside
235.	
What do abnormal Q waves signify on a 12-lead EKG?
A.	 Partial thickness death of myocardium
B.	 Complete thickness infarction of myocardium
C.	 They are of no significance
D.	 Repolarization of the myocardium
236.	
The most common new onset dysrhythmia seen in a patient with a diagnosis of 
pulmonary edema is
A.	 Paroxysmal atrial tachycardia
B.	 Supraventricular tachycardia
C.	 Sinus rhythm with an RBBB
D.	 Atrial fibrillation
237.	
What are some common reasons for pacemaker insertion?
A.	 Tachycardia, Wenckebach, and bradycardia
B.	 Symptomatic bradycardia, overdrive pacing, and acute MI with sinus dysfunction
C.	 Complete heart block, Wenckebach, and tachycardia
D.	 Bundle branch block, Wenckebach, and tachycardia
238.	
Right ventricular afterload may be reduced by
A.	 A hypoxic state
B.	 Hypoventilation
C.	 Inhaled nitric oxide
D.	 Administration of epinephrine
239.	
Your patient was admitted to the PCU with cough, fever, chills, anorexia, malaise, 
and headache. He currently has a pericardial friction rub and has a history of 
rheumatic fever. While examining the patient, you note fine, dark lines in his nail 
beds and some flat lesions on his palms. These flat lesions are known as
A.	 Janeway lesions
B.	 Osler’s nodes
C.	 Roth spots
D.	 Pella’s sign

Cardiovascular  ❙  49
240.	
A definitive diagnosis of myocarditis can be made via
A.	 Transmural catheterization
B.	 Transesophageal ultrasound
C.	 Transcutaneous ultrasound
D.	 Endomyocardial biopsy
241.	
A heart murmur associated with acute valvular regurgitation is called
A.	 S3
B.	 S2
C.	 S1
D.	 S4
242.	
Your patient was diagnosed with refractive SVT that did not respond to either 
adenosine or cardioversion. The patient is being monitored before being 
transported for ablation therapy. Tachyarrhythmias that are refractive to 
conventional therapies may have to be treated with radio-frequency ablation. 
This treatment is usually successful on reentry tachyarrhythmias. The radio 
frequency destroys myocardial tissue via
A.	 Radiation
B.	 Heat
C.	 Cold
D.	 An overriding signal to ablate the pacemaker
243.	
A high CVP reading may be caused by
A.	 Nitroglycerin administration
B.	 Increased contractility
C.	 Hypovolemia
D.	 Cardiac tamponade
244.	
New-onset atrial fibrillation frequently develops as sequelae to
A.	 Pulmonary edema
B.	 Left heart failure
C.	 Use of PPIs
D.	 Tricuspid regurgitation
245.	
Intravenous hydralazine is incompatible with
A.	 Furosemide
B.	 Hydrocortisone
C.	 Potassium chloride
D.	 Heparin
246.	
Which of the following statements about drowning victims is true?
A.	 There is no evidence that water acts as an obstructive foreign body
B.	 CPR should be performed while the patient is in the water
C.	 Immediate maneuvers to relieve foreign body airway obstruction should 
precede BLS
D.	 Spinal cord injuries are common among drowning victims

50  ❙  Section 4
247.	
What is the purpose of a right side 12-lead EKG?
A.	 It allows a view of the pulmonary blood flow
B.	 It looks at the inferior wall of the heart
C.	 It looks at the right ventricle and the posterior of the heart
D.	 It assesses for left ventricle aneurysm
248.	
Your patient lives on a nearby Indian reservation. He is retired and on a fixed 
income without insurance. He is being discharged today after an overnight 
observational stay for chest pain. In planning his discharge care, which of the 
following should be considered first to increase compliance with his plan of care 
once he is home?
A.	 Arrange for home nursing visits every day for 1 week
B.	 Ask the physician to consider an over-the-counter antiplatelet medication
C.	 Schedule his follow-up appointment with the cardiologist in 3 months
D.	 Suggest a gym membership to begin exercising
249.	
A patient just admitted to your PCU was diagnosed with unstable angina. He is 
scheduled for an exercise stress test. He tells you that he has a “bad hip” and an 
old knee injury that make it difficult for him to walk or stand for more than 20 
minutes. You tell him
A.	 “You only need to walk for 10 minutes”
B.	 “You can ride a bike for 20 minutes instead”
C.	 “I will call the physician and ask for the weight-lift test”
D.	 “I will call the physician and ask for a stress echocardiography test”
250.	
Approximately what percentage of coronary artery blockage is needed to cause 
angina?
A.	 45%
B.	 60%
C.	 75%
D.	 90%
251.	
Sometimes patients suffer from a condition called silent ischemia. The patient 
will show objective signs of ischemia on an EKG but offer no complaints of 
anginal pain. This condition is particularly troubling as about one-third of all 
MI patients do not complain of chest pain. Patients who are at high risk for silent 
ischemia are
A.	 Smokers
B.	 Patients living in cold climates
C.	 Patients with renal impairment
D.	 Diabetics
252.	
When a patient suffers a myocardial infarction, the infarcted area is surrounded 
by injured but still viable tissue. This area is known as
A.	 The zone of necrosis
B.	 The necrotic zone
C.	 The zone of injury
D.	 The zone of infarction

Cardiovascular  ❙  51
253.	
After a mycocardial infarction, there remains an area of viable cells. 
Repolarization in this area is temporarily impaired but will return to normal over 
time. This area is called the
A.	 Zone of ischemia
B.	 Zone of injury
C.	 Zone of infarction
D.	 Zone of necrosis
254.	
After a myocardial infarction, there is an area of dead muscle. This area is known 
as the
A.	 Zone of ischemia
B.	 Zone of injury
C.	 Zone of necrosis
D.	 Zone of infarction
255.	
Your patient suffered an acute inferior wall MI two days ago, the patient suddenly 
complains of severe chest pain hypotension, syncope, and hemodynamic collapse 
with signs and symptoms of cardiogenic shock. A holosystolic murmur is 
auscultated on the left sternal border. This patient is probably suffering from
A.	 A ventricular septal rupture
B.	 Papillary muscle rupture
C.	 An anterior wall MI
D.	 A posterior wall MI
256.	
Your new patient, who was diagnosed with heart failure, awakened from sleep 
gasping for air. As a progressive care nurse, you believe this patient is suffering 
from
A.	 Paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea
B.	 A panic attack
C.	 Orthopnea
D.	 Asthma
257.	
Your patient was diagnosed with heart failure. The patient has difficulty 
breathing while lying flat. This condition is known as
A.	 Dyspnea
B.	 Orthopnea
C.	 Manifested cardiac asthma
D.	 Pulmogenic heart failure
258.	
Your patient who has been admitted for heart failure has developed dyspnea 
and has audible wheezing. The patient also has a nonproductive cough. When 
auscultating the lungs, fine crackles are heard. This patient likely is suffering from
A.	 Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction
B.	 Orthopnea
C.	 Cardiac asthma
D.	 Noncardiogenic pulmonary edema

52  ❙  Section 4
259.	
If intravenous nitroglycerin is required for relief of ischemic chest discomfort, a 
treatment goal would be
A.	 Keep the systolic BP greater than 100
B.	 Do not use in patients with concomitant pulmonary edema
C.	 Limit drop of SBP to 30 mmHg below baseline in hypertensive patients
D.	 Titrate to effect without an end point

Cardiovascular  ❙  53
SECTION 4: CARDIOVASCULAR ANSWERS
1.	
Correct answer: B
When the heart begins to fail and cardiac output is insufficient, several neurohormonal 
compensatory mechanisms are activated. These mechanisms include the renin-
angiotensin-aldosterone system and the sympathetic nervous system. If the patient 
also suffers from hypertension, the patient may develop ventricular hypertrophy. The 
process of reshaping the ventricle is known as ventricular remodeling.
2.	
Correct answer: D
The most common clinical symptoms of restrictive cardiomyopathy are an engorged 
liver, orthopnea and dyspnea. Other symptoms are a decreased cardiac output, an 
S4 and S3, and an elevated central venous pressure. The patients may present with 
enlarged atria and small ventricles. The atrial septum may be thicker than normal.
3.	
Correct answer: D
Your patient has been diagnosed with mitral valve regurgitation (insufficiency). As 
a progressive care nurse, you know a frequent cause of this condition is likely to be 
a dysfunction of one or more valve components. Retrograde blood flow into the left 
atrium  is wrong because it is actually the definition of mitral valve insufficiency. 
Progressive reduction in size of the aortic valve is wrong because the aortic valve is not 
involved, and an underdeveloped left atrium is wrong because the left atrium is likely 
to be enlarged as a result of the insufficiency, not the cause.
4.	
Correct answer: D
When using a temporary pulse generator, the dial that regulates the amount of 
electrical current that is measured in milliamperes (mA) and delivered to the heart to 
initiate the depolarization impulse is called the output dial.
5.	
Correct answer: B
You have just received a patient from ICU who underwent a CABG 3 days ago. On 
initial assessment, you note the patient has wires that exit subcostally to the left of the 
sternum. The position of these wires indicates that the wires are attached to the heart 
in the ventricles. Removal of the wires generally has minimal risk. However, many 
facilities do not allow RNs to remove the wires, so make certain you know the policy 
and procedure for your hospital.
6.	
Correct answer: A
Your patient suffered a cardiac arrest and has achieved ROSC but is comatose (lacking 
meaningful response to verbal commands). According to the 2015 American Heart 
Association guidelines for CPR and ECC, targeted temperature management (TTM) is 
to maintain a constant temperature between 32°C and 35°C (89.6°F and 95.2°F) for at 
least 24 hours.
7.	
Correct answer: C
While participating in a cardiac arrest on your unit, you note a colleague is 
performing chest compressions at a rate of approximately 90 per minute. The correct 
rate for performing chest compressions on an adult is 100–120 per minute, according 
to the 2015 American Heart Association guidelines for CPR and ECC. It is also good 
practice to allow the chest to fully recoil after each compression.

54  ❙  Section 4
8.	
Correct answer: B
Chest compressions tend to be too shallow or too deep. If too shallow, the compression 
may be ineffectual. If too deep, the compression may actually cause an injury. 
According to the 2015 American Heart Association guidelines for CPR and ECC, 
compression depth should be targeted at 2 to 2.4 inches.
9.	
Correct answer: C
A pulse pressure is the difference between the systolic blood pressure and the diastolic 
blood pressure—in this case, 30. This measurement is significant because if the patient 
has a narrow pulse pressure, it would indicate systemic compensatory vasoconstriction 
due to a decrease in arterial pressure (the stroke volume falls and the systolic pressure 
decreases). Another way to look at this phenomenon is to think of the high systemic 
vascular resistance causing an increase in diastolic pressure.
10.	
Correct answer: D
The ejection fraction should be over 50%. This is the amount of blood ejected from the 
left ventricle compared to the total amount available. This amount is expressed as a 
percentage. For example, if the ventricle contains 90 ml of blood and 50 ml are ejected, 
the amount would be represented as a percentage, in this case 63%. An ejection 
fraction of 35% or less indicates a problem with contractility, outflow, or filling.
11.	
Correct answer: B
ST segment depression usually indicates myocardial ischemia. This patient also 
exhibited substernal chest pain, another finding seen with ischemia.
12.	
Correct answer: B
Metabolism of the heart is decreased during diastole, which comprises about one-half 
of the cardiac cycle at birth. Shortly after birth the diastolic phase lengthens to 
comprise two-thirds of the cardiac cycle. An increase in cardiac output decreases 
diastole because more time is necessary to eject contents.
13.	
Correct answer: C
The MAP is a mean pressure that takes into account that the diastolic phase of 
the cardiac cycle comprises two-thirds of the cycle. The calculation for the MAP is 
MAP = 2(DBP) + (SBP) / 3; in this case, 85. If you took the average of the two pressures, 
it would not account for the importance of the diastolic phase. The heart rate is not 
entered into this calculation. Patients should maintain a MAP of at least 60 to ensure 
perfusion to the brain and kidneys.
When the heart rate is over 100, the diastolic phase may be less than one-half the 
cardiac cycle. Electronic machines are calibrated to take variables into consideration 
and the digitally displayed MAP readings are highly accurate.
14.	
Correct answer: A
In chronic mitral valve insufficiency, the left atrium dilates to accommodate the excess 
volume caused by the regurgitated blood volume. Chronic mitral valve insufficiency 
is caused by infective endocarditis and chronic mitral valve regurgitation is caused 
by papillary muscle rupture are wrong because infective endocarditis and papillary 
muscle rupture are causes of acute mitral valve regurgitation. Left ventricle atrophies 
in patients with chronic mitral regurgitation is wrong because the ventricle actually 
increases in size to maintain cardiac output.

Cardiovascular  ❙  55
15.	
Correct answer: C
Phosphodiesterase inhibitors are inotropes that can also cause vasodilation and are 
referred to as inodilators. Milrinone (Primacor) is an example of an inotrope, as is 
Amrinone (Inocor). These medications inhibit phosphodiesterase, and this action 
results in increased levels of intracellular calcium and adenosine monophosphate. 
Cardiac output is increased due to an increase in contractility, while the vasodilation 
reduces afterload. Both of these medications a will cause a degree of thrombocytopenia. 
Milrinone may also cause atrial and ventricular rhythm disturbances.
16.	
Correct answer: D
Epinephrine and norepinephrine may be used in a progressive care unit to treat 
hypotension. The following actions of these two vasopressors will increase blood 
glucose by increasing liver glycogenolysis and stimulating glycogenesis. In addition, 
epinephrine and norepinephrine increase peripheral insulin resistance, increase 
lipolysis, and suppress insulin secretion.
17.	
Correct answer: A
History of asthma is not a consideration for the use of Pradaxa for a patient 
undergoing a spinal procedure. Use of a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory such 
as aspirin or may cause or exacerbate hematoma formation. A history of spinal 
deformity or spinal surgery may lead to the formation of a spinal/epidural hematoma 
as well. The deformity or even scar tissue may alter the path of a needle or catheter, 
causing a puncture or fluid extravasation. An indwelling epidural catheter may 
become dislodged or irritate tissue, promoting bleeding.
18.	
Correct answer: B
Aortic regurgitation is likely to be caused by Marfan syndrome, rheumatoid arthritis, 
rheumatic fever, syphilis, an older valve, a subaortic stenosis, or hypertension.
19.	
Correct answer: B
Normal cardiac output should be 4 to 8 L/min. The formula for calculating this value 
is: CO = HR × SV. In this case, 76 (HR) × 65 (SV) = 4,940 ml/min. Converted to liters, 
this value would equal 4.94 L/min.
20.	
Correct answer: B
Unstable angina usually associated with left anterior descending (LAD) coronary 
artery lesions is known as Wellen’s syndrome. Characteristic changes include inverted 
symmetric T waves and/or biphasic waves with little or no ST elevation and the 
absence of Q waves. However, the most dangerous aspect of this syndrome is that the 
EKG changes appear only when the patient is pain free. Sometimes, staff may believe 
the resolution of pain means the patient can be scheduled for a stress test. The stress 
test may initiate an impending MI, so it must not be performed. When a patient has 
Wellen’s syndrome, an MI may occur in as little as a few minutes to a few days.
21.	
Correct answer: C
Stroke volume is comprised of contractility, preload, and afterload. Viscosity, blood 
volume, and impedance represent the components of afterload. Myocardium is 
sensitive to changes, especially increased afterload. With only minute changes in 
afterload, the stroke volume can fall significantly.

56  ❙  Section 4
22.	
Correct answer: D
During CVP pressure monitoring, the c wave represents the increase in RA pressure 
from closure of the tricuspid valve.
23.	
Correct answer: B
The control on a temporary pacemaker that regulates the ability of the pacemaker 
to detect the heart’s intrinsic electrical activity is known as the sensitivity control. 
The signal the generator will recognize is measured in millivolts (mV). The lowest 
sensitivity to 20 mV or async, prohibits the pacemaker from sensing any intrinsic 
electrical activity. Conversely, setting the sensitivity to 0.5 to 1mV, allows the 
pacemaker to sense even the lowest amplitude signals.
24.	
Correct answer: C
The reversal agent for Pradaxa (dagbigatran) is idarucizumab (Praxbind).
25.	
Correct answer: A
Pradaxa is actually indicated for use in patients to reduce the risk of stroke and 
systemic embolism in patients with nonvalvular atrial fibrillation. Pradaxa is 
contraindicated for use in patients with a mechanical heart valve, a known 
hypersensitivity reaction, or active pathological bleeding.
26.	
Correct answer: A
Exceptional and extreme mental stress, anger and resentment in a postmenopausal 
woman may cause Takotsubo cardiomyopathy (“broken heart” syndrome). Excessive 
catecholamine release may stun or completely exhaust the mid-section and tip the 
heart. Troponin and creatinine kinase levels are only very slightly elevated. EKG 
changes may show initial ST elevation and short QT. For a few days the QT may be 
prolonged with large, deep negative T waves. Recovery may take weeks and show a 
flipped T wave and normal QT. Treatment is via supportive care relief of stress.
In March of 2016, the European Journal of Cardiology published new findings on 
Takotsubo cardiomyopathy. The age range was expanded from 55 to 65, and male 
patients were added. Looks like we just have too much stress nowadays.
27.	
Correct answer: B
A low CVP reading may represent increased contractility. The heart is able to eject its 
contents more easily, reducing the pressure in the right atrium.
28.	
Correct answer: C
Right ventricular preload in the heart is measured by the central venous pressure 
(CVP). The normal range for a CVP is 2–8 mmHg. The CVP is also known as the right 
atrial pressure (RAP).
29.	
Correct answer: C
Prinzmetal’s angina is also known as variant angina and is usually caused by a 
coronary vasospasm. It may occur at rest, long after exercise, or during sleep.

Cardiovascular  ❙  57
30.	
Correct Answer: B
The S in the PQRST pain assessment algorithm stands for Severity.
The PQRST pain assessment method is used to collect assessment data regarding chest 
pain in a logical manner that ensures complete assessment data is gathered.
• 
The P in the acronym stands for “provokes.” Does any activity specifically provoke 
the pain?
• 
Q represents the “quality of the pain.” Typical adjectives used include sharp, stabbing, 
squeezing, pressure, tightness, dull, indigestion-like, and pulsating.
• 
 R is “radiation,” meaning that pain starts at one location and ends at another loca­
tion. For example, pain may radiate from the chest to the jaw, a specific arm, the 
back, and/or abdomen.
• 
S stands for “severity of the pain.” Some patients may have altered pain sensation 
from other disease processes such as diabetes, neuropathies, and multiple scleroses 
and may not present with typical symptoms for a myocardial infarction.
• 
T stands for “time.” The duration of the pain is important when considering anti­
thrombolytics as treatment, because this is highly time sensitive and will impact 
success of the treatment.
31.	
Correct answer: D
You are caring for a patient who was admitted for observation for a pulmonary 
contusion sustained from a bicycle accident. While ambulating, the patient suddenly 
complains of chest pain. You note that while describing the pain, the patient clenches 
his fist over the sternal area. This gesture is commonly associated with ischemic chest 
pain and is known as Levine’s sign. It is thought that the clenched fist occurs because 
pain is referred primarily to the left forearm. Patients suffering from acute coronary 
syndrome, an MI, or angina pectoris often produce this gesture.
32.	
Correct answer: A
The systolic pressure obtained when an arm is raised and is at least 15 mmHg lower 
than a pressure obtained at heart level, usually indicates the patient is suffering from 
aortic insufficiency (aortic regurgitation). Blood flows in the reverse direction during 
ventricular diastole due to a leak in the aortic valve. Less volume is pumped from the 
left ventricle during systole.
33.	
Correct answer: B
The normal range for a serum amiodarone level is 1 to 2.5 mcg/ml.
34.	
Correct answer: B
STEMI and NSTEMI are both myocardial infarctions. The essential fact is that the 
NSTEMI does not have ST elevation on the EKG tracing and is identified by the cardiac 
enzymes. The STEMI diagnosis is based on symptoms, clinical examination, and the 
EKG tracing. Treatment is not delayed for the patient presenting with STEMI.
35.	
Correct answer: B
A 1-mm ST elevation, with or without a pathologic Q wave, is diagnostic for STEMI. 
A large R wave in lead V1 or V2 may indicate a posterior wall MI. An NSTEMI has no 
ST elevation and must have cardiac enzymes for diagnosis.

58  ❙  Section 4
36.	
Correct answer: C
When the physician presses on the thyroid cartilage and displaces it to the patient’s 
left. The physician is most likely determining the possibility the patient has an aortic 
arch aneurysm. The displacement to the left increases contact between the aorta and 
the left bronchus so systolic pulsations from the aorta can be felt. This is can be felt 
and are known as Cardarelli’s sign.
37.	
Correct answer: B
During inspiration your patient has a paradoxical rise in jugular venous pressure. 
This phenomenon is commonly associated with right heart failure. Blood flow to the 
right ventricle is impaired because of a decrease in compliance or possibly fluid in 
the pericardial space. Blood backs up into the venous system, causing the increase in 
jugular venous pressure.
38.	
Correct answer: C
Your patient is suffering from restrictive cardiomyopathy. During your initial 
assessment you note the patient is demonstrating Kussmaul’s sign. As a progressive 
care nurse, you know this finding indicates a rise of jugular venous pressure on 
inspiration. Normally, the jugular venous pressure drops on inspiration due to a 
compliant right ventricle and decreased thoracic pressure.
39.	
Correct answer: B
Calcium channel blockers act primarily on arteriolar tissue. Large lumen vessels in 
the arterial system are affected. The advantage of this action is that both systolic and 
diastolic pressures are reduced and the patient will not have a drop in blood pressure. 
The blood pressure may be lowered slightly and cause a reflex baroreceptor response 
to speed up the heart rate to maintain cardiac output.
40.	
Correct answer: A
Decreased preload may result from hyperthermia (vasodilation), diuresis, hemorrhage, 
surgery, vomiting, and diarrhea. Any condition(s) that may result in a loss of fluid 
within the intravascular space will decrease preload.
41.	
Correct answer: D
If a patient becomes tachycardic, the QT and the RR intervals shorten.
42.	
Correct answer: A
Bronchospasms are an adverse drug reaction to Plavix administration. Some 
asthmatics are prone to bronchospasms and should be advised to report an 
increase in frequency and/or severity while taking Plavix. Pneumonia is an adverse 
reaction to enoxaparin sodium (Lovenox) administration. Apnea may be seen with 
fentanyl administration. Hemoptysis is an adverse reaction to prasugrel (Effient) 
administration.
43.	
Correct answer: B
The right ventricle infarction is often seen in the patient with an inferior wall MI and 
ST elevation in leads V1 and V2. A right side 12-lead EKG should be done to verify the 
right ventricular infarction.

Cardiovascular  ❙  59
44.	
Correct answer: C
Potassium and magnesium levels should be monitored closely for any patient on 
dofetilide. This drug blocks potassium channels to delay QT interval. Hypokalemia 
and hypomagnesemia may increase the risk of drug induced Torsade de pointes.
45.	
Correct answer: C
Headache and hallucinations are symptoms of an adverse reaction to clopidogrel 
bisulfate (Plavix). Additional CNS symptoms would include confusion, depression, 
dizziness, and fatigue. These findings should be reported to the physician immediately; 
Plavix administration should be discontinued and alternative anticoagulation 
therapy started. Aspirin, Angiomax, and Lovenox adverse reactions do not include 
hallucinations.
46.	
Correct answer: D
Dofetilide is contraindicated until amiodarone serum levels drop below 0.3 mcg/ml. 
Since amiodarone’s half-life is around 60 days, probable recent administration during 
the patient’s resuscitation would place the patient at risk for profoundly widened QT 
interval and risk for another cardiac event.
47.	
Correct answer: A
Upright QRS in leads V1, and V2 show right bundle branch blocks. A simple way to 
remember which type of bundle branch block with a QRS wider than 0.12 seconds is to 
think of the turn signals on your car. For a right turn, you must push the lever up; for 
a left turn the lever must go down. So, looking at V1 and V2, if the QRS is upright, then 
there is a right bundle branch block. If V1 and V2 are downward in force, then it is a 
left bundle branch block.
48.	
Correct answer: A
Using ICHD nomenclature, the first V is the chamber paced.
Chamber 
Paced
Chamber 
Sensed
Mode of 
Response
Programmability, 
Rate modulation
Antiatachy-
arrhythmia 
Function
V = Ventricle
V = Ventricle
I = Inhibit
P = Simple programmable
P = Pacing
A = Atrium
A = Atrium
T = Triggered
M = Multiprogrammable
S = Shock
D = Dual 
chamber
D = Dual 
chamber
D = Dual 
(T & I)
R = Rate modulation
Dual = Dual 
(P & S)
49.	
Correct answer: C
Using ICHD nomenclature, the second V is the chamber sensed.
50.	
Correct answer: B
Quinidine and hypomagnesemia can lead to Torsade de pointes (also known as 
polymorphic ventricular tachycardia), a recurrent ventricular tachycardia that turns 
on its axis every 6–8 beats, giving the EKG a twisting or “turning on point” look. 
Hypomagnesemia may occur when the patient receives total parenteral nutrition.

60  ❙  Section 4
51.	
Correct answer: D
When your patient’s calf muscle is pressed forward against the tibia but not when 
compressed side to side, pain is elicited. This finding is known as Moses’ sign or 
sometimes as Bancroft’s sign. Usually this result indicates a deep vein thrombosis, but 
is not specific to the diagnosis but raises suspicion. Another possible indicator of DVT 
is Lowenberg’s sign. If a blood pressure cuff is place around the calf and inflated to 
80 mmHg, immediately eliciting pain, the result may indicate DVT.
52.	
Correct answer: C
You are attempting to obtain a blood pressure on your new admission, an elderly 
patient. After obliterating the radial pulse, an attempt is made to palpate the radial 
pulse. The area feels like a firm tube. This finding indicates pseudohypertension. The 
elderly often have stiff arterial walls due to atherosclerosis. Sometime calcification 
prevents the artery from being compressed by the blood pressure cuff. The readings 
may be falsely high if auscultated, but if an arterial line is used, a more accurate 
measurement can be obtained.
53.	
Correct answer: C
Discharge instructions for a patient prescribed amiodarone include avoiding 
grapefruit and grapefruit juice because they increase blood amiodarone levels. Outside 
activities should include restricting contact sports and require use of sunscreen and 
clothing to protect the skin from exposure to sunlight. Amiodarone may impair liver 
function and lead to thrombocytopenia. Sunlight exposure may lead to a bluish-gray 
cast to the skin. If the patient normally uses theophylline to treat asthma, the dosage 
may need to be decreased as amiodarone increases serum theophylline levels. 
However, in this case, nothing was mentioned about this patient having asthma. 
Dark urine, respiratory distress, and/or edema should be reported immediately to the 
physician, as these are signs of renal and pulmonary impairment.
54.	
Correct answer: B
This patient has dilated cardiomyopathy that is causing systolic dysfunction. Patients 
with this type of cardiomyopathy will have S3 and S4 gallops, and the EKG may show 
atrial fibrillation, ventricular dysrhythmias, or a sinus tachycardia most of the time. 
The patient may have a systolic murmur of the AV valves. The patient will probably 
also have peripheral edema or ascites, hepatomegaly, and pale, cool extremities. It is 
possible to have changes in mentation. Hypertrophic and restrictive cardiomyopathies 
are diastolic dysfunctions.
55.	
Correct answer: D
Dobutamine improves cardiac output primarily by increasing cardiac contractility. 
Unlike dopamine, dobutamine does not increase heart rate and can be used in 
tachycardic patients.
56.	
Correct answer: D
Atropine administration may result in headaches, dizziness, and coma. You should 
also observe for urinary retention and hypotension and tachycardia due to blocking of 
parasympathetic receptor sites.

Cardiovascular  ❙  61
57.	
Correct answer: B
The PCU nurse should monitor closely the urine output and liver function tests 
of a patient receiving a loading dose of amiodarone. The high concentration of 
amiodarone may cause renal necrosis and impaired output leading to vascular 
congestion and respiratory distress. Amiodarone has been linked to hepatocellular 
damage and impaired liver function. Other side effects include anemia, neutropenia, 
pancytopenia, and thrombocytopenia. Thyroid levels should also be monitored 
because amiodarone may cause hypo- or hyperthyroidism. Amiodarone has been 
linked to bluish-gray pigmentation in long-term patients exposed to sunlight.
58.	
Correct answer: A
Patients taking both diazoxide and furosemide should have their glucose levels 
monitored closely for possible hyperglycemia. Diazoxide inhibits pancreatic release of 
insulin and stimulates the liver to release glucose.
59.	
Correct answer: B
The high-contrast mediums used in cardiac catheterizations may cause or contribute 
to hypernatremia due to their high sodium content.
60.	
Correct answer: B
The classic description of an X-ray showing a pericardial effusion is the “water bottle” 
silhouette. In patients with a pericardial effusion, QRS amplitude is decreased. 
Diastolic filling is decreased as well.
61.	
Correct answer: A
A blunt cardiac injury is most likely to affect the right ventricle because it usually 
suffers the force of blows to the chest. The right ventricle lies directly behind the 
sternum and close to the chest wall. The left ventricle is lateral to the sternum and less 
likely to be injured. Both atria are small and more protected as well.
62.	
Correct answer: D
This patient has increased exercise intolerance, edema, and dyspnea, all of which are 
signs of left ventricular failure. The crackles are probably the result of fluid buildup in 
the lungs. Because the left heart cannot pump effectively, the fluid backs up.
63.	
Correct answer: B
The pH is normal (compensated), the CO2 level is high (respiratory acidosis), and the 
HCO3 level is normal. As you were reading along, you probably expected a question 
about a cardiac issue, not ABGs. Read each question carefully as you could easily 
misinterpret what a question is asking.
64.	
Correct answer: D
The patient’s intolerance for activity and crackles indicate pulmonary congestion. 
Edema indicates third spacing. All of these symptoms are cardinal signs of CHF.
65.	
Correct answer: C
This patient’s heart cannot pump the fluid out and the lungs are congested (dyspnea). 
Edema is a sign of pump failure. The patient will probably develop ascites and 
hepatomegaly.

62  ❙  Section 4
66.	
Correct answer: C
The type of myocardial infarction that involves the entire thickness of myocardium 
in a region is called transmural. “Transmural” describes the full thickness of the 
myocardial wall. “Subendocardial” indicates that the infarction has not affected the 
full thickness of the myocardium. The anteroseptal and inferior walls are potential 
locations of the myocardial infarction.
67.	
Correct answer: A
Your patient with an implanted cardiac defibrillator should have thresholds checked 
frequently during administration of amiodarone. Amiodarone may affect the pacing 
threshold of implanted cardiac defibrillators, so the pacing settings should be verified 
prior to and during amiodarone administration. Anisindione is an anticoagulant and 
administration is contraindicated for a patient with an invasive device such as an 
implanted cardiac defibrillator.
68.	
Correct answer: C
Increased preload may be caused by renal problems. An overload of fluid is present 
in the intravascular space. Preload may also be increased in cases where resistance 
is increased, such as in valve dysfunctions or vasoconstriction. Anything that blocks 
fluid from progressing forward or prevents elimination of fluids is a potential cause of 
increased preload. If the heart fails and the myocardium cannot pump fluid out, such 
as in damage from surgery, cardiomyopathies, or decreased stretch following heart 
surgery, preload increases.
69.	
Correct answer: C
Beta-1 receptors cause an increase in conductivity, heart rate and contractility. They 
are an integral part of the sympathetic nervous system.
70.	
Correct answer: D
Stimulation of the parasympathetic nerve fibers in the heart will result in the release 
of acetylcholine. The acetylcholine binds to parasympathetic receptors. These receptors 
are classified into two types: muscarinic and nicotinic. Muscarinic parasympathetic 
receptors are located in the heart and smooth muscle. Nicotinic receptors are found at 
the neuromuscular junction, the central nervous system, and adrenal medulla.
71.	
Correct answer: B
Nesiritide is an appropriate drug for heart patients with acute decompensated 
congestive heart failure. The action of nesiritide is to cause arterial and venous smooth 
muscle relaxation to decrease cardiac afterload. This relieves pulmonary congestion 
and cardiac workload. Constrictive pericarditis, obstructive cardiomyopathy, and 
pericardial tamponade are all examples of preload dependent heart diseases and 
nesiritide should never be administered. The dilative effects of nesiritide would 
diminish venous blood to the heart, worsening cardiac function.
72.	
Correct answer: B
Dofetilide (Tikosyn) should not be administered to any patient with a prolonged 
QT interval. Since Tikosyn blocks potassium channels to widen the QT interval, 
preexisting prolonged QT syndrome, and could develop into life-threatening 
arrhythmias.

Cardiovascular  ❙  63
73.	
Correct answer: A
Tikosyn is the brand name for dofetilide, a methanesulfonanilide used as an 
antiarrhythmic to specifically treat atrial fibrillation. Mexiletine hydrochloride is also 
known as Mexitil, a lidocaide analogue administered for ventricular arrhythmias. 
Sotalol is more commonly known as Betapace and is also used to treat ventricular 
arrhythmias. Flecainide, Tambocar, is used to treat ventricular tachycardia.
74.	
Correct answer: A
The 2015 American Heart Association Guidelines for CPR and Emergency 
Cardiovascular Care do not recommend routine use of cricoid pressure during cardiac 
arrest. There is some evidence that the use of cricoid pressure impedes the airway 
when performed incorrectly.
75.	
Correct answer: D
Continuous wave capnography is the most reliable method of confirming and 
monitoring correct placement of an ETT. Capnography can monitor the effectiveness 
of chest compressions and detect the return of spontaneous circulation. Use of 
capnography is a recommendation of the 2015 American Heart Association Guidelines 
for CPR and Emergency Cardiovascular Care.
76.	
Correct answer: D
According to the 2015 American Heart Association Guidelines for CPR and Emergency 
Cardiovascular Care, high-quality CPR is the single most important component of a 
successful outcome for a patient requiring advanced cardiac life support.
77.	
Correct answer: D
According to the 2015 American Heart Association Guidelines for CPR and Emergency 
Cardiovascular Care, vasopressin is no longer recommended for routine use in the 
management of PEA or asystole.
78.	
Correct answer: B
Passive filling of the left atrium is through the pulmonary veins. The superior and 
inferior vena cava supply blood for passive filling of the right atrium.
79.	
Correct answer: A
The vasodilatory action of nitrates will decrease afterload.
80.	
Correct answer: C
The most sensitive cardiac markers are Troponin T and troponin I. These biomarkers 
show injury to myocytes, not just cell death. Troponin T can be elevated with skeletal 
muscle injury. Troponin I is diagnostic of an MI and can be falsely elevated in renal 
insufficiency.
81.	
Correct answer: D
If your patient has a CK-MB concentration greater than 5% of the total CK, this 
finding is indicative of myocardial necrosis.

64  ❙  Section 4
82.	
Correct answer: A
Brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) is released when the myocardium is stretched. BNP is 
a substance secreted from the ventricles in response to changes in pressure that occur 
when heart failure develops and worsens. False high levels tend to be found in females, 
the elderly, patients with hypertension, and patients who take nesiritide. False low 
levels can occur in obese patients because the BNP collects in adipose tissue and clears 
slowly.
BNP levels below 100 pg/mL indicate no heart failure
BNP levels of 100–300 pg/mL suggest heart failure
BNP levels above 300 pg/mL indicate mild heart failure
BNP levels above 600 pg/mL indicate moderate heart failure
BNP levels above 900 pg/mL indicate severe heart failure
Please note that the BNP levels are measured in picograms (pg), not milligrams (mg). 
A picogram is one billionth of a milligram or one trillionth of a gram.
83.	
Correct answer: B
A biomarker that is not cardiac specific but can be elevated by falls, cardiopulmonary 
resuscitation, and injections is myoglobin. Serum myoglobin is a test that measures 
the amount of myoglobin in the blood. Myoglobin is a protein in heart and skeletal 
muscles. Muscles use up available oxygen. Myoglobin has oxygen attached to it, so 
additional O2 is available to muscles. If the muscle is damaged, myoglobin is released 
and excreted by the kidneys. In large amounts, kidney damage may occur. If the 
patient has suffered an infarct, myoglobin levels peak about 8 hours after infarct, 
rapidly returning to normal in about 18–24 hours.
84.	
Correct answer: C
For a patient with atrial fibrillation, a therapeutic range for INR would be 2.0–3.0. For 
prosthetic valves, the therapeutic range would be 2.5–3.5.
85.	
Correct answer: A
A biomarker that indicates an inflammation is present is C-reactive protein. C-reactive 
protein is produced by the liver. Blood is mixed with an antiserum which attaches 
to a specific protein. Levels of CRP may not be increased in people with rheumatoid 
arthritis and lupus. Some additional causes of elevated C-reactive protein levels are 
cancer, connective tissue disease, inflammatory bowel disease, rheumatic fever, 
tuberculosis, the last half of pregnancy or with the use of oral contraceptives, and 
possible uremia.
86.	
Correct answer: B
Ventricular filling occurs passively at first. When the pressure in the ventricles 
increases, the AV valves close. During atrial contraction, the remainder of the ventricle 
is filled. This atrial contraction is called atrial kick and provides an estimated 20–22% 
of cardiac output.
87.	
Correct answer: B
Visitation policies vary by institution. However, it is best to identify one person as 
the point of contact. HIPAA regulations require limitations on the release of any 
medical information be set by the patient if the patient is able to communicate his or 
her wishes. If the patient is unable to make this decision, the next of kin can act as a 
contact person.

Cardiovascular  ❙  65
88.	
Correct answer: A
The best response would be to respond collaboratively and interact with other 
professionals. Ideally, this conference should occur ASAP.
89.	
Correct answer: C
Utilizing the internal mammary artery means grafts do not have to come from the 
saphenous veins in the leg, minimizing the risk for infection from another site. In 
the graft procedure, the internal mammary artery is separated at only one end and 
reanastomosed to the affected coronary artery distal to the affected area. The patency 
of the resulting graft is generally quite good. After 10 years, approximately 90% of 
grafts are still patent.
90.	
Correct answer: A
Your patient just underwent a percutaneous intervention for stent placement, after 
which he was returned to your telemetry unit. You note a rash over the patient’s trunk 
and arms. This is probably due to an allergic reaction to the contrast dye. Iodine dye 
is used and will cause a rash, itching, swelling, and can also lead to laryngospasm 
and anaphylaxis in some patients. It is imperative to determine whether the patient is 
allergic to iodine, shellfish, or horses prior to initiating the procedure.
91.	
Correct answer: A
Along with acute ST elevation, another indicator of necrosis would be an abnormal 
Q wave. If the Q wave appears within about six hours of a transmural MI, it is an 
ominous sign. If the Q wave is more than 0.04 seconds long, it is a sign of necrosis. 
In an inferior MI, the Q wave should not exceed 0.03 seconds or it is indicative of 
necrosis.
92.	
Correct answer: C
Quite often, the patient develops cardiogenic shock and requires emergent placement 
of a VAD. If the nurse is able to at least explain the function of the device, it can be a 
great relief to the family.
93.	
Correct answer: B
The patient is approaching crisis and may feel hopeless. The nurse should take the 
time to fully explore and validate the patient’s feelings, then decide on the appropriate 
course of action.
94.	
Correct answer: D
In response to stretch of the ventricular myocardium, brain natriuretic peptide is 
secreted. This peptide will cause vasodilation and sodium and water loss via the 
kidneys by inhibiting the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system. High levels of this 
peptide (BNP) will help confirm the diagnosis of acute heart failure. Sometimes we use 
nesiritide (Natrecor), a recombinant form of BNP, to treat symptoms of heart failure. 
An S3 heart sound is associated with elevated levels of brain natriuretic peptide in 
heart failure in a noncompliant ventricle.
95.	
Correct answer: A
The progressive care nurse should immediately report any BUN/creatinine ratio > 20 in 
the presence of decreased urine output to the physician for a patient on nesiritide. The 
increased creatinine level and decreased urine output are indicators of compromised/
diminished blood flow to the kidneys with impending development of prerenal 

66  ❙  Section 4
azotemia. Azotemia is an adverse reaction to nesiritide administration. With prerenal 
azotemia, other lab results to monitor and report include a urine osmolality of 
< 500 mOsm/L and a urine specific gravity > 1.015.
96.	
Correct answer: C
Integrilin (eptifbatide) is used primarily for patients with acute coronary syndrome to 
inhibit platelet aggregation.
97.	
Correct answer: D
If the conversation is not hushed and you overhear the statement as part of your 
regular duties, it would be appropriate to clarify or correct misinformation if it 
would not involve diagnosing the patient’s disease process. In this case, the patient 
provides you an opportunity to teach him about his cardiac murmur. Aortic stenosis 
will cause a murmur, but the harshness or degree of auscultation is not directly 
correlated with the degree of severity or risk to the patient. Based on his statement, he 
may not understand what a diagnosis of aortic stenosis entails. By asking about his 
comprehension, you will be able to determine what his degree of understanding is, 
which knowledge you may correct or clarify, and to what degree his physician may 
need to discuss his prognosis or plan of care.
98.	
Correct answer: B
The patient would exhibit signs and symptoms of hypercalcemia, confirmed by his 
calcium level of 13.5 mg/dL. Signs and symptoms would include smooth-muscle 
relaxation, lethargy, confusion, shortened QT interval, bradycardia, heart blocks, 
bundle branch blocks, and hypertension. The effects of digitalis and, possibly, digitalis 
toxicity can further compound symptoms.
99.	
Correct answer: A
Due to the decreased availability of calcium essential to the coagulation phase (used 
within the intrinsic, extrinsic, and common pathways), the patient will not have 
formed permanent clots. The platelet plugs formed over damaged vessels initially after 
surgery may be dislodged by blood flow, leading to recurrent bleeding at postoperative 
days 7 to 10.
100.	
Correct answer: D
Peripartum cardiomyopathy develops during the first 3 to 4 months after completion 
of pregnancy. Sometimes the cause is myocarditis.
101.	
Correct answer: A
Dilated cardiomyopathy causes systolic dysfunction. As a result, you will hear S3 and 
S4 gallops and the EKG may show atrial fibrillation, ventricular dysrhythmias, or 
sinus tachycardia most of the time. The patient may have a systolic murmur of the 
AV valves. In addition, the patient will probably have peripheral edema or ascites, 
hepatomegaly, and pale, cool extremities. Changes in mentation are possible as well. 
Hypertrophic and restrictive cardiomyopathies are diastolic dysfunctions.
102.	
Correct answer: C
The correct dosing for ticagrelor (Brilinta) is to give 180 mg PO once then 90 mg PO 
BID to begin in 5 days. To avoid severe bleeding risks, hold administration of Brilinta 
at least 5 days before and after an invasive procedure, such as stent placement, oral 
surgery, and elective surgery.

Cardiovascular  ❙  67
103.	
Correct answer: A
Ticagrelor (Brilinta) was designed to always be taken concurrently with aspirin. 
Maximum benefit was found to be maintained with aspirin dosing at 75–100 mg PO 
daily. Ticagrelor effectiveness decreases when aspirin dosing exceeds 100 mg per day. 
Patients should be counseled to avoid over-the-counter medications containing aspirin.
104.	
Correct answer: D
Coumadin (warfarin) blocks vitamin K coagulation factors of II, VII, IX, X, and XI of 
the extrinsic pathway. Normal PT is in the range of 11.2 to 13.2 seconds. A PT of 28 
seconds indicates severe risk of bleeding, and the Coumadin dose should be held and 
the physician notified immediately. Many laboratories and physicians will use the INR 
value for purposes of Coumadin titration, as it is more reliable and standardized. The 
PT value must still be obtained to determine the INR calculation. The INR target is 2 to 
3.5. INR values > 4.5 indicate that the patient is at increased risk for bleeding, and a 
value > 6 indicates the need for vitamin K administration.
105.	
Correct answer: A
When auscultating the heart, a common area for hearing murmurs and ectopic beats 
is Erb’s point. The location is the 3rd intercostal space, on the left sternal border.
106.	
Correct answer: D
Procainamide’s adverse effects include severe hypotension (usually because of a rapid 
infusion) and A-V block. Procainamide may also widen the QRS complex due to slow 
impulse conduction through the Purkinje fibers and ventricular myocardium. If the 
QRS widens more than 35–50%, the drug should be discontinued. Adverse effects 
usually disappear when the drug is discontinued. Two of the actions of procainamide 
are depression of the excitability of cardiac muscle and slowing the conduction in 
the atria.
107.	
Correct answer: A
The antagonist for morphine or other opioids is Narcan (naloxone). Generally, the 
naloxone dose is 0.4 mg IV. This dose can be repeated about every 3 to 4 minutes three 
times. When giving Narcan, you must always be alert for the patient to relapse once 
the dose wears off. Administering multiple follow-up doses is not uncommon.
108.	
Correct answer: B
This patient has dilated cardiomyopathy that is causing systolic dysfunction. Patients 
with this type of cardiomyopathy will have S3 and S4 gallops, and the EKG may show 
atrial fibrillation, ventricular dysrhythmias, or a sinus tachycardia most of the time. 
The patient may have a systolic murmur of the AV valves. The patient will probably 
also have peripheral edema or ascites, hepatomegaly, and pale, cool extremities. It is 
possible to have changes in mentation. Hypertrophic and restrictive cardiomyopathies 
are diastolic dysfunctions.
109.	
Correct answer: A
Motion of cardiac valves and detection of pericardial fluid is done with M-mode 
echocardiography. M-mode echocardiography enables evaluation of anatomic 
relationships and the relative sizes of each.

68  ❙  Section 4
110.	
Correct answer: B
The type of echocardiography that shows the quantity of flow across an obstruction is 
known as continuous-wave Doppler echocardiography. This type of echocardiography 
is used to detect direction of shunting, estimating cardiac output, and assessing 
ventricular diastolic function. This type of echocardiography provides a good estimate 
of pressure gradients.
111.	
Correct answer: C
Dobutamine is used to improve cardiac output by acting on beta1 adrenergic 
receptors in the heart. It may cause minimal peripheral vasodilation but primarily 
acts to increase contractility, coronary blood flow, and heart rate to improve cardiac 
output. Dopamine acts on alpha-adrenergic receptors in the heart. Norepinephrine 
is a catecholamine that acts on both alpha- and beta-adrenergic receptors in the 
cardiovascular tissue.
112.	
Correct answer: B
Alpha-adrenergic effects of norepinephrine include peripheral arteriolar 
vasoconstriction. Increased force of myocardial contraction and increased AV 
conduction time are the effects of beta-adrenergic sympathetic stimulation.
113.	
Correct answer: A
Epinephrine 1:1,000 is kept at the bedside of a patient beginning lisinopril 
administration should the patient exhibit angioedema. Angioedema of the face, 
glottis, larynx, and tongue may lead to upper airway obstruction. Treatment with 
0.3–0.5 ml of epinephrine 1: 1,000 SQ is used to treat the anaphylactic reaction.
114.	
Correct answer: A
Nifedipine is a calcium channel blocker.
115.	
Correct answer: C
It is important that adenosine be given rapidly because if adenosine is given slowly, 
it may cause systemic vasodilation and reflex tachycardia, further compromising 
cardiac output. Blurred vision is an expected adverse reaction. The patient 
should be monitored for development of atrial fibrillation, bradycardia, and heart 
blocks. Withhold adenosine if the patient is in atrial fibrillation, atrial flutter, and 
second-degree type II or complete heart block. Adenosine slows conduction via the AV 
node, and these rhythms may degrade to ventricular fibrillation.
116.	
Correct answer: D
A nursing student is learning about heart sounds. The student asks you where the 
point of maximal impulse (PMI) is located on the chest. As a progressive care nurse, 
you know the PMI is located in the apical area, located at the 5th intercostal space, 
mid-clavicular line.
117.	
Correct answer: B
Radio ablation uses waves that actually heat the tissue around the active sites and 
prevent reentry loop. Once the temperature reaches 50°C, cell damage and death 
occur. The continuing heat creates a lesion approximately 2–5 mm in diameter. This 
“burned” area causes necrosis and will not conduct electricity.

Cardiovascular  ❙  69
118.	
Correct answer: D
Ibutilide is a relatively new Class III/IV medication. It must be used at the time of the 
cardioversion and will be ineffective if used prior to the cardioversion.
119.	
Correct answer: C
If the CVP catheter is in the right ventricle and touches the myocardium, PVCs can 
result. Occasionally, the physician will insert the catheter a bit too far, causing PVCs. 
In this case, the catheter simply has to be withdrawn to a better position in the right 
atrium. This is a rare occurrence. If the patient’s catheter was left in the right ventricle, 
the V-tach might continue and the patient might suffer cardiac arrest.
120.	
Correct answer: A
The circumflex coronary artery feeds the left atrium and left ventricle. Infarctions as 
a result of occlusion of this artery result in lateral or left-sided heart damage. The left 
anterior descending artery and the circumflex artery both branch off from the left 
coronary artery.
121.	
Correct answer: B
New onset or acute mitral valve regurgitation is often a result of myocardial infarction 
of the left anterior descending and circumflex arteries. These arteries feed the 
papillary muscles, which in turn support mitral valve function. Prolonged ischemia 
causes the papillary and/or chordae tendinae of the mitral valve to rupture and 
prevent full closure of the mitral valve during systole. As the blood flows back into the 
left atrium, the murmur can be auscultated.
122.	
Correct answer: C
Patients with peripheral vascular disease are often hypothermic because of poor 
circulation. Healing is also slowed because of the decrease in circulation. The nurse 
should provide proper alignment without impeding circulation and monitor the 
patient’s peripheral pulses for presence and quality. The color and temperature of the 
extremity should be monitored and results charted.
123.	
Correct answer: A
The injuries to the patient’s chest may have caused a pulmonary artery laceration or a 
cardiac contusion (the latter condition is more likely). His blood pressure is low and the 
EKG shows ST-segment elevation in the anterior leads. If the myocardium is contused, 
it will react the same way as if an MI had occurred. The ST elevation may be the result 
of a physiologic insult to a coronary artery, and an area of the myocardium may be 
ischemic. If so, the pumping function of the myocardium will be compromised and 
may need additional support with inotropes. The patient may undergo angiography 
and/or surgery. Volume replacement may be necessary. This patient is probably in the 
first stage of cardiogenic shock.
124.	
Correct answer: D
Approximately 24 hours after a surgical procedure, the release of inflammatory cell 
mediators can lead to vasodilation. This patient has a permanent pacemaker, but 
apparently her heart rate cannot compensate for the drop in blood pressure. The 
cardiac output did not increase as a result of the reduced systemic resistance. Her 
pacemaker did not allow the heart rate to climb above 70. The dobutamine acted on 
the pump and increased the heart’s contractility. This patient also has a history of a 
previous MI.

70  ❙  Section 4
125.	
Correct answer: C
A carotid bruit is the significant physical finding associated with carotid stenosis. 
Heberden’s nodules and Broussard’s nodules are both seen with arthritis. The systolic 
murmur is an indication of a valvular problem.
126.	
Correct answer: C
COPD causes changes in the 12-lead EKG due to the workload for the right side of the 
heart. Changes commonly seen in patients with COPD include tall, peaked P waves, 
right axis deviation, right ventricular hypertrophy, and low-voltage QRS.
127.	
Correct answer: A
A pericardial friction rub would be best heard at Erb’s point, the 3rd intercostal space, 
on the left sternal border.
128.	
Correct answer: A
Dong quai, gingko biloba, and ginseng can increase bleeding times and should be 
avoided while taking anticoagulants. Saw palmetto decreases the effectiveness of 
Plavix.
129.	
Correct answer: D
Cardiac glycosides possess positive inotropic activity, which is mediated by inhibition 
of sodium-potassium adenosine triphosphatase. Also, cardiac glycosides reduce 
conductivity in the heart, particularly through the atrioventricular node, and 
therefore have a negative chronotropic effect. The cardiac glycosides have very similar 
pharmacologic effects but differ considerably in their speed of onset and duration 
of action. They are used to slow the heart rate in supraventricular arrhythmias, 
especially atrial fibrillation, and also are used in patients with chronic heart failure.
130.	
Correct answer: B
The high iodine content of amiodarone can actually exert an effect on the thyroid and 
produce an antiarrhythmic action. It is always a good idea to ask if the patient has an 
allergy or sensitivity to iodine prior to administering this medication.
131.	
Correct answer: B
By definition, pansystolic means the murmur is heard throughout systole. The only 
systolic murmur listed is tricuspid insufficiency. All the others are diastolic murmurs.
132.	
Correct answer: B
A reflex tachycardia caused by stretch of right atrial receptors is known as the 
Bainbridge reflex. It is believed that the Bainbridge reflex exists to speed up the heart 
rate if the right side becomes overloaded and helps equalize pressures in both sides.
133.	
Correct answer: D
Adenosine is used for the suppression/elimination of sustained supraventricular 
tachycardia. It can also be used in diagnostic studies to establish the cause of the SVT. 
Adverse effects may include transient arrhythmias, flushing, dyspnea, and, rarely, 
apnea. It is important to note that in approximately 30% of patients, SVT recurs. 
Caffeine and theophylline act by competitive antagonism to diminish the effect of 
adenosine.

Cardiovascular  ❙  71
134.	
Correct answer: D
The left ventricular assist device (LVAD) is the most commonly used because left heart 
failure is more common and usually precedes right ventricular failure.
135.	
Correct answer: B
Ventricular assist devices (VAD) are used as destination therapy as well as a 
bridge to transplant. Prolonged cardiac arrest, especially with neurologic damage, 
is a contraindication to use of a VAD. Extensive organ damage is another 
contraindication. VADs are not indicated for dysrhythmias. Other indications for a 
VAD include cardiogenic shock and inability to wean from cardiopulmonary bypass. 
Always be aware of the possibility of device failure.
136.	
Correct answer: D
The fourth heart sound, S4, is always pathologic after the first 24 hours of life and 
indicates a decreased ventricular compliance. The S4 is produced when an atrial 
contraction fills up the ventricle. S4 is rarely heard in the newborn and occurs just 
before the S1 heart sound. During the first 24 hours of life, the S4 may be heard just 
after the first heart sound and sounds like a clicking noise.
137.	
Correct answer: A
It is important to explain that this patient needs a pacemaker or AICD that can 
deliver a more powerful impulse when needed (demand). The asynchronous mode will 
override her internal pacemaker.
138.	
Correct answer: C
Your new patient sustained an inferior wall MI and after an unremarkable recovery 
from two vessel bypass, was transferred to your PCU three hours ago. The patient 
has been stable until now. When attempting to walk this patient across the room, 
he complains of chest pain and respiratory difficulty. While assessing the patient 
you auscultate a harsh, holosystolic murmur that is loudest along the left sternal 
border. As a progressive care nurse, you realize this patient has probably sustained 
a life-threatening condition known as a ventricular septal rupture, causing blood to 
shunt from the left ventricle to the right ventricle.
139.	
Correct answer: B
A popliteal blood pressure at least 40 mmHg higher than a brachial blood pressure 
is known as Hill’s sign. Hill’s sign reflects the rapid rise in pulsation found in patients 
with aortic insufficiency. DeMusset’s sign is also found in aortic insufficiency (the 
bobbing of the head in time with the forceful pulse).
140.	
Correct answer: B
This patient is probably suffering from pericarditis. The CXR will probably show 
a pericardial effusion. The elevated sed. rate and WBCs indicate infection. In 
pericarditis, leaning forward often relieves chest pain and laying supine makes it 
worse. If the pain worsens on inspiration, it is because the lungs expand and come 
in contact with the pericardium. The patient will probably also have a fever. One 
of the things to monitor is any sign of a cardiac tamponade and to make certain 
anticoagulants are discontinued.

72  ❙  Section 4
141.	
Correct answer: A
The purpose of treating a patient who has CHF with vasoactive and inotropic 
medications is to decrease the workload of the heart by vasodilation (reduce preload 
and afterload) and improve contractility. These medications will decrease preload and 
afterload and increase contractility.
142.	
Correct answer: D
Your next priority is to defibrillate the patient with 200 Joules with a biphasic 
defibrillator.
143.	
Correct answer: B
Digoxin is classified as both a negative chronotrope and a positive inotrope.
144.	
Correct answer: C
Pacemaker spikes are not followed by p waves. The pacemaker is not capturing. The 
first thing the nurse should do is increase the milliamperes. The nurse should also 
check the pacemaker connections and try turning the patient on the side if tolerated.
145.	
Correct answer: B
Type I aneurysms are the most common type of aortic aneurysms. Tears begin in the 
ascending aorta, and the dissection extends beyond the aortic arch.
146.	
Correct answer: D
A type III aneurysm involves a tear in the descending aorta, with distal dissection 
only. They are not the rarest form of aneurysm, occurring in 20–30% of cases.
147.	
Correct answer: C
A risk factor for an aortic aneurysm would not include hypotension. Risk factors 
include connective tissue disorders, medial necrosis of the aorta, coarctation of 
the aorta, blunt chest trauma, pregnancy, family history of aortic aneurysm, and 
hypertension.
148.	
Correct answer: B
This patient most likely has an abdominal aortic aneurysm that could dissect at any 
moment. Make the patient comfortable with a minimum of movement and inform the 
physician immediately.
149.	
Correct answer: C
Avoid grapefruit when taking colchicine.
150.	
Correct answer: C
When central venous pressure monitoring is desired, the access site with the lowest 
infection rate for an anticipated dwell time prolonged more than five days is likely to 
be the subclavian vein. Disadvantages of using the subclavian site would be difficulty 
of access and a higher risk of pneumothorax and hemothorax.
151.	
Correct answer: B
If you auscultate a blowing, high-pitched murmur at the apex and it appears to 
radiate to the left axilla, this murmur is probably indicative of mitral insufficiency or 
regurgitation.

Cardiovascular  ❙  73
152.	
Correct answer: C
A cardiac murmur that has maximal intensity at the base of the heart (commonly at 
the second intercostal space, right sternal border) and radiates to the apex and neck is 
the murmur of aortic stenosis.
153.	
Correct answer: D
An early diastolic murmur with maximal intensity at the fourth intercostal space, left 
sternal border, is a murmur of tricuspid stenosis.
154.	
Correct answer: B
The following statement is true about angina: Troponins and CK-MB isoenzymes are 
not elevated in patients with stable angina. These biomarkers are also not elevated in 
unstable angina.
155.	
Correct answer: B
The S2 heart sound is created by closure of the pulmonic and aortic valves. S2 is best 
heard in the upper-left sternal border or pulmonic area.
156.	
Correct answer: B
Chlorothiazide reduces urinary calcium losses and does not result in profound 
potassium losses.
157.	
Correct answer: D
The primary use of nesiritide (Natrecor) would be to cause vascular smooth muscle 
vasodilation. It is a b-type natriuretic peptide that stimulates cGMP production. Like 
ATP, cGMP is used to increase more specialized cellular energy conversion, resulting in 
smooth muscle relaxation.
158.	
Correct answer: B
Rate, rhythm, axis, hypertrophy, and infarction are the most valuable areas examined 
in a 12-lead EKG.
159.	
Correct answer: C
Muscle aches, muscle weakness, and fatigue are findings associated with drug-induced 
hyperthyroidism associated with amiodarone administration. T3 and T4 levels 
should be checked. Additional labs expected to be ordered would include serum 
amiodarone levels, CBC, LFT, and coagulation studies. Amiodarone toxicity may lead 
to agranulocytosis, anemia, neutropenia, pancytopenia, and liver injury resulting in 
increased bleeding disorders.
160.	
Correct answer: C
ST elevation in EKG leads V1-V3, syncopal episodes and a RBBB may indicate Brugada 
syndrome. This is a genetic disease found equally in boys and girls, but more prevalent 
in young men. The heart is structurally normal, as can be the EKG when tested. 
Patients may develop polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (without a prolonged QT) 
or other ventricular arrhythmias. Patients have syncopal episodes if the episode is 
brief or cardiac arrest if the episode is sustained. Fever and some medications may 
increase the incidence. Specific drugs used to initiate symptoms and diagnose Brugada 
are flecainide, ajmaline, and procainamide. The only treatment is use of an AICD.

74  ❙  Section 4
161.	
Correct answer: C
Pulsus alternans occurs in left ventricular failure when a weakened myocardium 
cannot maintain an even pressure with each contraction. The pulses alternate 
between strong and weak. This condition is also seen in CHF.
162.	
Correct answer: A
When the parasympathetic and sympathetic nervous systems stimulate the right 
vagus nerve, the SA node is affected and slows the heart rate. Acetylcholine is a 
neurotransmitter.
163.	
Correct answer: A
Cyanosis may be observed when at least 5 g/100 ml of deoxygenated hemoglobin is 
present in circulation.
164.	
Correct answer: B
On an EKG, left-sided heart failure results in wide, notched P waves. A tall, peaked 
P wave is indicative of right-sided heart failure. Changes in ST segments (or T waves) 
usually indicate myocardial ischemia.
165.	
Correct answer: C
Rheumatic fever remains the most common cause of acquired valvular disease. The 
valves are a perfect place for bacteria to colonize, and the blood is a perfect medium 
for bacterial growth. The causative organism is beta-hemolytic streptococcus.
166.	
Correct answer: D
When removing a central venous catheter, if the patient’s condition permits, the 
patient should be placed flat or in reverse Trendelenburg position. Contraindications to 
this position would not include prolonged coagulation times. Often, these patients are 
given fresh frozen plasma or platelets prior to the removal of the catheter.
167.	
Correct answer: D
If the patient is bleeding, the blood may settle into the lumbar area. Blood is heavy 
and will flow into the retroperitoneal area because of gravity. More than an hour 
may pass and several hundred milliliters of blood may be lost before vital signs are 
affected.
168.	
Correct answer: D
The aortogram is the established standard for definitive diagnosis of aortic dissection 
and is the only invasive procedure listed as an option for this question. This test is 
sometimes called an aortic angiogram with (radiopaque) contrast dye.
169.	
Correct answer: C
The P wave represents depolarization of the atrium and the QRS the depolarization 
of the ventricles; the size difference is related to the muscle mass involved in the 
polarization. The P wave’s amplitude represents the amount or size of the muscle mass 
involved in the depolarization of the atrium. The QRS wave represents the amount or 
size of the muscle mass involved in the depolarization of the ventricles. The greater 
the muscle mass, the greater the change in amplitude. Nonpatient-related factors 
that may affect these waves’ amplitude include gain setting, lead placement, and 
interference. Patient-related factors may include electrolyte imbalances, hypertrophy, 
and cardiac injury.

Cardiovascular  ❙  75
170.	
Correct answer: A
Your patient with obstructive jaundice has no prior history of cardiac arrhythmias. He 
asks why he is on a cardiac monitor. Your best response is, “You may develop a slower 
heart rate. This monitor will alert staff to any dangerous drop in your heart rate.” 
Obstructive jaundice may lead to cardiac changes. The other options use medical 
terminology and may further frighten the patient.
171.	
Correct answer: B
Patients with heart transplants do not feel cardiac pain because the heart has been 
denervated when removed from the donor.
172.	
Correct answer: B
When the heart is denervated, it has no connection to the autonomic nervous system, 
so a reflexive response does not occur. A sympathetic stimulant must be used to 
provide this response. If no other complications occur, the ventricle will eventually 
adjust to not receiving autonomic input.
173.	
Correct answer: A
Pain is a cardinal sign of an arterial obstruction. The nurse should check for pallor, 
other signs of an arterial blockage, sensation, and quality of pulses. If the obstruction 
is venous, the limb may exhibit cyanosis.
174.	
Correct answer: B
Your patient received streptokinase about 30 minutes ago for a lateral wall STEMI. You 
would expect reperfusion rhythms to occur. Reperfusion rhythms such as ventricular 
tachycardia, sinus bradycardia, accelerated idioventricular rhythm, and underlying 
sinus rhythms with ventricular ectopy may occur. The patient should experience less 
chest pain. The CPK isoenzymes may temporarily become elevated as blood flows 
freely through newly opened arteries. CHF is not a result of this therapy.
175.	
Correct answer: C
Family members are probably quite used to providing care for this patient because 
of his quadriplegia. Explain the rationale for the procedure and then demonstrate it. 
Do not ignore the patient. There is no point in speaking slowly unless the caregiver 
or the patient has difficulty understanding your instructions. Teaching quickly is 
counterproductive and may be considered rude and unprofessional. Allow time for a 
return demonstration of skills and allow for questions.
176.	
Correct answer: C
You should feel only a mild tingling sensation. You should not fear this device to the 
point of not performing CPR, and CPR should not be delayed in any event. If the ICD 
fires, anyone touching the patient at that moment may feel the tingling sensation.
177.	
Correct answer: B
The magnet is used to inhibit the shocking (tachy) feature of the ICD. It can shut 
down a malfunctioning ICD. Patient teaching includes letting the patient know the 
dangers of being in proximity to large magnets. Most ICDs have a warning tone built 
in so that if the patient comes too near a magnet, the tone is emitted. The type of tone 
produced varies with the device’s manufacturer.

76  ❙  Section 4
178.	
Correct answer: C
Mitral stenosis may cause pulmonary edema, but actually protects the left ventricle 
because fluid generally backs up into the lungs. BNP is partially excreted by the 
kidneys, so if a patient has kidney failure or especially if the glomerular filtration is 
below 60 ml/min/1.7 m2, the BNP level will be elevated. BNP is also secreted by the 
kidney and is another reason the level may be elevated. When patients are in septic 
shock, possibly due to myocardial damage, BNP may be released from endothelium.
179.	
Correct answer: D
Initial dosing of Levophed begins at 0.5 to 1 mcg/min. Levophed has a rapid onset 
with a duration of 1–2 min. At doses < 2 mcg/min, Levophed causes positive inotropic 
and chronotropic effects. Once dosing is > 4 mcg/min, arterial and venous vessels 
constrict, leading to increased blood pressure. Although usual maintenance dosing 
is 2 to 12 mcg/min, dosing may be titrated up to a maximum of 30 mcg/min to 
maintain blood pressure.
180.	
Correct answer: C
Hyperpyrexia is a potential life-threatening adverse reaction if Levophed is 
administered with medications classified as MAO inhibitors. Concurrent alpha blocker 
administration leads to decreased vasopressor effects. Beta-blocker administration 
may lead to decreased effects of both drugs. Levophed administration with nitrates 
will also lead to decreased effects of both drugs.
181.	
Correct answer: A
Regitine is kept at the bedside of patients on IV norepinephrine and dopamine in 
case IV extravasation occurs. The Regitine causes vasodilation in tissues to correct 
and prevent necrosis and sloughing. The solution should be used immediately. Never 
store the unused portion. In case of extravasation, multiple injections should be given 
around the IV site and other vascular access obtained. Some facilities do not allow 
nurses to administer Regitine, so please check policies and procedures for your specific 
facility.
182.	
Correct answer: A
Lidocaine infusion may cause respiratory arrest. A respiratory rate of 7 indicates 
impending failure and immediate action is required to provide respiratory support via 
a resuscitation bag, and staff should prepare for intubation. The infusion should be 
stopped if respiratory failure occurs, if a widening QRS is noted, or the heart rate drops 
below 60. The infusion must also be stopped if the patient becomes hypotensive, has 
difficulty speaking, or experiences numbness and tingling.
183.	
Correct answer: D
Rapid infusion of Lasix can cause ototoxicity and result in tinnitus and hearing loss.
184.	
Correct answer: A
Amiodarone may affect the pacing threshold of implanted cardiac defibrillators, thus 
the pacing settings should be verified prior and during amiodarone administration. 
Anisindione is an anticoagulant and administration is contraindicated for a patient 
with an invasive device such as an implanted cardiac defibrillator.

Cardiovascular  ❙  77
185.	
Correct answer: C
Symptoms of right-sided heart failure include hepatomegaly. When the right side of 
the heart fails it is often due to left-sided failure. The right ventricle cannot adequately 
pump blood out, so filling pressures rise and the blood backs up, resulting in the 
hepatomegaly. Thus, the CVP and RV pressures are elevated. Additional symptoms 
can include splenomegaly, ascites, abdominal pain, S3, S4, and weight gain.
186.	
Correct answer: B
A common cause of restrictive cardiomyopathy is glycogen storage disease. 
Amyloidosis is an additional cause of restrictive cardiomyopathy. The myocardium 
(especially the left ventricle) becomes rigid from fibrosis. This results in inadequate left 
ventricular filling and increased atrial dilatation. Left ventricular diastolic dysfunction 
occurs. Systolic function remains normal in this type of cardiomyopathy. Fluid backs 
up into the lungs and the patient looks like they have congestive heart failure. There is 
no cure, and symptoms are treated as they occur.
187.	
Correct answer: B
Signs of CNS toxicity from lidocaine may include agitation, vomiting, drowsiness, and 
muscle twitching. Later signs may include loss of consciousness, seizures, respiratory 
depression, and apnea. Cardiac toxicity may develop and cause hypotension, 
bradycardia, heart block, and may lead to cardiovascular collapse.
188.	
Correct answer: B
Leads II, III, and aVF show damage to the inferior wall of the heart. Leads I and 
aVL show damage to the higher areas of the lateral wall. V1 and V2 show septal wall 
damage. V5 and V6 show damage to the apical area.
189.	
Correct answer: A
Many foods should be avoided when taking warfarin. Those highest in vitamin K (the 
antagonist to warfarin) are broccoli, Brussels sprouts, cabbage, spinach, turnip greens, 
endive, scallions, and parsley. Additional foods to be avoided are red leaf lettuce, 
watercress, oils such as soybean and canola, and salads in general. All these foods 
decrease the effectiveness of warfarin.
190.	
Correct answer: A
This question is a slightly different way of asking about the symptoms of right heart 
failure. It is imperative that students are very familiar with symptoms of both right 
and left heart failure. Right-sided heart failure signs and symptoms include respiratory 
distress and hepatomegaly. The respiratory distress is the result of blood’s failure to 
flow to the lungs, causing hypoxemia. As blood backs up into the hepatic system, 
hepatomegaly and splenomegaly may result.
191.	
Correct answer: A
Polycythemia increases afterload due to the excess circulation of red blood cells. 
Hypovolemia and sepsis decrease afterload, as does aortic insufficiency. Aortic stenosis 
increases afterload, as do peripheral vasoconstriction and hypertension.
192.	
Correct answer: B
Early signs of left ventricular failure are tachypnea and tachycardia. Severe left 
ventricular failure also causes dyspnea.

78  ❙  Section 4
193.	
Correct answer: D
The third heart sound, S3, occurs when increased blood flow travels across the AV 
valves secondary to rapid passive ventricular filling from the atria. This is easy to 
remember if you associate the S3 sound with fluid. It is prominent in CHF, mitral valve 
insufficiency, anemia, and left-to-right shunts like ASD and VSD.
194.	
Correct answer: B
The BNP level of 420 pg/ml of B-type Natriuretic Peptide levels supports a diagnosis 
of definite decompensated (acute) heart failure. If the BNP is over 400, there is a 95% 
probability of acute heart failure. If the BNP is between 100 and 400 pg/ml, there is 
a 75% chance the patient has heart failure, especially if they have clinical symptoms 
or a past history of heart failure. If the BNP is less than 100 pg/ml, there is a less than 
10% chance the patient is in heart failure. All the other answers are wrong because 
BNP is measured in pictograms/ml, not the other values listed.
195.	
Correct answer: C
Lead V1 is the best lead to monitor for RBBB.
196.	
Correct answer: C
Treadmill stress testing may miss as many as 40% of cases of single-vessel disease. 
LV dysfunction may be diagnosed via a thallium test (myocardial scintigraphy). A 
positive treadmill test may not be positive for CAD.
197.	
Correct answer: D
Your patient is presenting with chest wall pain, most likely as the result of her having 
undergone open-heart surgery. Although the pain is expected, to support recovery and 
ensure the best possible outcome, the nurse will need to address pain and discomfort. If 
left untreated, the patient may not perform deep-breathing exercises or participate fully 
in physical therapy, placing her at risk for other postoperative complications. Morphine 
and diazepam will treat both pain and muscle spasms. There is no indication of 
infection to the wound site, and the pain described by the patient is not consistent 
with another infarction. EKG changes would most likely be seen. The physician should 
be contacted if the pain and spasms do not resolve with morphine and diazepam 
administration or if the pain should present differently with EKG changes.
198.	
Correct answer: D
The drug of choice to treat AV nodal and atrioventricular reentrant arrhythmias is 
adenosine. Adenosine is a naturally occurring substance in the body and has a very 
short half-life (only a few seconds). Adenosine slows AV nodal conduction or can stop 
the conduction process altogether, potentially causing a transient AV block (seen 
as asystole). The patient may experience mild to moderate chest discomfort, slight 
hypotension, bradycardia, and possibly flushing. Amiodarone and quinidine are 
antiarrhythmics. Clonidine is an antihypertensive.
199.	
Correct answer: C
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a chronic inflammatory autoimmune disease 
that affects the vascular and connective tissues within any body system and organ. As 
a result of the disease, inflammation may be increased and the stress of injury would 
further exacerbate the SLE. Symptoms and conditions to monitor closely for include 
pericarditis, hypertension, diarrhea, thrombocytopenia, anemia, leucopenia, joint 
and muscle pain, vasculitis, proteinurea, seizures, depression, pneumonia, pleural 
effusions, nausea, and ulcers.

Cardiovascular  ❙  79
200.	
Correct answer: C
A drug that can cause a significant rise in the INR is amiodarone, as do aspirin and 
sulfomamides. Statins, ethacrinic acid, and penicillin cause only a moderate rise 
in INR.
201.	
Correct answer: B
A drug that will significantly decrease the INR would be vitamin K. Vitamin K is 
widely used as an antidote for warfarin, but can actually decrease the INR too 
much and increase warfarin resistance, so careful monitoring is critical. Warfarin 
breakdown is also accelerated by barbiturates. Nafcillin, high-dose vitamin C, and 
cyclosporine decrease the INR only moderately. Other drugs that significantly decrease 
the INR include rifampin, phenobarbital, and glutethimide.
202.	
Correct answer: D
This patient has probably developed cardiogenic shock. The MI has impaired the 
heart’s ability to pump effectively. The cardiac output falls and the body reacts by 
vasoconstricting peripheral circulation and increasing the heart rate. Tachycardia 
is also the result of catecholamine release, and the myocardial oxygen consumption 
increases. The left ventricle works harder, but has been compromised by the MI. 
Preload increases because fluid cannot be pumped out of the chambers effectively. The 
S3 is a signal of increased preload. Pulmonary congestion occurs due to increased left 
heart pressures.
203.	
Correct answer: C
A new holosystolic murmur at the lower left sternal border means that turbulent blood 
flow is occurring there. The turbulence is caused by a hole that is allowing blood to 
flow through a previously closed area. The SvO2 will increase due to the mixing of 
blood. This condition must be corrected surgically.
204.	
Correct answer: B
Acute pericarditis is usually self-limiting within 2 to 6 weeks after its onset. Treatment 
includes bed rest, oxygen therapy, antiviral, antifungal, or antibacterial agents. In 
addition, drainage and management of cardiac tamponade may be necessary. The 
classic presentation of chronic pericarditis (also known as constrictive pericarditis) 
demonstrates fibrous pericardial thickening. Treatment may include the extreme 
measure of pericardiotomy (removal of the pericardium).
205.	
Correct answer: B
An infarct in the left main coronary artery is an ominous sign. Sudden death may 
occur, along with heart blocks and atrial and ventricular dysrhythmias.
206.	
Correct answer: C
A coronary perfusion pressure of at least 50 mmHg is required to maintain 
auto-regulatory control.
207.	
Correct answer: C
Pulsus paradoxus may be present in conjunction with asthma, emphysema, cardiac 
tamponade, restrictive pericarditis, or hemorrhagic shock. Pulse pressure is the 
difference between systolic and diastolic blood pressure. Pulsus parvus means a 
small or weak pulse. Pulsus alternans means the upstroke is more powerful than the 
down-stroke—that is, the stroke alternates in strength.

80  ❙  Section 4
208.	
Correct answer: D
Prophylactic administration of nitroglycerine translingual spray should be taken 5 to 
10 minutes before activity. Each metered dose of nitroglycerine spray is 0.4 mg and has 
a duration of 30–60 minutes. The spray may be administered under or on the tongue 
and still be effective.
209.	
Correct answer: B
If your patient receiving transdermal nitroglycerin states intent to use a hot tub, 
sauna, electric blankets, or magnetic therapy, then as his nurse you should notify the 
physician and request a change from transdermal to an extended release tablet or 
capsule. Transdermal NTG, either by patch or ointment plus an external heat source, 
is dangerous. More nitroglycerin is increased in the presence of high and/or prolonged 
exposure to heat. The medication will not rub off in water or sweat and normal 
bathing will not have the same effect. As a nurse, you should never advise a patient 
to change the medication amount ordered. The physician should be notified for any 
intent by the patient to change medication dosing or administration route. The better 
advice for the patient is to use the hot tub with caution and for short periods with the 
heat turned down and to never use the hot tub alone in case of emergency.
210.	
Correct answer: D
The cardiac marker most closely associated with cardiac risk factors such as 
hypertension, diabetes, and weight gain is C-reactive protein (hs-CRP). The higher 
the hs-CRP level, the greater the risk of a coronary event. The hs-CRP is a sensitive 
inflammatory marker. When evaluating hs-CRP results, you have to keep in mind 
that if other inflammatory conditions exist, such as a urinary tract infection or 
appendicitis, the hsCRP cannot accurately estimate the probability of an acute 
coronary event. If the hs-CRP level is < 1 mg/L, it is considered low risk/normal. If the 
hsCRP level is 1–3 mg/L, it indicates a moderate risk; a value of > 3 mg/L indicates 
high risk for development of coronary artery disease.
211.	
Correct answer: D
Leads V2–V4 indicate damage to the anterior wall of the heart. Leads V4 and R indicate 
right ventricular damage. V5 and V6 indicate apical injury. Leads V7–V9 are specific to 
the posterior wall.
212.	
Correct answer: B
The pulmonic valve is rarely affected by infective endocarditis. The mitral valve is the 
most common site affected by infective endocarditis. The aortic valve is the next most 
common valve affected. The tricuspid valve is often involved secondarily as a result of 
IV drug abuse.
213.	
Correct answer: B
Patients receiving sodium nitroprusside should be monitored for cyanide toxicity, 
and use of sodium nitroprusside should be avoided in patients with renal problems. 
Cyanide toxicity may result in tachycardia and severe hypotension. Monitor venous 
O2 concentration and acid–base balance. If nitroprusside extravasates from an IV, it 
will cause tissue sloughing and necrosis. The RBC cyanide level should be less than 
50 mcg/ml.

Cardiovascular  ❙  81
214.	
Correct answer: C
Myocarditis is clinically defined as inflammation of the myocardium. Coxsackie 
B1 virus has been more prevalent as a frequent cause of myocarditis. Numerous 
infections, systemic diseases, drugs, and toxins are associated with the development 
of myocarditis. Viruses, bacteria, protozoa, and even worms have been implicated as 
infectious agents. The absolute band count is not sensitive enough to predict sepsis, 
but a ratio of immature-to-total polymorphonuclear leukocytes < 0.2 has a very high 
negative predictive value.
215.	
Correct answer: C
When starting dopamine, it is important to ensure that hypovolemia has been treated 
appropriately. In septic shock, the patient may receive as many as 3 to 10 fluid boluses 
until pulmonary edema is noted or the boluses fail to impact blood pressure. Central 
venous access is the preferred route. If central access is unavailable, peripheral access is 
acceptable. However, the site must be monitored closely for infiltration and additional 
IV access points must be available. Phentolamine mesylate should be available in case 
infiltration does occur, but it is not the first action to be performed.
216.	
Correct answer: D
First, it is unlikely that a nurse in a progressive care unit would be aggressively 
titrating a dopamine drip. However, a few PCUs are titrating to this level. We just 
wanted you to know more about dopamine and rates of titration so in case a question 
would appear on the test, you would answer it correctly. Dopamine should not be 
titrated any faster than every 5 minutes because onset of action is 5 minutes and 
duration is 10 minutes. Titrating more frequently than every 5 minutes may result 
in greater hemodynamic instability and more difficulty in determining the effective 
dosage.
217.	
Correct answer: A
This patient’s pulse is very irregular and he is complaining of getting “zapped” 
often. The patient says he is exhausted from the repeated shocks and asks for pain 
medication. His EKG shows sinus bradycardia with numerous pacemaker spikes. The 
AICD has a faulty lead; a lead was probably dislodged or the lead was damaged on 
insertion. Either way, he needs a new AICD or new leads.
218.	
Correct answer: A
Pacemaker syndrome is due to a loss of atrial kick or regurgitation against a closed 
A-V valve. Fatigue, agitation, and forgetfulness are primary symptoms of this 
condition. It would be possible this patient’s atrial lead was damaged or has failed.
219.	
Correct answer: C
Pneumonia secondary to immobility is the primary reason for infection with VADs. 
Some type of ventilatory support may also be needed. Just the fact that tubes are 
placed into the body is a potential source of infection, but this is usually minimized 
by good hand washing and aseptic technique. Newer VADs are smaller and lighter, 
enabling the patient more mobility, but pneumonia continues to be the most common 
infection noted.

82  ❙  Section 4
220.	
Correct answer: C
Patients who have aortic insufficiency often exhibit Quincke’s sign. This sign is elicited 
by pressing upward from underneath the nail bed on the fingertip. A visible pulsation 
is seen in the nail bed. This results from a pulse with a rapid initial hard pulsation 
followed by a sudden collapse as blood flows back through an incompetent valve.
221.	
Correct answer: C
In a patient with a cardiac tamponade, stroke volume decreases. Because the heart 
cannot adequately fill or eject its contents adequately, stroke volume decreases and 
causes a decreased cardiac output. Contractility decreases because the muscle cannot 
adequately stretch and contract effectively.
222.	
Correct answer: D
Beck’s triad consists of distended neck veins, muffled heart sounds, and hypotension. 
In tamponade, tachycardia is an early sign. A narrowed pulse pressure occurs; fluid 
cannot be ejected from the heart. The muffled heart sounds occur because the fluid in 
the sac minimizes the transmission of sound waves.
223.	
Correct answer: B
Phentolamine (Regitine) 1 mg/ml solution should be injected into the affected area if 
dopamine infiltrates. It may take as much as 5 ml to treat the area.
224.	
Correct answer: A
A dilated superior vena cava would appear on an X-ray if a patient had a cardiac 
tamponade. The vena cava is dilated because blood cannot empty into the right 
atrium. The mediastinum would be widened. A CXR will not show delineation of the 
pericardium or epicardium. A pneumothorax may exist, but would not be an expected 
finding on an X-ray.
225.	
Correct answer: B
Early signs of left ventricular failure are tachypnea and tachycardia. Severe left 
ventricular failure also causes dyspnea and retractions.
226.	
Correct answer: B
Esmolol is incompatible with furosemide. Furosemide administration requires 
alternative venous access or oral administration. Esmolol is compatible with 
cimetidine, penicillin, and midazolam.
227.	
Correct answer: B
The most common cause of idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy is alcohol. Even 
though the exact causes are unknown, a large number of alcoholics develop dilated 
cardiomyopathy. Three possible reasons have been identified:
1.	 The alcohol itself, or the metabolites, have a toxic effect
2.	 Alcohol sometimes contains additives, such as cobalt
3.	 The cause may be nutritional in origin, such as a thiamine deficiency
New research shows a possible viral link to the chronic alcoholism. It is interesting 
that this type of cardiomyopathy might reverse itself if the drinking is stopped. Other 
types of cardiomyopathy are not reversible.

Cardiovascular  ❙  83
228.	
Correct answer: D
The maximum daily dose of Ofirmev is 4,000 mg for a patient weighing > 50 kg. 
Ofirmev is the parenteral form of acetaminophen. Dosing should be watched very 
closely to avoid toxic acetaminophen levels. For patients weighing < 50 kg, dosing 
should be calculated at 12.5 mg/kg. Preparation of Ofirmev should not be diluted and 
should not be administered any faster than over 15 minutes. Caution patients not to 
take any over-the-counter (OTC) medications without speaking with his/her primary 
care physician first as many OTCs contain acetaminophen and may lead to toxic 
levels.
229.	
Correct answer: D
Congestive heart failure results in a systemic venous engorgement because blood does 
not flow forward and is allowed to pool in organs and peripheral circulation. Tissues 
become hypoxic and further diminish function until complete failure and death.
230.	
Correct answer: C
The type of cardiomyopathy characterized by replacement of normal cells by 
fatty tissue is known as arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy. This is a relatively new 
classification of cardiomyopathy. The normal myocardial cells are replaced by fatty 
tissue and fibrous tissue. The right ventricle is primarily affected. Conduction cannot 
occur normally, and the patient will have multiple ventricular arrhythmias and 
right ventricular failure. Young people are at risk for sudden death. The cause of this 
condition is unknown, but some research has shown a possible link to an autosomal 
dominant gene.
231.	
Correct answer: B
Leads V2, V3, V4, I, and AVL are indicative of an anterolateral MI. The MI could also 
include V5, and V6, which are also lateral leads.
232.	
Correct answer: A
Life-threatening side effects of propranolol include laryngospasms and bronchospasms 
in addition to bradycardia, bone marrow suppression, and hypotension. Complete 
heart block and dizziness are side effects of propaferone (Rythmol). Lidocaine may 
cause respiratory depression and cardiovascular collapse. Polymorphic VT and 
dyspnea are life-threatening side effects of sotalol (Betapace).
233.	
Correct answer: C
Regurgitation systolic murmurs are associated with VSD, tricuspid regurgitation, and 
mitral valve regurgitation. Regurgitation systolic murmurs are caused by blood flow 
from an area of higher pressure throughout systole to an area of lower pressure.
234.	
Correct answer: D
When administering nitroglycerin, it is important to have normal saline or other 
volume expander at bedside in case of vascular collapse. The potential collapse is 
related to peripheral venous and arterial dilation (relative hypovolemia). Only non-
polyvinyl chloride tubing may be used for infusion because PVC may be absorbed 
by the nitroglycerin. Filtration is not required before infusion. Nitroglycerin is only 
compatible with D5W, normal saline, lactated ringers, D5NS, and half normal saline 
for infusion.

84  ❙  Section 4
235.	
Correct answer: B
Abnormal Q waves on an EKG signify a complete thickness infarction of myocardium. 
When the tissue dies due to myocardial infarction, it becomes electrically dead, 
causing the opposing energy to become the dominant feature. Partial thickness 
myocardial death would be a non-Q wave MI.
236.	
Correct answer: D
The most common new-onset dysrhythmia seen in a patient with a diagnosis of 
pulmonary edema is atrial fibrillation. Atrial fibrillation is the result of the constant 
stretching and disruption of normal pathways in the atrium due to increased preload 
from the pulmonary congestion.
237.	
Correct answer: B
There are multiple reasons for pacemaker insertion, including symptomatic 
bradycardia, bradycardia with escape beats, overdrive pacing, bradycardia/arrest, and 
acute MI with sinus dysfunction. In addition, Mobitz type II, complete heart block, and 
development of a new bundle branch block are reasons for pacemaker insertion.
238.	
Correct answer: C
Right ventricular afterload may be reduced by inhaled nitric oxide. Use of inhaled 
nitric oxide, nitroglycerin, nitroprusside, PGE1, or hyperventilation reduces right 
ventricular afterload. Epinephrine increases systemic afterload due to vasoconstriction 
and promotes increased PVR because of the increased left heart pressures. 
Hypoventilation and subsequent hypoxia also increase right heart afterload.
239.	
Correct answer: A
Your patient has endocarditis. Janeway lesions are flat and painless erythematous 
areas found predominantly on palms and soles of the feet. Osler’s nodes are small, 
painful nodules also associated with endocarditis and found on fingers and toes. 
Roth spots are seen when examining the retina. They are rounded and white and 
associated with endocarditis. It is thought that microvascular clots form in the heart 
and pass through the microcirculation and impede peripheral circulation, sometimes 
causing necrosis. Pella’s sign is not a medical term.
240.	
Correct answer: D
The only definitive way to diagnose myocarditis is via an endomyocardial biopsy.
241.	
Correct answer: D
A heart murmur associated with acute valvular regurgitation is called S4. S1 and S2 
are normal sounds. S3 is associated with fluid status. S4 is associated with ventricular 
compliance.
242.	
Correct answer: B
Radio-frequency waves destroy myocardial tissue with heat. These waves actually heat 
the tissue around the active sites and prevent reentry looping. Once the temperature 
reaches 50°C, cell damage and death occur. The continuing heat creates a lesion 
about 2–5 mm in diameter. This “burned” area causes necrosis and will not conduct 
electricity.

Cardiovascular  ❙  85
243.	
Correct answer: D
A high CVP reading may indicate LV, RV or biventricular failure, tricuspid 
regurgitation or stenosis, hypertension, hypervolemia, or cardiac tamponade. A low 
CVP reading may represent increased contractility or hypovolemia.
244.	
Correct answer: A
New onset atrial fibrillation frequently develops as sequelae to pulmonary edema.
245.	
Correct answer: A
Hydralazine is incompatible with furosemide, phenobarbital, aminophylline, and 
ampicillin. Hydralazine is compatible with heparin, dobutamine, hydrocortisone, 
potassium chloride, prostaglandin E1, and Dex/AA.
246.	
Correct answer: A
There is no evidence that water acts as an obstructive foreign body, so it is not 
necessary to try and remove it prior to proceeding with BLS. The new BLS starts with 
compressions, not airway. CPR cannot be performed effectively in water because 
compressions require a firm surface. Actually, spinal cord injuries are not common 
among drowning victims.
247.	
Correct answer: C
The right side 12-lead EKG looks at the right ventricle and the posterior heart. Some 
facilities have the capability of performing 16-lead EKGs, which look at the entire 
heart without having to move the precordial leads. This complete view of the heart’s 
vasculature status allows for pinpointing the site of the myocardial infarction.
248.	
Correct answer: B
Although the patient may want to be compliant with his or her plan of care, 
financial limitations may prohibit the patient from receiving expensive treatments, 
medications, and support services. If the patient is to start an antiplatelet medication, 
request from the physician that over-the-counter medications be considered before 
the use of more expensive brand-name drugs if the patient cannot afford to continue 
drugs that are started while he is in the hospital. The patient may be better able 
to afford and continue “baby aspirin” therapy versus Plavix. If brand-name and 
generic drugs are required, attempt to contact the drug manufacturer and ask 
about discounts or special programs for low-income patients. Home visits would be 
paid for by the patient. Follow-up phone calls by the unit staff or case management 
may prove cost-effective in verifying patient compliance and in answering any 
questions that the patient has. A cardiology appointment would likely be scheduled 
earlier than 3 months after discharge to ensure that the patient’s plan of care is 
effective and appropriate for his needs. Although exercise is beneficial, the cost of 
a gym membership might be prohibitive. Instead, suggest starting a walking club 
with other friends or neighbors to slowly increase activity while limiting costs. The 
companionship will improve the patient’s physical, psychological, and social health.
249.	
Correct answer: D
The exercise stress test requires that the patient walk on a treadmill or ride a stationary 
bike for at least 30 to 60 minutes. For this patient, that level of activity would be 
difficult, if not impossible, owing to his decreased mobility and pain. The best choice 
is to first inform the physician of the patient’s stated limitations and request an 
alternative test. The stress echocardiography uses dobutamine to stress the cardiac 
tissues without requiring the patient to walk or ride. The weight-lift test does not exist.

86  ❙  Section 4
250.	
Correct answer: C
Anginal pain usually occurs when approximately 75% of the artery’s diameter 
becomes occluded. Pain is more pronounced with exertion or emotional distress, when 
oxygen demand by cardiac tissue cannot be met by oxygen supply via the occluded 
arteries. The severity of pain may be compounded with vasospasms that further 
restrict blood flow through the coronary arteries.
251.	
Correct answer: D
Sometimes patients suffer from a condition called silent ischemia. The patient will 
show objective signs of ischemia on an EKG, but offer no complaints of anginal pain. 
This condition is particularly troubling as about one third of all MI patients do not 
complain of chest pain. Patients who are at high risk for silent ischemia are diabetic. 
Patients with a history of type 2 diabetes for more than 10 years develop autonomic 
neuropathy, which decreases their ability to experience chest pain.
252.	
Correct answer: C
When a patient suffers a myocardial infarction, the infarcted area is surrounded by 
injured, but still viable tissue. This area is known as the zone of injury. Oxygen supply 
to this area is lacking, causing the cells to not fully depolarize. On an EKG, there is 
observable elevation of the ST segment.
253.	
Correct answer: A
After a mycocardial infarction, there remains an area of viable cells. Repolarization 
in this area is temporarily impaired but will return to normal over time. This area is 
called the zone of ischemia or penumbra. On an EKG, T-wave inversion is seen.
254.	
Correct answer: D
After a myocardial infarction, there is an area of dead muscle. This area is known as 
the zone of infarction. An EKG will show new pathologic Q waves. As a progressive 
care nurse, you know the Q wave indicates a lack of depolarization in the area of the 
MI. Over time, scar tissue replaces the dead tissue.
255.	
Correct answer: A
Your patient suffered an acute inferior wall MI two days ago, the patient suddenly 
complains of severe chest pain hypotension, syncope, and hemodynamic collapse with 
signs and symptoms of cardiogenic shock. A holosystolic murmur is auscultated on the 
left sternal border. This patient is probably suffering from a ventricular septal rupture. 
The sudden deterioration is likely due to shunting of blood from the high-pressure area 
of the left ventricle, through the new opening to the low pressure right ventricle.
256.	
Correct answer: A
Your new patient, who was diagnosed with heart failure, awakened from sleep 
gasping for air. As a progressive care nurse, you believe this patient is suffering from 
paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea. This condition is a severe form of orthopnea.
257.	
Correct answer: B
Your patient was diagnosed with heart failure. The patient has difficulty breathing 
while lying flat. This condition is known as orthopnea. The patient will have an 
increase in venous return when supine, possibly overwhelming the lungs.

Cardiovascular  ❙  87
258.	
Correct answer: C
Your patient who has been admitted for heart failure has developed dyspnea and has 
audible wheezing. The patient also has a nonproductive cough. When auscultating the 
lungs, fine crackles are heard. This patient likely is suffering from cardiac asthma.
259.	
Correct answer: C
If intravenous nitroglycerin is required for relief of ischemic chest discomfort, 
a treatment goal would be to limit drop of SBP to 30 mmHg below baseline in 
hypertensive patient.


❙
  89 
❙
Section 5
Pulmonary
SECTION 5: PULMONARY QUESTIONS
1.	
During the postcardiac arrest phase, titration of inspired oxygen to the lowest 
level to achieve an arterial oxygen saturation of ________________% or greater is 
recommended.
A.	 92%
B.	 94%
C.	 96%
D.	 There were no specific levels recommended
2.	
Your patient has a confirmed flail chest. What alteration in acid–base balance 
would you expect this patient to have with this condition?
A.	 Metabolic alkalosis
B.	 Metabolic acidosis
C.	 Respiratory acidosis
D.	 Respiratory alkalosis
3.	
Your 45 year old patient was admitted to the PCU for a severe cough. She states 
that the cough has lasted 3 weeks. She also reports the coughing comes in long 
episodes that continue until she vomits. When you attempt to obtain a sputum 
specimen, what little sputum she produces is very thick and white. What 
condition do you suspect this patient has developed?
A.	 Asthma
B.	 Gastroesophageal reflux
C.	 Pertussis
D.	 Pneumonia
4.	
The driving pressure of air divided by airflow rate determined by airway diameter 
is known as
A.	 V–Q mismatch
B.	 A compliance curve
C.	 Airway resistance
D.	 A driving force curve
5.	
What is the drug of choice for treating pertussis?
A.	 Penicillin VK
B.	 Amoxicillin
C.	 Azithromycin
D.	 Doxycycline

90  ❙  Section 5
6.	
Patients with uncontrolled asthma may receive steroids and neuromuscular-
blocking agents in an attempt to mitigate their symptoms. These patients are at 
increased risk for
A.	 Hypertension
B.	 Prolonged muscle weakness
C.	 Renal failure
D.	 Hepatic failure
7.	
Your patient contracted a wound infection secondary to an appendix removal 
6 days ago. Today, the patient presented to the ED complaining of incisional 
pain and elevated temperature. She was started on intravenous gentamicin, then 
transferred to your PCU. As a progressive care nurse, you know gentamicin is also 
useful in the treatment of
A.	 Otitis media
B.	 Gram-positive rods
C.	 Pseudomonas aeruginosa
D.	 Bacillus
8.	
You suspect your patient is developing a pulmonary embolism. Signs and 
symptoms of a pulmonary embolus can include
A.	 Sinus bradycardia or a normal EKG
B.	 Pleuritic chest pain, decreased cardiac output
C.	 ABGs show respiratory acidosis, increased respiratory rate
D.	 Decreased pulmonary artery systolic pressure
9.	
Which of the following statements is true when a patient has a pulmonary 
embolism?
A.	 Respiratory acidosis occurs
B.	 Heparin is used to dissolve clots
C.	 Normal D-dimer results can rule out a pulmonary embolism
D.	 Metabolic alkalosis develops
10.	
Pulmonary embolism is actually considered a complication of deep venous 
thrombosis. To assess for deep venous thrombosis, which of the following signs 
should be assessed?
A.	 Moses’s
B.	 Davis’s
C.	 Corrigan’s
D.	 Hamman’s
11.	
Your new patient was admitted directly from her physician’s office to the PCU. The 
patient fell from a tree. She now complains of stabbing substernal pain each time 
she changes her position. Her chest X-ray results were just relayed to your unit by 
the radiologist. The patient has been diagnosed with a pneumomediastinum. A 
common significant finding in a patient with a pneumomediastinum is
A.	 Cullen’s sign
B.	 Grey–Turner’s sign
C.	 Hamman’s sign
D.	 Handes’s sign

Pulmonary  ❙  91
12.	
Which of the following drugs is classified as a methylxanthine?
A.	 Morphine
B.	 Theophylline
C.	 Prednisone
D.	 Atropine
13.	
While ambulating your patient, he suddenly collapses. During your primary 
assessment, you discover the patient is in respiratory arrest but does have a 
perfusing rhythm. Prior to the code team’s arrival, you obtain a bag-valve mask 
device. According to the 2015 American Heart Association guidelines for CPR and 
ECC, how often should you squeeze the bag to assist ventilations on this patient?
A.	 Once every 4 seconds
B.	 Once every 5 to 6 seconds
C.	 10 to 15 times per minute
D.	 12 to 15 times per minute
14.	
Analyze the following arterial blood gas values from a patient who had a CABG 
four days ago:
pH 7.43
CO2 37
HCO3 25
A.	 Compensated respiratory acidosis
B.	 Normal
C.	 Compensated metabolic acidosis
D.	 Compensated metabolic alkalosis
15.	
Analyze the following arterial blood gas values from a patient in acute kidney 
failure:
pH 7.11
CO2 67
HCO3 15
A.	 Uncompensated respiratory acidosis
B.	 Uncompensated metabolic alkalosis
C.	 Compensated metabolic acidosis
D.	 Uncompensated (mixed) respiratory/metabolic acidosis
16.	
Analyze the following arterial blood gas values who ingested methanol:
pH 7.38
CO2 25
HCO3 16
A.	 Compensated respiratory alkalosis
B.	 Compensated metabolic acidosis
C.	 Uncompensated metabolic acidosis
D.	 Uncompensated respiratory acidosis

92  ❙  Section 5
17.	
Analyze the following blood gas values from a patient who is suffering from 
asthma:
pH 7.49
CO2 29
HCO3 23
A.	 Uncompensated respiratory alkalosis
B.	 Compensated respiratory acidosis
C.	 Compensated metabolic alkalosis
D.	 Uncompensated metabolic acidosis
18.	
Analyze the following arterial blood gas values from a patient with atelectasis:
pH 7.43
CO2 29
HCO3 22
A.	 Uncompensated metabolic alkalosis
B.	 Uncompensated respiratory alkalosis
C.	 Compensated respiratory alkalosis
D.	 Compensated metabolic alkalosis
19.	
Analyze the following arterial blood gas values from a patient with restrictive 
lung disease:
pH 7.32
CO2 67
HCO3 25
A.	 Uncompensated metabolic alkalosis
B.	 Uncompensated respiratory acidosis
C.	 Compensated metabolic acidosis
D.	 Compensated respiratory acidosis
20.	
Analyze the following arterial blood gas values:
pH 7.37
CO2 36
HCO3 24
A.	 Normal
B.	 Compensated respiratory acidosis
C.	 Compensated metabolic acidosis
D.	 Compensated respiratory alkalosis
21.	
Analyze the following arterial blood gas values from a patient on room air who 
was just admitted after suffering a stroke and has just suffered a seizure:
pH 7.17
CO2 54
HCO3 21
A.	 Uncompensated metabolic alkalosis
B.	 Uncompensated (mixed) respiratory/metabolic acidosis
C.	 Compensated metabolic acidosis
D.	 Uncompensated respiratory acidosis

Pulmonary  ❙  93
22.	
Which of the following medications is given orally to inhibit rapid rise in 
pulmonary artery pressure secondary to hypoxia?
A.	 Calcium channel blockers
B.	 Nitric oxide
C.	 Sidenafil
D.	 Plavix
23.	
Which of the following statements about laryngeal mask airways is true?
A.	 It may be inserted by any nurse
B.	 It may cause hoarseness after removal
C.	 The patient must have an absent gag reflex
D.	 The laryngeal mask airway (LMA) eliminates the risk of aspiration
24.	
During a cardiac arrest, your patient aspirated gastric contents. Which of the 
following statements is true regarding this type of aspiration?
A.	 If the pH of the material is < 2.5, necrosis will be minimal
B.	 The patient always develops ARDS
C.	 Onset of symptoms is gradual
D.	 There is little danger of atelectasis
25.	
The patient you are caring for was diagnosed with aspiration pneumonitis. As a 
progressive care nurse, you know the most severe pulmonary reaction may occur 
from the aspiration of
A.	 A nonacidic liquid
B.	 Salt water
C.	 Gastric contents with a pH greater than 2.5
D.	 Acidic food particles
26.	
Pulse oximetry should never be used
A.	 To determine oxygen saturation values
B.	 During a cardiac arrest
C.	 As a determinant for predicting hemoglobin affinity for oxygen
D.	 To help determine a patient’s activity tolerance
27.	
A SpO2 value of 95% correlates with which of the following PaO2 values?
A.	 75
B.	 80
C.	 90
D.	 98
28.	
To prevent complications with a chest tube drainage system, the suction level 
should not be higher than
A.	 –20 cm/H2O
B.	 –30 cm/H2O
C.	 –40 cm/H2O
D.	 –50 cm/H2O

94  ❙  Section 5
29.	
Which of the following statements is true regarding chest tube drainage systems?
A.	 Drainage of frank blood in amounts >100 ml/hour is not significant
B.	 Drainage tubing should be placed horizontally on the bed, then down to the 
collection chamber
C.	 All drainage tubing should be dependent to the insertion site
D.	 Chest tube drainage from a mediastinal tube should bubble in the water seal 
chamber
30.	
Which of the following drugs is considered to be a mucolytic agent?
A.	 Atropine
B.	 Terbutaline
C.	 Acetylcysteine
D.	 Albuterol
31.	
Side effects of acetylcysteine include
A.	 Red urine
B.	 Headache
C.	 Hypertension
D.	 Bronchospasms
32.	
Patients often have decreases in lung compliance simply from the effects of aging. 
Which of the following conditions actually increases lung compliance?
A.	 Pulmonary edema
B.	 Pleural effusions
C.	 Obesity
D.	 Emphysema
33.	
One of the most effective ways to relieve bronchospasms is
A.	 To administer adrenalin
B.	 To administer an antihistamine
C.	 To administer prednisone
D.	 To administer a B2 receptor agonist
34.	
When the resident attempts to place a central line, air is accidentally introduced 
into the line when the IV tubing becomes disconnected. The best position in which 
to place this patient to minimize a venous air embolism is
A.	 Reverse Trendelenburg
B.	 Right side
C.	 Trendelenburg with left decubitus tilt
D.	 Left side
35.	
A venous air embolism may be caused by
A.	 Hemodialysis
B.	 Pulmonary artery catheters
C.	 Radial arterial catheters
D.	 Peritoneal dialysis

Pulmonary  ❙  95
36.	
A risk factor for development of thrombolic emboli includes which of the 
following conditions?
A.	 A patient who is 1 week postpartum
B.	 Carcinoma
C.	 Long bone fractures
D.	 Heparin administration
37.	
You are caring for a patient with an acute exacerbation of reactive airway 
disease. The patient has a history of asthma. Which of the following signs 
indicates this patient is suffering from acute respiratory distress?
A.	 Expiratory wheezes
B.	 Grunting
C.	 Sternocleodomastoid retractions
D.	 Inspiratory wheezes
38.	
Your patient has ceased wheezing during his asthma attack. This change in his 
condition
A.	 Indicates the patient is improving
B.	 Only means the nebulizer treatment is working
C.	 Indicates the patient is in complete respiratory failure
D.	 Means the patient’s anxiety has decreased
39.	
Wheezing is present in a number of medical conditions. In which of the following 
conditions is wheezing usually not present?
A.	 Smoke inhalation
B.	 Pneumonia
C.	 Near drowning
D.	 Bronchitis
40.	
Your patient tells you he has been taking Slo-Bid for his asthma. Side effects of 
this medication include
A.	 Lethargy
B.	 Flaccidity
C.	 Bradycardia
D.	 Muscle cramps
41.	
Long-acting forms of B agonists used in the treatment of asthma include
A.	 Salmeterol (Serevent®)
B.	 Albuterol (Proventil® HFA, Ventolin® HFA, Accuneb®, ProAir®)
C.	 Metaproterenol (Alupent®)
D.	 Levalbuterol (Xoponex® HFA, Xoponex® nebulizer solution)
42.	
The American Heart Association has classified acute pulmonary embolisms into 
three categories: massive, submassive, or low risk. A submassive pulmonary 
embolism is characterized by
A.	 An acute PE with evidence of right ventricular dysfunction or myocardial 
dysfunction
B.	 A patient without ventricular dysfunction
C.	 An acute PE with sustained BP < (90 mmHg) for more than 15 minutes
D.	 An acute PE with redistribution of ventilation to all lung fields

96  ❙  Section 5
43.	
Your elderly male patient has been diagnosed with end-stage mesothelioma. 
He came to the ED because of severe respiratory distress. He is now in your PCU 
receiving palliative care. Which of the following occupations is more likely to be 
associated with a diagnosis of mesothelioma?
A.	 Bricklayer
B.	 Gardener
C.	 Office manager
D.	 Shipbuilder
44.	
Pulse oximetry readings are considered unreliable when oxygen saturation levels 
fall below
A.	 55%
B.	 60%
C.	 80%
D.	 70%
45.	
The nursing student assigned to you for the day asks you to explain the 
oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve. You reply that the oxyhemoglobin dissociation 
curve is
A.	 A relationship between dissolved oxygen and the affinity for oxygen by the 
hemoglobin molecule
B.	 A graphic representation of carbon dioxide content versus oxygen content in 
arterial blood
C.	 A measure of methemoglobin
D.	 A way to calculate gas transport across the alveoli
46.	
Your patient with COPD has been receiving 600 mg of theophylline daily in 
divided doses. Which of the following assessment findings should be reported to 
the physician immediately, as these findings represent potential theophylline 
toxicity?
A.	 The patient is lethargic
B.	 Atrial tachycardia with occasional PVCs has developed
C.	 The patient’s blood glucose is 50
D.	 The patient has a systolic blood pressure of 160 mmHg
47.	
The respiratory therapist has just drawn an arterial blood gas sample. The syringe 
contains a small amount of heparin. What effect will too much heparin have on 
the sample, if any?
A.	 Increase the PaCO2
B.	 No effect
C.	 Decrease the bicarbonate
D.	 Totally prevent clotting
48.	
You are preparing to administer a loading dose of theophylline to your patient 
with COPD. For every 0.5 mg/kg given, you would expect a ___ increase in blood 
theophylline levels.
A.	 0.25 mcg/ml
B.	 0.5 mg/ml
C.	 0.75 mg/ml
D.	 1 mcg/ml

Pulmonary  ❙  97
49.	
Your patient is currently taking theophylline. As a progressive care nurse, you 
know this patient should be taught to
A.	 Stop smoking while taking this medication because smoking decreases medication 
clearance, leading to toxicity
B.	 Avoid current alcohol consumption while on theophylline as alcohol increases 
medication clearance
C.	 Notify the physician of any huge change in weight to adjust dosing
D.	 Avoid a high-protein, low-carbohydrate diet, as it will increase theophylline 
elimination
50.	
A measurement of total oxygen consumption is
A.	 SvO2
B.	 ETCO2
C.	 PtCO2
D.	 SjO2
51.	
Your patient required endotracheal intubation. Which of the following statements 
is true regarding the use of capnography to verify endotracheal tube placement?
A.	 Placement of the device can be difficult to learn initially
B.	 It is not necessary to auscultate lung sounds when this device is used
C.	 ETCO2 is a moderately reliable indicator of correct tube placement
D.	 It is not a substitute for pulse oximetry
52.	
Your patient had 1350 ml of pleural effusion removed via thoracentesis and 
immediately began coughing and was dyspneic. You believe this patient has 
developed
A.	 Reexpansion pulmonary edema
B.	 A pneumothorax
C.	 A cardiac tamponade
D.	 A hemothorax
53.	
Your patient is suffering substernal chest pain exacerbated when deep breathing. 
The patient also states his allergies are causing a dry cough, some nasal 
stuffiness, some pain in both ears, and a sore throat. The chest pain becomes 
more pronounced and pleuritic in nature. This patient has been on a 60% 
nonrebreathing mask for two days. It is likely this patient may be suffering from
A.	 A pulmonary embolism
B.	 Hypoxemia
C.	 Hyperoxia
D.	 Pneumothorax
54.	
Your patient has been slightly hypoxic since admission to the PCU. She sustained 
a tension pneumothorax following an automobile accident and had a chest tube 
placed in the ED. What potential imbalance would be expected with her hypoxic 
state?
A.	 Hypochloremia
B.	 Respiratory alkalosis
C.	 Decreased bicarbonate levels
D.	 Hypokalemia

98  ❙  Section 5
55.	
A student nurse asks you to explain the concept of hypoxemia. Hypoxemia is best 
defined as
A.	 A decrease in oxygen at the cellular level
B.	 A decrease in oxygen at the alveolar level
C.	 A decrease in oxygen levels in venous blood
D.	 A decrease in oxygen levels in arterial blood
56.	
Which of the following conditions is the most probable cause of the acid–base 
imbalance of uncompensated respiratory alkalosis?
A.	 Kidney failure
B.	 A side effect of theophylline
C.	 Hyperventilation
D.	 Hypoventilation
57.	
A possible treatment to best improve airflow in status asthmaticus is the use of
A.	 PEEP
B.	 Heliox
C.	 Norepinephrine
D.	 Nebulizer treatments
58.	
If you hear faint breath sounds on the left side of the chest and normal sounds on 
the right side immediately after your patient has been intubated, most likely
A.	 The ETT has an air leak
B.	 The physician has intubated the esophagus
C.	 The ETT is at the carina
D.	 The right main stem bronchus has been intubated
59.	
Analyze the following arterial blood gas results from a patient on 2L O2 via a 
nasal cannula. The patient is very anxious and awaiting the results of a biopsy:
pH 7.46
CO2 31
HCO3 21
A.	 Normal
B.	 Compensated respiratory acidosis
C.	 Uncompensated respiratory alkalosis
D.	 Uncompensated metabolic alkalosis
60.	
Analyze the following arterial blood gas values from a patient who has been 
vomiting the past hour:
pH 7.38
CO2 27
HCO3 19
A.	 Compensated metabolic acidosis
B.	 Compensated respiratory acidosis
C.	 Uncompensated metabolic acidosis
D.	 Uncompensated respiratory acidosis

Pulmonary  ❙  99
61.	
Analyze the following capillary blood gas results for a patient on 21% oxygen 
who has been ambulating in the hallway:
pH 7.44
CO2 41
HCO3 22
A.	 Compensated respiratory acidosis
B.	 Compensated respiratory alkalosis
C.	 Normal
D.	 Compensated metabolic acidosis
62.	
Analyze the following arterial blood gas results from a patient with a ventricular 
septal injury from a stab wound:
pH 7.57
CO2 22
HCO3 32
A.	 Uncompensated (mixed) respiratory/metabolic alkalosis
B.	 Compensated respiratory acidosis
C.	 Compensated metabolic alkalosis
D.	 Uncompensated respiratory alkalosis
63.	
Analyze the following arterial blood gas values obtained from a patient who is 
suffering from pneumonia:
pH 7.39
CO2 67
HCO3 36
A.	 Uncompensated metabolic alkalosis
B.	 Compensated respiratory acidosis
C.	 Compensated metabolic acidosis
D.	 Uncompensated respiratory acidosis
64.	
Which of the following statements is true about agonal gasps?
A.	 Agonal gasps are an indication of an extra thoracic obstruction
B.	 Gasping is a sign of cardiac arrest
C.	 Gasping is an abnormal pattern, but one that will provide ventilation
D.	 Agonal gasps indicates brain herniation
65.	
The volume of gas remaining in the lungs at the end of one normal expiration is 
called
A.	 Residual volume
B.	 Capacitance
C.	 Total lung capacity
D.	 Functional residual capacity
66.	
The volume of gas left in the lungs following a maximal respiratory effort is 
known as the
A.	 Vital capacity
B.	 Total lung capacity
C.	 Residual volume
D.	 Dead airspace

100  ❙  Section 5
67.	
Which of the following conditions is most likely to lead to inaccurate oxygen 
saturation values on a pulse oximeter?
A.	 Probe placement on an earlobe
B.	 Hyperthermia
C.	 Decreased peripheral perfusion
D.	 Cyanotic heart disease
68.	
The functional residual capacity is defined as
A.	 The amount of air in lungs after normal expiration
B.	 The amount of gas that can be forcefully exhaled after maximum inspiration
C.	 The amount of gas normally exhaled after a maximum inhalation
D.	 The amount of gas left in the lungs after a maximum exhalation
69.	
Gas exchange in the lungs requires movement of gas between the atmosphere, 
alveoli, and pulmonary vasculature. This movement of gases is via
A.	 Passive diffusion
B.	 Osmotic pressure
C.	 Airway resistance
D.	 Hydrostatic pressure
70.	
Your patient was admitted from the ED and is septic. The respiratory therapist 
who has just drawn an ABG sample asks you if the patient has a fever. The 
possibility of fever will have what effect on the sample he just collected?
A.	 The PO2 will be falsely elevated
B.	 The pH will rise
C.	 Fever has no effect
D.	 The HCO3 will be elevated
71.	
The cells responsible for forming a barrier for alveoli are known as
A.	 Histocytes
B.	 Type II alveolar epithelial cells
C.	 Macrophages
D.	 Type I alveolar epithelial cells
72.	
In the lungs, communicating channels through holes in the alveolar wall 
allowing gas movement between alveoli are called
A.	 Preacinar arteries
B.	 Alveolar pores of Kohn
C.	 Canae of Smolder
D.	 The palmar arteries
73.	
Type II alveolar cells produce
A.	 Surfactant
B.	 Phagocytes
C.	 Macrocytes
D.	 Carbon dioxide

Pulmonary  ❙  101
74.	
A diagnosis of asthma may be made by
A.	 A PEFR of 100–125
B.	 A FiO2 of 80%
C.	 A decreased FEV1
D.	 Wheezing
75.	
The FiO2 for a nasal cannula set at a flow rate of 6 L/min is
A.	 21%
B.	 24%
C.	 30%
D.	 40%
76.	
Your patient has been on a nasal cannula and now requires a non-rebreather 
mask to maintain his oxygenation saturation at acceptable levels. A non-
rebreather mask can deliver what percentage of oxygen when the O2 flow rate is 
set at 10–15 L/min?
A.	 24–40%
B.	 30–40%
C.	 60–80%
D.	 50–60%
77.	
Your patient required placement of chest tube after aspiration of a pleural 
effusion. When assessing a patient with a chest tube drainage system, which of 
the following statements is correct?
A.	 Check for subcutaneous emphysema around the insertion site by auscultation
B.	 If using a Pleur-Evac with autotransfusion connection, make certain all clamps are 
open
C.	 The average chest tube size for an adult is 20 French
D.	 If using a chest tube drainage system with a one-way valve and suction, water is 
required to maintain a seal
78.	
The patient you are caring for will require oxygen therapy at home, so it is 
important that the patient is taught
A.	 To secure oxygen tanks in a vertical position
B.	 To wear synthetic clothing to reduce the risk of static electricity
C.	 To use alcohol-based swabs to reduce oral dryness
D.	 To use only a nasal cannula and not a mask
79.	
Which of the following statements about excessive ventilation during cardiac 
arrest is true?
A.	 Excessive ventilation decreases intrathoracic pressure
B.	 Venous return to the heart is increased
C.	 Cardiac output will increase
D.	 Cerebral vasoconstriction may occur
80.	
The best position for a patient with ARDS is
A.	 Prone
B.	 On right side
C.	 On left side
D.	 Supine

102  ❙  Section 5
81.	
You are receiving report on a patient with pulmonary hypertension. Which of the 
following symptoms is consistent with presentation of pulmonary hypertension?
A.	 A prominent S4
B.	 Decreased respiratory rate
C.	 Dyspnea with exertion
D.	 Left-side heart failure
82.	
Your patient is suffering from primary pulmonary hypertension. Which of the 
following medication groups would be used to treat this condition?
A.	 Beta-blockers
B.	 Calcium channel blockers
C.	 MAO-inhibitors
D.	 Catecholamine
83.	
If left untreated, pulmonary hypertension may result in which of the following 
sequelae?
A.	 Increased left atrium pressures
B.	 Irreversible thinning of the medial smooth muscles in the arterioles
C.	 Reversible thickening of the lateral smooth muscle in the arterioles
D.	 Increased right ventricular pressures
84.	
What is the purpose of screening for collagen vascular disease and coagulation 
disorders in a patient with suspected pulmonary hypertension?
A.	 Hypoxemia triggers a decrease in collagen creation
B.	 Hypoxia results in decreased elastin production
C.	 Decreased blood flow results in blood pooling
D.	 Hypoxemia destroys collagen
85.	
An absolute contraindication for use of rapid sequence intubation is
A.	 Total loss of facial and/or oropharyngeal landmarks, which requires a surgical 
airway
B.	 An airway where intubation may not be successful
C.	 A “crash” airway where the patient is in arrest
D.	 There is no absolute contraindication for the use of rapid sequence intubation
86.	
Which of the following situations is not an indication for the use of rapid 
sequence intubation?
A.	 Prolonged respiratory effort that results in fatigue or failure
B.	 Uncooperative trauma patient with life-threatening injuries
C.	 Stab wound to neck with expanding hematoma
D.	 All cervical spine injuries
87.	
During rapid sequence intubation (RSI), cricoid cartilage pressure is often used 
to help prevent vomiting and aspiration of gastric contents. The esophagus is 
obstructed by the pressure to the anterior neck. This maneuver is known as the
A.	 Hamman’s maneuver
B.	 King maneuver
C.	 Sellick maneuver
D.	 Pitt maneuver

Pulmonary  ❙  103
88.	
When performing CPR on a cardiac arrest patient, as a progressive care nurse, 
you know the best, most reliable way to confirm placement of an endotracheal 
tube is
A.	 Auscultation of upper and lower lung fields
B.	 Use of a CO2 detector
C.	 Continuous waveform capnography (PetCO2)
D.	 Pulse oximetry
89.	
Analyze the following arterial blood gas values from an adult patient with 
tetralogy of Fallot:
pH 7.19
CO2 41
HCO3 14
A.	 Normal
B.	 Compensated respiratory acidosis
C.	 Uncompensated respiratory acidosis
D.	 Uncompensated metabolic acidosis
90.	
Interpret the following arterial blood gas results from a victim of a gunshot 
wound to the chest:
pH 7.22
CO2 63
HCO3 23
A.	 Compensated respiratory acidosis
B.	 Uncompensated metabolic acidosis
C.	 Uncompensated respiratory acidosis
D.	 Normal
91.	
One cause of decreased SvO2 in a patient is
A.	 An increased metabolic rate
B.	 Sedation
C.	 A decreased metabolic rate
D.	 Increased cardiac output
92.	
Your new patient has severe bronchitis. She has been treated at her extended care 
facility with a non-rebreather mask for 5 days. Today, she is exhibiting increased 
distress with chest discomfort, restlessness, a dry hacking cough with dyspnea, 
and numbness in her extremities. Pulmonary function tests (PFTs) indicate a 
decreased vital capacity (VC), decreased compliance, and decreased functional 
residual capacity (FRC). As the nurse caring for this patient, you should anticipate 
orders to
A.	 Administer Lasix 40 mg IV
B.	 Prepare for intubation with 100% FiO2
C.	 Take the patient for a CT scan and prepare to give tPA
D.	 Check the pulse oximeter correlation with an arterial blood gas and decrease 
the FiO2

104  ❙  Section 5
93.	
As patients age from birth through old age, chest wall compliance decreases. 
One of the reasons for this change is
A.	 Arterial oxygen tension increases
B.	 Total lung capacity decreases
C.	 Costal cartilage degeneration
D.	 Decreased residual volume
94.	
Which medication listed below is both an analgesic and an amnestic?
A.	 Barbiturates
B.	 Propofol
C.	 Atropine
D.	 Ketamine
95.	
Which of the following statements about cyanosis is true?
A.	 Cyanosis is directly related to increased PaCO2
B.	 Fingertip clubbing is an indication of chronic hypoxia
C.	 Cyanosis may be observed when 1–3 g of Hgb is desaturated
D.	 Cyanosis may be easily observed in cases of anemia and polycythemia
96.	
The respiratory therapist tells you he is covering too many patients and cannot 
perform postural drainage on your patient. He says your patient needs the left 
upper lobes drained if possible. The correct position to help this patient is
A.	 Flat on left side
B.	 Flat with hips elevated
C.	 Supine
D.	 Semi-reclining
97.	
Your patient has a hemothorax. What is the proper location of a chest tube for 
evacuation of a hemothorax?
A.	 Second intercostal space, midclavicular line
B.	 Second intercostal space, midaxillary line
C.	 Fifth intercostal space, midaxillary line
D.	 Fifth intercostal space, midclavicular line
98.	
An example of the hypoxemic type of respiratory failure is
A.	 Increased dead air space
B.	 ARDS
C.	 PaO2 < 60 mmHg while person is at rest, at sea level, on room air
D.	 Right heart failure
99.	
Where does the hypoxemic drive to breathe originate?
A.	 The cerebellum
B.	 The aortic and carotid arteries
C.	 The hypothalamus
D.	 The medulla

Pulmonary  ❙  105
100.	
Severe carbon monoxide poisoning occurs when carboxyhemoglobin levels are 
higher than which of the following percentages?
A.	 10–15%
B.	 20–40%
C.	 40–50%
D.	 50–60%
101.	
Carbon monoxide has an affinity for hemoglobin thought to be 200–300 times 
greater than oxygen. Elimination of carbon monoxide from the body is via the
A.	 Kidneys
B.	 Liver
C.	 Spleen
D.	 Lungs
102.	
The nurse reporting to you on a new patient states that the patient has developed 
subcutaneous emphysema. Subcutaneous emphysema usually occurs in the area 
of the
A.	 Head
B.	 Neck
C.	 Abdomen
D.	 Thorax
103.	
Breathing high concentrations of oxygen may wash out nitrogen that is present 
in alveoli. The nitrogen helps keep the alveoli open. If oxygen replaces nitrogen 
in the alveoli, the alveoli will shrink and begin to collapse. This phenomena is 
considered an adverse effect and is known as
A.	 Oxygen toxicity
B.	 Absorption atelectasis
C.	 A pulmonary dysplasia
D.	 Pulmonary hypertension
104.	
Which of the following are symptoms of active tuberculosis?
A.	 Dry cough, weight loss, night sweats
B.	 Hemoptysis, fever, night sweats, weight loss
C.	 Chest pain, wheezing, hemoptysis
D.	 Weight loss, hemoptysis, wheezing
105.	
Your patient has a 14-mm induration at the site of his PPD. What does this mean?
A.	 He has a positive PPD
B.	 He has latent TB
C.	 His results are indeterminate
D.	 He has a false-positive result
106.	
Which of the following medications is not used to treat TB?
A.	 Isoniazid
B.	 Pyrazidamide
C.	 Rimantadine
D.	 Rifampin

106  ❙  Section 5
107.	
A patient recently admitted from the ED requires immediate intubation. The 
physician orders succinylcholine. Which of the following conditions is not a side 
effect of succinylcholine?
A.	 Hypotension
B.	 Malignant hypothermia
C.	 Hypokalemia
D.	 Smooth muscle contraction
108.	
Accessory pathways connecting a small airway to an airspace normally supplied 
by another pathway is called
A.	 A cartilaginous bronchus
B.	 A membranous bronchiole
C.	 A canal of Lambert
D.	 The portal of Menifer
109.	
Falsely low readings on a pulse oximeter may be due to
A.	 Vasodilation
B.	 Vascular dyes
C.	 Patient motion
D.	 Fever
110.	
Which of the following considerations should the PCU nurse know prior to the 
administration of vancomycin?
A.	 Vancomycin is nephrotoxic
B.	 Vancomycin must be administered intramuscularly
C.	 Vancomycin should always be given with an aminoglycoside
D.	 Vancomycin is specific for Staphylococcus aureus
111.	
Precautions used when handling respiratory equipment or providing respiratory 
treatments in the PCU include
A.	 Using an alcohol-based antiseptic agent if your hands are visibly soiled before, 
during, and after patient care
B.	 Using an alcohol-based antiseptic solution only if you have worn gloves during 
contact with the patient
C.	 Using an antimicrobial soap and water before and after providing patient care
D.	 Only decontaminating your hands after providing care if gloves are worn
112.	
The ED nurse who transferred your patient reported that your patient had been 
previously intubated by paramedics with a laryngeal mask airway (LMA). The 
patient is now conscious and is on a nasal cannula at 2 L/min. Which of the 
following statements is true regarding the use of LMAs?
A.	 Nurses routinely insert these airways
B.	 There is a low risk of aspiration
C.	 It is a temporary airway
D.	 The vocal cords must be visualized

Pulmonary  ❙  107
113.	
Your patient was finally released from the hospital two weeks ago after a difficult 
course of treatment for sepsis. Yesterday, the patient was seen in the ED for 
follow-up for a small laceration. Today she is visiting staff in the PCU and says 
she plans to visit her family in Colorado Springs. Part of the teaching for this 
patient should include information on the effects of high altitude on her ability to 
oxygenate effectively. Which of the following changes would be expected on her 
blood gas results?
A.	 PaO2 increases
B.	 No effect would occur
C.	 O2 saturation would decrease
D.	 pH would decrease
114.	
Which of the following pulmonary dilators is used for the treatment of 
pulmonary hypertension?
A.	 Dobutamine
B.	 Dopamine
C.	 Inhaled nitric oxide
D.	 Epinephrine
115.	
An action of nitric oxide includes which of the following effects?
A.	 Vascular smooth muscle relaxation
B.	 To augment prostaglandin synthesis
C.	 To release macrophages
D.	 To increase pulmonary vascular resistance
116.	
Which of the following statements is true regarding the administration of CPAP?
A.	 CPAP cannot be delivered via an endotracheal tube
B.	 CPAP allows for a decrease in functional residual capacity
C.	 CPAP provides decreased pressure to the posterior pharynx
D.	 CPAP may be administered via nasal prongs
117.	
An adverse effect of excessive CPAP is
A.	 Continuous need to increase oxygen over time
B.	 A rise in intrathoracic pressure
C.	 Intraventricular hemorrhage
D.	 A sudden change in cerebral blood flow
118.	
Your new patient requires mechanical ventilation via a tracheostomy. If positive 
inspiratory pressure (PIP) is increased on a mechanical ventilator, what effect 
should this have on your patient’s blood gases?
A.	 It increases the PaCO2 and decreases the PaO2
B.	 It decreases the PaCO2 and decreases the PaO2
C.	 It decreases the PaCO2 and increases the PaO2
D.	 It decreases the pH and decreases the PaCO2

108  ❙  Section 5
119.	
Your patient is suffering from acute liver failure. The arterial blood gas results 
from the sample drawn one hour ago show the patient is an respiratory alkalosis. 
Which of the following arterial blood gas results would support that diagnosis?
A.	 pH 7.27, CO2 24, HCO3 24
B.	 pH 7.47, CO2 24, HCO3 24
C.	 pH 7.57, CO2 44, HCO3 32
D.	 pH 7.37, CO2 67, HCO3 26
120.	
Fluid therapy in ARDS is directed toward
A.	 Keeping a high cardiac output state
B.	 Maintaining a low protein content
C.	 Maintaining hyponatremia
D.	 Maintaining a low-circulating fluid volume
121.	
The nurse just coming on shift to care for your patient brought several ampules of 
normal saline to the bedside in preparation for suctioning your patient. Research 
has shown that use of normal saline does not thin secretions and may cause 
which of the following adverse effects?
A.	 Decreased mean arterial pressure
B.	 Decreased intrathoracic pressure
C.	 Anxiety
D.	 Bronchodilation
122.	
In the PCU, patients may be mechanically ventilated by a variety of ventilator 
modes. Which of the following ventilator modes allows the patient to breathe 
spontaneously?
A.	 HFV
B.	 SIMV
C.	 CMV
D.	 Oscillator
123.	
Many of the ventilator circuits used in a PCU utilize a closed catheter suction 
system. Which of the following is a disadvantage of closed catheter suctioning of 
a mechanically ventilated patient?
A.	 The patient does receive oxygen during the procedure
B.	 The extra weight of the inline tubing
C.	 Cost is higher with a single-use catheter
D.	 Cost is effective if used sporadically
124.	
Your patient will require long-term ventilatory support via a tracheostomy. 
A disadvantage of using a tracheostomy tube is
A.	 Subcutaneous emphysema
B.	 It increases airway resistance
C.	 The airway is less stable
D.	 It allows for right mainstem intubation

Pulmonary  ❙  109
125.	
Your patient requires a stoma stent. The function of a stoma stent is
A.	 To prevent aspiration
B.	 To avoid translaryngeal intubation
C.	 To provide the ability for the patient to speak
D.	 To keep the stoma tract open
126.	
Which of the following statements about silicone or plastic tracheostomy tubes 
is true?
A.	 Silicone holds up to repeated cleaning
B.	 Wire-reinforced tubes cannot be used in MRI imaging
C.	 A one-way speaking valve is easy to use
D.	 The tubes offer a lower cost to the facility
127.	
Mask continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) should be used with caution if a 
patient has
A.	 Low functional residual capacity (FRC)
B.	 A basilar skull fracture
C.	 Sinusitis
D.	 Pneumonia
128.	
Analyze the following arterial blood gas values from a patient who has been 
taking large quantities of antacids:
pH 7.53
CO2 42
HCO3 37
A.	 Uncompensated metabolic alkalosis
B.	 Compensated metabolic acidosis
C.	 Uncompensated respiratory alkalosis
D.	 Uncompensated mixed respiratory/metabolic alkalosis

110  ❙  Section 5
SECTION 5: PULMONARY ANSWERS
1.	
Correct answer: B
According to the 2015 American Heart Association guidelines for CPR and ECC, during 
the postcardiac arrest phase, titration of inspired oxygen to the lowest level to achieve 
an arterial oxygen saturation of 94% or greater is recommended when feasible. This 
may help avoid potential complications with oxygen toxicity.
2.	
Correct answer: C
A flail chest is a very painful condition that limits respiratory effort because of the 
pain. Analgesia and sedation that may be required may also depress respiratory drive 
and excursion. The CO2 will increase, PaO2 will decrease, and the pH will be below 7.35. 
The patient will develop respiratory acidosis.
3.	
Correct answer: C
This patient’s symptoms are indicative of pertussis. She reports the coughing comes in 
long episodes that continue until she vomits. What little sputum she produces is very 
thick and white. A PCR nasal probe should be done as soon as possible. Her family 
should be examined for signs of pertussis, especially if there are infants or children 
under the age of 2 or those who have not had a TDaP booster in the past 5 years.
4.	
Correct answer: C
The driving pressure of air divided by airflow rate determined by airway diameter is 
known as airway resistance.
5.	
Correct answer: C
Macrolide antibiotics such as azithromycin, clarithromycin, and erythromycin are 
recommended treatments for pertussis. Penicillins and tetracyclines are ineffective in 
treating pertussis.
6.	
Correct answer: B
Patients with uncontrolled asthma may receive steroids and neuromuscular blocking 
agents in an attempt to mitigate their symptoms. These patients are at increased risk 
for prolonged muscle weakness. Uncontrolled asthma symptoms during an attack may 
lead to prolonged and extensive muscle use to maintain independent respirations. 
Prolonged effort may result in respiratory failure due to respiratory muscle fatigue. 
Administration of a neuromuscular blocking agent further inhibits the smooth muscle 
retractions. Long-term steroid use has been linked to muscle wasting. Ventilatory 
weaning may be prolonged as respiratory muscles recover from both the disease 
process and pharmacologic intervention.
7.	
Correct answer: C
Gentamicin is effective against gram-negative rods and penicillin-resistant 
staphylococci, Escherichia coli strains, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Gentamicin 
may cause ototoxicity and nephrotoxicity. Gentamicin must never be given as 
IV push—only as a drip over at least 30–60 minutes. If the patient has oliguria or 
anuria, the dose must be decreased or discontinued.

Pulmonary  ❙  111
8.	
Correct answer: B
Signs and symptoms of a pulmonary embolus can include pleuritic chest pain and 
decreased cardiac output. An acute pulmonary embolism can be associated with 
right heart failure. The patient may suffer from nonspecific chest pain, dyspnea, 
tachycardia, hypotension, shock, and possibly coma.
9.	
Correct answer: C
A normal D-dimer rules out a pulmonary embolism. If the D-dimer is elevated, it 
may be caused by multiple other conditions. Hyperventilation occurs subsequent to 
hypoxemia caused by the PE, so respiratory alkalosis will be present, not metabolic 
alkalosis. Heparin does not dissolve existing clots.
10.	
Correct answer: A
Use Moses’s sign to assess for deep venous thrombosis (DVT). Moses’s sign is elicited 
by pressing the calf toward the tibia. This may also elicit pain. These results are not 
exclusive to DVT but may complement a diagnosis. Traditionally, we were taught to 
assess Homan’s sign: dorsiflexion of the ankle while bending the knee. If that elicited 
pain, the patient had a problem with circulation and possibly DVT.
11.	
Correct answer: C
A very common and significant finding in a patient with a pneumomediastinum is 
Hamman’s sign. Hamman’s sign is a “crunching” sound or a slight clicking sound 
with each heart sound auscultated over the apex of the heart.
12.	
Correct answer: B
Methylxanthines are an important classification of drugs. In addition to theophylline, 
caffeine, and theobromine are also methylxanthines. Methylxanthines can be found 
in coffee, tea, and cocoa. Low doses of drugs in this classification can stimulate 
cortical arousal and in higher doses cause insomnia. They can cause tachycardias 
and increase production of gastric acid and digestive enzymes. Methylxanthines also 
inhibit histamine release.
13.	
Correct answer: B
While ambulating your patient, he suddenly collapses. During your primary 
assessment, you discover the patient is in respiratory arrest but does have a perfusing 
rhythm. Prior to the code team’s arrival, you obtain a bag-valve mask device. 
According to the 2015 American Heart Association guidelines for CPR and ECC, you 
should squeeze the bag every 5 to 6 seconds to assist ventilations on this patient.
14.	
Correct answer: B
The pH is between 7.35 and 7.45, the CO2 is between 35 and 45 mmHg, and the HCO3 
is between 22 and 26 mEq/L. All the results are within normal ranges, so this ABG is 
considered normal.
15.	
Correct answer: D
This is an uncompensated (mixed) respiratory/metabolic acidosis. The pH is less than 
7.35, so the value is uncompensated acidosis. To determine whether the acidosis is 
respiratory or metabolic, find the value that represents acidosis. This would be both 
the HCO3 at < 22 mEq/L and the CO2 > 45 mmHg, meaning the cause of the acidosis 
is both respiratory and metabolic in nature.

112  ❙  Section 5
16.	
Correct answer: B
This blood gas result indicates a compensated metabolic acidosis. The pH is between 
7.35 and 7.45, so the gas is compensated, but the value is closer to acidosis, making 
the value compensated acidosis. Determine which respiratory or metabolic value is 
acidotic: in this case, the HCO3 at < 22 mEq/L.
17.	
Correct answer: A
This result signifies an uncompensated respiratory alkalosis. The pH is greater than 
7.45, so the value is uncompensated alkalosis. To determine whether the alkalosis is 
respiratory or metabolic, find the value that represents alkalosis: in this case, the CO2 
at < 35 mmHg.
18.	
Correct answer: C
This result demonstrates a compensated respiratory alkalosis. The pH is between 7.35 
and 7.45, so the value is compensated, but because it is closer to 7.45, the value is 
considered alkalotic. To determine whether the alkalosis is respiratory or metabolic, 
find the value that represents alkalosis: in this case, the CO2 at < 35 mmHg.
19.	
Correct answer: B
This result is an uncompensated respiratory acidosis. The pH is less than 7.35, so the 
value is uncompensated. To determine whether the acidosis is respiratory or metabolic, 
find the value that represents acidosis: in this case, the CO2 at > 45 mmHg.
20.	
Correct answer: A
The pH (between 7.35 and 7.45), the CO2 (between 35 and 45 mmHg), and the HCO3 
(22 and 26 mEq/L) are within normal ranges, so the ABG is considered normal.
21.	
Correct answer: B
This result is an uncompensated (mixed) respiratory/metabolic acidosis. The pH is 
less than 7.35, so the value is uncompensated acidosis. To determine whether the 
acidosis is respiratory or metabolic, find the value that represents acidosis. This would 
be both the HCO3 at < 22 mEq/L and the CO2 > 45 mmHg, meaning the cause of the 
acidosis is both respiratory and metabolic in nature.
22.	
Correct answer: C
Sidenafil is given orally to inhibit rapid rise in pulmonary artery pressure secondary to 
hypoxia.
23.	
Correct answer: C
Prior to insertion of an LMA, the patient must have an absent gag reflex. The 
laryngeal mask airway cannot be inserted by nurses unless they have specialized 
training. The LMA does not usually cause hoarseness because it does not pass through 
the vocal cords. There is a high risk of aspiration with LMA usage.
24.	
Correct answer: C
Symptoms from aspirated gastric contents have a gradual onset. The patient may 
develop ARDS, but not always. If the pH is > 2.5, very little necrosis will occur. If 
the pH is < 2.5, there is probability of pulmonary edema, necrosis, bleeding, and 
atelectasis.

Pulmonary  ❙  113
25.	
Correct answer: D
The patient you are caring for was diagnosed with aspiration pneumonitis. As a 
progressive care nurse, you know the most severe pulmonary reaction may occur 
from the aspiration of acidic food particles even if the particles are not obstructive. 
The pulmonary damage may be extensive. The patient will probably become 
hypercapneic, hypoxemic, and acidotic.
If the patient aspirates a nonacid food particle, the symptoms are similar 
initially. However, within six hours, the body responds to the particles as foreign 
bodies, granulomas form within 24 hours to five days, and this reaction will 
cause acidosis and hypoventilation, along with hypoxemia and hypercapnia. The 
patient’s symptoms will include shortness of breath, wheezing, coughing, tachypnea, 
tachycardia, crackles, cough, tachycardia, increased sputum production, hypoxemia, 
and cyanosis.
26.	
Correct answer: B
Pulse oximetry should never be used during a cardiac arrest. During resuscitation, 
blood pressure and blood flow may vary. The pharmacologic effects of medications 
such as vasoactive drugs used during resuscitation will compromise SpO2 values.
27.	
Correct answer: B
Pulse oximetry values do not directly correlate with PaO2. You must use ABGs 
to determine the PaO2, the amount of oxygen available to the tissues. SpO2 only 
measures the number of hemoglobin binding sites that are occupied compared with 
the number of hemoglobin binding sites available. The columns listed below show the 
probable correlation.
Interpretation of Pulse Oximetry Values (SpO2)
Value of Pulse Oximeter (%)
Probable PaO2
97
100
95
80
94
70
90
60
85
50
75
40
57
30
32
20
10
10
28.	
Correct answer: C
To prevent complications with chest tube drainage systems, the suction level 
should not be higher than –40 cm/H2O. Maintaining suction levels at higher than
 –40 cm/H2O may cause reexpansion pulmonary edema, pleural air leaks, and lung 
tissue entrapment. The lung may not be able to expand properly.

114  ❙  Section 5
29.	
Correct answer: B
Chest tube drainage tubing should be placed horizontally on the bed then down to 
the collection chamber. If a mediastinal chest tube is in place, bubbling in the water 
seal chamber may indicate a communication between the mediastinal space and the 
pleural space. The physician should be notified immediately. However, some sporadic 
bubbling will occur when suction is first turned on because fluid has to displace air in 
the collection chamber. Chest tube tubing that is dependent or coiled will allow for the 
accumulation of drainage. This obstruction may increase pressure in the lung.
30.	
Correct answer: C
Acetylcysteine is considered to be a mucolytic agent. Acetylcysteine has a sulfide group 
that effectively splits disulfine bonds in mucin molecules. The viscosity of the mucus is 
reduced. Atropine is an anticholinergic. Terbutaline and albuterol are B2 agonists.
31.	
Correct answer: D
Side effects of acetylcysteine include bronchospasms. Thinning the mucus may 
promote excessive coughing with resultant brochospasms. Additional side effects 
include rhinorrhea, stomatitis, nausea, and vomiting.
32.	
Correct answer: D
Emphysema actually increases lung compliance. Pulmonary edema, pleural effusions, 
and obesity decrease lung compliance. Other factors that decrease compliance are 
atelectasis, fibrotic changes, abdominal distension, pain (causes splinting), and flail 
chest (pain and loss of structure).
33.	
Correct answer: D
One of the most effective ways to relieve bronchospasms is to use a B2 receptor agonist. 
The B2 receptor agonists lower cellular calcium levels and relax bronchial smooth 
muscle. The selective B2 receptor agonists do not produce cardiac stimulation. The 
cardiac stimulation can result in tachycardia and reduced cardiac output.
34.	
Correct answer: C
The best position to place this patient to minimize the venous air embolism is 
Trendelenburg with left decubitus tilt. This position minimizes any air from migrating 
through the heart and into the lungs.
35.	
Correct answer: A
A venous air embolism may be caused by hemodialysis. Other potential causes are 
central and pulmonary artery catheters, endoscopy, and automatic pressure-driven 
injectors.
36.	
Correct answer: B
A risk factor for thrombolic emboli includes carcinoma. Neoplasms, obesity, trauma, 
dysrhythmias, congestive heart failure (CHF), and prolonged immobility are also 
factors.

Pulmonary  ❙  115
37.	
Correct answer: C
Sternocleodomastoid retractions indicate that an asthmatic patient is using accessory 
muscles to facilitate ventilation. Air is trapped in the air passages, so the patient has 
to create a higher negative pleural pressure by elevating the rib cage.
38.	
Correct answer: C
Your patient ceased wheezing during his asthma attack. This change in his condition 
means respiratory failure and intubation are imminent. If the patient is wheezing, it 
means air is getting through a narrowed opening. Asthmatics undergo air trapping 
when the inspired air must exit through a narrowed air passage. If the patient stops 
wheezing, it means no air is able to enter or exit the air passages.
39.	
Correct answer: B
Wheezing would not usually be present if the patient had pneumonia. There is an old 
mnemonic for asthma that can assist the acute care nurse with determining a possible 
cause of a patient’s distress. This mnemonic is ASTHMATIC:
A Asthma: Precipitating factor or event
S Stasis: DVT, pulmonary embolus
T Toxins: Smoke, chemical irritants, insecticides, perfumes, cleaning agents
H Heart: CHF, noncardiogenic pulmonary edema
M Mechanical: Foreign body aspiration
A Allergy: Anaphylaxis, aspiration (gastric contents), near drowning
T Trauma: Upper airway, possible lower airway
I Infection: Bronchitis, bronchiolitis, croup, pneumonia
C Congenital: Cystic fibrosis, chronic COPD
40.	
Correct answer: D
Slo-Bid is a form of theophylline. Side effects of theophylline include muscle cramps, 
jitteriness, headache, nausea, vomiting, dysrhythmias, and gastrointestinal issues.
41.	
Correct answer: A
Long-acting forms of B2 agonists used in the treatment of asthma include salmeterol 
(Serevent®) and formoterol (Foradil®). Short-acting beta2 agonists used for emergency 
treatment of asthma include albuterol (Proventil® HFA, Ventolin® HFA, Accuneb®, 
ProAir®), metaproterenol (Alupent®), levalbuterol (Xoponex® HFA, Xoponex® nebulizer 
solution), and pirbuterol (Maxair®).
42.	
Correct answer: A
The American Heart Association has classified acute pulmonary embolisms into 
three categories: massive, submassive, or low risk. A submassive pulmonary embolism 
is characterized as an acute PE with evidence of right ventricular dysfunction 
or myocardial necrosis. A massive PE is defined as an acute PE with sustained 
BP < (90 mmHg) for more than 15 minutes, use of inotropes not the result of other 
causes, or signs of shock. A low-risk patient does not have any of the aforementioned 
conditions.

116  ❙  Section 5
43.	
Correct answer: D
Mesothelioma is a cancer of the mesothelium. Most cases begin in the pleura or 
peritoneum. Mesothelioma is a relatively rare cancer, with approximately 2,000 new 
cases diagnosed in the United States each year. It occurs more often in men than 
in women, and the risk of developing this disease increases with age. Symptoms of 
mesothelioma may not appear until 30 to 50 years after exposure to asbestos. An 
increased risk of developing mesothelioma has been found among shipyard workers, 
people who work in asbestos mines and mills, producers of asbestos products, workers 
in the heating and construction industries, and other trades people.
Symptoms of mesothelioma include dyspnea, pleural effusions, weight loss, 
and abdominal pain and swelling due to an excess of fluid in the abdomen. Other 
symptoms of peritoneal mesothelioma may include bowel obstruction, clotting 
disorders, anemia, and fever. Symptoms with metastases may include pain, dysphagia, 
or swelling of the neck or face.	
Asbestos has been widely used in many industrial products, including cement, 
duct linings, sound insulation, brake linings, roof shingles, flooring products, textiles, 
and thermal insulation. If tiny asbestos particles float in the air, especially during 
the manufacturing process, they may be inhaled or swallowed and can cause serious 
health problems. In addition to mesothelioma, exposure to asbestos increases the risk 
of lung cancer, asbestosis, and cancers of the trachea, larynx, and kidney. Smoking 
does not appear to increase the risk of mesothelioma, but the combination of smoking 
and exposure increases a person’s risk of developing bronchial cancer.
44.	
Correct answer: D
Pulse oximetry readings are considered unreliable when oxygen saturation levels fall 
below 70%. Pulse oximetry accuracy is impacted by patient motion, low perfusion, 
venous pulsation, light, poor probe positioning, edema, anemia, and carbon 
monoxide levels. It is important to compare pulse oximetry values against arterial 
blood gases to validate values below 70% on the pulse oximeter.
45.	
Correct answer: A
The oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve is a curve that reflects the relationship between 
dissolved oxygen and the affinity for oxygen by the hemoglobin molecule.
46.	
Correct answer: B
Atrial tachycardia with occasional PVCs is an assessment finding that should be 
reported to the physician immediately as potential theophylline toxicity. Dosing at 
600 mg per day is a high dose and places the patient at risk for toxicity. If diet and/or 
medications are taken that decrease normal theophylline excretion, the patient 
may quickly become toxic from the theophylline. Other symptoms to report include 
insomnia, anxiety, confusion, disorientation, headaches, hypotension, hyperglycemia, 
and abdominal pain with diarrhea, nausea, and vomiting. Diligently monitor 
electrolytes.
47.	
Correct answer: C
Too much heparin in a glass syringe has dilutional effects and decreases the 
bicarbonate and the PaCO2.

Pulmonary  ❙  117
48.	
Correct answer: D
For every 0.5 mg/kg of theophylline given, there should be a 1 mcg/ml increase in 
blood levels. Study question note: When given a question with numbers, pay close 
attention to the type of measurement used. If you know that theophylline level is 
measured in mcg/ml, then you would be able to automatically rule out 0.5 and 
0.75 mg/ml as answers.
49.	
Correct answer: D
Patients taking theophylline should be advised to avoid a high-protein, low-
carbohydrate diet as it will increase theophylline elimination, leading to low serum 
levels. Smoking also will cause an increase in medication clearance with resultant 
low serum levels. Alcohol consumption while on theophylline may result in toxicity 
due to a decrease in clearance. Dosing is based on ideal weight, not actual weight, 
as theophylline does not bind well in the presence of body fat.
50.	
Correct answer: A
SvO2 is a measurement of total oxygen consumption.
51.	
Correct answer: D
Capnography (PetCO2) is not a substitute for pulse oximetry. Capnography monitors 
the concentration or partial pressure of carbon dioxide (CO2) in the respiratory gases. 
A pulse oximeter measures the availability of sites on the hemoglobin molecule for 
oxygen transport versus how many sites are occupied.
52.	
Correct answer: A
This patient has developed reexpansion pulmonary edema. Removal of large amounts 
of pleural fluid increases negative intrapleural pressure. Edema occurs when the lung 
does not reexpand.
The patient then develops a severe cough and dyspnea. If the symptoms occur 
during a thoracentesis, the procedure should be stopped.
53.	
Correct answer: C
Your patient is suffering substernal chest pain exacerbated when deep breathing. The 
patient also states his allergies are causing a dry cough, some nasal stuffiness, some 
pain in both ears, and a sore throat. The chest pain becomes more pronounced and 
pleuritic in nature. This patient has been on a 60% non-rebreathing mask for two 
days. It is likely this patient may be suffering from hyperoxia. When patients receive 
high concentrations of oxygen for extended periods of time, very high amounts of 
oxygen free radicals are circulating. These radicals cause damage to the capillary–
alveolar membrane. Enzymes are usually available to neutralize the radicals. When 
a patient suffers from oxygen toxicity, there are not enough enzymes to overcome 
the free radicals. If the oxygen level is not reduced, the damage to the vessels and 
parenchyma may lead to ARDS. It is to be noted that all the symptoms listed above 
are probably the result of of the hyperemic state, not an allergy. Symptoms usually 
resolve quickly once normal oxygen levels are restored.

118  ❙  Section 5
54.	
Correct answer: A
Your patient is probably hypochloremic. Chronic hypoxia leads to chronic respiratory 
acidosis. The kidneys then retain bicarbonate in the form of sodium bicarbonate. The 
bicarbonate is exchanged for sodium chloride. Ammonia is weak acid, and excess 
amounts must be removed from the body. This is done by releasing ammonium 
chloride. In chronic hypoxia there is an increase in bicarbonate levels and a decrease 
in chloride levels. Other causes of hypochloremia are NG suction, vomiting, and 
diarrhea.
55.	
Correct answer: D
Hypoxemia is a decreased oxygen level in the arterial blood or a PaO2 < 80 mmHg. 
Hypoxia is a decreased oxygen level at the cellular level.
56.	
Correct answer: C
Hyperventilating causes respiratory alkalosis because the patient is unable to get 
enough oxygen, often due to bronchial constriction. Hypoventilation causes a buildup 
of CO2, causing respiratory acidosis, not respiratory alkalosis.
57.	
Correct answer: B
Airflow in a patient with status asthmaticus may be improved by the use of heliox. 
Heliox is a helium–oxygen mixture that can help with delivery of inhaled medications 
to decrease the work of breathing. The PEEP must be carefully regulated so as not 
to cause barotrauma or a dynamic hyperinflation, and it might improve airflow. 
Norepinephrine is a vasoconstrictor. Nebulizers may also work, but if the patient is 
compromised the effectiveness is minimal at best.
58.	
Correct answer: D
If you hear faint breath sounds on the left side of the chest and normal sounds on the 
right side immediately after your patient has been intubated, most likely the right 
main stem bronchus has been intubated. The right main stem bronchus is somewhat 
wider and has less of an angle off the main stem bronchus, so it is much more readily 
intubated.
59.	
Correct answer: C
This result is uncompensated respiratory alkalosis. The pH is greater than 7.45, so the 
value is an uncompensated alkalosis. To determine whether the alkalosis is respiratory or 
metabolic, find the value that represents alkalosis: in this case, the CO2 at < 35 mmHg.
60.	
Correct answer: A
This result is compensated metabolic acidosis. The pH is between 7.35 and 7.45, so the 
value is compensated, but because it is closer to 7.35, the value is considered acidotic. 
To determine whether the acidosis is respiratory or metabolic, find the value that 
represents acidosis: in this case, the HCO3 at < 22 mEq/L.
61.	
Correct answer: C
The pH is between 7.35 and 7.45, the CO2 is between 35 and 45 mmHg, and the HCO3 
is between 22 and 26 mEq/L. All the results are within normal ranges, so this ABG is 
considered normal.

Pulmonary  ❙  119
62.	
Correct answer: A
This result is an uncompensated (mixed) respiratory/metabolic alkalosis. The pH is 
greater than 7.45, so the value is uncompensated. To determine whether the acidosis is 
respiratory or metabolic, find the value that represents alkalosis. This would be both 
the HCO3 at > 26 mEq/L and the CO2 < 35 mmHg, meaning the cause of the alkalosis 
is both respiratory and metabolic in nature.
63.	
Correct answer: B
This ABG result indicates a compensated respiratory acidosis. The pH is between 
7.35 and 7.45, so the value is compensated, but because it is closer to 7.35 the value is 
considered acidotic. To determine whether the acidosis is respiratory or metabolic, find 
the value that represents acidosis: in this case, the CO2 at > 45 mmHg.
64.	
Correct answer: B
According to the 2015 American Heart Association guidelines for CPR and ECC, 
gasping is in no way normal and is a sign of cardiac arrest.
65.	
Correct answer: D
Functional residual capacity is the volume of gas remaining in the lungs at the end of 
one normal expiration.
66.	
Correct answer: C
Residual volume is the volume of gas left in the lungs following a maximal respiratory 
effort.
67.	
Correct answer: C
Inaccurate oxygen saturation values on a pulse oximeter are likely due to decreased 
peripheral perfusion. Adequate perfusion must exist for the probe on a pulse 
oximeter to register an accurate evaluation of hemoglobin saturation. If the patient 
is hypothermic or has decreased peripheral perfusion, the results will be inaccurate. 
Vasoconstriction, position of the probe, and patient motion can also cause inaccurate 
readings on a pulse oximeter.
68.	
Correct answer: A
The functional residual capacity is defined as the amount of air in lungs after normal 
expiration. The formula for functional residual capacity is FRC = ERV (expired 
residual volume) + the RV (residual volume). The normal FRC in healthy lungs is 
about 2,000–3,000 ml.
69.	
Correct answer: A
Gas exchange in the lungs requires passive diffusion of gas between the atmosphere, 
alveoli, and pulmonary vasculature.
70.	
Correct answer: B
Fever causes the pH to rise. Most ABG machines are calibrated to 37°C. If the patient 
has a fever, the oxyhemoglobin curve will be shifted to the right. More oxygen will 
be given off to the tissues, so the machine has to be calibrated to account for the 
temperature.

120  ❙  Section 5
71.	
Correct answer: D
The cells that are responsible for forming a barrier for alveoli are type I epithelial cells. 
Type I cells line the outside of the alveoli and are easily inflamed by inhaled toxins 
or heated air. In addition, type I cells maintain the blood–gas interface. Type II cells 
produce surfactant.
72.	
Correct answer: B
In the lungs, communicating channels through holes in the alveolar wall allowing gas 
movement between alveoli are called alveolar pores of Kohn.
73.	
Correct answer: A
Type II alveolar cells produce surfactant. Surfactant is a lipoprotein and functions by 
increasing surface tension of alveoli and allowing alveoli to expand and contract. 
We should have some residual pressure in the alveoli at the end of respiration to keep 
the alveoli open (physiologic PEEP). If surfactant production is impaired, the alveoli’s 
ability to exchange O2 is compromised. Type I cells line the outside of the alveoli.
74.	
Correct answer: C
A diagnosis of asthma may be made by a decreased FEV1. The forced expiratory 
volume (FEV) is how much air is exhaled during the first second of effort. This amount 
should be ≥ 75% of the predicted normal value(s). In asthmatics, this value is decreased 
because of obstruction. The forced vital capacity (FVC) is the total amount of gas 
exhaled as forcefully and rapidly as possible after taking a maximal inspiration. The 
result should be above 80%.
75.	
Correct answer: D
The FiO2 for a nasal cannula set at a flow rate of 6 L/min is 40%. The nasal cannula is 
generally considered a low-flow oxygen device unless connected to a high-flow system. 
If using a flow > 4 L/min., the oxygen should be humidified to prevent drying the 
mucosal membranes.
76.	
Correct answer: C
A non-rebreather mask can deliver 60–80% of oxygen when the O2 flow rate is 
10–15 L/min. If both exhalation ports have one-way valves, then near-100% oxygen 
may be reached. To prevent suffocation in patients where the oxygen is disconnected, 
non-rebreathing masks now have only one one-way valve to prevent/limit inhalation 
of room air. Limiting the inhalation of room air results in decreasing the highest 
concentration of actual inspired oxygen to 60–80%.
77.	
Correct answer: B
If using a Pleur-Evac with autotransfusion connection, make certain all clamps are 
open. When using any autotransfusion drainage system, make sure to connect the 
system per the manufacturer’s recommendations. Most connections are color coded for 
easy connecting. Clamps must remain open to allow for blood collection and prevent 
increased intrathoracic pressures. Subcutaneous air should be checked by palpation 
and borders marked for further monitoring. If a one-way valve system and suction is 
used, water is not required to maintain a seal because the valve meets this function.

Pulmonary  ❙  121
78.	
Correct answer: A
If is important that the patient and any family members be taught to store oxygen 
tanks in the upright position. Synthetic materials often cause static electricity. Only 
lemon-glycerin swabs and not alcohol-based swabs should be used if the patient has 
dry lips. In this case we do not know if this patient will use O2 via a mask or cannula.
79.	
Correct answer: D
Excessive ventilation during cardiac arrest may cause cerebral vasoconstriction, 
diminishing blood flow to the brain. In addition, cardiac output is decreased, venous 
return to the heart is diminished, and intrathoracic pressure will increase.
80.	
Correct answer: A
Prone positioning is the best position to promote drainage and oxygenation for a 
patient with ARDS. It is often the most difficult position to achieve without proper 
lifting and safety devices.
81.	
Correct answer: C
Patients with pulmonary hypertension present with dyspnea during exertion, 
right-sided heart failure, increased respiratory and heart rates, and a prominent S2. 
Additional signs of pulmonary hypertension include fatigue and lethargy, enlarged 
liver, and pulmonary congestion. Cyanosis is a late sign of pulmonary hypertension.
82.	
Correct answer: B
Calcium channel blockers are used to treat primary pulmonary hypertension. Patients 
treated with nitric oxide improve faster when also treated with calcium channel 
blockers due to abnormalities in the membrane function.
83.	
Correct answer: D
Without initial, aggressive treatment of pulmonary hypertension, the medial smooth 
muscles in arterioles irreversibly thicken. This is due to development of high right-sided 
ventricular pressures and heart failure.
84.	
Correct answer: C
Pulmonary hypertension results in hypoxia and hypoxemia, leading to 
vasoconstriction. As vasoconstriction continues, the vessel walls begin to alter with 
increases in elastin and collagen. Prolonged vasoconstriction leads to increased 
shunting and blood pooling. Serum testing for abnormalities further increases the 
risks and progression of irreversible epithelial changes.
85.	
Correct answer: A
An absolute contraindication for use of rapid sequence intubation (RSI) is a total loss 
of facial and/or oropharyngeal landmarks, which requires a surgical airway. Another 
absolute contraindication is a total upper airway obstruction that requires surgical 
intervention. Relative contraindications for RSI include an airway where intubation 
may not be successful or an arrest “crash” intubation when there is no time for 
preoxygenation, pretreatment, or induction and paralysis.
86.	
Correct answer: D
Rapid sequence intubation (RSI) is not necessary to use for all cervical spine-injured 
patients. It would be appropriate for use if there is edema and loss of airway patency. 
Prolonged respiratory effort that results in fatigue or failure, a stab wound to neck with 
an expanding hematoma, and an uncooperative trauma patient with life-threatening 
injuries are indications for use of RSI.

122  ❙  Section 5
87.	
Correct answer: C
During rapid sequence intubation (RSI), cricoid cartilage pressure may be used to help 
prevent vomiting and aspiration of gastric contents. The esophagus is obstructed by 
the pressure to the anterior neck. This maneuver is known as the Sellick maneuver. 
The American Heart Association takes the position that the Sellick maneuver not 
be routinely used unless the person performing the maneuver is well trained and 
experienced.
88.	
Correct answer: D
When performing CPR on a cardiac arrest patient, as a progressive care nurse you 
know the best, most reliable way to confirm placement of an endotracheal tube is 
continuous waveform capnography (PetCO2).
89.	
Correct answer: D
The result of this blood gas analysis is an uncompensated metabolic acidosis. The pH 
is less than 7.35, so the value is uncompensated acidosis. To determine whether the 
acidosis is respiratory or metabolic, find the value that represents acidosis. In this case, 
the HCO3 < 22 mEq/L.
90.	
Correct answer: C
This blood gas result indicates an uncompensated respiratory acidosis. The pH is 
< 7.35, so the value indicates an uncompensated acidosis. Next, determine which 
respiratory or metabolic value represents acidosis: in this case, the CO2 at > 45 mmHg.
91.	
Correct answer: A
One cause of decreased SvO2 is an increased metabolic rate. An increased metabolic 
rate would increase the O2 uptake by tissues, resulting in a lower value measured by 
venous blood gases. The other answers result in a lower tissue oxygen requirement, 
and thus higher values of oxygen remain in the bloodstream.
92.	
Correct answer: D
This patient is exhibiting signs and symptoms of oxygen toxicity after five days of 
oxygen therapy at > 50% FiO2. Non-rebreather masks provide a minimum of 60% 
FiO2 at 6 Lpm. An arterial blood gas would show an increased PaO2 > 100 mmHg, 
ruling out respiratory failure (PaO2 < 60) that would require intubation. The dry, 
hacking cough rules out pulmonary edema and the need for Lasix. Numbness in the 
extremities is from the oxygen radicals in the blood, not a neurologic impairment that 
would indicate the need for a CT scan with possible tPA administration.
93.	
Correct answer: C
From birth, chest wall compliance decreases. Much of the decrease is due to 
degeneration and calcification of the costal cartilage; the elasticity decreases as well. 
Vertebrae develop osteoporosis and a degree of kyphosis can occur. Weight gain 
is common and posture is affected. Children are more commonly suffering from 
obesity and frequently develop back problems early in life. The chest wall compliance 
decreases as does vital capacity. Residual volume increases, PaO2 decreases, and 
PaCO2 increases.
94.	
Correct answer: D
Ketamine is both an analgesic and an amnestic.

Pulmonary  ❙  123
95.	
Correct answer: B
Fingertip clubbing is an indication of chronic hypoxia.
96.	
Correct answer: D
A semi-reclining or upright position promotes upper lobe drainage. Fluid or secretions 
will collect if the patient is flat.
97.	
Correct answer: C
To evacuate hemothorax, the tube is placed in the fifth intercostal space, midaxillary 
line. The chest tube will be low in the thoracic cavity and uses gravity to help clear 
the fluid. If a hemothorax is not completely removed, there is a possibility an infection 
will result, which can lead to empyema. When assessing a patient, it is a good idea to 
ask (if possible) the origin of any small scars on the thoracic area, as the patient may 
have had previous problems requiring a chest tube.
98.	
Correct answer: B
ARDS is a type of hypoxemic respiratory failure; the PaCO2 may be decreased or 
normal. There may be a ventilation/perfusion mismatch (pneumonia, atelectasis) 
due to an intrapulmonary shunt, or there is increased alveolar dead space (shock, 
pulmonary embolism). Pulmonary fibrosis may reduce diffusion capacity (COPD, 
ARDS).
99.	
Correct answer: B
The hypoxemic drive to breathe originates in the aortic and carotid arteries. In the 
bifurcation of the internal and external carotid arteries, carotid bodies, and aortic 
bodies (in the carotid arch) are chemoreceptors. When the supply of oxygen decreases, 
stimulation of the aortic and/or carotid bodies occurs and, in turn, stimulates 
cortical activity. The result is adrenal gland secretions (epinephrine, norepinephrine), 
tachycardia, tachypnea, increased respiratory rate, and increased blood pressure.
100.	
Correct answer: B
Severe carbon monoxide poisoning occurs when carboxyhemoglobin levels are higher 
than 20–40%. If carbon monoxide levels are above 60%, the patient will be comatose 
and probably die. Smokers often have carboxyhemoglobin levels of 5–10%. Normal 
levels in nonsmokers are less than 2%.
101.	
Correct answer: D
Elimination of carbon monoxide from the body is via the lungs. In cases of severe 
carbon monoxide (CO) poisoning, hyperbaric therapy must be utilized to force the 
CO molecule off the hemoglobin, but it is eliminated by the lungs.
102.	
Correct answer: D
Subcutaneous emphysema usually occurs in the thorax as a result of a pulmonary 
air leak. This air leak may be secondary to the patient receiving positive pressure 
ventilation or from alveolar rupture from a pneumothorax. The air travels along 
under the skin, may be easily palpated, and may feel like a crackling sensation. 
Patients who have chest tubes often have at least a small amount of subcutaneous 
emphysema at the tube insertion site. Sometimes the patient feels pain when 
palpation is performed because the air tears the tissue. The free air must be 
reabsorbed, and this may take several days.

124  ❙  Section 5
103.	
Correct answer: B
Breathing high concentrations of oxygen may wash out nitrogen that is present in 
alveoli. The nitrogen helps keep the alveoli open, resulting in residual volume. If 
oxygen replaces nitrogen in the alveoli, the alveoli will shrink and begin to collapse. 
Oxygen is absorbed into the bloodstream much faster than a replacement is available 
in the alveoli. The effect is very pronounced in areas of the lung only barely ventilated. 
This phenomena is considered an adverse effect and is known as absorption 
atelectasis.
104.	
Correct answer: B
The most common symptoms seen with active TB are night sweats, fever, fatigue, 
hemoptysis, weight loss, and chest pain. The cough would not be dry, and there would 
not be wheezing.
105.	
Correct answer: A
The patient has a positive PPD. Until a chest X-ray and AFB sputum culture are done, 
this patient is highly suspicious for TB. It is important to find out if the patient received 
BCG if they were born outside the United States. Once TB is confirmed, treatment 
should start right away and the patient should be placed in a room with a laminar 
airflow system.
106.	
Correct answer: C
Rimantadine is used to shorten the length and severity of influenza. It is not used 
to treat TB. Isoniazid, rifampin, and pyrazidamide are all medications used to treat 
latent TB infections.
107.	
Correct answer: D
Succinylcholine combines with acetylcholine to cause smooth muscle relaxation, 
not contraction. Prolonged use may cause a change in blocking action and result in 
potassium-regulated alterations in electrical activity. Side effects of succinylcholine 
include malignant hyperthermia and hypertension or hypotension, hyperkalemia, 
anaphylaxis, and increased intraocular pressure.
108.	
Correct answer: C
Accessory pathways connecting a small airway to an airspace normally supplied by 
other pathways are called canals of Lambert.
109.	
Correct answer: C
Falsely low readings on a pulse oximeter may be due to patient motion. If the patient 
is hypothermic or has decreased peripheral perfusion, the results will be inaccurate. 
Position of the probe can also cause inaccurate readings on a pulse oximeter.
110.	
Correct answer: A
Prior to the administration of vancomycin, the PCU nurse should know that 
vancomycin is nephrotoxic, especially if used in combination with aminoglycosides. 
Vancomycin is used in the treatment of methicillin-resistant strains (Staphylococcus 
epidermidis) and must be administered by slow intravenous drip.

Pulmonary  ❙  125
111.	
Correct answer: C
Antimicrobial soap and water may be used to decontaminate hands before, during, 
and after patient care regardless of glove use, visible soiling, or no apparent soiling. 
Hands should always be decontaminated using soap and water, waterless soap, or 
alcohol-based antiseptic agent before and after patient care to prevent the spread of 
organisms from patient to patient or from surfaces. Alcohol-based antiseptic agents 
should only be used if no visible soiling is observed.
112.	
Correct answer: C
The laryngeal mask airway (LMA) was intended as a temporary airway. It requires 
minimal training to insert, but cannot be placed by RNs as a matter of course. The 
patient must be unconscious and/or without gag reflex. The seal around the mask is a 
low pressure seal, so it cannot be used on patients with high peak ventilator pressures. 
The LMA has a significant risk of aspiration. Advantages with use of this airway are 
that it is simply blindly inserted into the hypopharynx, does not require visualization 
of the vocal cords, and does not traumatize the trachea. Patients will not have 
hoarseness or lose their voice altogether. At best, patients will complain of a mild sore 
throat.
113.	
Correct answer: C
At higher altitudes there is decreasing atmospheric pressure to force oxygen into the 
lungs, and therefore the O2 saturation would decrease. To compensate, the person 
must breathe faster. The percentage of oxygen remains the same and the partial 
pressure of the oxygen decreases. Arterial PaO2 decreases, and the O2 saturation 
decreases as well. The rapid breathing will result in hyperventilation, lowering the pH 
and raising the PaCO2 levels.
114.	
Correct answer: C
Inhaled nitric oxide (iNO) is a selective pulmonary vasodilator to treat pulmonary 
hypertension. iNO reduces death or the need for extracorporeal membrane 
oxygenation (ECMO), but the positive effect is in reducing the ECMO requirement. 
Do not use iNO on patients who are dependent on a right-to-left shunt.
115.	
Correct answer: A
An action of nitric oxide is to cause vascular smooth muscle relaxation. Nitric oxide is 
the molecule released from the endothelium that enables smooth muscle relaxation. 
Nitric oxide inhibits platelet aggregation and adherence and is thought to alter 
vascular permeability. It may also participate in nonspecific immunity because it is 
generated when macrophages are activated.
116.	
Correct answer: D
CPAP, or continuous positive airway pressure, may be delivered by nasal prongs, 
nasopharyngeal tubes, or endotracheal tubes. CPAP provides increased pressure to 
the posterior pharynx and increases transpulmonary pressure. It can prevent alveolar 
collapse and helps prevent obstructive apnea.
117.	
Correct answer: B
Excessive CPAP may increase intrathoracic pressure to the point of compressing the 
right atrium and vena cava. The preload will be decreased and cardiac output will be 
reduced.

126  ❙  Section 5
118.	
Correct answer: C
If positive inspiratory pressure (PIP) is increased on a mechanical ventilator, the result 
is a decrease in the PaCO2 and an increase in the PaO2.
119.	
Correct answer: B
The arterial blood gas results that support the diagnosis of respiratory alkalosis are 
pH 7.47, CO2 24, HCO3 24.
120.	
Correct answer: D
Fluid therapy in ARDS is directed toward maintaining a low circulating fluid volume. 
The fluid volume is kept low to keep the intracardiac and intrapleural pressures at 
minimal levels. If too much fluid is present, there may be leakage through damaged 
capillaries into the interstitial space.
121.	
Correct answer: C
Research on normal saline use in tracheal suctioning has proven that normal 
saline causes anxiety, increased risk for hospital-acquired pneumonia, and 
bronchoconstriction. Current recommendations focus on dry suctioning, frequent oral 
care, balanced hydration, and position changes prevent complications associated with 
intubation and mechanical ventilation.
122.	
Correct answer: B
SIMV, or synchronized intermittent mandatory ventilation, still provides a set 
frequency of breaths and either volume or pressure. The patient is permitted to 
breathe spontaneously at their own volume between mandatory ventilations. If the 
spontaneous breath occurs at the same time as a mandatory breath, the ventilator 
will synchronize with the patient, thus preventing “stacked” breaths. The other modes 
of ventilation listed (CMV, HFV, and oscillation) represent full control of setting by an 
operator and not the patient’s responses.
123.	
Correct answer: B
When a closed system is used, there is extra weight that can increase tension on the 
catheter or tubing. This may cause the ET or trach to move. Lack of available oxygen 
and cost effectiveness are characteristics of open catheter suctioning. The inline system 
is multi-use and is cost effective. Many manufacturers make the inline tubing for both 
ET tubes and tracheostomy tubes. Nurses must make certain they are using the correct 
tube for suctioning. Another problem with the inline catheters is the extra tubing that 
hangs out when the catheter is not in use. The patient may easily reach this tubing 
and extubate themselves or push the catheter down the airway and obstruct airflow.
124.	
Correct answer: A
A disadvantage of using a tracheostomy tube is subcutaneous emphysema. There 
are a large number of potential complications with the use of a tracheostomy tube. 
Some of these complications include tracheal stenosis, tracheal malacia, aspiration, 
infection, hemorrhage, and pneumothorax.
125.	
Correct answer: D
The function of a stoma stent is to keep the stoma tract open. The stents can be 
manufactured in either the straight or curved configuration. The stent rests against 
the anterior wall of the trachea and allows for freer passage of air and the patient 
can breathe spontaneously around the tube. Because of the differing nature of air 
passages, the stents are made straight and curved.

Pulmonary  ❙  127
126.	
Correct answer: B
Silicone or plastic tracheostomy tubes contain wires, so the magnet in the MRI will 
attract the wires in the tube. The silicone or plastic tubes cannot tolerate repeated 
cleanings. Use of a one-way speaking valve is contraindicated when using a foam cuff 
because the cuff may lie at an angle to the valve due to its orientation in the airway. 
Cost is actually higher to facilities because the tubes are difficult to keep clean and are 
labor intensive.
127.	
Correct answer: B
CPAP should be used with caution in patients with basilar skull fractures. Research 
has shown that pneumocephalus may occur if a basilar skull fracture exists. CPAP 
helps by increasing the functional residual capacity by helping to reexpand the 
alveoli. Patients that have acute cardiogenic pulmonary edema may also benefit from 
the use of CPAP.
128.	
Correct answer: A
This result is an uncompensated metabolic alkalosis. The pH is greater than 7.45, 
so the value is uncompensated. To determine whether the alkalosis is respiratory or 
metabolic, find the value that represents alkalosis: in this case, the HCO3 at 
> 26 mEq/L.


❙
  129 
❙
Section 6
Endocrine
SECTION 6: ENDOCRINE QUESTIONS
1.	
Where is the thyroid gland located?
A.	 Just below the hyoid bone
B.	 In the throat on either side of the trachea
C.	 Above the larynx
D.	 It sits on top of the thymus gland
2.	
What physical symptoms do you expect a patient to exhibit if diagnosed with 
Cushing’s syndrome?
A.	 Moon facies, edema, weight loss
B.	 Moon facies, acne, weight loss
C.	 Moon facies, purple striae on trunk, buffalo hump
D.	 Moon facies, easy bruising, weight loss
3.	
Which of the following hormones are produced by the anterior pituitary gland?
A.	 Vasopressin and oxytocin
B.	 FSH, LH, TSH, ACTH
C.	 ADH, TSH, FSH
D.	 GRF, TSH, Substance P
4.	
Your patient has been preliminarily diagnosed with Cushing’s syndrome. What 
diagnostic tests do you anticipate the physician ordering for this patient?
A.	 Computerized tomography of the brain, chest, and abdomen; 24-hour urine 
­cortisol levels; ACTH serum concentrations
B.	 Computerized tomography of the brain, chest, and abdomen; thyroid levels; basic 
metabolic panel
C.	 Serum and urine cortisol levels, thyroid panels, beta-natriuretic peptide levels
D.	 Urine ACTH concentrations, thyroid panel, C-reactive protein level
5.	
Your patient has DKA. She has a blood glucose level of 460 mg/dl and also has a 
potassium level of 6.2. You have started an insulin drip. You know that the insulin 
drip will
A.	 Move potassium back into the intracellular space
B.	 Not change potassium levels
C.	 Draw more potassium from the intracellular space
D.	 Draw more potassium from the extracellular space

130  ❙  Section 6
6.	
What are some of the signs and symptoms associated with DKA (diabetic 
ketoacidosis)?
A.	 Polyuria, polydipsia, polyphagia, dilute urine
B.	 Polyuria, polydipsia, polyphagia, fruity breath, dehydration, marked fatigue
C.	 Hyperactivity, confusion, nausea, vomiting
D.	 Kussmaul respirations, dilute urine
7.	
How is insulin secretion regulated?
A.	 Hormonal, exocrine gland secretion and glucose controls
B.	 Hormonal, insulin and neuronal controls
C.	 Chemical, glucagon and insulin controls
D.	 Chemical, hormonal and neuronal controls
8.	
Which of the following are risk factors for the development of diabetes mellitus?
A.	 Obesity (BMI of 42), blood pressure 160/95, HDL 28, brother with diabetes mellitus
B.	 Obesity (BMI of 27), blood pressure 120/70, HDL 42, no family history of diabetes 
mellitus
C.	 Obesity (BMI of 26), Caucasian ancestry, blood pressure 190/100, family history of 
diabetes mellitus
D.	 Obesity (BMI of 40), blood pressure 100/50, HDL 50, no family history of diabetes 
mellitus
9.	
Why are hyperglycemia and hyperlipidemia seen concurrently in patients with 
diabetes mellitus?
A.	 VLDL (very-low-density lipoprotein) production increases in response to increased 
insulin production
B.	 Insulin resistance promotes VLDL (very-low-density lipoprotein) production
C.	 Lipid breakdown is hindered by hyperinsulinemia
D.	 Glucose increases cause the liver to increase lipid production
10.	
What are the most common complaints with Addison’s disease?
A.	 Increased appetite, weight loss, insomnia
B.	 Weight gain, anorexia, constipation
C.	 Weakness, fatigue, weight loss
D.	 Salt craving, weight loss, constipation
11.	
Which of the following should be included in patient education for the patient 
with Addison’s disease?
A.	 Lifelong condition, follow-up labs, hydrocortisone injection
B.	 Follow-up labs, Medic-Alert bracelet, no-added-salt diet
C.	 Lifelong condition, no-added-salt diet, push oral fluids
D.	 Liberal sodium diet, self-limiting disease
12.	
What are the five S’s for the management of a patient with Addison’s disease in an 
adrenal crisis?
A.	 Steroids, saline, sulfa antibiotics, supplemental oxygen, struma
B.	 Steroids, salt, sugar, support, search for cause
C.	 Steroids, sugar, stress test, serologic tests, salt
D.	 Steroids, search for cause, serial labs, salt, stress test

Endocrine  ❙  131
13.	
What symptoms are to be expected when a patient is having a thyrotoxic crisis?
A.	 Hyperthermia, bradycardia
B.	 Hypotension, bradycardia
C.	 Flushing, hypoventilation
D.	 Hypertension, hyperthermia
14.	
Trousseau’s sign is seen with which of the conditions listed below?
A.	 Increased serum calcium
B.	 Decreased serum calcium
C.	 Decreased serum phosphorus
D.	 Hypothyroidism
15.	
Which of the following signs may be elicited in a patient with hypocalcemia?
A.	 Short QT interval
B.	 Hyperparathyroidism
C.	 Chvostek’s sign
D.	 Cullen’s sign
16.	
Which of the following hormones is responsible for the symptoms of 
hypothyroidism?
A.	 Low levels of T4 (thyroxine)
B.	 Low levels of T3 (thriothyroxine)
C.	 Decreased thyrocalcitonin
D.	 Increased thyrocalcitonin
17.	
Where in the body are the catecholamines produced?
A.	 Liver
B.	 Kidneys
C.	 Adrenal cortex
D.	 Adrenal medulla
18.	
What is the origin of microvascular disease associated with diabetes mellitus?
A.	 Vasoconstriction from hyperglycemia
B.	 Changes in the capillary basement membrane causing hypoxia on the cellular 
level
C.	 Increased atherosclerotic plaques on the intima
D.	 Repeated hypoglycemic events
19.	
What are the three major problems associated with macrovascular disease in a 
patient with diabetes mellitus?
A.	 Diabetic peripheral neuropathy, peripheral vascular disease, cerebral vascular 
accident
B.	 Peripheral neuropathy, coronary artery disease, cerebral vascular accident
C.	 Coronary artery disease, cerebral vascular accident, peripheral vascular disease
D.	 Retinopathy, coronary artery disease, cerebral vascular accident

132  ❙  Section 6
20.	
What is the role of glucophage in the body?
A.	 Glucophage acts on the liver to decrease blood sugar
B.	 Glucophage acts on the liver to increase blood sugar
C.	 Glucophage acts on the pancreas to decrease blood sugar
D.	 Glucophage acts on the pancreas to increase blood sugar
21.	
Where is the pancreas located in the abdomen?
A.	 Right lower quadrant of the abdomen
B.	 Left upper quadrant of the abdomen
C.	 Right upper quadrant of the abdomen
D.	 Left lower quadrant of the abdomen
22.	
Where are the parathyroid glands located?
A.	 Anterior to the thyroid gland
B.	 Posterior to the thyroid gland
C.	 They sit atop the thyroid gland
D.	 Below the thyroid gland
23.	
What conditions or medications can trigger the renin–angiotensin mechanism?
A.	 Aldosterone, diuretics
B.	 Diuretics, decreased renal blood flow
C.	 Diuretics, adrenergic blockers
D.	 Increased renal blood flow, diuretics
24.	
What is the correct order of response of the renin–angiotensin mechanism when 
there is a decrease in blood flow to the kidneys?
A.	 Renin, aldosterone, angiotensin I, angiotensin I converting enzyme, angiotensin II
B.	 Increased ADH, renin, angiotensin I, angiotensin II
C.	 Renin, angiotensinogen, angiotensin I, angiotensin I converting enzyme, 
­angiotensin II, aldosterone
D.	 Renin, ACTH, angiotensin
25.	
Which of the following statements is true about cortisol?
A.	 Cortisol increases glucose uptake in muscle and adipose tissue
B.	 Cortisol increases protein stores
C.	 Cortisol decreases tissue response of other hormones, such as glucagon and 
catecholamines
D.	 Cortisol exerts negative feedback on the hypothalamus and the anterior 
hypothalamus
26.	
Use of systemic steroids may cause
A.	 Decreased ability to perspire
B.	 Hyperactivity
C.	 Increased ability to tolerate cold and heat
D.	 Polydipsia

Endocrine  ❙  133
27.	
One of your coworkers has been trying to lose weight for the past six months. 
She lost 12 pounds initially, but now appears to be gaining weight, has become 
irritable at work, is occasionally depressed, and states she cannot sleep. She also 
states she thinks management is “out to get her” because she is having difficulty 
arriving to work on time. This individual may be suffering from
A.	 Chronic hypoglycemia
B.	 Overuse of steroids
C.	 Hypothyroidism
D.	 Hyperthyroidism
28.	
Cortisol, glucagon, catecholamines, and growth hormone (GH) as a group are 
classified as
A.	 Neuroprotective hormones
B.	 Serotonin inhibitors
C.	 Insulin-antagonistic hormones
D.	 Gluconeogenic hormones
29.	
Gluconeogenesis may be impaired by
A.	 Increased food intake
B.	 Excessive alcohol intake
C.	 Use of medications that impair the action of sulfonylureas
D.	 An insulin dose less than body requirements
30.	
Which of the following medications is used in the treatment of SIADH?
A.	 High-dose steroids
B.	 Sandostatin
C.	 Demeclocycline
D.	 Pitressin
31.	
What is the most common cause of hyperparathyroidism?
A.	 Chronic anabolic steroid use
B.	 Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
C.	 Chronic renal failure
D.	 Tumors of the parathyroid gland
32.	
What is the purpose of testing HgbA1c in patients with diabetes mellitus?
A.	 It is of little help in managing diabetes mellitus
B.	 It measures blood sugars over a 6-month period
C.	 It measures the effectiveness of diabetes mellitus therapy
D.	 It measures red blood cell activity in diabetes mellitus
33.	
Your patient’s TSH (thyroid-stimulating hormone) level is 0.001. What condition 
does this value indicate?
A.	 Hypoactive anterior pituitary function
B.	 Hyperactive anterior pituitary function
C.	 Hypothyroidism
D.	 Hyperthyroidism

134  ❙  Section 6
34.	
A fellow nurse asks you to explain the differences between the Somoygi effect and 
the Dawn phenomenon. What are the major differences between the Somoygi 
effect and the Dawn phenomenon?
A.	 They are essentially the same process
B.	 The Dawn phenomenon is nocturnal hypoglycemia, and the Somoygi effect is 
greatly increased blood sugars in the early morning
C.	 The Somoygi effect is nocturnal hypoglycemia with rebound hyperglycemia, 
and the Dawn phenomenon is increased morning glucose without nocturnal 
hypoglycemia
D.	 The Dawn phenomenon is morning hypoglycemia, and the Somoygi effect is 
­nocturnal hyperglycemia
35.	
Your patient was found unconscious in his backyard by his brother. His blood 
sugar is 1545, he has negative serum ketones, and his serum osmolality is 340. 
What fluids do you anticipate administering for medical treatment of this 
condition?
A.	 D5 ½NS intravenous fluids 300 ml/hour and an insulin drip with sliding scale 
coverage
B.	 Normal saline at 100 ml/hour, subcutaneous insulin with sliding scale coverage 
every 4 hours, and monitor potassium
C.	 Intravenous fluids with normal saline in high volumes, insulin drip with sliding 
scale coverage, and monitor electrolyte levels
D.	 Normal saline intravenously, bicarbonate drip, and monitor electrolytes
36.	
Where is renin stored in the body?
A.	 Renal tubule
B.	 Loop of Henle
C.	 Juxtoglomerular cells of the nephron
D.	 Adrenal cortex
37.	
A 28 year old female is being treated for new onset of diabetic ketoacidosis. You 
have referred her to a diabetic educator and are now teaching her about diabetes 
mellitus and HgbA1c. Which of the following HgbA1c test results should be the 
goal for good control of her diabetes mellitus?
A.	 7–8%
B.	 4–5%
C.	 6–7%
D.	 8–9%
38.	
Temperature regulation is controlled by the hypothalamus with the release of 
which of the following hormones?
A.	 Dopamine
B.	 Norepinephrine
C.	 Cortisol
D.	 Epinephrine

Endocrine  ❙  135
39.	
Which of the following diabetic patients is most likely to develop DKA?
A.	 Type 1 well-controlled on 70/30 insulin
B.	 Type 1 who is noncompliant with cellulitis of his left leg
C.	 Type 2 with an HgbA1c of 6.5 and minor surgery
D.	 Type 2 with asthma
40.	
Which of the following conditions can cause a thyroid storm in a patient with 
hyperthyroidism?
A.	 An overdose of PTU (propylthyrouricil)
B.	 Increased iodine intake
C.	 Trauma or infection
D.	 Decreased iodine intake
41.	
Your patient is having a thyrotoxic crisis. Which medication is given to reduce 
symptoms?
A.	 Propranolol
B.	 Levophed
C.	 Adenosine
D.	 Digoxin
42.	
Your patient on oral amiodarone has been admitted with myxedema. What 
symptoms do you expect to see in this patient?
A.	 Periorbital edema and facial puffiness
B.	 Tibial and pedal edema
C.	 Anasarca
D.	 No edema
43.	
Which of the following are signs of myxedema coma?
A.	 Fever, elevated T4 and T3
B.	 Decreased level of consciousness, hypotension
C.	 Decreased T4 and T3, hyperthermia
D.	 Hypothermia, decreased thyroid-stimulating hormone
44.	
What is the pathophysiology of pheochromocytoma?
A.	 Tumor of the renal gland secreting excessive angiotensinogen
B.	 Tumor of the adrenal glands secreting excessive catecholamines
C.	 Tumor of the pituitary gland secreting excessive ADH
D.	 Tumor of the adrenal glands secreting excessive angiotensin I
45.	
Which of the following can lead to hyperparathyroidism?
A.	 Low vitamin D levels, phenytoin, phenobarbital, laxatives
B.	 Phenytoin, calcium supplements, renal failure
C.	 Low phosphate levels, excessive vitamin D, laxatives
D.	 Low vitamin D levels, excessive vitamin K, phenytoin
46.	
Which of the following statements is true regarding glucagon?
A.	 Glucagon promotes glycolysis
B.	 Glucagon enables glucose to move into the cells
C.	 Glucagon helps the body store glycogen
D.	 Glucagon is released from the alpha cells in the pancreas

136  ❙  Section 6
47.	
An increase in catecholamines and amino acids with a decrease in serum glucose 
stimulates the release of
A.	 Calcitonin
B.	 Insulin
C.	 Aldosterone
D.	 Glucagon
48.	
A high serum magnesium or phosphate level, low serum calcium, with 
catecholamine release, results in secretion of
A.	 Aldosterone
B.	 Parathyroid hormone
C.	 Glyceride
D.	 Phosphates
49.	
An important nursing consideration in the patient with HHNS is
A.	 To prevent alkalosis
B.	 The administration of corticosteroids
C.	 To prevent hyperglycemia
D.	 To monitor electrolytes
50.	
The most common cause of hypothyroidism is
A.	 Graves’ disease
B.	 Acromegaly
C.	 Hashimoto’s disease
D.	 Decreased cortisol levels
51.	
Which of the following conditions must be present for calcium to be optimally 
utilized by the body?
A.	 Increased oral calcium intake
B.	 Increased phosphorus
C.	 A euthyroid state
D.	 Adequate vitamin D levels
52.	
Your patient is having aldosterone levels monitored daily. Which of the following 
is a primary effect of aldosterone?
A.	 Aldosterone promotes sodium loss
B.	 Aldosterone increases renal potassium excretion
C.	 Aldosterone decreases potassium excretion
D.	 Aldosterone increases water loss
53.	
Aldosterone is secreted by the
A.	 Zona reticularis of the adrenal cortex
B.	 Zona glomerulus of the adrenal cortex
C.	 Posterior pituitary gland
D.	 Adrenal medulla

Endocrine  ❙  137
54.	
Aldosterone secretion is regulated by
A.	 The anterior hypothalamus
B.	 Potassium ions in intracellular fluid
C.	 Angiotensin II
D.	 Hypercalcemia
55.	
Your patient’s aldosterone levels are low. As his nurse, you know a factor that 
suppresses aldosterone production is
A.	 Hypocalcemia
B.	 Hyperkalemia
C.	 Stress
D.	 Atrial natriuretic hormone
56.	
Functions of the thyroid gland, adrenal gland, and male and female reproductive 
glands are regulated by the
A.	 Thyroid gland
B.	 Pineal gland of the brain
C.	 Pineal–pituitary axis
D.	 Hypothalamic–pituitary axis
57.	
Where is the pituitary gland located?
A.	 Superior to the hypothalamus gland, near the optic chiasm
B.	 Inferior to the hypothalamus and sits in the sella turcica of the skull
C.	 Between the thalamus and hypothalamus in the midbrain
D.	 Superior to the pons and brainstem
58.	
Which drug is known to cause nephrogenic diabetes insipidus?
A.	 Demeclocycline
B.	 Amiloride
C.	 Celecoxib
D.	 Indomethicin
59.	
Part of your patient education for the family of a patient with pheochromocytoma 
should include dietary restrictions. Which of the following foods should the 
patient avoid?
A.	 Cream cheese
B.	 Red meat
C.	 Chocolate
D.	 Aged cheddar cheese
60.	
Your patient’s calcium level is 11.9 mg/dl. This value may be the result of which of 
the following conditions?
A.	 Hypoparathyroidism
B.	 Hyperparathyroidism
C.	 Excessive calcium intake
D.	 Recent fracture of a long bone

138  ❙  Section 6
61.	
Treatment for a thyrotoxic crisis includes
A.	 No need for treatment, the crisis will resolve spontaneously
B.	 Symptomatic care and wait for symptoms to subside
C.	 Synthroid administration and supportive care
D.	 Administration of PTH and symptomatic care
62.	
What is an important teaching point for a patient with hypothyroidism?
A.	 Take the medication at the same time every day, no need to fast
B.	 Take thyroid medication at the same time every day, 30 minutes before breakfast
C.	 Take the thyroid medicine each evening before bed
D.	 Take daily with food
63.	
What are the most common presenting symptoms of myxedema coma?
A.	 Facial swelling, ptosis, altered mental status, alopecia
B.	 Ptosis, goiter, tachycardia, hypertension
C.	 Altered mental status, hypertension, bradycardia
D.	 Hypothermia, altered mental status, tachycardia
64.	
There are no intensive care unit beds for your patient with myxedema coma, so 
initial treatment will be done in the PCU until a bed is available. What treatments 
do you anticipate for this patient?
A.	 Tapazole, fluids and electrolyte replacement
B.	 Levothyroxine, fluids and electrolyte replacement, correction of cause of 
myxedema
C.	 Fluids and electrolyte replacement, levothyroxine, methimazole
D.	 Levothyroxine, beta-blockers, fluids, and electrolyte replacement
65.	
The anterior pituitary gland controls which of the following glands?
A.	 Parathyroid, adrenal medulla, gonads
B.	 Thyroid, adrenal cortex, gonads
C.	 Parathyroid, thyroid, gonads
D.	 Thyroid, adrenal medulla, gonads
66.	
Which of the following conditions inhibits the release of thyroxine?
A.	 Hypocalcemia
B.	 Hyperthermia
C.	 Hypernatremia
D.	 Hypokalemia
67.	
What is the function of ADH (antidiuretic hormone)?
A.	 Aldosterone production
B.	 Sodium balance
C.	 Water balance
D.	 Potassium balance

Endocrine  ❙  139
68.	
Your patient has a tumor on her anterior pituitary gland. As a progressive 
care nurse, you know stimulation of the anterior pituitary gland is from the 
hypothalamus by way of the
A.	 Sympathetic nervous system
B.	 Feedback mechanism
C.	 Vascular system
D.	 Parasympathetic nervous system
69.	
Calcitonin is released by the
A.	 Thyroid gland
B.	 Adrenal medulla
C.	 Hypothalamus
D.	 Anterior pituitary gland
70.	
Your patient’s serum calcium level is high. An increase in serum calcium, 
glucagon, or magnesium will stimulate the release of
A.	 Parathyroid hormone
B.	 Calcitonin
C.	 Endogenous epinephrine
D.	 Aldosterone
71.	
What is the most common presentation of a patient with syndrome of 
inappropriate antidiuretic hormone (SIADH)?
A.	 Excessive, dilute urine output
B.	 Seizures
C.	 Hypotension
D.	 Tetany
72.	
Cortisol is a glucocorticoid. A major effect of cortisol in the body is to
A.	 Increase the loss of sodium from small intestines
B.	 Lower blood pressure in times of stress
C.	 Raise the level of free amino acids in the serum
D.	 Stimulate urine loss
73.	
How does hyperglycemic, hyperosmolar, nonketotic syndrome (HHNS) differ from 
diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA)?
A.	 HHNS has the same onset, higher blood sugars, more dehydration than DKA
B.	 HHNS has slower onset, lower blood sugars, less dehydration than DKA
C.	 HHNS has a slower onset, much higher blood sugar, more profound dehydration 
than DKA
D.	 HHNS has the same onset, lower blood sugar, no dehydration than DKA
74.	
Your patient has been diagnosed with HHNS. What lab results would you 
anticipate for this patient?
A.	 Glucose 550, positive ketones, serum osmolality 280 mOsm/L
B.	 Glucose 1258, negative ketones, serum osmolality 375 mOsm/L
C.	 Glucose 700, negative ketones, serum osmolality 270 mOsm/L
D.	 Glucose 600, positive ketones, serum osmolality 240 mOsm/L

140  ❙  Section 6
75.	
Congenital hypothyroidism is manifested by
A.	 A decreased TSH and a decreased T4
B.	 A euthyroid state
C.	 An elevated TSH and a decreased T4
D.	 A decreased TSH and an elevated T4
76.	
Which of the following conditions contributes to the development of acute 
hypoglycemia?
A.	 Insulinoma
B.	 Glucose consumption exceeds glucose production
C.	 Oral anithyperglycemic agents
D.	 Alcoholism
77.	
Recurrent episodes of acute hypoglycemia have led to a male patient’s admission 
to your unit. What therapies may be used to treat acute hypoglycemia (blood 
sugar less than 50 mg/dl)?
A.	 Small, frequent meals, increased carbohydrate consumption
B.	 Intravenous D50W administration, oral glucose, and treat the cause
C.	 Increased carbohydrate diet, intravenous glucose
D.	 Treat the cause, increased carbohydrate consumption
78.	
A 30 year old male was admitted to the PCU with a diagnosis of diabetic 
ketoacidosis. As his nurse you know his insulin drip will be titrated by sliding 
scale and his anion gap. What does the anion gap measure?
A.	 An estimate of cations and anions
B.	 An estimate of unmeasured anions
C.	 An estimate of potassium in the blood
D.	 An estimate of the correction of the acid–base balance
79.	
Your patient with diabetic ketoacidosis has an HCO3 level of 10 mEq/L. In 
addition to an insulin drip, you should anticipate which of the following orders?
A.	 Increase the insulin drip to hasten the resolution of the metabolic acidosis
B.	 Sodium bicarbonate bolus and repeat every 4–6 hours
C.	 Sodium bicarbonate drip with frequent HCO3 levels
D.	 Decrease the insulin drip as the acidosis is resolving
80.	
Your patient is suffering from myxedema coma. He is receiving intravenous 
thyroid replacement therapy when he suddenly develops hypotension, 
hypoglycemia, nausea, and vomiting. What has happened to this patient?
A.	 An allergic response to the thyroid medication
B.	 He needs an increased dose of thyroid medication
C.	 He needs a lower dose of thyroid medication
D.	 He is experiencing an Addisonian crisis

Endocrine  ❙  141
81.	
Which glands regulate thyroid function?
A.	 Posterior pituitary and hypothalamus
B.	 Anterior pituitary and thalamus
C.	 Anterior pituitary and hypothalamus
D.	 Posterior pituitary and thalamus
82.	
What is the treatment of choice once a diagnosis of pheochromocytoma is made?
A.	 Diet changes
B.	 Antihypertensive medications
C.	 Surgical removal of the tumor
D.	 Diuretics

142  ❙  Section 6
SECTION 6: ENDOCRINE ANSWERS
1.	
Correct answer: B
The thyroid gland is located below the larynx on either side of the trachea.
2.	
Correct answer: C
Numerous physical changes occur with Cushing’s syndrome or Cushing’s disease: 
thinning hair, acne, moon facies, increased body hair, buffalo hump on the upper 
back, purple striae on the trunk, truncal obesity with thin extremities, and easy 
bruising.
3.	
Correct answer: B
The anterior pituitary gland produces numerous hormones, which include TSH, LH, 
FSH, ACTH, and melanocyte-stimulating hormone. Substance P is a hormone released 
by the hypothalamus. Vasopressin and oxytocin are released by the posterior pituitary 
gland.
4.	
Correct answer: A
Cushing’s syndrome is usually seen with Cushing’s disease. Anticipated diagnostic 
tests include computerized tomography of the brain, chest, and abdomen, 24-hour 
urine cortisol levels, and ACTH serum concentrations. It is important to rule out 
tumors of the pituitary gland, chest (small cell cancer of the lung), adrenal tumors, 
and pheochromocytomas. These tumors cause excessive ACTH production leading to 
physical changes seen with Cushing’s syndrome, such as moon facies, buffalo hump, 
truncal obesity, and purple striae on the abdomen.
5.	
Correct answer: A
An insulin drip moves potassium back into the intracellular space, then potassium is 
pulled from the intracellular space due to metabolic acidosis. The insulin drip helps 
correct the metabolic acidosis, allowing the potassium to return to normal levels.
6.	
Correct answer: B
Signs and symptoms of DKA include polyuria, polydipsia, and polyphagia, known as 
the “3 P’s.” The fruity breath is from ketone production when fatty acids are broken 
down. Dehydration is due to the osmotic diuresis. Fatigue is due to potassium shifting 
from inside the cell to the intravascular space.
7.	
Correct answer: D
Insulin secretion is controlled by chemicals such as glucose and amino acids. 
Hormones such as GI hormones and prostaglandin will also control insulin secretion.
8.	
Correct answer: A
Risk factors for the development of diabetes mellitus include: blood pressure greater 
than 140/90 or higher than accepted for age, first-degree relative with diabetes 
mellitus, non-White ancestry, obesity (BMI greater than 30), and HDL (high-density 
lipoproteins) less than 35.
9.	
Correct answer: B
Insulin resistance predisposes the patient to elevated blood glucose and increased 
insulin production. VLDL (very-low-density lipoproteins) production increases with 
hyperinsulinemia.

Endocrine  ❙  143
10.	
Correct answer: C
The most common symptoms of Addison’s disease are weakness, fatigue, and weight 
loss. One unique symptom is salt cravings. Weight gain and constipation are more 
commonly seen with hypothyroidism. Addison’s disease is caused by deficient ACTH 
(adrenocorticotropic hormone) due to a problem with the adrenal cortex.
11.	
Correct answer: A
There are many important teaching points for patient Addison’s disease. It is important 
for the patient to understand this is a lifelong illness that has to be monitored 
regularly. They will need to know how to inject themselves with hydrocortisone for 
emergency situations. A Medic-Alert bracelet is necessary. A liberal sodium diet, up to 
3 grams a day, is recommended. Include family in the education.
12.	
Correct answer: B
The five S’s in the management of a patient in adrenal crisis include intravenous 
steroids, salt, sugar, support, and search for a cause. The patient may not need sulfa 
antibiotics, supplemental oxygen, or a stress test. Struma is synonymous for goiter.
13.	
Correct answer: D
Thyrotoxic crisis symptoms include: hypertension, hyperthermia, flushing, tachycardia 
(especially atrial tachyarrhythmias), high output heart failure, nausea and vomiting, 
psychosis, and delirium. Treatment includes supportive care and medications to block 
catecholamine effects.
14.	
Correct answer: B
Trousseau’s sign is known as carpal–pedal spasm and is seen with decreased calcium 
levels. Hypocalcemia can occur with end-stage renal disease (increased phosphorus) 
and decreased vitamin D levels. It is also seen in patients who receive 3 or more units 
of red blood cells that are treated with calcium citrate.
15.	
Correct answer: C
Chvostek’s sign is seen with hypocalcemia. It is elicited by tapping the cheek over the 
zygomatic arch and causes facial twitching. The QT interval would be prolonged with 
hypocalcemia. Cullen’s sign is ecchymosis around the umbilicus and is often seen in 
pancreatitis.
16.	
Correct answer: A
A low level of thyroxine is responsible for the symptoms of hypothyroidism. The 
decreased T4 leads to hypothyroid symptoms of cold, dry skin, hair loss, periorbital 
edema, and possible thyroid enlargement.
17.	
Correct answer: D
The adrenal medulla produces 75–85% of the catecholamine epinephrine and 25% of 
norepinephrine from phenylalanine.
18.	
Correct answer: B
The origins of microvascular disease associated with diabetes mellitus are due to 
changes in the capillary basement membrane, causing hypoxia on the cellular level. 
Prolonged hyperglycemia thickens the capillary basement membrane. This thickening 
leads decreased blood flow, hypoxia, and a lack of nutrients at the cellular level. The 
eye and kidney are the organs most susceptible to this process.

144  ❙  Section 6
19.	
Correct answer: C
Coronary artery disease, cerebral vascular accident, and peripheral vascular disease 
are the three major problems associated with macrovascular disease seen in type 2 
diabetes mellitus. Mortality or morbidity in these patients is due to macrovascular 
changes. Diabetes leads to early atherosclerosis and atherosclerotic heart disease. The 
other problems listed (retinopathy, peripheral neuropathy, and diabetic nephropathy) 
are microvascular diseases.
20.	
Correct answer: A
The role of glucophage in the body is as an antihyperglycemic agent, which improves 
glucose tolerance in patients with type 2 diabetes. Glucophage®(Metformin) decreases 
liver glucose production and also acts to decrease intestinal absorption of glucose.
21.	
Correct answer: B
The pancreas is located in the left upper quadrant of the abdomen and sits behind 
the stomach near the spleen and duodenum. This is a basic question, but one that has 
caught many an unwary nurse.
22.	
Correct answer: B
The parathyroid glands are located posterior to the thyroid gland and may consist of 
four to six small glands. The parathyroid glands produce PTH (parathyroid hormone), 
which regulates serum calcium, magnesium, and phosphorus levels. PTH also 
stimulates the kidney to produce bioavailable vitamin D.
23.	
Correct answer: B
Anything that causes a perceived drop in renal blood flow triggers the 
renin–angiotensin mechanism. Renin release can also be triggered by sodium 
and volume depletion such as seen with diuretic use.
24.	
Correct answer: C
The correct order of response of the renin–angiotensin mechanism when there is 
a decrease in blood flow to the kidneys is renin, angiotensinogen, angiotensin I, 
angio-tensin I converting enzyme, angiotensin II, and aldosterone. The kidneys 
perceive a drop in blood flow, leading to the release of renin from the juxtoglomerular 
cells of the nephron. This stimulates the release of angiotensinogen, which stimulates 
the release of angiotensin I. If the blood pressure is not corrected, the lungs release 
angiotensin I converting enzyme, which in turn causes the secretion of angiotensin II. 
Angiotensin II causes the release of aldosterone from the adrenal glands, causing the 
retention of sodium and water, as well as increased blood pressure.
25.	
Correct answer: D
Cortisol exerts negative feedback on the hypothalamus and the anterior 
hypothalamus. Cortisol has an insulin antagonistic effect and decreases glucose 
uptake in muscle and adipose tissue.
26.	
Correct answer: D
Use of systemic steroids may cause polydipsia. The patient will have a decreased 
ability to tolerate cold and heat, will suffer from excess perspiration, and will likely be 
fatigued and weak.

Endocrine  ❙  145
27.	
Correct answer: B
The symptoms of weight gain, irritability at work (emotional lability), occasional 
depression, and statements that she cannot sleep, coupled with paranoia (she also 
states she thinks management is “out to get her”) are classic signs of overuse of 
steroids. Because she is having difficulty arriving to work on time, she may be 
suffering from lack of coping ability and impairment of ability to perform ADLs. 
These are also indicators of overuse of steroids.
28.	
Correct answer: C
Cortisol, glucagon, catecholamines, and growth hormone (GH) as a group are 
classified as insulin-antagonistic hormones.
29.	
Correct answer: B
Gluconeogenesis may be impaired by excessive alcohol intake.
30.	
Correct answer: C
Demeclocycline is used in the treatment of SIADH. Its use in treatment of SIADH is 
because of its side effect; demeclocycline induces nephrogenic diabetes insipidus. The 
patient becomes dehydrated due to the inability to concentrate urine.
31.	
Correct answer: C
Chronic renal failure is the most common cause of hyperparathyroidism.
32.	
Correct answer: C
HgbA1c measures the effectiveness of diabetes mellitus therapy. Hemoglobin and 
glucose have an affinity for each other and join together to form a glycolated 
hemoglobin. The HgbA1c rises and falls in direct correlation with blood sugars. The 
American College of Endocrinologists recommends a HgbA1c of less than 6.5%, 
whereas the American Diabetes Association recommends a HgbA1c less than 7%. 
Patients with a HgbA1c less than 6% are considered nondiabetic.
33.	
Correct answer: D
A TSH (thyroid-stimulating hormone) level of 0.001 indicates hyperthyroidism or 
thyrotoxicosis. Causes can include goiter, Graves’ disease, thyroid carcinoma, and 
TSH-secreting pituitary adenoma. Hyperthyroidism without toxicosis is most often 
related to excessive intake of thyroid hormones.
34.	
Correct answer: C
The Somoygi effect is nocturnal hypoglycemia with rebound hyperglycemia. It is more 
common in Type 1 diabetics, especially children. The Dawn phenomenon is morning 
hyperglycemia without nocturnal hypoglycemia, and it is caused by growth hormone 
secretion in the early morning hours.
35.	
Correct answer: C
The patient has HHNS. Normal saline should be given in large volumes until depletion 
is corrected and then D5NS once blood glucose is in the 250–300 mg/dl range. An 
insulin drip with a sliding scale and hourly glucose monitoring would probably be 
ordered. Frequent electrolyte monitoring would also be performed. If the patient was 
given D5 ½NS too early in the treatment, it could lead to cerebral edema.

146  ❙  Section 6
36.	
Correct answer: C
Renin is stored in a crystalline form in the juxtoglomerular cells of the kidneys. 
When the kidneys perceive a decreased blood flow, the sympathetic response 
triggers the release of renin, which converts angiotensinogen to angiotensin I, 
a mild vasoconstrictor. If the problem is not resolved, the lungs release angiotensin I 
converting enzyme to create angiotensin II, a powerful vasoconstrictor. Angiotensin II 
triggers the release of aldosterone from the adrenal glands, which causes sodium and 
water retention, thereby increasing the blood pressure.
37.	
Correct answer: C
A HgbA1c of 6–7% will mean this patient’s glucose was 100–150 mg/dl over a 3-month 
period. A range of 4–5% is normal, and 7–8% and 8–9% or more are indicative of 
poorly controlled diabetes mellitus.
38.	
Correct answer: B
Norepinephrine is released by the hypothalamus in response to chemical and 
temperature receptors in the skin, face, and along the spinal column. Norepinephrine 
triggers a cascade of actions within the body to retain or create heat in the core. 
The efficiency of this cascade is impaired by weight, disease process, and respiratory 
function. Peripheral vasoconstriction shunts blood flow to internal organs to 
control heat loss through the abdomen. Norepinephrine also causes pulmonary 
vasoconstriction, which inhibits normal blood flow through the lungs, inhibiting 
blood oxygenation. The best treatment for hypothermia or cold stress is appropriate 
and timely prevention.
39.	
Correct answer: B
The patient most likely to develop DKA is the one who is noncompliant with cellulitis. 
DKA is more common in insulin-dependent diabetics, especially those with an illness 
or infection such as cellulitis. However, 20–30% of DKA patients have no identified 
precipitating factors. A well-controlled diabetic is at low risk for DKA. Type 2 diabetics 
are more likely to develop HHNS.
40.	
Correct answer: C
Injury or infection, as well as manipulation, of the thyroid gland can trigger a thyroid 
storm and thyrotoxicosis.
41.	
Correct answer: A
Propranolol (Inderal) is used for a patient having a thyrotoxic crisis. Propranolol is 
a beta-blocker and decreases the effects of the sympathetic stimulation of thyrotoxic 
crisis. It controls heart rate, hypertension, and oxygen consumption.
42.	
Correct answer: A
Patients with myxedema often have periorbital edema and facial puffiness.
43.	
Correct answer: D
Myxedema coma is a life-threatening emergency. The patient has severe 
hypothyroidism that leads to hypothermia, hypotension, low blood sugar, and lactic 
acidosis. It is often seen in elderly patients with concomitant vascular disease.

Endocrine  ❙  147
44.	
Correct answer: B
Pheochromocytomas are tumors of the adrenal glands that cause excessive secretion 
of the catecholamines such as norepinephrine, epinephrine, and dopamine. Symptoms 
include sudden increase of blood pressure, headache, chest pain, tachycardia, profuse 
sweating, and palpitations.
45.	
Correct answer: A
Aside from chronic renal failure, low vitamin D levels, phenytoin, phenobarbital, and 
laxatives can lead to hyperparathyroidism. The patient can present with pathologic 
fractures.
46.	
Correct answer: D
Glucagon is released from the alpha cells in the pancreas. Glucagon inhibits 
glycolysis, increases lipolysis, and increases blood glucose by stimulating 
glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis.
47.	
Correct answer: D
An increase in catecholamines and amino acids with a decrease in serum glucose 
stimulates the release of glucagon. If one becomes low on serum glucose from exercise, 
for example, glucagon is released to help produce an increase in blood glucose.
48.	
Correct answer: B
A high serum magnesium or phosphate level, low serum calcium, with catecholamine 
release results in secretion of parathyroid hormone. Bone breakdown is accelerated, 
releasing calcium into the blood. Calcium reabsorption is increased in the intestine, 
and kidney tubule reabsorption is decreased. Phosphate loss is increased in the urine, 
which decreases serum phosphate. Parahormone increases reabsorption of magnesium 
by renal tubules. Renal calculi may develop.
49.	
Correct answer: D
An important nursing consideration in the patient with HHNS monitor electrolytes 
and treat dysrhythmias. The severe hypokalemia is the result of no intracellular-to-
extracellular shift occurring because the patient is not usually acidotic. When the 
patient is hypokalemic, hypocalcemia, and hypomagnesemia also occur. Cardiac 
tissue may be compromised due to electrolyte imbalances and life-threatening 
dysrhythmias may occur.
50.	
Correct answer: C
Hashimoto’s disease, or chronic lymphocytic thyroiditis, is the most common cause 
of hypothyroidism. Hashimoto’s disease is an autoimmune disorder. In Hashimoto’s 
disease, the immune system makes antibodies against the thyroid and interferes with 
production of thyroid hormone.
51.	
Correct answer: D
Calcium cannot be utilized by the body without adequate vitamin D levels. Fifteen 
minutes of daylight on the skin without use of sun block allows the body to create its 
own vitamin D. An increased phosphorus level would bind the calcium, making it 
unavailable.
52.	
Correct answer: B
The primary effects of aldosterone are to increase reabsorption of water and sodium, 
which results in an increased extracellular fluid volume. Renal excretion of potassium 
is increased.

148  ❙  Section 6
53.	
Correct answer: B
Aldosterone is secreted by the zona glomerulus of the adrenal cortex.
54.	
Correct answer: C
Aldosterone secretion is regulated by angiotensin II. When renal blood flow is 
decreased, angiotensin is released, and it stimulates aldosterone secretion. An increase 
in potassium ions in extracellular fluid also stimulates the release of aldosterone. 
Adrenocorticotropic hormone stimulates aldosterone production for short periods of 
time.
55.	
Correct answer: D
A factor that suppresses aldosterone production is atrial natriuretic hormone. 
Hypercalcemia and hypokalemia also suppress aldosterone production.
56.	
Correct Answer: D
Functions of the thyroid gland, adrenal gland, and male and female reproductive 
glands are regulated by the hypothalamic–pituitary axis. The hypothalamic–pituitary 
axis releases a number of hormones that inhibit or release several other hormones that 
affect body functions.
57.	
Correct answer: B
The pituitary gland is inferior to the hypothalamus and sits in the sella turcica of the 
sphenoid bone.
58.	
Correct answer: A
Demeclocycline is the only tetracycline known to cause nephrogenic diabetes 
insipidus. In few cases, amiloride and prostoglandin inhibitors such as celecoxib and 
indomethicin have been noted to be effective treatments for nephrogenic diabetes 
insipidus.
59.	
Correct answer: D
Hypertension with pheochromocytoma can be triggered by foods such as cheese, 
alcohol, yogurt, and caffeine. It is important to give the patient a list of foods to avoid. 
Crises often occur after life events where these foods might be consumed.
60.	
Correct answer: B
A calcium level of 11.9 mg/dl indicates hyperparathyroidism. Hyperparathyroidism 
can be either primary or secondary in nature. Primary hyperparathyroidism is the 
excess secretion of PTH (parathyroid hormone) and may be related to a breakdown 
of the feedback system to the glands or overgrowth of the glands. Secondary 
hyperparathyroidism is generally related to a chronic disorder such as chronic renal 
failure or a malabsorption state.
61.	
Correct answer: D
Treatment of thyrotoxic crisis includes PTH to decrease thyroid-stimulating hormone 
and thyroid hormones, plus treatment based on presenting symptoms.
62.	
Correct answer: B
Thyroid medications should be taken on an empty stomach 30 minutes before 
breakfast, at the same time every day. Other teaching points include regular follow-up 
labs of TSH and T4, and watching for symptoms of myxedema and hyperthyroidism. 
Taking thyroid medication in the evening can lead to insomnia.

Endocrine  ❙  149
63.	
Correct answer: A
There are numerous symptoms of myxedema coma, which include facial swelling, 
altered mental status, alopecia, hypotension, bradycardia, hypothermia, ptosis, 
periorbital edema, and macroglossia. The symptoms that are not seen with 
myxedema are tachycardia, hypertension, and goiter. These symptoms are seen with 
hyperthyroidism.
64.	
Correct answer: B
Intravenous administration of levothyroxine and replacement of fluids and electrolytes 
are initial therapies for myxedema coma. The patient must also be supported to 
prevent potential cardiopulmonary collapse, sometimes requiring mechanical 
ventilation.
65.	
Correct answer: B
The anterior pituitary, or adenohypophysis, controls the function of the thyroid gland 
with TSH (thyroid-stimulating hormone). The anterior pituitary also controls the 
adrenal cortex with ADH (antidiuretic hormone) and the gonads with LH (luteinizing 
hormone) or ICSH (interstitial cell-stimulating hormone).
66.	
Correct answer: B
Hyperthermia inhibits the release of thyroxine.
67.	
Correct answer: C
ADH (antidiuretic hormone) deals with the functions of thirst and water balance. It is 
produced by the posterior pituitary gland. When the plasma becomes concentrated, 
or there is a reduced blood volume, the posterior pituitary gland releases ADH, 
causing water retention and concentration of urine. ADH is regulated by a feedback 
mechanism in the pituitary gland.
68.	
Correct answer: C
Stimulation of the anterior pituitary gland is from the hypothalamus by way of the 
vascular system.
69.	
Correct answer: A
Calcitonin is released by the thyroid gland.
70.	
Correct answer: B
An increase in serum calcium, glucagon, or magnesium stimulates the release of 
calcitonin. Calcitonin reduces serum calcium levels, targets bone and kidney cells to 
inhibit bone cell lysis, and decreases calcium reabsorption by the kidney.
71.	
Correct answer: B
Seizures are one of the most common presenting symptoms of SIADH. SIADH causes 
hemodilution and a relative decrease in serum sodium levels. Once the sodium 
falls below 120, the patient is at great risk for seizures. Excessive urine output and 
hypotension are symptoms of diabetes insipidus.
72.	
Correct answer: C
Cortisol raises the free amino acids in the serum by inhibiting collagen formation 
and protein synthesis. Cortisol stimulates gastric acid secretion, inhibits loss of 
sodium from the small intestines, acts as an antidiuretic hormone, and works with 
epinephrine and norepinephrine to increase blood pressure.

150  ❙  Section 6
73.	
Correct answer: C
HHNS develops slowly in type 2 diabetes, most often in elderly patients or those with 
undiagnosed diabetes mellitus. The blood sugars are generally more than 600 mg/dl 
and can go over 1,500 mg/dl. The other differentiation between HHNS and DKA is the 
lack of ketones with HHNS.
74.	
Correct answer: B
Blood sugars over 600 mg/dl with negative serum ketones and a serum osmolality 
greater than 310 are typical of hyperglycemic, hyperosmolar, nonketotic syndrome 
(HHNS). The pH is usually greater than 7.3, and the BUN (blood urea nitrogen) may 
be elevated. Osmolality is the best predictor of survivability than the blood sugar 
levels.
75.	
Correct answer: C
Congenital hypothyroidism is manifested by an elevated TSH and a decreased T4. 
This disease is usually autosomal recessive, but some cases are autosomal dominant. 
Congenital hypothyroidism occurs when the thyroid gland fails to develop or function 
properly. The thyroid gland may be absent, hypoplastic, or displaced. In a few cases, 
the gland is enlarged, but the production of thyroid hormones is deficient or absent.
76.	
Correct answer: B
Acute hypoglycemia occurs if glucose consumption exceeds glucose production. Lack 
of food, or if the liver is unable to provide glucogenesis, causes a drop in blood glucose 
can drop to less than 50 mg/dl.
77.	
Correct answer: B
D50W, oral glucose, and treating the cause are the most effective ways to treat acute 
hypoglycemia. Increased carbohydrate consumption would be prohibited. The optimal 
diet would consist of small, frequent meals and reduced carbohydrates.
78.	
Correct answer: B
The anion gap measures anions not generally measured in routine labs. It is an 
estimate of the degree of lactic acidosis. The formula for figuring the anion gap is 
Na (HCO3 + Cl). The normal level is 10–20 mEq/L. With diabetic ketoacidosis the 
anion gap is greater than 30 mEq/L.
79.	
Correct answer: C
A sodium bicarbonate drip should be anticipated to replace the HCO3. This helps to 
resolve the metabolic acidosis. Boluses would be given only if the pH was very low. The 
insulin drip will not directly correct the HCO3.
80.	
Correct answer: D
Your patient is having an Addisonian crisis. Subclinical adrenal insufficiency may 
coexist with myxedema. The treatment of choice is intravenous hydrocortisone 
therapy.

Endocrine  ❙  151
81.	
Correct answer: C
The anterior pituitary and hypothalamus glands regulate thyroid function. The 
anterior pituitary gland secretes TSH (thyroid-stimulating hormone) and the 
hypothalamus regulates the anterior pituitary gland with thyrotropin-releasing 
hormone (TRH).
82.	
Correct answer: C
The best option for pheochromocytoma is surgical removal of the tumor. It is 
important to remove the tumors, as they can rupture and lead to the patient’s 
death. Alpha-adrenergic blockers or beta-adrenergic blockers may be used to treat 
hypertension until surgery can be performed.


❙
  153 
❙
Section 7
Hematology/Immunology
SECTION 7: HEMATOLOGY/IMMUNOLOGY QUESTIONS
1.	
The definition of palliative care recognized in the United States is
A.	 Palliative care is care coordinated within one specific unit
B.	 Patient and family hopes for peace and dignity are supported at the end of life
C.	 Palliative and nonpalliative caregivers must collaborate to provide family care 
needs
D.	 Palliative care means patient and family-centered care that optimizes quality of 
life by anticipating, preventing, and treating suffering. Palliative care throughout 
the continuum of illness involves addressing physical, intellectual, emotional, 
social, and spiritual needs and to facilitate patient autonomy, access to 
information, or both.
2.	
Nursing interventions should include which of the following to minimize risk to a 
patient with HIT?
A.	 Avoid the use of heparin flushes
B.	 Assess the need for manual blood pressure measurements
C.	 Monitor platelet counts
D.	 Observe for petechiae
3.	
Type II HIT patients are at great risk for developing
A.	 Generalized bleeding
B.	 Pericarditis
C.	 Thrombosis
D.	 Limb amputation
4.	
Your patient was envenomated by a rattlesnake on the right lower leg this 
morning while crawling under a neighbor’s porch. The entire right lower leg is 
ecchymotic. The best course of treatment would be to provide
A.	 Clotting factors and antivenin
B.	 Clotting factors and heparin
C.	 IV at 100 ml/hour and antivenin
D.	 IV at 100 ml/hour and heparin
5.	
A snake bite results in activation of which of the following responses to 
physiologic insult to the body?
A.	 Fibrinolytic system
B.	 Antithrombin system
C.	 Intrinsic cascade
D.	 Extrinsic cascade

154  ❙  Section 7
6.	
Your patient was thrown from the back of a truck onto a road and suffered 
abdominal abrasions and lacerations with a splenic rupture and a fractured right 
humerus. While in surgery, he received 6 units of PRBCs. As his nurse you know 
that this patient should also receive
A.	 FFP
B.	 Platelets
C.	 Whole blood
D.	 Heparin
7.	
Your patient has a history of acute lymphoblastic leukemia. During your 
assessment you note she is confused, hypotonic, and starts having generalized 
seizures. You would anticipate receiving orders for which of the following tests?
A.	 A spinal tap
B.	 CT scan
C.	 MRI
D.	 PET scan
8.	
Blood component replacement therapy for DIC may include all but which of the 
following?
A.	 FFP
B.	 Cryoprecipitate
C.	 Amicar
D.	 Platelets
9.	
Your patient is 26 years old and presented with chest pain and respiratory distress. 
He weighs approximately 150 pounds. During your assessment you note he is 
short of breath and has a dry cough. On the patient’s chest you find irregularly 
shaped lumps near the left infraclavicular border. Based on these findings, which 
of the following questions should you ask the patient?
A.	 “Have you suddenly gained weight in the last 2 months?”
B.	 “Have you noticed skin patches that are itchy and with a green cast?”
C.	 “Have you noticed any stomach pain or swelling?”
D.	 “Has your appetite increased over the last few months?”
10.	
Your patient has been diagnosed with anemia. She will be receiving Epogen. 
Adverse effects of Epogen include
A.	 Iron depletion
B.	 Hypokalemia
C.	 Decreased creatinine
D.	 Decreased ability to clot
11.	
Clopidogrel may interfere with the metabolism of which of the following drugs?
A.	 Phenobarbital
B.	 Phenytoin
C.	 Cimetidine
D.	 Estrogen

Hematology/Immunology  ❙  155
12.	
How does low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH) differ from unfractionated 
heparin?
A.	 It is more difficult to administer
B.	 There are more side effects with LMWH
C.	 LMWH is more stable
D.	 Unfractionated heparin is easier to administer
13.	
Hemoglobin is primarily phagocytized in the
A.	 Liver
B.	 Gallbladder
C.	 Spleen
D.	 Pancreas
14.	
Your patient has been diagnosed with an oat cell carcinoma. Oat cell carcinomas 
are primarily found in the
A.	 Central airways
B.	 Genital area
C.	 Bronchial wall
D.	 Pancreas
15.	
Heparin requires laboratory monitoring to determine the target range for 
a therapeutic dosage. Which of the following does not require laboratory 
monitoring?
A.	 Clopidogrel (Plavix)
B.	 Generation II antiplatelet medications
C.	 Antithrombin III inhibitors
D.	 Low molecular weight heparin
16.	
Your patient’s mother carries the sickle cell trait. Which of the following 
statements about sickle cell anemia is true?
A.	 Sickle cell anemia always results in death by age 40
B.	 Sickle cell anemia causes a loss of protein intrinsic factor
C.	 High blood viscosity and low oxygen tension may cause a sickle cell crisis
D.	 Sickle cell disease is limited to the African American and Caucasian populations
17.	
The Kleihauer–Betke test identifies
A.	 Sickle cell trait in utero
B.	 Common blood group antigens
C.	 Bone marrow lymphocyte precursors
D.	 Fetal hemoglobin in maternal blood
18.	
Your patient is 21 years old and plans to breastfeed her newborn. A mother’s 
breastmilk contains the immunoglobulin known as
A.	 IgG
B.	 IgX
C.	 IgY
D.	 IgB

156  ❙  Section 7
19.	
If an 18 year old mother received an incompatible transfusion of Rh-positive 
platelets following a placental rupture, it would be appropriate to administer
A.	 Neostigmine
B.	 FFP
C.	 RhoGAM
D.	 CuroSurf
20.	
Your patient is 32 years old and was admitted for a liver transplant. A thorough 
history was obtained by the transplant coordinator prior to admission to the 
PCU. Patients can become presensitized and are more likely to experience organ 
rejection if they have a history of
A.	 Multiple pregnancies
B.	 Small or reduced lumens in the bile ducts
C.	 Destruction of small airways
D.	 Cytomegalovirus (CMV) infections
21.	
Your patient was stung by a bee and had an anaphylactic reaction. She has 
received epinephrine both via EpiPen and intravenously because she had severe 
airway obstruction due to swelling. Epinephrine is given for anaphylactic 
reactions because
A.	 It prevents localized edema
B.	 It promotes temporary changes in ST segments
C.	 It prevents third space fluid loss
D.	 It promotes bronchodilation and inhibits additional mediator release
22.	
A 25 year old patient has been treated in your unit for an exacerbation of his 
thalassemia. The teaching plan for a patient with thalassemia would include
A.	 Keeping the limbs flat to avoid a stasis ulcer
B.	 Avoiding oral stimulants (e.g., caffeine)
C.	 Eating fewer, larger, high-protein meals
D.	 Using warm water to cleanse the skin
23.	
Your patient is an 18 year old who has not been eating correctly for about 2 weeks 
because he is stressed out about asking a girl to their college prom. He eats a diet 
of toaster pastries, pastas, and high-calorie, high-sugar foods and drinks large 
quantities of Red Bull. He collapsed at home today after becoming dyspneic. His 
EKG shows sinus tachycardia without ectopy; he is pale, somewhat irritable, and 
complains of a headache. His initial diagnosis is folic acid deficiency. Tomorrow 
the patient is scheduled for more tests to determine if there is an underlying 
disease process. You suspect that he simply has a dietary deficiency and prepare 
to instruct him about foods that contain high amounts of folic acid. These foods 
would include
A.	 Green beans
B.	 Peanut butter
C.	 Oranges
D.	 Fish

Hematology/Immunology  ❙  157
24.	
Your patient is an 18 year old diagnosed with Hodgkin’s lymphoma. Which of the 
following techniques is important to teach this patient about skin care?
A.	 Use an alcohol-based cleaner to treat acne
B.	 Use a moisturizer containing lidocaine
C.	 Use ice packs directly on the skin to decrease swelling
D.	 Scrub daily with a pumice-based soap
25.	
Which of the following statements is true about hepatitis D?
A.	 Hepatitis D is detectable only when the patient has concurrent HBV infection
B.	 IgM rises late in the course of infection
C.	 IgG rises slowly and the increase is limited to the acute phase of infection
D.	 Hepatitis D is an RNA virus that is able to self-replicate when it is present 
­concurrently with HBV
26.	
The patient you are caring for has an elevated warfarin level. The antidote for 
warfarin is either oral or intravenous administration of
A.	 Aquamephyton
B.	 Factor III
C.	 LMWH
D.	 Factor X
27.	
A function of a red blood cell is
A.	 Cell humoral mediation
B.	 To function as a macrophage
C.	 To initiate hemostasis
D.	 Carbonic acid dissociation
28.	
An adverse effect of an antihistamine would include
A.	 Anticholenergic effects
B.	 Itching and anxiety
C.	 Central nervous system depression
D.	 Sodium channel blockade
29.	
After an antigenic substance has been eliminated, what type of cell plays an 
active role in suppression of an immune response?
A.	 A segmented neutrophil
B.	 Eosinophils
C.	 Band neutrophils
D.	 T8 lymphocytes
30.	
A blood differential test measures the percentage of each type of white blood 
cell found in the blood. Which type of cell makes up the largest percent of WBCs 
normally found in the blood?
A.	 Band neutrophils
B.	 Segmented neutrophils
C.	 Lymphocytes
D.	 Monocytes

158  ❙  Section 7
31.	
Your patient’s differential results show a decreased percentage of neutrophils. This 
result may be due to
A.	 Trauma
B.	 Chemotherapy
C.	 Gout
D.	 Eclampsia
32.	
If differential results show an increase in neutrophils, this increase may be the 
result of
A.	 Gout
B.	 Neoplastic anemia
C.	 Pneumonia
D.	 Aplastic anemia
33.	
The differential drawn with your patient’s A.M. labs shows a lymphocyte count of 
22%. This result may be indicative of
A.	 Infectious mononucleosis
B.	 Infectious hepatitis
C.	 Sepsis
D.	 Lymphocytic leukemia
34.	
If a patient’s differential shows an increase in the percentage of lymphocytes, this 
result may be due to
A.	 Multiple myloma
B.	 Radiation therapy
C.	 Leukemia
D.	 Sepsis
35.	
Which condition listed below would result in an increased percentage of 
monocytes?
A.	 Pneumonia
B.	 An overwhelming bacterial infection
C.	 Bone marrow damage
D.	 A parasitic infection
36.	
Your patient is suffering from an infection and this is the first time the patient has 
been exposed to the bacteria responsible for the infection. Which of the following 
types of cells would be the first to respond to the antigen?
A.	 T8 lymphocytes
B.	 Eosinophils
C.	 T4 lymphocytes
D.	 Segmented neutrophils
37.	
The antidote for reversing the effects of heparin and heparin derivatives is
A.	 Fresh frozen plasma
B.	 Protamine sulfate
C.	 Factor III
D.	 There is no antidote for heparin

Hematology/Immunology  ❙  159
38.	
Why is DIC usually fatal if untreated?
A.	 Exsanguination
B.	 Intracranial hemorrhage
C.	 Myocardial infarction
D.	 Cerebral thrombosis
39.	
Your patient had a previous transplant two years ago. She is now experiencing 
severe back pain. Back pain or abdominal pain with itching can be indicators of 
acute rejection in which of the following organs?
A.	 Pancreas
B.	 Lung
C.	 Liver
D.	 Kidney
40.	
The ACT (activated coagulation time) is more sensitive to _______ and ________ 
than whole blood clotting time.
A.	 Oxygenation, hemofiltration
B.	 Factor VIII, heparin
C.	 Warfarin, leukemia
D.	 Liver disease, calcium
41.	
What is the most common cause of a fatal transfusion reaction?
A.	 Immune-compromised recipient
B.	 Volume overload
C.	 Mismatched blood
D.	 Severe hyperkalemia
42.	
Rejection of a transplanted organ usually occurs as a result of
A.	 Cellular immunity
B.	 Humoral immunity
C.	 Delayed hypersensitivity reaction
D.	 Complement cascade
43.	
Organ rejection that occurs 3–5 days after transplant that is antibody mediated, 
with fever and oliguria, is known as
A.	 A chronic rejection
B.	 An acute rejection
C.	 An accelerated acute rejection
D.	 A hyperacute rejection
44.	
Your patient had a renal transplant about one year ago. She is now being seen for 
severe flu-like symptoms. What sign or symptom would lead you to suspect that 
this patient is having an acute rejection episode?
A.	 Hypotension
B.	 Pelvic pain
C.	 Increased urine output
D.	 Decreased urine osmolality

160  ❙  Section 7
45.	
The most prevalent type of anemia is known as
A.	 Chronic anemia
B.	 Acute anemia
C.	 Pernicious anemia
D.	 Iron-deficiency anemia
46.	
Acute posthemorrhagic anemia develops after
A.	 Bone marrow is damaged
B.	 The spleen is damaged
C.	 Iron levels decrease by more than 15%
D.	 A rapid loss of erythrocytes
47.	
Which of the following types of cells would be considered nongranular 
leukocytes?
A.	 Eosinophils
B.	 Neutrophils
C.	 Monocytes
D.	 Basophils
48.	
Your patient has immune thrombocytopenic purpura that has worsened and 
become refractory to treatments, including plasmapheresis and injections of 
gamma globulin. Glucocorticoid therapy has also not been successful. The patient 
will be undergoing a splenectomy. One of the preoperative treatments to expect is
A.	 Interferon
B.	 Anti-Rh immunoglobulin
C.	 Haemophilus influenzae type B vaccination
D.	 Colchicine
49.	
Which of the following clotting factors must be present blood plasma and is 
required for coagulation in both the intrinsic and extrinsic pathway?
A.	 Factor IX (Plasma Thromboplastin)
B.	 Factor IV (Calcium)
C.	 Factor II (Prothrombin)
D.	 Factor IIa (Thrombin)
50.	
Your patient is a 35 year old female with Hodgkin’s disease. She has developed 
respiratory distress secondary to her chemotherapy treatment. She was placed 
on a nasal cannula and labs were drawn. The results of this patient’s CBC with 
differential are as follows:
WBCs 1450/mm3
Segmented neutrophils 23%
Banded neutrophils 11%
Lymphocytes 29%
Platelets 17,000/mm3
aPTT 105 seconds
Based on the available lab data, which of the following complications is likely to 
occur with this patient?
A.	 Pulmonary embolus and infection
B.	 Systemic infection
C.	 Heart failure
D.	 Infection and bleeding

Hematology/Immunology  ❙  161
51.	
Which of the cells listed below secrete lymphokines?
A.	 Segmented neutrophils
B.	 T lymphocytes
C.	 Eosinophils
D.	 B lymphocytes
52.	
Which of the following antibodies mediates allergic reactions?
A.	 IgG
B.	 IgE
C.	 IgM
D.	 IgD
53.	
Your patient is suffering from pneumococcal pneumonia. What antibiotics would 
you expect to be prescribed for this patient?
A.	 Aminoglycosides
B.	 Vancomycin
C.	 Cephalosporins
D.	 Amphotericin B
54.	
The initial response to promote coagulation of an injured blood vessel is
A.	 Platelet aggregation
B.	 Fibrin formation
C.	 Thrombin formation
D.	 Vasoconstriction
55.	
The electrolyte necessary for normal coagulation that acts as an enzyme cofactor 
via the intrinsic, extrinsic, and common pathways is
A.	 Potassium
B.	 Sodium
C.	 Calcium
D.	 Magnesium
56.	
Which of the following actions affects the thrombotic effect of plasmin?
A.	 Calcium ionization
B.	 Fibrin breakdown
C.	 Prevention of platelet aggregation
D.	 Magnesium
57.	
A clotting factor most likely synthesized in the spleen is
A.	 Factor II
B.	 Factor IIa
C.	 Factor VIII
D.	 Calcium
58.	
Actions of histamine include
A.	 Vasodilation
B.	 Vasoconstriction
C.	 Production of smooth muscle contractions
D.	 Increased capillary permeability

162  ❙  Section 7
59.	
Actions of leukotriene include
A.	 Production of smooth muscle contractions
B.	 Vasodilation
C.	 Development of fever
D.	 Activation of lymphocytes
60.	
An action of serotonin would be
A.	 Pulmonary vasoconstriction
B.	 Smooth muscle relaxation
C.	 Promotion of platelet aggregation
D.	 Decreasing capillary permeability
61.	
Which of the following statements is true about the immunoglobulin IgA?
A.	 IgA kills bacteria in the bloodstream
B.	 IgA attaches to mast cells and basophils, then causes them to release their contents
C.	 IgA coats bacteria and viruses to enhance phagocytosis
D.	 IgA activates the complement system
62.	
Prothrombin, Factors VII, IX, and X depend on ___________________ for their 
synthesis and full activity.
A.	 Exposed epithelium
B.	 Fibrin stabilization
C.	 Vitamin K
D.	 Tissue trauma
63.	
Which of the following statements is true about prothrombin?
A.	 Fibrinogen becomes prothrombin
B.	 Prothrombin is synthesized in the spleen
C.	 Prothrombin is vitamin K dependent
D.	 Prothrombin is the precursor to fibrin
64.	
Days or weeks after a transfusion, a patient may develop a delayed hemolytic 
reaction. Symptoms of this condition would include
A.	 Hypoxemia
B.	 Chills
C.	 Crackles
D.	 Mild jaundice
65.	
To help prevent dilutional coagulopathy during transfusions, it is advised to 
administer
A.	 Only packed cells
B.	 Fresh frozen plasma
C.	 Cryoprecipitate
D.	 Only whole blood
66.	
A treatment used for disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) that decreases 
the amount of fibrin-split products is
A.	 Antithrombin III
B.	 Desmopressin
C.	 Fresh frozen plasma
D.	 Amicar

Hematology/Immunology  ❙  163
67.	
Which of the following statements is true about the use of colloids?
A.	 Colloids should be used in initial burn resuscitations
B.	 Colloids are large-molecule protein or starch solutions
C.	 Colloids provide greater hydrostatic pressure to help push fluids into the interstitial 
spaces
D.	 Colloids should be used concurrently with whole blood products
68.	
Use of the colloid Hetastarch may affect your patient in which of the following 
ways?
A.	 Hetastarch may elevate serum amylase levels
B.	 Hetastarch may decrease serum potassium levels
C.	 Hetastarch will increase capillary permeability
D.	 Hetastarch will cause acute tubular necrosis
69.	
You are caring for a middle-aged woman with mononucleosis. What symptoms do 
you expect this patient to exhibit?
A.	 Fever, chills, sore throat, cough
B.	 Sore throat, lymphadenopathy, maculopapular rash
C.	 Hepatosplenomegaly, nasal congestion, maculopapular rash
D.	 Lymphadenopathy, fever, cough
70.	
What teaching should be done for the patient with infectious mononucleosis 
when discharging them from the progressive care unit?
A.	 There are no special precautions
B.	 Avoid contact sports and activities that increase intra-abdominal pressure
C.	 Antibiotics will cure the mononucleosis
D.	 Expect to feel better in 7 to 10 days
71.	
What treatment do you anticipate for a patient with infectious mononucleosis?
A.	 Supportive therapy for most patients
B.	 Intravenous antibiotics and contact isolation
C.	 Acyclovir 400 mg orally every 8 hours for 10 days
D.	 High-dose intravenous steroids
72.	
What is the causative agent in infectious mononucleosis?
A.	 Streptococcus pyogenes
B.	 Streptococcus mutans
C.	 Epstein–Barr virus
D.	 Herpes simplex I
73.	
Normal hemostasis consists of three steps that occur in rapid sequence. The first 
step in this process is
A.	 Platelet plug formation
B.	 Vascular spasm
C.	 Coagulation
D.	 Fibrin product degradation

164  ❙  Section 7
74.	
An antirejection drug classified as an antimetabolite is
A.	 Cyclosporine
B.	 Terralimus
C.	 Prednisolone
D.	 Imuran
75.	
Factor VIII deficiency is also known as
A.	 Hemophilia B
B.	 Sickle cell anemia
C.	 Von Willebrand’s disease
D.	 Aplastic anemia
76.	
The blood component that contains factor VIII is
A.	 FFP
B.	 PRBCs
C.	 Salt-poor albumin
D.	 Cryoprecipitate
77.	
A fluid that causes decreased platelet aggregation and possible allergic 
reactions is
A.	 Hetastarch
B.	 Dextran
C.	 Lactated Ringer’s
D.	 D5/Isolyte M
78.	
Your patient is to receive two units of packed cells over the next 4 hours. When 
patients receive multiple transfusions, they are susceptible to increased
A.	 Bilirubin and amylase levels
B.	 BUN and creatinine levels
C.	 Serum potassium levels
D.	 Sodium and magnesium retention
79.	
A medication that may cause hemolytic anemia is
A.	 Phenobarbital
B.	 Furosemide
C.	 Quinidine
D.	 Captopril
80.	
Your patient was admitted with a factor VIII deficiency. In addition to specific 
factor VIII, the blood component that carries factor VIII, factor XIII, and 
fibrinogen is
A.	 FFP
B.	 PRBC
C.	 Salt-poor albumin
D.	 Cryoprecipitate
81.	
Possible causes of thrombocytopenia could include
A.	 Alcoholism
B.	 Portal hypertension
C.	 Latex sensitivity
D.	 A low-protein diet

Hematology/Immunology  ❙  165
82.	
A mathematical calculation that minimizes the variance of PT results that is 
due to different lab reagents is known as
A.	 Activated partial thromboplastin time
B.	 ADP receptor blocker test
C.	 International Normalized Ratio
D.	 Warfarin complement receptor test
83.	
All the clotting factors in blood are synthesized in the liver except
A.	 VIII and XII
B.	 VII and IX
C.	 IX and III
D.	 IIa and IXa
84.	
The synthesis of hemoglobin is regulated by
A.	 A myeloid stem cell
B.	 Erythropoietin
C.	 Thromboplastin
D.	 Thrombopoietin
85.	
The physician has ordered an MCH test for your patient. This test evaluates
A.	 The average concentration of RBCs in a single sample
B.	 The average amount (by weight) of hemoglobin in each RBC
C.	 The average size and volume of a single RBC
D.	 The average concentration of hemoglobin per single RBC
86.	
Which of the following statements regarding ABO incompatibilities is true?
A.	 ABO incompatibility is more frequent in mothers with type O blood
B.	 ABO incompatibility is more severe in mothers with type AB blood
C.	 ABO incompatibility is more severe than Rh incompatibility
D.	 ABO incompatibility is more frequent in mothers with type B blood
87.	
Your patient has been diagnosed with DIC. Which of the following drugs is useful 
in the treatment of DIC to inhibit fibrinolysis?
A.	 Heparin
B.	 Cryoprecipitate
C.	 Prednisone
D.	 Amicar
88.	
Your patient has a history of hemolytic anemia. She was admitted today for chest 
pain, fever, and heart failure. These symptoms indicate the patient is probably 
suffering from
A.	 A hemolytic crisis
B.	 Pulmonary edema
C.	 DIC
D.	 A myocardial infarction

166  ❙  Section 7
89.	
Immune-mediated HITT usually begins about _______ after the initiation of 
heparin therapy.
A.	 24 hours
B.	 72 hours
C.	 Three days
D.	 5–7 days
90.	
A partial thromboplastin time (PTT) is used to assess
A.	 Intrinsic and common portions of the coagulation cascade
B.	 The number of fibrin degradation products present
C.	 The number of platelets
D.	 The number of hemoglobin molecules
91.	
The extrinsic system of the coagulation cascade is initiated by
A.	 Exposure to cell membrane tissue factor
B.	 Vascular endothelial injury
C.	 Irritation of the intimal lining of blood vessels
D.	 Hypocalcemia
92.	
Which of the following tests is used to assess the extrinsic and common pathways 
of the coagulation cascade?
A.	 Split fibrin product
B.	 Prothrombin time
C.	 Partial thromboplastin time
D.	 Activated clotting time
93.	
A transfusion reaction that usually occurs within 5–30 minutes of the start of the 
transfusion is known as
A.	 An allergic reaction
B.	 A febrile reaction
C.	 An acute intravascular hemolytic reaction
D.	 An acute extravascular hemolytic reaction
94.	
Pernicious anemia results from a lack of
A.	 Vitamin B6
B.	 Vitamin A
C.	 Vitamin B12
D.	 Vitamin E
95.	
A pharmacologic antagonist to vitamin K is
A.	 Neostigmine
B.	 Digoxin
C.	 Amiodarone
D.	 Phenobarbital

Hematology/Immunology  ❙  167
96.	
Your patient is being treated for respiratory difficulty. He has been increasingly 
restless and now has petechiae on the trunk, arms, and legs. His abdomen is 
slightly distended, and he demonstrates increased respiratory effort. He is now 
obtunded. During your assessment, you note pink-tinged urine in the Foley bag, 
generalized ecchymosis, and oozing from the IV line insertion point. You suspect 
this patient may be suffering from
A.	 DIC
B.	 Pulmonary emboli
C.	 A fat embolism
D.	 Meningitis
97.	
Cyclosporine has significant adverse effects that include
A.	 Hepatotoxicity
B.	 Hypertension
C.	 Acute pancreatitis
D.	 Hypokalemia
98.	
A coagulation test that is sensitive to the vitamin K dependent clotting factors 
that warfarin inhibits is
A.	 Prothrombin time
B.	 Extrinsic tissue factor
C.	 Calcium levels
D.	 Activated partial thromboplastin time
99.	
The major immunoglobulin of serum and interstitial fluid is
A.	 IgG
B.	 IgA
C.	 IgE
D.	 IgM
100.	
A decrease in the available number of erythrocytes caused by bone marrow 
production failure is known as
A.	 Chronic anemia
B.	 Hemolytic anemia
C.	 Aplastic anemia
D.	 Pernicious anemia
101.	
Your patient was admitted to the PCU for low H and H secondary to epistaxis, 
as well as bleeding into the diaphragm. She bleeds from the gums, even with 
only the lightest stimulus. Petechiae are noted on her chest and arms. Her platelet 
count is < 100,000. Her probable diagnosis is
A.	 Idiopathic thrombocytopenia purpura
B.	 Pernicious anemia
C.	 Aplastic anemia
D.	 Hemolytic anemia

168  ❙  Section 7
102.	
High blood viscosity and low oxygen tension are the cause of which of the 
following types of anemia?
A.	 Pernicious anemia
B.	 Aplastic anemia
C.	 Sickle cell anemia
D.	 Hemolytic anemia
103.	
Your patient has been prescribed Epogen. As a progressive care nurse, you know 
adverse effects of Epogen include
A.	 Decreased thrombosis
B.	 Increased iron
C.	 Hypertension
D.	 Decreased BUN
104.	
Cellular humoral immunity is mediated by which of the following types of cells?
A.	 Eosinophils
B.	 B lymphocytes
C.	 T Lymphocytes
D.	 Killer cells

Hematology/Immunology  ❙  169
SECTION 7: HEMATOLOGY/IMMUNOLOGY ANSWERS
1.	
Correct answer: D
The definition of palliative care in the United States as described by both the 
US Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Centers for Medicare and 
Medicaid Services (CMS) and the National Quality Forum (NQF) states, “Palliative 
care means patient and family-centered care that optimizes quality of life by anticipating, 
preventing, and treating suffering.” Palliative care throughout the continuum of illness 
involves addressing physical, intellectual, emotional, social, and spiritual needs 
and to facilitate patient autonomy, access to information, or both.
2.	
Correct answer: A
HIT is heparin-induced thrombocytopenia, so it is best to eliminate the use of heparin.
3.	
Correct answer: B
Type II HIT patients are at great risk for developing pericarditis. Type II HIT is 
sometimes called “white clot syndrome.” Thrombi are primarily venous in origin 
and can lead to DVT, pulmonary emboli, thrombotic stroke, limb ischemia, and 
myocardial infarction.
4.	
Correct answer: A
Treatment should include clotting factors and antivenin. Rattlesnakes envenomate 
with an enzyme called hyaluronidase, which breaks down the hyaluronic acid barriers 
on cells. The cells lyse and exudative products enter the blood stream. Treatment is 
very similar to a patient with DIC because fibrin split products (anticoagulants) are 
released. The patient may have to receive multiple vials of antivenin.
5.	
Correct answer: D
Damage to the tissues and vessels as a result of a snakebite initiates the extrinsic 
cascade. Thromboplastin and factor VII are released and are activated in the presence 
of calcium.
6.	
Correct answer: B
This patient should also receive platelet infusions. PRBCs contain no platelets, and 
platelets must be given to aid in hemostasis.
7.	
Correct answer: A
This patient’s presentation of confusion, hypotonia, and seizures is indicative of spinal 
cord involvement. A spinal tap would provide proof of the presence of blast cells in the 
spinal fluid. Rapid, aggressive chemotherapy treatment is indicated.
8.	
Correct answer: C
Blood component (factor) replacement therapy for DIC does not include aminocaproic 
acid (Amicar). Amicar is used to inhibit fibrinolysis, not replace clotting factors. 
It is used in the treatment of DIC, but it may change a simple bleeding issue into 
DIC. It must be used in combination with heparin. DIC is usually treated with FFP, 
cryoprecipitate, and platelets. Cryoprecipitate contains more than 5–10 times more 
fibrinogen than FFP. A good rule of thumb is to give 10 units of cryoprecipitate for 
every 3 units of FFP. If the patient is actively bleeding, platelets are commonly used.

170  ❙  Section 7
9.	
Correct answer: C
An irregularly shaped lump near the infraclavicular border and respiratory distress 
with dry cough is suspicious for lymphoma. The nurse should ask if there has been 
any abdominal pain or distension, which might be indicative of hepatosplenomegaly. 
Rapid tumor growth is associated with Burkitt’s non-Hodgkin lymphoma. Additional 
questions will assist in determining which type of lymphoma may be present. 
A sudden weight loss, fever, and nausea/vomiting with decreased appetite have been 
associated with lymphomas. The nurse’s findings and history assessment should be 
reported to the physician immediately. As this patient is also suffering respiratory 
distress, the physician may perform a biopsy to determine type of lymphoma and 
additional tests to determine spread of disease.
10.	
Correct answer: A
Epogen and Procrit are recombinant erythropoietin, and they are used to correct 
anemia. Adverse effects include clotting at the site of vascular access, depletion of iron, 
and may cause increases of potassium, creatinine, and BUN.
11.	
Correct answer: B
Clopidogrel (Plavix) interferes with phenytoin, tamoxifen and tolbutamide, fluvastin, 
toresemide, and warfarin. It also may affect nonsteroidal anti-inflammatories. Plavix 
does not seem to affect estrogen, cimetidine, or phenobarbital.
12.	
Correct answer: C
Low-molecular-weight heparin is more stable than unfractionated heparin. LMWH 
(i.e., Lovenox) is so stable and predictable that PTTs are not required. It is also easy to 
administer at home.
13.	
Correct answer: A
Hemoglobin is phagocytized primarily in the liver. Hemoglobin is comprised of two 
parts. The first part is “heme” that causes the reddish color and contains iron and 
porphyrin. The second part is a protein called “globin.” Hemoglobin combines with 
oxygen to form oxyhemoglobin. Hemoglobin also binds with CO2 and carries it to 
alveoli to be expired. When the hemoglobin is phagocytized in the liver, it breaks 
down into the heme and globin.
14.	
Correct answer: C
Oat cell carcinomas are primarily found in the bronchial wall. Oat cell carcinoma is 
a small cell carcinoma. On CXR, a central mass will be seen. This type of carcinoma 
easily spreads to the brain, bone, liver, and adrenal glands. Prognosis is very poor.
15.	
Correct answer: D
Heparin requires laboratory monitoring to determine the target range for a 
therapeutic dosage. Low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH) does not require 
laboratory monitoring. For patients taking these derivatives, there is hardly any 
variance in their ability to bind with plasma proteins. A more predictable medication 
level can be obtained and the patient does not have the additional stress of multiple 
repeated blood draws.
16.	
Correct answer: C
High blood viscosity and low oxygen tension may cause a sickle cell crisis.

Hematology/Immunology  ❙  171
17.	
Correct answer: D
The Kleihauer–Betke test identifies fetal hemoglobin in maternal blood. The results of 
this test allow for calculations to determine the amount of fetal–maternal hemorrhage 
and the amount of immune globulin (RhoGAM) necessary to prevent sensitization. 
If a patient has a positive test, follow-up testing at a postpartum check-up should be 
done to rule out the possibility of a false-positive result. For example, a false-positive 
result in the mother could be caused by sickle cell trait, which causes persistent 
elevation of fetal hemoglobin.
18.	
Correct answer: A
A mother’s breastmilk contains multiple immunoglobulins including IgG, IgA, 
IgM, IgD, and IgE. IgA provides antibodies specific to environmental antigens. IgA 
specifically provides protection to the infant’s gastrointestinal system by protecting 
against viruses and bacteria-associated food. IgE plays a key role in histamine release 
and allergic response.
19.	
Correct answer: C
If an 18 year old mother received an incompatible transfusion of Rh-positive platelets 
following a placental rupture, it would be appropriate to administer RhoGAM.
20.	
Correct answer: A
Patients can be presensitized and are more likely to develop organ rejection if they 
have a history of multiple pregnancies. It is becoming more common in some areas 
for teenagers to have had multiple pregnancies by age 15. Other possible causes of 
organ rejection include transfusions, previous organ transplants, and blood type 
incompatibilities. Small or reduced lumens in the bile ducts, destruction of small 
airways, and cytomegalovirus (CMV) infections are the results of organ rejection, 
not causes.
21.	
Correct answer: D
Epinephrine is given for anaphylactic reactions because it promotes bronchodilation 
and inhibits additional mediator release. Epinephrine counteracts the 
bronchoconstrictive and vasodilator actions of histamine by stimulating alpha, beta-1, 
and beta-2 receptors. Epinephrine is also useful in treating hay fever and urticaria.
22.	
Correct answer: B
In thalassemia, the erythrocytes—known as “target cells”—are very thin and fragile. 
Use of oral stimulants could lead to vasoconstriction. The serum bilirubin is elevated 
in this disease, so you should caution the patient against scratching. Cool water and 
lotion may be used for skin care. The integrity of the skin is weakened, so careful 
positioning is paramount. The patient may require ongoing transfusions. Multiple 
transfusions may actually lead to the presence of too much iron, which might then 
have to be removed through chelation.
23.	
Correct answer: B
Peanut butter contains large amounts of folic acid. Other foods that are high in folic 
acid include red beans, broccoli, asparagus, liver, and beef.

172  ❙  Section 7
24.	
Correct answer: B
Your patient is 18 years old and may have body image issues related to her Hodgkin’s 
lymphoma and treatment. Patients with Hodgkin’s lymphoma often have severe itching 
and bruising. The itching is caused by an increase of eosinophils in the blood stream. 
If liver impairment and hepatomegaly are present, patients may have difficulty clotting 
and present with bruising and petechiae. Skin care should focus on maintaining skin 
integrity and soothing itching. A moisturizer containing lidocaine may sooth itching 
and prevent skin compromise. Alcohol-based cleaners and soaps with pumice will dry 
the skin and be too abrasive. Ice may be used to sooth itching, but the patient should 
use a barrier when it is applied to prevent damage to the dermal layer.
25.	
Correct answer: A
Hepatitis D (HDV) can replicate only when hepatitis B (HBV) is present. When HDV is 
present, either as a coinfection or as a superinfection, liver disease and progression are 
more rapid and severe. IgM levels rise early in infection and may remain chronically 
high. IgG levels rise more slowly during infection, but will continue to be elevated for 
the remainder of the patient’s life.
26.	
Correct answer: A
The patient you are caring for has an elevated warfarin level. The antidote for 
warfarin is either oral or intravenous administration of Aquamephyton (vitamin K). 
If given intravenously, the rate should not exceed 1 mg/min in order to avoid 
anaphylaxis. If given IV, it may take 1–2 hours to affect the vitamin K clotting factors. 
If the patient’s condition requires a faster reversal, you can use fresh frozen plasma or 
prothrombin complex concentrates along with the vitamin K.
27.	
Correct answer: D
A red blood cell has multiple functions, including carbonic acid dissociation to form 
bicarbonate ions. The RBC provides oxygen transport via hemoglobin and carbon 
dioxide transport via carboxyhemoglobin. The RBC buffers protons by binding with 
hemoglobin to form acid hemoglobin.
28.	
Correct answer: A
An adverse effect of an antihistamine would include anticholenergic effects. An 
antihistamine is indicated for itching and anxiety and is a mild central nervous 
system depressant.
29.	
Correct answer: D
After an antigenic substance has been eliminated, a T8 lymphocyte plays an active 
role in suppression of an immune response. T8-lymphocytes become activated by 
antigen-presenting cells and subsequently proliferate. These cells then differentiate 
into cytotoxic T-lymphocytes to kill infected and tumor cells within the body.
30.	
Correct answer: B
Segmented neutrophils make up the largest percent of WBCs normally found in the 
blood. A differential result should be in the range of
Neutrophils: 40% to 60%
Lymphocytes: 20% to 40%
Monocytes: 2% to 8%
Eosinophils: 1% to 4%
Basophils: 0.5% to 1%
Bands (immature neutrophils): 0% to 3%

Hematology/Immunology  ❙  173
31.	
Correct answer: B
Your patient’s differential results show a decreased percentage of neutrophils. This 
result may be due to chemotherapy. Other potential causes of decreased neutrophils 
include aplastic anemia, viral infections, pneumonia, systemic bacterial infections, 
and radiation exposure.
32.	
Correct answer: A
If differential results show an increase in neutrophils, this increase may be the 
result of gout. Additional causes of increased neutrophils are rheumatoid arthritis, 
rheumatic fever, thyroiditis, acute stress, infection, myelocytic leukemia, trauma, and 
eclampsia.
33.	
Correct answer: C
The differential drawn with your patient’s A.M. labs shows a lymphocyte count of 
22%. This result may be indicative of sepsis. The normal range for lymphocytes on 
a differential is 20–40%, so this patient is deficient in lymphocytes. All the other 
conditions listed (infectious mononucleosis, infectious hepatitis, and lymphocytic 
leukemia) would cause an increase in lymphocytes.
34.	
Correct answer: A
If a patient’s differential shows an increase in the percentage of lymphocytes, 
this result may be due to multiple myloma, viral infections such as infectious 
mononucleosis, measles, and mumps, and infectious hepatitis. Additional causes 
of increased lymphocytes could be lymphocytic leukemia, radiation treatment 
(or exposure), and chronic bacterial infections.
35.	
Correct answer: D
A parasitic infection would increase the percentage of monocytes as reflected on 
a differential. Additional possible reasons the monocytes would be elevated are 
tuberculosis, infectious mononucleosis, or chronic inflammatory diseases.
36.	
Correct answer: D
If your patient is suffering from an infection and this is the first time the patient has 
been exposed to the bacteria responsible for the infection, segmented neutrophils 
would be the first to respond to the antigen.
37.	
Correct answer: B
The antidote for reversing the effects of heparin and heparin derivatives is protamine 
sulfate. Dosage is determined by the number of heparin units in the body. Generally, 
1 mg of protamine is given per 100 units of heparin needing neutralization. Keep in 
mind that LMWH is only partially reversed by protamine sulfate.
38.	
Correct answer: A
DIC is usually fatal if untreated because the patient exsanguinates.
39.	
Correct answer: C
Back pain or abdominal pain with itching can be indicators of acute rejection of the 
liver. Additional indicators would include elevated liver enzymes, elevated bilirubin, 
jaundice, and elevated ammonia levels (a late sign). The itching is a result of bilirubin 
deposits in the skin.

174  ❙  Section 7
40.	
Correct answer: B
The ACT (activated coagulation time) is more sensitive to factor VIII and heparin than 
whole blood clotting time. The test is easy to do and is reliable. The ACT measures the 
ability of the blood to clot. Fresh, whole blood is added to a test tube that contains an 
activator. The activator can be glass particles, kayolin, or diatomaceous earth. The 
result will be the time it takes for a clot to form.
41.	
Correct answer: C
The most common cause of a fatal transfusion reaction is mismatched blood. 
Mismatched blood causes a hemolytic reaction, resulting in systemic cellular lysis. 
The overwhelming destruction of cells cannot be corrected rapidly enough by the bone 
marrow.
42.	
Correct answer: A
Rejection of a transplanted organ usually occurs as a result of cellular immunity. The 
function of T cells is cellular immunity. These cells recognize the transplanted organ 
cells as foreign, resulting in a mounted attack leading to rejection. Immunosuppressive 
drugs suppress this normal response.
43.	
Correct answer: C
Organ rejection that occurs 3–5 days after transplant that is antibody mediated, with 
fever and oliguria, is known as an accelerated acute rejection. This is the standardized 
definition of this type of rejection.
44.	
Correct answer: B
The transplanted kidney is placed in the pelvic area. Pelvic pain is an ominous sign. 
Patients who have undergone kidney transplants should be educated to notify their 
physicians immediately if suffering from pelvic pain, as it is a symptom of rejection.
45.	
Correct answer: D
Iron-deficiency anemia is the most frequently occurring anemia seen around the 
world. It can be caused by either consumption of an iron-poor diet or an excessive loss 
of iron. Trauma is a primary cause of acute loss, with the anemia then resulting from 
bleeding. Blood donations, menses, GI bleeding, malabsorption syndromes, pica, and 
excessive diarrhea are all potential causes of this type of anemia. If you could view the 
erythrocytes under a microscope, they look kind of “puny.” They are pale from lack of 
hemoglobin and tend to be smaller than normal red blood cells.
46.	
Correct answer: D
Acute posthemorrhagic anemia may be the result of hemorrhage, cancerous lesion, an 
ulcerative lesion that erodes an arterial wall, trauma to a major vessel, or rupture of 
an aneurysm. After hemorrhage, plasma is lost and vasoconstriction takes place. The 
concentration of erythrocytes is increased because the volume is low—in other words, 
the same number of cells are in less fluid, so the count is artificially high. It can take 
approximately 6 weeks for hemoglobin levels to return to normal.

Hematology/Immunology  ❙  175
47.	
Correct answer: C
A monocyte would be considered a nongranular leukocyte. Both monocytes and 
lymphocytes are classified as agranulocytes. Monocytes are the largest leukocytes, but 
account for only a small portion of the total cell count for WBCs. When the monocytes 
mature, they become tissue macrophages and work as phagocytes. When a phagocyte 
lives in the liver, it is called a Kupffer cell. When it is in the lungs, it is called an 
alveolar macrophage. When it is found in connective tissues, it is a histiocyte.
Macrophages contain lysosomal enzymes and chemicals that can destroy 
bacteria. If a macrophage is activated by an antigen, it will secrete monokines, which 
control communication between all the cells involved in the immune response.
48.	
Correct answer: C
Preoperative treatment would include a Haemophilus influenzae type B vaccination. 
Interferon is not applicable. Anti-Rh immunoglobulin and colchicine are treatments 
for ITP that will have probably been tried prior to the decision to perform a 
splenectomy. The patient should also be vaccinated for pneumococcal and 
meningococcal organisms to lower the risk of postoperative infection.
49.	
Correct answer: B
Factor IV (Calcium) must be present blood plasma and is required for coagulation in 
both the intrinsic and extrinsic pathway.
50.	
Correct answer: D
This patient is likely to develop an infection and bleeding.
51.	
Correct answer: B
T lymphocytes secrete lymphokines. As part of the inflammatory response, 
lymphokines encourage cell growth, promote cell activation, and destroy target cells.
52.	
Correct answer: B
Allergic reactions are mediated by IgE.
53.	
Correct answer: C
Cephalosporins are generally used to treat pneumococcal pneumonia. Cephalosporins 
have a beta-lactam ring structure that interferes with synthesis of the bacterial cell 
wall, so the cell breaks down and dies.
54.	
Correct answer: D
The initial response to promote coagulation of an injured blood vessel is 
vasoconstriction.
55.	
Correct answer: C
The electrolyte necessary for the normal coagulation process via the intrinsic, 
extrinsic, and common pathways is calcium.
56.	
Correct answer: B
Fibrin breakdown affects the thrombotic effect of plasmin.
57.	
Correct answer: C
A clotting factor most likely synthesized by macrophages in the spleen is factor VII, 
which also may work in conjunction with macrophages.

176  ❙  Section 7
58.	
Correct answer: A
Actions of histamine include vasodilation, increased capillary permeability, inhibition 
of T cells, initiation of bronchospasms, increased secretion of mucus, and increased 
heart rate and contractility.
59.	
Correct answer: A
Actions of leukotriene include production of smooth muscle contractions, 
vasoconstriction, and increased capillary permeability.
60.	
Correct answer: A
Actions of serotonin include pulmonary vasoconstriction, smooth muscle contractions 
(bronchospasms), vasodilation (systemic), and increased capillary permeability.
61.	
Correct answer: D
IgA activates the complement system, protects epithelial surfaces, and protects against 
entry into the respiratory, genitourinary, and gastrointestinal tracts.
62.	
Correct answer: C
Prothrombin and factors VII, IX, and X depend on vitamin K for their synthesis and 
full activity. Vitamin K is produced by intestinal flora, and without it, these four 
factors cannot bind to phospholipid platelet surfaces or function in blood coagulation. 
Vitamin K cannot be stored by the body Factors. VII, IX, X, and prothrombin will not 
be synthesized by the liver if vitamin K is not available.
63.	
Correct answer: C
Prothrombin is vitamin K dependent, is synthesized in the liver, and is the precursor to 
thrombin (IIa).
64.	
Correct answer: D
Days or weeks after a transfusion, a patient may develop a delayed hemolytic 
reaction. Symptoms of this condition would include mild jaundice, purpura, anemia, 
and fever. It is incumbent on the nurse to monitor strict I&O, especially urine output 
and hematocrit and hemoglobin results.
65.	
Correct answer: B
Dilutional coagulopathy results when excess units of packed cells are administered. 
Bleeding may occur at the puncture site and the PT and PTT will be prolonged. It 
is good practice to administer 2 units of fresh frozen plasma for every 10 units of 
packed cells.
66.	
Correct answer: D
A treatment used for disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) that decreases 
the amount of fibrin split products is Amicar. The fibrinolytic system is blocked so 
stable clots do not become degraded. The Amicar decreases the amount of fibrin split 
products (which are anticoagulants).
67.	
Correct answer: B
Colloids are large-molecule protein or starch solutions. Dextran and Hetastarch may 
decrease platelet aggregation.

Hematology/Immunology  ❙  177
68.	
Correct answer: A
Hetastarch may elevate serum amylase levels, but the levels will return to normal 
within a week after administration. Hetastarch will not increase serum potassium 
levels or increase capillary permeability. Hetastarch must be used with caution in 
patients in anaphylactic or septic shock because capillary permeability is already 
increased. Dextran may cause acute tubular necrosis.
69.	
Correct answer: B
Infectious mononucleosis presents with severe sore throat, lymphadenopathy, 
maculopapular rash, and, at times, hepatosplenomegaly. The patient may also 
experience mild to moderate abdominal discomfort and fatigue. In severe cases, the 
spleen may rupture. It is important to teach the patient the importance of rest and to 
follow up with their primary care provider to prevent relapse. It can take several weeks 
to months to recover from infectious mononucleosis.
70.	
Correct answer: B
It is important to tell a patient with infectious mononucleosis to avoid strenuous 
activities that increase intra-abdominal pressure, such as heavy lifting, overexertion, 
minor trauma, and contact sports. These activities may lead to splenic rupture. 
The patient must be taught to return to the ED or primary care provider if severe 
abdominal pain develops.
71.	
Correct answer: A
For most patients with infectious mononucleosis, supportive therapy is all that is 
necessary. NSAIDs may be prescribed for pain or fever, along with increased oral fluids 
and rest. Steroids are sometimes necessary to manage more severe cases. Acyclovir is 
not indicated and has no value for these patients even though the Epstein–Barr virus is 
the causative agent.
72.	
Correct answer: C
The Epstein–Barr virus is the causative agent in infectious mononucleosis. It is spread 
by contact with body fluids, most often saliva. This disease is predominantly seen 
in teens and 30 year olds, but people of any age may become infected. Streptococcus 
pyogenes causes strep throat. Streptococcus mutans causes tooth decay. Herpes simplex I 
causes cold sores and is one form of genital herpes.
73.	
Correct answer: B
Normal hemostasis consists of three steps that occur in rapid sequence. The first step 
in this process is vascular spasm, causing vasoconstriction. Next, a platelet plug is 
formed when the platelets stick together, forming a temporary seal. The third step is 
coagulation. Reinforcement of the platelet plug is provided by fibrin.
74.	
Correct answer: D
An antirejection drug classified as antimetabolite is Imuran. Antimetabolites interfere 
with RNA and DNA synthesis and inhibit T and B lymphocyte proliferation.
75.	
Correct answer: C
Factor VIII deficiency is also known as Von Willebrand disease. Hemophilia A and B 
are factor IX deficiencies.

178  ❙  Section 7
76.	
Correct answer: D
The blood component that contains factor VIII is cryoprecipitate. Cryoprecipitate 
means it is quick-frozen. It contains large amounts of factor VIII. Cryoprecipitate 
does have disadvantages. It is expensive and there are newer recombinant factor VIII 
products available. There also is the risk of transmission of hepatitis A, hepatitis C, 
hepatitis G, and HIV.
77.	
Correct answer: B
A fluid that causes decreased platelet aggregation and possible allergic reactions is 
Dextran. Sometimes Dextran causes acute tubular necrosis because it is made of 
polymers of high-molecular-weight polysaccharides.
78.	
Correct answer: C
When patients receive multiple transfusions, they are susceptible to increased 
serum potassium levels. When blood is transfused, sometimes the cells lyse and the 
intracellular potassium is released. This can also occur as the cells strike the floating 
ball in the infusion chamber. It is sound practice to monitor electrolytes after every 
two units of blood given. Remember to monitor the patient for dysrhythmias.
79.	
Correct answer: C
A medication that may cause hemolytic anemia is quinidine. In addition, quinidine, 
procainamide, and acetaminophen may cause hemolytic anemia. Phenobarbital may 
actually cause aplastic anemia, and furosemide may cause a generalized anemia. 
Captopril causes pancytopenia.
80.	
Correct answer: D
Cryoprecipitate, as mentioned previously, does carry factors VIII, XIII, and fibrinogen. 
There is a risk of disease transmission and transfusion reactions.
81.	
Correct answer: B
Possible causes of thrombocytopenia could include portal hypertension. Other 
potential causes include sepsis, viral infection, burns, and radiation therapy. 
Medications such as thiazides, furosemide, penicillins, sulfonomides, ranitidine, and 
heparin may cause thrombocytopenia. Chemotherapy is another cause.
82.	
Correct answer: C
A mathematical calculation that minimizes the variance of PT results that is due 
to different lab reagents is known as the International Normalized Ratio (INR). The 
results are a way to standardize results for patients taking warfarin.
83.	
Correct answer: A
All factors except VIII and XII are synthesized in the liver, so that is why liver injuries 
can bleed so much and are so dangerous. At this time, it is postulated that some of 
these factors may actually be synthesized in the spleen as well, but that information is 
unlikely to be tested.
84.	
Correct answer: B
Erythropoietin is a hormone responsible for the synthesis of hemoglobin. 
Erythropoietin levels increase in response to anemia and low oxygen states and 
decrease in response to hypertransfusion. Levels are also increased in infants with 
Down syndrome and intrauterine growth restriction. Erythropoietin may also be 
elevated in infants born to mothers with pregnancy-induced hypertension or diabetes.

Hematology/Immunology  ❙  179
85.	
Correct answer: B
A mean corpuscular hemoglobin (MCH) test measures the average amount 
(by weight) of hemoglobin in each RBC. A mean corpuscular hemoglobin 
concentration (MCHC) test measures the average concentration of hemoglobin per 
single RBC. A mean corpuscular volume (MCV) test measures the average size and 
volume of a single RBC.
86.	
Correct answer: A
ABO incompatibility is most often seen in mothers with type O blood, which has an 
absence of antigens. If the mother is exposed to A and B antigens from the fetus, an 
ABO incompatibility will exist. The mother can also be exposed to A and B antigens 
carried in food, bacteria, and pollen. This can make the first pregnancy perilous. ABO 
incompatibility is less severe than Rh incompatibility and occurs more frequently. 
ABO incompatibility protects against fetal Rh disease because of rapid destruction 
of A and B cells. This rapid destruction prevents Rh antigen exposure and resultant 
maternal antibody production.
87.	
Correct answer: D
Aminocaproic acid (Amicar) interferes with plasmin and inhibits fibrinolysis. Synthetic 
antithrombin III inhibits thrombin and can be very useful in DIC.
88.	
Correct answer: A
Your patient has a history of hemolytic anemia. She was admitted today for chest 
pain, fever, and heart failure. These symptoms indicate the patient is probably 
suffering from a hemolytic crisis. Patients who have hemolytic anemia may be 
fine until they are exposed to a major stressor like infection, trauma, or surgery. 
A psychological stressor, such as divorce, may also initiate a crisis. The patient may be 
overwhelmed, so hemolysis accelerates and may cause tissue hypoxia, ischemia, and 
progress to necrosis and infarction. Treatment is supportive and targeted to presenting 
symptoms.
89.	
Correct answer: D
Immune-mediated HITT usually begins about 5 to 7 days after the initiation of 
heparin therapy. If a severe reaction develops, the patient will have chest pain due to 
cardiac ischemia, neurologic impairment and LOC changes, and paresthesias because 
of cerebral ischemia. The patient may develop pulmonary emboli, dyspnea, extremity 
pain and pallor due to thrombosis, and possible arterial thrombosis. It usually takes 
5–7 days to manifest, but it can take much less.
90.	
Correct answer: A
A partial thromboplastin time (PTT) is used to assess intrinsic and common portions 
of the coagulation cascade. The results may be affected by an absence of clotting 
factors, anticoagulants, low levels of clotting factors, inhibitors, and an increased use 
of clotting factors.
91.	
Correct answer: A
The extrinsic system of the coagulation cascade is initiated by exposure of cell 
membrane tissue factor from tissue injury. The intrinsic system is initiated by vascular 
endothelial injury.

180  ❙  Section 7
92.	
Correct answer: B
The prothrombin time (PT) is used to assess the extrinsic and common pathways of the 
coagulation cascade. The test used to assess the intrinsic and common pathways of the 
coagulation cascade is the partial thromboplastin time (PTT).
93.	
Correct answer: C
A transfusion reaction that usually occurs within 5–30 minutes of the start of the 
transfusion is known as an acute intravascular hemolytic reaction. The patient may 
experience chills, fever, tachycardia, hypotension, hematuria, back pain, and may 
exhibit additional signs of shock. The extravascular hemolytic reaction may manifest 
as fever, low H and H even after transfusion, and elevated bilirubin.
94.	
Correct answer: C
Pernicious anemia results from a lack of vitamin B12. This disease results from lack 
of protein intrinsic factor in the stomach that helps the body absorb vitamin B12. This 
stress on the heart from resultant hypoxia can cause heart murmurs, tachycardias, 
arrhythmias, hypertrophy, and heart failure. A lack of vitamin B12 raises the 
homocysteine level. High levels of homocysteine add to the buildup of fatty deposits. 
A lack of vitamin B12 can damage nerve cells and cause problems such as paresthesias 
in hands and feet and problems with ambulation and balance. Memory loss, visual 
disturbances, and confusion may develop. The condition was named “pernicious” 
because it was often fatal before the cause was discovered to be a lack of vitamin B12.
95.	
Correct answer: D
Pharmacologic antagonists to vitamin K are phenobarbital and hydantoin 
(anticonvulsants) and heparin and warfarin (anticoagulants). These drugs induce 
hepatic enzymes and increase vitamin K degradation. Vitamin K transport across the 
placenta is inhibited, and vitamin K dependent clotting factors are depressed.
96.	
Correct answer: A
This patient probably has DIC. Disseminated intravascular coagulation is an 
overstimulation of the clotting cascade. Both the intrinsic and extrinsic pathways are 
activated at the same time, which causes an acceleration of the clotting process. When 
the clots lyse, the fibrin split products are anticoagulants. Eventually, all the clotting 
factors are used up, and no further clots can form. Neonates are at increased risk 
for DIC secondary to inappropriate levels of anticoagulants and fibrinolytics, along 
with decreased levels of antithrombin and protein. One of the treatments for DIC is 
antithrombin III, which sometimes attenuates organ failure and reverse coagulopathy.
97.	
Correct answer: B
Cyclosporine has significant adverse effects that include nephrotoxicity, hypertension, 
hyperkalemia, leg cramps, headache, seizures, and development of neoplasms.
98.	
Correct answer: A
A coagulation test that is sensitive to the vitamin K dependent clotting factors that 
warfarin inhibits is the prothrombin time. The test measures the amount of time it 
takes for a thrombus to form after tissue factor (Factor III) is added to a patient’s blood 
sample.
99.	
Correct answer: A
The major immunoglobulin of serum and interstitial fluid is immunoglobulin G (IgG). 
This immunoglobulin provides immunity against viral and bacterial pathogens.

Hematology/Immunology  ❙  181
100.	
Correct answer: C
A decrease in the available number of erythrocytes caused by bone marrow 
production failure is known as aplastic anemia. About 50% of all the cases of 
aplastic anemia are caused by toxins. The other 50% have an unknown cause. Some 
of the known causes are radiation (X-rays, radioactive isotopes, radium), benzene, 
streptomycin, carbon tetrachloride, DDT, chloramphenicol, and sulfonamides. Many 
types of pesticides other than DDT are thought to contribute to aplastic anemia.
101.	
Correct answer: A
Idiopathic thrombocytopenia purpura (ITP) is the result of a low platelet count. 
Sometimes platelets are destroyed early and systematically. The cause is thought to be 
an autoimmune response. Hemorrhages may occur in the brain, which may lead to 
stroke and an increased intracranial pressure.
102.	
Correct answer: C
Sickle cell anemia occurs primarily in the African American population. These people 
are homozygous for HgS and have more HgS than HgA. This causes some of the cells 
to form a “sickle” shape—curved with rough edges. A crisis can occur when the low 
oxygen tension (postulated) causes a proliferation of these cells. The sharp edges of 
these cells travel through the microcirculation and damage capillaries. A simple thing 
like cold weather can precipitate massive sickling. Other identified factors include 
dehydration, vomiting, diarrhea, high altitude, excessive exercise, and stress. When 
these cells break apart, they occlude the microcirculation and lower oxygen tension, 
which initiates more sickling. This is a very painful time for the patient, and oxygen, 
pain management, and fluids are very important.
103.	
Correct answer: C
Epogen and Procrit are recombinant erythropoietin, and they are used to correct 
anemia that can occur with chronic renal failure and an adverse effect would be 
hypertension. Additional adverse effects include clotting at the site of vascular access, 
depletion of iron, and increased potassium, creatinine, and BUN.
104.	
Correct answer: B
Cellular humoral immunity is mediated by B lymphocytes. The B lymphocytes 
originate in bone marrow and mature there. The B lymphocytes form antibodies 
(immunoglobulins) that regulate a response to a specific antigen that has bound itself 
to the B cell’s receptor sites. The B cell then forms a specific antibody for that particular 
antigen. Five different types of immunoglobulins are available: IgG, IgA, IgM, IgE, and 
IgD. After the antibodies are synthesized, the specific antibody can attach to its antigen 
and set off the reaction to allow for phagocytosis. The cells retain a “memory” for the 
specific antigen, and if another exposure occurs, the response will be quicker and 
stronger.


❙
  183 
❙
Section 8
Neurology
SECTION 8: NEUROLOGY QUESTIONS
1.	
You are caring for a patient with multiple sclerosis. The neurologist wants to start 
your patient on steroids for five days. Which of the following is true and should be 
considered by the palliative care team prior to beginning this medication?
A.	 What is the medical team’s treatment goal?
B.	 A pharmacist consultant is not necessary as the the patient has been on this 
­medication before
C.	 Because the medication is only prescribed for five days, there is no need to monitor 
the patient’s response
D.	 Can any current medications be stopped prior to beginning this medication?
2.	
Your patient has had a major left-sided stroke. What is the most common cause of 
stroke in the United States?
A.	 Uncontrolled diabetes mellitus
B.	 Cocaine abuse
C.	 Uncontrolled hypertension
D.	 Tobacco addiction
3.	
Why does diabetes mellitus increase the risk of stroke?
A.	 DM increases the risk of hypertension
B.	 DM decreases neuroreceptor response in cerebral circulation
C.	 DM accelerates atherosclerosis of the large arteries
D.	 DM increases the risk of clot formation
4.	
Your patient with uncontrolled hypertension is most likely to have which of the 
following types of stroke?
A.	 Ischemic
B.	 Lacunar
C.	 Transient ischemic attack
D.	 Reversible neurologic deficit
5.	
Which hemisphere, cerebral or cerebellar, is more likely to be affected by stroke?
A.	 Right cerebellar hemisphere
B.	 Right cerebral hemisphere
C.	 Left cerebral hemisphere
D.	 Left cerebellar hemisphere

184  ❙  Section 8
6.	
Your priority in caring for a patient with a cerebrovascular accident is
A.	 Prevention of decubitus ulcers
B.	 Prevention of aspiration of food or fluid
C.	 Prevention of contractures
D.	 Prevention of depression
7.	
An elderly man has had a left temporal cerebrovascular accident due to 
uncontrolled hypertension. As his nurse, you know that this patient is likely to 
have which of the following deficits?
A.	 Motor deficits
B.	 Expressive aphasia
C.	 Receptive aphasia
D.	 Balance deficits
8.	
Suspected cases of meningitis should be placed in which of the following types of 
isolation?
A.	 Universal precautions are all that is needed
B.	 Contact precautions
C.	 Reverse isolation
D.	 Droplet precautions
9.	
Which results would you expect in the evaluation of the cerebrospinal fluid in a 
patient with Guillain–Barré syndrome?
A.	 Increased white blood cells
B.	 Increased protein levels
C.	 Increased glucose levels
D.	 Anaerobic bacteria
10.	
Which of the following descriptions would be the most appropriate for the patient 
with Guillain–Barré syndrome?
A.	 Impaired motor weakness, impaired respiratory function, acute pain
B.	 Impaired respiratory function, impaired nutrition, acute pain
C.	 Impaired motor weakness, impaired bowel function, acute pain
D.	 Impaired respiratory function, impaired bowel function, acute pain
11.	
Your patient with Guillain–Barré syndrome is experiencing a great deal of pain. 
Why is this occurring?
A.	 Parasympathetic function
B.	 Sympathetic inactivity
C.	 Autonomic dysfunction
D.	 Sympathetic function
12.	
Nursing management of a patient with Guillain–Barré syndrome includes which 
of the following actions?
A.	 Monitoring labs and neurologic signs
B.	 Monitoring respiratory status and neurologic signs
C.	 Monitoring respiratory status and lab results
D.	 Monitoring labs results and urinary output

Neurology  ❙  185
13.	
A primary nursing diagnosis for the patient with Guillain–Barré syndrome 
should include
A.	 Impaired nutrition
B.	 Risk for impaired respiratory function
C.	 Impaired fluid balance
D.	 Impaired body image
14.	
Exclusion criteria for treatment of patients with acute ischemic stroke with rtPA 
within 3 to 4.5 hours from symptom onset includes
A.	 NIHSS score of 9
B.	 Oral anticoagulant use with normal INR
C.	 History of diabetes
D.	 Diagnosis of ischemic stroke with measurable neurological deficit
15.	
A depressed patient states, “I don’t want to die like my mother did with MS.” This 
patient is exhibiting behavior consistent with which Kubler-Ross stage of grief?
A.	 Denial
B.	 Bargaining
C.	 Anger
D.	 Acceptance
16.	
What are the four different types of Guillain–Barré syndrome?
A.	 Ascending, progressive, relapsing–remitting, pure motor
B.	 Ascending, descending, Miller–Fisher variant, pure motor
C.	 Ascending, descending, relapsing, pure sensory
D.	 Ascending, relapsing–remitting, pure motor, pure sensory
17.	
Common symptoms of an exacerbation of multiple sclerosis can include which of 
the following symptoms?
A.	 Hyperesthesia, fatigue, and hyporeflexia
B.	 Paresthesias, urinary incontinence, and constipation
C.	 Diplopia, ataxia, and emotional lability
D.	 Ataxia, dementia, and temporal neuralgia
18.	
What is the postulated etiology of multiple sclerosis?
A.	 Heredity
B.	 Autoimmune disorder
C.	 Chemical exposure
D.	 Heavy metal poisoning
19.	
Myasthenia gravis is diagnosed using which of the following tests?
A.	 Weber test
B.	 Rinne test
C.	 Tensilon test
D.	 Clonus test

186  ❙  Section 8
20.	
Which of the following statements about Bell’s palsy is true?
A.	 The patient will have to take long-term steroid treatments
B.	 The patient will have to wear sunglasses when outside
C.	 The patient will develop a secondary petechial rash
D.	 The patient will no longer require the use of thermal packs to the face
21.	
An elderly woman has had several months of declining fine motor skills. 
Her family brought her to the hospital because of a sudden onset of dementia 
and incontinence. Following a CT scan she was diagnosed with normal 
pressure hydrocephalus. What is the most common cause of normal pressure 
hydrocephalus?
A.	 Cerebrovascular accident
B.	 Deep vein thrombosis
C.	 An idiopathic cause
D.	 Recreational drug use
22.	
Your patient has suffered a stroke. He has been evaluated using the NIH stroke 
scale and received a score of 26. This score indicates that this patient has suffered
A.	 A minor stroke
B.	 A severe stroke
C.	 A moderate stroke
D.	 A moderate/severe stroke
23.	
One of the primary purposes of using the NIH scale is to determine whether or not 
the degree of disability from a stroke will merit
A.	 Extended rehabilitation
B.	 A DNR order
C.	 Additional speech therapy
D.	 Use of tPA
24.	
Which of the following is not considered a testable aspect of brain function when 
using the NIH stroke scale?
A.	 Language
B.	 Ethnicity
C.	 Sensation
D.	 Vision
25.	
Your patient is being evaluated for meningitis. The patient is placed supine, 
with hips and knees flexed. When the physician attempts to extend the leg past 
135 degrees, the patient complains of pain. This response is known as
A.	 Cullen’s sign
B.	 Moses’s sign
C.	 Trevell’s sign
D.	 Kernig’s sign
26.	
What patient parameters does the Glasgow Coma Scale measure?
A.	 Verbal response, orientation, and activity
B.	 Eye opening, motor response, and verbal response
C.	 Eye opening, orientation, and motor response
D.	 Verbal response, orientation, and eye opening

Neurology  ❙  187
27.	
What results do you anticipate from a lumbar puncture in a patient with 
suspected Guillain–Barré syndrome?
A.	 The cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) is normal
B.	 The glucose level is down but the CSF is otherwise normal
C.	 There is a high red blood cell count in the CSF
D.	 The CSF protein level is elevated but the cell count is normal
28.	
A female is brought to the PCU directly from her physician’s office by paramedics. 
The primary physician did not obtain a temperature on this patient. She has a 
fever of 105.7°F. The hospitalist called a neurologist to evaluate the patient. He 
performs a lumbar puncture for evaluation of this patient’s cerebrospinal fluid. 
Which of the following results would you expect to see if this patient has bacterial 
meningitis?
A.	 Xanthochromia, elevated CSF glucose, decreased protein
B.	 Decreased CSF specific gravity, increased protein levels, normal cell count
C.	 Elevated specific gravity, cloudy CSF, decreased glucose, elevated WBCs
D.	 Increased protein levels, elevated cell count, CSF glucose
29.	
New AHA guidelines provide for exclusion criteria for patients with ischemic 
strike who otherwise could be treated with rtPA within 3 hours of symptom onset. 
Exclusion criteria would include
A.	 Age > 18 years
B.	 Platelet count > 100,000 mm3
C.	 History of previous intracranial hemorrhage
D.	 diagnosis of ischemic stroke with measurable neurological deficit
30.	
Ascertaining the status spinal reflexes could indicate
A.	 Functional upper motor neurons
B.	 Nonfunctional lower motor neurons
C.	 Nonfunctional upper motor neurons
D.	 Functional lower motor neurons
31.	
A sympathetic response to stimuli results in
A.	 Heightened awareness, increased blood pressure, bronchial dilation, and increased 
glucogenosis
B.	 Dilated pupils, bronchial relaxation, increased gastric motility, and normal urine 
output
C.	 Vasodilatation, increased blood pressure, decreased gastric secretions, and pupils 
at 3 mm
D.	 Relaxation, decreased blood pressure, and bronchial dilation
32.	
Normal intracranial pressure is in the range of
A.	 0–5 mmHg
B.	 4–5 mmHg
C.	 16–20 mmHg
D.	 20–40 mmHg

188  ❙  Section 8
33.	
Which of the following mechanisms decreases intracranial pressure?
A.	 CO2 retention
B.	 PaO2 less than 50 mmHg
C.	 Increased cerebrospinal fluid absorption
D.	 Increased metabolic activity
34.	
What is autonomic hyperreflexia?
A.	 Malfunction of the autonomic nervous system seen with head injury
B.	 Malfunction of the autonomic nervous system seen with spinal cord injury
C.	 Malfunction of the autonomic nervous system seen with pituitary tumor removal
D.	 Malfunction of the autonomic nervous system seen with epidural bleeds
35.	
Your patient has a gunshot wound to his T11-12 spine. Upon assessment you 
find motor paralysis on the same side as the gunshot wound but loss of pain and 
temperature sensation on the opposite side. This phenomenon is known as
A.	 Grey–Turner syndrome
B.	 Cushing’s syndrome
C.	 Syndrome X
D.	 Brown-Sequard syndrome
36.	
What is the most common etiology of meningococcal meningitis?
A.	 Streptococcus pneumonia
B.	 Neisseria meningitidis
C.	 Staphylococcus aureus
D.	 Haemophilius influenza
37.	
What is the hallmark symptom of meningococcal meningitis?
A.	 Headache
B.	 Petechiae
C.	 Malaise
D.	 Vomiting
38.	
What is the proper technique for eliciting a Babinski response?
A.	 Stroke the sole of the foot from side to side
B.	 Stroke the sole of the foot along the lateral sole from the heel up toward the toes 
and across the ball of the foot
C.	 Strike the heel and the ball of the foot
D.	 Strike the Achilles tendon with a reflex hammer
39.	
What effect is seen with a normal response to the doll’s eyes maneuver?
A.	 Disconjugate gaze with head turn
B.	 Conjugate gaze in the opposite direction as the head is turned
C.	 Conjugate gaze in the same direction as the head is turned
D.	 Nystagmus with head turning
40.	
Cerebrospinal fluid is formed in which of the following locations in the brain?
A.	 Lateral ventricles
B.	 Choroid plexus
C.	 Subarachnoid space
D.	 Arachnoid villi

Neurology  ❙  189
41.	
Patients who have left hemispheric involvement will often
A.	 Overestimate their abilities
B.	 Move slowly
C.	 Display impulsive behavior
D.	 Use poor judgment
42.	
Your new patient has been diagnosed with meningitis and is having a lumbar 
puncture. As his progressive care nurse, you know the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) 
should be
A.	 Hazy with a glucose level of 85
B.	 Clear with RBCs present
C.	 Clear and colorless with less than 45 mg/dl of protein
D.	 Clear and colorless with a white blood cell count greater than 150 cells/mm3
43.	
What does the acronym RIND represent?
A.	 Recurrent ischemic neurologic default
B.	 Reversible intracerebral neurologic deficit
C.	 Recurrent intracerebral neurologic default
D.	 Reversible ischemic neurologic deficit
44.	
You are educating your patient and his family about stroke. Part of your talk 
involves modifiable risk factors for stroke. Which of the following are modifiable 
risk factors for stroke?
A.	 Alcohol use, obesity, family history
B.	 Alcohol use, smoking, obesity
C.	 Alcohol use, family history, smoking
D.	 Alcohol use, family history, hypertension
45.	
Your patient has three large aneurysms in his Circle of Willis. What methods are 
used to treat these types of aneurysms?
A.	 Clipping the aneurysms and endovascular coiling
B.	 Clipping of the aneurysms and tPA administration
C.	 Medical management of blood pressure and Amicar infusion
D.	 Amicar infusion and tPA administration
46.	
Which diagnoses should be considered as the cause of any patient’s seizures?
A.	 Alcohol abuse and hypertension
B.	 Panic attack and psychological illness
C.	 Panic attack and transient ischemic attack
D.	 Cardiac arrhythmias and hypertension
47.	
Lab studies for multiple sclerosis identification include
A.	 Cerebrospinal fluid evaluation, sedimentation rate, and fluorescent treponomal 
antibody absorption
B.	 Cerebrospinal fluid evaluation, syphilis, and a drug screen
C.	 Cerebrospinal fluid evaluation, CBC, and HIV
D.	 Cerebrospinal fluid evaluation, lipids, and sedimentation rate

190  ❙  Section 8
48.	
What are the two major types of multiple sclerosis?
A.	 Progressive and relapsing–resolving
B.	 Relapsing–remitting and static
C.	 Progressive and relapsing–relapsing
D.	 Relapsing–remitting and progressive
49.	
What is myasthenia gravis?
A.	 A neuromuscular disorder where myelin is destroyed at varying rates
B.	 A neuromuscular disorder at the neuromuscular junction
C.	 A neuromuscular disorder seen after viral infections
D.	 A fatal neuromuscular disorder of upper motor neurons and lower motor neurons 
causing muscle wasting
50.	
What are some common symptoms of myasthenia gravis?
A.	 Ptosis, proximal muscle weakness, and spasticity
B.	 Dysphonia and atrophy
C.	 Fatigue, proximal muscle weakness, and respiratory weakness
D.	 Generalized weakness, hyperreflexia, and dyspnea
51.	
A 50 year old woman was admitted to PCU for acute coronary syndrome. She also 
has myasthenia gravis and has pyridostigmine in her purse so she does not miss 
a dose. The staff does not know she has this medication. Suddenly, the patient’s 
monitor alarms and indicates a severe bradycardia. You suspect an overdose of 
pyridostigmine. If that is true, the patient’s problem is
A.	 Cholinergic crisis
B.	 Acetylcholine crisis
C.	 Myasthenia gravis crisis
D.	 The bradycardia is related to the acute coronary syndrome, not myasthenia gravis
52.	
Assessment of a patient indicated an abnormal response when the patient was 
tested for pronator drift. This response indicates that the patient probably has
A.	 A forearm fracture
B.	 Myasthenia gravis
C.	 Upper motor neuron disease
D.	 A skull fracture
53.	
When you attempt to passively flex your patient’s neck and touch his chin to his 
chest, he complains of a stiff neck and pain. This response indicates
A.	 Meningeal irritation
B.	 A basilar skull fracture
C.	 Labyrinthitis
D.	 A peritonsilar abscess

Neurology  ❙  191
54.	
A 69 year old man is complaining a left chest pain that radiates to his back. 
He thinks he somehow burned himself. When you remove his shirt there are 
erythematous blisters from the spine to the sternum. The blisters are most likely 
which of the following disorders?
A.	 Herpes zoster infection (shingles)
B.	 Sjögren’s syndrome
C.	 Stevens–Johnson syndrome
D.	 A second-degree burn
55.	
Your patient has been diagnosed with sine shingles. What lab test(s) do you 
anticipate the physician will order?
A.	 CBC, CMP, sedimentation rate
B.	 Varicella-zoster virus culture
C.	 CBC, CMP, varicella titer
D.	 Blood culture, wound swab
56.	
Under which of the following circumstances is a lumbar puncture 
contraindicated?
A.	 Signs of increased cranial pressure of unknown origin
B.	 Signs of an intracranial hemorrhage
C.	 Signs of Guillain–Barré syndrome
D.	 Obtaining a specimen for laboratory study
57.	
If your patient scores 15 on the Adult Glasgow Coma Scale, this result indicates
A.	 The patient has a poor chance of survival physically and neurologically
B.	 The patient has a fair chance of survival neurologically intact
C.	 The patient is likely to survive neurologically intact
D.	 The patient will have no discernible brain function
58.	
Patients who have head injuries with right hemispheric involvement will often
A.	 Use great caution when making decisions
B.	 Tend to underestimate their abilities
C.	 Move slowly
D.	 Display poor judgment
59.	
In a patient with a complete transection of the spinal cord at the C2-3 level, you 
would expect which of the following findings?
A.	 Full sensation of the face, intermittent breathing, shoulder shrug
B.	 Some sensation on the occiput, face, and ears, no diaphragm movement
C.	 Complete loss of sensory and motor function below the level of the injury
D.	 No movement of the diaphragm, shoulder shrug
60.	
What is the highest level of cervical spinal cord injury at which a patient can 
survive without ventilator assistance?
A.	 C3-4
B.	 C7-8
C.	 C5-6
D.	 C1-2

192  ❙  Section 8
61.	
Where does the dermatome for the fifth thoracic spinal nerve cross the anterior 
portion of a patient’s body?
A.	 At the level of the axilla
B.	 At the level of the xyphoid process
C.	 At the level of the clavicular line
D.	 At the nipple line
62.	
Your head-injured patient has developed nystagmus. Nystagmus may be 
defined as
A.	 Eyes deviated to the side of the injury
B.	 A convergent gaze
C.	 Rhythmic tremor or shaking of the eyes
D.	 Divergent gaze
63.	
Today you are precasting a nursing student and demonstrating an assessment 
of pupillary function on your patient. Which of the following statements about 
pupillary function is true?
A.	 Parasympathetic pupil control initiates pupillary dilation
B.	 Parasympathetic control of the pupil is via innervation of the ocular motor 
nerve (CNIII)
C.	 When sympathetic fibers are stimulated, the pupil constricts
D.	 Pinpoint pupils are the result of stimulation of parasympathetic control
64.	
What are the two major types of stroke?
A.	 Ischemic and lacunar
B.	 Ischemic and hemorrhagic
C.	 Hemorrhagic and transient ischemic attack
D.	 Hemorrhagic and reversible ischemic neurologic deficit
65.	
You are caring for a 72 year old man with a left-sided cerebrovascular accident. 
Which symptoms do you expect to see?
A.	 Hearing deficits, left vision problems, left facial droop
B.	 Speech deficits, loss of right visual field, right facial droop
C.	 Loss of right visual field, receptive aphasia, left facial droop
D.	 Speech deficits, left visual field loss, left facial droop
66.	
Which area in the cerebrum controls verbal expression?
A.	 Wernicke’s area
B.	 Broca’s area
C.	 Limbic area
D.	 Pontine area
67.	
A 35 year old woman has Guillain–Barré syndrome. What is the most important 
diagnostic parameter for this patient?
A.	 Blood pressure
B.	 Negative inspiratory force (NIF)
C.	 Pain level
D.	 Cerebrospinal fluid study results

Neurology  ❙  193
68.	
Which of the following descriptions would be the most appropriate for the patient 
with ascending Guillain–Barré syndrome?
A.	 Impaired motor weakness, impaired respiratory function, acute pain
B.	 Impaired respiratory function, impaired nutrition, acute pain
C.	 Impaired motor weakness, impaired bowel function, acute pain
D.	 Impaired respiratory function, impaired bowel function, acute pain
69.	
Death from status epilepticus is usually caused by which of the following 
mechanisms?
A.	 Airway blockage leads to severe cerebral hypoxia
B.	 A hypermetabolic state within the brain
C.	 Falls from seizure causing head trauma
D.	 Aspiration pneumonia
70.	
Your patient is being admitted with the diagnosis of new onset grand mal 
seizures. While moving her to the gurney, you witness a seizure. What is the first 
action you should take to protect this patient?
A.	 Hold the patient down to prevent injury
B.	 Roll the patient to her right side and protect the airway
C.	 Insert an oral airway and call for help
D.	 Hit the Code Blue button
71.	
Your patient had a grand mal seizure lasting 70 seconds. As soon as the seizure 
passed, he was fully awake and asking for food. Given the patient’s reaction to his 
seizure, you should
A.	 Tell the patient you know he faked the seizure
B.	 Feed the patient
C.	 Notify the attending physician and anticipate a psychological evaluation
D.	 Give Dilantin 1 g IV slowly
72.	
Aggrenox is commonly used to treat
A.	 Myocardial infarction
B.	 Cerebrovascular accident
C.	 Pulmonary embolism
D.	 Deep vein thrombosis
73.	
Your patient has been diagnosed with multiple sclerosis (MS). She was admitted 
to the PCU after an acute exacerbation during which she experienced left-side 
weakness. You know that multiple sclerosis is classified as which of the following 
types of disease?
A.	 Motor disorder of the spinal cord
B.	 Demyelinating disorder of the brain and spinal cord
C.	 Motor disorder of the brain and spinal cord
D.	 Demyelinating disease of the spinal cord

194  ❙  Section 8
74.	
As a progressive care nurse, you know the treatment of diabetes insipidus includes 
which of the following interventions?
A.	 Fluid restriction
B.	 Intravenous replacement to cover the increased urine output
C.	 Diuretics
D.	 Demeclocycline
75.	
Which answer below represents one possible cause of autonomic hyperreflexia?
A.	 Diarrhea
B.	 Suctioning
C.	 Constipation
D.	 Warm breeze
76.	
A positive Babinski or plantar reflex indicates
A.	 Malfunction of the hypothalamus
B.	 Normal neurologic functioning
C.	 Upper motor neuron lesion of the pyramidal tract
D.	 Lower motor neuron lesion of the pyramidal tract
77.	
A young woman was injured in a motor vehicle accident, and she is 
demonstrating decerebrate posturing. As her nurse, you know decerebrate 
posturing displays as
A.	 One arm flexed, one flaccid, legs flaccid
B.	 Both arms fully extended and internally rotated, legs flaccid
C.	 Both arms fully extended and internally rotated, legs fully extended with toes 
pointed
D.	 Flaccid arms and legs extended
78.	
Your patient suddenly develops right pupil dilation. What significance does this 
change indicate?
A.	 Basilar skull fracture
B.	 Uncal herniation
C.	 Brainstem herniation
D.	 Cerebrovascular accident
79.	
Your patient was an unrestrained driver in a motor vehicle crash where he struck 
and fractured the windshield. He has a left frontal lobe injury. Which of the 
following symptoms would you expect in this patient?
A.	 Hearing and balance impairment
B.	 Sensory and memory problems
C.	 Personality changes, poor short-term memory
D.	 Loss of motor function, hearing problems
80.	
What differentiates a transient ischemic attack (TIA) from a reversible ischemic 
neurologic deficit (RIND)?
A.	 TIA lasts less than 24 hours, a RIND lasts more than 24 hours
B.	 TIA lasts less than 6 hours, a RIND lasts more than 48 hours
C.	 TIA lasts more than 24 hours, a RIND lasts less than 24 hours
D.	 TIA lasts less than 24 hours, a RIND lasts less than 6 hours

Neurology  ❙  195
81.	
What volume of cerebrospinal fluid is produced each day?
A.	 1000–1200 ml
B.	 600–700 ml
C.	 400–800 ml
D.	 800–900 ml
82.	
Your patient has an old injury to C5. He has a blood pressure of 215/129 and his 
pulse is 175. What is the cause of his symptoms?
A.	 Autonomic dysreflexia
B.	 Hypertension
C.	 Spinal shock
D.	 Neurogenic shock
83.	
Cerebral aneurysms are most often located in the
A.	 Internal carotid arteries
B.	 Bifurcations of the anterior–posterior Circle of Willis
C.	 Temporal artery
D.	 Vertebral arteries
84.	
The most common first symptom of a rupturing cerebral aneurysm is
A.	 Fever
B.	 Nuchal rigidity
C.	 Nausea and vomiting
D.	 An explosive headache, often “worst headache of my life.”
85.	
Nursing management of a patient with a cerebral aneurysm includes
A.	 Ambulation, monitoring of vital and neurologic signs
B.	 Glasgow Coma Scale assessments and monitoring for cerebral vascular spasm
C.	 Maintaining normal intracranial pressure
D.	 Maintaining systolic blood pressure less than 120 mmHg
86.	
What is the formula for cerebral perfusion pressure (CPP)?
A.	 CPP = SBP + MAP and ICP
B.	 CPP = MAP – ICP
C.	 CPP = ICP – MAP
D.	 CPP = MAP – CVP and ICP
87.	
The goal for CPP is a pressure of
A.	 50–80 mmHg
B.	 20–40 mmHg
C.	 10–20 mmHg
D.	 40–60 mmHg
88.	
Spinal shock is defined as a(n)
A.	 Areflexia at or below the spinal cord injury
B.	 Hyperreflexia and spasticity after spinal cord injury
C.	 Areflexia that rises above the site of injury
D.	 Spasticity below injury site

196  ❙  Section 8
89.	
Neurogenic shock differs from spinal shock in which of the following ways?
A.	 Neurogenic shock is a less severe form of shock with spinal cord injury that causes 
a brief decrease in blood pressure
B.	 Neurogenic shock is a more severe form of shock that causes cardiovascular 
­collapse in patients with a spinal cord injury above T6
C.	 Neurogenic shock is a more severe shock that increases paralysis and death
D.	 Neurogenic shock is a more severe form of shock that occurs within hours after 
a spinal cord injury and causes increased sympathetic outflow
90.	
Arteriovenous malformations (AVMs) are
A.	 Commonly found misshapen blood vessels
B.	 More common in women than in men
C.	 A complex tangle of misshapen blood vessels susceptible to hemorrhage
D.	 Never seen in children
91.	
The hallmark symptom of encephalopathy from any cause is
A.	 An altered mental state
B.	 Liver failure
C.	 Renal failure
D.	 Infection
92.	
Treatment of encephalopathy includes
A.	 Antibiotics
B.	 High-dose steroids
C.	 Treating the underlying cause first
D.	 Electrolyte replacement
93.	
Diagnostic tests for a patient with encephalopathy could include
A.	 BMP, CRP, and CXR
B.	 Blood tests, CSF evaluation, and EEG
C.	 EEG and Dilantin levels
D.	 Lumbar puncture and cervical ultrasound
94.	
What is the effect of Cushing’s syndrome in a patient with increased intracranial 
pressure?
A.	 Increased systolic blood pressure, widening pulse pressure, bradycardia
B.	 Elevated blood pressure, narrow pulse pressure, tachycardia
C.	 Bradycardia, low blood pressure, narrow pulse pressure
D.	 Tachycardia, increased systolic blood pressure, widening pulse pressure
95.	
Which of the following mechanisms decreases intracranial pressure?
A.	 CO2 retention
B.	 PaO2 less than 50 mmHg
C.	 Increased cerebrospinal fluid absorption
D.	 Increased metabolic activity

Neurology  ❙  197
96.	
The newest admission to your unit was admitted with a diagnosis of a closed head 
injury has a Foley catheter. In 1 hour, her urine output increased from 30 ml/hour 
to 1000 ml of very pale, clear urine. As a progressive care nurse, you know the 
increase in urine output is probably due to
A.	 A volume shift from the third space
B.	 Syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone
C.	 Diabetes insipidus
D.	 Diuresis from steroids

198  ❙  Section 8
SECTION 8: NEUROLOGY ANSWERS
1.	
Correct Answer: D
When considering adding additional medications or treatments to the care of a 
patient receiving palliative care, it is important to assess the current medications 
for the ability to stop medication(s) prior to adding new medications or treatments. 
A current medication may be causing symptoms that are contributing to the patient’s 
suffering. Halting a current medication or treatment may relieve the symptoms 
without the addition of new pharmacologic intervention. With any new medication, 
even if previously taken, the patient should always be monitored for reaction, adverse 
effects and if the medication is acting as expected and there are no interactions with 
other medications or treatments. Involvement of a pharmacist as part of the palliative 
care team would be crucial for identify medication interactions prior to administration 
and may be able to suggest alternates that may be a better choice to meet overall 
treatment goals. The overall goals of the treatment team, including patient wishes, 
should be taken into account prior to starting any new medications or treatments. 
Only evaluating the goals of one element of the palliative care team, may exclude 
critical core goals and exceed patient threshold for intervention. (Palliative Care 
Pocket Consultant, Ohio)
2.	
Correct answer: C
Uncontrolled hypertension is the most common cause of stroke in the United States. 
More than 360,000 strokes per year are due to hypertension. Stroke can be the 
first symptom of hypertension for many patients. Diabetes mellitus can lead to 
cardiovascular disease and hypertension, but it is less common than hypertension 
alone.
3.	
Correct answer: C
Diabetes mellitus causes accelerated atherosclerosis in the large arteries of the cerebral 
circulation, thereby narrowing the lumen and increasing the risk for stroke.
4.	
Correct answer: B
Uncontrolled hypertension is most likely to cause a lacunar stroke. A lacunar 
infarction is due to thrombosis of the small arteries that penetrate the cerebrum. 
It causes facial, arm, and leg deficits.
5.	
Correct answer: C
In most people, the dominant side of the brain is the left cerebral hemisphere and is 
the most likely site for a cerebrovascular accident.
6.	
Correct answer: B
Prevention of aspiration should be the priority of the PCU nurse. Prevention of 
decubitus ulcers, contractures, and depression are also a part of caring for a patient 
with a cerebrovascular accident, but the ABCs (airway, breathing, circulation) are 
always the first priority.
7.	
Correct answer: C
A left temporal cerebrovascular accident will likely cause receptive aphasia. This 
patient has had a stroke affecting Wernicke’s area in the temporal lobe, which affects 
verbal reception. This causes an inability to interpret speech and can also affect 
comprehension of written words.

Neurology  ❙  199
8.	
Correct answer: D
Droplet precautions are indicated for suspected bacterial meningitis for the first 
48 hours of antimicrobial therapy. This type of isolation is used for those types of 
infections spread when the patient talks, coughs, or sneezes. Reverse isolation is used 
to protect the immunocompromised patient. Contact isolation is for those patients 
with conditions such as MRSA or VRE.
9.	
Correct answer: B
Protein in the CSF is always increased with Guillain–Barré due to the destruction 
of the myelin sheath. Because Guillain–Barré is an autoimmune disorder, WBCs, 
abnormal glucose levels, and bacteria would not be present in the CSF.
10.	
Correct answer: A
Guillain–Barré patients experience motor weakness, impaired respiratory function, 
and acute pain. The pain is due to accentuated sympathetic response secondary to loss 
of parasympathetic counterbalance.
11.	
Correct answer: C
Autonomic dysfunction in Guillain–Barré is caused by lack of balance in the 
autonomic nervous system. The sympathetic nervous system is unopposed, causing 
heightened sensitivity and over-response to minor stimuli, causing pain.
12.	
Correct answer: B
Respiratory status and neurologic signs are the most important nursing management 
issues, especially during the early onset of the demylenating process.
13.	
Correct answer: B
Risk for impaired respiratory function is the most important nursing diagnosis. Other 
nursing diagnoses include acute pain, risk for impaired verbal communication, and 
potential for neuromuscular weakness related to demyelination.
14.	
Correct answer: D
According to the 2015 American Heart Association guidelines for CPR and ECC, 
exclusion criteria for treatment of patients with acute ischemic stroke with rtPA within 
3 to 4.5 hours from symptom onset would not include diagnosis of ischemic stroke 
with a measurable neurological defect. Exclusion criteria would include a severe stroke 
NIHSS score of > 25, oral anticoagulant use regardless of the INR, and a history of 
diabetes and a prior ischemic stroke.
15.	
Correct answer: C
This patient is angry at her diagnosis and afraid she will suffer the same fate as her 
mother. The five stages of grief identified by Kubler-Ross in 1969 are denial, anger, 
bargaining, depression, and acceptance. The patient can move through the stages in 
any order and can revisit a stage at any time. The nurse should try to encourage the 
patient to express her feelings. The physician should also be notified, and the patient 
should receive counseling. Antidepressants may be considered.

200  ❙  Section 8
16.	
Correct answer: B
Ascending, descending, Miller–Fisher variant, and pure motor are the four types of 
Guillain–Barré syndrome. Ascending is the classic form of weakness and numbness 
that starts in the legs and moves up the trunk to involve the cranial nerves in some 
patients. The weakness is symmetric. Descending affects the cranial nerves first and 
the weakness progresses caudally. Respiratory failure is a major problem for these 
patients. Miller-Fisher variant is a very rare form that has a triad of symptoms that 
includes ophthalmoplegia, areflexia, and pronounced ataxia. The pure motor form of 
Guillain–Barré is identical to ascending, but there is limited sensory involvement and 
therefore no pain.
17.	
Correct answer: C
Multiple sclerosis produces a wide variety of symptoms depending on the white matter 
being affected by the exacerbation. These symptoms include both motor and sensory 
problems. Symptoms include ataxia, Babinski reflex, vision disturbances (for example, 
diplopia), clumsiness, emotional lability, fatigue, paresthesias, paralysis, hyperactive 
deep tendon reflexes, loss of proprioception, loss of vibratory sense, impotence in men, 
and urinary problems in women.
18.	
Correct answer: B
Although the exact etiology of multiple sclerosis is unknown, it is thought to be an 
autoimmune disorder triggered by environmental exposure or viral illness. There are 
clusters in Northern European families, and there is a higher incidence in people who 
work with manganese.
19.	
Correct answer: C
The tensilon test is often used to test for myasthenia gravis because of the ease of 
administration. The medication has a quick onset and half-life. Ten milligrams are 
given intravenously. If there is improvement in a weak muscle, it is considered a 
positive tensilon test. The Weber and Rinne tests are for hearing. Clonus is a reflex 
used to test spasticity.
20.	
Correct answer: B
The patient with Bell’s palsy will need to wear sunglasses when outside and use 
artificial tears because the blink reflex is absent. Steroids are often used short term for 
this condition. Thermal packs, especially cold, may exacerbate the condition.
21.	
Correct answer: C
The most common cause of normal pressure hydrocephalus is idiopathic 
(unknown). For most patients the cause is idiopathic. The mnemonic for normal 
pressure hydrocephalus (NPH) is “wet, wobbly, and wacky” due to the symptoms of 
incontinence, instability, and dementia. This condition can be successfully treated 
with a ventriculoperitoneal (VP) shunt.
22.	
Correct answer: B
The patient received a score of 26 after an evaluation for a stroke. This value indicates 
a severe stroke. The NIH scale rankings are
0 = no stroke
1–4 = minor stroke
5–15 = moderate stroke
15–20 = moderate/severe stroke
21–42 = severe stroke

Neurology  ❙  201
23.	
Correct answer: D
One of the primary purposes of using the NIH scale is to determine whether or not 
the degree of disability will merit use of tPA. The NIHSS also provides objective 
comparisons of efficacy between treatment and rehabilitation modalities.
24.	
Correct answer: B
Ethnicity is not considered a testable aspect of brain function when using the NIH 
stroke scale. Components of the NIHSS include testing for language, sensation, vision, 
consciousness, movement, and speech.
25.	
Correct answer: D
When the patient is placed supine, with hips and knees flexed, and the physician 
attempts to extend the leg past 135 degrees, the patient complains of pain. This 
response is known as Kernig’s sign and indicates meningeal irritation.
26.	
Correct answer: B
The Glasgow Coma Scale measures eye opening, motor response, and verbal response. 
It rates each with a total scale from 3 to 15, with 15 being a fully responsive patient. 
A score of 6–7 is comatose level. The longer that the patient remains in the lower score 
ranges, the worse the projected outcome.
27.	
Correct answer: D
The cerebrospinal fluid in a patient with Guillain–Barré syndrome generally shows 
elevated protein but a normal cell count. A patient with meningitis or a subarachnoid 
hemorrhage would present with a decreased glucose level in the CSF. A high red blood 
cell count would be indicative of an intracranial hemorrhage such as a ruptured 
aneurysm.
28.	
Correct answer: C
With meningitis, the specific gravity is elevated, the CSF cloudy due to the infection, 
and the white blood cell count elevated. The glucose would be decreased in this case. 
Xanthochromia is a yellow, orange, or brown color of the CSF due to the breakdown of 
RBCs from a previous hemorrhage and is not seen with meningitis.
29.	
Correct answer: C
New AHA 2015 guidelines provide for exclusion criteria for patients with ischemic 
strike who otherwise could be treated with rtPA within 3 hours of symptom onset. 
Exclusion criteria would include a history of previous intracranial hemorrhage. 
A platelet count greater than 100,000 mm3 is not an exclusion criteria; however a 
platelet count of less than 100,000 mm3 would be an exclusion criteria. Age > 18 years 
and a diagnosis of ischemic stroke with a measurable neurological deficit are both 
inclusion criteria.
30.	
Correct answer: D
The knee jerk, also known as the patellar reflex, is an example of a functional lower 
motor neuron. These reflexes are also known as deep tendon reflexes. The nerve 
impulse makes an arc from the tendon to the sensory portion of the spinal cord to the 
motor root and back to the patella, causing extension of the lower leg.

202  ❙  Section 8
31.	
Correct answer: A
A sympathetic response to a stimuli results in heightened awareness, increased blood 
pressure, bronchial dilation, and increased glucogenosis. Other responses include 
dilated pupils for increased visual acuity, increased heart rate, increased myocardial 
contractility, increased blood pressure, increased respiratory rate, decreased gastric 
motility, decreased gastric secretion, decreased urine output, decreased insulin 
production, and decreased renal blood flow.
32.	
Correct answer: B
The normal range for intracranial pressure is 4 to 15 mmHg.
33.	
Correct answer: C
Cerebrospinal fluid absorbed at an increased rate decreases intracranial pressure. 
CO2 retention, PaO2 less than 50 mmHg, and increased metabolic activity contribute 
to increased intracranial pressure.
34.	
Correct answer: B
Autonomic hyperreflexia is a potentially life-threatening response to a minor stimuli 
seen after spinal cord injury at T6 or higher. It occurs after the initial spinal shock has 
resolved. Symptoms can include severe hypertension, dysrhythmias, severe headache, 
and photophobia.
35.	
Correct answer: D
Brown Sequard causes ipsilateral (same side) motor paralysis and contralateral 
(opposite side) loss of pain and temperature sensation. This syndrome occurs because 
of the way the pyramidal tracts cross in the spinal column.
36.	
Correct answer: B
Neisseria meningitidis is the causative agent for meningococcal meningitis. Streptococcus 
pneumonia causes pneumococcal meningitis. Haemophilius influenza causes 
Haemophilius meningitis. Staphylococcus aureus is not likely to cause meningitis but 
can cause infection in the brain with ventriculostomy drains or bolts.
37.	
Correct answer: B
Petechiae are the hallmark symptom of meningococcal meningitis. Headache, 
malaise, and vomiting can be seen with any form of meningitis.
38.	
Correct answer: B
The proper technique is stroking the lateral sole of the foot from the heel up to and 
across the ball of the foot. It should be done in one motion with a relatively sharp 
instrument like the end of a reflex hammer.
39.	
Correct answer: B
With a normal doll’s eyes or oculocephalic reflex, the eyes appear to move to the 
opposite direction from the head turn. For example, if the head is turned quickly to 
the patient’s left, the eyes normally appear to move to the far right side. If the reflex 
is absent, the eyes appear fixed and do not move. This is a poor neurologic sign. It 
represents pontine and midbrain damage. It may be used in determining brain death.
40.	
Correct answer: B
Cerebrospinal fluid is formed by the choroid plexus of the third ventricle. The arachnoid 
villi, projections from the subarachnoid space, reabsorb the cerebrospinal fluid.

Neurology  ❙  203
41.	
Correct answer: B
Patients who have left hemispheric involvement will often move slowly with caution 
and underestimate their abilities.
42.	
Correct answer: C
The cerebrospinal fluid should be clear and colorless with a protein count of 
16–45 mg/dl, WBCs 0–5 cells/mm3, and the glucose level should be approximately 
80% of the serum glucose level.
43.	
Correct answer: D
RIND is a reversible ischemic neurologic deficit. It is similar to a TIA, but symptoms 
last more than 24 hours and the patient recovers completely.
44.	
Correct answer: B
Alcohol use, smoking, and obesity are all modifiable risk factors in preventing stroke.
45.	
Correct answer: A
Clipping of the aneurysm and endovascular coiling are the two common methods 
of managing aneurysms in the Circle of Willis. tPA is a thrombolytic and would 
not be given to this patient. Controlling the blood pressure involves maintaining a 
good cerebral perfusion pressure to reduce the risk of vasospasm. Amicar inhibits 
plasminogen activator, allowing fibrin production.
46.	
Correct answer: C
Panic attacks, transient ischemic attacks, cardiac arrhythmias, and syncope are some 
causes of seizures.
47.	
Correct answer: A
Cerebrospinal fluid results will show a negative syphilis (RPR), abnormal colloid 
gold curve, increased IgG, myelin debris, and slightly increased protein. Other tests 
include fluorescent treponomal antibody absorption (FTA-ABS), sedimentation rate, 
HTLV-1 serology, and check for vascular disorders. Neurologic testing includes evoked 
responses that are highly predicative for MS. MRI shows plaques as white spots in the 
brain.
48.	
Correct answer: D
Relapsing–remitting and progressive are the most common forms of multiple 
sclerosis. The frequency of relapsing–remitting episodes is related to stress and illness. 
Progressive may follow a continuous but slow route or it may advance quickly to the 
patient’s death. Relapsing–remitting may worsen to progressive MS.
49.	
Correct answer: B
Myasthenia gravis is a pure motor disorder that occurs when an autoimmune 
response at the neuromuscular junction destroys acetylcholine receptors on the muscle 
membrane.
50.	
Correct answer: C
Most myasthenia gravis symptoms deal with the weakness caused by the lack of 
acetylcholine receptors at the neuromuscular junction. These symptoms include ptosis, 
diplopia, facial weakness, dysphagia, dysarthria, fatigue, neck weakness, proximal 
limb weakness, respiratory weakness, and generalized weakness.

204  ❙  Section 8
51.	
Correct answer: A
Cholinergic crisis is a life-threatening problem with any overdose, accident or 
otherwise. It causes bradycardia, severe weakness, cardiac arrest, and occasionally 
respiratory arrest.
52.	
Correct answer: C
An abnormal response when testing for pronator drift indicates that the patient may 
have an upper motor neuron disease or weakness in the shoulder girdle. To elicit 
this response, have the patient stand for 20–30 seconds with both arms outstretched 
forward, palms up, and eyes closed. Tell the patient to hold that position while you tap 
the hands vigorously downward. The patient will not be able to maintain extension 
and supination and will drift into pronation.
53.	
Correct answer: A
When you attempt to passively flex your patient’s neck and touch his chin to his 
chest, he complains of a stiff neck (nuchal rigidity) and pain. This response indicates 
meningeal irritation.
54.	
Correct answer: A
Shingles on the trunk are characterized by lesions that follow a dermatome. 
Dermatomes are the paths innervated by the spinal nerves. Shingles may be found 
anywhere on the body, including inside the mouth.
55.	
Correct answer: B
Labs are often not required for shingles, but if the patient presents with sine shingles 
(symptoms without rash), the varicella-zoster viral culture may be necessary. Unless 
a secondary infection is suspected, blood cultures and a CBC would not be done. 
A varicella titer only shows immunity to varicella, not an acute illness.
56.	
Correct answer: A
Contraindications for a lumbar puncture (LP) are signs of increased intracranial 
pressure, infection in the area where the LP would be performed, and anticoagulant 
therapy. If an LP is done when there is increased intracranial pressure, the sudden 
change in pressure in the cerebrospinal space can cause herniation of the brainstem 
and death.
57.	
Correct answer: C
If your patient scores 15 on the Adult Glasgow Coma Scale, the patient is likely to 
survive neurologically intact. GCS scoring is as follows:
Glasgow Coma Scale (Adult)
Best Eye Response
Best Verbal Response
Best Motor Response
No eye opening (1)
Eye opening to pain (2)
Eye opening to verbal 
command (3)
Eyes open 
spontaneously (4)
No verbal response (1)
Incomprehensible sounds (2)
Inappropriate words (3)
Confused (4)
Oriented (5)
No motor response (1)
Extension to pain (2)
Flexion to pain (3)
Withdrawal from pain (4)
Localizing pain (5)
Obeys commands (6)

Neurology  ❙  205
58.	
Correct answer: D
Patients who have right hemispheric involvement will often display poor judgment, 
euphoria, impulsive behavior, and overestimate their abilities.
59.	
Correct answer: B
The patient with a high cervical transection of the spinal cord can present with 
the following: sensation of the occiput, face, and ears; there is no diaphragmatic 
movement; no voluntary movement below the injury; and there is loss of bowel and 
bladder function. Patients with this level of injury often die due to pneumonia.
60.	
Correct answer: C
At C5-6 there is enough diaphragmatic movement to allow for adequate respiratory 
function. Injuries above C5-6 require some level of mechanical ventilation.
61.	
Correct answer: D
The fifth thoracic spinal nerve innervates at the nipple line. The dermatome 
innervates not only the skin but the organs, muscles, and tendons along the same 
path. It is important to know the dermatomes when dealing with spinal injuries 
because they help locate the level of the injury.
62.	
Correct answer: C
Nystagmus, a rhythmic tremor or shaking of the eyes, indicates pressure or damage to 
cranial nerve VIII (acoustic) in the vestibular portion. Shaking is usually stronger on 
one side and may occur in any of the cardinal eye directions.
63.	
Correct answer: B
Today you are precasting a nursing student and demonstrating an assessment of 
pupillary function on your patient. The true statement about pupillary function 
is that parasympathetic control of the pupil is via innervation of the ocular motor 
nerve (CNIII).
64.	
Correct answer: B
The two major types of stroke are ischemic and hemorrhagic. Hemorrhagic strokes are 
usually caused by hypertension and may include aneurysm rupture. Ischemic strokes 
are usually caused by an occlusion of an atherosclerotic cerebral artery secondary to 
an embolus or occlusion.
65.	
Correct answer: B
A left-side cerebrovascular accident causes right-side deficits because of crossing of the 
cerebrospinal tracts in the brain and spinal cord. You would expect the patient to have 
speech deficits, loss of right visual field, and right facial droop.
66.	
Correct answer: B
Broca’s area at the lower edge of the frontal lobe is responsible for verbal expression. 
A deficit in this area is called expressive aphasia. The patient can comprehend what is 
said but lacks the ability to form the words due to loss of motor skills.
67.	
Correct answer: B
The negative inspiratory force measures the ability of the patient to take a deep breath 
to -28 mmHg. If the effort is less than -28 mmHg, the patient should be evaluated for 
intubation to prevent respiratory arrest.

206  ❙  Section 8
68.	
Correct answer: A
Guillain–Barré patients experience motor weakness, impaired respiratory function, 
and acute pain. The pain is due to accentuated sympathetic response secondary to loss 
of parasympathetic counterbalance.
69.	
Correct answer: B
Death from status epilepticus is usually caused by a hypermetabolic state within the 
brain. Status epilepticus results in decreased oxygen and glucose levels in the brain, 
leading to the release of glutamate. The increased glutamate causes the influx of 
calcium into the neurons, destabilizing them electronically, which leads to cell injury 
and death.
70.	
Correct answer: B
The best action is to turn the patient to her right side and protect her airway. Because 
the seizure has already started, it would be impossible to safely insert an oral airway. 
Never try to restrain a patient having a seizure. Hitting the Code Blue button is 
certainly an option, but it doesn’t help the patient immediately. Precipitating events, 
aura, onset, duration, nursing actions, and postictal state should be included in the 
nursing notes.
71.	
Correct answer: C
This patient should be given a psychological evaluation. If he had a genuine grand 
mal seizure, the postictal state is expected to last several hours, and the patient would 
not be able to request food.
72.	
Correct answer: B
Aggrenox is a persantine-based medication given in twice daily dosing for stroke or 
TIA patients.
73.	
Correct answer: B
Multiple sclerosis is a demyelinating disorder of the white matter of the brain and 
spinal cord. It can be intermittent, progressive, or relapsing. It follows an acute or 
a progressive course. It is the major cause of disability in young adults aged 16–40. 
Multiple sclerosis affects females more than males.
74.	
Correct answer: B
Treatment of diabetes insipidus includes intravenous replacement with D5W/½ NS 
with 20 mEq of potassium is titrated to replace hourly urine output. Other therapies 
include DDAVP (desmopressin) nasal spray or a pitressin infusion. Strict I&O and daily 
weights, monitoring electrolytes, and serum and urine osmolalities are also done.
75.	
Correct answer: C
Autonomic hyperreflexia, also known as autonomic dysreflexia, is caused by 
numerous stimuli such as bowel or bladder dysfunction, cool breezes, a clogged 
urinary catheter, and constipation.
76.	
Correct answer: C
A positive Babinski or plantar reflex is a sign of an upper motor neuron lesion. It can 
be seen with spinal cord compression, head injury, and stroke. It is a pathologic sign.

Neurology  ❙  207
77.	
Correct answer: C
Decerebrate posturing displays as both arms fully extended and internally rotated, 
legs fully extended with toes pointed. Decerebrate posturing demonstrates pressure on 
the midbrain and pons. It is a very poor neurologic sign, especially if it continues for 
more than 4 hours.
78.	
Correct answer: B
Ipsilateral, or same side, pupil dilation is the symptom seen with uncal herniation 
across the tentorium. The tentorium is a fold of dura mater that supports the temporal 
and occipital lobes. This herniation puts pressure directly on CN III, causing pupil 
dilation.
79.	
Correct answer: C
Personality changes and poor short-term memory are expected symptoms in a patient 
with left frontal lobe injury. The frontal lobe is responsible for personality, memory, 
motor function, Broca’s area, and critical thinking skills.
80.	
Correct answer: A
TIAs typically last a very short time, sometimes less than an hour but no longer 
than 24 hours, and there are no neurologic deficits. With a RIND the symptoms last 
more than 24 hours, but the patient still has a complete recovery. Both are possible 
precursors of a major stroke within a year.
81.	
Correct answer: C
About 400–800 ml of cerebrospinal fluid is produced daily by the choroid plexus in 
the third ventricle. There is approximately 125–150 ml circulating in the ventricular 
system and spinal column at one time.
82.	
Correct answer: A
This patient has autonomic dysreflexia also known as autonomic hyperreflexia. This 
is a life-threatening exaggerated sympathetic response to minor stimuli. The stimuli 
may be a drafty room, a full bladder, or a bowel obstruction. Treating the cause will 
fix the problem. The symptoms include hypertension, severe headache, tachycardia or 
bradycardia, and profuse sweating or flushing.
83.	
Correct answer: B
Eighty-five percent of cerebral aneurysms are located at the anterior bifurcations of the 
Circle of Willis and 15% at the posterior bifurcations.
84.	
Correct answer: D
An explosive headache, often “worst headache of my life,” is a common statement 
from patients suffering from rupturing cerebral aneurysms. It frequently is the last 
thing patients say before losing consciousness.
85.	
Correct answer: B
Glasgow Coma Scale assessment is imperative and is helpful in monitoring for 
vascular spasm, a potentially life-threatening problem for a patient with a cerebral 
aneurysm. Vascular spasm occurs secondary to meningeal irritation from the blood in 
the subarachnoid space.

208  ❙  Section 8
86.	
Correct answer: B
Mean arterial pressure minus intracranial pressures equals cerebral perfusion 
pressure. Cerebral perfusion pressure is a calculated measurement of the pressure 
gradient that allows blood to flow to the brain. The CPP may also be calculated using 
the CVP instead of the ICP because it is a measure of vascular resistance.
87.	
Correct answer: A
As cerebral perfusion pressure is a calculated measurement of the pressure gradient 
that allows blood to flow to the brain, the goal is a CPP of 50–80 mmHg.
88.	
Correct answer: A
Spinal shock is defined as an areflexia at or below the spinal cord injury. Spinal shock 
can occur hours to weeks after an injury to the spinal cord. The patient develops 
flaccidity, loss of sensation, and loss of bowel and bladder function. Hyperreflexia and 
spasticity occurs after spinal shock resolves.
89.	
Correct answer: B
Neurogenic shock is a much more severe form of shock that may occur with spinal 
cord injuries at or above T6. The autonomic dysfunction causes increased vagal tone, 
which results in severe bradycardia, decreased cardiac output, peripheral dilatation, 
and decreased SVR.
90.	
Correct answer: C
AVMs are a complex tangle of misshapen blood vessels susceptible to hemorrhage. 
AVMs lack the normal blood flow from arterial to venous flow and do not go through 
a capillary bed. This high-pressure flow makes them more likely to bleed. AVMs are 
not common, occur slightly more often in men, and are the most common cause of 
stroke in children under 12 years of age.
91.	
Correct answer: A
An altered mental state is the primary symptom of encephalopathy. The definition 
of encephalopathy is an umbrella term for a collection of symptoms of other 
illnesses. This can include liver or renal failure, infection, brain tumors, increasing 
hydrocephalus, and environmental hazard exposure.
92.	
Correct answer: C
Because there are so many potential causes, encephalopathy must be treated at its 
cause first. Examples of treatment include antibiotics, hemodialysis, and electrolyte 
replacement.
93.	
Correct answer: B
Blood tests for a patient with encephalopathy can include CMP, CBC, and 
sedimentation rate, as well as tests for specific illnesses or toxins. Other tests may be 
done such as a lumbar puncture to rule out neurologic infection. Additional tests 
include electroencephalogram (EEG) and imaging studies of specific structures—such 
as hepatic or renal imaging.

Neurology  ❙  209
94.	
Correct answer: A
The effect of Cushing’s syndrome in a patient with increased intracranial pressure 
is increased systolic blood pressure, widening pulse pressure, and bradycardia. 
Cushing’s syndrome is also known as the triad of symptoms. These are late indicators 
of a serious deterioration of neurologic status. This patient is at very high risk for 
herniation and death.
95.	
Correct answer: C
Cerebrospinal fluid absorbed at an increased rate decreases intracranial pressure. 
CO2 retention, PaO2 less than 50 mmHg, and increased metabolic activity contribute to 
increased intracranial pressure.
96.	
Correct answer: C
A sudden increase in urine output from 30 to 1000 ml/hour of pale, clear urine 
indicates diabetes insipidus. Diabetes insipidus (DI) is a serious decrease in antidiuretic 
hormone (ADH). The most common causes of neurogenic DI are closed head injury 
and posterior pituitary tumor removal. ADH is produced by the posterior pituitary 
gland. Closed head injury and cerebral edema lead to pressure on the pituitary gland, 
thus decreasing ADH. Other common causes of DI are lung cancer (small or oat cell 
carcinoma), leukemia, and lymphoma.


❙
  211 
❙
Section 9
Gastrointestinal
SECTION 9: GASTROINTESTINAL QUESTIONS
1.	
Your patient with stage IV esophageal cancer that has metastasized to the liver 
and bone is awaiting discharge home under hospice. During your assessment, the 
patient is short of breath with cough, has constipation, and vomits when eating 
solid foods. The patient complains that what bothers him most is he dislikes the 
vanilla-flavored shakes that comes on his tray. What would be a high priority for 
this patient?
A.	 Ensure that respiratory administers his breathing treatments every 4 hours as 
ordered
B.	 Call the physician to add a cough suppressant to the patient’s medication list
C.	 Call dietary to request a different flavored shake or if a flavor additive can be 
added
D.	 Ensure that the patient has a stool softener added to the medication list
2.	
Your patient has been diagnosed with chronic liver disease. In addition to a 
venous hum or murmur, you may also note which of the following findings 
during abdominal auscultation?
A.	 Aortic bruit
B.	 Hepatic bruit
C.	 Iliac artery bruit
D.	 Renal artery bruit
3.	
Your patient was involved in a motor vehicle accident with blunt abdominal 
trauma related to the seatbelt placement. He begins complaining of severe 
abdominal pain around the epigastric area that is knife-like and twisting. You 
also note a low-grade fever with diaphoresis, abdominal distension, decreased 
bowel tones, and rebound tenderness. You suspect this patient may be suffering 
from
A.	 Pancreatitis
B.	 Acute liver failure
C.	 Gastrointestinal bleeding
D.	 Abdominal bruising
4.	
A nonalcohol-abusing man was diagnosed with portal hypertension and direct 
variceal bleeding. His wedge hepatic venous pressure is less than portal pressure, 
due to portal vein thrombosis. His symptoms may be due to
A.	 Chronic active hepatitis
B.	 Umbilical vein catheterization as a neonate
C.	 Metastatic carcinoma
D.	 Tuberculosis

212  ❙  Section 9
5.	
A patient with chronic pancreatitis was admitted for respiratory distress and 
pulmonary edema. These symptoms are due to
A.	 Pulmonary capillary endothelial damage related to phospholipase
B.	 Bronchospasms related to stress
C.	 Aspiration
D.	 Atrial fibrillation
6.	
You are admitting a patient after a head injury. As you perform your assessment, 
you note a stoma to the right iliac fossa in the lower abdomen. There are soft, 
scattered bowel tones. Output is loose, brownish-tinged, and without form. You 
document your findings as a(n)
A.	 Sigmoid colostomy
B.	 Ileostomy
C.	 Loop colostomy
D.	 Ascending colostomy
7.	
Which of the following types of bowel obstructions leads to infarction or 
strangulation?
A.	 Acute
B.	 Subacute
C.	 Chronic
D.	 Intermittent
8.	
A middle-aged male patient has been medically treated for GERD for the past 
three years. He is now being treated for aspiration pneumonia due to increasing 
difficulty swallowing and vomiting. He admits to noncompliance with his GERD 
medication regime and was diagnosed with Barrett’s esophagus 6 months ago. He 
has also been diagnosed with esophageal cancer. Which surgical procedure will 
he likely undergo to remove his cancer?
A.	 Whipple
B.	 Modified Whipple
C.	 Esophagectomy
D.	 Esophagastrectomy
9.	
The most frequent cause of parasitic gastroenteritis in the United States is
A.	 Giardia lamblia
B.	 Clostridium difficile
C.	 Entamoeba histolytica
D.	 Cryptosporidium
10.	
An antimicrobial drug should improve diarrhea caused by
A.	 E. coli
B.	 Staphylococcus aureus
C.	 Shigella
D.	 A rotavirus

Gastrointestinal  ❙  213
11.	
Which of the following terms describes bleeding that is bright or dark red and 
that is passed from the rectum?
A.	 Melena
B.	 Occult
C.	 Hematemesis
D.	 Hematochezia
12.	
Hepatorenal syndrome is a complication of hepatic failure due to
A.	 Vasodilatation
B.	 Increased circulating plasma
C.	 Increased renal circulation
D.	 Release of mediators
13.	
Cullen’s sign presents as
A.	 A marbled appearance to the abdomen
B.	 Bruising of the scrotum or labia
C.	 Bluish discoloration of the flanks
D.	 Bluish discoloration of the periumbilical area
14.	
Your patient is a recovering anorexic who attends group counseling sessions at 
your facility. The PCU was busy and the patient’s discharge was delayed, so you 
ordered a lunch for the patient. Later in the afternoon, as you are preparing 
to discharge the patient, you note she has not touched her lunch. Your best 
therapeutic statement should be
A.	 “It’s okay. I know that hospital food is not gourmet, but the cafeteria is more 
appetizing.”
B.	 “If you don’t eat, we will have to put a feeding tube in you.”
C.	 “You need to eat to regain strength and prevent complications. We will work with 
you to find foods that you like.”
D.	 “Food is not your enemy. Eating this is not going to make you fat.”
15.	
Which of the following forms of hepatitis is often misdiagnosed as gastroenteritis?
A.	 Hepatitis A
B.	 Hepatitis B
C.	 Hepatitis C
D.	 Hepatitis E
16.	
Which form of hepatitis originates as a DNA virus?
A.	 Hepatitis A
B.	 Hepatitis B
C.	 Hepatitis C
D.	 Hepatitis D
17.	
You are preparing your patient for a paracentesis. Which of the following actions 
should be the first step in assisting with a paracentesis?
A.	 Have the patient void or insert a Foley catheter
B.	 Examine the abdomen for dullness
C.	 Order an upright X-ray of the abdomen
D.	 Position the patient with the affected side up

214  ❙  Section 9
18.	
Your patient was diagnosed with Barrett’s esophagus. Which of the following 
conditions is your patient at greatest risk for developing?
A.	 Esophageal varices
B.	 Gastritis
C.	 Esophageal cancer
D.	 GERD
19.	
Anastomotic leaks are common after bariatric surgeries. Symptoms can be subtle 
and may include hyperthermia, tachycardia, tachypnea, abdominal pain, and 
anxiety. If undiagnosed, all of the following complications may result except
A.	 Hyperoxia
B.	 Sepsis
C.	 MODS
D.	 Death
20.	
A patient was admitted to the PCU because of abdominal pain. She recently had 
knee surgery for which she received Tylenol #3 for pain control. She has no bowel 
sounds, her abdomen is firmly distended, and she is diffusely tender across the 
abdomen. What is the probable cause of this patient’s symptoms?
A.	 Appendicitis from the pain meds
B.	 Paralytic ileus from the codeine
C.	 Gastroenteritis after eating undercooked chicken
D.	 Pancreatitis from lack of exercise
21.	
A glycoprotein produced in the stomach that is required for vitamin B12 
absorption is
A.	 Hydrochloric acid
B.	 Pepsinogen
C.	 Secretin
D.	 Intrinsic factor
22.	
Which of the following medications inhibits gastrin synthesis, gastric acid output, 
and decreases splanchnic circulation?
A.	 Vasopressin
B.	 Famotidine
C.	 Octreotide acetate
D.	 Ranitidine
23.	
A contraindication for use of magnesium hydroxide (Milk of Magnesia) is
A.	 Intestinal obstruction
B.	 Hyperacidity
C.	 Bowel evacuation
D.	 Depressed immune system

Gastrointestinal  ❙  215
24.	
Your new patient initially presented to the ED with appendicitis. Morphine has 
controlled his symptoms during his stay in the ED, and the hospitalist plans to try 
to manage the appendicitis medically. As you are transferring him to his bed, he 
asks if the pain will ever come back. You tell him
A.	 “No. You should not ever have this problem again.”
B.	 “Yes, but not for several years.”
C.	 “Yes, but the pain will not be as severe.”
D.	 “Possibly. About one-third of patients are readmitted and require surgery within 
1 year.”
25.	
A 24 year old female has severe Crohn’s disease and an ileostomy. She is at 
greatest risk for which of the following complications?
A.	 Dehydration
B.	 Hypernatremia
C.	 Hemorrhage
D.	 Prolapsed stoma due to vigorous exercise once discharged
26.	
Patients considering gastric bypass for weight management control should begin 
bariatric education
A.	 Prior to the decision to have surgery
B.	 When the decision to have surgery is made
C.	 Bariatric surgery education is not necessary
D.	 After surgery
27.	
A young man is visiting his sister in the PCU. She was complaining to him 
about her severe stomach cramping. There is a familial history of polyposis and 
inflammatory bowel disease. He is worried about his risk of developing cancer, 
so in a quiet moment, he asks you about the possibility of his developing cancer. 
Which of the following statements is true regarding colorectal cancers?
A.	 Adenocarcinomas are the least common cancer
B.	 Right colon lesions are rare
C.	 Left colon tumors spread, ulcerate, and erode blood vessels
D.	 Rectal tumors are associated with localized metastasis
28.	
Which of the following nutrients supports function and growth of lymphocytes 
and macrophages?
A.	 Polyunsaturated fatty acids
B.	 Saturated fatty acids
C.	 Glutamine
D.	 Nucleotides
29.	
A gradual wasting of body fat and muscle, as well as the proteins contained in the 
internal organs (visceral protein), is known as
A.	 Somatosis
B.	 Marasmus
C.	 Somatic residual deficit
D.	 Necrofascitis

216  ❙  Section 9
30.	
Amylase levels are usually elevated in patients with pancreatitis or pancreatic 
cancer. The normal range for amylase is
A.	 150–215 units/L
B.	 12–15 units/L
C.	 30–45 units/L
D.	 56–190 units/L
31.	
Your patient has cirrhosis, so you would expect his alinine transferase (ALT) to be 
elevated. The normal value for the ALT is in the range of
A.	 5–36 units/ml
B.	 14–65 units/ml
C.	 45–65 units/ml
D.	 2–7.2 units/ml
32.	
Your patient has been diagnosed with an intestinal obstruction. Which 
phosphorus level listed below would be indicative of this condition?
A.	 2.2–2.9 mg/dL
B.	 3.0–4.2 mg/dL
C.	 3.7–4.9 mg/dL
D.	 3.0–4.5 mg/dL
33.	
Ammonia levels are elevated in patients with heart failure, renal failure, and 
hepatic failure. A normal range for ammonia is
A.	 5–60 mOsm/dL
B.	 15–110 mOsm/dL
C.	 50–200 mOsm/dL
D.	 170–240 mOsm/dL
34.	
Your patient has had several bouts of diarrhea over the past three days. As a 
progressive care nurse, you know this patient is likely to be low on magnesium. 
Which range of values listed below would indicate a lower than normal range for 
magnesium?
A.	 3.5–4.2 mcg/dL
B.	 0.9–1.4 mEq/L
C.	 2.2–3.8 mmol/L
D.	 4.0–7.5 units/ml
35.	
Total bilirubin levels may be elevated in patients suffering from profound 
hemolysis, a biliary obstruction, or hepatic disease. The normal range for total 
bilirubin is
A.	 0.3–1.3 mg/dL
B.	 1.5:1 to 2.0:1 mmol/L
C.	 4.0–6.5 g/dL
D.	 2.4–4 units/ml

Gastrointestinal  ❙  217
36.	
Your patient is suffering from a biliary obstruction. As a progressive care nurse, 
you know his direct bilirubin levels will be affected. The normal value for a direct 
bilirubin level is
A.	 0.1–0.3 mg/dL
B.	 10–30 mg/dL
C.	 1.3–3.0 mg/dL
D.	 0.3–1.3 mg/dL
37.	
Indirect bilirubin levels are elevated in profound hemolysis and hepatic disease. 
An example of an elevated indirect bilirubin level is in the range of
A.	 1.5:1 to 2.0:1 mmol/L
B.	 0.3–1.3 mg/dL
C.	 1.8 mg/dL
D.	 2.4–4 units/ml
38.	
Which of the following statements is true about the appropriate use of a 
Miller–Abbott tube?
A.	 The tube is used for patients who are immediate surgical candidates
B.	 The Miller–Abbott tube is used for proximal decompression of the bowel
C.	 The Miller–Abbott tube is only used on patients when a bowel obstruction is 
­believed to be irreversible
D.	 The Miller–Abbott tube is used in patients to relieve a paralytic ileus
39.	
Which of the following procedures is most likely to be performed on a patient 
with tumors of the descending or sigmoid colon?
A.	 A temporary colostomy
B.	 A permanent colostomy
C.	 A bowel resection
D.	 A right hemicolectomy
40.	
A low anterior resection is the likely surgical procedure for patients with
A.	 Malignant lesions of the lower sigmoid colon and anus
B.	 Tumors of the mid or lower left transverse colon
C.	 Proximal and midrectal tumors
D.	 Tumors of the cecum
41.	
A drug that crosses the mucosal barrier and should be avoided in the treatment of 
a peptic ulcer is
A.	 Nicotine
B.	 Indomethacin
C.	 Corticosteroids
D.	 Reglan
42.	
A subjective sign of a peptic ulcer would be
A.	 Hyperactive bowel sounds
B.	 Pallor
C.	 Tarry stools
D.	 Epigastric pain

218  ❙  Section 9
43.	
Which of the following lab values would be decreased in liver disease?
A.	 AST
B.	 ALT
C.	 Hgb
D.	 LDH
44.	
Which of the following levels is likely to be elevated in a patient with a 
peptic ulcer?
A.	 Total protein
B.	 Albumin
C.	 Transferrin
D.	 Gastrin
45.	
An absolute contraindication for providing tube feedings to a patient would 
include
A.	 Intestinal obstructions
B.	 Adhesions
C.	 Bacteremia
D.	 An enterocutaneous fistula
46.	
A relative contraindication for providing tube feedings for a patient would not 
include
A.	 Adhesions
B.	 Bacteremia
C.	 Severe malabsorption
D.	 Pneumonia
47.	
One way of confirming placement of a feeding tube is to sample the gastric 
aspirate. If the patient has not received any pH-altering medications, the pH of 
the aspirate should be in the range of
A.	 5.2–6.0
B.	 2.5–4.0
C.	 1.0–3.0
D.	 3.5–4.8
48.	
While you are assessing a patient’s abdomen, you note that on palpation of the 
left lower quadrant, the patient complains of pain in the right lower quadrant. 
This finding is known as
A.	 McBurney’s point
B.	 Rovsing’s sign
C.	 Seat belt sign
D.	 Cullen’s sign
49.	
Which of the following actions will facilitate or confirm passage of a 
Miller–Abbott tube through the GI tract?
A.	 Use aspirate pH
B.	 Place the patient on their right side for 4 hours
C.	 Do a chest X-ray within 1 hour after tube insertion
D.	 Tape the tube securely to the nose to measure length correctly

Gastrointestinal  ❙  219
50.	
Your patient fell out of bed at the end of the previous shift. Although an X-ray of 
his abdomen is negative, he is now complaining of pain in his left shoulder. You 
suspect the patient may be suffering from
A.	 Splenic bleeding
B.	 A liver laceration
C.	 A dislocated shoulder
D.	 A rib fracture
51.	
A major limitation of peritoneal lavage is
A.	 Peritoneal lavage cannot be confirmed as positive without a microscopic 
examination
B.	 Peritoneal lavage is always inaccurate in cases of sepsis
C.	 Peritoneal lavage is only useful in detecting diaphragmatic injuries
D.	 Peritoneal lavage cannot diagnose retroperitoneal injuries
52.	
When liver parenchymal cells are aggressively destroyed and replaced with 
fibrotic tissue, leading to impaired hepatic function, this condition is known as
A.	 Cirrhosis
B.	 Ascites
C.	 Hepatic vein degradation
D.	 Budd–Chiari syndrome
53.	
Which of the following medications is classified as a histamine H2 receptor 
antagonist?
A.	 Calcium carbonate
B.	 Magnesium hydroxide
C.	 Aluminum hydroxide
D.	 Ranitidine
54.	
Three or more episodes of acute, midline abdominal pain lasting for 2 hours to 
several days with periods without symptoms is known as
A.	 An abdominal migraine
B.	 Chronic appendicitis
C.	 Functional dyspepsia
D.	 Esophagitis
55.	
Assessment of the abdomen should occur in which order?
A.	 Inspection, palpation, auscultation, percussion
B.	 Auscultation, inspection, palpation, percussion
C.	 Percussion, inspection, palpation, auscultation
D.	 Inspection, auscultation, percussion, palpation
56.	
Your patient has been diagnosed with gastroenteritis. The primary causative 
agent for this condition is
A.	 Clostridium difficile
B.	 Salmonella typhi
C.	 Cryptosporidium
D.	 A rotavirus

220  ❙  Section 9
57.	
Your patient was admitted overnight to the PCU after a motor vehicle accident 
that left her only mildly bruised. Just prior to discharge, the patient complained 
of diffuse abdominal pain and described symptoms she has had during the past 
week. Which symptom probably indicates an early sign of appendicitis?
A.	 Flank pain
B.	 Pain while resting
C.	 Night waking
D.	 Pain after vomiting
58.	
The stage of hepatitis characterized by jaundice, pallor, pale stool, dark urine, 
and pruritis is called the ________ stage.
A.	 Preicteric
B.	 Fulminant
C.	 Toxic
D.	 Icteric
59.	
Melena stools indicate bleeding from what body area?
A.	 Mouth
B.	 Upper gastrointestinal
C.	 Descending colon
D.	 Liver
60.	
The most common cause of death related to acute hepatic failure is
A.	 Pulmonary embolism
B.	 Anemia
C.	 Brainstem herniation
D.	 Pulmonary edema
61.	
Your patient is a model and weighs 94 pounds. She was found unconscious in the 
bathroom. She was admitted for severe dehydration and starvation. Which of the 
following symptoms would you expect to observe with this patient?
A.	 Decreased serum lactate
B.	 Normal urinary nitrogen excretion
C.	 Conservation of body fluids with third spacing
D.	 Decreased serum catecholamines, glucagon, and cortisol
62.	
Which of the following lab results would contraindicate performing a peritoneal 
lavage?
A.	 RBC 5.4 million/mm3
B.	 PLT 78,000 mm3/ml
C.	 PT 12.5 sec and PTT 75 sec
D.	 Hgb 14.5 g/dL and Hct 46%
63.	
During gastric lavage for stress-related erosion syndrome (SRES) gastric bleeding, 
your patient becomes hyperthermic, tachycardic, complains of sudden abdominal 
pain, and has abdominal rigidity. As his nurse, you should
A.	 Continue with the lavage; the symptoms are normal
B.	 Stop the infusion and contact the physician
C.	 Stop the infusion and rewarm the fluid
D.	 Slow the infusion and change the fluid

Gastrointestinal  ❙  221
64.	
Medications that are bound to protein may have which of the following effects?
A.	 Increased availability
B.	 Rapid distribution
C.	 Less available drug for the desired effect
D.	 Idiosyncrasy
65.	
Your patient frequently eats at fast food restaurants. He is now suffering with 
severe abdominal pain and diarrhea. The probable causative organism for his 
condition is
A.	 Giardia lamblia
B.	 E. coli
C.	 Staphylococcus aureus
D.	 Norwalk virus
66.	
Which drug is classified as an ammonia detoxicant and a hyperosmotic laxative?
A.	 Lactulose
B.	 Cyclosporine
C.	 Tacrolimus
D.	 Muromonab
67.	
A side effect of erythromycin is
A.	 Tachycardia
B.	 Headache
C.	 Eosinophilia
D.	 Atrial arrhythmias
68.	
A patient was admitted to your unit with recurrent pneumonia and severe 
dysphagia. You are unable to pass an NG tube. You suspect this patient is 
suffering from
A.	 A tracheoesophageal fistula
B.	 Varices
C.	 Intestinal atresia
D.	 A diaphragmatic hernia
69.	
Your patient has cirrhosis, and he came to the unit today after a weekend party 
with alcohol, drugs, and smoking. His lab results are as follows:
ALT 245 U/L	
AST 147 U/L
PT 24 sec	
PLT 75 × 103/mm3
Hgb 8.4 g/dl	
Hct 31%
Bilirubin 10 mg/dl
These results indicate this patient is at a high risk for
A.	 Variceal bleeding
B.	 Peptic ulcer disease
C.	 Gastritis
D.	 Boerhaave’s syndrome

222  ❙  Section 9
70.	
Ascites is a common finding in patients with chronic liver failure. Which of the 
following statements about ascites is true?
A.	 Ascites is a result of an increase in albumin
B.	 Ascites is the result of decreased hydrostatic pressure and increased oncotic 
­pressures in the portal system
C.	 Ascites occurs secondary to aldosteronism
D.	 Ascites is due to an increased ventilation/perfusion (V/Q) ratio
71.	
Common adverse reactions to cimetidine include
A.	 Elevated BUN and creatinine
B.	 Rash, nausea, and agitation
C.	 Decreased liver enzymes and anorexia
D.	 Jitteriness and mottled skin
72.	
Cimetidine, famotidine, and ranitidine belong to which class of medications?
A.	 Proton pump inhibitors (PPIs)
B.	 Antacids
C.	 H2 blockers
D.	 Antiemetics
73.	
Your patient is a frequent admission in your unit for alcohol-induced comas. He 
has been in the ICU the past 2 days. Just before transfer from the gurney to the PCU 
bed, he begins projectile vomiting bright red blood. Your first action should be to
A.	 Position the patient flat
B.	 Obtain and insert a Linton–Nachlas tube
C.	 Make the patient NPO and verify IV access
D.	 Start dopamine at 5 μg/kg/min
74.	
A college student had an appendectomy in another state while on spring 
break 1 week ago. He is admitted to the PCU with fever, nausea, vomiting, and 
abdominal pain with a red, swollen surgical incision. You anticipate his next 
treatment to include
A.	 Immediate surgery with IV antibiotics
B.	 Hydration and antibiotics
C.	 Bedside excision of abscess
D.	 Bedside wound debridement
75.	
Your patient was admitted for dehydration and malnutrition after collapsing in 
his bedroom. His wife reports he has been eating very bland, soft foods for three 
weeks because of reflux and difficulty swallowing. As a progressive care nurse, 
you suspect the patient is suffering from
A.	 Partial tongue paralysis
B.	 Gastric cancer
C.	 Tracheal neoplasm
D.	 Esophageal neoplasm

Gastrointestinal  ❙  223
76.	
Your patient is a postgastric bypass patient experiencing dumping syndrome 
after eating any type of meal. Which of the following medications should she stop 
immediately?
A.	 Nitroglycerin
B.	 Insulin
C.	 Pepcid
D.	 Reglan
77.	
When patients have liver failure, fatty nodules may develop subcutaneously due 
to cholesterol accumulation. These nodules are called
A.	 Asterixis
B.	 Factor hepaticus
C.	 Xanthomas
D.	 Telangiectasis
78.	
Your patient is an Orthodox Jew who presents with an unintentional weight loss 
of 20 pounds. He also suffers from fatigue, anorexia, and chronic, watery diarrhea 
with bloody mucus. He is tachycardic, tachypneic, hyperthermic, with a Hgb of 
7 g/dL and Hct of 21%. You suspect this patient is suffering from
A.	 Colonic diverticulitis
B.	 Ulcerative colitis
C.	 Pancreatitis
D.	 Cholecystitis
79.	
Sandostatin is ordered for your patient with portal hypertension. Which of the 
following nursing actions is most important to perform when first starting this 
drug?
A.	 Careful monitoring of input and output
B.	 Check nerve stimulation
C.	 Blood glucose checks
D.	 Check blood pressure every 5 minutes
80.	
What is the drug of choice for treating gastroesophageal reflux?
A.	 Metoclopramide
B.	 Questran
C.	 Regitine
D.	 Meperidine
81.	
During a Whipple procedure, which of the following organs is removed?
A.	 Esophagus
B.	 Gallbladder
C.	 Ascending colon
D.	 Jejunum

224  ❙  Section 9
82.	
Your patient underwent the Whipple procedure 10 days ago for pancreatic 
cancer. She was started on clear liquids and then advanced to a soft diet. She is 
now suffering from repetitive vomiting. She is sweating profusely, shaking, and 
confused as to place. On the monitor you note tachypnea and tachycardia. You 
suspect this patient is experiencing
A.	 An anxiety or panic attack
B.	 Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD)
C.	 Dumping syndrome
D.	 Hypoglycemia
83.	
Your patient underwent the Roux-en-Y gastric bypass procedure two days ago. 
Which nutritional complication is your patient most at risk for developing?
A.	 Hypercalcemia
B.	 Vitamin C deficiency
C.	 Vitamin B12 deficiency
D.	 Hyperalbuminism
84.	
The family of your patient with chronic liver failure would like to know what they 
can do to make him more comfortable after he is discharged tomorrow. You tell 
them that when they visit the patient in his long-term care facility, they can
A.	 Provide deep tissue massage every 2 hours
B.	 Apply a moisturizing lotion when visiting
C.	 Assist with rapid range of motion every 4 hours
D.	 Limit visitation to once a day
85.	
What is the most common means of infection with Giardia lamblia?
A.	 Eating undercooked game such as rabbit
B.	 Drinking water from a mountain stream
C.	 Teens sharing food and soda
D.	 Having venison steak at a restaurant
86.	
What type of organism is Giardia lamblia?
A.	 A spirochete
B.	 A type of tape worm
C.	 A protozoan parasite
D.	 A flagellated bacterium
87.	
Your patient has acute esophageal and gastric varices. Which esophagogastric 
tamponade tube is the best choice for differentiating bleeding from the esophagus 
or the stomach?
A.	 Minnesota tube
B.	 Sengstaken–Blakemore tube
C.	 Linton–Nachlas tube
D.	 Standard nasogastric tube

Gastrointestinal  ❙  225
88.	
Your patient was seen in the emergency department for abdominal pain and 
vomiting. On admission to the PCU, her heart rate is 150, respiratory rate is 30, 
blood pressure is 105/60, and temperature 100.4°F. She indicates that the pain 
began 6 hours ago with abdominal rigidity, and you determine she has absent 
bowel tones when assessed. Which of the following symptoms supports a diagnosis 
of acute mesenteric artery occlusion?
A.	 Warm, flushed skin
B.	 Bruit noted in the left iliac fossa
C.	 Colicky periumbilical pain associated with explosive diarrhea
D.	 Pain is intermittent and localized

226  ❙  Section 9
SECTION 9: GASTROINTESTINAL ANSWERS
1.	
Correct Answer: C
Although this patient has several disease-related complications that are causing him 
distress such as dyspnea, cough, constipation, and emesis, the patient focuses on a 
shake flavor as his major complaint. Our first instinct is to fix the disease processes, 
but by addressing the patient’s priority, you may relieve unnecessary stress on the 
patient and provide a source of nutrition and hydration the patient may tolerate 
without emesis, which would relieve constipation symptoms. The patient’s report 
of priority of symptoms should be considered the gold standard for prioritizing 
interventions with palliative and hospice care. Patient prioritization should supersede 
the healthcare provider’s prioritization. Breathing treatments, cough suppressant, and 
stool softeners may aid in comforting the patient, but should be prioritized based on 
the overall treatment goals.
2.	
Correct answer: B
Hepatic bruits are heard over the liver and may also indicate primary liver cancer, 
alcoholic hepatitis, or vascular liver metastases. An aortic bruit over the epigastric 
area indicates a partial aortic occlusion. Iliac artery bruits are heard over the left/right 
inguinal areas. Renal artery bruits indicate renal artery stenosis.
3.	
Correct answer: A
Acute pancreatitis may occur as a result of seat-belt trauma to the pancreatic duct 
or abdominal ischemia. Acute liver failure is characterized by flu-like symptoms, 
jaundice, confusion, and enlarged liver. Gastrointestinal bleeding has a history of 
ulcers and/or esophageal varices with hemodynamic changes, narrowing pulse 
pressures, hematemesis, and hyperactive bowel tones. Abdominal trauma does not 
produce the knife-like and twisting pain, and tenderness and a marbled appearance 
would be noted.
4.	
Correct answer: B
This patient may have had an umbilical catheter placed when he was a neonate—
a prehepatic factor. Prehepatic (presinusoidal) factors lead to hepatic venous pressures 
less than portal pressures. Chronic active hepatitis is an intrahepatic (sinusoidal) 
factor. Wedge hepatic venous pressures are increased or equal to portal pressures. 
Metastatic carcinoma and cardiac diseases such as CHF can cause portal hypertension 
and may indirectly cause variceal bleeding.
5.	
Correct answer: A
A patient with chronic pancreatitis was admitted for respiratory distress and 
pulmonary edema. These symptoms are due to pulmonary capillary endothelial 
damage related to phospholipase. Pulmonary capillary endothelial damage allows 
fluid to leak into the interstitium.
6.	
Correct answer: B
An ileostomy is located at the right ileac fossa just before the colon. Because most 
water absorption occurs in the colon, stool from the small intestines is loose and 
unformed. Sigmoid colostomy stools more closely resemble normal stools, as most of 
the water has been absorbed. Loop, or transverse, and ascending colostomies have 
loose stools with more formation.

Gastrointestinal  ❙  227
7.	
Correct answer: A
Acute bowel obstruction is the only type of obstruction that leads to infarction or 
strangulation. Obstruction occurs rapidly and may inhibit blood to a portion of the 
bowel. The other types of obstructions permit limited or intermittent blood flow that 
sustains but compromises tissue function.
8.	
Correct answer: C
This patient will probably undergo an esophagectomy. This procedure involves 
removal of the damaged esophagus to the proximal portion of the stomach. The 
stomach is then resectioned to form a new esophagus. If the stomach is also cancerous, 
the stomach is removed and the small bowel is resectioned to create a new esophagus.
9.	
Correct answer: A
Giardia lamblia is the most frequent cause of parasitic gastroenteritis in the 
United States.
10.	
Correct answer: C
An antimicrobial drug should improve diarrhea caused by Shigella.
11.	
Correct answer: D
Hematochezia describes bleeding that is bright or dark red blood that is passed from 
the rectum.
12.	
Correct answer: D
Hepatorenal syndrome is a complication of hepatic failure due to the release of 
mediators. The release of mediators results in vasoconstriction, which diverts blood 
flow to the kidneys. There is a decrease in circulating plasma as the patient develops 
ascites. Vasoconstriction, not vasodilatation, occurs in end-stage liver failure. There is 
a decrease in renal circulation due to plasma shifting and vasoconstriction.
13.	
Correct answer: D
Cullen’s sign refers to the bluish discoloration of the periumbilical area as seen 
in pancreatitis and/or abdominal trauma. Marbled appearance is common with 
abdominal trauma. Coopernail’s sign is bruising of the scrotum or labia. Turner’s sign 
is bruising of the flanks.
14.	
Correct answer: C
The goal when working with bulimic and anorexic patients and their families is 
to support positive nutritional changes while acknowledging and supporting the 
psychological changes in body and food perception. By acknowledging the difficulties 
the patient has with food perception and willingness to providing support and 
counseling with a nutritionist, dietician, and psychologist, the patient will find foods 
that are both appealing and provide needed nutrition. The remaining answers are 
abrasive or do not address the physiologic or psychological struggle with eating.
15.	
Correct answer: A
Hepatitis A is often misdiagnosed initially as gastroenteritis because symptoms are 
usually self-limiting. Fecal–oral transmission may also be mistaken as food poisoning.
16.	
Correct Answer: B
Hepatitis B is the only DNA virus listed. The other forms of hepatitis are RNA viruses.

228  ❙  Section 9
17.	
Correct answer: A
The correct order for these interventions when assisting with a paracentesis is to: have 
the patient void or insert a Foley catheter, order an upright X-ray of the abdomen, 
position the patient with the affected side up, and examine the abdomen for dullness.
18.	
Correct answer: C
Because of cellular changes in the esophageal lining, the patient is at increased 
risk for esophageal cancer. Barrett’s esophagus is a result of mucosal changes in 
the esophagus after repeated and prolonged exposure to gastric secretions seen in 
untreated gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD).
19.	
Correct answer: A
Patients who have had bariatric surgery are at risk for hypoxia, not hyperoxia.
20.	
Correct answer: B
This patient recently had knee surgery for which she received Tylenol #3 for pain 
control. She has no bowel sounds, her abdomen is firmly distended, and she is diffusely 
tender across the abdomen. The probable cause of her symptoms is a paralytic ileus 
from the codeine.
21.	
Correct answer: D
Intrinsic factor is a glycoprotein produced in the stomach that is required for 
vitamin B12 absorption.
22.	
Correct answer: C
Octreotide acetate inhibits gastrin synthesis, gastric acid output, and decreases 
splanchnic circulation.
23.	
Correct answer: A
Intestinal obstruction is a contraindication for use of magnesium hydroxide (Milk of 
Magnesia). Additional contraindications include ileostomy, colostomy, and appendicitis.
24.	
Correct answer: D
This question requires honest communication with the patient regarding possible 
reoccurrence of symptoms. Approximately one-third of patients with appendicitis 
that are treated with antibiotics and pain management are readmitted and require 
appendectomies within 1 year. The remaining answers are stated as absolutes and 
are inappropriate for a nurse. If the appendix is not removed, the patient may have a 
reoccurrence of symptoms at a later date. There is no way to predict if and when an 
appendix may become infected or diseased. There is no way to predict the pain level 
of appendicitis, because pain is perceived differently for each patient.
25.	
Correct answer: A
Dehydration is a severe complication in patients with ileostomies. Water reabsorption 
is normally accomplished by the colon. This patient may have had a large portion or 
all of the large intestine removed related to the Crohn’s disease process. Fluids should 
be encouraged and IV support maintained to prevent hypovolemic shock. Teaching 
should include signs and symptoms of shock and preventative home management. 
Although a stoma prolapse may occur after discharge home, the stoma can be 
reopened without major complications. Hyponatremia, not hypernatremia, is a serious 
complication as sodium uptake also occurs in the colon. Hemorrhage is not a concern 
unless the stoma is scratched or damaged during care. Light pressure should be 
applied until bleeding stops, but it is not a life-threatening complication.

Gastrointestinal  ❙  229
26.	
Correct answer: A
Patients considering gastric bypass for weight management control should definitely 
begin bariatric education prior to the decision to have surgery. Gastric bypass surgery 
can lead to permanent gastric changes and places the obese patient at risk for both 
surgical- and anesthesia-related complications. For many bariatric patients, the initial 
gastric bypass surgery is not necessarily the only surgery required. Often, cosmetic 
surgery to remove loose skin around the stomach, back, thighs, arms, and chest is 
required to improve self-image. Each surgery has additional risk. Therefore, complete 
bariatric education should be provided to any patient considering bariatric surgery. 
Education should include preoperative changes in diet, nutritional consultation, 
psychological evaluation, and full medical evaluation including lab work and 
cardiovascular testing. Education and support for the bariatric surgery patient should 
continue throughout the surgical process with ongoing education, nutritional support, 
and physiological support for years after surgery.
27.	
Correct answer: C
Left colon (descending) lesions spread, ulcerate, and erode blood vessels within 
the colon. Obstruction is a very common complication with this type of lesion. 
Adenocarcinomas are the most common of the neoplasms. Right colon, or ascending 
colon, lesions are typically polypoid lesions and are associated with a familial history 
of polyps. Rectal lesions may spread to the vagina or prostate but are known for 
systemic metastasis.
28.	
Correct answer: D
Nucleotides support the function and growth of lymphocytes and macrophages.
29.	
Correct answer: B
A gradual wasting of body fat and muscle, as well as the proteins contained in the 
internal organs (visceral protein), is known as marasmus. Patients with chronic 
illnesses and gradual starvation often exhibit marasmus.
30.	
Correct answer: D
Amylase levels are usually elevated in patients with pancreatitis or pancreatic cancer. 
The normal range for amylase is 56–190 units/L.
31.	
Correct answer: A
The normal value for the alinine transferase (ALT) is in the range of 5–36 units/ml. 
The ALT was formerly known as the SGPT.
32.	
Correct answer: C
In a patient diagnosed with an intestinal obstruction, the phosphorus would be 
elevated. A normal range for phosphorus would be about 3.0–4.5 mg/dL.
33.	
Correct answer: B
Ammonia levels are elevated in patients with heart failure, renal failure, and hepatic 
failure. A normal range for ammonia is 15 to 110 mOsm/dL. Since ammonia is a 
byproduct of protein metabolism, levels tend to be higher in conditions that interfere 
with this metabolism.

230  ❙  Section 9
34.	
Correct answer: B
Your patient has had several bouts of diarrhea during the past 3 days. As a progressive 
care nurse, you know this patient is likely to be low on magnesium. The normal 
range for magnesium is 1.5–2.2 mEq/L, so a low level would correspond to 
answer B: 0.9–1.4 mEq/L.
35.	
Correct answer: A
Total bilirubin levels may be elevated in patients suffering from profound hemolysis, 
a biliary obstruction, or hepatic disease. The normal range for total bilirubin is 
0.3–1.3 mg/dL.
36.	
Correct answer: A
Your patient is suffering from a biliary obstruction. As a progressive care nurse, you 
know his direct bilirubin levels will be affected. The normal value for a direct bilirubin 
level is 0.1–0.3 mg/dL.
37.	
Correct answer: C
Indirect bilirubin levels are elevated in profound hemolysis and hepatic disease. 
An example of an elevated indirect bilirubin level is 1.8 mg/dL.
38.	
Correct answer: B
The Miller–Abbott tube is used for proximal decompression of the bowel. This tube is 
not used for complete bowel obstruction or paralytic ileus.
39.	
Correct answer: D
A right hemicolectomy is most likely to be performed on a patient with tumors of the 
descending or sigmoid colon.
40.	
Correct answer: C
A low anterior resection is the likely surgical procedure for patients with proximal and 
midrectal tumors. Patients with malignant lesions of the lower sigmoid colon and anus 
will probably undergo an abdominoperineal resection. Tumors of the mid or lower-left 
transverse colon usually result in a transverse colectomy.
41.	
Correct answer: B
A drug that crosses the mucosal barrier and should be avoided in the treatment of a 
peptic ulcer is indomethacin. Other drugs that cross the mucosal barrier are aspirin, 
ibuprofen, and NSAIDs. Nicotine increases stimulation.
42.	
Correct answer: D
A subjective sign of a peptic ulcer would be epigastric pain. Pallor, tarry stools, and 
hyperactive bowel sounds are all objective signs.
43.	
Correct answer: C
The Hgb and Hct would be decreased in liver disease. The liver exzymes (AST, ALT, 
and LDH) would be increased in liver failure.
44.	
Correct answer: D
Gastrin and amylase are likely to be elevated in a patient with a peptic ulcer. Total 
proteins, albumin, and transferrin are likely to be decreased because the patient is 
often malnourished.

Gastrointestinal  ❙  231
45.	
Correct answer: A
Absolute contraindications for providing tube feedings would include intestinal 
obstructions, a paralytic ileus, tumors, an intestinal perforation, and adhesions.
46.	
Correct answer: B
Relative contraindications for providing tube feedings for a patient would include 
bacteremia, severe malabsorption, and an enterocutaneous fistula.
47.	
Correct answer: C
One way of confirming placement of a feeding tube is to sample the gastric aspirate. 
If the patient has not received any pH-altering medications, the pH of the aspirate 
should be in the range of 1.0–3.0.
48.	
Correct answer: B
While you are assessing a patient’s abdomen, you note that on palpation of the 
left lower quadrant, the patient complains of pain in the right lower quadrant. This 
finding is known as a Rovsing’s sign. This finding indicates peritoneal irritation and 
can also help in the diagnosis of appendicitis.
49.	
Correct answer: A
Using aspirate pH will facilitate or confirm passage of a Miller–Abbott tube through 
the GI tract. As the tube progresses, the pH of the stomach is acidotic. As the tube 
passes through the pylorus, the pH will become slightly more alkaline. The pH is 
alkaline in the intestine.
50.	
Correct answer: A
You should suspect the patient may be suffering from splenic bleeding. Your patient 
fell out of bed at the end of the previous shift. Although an X-ray of his abdomen is 
negative, he is now complaining of pain in his left shoulder. This finding is known as 
Kehr’s sign and indicates bleeding occurring below the diaphragm that is irritating the 
phrenic nerve.
51.	
Correct answer: D
A major limitation of peritoneal lavage is that peritoneal lavage cannot diagnose 
retroperitoneal injuries or diaphragmatic injury/trauma.
52.	
Correct answer: A
When liver parenchymal cells are aggressively destroyed and replaced with fibrotic 
tissue, leading to impaired hepatic function, this condition is known as cirrhosis.
53.	
Correct answer: D
Ranitidine is classified as a histamine H2 receptor antagonist. Calcium carbonate, 
magnesium hydroxide, and aluminum hydroxide are all antacids.
54.	
Correct answer: A
Three or more episodes of acute, midline abdominal pain lasting for 2 hours to several 
days with periods without symptoms is known as an abdominal migraine.

232  ❙  Section 9
55.	
Correct answer: D
This is another of those deceptively easy questions. Make absolutely certain you know 
the correct order for assessment. Inspection to determine landmarks and appearance, 
auscultation to establish location and quality of bowel tones, percussion notes or 
tones are different for various internal organs, and palpation to establish wall tone, 
tenderness, and size of organs. Percussion and palpation prior to inspection or 
auscultation could affect the assessment findings.
56.	
Correct answer: D
The primary causative agent for gastroenteritis is a rotavirus.
57.	
Correct answer: C
An early sign of appendicitis is night waking. The patient has nonspecific discomfort 
and wakes frequently.
58.	
Correct answer: D
The stage of hepatitis characterized by jaundice, pallor, pale stool, dark urine, and 
pruritis is called the icteric stage.
59.	
Correct answer: B
Melena is black, tarry stool containing blood from the upper gastrointestinal area or 
ascending colon. Oral bleeding may result in hematemesis. Descending colon bleeding 
may lead to bright red stools. Iron, bismuth, and other foods may be mistaken for 
melena, but an occult blood test of the stool rules this out.
60.	
Correct answer: C
The most common cause of death related to acute hepatic failure is brainstem 
herniation. Brainstem herniation is the most common cause of death due to increased 
coagulation times, intracranial hemorrhaging, and hypoxia leading to cerebral 
edema. Anemia is a complication of prolonged bleeding times, but not the primary 
cause of death. Pulmonary impairment is the result of hemorrhaging, not embolism or 
edema.
61.	
Correct answer: C
Prolonged starvation and protein loss resulting in fluid shifting and third spacing are 
symptoms seen in a patient who is suffering from starvation and dehydration. Muscle 
wasting results in an increase in serum lactate levels, not a decrease. Initially, there 
is an increased urinary nitrogen excretion, which is followed by a decrease. There is 
also an increase in serum catecholamine, glucagons, and cortisal as the body releases 
elements to maintain energy and glucose available.
62.	
Correct answer: B
A patient with a platelet count of 78,000 mm3/ml is thrombocytopenic and at risk for 
coagulation complications, which contraindicates performing a peritoneal lavage. 
Heparin is normally added to the solution to prevent clotting and can lead to further 
complications of bleeding. The other lab values are within normal range for either 
males or females.

Gastrointestinal  ❙  233
63.	
Correct answer: B
The patient is exhibiting signs and symptoms of gastric perforation. This is a surgical 
emergency, and the lavage should be stopped, fluid aspirated, and the physician 
notified immediately. Additional actions include the placement of at least two 
large-bore IVs, preparing to administer IV fluid replacement if hypovolemic shock 
occurs, and preparing the patient for immediate surgery.
64.	
Correct answer: C
Medications that are bound to protein may have less available drug for the desired 
effect.
65.	
Correct answer: B
E. coli is linked with abdominal pain and diarrhea from fast-food restaurants.
66.	
Correct answer: A
Lactulose is classified as an ammonia detoxicant and a hyperosmotic laxative.
67.	
Correct answer: C
Eosinophilia is a side effect of erythromycin. Additional side effects include 
bradycardia, abdominal pain, nausea, ventricular arrhythmias, and cholestatic 
jaundice.
68.	
Correct answer: A
When a patient has a tracheoesophageal fistula, the nurse will be unable to pass an 
NG tube.
69.	
Correct answer: A
These results indicate that this patient has a high risk for variceal bleeding. Fifty 
percent of deaths of patients with cirrhosis are from variceal bleeding. These lab tests 
are used to differentiate causes of bleeding. History and lab values lean toward varices. 
Although the Hgb and Hct are decreased in peptic ulcer disease and gastritis, the other 
lab changes would not be occurring. Boerhaave’s syndrome is a full-thickness rupture 
or perforation of the esophageal wall due to prolonged and frequent vomiting related 
to eating disorders.
70.	
Correct answer: C
Ascites occurs secondary to aldosteronism. Aldosteronism initiates sodium retention, 
increasing portal hypertension. Low albumin levels with increased hydrostatic 
pressure and decreased oncotic pressures result in ascites. Because of fluid shifting 
there would be a decrease in the ventilation/perfusion (V/Q) ratio.
71.	
Correct answer: B
Common adverse reactions to cimetidine can include rash, nausea, agitation, 
vomiting, diarrhea, flushing, neutropenia, elevated liver enzymes, and drowsiness.
72.	
Correct answer: C
Cimetidine, famotidine, and ranitidine are H2 blockers. They inhibit gastric acid 
production by antagonism of the histamine H2 receptors. They are used for prevention 
of ulcers and in the treatment of GI bleeding.

234  ❙  Section 9
73.	
Correct answer: C
This patient has likely ruptured varices. Priorities are to maintain airway, stop 
bleeding, and verify venous access for blood replacement, fluid management, and 
homeostasis. You want to position the patient upright to prevent aspiration, not flat. 
You would anticipate the placement of a Minnesota tube, not a Linton–Nachlas tube. 
Dopamine at 5 μg/kg/min would better support renal function, not blood pressure, 
as needed in this patient.
74.	
Correct answer: A
This patient is exhibiting signs and symptoms of an abscess after surgical intervention 
for appendicitis, which occurs in 5–33% of patients. Surgical debridement of the 
incision and IV antibiotics are appropriate immediate treatment to prevent sepsis. 
Hydration and antibiotics alone will not treat the abscess. Bedside excision of the 
abscess may reduce the amount of infected fluid and tissue at the site, but will 
not prevent further infection. Bedside wound debridement places a high risk of 
further contamination of the site. In approximately 2% of cases, the abscess may be 
intra-abdominal and may require surgical intervention under anesthesia as well as 
continued antibiotic treatment.
75.	
Correct answer: D
This patient is exhibiting classic progression of a developing esophageal neoplasm. 
Complications that coincide with this disease process are related to changes in 
nutritional intake. Narrowing of the esophageal lumen results in increasing difficulties 
and pain when swallowing, leading to a softer diet until the patient can swallow only 
liquids. Partial tongue paralysis would be supported if the patient also had difficulty 
speaking, but that symptom is not given. Gastric cancer is indicated with indigestion 
and fullness, not difficulty swallowing. Tracheal neoplasm would be exhibited with 
more respiratory distress.
76.	
Correct answer: D
Anyone experiencing dumping syndrome after gastric bypass surgery should stop 
taking reglan. Reglan increases gastric emptying by increasing peristalsis, thus 
increasing the effects of dumping syndrome. Reglan may be used after gastrectomy 
when gastroparesis is present, but once peristalsis has resumed, it should be stopped.
77.	
Correct answer: C
When patients have liver failure, fatty nodules called xanthomas, may develop 
subcutaneously due to cholesterol accumulation.
78.	
Correct answer: B
Based on the presenting symptoms and ethnicity, this patient probably has ulcerative 
colitis. He may also have leukocytosis and cachexia. Colonic diverticulitis presents 
with left upper quadrant pain, hyperthermia, vomiting, chills, diarrhea, and 
tenderness over the descending colon. Pancreatitis presents with left upper quadrant 
pain that radiates to the back or chest, hyperthermia, rigidity, rebound abdominal 
tenderness, nausea and vomiting, jaundice, Cullen’s sign, Grey–Turner’s sign, 
abdominal distention, and diminished bowel sounds. Cholecystitis presents with right 
upper quadrant or epigastric pain, pain that lasts up to 6 hours after a fatty meal, 
vomiting, and increased white blood cell counts.

Gastrointestinal  ❙  235
79.	
Correct answer: C
Glycemic emergencies may occur with sandostatin, especially in the diabetic patient. It 
is important to monitor blood glucose to prevent hyperglycemia and/or hypoglycemia. 
Blood pressure and urinary function may also be impacted, but are not as quickly 
life-threatening as unstable glucose levels.
80.	
Correct answer: A
The drug of choice for treating gastroesophageal reflux is metoclopramide. 
Metoclopramide increases gastric emptying and motility, thereby reducing reflux 
symptoms. The patient should be monitored for diarrhea and neurologic signs such as 
tremors or muscle twitching.
81.	
Correct answer: B
The Whipple procedure removes the tip or head of the pancreas, the gallbladder, the 
duodenum, and part of the bile duct. Occasionally, part of the stomach may also 
be removed. The extent of the cancerous pancreatic tumor indicates the extent of 
removal.
82.	
Correct answer: C
This patient’s symptoms are consistent with late dumping syndrome related to the 
partial gastrectomy during the Whipple procedure. With late dumping syndrome, 
symptoms occur 1 to 3 hours after meals. Additional symptoms include: weakness, 
fatigue, dizziness, anxiety, palpitations, and fainting. Patients may also exhibit early 
signs of dumping syndrome approximately 15–30 minutes after a meal with nausea, 
vomiting, cramps or abdominal pain, diarrhea, bloating, tachycardia, dysrhythmias, 
and dizziness. Although anxiety may be exhibited with dumping syndrome, an 
alteration in mental status with relation to food consumption and history supports 
a dumping syndrome diagnosis. Hypoglycemia is a greater risk for patients of just 
gastrectomy or bypass. GERD presents with heartburn and epigastric pain.
83.	
Correct answer: C
Because the gastric size is greatly reduced, there is less intrinsic factor to assist in 
vitamin B12 absorption to prevent pernicious anemia. Oral supplements are not 
recommended as they may not be absorbed quickly enough; sublingual or injected 
vitamin B12 may be required. Iron, thiamin, and calcium are all absorbed in the 
duodenum.	
In gastric bypass, the duodenum is also bypassed greatly, limiting the absorption 
of these vitamins and minerals. Careful supplementation is mandatory to prevent 
malnutrition. Protein deficiencies are also common and supplementation is necessary, 
especially in early postoperative recovery to prevent muscle wasting during the rapid 
weight loss period.
84.	
Correct answer: B
Tell the family that when they visit the patient in his long-term care facility, 
they can apply a moisturizing lotion when visiting. Skin becomes very dry, and 
gentle application of a moisturizer may relieve discomfort. Deep tissue massage is 
contraindicated due to the decreased platelet count and increased bruising.
85.	
Correct answer: B
Drinking water from a mountain stream is not the only way to acquire giardiasis, 
because any contaminated water can lead to infection.

236  ❙  Section 9
86.	
Correct answer: C
Giardia lamblia is a protozoan parasite that colonizes the small intestine, causing 
diarrhea.
87.	
Correct answer: A
The Minnesota tube is the best choice for differentiating bleeding from the esophagus 
or the stomach. The Minnesota tube has separate suction and balloons that can 
function independently. The Sengstaken–Blakemore tube has only three lumens 
with only one suction port. The Linton-Nachlas tube is for gastric varices only. The 
standard nasogastric tube has no balloon function to tamponade bleeding.
88.	
Correct answer: C
A diagnosis of acute mesenteric artery occlusion is supported by a history of colicky 
periumbilical pain associated with explosive diarrhea. Abdominal pain becomes 
constant and diffuse. As symptoms progress, the patient will become tachycardic, 
tachypneic, feverish, and hypotensive with worsening abdominal pain and rigidity. 
Skin will become cold and clammy with shunting as compensatory mechanisms fail.

❙
  237 
❙
Section 10
Renal
SECTION 10: RENAL QUESTIONS
1.	
Which of the following solutions is usually avoided in patients with kidney 
failure?
A.	 Hetastartch
B.	 Lactated Ringer’s solution
C.	 0.45 NaCl
D.	 Albumin 5%
2.	
Which of the following statements about creatinine is true?
A.	 A normal range is 0.8 to 1.4 mg/dl
B.	 Creatinine levels are higher in females
C.	 Lower than normal levels may indicate pyelonephritis
D.	 Low levels are a precursor to eclampsia
3.	
Sudden anuria may be due to
A.	 An embolic event
B.	 Congestive heart failure
C.	 Prostate enlargement
D.	 Azotemia
4.	
The BUN may be elevated in patients
A.	 Undergoing steroid treatments
B.	 Taking streptomycin
C.	 Taking chloramphenicol
D.	 With a low protein intake
5.	
The current definition of acute renal failure is
A.	 Trauma to one or both kidneys
B.	 Decrease in renal perfusion from shock or anaphylaxis
C.	 A sudden or rapid decline in renal filtration function
D.	 An obstruction to passage of urine
6.	
Postrenal AKI may be caused by
A.	 Malignant hypertension
B.	 Transplant rejection
C.	 Neurogenic bladder
D.	 Preeclampsia

238  ❙  Section 10
7.	
Patients who have sustained crush injuries are susceptible to
A.	 Hypokalemia
B.	 Lowered CK levels
C.	 Rhabdomyolysis
D.	 Alkalized urine
8.	
Anuria is defined as a urine output of
A.	 Less than 30 ml/h
B.	 200 ml/d
C.	 300 ml/d
D.	 Less than 100 ml/d
9.	
Nephrotoxicity may be caused by which of the following medications?
A.	 Furosemide
B.	 Aspirin
C.	 Thioguanine
D.	 Acyclovir
10.	
Allergic nephritis may be caused by
A.	 Inadequate protein consumption
B.	 Weight loss
C.	 Cimetidine
D.	 Water intoxication
11.	
The primary site for urea synthesis is in the
A.	 Kidneys
B.	 Liver
C.	 Lungs
D.	 Pancreas
12.	
Increased production of urea may be due to
A.	 GI bleeding
B.	 Low protein diet
C.	 Congenital kidney disease
D.	 Hypothermia
13.	
An important nursing consideration when administering mannitol to your 
progressive care patient is
A.	 Higher doses are required for patients suffering from rhabdomyolysis
B.	 Mannitol is not to be used in head injured patients
C.	 Mannitol must be administered using an inline 5 micron filter
D.	 Mannitol causes ototoxicity if administered rapidly
14.	
All of the following are treatments for hyperkalemia except
A.	 Glucose and insulin
B.	 Kaon
C.	 Calcium gluconate
D.	 Bicarbonate administration

Renal  ❙  239
15.	
Your patient has congestive heart failure and was prescribed Lasix for water 
retention by her nurse practitioner. The patient’s feet and legs continued to 
swell, so she took an extra Lasix this morning. She became dizzy and nauseous 
and then was admitted to the PCU. Now she has profound muscle weakness and 
flat T waves. You would expect this patient’s potassium level at this time to be 
approximately
A.	 1.8 mEq/L
B.	 3.8 mEq/L
C.	 4.2 mEq/L
D.	 6.1 mEq/L
16.	
Magnesium is required for all of the following physiologic functions except
A.	 To act as an antagonist to calcium
B.	 Enzyme activation
C.	 Synthesis of nucleic acid and proteins
D.	 Sodium–potassium pump operation
17.	
Your patient was admitted and treated for Torsades de Pointes. You are teaching 
about adding foods to his diet that are rich in magnesium. Your patient 
asks which of the following foods on his favorite foods list is a poor source of 
magnesium.
A.	 Honey
B.	 Broccoli
C.	 Almonds
D.	 Chocolate
18.	
The most common cause of hypermagnesemia is
A.	 Gastrointestinal bypass
B.	 Gastrointestinal fistulas
C.	 Renal failure
D.	 Overdose
19.	
What percentage of calcium is stored in the bone?
A.	 99%
B.	 85%
C.	 80%
D.	 75%
20.	
Serum calcium is increased by which of the following conditions?
A.	 Increases in vitamin D
B.	 Renal tubular excretion
C.	 Gastrointestinal excretion
D.	 Bone demineralization
21.	
Your patient is undergoing hemodialysis in your PCU for acute renal failure 
as a result of uncontrolled type 2 diabetes. His wife asks how you know the 
hemodialysis is effective. Adequacy of dialysis is measured by
A.	 Urine creatinine clearance
B.	 Sodium, chloride, and potassium levels
C.	 Blood pressure
D.	 Urea clearance

240  ❙  Section 10
22.	
You are caring for a patient in kidney failure. As a progressive care nurse, you 
know one expected side effect of kidney failure is the development of
A.	 Anemia
B.	 Pulmonary secretions
C.	 Hyponatremia
D.	 Hypoxia
23.	
Use of the colloid Hetastarch may affect your patient in which of the following 
ways?
A.	 Hetastarch may elevate serum amylase levels
B.	 Hetastarch may decrease serum potassium levels
C.	 Hetastarch may increase capillary permeability
D.	 Hetastarch may cause acute tubular necrosis
24.	
The normal adult glomerular filtration rate (GFR) is
A.	 180 L/day
B.	 600 ml/min
C.	 250 ml/hr
D.	 75 L/day
25.	
Which of the following fluids can accelerate systemic inflammation in trauma 
patients by activating neutrophils?
A.	 Colloids
B.	 Crystalloids
C.	 Osmotic diuretics
D.	 Hypertonic saline
26.	
Which of the following IV fluids actually suppresses inflammation?
A.	 Hypertonic saline
B.	 Normal saline
C.	 Hetastarch
D.	 D5W
27.	
A type of IV fluid used to create volume expansion would be
A.	 Hypotonic
B.	 A crystalloid
C.	 A colloid
D.	 0.45% normal saline
28.	
An IV fluid not considered to be a colloid would be
A.	 0.2% normal saline
B.	 Mannitol
C.	 Dextran
D.	 Hetastarch
29.	
Which IV fluid listed below is least likely to be used for resuscitation?
A.	 5% albumin
B.	 25% albumin
C.	 Dextrose 5% in water (D5W)
D.	 Lactated Ringer’s

Renal  ❙  241
30.	
If water shifts out of the vascular bed and into the cells by osmosis, an IV fluid 
causing that effect would be
A.	 25% albumin
B.	 Mannitol
C.	 0.9% normal saline
D.	 0.45% NS
31.	
Which of the following statements is true regarding the administration of 
colloids?
A.	 As hydrostatic pressure decreases, pores increase in size to let particles through
B.	 You can give smaller amounts of fluid (about 250 ml) and achieve the same effect 
you would with 4 liters of crystalloids
C.	 Edema takes a much shorter time to resolve
D.	 Colloids are neuroprotective
32.	
The two most commonly used isotonic fluids are
A.	 0.45% NS and 0.2% NS
B.	 Normal saline (0.9%) and lactated Ringer’s
C.	 0.45% NS and 0.9% NS
D.	 5% albumin and 0.2% NS
33.	
Which drug is known to cause nephrogenic diabetes insipidus?
A.	 Demeclocycline
B.	 Morphine
C.	 Lactulose
D.	 Vasopressin
34.	
Your patient was initially admitted two days ago for a paracentesis to remove 
fluid from a pleural effusion. The patient has a history of diabetes and a familial 
history of lupus. The patient also underwent a CT of the chest with contrast. 
When assessing the patient this morning, you note generalized edema and mild 
shortness of breath. The patient’s vital signs are essentially unchanged. The 
patient states he is tired and has a loss of appetite. The physician had ordered a 
variety of daily blood tests. All results were within normal parameters except the 
following:
BUN 4.1
CR 2.1
Albumin 2.4
Based on the patient’s presentation, history and lab results, you believe the 
patient is suffering from
A.	 Contrast-induced nephropathy
B.	 Hyperalbunemia
C.	 Acute tubular necrosis
D.	 Hypolipidemia

242  ❙  Section 10
35.	
You are assessing your patient’s existing shunt prior to emergency hemodialysis. 
You note there is no thrill or bruit at the shunt site. Your next nursing action 
should be to
A.	 Call the surgeon to do a new graft
B.	 Use a Doppler to determine graft patency
C.	 Administer a bolus of heparin
D.	 Continue with the hemodialysis, as there is nothing wrong
36.	
The usual amount of dialysate used in peritoneal dialysis is
A.	 0.5–1 L
B.	 1–2 L
C.	 2–3 L
D.	 3–4 L
37.	
You are preparing to teach your patient about peritoneal dialysis. It is important 
to tell the patient that which one of the following findings is normal?
A.	 During the instillation phase the insertion site may leak
B.	 During the dwell phase you may feel abdominal fullness and shortness of breath
C.	 During the dwell phase subcutaneous fluid may be seen in the groin
D.	 During the drain phase you will feel dizzy and have palpitations
38.	
You are providing discharge teaching to the family of a patient who received 
peritoneal dialysis. The patient will undergo at least three more treatments at a 
rural outpatient clinic. As part of the discharge teaching, you give the patient 
a home glucometer. The daughter questions this action because her mother is not 
a diabetic. An appropriate response to the daughter would be
A.	 Peritoneal dialysis can cause diabetes
B.	 Her mother was just diagnosed with diabetes
C.	 The dialysate contains glucose and can lead to hyperglycemia
D.	 Peritoneal dialysis may lead to pancreatitis
39.	
Which of the following fruits has the lowest sodium content per 3.5-ounce 
serving?
A.	 Cantaloupe
B.	 Grapes
C.	 Peaches
D.	 Blackberries
40.	
Your patient is trying to limit his salt intake. Which of the following meat 
products would you recommend for him to eat?
A.	 Chicken without the skin
B.	 Canned beef hash
C.	 Fresh pike
D.	 Canned crab

Renal  ❙  243
41.	
Your patient sustained an injury to a kidney two days ago, resulting in 
hyperlipidemia, edema, low albumin in the blood, and proteinuria. These 
findings are indicative that the patient is suffering from
A.	 Nephrotic syndrome
B.	 An abdominal infection
C.	 A catheter-induced nephrotoxic injury
D.	 Postrenal failure
42.	
A common cause of hyponatremia is
A.	 Salt water drowning
B.	 Overhydration
C.	 Administration of hypertonic solutions
D.	 Hyperoxia
43.	
An elderly patient has a fever, chills, dysuria, frequency, and pain at the 
costovertebral angle. It is likely this patient is suffering from
A.	 Pyelonephritis
B.	 Urinary calculi
C.	 A lower urinary tract infection
D.	 AKI
44.	
The primary causative organism for urinary tract infections is
A.	 Escherichia coli
B.	 Staphylococcus aureus
C.	 Proteus species
D.	 Klebsiella
45.	
An elderly male patient requires urinary catheterization. As you attempt to 
advance the catheter, you meet resistance and cannot advance the catheter more 
than about 3 inches into the urethra. The probable cause of this blockage is
A.	 A urinary calculus
B.	 Benign prostatic hyperplasia
C.	 A large catheter
D.	 A small catheter that has curled on itself
46.	
What symptoms would you expect in a patient with genital herpes?
A.	 Dysuria, myalgia, and burning pain
B.	 Dyspareunia, pustules, and itching
C.	 Single, crusted lesion that is painful
D.	 Fever, groin pain, and lymphadenopathy
47.	
Which of the following drugs would be used for an initial outbreak of genital 
herpes?
A.	 Penicillin VK 500 mg every 8 hours for 10 days
B.	 Acyclovir 400 mg every 8 hours for 10 days
C.	 Septra DS 160/800 mg every 12 hours for 10 days
D.	 Doxycycline 100 mg every 12 hours for 10 days

244  ❙  Section 10
48.	
Intrinsic AKI is most commonly caused by
A.	 Arteriolar vasoconstriction
B.	 Acute ischemic or cytotoxic injury
C.	 Amphotericin
D.	 Hypercalcemia
49.	
You are receiving report on a patient who was injured when he suffered a seizure 
while working on his roof. His sodium level on admission was 130 mEq/L. What 
symptoms of hyponatremia would you expect this patient to exhibit?
A.	 Twitching
B.	 Tachypnea
C.	 Lethargy
D.	 Flattened T waves
50.	
A drug reaction often caused by a Beta-lactam antibiotic that causes an acute 
inflammation of the kidneys where the primary lesions are in the interstitial 
space between the nephron is known as
A.	 Afferent vasodilation
B.	 Progressive nephron loss
C.	 Intrarenal failure (AKI)
D.	 Amyloidosis
51.	
One of the most common causes for the symptoms of hyponatremia is
A.	 An adrenal gland tumor
B.	 An impaired thirst impulse
C.	 Lung muscle paralysis
D.	 Brain swelling
52.	
The definition of euvolemic hyponatremia is
A.	 Water intake is sufficient to meet the body’s needs
B.	 Sodium and water are lost from the body to neutralize sodium content
C.	 As total body water increases, the body’s sodium content stays the same
D.	 Sodium and water are both lost from the body, but the sodium loss is greater
53.	
When sodium and water are both lost from the body and the sodium loss is 
greater, this condition is known as
A.	 Hypovolemic hyponatremia
B.	 Hyponatremia valgus
C.	 Water intoxication
D.	 Hyponatremic gravidarum
54.	
Your patient is suffering from a condition where both sodium and water content 
in the body increase. However, the water gain is greater, and the patient is 
developing pulmonary edema. This patient’s condition is called
A.	 Hypervolemic hyponatremia
B.	 Hyperphosphatemia
C.	 Manheim syndrome
D.	 Hyponatremia valgus

Renal  ❙  245
55.	
Causes of hyponatremia include which of the conditions listed below?
A.	 Confusion
B.	 Muscle spasms
C.	 Burns
D.	 Convulsions
56.	
The normal range for serum osmolality in a healthy adult is
A.	 163 to 240 mOsm/kg
B.	 275 to 295 mOsm/kg
C.	 55 to 110 mOsm/kg
D.	 120 to 195 mOsm/kg
57.	
Which of the following conditions is likely to lead to hypernatremia?
A.	 Vomiting
B.	 Liver failure
C.	 Fresh water drowning
D.	 Diabetes insipidus
58.	
You notice your patient’s hand spasming when the automatic blood pressure 
cuff inflates. When you attempt a manual blood pressure measurement, the 
same thing happens when you inflate just past the systolic pressure and keep the 
pressure in place. This carpopedal spasm is indicative of
A.	 Hypokalemia
B.	 Hyperphosphatemia
C.	 Hypocalcemia
D.	 Hypernatremia
59.	
While assessing your patient, you notice significant pretibial and pedal edema. 
When the patient is weighed, you note he stated he has gained 1.4 kilograms of 
weight in 24 hours. This is equal to at least __________ ml of excess fluid.
A.	 2,200
B.	 1,400
C.	 3,000
D.	 500
60.	
One way to check for low calcium levels is to tap over a branch of the facial 
nerve. If the patient is hypocalcemic, the upper lip on the same side (ipsilateral) 
will twitch. This response is known as
A.	 Trousseau’s sign
B.	 Chvostek’s sign
C.	 Grey–Turner’s sign
D.	 Homans’ sign

246  ❙  Section 10
61.	
Your patient is an elderly diabetic with congestive heart failure. After 4 days 
of no contact, her daughter found her in bed, unresponsive. She has a red, dry, 
swollen tongue, temperature of 102ºF, and flushed dry skin. She is tachycardic, 
hypotensive, and has decreased reflexes. Her urine specific gravity is 1.050. You 
suspect this patient is suffering from
A.	 Hypernatremia
B.	 Hypocalcemia
C.	 Hypermagnesemia
D.	 Hypokalemia
62.	
What percentage of the body’s potassium may be found in the extracellular fluid?
A.	 2%
B.	 5%
C.	 10%
D.	 98%
63.	
Potassium is reabsorbed in which of the areas listed below?
A.	 Proximal tubules
B.	 Distal tubules
C.	 Ascending colon
D.	 Descending colon
64.	
Generalized muscle weakness progressing to coma is a late sign of a patient 
suffering from
A.	 Hyponatremia
B.	 Repetitive seizure activity
C.	 A lack of ADH
D.	 Poor fluid intake
65.	
Your patient came to the PCU with severe abdominal pain. It was determined that 
she has peritonitis and had a J-tube placed while waiting for an ICU bed. This 
patient is at risk for which of the following electrolyte deficits?
A.	 Sodium
B.	 Magnesium
C.	 Manganese
D.	 Phosphorus
66.	
___________ is the major extracellular cation, and _________ is the major 
intracellular cation.
A.	 Calcium, magnesium
B.	 Sodium, calcium
C.	 Potassium, sodium
D.	 Sodium, potassium
67.	
If your patient is hypokalemic, what changes would you expect to see on an EKG 
tracing?
A.	 Peaked T waves
B.	 U waves
C.	 Shortened QT intervals
D.	 Absent P waves

Renal  ❙  247
68.	
The food listed below that has the lowest amount of potassium is
A.	 Avocados
B.	 Raisins
C.	 Potatoes
D.	 Carrots
69.	
Your new patient originally came to the ED for exercise intolerance and shortness 
of breath. It was determined he had excess fluid retention secondary to mild 
CHF. The patient was placed on diuretics, then transferred to the PCU, where you 
have been educating him about dietary issues. You discussed cooking methods 
for vegetables with your patient and his wife. Which of the following cooking 
techniques leaches out the greatest amount of potassium from vegetables?
A.	 Boiling
B.	 Baking
C.	 Steaming
D.	 Microwaving
70.	
Your patient is receiving potassium in his IV fluid, and the physician has ordered 
a potassium rider. What is the maximum rate of infusion for potassium solutions 
in a peripheral IV line?
A.	 2 mEq/hour
B.	 4 mEq/hour
C.	 10 mEq/hour
D.	 15 mEq/hour
71.	
The major cation in intracellular fluid is
A.	 Sodium
B.	 Calcium
C.	 Potassium
D.	 Magnesium
72.	
Hypokalemia may cause significant changes in acid–base balance. Which 
condition below is associated with hypokalemia?
A.	 Respiratory alkalosis only
B.	 Metabolic alkalosis only
C.	 Both respiratory and metabolic alkalosis
D.	 Metabolic acidosis only
73.	
Hypokalemia due to excessive urinary excretion would not be caused by
A.	 Oliguria
B.	 Renal disease
C.	 Lasix
D.	 Increased adrenal cortical hormones
74.	
It is recommended that adults consume approximately ______ mg of potassium 
daily.
A.	 500
B.	 1,000
C.	 2,000
D.	 3,500

248  ❙  Section 10
75.	
Normal magnesium levels for an adult are in the range of
A.	 0.5–1.5 mg/dl
B.	 1.5–2 mg/dl
C.	 2–3 mg/dl
D.	 4–5 mg/dl
76.	
Magnesium is most prevalent in which of the following areas of the body?
A.	 Extracellular fluid
B.	 In the liver
C.	 In the bone
D.	 In the spleen
77.	
As part of his discharge teaching, you are helping your patient determine what 
foods are rich in magnesium. He asks you what the recommended daily intake of 
magnesium is for an adult. Your answer is
A.	 50–100 mg per day
B.	 100–200 mg per day
C.	 200–350 mg per day
D.	 350–420 mg per day
78.	
Excessive intake of calcium and vitamin D, prolonged NG suctioning and high 
dose steroid use may lead to
A.	 Hypernatremia
B.	 Lethargy, flaccidity, and hypotonia
C.	 Bradycardia
D.	 Hypomagnesmia
79.	
Which of the following statements about calcium is true?
A.	 Approximately 40% of calcium is ionized in the serum
B.	 Calcium levels cannot be correlated with albumin levels
C.	 Calcium bonded to protein cannot pass the capillary wall
D.	 Calcium is not necessary for coagulation
80.	
You are testing for hypocalcemia by trying to elicit Trousseau’s sign. You elicit this 
response by
A.	 Tapping the cheek
B.	 Lifting the left leg up and looking for head movement toward the chest
C.	 Inflating a BP cuff to greater than the systolic pressure for 3 minutes and waiting 
for a carpal spasm
D.	 Taking a sharp object up from the heel to the toes and watching for the toes to 
spread
81.	
Your patient is scheduled to undergo continuous renal replacement therapy 
(CRRT) this week. Your patient teaching should include which of the following 
drugs that need to be stopped 2–3 days prior to therapy?
A.	 Beta-blockers
B.	 ACE inhibitors
C.	 Heparin
D.	 Calcium channel blockers

Renal  ❙  249
82.	
Your patient has renal failure and will be undergoing continuous renal 
replacement therapy (CRRT). She asks if she can have visitors during the 
procedure. You tell her
A.	 “Of course. There are no restrictions.”
B.	 “No. They would be in the way of the equipment.”
C.	 “No. They will increase your risk of infection.”
D.	 “Probably, but if they are sensitive to the sight of blood, they may want to wait 
until after the procedure.”
83.	
Your patient is in renal failure after cardiac arrest, causing continued 
cardiovascular instability. The best method for removal of his extra fluid is by 
using
A.	 Hemodialysis
B.	 Peritoneal dialysis
C.	 Continuous renal replacement therapy
D.	 Plasmapheresis
84.	
Hemodialysis is used to treat many metabolic abnormalities as well as renal 
failure. One possible use for hemodialysis is to administer
A.	 Vitamin C and calcium carbonate for patients with osteoporosis
B.	 Erythropoietin for excessive iron
C.	 Phosphate binders for hyperphosphatemia
D.	 Glucose for hyperglycemia
85.	
Communication among all staff is vital. When transferring your patient with a 
graft, which of the following information is a priority to communicate to all staff 
that may come in contact with this patient?
A.	 Last dialysis date
B.	 Location of the graft
C.	 Type of dialysis machine used
D.	 Total fluid removed with last dialysis
86.	
A nursing consideration when administering magnesium to a patient would 
include
A.	 Administering an IV dose quickly, over three minutes
B.	 Being prepared to give calcium gluconate if needed
C.	 Knowing high magnesium levels enhance the action of digitalis
D.	 Knowing calcium levels will rise as magnesium is given intravenously
87.	
Your patient was just diagnosed with SIADH. Causes of SIADH may include
A.	 Stupor
B.	 Guillain–Barré syndrome
C.	 Seizures
D.	 Hallucinations
88.	
Urinary calculi most often form in the
A.	 Ureters
B.	 Glomerulus
C.	 Bladder
D.	 Renal pelvis

250  ❙  Section 10
89.	
Hypertonic hyponatremia may occur as a result of
A.	 Mannitol administration
B.	 Hypoglycemia
C.	 Myocardial infarction
D.	 Hormonal medication from the pituitary gland
90.	
Which of the following statements is false regarding water and sodium regulation 
in the elderly?
A.	 The sensation of thirst, renal function, concentration, and hormonal modulators of 
salt and water balance are often impaired in the elderly patient
B.	 Elderly patients have fewer problems with sodium and water balance secondary to 
nutritional deficits
C.	 Elderly patients are highly susceptible to iatrogenic events involving salt and water
D.	 Age-related changes, chronic diseases, and lapses in care are often associated with 
impairment of sodium and water metabolism in elderly patients
91.	
Medications that can decrease BUN levels include
A.	 Neomycin and rifampin
B.	 Chloral hydrate and furosemide
C.	 Bacitracin and gentamicin
D.	 Chloramphenicol and streptomycin
92.	
Your patient is becoming confused, is lethargic, and has muscle weakness. 
A review of her lab reports shows a calcium level of 11.7. A common way to treat 
this condition is to use
A.	 D5W and a Kayexalate enema
B.	 Normal saline and a loop diuretic
C.	 Glucose followed by insulin
D.	 Nothing. This is a normal value.
93.	
Your patient has a calcium level of 7.8. You would expect which of the following 
changes to be observed on the EKG tracing?
A.	 Tall, peaked T waves
B.	 A prominent U wave
C.	 A first-degree AV block
D.	 A prolonged QT interval
94.	
What is the primary acid–base disturbance exhibited by patients with AKI?
A.	 Metabolic acidosis
B.	 Respiratory acidosis
C.	 Metabolic alkalosis
D.	 Respiratory alkalosis
95.	
Which of the following statements is true about magnesium?
A.	 Monitor those on digitalis for toxicity (low Mg enhances digitalis actions)
B.	 Give quickly—IV Mg acts slowly and can cause cardiac and/or respiratory arrest
C.	 Addison’s disease will cause hypomagnesemia
D.	 Hypomagnesemia has a sedative effect on the neuromuscular junction

Renal  ❙  251
96.	
Your patient had gastric bypass surgery two weeks ago. Which of the following 
electrolytes is she at most risk for an imbalance?
A.	 Potassium
B.	 Magnesium
C.	 Calcium
D.	 Sodium
97.	
Your patient eats a diet high in calcium because her family has a history of 
osteoporosis. She was admitted to the PCU for a fractured pelvis and pulmonary 
embolism suffered when she fell down her stairs. She has been experiencing 
increasing weakness and muscle tremors. She has noted an increase of “skipping” 
beats. She stated she was very dizzy and disoriented just before she fell. Based on 
the symptoms, which of the following lab values should you assess immediately?
A.	 Calcium level
B.	 Sodium level
C.	 Hemoglobin and hematocrit
D.	 Magnesium level
98.	
Your new patient was diagnosed with breast cancer eight years ago. The cancer 
has now metastasized to the bone. She came to the ED because her current pain 
medication is ineffective and her physician could not be reached by phone. The 
patient was transferred to the PCU about an hour ago. You would expect to see 
which of the following changes in her electrolyte levels?
A.	 Decrease in magnesium and increase in calcium levels
B.	 Decrease in both magnesium and calcium levels
C.	 Increase in both magnesium and calcium levels
D.	 Increase in magnesium and a decrease in calcium levels
99.	
Your patient is in cardiac arrest. Magnesium replacement is ordered. What is the 
usual dose of magnesium for a patient in cardiac arrest?
A.	 0.5 grams
B.	 1–2 grams
C.	 3–4 grams
D.	 4–5 grams
100.	
This morning, magnesium was ordered for your patient. During the infusion, you 
note flaccidity, absent patellar reflexes, shallow respirations, and a flushed face. 
Your first nursing action should be
A.	 Give the magnesium—the patient is just sleeping
B.	 Hold the dose for 1 hour
C.	 Give the dose over 3 hours
D.	 Hold the dose, contact the physician, and obtain a magnesium level
101.	
The family of your patient with hypermagnesemia asks why his face is flushed. 
Which of the following statements would be considered the most appropriate 
therapeutic response?
A.	 “He has a temperature.”
B.	 “His magnesium level is a little high and causes his face to look flushed.”
C.	 “He is embarrassed because the hospital gown does not provide enough coverage.”
D.	 “He just completed his physical therapy.”

252  ❙  Section 10
102.	
Hypertonic fluids shift fluid from the intracellular to extracellular fluid and, as a 
result, expand blood volume. An example of a hypertonic fluid is
A.	 Ringer’s lactate
B.	 0.9 NS
C.	 D5W
D.	 3% saline
103.	
Which of the following is the correct fluid exchange sequence in peritoneal 
dialysis?
A.	 Dump, dwell, and drain
B.	 Instillation, dwell, and drain
C.	 Drain, instillation, and dwell
D.	 Instillation, drain, and dwell
104.	
Peritoneal dialysis functions by using which two principles?
A.	 Diffusion and ultrafiltration
B.	 Osmotic pressure and osmosis
C.	 Ultrafiltration and oncotic pressure
D.	 Diffusion and osmosis
105.	
During the drain phase you note only 50% return in the collection bag. Your next 
action should be to
A.	 Position the patient prone
B.	 Check for kinks, bends, or cracks in the tubing
C.	 Double check the amount installed
D.	 Assess for subcutaneous fluid
106.	
Apheresis is best defined as
A.	 The removal of plasma and/or proteins from the blood
B.	 The selective removal of cells, plasma, and substances from the blood
C.	 The selective removal of cellular components from the blood
D.	 The removal of an antigen in the blood
107.	
Your patient has been diagnosed with hypertension. He states that to control 
his blood pressure, he “will never eat another thing with salt.” An appropriate 
response to this patient would be
A.	 “That is not easy. Most fresh vegetables and fruit have tons of sodium.”
B.	 “Great. Sodium only plays a minor part in water balance and cellular activity, so 
your body won’t know the difference.”
C.	 “You cannot completely eliminate sodium from your diet. Your body has an 
intricate system of safety measures to protect the level of sodium in your body.”
D.	 “Good idea. That should work fine.”
108.	
The recommended sodium daily intake for someone limiting sodium in their diet 
ranges between
A.	 100 and 900 mg
B.	 1,000 and 2,000 mg
C.	 3,000 and 5,000 mg
D.	 4,000 and 6,000 mg

Renal  ❙  253
109.	
Your patient was put on a limited sodium diet and has been working with a 
nutritionist. He was admitted to your PCU for chest pain and pulmonary edema. 
He reports that he had stopped all additional sodium intake, has been following 
his diet regimen closely, stopped eating out, and is drinking 8–10 eight-ounce 
glasses of tap water every day. He also states he is voiding sufficient amounts. 
His sodium level is 155 mEq/L. From the potential causes listed below, what is the 
likely cause of this patient’s hypernatremia?
A.	 Renal failure
B.	 Hypotonic fluids
C.	 Diabetes mellitus
D.	 His water softener system
110.	
Your patient was having chest pain while lifting boxes into his attic. The 
symptoms abated immediately when he stopped lifting the weight. His wife 
brought him to the ED anyway. The EKG and tests were normal, so he was 
transferred to the PCU. The patient’s wife says he does not eat a good diet and 
that it may cause a heart attack. The patient loves cheese, but wants to limit 
his sodium intake. Which of the following cheeses has the highest sodium per 
3.5 ounces?
A.	 Swiss cheese
B.	 Mozzarella cheese
C.	 Cheddar cheese
D.	 Parmesan cheese
111.	
Your female patient has a fever, chills, pain on urination, moderate burning at 
the supra pubic area, and diarrhea. This patient is most likely suffering from
A.	 Acute renal failure
B.	 A kidney infection
C.	 A lower urinary tract infection
D.	 An upper urinary tract infection
112.	
A renal transplant that results from humoral rejection or acute cellular rejection 
may be definitively diagnosed only via
A.	 Ultrasound
B.	 Nuclear scan
C.	 Doppler scan
D.	 Renal biopsy
113.	
In the polyuric phase of AKI, it is important for the nurse to carefully monitor
A.	 Nitrogen balance
B.	 Potassium and phosphorus
C.	 Dopamine and mannitol levels
D.	 Desmopressin levels
114.	
Oliguria is a urine output of 100–400 ml/d and is usually the result of
A.	 Pyelonephritis
B.	 Rhabdomyolysis
C.	 Prerenal syndrome
D.	 Potassium levels

254  ❙  Section 10
115.	
Your patient was sent to the PCU directly from her physician’s office. She had been 
complaining of fatigue and generalized pain. Her lab work indicated a rapidly 
rising BUN, and she is now undergoing further tests. While assessing the patient, 
you note she has severe acne around the face and neck. You suspect that the rise 
in BUN may be due to the patient’s use of
A.	 Tetracycline
B.	 HCTZ
C.	 Bumetanide
D.	 Mannitol
116.	
Mannitol and loop diuretics may be used in the treatment of AKI. Mannitol is 
nontoxic but must be used with caution because
A.	 Mannitol may damage the eighth cranial nerve
B.	 Mannitol may cause vestibular impairment
C.	 Mannitol may produce a hyperosmolar state
D.	 Mannitol may bind with proteins in the renal tubule
117.	
The use of NSAIDs may cause
A.	 Prerenal AKI
B.	 Intrinsic AKI
C.	 Postrenal AKI
D.	 Increased urine osmolality
118.	
A colloid that is contraindicated in bleeding disorders, renal failure, and CHF is
A.	 0.45% normal saline
B.	 Mannitol
C.	 Albumin
D.	 Dextran
119.	
Which of the following statements is false about calcium?
A.	 Although calcium is needed for blood clotting, prolonged deficiency or very low 
levels are needed before clotting mechanisms are altered
B.	 Calcium functions as a membrane stabilizer, so low levels increase excitability of 
nerves and muscles (especially GI)
C.	 Regulation of calcium varies by rate of GI absorption and by thyroid control of 
vitamin D absorption
D.	 Bones store calcium. If serum levels are low, bones release calcium and become 
osteoporotic
120.	
Your patient’s potassium level was 6.1 this morning. As a progressive care nurse, 
you believe the result is due to an improper blood drawing technique. The results 
of the next draw show a potassium level of 5.7. The physician elects to try and 
remove potassium by increasing renal excretion. The drug(s) that will likely be 
used for this purpose are
A.	 Diuretics and low-dose dopamine
B.	 Glucose and insulin
C.	 Kayexalate
D.	 Sodium bicarbonate

Renal  ❙  255
SECTION 10: RENAL ANSWERS
1.	
Correct answer: B
Use of Lactated Ringer’s solution is often avoided in a patient with kidney failure 
because LR contains potassium.
2.	
Correct answer: A
A normal range for creatinine is 0.8 to 1.4 mg/dl. Females have less muscle mass than 
males, so they have lower levels of creatinine. Higher levels than normal may indicate 
pyelonephritis or eclampsia.
3.	
Correct answer: A
Sudden anuria is usually due to postrenal AKI, such as from an embolic event. 
Mechanical obstruction of the urinary collection system is involved. The collection 
system is comprised of the renal pelvis, the ureters, the bladder, and the urethra.
4.	
Correct answer: A
The BUN may be elevated in patients undergoing steroid treatments. The BUN may 
also be elevated in cases of GI or mucosal bleeding or excessive protein intake.
5.	
Correct answer: C
The current definition of acute renal failure is a sudden or rapid decline in renal 
filtration function. Acute renal failure is now known as acute renal injury (AKI) and 
can be classified as prerenal, intrinsic, or postrenal. Because material covered on the 
PCCN exam reflects practice up to about 6 months ago, the new terminology should 
be added. Some item writers may use this new terminology on the exam.
6.	
Correct answer: C
Postrenal AKI may be caused by a neurogenic bladder. Other causes include tumor, 
tricyclic antidepressants, fibrosis, BPH, prostate CA, urethral obstruction, stone 
disease, and ligation during surgery. Malignant hypertension, transplant rejection, 
DIC, and preeclampsia are causes of intrinsic failure/injury.
7.	
Correct answer: C
Patients who have sustained crush injuries are susceptible to the development of 
rhabdomyolysis. Creatine and myoglobin is released from damaged cells. Large 
amounts of myoglobin are toxic to kidney cells. Often, potassium is released from 
its normal intracellular compartmental to cause hyperkalemia. To help mitigate the 
rhabdomyolysis, crystalloids that have been alkalinized by sodium bicarbonate are 
used, along with the diuretic mannitol. Use of mannitol increases urine output and 
helps reduce the excess potassium, and the bicarbonate helps mitigate acidosis.
8.	
Correct answer: D
Anuria is defined as a urine output less than 100 ml/d.
9.	
Correct answer: D
Acyclovir is nephrotoxic and can crystallize in the kidney and cause AKI. It is 
important for the nurse to carefully monitor the infusion time and the amount of fluid 
used to dilute intravenous drugs. Additional drugs that can crystallize in the kidney 
are sulfonamides, idinivir, and triamterine.

256  ❙  Section 10
10.	
Correct answer: C
Allergic nephritis may be caused by cimetidine. Cimetidine interferes with creatinine 
excretion in the renal tubule. Renal function does not decrease, but the creatinine does 
rise. If diminished renal function exists, an allergic nephritis may develop.
11.	
Correct answer: B
Over 99% of urea synthesis occurs in the liver. Dietary protein is converted into amino 
acids and peptides. About 90% of these molecules are absorbed and transferred to the 
liver. Any excess nitrogen is converted into urea.
12.	
Correct answer: A
Increased production of urea may be due to GI bleeding. Approximately 500 ml of 
whole blood equals 100 grams of protein. The extra protein must be converted to urea.
13.	
Correct answer: C
An important nursing consideration when administering mannitol to your progressive 
care patient is mannitol must be administered using an inline 5 micron filter. 
Mannitol may crystalize at low temperatures. The filter is also required if using 
mannitol with a concentration greater than 15%. Be cautious when giving mannitol to 
a patient in renal failure because the mannitol may cause hyperosmolarity.
14.	
Correct answer: B
Kaon is not a treatment for hyperkalemia. Kaon is another name for potassium 
gluconate, a common potassium replacement medication. Glucose and insulin, 
calcium gluconate, and bicarbonate all bind or push the potassium back into the cell 
from the intravascular space and reduce extracellular potassium levels.
15.	
Correct answer: A
This patient is exhibiting signs and symptoms of hypokalemia. Hypokalemia is 
defined as any potassium level under 3.5 mEq/L. It is important to reinforce teaching 
patients how diuretics impact electrolyte levels and the underlying condition.
16.	
Correct answer: A
Magnesium does not act as an antagonist to calcium. Magnesium is required for 
enzyme activation, synthesis of nucleic acid and proteins, and sodium–potassium 
pump operation. Magnesium is usually synergistic with calcium to control 
neuromuscular function within all muscle groups.
17.	
Correct answer: A
Honey has the lowest amount of magnesium. It is better to recommend foods such as 
leafy vegetables that have a deep, green color, whole grains, nuts, legumes, seafood, 
cocoa, and chocolate.
18.	
Correct answer: C
Renal failure is one of the most common causes of hypermagnesemia. The patient 
is unable to excrete excess magnesium via the urine. Gastrointestinal bypass and 
fistulas lead to hypomagnesemia.
19.	
Correct answer: A
Ninety-nine percent of the body’s calcium is stored in the bone.
20.	
Correct answer: A
Vitamin D increases serum calcium levels.

Renal  ❙  257
21.	
Correct answer: D
Urea clearance in the blood is the best indicator for monitoring dialysis effectiveness. 
Electrolytes may be altered due to fluid shifting and the distillate used. Blood pressure 
may fluctuate with fluid removal and is not the best measurement method. Urine 
creatinine clearance indicates residual renal function.
22.	
Correct answer: A
You are caring for a patient in kidney failure. As a progressive care nurse, you know 
one expected side effect of kidney failure is the development of anemia. If the kidney 
no longer produces erythropoietin, the bone marrow will not be stimulated to produce 
red blood cells (erythrocytes). Erythrocytes normally survive 80–120 days. It is 
important to note that if your patient is on dialysis, the life of these cells is reduced to 
about 65–80 days. The shortened life span increases the possibility of the development 
of anemia.
23.	
Correct answer: A
Hetastarch may elevate serum amylase levels, but the levels will return to normal 
within a week after administration. Hetastarch will not increase serum potassium 
levels or increase capillary permeability. Hetastarch must be used with caution in 
patients in anaphylactic or septic shock because capillary permeability is already 
increased. Dextran may cause acute tubular necrosis.
24.	
Correct answer: A
The normal adult glomerular filtration rate (GFR) is 180 L/day or 125 ml/min. Normal 
adult urine volume is about 1–2 L/day.
25.	
Correct answer: B
Crystalloids, particularly lactated Ringer’s solution, can accelerate systemic 
inflammation in trauma patients by activating neutrophils. These neutrophils destroy 
surrounding tissue by way of oxidative burst, then release hydrogen peroxide into 
the tissue, leading to acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) and multiple organ 
failure (MOF/MODS).
26.	
Correct answer: A
Hypertonic saline suppresses inflammation, helps correct electrolyte imbalances, and 
pulls water back to the intravascular space from the cells and interstitial spaces.
27.	
Correct answer: C
Colloids are used for volume expansion. Particles suspended in colloids don’t break 
down into smaller pieces in water and most won’t fit through most capillary pores, so 
therefore they stay in the vascular bed.
28.	
Correct answer: A
An IV fluid not considered to be a colloid would be 0.2% normal saline. Colloids 
include human albumin (a natural protein that’s separated from plasma) and 
hetastarch (HES), a synthetic starch derived from hydroxyethyl glucose. Additional 
colloids include mannitol (an alcohol sugar) and dextran (a polysaccharide).
29.	
Correct answer: C
Dextrose 5% in water (D5W) is not used for resuscitation because its glucose is 
metabolized and quickly becomes hypotonic. In fact, D5W is a good source of free 
water.

258  ❙  Section 10
30.	
Correct answer: D
If water shifts out of the vascular bed and into the cells by osmosis, an IV fluid causing 
that effect would be 0.45% NS.
31.	
Correct answer: B
You can give smaller amounts of fluid (about 250 ml) and achieve the same effect you 
would with 4 liters of crystalloids. As hydrostatic pressure rises in the capillaries, the 
pores stretch. This phenomenon causes edema that takes longer to resolve.
32.	
Correct answer: B
The two most commonly used isotonic fluids are normal saline (0.9%) and lactated 
Ringer’s. All the other solutions listed are hypotonic or hypertonic.
33.	
Correct answer: A
Demeclocycline is known to cause nephrogenic diabetes insipidus.
34.	
Correct answer: A
Based on the patient’s presentation, history, and lab results, you believe the patient 
is suffering from contrast-induced nephropathy (CIN). CIN is often defined as renal 
impairment or acute kidney injury occurring within 48–72 hr of administration of 
intravascular high molecular weight radiographic contrast material. The nephropathy 
cannot be attributed to other causes. Lab results that support the finding of 
contrast-induced nephropathy are: proteinuria (greater than 3 g per day). Normally, 
urine contains less than 150 mg of protein per 24-hour period. A clinical definition 
of CIN is an increase in serum creatinine of 0.5 mg/dl or a 25% increase from the 
patient’s baseline within three days of contrast medium exposure. Hypoalbuminemia 
occurs because of the high levels of protein leaking via the kidneys. Low albumin 
causes fluid to move from blood to tissue, causing edema.
35.	
Correct answer: B
Lack of thrill and/or bruit may indicate that the graft has occluded and dialysis is 
not possible. It is best to use a Doppler to determine graft patency prior to any calls or 
administration of any medication. Although you may not hear or feel the thrill and 
bruit, the graft may still be patent. The surgeon should be notified if the Doppler study 
is negative. Heparin will not lyse an existing clot.
36.	
Correct answer: C
Two to three liters of dialysate are commonly used for peritoneal dialysis.
37.	
Correct answer: B
It is common for patients to have a feeling of abdominal fullness related to the 2–3 L 
of dialysate installed in the abdomen and allowed to dwell. Leaking at the insertion 
site must be reported to the physician, as the patient may develop peritonitis, and 
the patient should be monitored closely. Dialysis cannot continue until the insert site 
is repaired. If fluid is felt or seen in the groin, this indicates a hernia and may lead 
to strangulation of any bowel that enters the groin during the dwell phase and is 
trapped there when the dialysate is drained. If a patient feels dizzy or has palpitations 
during the drain phase, this indicates a too-rapid fluid shift or triggering of the vagal 
nerve. The drain time may need to be lengthened.

Renal  ❙  259
38.	
Correct answer: C
The daughter questions the use of a glucometer because her mother is not a 
diabetic. You should tell the daughter the dialysate contains glucose and can lead 
to hyperglycemia. During diffusion, glucose may cross the membranes and cause 
hyperglycemia. It is important for the patient to monitor this complication at home. 
Careful education will assist the family in managing any complications and when to 
notify the physician. Some smaller, rural settings are performing outpatient peritoneal 
dialysis or hiring dialysis nurses to perform this function.
39.	
Correct answer: D
Blackberries have 1 mg of sodium per 3.5 ounce serving. Peaches have 2 mg, grapes 
have 3 mg, and cantaloupe has 12 mg.
40.	
Correct answer: C
To reduce sodium intake, suggest that the patient eat fresh pike. Most fresh fish is low in 
sodium. Pike has only 51 mg of sodium per 3.5 ounce serving, compared with chicken 
at 60–80 mg, canned beef hash at 540 mg, and canned crab at 1,000 mg. Any canned 
or processed meat contains some preservative. For most people, eating fresh or fresh 
frozen meats, vegetables, and fruits will aid in limiting sodium, fat, and sugar intake.
41.	
Correct answer: A
Your patient sustained an injury to a kidney two days ago, resulting in 
hyperlipidemia, edema, low albumin in the blood, and proteinuria. These findings 
are indicative that the patient is suffering from nephrotic syndrome. When glomeruli 
are damaged, proteins such as albumin leak into the bloodstream. In this disease, 
3+ grams of protein may leak into the urine over 24 hours (20+ times normal). 
Hypoalbuminemia occurs because of the high levels of protein leaking via the 
kidneys. Low albumin causes fluid to move from blood to tissue, causing edema.
42.	
Correct answer: B
Overhydration is a common cause of hyponatremia. The level is below normal due 
to dilution and not a disease process or injury. Intake of fluids orally or intravenously 
has caused an artificial drop in sodium. Correction is done through fluid restriction 
or decreasing IV rates. Other causes of hyponatremia include loss of sodium through 
sweating or vomiting, shock, bleeding, SIADH, renal failure (inability to save sodium), 
hypoxia, freshwater drowning, or an overadministration of hypotonic fluids.
43.	
Correct answer: A
A patient presenting with fever, chills, dysuria, frequency, and pain at the 
costovertebral angle is likely suffering from pyelonephritis. The patient will also likely 
present with orthostatic vital signs and pain on palpation or urination that may 
radiate toward the umbilicus or lower abdomen.
44.	
Correct answer: A
The primary causative organism for urinary tract infections is Escherichia coli. Newer 
studies have shown that adenovirus-related hemorrhagic cystitis is becoming a more 
frequently diagnosed cause of UTIs.
45.	
Correct answer: B
Benign prostatic hyperplasia is common in elderly men. The prostate gland enlarges 
and impinges on the urethra.

260  ❙  Section 10
46.	
Correct answer: A
Dysuria, myalgia, and burning pain are common symptoms of genital herpes. Genital 
herpes (herpes simplex II) may have no symptoms for years. The most common 
symptoms of an initial outbreak include fever, malaise, dysuria, dyspareunia, and 
vesicles anywhere boxer shorts fit. Most of the vesicles occur on the labia for a female 
and the penis, glans, or scrotum for the male.
47.	
Correct answer: B
Acyclovir (Zovirax), valacyclovir (Valtrex), or famciclovir (Famvir) are the three 
antiviral medications used for herpes outbreaks.
48.	
Correct answer: B
Intrinsic AKI is most commonly caused by acute ischemic or cytotoxic injury. Other 
causes include cell detachment, dilatation of the lumen, and injury to the distal 
nephron. Arteriolar vasoconstriction, amphotericin, and hypercalcemia are causes of 
prerenal AKI.
49.	
Correct answer: A
With hyponatremia, sodium levels drop below 135 mEq/L. Twitching and seizures 
are common, as well as apnea (not tachypnea), irritability (lethargy is seen with 
hypernatremia), and generalized muscle weakness (late sign). Flattened T waves are 
seen with hypokalemia.
50.	
Correct answer: C
A drug reaction often caused by a Beta-lactam antibiotic that causes an acute 
inflammation of the kidneys where the primary lesions are in the interstitial space 
between the nephron is known as intrarenal failure (AKI). Other drugs that may 
cause this reaction are: Cephalosporins, Sulfonamides, Rifampin, Nonsteroidal 
anti-inflammatories, and diuretics. Additional beta-lactam antibiotics include 
penicillin, ampicillin, and methicillin.
51.	
Correct answer: D
Brain swelling causes most of the symptoms of hyponatremia. Sodium is found mostly 
in the body fluids outside the cells. When the amount of sodium in fluids outside cells 
drops, water moves into the cells to balance the levels. This causes the cells to swell 
with too much water. Although most cells can handle this swelling, brain cells cannot 
because the skull is essentially a closed space. An impaired thirst impulse and lung 
muscle paralysis are symptoms of hypernatremia.
52.	
Correct answer: C
The definition of euvolemia is the state that exists when as total body water increases, 
the body’s sodium content stays the same.
53.	
Correct answer: A
When sodium and water are both lost from the body and the sodium loss is greater, 
this condition is known as hypovolemic hyponatremia.
54.	
Correct answer: A
If your patient is suffering from a condition where both sodium and water content in 
the body increase and the water gain is greater, this condition is called hypervolemic 
hyponatremia.

Renal  ❙  261
55.	
Correct answer: C
Causes of hyponatremia may include burns, CHF, diuretics, SIADH, cirrhosis, kidney 
disease, vomiting, diarrhea, and sweating. The other answers presented (confusion, 
muscle spasms, and convulsions) are symptoms of hyponatremia, not causes.
56.	
Correct answer: B
The normal range for serum osmolality in a healthy adult is from 275 to 
295 mOsm/kg.
57.	
Correct answer: D
Diabetes insipidus (lack of ADH) is likely to lead to hypernatremia. Additional causes 
include poor fluid intake, renal failure, and aldosteronism.
58.	
Correct answer: C
The carpopedal spasm is indicative of hypocalcemia and is known as Trousseau’s 
sign. You can also elicit this response by having the patient hyperventilate. When the 
patient becomes alkalotic, the serum calcium level decreases and a carpopedal spasm 
occurs.
59.	
Correct answer: B
1 kilogram = 2.2 pounds = 1,000 ml. Thus, 1.2 kilograms equals 1,200 ml. Although 
you may believe this is too basic a piece of information for a PCCN exam, it is the little 
pieces of information like this that trip people up on the exam.
60.	
Correct answer: B
One way to check for low calcium is to tap over a branch of the facial nerve. If the 
patient is hypocalcemic, the upper lip on the same side (ipsilateral) will twitch. This 
is known as Chvostek’s sign. Trousseau’s sign utilizes a BP cuff to elicit a carpopedal 
spasm indicative of hypocalcemia. Grey–Turner’s sign is ecchymosis around the 
umbilicus, indicating abdominal issues, and Homan’s sign may indicate DVT.
61.	
Correct answer: A
Because of her diabetes, this patient was unable to drink sufficient fluids, leading to 
dehydration, hemoconcentration, and resultant hypernatremia. Due to her diabetes 
she may have additional renal injury. Because of the decreased blood flow through 
the kidneys from the CHF, the kidneys were unable to filter the excess sodium from 
her body.
62.	
Correct answer: A
Approximately 2% of potassium is extracellular, whereas the remaining 98% is 
intracellular. Intracellular electrolytes cannot be directly measured, but extracellular 
levels can be measured. Normal extracellular values range from 3.5 to 5.0 mEq/L.
63.	
Correct answer: B
Regulated excretion (absorption) of potassium is in the distal tubules.
64.	
Correct answer: A
Generalized muscle weakness progressing to coma is a late sign of a patient suffering 
from hyponatremia. Seizure activity, low ADH levels, and poor fluid intake are signs of 
hypernatremia.

262  ❙  Section 10
65.	
Correct answer: A
This patient is at risk for hyponatremia. Large amounts of extracellular fluids are in 
the peritoneal cavity. If sodium is lost in here, then the calcium is no longer available 
to be absorbed into the vasculature.
66.	
Correct answer: D
Sodium is the major extracellular cation, and potassium is the major intracellular 
cation.
67.	
Correct answer: B
A U wave is seen in patients who are hypokalemic. A peaked T wave, a shortened QT 
interval, and an absent P wave are seen with hyperkalemia.
68.	
Correct answer: D
Carrots have the lowest amount of potassium at 233 mg. Avocados have about 
1,484 mg, raisins 751 mg, and potatoes 610 mg.
69.	
Correct answer: A
Boiling leaches out most of the nutrients into the water. Baking is the best method, 
allowing the vegetables to retain most of their potassium and other nutrients.
70.	
Correct answer: C
Potassium should not be infused at any rate greater than 10 mEq/hour to prevent 
extravasations, pain, or spasms related to rapid electrolyte changes.
71.	
Correct answer: C
The major cation in intracellular fluid is potassium.
72.	
Correct answer: C
Potassium and hydrogen move opposite of each other. When a patient is hypokalemic, 
hydrogen moves into the extracellular fluid, leading to both respiratory and metabolic 
alkalosis.
73.	
Correct answer: A
Hypokalemia due to excessive urinary excretion is not caused by oliguria. Oliguria is a 
result of hyperkalemia. Renal disease, Lasix, and increased adrenal cortical hormones 
lead to hypokalemia.
74.	
Correct answer: C
It is recommended that adults consume approximately 2,000 mg of potassium daily.
75.	
Correct answer: C
The current recommended serum magnesium level is 2–3 mg/dl. This level may be 
higher for patients with cardiac disease or in their third trimester of pregnancy to treat 
pregnancy-induced hypertension and to control premature contractions.
76.	
Correct answer: C
Approximately 50% of the body’s magnesium is within the bone marrow. The 
measured serum magnesium only reflects approximately 1% of the body’s magnesium, 
and the remaining 49% is found in the intracellular space.
77.	
Correct answer: D
Currently, the recommended adult intake for magnesium is 350–420 mg per day. For 
pregnant women, the preferred intake is at the higher end of the range. Children’s 
intake should be less, based on age.

Renal  ❙  263
78.	
Correct answer: D
Excessive intake of calcium and vitamin D, prolonged NG suctioning, and high-dose 
steroid use may lead to hypomagnesemia.
79.	
Correct answer: C
If calcium is bonded with protein, the molecule is too large to pass from the 
extracellular fluid into intracellular due to restrictive capillary permeability. Fifty to 
70% of serum calcium is ionized in the serum. Because of the protein binding ability 
of calcium, albumin and calcium levels can be directly correlated. Calcium plays a 
major role in coagulation.
80.	
Correct answer: C
The technique for eliciting a Trousseau’s sign is to inflate a blood pressure cuff greater 
than the systolic blood pressure for 3 minutes. A positive sign is if the carpal nerve 
spasms, causing the hand to curve inward with all fingers touching.
81.	
Correct answer: A
Beta-blockers may cause an anaphylactic reaction with the membranes or the filter in 
the CRRT. Bradykinins are released as a result, causing the systemic anaphylaxis.
82.	
Correct answer: D
Some individuals do not tolerate the sight of blood. Because CRRT occurs outside the 
body, blood is in full sight. To improve communication between both patient and 
visitors, it is best for the patient to let visitors know when procedures are occurring 
so they may visit at a time when a CRRT procedure is not occurring. There are some 
restrictions to how many people may fit in one room with the equipment. This will 
vary by facility. The more people in a room, the higher the risk that the equipment 
could be touched and/or disconnected.
83.	
Correct answer: C
The best method for removal of this patient’s extra fluid is by using continuous renal 
replacement therapy. CRRT results in slower volume regulation to avoid rapid shifts in 
volume. This method results in continuous removal and/or regulation of solutes and 
volume.
84.	
Correct answer: C
Hemodialysis is used to administer phosphate binders for patients with 
hyperphosphatemia. In addition, it may be used to provide vitamin D and calcium 
carbonate for osteoporosis, erythropoietin for iron deficiencies (anemia), and glucose 
for hypoglycemia.
85.	
Correct answer: B
It is imperative that all staff members are made aware of graft site location. This 
includes lab techs, nursing assistants, student nurses, medical staff, physical therapy, 
and respiratory therapy. You want to avoid any lab or blood draws, blood pressures, or 
occlusions in the grafted limb.
86.	
Correct answer: B
A nursing consideration when administering magnesium to a patient would include 
being prepared to administer calcium gluconate. Calcium levels fall when magnesium 
is given IV.

264  ❙  Section 10
87.	
Correct answer: B
Causes of SIADH may include Guillain-Barré syndrome, meningitis, encephalitis, 
brain tumors, head trauma, medications, psychoses, and damage to the 
hypothalamus or pituitary gland during surgery. Stupor, hallucinations, and seizures 
are symptoms of SIADH, not causes.
88.	
Correct answer: D
Urinary calculi most often form in the renal pelvis. Patients who consume a diet high 
in proteins, calcium, or fruit juices are at risk, as are patients with a sedentary lifestyle 
and a history of gout or previous calculi.
89.	
Correct answer: A
Hypertonic hyponatremia can occur after the administration of mannitol or glycerol. 
The osmotically active nonelectrolytes in the extracellular fluid create an osmotic 
gradient that draws water out of the cells and into the extracellular space. This results 
in a dilutional hyponatremia. Hyperglycemia is an additional cause of hypertonic 
hyponatremia. The large sugar molecules draw water from the cells.
90.	
Correct answer: B
“Elderly patients have fewer problems with sodium and water balance secondary to 
nutritional deficits” is a false statement.
True statements include:
“The sensation of thirst, renal function, concentration, and hormonal modulators of 
salt and water balance are often impaired in the elderly patient.”
“Elderly patients are highly susceptible to iatrogenic events involving salt and water.”
“Age-related changes, chronic diseases, and lapses in care are often associated with 
impairment of sodium and water metabolism in elderly patients.”
91.	
Correct answer: D
Medications that can decrease BUN levels include chloramphenicol and streptomycin. 
Chloral hydrate, furosemide neomycin, rifampin, bacitracin, and gentamicin are 
medications that increase BUN levels.
92.	
Correct answer: B
The patient has hypercalcemia, as evidenced by the calcium level of 11.7. A loop 
diuretic prevents reabsorption of calcium, and normal saline is used to increase the 
patient’s glomerular filtration rate. If you were to administer a thiazide diuretic, it 
would actually decrease calcium excretion. Use of glucose, insulin, and Kayexalate are 
not indicated because they are treatments for hyperkalemia.
93.	
Correct answer: D
This patient is hypocalcemic. Lack of calcium slows cardiac contractility (the 
prolonged QT) and the patient might develop Torsades de Pointes (polymorphic 
ventricular tachycardia). Torsades is also caused by hypomagnesmia.
94.	
Correct answer: A
The primary acid–base disturbance exhibited by patients with AKI is metabolic acidosis. 
The AKI patient cannot excrete ammonium or acid ions in quantities that are necessary 
to aid in the excretion of hydrogen. The buildup of the hydrogen causes the acidosis.

Renal  ❙  265
95.	
Correct answer A
Monitor those on digitalis for toxicity (low Mg enhances digitalis actions). The 
other selections are incorrect. They should read, “Hypermagnesemia has a sedative 
effect on the neuromuscular junction”; “Give slowly—IV Mg acts quickly and 
can cause cardiac and/or respiratory arrest”; and “Addison’s disease will cause 
hypermagnesmia.”
96.	
Correct answer: B
Because magnesium is absorbed in the small intestines, surgeries, such as gastric 
bypass, that remove or alter the small intestines place the patient at risk for 
hypomagnesemia. Gastric surgeries also impact water reabsorption, time processing 
in the intestines, calcium level, and amount of lactose in the diet.
97.	
Correct answer: D
This patient is exhibiting signs and symptoms of hypomagnesemia. This is related 
to the high calcium intake. Calcium and magnesium are absorbed in the small 
intestines. Calcium consumed in extremely high doses competes with magnesium 
absorption. The patient needs nutritional teaching to balance her diet.
98.	
Correct answer: A
As cancer spreads through bone, calcium is released into the serum. In a hypercalcemic 
state, magnesium secretion decreases, thus leading to hypomagnesemia.
99.	
Correct answer: B
Only if a patient is in cardiopulmonary arrest would you infuse 1 to 2 g of magnesium. 
IV infusions of magnesium should run no faster than 30 mg per minute. Careful 
monitoring should be done for further EKG changes.
100.	
Correct answer: D
The patient is exhibiting the signs and symptoms of hypermagnesemia. The dose 
should be held, the physician contacted, and the magnesium level evaluated.
101.	
Correct answer: B
The best answer from the choices listed is, “His magnesium level is a little high and 
causes his face to look flushed.” Magnesium levels greater than 5 mEq/L lead to 
vasodilation of the facial vessels.
102.	
Correct answer: D
Hypertonic fluids shift fluid from the intracellular to extracellular fluid and, as a 
result, expand blood volume. An example of a hypertonic fluid is 3% saline. Other 
hypertonic fluids include D50.9 NS and D10W.
103.	
Correct answer: B
The correct sequence for fluid exchange in peritoneal dialysis is to first instill the 
dialysate, allow the fluid to dwell within the abdomen for a predetermined time, and 
drain the fluid. The number of exchanges is determined by the physician and the 
desired outcomes.

266  ❙  Section 10
104.	
Correct answer: D
Peritoneal dialysis functions by the principles of diffusion and osmosis. Diffusion 
is the passive movement of solutes across a membrane. The direction of diffusion is 
based on concentration (from higher to lower), heat, and pressure. The speed at which 
diffusion occurs is based on the grade or steepness of the differences in concentrations 
on each side of the membrane and the molecule moving across the membrane (size, 
polarity). Osmosis is the passive movement of solvents (i.e., water) over a permeable 
membrane. Movement of the solvent depends on the permeability of the membrane—
the more permeable the membrane, the more passive the movement of solutes and 
solvents. Permeability may impact the type of solutes able to unintentionally cross the 
membrane.
105.	
Correct answer: B
Kinking, bends, and cracks in the tubing are the most likely causes of a decreased 
dialysate return. If that does not correct fluid flow, then reposition the patient, assess 
for any subcutaneous fluid or fluid within the groin, double check the amount of fluid 
installed, and complete an assessment before reporting the situation to the physician.
106.	
Correct answer: B
Apheresis is the general term used for all pheresis techniques and encompasses any 
selective removal of cells, plasma, and substances from blood with the return of 
remaining components and volume to the patient. Plasmapheresis is the removal of 
plasma and/or proteins from the blood or as a plasma exchange. Cytapheresis is the 
selective removal of cellular components from the blood (i.e., WBC). Leukocytopheresis 
is the specific removal of WBCs. Erythrocytopheresis is the removal of RBCs. 
Plateletpheresis is the removal of platelets. Plasma adsorption/perfusion is the filtering 
and treatment of plasma via adsorptive fiber filters. Immunoadsorption is the removal 
of an antigen via an antibody filter. Photopheresis is the removal and return of blood 
after exposure to ultraviolet light to destroy specific cells (in solid organ transplant 
rejection).
107.	
Correct answer: C
Sodium cannot be completely eliminated from the diet. Sodium is a major cation 
in the extracellular fluid within the body. Sodium plays a key part in the sodium–
potassium pump, stabilizing polarization of cells, and water balance. The body 
protects sodium levels by titrating aldosterone and antidiuretic hormone (ADH) and 
changing filtration within the kidneys. Fresh fruits and vegetables contain minimal 
amounts of salt. Canned vegetables use sodium to preserve flavor and have the 
highest sodium levels.
108.	
Correct answer: B
The daily recommended sodium intake for someone limiting sodium from their diet 
should be between 1,000 and 2,000 mg per day. This challenges the body to use 
sodium efficiently without overstressing the body’s systems. A low-sodium diet aims 
for daily sodium intake less than 1,000 mg.

Renal  ❙  267
109.	
Correct answer: D
Many water-softening systems filter out calcium and magnesium (these minerals make 
water hard) and replace them with sodium. The longer the filter has been in place, 
the greater the sodium content of the water. Not all water softeners use sodium, so 
recommend to patients to check their system type. Possibly, instead of drinking the tap 
water, Ben should drink and food should be prepared with distilled or bottled water. He 
may also consider replacing the water filter with a reverse osmosis system. The patient 
is following his diet as prescribed and does not exhibit any signs of renal failure. 
Hypertonic fluids would lead to higher sodium levels. Diabetes insipidus would lead to 
elevated sodium levels due to the lack of ADH.
110.	
Correct answer: D
Parmesan cheese has a sodium level of 1,862 mg, whereas Swiss has 260 mg, cheddar 
has 620 mg, and mozzarella has 373 mg.
111.	
Correct answer: C
This patient has fever, chills, pain on urination, moderate burning at the supra pubic 
area, and diarrhea. This patient is most likely suffering from a lower urinary tract 
infection. Females are more likely to have urinary tract infections than men because 
they have shorter urethras and bacteria can easily ascend the tract.
112.	
Correct answer: A
A renal transplant that results from humoral rejection or acute cellular rejection 
may be definitively diagnosed only via ultrasound. Ultrasound may be difficult to 
obtain or interpret due to ascites, obesity, or fluid in the retroperitoneal area. Doppler 
scans measure blood flow, and the flow is diminished due to prerenal and intrinsic 
AKI. Nuclear scans are of limited value because the excretion rates may be slowed by 
disease. The renal biopsy is the gold standard for diagnosing rejection.
113.	
Correct answer: B
Potassium and phosphorus must be diligently monitored during the polyuric phase of 
AKI because of the potential for dysrhythmias.
114.	
Correct answer: C
Oliguria is a urine output of 100–400 ml/d and is usually the result of prerenal 
syndrome or hepatorenal syndrome. Pyelonephritis, rhabdomyolysis, and acute 
glomerular nephritis are causes of nonoliguria (> 400 ml/d of urine output).
115.	
Correct answer: A
While assessing the patient, you note she has severe acne around the face and neck. 
You suspect that the rise in BUN may be due to tetracycline. Tetracycline decreases 
anabolism and thereby increases the BUN.
116.	
Correct answer: C
Mannitol is nontoxic but must be used with caution because it may produce a 
hyperosmolar state. Damage to the eighth cranial nerve, vestibular impairment, and 
renal tubule binding of proteins are characteristics of loop diuretics. Loop diuretics 
include furosemide, bumetadine, and torsemide.
117.	
Correct answer: A
NSAIDs block prostaglandin production, which alters glomerular arteriolar perfusion 
and may cause prerenal AKI.

268  ❙  Section 10
118.	
Correct answer: D
A colloid that is contraindicated in bleeding disorders, renal failure, and CHF is 
Dextran.
119.	
Correct answer: C
A false statement about calcium is, “Regulation of calcium varies by rate of GI 
absorption and by thyroid control of vitamin D absorption.” It is the parathyroid 
gland that controls vitamin D absorption.
120.	
Correct answer: A
Your patient’s potassium level was 6.1 this morning. As a progressive care nurse, 
you believe the result is due to an improper blood drawing technique. The results of 
the next draw show a potassium level of 5.7. The physician elects to try and remove 
potassium by increasing renal excretion. The drug(s) that will likely be used for this 
purpose are diuretics and low-dose dopamine. No information was presented that 
the patient was unstable or in acidosis, so diuretics and low-dose dopamine are 
recommended.

❙
  269 
❙
Section 11
Multisystem
SECTION 11: MULTISYSTEM QUESTIONS
1.	
Which of the following statements about anaphylaxis is correct?
A.	 The condition of anaphylaxis requires the patient to be sensitized
B.	 Anaphylaxis does not need IgE antibodies for a hypersensitivity reaction to occur
C.	 There are five classifications of anaphylaxis, all are extreme emergencies
D.	 An anaphylactoid response is identical to anaphylaxis
2.	
Which of the following substances will initiate an anaphylactoid reaction?
A.	 Dextran
B.	 Thiamine
C.	 Opiates
D.	 Milk
3.	
Which of the following would be an appropriate definition of anaphylactic shock?
A.	 Systemic vasodilation that causes low blood pressure which is by definition 30% 
lower than the person’s baseline or below standard values
B.	 Anaphylaxis is the recurrence symptoms within 1–72 hours with no further 
­exposure to the allergen
C.	 Anaphylactic shock does not involve an allergic reaction but is due to direct mast 
cell degranulation.
D.	 An overreaction and misdirection of immune responses
4.	
A burn that involves muscle, fat, or bone is classified as a
A.	 First-degree partial thickness burn
B.	 Second-degree partial thickness burn
C.	 Third-degree full thickness burn
D.	 Fourth-degree full thickness burn
5.	
Use of 0.5% silver nitrate solution is a good treatment for burns because of its 
broad-spectrum antibacterial action. As a PCU nurse, you know a disadvantage 
of using this medication is
A.	 Metabolic acidosis
B.	 Hypochloremia and hyponatremia
C.	 Transient leucopenia
D.	 Limited penetration of eschar

270  ❙  Section 11
6.	
The area of a burn that has the closest contact with the heat source and sustains 
the most damage is the
A.	 Zone of stasis
B.	 Zone of hyperemia
C.	 Zone of erythema
D.	 Zone of coagulation
7.	
After a patient ingests toxic levels of iron, there is a latent asymptomatic phase. 
This phase may cause caregivers to underestimate the continuing risk to the 
patient. This latent phase usually occurs _______ hours after ingestion.
A.	 1–4
B.	 2–12
C.	 8–16
D.	 12–24
8.	
The toxic ingredient in automobile antifreeze is
A.	 Freon
B.	 Ethanol
C.	 Methanol
D.	 Ethylene glycol
9.	
An acid that is absorbed even through intact skin, causing local and systemic 
effects, is
A.	 Ethylene glycol
B.	 Hydrofluoric acid
C.	 Carbonic acid
D.	 Acetic acid
10.	
High-dose epinephrine was started for your patient after resuscitation from a 
cardiac arrest due to beta-blocker overdose. Which of the following lab results 
should you monitor closely?
A.	 Glucose levels
B.	 Calcium levels
C.	 Chloride levels
D.	 Sodium levels
11.	
Which statement is true regarding alkaline substances?
A.	 The pH is lower than 2
B.	 Vascular thrombosis may result
C.	 Eschar forms over the burned area
D.	 Alkalines dehydrate tissues
12.	
Which of the following substances contain large amounts of alkali?
A.	 Toilet bowl cleaners
B.	 Swimming pool chemicals
C.	 Oven cleaners
D.	 Metal cleaners

Multisystem  ❙  271
13.	
Symptoms of salicylate poisoning include
A.	 Respiratory acidosis and bradycardia
B.	 Lethargy and hypotension
C.	 Abdominal cramping and hyperglycemia
D.	 Tachycardia and hyperthermia
14.	
The antidote for iron poisoning is
A.	 No antidote is available, treat symptoms only
B.	 Chelation
C.	 Deferoxamine
D.	 Activated charcoal
15.	
The acid–base imbalance likely to be seen with an iron overdose is
A.	 Respiratory acidosis
B.	 Metabolic alkalosis
C.	 Metabolic acidosis
D.	 Respiratory alkalosis
16.	
You just discovered your patient is being treated at home for MRSA. She has been 
receiving vancomycin. You are able to check a trough level and the result was 
> 20 μg/ml. This level is very significant and
A.	 May cause ototoxicity
B.	 May cause nephrotoxicity
C.	 Is therapeutic
D.	 Indicates the current dosage is too low
17.	
Poisoning by arsenic may cause which of the following symptoms?
A.	 Pneumonia, renal dysfunction
B.	 Tachycardia, hypertension
C.	 Paresthesia, cerebral edema
D.	 Convulsions
18.	
Which of the following statements about taking the temperature of a geriatric 
patient is true?
A.	 Axillary temperatures are the most accurate
B.	 Oral temperature is decreased with age
C.	 Core measurements are the preferred route to obtain temperature measurements
D.	 Increased stroke volume increases core temperature
19.	
A young man was admitted complaining of a rash on his penis he has had for the 
past 3 days. The rash looks like blisters in a small cluster on the shaft of the penis. 
This patient’s symptoms are suspicious for which sexually transmitted infection?
A.	 Herpes zoster
B.	 Syphilis
C.	 Molluscum contagiosum
D.	 Herpes simplex I or II

272  ❙  Section 11
20.	
A middle-aged, retired school teacher presented initially to the ED for cocaine 
intoxication. After admission to the PCU, he begins to complain of severe 
epigastric pain. Labs are as follows:
WBC 17.5 with 76% neutrophils, hematocrit 41%, 
LDH 341, platelets 226, BUN 7, creatinine 1.0. 
Urine analysis shows trace of proteins, few RBCs, 
and + urine toxicology for cocaine. 
What is the likely cause of this patient’s pain?
A.	 Peptic ulcer disease
B.	 Renal infarction
C.	 Gastroenteritis
D.	 Infarcted mesenteric artery
21.	
If muscle is burned, what classification is this type of burn?
A.	 First degree
B.	 Second-degree partial thickness
C.	 Third-degree full thickness
D.	 Fourth-degree full thickness
22.	
Your patient has burns on the right arm that are circumferential (all the way 
around the arm). What is the highest immediate risk with this type of burn?
A.	 Infection into the bone
B.	 Difficulty removing dead tissue
C.	 Compartment syndrome
D.	 Escharotomy
23.	
This morning a fire broke out in your patient’s home. The patient’s bed was 
covered in wool blankets and wool clothing was in the closet. She did not suffer 
any burns but did inhale large quantities of smoke. What would be the most 
potent toxin she might have inhaled?
A.	 Carbon monoxide
B.	 Smoke
C.	 Inhaled nitrates
D.	 Cyanide
24.	
An elderly female is admitted to your unit with tachycardia (HR 132), RR 30, 
BP 90/65, T 96.4°F. Her white count is 17,600. The patient states she was treated 
for a “kidney infection” 2 weeks ago. She denies pain at this time. This patient 
probably is suffering from
A.	 MODS
B.	 A kidney stone
C.	 SIRS
D.	 Appendicitis
25.	
Your patient was admitted to your unit because of increased respiratory effort and 
possible pneumonia. The blood culture revealed the presence of E. coli. Which of 
the following antibiotics would have the best effect on the bacteria?
A.	 Ganciclovir
B.	 Gentamycin
C.	 Cytarabine
D.	 Cefoxitin

Multisystem  ❙  273
26.	
Your patient had a root canal. He has developed Ludwig’s angina. This type of 
angina can be defined as
A.	 A type of painful bradycardia in which the QT interval is lengthened
B.	 An infectious process
C.	 A dysrhythmia with severe pain secondary to inhalation of noxious gases
D.	 Cardiac ischemia postcode syndrome
27.	
In sepsis, endotoxins stimulate production of tumor necrosis factor (TNF). 
The TNF, in turn, stimulates
A.	 Neutrophil activation and platelet aggregation
B.	 Parathyroid hormone production
C.	 Increased CO2 retention
D.	 Increased CPP
28.	
Patients who have oral amphetamine overdoses should receive which of the 
following as part of their treatment regimen?
A.	 Ammonium chloride
B.	 Ipecac
C.	 Caffeine
D.	 Theophylline
29.	
A geriatric patient, victim of a brown recluse spider bite, is leaving your unit. 
As part of his discharge teaching, you include ways to prevent future bites. 
Recommendations should not include
A.	 Shaking out all clothing prior to getting dressed
B.	 Always wearing gloves when touching wood products or rocks and when working 
in basements or attics
C.	 Changing all storage boxes to cardboard
D.	 Installing yellow or sodium vapor light bulbs outdoors
30.	
You are treating a patient with long QT syndrome. Which of the following herbs 
should this patient avoid?
A.	 Ginseng
B.	 Ginkgo biloba
C.	 Marijuana
D.	 Oregano
31.	
Your middle-aged male patient has been prescribed ergotamine. This drug was 
probably prescribed for
A.	 Erectile dysfunction
B.	 Headaches
C.	 Pruritis
D.	 Nausea
32.	
Patients who are stung by bees numerous times are in danger of developing
A.	 Kidney failure
B.	 Anemia
C.	 Long QT interval
D.	 Hydrocephalus

274  ❙  Section 11
33.	
A possible side effect of cocaine is
A.	 Malignant hyperthermia
B.	 Cherry red skin
C.	 Paralytic ileus
D.	 Constricted pupils
34.	
Your patient is a recovering alcoholic started on pantoprazole sodium (Protonix) 
for GERD. The IV push injection should be administered over what period of time?
A.	 Rapid push
B.	 2 minutes
C.	 4 minutes
D.	 Protonix should not be given as an IV push
35.	
Which of the following statements is true regarding the degeneration of the 
extrapyramidal system of a geriatric patient?
A.	 The patient’s vision decreases
B.	 The patient has greater difficulty climbing stairs because of deteriorating joints
C.	 Generalized weakness increases by 1% per year over the age of 65
D.	 Muscle tremors increase in frequency
36.	
Your patient has overdosed on metoprolol. As a progressive care nurse you know 
an appropriate nursing action would be to
A.	 Prepare for cardioversion
B.	 Administer activated charcoal
C.	 Have a pacer at the bedside
D.	 Prepare to administer beta-blockers
37.	
The burn on your patient’s right arm is pink and blistered. When touched the 
patient screams with pain. This classification of burn is
A.	 First degree
B.	 Second-degree partial thickness
C.	 Third-degree full thickness
D.	 Fourth-degree full thickness
38.	
Initially, a burned area can be estimated by the Rule of Nines or using the palm as 
1% of the body surface area. There are many ways to calculate the body surface 
area involved. If your patient was burned over 30% of his body and weighs 70 kg, 
calculate the total fluid requirements during the first 24 hours using the Parkland 
formula for burn resuscitation.
A.	 2,100 ml
B.	 6,300 ml
C.	 4,500 ml
D.	 8,400 ml

Multisystem  ❙  275
39.	
Using the Parkland formula for burn resuscitation, calculate the fluid 
requirements (first 24 hours) for a patient who weighs 65 kg and is burned over 
45% of his body.
A.	 29,250 ml
B.	 11,700 ml
C.	 26,000 ml
D.	 10,300 ml
40.	
When utilizing the Parkland formula to calculate fluid needs, the preferred fluid 
for burn resuscitation is
A.	 Normal saline
B.	 D5/Isolyte M
C.	 Lactated Ringer’s
D.	 D5W
41.	
To minimize inflammation in burns, which of the following therapies may be used?
A.	 Vitamin C
B.	 Hyperbaric therapy
C.	 Prednisone
D.	 Burns open to air
42.	
Which of the following is not considered a direct source of energy that would lead 
to a patient’s injury?
A.	 Electrical
B.	 Oxygen deprivation
C.	 Chemical
D.	 Thermal
43.	
Rocky Mountain spotted fever is caused by
A.	 A parasite
B.	 Fleas
C.	 Rotavirus
D.	 Fungi
44.	
Your patient was a spectator at a golf tournament when he was struck by 
lightning. He was thrown about 10 feet into a tree. He suffered a fractured left 
radius and ulna, a concussion, and burns on his left arm, chest, and right leg. 
He has been somewhat confused since the accident. Which of the following 
statements about lightning injuries is true?
A.	 Internal burns are common
B.	 Barotrauma is rare
C.	 Myoglobinuria is rarely seen
D.	 DC current will most likely cause ventricular fibrillation
45.	
Your patient has been diagnosed with Pickwickian syndrome. This disease is 
characterized by
A.	 Malnutrition
B.	 An abnormally low red blood cell count
C.	 Sleep apnea
D.	 Frequent bradycardia

276  ❙  Section 11
46.	
The antidote for digoxin overdose is
A.	 Calcium gluconate
B.	 Digoxin immune fab
C.	 Glucagon
D.	 Potassium chloride
47.	
If a patient sustains an injury from electromagnetic waves, such as those from an 
X-ray, the type of energy involved is
A.	 Mechanical
B.	 Electrical
C.	 Chemical
D.	 Radiant
48.	
When energy is transferred from a bullet to an individual, the type of energy 
transferred is called
A.	 Mechanical energy
B.	 Kinematic energy
C.	 Physical energy
D.	 Thermal energy
49.	
The systemic response to infection defined as the presence of SIRS in addition to a 
documented or presumed infection is known as
A.	 A SIRS sustained response
B.	 Sepsis
C.	 Bacteremia
D.	 A mediated response
50.	
The presence of bacteria within the bloodstream is known as
A.	 Bacteremia
B.	 An inflammatory response
C.	 Septic shock
D.	 Septicemia
51.	
A state of physiologic dysfunction in which two or more organ systems are not 
capable of maintaining homeostasis is known as
A.	 Cell-mediated sepsis
B.	 Cellular ischemia
C.	 End-organ hypoperfusion
D.	 Multiple organ dysfunction syndrome
52.	
A sepsis-induced state with hypotension, despite adequate fluid resuscitation, is 
called
A.	 Secondary sepsis-induced hypotension
B.	 Severe sepsis
C.	 Primary sepsis-induced hypotension
D.	 Septic shock

Multisystem  ❙  277
53.	
The progressive care unit director has tasked you with representing your 
department in a risk management task force. The purpose of risk management is to
A.	 Identify healthcare staff who are negligent
B.	 Collect and store records regarding potential and actual injuries in the hospital
C.	 Monitor staff competency
D.	 Determine scope of practice within the hospital based on financial liability
54.	
Which type of isolation is required for vancomycin-resistant enterococci (VRE) 
infections?
A.	 Standard or universal precautions
B.	 Reverse isolation
C.	 Contact isolation
D.	 Droplet isolation
55.	
Signs and symptoms of heat stroke include
A.	 Slow pulse
B.	 Hot, dry skin
C.	 Muscle cramps
D.	 Fatigue
56.	
Signs of vitamin D toxicity include
A.	 Seizures
B.	 Increased susceptibility to respiratory diseases
C.	 Azotemia
D.	 Hypocalcemia
57.	
You have been tasked with starting a peripheral IV on an obese patient. Which of 
the following techniques is the most likely to be successful?
A.	 Use a smaller gauge catheter
B.	 Start the IV in the patient’s foot
C.	 Use a tight tourniquet
D.	 Have the patient clench the fist and use a loose tourniquet
58.	
Your patient underwent PTCA therapy yesterday. Integrilin 0.5 mcg/kg/min is 
infusing via IV. You would anticipate which change to the medication regimen?
A.	 Change over to PO administration today
B.	 Discontinue the medication and switch to another platelet aggregation inhibitor 
today
C.	 Increase dosage to 0.75 mcg/mg/min today to maximize effect
D.	 Wean to 0.25 mcg/kg/min in anticipation of discontinuing the medication in the 
morning
59.	
Which of the following drugs should be held while your patient is receiving 
diltiazem hydrochloride?
A.	 Nitroglycerin
B.	 Digoxin
C.	 Insulin
D.	 Rifampin

278  ❙  Section 11
60.	
Your patient was stabbed in the chest 2 weeks ago. The damage done to the heart 
required a prosthetic mitral valve replacement. The patient is now experiencing 
transient chest pain and syncopal episodes. A TEE is ordered. You anticipate 
performing which of the following actions prior to the procedure?
A.	 Holding all medications 8 hours prior to procedure
B.	 Allowing the patient to keep dentures in
C.	 Administering prophylactic antibiotics
D.	 Positioning the patient on the right side
61.	
Contraindications for a pulmonary angiogram would include
A.	 Perfusion deficits
B.	 Vascular filling defects
C.	 Pulmonary thromboembolism
D.	 Pregnancy
62.	
Acetaminophen overdose may take as long as 2 weeks to resolve. From 72 to 
96 hours after ingestion, the patient’s symptoms will include
A.	 Pallor, lethargy, and metabolic acidosis
B.	 Increased renal function
C.	 Right upper quadrant pain and increased serum hepatic enzymes
D.	 Jaundice, confusion, and coagulation disorders
63.	
Which of the following statements about cocaine is false?
A.	 Cocaine use, even just one time, can cause rhabdomyolysis
B.	 Cocaine and tobacco use are associated with spontaneous abortion
C.	 Laboratory specimens should be kept on ice
D.	 Cocaine causes the placenta to shrink
64.	
Patient and family teaching toward preparing a patient for digital subtraction 
angiography includes
A.	 The length of the procedure is approximately 90 minutes
B.	 Women who are breastfeeding should substitute formula for breast milk for one or 
more days after the procedure
C.	 The patient will be able to change position frequently during the procedure
D.	 The patient will be free to move around during the procedure
65.	
Your patient has a history of cluster migraine headaches and has been treated 
with lithium. Her lithium level on admission was 1.7 mmol/L. This value would 
correspond with which of the following symptoms?
A.	 Somnolence and coma
B.	 Ataxia and diarrhea
C.	 Seizures and flattened T wave
D.	 Manic-depressive behavior
66.	
Your patient, post-PTCA, is receiving eptifibatide (Integrilin) therapy. Which of 
the following lab results represents effective therapeutic management?
A.	 An aPTT 52 seconds
B.	 An aPTT 89 seconds
C.	 Platelet level of 89,000/mm3
D.	 ACT 221 seconds

Multisystem  ❙  279
67.	
Your patient underwent pulmonary function testing. The respiratory therapist 
tells you the preliminary result is a low peak expiratory flow rate (PEFR). This 
might indicate
A.	 Asthma
B.	 Pneumothorax
C.	 Pulmonary cysts
D.	 Heart failure
68.	
What is the causative organism for Lyme disease?
	
A.	 Escherichia coli
	
B.	 Klebsiella pneumonia
	
C.	 Serratia marcescens
	
D.	 Borrelia burgdorferi
69.	
Your patient is a construction worker who was seen in the ED after falling into a 
trench. He sustained a left fractured tibia and fibula and a fractured left scapula. 
He required a splenectomy and was just admitted to your care. The nursing 
supervisor tried to get a bed in the ICU, but none was available. Your initial 
assessment results are as follows:
EKG: ST at 126 with isolated PVC
BP: 84/50
Skin pale, cool, clammy
RR 26, breath sounds clear, slightly diminished RLL
O2: 2 L/min via NC
Mentation: Responds to questions slowly, oriented to self and time CVP 4
Which of the following conditions do you believe this patient is developing?
A.	 Cardiogenic shock
B.	 Hypovolemic shock
C.	 Septic shock
D.	 Left ventricular failure
70.	
Which of the following is not an action of diltiazem (Cardizem)?
A.	 Blocks calcium channels
B.	 Relaxes coronary vessels
C.	 Increases peripheral vascular resistance
D.	 Prolongs AV conduction
71.	
Which of the following is not an action of octreotide acetate (Sandostatin)?
A.	 Increases gastrointestinal motility
B.	 Inhibits serotonin secretion
C.	 Decreases pancreatic secretion
D.	 Decreases hepatic venous pressure
72.	
The inadvertent administration of a vesicant medication into surrounding tissue 
is known as
A.	 Compartment syndrome
B.	 Extravasation
C.	 Ischemic necrosis
D.	 Infiltration

280  ❙  Section 11
73.	
Which of the following is a side effect of concurrent administration of carvedilol 
and clonidine?
A.	 Hypotension and bradycardia
B.	 Hypoglycemia
C.	 Heart blocks and bradycardia
D.	 Tachycardia and hypertension
74.	
Which electrolyte should be monitored closely while the patient is receiving 
valsartan (Diovan)?
A.	 Potassium
B.	 Phosphate
C.	 Calcium
D.	 Magnesium
75.	
Your patient received spinal Duramorph with general anesthesia for surgery. 
As you are transferring the patient from the gurney to the bed, you note that the 
patient has periodic apnea and audible wheezing. What other adverse reactions 
should you anticipate in this situation?
A.	 Hypotension and decreased intracranial pressures
B.	 Bradycardia and increased libido
C.	 Palpitations and anemia
D.	 Rapid capillary refill and bounding pulses
76.	
Your patient is going home on olmesartan for hypertension. Which of the 
following patient teaching elements is false?
A.	 Drink 2–3 L of fluid daily
B.	 Exercising during any part of the day is acceptable
C.	 Avoid alcohol consumption
D.	 Monitor urine output and notify your physician if urine becomes dark in color
77.	
Your patient is a computer programmer being treated for DVT. Enoxaparin 
sodium was ordered. Which of the following key points for patient teaching 
is true?
A.	 Rub the injection site to increase absorption and avoid nodule formation
B.	 Injection sites should be rotated between the abdomen, bilateral thighs, and 
bilateral underarms
C.	 Injections should be administered with the patient lying down
D.	 Expel the air bubble in the syringe prior to administration to prevent air embolism
78.	
You are admitting a patient from the ER with a fractured femur, mild concussion, 
and multiple facial lacerations after a motor vehicle accident. His blood alcohol 
level was elevated despite his report of only drinking one standard-sized beer 
while with friends at a bar 3 hours prior to driving. His stated medical history 
includes OTC Pepcid use to treat GERD. What factor is most likely to have 
contributed to the patient’s elevated blood alcohol level?
A.	 The patient is not being honest and consumed more than one beer before driving
B.	 The Pepcid increased blood alcohol level by delaying metabolism
C.	 The patient consumed a larger than standard size beer
D.	 The patient’s report of waiting 3 hours prior to driving

Multisystem  ❙  281
79.	
What are the primary actions of milrinone?
A.	 Vasodilation and positive inotropy
B.	 Vasodilation and positive chronotropy
C.	 Positive chronotropy and vasodilation
D.	 Beta and alpha receptor inhibitor
80.	
Your patient with hyperthyroidism is being started on metoprolol for angina. 
What would happen if the patient suddenly stops taking this drug?
A.	 No effect
B.	 Leukopenia
C.	 Thyroid storm
D.	 Bradycardia
81.	
Metoprolol is prescribed for hypertension. If dosing exceeds 400 mg daily, the 
patient should be monitored closely for
A.	 Bronchospasms
B.	 Agitation
C.	 Increased HDL
D.	 Flushing
82.	
During your history and physical assessment of a middle-aged female admitted 
for chest pain, she reports a history of shingles outbreak 3 months ago. You 
should question which of the following physician orders to obtain clarification?
A.	 Aspirin 160 mg daily
B.	 Morphine 2 mg IV PRN
C.	 Nitroglycerin 2 sprays every 3–5 min for chest pain
D.	 Oxygen via nasal cannula PRN
83.	
Which of the following is a true statement regarding the administration of 
bivalirudin (Angiomax)?
A.	 Bivalirudin binds to fibrinogen to prevent clot formation
B.	 Bivalirudin is available in 75 mg tablets for home administration
C.	 The aPTT should be monitored during administration of bivalirudin
D.	 Administer vitamin K and protamine if bivalirudin overdose occurs
84.	
Your patient with unstable angina weighs 110 lbs. What is an appropriate dose of 
Effient for this patient?
A.	 1 mg PO bid
B.	 3 mg IV daily
C.	 5 mg PO daily
D.	 10 mg IV daily
85.	
Your patient has suffered from chronic neck pain since a car accident 4 years ago. He 
underwent cervical fusion yesterday and is complaining of cervical neck pain. Your 
physician order is for “Fentanyl 0.5 mg IM every 1–2 hours for pain.” You should
A.	 Administer as ordered via a rapid push
B.	 Administer over 10 minutes to prevent apnea
C.	 Notify the physician for clarification as the ordered frequency should be every 
3–4 hours
D.	 Notify the physician for clarification as the ordered amount should be 0.05 mg IM

282  ❙  Section 11
86.	
Your patient is being started on digoxin for paroxysmal atrial tachycardia. Which 
patient teaching statement is inappropriate with regard to digoxin?
A.	 Avoid eating grapefruit or drinking grapefruit juice
B.	 Avoid taking digoxin with high fiber foods
C.	 Take the medication at the same time every day
D.	 Check your pulse prior to taking the medication and do not take it if your heart 
rate is < 60 bpm
87.	
The inadvertent administration of a nonvesicant medication into surrounding 
tissue is known as
A.	 Ischemic necrosis
B.	 Catheter dislodgement
C.	 Compartment syndrome
D.	 Infiltration
88.	
A microbial phenomenon characterized by an inflammatory response to the 
microorganisms or the invasion of normally sterile tissue by those organisms is 
known as
A.	 Septicemia
B.	 SIRS
C.	 MODS
D.	 Infection
89.	
The presence of a systolic blood pressure of less than 90 mmHg or a reduction of 
more than 40 mmHg from baseline in the absence of other causes of hypotension 
is known as
A.	 Septic shock
B.	 Secondary hypotension
C.	 Sepsis-induced hypotension
D.	 End-organ hypoperfusion
90.	
Your patient was admitted to the PCU with recurrent Pneumocystis carinii. She is 
currently taking protease inhibitors and a nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase 
inhibitor. Which of the following herbals may be contributing to her recurrent 
Pneumocystis carinii?
A.	 Ginkgo biloba
B.	 Ginseng
C.	 St. John’s Wort
D.	 Thyme
91.	
Your patient, a victim of a black widow spider bite, became obtunded, 
bradycardic, apneic, and hypotensive soon after arrival in the PCU. Your first 
action should be to
A.	 Administer morphine 2 mg IV
B.	 Administer antivenin
C.	 Tie a tourniquet around the leg
D.	 Prepare to intubate

Multisystem  ❙  283
92.	
Your patient is preparing to go home after treatment with antivenin for a black 
widow spider bite. Which of the following discharge instructions is appropriate?
A.	 “You may experience muscle spasms for only a few days.”
B.	 “You may experience tingling and weakness for several years.”
C.	 “Call your doctor immediately if you have joint or abdominal pain or begin to 
have trouble breathing.”
D.	 “It is normal to have a rash or fever in the next 3 days.”
93.	
Many people are adding “exotic” herbs and supplements into their food and 
diets. Many may be very harmful and interact with medicines a child is taking or 
may result in serious or deadly complications of existing diseases. Your patient is 
experimenting with flavorings. She made a roast with Scotch Broom on it the night 
prior to admission to the PCU. After ingesting the soup she began to feel lightheaded 
and experienced palpitations and weakness. A priority of treatment is to
A.	 Insert a nasogastric tube and provide gastric lavage with activated charcoal
B.	 Insert a Foley catheter
C.	 Continue quinidine medications taken at home
D.	 Continue the amiodarone infusion started for PVCs
94.	
A college student was helping a friend clean out a garage yesterday. He developed 
a raised area that initially looked like a mosquito bite but is now red, pus-filled, 
and inflamed. He is admitted to the unit with a necrotizing wound. You suspect a 
brown recluse spider bite. This patient should not exhibit which of the following 
signs and symptoms?
A.	 Dyspnea
B.	 Nausea and vomiting
C.	 DIC
D.	 Hemolysis and thrombocytopenia
95.	
A 38 year old woman was admitted to your unit after experiencing abdominal 
cramping, nausea, and severe diarrhea. Her EKG shows sinus tachycardia with 
frequent PVCs. She is currently on an amiodarone infusion. The only significant 
history was that the patient ate at a seafood restaurant 3 days ago. This patient is 
probably suffering from
A.	 Irritable bowel syndrome
B.	 Hypokalemia
C.	 Celiac disease
D.	 Shellfish poisoning
96.	
Cadmium accumulates in the lungs, liver, and kidneys by exposure to
A.	 Cigarette smoke
B.	 Asbestos
C.	 Lead paint
D.	 Freshwater fish
97.	
What is the incubation period for inhalation anthrax?
A.	 7–10 days
B.	 5–7 days
C.	 7–60 days
D.	 20–30 days

284  ❙  Section 11
98.	
What are the initial symptoms for inhaled anthrax?
A.	 Mild, flu-like symptoms
B.	 Severe dyspnea and productive cough
C.	 High fever, cough, and stridor
D.	 Cutaneous lesions, cough, and high fever
99.	
Your patient works at a fast-food restaurant. She found an envelope that was 
torn and had white powder falling out of the tear. She and her fellow employees 
were sent to the hospital and are being evaluated for possible inhalation anthrax. 
What is the treatment of choice for this patient?
A.	 Penicillin G 2 million units intravenously every 6 hours
B.	 Ciprofloxacin 400 mg intravenously every 12 hours
C.	 Doxycycline 500 mg intravenously every 12 hours
D.	 Augmentin 875/125 mg intravenously every 12 hours
100.	
What form of isolation should be used for the patient with inhalation anthrax?
A.	 Full isolation with laminar air flow
B.	 Droplet precautions
C.	 Standard contact precautions
D.	 Reverse isolation
101.	
Your hospital is put on an external disaster notice after a ricin poisoning incident 
at a local train station. Your PCU prepares to accept casualties. What makes ricin 
so toxic to humans?
A.	 Ricin causes respiratory failure
B.	 Ricin causes renal failure
C.	 Ricin inhibits protein synthesis, leading to cell death
D.	 Ricin destroys the mitochondria in the cell, causing cell death
102.	
Which of the following patient populations is most at risk for an intravenous 
infiltration?
A.	 The elderly/children
B.	 Patients having coronary bypass surgery
C.	 Patients with central line IVs
D.	 Patients with a history of IV drug abuse
103.	
Your new patient lives on a farm. She frequently helps her sister home-prepare 
meat and vegetables and preserve them by canning. She was admitted to the PCU 
with profound weakness, double vision, slurred speech, and dysphagia. Her initial 
diagnosis is Guillain–Barré syndrome. While you are interviewing her sister, you 
learn that a few days ago your patient ingested some home-canned green beans 
that were several years old. No other family members ate the beans because the 
color was odd. What should you do with this information?
A.	 Do nothing, it is of no consequence
B.	 Notify the physician immediately, the patient may have botulism
C.	 Tell the physician tomorrow during rounds
D.	 Continue the interview

Multisystem  ❙  285
104.	
A possible adverse effect with the use of fentanyl is
A.	 Neutropenia
B.	 Chest wall rigidity
C.	 Hyperthyroidism
D.	 Tachypnea
105.	
A possible adverse effect of morphine is
A.	 Ileus
B.	 Hyperactive bowel tones
C.	 Ototoxicity
D.	 Increased venous capacitance
106.	
Fentanyl administered intravenously is incompatible with
A.	 Piperacillin
B.	 Phenytoin
C.	 Esmolol
D.	 Morphine
107.	
A contraindication for the use of fentanyl is
A.	 Asthma
B.	 A urinary tract infection
C.	 Concomitant use of penicillin
D.	 Open heart surgery
108.	
Your patient tells you she uses witch hazel. Your first question after hearing this 
should be
A.	 “Why did you take witch hazel?”
B.	 “How did you obtain the witch hazel?”
C.	 “How much and how often did you use witch hazel?”
D.	 “Does your family know you use witch hazel?”
109.	
Your new patient was brought into the emergency room after collapsing at a 
party. Her cardiac and neurologic work-up is negative. Her preliminary urine 
drug screen is also negative, so she was transferred to the PCU. What do you 
suspect may have caused her collapse?
A.	 GHB
B.	 Dehydration
C.	 Ecstasy
D.	 Metoprolol
110.	
Which of the following statements is false regarding the use of activated charcoal 
for suspected or confirmed poisoning?
A.	 Activated charcoal adsorbs most poisons
B.	 Activated charcoal adsorbs metals
C.	 Activated charcoal cannot be mixed with ice cream
D.	 Single doses of activated charcoal are indicated for serious poison exposures

286  ❙  Section 11
111.	
Multiple doses of activated charcoal should be used for ingestion of
A.	 Theophylline
B.	 Gentamicin
C.	 Aspirin
D.	 Acetaminophen
112.	
By definition, systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) must be 
comprised of two or more variables identified by the American College of Chest 
Physicians (ACCP) and the Society of Critical Care Medicine (SCCM). Which of the 
following variables was not identified in the definition of SIRS?
A.	 Fever of more than 38°C (100.4°F) or less than 36°C (96.8°F)
B.	 Respiratory rate of more than 20 breaths per minute or arterial carbon dioxide ten­
sion (PaCO2) of less than 32 mmHg
C.	 Abnormal white blood cell count (>12,000/µL or <4,000/µL or >10% immature 
[band] forms)
D.	 A heart rate of more than 80 beats per minute
113.	
Ketamine is contraindicated in a patient with
A.	 Bronchospasm
B.	 Altered intracranial pressure
C.	 Barbiturate overdose
D.	 Opioid overdose
114.	
Which of the following statements is true regarding the administration of 
propofol?
A.	 Propofol is used for long-term procedures
B.	 Propofol is not indicated for use in a patient with bronchospasm
C.	 Propofol is made from eggs and soybeans
D.	 Propofol increases cerebral blood flow
115.	
Which of the following statements about superficial frostbite is true?
A.	 Use heavy blankets to help rewarm the entire patient
B.	 The skin will be bright pink and feel cold to the touch
C.	 Rewarm the affected part using warm water at 104º to 110ºF
D.	 Keep the affected part dependent
116.	
Your patient was admitted directly to the PCU with deep frostbite. Which of the 
following actions should not be performed immediately for this patient?
A.	 Remove the patient’s wet clothing
B.	 Administer warm, noncaffeinated fluids
C.	 Administer narcotic analgesics
D.	 Amputate tissue that is black in color
117.	
What is the hallmark symptom of primary syphilis?
A.	 Painful vesicular lesions on genitalia
B.	 Painless chancre or lesion at the site of inoculation
C.	 Painless maculopapular lesions on the groin
D.	 Painful papules on genitalia

Multisystem  ❙  287
118.	
Which of the following types of fluids is least likely to result in tissue damage 
from an infiltration/extravasation?
A.	 Cytotoxic drugs
B.	 Alkaline solutions
C.	 Vasoconstrictors
D.	 Isotonic solutions
119.	
A male patient was pumping gas when a spark ignited the fumes. He suffered full 
thickness burns of the right arm. During your initial assessment you note that 
eschar is present and the right radial pulse is not palpable. A Doppler pulse is also 
not discernible. Which of the following actions is appropriate at this time?
A.	 Move the arm away from the torso and elevate it on a pillow
B.	 Escharotomy
C.	 Morphine 4 mg IV
D.	 Ice packs to reduce swelling
120.	
A 40 year old was admitted to your PCU after a burn injury. He was helping 
his friend barbeque in the back yard and a sudden flame-up burned his chest, 
right shoulder, and chin. What finding would be indicative of probable smoke 
inhalation in this patient?
A.	 PaO2 81, met HgB level of 2%
B.	 PaO2 76, pCO2 26
C.	 Increased CO2
D.	 A carboxyhemoglobin of 18%, burned chin
121.	
During the immediate postburn period, which of the following fluids would be 
most beneficial?
A.	 Normal saline
B.	 0.45% normal saline
C.	 Lactated Ringer’s
D.	 Albumin
122.	
Your patient was burned over the anterior chest, right forearm, anterior neck, and 
the lateral aspect of the right leg. The burns on his right forearm have a white, 
leather-like appearance, and the patient has no sensation in that area. What 
classification of burn are these injuries to the right forearm?
A.	 First degree
B.	 Second-degree partial thickness
C.	 Third-degree full thickness
D.	 Fourth-degree full thickness
123.	
Which of the following medications would you anticipate using to improve the 
pumping action of the heart when a patient is developing cardiogenic shock?
A.	 Dobutamine
B.	 Epinephrine
C.	 Diltiazem
D.	 Isoproterenol

288  ❙  Section 11
124.	
Your patient lived in the country at a camp all summer and ate large quantities 
of deer and fish. He was admitted to the PCU for respiratory distress, weight loss, 
vomiting, and numbness around the mouth. He is also suffering from mouth 
sores, and he drools constantly. His probable diagnosis is
A.	 Botulism
B.	 Chlamydia infection
C.	 Difficile infection
D.	 Mercury poisoning
125.	
Your patient was very anxious prior to a bronchoscopy. He received an IM 
injection of Versed. His blood pressure dropped from 142/80 to 88/56, and he 
became bradycardic. To counter this reaction, he should be given
A.	 Xanax
B.	 Ativan
C.	 Valium
D.	 Romazicon
126.	
Which of the following vasodilators should not be mixed with Ringer’s lactate?
A.	 Nesiritide
B.	 Captopril
C.	 Cardene
D.	 Epinephrine
127.	
Your patient lives on a ranch. Yesterday he complained of a stiff neck and was 
very lethargic. Last night he was found unconscious and had apparently vomited 
and possibly aspirated. He was immediately transported to your ED. After a 
preliminary evaluation, he was admitted to the PCU. This patient probably has
A.	 Pneumonia
B.	 West Nile virus
C.	 Western equine encephalitis
D.	 A brain tumor
128.	
Which statement about plague is incorrect?
A.	 Plague is caused by Yersinia pestis
B.	 Aerosol droplets may spread plague person to person
C.	 Plague is usually transmitted by rats
D.	 Plague may be used as a biological weapon
129.	
Vein damage is least likely to occur when which of the following solutions is 
administered via a peripheral IV catheter?
A.	 A high osmolality (> 900 mosm/L) medication
B.	 A solution with a pH of < 5
C.	 A solution with a pH > 9
D.	 Ringer’s lactate
130.	
Which of the following choices is not a form of anthrax?
A.	 Nonspecific
B.	 Cutaneous
C.	 Pulmonary
D.	 Gastrointestinal

Multisystem  ❙  289
131.	
The type of chemical agent that can cause blistering is called a
A.	 Vesicant
B.	 Contaminant
C.	 Intoxicant
D.	 Nerve agent
132.	
The type of device made by combining radioactive materials and an explosive is 
known as a(n)
A.	 Improved nuclear device
B.	 Radiologic dispersal device
C.	 Simple radiological device
D.	 Improved explosive device
133.	
An ambulance brought in a patient from an incident at a bus station. The ED 
is full and the only available bed is yours in the PCU. The patient is irritable, 
confused, and has paresthesias around the mouth. He is having watery, rice-like 
diarrhea, nausea, and vomiting. These symptoms are indicative of
A.	 Arsenic poisoning
B.	 Digoxin toxicity
C.	 Methanol poisoning
D.	 Insecticide poisoning
134.	
A blast injury that occurs when a body is hurled though the air and struck by 
another object is known as
A.	 A primary blast injury
B.	 A compound blast injury
C.	 A secondary blast injury
D.	 A tertiary blast injury
135.	
An example of a primary blast injury is
A.	 Hemorrhagic contusion
B.	 Fractured femur
C.	 An arm impaled by a stick
D.	 Gunshot wound
136.	
Why would immediately stopping Effient administration when life-threatening 
bleeding occurs not improve patient condition?
A.	 Effient onset is 2 hours
B.	 Effient binds to thrombin systemically
C.	 Effient half-life is 7 hours
D.	 Effient irreversibly binds with platelets for the life of the platelet

290  ❙  Section 11
137.	
Your patient with chronic pain has transitioned to transdermal fentanyl 
administration in anticipation of discharge home. You note skin irritation under 
the patch when changing sites. You should
A.	 Do nothing, this is expected and the patient is not complaining of irritation
B.	 Notify the physician and request an order for Kenalog administration
C.	 Advise the patient to rotate patch sites every 24 hours for a total of 72 hours using 
the same patch
D.	 Advise the patient to cut the patch into 4 pieces and place the pieces in multiple 
locations
138.	
Your 75 kg patient is to receive midazolam prior to a bronchoscopy. Which of the 
following is an appropriate order for this patient?
A.	 Versed 2.5 mg IVP over 2 min just prior to procedure
B.	 Ativan 3.75 mg IV x1 15 to 20 min prior to procedure
C.	 Valium 20 mg IV x1 30 minutes prior to procedure
D.	 Precedex 75 mcg IV x1 prior to procedure
139.	
The appropriate potency conversion from morphine to fentanyl is
A.	 100 mcg of fentanyl equals 10 mg of morphine
B.	 10 mg of fentanyl equals 1 mg of morphine
C.	 1,000 mcg of fentanyl equals 100 mcg of morphine
D.	 1 mg of fentanyl equals 10 mg of morphine
140.	
Aspirin inhibits platelet aggregation by
A.	 Inhibiting thrombin
B.	 Inhibiting fibrin
C.	 Inhibiting thromboxane
D.	 Inhibiting fibrinogen
141.	
Your diabetic patient with chronic pain is being started on Duragesic patches. You 
would anticipate what changes to the patient’s insulin dosing?
A.	 No change is anticipated
B.	 The amount of insulin administered to this patient will increase
C.	 The amount of insulin administration to this patient will decrease
D.	 The amount of insulin administration will only decrease during the first 24 hours 
of administration of a Duragesic patch
142.	
Guidelines are available for aspirin administration to patients to prevent or have 
had MIs, TIAs, and strokes. You would anticipate your patient admitted for a 
lateral MI to be started on aspirin therapy at
A.	 81 mg daily
B.	 160 mg daily for 30 days
C.	 325 mg daily
D.	 325 mg BID
143.	
A disadvantage of using negative pressure wound care (NPWC) devices is
A.	 NPWC cannot be used on wounds associated with malignancies
B.	 NPWC removes interstitial fluid
C.	 NPWC promotes a moist healing environment
D.	 NPWC removes barriers to cell migration and proliferation

Multisystem  ❙  291
144.	
Which of the following elements would not be necessary to establish in order to 
determine malpractice?
A.	 Injury
B.	 Breach of duty
C.	 Physician relation
D.	 Duty of care
145.	
You have been designated to serve on your department’s Policies and Procedures 
committee. Best practice concerning hair removal prior to insertion of a 
peripheral IV would be to
A.	 Use a depilatory cream on fragile skin
B.	 Use a pair of scissors
C.	 Use a razor
D.	 Leave the hair in place

292  ❙  Section 11
SECTION 11: MULTISYSTEM ANSWERS
1.	
Correct answer: A
The condition of anaphylaxis requires the patient to be sensitized by exposure to the 
antigen at least once and their reaction mediated through immunoglobin E (IgE) 
antibodies. An anaphylactoid reaction doesn’t need the presence of IgE-3.
Examples of substances causing anaphylactic reactions include: antibiotics 
(penicillin, cephalosporins), foods (milk, egg whites, shellfish, nuts, chocolate, grains, 
beets), and foreign proteins (latex, venom, glue). Other potential causes of anaphylaxis 
may include anesthetics, egg-based vaccines, exercise, and cold.
2.	
Correct answer: D
Milk will not initiate an anaphylactoid response, but will cause an anaphylactic 
response. An anaphylactoid reaction can occur following a single, first-time exposure 
to certain agents in nonsensitized patients. Anaphylactoid substances cause a direct 
breakdown of the mast cell and basophil membranes. An anaphylactoid reaction 
doesn’t need the presence of IgE antibodies for a hypersensitivity reaction to occur.
Substances which may cause an anaphylactoid response include NSAIDS, aspirin, 
radiopaque contrast media, fluorescein opiates, thiamine, and dextran. Additional 
triggers include sulfites, perfumes, bleach, wine, and beer.
3.	
Correct answer: A
Anaphylactic shock is one of three classifications of anaphylaxis. It is a systemic 
vasodilation that causes low blood pressure, which is by definition 30% lower than the 
person’s baseline or below standard values.
Biphasic anaphylaxis is the recurrence symptoms within 1–72 hours with no 
further exposure to the allergen. Pseudoanaphylaxis or anaphylactoid reactions are a 
type of anaphylaxis that does not involve an allergic reaction but is due to direct mast 
cell degranulation. Nonimmune anaphylaxis is the current term used by the World 
Allergy Organization.
4.	
Correct answer: D
A fourth-degree full thickness burn involves muscle, fat, fascia, or bone. This type of 
burn usually occurs as a result of deep thermal or electrical burns.
5.	
Correct answer: B
Hypochloremia and hyponatremia are disadvantages of using 0.5% silver nitrate 
solution for burn patients.
6.	
Correct answer: D
The area of a burn that has the closest contact with the heat source and sustains the 
most damage is the zone of coagulation. Coagulation necrosis is usually the result of 
most burn injuries.
7.	
Correct answer: B
After a patient ingests toxic levels of iron, there is a latent asymptomatic phase that 
occurs 2–12 hours after ingestion. After about 12 hours the patient may enter the next 
phase, which is an abrupt cardiovascular collapse.

Multisystem  ❙  293
8.	
Correct answer: D
Ethylene glycol is the toxic ingredient in automobile antifreeze.
9.	
Correct answer: B
Hydrofluoric acid is absorbed even through intact skin, causing local and systemic 
effects. Hydrofluoric acid is used as a rust remover, metal cleaner, and to etch glass.
10.	
Correct answer: A
In patients receiving high-dose epinephrine, glucose levels should be monitored 
closely for potential hyperglycemia. There is an even greater risk for hyperglycemia 
if the patient is diabetic. Potassium, not calcium, chloride, or sodium, should also be 
monitored for potential hyperkalemia or hypokalemia.
11.	
Correct answer: B
Vascular thrombosis may result from alkaline substances, and liquefaction necrosis 
will occur. Serious injury results from products with a pH higher than 12.
12.	
Correct answer: C
Oven cleaners contain large amounts of alkali. Additional alkaline substances include 
dishwasher detergent, laundry detergent, drain openers, and ammonia capsules.
13.	
Correct answer: D
Symptoms of salicylate poisoning include tachycardia and hyperthermia. Additional 
symptoms include tinnitus, tachypnea, LOC changes, respiratory alkalosis, metabolic 
acidosis, or mixed acid–base abnormalities. Occult GI tract bleeding may occur.
14.	
Correct answer: C
Deferoxamine is used to treat iron poisoning via chelation. It is also possible the 
patient may have to be treated with GI tract decontamination, which may include 
gastric lavage or whole bowel irrigation. Chelation is the bond of elements, not a 
treatment.
15.	
Correct answer: C
Metabolic acidosis is likely to be seen with an iron overdose. After iron is metabolized, 
free hydrogen is released and leads to metabolic acidosis.
16.	
Correct answer: B
A trough vancomycin level > 20 μg/ml is actually a panic level and if not addressed will 
cause nephrotoxicity. Ototoxicity usually occurs if levels are prolonged at > 30 μg/ml. 
Vancomycin may cause hypertension, thrombocytopenia, tubular necrosis, colitis, and 
deafness. The patient may require hemodialysis, hemofiltration, or peritoneal dialysis. 
Note: Charcoal hemofiltration does not remove vancomycin.
17.	
Correct answer: D
Arsenic poisoning may cause convulsions. Arsenic is found in all human tissues as a 
trace element. The levels may become elevated with exposure. About 60% of ingested 
arsenic is excreted in the urine. Arsenic may be found in well water, pesticides, paints, 
cosmetics, treated wood, and coal. Chronic exposure can lead to various types of 
cancers.

294  ❙  Section 11
18.	
Correct answer: B
Oral temperature in the elderly is lower because blood flow to the buccal area is 
decreased. If an elderly person exhibits what would usually be considered a normal 
temperature, that reading could indicate an elevation in temperature. It is a good idea 
to not take axillary temperatures in anyone except a neonate because of interference 
from ambient temperatures.
19.	
Correct answer: D
Herpes simplex, either type I or II, can cause this patient’s symptoms. The cluster of 
blisters is seen anywhere boxer shorts fit—from the waist to the mid-thigh—although 
the genitalia is the most common location for both men and women. Syphilis presents 
with a single, painless lesion in the initial phase. Molluscum contagiosum is highly 
contagious and has flesh-colored, dome-shaped papules with an umbilicated center. 
Herpes zoster is shingles. Blisters, along with dermatomes, are seen with herpes zoster.
20.	
Correct answer: B
Renal infarction can occur with cocaine intoxication. The proteinuria and RBCs in the 
urine are indicative of the renal infarction. Cocaine abuse can lead to any infarction, 
including MI.
21.	
Correct answer: D
This is a fourth-degree burn. Not many people are familiar with this classification. 
This is a burn that not only involves muscle but it extends through muscle and bone.
22.	
Correct answer: C
The highest risk at this time is compartment syndrome. A circumferential burn may 
lead to compartment syndrome. Escharotomy is a procedure, not a direct risk. As a 
nurse you must constantly assess for quality of pulses. Edema may be so great as to 
completely cut off circulation in a limb and cause a myoglobin-related renal failure. 
Elevating the limb may help drain fluid and mitigate further edema. If the pulse is 
lost, it still may not mean compartment syndrome is the cause. It could be due to not 
replacing lost volume secondary to the burn. Although infection is a risk, it is not the 
immediate risk.
23.	
Correct answer: D
Wool and silk give off cyanide gas. Nitriles, like the gloves we wear, will burn and 
give off cyanide. Household plastics like melamine dishes, plastic cups, polyurethane 
foam in furniture cushions, and many other synthetic compounds may produce lethal 
concentrations of cyanide when burned under appropriate circumstances. Cyanide 
inhibits cellular respiration, even with enough oxygen stores. Cellular metabolism 
changes from aerobic to anaerobic and produces lactic acid. The organs with the 
highest oxygen requirements are the most affected by cyanide inhalation.
24.	
Correct answer: C
SIRS is a systemic infection that can present in the elderly with hypothermia and even 
a WBC of 4,000 or 12,000. MODS is usually the result of a direct injury to an organ. 
A kidney stone or appendicitis should present with pain and tenderness.

Multisystem  ❙  295
25.	
Correct answer: B
Gentamycin is an aminoglycoside, as are tobramycin and amikacin. These drugs are 
used to combat gram-negative bacterial infections such as E. coli, but they must be 
used with caution because they can cause nephrotoxicity.
26.	
Correct answer: B
Ludwig’s angina is a submaxillary infection. It is a cellulitis of the neck and floor of 
the mouth that usually occurs with, or after, dental disease.
27.	
Correct answer: A
In sepsis, endotoxins stimulate production of tumor necrosis factor (TNF). TNF, in 
turn, stimulates neutrophil activation and platelet aggregation. In addition, TNF 
stimulates increased capillary permeability and promotes the release of IL-1, IL-6, 
and IL-8.
28.	
Correct answer: A
Ammonium chloride can convert to ammonia and HCl in the liver. This conversion 
will indirectly correct metabolic alkalosis, but the ammonia that is generated can 
produce encephalopathy.
29.	
Correct answer: C
Recommendations should not include changing all storage boxes to cardboard. In fact, 
it is recommended that all cardboard be removed from houses and populated areas 
as soon as possible. Because cardboard is made of wood fibers, when it decays it is 
similar to a rotting tree stump, a popular haven for the brown recluse. The spider may 
hide or nest in folds and between layers of cardboard. Sealed plastic containers and 
bags provide some barriers to habitation. Gloves protect hands from exposure when 
handling wood and rocks or when working in storage areas such as basements and 
attics. Yellow or sodium light bulbs do not prevent the spider from nesting, but will 
limit food availability (lights repel other insects) and make the area less inviting.
30.	
Correct answer: A
Ginseng has been known to increase the QT interval, which would put this patient 
at greater risk for cardiac rhythm complications. Advise patients to carefully read 
the label before consuming any sports or high-energy drink, as many of these drinks 
now contain various herbs and high levels of caffeine. Ginseng may also cause breast 
tissue enlargement in men, erectile dysfunction, increased menstrual bleeding, and 
hormone imbalances in those with breast cancer, uterine cancer, and endometriosis. 
These effects may occur because ginseng has effects similar to those associated with 
estrogen. Ginseng may also cause complications or interactions with anticoagulation 
therapy, calcium-channel blockers, and diabetes management, and ginseng increases 
the potency of some sedatives.
31.	
Correct answer: B
Ergotamine (Ergot) is used as a treatment for migraine headaches. In females, it may 
be used to promote uterine contraction in childbirth. Because ergotamine promotes 
contraction of smooth muscles, it can be used to control bleeding.

296  ❙  Section 11
32.	
Correct answer: A
Bee stings deliver proteins in the venom that act as enzymes. The enzymes lyse the 
cells and the cellular debris accumulates very quickly and actually clogs the kidneys. 
The patient then dies from kidney failure. Any patient who has been stung multiple 
times needs to be monitored for at least 2 weeks following the incident.
33.	
Correct answer: A
A possible side effect of cocaine is malignant hyperthermia.
34.	
Correct answer: B
Pantoprazole sodium (Protonix) IV push injection should be given over 2 minutes or as 
an infusion over 15 minutes.
35.	
Correct answer: D
The extrapyramidal system of a geriatric patient deteriorates and can cause an 
increase in muscle tremors. Decreases in vision, joint deterioration, and generalized 
weakness are not reflective of deterioration of the extrapyramidal system.
36.	
Correct answer: C
A pacer should be kept at the bedside for a patient with metoprolol overdose because 
bradycardia, AV block, and hypotension will probably occur.
37.	
Correct answer: B
This type of burn may be a superficial or a deep second-degree partial thickness burn. 
The nerve endings are still intact, and this burn is very painful. Sometimes burns can 
be deceptive. A reddened area that should be diagnosed as a first-degree burn may be 
overlooked when staff is calculating requirements for fluid and nutrient resuscitation. 
After a few hours these areas can develop blisters and are only then recognized as 
dermal burns. There is a new way of assessing burn levels by using a laser Doppler 
during the first week of treatment.
38.	
Correct answer: D
The Parkland formula was developed by Dr. Charles Baxter at Parkland Hospital 
in Dallas, Texas, in the 1960s and is still utilized today. It is used nationwide as a 
standard for fluid resuscitation. There are many other formulas in use, but this one is 
widely known and will probably be on the PCCN examination. The formula is 4 ml 
fluid × patient’s weight (in kg) × % of burn, so 4 × 70 = 280 × 30 = 8,400 ml fluid 
requirement for the first 24 hours. Half the calculated volume is given in the first 
8 hours, and then the remaining volume is given over the next 16 hours. Remember to 
calculate from the time the burn occurred.
39.	
Correct answer: B
The formula is 4 × 65 = 260 × 45 = 11,700.
40.	
Correct answer: C
As mentioned previously, Ringer’s lactate is preferred for large volume resuscitation 
because LR contains 130 mEq/L of sodium compared with normal saline, which 
has 154 mEq/L. LR has a higher pH (6.5) compared to normal saline (5.0). The pH 
of the LR is close to a normal pH. The patient will be in metabolic acidosis, so the 
metabolized lactate will buffer the acidosis. LR is also an isotonic crystalloid.

Multisystem  ❙  297
41.	
Correct answer: A
Vitamin C is an antioxidant, and it is used to counter oxidant-mediated effects on 
the inflammatory cascade. Animal studies have shown that if the vitamin C is given 
within 6 hours of the burn, up to 50% of the fluid needed for resuscitation can be 
eliminated. Always remember that if you have a burn patient, you should start at 
least two large-bore IVs. Another new treatment involves the use of subatmospheric 
pressure dressings. These dressings may aid in removing excess fluid and help save 
areas that would otherwise have to be grafted or removed.
42.	
Correct answer: B
Oxygen deprivation is not considered a direct source of energy that would lead to a 
patient’s injury. It would be considered a cause of injury or death because of sequelae 
from the resultant lack of oxygen.
43.	
Correct answer: C
Rocky Mountain spotted fever is spread by ticks that carry a rotavirus. Symptoms 
include a sudden onset fever for 2 to 3 weeks and a rash that may cover the entire 
body. Treatment must include both chloramphenicol and tetracycline.
44.	
Correct answer: C
Myoglobinuria is rarely seen with lightning burns. AC current usually causes 
ventricular fibrillation, and DC current usually causes asystole. In some cases 
arrhythmias are delayed for up to 12 hours. The mechanism of lightning strikes is 
quite complex. There are several ways lightning can injure a person:
A side splash from another object is probably the cause of this patient’s injuries. The 
lightning hits something like a tree and then bounces off.
A direct strike may also have occurred.
Another type of strike can occur when the person is touching an object that is struck. 
Ground current effect occurs when energy spreads out across the surface of the earth. 
Lightning has two strokes, upward and downward. If they do not meet, energy can be 
directed outward.
Internal burns are rare. Myoglobinuria rarely occurs. Generally, lightning causes 
cardiac and respiratory arrest, burns from metals touching the victim (watches, 
necklaces, earrings), and neurologic damage.
45.	
Correct answer: C
Your patient has been diagnosed with Pickwickian syndrome. This disease is 
characterized by extreme obesity, sleep apnea, inadequate gas exchange, hypercarbia, 
hypoxemia, and polycythemia. Other symptoms may include daytime sleepiness, 
pulmonary hypertension, and an enlarged heart.
46.	
Correct answer: B
The antidote for digoxin overdose is digoxin immune fab. Digoxin immune fab 
reverses hyperkalemia and most dysrhythmias. Patients in renal failure may require 
dialysis to remove the digoxin immune fab.
47.	
Correct answer: D
If a patient sustains an injury from electromagnetic waves such as those from an 
X-ray, the type of energy involved is radiant. Other sources of radiant energy are 
sunlight, sound waves, and radioactive emissions.

298  ❙  Section 11
48.	
Correct answer: A
When energy is transferred from a bullet to an individual, the type of energy 
transferred is called mechanical energy. Energy is loaded onto the patient, and if the 
load overcomes the body’s ability to tolerate it, injury to one or more of the body’s 
tissues occurs.
49.	
Correct answer: B
The systemic response to infection defined as the presence of SIRS in addition to a 
documented or presumed infection is known as sepsis.
50.	
Correct answer: A
The presence of bacteria within the bloodstream is known as bacteremia. An 
individual with bacteremia does not necessarily develop sepsis or SIRS.
51.	
Correct answer: D
A state of physiologic dysfunction in which two or more organ systems are not capable 
of maintaining homeostasis is known as multiple organ dysfunction syndrome 
(MODS).
52.	
Correct answer: D
A sepsis-induced state with hypotension despite adequate fluid resuscitation is called 
septic shock.
53.	
Correct answer: B
Risk management plays a role in the collection, analysis, and storage of records 
regarding potential and actual injuries in the hospital, as well as court filings. It also 
identifies situations or actions of potential liability and analyzes techniques to prevent 
future injuries, medication errors, and accidents.
54.	
Correct answer: C
Vancomycin-resistant enterococci isolation requires contact isolation. The VRE 
can survive on surfaces such as your stethoscope for 1 hour and up, to 6 days on 
countertops.
55.	
Correct answer: B
Signs and symptoms of heat stroke include hot, dry skin, flushed face, high body 
temperature (> 40°C or 104°F), dyspnea, tachycardia, mental status changes, and 
absence of sweating (unless engaged in activity). This is a medical emergency as the 
patient’s body can no longer maintain thermoregulation.
56.	
Correct answer: C
Signs of vitamin D toxicity include azotemia, hypercalcemia, vomiting, and 
nephrocalcinosis. Vitamin D deficiency will result in hypocalcemia, increased 
susceptibility to respiratory diseases, lethargy, and seizures.
57.	
Correct answer: A
You have been tasked with starting a peripheral IV on an obese patient. Use of 
a smaller gauge catheter is often successful because smaller diameter vessels are 
generally found in adipose tissue. Sometimes, if you use a longer catheter, it may reach 
through the adipose tissue to underlying vessels. You might also consider using a BP 
cuff in lieu of a rubber tourniquet to help visualize peripheral veins.

Multisystem  ❙  299
58.	
Correct answer: B
Integrilin and heparin IV administration post-PTCA should be discontinued after 
20 to 24 hours. Maximum therapy is extended to 96 hours. The dosage should not be 
weaned or increased as bleeding times and therapeutic effects would be negatively 
impacted. PO Integrilin is not available.
59.	
Correct answer: D
Rifampin should not be administered to patients receiving diltiazem hydrochloride as 
the rifampin decreases serum diltiazem levels to undetectable amounts by increasing 
metabolism of the drug. Nitroglycerin and digoxin therapy may be used concurrently. 
Insulin use may be required to manage adverse reaction of hyperglycemia, especially 
in diabetic patients.
60.	
Correct answer: C
The patient should receive prophylactic antibiotics to mitigate possible endocarditis, 
which may be the cause of his symptoms.
61.	
Correct answer: D
Pulmonary angiograms require iodine-based radiographic contrast dye to be injected 
into the antecubital or femoral vein via catheter to the pulmonary artery. The 
pulmonary vasculature can then be visualized. The radioactive iodine crosses the 
blood–placental barrier, which is why this procedure is contraindicated in pregnancy. 
Other contraindications include allergy to shellfish, iodine, radiographic dye, and 
renal insufficiency.
62.	
Correct answer: D
Renal function is possibly decreased, and the patient may have increased ALT and 
AST. The symptoms will abate in 4 days to 2 weeks.
63.	
Correct answer: D
Cocaine is classified as a Schedule II central nervous system stimulant. It is also used 
as a local anesthetic, a bronchodilator, and a vasoconstrictor. Cocaine compromises 
the heart’s antioxidant defense system, and an overdose can cause an MI. Cocaine 
can also cause aortic dissection, stroke, intestinal ischemia, hallucinations, and 
adverse effects on fetuses.
64.	
Correct answer: B
Digital subtraction angiography can be done to diagnose aneurysms, aortic valve 
stenosis, carotid stenosis, pulmonary emboli, ulcerative plaques, hepatocellular 
carcinomas, and many other conditions. The procedure carries some risks, including 
allergic reactions to the contrast dye, anaphylaxis, aphasia, hemiplegia, paresthesia, 
hemorrhage, infection, renal toxicity, and thromboemboli.

300  ❙  Section 11
65.	
Correct answer: B
Lithium is an alkali, a metal salt used mostly in the treatment of bipolar disorder and 
cluster migraine headaches. In bipolar disorder and alcohol withdrawal, lithium works 
by altering sodium transport in nerves and muscles, which helps to stabilize mood. 
Untreated lithium toxicity may lead to seizures, coma, and cardiac dysrhythmias 
when levels reach greater than 2.5 mEq/L. Toxicity usually occurs with levels of 
2 mEq/L, but symptoms may be noted at even lower blood levels with certain body 
chemistries. Initial toxicity is noted when the patient experiences diarrhea, vomiting, 
drowsiness, muscular weakness, and disorientation. As toxicity and symptoms 
worsen, nystagmus, ataxia, giddiness, tinnitus, confusion, and blurred vision may be 
present. Patients must be managed by close monitoring and immediate intervention of 
dysrhythmias and electrolyte imbalances.
66.	
Correct answer: A
An aPTT of 52 seconds indicates effective therapeutic eptifibatide (Integrilin) 
management post-PTCA. Once aPTT is < 45 seconds and ACT < 150 seconds, the 
sheath may be removed in anticipation of discharge. ACT of 221 is normal during 
PTCA procedure, not postprocedure. A platelet level < 100,000/mm3 indicates an 
adverse reaction and Integrilin therapy should be held.
67.	
Correct answer: A
Because of air trapping, a person with asthma has a low peak flow rate during 
expiration.
68.	
Correct answer: D
The causative organism for Lyme disease is Borrelia burgdorferi, a spirochete carried by 
the deer tick.
69.	
Correct answer: B
This patient appears to be decompensating and developing hypovolemic shock. He 
is in sinus tachycardia, and his systolic blood pressure is only 84 and his CVP is 4, 
RR is 26, skin is cool and clammy, and his mentation is diminished.
70.	
Correct answer: C
Increased peripheral vascular resistance is not an action of diltiazem (Cardizem). By 
blocking calcium transport into cells, coronary and vascular smooth muscles relax, 
leading to decreased peripheral vascular resistance and vasodilation. Prolonging AV 
conduction causes a decrease in heart rate and interrupts reentrant tachycardiacs.
71.	
Correct answer: A
Octreotide acetate (Sandostatin) decreases gastrointestinal motility, it does not 
increase motility. The suppression of serotonin, as well as GI and pituitary hormones 
results in increased gastrointestinal water reabsorption, decreasing dehydration.
72.	
Correct answer: B
The inadvertent administration of a vesicant medication into surrounding tissue is 
known as extravasation. A vesicant is fluid or medication capable of causing necrosis, 
blistering, and tissue damage.

Multisystem  ❙  301
73.	
Correct answer: D
Tachycardia and hypertension are side effects of the concurrent administration 
of carvedilol and clonidine and are more profound when clonidine is stopped. 
Hypoglycemia occurs as a side effect with concurrent administration of oral 
antidiabetic medications. Hypotension and bradycardia are seen with concurrent 
administration with MAO inhibitors and beta-blockers. Amiodarone administration 
may lead to heart blocks as well as bradycardia.
74.	
Correct answer: A
Potassium should be monitored closely while the patient is receiving valsartan 
(Diovan). Due to the inhibitory action on aldosterone, potassium levels may rise to 
dangerous levels, leading to arrhythmias.
75.	
Correct answer: C
Adverse reactions to Duramorph (morphine sulfate) administration include respiratory 
depression, palpitations, and anemia, as well as hypotension, bradycardia, delayed 
capillary refill, decreased libido, and increased intracranial pressure.
76.	
Correct answer: B
Although exercise is an important element in treating hypertension, it is important 
NOT to exercise during the heat of the day to avoid dehydration. Patients need to 
maintain hydration with at least 2–3 L of fluid daily to maximize the efficacy of 
olmesartan medoxomil (Benicar). Patients should avoid alcohol consumption that 
would contribute to dehydration. Dark urine and decreased urinary output are strong 
indicators of dehydration or a more ominous sign of acute renal failure.
77.	
Correct answer: C
Patients should be taught to administer enoxaparin sodium (Lovenox) when lying 
down. The only injection site area to be used is the abdomen. When injecting the dose, 
advise the patient not to remove the air bubble in the syringe as the air bubble is used 
to ensure administration of the full dose. Rubbing the injection site postadministration 
will increase the likelihood of bruising and should be avoided.
78.	
Correct answer: B
Pepcid (famotidine) has been found to increase blood alcohol levels by delaying 
metabolism and may contribute to alcohol-related injuries. Patients have been known 
to underestimate the amount, frequency, and size of consumed alcoholic beverages, 
but some medications, such as Pepcid, can sustain blood alcohol levels, contributing to 
risky behaviors. Risk of bleeding is amplified in patients who combine energy drinks 
containing ginseng or ginkgo balboa with alcohol.
79.	
Correct answer: A
Vasodilation and positive inotropy are the primary actions of milrinone. Milrinone is 
a cAMP inhibitor used primarily for congestive heart failure.
80.	
Correct answer: C
If a patient with hyperthyroidism on metoprolol suddenly stops taking the drug, 
the patient may experience a thyroid storm. If metoprolol is to be discontinued, the 
patient should slowly be weaned off while monitoring T3 and T4 levels. Leukopenia and 
bradycardia are adverse reactions of metoprolol administration.

302  ❙  Section 11
81.	
Correct answer: A
If metoprolol dosing exceeds 400 mg daily, the patient should be monitored closely 
for bronchospasms. If the patient has a history of reactive airway disease, metoprolol 
dosing may need to be reduced. Patients may also experience fatigue, hallucinations, 
drowsiness, decreased HDP, and dry eyes and mouth.
82.	
Correct answer: A
As a nurse you would question an order for aspirin for any patient with recent 
history of varicella outbreak, either as chicken pox or shingles. Administration of 
aspirin places the patient at risk for Reye’s Syndrome. Other patients at risk include 
any patient recovering from viral infection or a patient who exhibits presence of 
flu-like symptoms. The specific mechanism for the reaction and precipitation of 
Reye’s Syndrome and aspirin administration is unknown, but failure to receive early 
treatment may lead to death. Initial symptoms of Reye’s syndrome include persistent 
vomiting, listlessness, drowsiness, personality changes (irritability), and aggressive 
behavior.
83.	
Correct answer: C
The aPPT should be monitored during administration of bivalirudin for early 
identification of life-threatening bleeding complications. As there is no antidote for 
bivalirudin overdose, administration via IV injection and infusion should be carefully 
monitored. Bivalirudin binds to free thrombin and thrombin in existing clots, 
placing patients at high risk for exsanguination from existing wounds and invasive 
procedures. In addition, a woman during menses may experience profound bleeding 
while receiving Angiomax.
84.	
Correct answer: C
The appropriate dose of prasugrel (Effient) for a patient weighing < 60 kg (132 lbs) is 
5 mg PO daily. For patients weighing > 60 kg (132 lbs), the normal dose is 10 mg PO 
daily. Effient is metabolized in the liver and for patients weighing < 60 kg, there is a 
potential for increased bleeding.
85.	
Correct answer: D
An order for fentanyl 0.5 mg IM q 1–2 hours for pain should be questioned 
immediately as the dose is 10 times the normal dose. Transcription errors lead to 
potentially life-threatening reactions. Despite the use of electronic medication records, 
some facilities still must transcribe physician orders to the electronic record, leading 
to medication errors. Decimal placement can often be missed in scanning and faxing 
orders to pharmacy. Order clarification by the nurse and pharmacy helps prevent 
such errors.
86.	
Correct answer: A
Avoidance of grapefruit or grapefruit juice does not impact digoxin administration 
or efficacy. High-fiber foods such as beans and brans taken with digoxin will impair 
digoxin absorption. Digoxin should be taken at the same time every day to avoid 
missing doses. Most patients understand that the heart rate should be checked prior 
to taking digoxin, but it is important that the patient also understand that the dose 
should be skipped if the heart rate is < 60 bpm and to notify the prescribing physician 
as soon as possible.

Multisystem  ❙  303
87.	
Correct answer: D
The inadvertent administration of a nonvesicant medication into surrounding tissue is 
known as infiltration.
88.	
Correct answer: D
A microbial phenomenon characterized by an inflammatory response to the 
microorganisms or the invasion of normally sterile tissue by those organisms is known 
as infection.
89.	
Correct answer: C
The presence of a systolic blood pressure of less than 90 mmHg or a reduction of more 
than 40 mmHg from baseline in the absence of other causes of hypotension is known 
as sepsis-induced hypotension.
90.	
Correct answer: C
St. John’s Wort is contraindicated in patients with HIV/AIDS because the herb interferes 
with the metabolism of protease inhibitors and nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase 
inhibitors.
91.	
Correct answer: D
This patient is having a severe reaction to the black widow bite. He is apneic and 
bradycardic. Priorities are to maintain the airway to provide ventilation and oxygen 
therapy. The next step is to administer antivenin as soon as available. Morphine 
may help with pain but will worsen the bradycardia and hypotension. It is a myth 
that tying a tourniquet around the affected limb will stop the venom from reaching 
the bloodstream or lymphatic system. At this point, the venom is already systemic. 
In minor cases involving healthy patients, symptoms may be managed with pain 
control, muscle relaxants, and comfort measures. Symptoms should dissipate during 
the first 3 days after exposure.
92.	
Correct answer: C
This patient suffered a black widow spider bite. Her discharge instructions should include 
contacting her physician immediately if she has joint or abdominal pain or difficulty 
breathing. Joint and abdominal pain (pain related to splenomegaly), as well as dyspnea, 
may be signs of anaphylaxis or serum sickness up to 2 to 4 weeks after antivenin 
administration. Patients should be taught to contact their physicians immediately 
so early treatment can be initiated to prevent complications. Administration of 
corticosteroids and antihistamines will aid in combating the inflammatory response 
to the animal proteins in the antivenin. The neurotoxin may cause residual muscle 
spasms, tingling, weakness, and nervousness for weeks to months after the exposure to 
the venom. Patients may need to slowly increase activity during their recovery.
93.	
Correct answer: A
The priority of care is to insert a nasogastric tube and provide gastric lavage with 
activated charcoal. Scotch Broom contains sparteine, which has very powerful 
cardiovascular effects. Arrhythmias, blood pressure changes (increased or decreased), 
coagulation changes, and vision changes are possible side effects of this herb. The 
best action listed is to lavage the stomach to remove any un- or partially digested 
Scotch Broom. You will need to insert a Foley catheter, as Scotch broom does have 
diuretic properties, but it is not a priority. Quinidine and amiodarone should be 
stopped immediately because they will interact with the Scotch Broom to cause further 
cardiovascular collapse by increasing the toxicity of the Scotch Broom.

304  ❙  Section 11
94.	
Correct answer: A
Patients suffering from a brown recluse spider bite will not present with dyspnea. 
Patients may not initially know they were bitten and will seek medical help 12 to 
36 hours after the initial bite. Because treatment is delayed, symptoms may be difficult 
to treat. Most patients may present with flu-like symptoms such as nausea and 
vomiting. DIC, hemolysis, and thrombocytopenia are severe symptoms. Treatment 
includes ice to control inflammation, keeping the area clean and protected, and 
treating symptoms. No specific treatment has been proven to be 100% effective. 
Dapsone has limited support for preventing necrosis. Nitroglycerin patches counter the 
vasoconstrictive properties of the venom and lead to hemodilution in the bloodstream 
and increased bleeding at the site to wash the venom out.
95.	
Correct answer: D
Shellfish poisoning can exhibit symptoms days after ingestion. The toxin contained 
in shellfish, clams, and oysters is called saxotoxin and is not affected by steaming or 
cooking. It inhibits sodium channels of membranes, blocking propagation of nerve 
and muscle action potentials. If the nerves are involved, there may be parasthesias of 
the lips, tongue, gums, and face. The parasthesias may spread to the trunk and lead 
to paralysis and respiratory arrest. There is no definite treatment, so care is driven by 
treating symptoms and providing psychological support.
96.	
Correct answer: A
Cadmium accumulates in the lungs, liver, and kidneys by exposure to cigarette 
smoke. Cadmium is actually a heavy metal with a half-life of 15–20 years. It is a 
respiratory irritant and can produce pulmonary edema, interstitial pneumonia, and 
cardiovascular collapse if inhaled. It is used in the manufacture of storage batteries, 
alloys, and in electroplating. If cadmium is ingested, the individual will have severe 
gastrointestinal symptoms within 30 minutes. Most cadmium collects in erythrocytes 
and kidney tissues. It is not metabolized in the body.
97.	
Correct answer: C
Inhalation anthrax has an incubation period of 7 days to as long as 60 days after 
exposure. Symptoms are initially vague and flu-like such as malaise, low-grade 
fever, and nausea. These symptoms quickly progress to profound diaphoresis, chest 
discomfort, and rhonchi. The mild symptoms occur in the first 5 days of the illness 
followed by a brief rally. There is then an abrupt onset of high fever and severe 
respiratory distress. Death occurs as early as 24–36 hours after symptoms begin.
98.	
Correct answer: A
Inhalation anthrax starts with mild, nonspecific symptoms such as malaise, low-grade 
fever, fatigue, and cough. Untreated, death occurs within 24–36 hours from respiratory 
failure.
99.	
Correct answer: B
Ciprofloxacin, a fluorquinolone antibiotic, is the drug of choice for inhalation anthrax. 
Doxycycline, a tetracycline derivative, may also be used, but the dosage is incorrect. 
Penicillin G is not an option as the bacteria, Bacillus anthracis, becomes beta-lactamase 
positive, making the penicillin ineffective. Augmentin is not used for this situation, 
and it is only given orally.

Multisystem  ❙  305
100.	
Correct answer: C
The CDC states that contact precautions are all that is required for inhalation 
anthrax. Standard precautions may include the use of a face mask if the patient is 
having a productive cough.
101.	
Correct answer: C
Ricin is made from castor beans and is one of the most toxic substances known. It 
interferes with protein synthesis and causes cell death. Chewing castor beans may 
cause some symptoms, but the most lethal form is inhaled. The toxin is not spread 
by casual contact. The most likely victims would be seen in enclosed areas such as 
subway trains, buses, or small rooms. It is usually aerosolized with some liquid like 
water or a weak acid.
102.	
Correct answer: A
The elderly and children are at greatest risk for intravenous infiltration. The elderly 
have less elastic veins, children have immature veins. Examples of other risk groups 
include patients who have had CVAs, diabetics, spinal injured patients, and severely 
debilitated patients.
103.	
Correct answer: B
Notify the physician immediately, as the patient may have botulism. Sometimes, 
families do not have enough education to make proper decisions or understand the 
nature of a disease. Attempting to elicit an appropriate history can be challenging. 
It is likely that, because of the presenting symptoms, this patient has botulism.
104.	
Correct answer: B
Possible adverse effects of fentanyl include respiratory depression, chest wall rigidity, 
apnea, laryngospasm, abdominal distension, loss of bowel sounds, and generalized 
muscle rigidity.
105.	
Correct answer: A
Possible adverse effects of morphine include respiratory depression, ileus, abdominal 
distension, delayed gastric emptying, hypotension, bradycardia, and urine retention.
106.	
Correct answer: B
Fentanyl administered intravenously is incompatible with phenytoin, azithromycin, 
and pentobarbital.
107.	
Correct answer: A
Contraindications for the use of fentanyl include increased intracranial pressure, 
severe respiratory disease or depression including acute asthma (unless the patient 
is mechanically ventilated), and seizures. Additional contraindications include CNS 
depression, paralytic ileus, severe liver or renal insufficiency, and hyperglycemia 
(fentanyl may elevate blood glucose). Fentanyl is used in open heart surgery.
108.	
Correct answer: A
Although you may ask all these questions, the first question should be used to 
determine if this patient was using actual witch hazel for acne or facial cleaning or if 
she is using the slang term “witch hazel” for heroin. Many street drugs may present 
with innocuous names. Heroin may also be referred to as smack, nose drops (liquid 
heroin), dragon rock (mixed with cocaine), A-bomb (mixed with marijuana), big H, 
brown sugar, brown tape, diesel, and old navy. Monitor for additional signs and 
symptoms of heroin abuse such as venous tracks, bruising, and burnt fingertips from 
holding a roll lighter to smoke the heroin.

306  ❙  Section 11
109.	
Correct answer: A
The sudden collapse of a young woman at a party without explanation is suspicious 
for gamma hydroxybutyrate (GHB) or ketamine ingestion. These are known date or 
party rape drugs. Due to the anesthetic and amnesic effects of the drug, an affected 
female may be unable to describe events leading up to the collapse. To determine 
exposure the drug screen should be repeated, looking specifically for gamma 
hydroxybutyrate and/or ketamine.
110.	
Correct answer: B
Activated charcoal does not adsorb metals. Activated charcoal adsorbs most poisons. 
Activated charcoal cannot be mixed with ice cream or syrups because the charcoal 
adsorbs many of these agents, rendering it less effective. Single doses of activated 
charcoal are indicated for serious poison exposures.
111.	
Correct answer: A
Multiple doses of activated charcoal should be used for ingestions of theophylline. 
Additional drugs for which multiple doses are indicated include digoxin, 
phenobarbital, and amitriptyline.
112.	
Correct answer: D
A heart rate of more than 80 beats per minute was not identified as a variable for the 
definition of SIRS.
113.	
Correct answer: B
Ketamine is contraindicated in a patient with altered intracranial pressure because it 
increases ICP and cerebral blood flow.
114.	
Correct answer: C
Propofol is made from egg phosphates and soybeans. It is incumbent on the nurse to 
determine if the patient has allergies or sensitivities to these ingredients.
115.	
Correct answer: C
Rewarm the affected part using warm water at 40 to 43.3°C (104–110°F). Keep the 
affected part elevated and do not place heavy blankets over the area. The skin will be 
a waxy, whitish color. The patient may also have numbness, tingling, or a burning 
sensation of the affected area.
116.	
Correct answer: D
In patients with deep frostbite, amputations are not an emergency. An amputation 
may be performed days or weeks after the injury. Priorities are to remove wet clothing, 
rewarm the patient, administer warm, noncaffeinated fluids (if the patient has an 
intact gag reflex), administer analgesics, and consider tetanus prophylaxis.
117.	
Correct answer: B
The primary lesion of syphilis is a painless chancre or lesion generally found on the 
genitalia. Because of the painless nature of the lesion and the surrounding pubic hair, 
the lesion may be missed.
118.	
Correct answer: D
Isotonic fluids are least likely to cause tissue damage from an infiltration or 
extravasation. Cytotoxins, vasopressors, alkaline, acidic, or hypertonic fluids are 
highly likely to cause tissue damage if they infuse into surrounding tissue.

Multisystem  ❙  307
119.	
Correct answer: B
Loss of the radial pulse indicates probable compartment syndrome; this is an 
emergency, and pressure must be relieved via an escharotomy, an incision through 
multiple layers of tissue. Any circumferential burn of the body may lead to impaired 
function and necessitate an escharotomy.
120.	
Correct answer: D
A carboxyhemoglobin of 18% and a burned chin is indicative of smoke inhalation 
in this patient. When a sudden flame-up comes near the face, the first instinct is to 
gasp. This inhalation of superheated air will cause swelling of the tissues in the air 
passages. This man was probably very near the flame as his chin was burned, and he 
is at great risk of a compromised airway and may need intubation.
121.	
Correct answer: C
Lactated Ringer’s is used for burn patients for a variety of reasons with many of the 
formulas for burn resuscitation. It is preferred for large volume resuscitation because 
LR contains 130 mEq/L of sodium compared with normal saline that has 154 mEq/L. 
LR has a higher pH (6.5) compared to normal saline (5.0). The pH of the LR is close to 
a normal pH. The patient will be in metabolic acidosis, so the metabolized lactate will 
buffer the acidosis. LR is also an isotonic crystalloid.
122.	
Correct answer: C
Third-degree full thickness burns destroy nerve endings because they extend into 
subcutaneous tissue. The tissue may have a whitish color and will be somewhat firm 
with a leather-like appearance. Sometimes you can see clotted vessels through the 
eschar.
123.	
Correct answer: A
Dobutamine is an inotrope and will improve the pumping action of the heart. This 
alpha-, beta1-, and beta2-agonist will increase contractility and cardiac output, with 
little or no concomitant increase in myocardial oxygen consumption. Dobutamine has 
a very mild vasodilatory effect, though high doses can cause ischemia.
124.	
Correct answer: D
The probable diagnosis for this patient is mercury poisoning. Fish can contain large 
amounts of mercury. The concentration in fish can be more than 1,000 times greater 
than in the surrounding water. People who eat fish as a main component of their diet 
may be at risk. Organic mercury compounds are very toxic. They are taken into the 
body by ingestion, inhalation, skin, and eye contact. These mercury compounds can 
attack all body systems. They can cause nausea, lack of appetite, abdominal pain, 
kidney failure, swollen gums and mouth sores, numbness and tingling in the lips, 
mouth, tongue, hands, and feet, tremors, and seizures. The patient can become very 
uncoordinated and feel disconnected from his surroundings. He may lose part or all 
of his vision and hearing. Additional neurologic issues may include memory loss, 
personality changes, and headache. Organic mercury can pass to a baby via breast 
milk. Methyl mercury may cause serious birth defects.
125.	
Correct answer: D
Romazicon is a benzodiazepine antagonist and should be given to counteract the 
effects of Versed. Xanax, Valium, and Ativan are also benzodiazepines.

308  ❙  Section 11
126.	
Correct answer: C
Cardene cannot be mixed with Ringer’s lactate or sodium bicarbonate infusions. 
According to studies, although the combination does not cause a precipitate, the 
Ringer’s lactate inactivates 15 to 42% of the drug.
127.	
Correct answer: C
Western equine encephalitis is a type of encephalitis caused by an arbovirus 
(togovirus). An arbovirus means it is carried by arthropods. A horse or small mammal 
was probably infected and the virus was vectored by a mosquito. This type of 
encephalopathy is not directly transmitted human to human. This patient is at high 
risk for aspiration pneumonia and ARDS.
128.	
Correct answer: C
Plague is not transmitted by rats. Plague is transmitted by fleas carrying the Yersinia 
pestis bacterium, and aerosol droplets may spread the disease from person to person. 
Some countries consider plague as a biologic weapon.
129.	
Correct answer: D
Vein damage is least likely to occur when Ringer’s lactate is administered by a 
peripheral IV catheter. Even though the pH is 6.5, Ringer’s lactate is considered 
isotonic. The other choices were acidic, alkalotic, or hyperosmolar, making them 
unsuitable for peripheral IV administration.
130.	
Correct answer: A
Nonspecific is not a form of anthrax. Cutaneous, pulmonary, and gastrointestinal are 
all forms of anthrax.
131.	
Correct answer: A
The type of chemical agent that can cause blistering is called a vesicant.
132.	
Correct answer: B
The type of device made by combining radioactive materials and an explosive is 
known as a radiologic dispersal device.
133.	
Correct answer: A
Watery, rice-like diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, irritability, confusion, and paresthesias 
around the mouth are symptoms of arsenic poisoning. Additional symptoms include 
headache, a metallic taste, palpitations, and EKG changes.
134.	
Correct answer: D
A tertiary blast injury is a blast injury that occurs when a body is hurled though the 
air and struck by another object.
135.	
Correct answer: A
Hemorrhagic contusion is an example of a primary blast injury. A blast injury occurs 
after an explosion that causes sudden changes in atmospheric pressure.
136.	
Correct answer: D
Effient irreversibly binds with platelets (not thrombin) for the life of the platelet, 
which is 7–10 days. This is the primary reason why ceasing administration of Effient 
(prasugrel) will not immediately lead to improvement of life-threatening bleeding 
disorders.

Multisystem  ❙  309
137.	
Correct answer: B
If a patient receiving transdermal fentanyl (Duragesic) administration is experiencing 
skin irritation under the patch, the nurse should request concurrent administration of 
Kenalog (triamcinolone topical spray). The spray can be applied to the skin and the 
Duragesic patch applied over it to alleviate skin irritation. Kenalog does not inhibit or 
interfere with transdermal uptake of Duragesic. Although the patient did not complain 
about the skin irritation, proactive treatment may lead to better patient compliance. 
It is never appropriate to advise a patient to take any medication in a manner not 
prescribed. Cutting the patch or constantly moving the patch may interfere with 
normal uptake of the medication leading to adverse reactions.
138.	
Correct answer: A
This question requires the nurse to know both generic and brand names for commonly 
used medications. It is easy to confuse the names for many commonly used drugs. 
Midazolam is also known as Versed and an appropriate dose is 2.5 mg IVP over 2 min 
just prior to procedure.
139.	
Correct answer: A
The appropriate potency conversion from morphine to fentanyl is 100 mcg of fentanyl 
equals 10 mg of morphine.
140.	
Correct answer: C
Aspirin inhibits platelet aggregation by inhibiting thromboxane A2 production. 
Thromboxane A2 stimulates platelet aggregation.
141.	
Correct answer: B
Duragesic patches contain 2 g of sugar and diabetic patients will likely need a slight 
increase adjustment to insulin therapy to account for the additional sugar intake.
142.	
Correct answer: C
You would anticipate your patient admitted for a lateral MI to be started on aspirin 
therapy at 325 mg daily to reduce the risk of another MI. Dosage of 81 mg daily has 
been found insufficient to prevent and treat patients at risk for or after myocardial 
event. Instead, 160 mg daily has been recommended to prevent or reduce severity of 
an MI. Dosages exceeding 325 mg per day could quickly lead to salicylate poisoning.
143.	
Correct answer: A
A disadvantage of using negative pressure wound care devices is NPWC cannot 
be used on wounds associated with malignancies. Advantages of NPWC include 
promotion of a moist healing environment, removal of barriers to cell migration and 
proliferation, and removal of interstitial fluid.
144.	
Correct answer: C
There are four necessary elements necessary to determine malpractice: Duty of care, 
breach of duty, injury, and causation. Physician relation is a nebulous statement and 
has no bearing on the question.
145.	
Correct answer: B
Best practice concerning hair removal prior to insertion of a peripheral IV would be to 
use a pair of scissors or disposable-head surgical clippers. Use of a razor might cause 
cuts or microabrasions, which increase the risk for infection. Depilatory creams should 
never be used as they might also provide a portal for bacterial entry.


❙
  311 
❙
Section 12
Behavioral
SECTION 12: BEHAVIORAL QUESTIONS
1.	
Which of the following statements about the treatment of patient delirium in the 
progressive care unit is accurate?
A.	 No drug has been approved by the FDA to treat delirium
B.	 Propofol the best treatment when the cause of the delirium is unknown
C.	 Benzodiazepines have the greatest efficacy in the treatment of delirium
D.	 Delirium goes undetected in about 10% of progressive care patients
2.	
Signs and symptoms of anorexia nervosa may include
A.	 Tachycardia
B.	 Absent menses
C.	 Hyperthermia
D.	 Hyperactivity
3.	
Your patient is being evaluated for adult ADHD. Which of the following 
conditions or abnormalities is expected to be present if he has ADHD?
A.	 A cousin with hyperthyroidism
B.	 Eye problems
C.	 A heart murmur
D.	 None
4.	
Your patient is waiting for surgery for a fractured tibia. Despite being heavily 
medicated for pain, he continually demands to have his cell phone and a 
computer pad in his room. His wife says the patient spends too much time on the 
computer at home. The patient insists he only spends about an hour after work on 
the computer and texting his friends. Your patient probably suffers from
A.	 Internet addiction
B.	 Bipolar disorder
C.	 Depression anxiety
D.	 Separation anxiety
5.	
Which of the following statements is untrue regarding responses to posttraumatic 
stress disorder?
A.	 Patients are less likely to socialize
B.	 Patients may have decreased ability to complete home or work tasks
C.	 Patients may become irritable and hostile
D.	 Patients may exhibit regressive behaviors

312  ❙  Section 12
6.	
Which of the following statements is true about posttraumatic stress disorder?
A.	 Only war veterans experience PTSD
B.	 PTSD is easy to diagnose
C.	 Multiple traumatic events heighten the risk of PTSD
D.	 Patients become less aggressive
7.	
D. and S. are the parents of an 18 year old with leukemia. Their daughter just 
died. Initially, the parents stay a little while in the PCU waiting room. Both 
parents have a glazed expression while at their daughter’s bedside. As a nurse, 
you recognize their response as
A.	 Adaptation to the environment
B.	 The initial steps to coping
C.	 The initial response to a crisis
D.	 Normal and does not need to be addressed
8.	
When a person makes a conscious or unconscious attempt to disavow the 
meaning or even the knowledge of an event in order to reduce anxiety or fear, it is 
known as
A.	 Regression
B.	 Coping
C.	 Powerlessness
D.	 Ineffective denial
9.	
The specific antidote for methamphetamine is
A.	 Desipramine
B.	 Alkalinizing agents
C.	 There is no antidote
D.	 Naloxone
10.	
Patients who are undergoing alcohol withdrawal are frequently hypoglycemic. 
Their treatment regimen should include
A.	 Bolus of D10W, q 2 hour blood glucose monitoring
B.	 TPN with high concentrations of sugars, q 2 hour blood glucose monitoring
C.	 Maintenance fluids of D25W at 125 ml/h peripherally
D.	 Thiamine, then bolus with D50W, then infusion of D5W
11.	
Which of the following illegal drugs is the most commonly abused?
A.	 Marijuana
B.	 Toluene
C.	 Cocaine
D.	 Heroin
12.	
The useful organization and incorporation of both new and old data, experience, 
and emotional capacities into the personality is called
A.	 Introspection
B.	 Solidarity
C.	 Introversion
D.	 Integration

Behavioral  ❙  313
13.	
Patients who have schizophrenia sometimes exhibit opposition or resistance, 
either covertly or overtly, to outside suggestions or advice. This behavior 
is known as
A.	 Projection
B.	 Negativism
C.	 Manipulation
D.	 Antagonism
14.	
You are assessing a college-age patient who appears euphoric and confused. 
While looking around the room, you note a chewed-up pacifier on the bed. Why 
would the pacifier be significant?
A.	 It was left from a previous patient
B.	 The patient may have been using the pacifier prior to your entering the room
C.	 The pacifier was caught in the railing and torn
D.	 The patient’s children were in the room just before you arrived
15.	
The drug of choice for the treatment of tricyclic antidepressant overdose is
A.	 Atropine
B.	 Imipramine
C.	 Doxepin
D.	 Sodium bicarbonate
16.	
“An acute change in consciousness that is accompanied by inattention and either 
a change in cognition or perceptual disturbance” is the definition of
A.	 Postconcussion syndrome
B.	 Dementia
C.	 Delirium
D.	 Severe depression
17.	
Your patient was admitted to the PCU after a barroom brawl in which he suffered 
multiple minor stab wounds. He is angry and verbally assaults the staff. The goal 
of anger management for this patient would not include
A.	 Confronting the patient directly with whatever made him angry
B.	 Discussing what in particular made the patient angry
C.	 Discussing with the patient alternative and positive ways to express his feelings
D.	 Developing positive ways for the patient to express his feelings when confronted 
with frustrating situations in the future
18.	
Your patient had a three-vessel CABG procedure and sustained a small stroke 
during the procedure. The stroke left some residual numbness in the left arm. The 
family is quite agitated and does not agree with the patient’s advance directives. 
The family informs you that they want everything done for the patient and to 
ignore the patient’s request for no resuscitative measures. Which of the following 
nursing interventions would be appropriate at this time?
A.	 Inform the family that the physician will meet with them to discuss treatment 
options
B.	 Tell the patient about the family’s concerns
C.	 Notify the physician that all orders are to come from the family
D.	 Inform the family that the patient is fully capable of making decisions

314  ❙  Section 12
19.	
Your patient is scheduled for implantation of a VAD. About 20 minutes prior to 
the scheduled start of the procedure, she informs you that she has concerns about 
side effects and the procedure itself. Your best nursing intervention would be to
A.	 See if the patient signed the consent form for the procedure
B.	 Notify the physician that the patient does not have a full understanding of the 
procedure
C.	 Cancel the procedure
D.	 Answer the patient’s questions yourself
20.	
A car carrying four teenagers went off a bridge and killed all but one of the teens. 
Today, a second EEG was done and brain death was confirmed for the fourth 
teen. The family was approached about organ donation. They requested that the 
patient remain in the PCU for at least seven to eight days until the older sister can 
return from a war zone. The appropriate nursing response would be to
A.	 Tell the family other patients are waiting for the bed
B.	 Notify the physician to tell the family organ donation must be made within 
24 hours
C.	 Notify social services and arrange for emergency compassionate leave for the sister
D.	 Wait until the family leaves to procure the organs
21.	
Your patient suffered a concussion. She is currently unable to recognize familiar 
faces. This symptom is not explained by defective visual acuity or reduced 
consciousness or alertness. Her condition is not uncommon and is known as
A.	 Symbolization
B.	 Thought insertion
C.	 Transference
D.	 Prosopagnosia
22.	
Which of the following patients are most likely to exhibit signs of PTSD?
A.	 A 14 year old runaway boy
B.	 A 24 year old female who witnessed a murder
C.	 A 38 year old man arrested for his first DUI
D.	 A 64 year old lady who experienced a 3.5 earthquake
23.	
As a part of your assessment of a patient experiencing post-traumatic stress 
disorder, which of the following symptoms are most likely to occur?
A.	 Denial that anything is wrong
B.	 Total recall of the event
C.	 Duration of symptoms longer than one week
D.	 Willingness to discuss the incident
24.	
While examining a veteran who was a prisoner of war, what behavior would you 
expect to observe?
A.	 A well-kept patient who has had the same job for 15 years
B.	 An anxious man who keeps asking where his car keys are
C.	 A patient who is unkempt and becomes agitated when asked the date
D.	 A street person who lost their job 6 months ago

Behavioral  ❙  315
25.	
During shift report, you learn your elderly patient has never used the call light 
to summon a nurse during the two days he has been on the unit. With previous 
nurses, he has been minimally responsive and somewhat apathetic. At shift 
change, your assessment you find this patient a decreased responsiveness, a flat 
affect, is somewhat withdrawn, and lethargic as well as apathetic. You believe this 
patient may be demonstrating
A.	 Severe depression
B.	 PTSD
C.	 Mild dementia
D.	 Hypoactive delirium
26.	
A side effect after administration of an antipsychotic drug that causes muscle 
spasms is known as
A.	 Dystonia
B.	 Expression
C.	 Latency
D.	 Delusion
27.	
Your patient has been taking an antipsychotic medication. She is now suffering 
from drooling, muscle tremors, and has difficulty walking. This patient is 
exhibiting
A.	 Boundary effects
B.	 Extrapyramidal effects
C.	 Dystonic effects
D.	 Latent effects
28.	
Your 22 year old patient inhaled a large amount of cocaine. He is now 
complaining of paresthesias and “something small like little pieces of rock 
crawling under my skin.” This condition is a type of psychosis and is known as
A.	 Magnan’s sign
B.	 Drummond’s sign
C.	 Cullen’s sign
D.	 Wilder’s sign
29.	
Acetaminophen overdose may cause hypoglycemia and should be treated with a
A.	 Continuous IV infusion of D5W at 100 cc/hour
B.	 Bolus of D10W, continuous infusion of 0.45% normal saline
C.	 Bolus of D50W, continuous infusion of D5W
D.	 Continuous IV infusion of Lactated Ringer’s
30.	
Your patient is undergoing alcohol withdrawal and exhibits diplopia, peripheral 
neuropathy, confusion, recent memory loss, and hyperexcitability. You suspect 
that this patient is suffering from
A.	 Jorn’s syndrome
B.	 Leucine deficiency
C.	 Increased caritine levels
D.	 Wernicke–Korsakoff syndrome

316  ❙  Section 12
31.	
A fellow nurse was fine during day shift. She did mention that she wanted to 
attend a concert the next night but had to work. When you return to work the 
next day, you find the nurse called in sick. The nurse’s behavior is probably an 
example of
A.	 Mental fatigue
B.	 Malingering
C.	 Schizophrenic Language
D.	 Depersonalization
32.	
The effects of the high dosage of bath salts are similar to the symptoms of 
amphetamines, cocaine, and methamphetamine. Treatment of bath salts 
overdose would include
A.	 Phenylalanines
B.	 Phentermines
C.	 Benzodiazepines
D.	 Ephedrines
33.	
Your new patient is two days post a mitral valve replacement. When you enter 
the patient’s room, he is crawling over the bedrails, the bed linens are a mess, 
the Foley catheter is lying on the floor, and is visibly upset and swearing. 
This behavior was not mentioned at shift report and appears to be new. As a 
progressive care nurse, you suspect this patient is suffering from
A.	 Dementia
B.	 Hyperactive delirium
C.	 An allergic reaction
D.	 Severe metabolic acidosis
34.	
Supporting and respecting the culture, beliefs, and values of the progressive care 
patient is known as
A.	 Standard of care
B.	 Moral agency
C.	 Duty
D.	 Advocacy
35.	
Many times nurses experience conflicts when asked to assist patients with decision 
making. The obligation to assist the patient in making a decision when the 
patient does not have sufficient data or expertise is called
A.	 Paternalism
B.	 Moral agency
C.	 Interdependence
D.	 Assumptive thinking
36.	
In health care, actions are right or wrong based on a set of rules and morals. This 
ethical approach is known as
A.	 Social contract theory
B.	 Deontology
C.	 Moral agency
D.	 Natural law

Behavioral  ❙  317
37.	
If your patient is seeking freedom from a sense of worthlessness and loneliness, 
the patient is at the __________________ level of Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs.
A.	 Self-actualization
B.	 Esteem and recognition
C.	 Love and belonging
D.	 Safety and security
38.	
Individuals who are driven toward unacceptable behaviors and who redirect their 
energy into more socially acceptable behaviors are using a psychological defense 
mechanism called
A.	 Resolution
B.	 Compensation
C.	 Repression
D.	 Sublimation
39.	
Alcohol abuse may lead to a deficiency in micronutrients that in turn may cause 
depression and suicidal behavior. One of these micronutrients is
A.	 Potassium
B.	 Copper
C.	 Sodium
D.	 Selenium
40.	
The false belief that something is wrong with one’s body or body part is called
A.	 Malingering
B.	 Hypochondriasis
C.	 Transference
D.	 Somatic delusion
41.	
Although there is no universally accepted core model of care for patients with 
delirium, AACN has adopted the ABCDE bundle. This core model is a mix of 
evidence-based practice strategies that can be incorporated into daily patient 
care. The purpose is to systematically reduce modifiable risk factors and improve 
patient outcomes. The letters A, B, C, D, and E mean
A.	 Awakening, breathing, choice of sedative, delirium detection, exercise
B.	 Activity, bargaining, confusion, distraction, energy
C.	 Agitation, bargaining, combative, delirium, engaged
D.	 Anxiety, behavior, combative, drug, enraged
42.	
The fear of crowds is known as
A.	 Acrophobia
B.	 Agoraphobia
C.	 Arachnophobia
D.	 Aschizophobia
43.	
Your patient is explaining his medical history to you when he simply stops 
speaking and looks around the room. His behavior is known as
A.	 Rude
B.	 Affect
C.	 Blocking
D.	 Amnesia

318  ❙  Section 12
44.	
Simultaneous existence of contradictory or contrasting emotions toward a person 
or object is known as
A.	 Apathy
B.	 Double bind
C.	 Depersonalization
D.	 Ambivalence
45.	
Which of the following medications is not considered an antimanic drug?
A.	 Klonopin
B.	 Tegretol
C.	 Lithium
D.	 Tofranil
46.	
Which of the following is classified as an antianxiety drug?
A.	 Restoril
B.	 Elavil
C.	 Sinequan
D.	 Tofranil
47.	
Your patient cut his forearm and requires several stitches. He begins to 
hallucinate when the resident is only midway through the procedure. The patient 
is demanding, loud, and very insistent. His behavior worsens and disrupts the 
staff. You could categorize this patient’s behavior as
A.	 Paranoid
B.	 Self-absorbed
C.	 Deteriorating
D.	 Overanxious
48.	
The Society of Critical Care Medicine (SCCM) believes that the first step in 
delirium management is to identify the causes of delirium. They have developed a 
mnemonic called THINK to help determine the cause of delirium in a patient. The 
letter H in this mnemonic means
A.	 Hyperemia
B.	 Hydration
C.	 Hypoxemia
D.	 Hyperkalemia
49.	
A young woman was admitted to the PCU for observation after fighting at 
a friend’s house. She has a right fractured humerus, a right Colles’ fracture, 
mild concussion, and right orbital fracture. When paramedics arrived, she was 
found talking to herself, resisted medical care, and stated she could heal herself. 
During your assessment you find the patient withdrawn, irritable, fatigued, and 
indecisive about what to do with her clothing. Your next action should be to
A.	 Request a drug screen
B.	 Request a psychologist evaluation for schizophrenia
C.	 Request a social worker to assess the patient’s home life
D.	 Evaluate the patient for feelings of suicide

Behavioral  ❙  319
50.	
A false perception that is not grounded in reality and not accounted for by 
external stimuli is called
A.	 A fugue
B.	 A hallucination
C.	 An idea of reference
D.	 Disorientation
51.	
Your patient is a college student and was admitted to your unit after ingesting 
about 50 extra-strength acetaminophen tablets. Until now he has refused to 
say why he ingested the drug. About an hour after arrival, you find him crying. 
When you ask him why he is crying, he tells you he was sexually assaulted by an 
unknown male 3 weeks ago, and he is afraid this will brand him a homosexual. 
Which of the following responses is the most therapeutic?
A.	 “Don’t worry, you’ll get over this and be okay”
B.	 “Let me get the psychologist to come talk with you tomorrow”
C.	 “Why do you believe this will make you a homosexual?”
D.	 “What is wrong with being a homosexual?”
52.	
Binge eating, mutilation, obesity, drug abuse, and alcoholism are all examples of
A.	 Self-destructive behavior
B.	 Psychotic behavior
C.	 Neurosis
D.	 A fugue
53.	
As the educator for your progressive care unit, you note an increased frequency 
of patients with underlying mental disorders being admitted. You overhear 
some negative comments regarding nursing assignments for these patients. You 
ask the nurses to complete a self-awareness survey regarding their beliefs and 
understanding of mental health issues. You should use this information to
A.	 Determine which nurses should never care for patients with mental health issues
B.	 Change nursing assignments immediately
C.	 Determine which nurses should be written up and counseled
D.	 Create an education program for the nurses to increase understanding of mental 
health issues and learn how to access resources
54.	
Evidence to the public that a nurse meets established standards of quality and 
patient safety is provided by
A.	 The Nurse Practice Act
B.	 Institutional policies
C.	 Innovation and clinical inquiry
D.	 Certification

320  ❙  Section 12
55.	
You are obtaining a patient’s history when you notice multiple rotted teeth. You 
suspect bulimia nervosa. The patient tells you she regularly purges after meals so 
she can meet the weight standards for her job. What family dynamics would you 
expect to find associated with bulimia nervosa?
A.	 No significant family dynamics are noted with bulimia nervosa
B.	 A family history of drug abuse or psychiatric disorders
C.	 A strong sense of ego
D.	 Poor scholastic performance
56.	
Depression often devastates families and often goes undiagnosed and 
misunderstood by families, the public, and the medical community. Which of the 
following statements is also true regarding depression?
A.	 Depression is only seen in maltreated individuals
B.	 Depression is easy to diagnose
C.	 The elderly do not respond to antidepressant therapy
D.	 Depression is recurrent and may increase in severity
57.	
In the United States, Asperger’s syndrome is considered to be which of the 
following types of disorders?
A.	 Developmental delay disorder
B.	 Autistic spectrum disorder
C.	 Pervasive developmental disorder
D.	 Attention deficit disorder
58.	
Your patient has sickle-cell anemia and is a frequent patient in your progressive 
care unit. You were told in report that the patient’s siblings were escorted 
out of the unit for arguing in the hallway about financial difficulties and 
responsibilities. During your assessment, the patient appears to have difficulty 
concentrating on your questions and is withdrawn and restless. When attempting 
to engage her in activities, she refuses and states that she “wants to be alone.” 
You should
A.	 Respect her wishes and go care for your other patient
B.	 Leave the room to contact her husband
C.	 Straighten her room while looking for sharp objects or potential dangers
D.	 Leave the room to contact the patient’s physician
59.	
Your patient was admitted from the ED for appendicitis. She is grimacing and will 
not allow you to assess her abdomen. The hospitalist ordered Demerol for pain. 
Approximately 10 minutes after administration of the Demerol, the patient is 
combative, has pulled her IV out, has torn off her IV dressing, and is screaming at 
the staff. Your next action should be to
A.	 Apply restraints by yourself as additional staff may scare the patient
B.	 Wear personal protective equipment to enter her room to apply restraints
C.	 Call security to help subdue the patient
D.	 Use a Posey restraint system to subdue the patient

Behavioral  ❙  321
60.	
A model of health and illness that suggests that links among the nervous system, 
the immune system, behavioral styles, cognitive processing, and environmental 
factors can put people at risk for illness is called a
A.	 Integration model
B.	 Centration model
C.	 Synergy model
D.	 Biopsychosocial model
61.	
Your staff in the progressive care unit has just completed an unsuccessful code 
on a college age woman. Due to an unexpected cardiac event, the patient did not 
survive. Chaplain services are called in to assist with a nursing staff debriefing. 
Staff members experiencing which of the following emotions are at highest risk 
for psychological stress?
A.	 Anger
B.	 Fear
C.	 Anxiety
D.	 Denial
62.	
Your patient is a gang member and heavy alcohol abuser. During a fight almost 
24 hours ago, the patient was shot in the leg and hand. His gang members left 
him at the entrance to the ED with a note explaining the injuries sustained the 
previous night. You observe the patient thrashing around in the bed, and he is 
suddenly awake when you enter the room. He is shaking, has vomited, and is 
tachycardic, hypertensive, and talking to people not in the room. You suspect 
he is
A.	 Exhibiting signs of paranoid schizophrenia
B.	 Experiencing delirium tremens
C.	 Experiencing sepsis
D.	 Experiencing drug withdrawal
63.	
Within a Chinese family, cultural values and practices may include which of the 
following beliefs?
A.	 Chi is an external energy
B.	 Disease is caused by disharmony with society
C.	 Medicinal herbs are important
D.	 Family involvement in limited
64.	
A cyclic antidepressant that may cause cardiovascular effects and will probably 
cause status epilepticus is
A.	 Amoxapine
B.	 Amitriptyline
C.	 Desipramine
D.	 Doxepin
65.	
A patient intoxicated with methamphetamine would exhibit which of the 
following conditions?
A.	 Elevated liver enzymes
B.	 Bradycardia
C.	 Hypothermia
D.	 Hypotension

322  ❙  Section 12
66.	
Bath salts contribute to multiple overdoses. Bath salts are very addictive 
psychoactive chemicals which are presumed to include synthetic cocaine and 
an ecstasy variety in its components. Symptoms of bath salts overdose would 
not include
A.	 Hallucinations, delusions
B.	 Self-injury behavior and suicide attempts
C.	 Profound lethargy
D.	 Extreme agitation
67.	
The stage between normal forgetfulness due to aging and the development 
of dementia is called
A.	 Loss of problem solving
B.	 Mild cognitive impairment
C.	 Pre-Alzheimers
D.	 Delirium
68.	
Getting lost on familiar routes, having difficulty balancing a checkbook, and 
misplacing items may be signs of
A.	 Delirium
B.	 Dementia
C.	 Depression
D.	 Confusion
69.	
A mood state characterized by pessimistic thinking, lowered self-esteem, sadness, 
and guilt is called
A.	 Fugue
B.	 Delirium
C.	 Withdrawal
D.	 Depression
70.	
Patients with posttraumatic stress disorder may experience recurrence of a 
memory, feeling, or perceptual experience from the past. This condition is 
known as a
A.	 Disintegration
B.	 Euthymia
C.	 Flashback
D.	 Fantasy
71.	
A model of health and illness that suggests that links among the nervous system, 
the immune system, behavioral styles, cognitive processing, and environmental 
factors can put people at risk for illness is called a(n)
A.	 Integration model
B.	 Centration model
C.	 Synergy model
D.	 Biopsychosocial model

Behavioral  ❙  323
72.	
A key to prevention of excess mortality and morbidity in patients at risk for 
alcohol withdrawal is the appropriate use of an instrument designed to assess the 
level of risk for alcohol withdrawal. An example of an instrument to assess risk of 
alcohol withdrawal is the
A.	 Bevington scale
B.	 P.O.L.A.R.I. scale
C.	 AWSS scale
D.	 CIWA-AR scale
73.	
Continuing with the scenario from the previous question, as the patient recovers 
from her injuries, her behavior and moods change rapidly. Which of the following 
behaviors is most concerning to you as the nurse and indicates possible suicidal 
behavior?
A.	 Drug seeking with multiple requests for pain medications and sedatives
B.	 Withdrawal from conversation and interaction
C.	 Crying and statements of helplessness
D.	 Screaming at her distant relatives
74.	
During discharge teaching, you notice multiple bruises on the arms and reddened 
areas on the neck of your patient’s sister. You suspect she is being physically 
abused. What other indicator would support your assessment?
A.	 Extroverted behavior
B.	 Denial of abuse when asked directly
C.	 She volunteers information
D.	 Hesitance to discuss home situation
75.	
You are caring for a patient who was the driver in a motor vehicle accident 
in which a child was killed. She is combative and restless, hyperventilating, 
tachycardic, and has an elevated blood pressure. She states, “I’ve got to leave 
here . . . they’ll arrest me . . . they’ll lock me up . . . I can’t believe this . . . there is 
no way out.” You should tell her
A.	 “They should arrest you, you killed a child.”
B.	 “Calm down. It wasn’t your fault.”
C.	 “Stop it. You are working yourself up. Look at me and focus on what I am telling 
you to do.”
D.	 “Just relax. They can’t arrest you because you are a patient here.”
76.	
Your patient, a drug abuser with cirrhosis, has returned again to your unit 
after failing rehabilitation. Although you previously had a friendly and open 
relationship, he will not look at you and only answers minimally to questions. 
You tell him
A.	 “I can’t believe you wasted the opportunity at the rehabilitation center.”
B.	 “I know you want to stay drug-free but now you will have a permanent criminal 
record.”
C.	 “Why don’t we work together to find new resources for you to use when you are 
tempted to take one of these drugs?”
D.	 “I am proud of how long you stayed sober. Let’s try again.”

324  ❙  Section 12
77.	
Your patient was admitted to the PCU after fainting at work secondary to 
bradycardia and malnutrition. She is 67 inches tall but weighs only 93 pounds. 
You find her crying, sitting on the edge of her bed. She tells you that she is worried 
the intravenous fluid will make her gain weight. What is the most effective way to 
manage this problem?
A.	 Have her boyfriend talk to her
B.	 Ask if she wants to speak to her minister
C.	 Ask the physician for a dietary consult
D.	 Ask for a patient conference with the healthcare team and family
78.	
Bath salts withdrawal symptoms are similar to methamphetamine withdrawal. 
These symptoms would include
A.	 Agitation
B.	 Euphoria
C.	 Increased appetite
D.	 Melancholy
79.	
Your patient is the lone survivor of a car crash that killed her parents and 
two siblings. She is recovering from a pneumothorax, hemothorax, and a left 
fractured tibia. She has been extremely depressed and withdrawn. You are 
discussing medications, psychiatric therapy, and the increased risk of suicide and 
suicidal behavior with the patient’s distant relatives. The family members make 
each of the following statements. Which of the statements is false?
A.	 “If she is considering suicide, she will make statements or give warnings of 
suicide.”
B.	 “We should trust our instincts if we feel she is in danger.”
C.	 “As she recovers from her depression, she is at greater risk of suicide.”
D.	 “If she talks about suicide or asks about pills, then she is just voicing the thought 
and will not attempt suicide.”
80.	
An antidote for ethylene glycol toxicity is
A.	 Digoxin
B.	 Anisindione
C.	 Fomepizole
D.	 Narcan
81.	
GHB (Ecstasy) overdoses can lead to amnesia in approximately what percentage 
of cases?
A.	 13%
B.	 21%
C.	 24%
D.	 32%
82.	
Factors that may affect results of urine morphine levels would not include
A.	 Poppy seed ingestion may produce false-positive results
B.	 10 mg MS IV may be detectable in urine up to 84 hours
C.	 Use of stealth adulterant to cause negative results in a positive sample
D.	 High levels of lymphocytes will mask morphine in urine

Behavioral  ❙  325
83.	
Your patient is experiencing delirium tremens. Nursing interventions include 
keeping the room well lit and minimizing stimulation. Staff members 
continuously reorient the patient to time, place, and person. Haldol has been 
given as ordered, and the patient is in four-point restraints. Which of these 
nursing interventions should be discontinued?
A.	 Reorientation
B.	 Medication administration
C.	 Restraints
D.	 Controlling stimulation
84.	
Your patient is a young woman with diffuse abdominal pain and confusion. Just 
after admission, she had generalized seizures and bradycardia. Opioid overdose 
was suspected and she was given naloxone with only minimal effect. The patient 
is now lethargic, but does tell you she is a “body packer” to help pay for beauty 
school. She soon becomes hypotensive and bradycardic. Appropriate therapy 
includes
A.	 Bowel irrigations, intubation, mechanical ventilation, anticonvulsants
B.	 Sodium bicarbonate activated charcoal, hemodialysis
C.	 Antiemetics, gastric lavage, bronchodilators
D.	 Activated charcoal, sodium bicarbonate, vasopressors
85.	
Excessive motor activity that accompanies and is associated with a feeling of 
inner tension and is usually nonproductive and repetitious is called
A.	 Displacement
B.	 Idiosyncratic
C.	 Lability
D.	 Agitation
86.	
Your patient has dementia. The physician places a pen in the patient’s hand while 
the patient has their eyes closed. The patient is unable to recognize the object as a 
pen. This failure to recognize objects despite intact sensory function is known as
A.	 Cognition
B.	 Conversion
C.	 Displacement
D.	 Agnosia
87.	
Your patient’s family is frustrated that their family member has not improved 
during the week since being placed on Elavil. The patient has remained depressed, 
so the family brought the patient to the hospital to determine the cause of the 
continuing depression. As a progressive care nurse, you know
A.	 The Elavil dose is not high enough to be therapeutic
B.	 Elavil is causing an idiosyncratic reaction in this patient
C.	 The patient must not be taking the medication
D.	 Elavil may take up to 3 weeks to become effective

326  ❙  Section 12
88.	
A patient undergoing an assessment for an ear injury becomes agitated because 
his friend was not allowed to accompany him to the treatment area. Despite 
reassurances that the exam will not take long, the patient throws a chair into the 
wall and begins disconnecting the suction and oxygen apparatus from the wall. 
Your first priority is to
A.	 Call a code
B.	 Be firm and establish clear limits on behavior
C.	 Leave the room
D.	 Sedate the patient
89.	
Which of the following drugs is classified as an MAO inhibitor?
A.	 Nardil
B.	 Cogentin
C.	 Artane
D.	 Akineton
90.	
When treating salicylate overdose, which of the following goals is appropriate for 
this condition?
A.	 A hypocalcemic state
B.	 Urine pH of 7 to 8
C.	 Resolution of jaundice
D.	 Entry of salicylate into the CNS
91.	
When a patient experiences a subjective human response to a perceived or actual 
threat, the range of response may vary from vague discomfort to panic and loss of 
control. This response is known as
A.	 Transference
B.	 Anxiety
C.	 Internal loss of control
D.	 A defense mechanism
92.	
The word is used to describe observable behavior that represents the expression of 
a subjectively experienced feeling state (emotion) is known as
A.	 Lability
B.	 Affect
C.	 Constricted
D.	 Blunt
93.	
Your patient is a father of six who has suffered a heart attack and requires 
immediate coronary artery bypass graft. His children and wife are present as well 
as multiple other family members and church members. You overhear his wife 
and children speaking about complete insurance coverage; they state that the 
patient’s employer has approved significant sick time for his recovery and has 
offered him the chance to work from home if additional home recuperation time 
is required. You are determining the level of psychiatric distress in this family. 
Your first priority is to
A.	 Administer psychotic medications
B.	 Examine the range and effectiveness of coping mechanisms
C.	 Work with any available family members, friends, or religious support systems
D.	 Determine if there is a crisis

Behavioral  ❙  327
94.	
A woman who is 8 months pregnant was severely injured in an automobile 
accident. Her condition has been declining over the past week. The husband has 
been informed of the probable demise of his wife. The patient was made a “Do 
not resuscitate” and moved to the PCU because she requires more care than the 
staff on the orthopedic unit can provide. In addition, the physician suspects fetal 
demise and has notified the husband of this possibility. The husband wants to 
bring their only other child, an 8 year old boy, into the PCU to visit his mother. 
The PCU has a policy that children must be 12 years old to visit. What is an 
appropriate nursing action at this time?
A.	 Sneak the child in during night shift
B.	 Take a picture of the mother for the child
C.	 Arrange a patient care conference as soon as possible to discuss options
D.	 Inform the husband that the visiting policy is strictly enforced
95.	
The use of alkalinizing agents for the treatment of methamphetamine overdose is
A.	 Not necessary
B.	 Only to be used if seizures are present
C.	 Contraindicated
D.	 The only method to treat the resultant muscle spasms
96.	
Which of the following conditions is least likely to affect an elderly patient’s 
ability to counter psychiatric emergencies?
A.	 Altered or reduced problem-solving and coping mechanisms
B.	 Stable health
C.	 Increased loss of or limited support systems
D.	 Greater financial pressures or limited resources
97.	
Patients with dementia often lose their ability to taste. An inability to taste is 
known as
A.	 Dysgeusia
B.	 Dysgnathia
C.	 Micrognathia
D.	 Macrognathia
98.	
An organ that is part of the limbic system and involved in some aspects of 
memory, control of the autonomic functions, and in emotional expression is the
A.	 Pituitary gland
B.	 Hippocampus
C.	 Locus coeruleus
D.	 Pineal gland
99.	
Which of the following drugs has a half-life of approximately 24 hours and 
requires continuous doses of naloxone?
A.	 Demerol
B.	 Heroin
C.	 Cocaine
D.	 Methadone

328  ❙  Section 12
100.	
The triad of symptoms usually associated with opioid overdose is
A.	 Respiratory depression, meiosis, and coma
B.	 Obtundation, hypotension, and ventricular arrhythmias
C.	 Confusion, slurred speech, and seizures
D.	 Stupor, respiratory alkalosis, and hypotension
101.	
The specific antidote for a benzodiazepine overdose is
A.	 Calcium chloride
B.	 Flumazenil
C.	 Atropine
D.	 Calcium gluconate
102.	
The useful organization and incorporation of both new and old data, experience, 
and emotional capacities into the personality is called
A.	 Introspection
B.	 Solidarity
C.	 Introversion
D.	 Integration
103.	
The primary symptoms of cocaine toxicity include hyperthermia, 
hyperactivity, tachycardia, and hypertension. These symptoms may be 
managed by administration of
A.	 Morphine
B.	 Fentanyl
C.	 Codeine
D.	 Ativan
104.	
Lithium is used as an antipsychotic medication to treat bipolar disorder. Lithium 
toxicity is deadly. Which of the following statements is true regarding lithium 
toxicity?
A.	 Toxicity may occur if blood levels reach 1 mEq/L
B.	 Signs of lithium toxicity include constipation, hypertonicity, and giddiness
C.	 Untreated lithium toxicity may lead to seizures, coma, and cardiac dysrhythmias
D.	 Lithium toxicity may be treated safely on a medical–surgical floor
105.	
Your patient gave birth 2 months ago to a healthy baby boy. She has been 
suffering from postpartum depression. She was admitted with hallucinations, 
agitation, ventricular arrhythmias, and a possible seizure (witnessed by her 
husband). She has been taking a tricyclic antidepressant. Which of the following 
drugs is classified as a tricyclic antidepressant?
A.	 Amitriptyline
B.	 Gentamicin
C.	 Clonidine
D.	 Fluvastatin

Behavioral  ❙  329
106.	
Continuing with the scenario above, the patient’s husband said the last time the 
patient took one of prescribed doses of her amitriptyline was last evening. A blood 
level was drawn in the ED and considered a trough level. This patient’s treatment 
should include
A.	 Hemodialysis
B.	 Sodium bicarbonate
C.	 Syrup of Ipecac
D.	 Trazodone
107.	
Methamphetamine is officially classified as a(n)
A.	 Stimulant
B.	 Euphoric
C.	 Hallucinogen
D.	 Antidepressant

330  ❙  Section 12
SECTION 12: BEHAVIORAL ANSWERS
1.	
Correct answer: A
No drug has been approved by the FDA to treat delirium. If you read the research 
presented on the AACN website, it will be clear that although multiple studies 
have been done on both ICU and PCCU patients there is no clear consensus as to 
a medication regimen. It is believed that 65% of ICU patients with delirium go 
undetected; the number is unknown as for PCCU patients. The lack of detection is 
believed to be partly due to lack of a standardized assessment tool. Two tools that 
have the highest degree of validity are the Confusion Assessment Method for the ICU 
(CAM-ICU) and the Intensive Care Delirium Screening Checklist (ICDSC). We suggest 
visiting the AACN website at http://www.aacn.org/WD/practice/docs/practicealerts
/delirium-practice-alert-2011.pdf to read about delirium assessment and management.
2.	
Correct answer: B
Patients with anorexia nervosa may have a diminished or absent menses. Other signs 
and symptoms may include bradycardia, hypothermia, fatigue, GERD, electrolyte 
abnormalities, hair loss, and loss of tooth enamel.
3.	
Correct answer: D
In most cases, no additional abnormalities are found. However, if there is a family 
history of ADHD, there is a higher probability of an individual having ADHD.
4.	
Correct answer: A
There is actually a diagnosis of Internet addiction. The American Psychiatric 
Association is developing criteria for this diagnosis. Criteria currently recognized are: 
lying about time spent on the Internet, avoiding friends or family to be on the Internet, 
anxiety when the Internet is not available, and increasing hours spent on the Internet. 
Academic and work performance often suffers. Internet addiction rehabilitation 
centers are becoming more prevalent. The patient needs a referral to a mental health 
practitioner. At present, it is believed that approximately 9 million Americans fulfill 
the criteria for Internet addiction, and 30% of those with Internet addiction have one 
or more comorbid psychiatric disorders.
5.	
Correct answer: B
Patients with PTSD may have diminished concentration and are unable to concentrate 
on home or work tasks. Patients often regress, have increased anxiety, become 
aggressive, suffer panic attacks, avoid family, and reenact the event frequently. 
Patients with PTSD are more likely to attempt suicide than their peers without PTSD.
6.	
Correct answer: C
Posttraumatic stress disorder may result in many different symptoms. If the 
patient experiences multiple traumatic events, the risk for developing PTSD 
increases. Additional causes of PTSD can include physical or sexual abuse, neglect, 
harassment, death of a significant other, accidents, war, terrorist attacks, disasters, 
or life-threatening illnesses/injuries. PTSD may also be caused by witnessed domestic 
violence, suicide, or murder.

Behavioral  ❙  331
7.	
Correct answer: C
The death of their daughter is causing the parents to experience the initial response 
to a crisis. The death may have been expected eventually but now involves an 
environment and circumstances beyond the parent’s experience or ability to cope. The 
crisis may last for weeks depending on available support systems, the healthcare team, 
parent education, culture, and spiritual intervention.
8.	
Correct answer: D
Ineffective denial a nursing diagnosis accepted by the North American Nursing 
Diagnosis Association, defined as denial that is detrimental to health when a person 
makes a conscious or unconscious attempt to disavow the meaning or even the 
knowledge of an event in order to reduce anxiety or fear.
9.	
Correct answer: C
There is no specific antidote for methamphetamine. It is only possible to 
treat symptoms as they appear. Desipramine may cause sustained activity of 
amphetamines in the brain. Alkalinizing agents may potentiate the actions of 
amphetamines.
10.	
Correct answer: D
Patients who are undergoing alcohol withdrawal are frequently hypoglycemic. 
Treatment should include thiamine, then bolus with D50W, and then start an infusion 
of D5W.
11.	
Correct answer: A
Marijuana is the most commonly abused illegal drug in the world. In many countries 
and some states, medicinal marijuana has been legalized and closely regulated. For 
more information regarding statistics for a specific area and current ranking, the U.S. 
government websites at http://www.dea.gov and http://www.nida.nih.gov are updated 
frequently. Toluene is the addictive chemical in glue.
12.	
Correct answer: D
The useful organization and incorporation of both new and old data, experience, and 
emotional capacities into the personality is called integration.
13.	
Correct answer: B
Patients who have schizophrenia sometimes exhibit opposition or resistance, either 
covertly or overly, to outside suggestions or advice. This behavior is known as 
negativism.
14.	
Correct answer: B
A chewed-up pacifier and presentation of euphoria and confusion should lead the staff 
to consider ecstasy addiction and abuse. Ecstasy, or methylenedioxymethamphetamine 
(MDMA), causes trismus, or teeth grinding. Users may chew on pacifiers to preserve 
teeth and hide the grinding from others.
15.	
Correct answer: D
Sodium bicarbonate is used to treat tricyclic overdose. Imipramine and doxepin are 
both tricyclics.

332  ❙  Section 12
16.	
Correct answer: C
An acute change in consciousness that is accompanied by inattention and either a 
change in cognition or perceptual disturbance” is the definition of delirium defined by 
the American Psychiatric Association.
17.	
Correct answer: A
The goal of anger management for this patient would not include confronting the 
patient directly with whatever made him angry. Direct confrontation with the object 
of anger may further exacerbate the situation and limit the person’s ability to deal 
positively with the situation. Instead, engage the person in a conversation regarding 
the stressor and assist him in identifying feelings and options.
18.	
Correct answer: D
Sometimes family members do not have enough education to make proper decisions. 
In this case, the family needs to know that the patient is still capable of making 
decisions and that his wishes will be honored.
19.	
Correct answer: B
Even if the patient signed a consent form, she does not appear to be certain about the 
procedure or is not fully informed. The nurse must act as advocate and notify the 
physician.
20.	
Correct answer: C
The appropriate nursing response would be to notify social services. In the best 
possible world, the military could arrange for compassionate leave for the military 
service member. Hospital personnel certainly should not simply go ahead and try to 
procure organs as soon as the family leaves.
21.	
Correct answer: D
Your patient suffered a concussion. She is currently unable to recognize familiar faces. 
This symptom is not explained by defective visual acuity or reduced consciousness 
or alertness. Her condition is called prosopagnosia and often resolves when the brain 
injury heals.
22.	
Correct answer: B
The 24 year old female who witnessed a murder is at a high risk for development of 
PTSD. Any person who witnesses an intense event is at risk for PTSD. The symptoms 
may last months or even years. Other factors that influence how the person responds 
include their mental state at the time of the event, the intensity of the event, and any 
medical complications.
23.	
Correct answer: A
Denial is often seen in people with post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). Most people 
with PTSD will have trouble recalling the event and even omit significant details. 
Other symptoms include avoidance of people and places that remind them of the 
traumatic event; flattened affect, flashbacks, nightmares, and hallucinations may also 
occur. Symptoms must last more than a month to establish PTSD.
24.	
Correct answer: C
A patient who is unkempt and becomes agitated when asked the date may exhibit 
anxiety or even delusions, all symptoms of PTSD. A stable person is able to maintain a 
job for many years is unlikely to be suffering from PTSD. Other behaviors of someone 
suffering from PTSD may include forgetfulness, suicidal ideation, depression, and fear.

Behavioral  ❙  333
25.	
Correct answer: D
During shift report, you learned your elderly patient has never used the call light to 
summon a nurse during the two days he has been on the unit. With previous nurses, he 
was minimally responsive and somewhat apathetic. At shift change, your assessment 
found this patient a decreased responsiveness, a flat affect, somewhat withdrawn, 
and lethargic as well as apathetic. You believe this patient may be demonstrating 
hypoactive delirium. Patients may demonstrate both hyperactive and hypoactive 
delirium. Patients who demonstrate hyperactive delirium often pull at bedsheets, pull 
out catheters, are agitated, call out, are extremely restless, and emotionally labile.
26.	
Correct answer: A
A side effect after administration of an antipsychotic drug that causes muscle spasms 
is known as dystonia.
27.	
Correct answer: B
The patient’s drooling, muscle tremors, and difficulty walking are similar to those of 
patients who suffer from Parkinson’s disease and are known as extrapyramidal effects.
28.	
Correct answer: B
This condition is a type of psychosis and is known as Drummond’s sign. Cocaine users 
have paresthesias, psychoses, and imagine they have a foreign body, in the shape of a 
powder or fine sand, under the skin that it is constantly changing its position.
29.	
Correct answer: C
Acetaminophen overdose may cause hypoglycemia and should be treated with a bolus 
of D50W, and a continuous infusion of D5W. Hypoglycemia occurs because of the 
hepatotoxic effects of acetaminophen. Infusions must also be based on blood glucose 
results.
30.	
Correct answer: D
The patient undergoing alcohol withdrawal and who exhibits diplopia, peripheral 
neuropathy, confusion, recent memory loss, and hyperexcitability has Wernicke–
Korsakoff syndrome. Wernicke–Korsakoff syndrome is a thiamine deficiency and a 
metabolic encephalopathy.
31.	
Correct answer: B
Claiming symptoms of illness or injury with intent to deceive in order to obtain a goal, 
for example a claim of physical illness to avoid working, is known as malingering.
32.	
Correct answer: C
The effects of the high dosage of bath salts are similar to the trip of amphetamines, 
cocaine, and methamphetamine. Treatment of bath salts overdose would include 
benzodiazepines.
33.	
Correct answer: B
Your new patient is two days post a mitral valve replacement. When you entered the 
patient’s room, he was crawling over the bedrails, the bed linens were a mess, the 
Foley catheter was lying on the floor, and the patient was visibly upset and swearing. 
This behavior was not mentioned at shift report and appeared to be new. As a 
progressive care nurse, you suspect this patient is suffering from hyperactive delirium. 
This behavior is frequently associated with hyperactive delirium. Remember that a 
patient may also demonstrate hypoactive delirium (decreased responsiveness, a flat 
affect, withdrawal, lethargic, and apathetic).

334  ❙  Section 12
34.	
Correct answer: D
Supporting and respecting the culture, beliefs, and values of the progressive care 
patient is known as advocacy.
35.	
Correct answer: A
The obligation to assist the patient in making a decision when the patient does not 
have sufficient data or expertise is called paternalism. The nurse has the duty to do no 
harm (nonmaleficence) and should not take away the patient’s autonomy.
36.	
Correct answer: B
In health care, actions are right or wrong based on a set of rules and morals. This 
ethical approach is known as deontology. Deontology emphasizes duty (obligation) to 
another human being.
37.	
Correct answer: B
If your patient is seeking freedom from a sense of worthlessness and loneliness, the 
patient is at the esteem and recognition level of Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs.
38.	
Correct answer: D
Individuals who are driven toward unacceptable behaviors and who redirect their 
energy into more socially acceptable behaviors are using a psychological defense 
mechanism called sublimation.
39.	
Correct answer: D
Alcohol abuse may lead to a deficiency in micronutrients that in turn may cause 
depression and suicidal behavior. One of these micronutrients is selenium.
40.	
Correct answer: D
The false belief that something is wrong with one’s body or body part is called 
somatic delusion. Malingering is the deliberate manufacturing of an illness to prolong 
treatment. Hypochondriasis is morbid concern with one’s body or health in the 
absence of a physical cause.
41.	
Correct answer: A
Although there is no universally accepted core model of care for patients with 
delirium, AACN has adopted the ABCDE bundle. This core model is a mix of 
evidence-based practice strategies that can be incorporated into daily patient 
care. The purpose is to systematically reduce modifiable risk factors and improve 
patient outcomes. The letters A, B, C, D, and E mean Awakening and Breathing trial 
coordination, Choice of sedative, Delirium Detection, early progressive mobility, 
and Exercise.
42.	
Correct answer: B
The fear of crowds is known as agoraphobia. A phobia is a fear or dread of an act, an 
object, or a situation that is usually not realistically dangerous. However, the patient 
perceives that danger exists.
43.	
Correct answer: C
When a patient simply stops talking and there is a gap or interruption in speech that 
is related to absent thoughts or distractions; it is known as blocking.

Behavioral  ❙  335
44.	
Correct answer: D
Simultaneous existence of contradictory or contrasting emotions toward a person or 
object is known as ambivalence.
45.	
Correct answer: D
Tofranil is an antidepressant. Tegretol, klonopin, and lithium are all antimanic drugs.
46.	
Correct answer: A
Restoril is classified as an antianxiety drug. Elavil, sinequan, and tofranil are all 
classified as tricyclic medications.
47.	
Correct answer: C
Because this patient’s behavior is escalating, the correct categorization of the behavior 
is “deteriorating.” The patient may be exhibiting some paranoid tendencies, but the 
cause of the hallucinations is unknown at this time.
48.	
Correct answer: C
The Society of Critical Care Medicine (SCCM) believes that the first step in delirium 
management is to identify the causes of delirium. They have developed a mnemonic 
called THINK to help determine the cause of delirium in a patient. The letter H in this 
mnemonic means hypoxemia. The mnemonic was designed for ICU patients but is 
applicable to progressive care. We do not think this mnemonic will be on the PCCN 
exam. Having said that, much emphasis is now placed on the identification and care 
of the patient with delirium. It is best to be overprepared rather than underprepared.
The THINK mnemonic follows:
Toxic situations: CHF, shock, dehydration deliriogenic meds (tight titration of 
sedatives). New organ failure (e.g., liver, kidney)
Hypoxemia
Infection/sepsis (nosocomial)
Immobilization
Nonpharmacologic interventions (Are these being neglected?): Hearing aids, glasses, 
sleep protocols, music, noise control, ambulation
K+ or electrolyte problems
49.	
Correct answer: D
You should first evaluate the patient’s feelings, paying close attention to any 
statements indicating a risk for suicide or injury to staff. Morgan is now exhibiting 
signs of depression after a manic episode. Patients with psychotic elements exhibited 
with mania, depression, or both may be misdiagnosed with schizophrenia, anxiety 
disorder, and/or drug abuse. Patients with bipolar disorder may swing between 
moods over minutes, hours, or days. Symptoms include hallucinations, delusions, 
and aggressive or violent behavior. Careful history may reveal a trend of manic and 
depressive episodes that would clarify Morgan’s true condition and lead to faster and 
correct treatment. A social worker should be involved, but ensuring immediate patient 
and staff safety is the primary concern.
50.	
Correct answer: B
A false perception that is not grounded in reality and not accounted for by external 
stimuli is called a hallucination.

336  ❙  Section 12
51.	
Correct answer: C
This patient has opened up to you, and it is important to maintain the communication. 
Finding out why he feels homosexuality is bad gives insight to the suicide attempt. 
There are many other legal and ethical issues that have to be handled with this case. 
It is obvious he will need psychological counseling. After your conversation you must 
follow your hospital’s policy/procedure manual about reporting such incidents. “Don’t 
worry, you’ll get over this and be okay” and “Let me get the psychologist to come talk 
with you tomorrow” are not therapeutic, and they negate his feelings. Asking, “What is 
wrong with being a homosexual?” could be perceived as threatening.
52.	
Correct answer: A
Binge eating, mutilation, obesity, drug abuse, and alcoholism are all examples of 
self-destructive behavior. Self-destructive behaviors are those that over time will 
shorten or threaten length and quality of life.
53.	
Correct answer: D
You ask the nurses to complete a self-awareness survey regarding their beliefs and 
understanding of mental health issues. You should use this information to create an 
education program for the nurses to increase understanding of mental health issues 
and learn how to access resources. Surveys can be used to anonymously identify staff 
perceptions and determine educational opportunities. Mental health issues impact every 
person at some point in their lives. Whether due to a catastrophic event or ongoing 
psychological issues, it is important that nurses understand their own biases regarding 
mental health and be able to identify resources when caring for this population. If the 
nurses believe the survey will be used punitively, then data may be skewed to what the 
staff believe the surveyor is looking for, not the truth. Instead of changing assignments 
immediately, it is best to use the opportunity for education and professional growth.
54.	
Correct answer: D
The public can be assured by evidence that a nurse meets established standards of 
quality and patient safety is provided by certification.
55.	
Correct answer: B
Family dynamics you would expect to find associated with bulimia nervosa include 
a strong family history of similar disorders, drug abuse, and psychiatric disorders. 
Bulimia nervosa is often seen in patients who are overachievers, trying to please those 
around them. These patients often do very well in school and have above-average 
intelligence. They also have poor self-esteem or self-image problems.
56.	
Correct answer: D
Depression is recurrent and may increase in severity. Many cases report that after the 
first depressive episode, as many as 40% of individuals will experience another episode 
within 2 years. Often, these patients are diagnosed with multiple psychiatric disorders 
such as anxiety disorder, dysthymic disorders, disruptive behavior, or substance 
abuse. Depression may be seen in any patient, although environmental factors such 
as maltreatment can contribute to risk of depression. A patient with chronic illness, 
infection, or certain biochemical factors is also at risk for depression. Depression is 
difficult to diagnose unless there is an understanding of depression and risk factors. 
Unfortunately, depression can be just as severe in children and teens as in adults and 
is associated with approximately 80% of childhood and teen suicides. Undiagnosed 
and untreated depression can continue into adulthood impacting personal and 
professional relationships and the ability to function successfully in society.

Behavioral  ❙  337
57.	
Correct answer: C
Asperger’s syndrome is a pervasive developmental disorder. Patients affected by this 
disorder are eccentric in their behavior and social interactions. Men are affected 
by this disorder at a 4:1 ratio over women. There is no known cause of Asperger’s 
syndrome, but it often occurs with fragile X syndrome, hypothyroidism, and 
neurofibromatosis. The condition is generally diagnosed between 3 and 11 years of 
age. About one-fourth of those affected grow out of their condition by adulthood.
58.	
Correct answer: C
This patient is exhibiting signs of depression and should not be left alone until you 
have determined she is not a danger to herself or others. While straightening her 
room, you should note any potential items that could be used to harm herself or 
others. If the items can be removed, do so; if not, attempt to lessen the danger. The 
patient’s depression may have been brought on by many factors such as her prolonged 
and recurrent illness, family financial and emotional stress, and feelings of guilt or 
anger regarding her frequent hospital visits. Only after ensuring the patient’s safety 
should the nurse leave the room to contact the physician, social worker, case manager, 
charge nurse, and manager. If the patient’s mental health continues to deteriorate, she 
may need constant observation for suicide or restraints applied. The patient’s husband 
will need to be contacted and updated, but it is important that the staff have a clear 
plan of action with him. This includes family support, financial guidance, specialist 
support, and, most importantly, a plan for your patient’s mental and physical health.
59.	
Correct answer: B
When entering this patient’s room or any patient’s room to apply restraints, wear 
appropriate personal protective equipment to protect yourself against exposure to 
bodily fluids. The patient most likely has had a psychotic reaction to the Demerol and 
has exposed her IV site and removed her IV, resulting in a potential for exposure to 
bodily fluids. When attempting to place restraints on a combative patient, regardless 
of the age, at least four staff members should be present—one for each limb. The 
family should not be asked to participate in placement of the restraints as they are 
untrained and it may be seen as a betrayal by the patient. Instead, family members 
should remain at a safe distance to avoid injury or interference with healthcare 
providers. A Posey is not the best choice because it leaves the patient’s hands free to 
continue pulling on IV lines. Whenever restraints are in use, be vigilant to document 
continued need of restraints, type used, time placed, vital signs including airway, 
breathing, and circulation before and after restraints are placed, time of removal, and 
reassessments. Be sure to follow your facility’s restraint protocols and policies. Patient 
and staff safety is paramount.
60.	
Correct answer: D
A model of health and illness that suggests that links among the nervous system, the 
immune system, behavioral styles, cognitive processing, and environmental factors 
can put people at risk for illness is called a biopsychosocial model.

338  ❙  Section 12
61.	
Correct answer: C
Anger, fear, and denial are normal emotions in this situation, but staff members 
that feel anxiety are at the greatest risk. Anxiety is a common emotion found in 
psychological emergencies. Anxiety involves uncertainty of the unknown and 
may limit the person’s ability to identify resources or initiate appropriate coping 
mechanisms. Debriefings after codes, both successful and unsuccessful, are 
therapeutic and allow staff to verbalize emotions in a safe and stable environment. 
As a team, the staff may identify ways to support families and each other during crisis 
and emergency situations.
62.	
Correct answer: B
The timing of this patient’s symptoms is consistent with alcohol withdrawal or 
delirium tremens (DTs). DTs usually are seen 12 to 24 hours after last ingestion of 
alcohol as blood alcohol levels drop. Effects may peak up to 15 days after DTs begin. 
Fluids, vitamins, nutrition, and short-term pharmacologic treatments are appropriate. 
The severity of symptoms is affected by the amount and duration of alcohol ingestion 
as well as underlying physical health, other drugs, and existing psychological status. 
There are no indications at this time that the patient is septic or has schizophrenia. 
There may be underlying drug withdrawal symptoms.
63.	
Correct answer: C
Many cultures may have beliefs and practices that may influence medical 
management of the patient in the hospital setting. The Chinese often use medicinal 
herbs and religious beliefs regarding internal energy known as a person’s chi to 
manage health. Cultural beliefs must be acknowledged as influential in patient care 
regardless of staff beliefs.
64.	
Correct answer: A
Amoxapine is a cyclic antidepressant that may cause cardiovascular effects and will 
probably cause status epilepticus. The patient often requires intubation and muscular 
paralysis because of seizures.
65.	
Correct answer: A
A patient intoxicated with methamphetamine exhibits elevated liver enzymes, 
tachycardia, hyperthermia, and hypertension.
66.	
Correct answer: C
Symptoms of bath salts overdose would not include profound lethargy. Symptoms of 
bath salts overdose include arrhythmias, paranoia, extreme agitation, superhuman 
strength and combativeness, hypertension, hallucinations, delusions, self-injury 
behavior, and suicide attempts. Additional symptoms include hypothermia with 
occasional hot flashes, or extreme hyperthermia, tongue rolling, facial muscle tension, 
panic attacks, and anxiety.
67.	
Correct answer: B
The stage between normal forgetfulness due to aging and the development of 
dementia is called mild cognitive impairment. People with MCI have mild problems 
with thinking and memory that do not interfere with everyday activities. They are 
often aware of the forgetfulness. Not everyone with MCI develops dementia.

Behavioral  ❙  339
68.	
Correct answer: B
Getting lost on familiar routes, having difficulty balancing a checkbook, and 
misplacing items may be signs of dementia. Additional early signs of dementia are 
inability to learn new information or routines, losing interest in things previously 
enjoyed, personality changes, and loss of social skills.
69.	
Correct answer: D
A mood state characterized by pessimistic thinking, lowered self-esteem, sadness, and 
guilt is called depression.
70.	
Correct answer: C
Patients with posttraumatic stress disorder may experience recurrence of a memory, 
feeling, or perceptual experience from the past. This condition is known as a 
flashback.
71.	
Correct answer: D
A model of health and illness that suggests that links among the nervous system, the 
immune system, behavioral styles, cognitive processing, and environmental factors 
can put people at risk for illness is called a biopsychosocial model.
72.	
Correct answer: D
An example of an instrument to assess risk of alcohol withdrawal is the Clinical 
Institute Withdrawal Assessment of Alcohol Scale, Revised (CIWA-Ar). The CIWA-Ar 
measures 10 symptoms. Mild withdrawal is indicated by a score of less than 8. 
Autonomic arousal (moderate) withdrawal is indicated by a score between 8 and 
15. Scores of 15 or more indicate impending delirium tremens. Appropriate use of 
this scale helps staff individualize and modify treatment regimens as needed. The 
CIWA-Ar categories and ranges are as follows:
Agitation	
(0–7)
Anxiety	
(0–7)
Auditory disturbances	
(0–7)
Clouding of Sensorium	
(0–4)
Headache	
(0–7)
Nausea/Vomiting	
(0–7)
Paroxysmal Sweats	
(0–7)
Tactile disturbances	
(0–7)
Tremor	
(0–7)
Visual disturbances	
(0–7)
73.	
Correct answer: C
Feelings of helplessness or hopelessness indicate psychotic emergencies. Extreme 
anxiety or ability to recognize options should alert staff and family that the person 
is at greater risk of suicide, because suicide may be seen by the patient or individual 
as the only option. The other answers indicate depression and/or levels of grief and 
emotional expression.

340  ❙  Section 12
74.	
Correct answer: B
Abuse may be suspected if the sister denies abuse in the presence of bruising, injury 
to bones, and ecchymosis around the throat. Many abused women and children have 
stories of a positive home life and excuses to explain injuries due to clumsiness. Due 
to the likely introverted personalities of abused individuals, it is important to establish 
a safe zone and trust to encourage honest communication and to begin assistance to 
escape the abuse.
75.	
Correct answer: C
The goal at this point is to regulate the patient’s breathing and stabilize vital signs. 
Using a firm and quiet voice with simple sentences can help the severely anxious 
patient focus and diffuse the anxiety. Severely anxious individuals are less able to see 
options and cope at this stage. Goals should include decreasing any unnecessary stress 
and remaining available to the patient for communication. The statement, “Calm 
down. It wasn’t your fault” speaks to facts not known. Statements like, “They should 
arrest you, you killed a child” are judgmental.
76.	
Correct answer: C
“Why don’t we work together to find new resources for you to use when you are 
tempted to take one of these drugs?” is the appropriate statement. Sometimes patients 
are “frequent flyers” and relationships are developed with certain progressive care 
staff. The patient may feel as if he has failed the nurse by not remaining sober 
and that assistance may be withdrawn. This statement does not judge the patient 
and shows the patient the help is still available by initiating communication and 
encouraging the patient to talk about his struggles with staying away from drugs.
77.	
Correct answer: D
This patient has anorexia. It is very difficult to treat anorexia nervosa and often 
requires a team approach. This patient and her significant others may need 
psychological counseling as well as medical and nutritional assistance. The important 
concern for the progressive care nurse is the impact the anorexia has on the body and 
the patient’s recovery. The typical anorexic may have multiple complications of one 
or more body systems. She may have symptoms such as cardiac arrhythmias, EKG 
abnormalities, amenorrhea, esophagitis, anemia, dehydration, electrolyte imbalances, 
peripheral neuropathy, hematuria, and osteopenia.
78.	
Correct answer: D
Bath salts withdrawal symptoms are similar to methamphetamine withdrawal. These 
symptoms would include melancholy, fatigue, decreased appetite, difficulty sleeping, 
psychotic behaviors, anxiety, and depression.
79.	
Correct answer: D
“If she talks about suicide or asks about pills, then she is just voicing the thought and 
will not attempt suicide” is not an accurate statement. Careful consideration and 
observation should be given to any person voicing any thought or plan regarding 
suicide. Many individuals will provide warnings about their suicidal thoughts, 
thereby providing those in the family or in proximity the opportunity to intervene. 
Such warnings are often cries for help and intervention. Family members should pay 
close attention to any impression or instinct that the person is considering suicide. As 
individuals enter and exit depression, they are at greatest risk for suicide as they have 
sufficient mental focus to form a plan and energy or motivation to carry it out.

Behavioral  ❙  341
80.	
Correct answer: C
An antidote for ethylene glycol toxicity is fomepizole. Ethylene glycol is a compound 
found in antifreeze. After ingestion, it is converted to oxalic acid, which is excreted 
by the kidneys. This causes crystals in the urine, acidosis, tetany, and renal failure. 
Hemodialysis and peritoneal dialysis will remove ethylene glycol.
81.	
Correct answer: A
GHB (ecstasy) overdoses can lead to amnesia in approximately 13% of cases. Ecstasy 
can also cause ataxia, central nervous system depression, coma, bradycardias, 
hypothermia, hypotension, hypothermia, respiratory depression, and respiratory 
acidosis.
82.	
Correct answer: D
Factors that may affect results of urine morphine levels would not include high levels 
of lymphocytes. The stealth adulterant masks morphine in the urine. Poppy seed 
ingestion may produce false-positive results. When heroin is taken, it breaks down into 
morphine. Ten milligrams of morphine is detectable in urine for 84 hours and can be 
measured in corpses for about a week.
83.	
Correct answer: C
Restraints should only be used if alternative methods for behavioral correction are 
ineffective. There is no indication that the patient is violent or has caused any threat 
to staff or self. Restraints should only be used as a last resort to prevent injury to self 
and staff. Reorientation, medication, and controlling external stimulation are all 
effective methods for controlling behavior.
84.	
Correct answer: A
“Body packer” is a term used for people who transport narcotics in body cavities. 
In this case, it is probable that a packet may have ruptured. Bowel irrigations, 
intubation, mechanical ventilation, and anticonvulsants may be required as 
treatments for this patient. More doses of naloxone may be necessary, along with 
supportive treatment for opioid overdose. Be alert for bradycardia, hypotension, 
respiratory depression, and hypothermia.
85.	
Correct answer: D
Excessive motor activity that accompanies and is associated with a feeling of inner 
tension and is usually nonproductive and repetitious is called agitation. As nurses, we 
observe agitation frequently in patients who fidget, wring their hands, pull on clothes 
or bedding, and who are unable to lie or sit still.
86.	
Correct answer: D
The failure to recognize objects despite intact sensory function is known as agnosia 
and is often seen in patients with dementia.
87.	
Correct answer: D
Elavil and tricyclics in general may take up to 3 weeks to become effective. It is 
appropriate to reassure the patient and the family and make certain all parties 
verbalize understanding.

342  ❙  Section 12
88.	
Correct answer: B
This patient is acting out his frustration. It is important to act immediately to set firm 
clear goals and limits to behavior. It is crucial you remain with the patient until he 
calms down, then attempt to discuss his feelings. Obviously, if you believe you or the 
patient is in imminent danger, call for help.
89.	
Correct answer: A
Nardil is classified as an MAO inhibitor. Parnate and marplan are also MAO 
inhibitors. Cogentin, artane, and akineton are anti-Parkinson drugs.
90.	
Correct answer: B
A urine pH of 7 to 8 is an appropriate goal for a patient treated for salicylate overdose.
91.	
Correct answer: B
When a patient experiences a subjective human response to a perceived or actual 
threat, the range of response may vary from vague discomfort to panic and loss 
of control. This response is known as anxiety. When anxiety levels increase, the 
patient feels the physiologic effects from sympathetic nervous system stimulation. 
After the initial excitement, patients often experience a decrease is coping skills, 
problem-solving ability and a narrowed perceptual field.
92.	
Correct answer: B
The word is used to describe observable behavior that represents the expression of 
a subjectively experienced feeling state (emotion) is known as affect. Types of affect 
include flat, labile, euthymic, irritable, constricted, blunted, and inappropriate.
93.	
Correct answer: D
In any potential psychiatric emergency or crisis, it is important to determine if one 
actually exists. In this scenario, the patient has an extensive and involved support 
system, financial stability, and effective coping mechanisms, so a psychiatric crisis is 
not likely to develop. It is still important to carefully monitor for any change in status.
94.	
Correct answer: C
The most appropriate nursing action would be to arrange a patient care conference as 
soon as possible to discuss options. This is the best nursing response because it ensures 
that all members of the healthcare team can join in the decision. Visiting policies 
vary, but are primarily designed to protect children from disease and from being 
overwhelmed by equipment and the PCU milieu. Under the circumstances, you would 
probably want to sneak the kid in on night shift, but many factors should be weighed 
here. This visit could have a profound effect on the child’s last memory of his mother. 
The conference will weigh the child’s maturity and coping ability. He and the father 
will probably lose the mother and the sibling. There is no simple answer.
95.	
Correct answer: C
Alkalinizing agents may potentiate the actions of amphetamines, so their use 
is contraindicated. As mentioned previously, there is no specific antidote for 
methamphetamine. It is only possible to treat symptoms as they appear.

Behavioral  ❙  343
96.	
Correct answer: B
Stable health is least likely to affect an elderly patient’s ability to counter a psychiatric 
emergency. Often elderly persons have unstable health that contributes to psychiatric 
crisis and emergency. Many elderly individuals have limited support systems. Time 
and circumstances may result in loss of loved ones by death or distance. They often 
have altered or reduced problem-solving and coping mechanisms. Limited ability to 
work, disabilities, greater financial pressures, or limited resources and funds may also 
lead to greater emotional and psychiatric distress because of financial issues.
97.	
Correct answer: A
Patients with dementia often lose their ability to taste. An inability to taste is known 
as dysgeusia.
98.	
Correct answer: B
An organ that is part of the limbic system and involved in some aspects of memory, 
control of the autonomic functions, and in emotional expression is the hippocampus.
99.	
Correct answer: D
Methadone has a half-life of approximately 24 hours and requires continuous doses of 
naloxone. The continuous doses prevent respiratory depression until the methadone is 
eliminated from the patient’s system.
100.	
Correct answer: A
Respiratory depression, meiosis, and coma are the triad of symptoms associated with 
opioid overdose.
101.	
Correct answer: B
Flumazenil is a specific antidote for benzodiazepine overdose. This drug should not 
be used on patients who overdose on tricyclic antidepressants because of an increased 
risk of seizures.
102.	
Correct answer: D
The useful organization and incorporation of both new and old data, experience, and 
emotional capacities into the personality is called integration.
103.	
Correct answer: D
Ativan may be used to control the symptoms of cocaine toxicity.
104.	
Correct answer: C
Untreated lithium toxicity may lead to seizures, coma, and cardiac dysrhythmias 
when levels reach greater than 2.5 mEq/L. Toxicity usually occurs with levels of 
2 mEq/L, but symptoms may be noted at even lower blood levels with certain body 
chemistries. Initial toxicity is noted when the patient experiences diarrhea, vomiting, 
drowsiness, muscular weakness, and disorientation. As toxicity and symptoms 
worsen, nystagmus, ataxia, giddiness, tinnitus, confusion, and blurred vision may be 
present. Patients must be managed by close monitoring and immediate intervention of 
dysrhythmias and electrolyte imbalances.

344  ❙  Section 12
105.	
Correct answer: A
Amitriptyline is classified as a tricyclic antidepressant. A tricyclic antidepressant acts 
by blocking norepinephrine and serotonin uptake in the central nervous system. They 
also have anticholinergic properties. The really interesting thing about this group of 
drugs is that they metabolize in the liver to one of the other tricyclics. You must test 
for levels of all the tricyclics because the one you are testing for may have metabolized 
and exacerbated the effect on the patient.
106.	
Correct answer: B
This patient’s treatment should include sodium bicarbonate. ABG results should guide 
the amount to be given. Hemodialysis will not remove amitriptyline from the system. 
Syrup of Ipecac is not indicated, especially because the patient ingested the medication 
last evening. You may give hypertonic saline for hypotension.
107.	
Correct answer: C
Methamphetamine is officially classified as a hallucinogen by The Diagnostic and 
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders. The World Health Organization (WHO) published 
a list that shows methamphetamine as the second-most-abused chemical substance. 
The drug may be ingested, smoked, injected, inserted into the anus or urethra, or 
snorted. Street names include crystal meth, big blue, base, and ice. The base of the 
drug is pseudoephedrine or ephedrine mixed with common ingredients. The mixture 
is often highly explosive, and the first warning a meth lab is nearby is when it 
blows up.

❙
  345 
❙
Section 13
References
AACN Certification Corporation. Nurse Certification Benefits Patients and Families. Available 
at: http://www.aacn.org/wd/certifications/content/benefitstoptempnrs.pcms?menu
=certification. Accessed April 6, 2015.
Abassi, Z., Weissman, I., Karram, T., Goltsman, I., Hoffman, A., Better, O. S., & Winaver, J. 
(2013). Restoration of renal responsiveness to atrial natriuretic peptide in experimental 
nephrotic syndrome by albumin infusion. American Journal of Nephrology, 38(4), 292–299.
Abd Elbaky, G. B., Hay, P. J., le Grange, D., Lacey, H., Crosby, R. D., & Touyz, S. (2014). 
Pre-treatment predictors of attrition in a randomised controlled trial of psychological 
therapy for severe and enduring anorexia nervosa. BMC Psychiatry, 14, 69.
Abunnaja, S., Marshall, C., Cuviello, A., Brenes, R. A., & Tripodi, G. (2014). Concomitant deep 
venous thrombosis, femoral artery thrombosis, and pulmonary embolism after air travel. 
Case Reports in Vascular Medicine, 12(3), 675–678.
Adams, T. N., & Gibson, M. (2016). Cryptococcal meningitis in a patient with sarcoidosis. Baylor 
University Medical Center Proceedings, 29(2), 207–208.
Adiga, A., Edriss, H., & Nugent, K. (2016). Intracranial aneurysm and sildenafil. Baylor University 
Medical Center Proceedings, 29(2), 178–180.
Agarwal, S., George, J., Padhan, R. K., Vadiraja, P. K., Behera, S., Hasan, A., . . . Garg, P. K. 
(2016). Reduction in mortality in severe acute pancreatitis: A time trend analysis over 
16 years. Pancreatology, 16(2), 194–199.
Agha, S. S., Zammit, S., Thapar, A., & Langley, K. (2013). Are parental ADHD problems 
associated with a more severe clinical presentation and greater family adversity in children 
with ADHD? European Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 22(6), 369–377.
Agu, C. C., Salhan, D., Bakhit, A., Basheer, H., Basunia, M., Bhattarai, B., . . . Dufresne, A. 
(2015). Tricuspid valve endocarditis complicated by mobitz type II heart block—a case report 
and literature review. Journal of Community Hospital Internal Medicine Perspectives, 5(6), 29689. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.3402/jchimp.v5.29689
American Heart Association. (2016). Advanced Cardiovascular Life Support Provider Manual 
2015 Guidelines. Dallas, TX.
Ahrens, T., Prentice, D., & Kleinpell, R. M. (2011). Progressive care nursing certification: Preparation, 
review, and practice exams. St. Louis, MO: McGraw-Hill.
Airel, P. S., Steele, M. B., Lin, A. H., Seidensticker, D. F., & Shwayhat, A. F. (2013). Pericarditis, 
thymic hyperplasia, and graves’ thyrotoxicosis: Case report and review of the literature. 
Military Medicine, 178(7), e865–869.
Aksakal, N., Erçetin, C., Özçinar, B., Aral, F., & Erbil, Y. (2015). Lithium-associated primary 
hyperparathyroidism complicated by nephrogenic diabetes insipidus. Ulusal Cerrahi Dergisi, 
31(3), 166–169.
Alavi, S., Jannatifard, F., Maracy, M., Alaghemandan, H., & Setare, M. (2014). Comparison of 
national and personal identity between person with internet addiction disorder and normal 
internet users. Journal of Education and Health Promotion, 3, 42.
Albertine, P., Borofsky, S., Brown, D., Patel, S., Lee, W., Caputy, A., & Taheri, M. R. (2016). Small 
subdural hemorrhages: Is routine intensive care unit admission necessary? American Journal 
of Emergency Medicine, 34(3), 521–524.
Aldaqadossi, H. A. (2013). Stone expulsion rate of small distal ureteric calculi could be predicted 
with plasma C-reactive protein. Urolithiasis, 41(3), 235–239.

346  ❙  References
Alder, G. J., Ellis, J. G., Barclay, N. L., & Wetherell, M. A. (2016). Assessing the daily stability of 
the cortisol awakening response in a controlled environment. BMC Psychology, 4.
Aldous, S. J., Florkowski, C. M., Crozier, I. G., & Than, M. P. (2012). The performance of high 
sensitivity troponin for the diagnosis of acute myocardial infarction is underestimated. 
Clinical Chemistry & Laboratory Medicine, 50(4), 727–729.
Almond, M. H., McAuley, D. F., Wise, M. P., & Griffiths, M. J. (2012). Influenza-related 
pneumonia. Clinical Medicine, 12(1), 67–70.
Alspach, J. G. (2012). Acute myocardial infarction without chest pain: A life-threatening 
variant? Critical Care Nurse, 32(4), 10–13.
American Association of Critical-Care Nurses. (2006). AACN core curriculum for critical care 
nursing. St. Louis, MO: Saunders.
American Journal of Critical Care. (2012). RS28 novice critical care nurse performance of 
defibrillation, cardioversion, and transcutaneous pacing. American Journal of Critical Care, 
21(3), e83.
American Psychiatric Association (1994). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders 
(4th ed.). Washington, DC.
Amirkhanlou, S., Rashedi, A., Taherian, J., Hafezi, A. A., & Parsaei, S. (2016). Comparison of 
gabapentin and ketotifen in treatment of uremic pruritus in hemodialysis patients. Pakistan 
Journal of Medical Sciences Quarterly, 32(1), 22–26.
Amoli, A. I., Bozorgi, A., Talasaz, A. H., Omran, A. S., Mortazavi, S. H., Jalali, A., . . . Jenab, Y. (2015). 
Efficacy of colchicine versus placebo for the treatment of pericardial effusion after open-heart 
surgery: A randomized, placebo-controlled trial. American Heart Journal, 170(6), 1195–1201.
Anderson, J. L., May, H. T., Lappé, D. L., Bair, T., Le, V., Carlquist, J. F., & Muhlestein, J. B. (2016). 
Impact of testosterone replacement therapy on myocardial infarction, stroke, and death 
in men with low testosterone concentrations in an integrated health care system. American 
Journal of Cardiology, 117(5), 794–799.
Andrejaitiene, J., & Sirvinskas, E. (2012). Early post-cardiac surgery delirium risk factors. 
Perfusion, 27(2), 105–112.
Andruszkiewicz, G., & Fike, K. (2016). Emerging technology trends and products: How tech 
innovations are easing the burden of family caregiving. Generations, 39(4), 64–68.
Anonymous. (2015). FDA approves praxbind for pradaxa reversal. HEM/ONC Today, 16(22), 117.
Anticoagulant reversal agent nets FDA approval. (2015). Cardiology Today, 18(11), 19.
Appelboam, A., Reuben, A., Mann, C., Gagg, J., Ewings, P., Barton, A., . . . Benger, J. (2015). 
Postural modification to the standard valsalva manoeuvre for emergency treatment 
of supraventricular tachycardias (REVERT): A randomised controlled trial. The Lancet, 
386(10005), 1747–1753.
Aranda, C. S., Ensina, L. F., Nunes, I. C., Mallozi, M. C., Mendes, C., Martins, A. M., & Solé, D. 
(2016). Diagnosis and management of infusion-related hypersensitivity reactions to enzyme 
replacement therapy for lysosomal diseases: The role of desensitization. Journal of Allergy and 
Clinical Immunology in Practice, 4(2), 354–356.
Araújo, I. R., Ferrari, T. C., Teixeira-Carvalho, A., Campi-Azevedo, A., Rodrigues, L. V., Júnior, 
M. H., . . . Nunes, M. C. (2015). Cytokine signature in infective endocarditis. PLoS ONE 10(7).
Arebro, J., Tengroth, L., Razavi, R., Kumlien Georén, S., Winqvist, O., & Cardell, L. (2016). 
Antigen-presenting epithelial cells can play a pivotal role in airway allergy. Journal of Allergy 
and Clinical Immunology, 137(3), 957–960.
Aristotelis, V. K., Liouta, E., Komaitis, S., Anagnostopoulos, C., & Stranjalis, G. (2016). 
Idiopathic intracranial hypertension: Epidemiology, pathophysiology, clinical features and 
contemporary management. Hospital Chronicles, 11(2), 77–84.
Arshad, N., Ahmad, N. M., Saeed, M. A., Khan, S., Batool, S., & Farman, S. (2016). Adherence to 
methotrexate therapy in rheumatoid arthritis. Pakistan Journal of Medical Sciences Quarterly, 
32(2), 413–417.
Arti, H., Khorami, M., & Ebrahimi-Nejad, V. (2016). Comparison of negative pressure wound 
therapy (NPWT) & conventional wound dressings in the open fracture wounds. Pakistan 
Journal of Medical Sciences Quarterly, 32(1), 65–69.

References  ❙  347
Ascough, S., Ingram, R. J., & Altmann, D. M. (2012). Anthrax lethal toxin and the induction of 
CD4 T cell immunity. Toxins, 4(10), 878–899.
Aurelio, A., & Durante, A. (2014). Contrast-induced nephropathy in percutaneous coronary 
interventions: Pathogenesis, risk factors, outcome, prevention and treatment. Cardiology, 
128(1), 62–72.
Ayuse, T., Kurata, S., & Ayuse, T. (2015). Anaphylactoid-like reaction to midazolam during oral 
and maxillofacial surgery. Anesthesia Progress, 62(2), 64–65.
Azabagic, S., Cickusic, A. J., & Zukic, E. (2012). Effects of short-term octreotide therapy on TSH 
adenoma with atrial fibrillation: Case report. HealthMed, 6(3), 1081–1086.
Bainey, K. R., Rahim, S., Etherington, K., Rokoss, M. L., Natarajan, M. K., Velianou, J. L., . . . 
Mehta, S. R. (2015). Effects of withdrawing vs continuing renin-angiotensin blockers on 
incidence of acute kidney injury in patients with renal insufficiency undergoing cardiac 
catheterization: Results from the angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor/angiotensin 
receptor blocker and contrast induced nephropathy in patients receiving cardiac 
catheterization (CAPTAIN) trial. American Heart Journal, 170(1), 110–116.
Baker, A. L., Kavanagh, D. J., Kay-Lambkin, F. J., Hunt, S. A., Lewin, T. J., Carr, V. J., & 
Connolly, J. (2010). Randomized controlled trial of cognitive-behavioural therapy for 
coexisting depression and alcohol problems: Short-term outcome. Addiction, 105(1), 87–99.
Bal, U., Aydinalp, A., Yilmaz, K., Ozcalik, E., Hasirci, S., Atar, I., . . . Muderrisoglu, H. 
(2014). The effects of a low international normalized ratio on thromboembolic and 
bleeding complications in patients with mechanical mitral valve replacement. Journal of 
Cardiothoracic Surgery, 9, 79.
Balas, M. C., Vasilevskis, E. E., William, J., Boehm, L., Pun, B. T., Olsen, K. M., Peitz, G. J., & Ely, 
E. W. (2012). Critical care nurses’ role in implementing the “ABCDE bundle” into practice. 
Critical Care Nurse, 32(2), 35–48.
Barbui, T., Thiele, J., Vannucchi, A. M., & Tefferi, A. (2014). Rethinking the diagnostic criteria of 
polycythemia vera. Leukemia, 28(6), 1191–1195.
Barugh, A. J., Gray, P., Shenkin, S. D., Maclullich, A. M. J., & Mead, G. E. (2014). Cortisol levels 
and the severity and outcomes of acute stroke: A systematic review. Journal of Neurology, 
261(3), 533–545.
Bass, C., & Halligan, P. (2014). Factitious disorders and malingering: Challenges for clinical 
assessment and management. Lancet, 383(9926), 1422–1432.
Batchelor, J. S. (2015). A meta-analysis to determine the effect of coagulopathy on intracranial 
haematoma progression in adult patients with isolated blunt head trauma. Trauma, 17(4), 
243–249.
Bauer, J., Keeley, B., Krieger, B., Deliz, J., Wallace, K., Kruse, D., . . . Gorfine, S. (2015). Adhesive 
small bowel obstruction: Early operative versus observational management. American 
Surgeon, 81(6), 614–620.
Beltz, A. M., Berenbaum, S. A., & Wilson, S. J. (2015). Sex differences in resting state brain 
function of cigarette smokers and links to nicotine dependence. Experimental and Clinical 
Psychopharmacology, 23(4), 247–254.
Bennetts, R. J., Butcher, N., Lander, K., Udale, R., & Bate, S. (2015). Movement cues aid face 
recognition in developmental prosopagnosia. Neuropsychology, 29(6), 855–860.
Berkowitz, R., Alhaj, E., Manchikalapudi, R. B., Satya, K., Dadfarmay, S., & Zakir, R. (2010). 
Determinants of right ventricular failure in patients admitted with acute left heart failure. 
Congestive Heart Failure, 16(6), 243–248.
Bernacki, G. M., & Becker, R. C. (2013). Oral anticoagulants in older adults with atrial 
fibrillation. Journal of Thrombosis and Thrombolysis, 36(4), 403–415.
Billiodeaux, S. T., Samuelson, C. G., Willett, O., Arulkumar, S., Thomas, D., Hamilton, C. S., . . . 
Fox, C. J. (2014). Intraoperative and postoperative blood glucose concentrations in diabetic 
surgical patients receiving lactated ringer’s versus normal saline: A retrospective review of 
medical records. Ochsner Journal, 14(2), 175–178.
Bissell, B. D., Erdman, M. J., Smotherman, C., Kraemer, D. F., & Ferreira, J. A. (2015). The impact 
of endocrine supplementation on adverse events in septic shock. Journal of Critical Care, 
30(6), 1169–1173.

348  ❙  References
Biswajit, H., Pratim, P. P., Kumar, S. T., Shilpi, S., Krishna, G. B., & Aditi, A. (2012). Aplastic 
anemia: A common hematological abnormality among peripheral pancytopenia. North 
American Journal of Medical Sciences, 4(9), 384–388.
Boettger, S., Friedlander, M., Breitbart, W., & Passik, S. (2011). Aripiprazole and haloperidol in 
the treatment of delirium. Australian & New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 45(6), 477–482.
Bohan, P. K., Yonge, J., Connelly, C., Watson, J. J., Friedman, E., & Fielding, G. (2016). 
Wernicke encephalopathy after restrictive bariatric surgery. American Surgeon, 82(4), 
E73–E75.
Boink, G. J. J., Christoffels, V. M., Robinson, R. B., & Tan, H. L. (2015). The past, present, and 
future of pacemaker therapies. Trends in Cardiovascular Medicine, 25(8), 661–673.
Boltin, D. (2016). Probiotics in helicobacter pylori-induced peptic ulcer disease. Best Practice & 
Research, 30(1), 99–109.
Bose, E., & Hravnak, M. (2015). Thromboelastography: A practice summary for nurse 
practitioners treating hemorrhage. Journal for Nurse Practitioners, 11(7), 702–709.
Bosse, G. M. (2014). Hot asphalt burns: A review of injuries and management options. American 
Journal of Emergency Medicine, 32(7), 820.e1–820.
Boulanger, J., Ducharme, A., Dufour, A., Fortier, S., & Almanric, K. (2015). Management of the 
extravasation of anti-neoplastic agents. Supportive Care in Cancer, 23(5), 1459–1471.
Boyce, B. A., Brady, Y., & Homer, B. (2012). Incidence and severity of phlebitis in patients 
receiving peripherally infused amiodarone. Critical Care Nurse, 32(4), 27–71.
Brahmania, M., Feld, J., Arif, A., & Janssen, H. L. A. (2016). New therapeutic agents for chronic 
hepatitis B. Lancet Infectious Diseases, 16(2), e10–e21.
Brar, S. S., Aharonian, V., Mansukhani, P., Moore, N., Shen, A. Y., Jorgensen, M., . . . Kane, K.
(2014). Haemodynamic-guided fluid administration for the prevention of contrast-induced 
acute kidney injury: The POSEIDON randomised controlled trial. Lancet, 383(9931), 
1814–1823.
Brauer, R., & Chen, P. (2016). Influenza leaves a TRAIL to pulmonary edema. Journal of Clinical 
Investigation, 126(4), 1245–1247.
Britton, M. E. (2011). Drugs, delirium and older people. Journal of Pharmacy Practice & Research, 
41(3), 233–238.
Brooks, J. T., Buchacz, K., Gebo, K. A., & Mermin, J. (2012). HIV infection and older Americans: 
The public health perspective. American Journal of Public Health, 102(8), 1516–1526.
Brorsen, A. J., & Rogelet, K. R. (2014). PCCN Certification Review (2nd ed.). Sudbury, MA: ­Jones & 
Barlett Learning.
Brown, C. H., Faigle, R., Klinker, L., Bahouth, M., Max, L., LaFlam, A., . . . Hogue, C. W. (2015). 
The association of brain MRI characteristics and postoperative delirium in cardiac surgery 
patients. Clinical Therapeutics, 37(12), 2686–2699.
Brown, M. (2012). Managing the acutely ill adult with sickle cell disease. British Journal of 
Nursing, 21(2), 90–96.
Brownlie, B. E., & Turner, J. G. (2011). Lithium-associated thyrotoxicosis. Clinical Endocrinology, 
75(3), 402–403.
Budzynski, P., Pedziwiatr, M., Grzesiak-Kuik, A., Natkaniex, M., Mafor, P., Matlok, M., . . . 
Budzynski, A. (2015). Changing patterns in the surgical treatment of perforated duodenal 
ulcer—Single centre experience. Wideochirurgia i Inne Techniki Malo Inwazyjne, 10(3), 
430–436.
Burchardt, P., Guzik, P., Tabaczewski, P., Synowiec, T., Bogdan, M., Faner, P., . . . Palasz, A. 
(2013). Early renal dysfunction after contrast media administration despite prophylactic 
hydration. International Journal of Cardiovascular Imaging, 29(5), 959–966.
Burge, D., Kent, W., Verdon, J., Voogt, S., & Haines, H. M. (2010). Nurse practitioners are well 
placed to lead in the effective management of delirium. Australian Journal of Advanced 
Nursing, 28(1), 67–73.
Burns, S. (ed.). (2014). AACN Essentials of Critical Care Nursing (3rd ed.). New York, NY: McGraw-
Hill Education.

References  ❙  349
Burst, V., Witthus, M., Grundmann, F., Müller, R., & Kubacki, T. (2013). Optimal treatment of 
hyponatremia in clinical practice. Clinical Practice, 10(6), 737–749.
Buunk, A. M., Groen, R. J. M., Veenstra, W. S., Metzemaekers, J. D. M., van, d. H., van Dijk, J., . . . 
Spikman, J. M. (2016). Cognitive deficits after aneurysmal and angiographically negative 
subarachnoid hemorrhage: Memory, attention, executive functioning, and emotion 
recognition. Neuropsychology, 5(19). Online First Publication: http://dx.doi.org
/10.1037/neu0000296
Byrne, J., Romero, T., & Swain, E. (2016). Patients with acute MI, cardiogenic shock at elevated 
risk for poor outcome within 60 days of discharge. Cardiology Today, 19(4), 62.
Cai, X., Long, Z., Lin, L., Feng, Y., Zhou, N., & Mai, Q. (2012). Serum cystatin C is an early bio-
marker for assessment of renal function in burn patients. Clinical Chemistry & Laboratory 
Medicine, 50(4), 667–671.
Caiazza, A., Russo, L., Sabbatini, M., & Russo, D. (2014). Hemodynamic and tubular changes 
induced by contrast media. BioMed Research International. http://dx.doi.org/10.1155/2014/578974 
Caletti, M. G., Balestracci, A., & Di Pinto, D. (2014). Pre- and post-treatment urinary tract 
findings in children with nephrogenic diabetes insipidus. Pediatric Nephrology, 29(3), 487–490.
Cameron, S., Ball, I., Cepinskas, G., Choong, K., Doherty, T. J., Ellis, C. G., . . . Fraser, D. D. 
(2015). Early mobilization in the critical care unit: A review of adult and pediatric literature. 
Journal of Critical Care, 30(4), 664–672.
Campbell, R. L., Bashore, C. J., Lee, S., Bellamkonda, V. R., Li, J. T. C., Hagan, J. B., . . . 
Bellolio, M. F. (2015). Predictors of repeat epinephrine administration for emergency 
department patients with anaphylaxis. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology in 
Practice, 3(4), 576–584.
Campise, M., Giglio, E., Trespidi, L., Messa, P., & Moroni, G. (2015). Pregnancies in women 
receiving renal transplant for lupus nephritis: Description of nine pregnancies and review of 
the literature. Lupus, 24(11), 1210–1213.
Campuzano, O., & Brugada, R. (2015). Age, genetics, and fibrosis in the brugada syndrome. 
Journal of the American College of Cardiology, 66(18), 1987–1989.
Cantón, R., & del Campo, R. (2010). Cystic fibrosis: Deciphering the complexity. Clinical 
Microbiology and Infection, 16(7), 793–797.
Carey, E. J., Ali, A. H., & Lindor, K. D. (2015). Primary biliary cirrhosis. Lancet, 386(10003), 
1565–1575.
Carmona-Calero, E. M., Castaneyra-Ruiz, L., Gonzalez-Marrero, I., Gonzalez-Toledo, J. M., 
Paz-Carmona, H. D., Castaneyra-Ruiz, A., . . . Castaneyra-Perdomo, A. (2012). Vasopressin, 
angiotensin II and tyrosine-hydroxylase expression in the hypothalamus of the syndrome of 
inappropriate ADH: A case report. Open Pathology Journal, 6, 1–7.
Carvalho, A. S., Rodeia, S. C., Silvestre, J., & Póvoa, P. (2016). Exertional heat stroke and acute 
liver failure: A late dysfunction. BMJ Case Reports, 2016, doi:10.1136/bcr-2016–214434.
Cenko, E., & Bugiardini, R. (Aug 2015). Vasotonic angina as a cause of myocardial ischemia in 
women. Cardiovascular Drugs and Therapy, 29(4), 339–345.
Cha, Y. S., Kim, H., Kim, J., Kim, O. H., Kim, H. I., Cha, K., . . . Hwang, S. O. (2016). Incidence 
and patterns of hemolytic anemia in acute dapsone overdose. American Journal of Emergency 
Medicine, 34(3), 366–369.
Chaari, A., Chtara, K., Toumi, N., Bahloul, M., & Bouaziz, M. (2015). Neurogenic pulmonary 
edema after severe head injury: A transpulmonary thermodilution study. American Journal of 
Emergency Medicine, 33(6), 858.e1–858.
Chen, C., & Cheng, Y. (2014). Delayed massive hemothorax complicating simple rib fracture 
associated with diaphragmatic injury. American Journal of Emergency Medicine, 32(7), 818.
Chen, T., Chang, C., Tzeng, N., Kuo, T. B. J., Huang, S., Lu, R., & Chang, H. (2015). Different 
patterns of heart rate variability during acute withdrawal in alcohol dependent patients 
with and without comorbid anxiety and/or depression. Journal of Psychophysiology, 29(3), 
87–98.
Chhabra, L., & Spodick, D. H. (2015). Did colchicine prove useful in the prevention of 
postoperative atrial fibrillation? American Journal of Cardiology, 116(1), 165.

350  ❙  References
Chigurupati, K., Reshmi, L., Gadhinglajkar, S., Venkateshwaran, S., & Sreedhar, R. (2015). 
Pulmonary edema following transcatheter closure of atrial septal defect. Annals of Cardiac 
Anaesthesia, 18(3), 441–444.
Choi, J. H., Kim, E. J., Kim, Y. S., Kim, T. H., Choi, J., Kwon, S. Y., . . . Lee, S. H. (2011). 
Effectiveness of nasal surgery alone on sleep quality, architecture, position, and sleep-
disordered breathing in obstructive sleep apnea syndrome with nasal obstruction. American 
Journal of Rhinology & Allergy, 25(5), 338–341.
Christensen, M. (2014). An exploratory study of staff nurses’ knowledge of delirium in the 
medical ICU: An Asian perspective. Intensive & Critical Care Nursing, 30(1), 54–60.
Chulay, M., & Burns, S. (2010). Essentials of progressive care nursing (2nd ed.). St. Louis, MO: 
McGraw-Hill.
Churchyard, G. J., Fielding, K. L., Lewis, J. J., Coetzee, L., Corbett, E. L, Godfrey-Faussett, P., . . . 
Grant, A. D. (2014). A trial of mass isoniazid preventive therapy for tuberculosis control. 
New England Journal of Medicine, 370(4), 301–310.
Cia, A. N., Costa, L. d. C. M., Hancock, M., & Costa, L. O. P. (2016). Identifying patients with 
chronic low back pain who respond best to mechanical diagnosis and therapy: Secondary 
analysis of a randomized controlled trial. Physical Therapy, 96(5), 623–630.
Cleary, M. A., Nottingham, S. L., Kasamatsu, T. M., & Bennett, J. P. (2016). Using a continuing 
education workshop to facilitate implementation of evidence-based practices for recognition 
and treatment of exertional heat stroke in secondary school athletic trainers. Athletic 
Training & Sports Health Care, 8(3), 100–111.
Clegg, A., Young, J., & Siddiqi, N. (2012). Delirium in cardiac patients: A clinical review. British 
Journal of Cardiac Nursing, 7(3), 111–115.
Cleland, S. J., Fisher, B. M., Colhoun, H. M., Sattar, N., & Petrie, J. R. (2013). Insulin resistance 
in type 1 diabetes: What is ’double diabetes’ and what are the risks? Diabetologia, 56(7), 
1462–1470.
Codner, P., Orvin, K., Assali, A., Sharony, R., Vaknin-Assa, H., Shapira, Y., . . . Kornowski, R. 
(2015). Long-term outcomes for patients with severe symptomatic aortic stenosis treated 
with transcatheter aortic valve implantation. American Journal of Cardiology, 116(9), 
1391–1398.
Cohen, M. G., Matthews, R., Maini, B., Dixon, S., Vetrovec, G., Wohns, D., . . . O’Neill, W. W. 
(2015). Percutaneous left ventricular assist device for high-risk percutaneous coronary 
interventions: Real-world versus clinical trial experience. American Heart Journal, 170(5), 
872–879.
Cohn, A. M., Johnson, A. L., Hair, E., Rath, J. M., & Villanti, A. C. (2016). Menthol tobacco use is 
correlated with mental health symptoms in a national sample of young adults: Implications 
for future health risks and policy recommendations. Tobacco Induced Diseases, 14(1), online 
first publication. doi:10.1186/s12971-015-0066-3
Collado, S., Coll, E., Nicolau, C., Pons, M., Cruzado, J. M., Pascual, J., & Cases, A. (2015). Carotid 
atherosclerotic disease predicts cardiovascular events in hemodialysis patients: A prospective 
study. PLoS ONE, 10(6). http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0127344
Collins, N. A., & Higgins, G. L. (2015). Reconsidering the effectiveness and safety of carotid 
sinus massage as a therapeutic intervention in patients with supraventricular tachycardia. 
American Journal of Emergency Medicine, 33(6), 807–809.
Conlin, A. M. S., Bukowinski, A. T., & Gumbs, G. R. (2015). Analysis of pregnancy and infant 
health outcomes among women in the national smallpox vaccine in pregnancy registry 
who received anthrax vaccine adsorbed. Vaccine, 33(36), 4387–4390.
Connolly S. J., Wallentin, L., & Ezekowitz, M. D. (2013). The long‑term multicenter observational 
study of dabigatran treatment in patients with atrial fibrillation (RELY‑ABLE) study. 
Circulation, 128(3), 237–243.
Conrozier, T., Mathieu, P., & Rinaudo, M. (2014). Mannitol preserves the viscoelastic properties 
of hyaluronic acid in an in vitro model of oxidative stress. Rheumatology and Therapy, 1(1), 
45–54.

References  ❙  351
Cosentino, M., Breda, A., Sanguedolce, F., Landman, J., Stolzenburg, J., Verze, P., . . . 
Villavicencio, H. (2013). The use of mannitol in partial and live donor nephrectomy: 
An international survey. World Journal of Urology, 31(4), 977–982.
Cowie, M. R. (2012). Recent developments in the management of heart failure. Practitioner, 
256(1752), 25–29.
Cox, A. (2016). Folic acid supplementation increases gestational diabetes risk. Endocrine Today, 
14(3), 36.
Critical Care Nurse. (2012). Delirium assessment and management. Critical Care Nurse, 32(1), 79–82.
Critical Care Nurse. (2012). EB117: Using the evidence to decrease delirium. Critical Care Nurse, 
32(2), e66–e67.
Critical Care Nurse. (2012). EB55: Detecting delirium in patients in the surgical intensive care 
unit: Implementing the Confusion Assessment Method-Intensive Care Unit tool. Critical Care 
Nurse, 32(2), 5–6.
Culebras A., Messe, S. R., & Chaturvedi, S. (2014). Summary of evidence‑based guideline update: 
Prevention of stroke in nonvalvular atrial fibrillation: Report of the Guideline Development 
Subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurology. Neurology, 82(8), 716–724.
Dalbudak, E., & Evren, C. (2014). The relationship of internet addiction severity with attention 
deficit hyperactivity disorder symptoms in Turkish university students; impact of personality 
traits, depression and anxiety. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 55(3), 497–503.
Dancer, R. C. A., Parekh, D., Lax, S., D’Souza, V., Zheng, S., Bassford, C. R., . . . Thickett, D. R. 
(2015). Vitamin D deficiency contributes directly to the acute respiratory distress syndrome 
(ARDS). Thorax, 70(7), 617.
Daneshmand, M. A., Krishnamoorthy, A., Samsky, M. D., Felker, G. M., Pura, J. A., 
Lokhnygina, Y., . . . Patel, C. B. (2015). Comparison of 2-year outcomes of extended 
criteria cardiac transplantation versus destination left ventricular assist device therapy 
using continuous flow. American Journal of Cardiology, 116(4), 573–579.
Das, D., & Almajed, N. S. (2016). Wellens syndrome. Canadian Medical Association Journal, 
188(7), 529.
De Cori, S., Biancofiore, G., Bindi, L., Cosottini, M., Persaresi, I., Murri, L., & Mascalchi, M. 
(2010). Clinical recovery despite cortical cerebral and cerebellar damage in heat stroke. 
Neuroradiology Journal, 23(1), 35–37.
de Jonghe, A., van Munster, B. C., Goslings, J. C., Kloen, P., van Rees, C., Wolvius, R., . . . 
de Rooij, S. E. (2014). Effect of melatonin on incidence of delirium among patients with 
hip fracture: A multicentre, double-blind randomized controlled trial. Canadian Medical 
Association Journal, 186(14), E547–56.
Dean, K., Jenkinson, C., Wilcock, G., & Walker, Z. (2014). The development and validation 
of a patient-reported quality of life measure for people with mild cognitive impairment. 
International Psychogeriatrics, 26(3), 487–497.
DeBoer, M. D., Gurka, M. J., Woo, J. G., & Morrison, J. A. (2015). Severity of metabolic syndrome 
as a predictor of cardiovascular disease between childhood and adulthood. Journal of the 
American College of Cardiology, 66(6), 755–757.
DeBoer, S., & Seaver, M. (2013). Endocrine—DI and SIADH. Journal of Emergency Nursing, 39(6), 
e107–e108.
Delano, M. J., & Ward, P. A. (2016). Sepsis-induced immune dysfunction: Can immune therapies 
reduce mortality? Journal of Clinical Investigation, 126(1), 23–31.
Dennison, R. D. (2013). PASS CCRN®! (4th ed.). St. Louis, MO: Mosby.
Dhurandher, D., & Singh, B. G. (2016). Effect of social support on mental health of adolescents 
with sickle cell anemia. Indian Journal of Health and Wellbeing, 7(3), 367–368.
DiMagno, M. J. (2015). Clinical update on fluid therapy and nutritional support in acute 
pancreatitis. Pancreatology, 15(6), 583–588.
Ding, J., Han, J., Jing, Z., & Jiang, Y. (2016). Is it dangerous to treat acute ischemic stroke by 
thrombolytic therapy in patients with comorbid intracranial aneurysms? American Journal of 
Emergency Medicine, 34(3), 636–642.

352  ❙  References
Domingo, P., & Pomar, V. (2016). Bacterial meningitis: The end of the beginning? Lancet 
Infectious Diseases, 16(3), 271–272.
Dong, N., Luo, L., Wu, J., Jia, P., Li, Q., Wang, Y., . . . Shen, B. (2015). Monoclonal antibody, 
mAb 4C13, an effective detoxicant antibody against ricin poisoning. Vaccine, 33(32), 3836–3842.
Doulames, V. M., & Plant, G. W. (2016). Induced Pluripotent Stem Cell Therapies for Cervical 
Spinal Cord Injury. International Journal of Molecular Sciences, 17(4), 530. http://doi.org
/10.3390/ijms17040530
Dressler, D. K. (2012). Coagulopathy in the intensive care unit. Critical Care Nurse, 32(5), 48–60.
Driver, C. (2012). Pneumonia part 1: Pathology, presentation and prevention. British Journal of 
Nursing, 21(2), 103–106.
Drotar, D., Ittenbach, R., Rohan, J. M., Gupta, R., Pendley, J. S., & Delamater, A. (2013). Diabetes 
management and glycemic control in youth with type 1 diabetes: Test of a predictive model. 
Journal of Behavioral Medicine, 36(3), 234–245.
Dunlay, S. M., Weston, S. A., Killian, J. M., Bell, M. R., Jaffe, A. S., & Roger, V. L. (2012). Thirty-
day rehospitalizations after acute myocardial infarction: A cohort study. Annals of Internal 
Medicine, 157(1), 11–18.
Echevarría, I. M., & Schwoebel, A. (2012). Development of an intervention model for the 
prevention of aspiration pneumonia in high-risk patients on a medical-surgical unit. 
MEDSURG Nursing, 21(5), 303–308.
El-Chami, M., Binongo, J. N. G., Levy, M., Merchant, F. M., Halkos, M., Thourani, V., . . . Leon, A. R. 
(2015). Effect of surgical atrial fibrillation ablation at the time of cardiac surgery on risk of 
postoperative pacemaker implantation. American Journal of Cardiology, 116(1), 88–91.
Electrolyte and acid-base disturbances in diabetes mellitus. (2015). New England Journal of 
Medicine, 373(25), 2481–2483.
Eley, H. L., Hemmett, J., Cessford, T. A., Amiri, N., Geller, G. S., Baradaran, N., . . . Dodek, P. M. 
(2016). Multipronged strategy to reduce routine-priority blood testing in intensive care unit 
patients. Journal of Critical Care, 31(1), 212–216.
Elmistekawy, E., Yen-Yen, G., Une, D., Lemay, M., Stolarik, A., & Rubens, F. D. (2016). Clinical and 
mechanical factors associated with the removal of temporary epicardial pacemaker wires after 
cardiac surgery. Journal of Cardiothoracic Surgery, 11. (8), DOI:10.1186/s13019-016-0414-2.
Enthoven, W. T. M., Geuze, J., Scheele, J., Bierma-Zeinstra, S., Bueving, H. J., Bohnen, A. M., . . . 
Luijsterburg, P. A. J. (2016). Prevalence and "red flags" regarding specified causes of back 
pain in older adults presenting in general practice. Physical Therapy, 96(3), 305–312.
Ère, L., Mateus, V., Clerfond, G., Grall, S., Willoteaux, S., Prunier, F., & Furber, A. (2015). 
Predictive factors of pericardial effusion after a first acute myocardial infarction and 
successful reperfusion. American Journal of Cardiology, 116(4), 497–503.
Ervin, K., & Koschel, A. (2012). Dementia care mapping as a tool for person-centred care. 
Australian Nursing Journal, 19(10), 32–55.
Estep, J. D., Starling, R. C., Horstmanshof, D. A., Milano, C. A., Selzman, C. H., Shah, K. B., . . . 
Rogers, J. G. (2015). Risk assessment and comparative effectiveness of left ventricular 
assist device and medical management in ambulatory heart failure patients. Journal of the 
American College of Cardiology, 66(16), 1747–1761.
Eyal, O., Oren, A., Jüppner, H., Somech, R., De Bellis, A., Mannstadt, M., . . . Weintrob, N. (2014). 
Hypoparathyroidism and central diabetes insipidus: In search of the link. European Journal of 
Pediatrics, 173(12), 1731–1734.
Farsijani, N. M., Liu, Q., Kobayashi, H., Davidoff, O., Sha, F., Fandrey, J., . . . Haase, V. H. (2016). 
Renal epithelium regulates erythropoiesis via HIF-dependent suppression of erythropoietin. 
Journal of Clinical Investigation, 126(4), 1425–1437.
Farsky, S. H. (2011). Nitric oxide modulates lipopolysaccharide-induced endothelial platelet 
endothelial cell adhesion molecule expression via interleukin-10. Clinical and Experimental 
Immunology, 165(2), 172–179.

References  ❙  353
Fedecostante, M., Spannella, F., Cola, G., Espinosa, E., Dessì-Fulgheri, P., & Sarzani, R. (2014). 
Chronic kidney disease is characterized by “double trouble” higher pulse pressure plus 
night-time systolic blood pressure and more severe cardiac damage. PLoS ONE, 9(1), e86155. 
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0086155
Feldman, M., Wu, E., Mendoza, M., Lowry, B., Ford, L., & Holloway, I. (2012). The prevalence and 
correlates of receiving confirmatory HIV test results among newly diagnosed HIV-positive 
individuals at a community-based testing center. AIDS Education & Prevention, 24(5), 445–455.
Felicilda-Reynaldo, R. (2013). Cardiac glycosides, digoxin toxicity, and the antidote. Medsurg 
Nursing, 22(4), 258–261.
Feng, Y., Liu, L., & Yang, D. (2015). GW26-e1322 incidence and influence factors of new onset 
rapid atrial arrhythmias patients with permanent pacemakers. Journal of the American 
College of Cardiology, 66(16), C180–C181.
Fink, J. B., & Ari, A. (2011). Posture perfect: The role of positioning during bronchodilator 
administration with oxygen or heliox. Respiratory Care, 56(7), 1056–1057.
Floresca, D., Dupree, L., Basile, S., & Tan, P. (2012). Evaluation of appropriate serologic testing 
for suspected heparin-induced thrombocytopenia. American Journal of Health-System 
Pharmacy, 69(18), 1581–1587.
Fong, T. G., Davis, D., Growdon, M. E., Albuquerque, A., & Inouye, S. K. (2015). The interface 
between delirium and dementia in elderly adults. Lancet Neurology, 14(8), 823–832.
Fowler, J. R., Rerko, M. A., & Grand, A. G. (2013). Benign subcutaneous emphysema of the upper 
extremity. Orthopedics (Online), 36(11), e1458–1460.
Fragoso, A., Mendes, F., Silva, A. P., & Neves, P. L. (2015). Insulin resistance as a predictor 
of cardiovascular morbidity and end-stage renal disease. Journal of Diabetes and Its 
Complications, 29(8), 1098–1104.
Franko, D. L., Keshaviah, A., Eddy, K. T., Krishna, M., Davis, M. C., Keel, P. K., & Herzog, D. B. 
(2013). A longitudinal investigation of mortality in anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa. 
American Journal of Psychiatry, 170(8), 917–925.
Freeman, J. F., Ciarallo, C., Rappaport, L., Mandt, M., & Bajaj, L. (2016). Use of capnographs to 
assess quality of pediatric ventilation with 3 different airway modalities. American Journal of 
Emergency Medicine, 34(1), 69–74.
Freeman, S. (2011). Care of adult patients with a temporary tracheostomy. Nursing Standard, 
26(2), 49–56.
Fujii, J., Mizoue, T., Kita, T., Kishimoto, H., Joh, K., Nakada, Y., . . . Kurozawa, Y. (2016). Risk of 
haemolytic uraemic syndrome caused by shiga-toxin-producing escherichia coli infection in 
adult women in japan. Epidemiology and Infection, 144(5), 952–961.
Gainotti, G. (2013). Is the right anterior temporal variant of prosopagnosia a form of 
“associative prosopagnosia” or a form of “multimodal person recognition disorder”? 
Neuropsychology Review, 23(2), 99–110.
Galeev, S., Abdullaev, Y., & Michail, R. (2015). MODS, APACHE scores versus novel model of 
acute pancreatitis assessment in prediction of disease outcome. Pancreatology, 15(3), S9–S10.
Gallagher, J. C., Sai, A., Templin, T., & Smith, L. (2012). Dose response to vitamin D 
supplementation in postmenopausal women: A randomized trial. Annals of Internal Medicine, 
156(6), 425–437.
Gallimore, E. (2016). Infusion-related risks associated with chemotherapy. Nursing Standard 
(2014+), 30(25), 51.
Gallo, J. J., Morales, K. H., Bogner, H. R., Raue, P. J., Zee, J., Bruce, M. L., & Reynolds, C. F. (2013). 
Long term effect of depression care management on mortality in older adults: Follow-up of 
cluster randomized clinical trial in primary care. British Medical Journal, 346. http://dx.doi
.org/10.1136/bmj.f2570 
Gandy, W. E., & Grayson, S. (2012). Cardiac zebras: Diagnosing Wellens and Brugada syndromes 
on 12–lead ECGs. EMS World, 41(9), 24–28.

354  ❙  References
Garg, S. (2015). Hyponatremia management in critically ill: Food (protein) for thought. Indian 
Journal of Critical Care Medicine, 19(3), 189–190.
Gedik, E., Yücel, N., Sahin, T., Koca, E., Çolak, Y., & Togal, T. (2015). Intensive care admission 
in patients with HELLP syndrome in a tertiary referral hospital. Intensive Care Medicine 
Experimental, 3, 1.
Geerdink, R. J., Pillay, J., Meyaard, L., & Bont, L. (2015). Neutrophils in respiratory syncytial 
virus infection: A target for asthma prevention. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, 
136(4), 838–847.
Geli, P., Rodriguez, E., Piano, S., Ariza, X., Morando, F., Solà, E., . . . Ginès, P. (2015). Acute 
kidney injury and acute-on-chronic liver failure classifications in prognosis assessment of 
patients with acute decompensation of cirrhosis. Gut, 64(10), 1616.
Généreux, P., Giustino, G., Witzenbichler, B., Weisz, G., Stuckey, T. D., Rinaldi, M. J., . . . Stone, G. W. 
(2015). Incidence, predictors, and impact of post-discharge bleeding after percutaneous 
coronary intervention. Journal of the American College of Cardiology, 66(9), 1036–1045.
Gesin, G., Russell, B. B., Lin, A. P., Norton, H. J., Evans, S. L., & Devlin, J. W. (2012). Impact of a 
delirium screening tool and multifaceted education of nurses’ knowledge of delirium and 
ability to evaluate it correctly. American Journal of Critical Care, 21(1), e1–e11.
Geske, J. B., McKie, P. M., Ommen, S. R., & Sorajja, P. (2013). B-type natriuretic peptide and 
survival in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Journal of the American College of Cardiology, 
61(24), 2456–2460.
Ghane, M., Gharib, M., Ebrahimi, A., Saeedi, M., Akbari-Kamrani, M., Rezaee, M., & Rasouli, H. 
(2015). Accuracy of early rapid ultrasound in shock (RUSH) examination performed by 
emergency physician for diagnosis of shock etiology in critically ill patients. Journal of 
Emergencies, Trauma and Shock, 8(1), 5–10.
Giannou, A. D., Marazioti, A., Spella, M., Kanellakis, N. I., Apostolopoulou, H., Psallidas, I., . . . 
Stathopoulos, G. T. (2015). Mast cells mediate malignant pleural effusion formation. Journal 
of Clinical Investigation, 125(6), 2317–2334.
Gill, M., & McCauley, M. (2015). Psychogenic polydipsia: The result, or cause of, deteriorating 
psychotic symptoms? A case report of the consequences of water intoxication. Case Reports in 
Psychiatry. http://dx.doi.org/10.1155/2015/846459
Ginsberg, Y., Beusterien, K. M., Amos, K., Jousselin, C., & Asherson, P. (2014). The unmet 
needs of all adults with ADHD are not the same: A focus on Europe. Expert Review of 
Neurotherapeutics, 14(7), 799–812.
Girard, R., Baboi, L., Ayzac, L., Richard, J., & Guérin, C. (2014). The impact of patient 
positioning on pressure ulcers in patients with severe ARDS: Results from a multicentre 
randomised controlled trial on prone positioning. Intensive Care Medicine, 40(3), 
397–403.
Glynn, L., & Corry, M. (2015). Intensive care nurses’ opinions and current practice in relation to 
delirium in the intensive care setting. Intensive & Critical Care Nursing, 31(5), 269–275.
Glynn, N., O’brien, D., & Agha, A. (2013). Late recovery of cranial diabetes insipidus following 
pituitary surgery. Hormone Research in Paediatrics, 80(3), 217–220.
Gökalp, O., Yesilkaya, N. K., Besir, Y., & Gürbüz, A. (2016). Effects of pentoxifylline on blood 
transfusion/Author’s reply. Anadulu Kardiyoloji Dergisi, 16(3), 226.
Goldberger, J. J., Subacius, H., Patel, T., Cunnane, R., & Kadish, A. H. (2014). Sudden cardiac 
death risk stratification in patients with nonischemic dilated cardiomyopathy. Journal of the 
American College of Cardiology, 63(18), 1879–1889.
Golembiewski, J., & Dasta, J. (2015). Evolving role of local anesthetics in managing postsurgical 
analgesia. Clinical Therapeutics, 37(6), 1354–1371.
Goodrick, S. (2015). The hinterland of delirium. Lancet Neurology, 14(8), 792.
Górska, S., Forsyth, K., Irvine, L., Maciver, D., Prior, S., Whitehead, J., . . . Reid, J. (2013). Service-
related needs of older people with dementia: Perspectives of service users and their unpaid 
carers. International Psychogeriatrics, 25(7), 1107–1114.

References  ❙  355
Goud, A., Abdelqader, A., Dahagam, C., & Padmanabhan, S. (2015). Isolated pulmonic valve 
endocarditis presenting as neck pain. Journal of Community Hospital Internal Medicine 
Perspectives, 5(6). doi:10.3402/jchimp.v5.29647
Gowin, E., Wysocki, J., Avonts, D., & Januszkiewicz-Lewandowska, M. M. (2016). Usefulness of 
inflammatory biomarkers in discriminating between bacterial and aseptic meningitis in 
hospitalized children from a population with low vaccination coverage. Archives of Medical 
Science, 12(2), 408–414.
Greenaway, C., Ma, A. T., Kloda, L. A., Klein, M., Cnossen, S., Schwarzer, G., & Shrier, I. (2015). 
The seroprevalence of hepatitis C antibodies in immigrants and refugees from intermediate 
and high endemic countries: A systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS ONE, 10(11). 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0141715
Guastoni, C., Bellotti, N., Poletti, F., Covella, P., Gidaro, B., Stasi, A., . . . De Servi, S. (2014). 
Continuous venovenous hemofiltration after coronary procedures for the prevention of 
contrast-induced acute kidney injury in patients with severe chronic renal failure. American 
Journal of Cardiology, 113(4), 588–592.
Gubler, M. (2014). Renal tubular dysgenesis. Pediatric Nephrology, 29(1), 51–59.
Gucyetmez, B., & Atalan, H. K. (2016). C-reactive protein and hemogram parameters for the 
non-sepsis systemic inflammatory response syndrome and sepsis: What do they mean? PLoS 
ONE, 11(2):e0148699. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0148699. 
Guerin, C., Bayle, F., Leray, V., Debord, S., Stoian, A., Yonis, H., . . . Richard, J. (2015). Open lung 
biopsy in nonresolving ARDS frequently identifies diffuse alveolar damage regardless of the 
severity stage and may have implications for patient management. Intensive Care Medicine, 
41(2), 222–230.
Gul, E. E., Abdulhalikov, T., Aslan, R., & Aydogdu, I. (2011). A rare and undesirable 
complication of heparin-induced thrombocytopenia: Acute massive pulmonary embolism. 
Clinical and Applied Thrombosis/Hemostasis, 17(5), 546–548.
Gulati, A., Oscroft, N., Chadwick, R., Ali, M., & Smith, I. (2015). The impact of changing people 
with sleep apnea using CPAP less than 4 h per night to a bi-level device. Respiratory Medicine, 
109(6), 778–783.
Gupta, R. K., Xie, B. H., Patton, K. T., Lisovsky, M., Burks, E., Behrman, S. W., . . . Deshpande, V. 
(2016). Follicular pancreatitis: A distinct form of chronic pancreatitis—an additional mimic 
of pancreatic neoplasms. Human Pathology, 48, 154–162.
Gürkov, R., Strobl, R., Heinlin, N., Krause, E., Olzowy, B., Koppe, C., & Grill, E. (2016). 
Atmospheric pressure and onset of episodes of menière’s disease—a repeated measures 
study. PLoS ONE, 11(4). e0152714. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0152714. 
Habib, A. G. (2011). Effect of pre-medication on early adverse reactions following antivenom use 
in snakebite. Drug Safety, 34(10), 869–880.
Hall, J. E. (2015). Guyton & Hall Textbook of Medical Physiology (13th ed.). Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier.
Hamaya, H., Hifumi, T., Kawakita, K., Okazaki, T., Kiridume, K., Shinohara, N., . . . Kuroda, Y. 
(2015). Successful management of heat stroke associated with multiple-organ dysfunction 
by active intravascular cooling. American Journal of Emergency Medicine, 33(1), 124.e5–124.
Hameed, N., Yedinak, C. G., Brzana, J., Gultekin, S. H., Coppa, N. D., Dogan, A., . . . Fleseriu, M. 
(2013). Remission rate after transsphenoidal surgery in patients with pathologically 
confirmed Cushing’s disease, the role of cortisol, ACTH assessment and immediate 
reoperation: A large single center experience. Pituitary, 16(4), 452–458.
Han, Y., Zhu, G., Han, L., Hou, F., Huang, W., Liu, H., . . . Huo, Y. (2014). Short-term rosuvastatin 
therapy for prevention of contrast-induced acute kidney injury in patients with diabetes and 
chronic kidney disease. Journal of the American College of Cardiology, 63(1), 62–70.
Hardin, S., & Kaplow, R. (2005). Synergy for clinical excellence: The AACN synergy model for patient 
care. St. Louis, MO: Saunders.
Hardin, S. R., & Kaplow, R. (2016). Cardiac Surgery Essentials (2nd ed.). MA: Jones & Bartlett 
Learning.

356  ❙  References
Hardinge, M., Annandale, J., Bourne, S., Cooper, B., Evans, A., Freeman, D., . . . Wilkinson, T. 
(2015). British thoracic society guidelines for home oxygen use in adults. Thorax, 70.
Hasegawa, N., Hashimoto, M., Yuuki, S., Honda, K., Yatabe, Y., Araki, K., & Ikeda, M. (2013). 
Prevalence of delirium among outpatients with dementia. International Psychogeriatrics, 
25(11), 1877–1883.
Heart disorders and diseases; findings from McMaster university in the area of heart attack 
reported (role of aspirin for prevention and treatment of perioperative cardiovascular 
events). (2016). Medical Devices & Surgical Technology Week, 140, 1537–1538.
Heart disorders and diseases; new heart attack study findings have been reported by 
investigators at Nicosia General Hospital (heavy lifting causing spontaneous coronary 
artery dissection with anterior myocardial infarction in a 54-year-old woman). (2016). 
Medical Devices & Surgical Technology Week, 1(2), 192.
Heart disorders and diseases; reports summarize heart attack findings from Long Island 
University (use of aspirin and statins for the primary prevention of myocardial infarction 
and stroke in patients with human immunodeficiency virus infection). (2016). AIDS 
Weekly, 51.
Hibel, L. C., Mercado, E., & Trumbell, J. M. (2012). Parenting stressors and morning cortisol in a 
sample of working mothers. Journal of Family Psychology, 26(5), 738–746.
Hickey, J. (2013). Clinical Practice of Neurological & Neurosurgical Nursing (7th ed.). New York, 
NY: LWW.
Hieda, M., Sata, M., & Nakatani, T. (2015). The importance of the management of infectious 
complications for patients with left ventricular assist device. Healthcare, 3(3), 750–756.
Higashi, H., Kanki, A., Watanabe, S., Yamamoto, A., Noda, Y., Yasokawa, K., . . . Ito, K. (2014). 
Traumatic hypovolemic shock revisited: The spectrum of contrast-enhanced abdominal 
computed tomography findings and clinical implications for its management. Japanese 
Journal of Radiology, 32(10), 579–584.
Hildebrandt, T., Yehuda, R., & Olff, M. (2012). Effects of traumatic stress molecular and 
hormonal mechanism. European Journal of Psychotraumatology, 3, Special section 1–123.
Hirsh, B. J., Copeland-Halperin, R., & Halperin, J. L. (2015). Fibrotic atrial cardiomyopathy, 
atrial fibrillation, and thromboembolism. Journal of the American College of Cardiology, 
65(20), 2239–2251.
Hong, J. H., Park, S., Shcheynikov, N., & Muallem, S. (2014). Mechanism and synergism in 
epithelial fluid and electrolyte secretion. Pflügers Archiv—European Journal of Physiology, 
466(8), 1487–1499.
Hosie, A., Davidson, P. M., Agar, M., Sanderson, C. R., & Phillips, J. (2013). Delirium prevalence, 
incidence, and implications for screening in specialist palliative care inpatient settings: 
A systematic review. Palliative Medicine, 27(6), 486–498.
Hou, W., Wen, J., Ji, Z., Chen, J., & Li, H. (2014). Reflex anuria: An old concept with new 
evidence. International Urology and Nephrology, 46(2), 323–328.
Huang, Z. L., Urade, Y., & Hayaishi, O. (2011). The role of adenosine in the regulation of sleep. 
Current Topics in Medicinal Chemistry, 11(8), 1047–1057.
Huffman, C., Torguson, R., Fatemi, O., Chen, F., Gai, J., Suddath, W., . . . Waksman, R. (2015). 
Comparison of bleeding outcomes after percutaneous coronary intervention in patients with 
versus without aortic stenosis. American Journal of Cardiology, 116(7), 1106–1109.
Hughes, E. K., Le Grange, D., Court, A., Yeo, M. S. M., Campbell, S., Allan, E., . . . Sawyer, S. M. 
(2014). Parent-focused treatment for adolescent anorexia nervosa: A study protocol of a 
randomised controlled trial. BMC Psychiatry, 14, 105.
Hugo, J. O., David, C. G., Ernestina, H. G., & Gerardo, B. M. (2016). The role of dopamine and 
its dysfunction as a consequence of oxidative stress. Oxidative Medicine and Cellular Longevity, 
80(10), 971–973.
Hulka, L. M., Vonmoos, M., Preller, K. H., Baumgartner, M. R., Seifritz, E., Gamma, A., & Quednow, 
B. B. (2015). Changes in cocaine consumption are associated with fluctuations in self-reported 
impulsivity and gambling decision-making. Psychological Medicine, 45(14), 3097–3110.

References  ❙  357
Hutchinson, A., Brand, C., Irving, L., Roberts, C., Thompson, P., & Campbell, D. (2010, May). 
Acute care costs of patients admitted for management of chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease exacerbations: Contribution of disease severity, infection and chronic heart failure. 
Internal Medicine Journal, 40(5), 364–371.
Ibey, A. A. M., Ciarniello, C., & Gorelik, S. (2015). Inadvertent overinfusion of norepinephrine 
using infusion pump loading dose. Intensive & Critical Care Nursing, 31(6), 375–379.
Imazio, M., & Gaita, F. (2015). Colchicine for postoperative pericardial effusions: Not the magic 
bullet for all kind of pericardial diseases! Heart, 101(21), 1693.
Improving delivery of blood products would reduce deaths after major haemorrhage. (2016). 
Nursing Standard (2014+), 30(27), 15.
Ingelfinger, J. R., & Berl, T. (2015). Disorders of fluids and electrolytes: Vasopressin antagonists. 
New England Journal of Medicine, 372(23), 2207–2216.
Ingelfinger, J. R., Palmer, B. F., & Clegg, D. J. (2015). Disorders of fluids and electrolytes: 
Electrolyte and acid-base disturbances in patients with diabetes mellitus. New England 
Journal of Medicine, 373(6), 548–559.
Inonu, H., Doruk, S., Sahin, S., Erkorkmaz, U., Celik, D., Celikel, S., & Seyfikli, Z. (2012). 
Oxidative stress levels in exhaled breath condensate associated with COPD and smoking. 
Respiratory Care, 57(3), 413–419.
Ishikura, H., Nakamura, Y., Kawano, Y., Tanaka, J., Mizunuma, M., Ohta, D., . . . Murai, A. 
(2015). Intravenous immunoglobulin improves sepsis-induced coagulopathy: A 
retrospective, single-center observational study. Journal of Critical Care, 30(3), 579–583.
Ivatury, R. R. (2012). Thin chest wall is an independent risk factor for the development of 
pneumothorax after chest tube removal. American Surgeon, 78(4), 478–480.
Jacquemyn, Y., Jochems, L., Duiker, E., Bosmans, J., Viviane, V. H., & Christel, V. C. (2004). Long-
term renal function after HELLP syndrome. Gynecologic and Obstetric Investigation, 57(2), 
117–120.
Jäger, K., Kielstein, H., Dunse, M., Nass, N., Paulsen, F., & Sel, S. (2013). Enzymes of urea 
synthesis are expressed at the ocular surface, and decreased urea in the tear fluid 
is associated with dry-eye syndrome. Graefe’s Archive for Clinical and Experimental 
Ophthalmology, 251(8), 1995–2002.
Jehangir, W., & Osman, M. (2015). Electrical alternans with pericardial tamponade. New England 
Journal of Medicine, 373(8), e10.
Jelani, A., & Jugdutt, B. I. (2010). STEMI and heart failure in the elderly: Role of adverse 
remodeling. Heart Failure Reviews, 15(5), 513–521.
Jensen, M. T., Sogaard, P., Andersen, H. U., Bech, J., Hansen, T. F., Galatius, S., . . . Jensen, J. S. 
(2014). Prevalence of systolic and diastolic dysfunction in patients with type 1 diabetes 
without known heart disease: The thousand & 1 study. Diabetologia, 57(4), 672–680.
Jeong, B., Jeon, E. J., Yoo, H., Koh, W., Suh, G. Y., Chung, M. P., . . . Jeon, K. (2014). Comparison 
of severe healthcare-associated pneumonia with severe community-acquired pneumonia. 
Lung, 192(2), 313–320.
Jeschke, M. G., & Herndon, D. N. (2014). Burns in children: Standard and new treatments. The 
Lancet, 383(9923), 1168–1178.
Jesmin, S., Gando, S., Wada, T., Hayakawa, M., & Sawamura, A. (2016). Activated protein C 
does not increase in the early phase of trauma with disseminated intravascular coagulation: 
Comparison with acute coagulopathy of trauma-shock. Journal of Intensive Care, 4(1), 
doi:10.1186/s40560-015-0123-2
Jin, Z., Wu, J., & Yan, L. (2016). Chemical conditioning as an approach to ischemic stroke 
tolerance: Mitochondria as the target. International Journal of Molecular Sciences, 17(3), 351.
Johnson, D. (2015). The burns you want to avoid. International Society for the History of the 
Neurosciences, 49(11), 28.
Johnson, D., Giles, K., Acuna, A., Saenz, C., Bentley, M., & Budinich, C. (2016). Effects of tibial 
intraosseous and IV administration of vasopressin on kinetics and survivability in cardiac 
arrest. American Journal of Emergency Medicine, 34(3), 429–432.

358  ❙  References
Jolobe, O. M. P. (2016). The wider implications of normal cerebrospinal fluid cellularity in 
pneumococcal meningitis. American Journal of Emergency Medicine, 34(3), 657.
Jon´czyk-Matysiak E., Kłak M., Weber-Da˛browska B., Borysowski  J., & Górski A. (2014). 
Possible Use of bacteriophages active against Bacillus anthracis and other B. cereus group 
members in the Face of a Bioterrorism Threat, BioMed Research International, 2014, 1–14. 
doi:10.1155/2014/735413
Jones & Bartlett Learning, (2016). 2016 Nurse’s Drug Handbook (15th ed.). Sudbury, MA
Jones & Bartlett Learning. (2011). 2012 Nurse’s Drug Handbook. (11th ed.). Sudbury, MA.
Joundi, R. A., & Boyle, K. (2016). Endovascular thrombectomy in acute ischemic stroke. Canadian 
Medical Association Journal, 188(6), 446.
Jozwiak, M., Teboul, J., & Monnet, X. (2015). Extravascular lung water in critical care: Recent 
advances and clinical applications. Annals of Intensive Care, 5(1), 1–13.
Jun, J. Y., Lee, Y. G., Lee, S., Yoo, S. Y., Song, J., & Kim, S. J. (2015). Association between defense 
mechanisms and psychiatric symptoms in north korean refugees. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 
56, 179–187.
Kaese, S., Schülke, C., Fischer, D., & Lebiedz, P. (2013). Pheochromocytoma-induced takotsubo-
like cardiomyopathy and global heart failure with need for extracorporal life support. 
Intensive Care Medicine, 39(8), 1473–1474.
Kang, D. H., Kim, Y. J., Kim, S. H., Sun, B. J., Kim, D. H., Yun, S. C., . . . Sohn, D. W. (2012). Early 
surgery versus conventional treatment for infective endocarditis. New England Journal of 
Medicine, 366(26), 2466–2473.
Kao, J. (2015). Hepatitis B vaccination and prevention of hepatocellular carcinoma. Best 
Practice & Research, 29(6), 907–917.
Kapur, V. K. (2010). Obstructive sleep apnea: diagnosis, epidemiology, and economics. 
Respiratory Care, 55(9), 1155–1167.
Karnyski, J., Dhillon, S. S., Kumar, A., & Harris, K. (2015). Endobronchial ultrasound-guided 
transbronchial needle aspiration while receiving aspirin and clopidogrel: Is it always safe? 
Annals of the American Thoracic Society, 12(11), 1733–1734.
Kastrati, A., Colleran, R., & Ndrepepa, G. (2016). Cardiogenic shock. Journal of the American 
College of Cardiology, 67(7), 748–750.
Kaufman, G. (2011). Asthma: Pathophysiology, diagnosis and management. Nursing Standard, 
26(5), 48–56.
Kaur, M., Singh, S., & Bhatnagar, R. (2013). Anthrax vaccines: Present status and future 
prospects. Expert Review of Vaccines, 12(8), 955–970.
Kazi, D. S., & Bolger, A. F. (2015). Infective endocarditis and antibiotic prophylaxis. Lancet, 
386(9993), 530.
Keach, J. W., Bradley, S. M., Turakhia, M. P., & Maddox, T. M. (2015). Early detection of occult 
atrial fibrillation and stroke prevention. Heart, 101(14), 1097.
Keech, B. M. (2015). Thoracic epidural analgesia in a child with multiple traumatic rib fractures. 
Journal of Clinical Anesthesia, 27(8), 685–691.
Keidan, I., Sidi, A., Ben-Menachem, E., Derazne, E., & Berkenstadt, H. (2015). A simple 
diagnostic test to confirm correct intravascular placement of peripheral catheters in order to 
avoid extravasation. Journal of Clinical Anesthesia, 27(7), 585–588.
Keller-Ross, M., Johnson, B. D., Joyner, M. J., & Olson, T. P. (2014). Influence of the metaboreflex 
on arterial blood pressure in heart failure patients. American Heart Journal, 167(4),
521–528.
Keller, K., Beule, J., Balzer, J., & Dippold, W. (2015). Blood pressure for outcome prediction and 
risk stratification in acute pulmonary embolism. American Journal of Emergency Medicine, 
33(11), 1617–1621.

References  ❙  359
Kelsall, C. (2016). Forced expiratory volume in 1 second predicts sickle cell anemia death. 
HEM/ONC Today, 17(4), 67.
Kelsall, C. (2016). USPSTF: Insufficient evidence exists for anemia testing, iron supplementation 
in pregnant women. HEM/ONC Today, 17(8), 70.
Khan, M., Azfar, M., & Khurshid, S. (2014). The role of inhaled nitric oxide beyond ARDS. Indian 
Journal of Critical Care Medicine, 18(6), 392–395.
Khan, R., Lopes, R. D., Neely, M. L., Stevens, S. R., Harrington, R. A., Diaz, R., . . . Goodman, S. G. 
(2015). Characterising and predicting bleeding in high-risk patients with an acute coronary 
syndrome. Heart, 101(18), 1475.
Khera, S., Kolte, D., & Aronow, W. S. (2014). Use of ranolazine in patients with stable angina 
pectoris. Cardiology, 128(3), 251–258.
Khwaja, G., Duggal, A., Kulkarni, A., Chaudhry, N., Gupta, M., Chowdhury, D., & Bohra, V. 
(2013). Recurrent prolonged fugue states as the sole manifestation of epileptic seizures. 
Annals of Indian Academy of Neurology, 16(4), 561–564.
Kilicgedik, A., Karabay, C., Aung, S., Guler, A., Kalayci, A., Tasar, O., & Kirma, C. (2012). 
A successful percutaneous closure of ventricular septal defect following septal myectomy in 
patients with hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy. Perfusion, 27(3), 253–255.
Kim, G., Barner, J. C., Rascati, K., & Richards, K. (2016). Examining time to initiation of biologic 
disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs and medication adherence and persistence among 
Texas Medicaid recipients with rheumatoid arthritis. Clinical Therapeutics, 38(3), 646–654.
Kizior, R. J. & Hodgson, B. B. (2016). Saunders Nursing Drug Handbook 2017. St Louis, MO: Saunders.
Klein Klouwenberg, P. M. C., Zaal, I. J., Spitoni, C., Ong, D. S. Y., van der Kooi, A.W., 
Bonten, M. J. M., . . . Cremer, O. L. (2014). The attributable mortality of delirium in critically ill 
patients: Prospective cohort study. British Medical Journal, 349. http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmj.g6652
Klinngam, N., Sittipunt, C., Poonyathawon, S., Chatrkaw, P., Tachaboon, S., & Srisawat, N. 
(2015). The neutrophil function in severe Sepsis/Septic shock patients with mods. Intensive 
Care Medicine Experimental, 3, 1.
Knepper, M. A., & Miranda, C. A. (2013). Urea channel inhibitors: A new functional class of 
aquaretics. Kidney International, 83(6), 991–993.
Koç, U., Karnak, D., Güzin Ö. K., & Kayacan, O. (2012). Trace elements (copper, zinc and 
selenium) in acute COPD exacerbation. Trace Elements & Electrolytes, 29(1), 59–64.
Koliscak, L., & Maynor, L. (2012). Pharmacologic prophylaxis against venous thromboembolism 
in hospitalized patients with cirrhosis and associated coagulopathies. American Journal of 
Health-System Pharmacy, 69(8), 658–663.
Kong, V. Y. (2012). A tragic miscommunication: Ethical decision making in burns care. Online 
Journal of Health Ethics, 8(1), 1–10.
Konstantinides, S. V. (2016). Trends in pulmonary embolism outcomes. Journal of the American 
College of Cardiology, 67(2), 171–173.
Korkmaz, A., Ozlu, T., Ozsu, S., Kazaz, Z., & Bulbul, Y. (2012). Long-term outcomes in acute 
pulmonary thromboembolism: The incidence of chronic thromboembolic pulmonary 
hypertension and associated risk factors. Clinical and Applied Thrombosis/Hemostasis, 18(3), 
281–288.
Kumar, A., Singla, R., & Sharma, B. (2014). Anterior third ventricular epidermoid presenting 
with diabetes insipidus. Neurology India, 62(1), 86–88.
Kumar, P., Thapliyal, R., Coshic, P., & Chatterjee, K. (2013). Retrospective evaluation of adverse 
transfusion reactions following blood product transfusion from a tertiary care hospital: 
A preliminary step towards hemovigilance. Asian Journal of Transfusion Science, 7(2), 109–115.
Kumar, R., Mathur, M., Garsa, R., Agarwal, D., Malhotra, V., Yadav, S., & Tomar, V. (2016). 
An unusual case of urinary incontinence in a post-renal transplant patient. Saudi Journal of 
Kidney Diseases and Transplantation, 27(1), 170–171.

360  ❙  References
Kung, A. W. (2007). Neuromuscular complications of thyrotoxicosis. Clinical Endocrinology, 67(5), 
645–650.
Kwok, C. S., Boekholdt, S. M., Lentjes, M. A. H., Loke, Y. K., Luben, R. N., Yeong, J. K., . . . Khaw, K. 
(2015). Habitual chocolate consumption and risk of cardiovascular disease among healthy 
men and women. Heart, 101(16), 1279.
La Fontaine, J., & Oyebode, J. R. (2014). Family relationships and dementia: A synthesis 
of qualitative research including the person with dementia. Ageing and Society, 34(7), 
1243–1272.
Lankisch, P. G., Apte, M., & Banks, P. A. (2015). Acute pancreatitis. Lancet, 386(9988), 85–96.
Lavender, J. M., De Young, K. P., Wonderlich, S. A., Crosby, R. D., Engel, S. G., Mitchell, J. E., . . . 
Le Grange, D. (2013). Daily patterns of anxiety in anorexia nervosa: Associations with 
eating disorder behaviors in the natural environment. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 122(3), 
672–683.
Law, C., Khaliq, A., & Guglin, M. (2013). Reversible cardiogenic shock due to catecholamine-
induced cardiomyopathy: A variant of takotsubo? American Journal of Emergency Medicine, 
31(11), 1621.e1–161.e3.
Lawrence, E., & Li, F. (2015). Foot burns and diabetes: A retrospective study. Burns & Trauma, 3 (24), 
doi:10.1186/s41038-015-0024-6
Lee, J. J. Y., Kilonzo, K., Nistico, A., & Yeates, K. (2014). Management of hyponatremia. Canadian 
Medical Association Journal, 186(8), E281–286.
Letsas, K. P., Liu, T., Shao, Q., Korantzopoulos, P., Giannopoulos, G., Vlachos, K., . . . Sideris, A. 
(2015). Meta-analysis on risk stratification of asymptomatic individuals with the brugada 
phenotype. American Journal of Cardiology, 116(1), 98–103.
Levy, B., Bastien, O., Karim, B., Cariou, A., Chouihed, T., Combes, A., . . . Kuteifan, K. (2015). 
Experts’ recommendations for the management of adult patients with cardiogenic shock. 
Annals of Intensive Care, 5(1), 1–10.
Li, J., Tong, Y., Zhang, Y., Tang, L., Lu, Q., Zhang, F., . . . Tong, N. (2016). Effects on all-cause 
mortality and cardiovascular outcomes in patients with type 2 diabetes by comparing 
insulin with oral hypoglycemic agent therapy: A meta-analysis of randomized controlled 
trials. Clinical Therapeutics, 38(2), 372–386.
Liamis, G., Liberopoulos, E., Barkas, F., & Elisaf, M. (2013). Spurious electrolyte disorders: 
A diagnostic challenge for clinicians. American Journal of Nephrology, 38(1), 50–57.
Light, R. W. (2011). Pleural controversy: Optimal chest tube size for drainage. Respirology, 16(2), 
244–248.
Longo, D. L., Adalja, A. A., Toner, E., & Inglesby, T. V. (2015). Clinical management of potential 
bioterrorism-related conditions. New England Journal of Medicine, 372(10), 954–962.
Loubani, O. M., & Green, R. S. (2015). A systematic review of extravasation and local tissue 
injury from administration of vasopressors through peripheral intravenous catheters and 
central venous catheters. Journal of Critical Care, 30(3), 653.e9–653.
Loughran, S., Kealy, J., Shook, A., & Kaan, A. (2012). The development and evaluation of a 
competency-based program for patients with a ventricular assist device. Canadian Journal of 
Cardiovascular Nursing, 22(3), 18–23.
Lucke-Wold, B., Logsdon, A. F., Manoranjan, B., Turner, R. C., McConnell, E., Vates, G. E., . . . 
Simard, J. M. (2016). Aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage and neuroinflammation: 
A comprehensive review. International Journal of Molecular Sciences, 17(4), 497.
Lumor, S. E., Deen, B. D., Ronningen, I., Smith, K., Fredrickson, N. R., Diez-Gonzalez, F., & 
Labuza, T. P. (2013). Assessment of the inhibition of ricin toxicity by lactose in milk. Journal 
of Food Protection, 76(12), 2037–2039.
Luo, C., Yang, H., Chen, Y., Zhang, Z., & Gong, Z. (2014). Respiratory nursing interventions 
following tracheostomy in acute traumatic cervical spinal cord injury. Cell Biochemistry and 
Biophysics, 70(1), 455–459.
Luo, L., Huang, W., Zhou, L., Wang, J., Xu, L., & Li, P. (2014). Optimal dose of succinylcholine 
for tracheal intubation in patients during inhalation induction with sevoflurane: 
A randomized controlled trial. Journal of Clinical Anesthesia, 26(7), 557–562.

References  ❙  361
Lurati, A. R. (2013). Reverse malingering—staying on the job at any cost. Workplace Health & 
Safety, 61(7), 297–298.
MacQueen, I. T., Dawes, A. J., Hadnott, T., Strength, K., Moran, G. J., Holschneider, C., . . . 
Maggard-Gibbons, M. (2015). Use of a hospital-wide screening program for early detection 
of sepsis in general surgery patients. American Surgeon, 81(10), 1074–1079.
Mahajan, A., Go, M. J., Zhang, W., Below, J. E., Gaulton, K. J., Ferreira, T., . . . Segrè, A. V. (2014). 
Genome-wide trans-ancestry meta-analysis provides insight into the genetic architecture of 
type 2 diabetes susceptibility. Nature Genetics, 46(3), 234–244.
Mahajan, K., Asotra, S., Negi, P., & Gupta, G. (2016). Massive right pleural effusion leading to 
cardiac tamponade in absence of pericardial effusion: A rare presentation. BMJ Case Reports, 
2016.
Mahar, P. D., Wasiak, J., Cleland, H., Watters, D., Paul, E., Marsh, P., & Gin, D. (2013). Mortality 
and use of the auxiliary score in extensive toxic epidermal necrolysis patients admitted to 
an adult burns referral centre. Dermatology, 227(2), 180–185.
Majercik, S., Vijayakumar, S., Olsen, G., Wilson, E., Gardner, S., Granger, S. R., . . . White, T. W. 
(2015). Surgical stabilization of severe rib fractures decreases incidence of retained 
hemothorax and empyema. American Journal of Surgery, 210(6), 1112–1117.
Malahfji, M., Centeno, E. N., Negi, S. I., Mahfouz, M., Nassir, B., Gregoric, I., . . . Loyalka, P. 
(2015). TCT-203: Use of percutaneous assist device therapy in ventricular septal defects 
in postinfraction cardiogenic shock. Journal of the American College of Cardiology, 66(15), 
B77–B78.
Management of potential bioterrorism-related conditions. (2015). New England Journal of 
Medicine, 372(23), 2272–2273.
Manno, E. (Ed.). (2012). Emergency management in neurocritical care. Hoboken, NJ: 
Wiley-Blackwell. 
Mant, J., McManus, R. J., Roalfe, A., Fletcher, K., Taylor, C. J., Martin, U., . . . Hobbs, F. D. R. 
(2016). Different systolic blood pressure targets for people with history of stroke or transient 
ischaemic attack: PAST-BP (prevention after stroke-blood pressure) randomized controlled 
trial. British Medical Journal, 352. http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmj.i708 
Marateb, H. R., Mansourian, M., Faghihimani, E., Amini, M., & Farina, D. (2014). A hybrid 
intelligent system for diagnosing microalbuminuria in type 2 diabetes patients without 
having to measure urinary albumin. Computers in Biology and Medicine, 45, 34–42.
Maria, P. D., Pes, G. M., Bassotti, G., & Usai-Satta, P. (2016). Dyspepsia: When and how to test 
for helicobacter pylori infection. Gastroenterology Research and Practice. http://dx.doi
.org/10.1155/2016/8463614
Maron, B. J., Rowin, E. J., Casey, S. A., Garberich, R. F., & Maron, M. S. (2016). What do patients 
with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy die from? American Journal of Cardiology, 117(3), 434–435.
Marshall-McKenna, R., Hutchison, C., Lindsay, D., Stevenson, C., Stirling, L., Armstrong, A., & 
McIlroy, P. (2015). Management of chemotherapy-related arm symptoms in patients with 
breast cancer. Cancer Nursing Practice (2014+), 14(2), 22.
Martin, M. J., & Harrison, T. W. (2015). Causes of chronic productive cough: An approach to 
management. Respiratory Medicine, 109(9), 1105–1113.
Martinez-Vea, A., Marcas, L., Bardaji, A., Romeu, M., Gutierrez, C., Garcia, C., . . . Giralt, M. 
(2012). Role of oxidative stress in cardiovascular effects of anemia treatment with 
erythropoietin in predialysis patients with chronic kidney disease. Clinical Nephrology, 77(3), 
171–181.
Maski, M. R., Thomas, R. J., Karumanchi, S. A., & Parikh, S. M. (2016). Urinary neutrophil 
gelatinase-associated lipocalin (NGAL) in patients with obstructive sleep apnea. PLoS ONE, 
11(5). http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0154503
Masri-iraqi, H., Robenshtok, E., Tzvetov, G., Manistersky, Y., & Shimon, I. (2014). Elevated white 
blood cell counts in Cushing’s disease: Association with hypercortisolism. Pituitary, 17(5), 
436–440.
Matura, L. A. (2011). Pulmonary arterial hypertension: An overview. British Journal of Cardiac 
Nursing, 6(6), 268–277.

362  ❙  References
Matute, O. V., Ferrer, M. M., Damelio, C. M., Bernad, A., Yu Madamba, R. C., & Gastaminza, G. 
(2016). Eosinophilic bronchitis caused by exposure to wheat flour in the workplace. Journal 
of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, 137(2), AB33.
McCully, B. H., Fabricant, L., Geraci, T., Greenbaum, A., Schreiber, M. A., & Gordy, S. D. (2014). 
Complete cervical spinal cord injury above C6 predicts the need for tracheostomy. American 
Journal of Surgery, 207(5), 664–668; discussion 668–669.
McDonald, E. M., Gielen, A. C., Shields, W. C., Stepnitz, R., Parker, E., Ma, X., & Bishai, David. 
(2013). Residential carbon monoxide (CO) poisoning risks: Correlates of observed CO alarm 
use in urban households. Journal of Environmental Health, 76(3), 26–32.
McGuigan, A., & Brown, R. (2016). Early and delayed presentation of traumatic small bowel 
injury. BMJ Case Reports, 2016.
McHale Wiegand, D. J. (2010). AACN Procedure Manual for High Acuity, Progressive, and Critical 
Care (6th ed.). St. Louis, MO: Saunders.
McHugh, S., Wang, X., & Sullivan, E. (2015). Diagnosis of cardiac tamponade with 
transesophageal echocardiography following the induction of anesthesia for suspected 
testicular torsion. Annals of Cardiac Anaesthesia, 18(3), 449–452.
McNeil, M. M., Weintraub, E. S., Duffy, J., Sukumaran, L., Jacobsen, S. J., Klein, N. P., . . . 
DeStefano, F. (2016). Risk of anaphylaxis after vaccination in children and adults. Journal of 
Allergy and Clinical Immunology, 137(3), 868–878.
Mead, N. E., & O’Keefe, K. P. (2009). Wellen’s syndrome: An ominous EKG pattern. Journal of 
Emergencies, Trauma & Shock, 2(3), 206–208.
Medina, E. (2014). Methanol hazards & safeguards. Professional Safety, 59(6), 67–74.
Mehta, C., & Mehta, Y. (2016). Management of refractory hypoxemia. Annals of Cardiac 
Anaesthesia, 19(1), 89–96.
Meier, B., König, A., Parak, S., & Henke, K. (2011). Suppressed, but not forgotten. Swiss Journal of 
Psychology/Schweizerische Zeitschrift Für Psychologie/Revue Suisse De Psychologie, 70(1), 5–11.
Mellor, D. (2012). A review of the current nutritional guidelines for diabetes. Practice Nursing, 
23(5), 234–240.
Menafoglio, A., Di Valentino, M., Porretta, A. P., Foglia, P., Segatto, J., Siragusa, P., . . . Gallino, A. 
(2015). Cardiovascular evaluation of middle-aged individuals engaged in high-intensity 
sport activities: Implications for workload, yield and economic costs. British Journal of Sports 
Medicine, 49(11), 757.
Meurin, P., Lelay-Kubas, S., Pierre, B., Pereira, H., Pavy, B., Iliou, M. C., . . . Tabet, J. Y. (2015). 
Colchicine for postoperative pericardial effusion: A multicentre, double-blind, randomised 
controlled trial. Heart, 101(21), 1711.
Meyers, J. D., Jay, P. Y., & Rentschler, S. (2016). Reprogramming the conduction system: Onward 
toward a biological pacemaker. Trends in Cardiovascular Medicine, 26(1), 14–20.
Miranda, W. R., Connolly, H. M., DeSimone, D. C., Phillips, S. D., Wilson, W. R., Sohail, M. R., . . . 
Baddour, L. M. (2015). Infective endocarditis involving the pulmonary valve. American 
Journal of Cardiology, 116(12), 1928–1931.
Moffett, B. S., Valdes, S. O., & Kim, J. J. (2013). Possible digoxin toxicity associated with 
concomitant ciprofloxacin therapy. International Journal of Clinical Pharmacy, 35(5), 673–676.
Møller, E., Bakke, M., Dalager, T., Werdelin, L. M., Lonsdale, M. N., Højgaard, L., & Friberg, L. 
(2013). Somatosensory input and oromandibular dystonia. Clinical Neurology and 
Neurosurgery, 115(7), 1141–1143.
Moore, K. (2015). Hot topics: Chemical burns in the emergency department. Journal of Emergency 
Nursing, 41(4), 364–365.
Morel, N., Bonjour, M., Le Guern, V., Le Jeunne, C., Mouthon, L., Piette, J., & Costedoat-
Chalumeau, N. (2015). Colchicine: A simple and effective treatment for pericarditis in 
systemic lupus erythematosus? A report of 10 cases. Lupus, 24(14), 1479–1485.
Morimura, N., Takahashi, K., Doi, T., Ohnuki, T., Sakamoto, T., Uchida, Y., . . . Ikeda, H. (2015). 
A pilot study of quantitative capillary refill time to identify high blood lactate levels in 
critically ill patients. Emergency Medicine Journal, 32(6), 444.

References  ❙  363
Morsy, M., Efeovbokhan, N., & Jha, S. K. (2015). Complete heart block and asystole following 
blunt cardiac trauma. Journal of Community Hospital Internal Medicine Perspectives, 5(5). 
http://dx.doi.org/10.3402/jchimp.v5.28423
Moser, B., Deisenhammer, E. A., Marksteiner, J., Papousek, I., Fink, A., & Weiss, E. M. (2014). 
Serial position effects in patients with mild cognitive impairment and early and moderate 
alzheimer’s disease compared with healthy comparison subjects. Dementia and Geriatric 
Cognitive Disorders, 37(1–2), 19–26.
Mourelo, M., Galeiras, R., Pértega, S., Freire, D., López, E., Broullón, J., & Campos, E. (2015). 
Tracheostomy in the management of patients with thermal injuries. Indian Journal of Critical 
Care Medicine, 19(8), 449–455.
Muir, A. J. (2015). Understanding the complexities of cirrhosis. Clinical Therapeutics, 37(8), 
1822–1836.
Mullins, T. L. K., Miller, R. J., & Mullins, E. S. (2015). Evaluation and management of adolescents 
with abnormal uterine bleeding. Pediatric Annals, 44(9), e218–222.
Muniraj, T., Dang, S., & Pitchumoni, C. S. (2015). Pancreatitis or not?—Elevated lipase and 
amylase in ICU patients. Journal of Critical Care, 30(6), 1370–1375.
Mushtaq, A., & Shafiq, M. (2015). An overview of empirical evidence of internet addiction 
disorder among adolescents. Indian Journal of Health and Wellbeing, 6(4), 441–444.
Muso, E. (2014). Beneficial effect of LDL-apheresis in refractory nephrotic syndrome. Clinical and 
Experimental Nephrology, 18(2), 286–290.
Nagao, M., Fujisawa, T., Ihara, T., & Kino, Y. (2016). Highly increased levels of IgE antibodies to 
vaccine components in children with influenza vaccine-associated anaphylaxis. Journal of 
Allergy and Clinical Immunology, 137(3), 861–867.
Naidech, A. M., Beaumont, J. L., Rosenberg, N. F., Maas, M. B., Kosteva, A. R., Ault, M. L., . . . 
Ely, E. W. (2013). Intracerebral hemorrhage and delirium symptoms: Length of stay, 
function, and quality of life in a 114-patient cohort. American Journal of Respiratory and 
Critical Care Medicine, 188(11), 1331–1337.
Najman, J. M., Khatun, M., Mamun, A., Clavarino, A., Williams, G. M., Scott, J., . . . Alati, R. 
(2014). Does depression experienced by mothers leads to a decline in marital quality: 
A 21-year longitudinal study. Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 49(1), 
121–132.
Nakashima, H., Yukawa, Y., Imagama, S., Ito, K., Hida, T., Machino, M., . . . Kato, F. (2013). 
Characterizing the need for tracheostomy placement and decannulation after cervical 
spinal cord injury. European Spine Journal, 22(7), 1526–1532.
Naples, R., Laskowski, D., Mccarthy, K., Mattox, E., Comhair, S. A., A., & Erzurum, S. C. (2015). 
Carboxyhemoglobin and methemoglobin in asthma. Lung, 193(2), 183–187.
Nasr, L. A., & Haydar, A. A. (2016). Back pain after trauma. British Medical Journal, 352(i825). 
doi:10.1136/bmj.i825
Natarajan, A., Hindocha, D., Kular, N., Fergey, S., & Davis, J. R. (2012). Vasculitic rash: Do not 
jump to conclusions. Clinical Medicine, 12(2), 179–180.
Nguyen, M. N., Zimmerman, L. H., Meloche, K., Dolman, H. S., Baylor, A. E., Fuleihan, S., . . . 
Tyburski, J. G. (2016). Hydromorphone vs fentanyl for epidural analgesia and anesthesia. 
American Journal of Surgery, 211(3), 565–570.
Niehaus, M., Rusgo, A., Roth, K., & Jacoby, J. L. (2016). Retropharyngeal air and 
pneumomediastinum: A rare complication of influenza A and asthma in an adult. American 
Journal of Emergency Medicine, 34(2), 338.e1–338.
Nogueira, J. P., Valéro, R., Maraninchi, M., Lorec, A. M., Samuelian-Massat, C., Bégu-Le 
Corroller, A., . . . Vialettes, B. (2013). Growth hormone level at admission and its evolution 
during refeeding are predictive of short-term outcome in restrictive anorexia nervosa. British 
Journal of Nutrition, 109(12), 2175–2181.
Noureldin, R. A., Liu, S., Nacif, M. S., Judge, D. P., Halushka, M. K., Abraham, T. P., . . . 
Bluemke, D. A. (2012). The diagnosis of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy by cardiovascular 
magnetic resonance. Journal of Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance, 14, 17.

364  ❙  References
Nursing Drug Handbook. (2017). Nursing 2017 Drug Handbook. New York, NY: Lippincott, 
Wolters, Kluwer.
Nursing Standard Staff. (2015). Burns nurses highlight fancy dress fire risk. Nursing Standard 
(2014+), 30(9), 7. http://dx.doi.org.ezproxy.rush.edu/10.7748/ns.30.9.7.s3 
O’Donovan, K. (2012). Acute management of right ventricular infarction. British Journal of 
Cardiac Nursing, 7(3), 118–123.
Ofstad, A. P., Johansen, O. E., Gullestad, L., Birkeland, K., Orvik, E., Fagerland, M. W., . . . 
Aakhus, S. (2014). Neutral impact on systolic and diastolic cardiac function of 2 years 
of intensified multi-intervention in type 2 diabetes: The randomized controlled Asker 
and Baerum cardiovascular diabetes (ABCD) study. American Heart Journal, 168(3), 280–288.
Omori, K., Jitsuiki, K., Ohsaka, H., Mishima, K., Ishikawa, K., Obinata, M., . . . Yanagawa, Y. 
(2015). Recurrent idiopathic ventricular fibrillation induced by high fever. American Journal 
of Emergency Medicine, 33(9), 1331.e1–1331.
Oyston, P. C. F., & Williamson, E. D. (2013). Prophylaxis and therapy of plague. Expert Review of 
Anti-Infective Therapy, 11(8), 817–829.
Padhi, R., Panda, B., Jagati, S., & Patra, S. (2014). Hyponatremia in critically ill patients. Indian 
Journal of Critical Care Medicine, 18(2), 83–87.
Pandey, S., Chittoria, R. K., Senthil, K., Bibilash, B. S., Friji, M. T., Mohapatra, D. P., & Dinesh, K. S. 
(2015). Warfarin induced tissue necrosis and its management. New Indian Journal of Surgery, 
6(4), 105–108.
Pandya, U., M.D., Polite, N., D.O., Wood, T., P.H.D., & Lieber, M., M.S. (2014). Increased total 
serum random cortisol levels predict mortality in critically ill trauma patients. American 
Surgeon, 80(11), 1112–1118.
Parikh, G., Shonde, S., Shah, R., & Kharadi, N. (2014). A case of guidewire embolism during 
central venous catheterization: Better safe than sorry! Indian Journal of Critical Care Medicine, 
18(12), 831–833.
Parrinello, R., Sestito, A., Di Franco, A., Russo, G., Villano, A., Figliozzi, S., . . . Crea, F. (2014). 
Peripheral arterial function and coronary microvascular function in patients with variant 
angina. Cardiology, 129(1), 20–24.
Parsaik, A. K., Ahlskog, J. E., Singer, W., Gelfman, R., Sheldon, S. H., Seime, R. J., . . . Low, P. A. 
(2013). Central hyperadrenergic state after lightning strike. Clinical Autonomic Research, 
23(4), 169–173.
Patel, S. B., Poston, J. T., Pohlman, A., Hall, J. B., & Kress, J. P. (2014). Rapidly reversible, 
sedation-related delirium versus persistent delirium in the intensive care unit. American 
Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, 189(6), 658–665.
Pathak, V., Hurtado Rendon, I. S., & Smina, M. (2012). Necrotizing pneumonia caused by group 
C streptococci in a young adult. Respiratory Care, 57(3), 454–456.
Paul, J., & Dasgupta, S. (2012). Early prediction of acute kidney injury by clinical features of 
snakebite patients at the time of hospital admission. North American Journal of Medical 
Sciences, 4(5), 216–220.
Pere, K. (2012). Developing nursing expertise in caring for older advanced stage heart failure 
patients and their families: Palliative and end-of-life care. Canadian Journal of Cardiovascular 
Nursing, 22(3), 12–17.
Perinel Ragey, S., Garnier, P., & Vergnon, J. M. (2014). Complete resolution of cerebral air 
embolism secondary to a transbronchial needle aspiration. Respiration, 86(6), 504–507.
Peterkin, N. D., Atkin, J. S., & Coris, E. E. (2016). What is the best practice for the treatment of 
exertional heat illnesses (heat cramps, heat syncope, heat exhaustion, and exertional heat 
stroke)? Athletic Training & Sports Health Care, 8(3), 97–99.
Peters, J. H., Hock, M., & Krohne, H. W. (2012). Sensitive maintenance: A cognitive process 
underlying individual differences in memory for threatening information. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 102(1), 200–213.
Pierson, D. J. (2012). Does aspirin reduce mortality in the systemic inflammatory response 
syndrome? Critical Care Alert, 20(4), 30–31.

References  ❙  365
Pisani, M. A., Murphy, T. E., Van Ness, P. H., Araujo, K. L., Inouye, S. K. (2007). Characteristics 
associated with delirium in older patients in a medical intensive care unit. Archives of 
Internal Medicine 167(15), 1629–1634.
Porhomayon, J., Davari-Farid, S., Li, C. M., Arora, P., Pourafkari, L., & Nader, N. D. (2015). 
Intraoperative administration of vasopressin during coronary artery bypass surgery is 
associated with acute postoperative kidney injury. Journal of Critical Care, 30(5), 963–968.
Porsbjerg, C., Lange, P., & Ulrik, C. S. (2015). Lung function impairment increases with age of 
diagnosis in adult onset asthma. Respiratory Medicine, 109(7), 821–827.
Povitz, M., James, M. T., Pendharkar, S. R., Raneri, J., Hanly, P. J., & Tsai, W. H. (2015). 
Prevalence of sleep-disordered breathing in obese patients with chronic hypoxemia: A cross-
sectional study. Annals of the American Thoracic Society, 12(6), 921–927B.
Pozzessere, A., Grotts, J., & Kaminski, S., M.D. (2015). Dabigatran use does not increase 
intracranial hemorrhage in traumatic geriatric falls when compared with warfarin. 
American Surgeon, 81(10), 1039–1042.
Pregnancy at older age may increase risk for future stroke. (2016). Cardiology Today, 19(3), 22.
Proietti, M., Marra, A. M., Tassone, E. J., De Vuono, S., Corrao, S., Gobbi, P., . . . Raparelli, V. 
(2015). Frequency of left ventricular hypertrophy in non-valvular atrial fibrillation. American 
Journal of Cardiology, 116(6), 877–882.
Pun, V. C., Hart, J. E., Kabrhel, C., Camargo, Carlos A., Jr, Baccarelli, A. A., & Laden, F. (2015). 
Prospective study of ambient particulate matter exposure and risk of pulmonary embolism 
in the nurses’ health study cohort. Environmental Health Perspectives (Online), 123(12), 1265.
Qiu, Y., Liu, Q., Chen, G., Wang, W., Peng, K., Xiao, W., & Yang, H. (2016). Outcome of rectal 
cancer surgery in obese and nonobese patients: A meta-analysis. World Journal of Surgical 
Oncology, 14. doi:10.1186/s12957-016-0775-y
Quick, J. A., & Barnes, S. L. (2015). Correct coagulopathy: Quickly and effectively. Lancet, 
385(9982), 2024–2026.
Quick, J. A., Meyer, J. M., Coughenour, J. P., & Barnes, S. L. (2015). Less is more: Low-dose 
prothrombin complex concentrate effective in acute care surgery patients. American Surgeon, 
81(6), 646–650.
Radenkovic, D. V., Johnson, C. D., Milic, N., Gregoric, P., Ivancevic, N., Bezmarevic, M., . . . 
Bajec, D. (2016). Interventional treatment of abdominal compartment syndrome during 
severe acute pancreatitis: Current status and historical perspective. Gastroenterology Research 
and Practice. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1155/2016/5251806
Rafeey, M., Shoaran, M., & Ghergherechi, R. (2016). Topical tranexamic acid as a novel 
treatment for bleeding peptic ulcer: A randomised controlled trial. African Journal of 
Paediatric Surgery, 13(1). doi:10.4103/0189-6725.181700
Rahmani, S. H., Faridaalaee, G., & Jahangard, S. (2015). Acute transient hemiparesis induced by 
lightning strike. American Journal of Emergency Medicine, 33(7), 984.e1–984.
Raj, V. M., Sankar, A. A., Pfeiffer, B., Katsoufis, C., Defreitas, M., . . . Abitbol, C. L. (2013). 
Therapeutic plasma exchange in the treatment of exertional heat stroke and multiorgan 
failure. Pediatric Nephrology, 28(6), 971–974.
Raju, D., Roysam, C., Singh, R., Clark, S., & Plummer, C. (2015). Unusual cause of hypoxemia 
after automatic implantable cardioverter-defibrillatorleads extraction. Annals of Cardiac 
Anaesthesia, 18(4), 599–602. doi:10.4103/0971-9784.166484
Ramos, G. P., Bisneto, J. C. V., Chen, D., & Pardanani, A. (2016). Initial presentation of CNS-
restricted acute lymphoblastic B cell leukaemia as peripheral polyneuropathy. BMJ Case 
Reports.
Randolph, C., Karantzoulis, S., & Guskiewicz, K. (2013). Prevalence and characterization of mild 
cognitive impairment in retired national football league players. Journal of the International 
Neuropsychological Society, 19(8), 873–880.
Rasmussen, K. C., Hoejskov, M., Johansson, P. I., Kridina, I., Kistorp, T., Salling, L., . . . Secher, N. H. 
(2015). Coagulation competence for predicting perioperative hemorrhage in patients 
treated with lactated ringers vs. dextran—A randomized controlled trial. BioMed Central 
Anesthesiology, 15:(178). doi:10.1186/s12871-015-0162-1

366  ❙  References
Raval, C., Upadhyaya, S., & Panchal, B. (2015). Dissociative fugue: Recurrent episodes in a 
young adult. Industrial Psychiatry Journal, 24(1), 88–90.
Read, A., Colder, J. P., Merrill, C. R., Ouimette, J. E., White, P., & Swartout, J. (2012). Trauma 
and posttraumatic stress symptoms predict alcohol and other drug consequence 
trajectories in the first year of college. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 80(3), 
426–439.
Recommendations on screening for depression in adults. (2013). Canadian Medical Association.
Journal, 185(9), 775–782.
Reeve, J. C., & Boden, I. (2016). The physiotherapy management of patients undergoing 
abdominal surgery. New Zealand Journal of Physiotherapy, 44(1), 33–49.
Reeve, S. F., Johnson, J. S., & Marshall, R. (2016). Urine test strips as a bedside diagnostic aid to 
rule out blood in CSF: A validation. Military Medicine, 181(3), 199–201.
Rey, D., Piroth, L., Wendling, M., Miailhes, P., Michel, M., Dufour, C., . . . Carrat, F. (2015). 
Safety and immunogenicity of double-dose versus standard-dose hepatitis B revaccination 
in non-responding adults with HIV-1 (ANRS HB04 B-BOOST): A multicentre, open-label, 
randomised controlled trial. Lancet Infectious Diseases, 15(11), 1283–1291.
Robinson, P. D., Blackburn, C., Babl, F. E., Gamage, L., Schutz, J., Nogajski, R., . . . Ngo, P. K. 
(2015). Management of paediatric spontaneous pneumothorax: A multicentre 
retrospective case series. Archives of Disease in Childhood Education and Practice Edition, 
100(10), 918.
Roger, C., Louart, B., Muller, L., Roberts, J., & Lefrant, J. (2015). Impact of an inducement to give 
high doses of amikacin and gentamicin on serum concentrations in critically ill patients 
with severe sepsis. Intensive Care Medicine Experimental, 3, 1–2.
Romero, T. (2016). Worsening migraines with hormone replacement may raise stroke risk in 
women. Cardiology Today, 19(4), 26.
Romero, T., Bloomgarden, Z. T., & Goldstein, L. B. (2016). IRIS: Actos lowers risk for CV events 
after ischemic stroke, TIA. Endocrine Today, 14(4), 45.
Roncarati, R., Viviani A. C., Krawitz, P., Lattanzi, G., Von Kodolitsch, Y., Perrot, A., . . . 
Robinson, P. N. (2013). Doubly heterozygous LMNA and TTN mutations revealed by 
exome sequencing in a severe form of dilated cardiomyopathy. European Journal of 
Human Genetics, 21(10), 1105–1111.
Rondon-berrios, H., Agaba, E. I., & Tzamaloukas, A. H. (2014). Hyponatremia: Pathophysiology, 
classification, manifestations and management. International Urology and Nephrology, 46(11), 
2153–2165.
Rothenberg, M. E., & Bousquet, J. (2015). News beyond our pages. Journal of Allergy and Clinical 
Immunology, 135(3), 587–588.
Rowley-Conwy, G. (2014). Management of major burns: Rehabilitation and recovery. Nursing 
Standard (2014+), 28(25), 65.
Rumboldt, Z. (2015). Hydroxyethyl starch should not be used to manage severe aluminium 
phosphide poisoning. Arhiv Za Higijenu Rada i Toksikologiju, 66(3), 219.
Russell, J. L., Wiles, D. A., Kenney, B., & Spiller, H. A. (2014). Significant chemical burns 
associated with dermal exposure to laundry pod detergent. Journal of Medical Toxicology, 
10(3), 292–294.
Ryoo, S. M., Sohn, C. H., Kim, H. J., Kwak, M. K., Oh, B. J., & Lim, K. S. (2013). Intracardiac 
thrombus formation induced by carbon monoxide poisoning. Human and Experimental 
Toxicology, 32(11), 1193–1196.
Ryser, A., & Heininger, U. (2015). Comparative acceptance of pertussis and influenza 
immunization among health-care personnel. Vaccine, 33(41), 5350–5356.
Sabatino, J. J., Werner, J. K., & Newsome, S. D. (2015). A rare case of hyponatremia from a 
hypothalamic lesion in a patient with multiple sclerosis. Multiple Sclerosis Journal, 21(5), 
662–665.
Sahay, M., & Sahay, R. (2014). Hyponatremia: A practical approach. Indian Journal of 
Endocrinology and Metabolism, 18(6), 760–771.

References  ❙  367
Saito, K. (2015). Postoperative diabetes insipidus in craniopharyngiomas: Effective management 
by adherence to a strict protocol. Neurology India, 63(5), 659–660.
Sakr, Y., Dünisch, P., Santos, C., Matthes, L., Zeidan, M., Reinhart, K., . . . Ewald, C. (2016). 
Poor outcome is associated with less negative fluid balance in patients with aneurysmal 
subarachnoid hemorrhage treated with prophylactic vasopressor-induced hypertension. 
Annals of Intensive Care, 6(1), 1–12.
Sakuramoto, H., Subrina, J., Unoki, T., Mizutani, T., & Komatsu, H. (2015). Severity of delirium 
in the ICU is associated with short term cognitive impairment. A prospective cohort study. 
Intensive & Critical Care Nursing, 31(4), 250–257.
Saleem, S., Yousuf, I., Gul, A., Gupta, S., & Verma, S. (2014). Hyponatremia in stroke. Annals of 
Indian Academy of Neurology, 17(1), 55–57.
Sampathkumar, P., & Sanchez, J. L. (2016). Zika virus in the Americas: A review for clinicians. 
Mayo Clinic Proceedings, 91(4), 514–521.
San Román, J. A., Vilacosta, I., López, J., & Sarriá, C. (2015). Critical questions about left-sided 
infective endocarditis. Journal of the American College of Cardiology, 66(9), 1068–1076.
Schlatter, J., Chiadmi, F., Gandon, V., & Chariot, P. (2014). Simultaneous determination of 
methanol, acetaldehyde, acetone, and ethanol in human blood by gas chromatography 
with flame ionization detection. Human and Experimental Toxicology, 33(1), 74–80.
Schmidt, H., Lotze, U., Ghanem, A., Anker, S. D., Said, S. M., Braun-Dullaeus, R., . . . Rauchhaus, M. 
(2014). Relation of impaired interorgan communication and parasympathetic activity in 
chronic heart failure and multiple-organ dysfunction syndrome. Journal of Critical Care, 29(3), 
367–373.
Schreckinger, M., Walker, B., Knepper, J., Hornyak, M., Hong, D., Kim, J., . . . Szerlip, N. J. (2013). 
Post-operative diabetes insipidus after endoscopic transsphenoidal surgery. Pituitary, 16(4), 
445–51.
Schuhmann, M. K., Gunreben, I., Kleinschnitz, C., & Kraft, P. (2016). Immunohistochemical 
analysis of cerebral thrombi retrieved by mechanical thrombectomy from patients with 
acute ischemic stroke. International Journal of Molecular Sciences, 17(3), 298.
Schulmeister, L. (2014). Safe management of chemotherapy: Infusion-related complications. 
Clinical Journal of Oncology Nursing, 18(3), 283–287.
Senthilkumaran, S., Benita, F., Sandeep, G. B., & Thirumalaikolundusubramanian, P. (2015). 
Peritoneal dialysis and potassium: Pains and gains in the ED. American Journal of Emergency 
Medicine, 33(7), 979–980.
Serafim, R. B., Bozza, F. A., Soares, M., do Brasil, P. E., Tura, B. R., Ely, E. W., & Salluh, J. I. F. 
(2015). Pharmacologic prevention and treatment of delirium in intensive care patients: 
A systematic review. Journal of Critical Care, 30(4), 799–807.
Sewell, M. C., Luo, X., Neugroschl, J., & Sano, M. (2013). Detection of mild cognitive 
impairment and early stage dementia with an audio-recorded cognitive scale. International 
Psychogeriatrics, 25(8), 1325–1333.
Shah, K. J., Scileppi, R. M., & Franz, R. W. (2011). Treatment of pulmonary embolism using 
ultrasound-accelerated thrombolysis directly into pulmonary arteries. Vascular and 
Endovascular Surgery, 45(6), 541–548.
Shah, R. U., de Lemos, J. A., Wang, T. Y., Chen, A. Y., Thomas, L., Sutton, N. R., . . . Granger, C. B. 
(2016). Post-hospital outcomes of patients with acute myocardial infarction with cardiogenic 
shock. Journal of the American College of Cardiology, 67(7), 739–747.
Shaw, A. D., Raghunathan, K., Peyerl, F. W., Munson, S. H., Paluszkiewicz, S. M., & Schermer, C. R. 
(2014). Association between intravenous chloride load during resuscitation and in-hospital 
mortality among patients with SIRS. Intensive Care Medicine, 40(12), 1897–1905.
Sherif, K., Sehli, S., & Jenkins, L. A. (2016). Takotsubo cardiomyopathy after administration of 
norepinephrine. Baylor University Medical Center Proceedings, 29(2), 166–167.
Shroyer, J., & Stewart, C. (2016). Knowledge of concussions by high school coaches in a rural 
environment. Physical Educator, 73(2), 373–387.
Singla, A., Amini, M. R., Alpert, M. A., & Gornik, H. L. (2013). Fatal anaphylactoid reaction 
associated with heparin-induced thrombocytopenia. Vascular Medicine, 18(3), 136–138.

368  ❙  References
Sinha, S., & Ray, B. (2015). Cerebral venous air embolism during epidural injection in adult. 
Indian Journal of Critical Care Medicine, 19(2), 116–118.
Skidmore-Roth, L. (2016). Mosby’s 2017 Nursing Drug Reference. St. Louis, MO: Mosby.
Slahaye, F., M’Hammedi, A., Guerpillon, B., de Gevigney, G., Boibieux, A., Dauwalder, O., . . . 
Vandenesch, F. (2016). Systematic search for present and potential portals of entry for 
infective endocarditis. Journal of the American College of Cardiology, 67(2), 151–158.
Smalls, N., Obirieze, A., & Ehanire, I. (2015). The impact of coagulopathy on traumatic splenic 
injuries. American Journal of Surgery, 210(4), 724–729.
Smith, L. (2016). 57th American Society of Hematology annual meeting. Lancet Oncology, 
17(2), 142.
Snipelisky, D., Stulak, J. M., Schettle, S. D., Sharma, S., Kushwaha, S. S., & Dunlay, S. M. (2015). 
Psychosocial characteristics and outcomes in patients with left ventricular assist device 
implanted as destination therapy. American Heart Journal, 170(5), 887–894.
Soo, J., Gray, J., & Manecke, G. (2014). Propofol and diabetes insipidus. Journal of Clinical 
Anesthesia, 26(8), 679–683.
Sorajja, D., Ramakrishna, H., Poterack, A., Shen, W., & Mookadam, F. (2015). Brugada 
syndrome and its relevance in the perioperative period. Annals of Cardiac Anaesthesia, 18(3), 
403–413.
Speck, A. L., Hess, M., & Baptist, A. P. (2016). An electronic asthma self-management 
intervention for young African American adults. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology in 
Practice, 4(1), 89–95.
Srikar, M. V., Aravind, A., Niranjan, B. N., Khandeparker, R. V. S., Sangeeta, & Grover, S. (2015). 
Phentolamine mesylate in reversal local anesthesia: A review. Journal of International Oral 
Health, 7(11), 129–131.
Srivastava, R., & Kumar, R. (2013). Electrical burns of the abdomen. Indian Journal of Plastic 
Surgery, 46(3), 587–590.
Stankowski, R. V., Kloner, R. A., & Rezkalla, S. H. (2015). Cardiovascular consequences of cocaine 
use. Trends in Cardiovascular Medicine, 25(6), 517–526.
Stanopoulos, I. (2011). Exercise capacity in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis: The effect of 
pulmonary hypertension. Respirology, 16(3), 451–458.
Staples, J. E. (2012). Modifiable risk factors for West Nile virus infection during an outbreak—
Arizona, 2010. American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 86(5), 895–901.
Stenger, M. B., Lee, S. M., Ribeiro, L. C., Phillips, T. R., Ploutz-snyder, R., . . . Platts, S. H. (2014). 
Gradient compression garments protect against orthostatic intolerance during recovery from 
bed rest. European Journal of Applied Physiology, 114(3), 597–608.
Stephenson, J. A., Gravante, G., Butler, N. A., Sorge, R., Sayers, R. D., & Bown, M. J. (2010). The 
systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS): Number and type of positive criteria 
predict interventions and outcomes in acute surgical admissions. World Journal of Surgery, 
34(11), 2757–2764.
Stiles, P. J., Drake, R. M., Helmer, S. D., Bjordahl, P. M., & Haan, J. M. (2014). Evaluation of chest 
tube administration of tissue plasminogen activator to treat retained hemothorax. American 
Journal of Surgery, 207(6), 960–963.
Stotts, A. L., Vujanovic, A., Heads, A., Suchting, R., Green, C. E., & Schmitz, J. M. (2015). The role of 
avoidance and inflexibility in characterizing response to contingency management for cocaine 
use disorders: A secondary profile analysis. Psychology of Addictive Behaviors, 29(2), 408–413.
Stucky, M. A., & Goldberger, Z. D. (2015). Digoxin: Its role in contemporary medicine. 
Postgraduate Medical Journal, 91(1079), 514.
Summerfield, D. T., Desai, H., Levitov, A., Grooms, D. A., & Marik, P. E. (2012). Inhaled nitric 
oxide as salvage therapy in massive pulmonary embolism: A case series. Respiratory Care, 
57(3), 444–448.
Sun, L., Boodhwani, M., Baer, H., & Mcdonald, B. (2013). The association between tracheostomy 
and sternal wound infection in postoperative cardiac surgery patients. Canadian Journal of 
Anesthesia, 60(7), 684–691.

References  ❙  369
Sutton, P. (2015). At last, vaccine-induced protection against helicobacter pylori. Lancet, 
386(10002), 1424–1425.
Suzuki, M., Sumiyoshi, T., Miyachi, H., Yamashita, J., Yamasaki, M., Miyauchi, K., . . . 
Takayama, M. (2015). Effect of coronary thrombectomy in cardiogenic shock complicating 
ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction. The American Journal of Cardiology, 115(12), 
1649–1654.
Swain, E. (2016). Testing for CRP could identify patients at risk for recurrent stroke. Cardiology 
Today, 19(4), 28.
Swain, E., & Smart, F. (2015). LVADs can benefit patients with restrictive cardiomyopathy. 
Cardiology Today, 18(9), 26.
Swee, D. S., Chng, C. L., & Lim, A. (2015). Clinical characteristics and outcome of thyroid storm: 
a case series and review of neuropsychiatric derangements in thyrotoxicosis. Endocrine 
Practice, 21(2), 182–189.
Taghizadeh Larsson, A., & Österholm, J. H. (2014). How are decisions on care services for people 
with dementia made and experienced? A systematic review and qualitative synthesis of 
recent empirical findings. International Psychogeriatrics, 26(11), 1849–1862.
Tajima, K., Zheng, F., Collange, O., Barthel, G., Thornton, S. N., Longrois, D., . . . Mertes, P. M. 
(2013). Time to achieve target mean arterial pressure during resuscitation from 
experimental anaphylactic shock in an animal model. A comparison of adrenaline alone 
or in combination with different volume expanders. Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 41(6), 
765–773.
Talebi-Taher, M., Babazadeh, S., Barati, M., & Latifnia, M. (2014). Serum inflammatory markers 
in the elderly: Are they useful in differentiating sepsis from SIRS? Acta Medica Iranica, 52(6), 
438–442.
Tallarida, C. S., Bires, K., Avershal, J., Tallarida, R. J., Seo, S., & Rawls, S. M. (2014). Ethanol 
and cocaine: Environmental place conditioning, stereotypy, and synergism in planarians. 
Alcohol, 48(6), 579–586.
Tandon, N., Ali, M. K., & Narayan, K. M. (2012). Pharmacologic prevention of microvascular 
and macrovascular complications in diabetes mellitus: Implications of the results of recent 
clinical trials in type 2 diabetes. American Journal of Cardiovascular Drugs: Drugs, Devices, and 
Other Interventions, 12(1), 7–22.
Taniguchi, T., Morimoto, T., Shiomi, H., Ando, K., Kanamori, N., Murata, K., . . . Kimura, T. 
(2015). Initial surgical versus conservative strategies in patients with asymptomatic severe 
aortic stenosis. Journal of the American College of Cardiology, 66(25), 2827–2838.
Tarescavage, A. M., & Glassmire, D. M. (2016). Differences between structured interview of 
reported symptoms (SIRS) and SIRS-2 sensitivity estimates among forensic inpatients: 
A criterion groups comparison. Law and Human Behavior, 35(4). doi:10.1037/lhb0000191
Tashkin, D. P. (2012). Is it asthma, COPD, or something in between, and does it matter? 
Respiratory Care, 57(8), 1354–1356.
Tauro, R. (2014). Delirium awareness-improving recognition and management through 
education and use of a care pathway. BMJ Quality Improvement Reports, 2(2). doi:10.1136
/bmjquality.u203195.w1451.
Thachil, J. (2016). Antiplatelet therapy—a summary for the general physicians. Clinical Medicine, 
16(2), 152–160.
Thakore, R. V., Johnson, M. A. J., Krohel, G. B., & Johnson, Lenworth N. (2016). Pseudotumor 
cerebri: What we have learned from the idiopathic intracranial hypertension treatment 
trial. Medicine and Health Rhode Island, 99(5), 22–24.
Thenganatt, M. A., & Jankovic, J. (2014). Treatment of dystonia. Neurotherapeutics, 11(1), 
139–152.
Theron, A., Bodger, O., & Williams, D. (2014). Comparison of three techniques using the 
parkland formula to aid fluid resuscitation in adult burns. Emergency Medicine Journal, 
31(9), 730.
Thombs, B. D., & Ziegelstein, R. C. (2014). Does depression screening improve depression 
outcomes in primary care? British Medical Journal, 348. http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmj.g1253

370  ❙  References
Thompson, M. D., Kalmar, E., & Bowden, S. A. (2015). Severe hyponatraemia with absence of 
hyperkalaemia in rapidly progressive addison’s disease. BMJ Case Reports, 2015.
Thyregod, H. G. H., Steinbrüchel, D. A., Ihlemann, N., Nissen, H., Kjeldsen, B. J., Petursson, P., . . . 
Søndergaard, L. (2015). Transcatheter versus surgical aortic valve replacement in patients 
with severe aortic valve stenosis. Journal of the American College of Cardiology, 65(20), 
2184–2194.
Tiedje, V., Schlamann, M., Führer, D., & Moeller, L. C. (2013). Diabetes insipidus as a rare 
cause of acute cognitive impairment in multiple sclerosis. Multiple Sclerosis Journal, 19(12), 
1676–1678.
Tjernberg, A. R., Bonnedahl, J., & Ludvigsson, J. F. (2016). Does celiac disease influence survival 
in sepsis? A nationwide longitudinal study. PLoS ONE, 11(4). http://dx.doi.org/10.1371
/journal.pone.0154663.
Tomiyama, A. J., Epel, E. S., McClatchey, T. M., Poelke, G., Kemeny, M. E., McCoy, S. K., & 
Daubenmier, J. (2014). Associations of weight stigma with cortisol and oxidative stress 
independent of adiposity. Health Psychology, 33(8), 862–867.
Torkildsen, Ã., Power, Ã., & Storstein, A. (2016). Detection of varicella-zoster virus DNA during 
medullary and brainstem relapses in multiple sclerosis. BMJ Case Reports, 2016.
Towe, C., Solomon, B., Donington, J. S., & Pass, H. I. (2014). Treatment of recalcitrant 
subcutaneous emphysema using negative pressure wound therapy dressings. BMJ Case 
Reports, 2014.
Tricco, A. C., Soobiah, C., Berliner, Shirra, M., Ng, Carmen H., Ashoor, H. M., . . . Straus, S. E. 
(2013). Efficacy and safety of cognitive enhancers for patients with mild cognitive 
impairment: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Canadian Medical Association Journal, 
185(16), 1393–1401.
Tsai, Y., Hsu, C., Hsu, C., Liao, W., & Chen, S. (2016). Paraplegia caused by aortic coarctation 
complicated with spinal epidural hemorrhage. American Journal of Emergency Medicine, 34(3), 
680.e1–680.
Tsao, Y., Chen, J., & Tsai, W. (2015). Cardiac tamponade caused by paradoxical immune 
reconstitution inflammatory syndrome. American Journal of Emergency Medicine, 33(11), 
1712.e1–1712.
Tucker, D. L., Rockett, M., Hasan, M., Poplar, S., & Rule, S. A. (2015). Does transcutaneous 
electrical nerve stimulation (TENS) alleviate the pain experienced during bone marrow 
sampling in addition to standard techniques? A randomised, double-blinded, controlled 
trial. Journal of Clinical Pathology, 68(6), 479.
Un, H., Dogan, M., Uz, O., Isilak, Z., & Uzun, M. (2016). Novel vagal maneuver technique for 
termination of supraventricular tachycardias. American Journal of Emergency Medicine, 34(1), 
118.e5–118.
Urden, L. D., & Stacy, K. M. (2013). Thelan’s Critical Care Nursing Diagnosis. St. Louis, MO: Mosby.
Uysal, E., Acar, Y. A., Kutur, A., Cevik, E., Salman, N., & Tezel, O. (2016). How reliable are 
electrolyte and metabolite results measured by a blood gas analyzer in the ED? American 
Journal of Emergency Medicine, 34(3), 419–424.
Vahidi, E., Shakoor, D., Aghaie Meybodi, M., & Saeedi, M. (2015). Comparison of intravenous 
lidocaine versus morphine in alleviating pain in patients with critical limb ischaemia. 
Emergency Medicine Journal, 32(7), 516.
Vaidya, B., & Pearce, S. H. S. (2014). Diagnosis and management of thyrotoxicosis. British 
Medical Journal, 349.
Vaidya, R., Scott, A. N., Tonnos, F., Hudson, I., Martin, A. J., & Sethi, A. (2016). Patients with 
pelvic fractures from blunt trauma. what is the cause of mortality and when? American 
Journal of Surgery, 211(3), 495–500.
van der Heijden, M. M. P., van Dooren, F. E. P., Pop, V. J. M., & Pouwer, F. (2013). Effects of exercise 
training on quality of life, symptoms of depression, symptoms of anxiety and emotional well-
being in type 2 diabetes mellitus: A systematic review. Diabetologia, 56(6), 1210–1225.
Vatan, B., Akdemir, R., Cakar, M., Gunduz, H., & Varim, C. (2013). Immediate primary 
transcatheter closure of left ventricular free wall rupture after myocardial infarction. 
Cardiology, 125(2), 82–85.

References  ❙  371
Venkatesan, R., Methachittiphan, N., Berbarie, R. F., Aaron, E., Jaffery, Z., & Rangasetty, U. 
(2016). Late diagnosis of Wellens syndrome in a patient presenting with an atypical acute 
coronary syndrome. American Journal of Emergency Medicine, 34(2), 338.e3–338.
Verlinde, M., Hollmann, M. W., Stevens, M. F., Hermanns, H., Werdehausen, R., & Lirk, P. (2016). 
Local anesthetic-induced neurotoxicity. International Journal of Molecular Sciences, 17(3), 339.
Vijayvergiya, R., & Mehrotra, S. (2015). Acute hemodynamic deterioration during permanent 
pacemaker implantation. Heart, 101(11), 841.
Walcott-Sapp, S., Van Horn, J., PA-C, Phillips, B., P.A.-C., & Gee, A., M. D., PhD. (2016). Splenic 
hemorrhage at altitude in a patient with undiagnosed sickle-cell trait. American Surgeon, 
82(3), E63–E64.
Wald, R. M., Marie Valente, A., & Marelli, A. (2015). Heart failure in adult congenital heart 
disease: Emerging concepts with a focus on tetralogy of fallot. Trends in Cardiovascular 
Medicine, 25(5), 422–432.
Wallin, M. T., Wilken, J. A., Turner, A. P., Williams, R. M., & Kane, R. (2006). Depression and 
multiple sclerosis: Review of a lethal combination. Journal of Rehabilitation Research and 
Development, 43(1), 45–62.
Wang, C. L., Davenport, M. S., Chinnugounder, S., Schopp, J. G., Kani, K., Zaidi, S., . . . Bush, W. H. 
(2014). Errors of epinephrine administration during severe allergic-like contrast reactions: 
Lessons learned from a bi-institutional study using high-fidelity simulation testing. 
Abdominal Imaging, 39(5), 1127–1133.
Wang, C., & Ng, C. (2013). Spontaneous hemothorax following thrombolytic and anticoagulant 
therapy for massive pulmonary embolism. American Journal of Emergency Medicine, 
31(6), 999.
Wang, L., Wang, K., Gao, X., Paul, T. K., Cai, J., & Wang, Y. (2015). Sex difference in the 
association between obesity and asthma in U.S. adults: Findings from a national study. 
Respiratory Medicine, 109(8), 955–962.
Watcher, R. (2012). Understanding patient safety (2nd ed.). Los Altos, CA: Lange.
Watt, J. M., Amini, A., Traylor, B. R., Amini, R., Sakles, J. C., & Patanwala, A. E. (2013). Effect 
of paralytic type on time to post-intubation sedative use in the emergency department. 
Emergency Medicine Journal, 30(11), 893.
Webber, B., Panos, A., & Rodriguez-Blanco, Y. (2016). Intravenous thrombolytic therapy for 
patients with ventricular assist device thrombosis: An attempt to avoid reoperation. Annals 
of Cardiac Anaesthesia, 19(1), 192–196.
Weijmans, M., Van, D.G., de Borst, G. J., Asselbergs, F. W., Cramer, M. J., Algra, A., & Visseren, 
F. L. J. (2015). The relation between the presence of cardiovascular disease and vascular risk 
factors in offspring and the occurrence of new vascular events in their parents already at 
high vascular risk. American Heart Journal, 170(4), 744–752.
Weiss, T. J., Baker, R. H., Weiss, J. B., & Weiss, M. M. (2013). Simple screening test for Exercise-
Induced bronchospasm in the middle school athlete. Strategies, 26(6), 13–16.
Welte, T., Dellinger, R. P., Ebelt, H., Ferrer, M., Opal, S. M., Schliephake, D. E., . . . Torres, A. 
(2015). Concept for a study design in patients with severe community-acquired pneumonia: 
A randomised controlled trial with a novel IGM-enriched immunoglobulin preparation—the 
CIGMA study. Respiratory Medicine, 109(6), 758–767.
Whitlock, R. P., Devereaux, P. J., Teoh, K. H., Lamy, A., Vincent, J., Pogue, J., . . . Yusuf, S. (2015). 
Methylprednisolone in patients undergoing cardiopulmonary bypass (SIRS): A randomised, 
double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet, 386(10000), 1243–1253.
Wiig, H., Schröder, A., Neuhofer, W., Jantsch, J., Kopp, C., Karlsen, T. V., . . . Titze, J. (2013). 
Immune cells control skin lymphatic electrolyte homeostasis and blood pressure. Journal of 
Clinical Investigation, 123(7), 2803–2815.
Wong, A., Benedict, N. J., & Kane-Gill, S. (2015). Multicenter evaluation of pharmacologic 
management and outcomes associated with severe resistant alcohol withdrawal. Journal of 
Critical Care, 30(2), 405–409.
Wong, G. R., Scherer, D. J., Nelson, A. J., & Worthley, M. I. (2016). Non-traumatic spinal 
intradural haematoma: A rare case of paralysis following abciximab for ST elevation acute 
coronary syndrome. BMJ Case Reports, 2016.

372  ❙  References
Wright, L. S., & Wilson, L. (2015). Quality of life and self-efficacy in three dialysis modalities: 
Incenter hemodialysis, home hemodialysis, and home peritoneal dialysis. Nephrology 
Nursing Journal, 42(5), 463–477.
Ximenes, R. O., Scalabrini, N. A., Diniz, M., Kubota, G. T., Ivo, M., . . . Daglius Dias, R. (2016). 
Patients with cirrhosis in the ED: Early predictors of infection and mortality. American Journal 
of Emergency Medicine, 34(1), 25–29.
Xiong, B., Wang, C., Yao, Y., Huang, Y., Tan, J., Cao, Y., . . . Huang, J. (2015). The dose-dependent 
effect of nesiritide on renal function in patients with acute decompensated heart failure: 
A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. PLoS ONE, 10(6), 
e0131326. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0131326
Xu, C., Qiao, Z., Lu, Y., Zhang, D., Jia, Z., Zhuang, X., . . . Shen, J. (2015). Influence of fatty liver 
on the severity and clinical outcome in acute pancreatitis. PLoS ONE, 10(11), e0142278. 
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0142278
Yang, B., Xu, J., Xu, F., Zou, Z., Ye, C., Mei, C., & Mao, Z. (2014). Intravascular administration of 
mannitol for acute kidney injury prevention: A systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS 
ONE, 9(1), e85029. http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0085029
Yazji, K., Kakhi, S., Ossei-Gerning, N., Choudhury, A., Anderson, R., & Kinnaird, T. (2015). 
Complex disease, partial revascularization, and adverse outcomes in patients treated with 
long-term warfarin therapy who underwent percutaneous coronary intervention. American 
Journal of Cardiology, 116(3), 350–354.
Yeganehkhah, M., Iranirad, L., Dorri, F., Pazoki, S., Akbari, H., Miryounesi, M., . . . 
Vafaeimanesh, J. (2014). Comparison between three supportive treatments for prevention 
of contrast-induced nephropathy in high-risk patients undergoing coronary angiography. 
Saudi Journal of Kidney Diseases and Transplantation, 25(6), 1217–1223.
Yoshitaka, S., Egi, M., Morimatsu, H., Kanazawa, T., Toda, Y., & Morita, K. (2013). Perioperative 
plasma melatonin concentration in postoperative critically ill patients: Its association with 
delirium. Journal of Critical Care, 28(3), 236–242.
Yusipovich, A. I., Braze, N. A., Luneva, O. G., Parshina, E. Y., Churin, A. A., Rodnenkov, O. V., & 
Maksimov, G. V. (2013). Changes in the state of hemoglobin in patients with coronary heart 
disease and patients with circulatory failure. Bulletin of Experimental Biology and Medicine, 
155(2), 233–235.
Zada, G., Tirosh, A., Huang, A. P., Laws, E. R., & Woodmansee, W. W. (2013). The postoperative 
cortisol stress response following transsphenoidal pituitary surgery: A potential screening 
method for assessing preserved pituitary function. Pituitary, 16(3), 319–325.
Zahn, G., Hauck, M., Pearson, D., Green, J. M., & Heffner, A. C. (2015). Major hemorrhage 
from hepatic laceration after cardiopulmonary resuscitation. American Journal of Emergency 
Medicine, 33(7), 991.e3–991.
Zakhari, R. (2014). Ethylene glycol poisoning: Resolution of cranial nerve deficit. Journal for 
Nurse Practitioners, 10(8), 616–619.
Zalucky, A. A., Nicholl, D. D. M., Hanly, P. J., Poulin, M. J., Turin, T. C., Walji, S., . . . Ahmed, 
S. B. (2015). Nocturnal hypoxemia severity and renin-angiotensin system activity in 
obstructive sleep apnea. American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, 192(7), 
873–880.
Zarar, A., Khan, A. A., Adil, M. M., & Qureshi, A. I. (2014). Anaphylactic shock associated with 
intravenous thrombolytics. American Journal of Emergency Medicine, 32(1), 113.e3–115.
Zeiger, R. S., Schatz, M., Dalal, A. A., Qian, L., Chen, W., Ngor, E. W., . . . Kawatkar, A. A. (2016). 
Utilization and costs of severe uncontrolled asthma in a managed-care setting. Journal of 
Allergy and Clinical Immunology.in Practice, 4(1), 120–129.
Zeppenfeld, V., & Cohen, D. (2013). Sublimation, culture, and creativity. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 105(4), 639–666.
Zhan, Z., Wang, C., & Wang, Z. (2015). Diagnosing acute pulmonary embolism masquerading as 
inferior myocardial infarction. American Journal of Emergency Medicine, 33(8), 1114.e5–1114.

References  ❙  373
Zhang, B., Liu, T., Wang, W., Zhang, X., Fan, S., Liu, Z., . . . Wu, X. (2014). A prospective 
randomly controlled clinical trial on azithromycin therapy for induction treatment of 
children with nephrotic syndrome. European Journal of Pediatrics, 173(4), 509–515.
Zhang, D., Shen, X., & Qi, X. (2016). Resting heart rate and all-cause and cardiovascular 
mortality in the general population: A meta-analysis. Canadian Medical Association Journal, 
188(3), E53–E63.
Zhang, G-l., Zhang, T., Ye, Y-n., Liu, J., Zhang, X-h., Xie, C., . . . & Gao, Z-l. (2016). 
Complement factor 3 could be an independent risk factor for mortality in patients with 
hbv related acute-on-chronic liver failure, BioMed Research International, 2016, 1–10. 
doi:10.1155/2016/3524842
Zhang, J., Lin, H., Yu, C., Peng, H., & Bai, R. (2013). Multiple autoimmune syndrome revealed by 
nephrogenic diabetes insipidus and hypokalaemic paralysis. Lupus, 22(11), 1178–1181.
Zhang, J., Wang, S., Hong, J., Liu, C., & Jiang, Y. (2015). New potential solutions for the 
chemolysis of urinary phosphate calculi determined by an in vitro study. Urolithiasis, 43(2), 
147–153.
Zhang, Z. G., & Chopp, M. (2016). Exosomes in stroke pathogenesis and therapy. Journal of 
Clinical Investigation, 126(4), 1190–1197.
Zhang, Z., Su, X., & Liu, C. (2015). Cardiac arrest with anaphylactic shock: A successful 
resuscitation using extracorporeal membrane oxygenation. American Journal of Emergency 
Medicine, 33(1), 130.e3–130.
Zhang, Z., Su, X., Liu, C., Song, D., Peng, J., Wu, M., . . . Wang, F. (2016). Thrombolysis during 
continuous chest compression in a patient with cardiac arrest due to pulmonary embolism: 
Prolonged CPR-induced spinal cord injury. American Journal of Emergency Medicine, 34(3), 
681.e3–681.
Zhao, X., Yu, Y., Xu, W., Dong, L., Wang, Y., Gao, B., . . . Zhang, W. (2016). Apolipoprotein 
A1-unique peptide as a diagnostic biomarker for acute ischemic stroke. International 
Journal of Molecular Sciences, 17(4), 458.
Zhu, W., Gregory, J. C., Elin O. E., Buffa, J. A., Nilaksh G., Zeneng, W., . . . Hazen, S. L. (2016). 
Gut microbial metabolite TMAO enhances platelet hyperactivity and thrombosis risk. 
Cardiology Today, 165(1), 111–124.

