www.allitebooks.com

Learning Xero
 
 
 
 
 
 
Learn to use Xero to make bookkeeping tasks simple and
gain valuable business insights effortlessly
 
 
 
 
 
Jon Jenkins
 
       BIRMINGHAM - MUMBAI
www.allitebooks.com

Learning Xero
 
Copyright © 2016 Packt Publishing
 
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or
transmitted in any form or by any means, without the prior written permission of the
publisher, except in the case of brief quotations embedded in critical articles or reviews.
Every effort has been made in the preparation of this book to ensure the accuracy of the
information presented. However, the information contained in this book is sold without
warranty, either express or implied. Neither the author, nor Packt Publishing, and its
dealers and distributors will be held liable for any damages caused or alleged to be caused
directly or indirectly by this book.
Packt Publishing has endeavored to provide trademark information about all of the
companies and products mentioned in this book by the appropriate use of capitals.
However, Packt Publishing cannot guarantee the accuracy of this information.
First published: February 2016
Production reference: 1250216
Published by Packt Publishing Ltd.
Livery Place
35 Livery Street
Birmingham 
B3 2PB, UK.
ISBN 978-1-78588-376-7
www.packtpub.com
www.allitebooks.com

Credits
Author
 
Jon Jenkins
 
 
Copy Editor
 
Merilyn Pereira 
Reviewer
 
Amy Harper
 
 
Project Coordinator
 
 Bijal Patel
 
 
Acquisition Editor
 
Vinay Argekar  
Proofreader
 
Safis Editing
 
 
 
Content Development Editor
 
Onkar Wani  
 
Indexer
 
Rekha Nair
 
 
Technical Editor
 
Vivek Arora  
 
Production Coordinator
 
Conidon Miranda
 
 
 
www.allitebooks.com

Foreword
Until quite recently, software had undergone a rather pedestrian process of evolution from
the earliest personal productivity tools of the PC era, to enabling team collaboration thanks
to the emergence of low cost networking in the 1990s, and then lastly through the era of the
first internet-aware software, which enabled organizational software like CRM. But around
the mid-point of the last decade, something very interesting began to happen in the world
of software that went on to create an unprecedented explosion in form, function, and sheer
volume of choice in the world of software that we live in today.
In 2011, Marc Andreessen, founder of Netscape (the world's first web browser), insightfully
encapsulated the factors behind this new era of software in his Wall Street Journal article,
Why Software Is Eating The World—"Six decades into the computer revolution, four decades since
the invention of the microprocessor, and two decades into the rise of the modern Internet, all of the
technology required to transform industries through software finally works and can be widely
delivered at global scale."
There has never been a time when we've had more choice in software nor has the capability
and usefulness of software ever been greater.
What's possibly even more interesting about this new world is that the biggest beneficiaries
will not be the mega-corporations who possess the huge amounts of capital necessary to
benefit from the earlier generations of software, but the millions of small and medium
sized businesses (SMBs) in the UK.
The productivity of our SMBs matters a great deal more than you might realize. SMBs
contribute to more than half of the UK's national gross domestic product every year and
account for almost three quarters of employment. And it's among this vital economic
community that modern, powerful software has finally found a home in the village shop,
the five person design studio, and the small town roofing contractor, which makes me
incredibly optimistic about the decades ahead when we'll finally see millions of great
British businesses unlocking their true potential with great software.
Of course, software on its own isn't enough and so before the UK's millions of business
owners and managers can hope to benefit from this new era, they first need to grasp what it
means practically, and how they might approach harnessing it. And it is in this regard that
the author of this book, Jon Jenkins, is well qualified having helped hundreds of small
businesses adapt to and embrace cloud software. As managing director at Xero, I first
met Jon around 5 years ago and was struck by both his passion and his clarity of vision
about the potential cloud software had for transforming the productivity of small
www.allitebooks.com

businesses in particular and it has been a pleasure to observe Jon go on to help, coach, and
advise many hundreds of companies since that time.
This book is the distillation of Jon's own expertise and ability together with countless
practical insights gained through working with all those companies and business owners.
 
Gary Turner
Managing Director, Xero
www.allitebooks.com

About the Author
Jon Jenkins graduated from Oxford Brookes University, Oxford, United Kingdom, in 2007
with a bachelor of science degree in applied accounting. He has been a certified chartered
accountant since 2006 at the age of just 25.  Jon began working in 1999 with Allied Leisure
PLC and quickly rose up the career ladder using passion and drive to improve processes,
procedures, and systems.  Seeing the difference small incremental changes could make to
businesses, each subsequent job has been all about improving processes, procedures, and
systems, and it is these experiences that have culminated in him writing this book. In 2011,
he founded a company called Smart Accountancy Systems focused on client care and a
wider range of services using cloud accounting software.  Jon holds regular seminars for
businesses wanting to explore or discover the possibilities of how the cloud can increase
productivity, profitability, and provide better job satisfaction. He is also the cofounder and
CEO of Hindsight, a new software development and Xero add-on, which enables advisors
to get even better business insight into client affairs so they can raise their service level yet
another notch.
 
I would like to thank Packt Publishing for enabling me to publish this book. I never
thought that I would be in a position to do such a thing.
I would also like to express my gratitude to Emma Chen and my children for their love,
patience, and support, not just during the time I have taken away to write this book, but in
the many late nights and long weekends that have been given up for me to follow my
passion. I hope that one day I am able to repay the favor.
Finally, a big thank you to Amy Harper for reviewing the book and pointing out my errors
sometimes! Without her support, we would not have gotten this over the line.
www.allitebooks.com

About the Reviewer
Amy Harper has been working in accountancy for a number of years within the industry
and in practice roles. Her main focus has been working with small- to medium-sized
businesses helping them grow and develop using current and accurate accounting data. She
believes the introduction of Xero has dramatically changed the way accountants now works
and it has enabled clients to be much more in touch with the actual performance of their
businesses.
Amy currently works at Smart Accountancy Systems as a finance manager delivering
management accounts, cashflows, and budgets to a portfolio of clients.
 
I would like to thank my husband for supporting me in my career and for being a great
sounding board for my ideas.
www.allitebooks.com

www.PacktPub.com
For support files and downloads related to your book, please visit www.PacktPub.com.
Did you know that Packt offers eBook versions of every book published, with PDF and
ePub files available? You can upgrade to the eBook version at www.PacktPub.com and as a
print book customer, you are entitled to a discount on the eBook copy. Get in touch with us
at service@packtpub.com for more details.
At www.PacktPub.com, you can also read a collection of free technical articles, sign up for a
range of free newsletters and receive exclusive discounts and offers on Packt books and
eBooks.
h t t p s : / / w w w 2 . p a c k t p u b . c o m / b o o k s / s u b s c r i p t i o n / p a c k t l i b
Do you need instant solutions to your IT questions? PacktLib is Packt's online digital book
library. Here, you can search, access, and read Packt's entire library of books.
Why subscribe?
Fully searchable across every book published by Packt
Copy and paste, print, and bookmark content
On demand and accessible via a web browser
Free access for Packt account holders
If you have an account with Packt at www.PacktPub.com, you can use this to access
PacktLib today and view 9 entirely free books. Simply use your login credentials for
immediate access.
www.allitebooks.com

Table of Contents
Preface
1
Chapter 1: Setting Up Xero for Success
5
Initial configuration
5
Setup Guide
6
Organization Settings
8
Financial Settings
10
Financial Year End
10
VAT
10
Invoice Settings
11
Invite users
12
Permission levels
13
Edit permission levels
15
Currencies
15
Chart of Accounts
16
Xero default Chart of Accounts
16
Add/edit account
18
Add a bank account
19
Change tax rate
20
Import Chart of Accounts
21
Account balances
22
Conversion balances
23
Process
23
Import invoices
24
Comparative balances
25
Summary
25
Chapter 2: Breaking the Bank
26
Bank overview
26
Dashboard
26
Bank feeds
28
Refresh feed
31
Import statements
32
Petty cash
32
Loan account
35
Credit cards
35
www.allitebooks.com

[ ii ]
Add a card
35
Common issues
36
PayPal
37
Add a feed
37
Bank rules
38
Add bank rules
39
Edit bank rules
41
Re-order bank rules
42
Bank reconciliation
42
Auto Suggest
42
Find & Match
43
Create
45
Bank transfers
45
Discuss and comments
46
Reconciliation Report
46
Manual reconciliation
48
Common errors and corrections
48
Account not reconciling
49
Duplicated statement lines
49
Missing statement lines
50
Remove & Redo
50
Manually marked as reconciled
51
Understanding reports
52
Summary
53
Chapter 3: Using Xero to Excel at Sales
54
Dashboard
54
Adding a contact
56
Importing contacts
57
Generating an invoice – standard
57
Inventory items
59
Generating an invoice – repeating
62
Editing invoices
63
Groups
63
E-mail
64
Xero Network Key
64
Number sequence
65
Importing
66
Invoice branding
66
Defaults
67

[ iii ]
Contact-specific
67
Word
67
Credit notes
68
Allocation
68
Summary
68
Chapter 4: Learning Xero Purchases
69
Dashboard
69
Add contacts
71
Import
71
Edit contacts
72
Purchasing
74
Standard bills
74
Inventory items
76
Repeating bills
78
Xero Network Key
79
Batch payments
80
Credit notes
80
Allocation
82
Summary
83
Chapter 5: Processing Payroll
84
Basic payroll setup 
84
Setting up payroll accounts
85
Setting up Pay Calendars
87
Setting up Tax Information
89
Setting up Pay Items
91
Adding employees
91
Entering personal details
92
Entering employment details
94
Entering tax details
95
Setting up auto enrolment
95
Entering opening balances
96
Creating a Pay Template
97
My payroll
98
Payroll overview
99
Processing payrolls
100
Approving time off
100
Process Pay Run 
101
Processing amendments
102

[ iv ]
Confirming Pay Run 
103
Making employee payments
103
Paying HMRC
104
Issuing payslips
104
End-of-period reports
104
Claiming statutory payments
105
Employment allowance
105
Sending an FPS – full payment submission
106
Sending an EPS – employer payment summary
106
CIS deductions
106
Summary
108
Chapter 6: Xero Expenses and Xero Touch
109
Expense Claims
109
Process
109
Add Receipt
111
Edit/delete
113
Submit
113
Tabs and statuses
114
Mileage
116
Xero Touch
118
Downloading
118
Dashboard
118
Bank reconciliation
119
Invoicing
120
Expenses
120
Contacts
121
Summary
122
Chapter 7: Managing Inventory
123
Which inventory
123
Untracked inventory
124
Tracked inventory
126
Changing methods
127
Untracked to tracked
127
Tracked to untracked
128
Add-ons
128
Inventory items
129
Import
129
Opening balances
130

[ v ]
Troubleshooting
131
Editing
131
Exporting
132
Deleting
132
Accounting
133
Inventory
133
Sales
135
Cost of goods sold
136
Monitor inventory
138
The inventory item details
138
The inventory items list
138
Sales by item
138
The inventory items summary report
139
Summary
139
Chapter 8: Real-Time Reporting
140
Report center
140
Favorites
141
Draft/Published/Filed/Archived
142
Draft
142
Published
143
Filed with HMRC
144
Archived
145
Export
145
Performance reports
145
Profit & Loss
146
Sales by Item
148
Position reports
149
Balance Sheet
150
Aged Receivables
150
Aged Payables
151
Budget Manager
152
Add/Edit
152
Run scenarios
154
Import/export
154
Reporting
155
Budget summary
155
Budget Variance
155
Profit and loss in the current financial year
156
Detail reports
156

[ vi ]
Account transactions
156
Trial Balance
156
Amending reports
157
Move and group
157
Common changes
160
Defaults
161
Summary
161
Chapter 9: Supercharging Xero with Add-ons
162
Xero add-ons
163
The Xero Marketplace
163
The Xero community
165
The Xero LinkedIn group
166
The Xero API and bespoke work
167
Managing Xero add-ons
167
Selecting add-ons
168
Receipt Bank
168
Float
170
Satago
172
Fathom
175
Financial analysis
176
Consolidations
177
Compare and benchmark
177
Hindsight
178
Summary
180
Chapter 10: Xero Tips and Tricks
181
Login
181
Google Apps
181
Browser
182
Password vaults
183
Help
183
Demo Company
184
Help Centre
184
Contact Xero Support
187
Ask my adviser
187
Other tips and tricks
188
Lock dates
188
Multiple tabs
189
Multiple organizations
189

[ vii ]
Search
190
Shortcut keys
190
Xero TV and training
191
Small Business Guides
191
Xero TV
191
Xero Training
192
Summary
192
Index
193

Preface
The way in which we work is changing beyond all recognition and this change is unlike
anything we will see again in our working lifetime. The change is being driven by
technology and software. You can embrace it and use it to your advantage or you can be
swallowed up and spat out.
The idea behind this book is to give you an insight into how you could be working and
saving yourself a whole bunch of time to get your life back. Do you really want to spend
your life chained to your desk? I don't think so.
Throughout this book, we will guide you through the way in which you should do your
bookkeeping using Xero and how to get the best from the system. Whether you are an
experienced bookkeeper or a business owner, we hope to enlighten you to the possibilities
that online accounting software offers you.
There is only one constant in business and that is change. Use this book as a catalyst to
change the way in which you work.
What this book covers
Chapter 1, Setting up Xero for Success, guides you through how to set up Xero correctly to
get the most from the system from day one.
Chapter 2, Breaking the Bank, introduces the reader to the joys of automated bank feeds
which some say is the greatest thing since sliced bread.
Chapter 3, Using Xero to Excel at Sales, walks you through how to get those invoices out of
the door in the most efficient manner.
Chapter 4, Learning Xero Purchases, teaches you how to manage your suppliers' bills and
keep on top of paying them on time.
Chapter 5, Processing Payroll in Xero, introduces you to the latest edition of the Xero
product enabling you to pay your employees and deal with autoenrolment pension
obligations.
Chapter 6, Xero Expenses and Xero Touch, ensures there is no excuse for losing receipts and
missing out on claiming back your tax-free money.

Preface
[ 2 ]
Chapter 7, Managing Inventory, helps you to keep track of all those widgets you buy and
sell in your business and maintain accurate accounting records effortlessly.
Chapter 8, Real-Time Reporting, concludes that it is possibly one of the greatest inventions
of modern time. No more waiting until the end of the month or year to see where you are
today.
Chapter 9, Supercharging Xero with Add-ons, states that if Xero is the greatest thing since
sliced bread, the add-on ecosystem is the butter and jam. Accounting is no longer a dirty
word in most offices with seamless integrations to other products.
Chapter 10, Xero Tips and Tricks, tells you that a party's not a party without a few things to
wow your audience. I guarantee there will be something you can all learn from this last
chapter.
What you need for this book
The great thing about SaaS products is the essence of their simplicity for an end user. As
such, all you need to get the most from this book is a subscription to Xero and the Internet.
It really is that simple.
Who this book is for
It is intended for those who want to learn how to use Xero to get better insights from their
business data and learn the best practices of bookkeeping using Xero. Perhaps you have
never used Xero, or perhaps you want to migrate from an existing accounting application to
Xero. In either case, this book will get you up and running quickly. It would be useful to
have a bit of familiarity with basic bookkeeping concepts, but no prior experience of Xero is
required.
Conventions
In this book, you will find a number of text styles that distinguish between different kinds
of information. Here are some examples of these styles and an explanation of their meaning.
Code words in text, database table names, folder names, filenames, file extensions,
pathnames, dummy URLs, user input, and Twitter handles are shown as follows: "I would
recommend using the Xero Help Guide and searching Import a Bank Statement to get
the file formatted correctly."

Preface
[ 3 ]
New terms and important words are shown in bold. Words that you see on the screen, for
example, in menus or dialog boxes, appear in the text like this: "At this point, you may as
well complete the Setup Guide by clicking on Next and then Finish."
 
Warnings or important notes appear in a box like this.
Tips and tricks appear like this.
Reader feedback
Feedback from our readers is always welcome. Let us know what you think about this
book-what you liked or disliked. Reader feedback is important for us as it helps us develop
titles that you will really get the most out of.
To send us general feedback, simply e-mail feedback@packtpub.com, and mention the
book's title in the subject of your message.
If there is a topic that you have expertise in and you are interested in either writing or
contributing to a book, see our author guide at www.packtpub.com/authors.
Customer support
Now that you are the proud owner of a Packt book, we have a number of things to help you
to get the most from your purchase.
Downloading the color images of this book 
 Downloading the color images of this book  We also provide you with a PDF file that has
color images of the screenshots/diagrams used in this book. The color images will help you
better understand the changes in the output. You can download this file from: h t t p s : / / w w
w . p a c k t p u b . c o m / s i t e s / d e f a u l t / f i l e s / d o w n l o a d s / L e a r n i n g X e r o _ C o l o r e d I m a g e s
. p d f.

Preface
[ 4 ]
Errata
Although we have taken every care to ensure the accuracy of our content, mistakes do
happen. If you find a mistake in one of our books-maybe a mistake in the text or the code-
we would be grateful if you could report this to us. By doing so, you can save other readers
from frustration and help us improve subsequent versions of this book. If you find any
errata, please report them by visiting h t t p : / / w w w . p a c k t p u b . c o m / s u b m i t - e r r a t a,
selecting your book, clicking on the Errata Submission Form link, and entering the details
of your errata. Once your errata are verified, your submission will be accepted and the
errata will be uploaded to our website or added to any list of existing errata under the
Errata section of that title.
To view the previously submitted errata, go to h t t p s : / / w w w . p a c k t p u b . c o m / b o o k s / c o n
t e n t / s u p p o r t and enter the name of the book in the search field. The required information
will appear under the Errata section.
Piracy
Piracy of copyrighted material on the Internet is an ongoing problem across all media. At
Packt, we take the protection of our copyright and licenses very seriously. If you come
across any illegal copies of our works in any form on the Internet, please provide us with
the location address or website name immediately so that we can pursue a remedy.
Please contact us at copyright@packtpub.com with a link to the suspected pirated
material.
We appreciate your help in protecting our authors and our ability to bring you valuable
content.
Questions
If you have a problem with any aspect of this book, you can contact us
at questions@packtpub.com, and we will do our best to address the problem.
www.allitebooks.com

1
Setting Up Xero for Success
Throughout this chapter, we will cover the Xero core settings to make sure you are getting
the most from Xero. Setting Xero up properly will save you time in the long run and ensure
you get the best out of it from day one. Think of this book as a concentrated version of the
instruction manual. You'll get to know about the best bits without the hard work. We'll
begin by running through the Xero Setup Guide, each section in this chapter also doubles as
help for that section within the General Settings. So, if you have already completed the
Setup Guide, you can still work through this chapter using general settings within Xero. It
also means you can refer back to this chapter at a later date should you wish to edit your
settings.
These are the topics we'll be covering in this chapter:
Configuring the initial set up of Xero
Using settings to navigate Xero and find the main menu settings
Setting up Xero for initial use and adding new users
Setting up the default settings
Initial configuration
This initial section covers what to do when setting up your Xero organization, so if you
have already completed this, well done. Please do not ignore this section as you may find
something that needs tweaking, and it is better to get it right now than when you have
started posting transactions.

Setting Up Xero for Success
[ 6 ]
When going through the initial configuration, you will be asked some basic information,
such as the name of the organization and where you pay taxes. You will be asked to choose
a plan that relates to the functionality you need. You can upgrade or downgrade at a later
date should you find your existing plan no longer fits your requirements. Finally, you will
need to enter your debit or credit card details for payment purposes. You will be billed
monthly, and the amount will be taken by your provided card. If you have other Xero
subscriptions already at this point, you will also be given the option to add the bill to your
current billing account, which means you will get one invoice and make one payment per
month covering all Xero organizations you have.
Setup Guide
We have devised this chapter to walk you through the Setup Guide, but please note that
each section of the Setup Guide is included in the Xero settings in its own right, so you can
work through the entire process by yourself. Or, if you have already done the initial setup,
you can just refer to the individual section in this chapter that relates to the Settings option
you need.
At any point, you can update or amend the Organisation Settings using the top menu
within Xero. Just go to Settings | General Settings | Organisation Settings. It is worth
taking a look at this after completing the Setup Guide as there are other options available
that are not completed during the Setup Guide, such as adding your business logo. There
are also several other options as to what contact details you can add, such as Skype and
DDI.
For settings that you wish to use on a regular basis, you can attach them to the Settings
submenu as a Favourite by clicking on the star icon next to the setting you wish to appear
as such. To remove the favorite, simply click on the star next to that setting option as
depicted in the following screenshot. This makes navigation a bit quicker.

Setting Up Xero for Success
[ 7 ]
If you are setting up a new organization, you will be ready to enter the Setup Guide, which
looks like this:
As you can see, there is a series of settings to tackle as depicted by the menu, but don't
worry, you do not have to complete this all in one go, and some of it will not be relevant to
you.
From the start screen, you will see an option to watch a guide to the setup process, and we
recommend that you watch at least the The Quick Start Guide video before starting:

Setting Up Xero for Success
[ 8 ]
There are links to other frequently asked questions that you can read, but we would suggest
at this point you dive in as you will be guided through each part of the Setup Guide in this
chapter.
When you are ready, click on Next to carry on. You will now see at the bottom of the page
you have the Back and Next buttons, and you can also Save and Quit, so you may come
back to complete the Setup Guide later. You do not have to complete the process in one
session, but you do have to complete it before you can start processing data.
Should you wish to move a bit more quickly, simply click through Next to get to the end
and start using the system. You can update the settings later, but just remember that what
you are asked for in the Setup Guide is the bare minimum for getting Xero ready. If you
have the information at hand, you may as well go over it now rather than miss something
important.
Organization Settings
The first section is all about your organization's details, and you can complete as much or as
little as you like. At this point, please note that what you enter here will appear on an online
invoice generated by Xero, so if you are a limited company and it is a legal requirement to
have the registered office address and company registration number on your form, do it
here.

Setting Up Xero for Success
[ 9 ]
The social links at the bottom of the Organization Settings page will also appear on online
invoices that are linked to your profiles, giving customers the ability to follow, share, and
connect.
You are guided through each section in the Setup Guide, and the part you are in is
highlighted green. This also refers to the section headings in this chapter and what the items
are called in the Xero's General Settings for ease of use. After entering the Organisation
Settings and clicking on Next, you will be asked if the business is VAT registered before
continuing to enter the Financial Settings. Click on Yes or No to continue.

Setting Up Xero for Success
[ 10 ]
Financial Settings
Financial Settings are where some of the more serious stuff sits, so please be careful what
you touch in here. We highly recommend that you are cautious and make sure you
understand the implications of changing Financial Settings before doing so. In the
following sections, we highlight a few of the major ones to watch out for.
Financial Year End
Select the Financial Year End for your organization using the dropdowns provided. It is
important to get this right as this will drive the reporting side of Xero in terms of calculating
your year-to-date figures:
If you don't know what your financial year end is, we suggest taking a look at your latest
set of accounts or checking with your accountant. You can change this under Financial
Settings later as it is not uncommon for a company to change its financial year end.
VAT
Xero can handle all the standard VAT schemes as highlighted in the following screenshot.
Keep in mind that should you change your VAT scheme, it is important to follow HMRC
guidance in terms of what you need to do on the next VAT return as Xero does not
automatically do this for you.

Setting Up Xero for Success
[ 11 ]
It is imperative that you get your VAT scheme correct; otherwise, you may have issues
reconciling your VAT control account and getting your first VAT return in Xero correct. It
may look right, but it might not include all the transactions you need, especially if you are
on a Cash Scheme, so make sure that the opening Receivables and Payables you enter have
VAT split out. If you are unsure of your VAT scheme, look at the settings in your previous
system and use the same VAT scheme, or speak to your accountant.
Be careful when moving to or from the Flat Rate Scheme as Xero does not automatically
change the VAT codes assigned to the account code, so you will need to do that manually
from within the Chart of Accounts settings.
It is important to add the VAT number within Financial Settings as this drives the VAT
number that appears on your sales invoices. It is an HMRC requirement for your sales
invoices to include your VAT number if you are VAT registered. The VAT number must be
entered if you wish to submit your VAT return directly to HMRC from within Xero.
Invoice Settings
What you can complete during the Setup Guide in terms of the Invoice Settings is limited
in relation to what you need to do, so we would suggest that when the option comes up to
do this, you skip this section by clicking the No, skip this step button:

Setting Up Xero for Success
[ 12 ]
Once you have completed the Setup Guide, go to Settings | General Settings | Invoice
Settings, where you can then complete your invoice template and default invoice settings,
such as your invoice number sequence.
Invite users
At this point in the Setup Guide, we would not recommend you invite users because you
are not finished yet. It makes more sense to invite people to the party when it's ready to
start, unless you need help setting up, of course. We would, in most instances, suggest
reaching for the No, skip this step button.
Once you have completed the Setup Guide, you can invite users from Settings | General
Settings | Users. It is as simple as adding their name and e-mail address and selecting the
relevant permissions:

Setting Up Xero for Success
[ 13 ]
One of the best things about using cloud software such as Xero is you are not normally
limited by the number of users you can have (if you are using other software, please check).
There are no additional license fees for Xero; it is one simple monthly charge regardless of
the number of users. This means you can now stop and take stock of what you get people
within the business to do.
You have an opportunity to make the business more efficient and allow people to enter
their own expenses, and answer any customer queries or self-serve reports they may need.
There are plenty of options in terms of what people can see and process, so it is important to
review each user role in turn to ensure there is something that meets your requirements
before changing all your internal processes.
Permission levels
There are so many different user role combinations and different editions in Xero as it is
extremely flexible, but that also means it can be difficult to determine who can do what.

Setting Up Xero for Success
[ 14 ]
Refer to the Help section in Xero, which can be found by clicking on the question mark in
the upper-right corner and typing in the search box what you are looking for:
We highly recommend that you look at information on user roles in the Help section, as
shown in the following screenshot:
The top two articles are of particular importance and contain some very useful comparison
tables. At this point, it is also worth pointing out that many of the Xero add-ons available
through the Xero Marketplace will require standard or adviser access for full functionality,
so make sure you consider this when making decisions about user roles.
www.allitebooks.com

Setting Up Xero for Success
[ 15 ]
Edit permission levels
Some user roles are only available as part of the Partner Edition, the Partner Edition being
the solution provided to accounting partners who sell directly to the end users. There are
versions of the software only available via a Xero Partner using the Partner Edition.
To edit a user's permission level, simply navigate back to Settings | General Settings
| Users, and then select the user you wish to edit. You will be presented with the following
screen, which will allow you to update the options available and then click on Save. The
user's access will now be changed. Should you wish to delete a user, click on the Delete
User button in the bottom left-hand corner of the screen. Think carefully about the role you
provide to users. In most instances, you will only want management and advisors to have
the adviser role, for example.
Currencies
Xero has full multi-currency capabilities, and throughout the Setup Guide, you may decide
to switch this on by adding a different currency or two. The edition of Xero you subscribed
to at the very beginning will determine whether this option is available. If you are operating
multi-currencies for sales invoicing, bank accounts, or supplier invoices, now is as good a
time as any to turn them on:

Setting Up Xero for Success
[ 16 ]
Simply click on the Add Currency button and then choose the currency you wish to add to
Xero using the drop-down option. When you use Xero, it uses the exchange rate from h t t p
: / / w w w . x e . c o m /, which is updated automatically every hour, so you know you are always
using the most recent exchange rate. Should you desire, this can be overridden when
posting transactions.
If you decide you would like to do this later, you can do so by going to Settings | General
Settings | Currencies.
Chart of Accounts
Getting the Chart of Accounts set up correctly is fundamental to having a good experience
using any accounting system. Xero gives you a couple of options here, and we have broken
them down into using the Xero default Chart of Accounts and importing a Chart of
Accounts. Before implementing either option, we would suggest reading both and then
making a decision on which is the best fit for your organization.
Xero default Chart of Accounts
In most instances, using the default Chart of Accounts provided by Xero will be perfectly
acceptable, and you can make changes later should you wish. It is quick and easy; simply
click on Use the default Chart of Accounts provided by Xero option, as shown in the
following screenshot, and then click on Next:

Setting Up Xero for Success
[ 17 ]
Your Chart of Accounts will be generated and look similar to the following screenshot. The
tax rate used will be based on your selection about VAT in the Financial Settings section.

Setting Up Xero for Success
[ 18 ]
Add/edit account
Before you confirm your Chart of Accounts, whether using the Xero default or your own
imported version, you will need to check it over, and at this stage, it is a great opportunity
to edit anything that needs updating.
From the Chart of Accounts, simply click on the Name of the account, which is a blue
hyperlink:
This will then take you into the Account Details, where you can make any adjustments. In
the following screenshot, you'll see that you can amend the Account Type, which
determines where the account will sit amongst reports, and on the right-hand side, there is
a useful diagram showing you where your account will sit within the Profit & Loss
and Balance Sheet.
Using the checkboxes in the bottom-left corner, you can turn on the ability for accounts to
sit on the dashboard in an Accounts Watchlist to keep a close eye on important accounts.
You can decide which account codes will display when people enter an expense claim,
which can be important to stop people anywhere they like. Finally, you can also choose an
account to act as a bank account, which comes in very useful if items are cleared through a
director's loan account, for example.

Setting Up Xero for Success
[ 19 ]
If you wish to change a lot of these settings, you can opt to set them as on or off on an
import file, so if you have lots of codes, why not set the status on the import file and save
yourself some time? Even if you have used the default Chart of Accounts, now is your
chance to go back and import a file.
Once you have finished editing, simply click on Save.
Add a bank account
If you have your bank account details to hand, then you should add your bank account at
this point by going to the Add Bank Account option. Enter your bank account details. If
you choose No when you get to the Account Balances screen, you will not be able to
balance your conversion balances. You could enter the bank balances in the suspense
account for the time being and adjust your conversion balances once you have your bank
account set up.

Setting Up Xero for Success
[ 20 ]
If you did not import your bank account as part of importing your Chart of Accounts or
decided to use the default Xero Chart of Accounts, you can add your bank account when
confirming your Chart of Accounts by clicking on the Add Bank Account button. From
here, you will see that you can also choose to add a PayPal or Credit Card account:
Complete the details as requested. Ensure you choose the correct Your Bank option;
otherwise, it will not be possible to enable your bank feeds to automate the collection of
your banking data. Where a direct feed is available for a bank, you may wish to choose the
alternative to not incur additional charges, but please check with Xero first to see if
additional charges apply for that bank.
Change tax rate
Before confirming your Chart of Accounts, you may wish to check that your tax rates are
correct, especially if you are converting from another system. If they need attention, then
you can click on the Change Tax Rate option and use the dropdown to select the correct
option. If you wish to change several accounts to the same tax rate, check them off first to
apply the change to multiple accounts at the same time.

Setting Up Xero for Success
[ 21 ]
Don't forget to click on Save when you have finished editing.
To change Tax Rates going forward, use Settings | General Settings | Tax Rates.
Now that you have finished editing your Chart of Accounts, you can click on Next to move
on.
Although we have not worked all the way through to the end, we are going to switch over
now to the Import Chart of Accounts option. This is due to the fact that once we get past
this stage, the remaining elements are the same regardless of which method you choose.
Import Chart of Accounts
You can import from a file, so if you have a Chart of Accounts from another system you
wish to use, then you can. If you have lots of Xero organizations, you may also have a
preferred Chart of Accounts you have built which you can export from another
organization and import where you want it. You will need to have the file prepared and
ready for import, and we strongly advise at this point that you use Xero's Help option and
search import your chart of accounts. Use that guide to help you through the import
process.

Setting Up Xero for Success
[ 22 ]
The file must be in CSV or TXT file format and can only be 700 rows long, including your
header row. There are examples at this stage that you can download from Xero to help you
do this quickly. This may save you time in the long run as you can add your Conversion
Balances to the import file, and this will save you needing to do this separately later.
As highlighted at the beginning of this chapter, you can import a Chart of Accounts at a
later stage by going to Settings | General Settings | Chart of Accounts.
Once your file is ready for import, select Browse and navigate to your file. If you have been
working on the file, make sure it is saved and closed. Now, you are ready to Import your
Chart of Accounts.
We highly recommend you make a decision about your Chart of Accounts before
processing any transactions. Also, think about the clean slate you have with your new Xero
system; use it wisely and as an opportunity for a bit of housekeeping.
If you encounter any problems when importing a Chart of Accounts, Xero will highlight
what the issue is, telling you which line in your import file has a problem. This allows you
the opportunity to correct the problem in your import and try again.
Account balances
Now that you have confirmed your Chart of Accounts, you need to let Xero know your
conversion date. This ensures Xero can deal with reporting correctly. If your year end is
May, then you will select June as your conversion date as Xero assumes you are starting on
the first day of the following month. This is a slight change for those of you used to entering
closing balances and therefore entering May as the conversion date. Doing this will cause
you a problem with reporting, so please make sure that the highlighted date shown at the
bottom of the screen is the last date of the period you are finishing before using Xero.

Setting Up Xero for Success
[ 23 ]
If you are moving to Xero from another system, we would advocate doing
so at the end of a quarter or financial year.
Conversion balances
If you did not select to Import your Chart of Accounts, including Conversion Balances,
then you will now want to add your conversion balances. You can select not to enter your
balances at this point, but you will have to do it at some stage. If you do not have the
information to hand, at least add your bank account balances so you can make sure that you
can reconcile your bank account. This is the actual bank statement amount, not the
cashbook balance if transferring from another system. If you have unpresented items, you
will need to set up a separate account to post these to when they clear the bank.
Clicking Show All Accounts will present you with the full Chart of Accounts list for you to
enter your conversion balances.
Process
If you have an Accounts Receivable or Aged Payables balance, then we would suggest 
entering these at 0.00 and then using the Import facility within Xero to import any aged
receivable or payable invoices.

Setting Up Xero for Success
[ 24 ]
Alternatively, you could import these first before entering the Aged Receivables and Aged
Creditors balances. Before you can confirm your Conversion Balances, the amounts on
these accounts must match what you have posted in Xero. If you try and enter balances
without any invoices in Xero, you will be confronted with the following:
If you only have a few invoices that make up your conversion balances, then why not hit
the Add Invoice or Add Credit Note options to manually enter the items that make up your
conversion balance? Enter invoices and credit notes as they appeared on your previous
accounting system.
Import invoices
If you have many invoices and credit notes that need posting, then you can make use of the
import facility within Xero. At this point, you may as well complete the Setup Guide by
clicking on Next and then Finish.
Using the Help facility, do a search for import invoices, bills, and credit notes.
This document is invaluable to guiding you through how to import your transactions.
Once you have imported the invoices and credit notes, you can navigate to Settings
| General Settings | Conversion Balances to complete the conversion balances process. If
the transactions imported match the Aged Receivables and Aged Payable amounts entered
and the overall totals match, the balance will be 0.00, so you can now save your conversion
balances. At this stage, lock the conversion dates to avoid anyone inadvertently causing a
problem with your opening balances.

Setting Up Xero for Success
[ 25 ]
Comparative balances
As well as adding the most recent year, you may also want to add some prior year
information for reporting purposes, so you can run comparative year-on-year reports. Xero
allows you to enter this by using the Add Comparative Balances option. This gets done
after the setup has been completed.
To add comparatives, you will want to visit Settings | General Settings | Conversion
Balances.
Summary
We have successfully prepped Xero and made it ready for use. In this chapter, we ran
through the major General Settings, set up your Default Settings, and explored some of
the common tasks associated with getting the system right for your company, including
financial settings, invoice settings, inviting users, currencies, Chart of Accounts, and
conversion balances. We have also looked at what is critical for getting Xero set up for use
and what can be reviewed later.
In the next chapter, we will start looking at the actual processing of information and begin
walking through how to deal with day-to-day bookkeeping in an efficient manner.

2
Breaking the Bank
Throughout this chapter, we will cover the Xero core bank functionalities, including one of
the most innovative tools of our time: automated bank feeds. We will walk through how to
set up the different types of bank account you may have and the most efficient way to
reconcile your bank accounts. If they don't reconcile, you will be shown how you can spot
and correct any errors.
Automated bank feeds have revolutionized the way in which a bank reconciliation is
carried out and the speed at which you can do it. Thanks to Xero, there is no longer an
excuse to not keep on top of your bank accounts and therefore maintain accurate and up-to-
date information for your business's key decision makers.
These are the topics we'll be covering in this chapter:
Setting up a bank feed
Using rules to speed up the process
Completing a bank reconciliation
Dealing with common bank reconciliation errors
Bank overview
Reconciling bank accounts has never been as easy or as quick, and we are only just at the
beginning of this journey as Xero continues to push the envelope. Xero is working with
banks to not only bring bank data into your accounting system but to also push it back
again. That's right; you could mark a supplier invoice paid in Xero and it could actually
send the payment from your bank account.

Breaking the Bank
[ 27 ]
Dashboard
When you log in to Xero, you are presented with the dashboard, which gives a great
overview of what is going on within the business. It is also an excellent place to navigate to
the main parts of Xero that you will need.
If you have several bank accounts, the summary pane that shows the cash in and out during
a month, as shown below, is very useful as you can hover over the bar chart to get a quick
snapshot of the total cash in and out for the month with no effort at all. If you want the
chart to sit at the top of your dashboard, click on Edit Dashboard at the bottom of the page,
and drag and drop the chart. When finished, click on Done at the bottom of the page to lock
them in place.
Reconciling bank accounts is fundamental to good bookkeeping, and only once the accounts
have been reconciled do you know that your records are up-to-date. It isn't worth spending
lots of time looking at reports if the bank accounts haven't been reconciled, as there may be
important items missing from your records.
By default, all bank accounts added will be shown on your dashboard, which shows the
main account information, the number of unreconciled items, and the balance per Xero and
per statement. You may wish to just see a few key bank accounts, in which case you can
turn some of them off by going to Accounts | Bank Accounts, where you will see a list of
all bank accounts.

Breaking the Bank
[ 28 ]
Here, you can choose to remove the bank accounts showing on the dashboard by
unchecking the Show account on Dashboard option. You can also choose the Change order
option, which allows you to decide the order in which you see the bank accounts on the
dashboard. Click on the up and down arrows to move the accounts as required.
Bank feeds
If you did not set up a bank account when you were setting up Xero, then we recommend
you do that now, as you cannot set up a bank feed without one. You can do this from the
dashboard by clicking on the Add Bank Account button or by navigating to Accounts
| Bank Accounts and Add Bank Account. Then, you are presented with of list of options
including Bank Account, Credit Card, or PayPal.
Enter your account details as requested and click on Save. It is very important at this stage
to note that you may be presented with several options for your bank as they offer different
accounts. If you choose the wrong one, your feed will not work.

Breaking the Bank
[ 29 ]
Some banks charge for a direct bank feed; you do not have to adhere to this, so ignore the
feeds ending with Direct Bank Feed and select the alternative one. The difference between
a Direct Bank Feed and the Yodlee service that Xero uses is that the data comes directly
from the bank and not via a third party, so is deemed to be more reliable.
Now that you have a bank account, you can add the feed by clicking on the Get bank feeds
button, as shown in the following screenshot:

Breaking the Bank
[ 30 ]
On the Activate Bank Feed page, the fields will vary depending on the bank you use and
the type of account you selected earlier. Enter the User Credentials as requested.
You will then see a screen with the text Connecting to Bank, which states it might take a
few minutes, so please bear with it; you are almost there.
When prompted, select the bank account from the dropdown called Select the matching
bank feed… that matches the account you are adding and choose whether you wish to
import from a certain date or collect as much data as possible. How far it goes back varies
by bank.
If you are converting from another system, it would be wise to use the conversion date as
the date from which you wish to start transactions, in order to avoid bringing in
transactions processed in your old system (that is if your conversion date was May 31, 2015,
you would use June 1, 2015.

Breaking the Bank
[ 31 ]
Once you are happy with the information provided, click on OK. If you have several
accounts, such as a savings account, then simply follow the process again for each account.
Refresh feed
Each bank feed is different, and some will automatically update; others, however, require
refreshing. You can usually tell which bank accounts require a manual refresh, as they will
show the following message at the bottom of the bank account tile on the dashboard:

Breaking the Bank
[ 32 ]
To refresh the feed from the dashboard, find the account to update and click the Manage
button in the top right-hand corner and then Refresh Bank Feed.
You can also do this from within Accounts | Bank Accounts | Manage Accounts
| Refresh Bank Feed.
To update your bank feed, you will need to refresh the feed each time you want to reconcile
the bank account.
Import statements
You get over most disappointments in life, unlike when you find out that the bank account
you have does not have a bank feed available.
Your options here are simple: go and change banks. But if that is too much hassle for you,
then you could always just import a file. Xero accepts OFX, QIF, and CSV. Should your
bank offer a selection, go with them in this order. OFX and QIF files are formatted and
should import without too many problems.
CSV, on the other hand, is a different matter. Each bank CSV download will come in a
different format and will need some work before it is ready for importing. This takes some
time, so I would recommend using the Xero Help Guide and searching Import a Bank
Statement to get the file formatted correctly.
If you only do things on a monthly basis, uploading a statement is not too much of a chore.
We would say at this point that the automated bank feed is one of the most revolutionary
things to come out of accounting software, so not using it is a crime. You simply are not
enjoying the full benefits of using Xero and cloud software without it.
Petty cash
It probably costs the business more to find missing petty cash discrepancies than the
discrepancy totals. Our advice is simple: try not to maintain a petty cash account if you can;
it is just one more thing to reconcile and manage.
We would advocate using a company debit card where possible, as the transactions will
then go through your main bank account and you will know what is missing. Get staff to
submit an expense claim, and if that is too much hassle, treat payments in and out as if they
have gone through the director's loan account, as that is what happens in most small
businesses.

Breaking the Bank
[ 33 ]
Should you wish to operate a petty cash account, you will need to mark the transactions as
reconciled manually, as there is no feed to match bank payments and receipts against. In
order to do this, you must first turn on the ability to mark transactions as reconciled
manually. This can be found hiding in the Help section. When you click on Help, you
should then see an option to Enable Mark as Reconciled, which you will need to click to
turn on this functionality.
Now that you have the ability to Mark as Reconciled, you can begin to reconcile the petty
cash. Go to Manage | Reconcile Account.
You will be presented with the four tabs below (if Cash Coding is not turned on for your
user role, you will not see that tab). The Reconcile tab should be blank, as there is no feed or
import in place. You will want to go to Account transactions, which is where the items you
have marked as paid from petty cash will live.
Underneath this section, you will also find a button called New Transactions, where you
can create transactions on the fly that you may have missed or are not going to raise a sales
invoice or supplier bill for. You can see from the following screenshot that we have added
an example of a Spend Money transaction, but you can also create a Receive Money
transaction when clicking on the New Transaction button. Click on Save when you have
finished entering the details of your transaction. If you have outstanding sales invoices or
purchase invoices that have been paid through the petty cash account, then you will need to
mark them as paid using the petty cash bank account in order for them to appear in the
Account Transactions section. To do this, navigate to those items and then complete
the Make a Payment or Receive a Payment section in the bottom left-hand corner.

Breaking the Bank
[ 34 ]
From the main Account transactions screen, you can then mark your transactions as
reconciled. Check off the items you wish to reconcile using the checkboxes on the left, then
click on More | Mark as Reconciled.
When you have completed the process, your bank account balance in Xero should match
that of your petty cash sheet.
www.allitebooks.com

Breaking the Bank
[ 35 ]
The status of transactions marked as Reconciled Manually will change to Reconciled in
black. When a transaction is reconciled, it has come in from either an import or a bank feed,
and it will be green. If it is unreconciled, it will be orange.
Loan account
A loan account works in the same way as a bank account, and we would recommend that
you set it up if a feed is available from your bank. Managing loans in Xero is easy, as you
can set up a bank rule for the interest and use the Transfer facility to reconcile any loan
repayments.
Credit cards
Like adding bank accounts, you can add credit cards from the dashboard by clicking on the
Add Bank Account button or by navigating to Accounts |Bank Accounts |Add Bank
Account | Credit Card.
Add a card
You may see several options for the bank you use, so double-check you are using the right
option or the feed will not work. If there is no feed set up for your particular bank or credit
card account, you will be notified as follows:

Breaking the Bank
[ 36 ]
In this case, you will need to either import a statement in either the OFX, QIF, or CSV
format, or manually reconcile your credit card account. The process is the same as that
detailed above for reconciling petty cash and will be matched against your credit card
statement.
If a feed is available, enter the login credentials requested to set up the feed in the same
fashion as when adding a new bank account feed.
Common issues
Credit cards act in a different way than a bank account, in that each card is an account on its
own, separate from the main account on which interest and balance payments are allocated.
This means that even if you have just one business credit card, you will, in effect, have two
accounts with the bank.
You can add a feed for each account if you wish, but for the main account, the only
transactions that will go through it are any interest accrued and balance payments to clear
the card.
We would suggest you set up the credit card account as a feed, as this is where you will see
most transactions and therefore save the most time in processing. Each time interest is
accrued, you will need to post it as a Spend Money transaction, and each time you make a
payment, the amount will be a Transfer from one of your other accounts. Both these
transactions will need to be marked as Reconciled Manually, as they will not appear on
your credit card feed setup. This is done in the same way as oultlined in the Petty cash
section earlier

Breaking the Bank
[ 37 ]
PayPal
Just like a bank account, you can sync Xero with your PayPal account, even in multiple
currencies. The ability to do this, coupled with using bank rules, can help supercharge your
processing ability and cut down on posting errors.
Add a feed
There is a little bit of configuration required to set up a PayPal account. Go to Accounts
| Bank Accounts | Add Bank Account | PayPal. Add the account name as you wish for it
to appear in Xero and the currency for the account. To use the feed (why wouldn't you?),
check  the Set up automatic PayPal import option, which will then bring up the other
options shown in the following screenshot:

Breaking the Bank
[ 38 ]
As previously suggested, if converting from another system, then import transactions from
the conversion dates, as with all previous transactions, should be dealt with in your old
accounting system.
Click on Save, and you will receive an e-mail from Xero to confirm your PayPal e-mail
address. Click on the activation link in the e-mail.
To complete the setup process, you need to update your PayPal settings in order for Xero to
turn on the automatic feeds.
In PayPal, go to My Account | Profile | My Selling Tools. Next to the API access, click
on Update | Option 1. The box should then be Grant API Permission. In the Third Party
Permission field, enter paypal_api1.xero.com, then click on Lookup.
Under Available Permissions, make sure you check the following options:
Click on Add, and you have finished the setup process.
If you have multiple currency accounts, then complete this process for each currency.
Bank rules
Bank rules give you the ability to automate the processing of recurring payments and
receipts based on your chosen criteria, and they can be a massive time saver if you have
many transactions to deal with.
An example would be the processing of PayPal fees on your PayPal account. Rather than
having to process each one, you could set up a bank rule to deal with the transaction.
Bank rules cannot be used for bank transfers or allocating supplier payment or customer
receipts.

Breaking the Bank
[ 39 ]
Add bank rules
You can add a bank rule directly from the bank statement line by clicking on Create rule
above the bank line details. This means waiting for something to come through the bank
first, which we think makes sense, as that detail is taken into consideration when setting up
the bank rule, making it simpler to set up.
You can also enter bank rules you know will need adding by going to the relevant bank
account and clicking Manage Account | Bank Rules | Create Rule.
We have broken the bank rule down into different sections.
Section 1 allows you to set the conditions that must be present in order for the bank rule to
trigger. Using equals means the payee or description in this example must match exactly. If
you were to change it to contains, then only part of the description need be present. This
can be very useful when the description contains a reference number that changes each
month. You do not want the bank rule to fail, so you might choose to remove the reference
number and change the condition to contains instead. You must set at least one condition.

Breaking the Bank
[ 40 ]
Section 2 allows you to set a contact, which we suggest you do; otherwise, you will have to
do this on the Bank Account screen each time before being able to reconcile that bank
statement line.
Section 3 allows you to fix a value to an account code. This can be useful if the bank rule
you are setting up contains an element of a fixed amount and variable amount. An example
might be a telephone bill where the line rental is fixed and the balance is for call charges
that will vary month by month.
Section 4 allows you to allocate a percentage to an account code. If there is not a fixed value
amount in section 3, you can just use section 4 and post 100% of the cost to the account code
of your choice. Likewise, if you had a bank statement line that you wanted to split between
account codes, then you could do so by entering a second line and using the percentage
column.
Section 5 allows you to set a reference to be used when the bank rule runs and there are five
options. We would suggest not using the by me during bank rec option, as this again
creates extra work, since you will have to fill it in each time before you can reconcile that
bank statement line.

Breaking the Bank
[ 41 ]
Section 6 allows you to choose which bank account you want the bank rule to run on. This
is useful if you start paying for an item out of a different bank account, as you can edit the
rule and change the bank account rather than having to create the rule all over again.
Section 7 allows you to set a title for the bank rule. Use something that will make it easy for
you to remember when on the Bank Rules screen.
Edit bank rules
If your bank rules are not firing the way you expected or at all, then you will want to edit
them to get them right. It is worth spending time in this area, as once you have mastered
setting up bank rules, they will save you time.
To edit a bank rule, you will need to navigate to Accounts | Bank Accounts | Manage
Accounts | Bank Rules. Click on the bank rule you wish to edit, make the necessary
adjustments, and then click on Save.
You will know if the bank rule is working, as it appears like the following when reconciling
your bank account. If you do not wish to apply the rule, you can click on Don't apply rule
in the bottom-left corner, or if you wish to check what it is going to do, click on View
details first to verify the bank rule is going to post where you prefer.

Breaking the Bank
[ 42 ]
Re-order bank rules
The order in which your bank rules sit is the order in which Xero runs them. This is
important to remember if you have bank rules set up that may conflict with each other and
not return the result you were expecting.
An example might be you purchasing different items from a supermarket, such as petrol
and stationery. In this example, we will call it Xeroco. In most instances, the bank statement
line will show two different descriptions or references, in this case Xeroco for the main store
and Xeroco Fuel for the gas station. You will need to set up your rules carefully, as using
only contains for Xeroco will mean that your postings could end up going to the wrong
account code. You would want the Xeroco Fuel bank rule to sit above the Xeroco rule.
Because they both contain the same description, if Xeroco was first, it would always trigger
and everything would get posted to stationery, including the petrol. If you set Xeroco Fuel
as the first bank rule to run if the bank statement line does not contain both words, it will
continue and then run the Xeroco rule, which would prove successful. Gas will get posted
to fuel and stationery will get posted to stationery.
You can drag and drop bank rules to change the order in which they run. Hover over the
two dots to the left of the bank rule number and you can drag them to the appropriate
position.
Bank reconciliation
Bank reconciliation is one of the main drivers in knowing when your books and records are
up-to-date. The introduction of automated bank feeds has revolutionized the way in which
we can complete a bank reconciliation, which is the process of matching what has gone
through the bank account and what has been posted in your accounting system. Below are
some ways to utilize all the functionality in the Xero toolkit.

Breaking the Bank
[ 43 ]
Auto Suggest
Xero is an intuitive system; it learns how you process transactions and is also able to make
suggestions based on what you have posted. As shown below, Xero has found a match for
the bank statement line on the left, which is why the right-hand panel is now green and you
can see the OK button to reconcile the transaction, provided you are happy it is the correct
selection.
You can choose to turn Auto Suggest off. At the bottom of each page in the bank screen,
you will find a checkbox, as shown in the following screenshot. Simply uncheck
the Suggest previous entries box to turn it off.
The more you use Xero, the better it learns, so we would advise sticking with it. It is not a
substitute for checking, however, so please check before hitting the OK button.
Find & Match
When Xero cannot find a match and you know the bank statement line in question probably
has an associated invoice or bill in the system, you can use Find & Match in the upper
right-hand corner, as shown in the following screenshot:

Breaking the Bank
[ 44 ]
You can look through the list of unreconciled bank transactions shown in the panel or you
can opt to use the Search facility and search by name, reference, or amount. In this example,
you can see that we have now found two transactions from SMART Agency that total the
£4,500 spent. As you can see in the following screenshot, there is also an option next to the
monetary amounts that will allow you to split the transaction. This is useful if someone has
not paid the invoice in full. If the amount received was only £2,500 in total, for example, you
could use Split to allocate £1,000 against the first transaction and £1,500 against the second
transaction.
When checked off, these turn green, and you can click on OK to reconcile that bank
statement line. If you cannot find a match, you will need to investigate what it relates to and
if you are missing some paperwork.
If we had been clever when making the original supplier payment, we could have used the
Batch Payment option in Accounts |Purchases |Awaiting Payment, checking off the items
that make up the amount paid, and Batch Payment would have enabled us to tell Xero that
there was a payment made totaling £4,500. Auto Suggest would have picked this up,
making the reconciliation easier and quicker. You have already done the hard bit by
working out how much to pay suppliers; you don't want to have to do it again when an
amount comes through the bank and you can't remember what it was for. It is also good
practice, as it means you will not inadvertently pay the same supplier again since the bill
will be marked as paid.

Breaking the Bank
[ 45 ]
The same can be done for customer invoices using the Deposit button. This is very helpful
when receiving check deposits or remittance advice well in advance of the actual receipt. By
marking the invoices as paid, you will not chase customers for money, unnecessarily
causing bad feelings along the way.
Create
There will be occasions when you will not have a bill or invoice in Xero from which to
reconcile the bank statement line. In these situations, you will need to create a transaction to
clear the bank statement line. In the example below, you can see that we have entered who
the contact is, what the cost relates to, and added why we spent the money. Xero will now
allow us to clear the bank statement line, as the OK button is visible.
We would suggest that this option be used sparingly, as you should have paperwork
posted into Xero in the form of a bill or invoice to deal with the majority of your bank
statement lines.

Breaking the Bank
[ 46 ]
Bank transfers
When you receive money in or transfer money out to another bank account, you have set up
within Xero a very simple way to deal with those transactions. Click on the Transfer tab
and choose the bank account from the dropdown. You will then be able to reconcile that
bank statement line.
In the account that you have made the transfer to, you will find that Xero will make the
auto suggest for you when you reconcile that bank account.
Discuss and comments
When you are performing the bank reconciliation, you may find that you get stuck and you
genuinely do not know what to do with it.
This is where the Discuss tab, shown in the following screenshot, can help:
You can simply enter a note to yourself for someone else in the business or for your advisor
to take a look at. Don't forget to click on Save when you are done. If someone can answer
your query, they can then enter their comment in the Discuss tab and save it.
Note that at present there is no notification process when you save a comment in the
Discuss tab, so you are reliant on someone regularly checking it. You will see something
similar to the note underneath the business name when you log in to Xero, so you can see
there is a comment that needs action.

Breaking the Bank
[ 47 ]
Reconciliation Report
This is the major tool in your armory to check whether your bank reconciles. There is no
greater feeling in life than your bank account reconciling and there being no unpresented
items left hanging around. To run the report from within a bank account, click on the 
Reconciliation Report button next to the Manage Account button.
From here, you can choose which bank account you wish to run the report from, so you do
not need to keep moving between the accounts, and also a date option as you will probably
want to run the report to various dates, especially if you encounter a problem.
On the reconciliation report, you will see the balance in Xero, which is the cashbook balance
(that is what would be in the bank if all the outstanding payments and receipts posted in
Xero cleared and all the bank statement lines that have come from the bank feed were
processed).
The outstanding payments and receipts are invoices and bills you have marked as paid in
Xero but have not been matched to a bank statement line yet. You need to keep an eye on
these, as older unreconciled items would normally indicate a misallocation or uncleared
item.

Breaking the Bank
[ 48 ]
Plus Un-Reconciled Bank Statement Lines are those items that have come through on a
feed but have not yet been allocated to something in Xero. This might mean that there are
missing bills or sales invoices in Xero, for example.
Statement Balance is the number that should match what is on your online or paper
statement, whether it is a bank account, credit card, or PayPal account. If the figures do not
match, then it will need investigating. In the next section, we have highlighted some of the
things that may have caused the imbalance and some ideas of what to do to rectify the
situation.
Manual reconciliation
If you are unable to set up a bank feed or import a statement, then you can still reconcile
bank accounts in Xero; it just feels a bit like going back in time.
To complete a manual reconciliation, you will need to follow the same process as used to
process petty cash, as discussed earlier in this chapter.

Breaking the Bank
[ 49 ]
Common errors and corrections
Despite all the innovation and technological advances Xero has made in this area, there are
still things that can go wrong—some human, some machine. The main thing is to recognize
this and know how to deal with it in the event that it happens. We have highlighted some of
the more common issues and resolutions in the following subsections.
Account not reconciling
There is no greater feeling than when you get that big green checkmark telling you that you
have reconciled all your transactions. Fantastic job done, you think! But not quite. You need
to check your bank statement, credit card statement, loan statement, or PayPal statement to
make sure it definitely matches as per the preceding bank reconciliation report section. The
job's not done until you have completed the manual check.
Duplicated statement lines
With all things technology, there is a chance that things can go wrong, and every now and
again, you may find that your bank feed has duplicated a line item. This is why it is so
important to check the actual statement against that in Xero. It is the only way to truly
know if the accounts reconcile.
A direct bank feed that costs money is deemed to be more robust, and some feeds through
Yodlee are better than others. It all depends on your bank, so it is worth checking with the
Xero community to get some guidance from fellow Xeroes.
If you are convinced that you have a duplicated bank statement line, you can choose to
delete it by finding the offending item in your account and clicking on the cross in the top

Breaking the Bank
[ 50 ]
left-hand corner of the bank statement line. When you hover over the cross, the item will
turn red. Use this sparingly and only when you know you have a duplicated line.
Missing statement lines
As with duplicated statement lines, there is also the possibility of a bank statement line not
being synced, and this can be picked up when checking that the Xero bank account figure
matches that of your online or paper bank statement. If they do not match, then we
recommend using the reconciliation report and working backwards month by month and
then week by week to try and isolate the date at which the bank last reconciled. Once you
have narrowed it down to a week, you can then start doing it day by day until you find the
date, and then check off the items in Xero against those on your bank statement until you
find the missing items.
If there are several missing items, we would probably suggest doing an import via OFX,
QIF, or CSV, but if there are only a few, then it would probably be best to enter them
manually and then mark them as reconciled so the bank will reconcile.
Remove & Redo
We know you are great at what you do, but everyone has an off day. If you have allocated
something incorrectly, you can easily amend it. auto suggest is fantastic, but you may get
carried away and just keep hitting that the OK button without paying enough attention.
This is particularly problematic for businesses dealing with lots of invoices for similar
amounts.
If you do find that you have made an error, then you can remove the original allocation and
redo it. You can do this by going to Accounts | Bank Accounts | Manage Account
| Reconcile Account | Account Transactions. As you can see in the following screenshot,
once you have found the offending item, you can check it off and then click on Remove &
Redo. You will also find on the right-hand side a Search button, which will allow you to
search for particular transactions rather than having to scroll through endless pages.

Breaking the Bank
[ 51 ]
If you happen to be in the actual bank transaction when you identify a problem, then you
can click on Options | Remove & Redo. This will then push the transaction back in to the
bank account screen to reconcile again.
Note that if you Remove & Redo a manually entered bank transaction, it will not reappear
in the bank account for you to reconcile, as it was never there in the first place. What you
will need to do is post the payment or receipt against the correct invoice or bill, and then
manually mark it as reconciled again or create another spend or receive money transaction.
Manually marked as reconciled
A telltale sign that someone has inadvertently caused a problem is when you look at the
Account Transactions tab in the bank account and there is a sea of green and reconciled
statuses, and then you spot the odd black reconciled status. This is an indication that
something has been posted to that account and marked as reconciled manually. This will
need investigating, as it may be genuine, such as some missing bank statement lines, or it
could be that someone has made a mistake and it needs to be removed.

Breaking the Bank
[ 52 ]
Understanding reports
If the bank account does not reconcile and it is not something obvious, then we would
suggest looking at the bank statements imported into Xero to see if there are any obvious
problems. Go to Accounts | Bank Accounts | Manage Account | Bank Statements. From
this screen, have a look to see if there is any overlap of dates imported and then drill into
the statements to check for anything that doesn't look right.
If you do come across duplicated lines, you can remove them by checking off the box on the
left and then clicking on the Delete button. You can see below that the bank statement line
has been grayed out and has a status of Deleted next to it. If you later discover that you
have made a mistake, then you can restore the bank statement line by checking off the box
again but clicking on Restore this time.
If you have incorrectly imported a duplicate statement or the bank feed has done so rather
than deleting the transactions, you can choose to delete the entire statement. This can be
achieved by clicking on the Delete Entire Statement button at the bottom-left of the Bank
Statements screen:

Breaking the Bank
[ 53 ]
Make sure you have checked the Also delete reconciled transactions for this statement
option before clicking Delete. If you are deleting the statement because it is incorrect, it
only makes sense that you also clear any transactions associated with this statement to
avoid further issues.
Summary
We have successfully added bank feeds that are now ready for automating the bank
reconciliation process.
In this chapter, we ran through the major bank functions and set up your bank feeds,
exploring how to set up bank rules to make the bank reconciliation task even easier and
quicker. On top of that, we also explored the possibilities of what could go wrong, but more
importantly, how to identify errors and put them right. One of the biggest bookkeeping
tasks you will undertake should now seem a lot easier.
In the next chapter, we will start looking at the sales order and invoicing process and how
to deal with day-to-day bookkeeping in an efficient manner.

3
Using Xero to Excel at Sales
Throughout this chapter, we will cover the Xero core sales process, from adding a new
contact and setting up invoice templates to raising an invoice. You will learn how to set up
beautiful-looking documents, how the sales order process works, and how that impacts on
inventory.
The inclusion of online invoicing from Xero not only enables you to set up beautiful-looking
documents, but it is also very easy to do. E-mailing documents is a breeze and you have a
full audit trail of what has happened to a document, which is great for chasing those slow
payers.
These are the topics we'll be covering in this chapter:
Understanding the sales dashboard layout
Adding new contacts and contact groups
Raising sales invoices and credit notes
Adding new inventory items to an invoice
Customizing invoice brands/themes
Dashboard
The sales dashboard in Xero is your one stop shop for everything you need to run sales for
the business. To get to the sales dashboard, you can click on Invoices Owed To You on the
main dashboard or go to Accounts | Sales. We have highlighted the major elements that
make up the dashboard below.

Using Xero to Excel at Sales
[ 55 ]
On the right-hand side of the dashboard, you will find a Search button. Use it to save time
by searching by invoice number, customer reference number, or amount, and drill down
even further by selecting within a date range by due date or transaction date.
On the left-hand side of the dashboard, you have the main controls for performing tasks
such as adding a new invoice or credit note or sending out statements to clients.
In the following screenshot, the main controls set the sales summary figures with the figure
in brackets representing the number of transactions that make up the figure and the
numerical value representing the total of those transactions. Clicking on any of these
sections will drill down to the invoices that make up that total.

Using Xero to Excel at Sales
[ 56 ]
You can also see the draft invoices that need approval. Until these invoices have been
approved, they will not be included in any reports you run within Xero, such as the profit
and loss account, so if you have an approval process within your business, make sure
people adhere to it to improve the report accuracy level.
Once you click on the summary, you will see the table below, which shows the invoices
making up that selection. You can also see tabs relating to the other criteria within Xero,
making it easy to navigate between the various lists without having to perform searches or
navigate away from this screen and break your workflow.
This view also allows you to add new transactions and issue statements, which provides
you with an uninterrupted workflow across the entire sales process.
Adding a contact
You can add a contact in Xero when raising an invoice to avoid having to navigate away
and come back, but you cannot enter any of the main contact details at this point. If you
need to raise a sales invoice or sales order to a new customer, we would recommend that

Using Xero to Excel at Sales
[ 57 ]
you add the customer first from Contacts | All Contacts | Add Contact, so you have all the
correct details for issuing the document.
Importing contacts
When you first start using Xero, or even if you have been using it for a while, you may have
a separate database elsewhere with your contacts. You can import these into Xero using the
predetermined CSV file template. This will enable you to keep all your records in sync.
Incorrect invoice details are one way to hold up the payment process, so you need to make
sure your accounting contact records are kept up-to-date.
To import a contact, navigate to Contacts | All Contacts | Import:
When you click on Import, it will  take you to a screen where you can download the Xero
contact import template. Download the file so you can compile it for importing. At this
point, we would recommend doing a search in the Xero Help Guide for Import contact
and taking a look through the guide before attempting to import. This is to make sure you
have configured the file correctly and there is a smaller chance of the file being rejected.
Generating an invoice – standard
There are many ways to create an invoice in Xero. From the main dashboard after you have
logged in, locate the invoices owed to you section on the right and click on New sales
invoice, as shown in the following screenshot:

Using Xero to Excel at Sales
[ 58 ]
Alternatively, you could do it by going to Accounts | Sales | New.
You may also notice that when you drill down into any of the summary items on the
dashboard, above each tab, you will also see the option to add New Invoice, as shown in
the following screenshot:
As you can see, there are many ways to raise a new invoice, but whichever way you do it,
you will then be shown this screen:
If you start typing the customer name in the To field, you will be provided with a list of
customer names beginning with those letters, which makes it easier and quicker to make a
selection. If, at that point, there is no contact record, you can click on + add contact to add a
new customer name so you can complete raising the invoice.

Using Xero to Excel at Sales
[ 59 ]
The date of the invoice will default to the day you are raising the invoice. You can change
this should you wish to be keying over the date. If you tab through the due date, it will
default to the day the invoice was raised. If you wish to offer credit terms, then you can
allow for that by changing the date. If you have selected business-wide default credit terms,
then the date will default to what you have selected; likewise, if you have set a customer
default credit term, then that will override the business default at this point.
Invoice numbers are sequential, and because Xero knows what the last invoice number used
was, it will offer up the next invoice number in sequence.
The Reference field allows you to enter a customer PO number or some other form of
internal reference number should you decide to use one.
The Branding option allows you to decide which branding theme you would like to use for
the sales invoice should you have more than one template. If you don't have more than one
template, then this dropdown will not appear. If you are using different branding themes,
then it would be sensible to set a default at the contact record level to avoid the possibility
of using the wrong template for a customer.
The paper icon allows you to upload items to e-mail out with the invoice once it has been
approved, and this might include a copy of a sales contract, your terms and conditions, or
perhaps your train ticket if you are charging the customer for your travel costs. It is up to
you.
You can change the currency of the invoice at this point, but again, if you have customers
that you bill in a different currency, we would suggest setting this as a default in the contact
record to avoid the chance of billing the customer in the wrong currency. If you do not have
multiple currencies set up in Xero, you will not see this option when raising an invoice.
The amounts are field can be used to toggle between tax exclusive and tax inclusive values,
which makes it easier when posting invoices. If you have the gross sale figure, you would
use the tax inclusive figure and allow Xero to automatically calculate the VAT for you
without using a calculator.
Inventory items
Inventory items on a sales invoice can save lots of unnecessary data entry if you have
standard services or products that you use within the business. You can add an inventory
item when raising a sales invoice, or you can add them from Settings | General Settings
| Inventory Items. If you decide to use inventory items, it would be sensible to do some
from the start and use the import file to get them set up quickly and easily.

Using Xero to Excel at Sales
[ 60 ]
Each time you raise an invoice, you can then select the inventory item that will pull through
the default description and amounts for that inventory item. You can then adjust as
necessary, but it saves having to key your product descriptions over and over again.
If you are using inventory items, the amount you have sold will be recorded against the
inventory item, and if you are using Xero for stock control, doing so will make the
necessary adjustments between your inventory on hand and the cost of goods sold in the
profit and loss account.
Should you not wish to use inventory items as a minimum, you will need to enter a
description for what you are selling, a quantity, the unit price, the sales account you are
posting it to, and the tax rate to be used. Using inventory items as well as making the data
entry quicker will also give you the ability to run sales reports by items and means you do
not have to set up a different account code for each type of sales area you wish to report on.
It is therefore worth taking some time to think about what you want to report on before
raising your first invoices.
Once you have finished entering your invoice details, you can then save your invoice or
Approve your invoice. The user roles you have given employees will drive the functionality
they have available here. If you choose to save an invoice, this appears in the Draft section
of the sales summary on the dashboard. If you have a sales workflow in your business
where a member of staff can raise but not approve an invoice, then save would be the
option for this person.
As you can see in the screenshot, there are several options available. If you were raising
several invoices in one go, you would choose Save & add another, as this avoids you being
sent to the sales dashboard each time and then having to navigate back to this section.
The Save & submit for approval option will move the invoice to the Awaiting Approval
section for another user to approve. This works well if you want segregation of duties.
Invoices that are awaiting approval do not appear in your Xero reports until they have been
approved.

Using Xero to Excel at Sales
[ 61 ]
In order for an invoice to be issued to a customer, it will need to be approved, so you can
either print it or e-mail it to the customer. We would advise e-mailing where possible, as not
only will it keep your costs down, but it also offers an extra layer of audit trail for the
invoice.
Once the invoice has been approved, you will see a few extra options have now appeared
both above and below the invoice. Above the invoice, you now have the ability to e-mail or
print the invoice as a PDF:
If you choose the Email option, then a pop up will appear with the e-mail details and a
preview pane showing you what the e-mail will look like. If you wish, you can choose to
use another e-mail template you have set up or change the wording as needed. If you have
attached items to be sent with the invoice, make sure you check the Include files as
attachments option; otherwise, they will not be sent with the invoice.

Using Xero to Excel at Sales
[ 62 ]
Beneath the invoice, a new box will appear, which gives you the ability to mark the invoice
as paid if it has been paid.
Beneath this, you now have the History & Notes section, which gives you a full audit trail
of what has happened to the invoice. This is why we suggest e-mailing out invoices, as you
will then be able to see when it was e-mailed and if the customer has received it. You can
also see if anyone has edited the invoice.
Generating an invoice – repeating
The process for raising a repeating invoice is exactly the same as for a standard invoice,
except for completing the additional fields below. You can choose the frequency of the
invoice to repeat, the date it is to start from, and the end date, which is optional. Due Date,
if set in the Invoice Settings, will default to your business default or the customer default if
you have a default set up in the contact record.

Using Xero to Excel at Sales
[ 63 ]
Before you can save the invoice, you will have to select how you want the invoice to be
issued. One option is Save as Draft, in which case someone will have to approve each
invoice and send them. The second option is Approve, which means someone will have to
send or Approve for Sending, in which case it will be automatically e-mailed to the
customer on the next due date.
Editing invoices
Once you have approved an invoice, you can still edit it, but you cannot delete it. You do
have the option to void invoices, but they will be retained within the invoice lists and will
be grayed out.
You can search for the invoice you wish to edit and in the top right-hand corner, click
Options | Edit, which will open the invoice and allow you to make any adjustments. The
details of the adjustment will be logged in the Audit History section of the invoice, so you
can track who made the adjustment and when.
If the invoice has a receipt allocated to it, then you will be limited to what can be edited. If
you need to change the VAT tax rate used, for example, you will need to remove the receipt
first and then edit the invoice. To remove a receipt from an invoice, click on the blue
hyperlink for the receipt and then navigate to Options | Remove & Redo.
Don't forget to reconcile the receipt against the invoice from the bank account once you
have finished editing the invoice. If the original receipt did not come via a bank feed and
was added manually, then you would need to add the receipt manually, as well.
Groups
Whereas repeating invoices work really well for those instances occurring on a frequent
basis, you might have instances where customers get billed on the basis of a certain event
happening. Every invoice might be exactly the same and you will likely wish there was a
way to raise an invoice to multiple customers. There is, and that functionality is called
groups.

Using Xero to Excel at Sales
[ 64 ]
From within Contacts, you can set up groups and assign contacts to a group. To do this, go
to Contacts | All Contacts | New Group and give your group a name; then click on OK.
To add a contact to a group, simply check off the box next to its name and then select Add
to Group, choose the relevant group, and click on Save.
Contacts can be assigned to multiple groups if needs be. This feature enables you to raise
invoices by groups. You can raise just one invoice and everyone in the group will get an
invoice, so the 10 training contacts will get 10 invoices, for example, but you have only done
the work once.
E-mail
Once an invoice has been approved and is ready to be issued, we would suggest you e-mail
the invoice, as this will give you an audit trail on what happened to the invoice.
If you do not have an e-mail address in the system, you can add it at this point and it will
retain that information in the contact record; you do not need to edit the contact record first.
You can edit the e-mail templates that you send out from Settings | General Settings
| Emails Settings at this point, and you can also select the e-mail address that you want the
e-mails to be sent from.
Xero Network Key
Xero Network Key allows you to pass your sales invoice data directly into someone else's
ledger if they use Xero. This can be a massive timesaver if you are doing lots of transactions
with other Xero users. Each Xero subscription has its own unique Xero Network Key which
you can share with the other Xero business by entering it into the relevant field in the
contact record.

Using Xero to Excel at Sales
[ 65 ]
When you send out an invoice, you will now see an icon like the one in the following
screenshot, which shows you have the ability with that customer to send the invoice via the
Xero network. This replaces the normal e-mail icon you would see when creating an
invoice.
If you opt to do this, your invoice data will be passed through to the Draft Purchases
section in the other Xero business for them to double-check, enter the account code to post it
to, and then approve. Minimal data entry is required, and there are no excuses not to pay
because the dog ate the invoice.
To locate your Xero Network Key to give the other Xero user, go to Settings | General
Settings | Xero to Xero.
Number sequence
You may choose what invoice sequence you want Xero to follow, and you can do this from
Settings | General Settings | Invoice Settings | Default Settings.

Using Xero to Excel at Sales
[ 66 ]
As you can see, from here, you have the option to add a prefix should you choose, and you
can add the next invoice number. So, if you are transferring from another system, you can
make sure you start where you left off.
Importing
As well as importing contacts, you can also import sales invoices to Xero. You may need to
do this when you first start using the system in order to set your opening balances, or you
may not use Xero invoicing and have another system within the business that raises them.
Either way, you can import the data to avoid having to rekey the data.
Navigate to Accounts | Sales | Import in order to import sales invoices.
As with contacts, we recommend using the Xero Help Guide, subsequently searching
Import invoices, and looking for the following guide:
Invoice branding
Xero allows you to customize your sales invoice templates, enabling you to tailor your sales
invoices to your businesses requirements. This also means if you wish to mirror what you
had in your old accounting system, then you can do so.

Using Xero to Excel at Sales
[ 67 ]
Defaults
There is an out-of-the-box option for your sales invoice template that is very quick and easy
to set up. In most cases, this will fulfill the needs of the business and requires minimal
information to get ready for use. To set up your default template, navigate to Settings
| General Settings | Invoice Settings. The minimum information you may wish to add to
raise your first invoice is as follows:
Adding a logo
Inserting bank account details
Adding payment terms
Contact-specific
Because you can choose to have multiple invoice templates set up in Xero, it is important to
use the right template for the right customer in order to avoid confusion and excuses for
non-payment of invoices.
You can set a business-wide default template to be used, but this can be overridden at the
contact level by editing the contact record and choosing the relevant default theme, as
highlighted in the following screenshot:
Word
Should you have very specific needs for your invoice template and the default templates
don't cut it for your business, then you can create your own. In Invoice Settings, you have
the ability to download a .docx version of the template, which you can edit and re-import.

Using Xero to Excel at Sales
[ 68 ]
Be careful to make sure you do not delete any of the placeholders required to generate a
sales invoice in Xero.
Credit notes
The process for raising a credit note is the same for adding a standard invoice. If you are
raising a credit note against a specific invoice, then we would suggest doing it from the
invoice, as Xero will then allocate the credit note against the invoice for you and it will be
one less thing for you to do.
Allocation
If you raise a credit note directly from an outstanding invoice in Xero, as identified above,
the credit will automatically get allocated to the invoice, but there may be instances where a
credit note is not specific to any one invoice or the invoice has been paid, in which case you
cannot raise a credit note in that fashion.
Once a credit has been raised, you can allocate it against an invoice by clicking on Options
in the top right-hand corner and then clicking on Allocate Credit. It is sensible to do this, as
you cannot pick up credit notes when allocating receipts from the bank. You have to
allocate a credit to an invoice first; otherwise, you will not able to clear a receipt against the
invoice since Xero does not allow you to allocate a part receipt.
Summary
We have successfully added a sales invoice and identified the different types of invoice
available in Xero.
In this chapter, we ran through the major sales functions and set up your sales invoice
template, exploring how to use inventory items to make the sales invoicing process even
easier and quicker. On top of that, we also looked at how to navigate around the sales
dashboard, how to make changes, and also how to track exactly what has happened to an
invoice.
In the next chapter, we will start looking at the purchase invoicing process and how to deal
with day-to-day bookkeeping in an efficient manner.

4
Learning Xero Purchases
In this chapter, you will cover all of the Xero core purchase processes, from posting
purchase bills and credit notes and editing contacts to making supplier payments. You will
learn how the purchase process works and how it impacts inventory.
By the end of this chapter, you will have a thorough understanding of the Purchase
dashboard and what the component parts mean as well as be able to easily navigate to the
areas you need.
These are the topics we'll be covering in this chapter:
Understanding the purchases dashboard layout
Adding new contact and post bills
Adding new inventory items to bills
Importing contacts
Dashboard
The purchases dashboard in Xero is your one-stop shop for everything you need in order to
manage the purchases for a business. To get to the Purchases dashboard, you can click
on Bills you need to pay on the main dashboard or go to Accounts | Purchases. We have
highlighted the major elements that make up the following dashboard.
On the right-hand side of the dashboard, you will find a Search button. Use it to save time,
searching by the bill number, reference, supplier, or amount and drill down even further by
selecting within a date range by the due date or the transaction date.

Learning Xero Purchases
[ 70 ]
On the left-hand side of the dashboard, you have the main controls required to perform
tasks such as adding a new bill, repeating a bill, the credit note or the purchase order:
Below the main controls sit the purchases' summary figures, with the figure in brackets
representing the number of transactions that make up the figure and the numerical value
representing the total amount of those transactions. Clicking on any of these sections will
drill down to the bills that make up that total.
You can also take a look at draft bills that need approval. Until bills have been approved (so
anything with a Draft or Awaiting Approval status), they will not be included in any
reports you run within Xero, such as the Profit and Loss account. So, if you have an
approval process within your business, make sure that people adhere to it in order to
improve the level of accuracy of reports.

Learning Xero Purchases
[ 71 ]
Once you click on the summary, you will see the following table, which shows the bills
comprising that selection. You can also see tabs related to the other criteria within Xero,
making it easy to navigate between the various lists without having to perform searches or
navigate away from this screen and break your workflow.
This view also allows you to add new transactions and mark bills as paid, providing you
with an uninterrupted workflow across the purchases process.
Add contacts
You can add a contact in Xero when raising a bill in order to avoid having to navigate away
and come back, but you cannot enter any of the main contact details at that point. We
recommend that if you need to enter a purchase order to a new supplier, you add the
supplier first by navigating to Contacts | All Contacts | Add Contact so that you have all
the correct details required to issue the document.
Import
When you first start using Xero, or even if you have been using it for a while, you may have
a separate database elsewhere with your contacts. You can import these into Xero using the
predetermined CSV file template. This will enable you to keep all of your records in sync.
Navigate to Contacts | All Contacts | Import.

Learning Xero Purchases
[ 72 ]
When you click on Import, it will take you to a screen where you can download the Xero
contact import template. Download the file so that you can compile your file for importing.
We recommend that you perform a search in the Xero Help Guide at this point on Import
Contact and take a look at the following guide before attempting to import in order to make
sure you have configured the file correctly and there is a smaller chance of the file being
rejected:
Edit contacts
Once a contact record has been set up, you can edit the details by going to Contacts
| Suppliers; from here, you can find the supplier you need using the Search facility.
Click on the supplier; then the Edit button will take you to the contact record so that you
can make changes as required. Make sure you save any changes you have made.

Learning Xero Purchases
[ 73 ]
You may wish to complete some options here in order to make the processing of purchases
a bit easier and quicker by adding defaults. The items that you can default are the account
code where you would like to post the bills, and whether the amounts are exclusive of taxes
or inclusive. These will help make it quicker to post bills and reduce the likelihood of
mispostings. They can, of course, be overwritten when posting bills.
You can also choose a default VAT tax rate to use, which again can resolve issues where
people are not sure which tax rate to use.
There are various other default settings you can choose in the contact record, and we
suggest that you take a look at these to see where you can reduce the risk of mistakes being
made while making it quicker to process bills.

Learning Xero Purchases
[ 74 ]
Purchasing
Getting the payment of supplier bills correct is fundamental to running a tight ship. Making
mistakes in relation to purchasing goods can lead to incorrect stock holding, overpayments
to suppliers, or deliveries being put on hold, which could have a significant impact on the
trading of the business. Therefore, it is crucial that you do things the correct way.
Standard bills
There are many ways to create a bill in Xero. From the Bills you need to pay section on the
right-hand side of the main dashboard when you first log in, click on New bill, as shown
here:
Alternatively, you could do this by going to Accounts | Purchases | New.
You may notice that when you have drilled down into any of the summary items on the
dashboard above each tab, you will also see the option to add New Bill, as shown in the
following screenshot:
www.allitebooks.com

Learning Xero Purchases
[ 75 ]
As you can see, there are many ways to raise a new bill, but whichever way you do it, you
will be shown this screen:
If you start typing the supplier name in the From field, you will be provided with a list of
supplier names beginning with those letters in order to make it easier and quicker to make a
selection. If there is no contact record at that point, you can click on + add contact to add a
new supplier name so that you can complete raising the bill. As you start typing, Xero will
provide a list of possible matches, so be careful not to set up multiple supplier accounts.
The date of the bill will default to the day on which you are raising the bill. You can change
this, should you wish to be keying over the date. If you tab through the due date, it will
default to the day the bill is raised. If you have selected business-wide default payment
terms, then the date will default to what you have selected; likewise, if you have set a
supplier default credit term, then that will override the business default at this point.
The Reference field is where you will enter the supplier invoice number.
The paper icon allows you to upload items and attach them to the bill, such as a copy of the
bill itself, a purchase order, or perhaps a contract. It is up to you, but attaching documents
such as bills makes life a lot easier as clicking on the paper icon allows you to see the
document on screen, so no more sifting through filing cabinets and folders. You can also
attach more than one document should you need to do that.
You can use the Total field as a double-check if you like, but you do not have to use it. If
you prefer, though, you can enter the bill total in this field, and then, if what you have
entered does not total when you try to post the invoice, it will tell you and you can adjust
accordingly.

Learning Xero Purchases
[ 76 ]
You can change the currency of the bill at this point, but again, if you have suppliers that
you bill using a different currency, we would suggest setting this as a default in the contact
record in order to avoid the chance of posting the supplier bill in the wrong currency. If you
do not have multiple currencies set up in Xero, you will not see this option when posting a
bill.
The amounts are field can be used to toggle between tax-exclusive and tax-inclusive values,
which makes it easier when posting bills. If you have the gross purchase figure, you would
use the tax-inclusive figure and allow Xero to automatically calculate the VAT for you
without using a calculator.
Inventory items
Inventory items on a bill can save lots of unnecessary data entry if you have standard
services or products that you purchase within the business. You can add an inventory item
when posting a bill, or you can add them by navigating to Settings | General Settings
| Inventory Items. If you have decided to use inventory items, it would be sensible to do
some from the start and use the Import file to get them set up quickly and easily.
Each time you post a bill, you can select the inventory item that will pull through the
default description and the amounts for that inventory item. You can then adjust things as
required, but it saves you from having to key your product descriptions over and over
again.
If you are using inventory items, the amount you have purchased will be recorded against
the inventory item. If you use Xero for inventory control, it will make the required
adjustments between your inventory at hand and the cost of goods sold in the profit and
loss account.
If you do not use inventory items as a minimum, you will need to enter a description, a
quantity, the unit price, the purchases account you are posting it to, and the tax rate to be
used. Apart from making the data entry quicker, inventory items provide you with the
ability to run purchase reports by items. This means you do not have to set up a different
account code for each type of good you wish to report on. It is worth taking some time to
think about what you want to report on before posting your first bills.

Learning Xero Purchases
[ 77 ]
Once you have finished entering your bill details, you can save your bill or approve your
bill. The User Roles you have given employees will drive the functionality they have
available here. If you choose to save a bill, this appears in the Draft section of the purchases
summary on the dashboard. If you have a purchases workflow in your business where a
member of the staff can raise but not approve a bill, then save will be the option for them.
As you can see in the following screenshot, there are several options available. If you are
posting several bills at one go, you will choose Save & add another as this avoids you being
sent to the purchases dashboard each time and then having to navigate back to this section:
In order for a bill to be posted, the accounts ledgers will need to be approved.
Once the bill has been approved, you will see that a few extra options have now appeared
both above and below the invoice. Above the invoice, you now have the ability to print the
invoice as a PDF, attach a document, or edit the bill by clicking on Bill Options.
Beneath the bill, you will now have a new box appear, which gives you the ability to mark
the bill as paid if it has been paid.

Learning Xero Purchases
[ 78 ]
Beneath this, you now have the History & Notes section, which gives you a complete audit
trail of what has happened to the bill, including whether anyone has edited the bill.
Repeating bills
The process for the raising of a repeating bill is exactly the same as that for a standard bill
except for completing the additional fields in the following screenshot. You can choose the
frequency of the bill to be repeated, the date it is to start from, and the end date, which is
optional. The Due Date option, if set in the Bill Settings, will default to your business
default or the supplier default if you have a default set up in the Contact record.

Learning Xero Purchases
[ 79 ]
Before you can save the bill, you will have to select how you want the bill to be posted.
These are saved as drafts, in which case, someone will have to approve each bill, which
means that the bill will get posted to the accounting records with no manual intervention.
Here are a couple of points to note if you're using repeating bills:
You would only want to use this for invoices where there are regular items to be
posted to the same account codes and for the same amounts.
It is easy to forget that you have set these up and end up posting the bill as well
and duplicating transactions.
You can set a reference for the repeating bill and this will be the same for all bills
posted. If you were to Save as Draft rather than Approve a repeating bill, it will
give you chance to amend the reference to the correct invoice number before
posting.
You can enter placeholders to add the week, month, year, or a combination of
those in order to make sure the correct narrative is used in the description but
also use this for the reference and avoid the point raised earlier about using Save
as Draft instead of Approve.
Xero Network Key
Xero Network Key allows you to receive your bill data directly into your Xero draft
purchases section from someone else's sales ledger if they use Xero. This can be a massive
time-saver if you are doing lots of transactions with other Xero users. Each Xero
subscription has its own unique Xero Network Key, which you can share with the other
Xero business by entering it into the relevant field in the contact record.
If you opt to do this, your bill data will be passed through to the Draft Purchases section in
Xero, and you will need to check the details, enter the account code to post it to, and
then Approve. Minimal data entry is required and it is a much quicker process.

Learning Xero Purchases
[ 80 ]
To locate your Xero Network Key to provide to the other Xero user, go to Settings
| General Settings | Xero to Xero.
Batch payments
If you pay multiple invoices from a single supplier or your bank gives you the ability to
produce a BACS file to import to your online banking, then you may wish to use Batch
payments.
Batch payments speeds up the process of paying suppliers and reconciling the bank
account. It can do this in two ways:
You can mark lots of invoices from multiple suppliers as paid at the same time.
You can create a file to be imported into your online banking.
When the supplier payments appear on the bank feed, the amount paid from the
online banking will match what you have allocated in Xero, which means that
auto suggest comes into play and will make the correct suggestion rather than
you having to use Find & Match to find all of the individual payments you
allocated. This is time-consuming and error-prone.
Credit notes
Every now and then, your supplier might get it wrong, in which case, they might need to
issue you with a credit note.
The process for raising a credit note is the same as that used to add a standard bill, apart
from the fact that you would navigate to New | Credit note this time. You can tell the
difference, as the input screen for a credit note is a dull red color rather than light blue
when inputting a bill.

Learning Xero Purchases
[ 81 ]
If you are raising a credit note against a specific bill, then we would suggest doing it from
the bill as Xero will then allocate the credit note against the bill for you and it will be one
less thing for you to do. It also copies the previous bills' information across so if you do not
need to rekey all of the data again. From the invoice you are crediting, navigate to Bill
Options |Add Credit Note:
Using the bill I posted earlier, I want to credit 300 of the 600 packs of golf balls we
purchased. Instead of having to enter all the information, I simply need to change 600 to
300, and you can also see that the credit note is automatically credited against the original
invoice. On top of this, the inventory will now be adjusted to take into account the fact that
we only purchased 300 packs of golf balls and not the original 600.

Learning Xero Purchases
[ 82 ]
Allocation
There may be instances where a credit note is not specific to any one bill or the bill has been
paid, in which case you cannot raise a credit in that fashion.
Once a credit has been approved, you can allocate it against a bill of your choice, or if there
are multiple bills outstanding, you may wish to split it. You can do this by entering the
amount in the Amount to Credit box. Once you have finished or allocated the whole
amount, click on Allocate Credit to complete the allocation.

Learning Xero Purchases
[ 83 ]
It is sensible to do this as you cannot pick up credit notes when allocating payments from
the bank. You can allocate a part payment using the Split option, but you will still need to
go back and allocate the credit note, so it makes sense to do it the first time around if
possible.
You can allocate a credit note to a bill at a later date should you wish by going to the credit
note and navigating to Credit Note Options | Allocate Credit in the top-right corner,
which will open up the same window as the one shown earlier.
Summary
We have successfully added a purchase bill and identified the different types of bills
available in Xero.
In this chapter, we ran through the major purchases functions and set up repeating bills,
exploring how to use inventory items to make the purchases invoicing process even easier
and quicker. On top of that, we also looked at how to navigate around the purchases
dashboard, how to make changes, and also track exactly what has happened to a bill.
In the next chapter, we will start looking at the payroll process and learn how to deal with
paying employees and submitting the correct information to HMRC.

5
Processing Payroll
Payroll is the latest addition to the Xero family and one of the biggest. During this chapter,
you will be guided through the maze that is Payroll. The Xero Payroll solution is the
equivalent of a software solution in its own right and should be treated as such. Take your
time running through this section, as getting someone’s pay wrong is not a great feeling.
As Payroll is the newest addition to the Xero stable, it is also the one most likely to be
updated. We have therefore purposely tried to stick to the core items in this chapter.
These are the topics we'll be covering in this chapter:
Setting up Payroll in Xero
Dealing with any employee amendments in Xero Payroll
Processing a pay run
Dealing with end-of-period reporting
Basic payroll setup 
When you first use Xero for running your payroll, you will need to configure the system to
be ready for use. In order to do so, you will need to click on the Payroll tab in the
navigation screen at the top.
You will then be met with a list of options that need to be completed in order to complete
your first Payroll . There are four sections in total that need completing, which are:
Payroll Accounts
Pay Calendars
Tax Information
Employees

Processing Payroll
[ 85 ]
During this process, we will be using Payroll Settings a lot, so you may wish to add this to
your Favorites under Settings to make it easier and quicker to navigate. If you do so, then
each time we mention General Settings in a navigational sense, you can ignore it and go
straight to Payroll Settings.
When you successfully complete each one, you will see that a green tick appears next to the
section, as shown in the following screenshot:
Setting up payroll accounts
Click on Add Payroll Accounts to start the process.
If you need to edit payroll accounts at a later date, you can also gain access to the same
settings that need configuring by going to Settings | General Settings | Payroll Settings
| Organisation.
You will see the following screenshot, which has default account codes selected for you.
Make sure these are as you want them. As an example, Xero defaults to posting PAYE and
NIC to two separate control accounts. In reality, the end user may not split the payment out,
so you may want to set both PAYE and NIC to go to the same account code to make life
easier:

Processing Payroll
[ 86 ]
If you wish to have more detail in your accounts and want to be able to post amounts to
tracking categories, you can do so using the Employee Groups section, as shown in the next
screenshot. Using the dropdown, you can choose one of the two tracking categories that
you have set up in Xero.
To allocate employees to an employee group, from within the employee record, select
Employment | Employee Group and you will then be able to select which category options
are available under that tracking category, as shown in the next screenshot.
Once you have made a selection, do not forget to click on Save, and then each payroll
posted afterwards will allocate the costs against the tracking category for reporting
purposes.

Processing Payroll
[ 87 ]
Whenever you do something in Xero Payroll when changing settings or updating employee
details, make sure you click on Save. There is a green banner that appears at the top of the
screen, as shown in the following screenshot, which will confirm that the change has been
saved. The banner does not slide up and down the page; therefore, if you are at the bottom
of a screen, you will need to scroll up to the top to make sure the change has been
completed.
Once you have completed these steps, you will have completed the first of the four steps
required to get your payroll ready.
Setting up Pay Calendars
The next stage to complete the payroll setup process is to tell Xero Payroll the frequency of
your payrolls. You may have businesses that have more than one pay frequency, that is,
weekly and monthly, which can be catered for using Xero Payroll. Do this with the Payroll
| Overview | Add Pay Calendars button.
You will then be presented with the following screen, which will allow you to set up your
payrolls based on the frequency. If you have more than one payroll period, then simply
complete this process for each frequency. Click on Add Pay Calendar:

Processing Payroll
[ 88 ]
On the following screen, you can see that there are simply four items that require
completing to get the pay calendar set up. Use the dropdown to select the pay period,
which is the frequency of your payroll. Using Xero Payroll, you can run a weekly,
fortnightly, four-weekly, monthly, quarterly, and annual pay period, so you can see that it
is extremely flexible.
Then, you can choose a payroll name for your payroll, which quite often will simply be the
same as the frequency, but it is up to you to choose something that you will find easy to
identify.
Start Date is the date on which the payroll you are setting up is to start, with the first
payment date being the date on which you will be paying employees on that payroll for the
first time.

Processing Payroll
[ 89 ]
When you have finished, click on the Add button, and you will have set up your first 
payroll. If you only have one pay frequency, then you are done with this stage and can
move on to step three.
Setting up Tax Information
In order to file your RTI submission to HMRC, you need to enter your HMRC login
credentials into Xero. Click on the Add Tax Information button:
 

Processing Payroll
[ 90 ]
You will need to enter your Employer PAYE Reference number and your Accounts Office
Reference number, which will have been supplied by HMRC when you originally
registered with them for PAYE. You do not need to complete the other fields, but you may
wish to for good housekeeping.
The Small Employers Relief and the Employment Allowance options will be specific to
your individual circumstances. Make sure you get this bit right to ensure that you are
claiming everything you are entitled to, or not, as the case may be.
If you do not know what these are, then we would suggest speaking to your accountant,
and failing that, you will need to seek guidance from HMRC.
Once you have completed the previous options, you will be asked to enter your HMRC
login credentials so that Xero can submit your payroll submissions to HMRC directly from
the system. Enter you details in the RTI Submission section, as shown in the next
screenshot. If you are submitting as an agent, select the Yes option, and then you will be
presented with some further fields to complete.

Processing Payroll
[ 91 ]
If the HMRC login credentials do not tie up with what HMRC expects, then they will not be
validated and you will receive the following warning message. You need to correct this
before moving on; otherwise, you will not be able to save this page.
Setting up Pay Items
Next up is configuring the pay items you will use when posting a payroll. This tells Xero
how to deal with the different things you might pay employees and also allows you the
ability to post costs into different account codes, should you want to be able to report on
overtime payments separately, for example.
While this is not on the list of the four things offered up by Xero, we would recommend
tackling it now so that when you add employees next, if you want to set up pay templates,
then the earnings and deduction types you will want will already be set up. It also means
that when you come to process your first payroll, everything is ready to go.
To add pay items, you will need to go to Settings | General Settings | Payroll Settings
| Pay Items.
From the tree on the left, you can choose which items you would like to add, such as
earnings, benefits, time off, deductions and reimbursements. Click on the Add button at the
top right and then add the details as necessary and click on Save. This will then become
available when you make payments to employees.

Processing Payroll
[ 92 ]
Adding employees
Adding employees gets its own section due to the amount of information that is required to
be entered. This being said, it is only the Personal Details, Employment, and Tax Details
sections that must be completed in order for an employee to be available to enter on a pay
run. The other sections added here are purely for information but, nonetheless, areas that
you may wish to set up from the off.
Adding employees is the last of the four stages that need to be completed before you can
process your payroll, so click on the Add Employees button and let's get started:
After you have completed the initial payroll setup process, you can add new employees
from the Employees section of Payroll or by using the New Task button that will become
available in Payroll Overview.
Entering personal details
As you can see from the following screenshot, you need to add basic personal details about
an employee to get them set up. Any fields not required have the word optional in brackets
after them. If you do have the optional information, you might as well enter it.

Processing Payroll
[ 93 ]
You will see that for each employee, there is an optional item called Employee Permissions,
which relates to whether an employee can approve time off for other employees. If you are
going to use the Time Off functionality in Xero, then some employees will need this ticked.
These employees will also need access to the payroll admin user role, so think carefully
about who should have this ability.
You can see from the following screenshot that as you complete each of the three
compulsory sections for an employee, it gets a green tick and the Setup section shows you
the status. Only when you have three ticks does the status become complete and you can
include that employee in your next pay run.

Processing Payroll
[ 94 ]
Entering employment details
As a minimum, you will need to fill in the National Insurance Number, NI Category, Start
Date, and Payroll Calendar options, which inform Xero which pay run the employee
belongs to, which is very useful if you are running multiple payrolls across a month.
Next, you need to complete the salary details for an employee. This will act as the default
position for each new pay run that you add this employee against:

Processing Payroll
[ 95 ]
Entering tax details
Finally, the tax information needs completing, which relates to the tax code that applies to
that employee. If you are bringing employees across from another system, then the Starter
Type field for all of them will be existing employee, in which case you will not see some of
the fields in the following screenshot:
Take time and care when completing this section, as entering the wrong information could
cause the employee to pay the wrong amount of tax. Xero will not be able to assist you with
queries about which tax code to use; they are there to help you use the system. If you have
any questions in relation to tax codes or calculation methods, we would strongly advise
speaking to your accountant or adviser.

Processing Payroll
[ 96 ]
Setting up auto enrolment
As the introduction of pension auto enrolment is still relatively new and the bulk of
businesses using Xero will not need to stage yet, this part of the payroll system requires
work. The majority of the businesses using Xero will need to start staging from February
2016 and Xero has laid the groundwork for the system to be able to cope with that. If you
are running an auto enrolment scheme, you should contact Xero directly with any queries
you may have.
Pension auto enrolment is a big undertaking that has been passed on to employers to
manage by the Government, and there is still a lot of uncertainty among small business
owners as to what the requirements are. Xero has put down the foundations to help you
fulfil your obligations.
You can see from the previous screenshot that when you enter tax details against each
employee, you have the ability to say whether someone is eligible for automatic enrolment,
but there is a lot of work required before making that call and also what happens when it
has been processed through the payroll.
Before you can say that someone is eligible for automatic enrolment, you will need to add
the pension provider details to Settings | General Settings | Payroll Settings | Auto
Enrolment.
From here, you can also configure the account codes to be used and the calculation of
pension defaults. These can be overridden at the employee pay slip level when completing
the payroll.
Entering opening balances
If you are bringing across your payroll data from another system, then you will need to
enter the employees yearly to-date payroll figures to ensure that the correct tax and national
insurance is applied. You will need to do this against each individual employee. Use the
P11 or equivalent report from your old payroll provider, and then navigate to Payroll |
Employees | Employee | Opening Balances then use the Tax – Current Employer section.
Enter the details as required from P11 reports for each employee:

Processing Payroll
[ 97 ]
This is also the same process you will need to complete when receiving a P45 for a new
employee. This time though, you will enter the gross pay and tax paid to date in the Tax –
Previous Employer section. Here, you will only enter the gross pay and tax paid to date
and not the national insurance.
Creating a Pay Template
For each employee, you have the ability to set up an individual template for them, which
avoids the need to add payments and deductions on each payroll, which is time consuming
and often leads to errors as things get forgotten.
To add a payment type or deduction such as a pension deduction, shown in the next
screenshot, you will need to add it to the Pay Template for each employee by going to
Payroll | Employees | Employee | Pay Template:

Processing Payroll
[ 98 ]
Then, you will be greeted with several options, where you can add a new earnings type,
deduction, reimbursement, benefit, or earnings order. To add one of these to the employees
pay template, click on +Add New under the relevant type and complete the details as
requested. This will then be added to the employee’s record each time a new payroll is
completed.
My payroll
One of the major innovations of Xero payroll is the ability to grant access to employees so
that they can carry out some routine administrative tasks, such as collecting pay slips,
requesting time off, and approving time off requests if they have been provided with that
ability in their employment record and have Payroll Admin access. This is optional and you
do not need to use it, but the more employees you have, the more time you may find that
this saves you time.
In order to invite employees, go to Payroll | Employees, then tick the boxes next to the
employees you wish to invite. You will then be able to click on the Invite to My Payroll
button, which up until that point was greyed out:
Note that you will only be able to invite those employees that have an e-mail address in
their employment record. If the tick box next to an employee's name is very faint, you will
not be able to select them, as they do not have an e-mail address entered.

Processing Payroll
[ 99 ]
On sending the invites, the employees will receive an e-mail, where they can log in to Xero.
If the employee has no other user rights in Xero, they will show up in the list of users as
payroll employee. If you were to click on them, you would see that their access is set to
None, that is, they cannot see anything within Xero other than their own payroll
information.
Payroll overview
Now you have completed the basic payroll setup, when you go to Payroll | Overview, you
will be confronted with a completely different view. The first thing you are greeted with is a
summary of the last payroll, the amount paid year to date, and a reminder of when the next
pay run date is. All useful information, I’m sure you would agree.
You can also carry out most of the important tasks from the overview using the New Task
button, as shown here, without navigating through several other menu options:
The Pay Runs screen will show you whether there are any payrolls in progress, and you can
also to start a new pay run from this section:

Processing Payroll
[ 100 ]
Processing payrolls
Now that you have completed the basic payroll setup and added your employees along
with any year to date tax and national insurance you may have needed, you are ready to 
process your first Xero payroll.
As with all things Xero, this has been designed to be effortless and simple. If there are no
changes to your standard payroll, then you could complete a payroll in as little as three
clicks.
Before you start your payroll, check whether you have completed any fixed changes to
employee records, such as pay increases and changes to tax codes. You can change the pay
during the payroll, but that change will not be reflected in the employment record for the
next pay run.
Approving time off
If there are any time off requests, then you will want to approve those prior to processing
your pay run, as these requests will appear on the pay slips. In theory, these should be
approved on an ongoing basis and certainly prior to the time off being taken, so they should
fall into the next payroll period.
Xero will calculate the holiday pay due, for example, using the details that have been
entered on the time off request. This means that employees can see the split between normal
pay and holiday pay easily on their pay slips.
From a reporting point of view, it also gives you the ability to report on the holiday pay
paid to each employee.
From Payroll | Time Off, select the time off requests you wish to approve and then click on
the Approve button at the top left. If you wish to look at a request in more detail, then you
can click on the request.

Processing Payroll
[ 101 ]
Only users with payroll admin access can view and edit the actual Time Off Request.
You can also submit and approve the request yourself if employees have not done it. In the
Time Off screen, click on New Time Off Request, complete the details, and then click on
Approve.
Process Pay Run 
Now you are ready; go to Payroll | Pay Runs | select the pay run for completion | 
Process Pay Run:
You can see all of the key details of your payroll, including the list of employees being
processed and their net pay. If you need to amend an employee's pay, simply click on it and
make adjustments as necessary.

Processing Payroll
[ 102 ]
Check the totals in the summary presented at the top of the payroll to double-check that
they are what you are expecting. 
Processing amendments
If you are not happy with the pay for an employee, you can amend it by clicking on the
employee's name. You will see a screen similar to the following one, with different earnings
and deductions for that employee. You can amend these as necessary, or if there are new
earnings or deductions, click on +Add New and add the details as necessary.
If this is going to be something that happens in each pay period, then we would suggest
adding it to the pay template for that employee to make it easier for you going forward.

Processing Payroll
[ 103 ]
If you have made a bit of a hash of an employee's pay and you are not sure where you are
with it, then you can use the Reset Payslip button. This will return the pay slip back to how
it originally was, that is, what is set up on the employee's Pay Template:
Confirming Pay Run 
Once you click the Post button, you will be presented with a popup to complete the pay
run . This is your last chance to make any changes before the payroll is physically submitted
to HMRC. If you are happy, then click on the Complete Pay Run button. You have just
completed your three-click payroll.
Making employee payments
Once the payroll has been completed and the details submitted to HMRC, you are in a
position to make the employee payments. You will be taken back to the pay run summary
screen, which lists the employees and their net pay amounts. While in this screen, you can
log in to your online banking portal and set up the payments.
If you have several employee payments to make and you entered your BACS Service User
Number earlier when setting up your payroll, then you can click on the Options button in
the bottom left and choose to download a BACS file. If you did not do this at the time, you
can do it now by going to Settings | General Settings | Payroll Settings | Organisation.
You will need to have entered bank details for all employees in their employment record
under the Payment Method tab.

Processing Payroll
[ 104 ]
Paying HMRC
As you are in the making payments mood, why not set up the PAYE and NI payment that
will be due to HMRC by the 22
nd  of the following month when paying by BACS. You do
not have to do this now, but it saves you from trying to remember to do it later.
To work out how much you owe, you can download the P32 report from that trusty
Options button again, or if you have moved on to other things, you might choose Payroll |
Taxes & Filings when you come back later.
Issuing payslips
After you have set up your payments, you may feel the urge to issue your pay slips to
employees immediately. Using the Option button again when you have completed your
pay run, you can choose to either e-mail pay slips or download them:
A word of caution here is that you need e-mail addresses to issue employees pay slips.
When you choose the Email Payslips option, you get a tick box-option to e-mail each one as
some employees may not wish to have their pay slips e-mailed to them. If you do e-mail
them, take care to try and use a personal e-mail address where possible. Nothing upsets a
workforce like knowing what your counterpart gets paid, and an employee covering for
someone else's inbox while they are on holiday can lead to problems.
End-of-period reports
There are several end-of-period reports that need filing with HMRC, but as you can see in
the next screenshot, most are created automatically by Xero when completing the other
payroll processes. One thing is for sure, once you have completed your payroll for a period,
you will want to double-check the Payroll | RTI Filings page to check that each Pay Period
has a green Accepted Status. This tells you that the reports have been successfully
submitted to HMRC.

Processing Payroll
[ 105 ]
Pay periods that do not have the Accepted Status should be investigated. Click on the Pay
Period and then on Download HMRC Response, which will detail why it was not accepted.
Make the necessary adjustments, click on the declined Pay Period, and then you can
resubmit the details to HMRC.
Claiming statutory payments
Xero does not currently support an automated process for statutory payments, so these
need to be calculated manually and added to the payroll system. This is not ideal, and if
you operate a lot of SMP or SSP, you may wish to wait this one out until it has been
completed. This is an area where issues can arise, and we would thoroughly recommend
speaking to Xero support when dealing with any type of statutory payment to make sure
you get it right.
The general process is to treat statutory payments as a Time Off type, and they should be
processed in much the same way as holidays.
Employment allowance
Most businesses in the UK are eligible to claim an employment allowance, which allows
them to deduct an amount from the employer's national insurance that is paid to HMRC.
Although Xero calculates the amount for you and enters it into the relevant P32 report and
screens, it does not actually make the posting into the account codes for you. You need to
post a manual journal between the account code you are posting your national insurance
liability to and the profit and loss account you post the employer's national insurance cost
to.

Processing Payroll
[ 106 ]
Use the information shown in the following screenshot in the Recoveries column to work
out how much the journal should be for each pay run. This can be found in Payroll | Taxes
& Filings. This is a shortcoming in Xero Payroll, as this should happen automatically when
the payroll is processed and is standard among other integrated accounts and payroll
solutions.
Sending an FPS – full payment submission
An FPS is automatically sent to HMRC each time you post your pay run. It happens at the
point when you agree to complete a pay run, as detailed earlier. At this stage, HMRC is
notified of what you have paid your employees and any deductions you have made. It
should be submitted each time you pay your employees, either on the day or before, if
possible.
Sending an EPS – employer payment summary
An EPS should be submitted to HMRC by the 19
th of the month following your pay run.
This details when you reclaim any statutory payments or have funds withheld for CIS and
sends information about the employment allowance you have claimed.
If you make no employee payments in the period, then you will not submit an FPS, but
submitting an EPS will notify HMRC of the fact that no employees were paid. In order for
this to happen, create a pay run and deselect all employees before you post the payroll.
Xero sends the EPS to HMRC automatically each month.

Processing Payroll
[ 107 ]
CIS deductions
As an EPS is automatically sent to HMRC each month by Xero, if you have suffered CIS
deductions, you will need to enter the amount into the Scheduled Monthly EPS screen
before this happens. Xero recommend, you do this by the 12
th of each month, which gives
you a week to complete the EPS information as each PAYE period runs from the 6
th to the
5
th.
To enter the CIS figure, go to Payroll | RTI Filings | Schedule EPS, where you will see the
following screen. Enter the amount you have suffered for CIS in the Amount field and then
click on Schedule EPS.
The EPS will then be sent to HMRC automatically by Xero.

Processing Payroll
[ 108 ]
Summary
We have set up Xero Payroll, added our employees, and walked through processing our
first payroll from start to finish.
In this chapter, we have run through the major period-end reports, the different stages of
completing a payroll, and how to edit employee and payroll setup.
In the next chapter, we will look at how to simplify expense processing and how you can
actually make accounting fun and easy with the use of the Xero Touch mobile app.

6
Xero Expenses and Xero Touch
During this Xero section, you will cover the Xero parts that might not get the exposure they
deserve but can still help you run an efficient operation. You will learn how to manage your
expenses and key business processes on the run using mobile devices.
By the end of this chapter, you will have a thorough understanding of how to process
personal expenses, including how employees can do it themselves. You will also know how
to navigate Xero Touch, the mobile solution to run your business from your phone or tablet.
We'll be covering the following topics in this chapter:
Submitting Expense Claims and understanding the process
Downloading and using Xero Touch to get the best of Xero on the go
Expense Claims
Expense Claims in Xero should be used only when you are reclaiming money that has come
from a personal bank account, personal credit card, or your cash.  All other types of
expenses paid from a business bank account will show on a bank feed or import, and you
do not want to double on the transactions in your ledgers.
The simplest way, therefore, to reduce the amount of expense claims submitted is to buy as
much as possible on business cards and from business accounts, especially where a bank
feed is available.
I think Xero would admit that Expense Claims is not up to the standard of the other features
available. It does feel clunky compared to the slickness usually encountered and does have
limitations around user roles.

Xero Expenses and Xero Touch
[ 110 ]
Process
In order to complete an Expense Claim in Xero, there are several stages that the claim needs
to go through. This works well for larger entities that have segregation of duties and checks
to be carried out, but for smaller owner managed businesses it does mean a few more clicks
than are necessary.
To start an expense claim from the main navigation, select Accounts | Expense Claims
where you will be presented with the following screenshot:
From this screen, you can see that there is an Add Receipt button that you will click to add
a new personal expense. You would build these up throughout the period and then submit
for authorization in line with the business procedures, be it weekly or monthly.
 
Note that you can only see expense claims that you have entered. You will
not be able to see items that other people have entered unless you are an
authorizer and they have sent the expense claim for authorization. This
means if you enter personal expenses on behalf of someone else, then as
far as Xero is concerned you are the claimant. If you wish to enter
expenses for other employees, you can log in as them that we will never
recommend or set them up as a supplier and enter the expenses, as if they
were bills against that supplier record. If you give access to Xero at Invoice
Only and Purchases Only, for example, then the user will be able to log in
to Xero and see contacts and the Purchases section of Xero.  Choose your
user roles very carefully by doing some research in the Xero Help Guide
and especially the community postings.  The lack of an expense, only user
role, means a lot of people avoid the use of Expense Claims altogether.

Xero Expenses and Xero Touch
[ 111 ]
Add Receipt
Xero's Expense Claims are quite inflexible and once a claim has been approved there is no
way to adjust individual items on the claim, so you will need to delete the expense claim
and reprocess, or you can use a manual journal. This was before the wonderful introduction
of Find & Recode, which allows you to make adjustments to Expense Claims and recode
the source transaction keeping everything present and correct.  This is available, if you have
advisor access, from Advisor | Find & Recode.
Click on the Add Receipt button in the main Expense Claim section, as shown in the
preceding screenshot, and you'll see the following screen:
There are now a series of fields that need to be completed. The following is a breakdown of
what you need to complete as a minimum to process the expense.
The Receipt from field allows you to select the supplier that the expense relates to. If you
start typing in the supplier name, if it is known to Xero then it will make suggestions for
you to choose from.
The Date field should be the date of the personal expense as per the receipt or invoice.
The Reference field can be something specific to the receipt or invoice such as the invoice
number or a number on the document, so you can refer back to it. Some businesses may use
a numbering system and write that number on the receipt to file and easily retrieve later.

Xero Expenses and Xero Touch
[ 112 ]
Don't forget that in the top right-hand corner is the paper icon, which allows you to upload
items against the claim and store electronically.
You can enter a total, which acts as a cross check for the items you enter on the receipt. If
the items you have entered do not balance with the total, you will be warned by Xero that
the totals do not match, and that will need correcting before it allows you to save the
receipt.
The Description field is used to enter a narrative on what was on the receipt. Write a solid
description or attach an image of the receipt so anyone who looks at it can easily see what
the purchase was for. This makes it easier when looking at reports. 
The quantity, unit price, and account code fields need to be completed in order for the
system to work out the amount of the expense and where to post it to in the accounts.
Add a new line gives you the ability to split out the receipt to different account codes so if
the purchase made relates to different places you can. If the purchase made is going to the
same account code then “don't go nuts” and create a new line for each item on the receipt, it
is simply not required. 
When you have finished entering the details and it balances back to the receipt, you can
click on Save to post the receipt as a draft or if you have other receipts to process you can
use the Save & Add Another Receipt as shown in the following screenshot, to remain in the
same place but have a clean receipt screen into which you can enter your next receipt
details.
As you can see from the preceding screenshot, it is not much different from completing
those old expense spreadsheets you have used. The beauty is that it will always add up, you
can amend mispostings and you can even restrict the account codes that people can post to
in the Chart of Accounts.
From Settings | General Settings | Chart of Accounts, you can untick or tick the box
against each account code that says Show on Expense Claims and that will drive what a
claimant can see and therefore post to when entering expenses. This can be great for
limiting errors.  Don't forget to click on Save.

Xero Expenses and Xero Touch
[ 113 ]
Overall it gives your process a workflow and segregation of duties which is normally
lacking in most businesses and can be one of the biggest areas open to staff abuse.
Edit/delete
As your receipts are saved, they are in the system as draft until such time that they have
been submitted and approved. This means that you can edit or delete them at any point up
until submission.
From the Expense Claim screen, you can edit a receipt by clicking on it and making the
adjustment and then clicking on Save.
To delete a receipt, click on the tick box next to the receipt entry and then click on Delete.
You will get a pop-up screen asking you to confirm that you wish to delete the receipt, then
click on OK to confirm the deletion or click on Cancel, if it is a mistake.
Once items have been submitted, it is much harder for the claimant to make adjustments
unless they have advisor's access, so we will recommend that you enter expenses in small
batches. If you need to make changes to the expense claim itself, you have to void the entire
claim and re-enter all receipts, so doing things in small batches can sometime be a great
time saver.
Submit
Once you have finished entering your receipts and you wish to get reimbursed, you will
need to submit them for approval. This will collate all of the individual receipts into an
expenses claim to be authorized. You can tick the receipts you wish to submit and then click
on the Submit for Approval button:

Xero Expenses and Xero Touch
[ 114 ]
Tabs and statuses
Running across the top of the Expense Claim screen are a series of tabs which indicate the
status of an expense claim, of which you may have several in progress at any one time.
The Current Claim screen shows you the list of receipts you have currently entered that are
in the draft status. Note that anything set here will not show in the accounting records until
it has been approved.
The Previous Claims tab shows you the previous claims you have made and the status of
those claims. If you wish to go back and see what was on that expense claim, you can click
on it.

Xero Expenses and Xero Touch
[ 115 ]
Once an expense claim has been submitted for approval, it will move from the Current
Claim tab to the Awaiting Authorization tab. A Xero user with approver's access will then
need to approve and authorize the submission.
The authorizer will have the option of using the checkboxes next to the items being claimed
to either mark them as Approved or Decline the item if it is not allowable in line with
business policy or delete the item.
There should be an issue with the expense claim, the authorizer can choose to Delete
Expense Claim altogether.  For easy review you could also choose to View Expense Claim
Summary Report. This produces a report with all of the receipts listed with the amounts
sorted into columns of account codes, the same as the expense claim spreadsheets most
people use today.

Xero Expenses and Xero Touch
[ 116 ]
Once items have been ticked and approved, you will then be presented with a new box in
the bottom left of the screen which asks you to authorize the expense claim. Here you can
enter the date that payment is due and the reporting date being the date that the
transactions will appear in your Xero reports. At this point, once the Authorize button has
been clicked the costs will appear in your accounting records.
Once the expense claim has been approved and authorized, it will then carry on its journey
to the Awaiting Payment tab.
If you know when you are going to make the payment, you can enter the payment details
by clicking on the claim in the Awaiting Payment tab and completing the payment details
much the same as you will for other purchase bills. Note that expense claims do not show in
Accounts | Purchases, so you need to keep an eye on Accounts | Expense Claims to make
sure you don't miss anything. Employees do not like being kept waiting to have
their reimbursement.
Even once an expense claim has been submitted, approved, and authorized, you still get a
chance to Void Expense Claim from the Awaiting Payment tab should you decide before
paying it that it needs removing.
All expense claims that have been authorized will be moved to the Archived tab.
Mileage
Mileage is a weakness in the Xero armor. There is no in app mileage solution which takes
into account the car you drive, the amount of miles completed year to date, or whether you
claim back the VAT.  None of that I am afraid.
There is a workaround though using the Expense Claim. Enter each mileage claim as a
receipt with the claimant as the receipt from, and then enter the details of the trip in the
Description field with the number of miles travelled as the quantity, with the unit price
being the amount per mile you are claiming.

Xero Expenses and Xero Touch
[ 117 ]
If you are claiming VAT back on your mileage, then we recommend splitting the receipt
and entering two lines. The first being the amount that you cannot claim VAT back on as
Zero Rated Expense and then a secondary line which is for the amount per mile that you
can claim VAT back on as 20% VAT on expenses. We have included an example in the
following screenshot:
The process for submitting a mileage claim will then be identical to submitting a normal
receipt as you have entered it as such. You can choose to submit your mileage for approval
separately from your receipts using the tick box next to the entries, or simply submit all of
your items together in one expense claim.

Xero Expenses and Xero Touch
[ 118 ]
Xero Touch
You will love Xero Touch, although it can become a little bit addictive. 
Xero Touch does not offer all of the features of the full blown platform but there is certainly
enough to keep your business ticking over when you are out and about. The main features
include reconciling the bank, submitting expense claims, and sending invoices, to name but
a few.
If you have multiple organizations on Xero, then you can access them all from within your
Xero Touch app. There is even a demo company for you to play with, before using your live
data.
Downloading
To get started with Xero Touch you will first need to download the app to your mobile
device. This can be done by searching Xero in your App Store. The app is available on
iPhone, iPad, and Android.
Dashboard
Your Xero Touch Dashboard will look something like the one in the following screenshot.
Double check the business name at the top to make sure you are looking at the right
business, as it is easy to end up posting stuff in the wrong place.
To change organization, click on the list icon in the top left and then the Organization
section to choose the right one.

Xero Expenses and Xero Touch
[ 119 ]
The dashboard shows your bank accounts and if you click on them it will take you into the
account to carry out reconciliation. The Invoices section shows you the varying sales
invoices you have outstanding in Xero and the status of these invoices. Again clicking on
these sections will drill down into the detail that makes up the balance.  Finally, the
Receipts section shows any expenses submitted and the status of these items. Clicking on
them will show you the items that make up the balance.
Bank reconciliation
Within Xero Touch, click on the bank account displayed on the dashboard that you wish to
reconcile. Each unreconciled bank line will be available for you to reconcile, exactly the
same as on the main Xero app. You will only see one bank line per screen. 
As per Xero, if it is green the system has found a match and provided you are happy with
the selection, you can click on OK and watch the transaction fall away of the page. Any
bank rules will show in blue, in line with what you would see in Xero. For any bank lines
where no suggestion is available you can create, find, and transfer just like when you are
using the main app.

Xero Expenses and Xero Touch
[ 120 ]
To work through the bank lines simply swipe up and down the screen to move between the
transactions that need reconciling.
One limitation of the bank reconciliation on Xero Touch is that you cannot deal with under
or over payments so these will need to be dealt with in Xero.
Invoicing
You can also raise a sales invoice using Xero Touch which is great for those people who
work out and about who are notorious for forgetting to invoice for work completed.  There
is no excuse as you can send an invoice straight to the customer as soon as the work is
completed. If you have payment services set up, you can even be paid before you get home.
Sit back, relax, and enjoy the weekend.
Either from the dashboard or after clicking on the Invoices icon at the bottom, you will see
a + symbol in top right-hand corner, which will allow you to create a new sales invoice.
The invoice options presented are exactly the same as in Xero down to being able to add
files, choose inventory items, and select the branding theme. This means the invoice
received by the customer is the same as they will receive from the main app— they would
not know if you were in the office or the Bahamas. No more being chained to the desk.
Work where and how you want, feels good doesn't it?
Expenses
Either from the dashboard or after clicking on the Receipts icon at the bottom, you will see
a + symbol in the top right-hand corner which will allow you to create a new receipt.
The receipt options presented are displayed in a slightly different way to an expense claim
in Xero, making it easier for the end user to submit the expense correctly and quickly. It
may be employees using Xero Touch in which case you want them to put data in correctly
to make the bookkeeping easier.

Xero Expenses and Xero Touch
[ 121 ]
Xero appreciates that you want a quick and easy experience when using the mobile device
so fields such as Description offer popular receipt descriptions so you do not need to key in
the word. Categorizing the account code is made easier by having a search box.
All these items add up to a better user experience and help in the transfer of businesses
from spreadsheets to business management tools.

Xero Expenses and Xero Touch
[ 122 ]
Contacts
Using Xero Touch, you have access to your Xero contacts at your fingertips. Never get
caught out of the office again without these crucial contact details. Using the Notes &
History section, the sales team can keep abreast of what has been sent to a customer and
when. No more excuses for nonpayment, you can see when invoices and statements have
been sent out. 
Summary
We have successfully added personal expenses and walked through the workflow
involved. 
In this chapter, we have run through the major stages of entering, submitting, and
approving personal expenses. On top of that we have also looked at how Xero Touch gives
you the ability to run your business affairs and deal with most day-to-day matters from a
mobile device whilst on the run. 
In the next chapter, we will start looking at how Xero Inventory can help speed up
invoicing and track sales and purchases.
 
 
 

7
Managing Inventory
Learn how to use Xero inventory to help manage and monitor your inventory levels.
Integrated inventory allows you to report on profitability and maintain inventory levels
automatically when using sales and purchase ordering alongside sales invoicing and bills.
Even if you don't have piles of inventory lying around to manage, you may still want to use
untracked inventory to record how many services you have sold and the average sales
price. Inventory in Xero really is for all types of businesses and industries.
These are the topics we'll be covering in this chapter:
Adding inventory items to reduce manual data entry and to speed up quoting
and invoicing
Updating the inventory on your balance sheet so you always know the real-time
value of your inventory
Tracking the quantities and value of your inventory on hand, which gives you
better control of what you buy and sell
Easily understanding which items are being sold and how much profit you're
making
Which inventory
Xero can track physical goods as well as use untracked inventory, which could be used to
monitor services. However, this is not limited to services as there may be products you wish
to monitor but do not count as inventory.

Managing Inventory
[ 124 ]
Note that before going ahead with using inventory, you should know that it does not
support the use of multicurrency and will only work with your default currency.
Tracked inventory in Xero is designed to be used in a situation where you are purchasing
goods to be sold at a later date. If your business buys and sells goods immediately, then
don't use inventory. Instead, post the transactions straight to the cost of sales in the profit
and loss account. The idea of inventory is to match the purchasing cost in the same period
as the sales to uphold the accuracy and integrity of your gross profit margins in the profit
and loss account and to keep accurate records of the level of inventory held by the business
as an asset in the balance sheet.
You can use a combination of tracked and untracked inventory if your business needs
require a mixture of the two.
The main functionality for inventory in Xero can be found by navigating to Accounts
| Inventory. This will take you to your inventory list, which details all of your items,
whether tracked or untracked.
Untracked inventory
You should use untracked inventory to manage services that you buy and sell in Xero.
Using untracked inventory allows you to speed up the process of entering data into
purchase orders, sales orders, bills, and sales invoices. When you create a transaction such
as a sales order, the first field that you need to fill is called Item, as shown in the following
screenshot. This is where items that you have set up will appear, and rather than entering
the same information time after time, you can simply select what you need.
The data pulled through this is then saved against the inventory item record. If you wish to
change the quantity or unit price, for example, this can be done at the transaction level. If,
however, this is a permanent change, then you will want to edit the inventory item.

Managing Inventory
[ 125 ]
When creating an inventory item whether tracked or untracked, you set a default
description, unit price, account code, and tax rate. This makes it extremely quick and
accurate to raise a sales order for a customer with minimal chance of errors. You can do this
on the fly when creating a transaction by clicking on the Item field and then clicking
on +Add Item at the top of the drop-down menu.
You may also add new items to your inventory at any time by going to
Accounts | Inventory | +New Item.
If you decide to add a new item, as it is not already listed, then fill in the boxes as required,
as shown in the following screenshot. For untracked inventory, it is likely that you will not
be purchasing the goods or services that you are selling. However, if you are purchasing,
you can also set up the item so that it is available when you are raising purchase orders or
bills to ensure that consistency is applied and to help with reporting and analysis.

Managing Inventory
[ 126 ]
Give the product or service an item code and item name, something that will be easy for
users to work out what the product or service relates to.
For untracked inventory, leave the I track this item box unticked. Then, if you purchase this
product or service as well as sell it, complete the other fields as necessary. Don't forget to
click on the Save button in the bottom-right corner when you have finished.
The product or service you have added will now be available for users to select when
raising transactions in Xero, and this will also enable you to run reports on what has been
bought and sold. However, as the products or services are not being tracked, Xero will not
track these products or services for inventory control purposes or post the values to the
accounting records.

Managing Inventory
[ 127 ]
Tracked inventory
You use tracked inventory in Xero to manage and count your inventory items. Using
tracked inventory in Xero will also automatically update your accounting records. It does
this by keeping a count of the goods bought and sold from the inventory items that you
have entered in your bills and sales invoices. Xero, therefore, can calculate the number and
value of items on hand, meaning there is no reason for small businesses to no longer have a
decent grasp of their inventory.
Xero uses the average value when calculating the value of inventory. If your business
operates on FIFO or LIFO, then using Xero inventory may not be right for you.
Once an item is marked as tracked, Xero updates its quantity and value on hand when a
transaction is entered and not at the transaction date.
To add a tracked item to Xero, the process is identical to that of untracked, as shown in the
preceding section, except the fact that you will need to tick the I track this item box.
Changing methods
There may be occasions when you want to change the method being applied to an 
inventory item, and this is achievable within Xero in certain circumstances.
To change the method being applied to an inventory item, go to Accounts | Inventory |
select Item |Edit item | and tick or untick I track this item.
If the box is unticked, then the item is deemed as Untracked, and if it is ticked, then it
is Tracked.
Untracked to tracked
If you are changing items from untracked to tracked because you now want to track the
quantity on hand and have Xero post the accounting transactions, then you may need to
add an opening balance. If you already have items in hand when converting, then you will
want to add opening balances, so you start from the right-hand side position. This is
discussed later in this chapter. Also, you need to bear in mind the following:
As there are limitations to converting tracked inventory to untracked inventory,
make sure you have thought long and hard about converting before doing so.
You cannot convert an untracked item that has been used on a repeating invoice
or bill, so you would need to set up a new inventory item as tracked.

Managing Inventory
[ 128 ]
Ensure that you have marked any existing invoices or bills as approved. Since the
change happens as soon as the box is ticked, items on a draft, for example, will
take on the new status and affect that quantity at hand.
Tracked to untracked
There are few instances when you can change the status of a tracked item back to
untracked, which are highlighted in the following bullets. If your item does not fall into one
of these categories, then you will need to set up a new inventory item and perform an
inventory adjustment to reduce the inventory at hand down to nil. The instances are as
follows:
You have not used the tracked item in a transaction yet, made an adjustment, or
imported an opening balance.
You've imported an opening balance, but you haven't posted a transaction yet.
Then, you need to remove the opening balance and change the status to
untracked.
Here, we have discussed how to change a single inventory item, but if you have multiple
items that require changing, it might be better to export your inventory list. Change the
untracked and tracked status of the inventory item and then import the list again. This will
also be the required action if you wish to remove opening balances.
Add-ons
There are some limitations with Xero inventory, so if it is not the right fit for your business,
don't try and shoehorn it in. You'll just end up with lots of workarounds, wasting time, and
inaccurate figures. For some businesses, an add-on inventory solution is more suitable. You
might consider using an add-on if your business has the following operations:
Creating bills of materials because you manufacture goods for sale
Regularly operating with negative inventory, that is, you sell goods before you've
purchased them
Requires purchase order receipting
Using a different inventory accounting method other than average cost, for
example, FIFO (first in, first out) or LIFO (last in, first out)
There are several excellent inventory products that can be found in the Xero Marketplace at
h t t p s : / / w w w . x e r o . c o m / u k / a d d - o n s / c a t e g o r y / i n v e n t o r y /.

Managing Inventory
[ 129 ]
Inventory items
Inventory items within Xero form the bedrock of all things inventory, so it is important to
understand the basics. While, you can make amendments to the type of inventory, it can get
messy if you end up with multiple inventory items for the same products and services.
There is no guarantee that users will follow processes or use the same items, which can lead
to your inventory getting messy very quickly.
Import
If you are new to Xero or new to Xero inventory, then you may have been using another
system for recording your inventory, or perhaps spreadsheets. Don't be put off using Xero 
inventory because of the amount of work involved in bringing that data across. You can
import that data into Xero inventory using the prebuilt import file, which is similar to that
of importing sales invoices. This makes the process quick and easy.
To get the import file template, go to Accounts | Inventory | Import | Items and
download the template file.
The Xero Help Guide is your friend here to make sure that you get your file ready for
import. Using the Help facility, perform a search on import inventory and run through
the import inventory items into Xero guide.

Managing Inventory
[ 130 ]
Opening balances
Opening balances for tracked inventory needs us to import separately from when you
create the inventory items. In order to import opening balances, the item code and item
description will need to be identical to the item listed in Xero. For this reason, we would
recommend you download the template from Xero.
Don't forget that your inventory balance needs to be greater than 0 before Xero allows you
to raise a sales invoice selling those items. Once you have imported your items, you will
need to enter the opening balances before you can start processing transactions that involve
tracked inventory.
The Xero Help Guide will help us here to make sure that you get your opening balances
ready for import. Using the Help facility, search enter inventory opening balances and
work through the enter opening balances for tracked inventory items guide.

Managing Inventory
[ 131 ]
Troubleshooting
The accounting behind Xero inventory is designed to make your life easier and create a
reliable inventory count. This means that it will stop you from doing some things that other
systems may allow, but that is a good thing. The following are some of the more common
problems you may encounter:
Negative inventory: Xero doesn't let you enter an invoice or a credit note,
or receive a money transaction if your tracked inventory item's quantity or value
falls below zero. Double-check your previous postings to make sure that your
inventory is not zero.
Deleting inventory: You can't delete an inventory item that has been used on a
repeated invoice or bill or one that has been used on an approved bill or invoice.
Editing
You can edit an inventory item at any time you choose by going to Accounts | Inventory |
select the item by clicking on it | Edit item.
Make your changes as necessary and then click on Save. You will also note that the paper
icon is available in an item record, which means that you can add documents to the item
record. It can be useful to add pictures of inventory to the record, as this can help people

Managing Inventory
[ 132 ]
when carrying out a physical inventory count to identify the right products.
If you change the item code, the change will flow through to existing transactions, quotes,
and purchase orders using that inventory item.
Changes or additions to any other fields will only affect future transactions, quotes, and
purchase orders using that inventory item.
Exporting
You can download your complete inventory items list from Xero into either a CSV or PDF
format. This is great for you to be able to review all the details assigned to each of your
items line by line. This can also be very useful if you decide you want to edit many items at
the same time, as you can export your current list, edit the account code to be used, for
example, and then import it. This is much quicker than trying to edit each item one by one.
To export your inventory list, go to Accounts | Inventory | Export.
Deleting
There are a couple of ways to delete inventory items in Xero, in bulk or by single item.
Bear in mind that there are limitations in what can be deleted. If your inventory item has
been used in a repeated invoice or bill or on an approved transaction, then you will not be
able to delete it.
In such a case, we would advise you to change the name of the inventory item so that the
users are aware not to use that item any longer. Then, enter Do Not Use or something
similar. If you are now using another item in a direct replacement of this one, you might
suggest Use XXX to make sure that users enter inventory against the correct products.

Managing Inventory
[ 133 ]
Go to Accounts | Inventory and tick the items that you wish to delete, and then the Delete
button grayed out in the header will now become active. You will now be able to click
on Delete to remove the items. You will have to confirm the deletion on the popup that
appears.
If you are deleting an individual item when inside the inventory item record, click on
Options in the top-left corner and then on Delete. Again, you will need to confirm the
deletion on the popup.
Accounting
We are now going to step things up and work through the accounting behind inventory.
Everything else is irrelevant if the accounting does not actually work. The easiest way to do
this is through a worked example.
Inventory
When you set up a tracked inventory item, you are asked to choose an inventory asset
account. This is where the purchase cost in relation to the items purchased will be posted,

Managing Inventory
[ 134 ]
building up an inventory asset on the balance sheet. At the same time, the inventory item
record is updated so that it shows the number of items now in hand, average cost, the
number committed in orders, and the most recent transactions: everything you need to run
a simple goods-in and goods-out type of operation.
From the preceding screenshot, you can see that in raising a new bill for large black t-shirts,
Xero tells you how many items you already have in hand. At this instance, we order
another 10 items.
The account code these are posted to is 630 – Inventory, as this is what we set as the
inventory asset account when we told the system that this was a tracked item.
Now that we have purchased 10 items at 20.00 each, as you can see in the preceding
screenshot, in the account transactions report for 630 – Inventory, the amount has been
posted for 200.00, increasing the inventory asset on the balance sheet.
www.allitebooks.com

Managing Inventory
[ 135 ]
This also has the impact of changing the inventory item records to show that we now hold
15 items in hand and not 5, which we had prior to the purchase.
If you were to examine the inventory item to take a closer look, you would now see that the
Recent Transactions panel has been updated to show the purchase of another 10 items, as
shown in the preceding screenshot. This gives you a great audit trail per item.
Sales
Now, we move on to how the sales are shown in the profit and loss account. Again, we are
going to use an example where we have sold 8 of the large back t-shirts that we purchased
earlier.

Managing Inventory
[ 136 ]
The preceding screenshot is taken from within the inventory item record, where we can see
that the sales price for the product is 40.00 and account code it gets posted to is 200 – Sales.
We have raised an invoice to sell 8 large black T-shirts, and again, Xero very kindly prompts
us with how many we have in hand. If we tried to sell more than 15, we would be creating
negative inventory, which Xero does not allow.
Now that we have raised this sales invoice from the preceding inventory item list, you can
see that Xero is now correctly recording that we have just 7 items in hand.
The amount posted to 200 – Sales is 320.00 as 8 items were sold at 40.00 each, so we now
know that the inventory levels recorded are correct and the amount posted in the Sales
column in the profit and loss account is also as expected.
Cost of goods sold
Finally, we take a look at how the cost of goods sold is shown in the profit and loss account.
We are following through the earlier example, where we sold 8 large back T-shirts.

Managing Inventory
[ 137 ]
From the inventory item, we can see that when this item is sold, it is going to post to 310 –
Cost of Goods Sold.
As we have sold 8 large black T-shirts, and since we know from earlier that the average
purchase price was 20.00, Xero has posted 160.00 through to 310 – Cost of Goods Sold in the
profit and loss account. Overall, we are showing a profit in the profit and loss account of
160.00 being the 320.00 sale and the 160.00 cost of goods sold.
The sale of 8 large black T-shirts creates another transaction being the opposite side of our
Cost of Goods Sold transaction is 630 – Inventory, and we have reduced our inventory
figure in the balance sheet by 160.00 as it is the average value of the 8 items sold.

Managing Inventory
[ 138 ]
Monitor inventory
You have done the entire labor-intensive bit and entered your inventory items, added
opening balances where appropriate, and started entering transactions in Xero.
Now we will see what all this hard work was for. The following sections show the main
reports that you will find within Xero, which will help you understand which inventory
you have in hand and the value of that inventory.
The first two of these reports can be found by navigating to Reports | New Reports
| Inventory Reports.
The inventory item details
This report shows you in detail what has happened during a date range that you specify for
a particular item. Each item has an opening balance, so you can easily identify where you
started and what has been purchased and sold during the period you are reporting. The
total is displayed for both the total value and the quantity-in-hand value. This is a great
report to drill down to the specifics.
The inventory items list
This is a summary version of the inventory items details report, where you get a one-line
summary for each inventory item during the period reports on. From this report, you can
see the average unit cost and sales price alongside the total value and quantity in hand at
the end of the reporting period.
The report is also grouped by untracked and tracked inventories in this report.
The next two reports are located at Reports | All Reports | Performance Reports.
Sales by item
The sales by item report allows you to report the items that you have sold if you use
inventory items within Xero. This can be very helpful when you want to look at the best-
selling lines, check the average sales price of items to double-check that you are not giving
away too much discount, and to cut out errors that have been made.

Managing Inventory
[ 139 ]
The inventory items summary report
This is a great report for seeing the bigger picture. Look at it item by item and get a view of
the net movement in monetary and quantity terms as well as get a view of the average
purchase and sales price over a period of time of your choosing.
Summary
We have now set up your inventory system up and it is ready for use. In this chapter, we
explained how the various different elements of Xero inventory impact each other.
We went through the major processes of adding, editing, and controlling inventory. On top
of that, we also looked at how to troubleshoot some common problems.
In the next chapter, we will start looking at how Xero Reporting can supercharge your
accounting system and put you in a position to make better, quicker, business decisions
based on accurate, up-to-date information.

8
Real-Time Reporting
During this section, you will cover some of the Xero core reports to make sure you are
looking at the right data at the right time. There is no point having access to accurate, timely
information if you don't look at it. If you want to make better business decisions, then you
need to learn which reports to use, why them, and what they are telling you.
By the end of this chapter, you will have a thorough understanding of the Report center in
Xero, how to use some of the standard reports, and how to change defaults to fit your
requirements.
These are the topics we'll be covering in this chapter:
Navigating to the Reports section and favorite common reports
Understanding the different report stages and user permission rights
Running common reports and understanding the financial data presented
Amending reports and making them available for others
Report center
The Report center in Xero is where you can find all of the major reports available within the
system. Navigating to the report center is simple; click on Reports | All Reports; which will
show you the complete list. Now, you can start to see the fruits of your labor when getting
that data into Xero; put some context around those numbers and help better, quicker,
decision making.

Real-Time Reporting
[ 141 ]
As you can see in the preceding screenshot, All Reports is the first selection in the list,
followed by New Reports, which is Xero's version 2.0 of reporting, which offers a much
wider range of report customization. This is still a work in progress and a limited number
of the standard reports are available. For the ones that are available, it is worth having a
play with them just to get an idea of how much more you can do with reporting in 2.0.
The All Reports section within report center breaks the reports down into areas so you can
find the reports you need more easily:
Performance Reports: This shows how the business is performing based on
revenue and expenses
Position Reports: This shows how the business is positioned based on assets,
liabilities, and equity
Cash Reports: This shows how the cash levels are changing within the business
Detail Reports: This shows the details of transactions within Xero
Foreign Currency Reports: This shows how currency fluctuation has affected
your foreign currency transactions (only available in multicurrency)
Tax Reports: This shows the EC Sales List (only available to EC users)
Pay Run Reports: This shows details of your pay run transactions (only use if
running your payroll in a system external to Xero)
Favorites
Once you have been through the report center, you will start making some initial decisions
about which reports you will probably use on a frequent basis. Rather than having to go
into the report center each time, you can mark them as a favorite. These reports will then
show on the main navigation menu, making it easier and quicker to look at the reports that
are important to you.
When in the report center, click on the star next to the report name, which will then turn
blue. To deselect the report, simply click on the blue star, reverting it to white.

Real-Time Reporting
[ 142 ]
The reports denoted by a blue star are those which then show on the favorites list in the
Reports menu. As you can see, the items we have marked as Favourites now appear on the
menu navigation under favorites.
Draft/Published/Filed/Archived
The great thing about Xero is the real-time nature of the data and reporting that you can
receive. Using add-ons and your own ingenuity, you can now be working on financial
records that are as close to real time as you are going to get.
This means that reports can and will constantly change. You may wish to be able to refer
back to a report at a given point in time and you can do so by changing the status of a
report when you have finished working on it. This is particularly useful when producing
management accounts or similar information.
There are effectively four different report statuses within Xero, as itemized here.

Real-Time Reporting
[ 143 ]
Draft
When working on reports, you have the ability to add commentary to them by clicking on
the Add Summary button, usually located in the top left of the report.
You can also add Footnotes to specific elements within a report; when hovering over the
numbers in the report, a drop-down arrow will appear, and when click on this it will show
you some options, as shown in the following screenshot. One of these is the ability to add
a footnote so you can add some information about that value.
After you have started completing commentary and footnotes, you may not want to lose
this work but will have other things to do, so you can choose to Save as Draft. The report
will be saved and will retain the information you have entered for you to come back later.
The Save As Draft button is available in the bottom left of each report:
You can locate a saved report in the draft tab section of the report center. This sits alongside
the other tabs, which hold the published and archived reports. To open  draft report, you
simply click on it. Don't forget to save your reports; if you wish to return to them at a later
date, there is nothing worse than adding lots of comments and points and then navigating
away.

Real-Time Reporting
[ 144 ]
Published
Once you have completed work on a report and you want to lock it as at that point in time,
then you will want to publish it. This means you can return to it in the future and it will
still show the same information regardless of what extra postings have been posted in Xero
since it was published.
The button for publishing a report sits on the bottom-right side of the report.
After clicking on Publish, you will then be presented with some options before completing
the process, such as the ability to add/edit the report's title and details and whether to add
a cover page and table of contents, to name but a few. Unless there are specific reasons to do
so, we would advise you to stick with the defaults.
Filed with HMRC
The Filed with HMRC tab will show you any reports that have been filed with HMRC,
such as your VAT returns. As you can file VAT returns direct from Xero, there is no need to
log in and rekey the data into HMRC online.
If you do file from within Xero, please do make sure that the color of the font is not red as
this would indicate that there was an issue when filing the report to HMRC and that it has
not actually been successfully filed.

Real-Time Reporting
[ 145 ]
Archived
A published report has other options associated with it, which are shown in the screenshot.
If you click on a published report, you will find these options in the bottom-left corner. You
can choose to delete the report, archive the report, or copy and edit the report.
The copy and edit options can be very useful if you have spent time getting a report just the
way you want it, and each time you run it, you simply want to change the date criteria. Use
the copy and edit function and then change the date criteria.
The archive option allows you to move reports from the published section to the archived
tab. This gives you the ability to do a bit of housekeeping and keep the number of reports in
the published tab to a sensible number without deleting reports.
Export
Although working online is amazing, there will be times when you will want to hack
around the report or simply provide a non-Xero user with some information. You can do
both of these things using the Export option on reports. Next to the print button in the
bottom-right corner of a report is the Export button, which gives you the ability to save the
report as a PDF or export the data into either the Excel or Google Sheets format.
Once you have your reports in the format desired, you can edit them as you would with
any other data created in Excel or Google Docs.
 

Real-Time Reporting
[ 146 ]
Performance reports
Performance reports within Xero are those reports that show you how the business is
performing in relation to the revenue generated and the expenses paid. The most common
reports are the Profit and Loss and Sales by Item, which we discuss in more detail later.
We do strongly advise that you spend some time running through each report so you get a
feel for what data you can get from Xero. There is no one size fits all.
Profit & Loss
To run the Profit & Loss report, click on the hyperlink of that name. There are many
different ways in which people want to slice and dice their data and the Profit & Loss
report probably has more options than any of the other reports for that reason.
Using the Common Formats tab, you can find your way around the most common formats
you may want to see in your Profit and Loss account:
Current and previous 3 months: This will give you the profit and loss for your
current financial month and the previous 3 months for comparison purposes.
Year to date progress: This shows you the year to date figures to the day you are
running the report and the previous couple of periods so you can see where you
are in terms of the prior year's trading. The default position is the date you run
the report, which might not be useful if your postings are not up to date, so you

Real-Time Reporting
[ 147 ]
may wish to change the dates the report is running. You can do this by clicking
on the Compare Periods tab and choosing the dates you wish to report on. This
allows a lot of flexibility as you could now compare days, weeks, and months.
Month to date progress: This is the same sort of report as the year to date
progress but it shows the current month and then the previous 3 months for
comparison purposes.
Current financial year: This is great for businesses that enter budgets into Xero
as it shows the profit and loss account broken down month by month. The
budget is replaced by the actual, effectively giving you a forecast for the year.
Actual versus Overall Budget: This shows you the budget for the month versus
the budget for the year and the year to date versus the budget with variances.
This is a very useful view of your Profit & Loss report and is well worth using if
you enter budgets in Xero.
In the screenshot shown previously, you can see another option, Compare regions, which is
a tracking category that has been set up. This allows you to create a profit and loss report by
region or the category you have set up using tracking. You can therefore create a profit and
loss report by salesperson, region, or project for examples.
The Compare Periods tab drives the periods that are shown on the report. As you can see,
there are many options for the way in which you look at your data. For example, using
the Period dropdown, you can choose whether you want to look at months, quarters, 6
months, or years. The Compare With tab then allows you to decide how many periods you
wish to have for comparison. Bear in mind that this matches the period selected, so having a
3 month period and a Previous 3 periods to compare will give you a year split into four
quarters.

Real-Time Reporting
[ 148 ]
From the Show Date Range tab, you can be even more specific than just choosing periods to
display as you can now drill down to actual dates. This means you could look at the profit
and loss by day or week. This is great for retail businesses.
As you saw previously, there are three tabs and several options on each tab as to how you
can view the data. We have run you through some of the most common options but please
do explore to see what suits your needs best.
Sales by Item
The Sales by Item report allows you to report on the items you have sold if you use
inventory items within Xero. This can be very helpful when wanting to look at the best-
selling lines, to check the average sales price of items to double check you are not giving
away too much discount, and cut out errors being made.

Real-Time Reporting
[ 149 ]
This is a report that you can look at by day if you wish, and you simply need to change the
From and To date to get the report ready for running. You can also elect to view the results
by Item Code or Description. Don't forget when making changes to the selection criteria to
click on the Update button so it returns the results for the changes you have made.
As you can see, the report gives you the Current Unit Price, Quantity Sold, Total,
and Average Price for each inventory item. On top of that, you can also see a summary of
how the sales are made up for the whole period. This can be very useful to see where sales
reported are not of an inventory item nature. The Other sales section makes up a large
amount of the overall total in this respect. It could be that sales invoices are being raised
without the correct inventory items attached, which will cause havoc with your inventory,
or there could be another perfectly sensible explanation, such as this business operates a
mixture of inventory and consultancy, which they do not track.
Position reports
The position reports are important in that they show you where you are in terms of
the assets, liabilities, and equity of the business. As well as wanting to know whether you
have made a profit or loss, as shown in the performance reports, you will want to know
how much cash you have in the bank, who you owe money to and who owes you.

Real-Time Reporting
[ 150 ]
Balance Sheet
The Balance Sheet shows you the overall position of the business and is a great report to see
the overall strength of a business. It is easy to run the Balance Sheet by going to Reports
| All Reports | Balance Sheet.
Using the preceding report options you can choose the balance date you wish to run the
report to and then the Compare To field to allow you to choose between the same period
last year, the previous financial year end, the previous quarter end, or the previous month
end. You could also, of course, choose to have no comparison period. Compare Periods
allows you to choose the number of periods, as with the Profit & Loss report, if you choose
to compare with the previous month and choose to compare with four periods, it will show
you the previous four months.
You can elect to sort by either the account name or account code and if you have used
tracking categories in Xero as per this example, you can then generate a Balance Sheet for
regions.
Aged Receivables
The Aged Receivables report gives you a list of those customers who owe you money at any
given point in time. You will want to use this report to keep an eye on those slow payers
and problem accounts. To run the Aged Receivables report, go to Reports | All Reports
| Aged Receivables.

Real-Time Reporting
[ 151 ]
There are limited options when running the aged receivables, so it is straightforward to
operate. Choose the date you wish to run the report to and then whether you want to show
the results by the month name or the month number. Using these options, coupled with the
ageing by the invoice date or due date, will allow you to view the invoices outstanding the
way you need.
Clicking on the show invoices tick box will show the report by customer but showing the
breakdown of the invoices, credit notes, and any overpayments on an account. This is a
much better view when carrying out credit control.
When you have run the report, you can then choose Show Aged Receivables Chart above
the data. This breaks down the outstanding amounts in a graphical format and appears at
the top of the report if you choose to publish the report.
Aged Payables
The Aged Payables report shows you a list of the open supplier invoices that you owe
money to at any given point in time. Keeping a close watch on this report will mean you
never get caught short on what payments are coming up but also ensuring those important
deliveries don't get held up. To run the Aged Payables report, go to Reports | All Reports
| Aged Payables.

Real-Time Reporting
[ 152 ]
There are limited options when running the aged payables so it is straightforward to
operate. Choose the date you wish to run the report to and then whether you want to show
the results by the month name or the month number. Using these options, coupled with the
ageing by the invoice date or due date, will allow you to view the bills outstanding the way
you need.
Clicking on the show invoices tick box will show the report by supplier but showing the
breakdown of the invoices, credit notes, and any overpayments on an account. This is a
much better view when carrying out supplier payment runs.
When you have run the report, you can then choose to Show Aged Payables Chart above
the data. This breaks down the outstanding amounts in a graphical format and appears at
the top of the report if you choose to publish the report.
Budget Manager
The Budget Manager allows you to enter budgets into Xero for comparison purposes
against the Profit & Loss reports. Bear in mind that it is only the profit and loss at the
moment that you can enter budgets for. If you create budgets using Excel or a forecasting
add-on, you will still need to use that as Xero does not yet allow the entering of Balance
Sheet budgets.
The Budget Manager, despite this limitation, is still very useful for smaller business owners
who want to be able to create a quick and easy budget to see where the current year may
take them.
To locate Budget Manager, click on Reports from the main navigation header, and
then Budget Manager: this is third on the list.

Real-Time Reporting
[ 153 ]
Add/Edit
You can add a new budget or edit one that you have already set up from within the budget
manager section. If editing a budget, make sure that the budget you are amending is the
correct one, so double check the name of the budget under the Select Budget section. To
add a new budget, click on the dropdown under Select Budget and then +Add new
budget; then, give it a name and click on Save.
As you can see from the screenshot, you can choose the starting point for your budget, the
number of the month's actuals that you want to see, and the period that you are creating
your budget for.
The Actuals field does not make up part of your budget; it is only there for guidance as
seeing some actuals will make it easier for you to think of your budgets for the forthcoming
period.
When you have made your selection, you will be presented with a grid-like box as shown in
the preceding screenshot, which you can then start entering data into. To speed up the
process, you can click on the green arrow that appears when you click on one of the cells,
and you will then have the ability to complete the options as shown here:

Real-Time Reporting
[ 154 ]
You can choose to set an amount to be applied to each and every month, which can be a
great time saver. If you want to change your budget after six months, then use this option
and then click on the cell in six months time and then update the amount. That way you
will only have to enter two amounts to cover the twelve month period rather than twelve.
You may wish to increase the amount by a value each month, in which case, enter the
monetary amount you want to increase each month by in the second box, or you can choose
to increase by percentage each month using the third option.
Doing things in this manner means you can have a base budget set up in a matter of
minutes, which you can then tweak as required. Using Xero, there is really no reason why
any small business owner should be caught out and not have a plan.
Run scenarios
You can run several different budgets in Xero, which you can then choose when running
the profit and loss reports. If you have more than one budget, you can select which one you
wish to use for comparison purposes under the Compare Periods tab by clicking on the 
Budget dropdown and then making your selection. You may have a best and worst case
budget, for example, and want to see how you are fairing against both sets of budgets.
Import/export
You can import and export your Budgets in Xero allowing you to create your budgets in
Excel and then import them back into Xero. To ensure you have the correct format, you may

Real-Time Reporting
[ 155 ]
wish to export first as this will then give you the correct format required to import. The
Export function in Xero will allow you to export the template in CSV, Excel, or Google
Docs.
Reporting
Within Xero Report center there is no designated area for the reports that relate to budgets
but there are a few reports that you may wish to check out, as detailed here.
Budget summary
This report shows you the budget report that you have entered into Xero either manually in
Budget Manager or via an import. In the Budget Manager screen, you do not get to see the
data in the best format so this report will provide you with the data you have entered in an
easy-to-digest way.
As you can see from the preceding screenshot, there are a few options for you to amend
how the report presents the information. You can choose when the report starts the length
of each period per column and the total number of periods to display.
Budget Variance
The Budget Variance report shows you the same results the Actual versus Budget discussed
earlier in the chapter under the profit and loss view.

Real-Time Reporting
[ 156 ]
Profit and loss in the current financial year
This report displays the current financial year's actual results and the budget period for the
rest of the financial year. This provides you with a forecast for the financial year of what the
current 12 month period looks like as you are going through the year.
Detail reports
The detail reports within Xero gives you the ability to start drilling down a layer to the
transactional items that make up the other reports. This is the area you will want to be using
when investigating numbers in the reports that don't quite make sense at first glance.
Account transactions
The account transactions report allows you to drill down into the transactions that make up
a particular account code.
In the preceding screenshot, you can see that you can select the date range you wish to see
and then you can choose whether to filter by the tracking categories you have set up. You
can run this report for any account code available in your Chart of Accounts.

Real-Time Reporting
[ 157 ]
Trial Balance
The Trial Balance report is run from the report center and the Detail Reports section. As
with most accounting systems, it shows you the list of nominal account codes being used
and the debit or credit balances. The report shows this for both the current period and then
the Year to Date amounts.
The only option where you get to amend the data being displayed is the date to which it is
run and whether you want to sort by Account Name or Account Code.
Amending reports
Xero offers many reports and flexibility around what to show in those reports and the dates
and periods that can be shown. But no one size fits all and there may be other things which
you wish to amend within the reports. As you would expect by now, this is completely
achievable with Xero.
Move and group
You may wish to amend the layout of a report to suit the requirements of your business.
Perhaps you have two directors who like to look at the profit and loss report in different
ways. One is a detail person the other is not. That is not a problem as you can amend the
default report layouts and then save the new layouts to be used whenever you need them.
To amend the default layout of any report, you will find the Layout Options button in the
bottom-left corner of the report.

Real-Time Reporting
[ 158 ]
Clicking on the Create new layout option will take you to a new screen, which looks like
this. This is a shortened version of the full layout for the profit and loss report but you
should get the idea from this:
Unlike a lot of other systems, the grouping of account codes in Xero is a breeze as you can
select them with tick boxes rather than having to try and group by account codes, which can
become messy over a period of time.
Simply click on the tick boxes next to the items you wish to move to another category with
the report layout, and then click on Move selected accounts….
You will be presented with a dropdown called Move, which will allow you to choose
another section of the report that you wish to see your account code appear in. An example
of this might be that you wish to see depreciation recorded as a non-operating expense.
For the director that is less of a details person, you might wish to group account codes
together so they have a summarized view of the profit and loss. You might want to group
establishment costs together, such as light and heat, rates, rent, insurance, and repairs. Well,
you could do so by ticking the boxes next to each of those items and then selecting the
Group selected accounts… button and giving it a name such as establishment.
You then have to choose where, within the report, you want the Group to sit and if you
want to show Show summary only. This option, as you would expect, allows you to show a
single line item named as per your group name with the total being the account codes
making up that selection. You can choose to leave it unticked, which will show the
individual account codes but there will be a header, the same as the Group name, and then
a subtotal for your group.

Real-Time Reporting
[ 159 ]
Before you complete the process, you will have to give your new layout report a name and
then you can save it.

Real-Time Reporting
[ 160 ]
There is also a tick box option to make the report a default for all users, in which case
anyone going to the report center and running that report would see the one you have just
created. This may not work in the scenario we have described. However, if you want to
amend the layout for everyone, as you simply want to change the look of it, then it would
make sense to tick the box to make it the default for all.
If you do not want it to be the default report for everyone and if you want to pull up that
report again, you will need to run the default report, and then, in the bottom-left corner
where the Layout Options button is located, you will now have a secondary option called
Choose layout…. This will allow you to select an alternative layout that you have created.
When you save a new layout, you will see a green banner appear above the report, which
will allow you to either edit the layout again, if you have not made all the changes you
wanted, or you can save the layout to my favorites, which will give you the option to make
the layout available in the other Xero organizations that you have access to.
This can be a great time saver if you have a preferred format for reports and do not want to
have to replicate that across all of your Xero organizations.
Once a report has been saved as a favorite, you can choose to use it when clicking on
Choose Layout under Layout Options.
Common changes
Some reports are much better when you can see the data on one screen. For reports that
look better in landscape, you can use the Wide View option, which sits in the top-right
corner of each page. If you click on that you will find that your report now fills the screen
and is much easier to navigate.

Real-Time Reporting
[ 161 ]
When wishing to change back, you will note that the Wide View option has now changed
to Standard View.
Clicking on Standard View will revert the report to its original size.
Defaults
There are some defaults you can set for the reports from your My Xero if you are looking
after several Xero subscriptions. From My Xero, click on Settings and then on Report
Publishing Styles; this will allow you to set defaults such as a logo to be added to the
report, a border color, and a report footer, which might be something such as a disclaimer.
Summary
We have navigated our way around the report center and identified the different types of
report available in Xero.
In this chapter, we have run through the major reports, the different statuses that can be
attached to a report, and how to edit the standard setup.
In the next chapter, we will look at how to supercharge your finance function by using
some of the best Xero add-ons in the marketplace and how they can impact your business.

9
Supercharging Xero with Add-
ons
If you think Xero is awesome, then you'll love the Xero ecosystem as there are over 500 add-
ons, which will help supercharge your business.
One of the greatest things about using an online platform such as Xero is the ability to serve
data back and forth between other products via an API (application programming
interface). This means that you can have one central point of data entry, and then share this
data with other systems, such as reporting tools and credit control products. This helps to
dramatically reduce the amount of double handling of data and the potential of data entry
mistakes. It also aids employees in becoming data processers to customer-facing resources
in order to help your business grow.
These are the topics we'll be covering in this chapter:
Ability to locate and navigate the marketplace
Review the appropriateness of add-ons
Managing your ever-growing collection

Supercharging Xero with Add-ons
[ 163 ]
Xero add-ons
The Xero ecosystem has been a game changer in terms of what your finance function can do
for your business. It is no longer just a cost center; it can be something that adds real value
at a fraction of the cost. It has never been easier, quicker, or cheaper to set up or manage a
business. Small businesses now genuinely have a level playing field with bigger businesses
as they have access to the same grade of software solutions at a fraction of the price. Using
Xero add-ons will give you a competitive advantage so make hay while the sun shines, and
let everyone else catch up.
The Xero Marketplace
You are probably thinking that's great, but I don't know where to start. There is a simple
answer to this, and it is called the Xero Marketplace and is conveniently located on the Xero
website at h t t p s : / / w w w . x e r o . c o m / u k / A d d - o n s /.
In the top right-hand corner, you will find a search facility that you can dive right into if
you know what you are looking for.
If you are not sure what you are looking for or just want to be nosey to ensure that you
don't miss any of the good stuff, then browse by category, as shown in the following
screenshot. You can also the browse by industry to take a look at which add-ons work
particularly well for a particular industry type, often referred to as verticals. Simply click on
any of the links to explore them further.

Supercharging Xero with Add-ons
[ 164 ]
When clicking on a category, you will be presented with a grid, as shown in the following
screenshot, with several rows that will show you the add-ons for a particular category. The
add-ons are listed in the order of the number of Xero businesses that integrate with them;
so, the top-left application is the most popular in terms of the number of Xero connections.
You will see a brief description of the application, the number of reviews that an add-on has
received, and the average rating out of five stars. You can click on the See reviews link to
read what other Xero users have to say.

Supercharging Xero with Add-ons
[ 165 ]
If you then want to know more about the add-on, click on the Find out more link at the
bottom, and this will take you to the landing page of the Xero products where you can find
out more about the specifics of a product and how it is linked to Xero. Having a Xero
landing page is a prerequisite of being listed on the Xero Marketplace and makes it easier to
find what you need on a single page.
The Xero community
You can click on the See reviews link to read the other Xero Users reviews. This is a great
way to get some unbiased feedback, and the reviews are located in the Xero community; so,
if you are unsure, you can ask a question of the community while scoping out your options.

Supercharging Xero with Add-ons
[ 166 ]
The Xero LinkedIn group
The Xero LinkedIn group is an excellent way to get an idea about what works well for other
Xero users and gain a practical insight into what is achievable. Xero has a very engaged and
helpful user base that is happy and willing to help other Xero users. As you can see in the
following screenshot, there are currently 16,734 members in this group. If you are on 
LinkedIn, search Groups for Xero Discussions and join the conversation.
If you have joined the party late and you don't want to miss out on the discussions that
have taken place for a particular add-on, use the Search facility within the LinkedIn Group
to catch up on all the gossip.

Supercharging Xero with Add-ons
[ 167 ]
The Xero API and bespoke work
Add-ons are amazing and give you the ability to reduce the time you spend on
administrative duties and enable employees to get involved in more interesting work.
Sometimes, though, you may want something extra that the add-ons don't provide, or,
perhaps, there are just things that you simply cannot change within your workflow to suit
the software. Not all is lost as there are some very clever people out there who can help you
by completing bespoke solutions for you. These wizards are vetted and can be found on the 
Xero website: https://www.xero.com/uk/Add-ons/category/
custom-made-integration/.
As you can from the preceding screenshot, there are only 22 approved developers listed.
This is not an awful lot to serve the half million Xero businesses out there. That being said,
there are many developers that can build bespoke solutions for you, but you may want to
go with a Xero-approved developer as they will have built at least two custom integrations.
Managing Xero add-ons
If, at any point, you wish to know what you have connected to Xero from the point of view
of an add-on, you can do this by going to Settings |General Settings |Connect |Add-ons
where you will see list of the add-ons.
Should you decide that you no longer wish to be connected or you have found another add-
on that suits your needs better, you can disconnect.

Supercharging Xero with Add-ons
[ 168 ]
It is good housekeeping to check your connections on a regular basis. On checking mine, I
disconnected six products that I no longer use and two of which are no longer in existence.
As the Marketplace functions on the basis of a number of connections, you should
disconnect from anything you don't use so as to not skew the results. You also don't really
want people to have access to your financial data if you are no longer using the product for
security reasons.
Selecting add-ons
There are many add-ons available for a variety of industries and sectors. To give you a real
flavour for what is achievable using add-ons, we have highlighted a few for you in the next
section to get you started. We would like to point out at this stage that other add-ons are
available.
This selection is simply a guide to explain what add-ons are available, these ones may not
be right for your needs or you may be looking for an industry-specific solution. In
compiling this list, we have tried to identify the problem area and how an add-on can
resolve it.
Receipt Bank
Receipt Bank is one of the most popular add-ons out there because it removes the hassle of
receipts and invoices. It automates the capturing of data from your receipts and invoices
and can automatically import this extracted data into Xero for you. It is an automated
purchase ledger machine. No more data entry, no more posting mistakes, no more lost
receipts and unclaimed expenses.
You simply submit your receipts and invoices to Receipt Bank in various ways:
Take a picture of a receipt with the mobile app
Upload Word and PDF files
Forward e-mails containing documents to your Receipt Bank account
Sync with Dropbox and PayPal
Buy a scanner with the Receipt Bank app
Send your paperwork in the post

Supercharging Xero with Add-ons
[ 169 ]
I think you get the point.
Now, harness the power of methods, and give your employees access to submit their own
expenses via Receipt Bank. Just think about it: no more crummy Excel spreadsheets with
receipts attached, sent in the post with bits missing, and data entered in the wrong columns.
Sounds good, doesn't it?
Once you have uploaded items to Receipt Bank, you can set up supplier rules for items to
auto-sync so that the next time a receipt comes in from a certain supplier, it will
automatically find its way into Xero. You can even assign a payment method against it so
that it's marked as paid in Xero. There's no chance for someone to pay it again if it has
already been paid.

Supercharging Xero with Add-ons
[ 170 ]
With Receipt Bank, a paperless office is actually achievable. No more filing cabinets as the
documents are all kept neatly within Receipt Bank and also pushed across to Xero so that
you have two electronic copies of each document. No more wasted time looking for unfiled
or misfiled documents. You can take a look at what you need without even leaving your
chair.
The reason people love Receipt Bank is that it takes away the boring mundane processing of
data and it actually makes it fun. Your accounts get processed quicker as you can take a
picture on your phone and the data can be transferred to Xero within minutes. Now that is
clever.
Float
One of the biggest concerns for a small business is cash flow, and one of the greatest risks to
a business is running into trouble due to poor cash flow management. Xero does give you
information when sales and purchases are due but not in a cohesive and simple way. You
have to spend time looking at different dashboards and reports and adding up the
numbers. You don't have time for that.
Enter Float, a simple cash flow forecasting tool for small businesses. This no longer involves
moving static data into forecasting and predicting the future cash flow of a business. By
syncing with Xero daily, Float gives you the ability to spot issues before they arise and
allows you to manage your cash flow against budgets you set. You can, therefore, see how
good you are at forecasting and tweak your assumptions as required, gaining a more
accurate insight into how the cash flow of your business works.

Supercharging Xero with Add-ons
[ 171 ]
Most people work out cash flow for a month so that they know where they will be on the
last day of the month. This is simply moronic as there are 20 plus working days in a month
and any one of them could represent a potential problem. Using the data from Xero Float
gives you a daily view of where you will be.

Supercharging Xero with Add-ons
[ 172 ]
Experiment with scenarios to create various what if situations. Know what the impact of
those key decisions will be on the cash flow of your business before you make them. You
may want to grow your business, but what does this mean in terms of how much cash you
need to facilitate that? Now, you know you have decisions to make based on sound
judgement and not just a gut feeling. This may just be the difference between success and
failure.
Satago
Something that you don't anticipate is just how difficult it can be to get customers to pay. If
your business is going to be operating primarily business-to-business (B2B)—that is, selling
to other businesses rather than consumers—then it is very likely that you will need to give
your customers credit.
This can be very difficult for a number of reasons. Your customers might not be too
organized, and they may just forget about your invoice. They may also be in financial
trouble themselves or just strategically pay you late to improve their own cash flow. If you
send many invoices per month, this can very quickly add up to a significant amount of time
spent chasing customers for payments when you should probably be chasing new
customers and doing the work you love.
Xero enables you to supercharge this process and get paid faster by integrating with an
automated credit control add-on called Satago.
Satago integrates with your Xero account and synchronises with your data at least once a
day so that it knows which invoices are still due.

Supercharging Xero with Add-ons
[ 173 ]
The software has a number of customizable e-mail templates that are automatically sent as
an invoice gets older. You can configure Satago to send an e-mail or two before Due Date to
remind the customer that the invoice will be due soon. If the invoice is not paid on time, the
system will automatically send escalating e-mail reminders to the customer asking for
payment. You are free to customize these e-mails to be as tough or easy as you like,
including automatically adding late fees to the messages.
One of the advantages of the software is that all the communication to and from your
customers about invoice payment is recorded in Satago. This means that if you have to take
legal action against your customer for nonpayment, you have a full audit trail of everything
you did to try to collect payment. The software acts as a specialist CRM system for credit
control.

Supercharging Xero with Add-ons
[ 174 ]
For those of you who feel uncomfortable chasing people for payment, Satago can be a real
blessing as the automation allows you to set and forget. Just using this simple add-on can
have a remarkable effect on a businesses' cash flow with users reporting that they get paid
up to 23 days quicker on average. For any small business, this will have a remarkable
impact on your company's health and also save you a lot of time and stress.
Of course, life would be simpler if we managed to avoid those customers who pay late in
the first place, and Satago can help in this case, too. The software includes data from
Experian—a leading credit reference bureau—that shows the key financial health data of
your customers. The credit score gives you an idea of the overall financial health of new or
existing customers, while the credit limit tells you the maximum recommended amount of
credit you should give your customers. Another important metric is Days Beyond Terms
(DBT). This tells you when, on an average, a given company will pay its other suppliers.
Satago has integrated this credit risk data with the data from your sales ledger; therefore, it
becomes very easy to quickly get an overview of which invoices are currently with your
riskiest customers and which customers should not receive any more credit from you.

Supercharging Xero with Add-ons
[ 175 ]
Satago offers a simple solution to get paid faster and understand how risky your customers
are. The integration and the basic credit risk data is free.
Fathom
Fathom provides insightful and engaging performance reports for businesses and their
advisers. Xero produces useful financial information and reports, and Fathom takes it to a
whole new level.
You need more than spreadsheets to help you analyze complex business data. You need a
powerful, engaging application to drive conversations and decisions.
Fathom is a management reporting and financial analysis tool that helps you to assess
business performance, monitor trends, and identify improvement opportunities. Creating
insightful analytics, reports, and dashboards has never been easier.

Supercharging Xero with Add-ons
[ 176 ]
Fathom is useful for business managers who want timely business insights and beautiful
performance reports. It is also useful for accountants and advisers who are seeking to
deliver more frequent and engaging advisory and management reporting services.
Fathom seamlessly integrates with Xero and allows you to transform your accounting data
into a range of reports and dashboards that make it easy for the most innumerate business
owner to understand their business in more depth with ease. The visual guides provide
insight that pure numbers may not pick up and make for better, quicker decisions, which
helps the business increase its profit and cash.
Financial analysis
Fathom provides a comprehensive framework of analysis tools and metrics for monthly,
quarterly, and annual reporting. You can easily monitor the financial and nonfinancial KPIs
that matter the most to your business.

Supercharging Xero with Add-ons
[ 177 ]
Consolidations
Fathom enables you to quickly and easily consolidate results for multiple companies and
create reports for multientity organizations.
Compare and benchmark
Fathom helps you to compare, rank, and benchmark your companies, clients, or franchisees.

Supercharging Xero with Add-ons
[ 178 ]
This makes it very easy to compare the performance of different entities and identify best
practices for training purposes.
Hindsight
Hindsight is one of the few add-ons on the market that exists to purely serve the needs of an
adviser. It strives to provide the adviser with valuable insights into a client's business to
start meaningful conversations with the client before they know that an opportunity has
arisen or a potential problem has emerged.
Imagine an app that can tell you what VAT scheme your clients should use, whether they
should incorporate mispostings by staff, what sales opportunities are available, and how
effective the staff is, all based on the information from Xero, which can be accessed through
a couple of clicks. That's what Hindsight has built.
Hindsight integrates with Xero to provide advisers with a central dashboard where they
can view all their clients in one place and spot issues and opportunities straight away as the
system syncs with your Xero organizations daily. Now there's no more waiting for clients to
flag up a problem; you are in charge of the situation. You never need to have that difficult
conversation again where the client has spotted something they think you should have
picked up.

Supercharging Xero with Add-ons
[ 179 ]
The alerts dashboard enables junior team members to work through tasks each day that
represent potential issues. Partners can take a look at sales opportunities that are flagged by
business insights, and these represent the areas in which you can help the business.
With over 50 prebuilt business insights, you can be up and running and advising like a pro
in minutes, which is great for all those busy practices out there.
Hindsight is ideal to scan before a big meeting: senior management can use a dashboard for
day-to-day troubleshooting and bookkeepers can get a daily list of tasks to take action on.
With the ability to add notes to the alert for audit trail purposes, you can even mute the
alert for a period of time if you have spoken to the client and they don't wish to discuss it
for another week.
Insights can be given priority grading so that the most important clients and urgent insights
get tackled first.

Supercharging Xero with Add-ons
[ 180 ]
There's no need to just keep throwing bodies at the issues as you scale your practice;
Hindsight allows you to scale your practice while maintaining fantastic client service.
It enables you to automate all of those tasks you wish you had time for, but it is impossible
to check everything for everybody unless you have an army of people. That is simply not
scalable.
Summary
We successfully showed you how to search and manage the Xero ecosystem to gain a
competitive advantage. Xero is a great product, but remember that this is just the start of
your adventure. Think of Xero as a commodity. It is there to satisfy your need to fulfil your
accounting and legal obligations as a business.
The add-ons may well feel like luxury items, but in time, they will also become a
commodity. However, since they aren't at the moment, take full advantage of them.
Remember that what you can do with Xero is only limited by your imagination, so go play.

10
Xero Tips and Tricks
In this chapter, we will explore various ways to help you become a power user of Xero by
becoming a master of efficiency with a series of tips and tricks to get things done quickly
and effortlessly.
These are the topics we'll be covering in this chapter:
Fine-tuning Xero to work to maximum efficiency and ease
Guidance on where to find help
Making the most of your browser
Login
If like me you will be logging into Xero multiple times a week, all these lost seconds of
remembering your login name and password will add up across the year. Just imagine what
you could do with these precious moments saved! In the following subsection, we have
mentioned a few ways you can gain these seconds back.
Google Apps
If you are a Google Apps user, then you may be aware of the great marketplace of apps that
are available. Xero works closely with Google Apps and reports can be exported as Google
Sheets. On top of this, you also have the ability to log in to Xero using Google Apps single
sign-on.
You must have a Google Apps account in order to do this and you must use the same e-mail
address for both products. If necessary you will need to change your Xero login e-mail to
match.

Xero Tips and Tricks
[ 182 ]
From Google Apps Marketplace, search for Xero and then click on the Install App button.
Once Xero is installed on your Google Apps account, each time you want to log in to Xero
simply click on the Apps icon at the top right of your Google account, where you would log
out. This is the grid that sits between your name and alarm icon.
Click on the More button, and then you will be able to see the other apps you have installed
in Google Apps.
One simple click on the Xero logo will then log you in. Simple!

Xero Tips and Tricks
[ 183 ]
Browser
If, like most people, you also live in your browser, then you will be used to logging in to
systems time after time each day. There is a shortcut for Xero to make it quicker logging in
which is particularly helpful for those people with long e-mail addresses.
Next time you login to Xero, add the extra piece of information you see on the following
screenshot, replacing yourname@yourdomain.co.uk with your actual e-mail address used
to log in to Xero. Now save this as favorite in your browser and each time you log in use
that saved favorite. This way your e-mail address is always going to be entered for you.
Password vaults
You probably have tens of passwords and usernames, if not hundreds. It is difficult to
remember all of them, so you probably use the same password for multiple logins. This is
not good practice as getting hacked, one can open your account up to multiple instances.
You especially don't want this to happen with your financial data in Xero. Xero has online
bank-level security but that will not help if someone can log in with your user credentials.
You may wish to check out a product such as LastPass, 1Password, or something similar.
These products autogenerate strong passwords and store them for you so you do not forget
them. Password vaults mostly offer browser extensions as well, which makes it really quick
and easy to log in to your favorite apps. You might also want to go back and create new
passwords for all of those systems where you have used the same password.
Make sure, if you decide to use a secure password vault, to follow all of the security
protocols advised. There is no point having a security box then leaving the safe wide open.
Help
There is no shame in asking for help and there are no stupid questions when learning a new
piece of software. Just imagine how many hours and marriages could have been saved if
asking for help was an acceptable thing to do. Thankfully, we now have sat nav. We don't
want you to waste time, so we have pointed you in the direction of how to make best use of
the help facilities in the following screenshot, which are available to you in Xero.

Xero Tips and Tricks
[ 184 ]
One of the first items you will come across in Xero is the Getting Started guides as depicted
in the preceding screenshot. As you move through Xero, you will find these on each of the
screens you enter. They offer helpful guidance on what you can do in that particular
section. If you click on the cross in the top right-hand corner, they will disappear but
reappear the next time you log in. If you wish to permanently remove it from a screen, click
on the Hide Getting Started in the top right-hand corner.
Demo Company
The Demo Company within Xero is there to make sure you don't make a mess of your
books. While you can edit, void, and even delete draft transactions, it is always best to have
a play with the Demo Company before playing with your live data.
Each time you log in to Xero, you will enter the My Xero section, which lists the
organizations you may access. If you only look after one organization, then you will not see
much here. What you will see, however, hiding under your organizations is the ability
to Try the Demo Company.
As well as accessing the Demo Company, you can also choose to reset the demo data, which
is good for when you have made a mess. You can also change country or edition, which can
be useful when you want to see what different options are available with each edition to
make sure you are on the right one.
The Demo Company data is refreshed every 28 days, so you always have a fresh supply of
information on which to test and practice.

Xero Tips and Tricks
[ 185 ]
Help Centre
Help Centre is located at the top right of your Xero navigation menu. Click on the question
mark icon to open up the Help section.
From within this panel, you can enter a question and search for help. You can go directly to
Help Centre by clicking on it. Help Centre contains articles and videos on how to use Xero.
Optionally, you might need help for the page you are on, in which case you can click on Get
help for this page, which will take you to the relevant section in Help Centre with no fuss.
When you start using Xero, you will be confronted with a green banner offering help for
each screen you enter. If you prefer you can turn this off by clicking on the Hide Getting
Started option; if you wish to turn this back on then you can do so from the same option;
this will then change to Show Getting Started.
There is also another useful element to Help Centre, the community, where users can post
questions and help each other using the solutions they may have found. This is a great way
to find out about Xero from a users practical point of view.
As you can see from the following screenshot, when you have searched for a topic using
Help, you will be presented with a whole list of options as to what to do next. They may not
all be relevant to what you want, so you can deselect the tick boxes if you only wanted to

Xero Tips and Tricks
[ 186 ]
see Xero's user guides or tutorial videos. If however you wanted to know how other users
have tackled particular issues, then you may want to just return the community items.
When you have found what you are looking for, simply click on the blue title of the item
and it will take you to the detailed guidance on that topic.

Xero Tips and Tricks
[ 187 ]
If you cannot find what you are after, then you have a couple of options left available to you
that are located on the main Help menu but also at the bottom right of the Help search that
you have completed. These options are asking Xero for support or asking your adviser, as
explained in the subsequent sections.
Contact Xero Support
Once you have worked through the various help options and if you are genuinely stumped,
then you will need to click on the Contact Xero Support option and provide them with as
much detail as possible to answer your question. Xero does not offer telephone support, so
to get your query resolved at the first attempt, it is important to furnish support with as
much information as possible. If you are submitting tickets and you deal with multiple
organizations and want to make your life easy for yourself by entering the organization
name in the Subject field. When receiving responses from support it will make it much
easier to identify.
It also makes sense to tick the option asking you to give Xero access to your organization at
this point, as they will normally ask for it. This speeds up the support process.
Ask my adviser
If you have an adviser that you purchased your Xero subscription through, they have the
option to enable support, which means under the Help section you would see another
option called Ask My Adviser that will show their contact details and make it easy for you
to contact them.
If it is not convenient at the time and you wish to get on with other things as the matter is
not that urgent, you can use the following form to submit a request to them. They will then
receive an e-mail of your request.

Xero Tips and Tricks
[ 188 ]
Other tips and tricks
There are several other tips and tricks that can make you a more efficient user of Xero and
save valuable time. These tips and tricks are explained in the following sections for you.
Lock dates
Locking period dates in Xero is good practice as it enables you to maintain an element of
control for management reporting purposes. This is especially relevant when you try to
avoid someone's posting transactions into the wrong financial year and causing problems
with opening balances.
It is important to consider the user role given to people when trying to lock periods as an
adviser, he will be able to post transactions even if you have set the Stop all users (except
advisers) date and we will recommend using this date when finalizing a period, such as
after completion of management accounts or VAT returns, as an example. If you have users
within Xero that you do not wish to be able to post back into previous periods, then change
their User Role to Standard.

Xero Tips and Tricks
[ 189 ]
The Stop all users option is what you will want to use when locking a financial year end
down as once the accounts have been prepared and signed; there should be very few
instances when you would want or need to change this. The period can be opened again by
changing the date that you need to make an adjustment. The date will need to be set at a
point in time prior to the date of the adjustment; and do not forget to change it back.
In the following example, we can see that this organization is likely to have a quarter end of
31
st May and a year end of 28
th February:
Multiple tabs
You access Xero through a web browser and you can have several tabs open at the same
time. When you see a blue hyperlink anywhere in Xero, this will take you to a new page.
However, if you carry out the equivalent of a right-click for PC users, you will be able to
open that screen in another tab. You can then flick between the tabs and look at different
data for the same organization at the same time.
Tabs are not updated until refreshed, so if you make a change in one tab then this will not
be seen in another tab until you have refreshed that tab.
Multiple organizations
You may wish to work on multiple Xero organizations at the same time; perhaps you may
wish to reconcile intercompany accounts. You cannot do this from the same browser but
what you can do is to open a different browser, such as Chrome or Firefox, or if you are
using Chrome, you can open an incognito window. You can log in to Xero again and work
on two organizations at the same time.

Xero Tips and Tricks
[ 190 ]
Be careful when doing this, especially if entering data, to make sure you
make entries into the correct organization.
When working with multiple organizations you will probably want to
ensure that each time you log in to Xero that you go to My Xero-the green
Xero. This ensures that you have to navigate to the organization you wish
to work with. It can be dangerous when you go straight into the last
organization you were working in, as you can end up posting into the
wrong organization. When you are logged in, click on the drop-down
arrow next to your name in the top right-hand corner and select
the Account option. Scroll down to Settings and make sure that the When
I Log In option is Go To My Xero and click on Save.
Search
You may find that you have run reports in Xero, which can be quite long. If you are looking
for a specific piece of information it might take a while scrolling up and down the page. If
there is no search facility in Xero you are looking at, then don't forget you can use the
browser's built-in search functionality.
In Chrome, for example, on your keyboard press Ctrl +F: a search box will appear in the top
right-hand corner and you can make an entry for what you're looking for. If that can be
found then, you will see 1 of 2 as shown in the following screenshot, which indicates there
are two entries found and you can then use the toggle arrows at the right to move between
the matching entries.
If there are multiple pages, you will need to complete the search on each of these pages of
the report. At the bottom of each page, always make sure the items being shown are set to
the maximum per page, which is up to 200. You can see in the following instance, if we
changed the items per page to 100, then we will only have one page instead of three as there
are 53 items in total on the report produced.

Xero Tips and Tricks
[ 191 ]
Shortcut keys
Tabbing through the date field when entering a sales invoice or purchase bill will
automatically enter it as today's date.
If you select the + key and a number, the date entered will be today plus the number of
days you have entered as the number. The following table shows some other useful 
shortcut dates. This is not a complete list but you can apply the logic to your given situation
or using the Xero Help Center, do a search on data entry shortcuts.
These shortcuts are great to use in the Due Date field, if the default for that transaction is
not correct.
Entry
Returns
Yes
Yesterdays date
Last M The date exactly one month ago
Next Y The date exactly one year ahead
Xero TV and training
There is only so much we could fit in this book but what you can learn does not stop with
us. This is just the beginning. Go and check out the whole plethora of information that Xero
have created for you on their website. Do not ignore the website, it is not just a sales site; it
contains a whole host of useful stuff.
Small Business Guides
These short guides can be located on the home page under Small Businesses | Small
Business Guides, and they give you a raft of articles written on business-related materials
that could be the difference between success and failure with certain aspects of your
business. They are written keeping you in the mind, so take advantage.
Xero TV
From the Xero homepage, go to More | Videos & Guides – Xero TV.
Get started with Xero 101, check out case studies to see how you can utilize Xero, see
product updates, and learn more about Xero accounting software from helpful how-to
videos. Make the most of your investment in Xero.

Xero Tips and Tricks
[ 192 ]
Xero Training
From the Xero homepage, go to More | Training & Events – Xero U.
Find education, training, and events tailored for small businesses, accountants,
bookkeepers, and other financial professionals. There are literally hundreds of courses so
there will be something to suit you. It is in Xero's benefit that you have a great customer
experience so they work really hard to make sure you enjoy the product. Some of the
training is pre-recorded webinars, so you can learn at your own pace.
Summary
We have successfully shown you some of the top tips and tricks to maximize the time you
spend working with Xero and on your accounting. If you apply these tips and tricks on a
daily basis, you will save significant time that can be put to good use checking out what's
next with Xero and how you can implement new features into your workflows. The biggest
tip we can can give is that Xero is an evolving product and it will continue to grow so keep
your eyes peeled and make sure you stay a step ahead of the game.
We hope you have enjoyed working your way through this introduction to Xero as much as
we have.

Index
A
Account Balances
   about  22
   Conversion Balances  23
add-ons
   about  163
   managing  167
   selecting  168
   URL  167
   Xero API  167
   Xero community  165
   Xero LinkedIn group  166
   Xero Marketplace  163
Aged Payables report  151
Aged Receivables report  150
automated bank feeds  26
B
Balance Sheet  150
bank feed
   refreshing  31
   setting up  28
bank reconciliation
   about  26, 42
   Auto Suggest, selecting  43
   bank feed, refreshing  31
   bank feed, setting up  28
   bank transfers  46
   commenting  46
   dashboard  27
   discussing  46
   Find & Match option, using  43
   loan account, managing  35
   manual reconciliation  48
   overview  26
   petty cash, handling  32
   reconciliation report, generating  47
   statements, importing  32
   transaction, creating  45
bank rules
   about  38
   adding  39
   editing  41
   re-ordering  42
Budget Manager
   about  152
   budget, adding  153
   budget, editing  153
   budget, exporting  154
   budget, importing  154
   budget, reporting  155
   budgets, running  154
budget report
   budget summary, displaying  155
   Budget Variance report  155
   profit and loss, displaying  156
C
Chart of Accounts
   account, adding  18
   account, editing  18
   bank account, adding  20
   default Chart of Accounts, using  16
   importing  21
   setting up  16
   tax rate, modifying  20
Conversion Balances
   about  23
   comparative balances, adding  25
   invoices, importing  24
   process  23
credit cards
   adding  35

[ 194 ]
   common issues  36
credit notes
   allocating  68, 82
   raising  68, 80
currencies
   adding  15
D
Days Beyond Terms (DBT)  174
detail reports
   about  156
   account transactions report  156
   Trial Balance report  157
E
employees
   adding, to Payroll  92
   auto enrolment, setting up  96
   employment details, adding  94
   opening balances, adding  96
   Pay Template, creating  97
   Payroll Admin access, granting  98
   personal details, adding  92
   tax details, adding  95
end-of-period reports
   CIS deductions  107
   employer payment summary (EPS), sending 
106
   employment allowance, claiming  105
   full payment submission (FPS), sending  106
   obtaining  104
   statutory payments, claiming  105
error handling
   about  49
   account not reconciling  49
   duplicated statement lines  49
   manually reconciled as reconciled  51
   Remove & Redo, using  50
   reports, checking  52
   statement lines, missing  50
Expense Claims
   about  109
   mileage claim, submitting  116
   process  110
   receipt, adding  111
   receipt, deleting  113
   receipt, editing  113
   receipt, submitting  113
   status  114, 116
   tabs  114, 116
F
Fathom
   about  175
   advantages  176
   consolidations  177
   used, for benchmarking  177
   used, for comparing  177
   used, for financial analysis  176
FIFO (first in, first out)  128
Financial Settings  10
   Financial Year End  10
   VAT  10
Float  170
G
Google Apps
   used, for logging in Xero  181
H
Help
   about  183
   Ask My Adviser  187
   Contact Xero Support  187
   Demo Company  184
   Help Centre  185
Hindsight
   about  178
   advantages  179
   using  178
I
inventory items
   about  129
   balances, opening  130
   deleting  132
   deleting inventory  131
   editing  131
   exporting  132

[ 195 ]
   importing  129
   negative inventory  131
   summary report  139
   troubleshooting  131
inventory
   add-ons, using  128
   inventory item details, displaying  138
   inventory items, listing  138
   methods, modifying  127
   monitoring  138
   reference link  128
   sales by item report  138
   tracked inventory  124
   untracked inventory  124
Invoice Settings  11
L
LIFO (last in, first out)  128
O
Organization Settings  9
P
PayPal account
   feed, adding  37
   managing  37
payroll processing
   about  100
   amendments, processing  102
   employee payments, creating  103
   HMRC, paying  104
   Pay Run, completing  103
   payslips, issuing  104
   Process Pay Run, using  101
   time off, approving  100
Payroll
   about  84
   employees, adding  92
   overview  99
   Pay Calendars, setting up  87, 89
   Pay Items, setting up  91
   payroll accounts, setting up  85, 87
   setting up  84
   Tax Information, setting up  89, 90, 91
performance reports
   generating  146
   Profit & Loss report  146
   Sales by Item report  148
position reports
   about  149
   Aged Payables report  151
   Aged Receivables report  150
   Balance Sheet  150
Profit & Loss report
   about  146
   Common Formats tab  146
   Compare Periods tab  147
   Show Date Range tab  148
purchase process
   about  74
   Batch payments, using  80
   inventory items, adding  76, 78
   repeating bills, considerations  79
   repeating bills, raising  78
   standard bills, creating  74, 76
   Xero Network Key, using  79
purchases dashboard
   about  69
   contacts, adding  71
   contacts, editing  72
   contacts, importing  71
   elements  69
R
Receipt Bank
   about  168
   using  168, 170
Report center
   report status, modifying  142
   report, exporting  145
   reports, marking as favorites  141
   using  140
report status
   about  142
   Archived  145
   Draft  143
   Filed with HMRC  144
   Published  144
reports

[ 196 ]
   amending  157
   Cash Reports  141
   default options, setting  161
   Detail Reports  141
   Foreign Currency Reports  141
   grouping  157
   moving  157
   Pay Run Reports  141
   Performance Reports  141
   Position Reports  141
   Tax Reports  141
   viewing  160
S
Sales by Item report  148
sales dashboard
   about  54
   contact, adding  56
   contacts, importing  57
   e-mail, using  64
   groups, setting up  64
   inventory items, adding  59
   invoice number, sequencing  65
   invoice, generating  57
   invoices, editing  63
   repeating invoice, generating  62
   sales invoices, importing  66
   Xero Network Key, using  64
sales invoice
   branding  66
   contact-specific, setting up  67
   custom template, setting up  67
   default template, setting up  67
Satago
   about  172
   advantages  173
T
tips and tricks
   dates, locking  188
   multiple organizations, working with  189
   multiple tabs, using  189
   search option, using  190
   shortcut keys, using  191
   Small Business Guides, using  191
   Xero Training  192
   Xero TV  191
tracked inventory
   about  124
   modifying, to untracked inventory  128
   using  127
U
untracked inventory
   about  123
   modifying, to tracked inventory  127
   using  124
users
   inviting  12
   permission levels, defining  13
   permission levels, editing  15
X
Xero API  167
Xero community  165
Xero LinkedIn group  166
Xero Marketplace
   about  163
   URL  163
Xero Network Key
   about  64, 79
   using  80
Xero Touch
   about  118
   bank reconciliation  119
   contacts, accessing  122
   dashboard  118
   downloading  118
   expenses, submitting  120
   invoice, sending  120
Xero
   initial configuration  6
   logging  181
   logging, with browser  183
   logging, with Google Apps  181
   password vaults  183
   Setup Guide  6

All About Packt
Thank you for buying Learning Xero
About Packt Publishing
Packt, pronounced 'packed', published its first book, Mastering phpMyAdmin for Effective
MySQL Management , in April 2004, and subsequently continued to specialize in publishing
highly focused books on specific technologies and solutions.
Our books and publications share the experiences of your fellow IT professionals in
adapting and customizing today's systems, applications, and frameworks. Our solution-
based books give you the knowledge and power to customize the software and technologies
you're using to get the job done. Packt books are more specific and less general than the IT
books you have seen in the past. Our unique business model allows us to bring you more
focused information, giving you more of what you need to know, and less of what you
don't.
Packt is a modern yet unique publishing company that focuses on producing quality,
cutting-edge books for communities of developers, administrators, and newbies alike. For
more information, please visit our website at www.packtpub.com.
About Packt Open Source
In 2010, Packt launched two new brands, Packt Open Source and Packt Enterprise, in order
to continue its focus on specialization. This book is part of the Packt Open Source brand,
home to books published on software built around open source licenses, and offering
information to anybody from advanced developers to budding web designers. The Open
Source brand also runs Packt's Open Source Royalty Scheme, by which Packt gives a royalty
to each open source project about whose software a book is sold.

Writing for Packt
We welcome all inquiries from people who are interested in authoring. Book proposals
should be sent to author@packtpub.com. If your book idea is still at an early stage and
you would like to discuss it first before writing a formal book proposal, then please contact
us; one of our commissioning editors will get in touch with you.
We're not just looking for published authors; if you have strong technical skills but no
writing experience, our experienced editors can help you develop a writing career, or
simply get some additional reward for your expertise.
 
Mastering pandas for Finance   
 
ISBN: 978-1-78398-510-4     Paperback: 298 pages
 
Master pandas, an open source Python Data Analysis Library, for financial
data analysis
 
• A single source for learning how to use the features of pandas for ﬁnancial and
quantitative analysis.
 
• Explains many of the ﬁnancial concepts including market risk, options
valuation, futures calculation, and algorithmic trading strategies.
QlikView for Finance
 
ISBN: 978-1-78439-574-2     Paperback: 174 pages
 
Deliver dynamic business intelligence dashboards for financial analysis
with QlikView
 
• Get accustomed to QlikView features for eﬀective data analysis and
visualization in Finance.
 
• Employ the Memory data store, which refreshes data in real time, providing a
faster response to business ﬁnancial information.

Haskell Financial Data Modeling and Predictive Analytics
 
ISBN: 978-1-78216-943-7     Paperback: 112 pages
 
Get an in-depth analysis of financial time series from the perspective of a
functional programmer 
 
• Understand the foundations of ﬁnancial stochastic processes.
 
• Build robust models quickly and eﬃciently.
 
• Tackle the complexity of parallel programming.
Excel 2010 Financials Cookbook
 
ISBN: 978-1-84969-118-5     Paperback: 260 pages
 
Powerful techniques for financial organization, analysis, and presentation in
Microsoft Excel
 
• Harness the power of Excel to help manage your business ﬁnances.
 
• Build useful ﬁnancial analysis systems on top of Excel.
 
• Covers normalizing, analysing, and presenting ﬁnancial data.
 
 
                     Please check www.PacktPub.com for information on our titles

