
Learning ArcGIS Pro
Create, analyze, maintain, and share 2D and 3D maps 
with the powerful tools of ArcGIS Pro
Tripp Corbin, GISP
BIRMINGHAM - MUMBAI

Learning ArcGIS Pro
Copyright © 2015 Packt Publishing
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, without the prior written 
permission of the publisher, except in the case of brief quotations embedded in 
critical articles or reviews.
Every effort has been made in the preparation of this book to ensure the accuracy 
of the information presented. However, the information contained in this book is 
sold without warranty, either express or implied. Neither the author, nor Packt 
Publishing, and its dealers and distributors will be held liable for any damages 
caused or alleged to be caused directly or indirectly by this book.
Packt Publishing has endeavored to provide trademark information about all of the 
companies and products mentioned in this book by the appropriate use of capitals. 
However, Packt Publishing cannot guarantee the accuracy of this information.
First published: November 2015
Production reference: 1261115
Published by Packt Publishing Ltd.
Livery Place
35 Livery Street
Birmingham B3 2PB, UK.
ISBN 978-1-78528-449-6
www.packtpub.com

Credits
Author
Tripp Corbin, GISP
Reviewer
Ian Broad
Commissioning Editor
Akram Hussain
Acquisition Editor
Meeta Rajani
Content Development Editor
Anish Dhurat
Technical Editor
Gaurav Suri
Copy Editors
Dipti Mankame
Jonathan Todd
Project Coordinator
Harshal Ved
Proofreader
Safis Editing
Indexer
Priya Sane
Production Coordinator
Manu Joseph
Cover Work
Manu Joseph

About the Author
Tripp Corbin, GISP is the CEO and a cofounder of eGIS Associates, Inc. He has 
over 20 years of surveying, mapping, and GIS-related experience. He is recognized 
as an industry expert with a variety of geospatial software packages, including 
Esri, Autodesk, and Trimble products. He holds multiple certifications, including 
Microsoft Certified Professional, Certified Floodplain Manager, Certified GIS 
Professional, CompTIA Certified Technical Trainer, Esri Certified Enterprise System 
Design Associate, and Esri Certified Desktop Professional.
During the course of his career, Tripp has assisted many private and public 
organizations to implement and maintain GIS solutions. Cities and counties have 
relied on his expertise to help them make the transition from hard copy maps into the 
digital world of GIS. Private companies, including engineering, surveying, planning, 
and forestry, often seek Tripp's experience to help them in various projects. Tripp's 
knowledge of GIS and surveying along with the ability to use multiple software 
packages has proven to be an invaluable asset.
As a GIS instructor, Tripp has taught students worldwide the power of GIS. He 
is a GIS instructor for the Institute for Transportation Research and Education at 
North Carolina State University, the Continuing Studies Center at University of 
North Alabama, and Davidson County Community College. He has authored many 
GIS classes on topics ranging from the beginner level, such as Introduction to GIS 
Fundamentals using ArcGIS to more advanced classes, such as Using AutoCAD 
in ArcGIS and Performing GIS Analysis with ArcGIS. In addition to teaching and 
authoring classes, Tripp has overseen the establishment of GIS training programs 
at these institutions.

Tripp is a very active member of the GIS professional community. He is a past 
president of Georgia URISA and URISA International Board Member. He currently 
serves on the GISP Application Review committee and as an At-Large GITA 
Southeast Board Member. Tripp is continually asked to present and conduct 
workshops at GIS-related conferences. He has conducted workshops on the GISP 
Certification, Deploying Mobile Solutions, GIS and Land Surveying, and Using 
GNSS Technologies at conferences, such as GIS Pro, Georgia Geospatial Conference, 
North Carolina GIS Conference, Ottawa GIS Conference, and others. Other 
contributions Tripp has made to the GIS Profession include helping to draft the 
Geospatial Technology Competency Model that was adopted by the US Department 
of Labor and providing help to other GIS Professionals around the world on various 
blogs, lists, and forums. In recognition of his contributions, he has received several 
awards, including the URISA Exemplary Leadership Award and the Barbara Hirsch 
Special Service Award.
I would like to thank several people who helped make this 
book a reality. First, I want to thank Polly Corbin, my wife. Her 
encouragement and support were invaluable. Thanks to Robert 
LeClair for helping me to work through software issues to determine 
whether they were bugs or user error. Finally, thanks to all those in 
the eGIS Associates' family, who picked up the slack, which allowed 
me to have the time to work on the book.

About the Reviewer
Ian Broad was first introduced to GIS at Fort Lewis College, his alma mater, located 
in Durango, CO. He now has nearly 7 years of experience in utility-based GIS, and 
has had the opportunity to work on many different projects, including those utilizing 
cutting-edge lidar technology. He's employed by Tillamook People's Utility District, 
a customer-owned electric company located on the beautiful Oregon Coast, where 
he provides a combination of GIS and IT expertise and support. Ian also operates 
Oregon Coast Drones an enterprise providing comprehensive aerial services.
He enjoys Python and JavaScript development, database design, open source 
solutions, participating on GIS StackExchange and other GIS communities, hiking, 
and aerial photography.
You can check out his personal website at http://www.ianbroad.com, and his latest 
project at http://www.oregoncoastdrones.com.

www.PacktPub.com
Support files, eBooks, discount offers, and more
For support files and downloads related to your book, please visit www.PacktPub.com.
Did you know that Packt offers eBook versions of every book published, with PDF 
and ePub files available? You can upgrade to the eBook version at www.PacktPub.
com and as a print book customer, you are entitled to a discount on the eBook copy. 
Get in touch with us at service@packtpub.com for more details.
At www.PacktPub.com, you can also read a collection of free technical articles, sign 
up for a range of free newsletters and receive exclusive discounts and offers on Packt 
books and eBooks.
https://www2.packtpub.com/books/subscription/packtlib
Do you need instant solutions to your IT questions? PacktLib is Packt's online digital 
book library. Here, you can search, access, and read Packt's entire library of books.
Why subscribe?
•	
Fully searchable across every book published by Packt
•	
Copy and paste, print, and bookmark content
•	
On demand and accessible via a web browser
Free access for Packt account holders
If you have an account with Packt at www.PacktPub.com, you can use this to access 
PacktLib today and view 9 entirely free books. Simply use your login credentials for 
immediate access.


[ i ]
Table of Contents
Preface	
ix
Chapter 1: Introducing ArcGIS Pro	
1
Installing ArcGIS Pro	
2
ArcGIS Pro minimum system requirements	
2
Operating system requirements	
2
Hardware requirements	
3
Other software requirements	
3
Recommendations from the author	
4
Downloading the install files	
5
Installing ArcGIS Pro	
9
Conducting a silent install for IT departments	
10
Managing and assigning ArcGIS Pro licenses	
11
The number and level of ArcGIS Pro licenses	
11
Managing ArcGIS Pro licenses	
12
Launching ArcGIS Pro	
14
Downloading and installing exercise data	
15
Opening an existing ArcGIS Pro project	
16
Summary	
18
Chapter 2: Using ArcGIS Pro – Navigating through 
the Interface	
19
Understanding the new interface terminology	
20
The ArcGIS Pro interface terminology	
20
Using the interface	
21
Navigating the ribbon	
22
The PROJECT tab	
22
The MAP tab	
25

Table of Contents
[ ii ]
Exercise 2A – working with the MAP tab	
32
Step 1 – opening a project	
32
Step 2 – navigating in the map	
33
Step 3 – using the Infographics tool (optional)	
38
Contextual tabs	
39
The FEATURE LAYER contextual tab	
39
The APPEARANCE tab	
40
The LABELING tab	
40
Exercise 2B – Working with 2D and 3D layers	
41
Step 1 – opening the project and adding layers	
41
Step 2 – changing symbology	
42
Step 3 – labeling	
46
Step 4 – working with a 3D layer	
47
Summary	
50
Chapter 3: Creating and Working with ArcGIS Pro Projects	
51
Working with an ArcGIS Pro project	
52
Understanding project terminology	
52
A project item	
52
A portal item	
53
A project package	
53
The home folder	
53
The default geodatabase	
53
Using the Project pane	
53
Exercise 3A – using the Project pane	
56
Step 1 – open and save a project	
57
Step 2 – navigating in the Project pane	
58
Step 3 – adding a database connection	
59
Step 4 – adjusting the layers	
61
Step 5 – connecting to ArcGIS server	
64
Creating a new project and project templates	
66
Creating a new project with Esri templates	
67
Exercise 3B – using an Esri template to create a new project	
67
Step 1 – creating a new project using the Local scene template	
68
Step 2 – connecting to data sources and adding your surface	
70
Custom project templates	
73
Exercise 3C – creating a custom project template	
74
Step 1 – create a project	
75
Step 2 – setting up a default map in the template	
75
Step 3 – adding a layout from an existing map document	
77
Step 4 – saving a project as a template	
80
Step 5 – creating a new project using a custom template	
82
Summary	
83

Table of Contents
[ iii ]
Chapter 4: Creating 2D Maps	
85
Creating and configuring 2D maps	
86
Creating a new map	
86
Exercise 4A – adding and configuring layers in a map	
88
Step 1 – creating the project	
88
Step 2 – adding layers	
90
Exercise 4B – adding a new map to a project	
94
Step 1 – creating the new map	
95
Step 2 – filtering a layer with a definition query	
96
Step 3 – adding annotation to the map	
99
Exercise 4C – using map and layer files	
99
Step 1 – adding a new map using a map file	
100
Step 2 – creating and using a layer file	
101
Step 3 – labeling	
101
Step 4 – configuring label conflict and placement options	
102
Challenge	
104
Summary	
104
Chapter 5: Creating 3D Maps	
105
3D maps	
105
Exercise 5A – creating a simple 3D scene	
108
Step 1 – creating a project and 3D scene	
108
Step 2 – adding a layer	
108
Step 3 – making a layer 3D	
111
Elevations	
112
Ground elevations	
113
Digital Elevation Models	
113
Triangulated Irregular Networks	
114
Extruding features	
116
Other methods to display 3D data	
118
Exercise 5B – creating a local scene	
119
Step 1 – open a project and add a local scene	
119
Step 2 – setting the ground surface	
119
Step 3 – adding layers and setting symbology	
121
Summary	
125
Chapter 6: Creating a Layout	
127
Things you need to consider when designing a layout	
128
Purpose	
128
The audience	
131
The author's story: A	
131
The author's story: B	
132
A situation	
133

Table of Contents
[ iv ]
Creating a layout in ArcGIS Pro	
134
Exercise 6A – creating a simple layout	
135
Step 1 – open ArcGIS Pro and your project	
135
Step 2 – adding a new blank layout	
135
Step 3 – displaying the desired area	
138
Step 4 – adding other elements	
139
Challenge	
142
Exercise 6B – creating and using a layout template	
142
Step 1 – saving a template file	
142
Step 2 – creating a new layout using a layout file	
142
Step 3 – configuring a new layout	
143
The challenge	
144
Summary	
145
Chapter 7: Editing Spatial and Tabular Data	
147
Editable data formats	
148
Data formats – editable or not	
148
How to know what format data is in	
149
How to edit data using ArcGIS Pro	
151
How to start editing features and attributes	
151
Preparing to edit	
151
The EDIT tab	
152
Creating new features	
156
Feature templates	
157
Exercise 7A – creating new features	
157
Step 1 – opening your project and preparing to edit	
157
Step 2 – adding your source data	
162
Step 3 – drawing a new sewer line	
163
Step 4 – update attributes	
166
Challenge	
166
Step 5 – drawing the manholes	
166
Step 6 – adding the roads	
168
Challenge	
176
Editing your schema	
176
Adding a field	
176
Field name	
177
Alias	
177
Field data types	
177
Exercise 7B – adding a field and populating values	
178
Step 1 – adding the field	
179
Step 2 – populating the field using the field calculator	
181
Importing a new feature class	
182
Exercise 7C – importing a Shapefile	
182
Step 1 – open the project and add a layer	
182
Step 2 – export to geodatabase	
183
Summary	
184

Table of Contents
[ v ]
Chapter 8: Geoprocessing	
185
What determines which tools you can use?	
186
Licensing levels	
186
Extensions for ArcGIS Pro	
187
Spatial Analyst	
188
3D Analyst	
189
Network Analyst	
190
Exercise 8A – determining the license level and extension	
191
Step 1 – open ArcGIS Pro	
191
Step 2 – determining the license level and extension	
191
The analysis process	
192
Preparing data for analysis	
193
The Clip tool	
194
The Dissolve tool	
194
The Project tool	
195
The Merge tool	
196
The Append tool	
197
Exercise 8B – using the Clip and Dissolve tools	
198
Step 1 – evaluate the data	
198
Step 2 – clipping the streets	
199
Step 3 – simplifying the data and calculating the total length	
200
Step 4 – exporting a table to Excel	
202
Other commonly used geoprocessing analysis tools	
203
Overlay analysis	
203
Proximity analysis	
206
Exercise 8C – performing analysis	
209
Step 1 – locating commercial properties near sewer lines	
209
Step 2 – exporting selected parcels	
212
Step 3 – determining how much of each commercial property is in the floodplain	
213
Step 4 – selecting commercial parcels that are not in the floodplain	
217
Summary	
219
Chapter 9: Creating and Using Tasks	
221
What is a task?	
221
Components of a task	
222
Running a task	
224
Exercise 9A – running a simple task	
225
Step 1 – start ArcGIS Pro and open a project	
225
Step 2 – opening and running a task	
225
Creating tasks	
227
Exercise 9B – exploring a task	
227
Step 1 – open a project	
227
Step 2 – opening a task in the Task Designer	
228
Step 3 – Reviewing a task's steps	
229
Things to consider	
230
What is the purpose or goal of the task?	
230

Table of Contents
[ vi ]
What is the workflow which supports the purpose?	
230
How will the task be used?	
231
Who is the audience for the task?	
232
Creating a task	
232
Creating a Task Item	
233
Creating a Task Group	
234
Creating a task	
234
Exercise 9C – creating a task	
235
Step 1 – open is project and create a Task Item	
235
Step 2 – creating a new task	
236
Task steps	
237
Components of a step	
237
General	
238
Actions	
240
Views	
242
Contents	
243
Exercise 9D – adding steps to a task	
244
Step 1 – open task in the Task Designer	
244
Step 2 – adding a step to zoom	
244
Step 3 – selecting the street segment	
246
Step 4 – selecting nearby parcels	
248
Step 5 – exporting selections to Excel spreadsheet	
249
Step 6 – run your task	
251
Challenge	
251
Summary	
251
Chapter 10: Automating Processes with ModelBuilder 
and Python	
253
Tasks, geoprocessing models, and Python scripts – what is 
the difference?	
254
Geoprocessing model	
254
Python script	
255
What is the difference?	
256
Creating geoprocessing models	
257
Model components and terminology	
257
Saving a model	
259
Exercise 10A – creating a model	
262
Step 1 – open the project and the ModelBuilder window	
263
Step 2 – adding model components	
264
Step 3 – adding another process	
267
Running a model	
270
Exercise 10B – running a model	
270
Step 1 – running the model from ModelBuilder	
270
Step 2 – resetting the run state	
272
Step 3 – running the model from a toolbox	
273
Making a model interactive	
274

Table of Contents
[ vii ]
Exercise 10C – making a model interactive	
276
Step 1 – marking variables as parameters	
276
Step 2 – exposing hidden variables	
277
Step 3 – running the model	
280
Python	
280
Some Python basics	
281
Commenting and documenting your scripts	
281
Variables	
283
Data paths	
284
The ArcPy module	
284
Locating Python syntax for a geoprocessing tool	
285
Exercise 10D – creating a Python script	
287
Step 1 – open IDLE	
288
Step 2 – writing the script	
290
Step 3 – adding the script to ArcGIS Pro and running it	
293
Summary	
295
Chapter 11: Sharing Your Work	
297
Sharing content with those on your network	
298
If they have ArcGIS Pro	
298
A layer file	
298
Map files	
300
Layout files	
301
If they don't have ArcGIS Pro	
301
Exporting to other GIS formats	
302
Exercise 11B – exporting to KML	
303
Exporting to non-GIS formats	
308
Sharing content with those not on your network	
310
A layer package	
311
Exercise 11C – creating a layer package	
311
A map package	
316
The map package challenge	
316
Project packages	
317
The project package challenge	
317
Summary	
318
Appendix A: ArcGIS Pro Glossary	
319
Appendix B: Chapter Questions and Answers	
327
Index	
335


Preface
[ ix ]
Preface
Esri's ArcGIS Platform is the premiere GIS solution for those wishing to build a fully 
functional and scalable GIS. ArcGIS includes many integrated components, such as 
desktop applications, databases, image and web servers, cloud applications, and data 
along with mobile and web applications. ArcGIS Pro is Esri's latest addition to this 
already amazing GIS platform.
ArcGIS Pro is a 64-bit desktop GIS application that makes use of a modern ribbon 
interface. This means that it has the ability to make full use of modern computer 
hardware while at the same time presenting users with an easy-to-use and intuitive 
interface. It contains powerful tools for visualizing and analyzing 2D and 3D data.
This book will take you from software installation to performing geospatial analysis. 
It is packed with how-tos for a host of commonly performed tasks. You start by 
learning how to download and install the software, including hardware limitations 
and recommendations. Then, you are exposed to the new ribbon interface and how its 
smart design can make finding tools easier. After you are exposed to the new interface, 
you are taken through the steps of creating a new GIS project to provide quick access 
to project resources. With a project created, you learn how to construct 2D and 3D 
maps, including how to add layers, adjust symbology, and control labeling. Next, you 
learn how to access and use analysis tools to help answer real-world questions. Finally, 
you will learn how processes can be automated and standardized in ArcGIS Pro using 
tasks, models, and Python scripts.
This book will provide an invaluable resource for all those seeking to use ArcGIS Pro 
as their primary GIS application or for those looking to migrate from ArcMap and 
ArcCatalog.

Preface
[ x ]
What this book covers
Chapter 1, Introducing ArcGIS Pro, explains the installation process and requirements 
of ArcGIS Pro. You will learn how to manage software licenses and the differences 
between the three license levels. Finally, you will launch ArcGIS Pro and open a 
project to begin exploring the application.
Chapter 2, Using ArcGIS Pro – Navigating through the Interface, introduces you to 
ArcGIS Pro's new ribbon-based interface. You will learn how the interface works 
and the terminology associated with it. You will begin to explore tools that will 
allow you to access data, maps, and tools within an ArcGIS Pro project.
Chapter 3, Creating and Working with ArcGIS Pro Projects, explains what an ArcGIS Pro 
project is and how it works. You will learn how to create new projects, add items to a 
project, and how to use project templates.
Chapter 4, Creating 2D Maps, shows you how to create 2D maps. You will learn how 
to add layers, control layer display and draw order, and configure different types of 
layer symbology. You will also learn how to configure labeling for layers along with 
other layer properties.
Chapter 5, Creating 3D Maps, shows how ArcGIS Pro can be used to create 3D maps. 
You will examine how to combine 2D and 3D data to create amazing 3D scenes. You 
will learn how to configure 3D layer symbology to produces realistic-looking views 
and navigate within a 3D map.
Chapter 6, Creating a Layout, teaches you how to create a layout that contains 2D 
and/or 3D maps, dynamic legends, scales, and so on. Often the final step of any 
project is to present your findings and work. In GIS, this is typically done with a 
map. The layout provides the frame for that map.
Chapter 7, Editing Spatial and Tabular Data, explains what types of data can be edited 
and outlines the recommended workflows to maintain GIS data using ArcGIS Pro. 
ArcGIS Pro allows users to edit a wealth of GIS data including both spatial and 
tabular information.
Chapter 8, Geoprocessing, introduces you to many of the most commonly used tools, 
where they can be accessed, and what will determine which tools are available 
to them within ArcGIS Pro. ArcGIS Pro includes a wealth of tools to analyze and 
manipulate GIS data, which are referred to as geoprocessing tools.
Chapter 9, Creating and Using Tasks, shows readers how they can create tasks for 
common workflows within their offices to improve efficiency and standardization. 
ArcGIS Pro Tasks allow GIS managers to standardize processes and workflows.

Preface
[ xi ]
Chapter 10, Automating Processes with ModelBuilder and Python, introduces readers 
to the basic concepts and skills needed to create simple models and Python scripts 
for ArcGIS Pro. ModelBuilder and Python can be used to automate and streamline 
analysis, conversion, and integration processes within ArcGIS Pro.
Chapter 11, Sharing Your Work, illustrates different methods within ArcGIS Pro to 
share maps, data, and processes with others, both on your network and off. As more 
and more people are becoming geospatially savvy, it is increasingly important to be 
able to share our GIS content with others.
Appendix A, ArcGIS Pro Glossary, provides a quick reference for the terminology 
associated with ArcGIS Pro.
Appendix B, Chapter Questions and Answers, provides the answers to questions contained 
in the chapters, so readers can verify the answers they gave for each question.
What you need for this book
•	
ArcGIS Pro 1.1 or higher (basic, standard, or advanced)
•	
Web browser
•	
Internet Access
Who this book is for
This book is for anyone wishing to learn how ArcGIS Pro can be used to create 
maps and perform geospatial analysis. It will be especially helpful for those who 
have used ArcMap and ArcCatalog in the past and are looking to migrate to Esri's 
newest desktop GIS solution. Although previous GIS experience is not required, 
you must have a good solid foundation using Microsoft Windows and a mouse. It is 
also helpful if you understand how to manage folders and files within the Microsoft 
Windows environment.
Conventions
In this book, you will find a number of text styles that distinguish between different 
kinds of information. Here are some examples of these styles and an explanation of 
their meaning.
Code words in text, database table names, folder names, filenames, file extensions, 
pathnames, dummy URLs, user input, and Twitter handles are shown as follows: 
"Right-click on the Student folder you just created and select Paste"

Preface
[ xii ]
A block of code is set as follows:
env.workspace = "C:\\student\\IntroArcPro\\Databases\\Trippville_GIS.
gdb"
#Runs Union Geoprocessing tool on 2 Feature classes
arcpy.Union_analysis (["Parcels", "Floodplains"], "Parcels_Floodplain_
Union", "NO_FID", 0.0003)
Any command-line input or output is written as follows:
msiexec.exe /i <setup staging location>\ArcGISPro.msi ALLUSERS=1 
INSTALLDIR="C:\MyArcGISPro\" /qb
New terms and important words are shown in bold. Words that you see on the 
screen, for example, in menus or dialog boxes, appear in the text like this: "Click on 
Computer under the Open pane. Then, select Browse under the Computer pane."
Warnings or important notes appear in a box like this.
Tips and tricks appear like this.
The chapters are sprinkled with questions to help you assess what you have learned 
and to verify if you have completed exercise tasks properly, for example:
Question: How many tasks are included in the Task Item you have 
opened and what are they? 
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
The answers to all the questions are listed chapter-wise in the Appendix towards the 
end of the book.
Reader feedback
Feedback from our readers is always welcome. Let us know what you think about 
this book—what you liked or disliked. Reader feedback is important for us as it helps 
us develop titles that you will really get the most out of.

Preface
[ xiii ]
To send us general feedback, simply e-mail feedback@packtpub.com, and mention 
the book's title in the subject of your message.
If there is a topic that you have expertise in and you are interested in either writing 
or contributing to a book, see our author guide at www.packtpub.com/authors.
Customer support
Now that you are the proud owner of a Packt book, we have a number of things to 
help you to get the most from your purchase.
Downloading the exercise data
You can download the example code files from your account at http://www.
packtpub.com for all the Packt Publishing books you have purchased. If you 
purchased this book elsewhere, you can visit http://www.packtpub.com/support 
and register to have the files e-mailed directly to you.
Downloading the color images of this book
We also provide you with a PDF file that has color images of the screenshots/
diagrams used in this book. The color images will help you better understand the 
changes in the output. You can download this file from https://www.packtpub.
com/sites/default/files/downloads/4496OT_ColoredImages.pdf.
Errata
Although we have taken every care to ensure the accuracy of our content, mistakes 
do happen. If you find a mistake in one of our books—maybe a mistake in the text or 
the code—we would be grateful if you could report this to us. By doing so, you can 
save other readers from frustration and help us improve subsequent versions of this 
book. If you find any errata, please report them by visiting http://www.packtpub.
com/submit-errata, selecting your book, clicking on the Errata Submission Form 
link, and entering the details of your errata. Once your errata are verified, your 
submission will be accepted and the errata will be uploaded to our website or added 
to any list of existing errata under the Errata section of that title.
To view the previously submitted errata, go to https://www.packtpub.com/books/
content/support and enter the name of the book in the search field. The required 
information will appear under the Errata section.

Preface
[ xiv ]
Piracy
Piracy of copyrighted material on the Internet is an ongoing problem across all 
media. At Packt, we take the protection of our copyright and licenses very seriously. 
If you come across any illegal copies of our works in any form on the Internet, please 
provide us with the location address or website name immediately so that we can 
pursue a remedy.
Please contact us at copyright@packtpub.com with a link to the suspected 
pirated material.
We appreciate your help in protecting our authors and our ability to bring you 
valuable content.
Questions
If you have a problem with any aspect of this book, you can contact us at 
questions@packtpub.com, and we will do our best to address the problem.

[ 1 ]
Introducing ArcGIS Pro
Esri's ArcGIS platform has become well-entrenched as the primary solution for GIS 
professionals seeking to implement a scalable integrated solution, which can start 
with a single user and grow to support multiple users across various platforms. With 
ArcGIS for Desktop, ArcGIS for Server, ArcGIS Online, and ArcGIS for Mobile, 
GIS professionals can design and implement a robust GIS solution that provides 
a wide range of functionality to meet the needs of a growing enterprise, which 
includes users of various skill levels, requirements, differing platforms, and data 
formats. However, Esri has not been content to rest on their laurels. They continue to 
push the GIS envelope. With the release of ArcGIS 10.3, Esri released a new desktop 
application named ArcGIS Pro.
ArcGIS Pro is a completely new application from Esri. It is not just an update to 
their venerable ArcGIS for Desktop platform. ArcGIS Pro has a modern ribbon 
interface that has become common in most current desktop applications. It is also 
designed from the ground up to take full advantage of modern hyperthreaded 
64-bit architecture. This greatly improves its performance compared to ArcMap 
and ArcCatalog. In this chapter, we will begin to take a look at this new robust 
and smart interface.
ArcGIS Pro also introduces a new licensing model to Esri users. It makes use of a 
subscription license, opposed to the standard single use or concurrent use license. 
Licenses of ArcGIS Pro are tied directly to the annual maintenance of your traditional 
ArcGIS for Desktop software and managed through ArcGIS Online. You will learn 
more about this later in the chapter.
ArcGIS Pro allows you to combine 2D and 3D content within a single application. In 
the past, you would need to utilize multiple applications, such as ArcMap, ArcScene, 
and ArcGlobe, to view 2D and 3D content. In this chapter, you will examine how you 
can view both 2D and 3D data within a single ArcGIS Pro project.

Introducing ArcGIS Pro
[ 2 ]
In this chapter, you will
•	
Learn the requirements to install ArcGIS Pro
•	
Get a general overview of ArcGIS Pro functionality
•	
Learn how to manage ArcGIS Pro licenses through ArcGIS Online
•	
Understand the relationship between ArcGIS Pro and ArcGIS for 
Desktop licenses
Installing ArcGIS Pro
In order to use ArcGIS Pro, you must first install it. To install ArcGIS Pro, you 
will need to verify that your system meets or exceeds the minimum requirements, 
download or have access to the install files, and finally have rights to install the 
software on the computer you are using. We will look at each of these steps next.
It is possible to install and run ArcGIS Pro on a computer that already has ArcGIS 
for Desktop installed even if ArcGIS for Desktop is an older version. The two 
applications may exist side by side.
It can also be installed on a computer that has no other Esri products installed.
ArcGIS Pro minimum system requirements
As mentioned earlier, ArcGIS Pro is a 64-bit application that supports hyperthreaded 
processing. This allows ArcGIS Pro to take full advantage of modern processors, 
such as the Intel i7 and RAM larger than 4 GB. The ability of ArcGIS Pro to make use 
of this increased computing capability also means the computer you run it on needs 
to have the power to run ArcGIS Pro.
Compared with ArcGIS for Desktop, ArcGIS Pro has higher minimum computer 
specifications. This includes increased hardware and operating system requirements.
Operating system requirements
ArcGIS Pro requires a 64-bit operating system (OS). It will not run on a 32-bit OS. 
ArcGIS Pro currently supports the following operating systems:
•	
Windows 8.1 Pro and Enterprise
•	
Windows 8.0 Pro and Enterprise
•	
Window 7 Ultimate, Professional, and Enterprise (with SP 1)
•	
Windows Server 2012 R2 Standard and Datacenter

Chapter 1
[ 3 ]
•	
Windows Server 2012 Standard and Datacenter
•	
Windows Server 2008 Standard, Enterprise, and Datacenter (with SP 1)
ArcGIS Pro versions 1.0 and 1.1 are currently not supported on Windows 10, Linux 
or iOS natively. Esri has said ArcGIS Pro version 1.2 will be supported on Windows 
10. They have not indicated whether ArcGIS Pro will support Linux or iOS in the 
future. It is possible to run ArcGIS Pro on a Linux or iOS computer if you create a 
virtual windows machine.
Hardware requirements
ArcGIS Pro has some hefty hardware requirements. It requires modern processors 
and large amounts of RAM. It also requires a graphics card powerful enough to 
display 2D and 3D data. To ensure that ArcGIS Pro runs smoothly, you need to 
make sure that your computer meets or exceeds the requirements shown here:
•	
Hyperthreaded dual core or better processor. 2x hyperthreaded hexa-core 
processor is optimal such as the Intel Core i7-3930K.
•	
Minimum of 4 GB of RAM with 8 GB of RAM recommended. 16 GB is 
considered optimal by Esri.
•	
Minimum of 4 GB of hard disk space to install software. 6 GB or higher 
is recommend.
•	
Graphics card that supports DirectX 9 and OpenGL 2.0 with 512 MB of 
video RAM minimum. Esri recommends a graphics card that supports 
DirectX 11 and OpenGL 3.2 with 2 GB of video RAM.
Unlike ArcGIS for Desktop, which has limits on the amount of RAM and processor 
resources it can use, ArcGIS Pro will use all the resources you can throw at it. So, 
the more processing power and memory your computer has the better ArcGIS Pro 
will perform.
Other software requirements
ArcGIS Pro is dependent on other applications that must be installed before 
installation. They provide supporting services which ArcGIS Pro relies on to 
function. These supporting applications include the following:
•	
Microsoft .NET Framework 4.5
•	
Microsoft Internet Explorer 8 or above
•	
ArcGIS Online or Portal for ArcGIS organizational account
ArcGIS Pro does not require ArcGIS for Desktop in order to be installed on a computer.

Introducing ArcGIS Pro
[ 4 ]
Recommendations from the author
I have been working with ArcGIS Pro since it was first released in beta. I have had 
the opportunity to run it on various computers as it has moved through multiple 
beta versions to the release of version 1.0 and now 1.1. This firsthand experience, 
along with my experience running ArcGIS for Desktop since it was first released, has 
led me to several recommendations when it comes to a system to run ArcGIS Pro.
Based on my experience, I recommend the following specifications when purchasing 
a computer to run ArcGIS Pro:
•	
Make sure that you have a graphics card with its own dedicated Graphics 
Processing Unit (GPU). ArcGIS Pro is a graphics-intensive program. Every 
time you pan, zoom, or add a new layer, you will be taxing the graphics 
capability of your computer. A dedicated GPU will allow your computer to 
handle this load by processing graphic rendering requests without burdening 
your computer's CPU and RAM. If your computer uses integrated video, 
then the computer's CPU and system RAM are used to handle all processing 
requests including graphic rendering. ArcGIS Pro is both a processor and 
graphics-intensive application due to the 2D and 3D maps it creates and the 
analysis it performs. This can put a tremendous load on your computer's 
resources. Having the dedicated GPU to handle the graphics rendering load 
on your computer will greatly improve the performance of ArcGIS Pro and 
your user experience.
To get a dedicated GPU usually requires your computer to have a separate 
video card or adaptor. Computers with integrated video typically do not 
have a dedicated GPU but instead use the CPU to handle the graphics 
processing. This will slow your computer down. A separate video card 
also has a dedicated video RAM, which will also enhance your computer's 
ability to run ArcGIS Pro.
•	
Use a solid state drive. Solid state drives are incredibly fast at accessing and 
storing data. They are almost as fast as RAM and are much faster than even 
the fastest hard disk drives. ArcGIS Pro will run at lightning speeds when 
installed on a solid state drive.

Chapter 1
[ 5 ]
•	
There is no such thing as too much RAM. The more RAM your computer 
has, the better ArcGIS Pro will perform, especially if you don't have a solid 
state drive.
•	
If you are going to be doing a lot of analysis or editing and cannot get a 
solid state drive, try using a raid system to improve performance. Raid 
systems utilize multiple hard drives to store data. They can be configured in 
multiple ways. A strip set-based raid, such as RAID 0, RAID 3, or RAID 5, 
provides the best performance. By storing the data across multiple drives, 
the computer can access the requested data from each one at the same time. 
This creates a multilane highway for your data to travel along. A raid system 
will require at least two hard drives and often a separate controller card.
•	
Run two or more monitors. ArcGIS Pro, like ArcGIS for Desktop, has 
multiple windows. Being able to display multiple windows at one time will 
increase your production. It can also allow you to have multiple applications 
open at one time. While I have not attempted to measure the increased 
production with ArcGIS Pro, I do know that it increased the production of 
my team using ArcGIS for Desktop by 10 percent to 15 percent.
All these recommendations can also be applied for those running other applications, 
such as ArcGIS for Desktop, AutoCAD, MicroStation, Photoshop, and other 
graphics-intensive applications. I have run all these applications and can say that 
based on those experiences, any of these recommendations will help them run better.
Downloading the install files
In order to install ArcGIS Pro, you will need to download the install files from 
the My Esri website at https://my.esri.com/. Once there you will need to log 
in using your Esri global account. You will need to make sure that your global 
account is linked to your organization's Esri customer account in order to do this.

Introducing ArcGIS Pro
[ 6 ]
Once you are logged in to My Esri, you will need to click on the My Organizations 
tab and select the Downloads option, as shown in the following screenshot:
If you are not the administrator for your organizations, Esri account, you might not 
see the Downloads tab. If this is the case, you will need to request permissions from 
Esri to view the Downloads tab. To do this, you need to go to My Organizations and 
then the Overview tab.

Chapter 1
[ 7 ]
Then, you need to click on Request Permissions and fill out the online form, as 
shown in the following image:

Introducing ArcGIS Pro
[ 8 ]
Once you get to the Downloads page, you will need to locate ArcGIS Pro and click 
on View Downloads. This will take you to the page that allows you to download 
several files, which you will use to install ArcGIS Pro and supporting applications. 
You can also check system requirements, see additional products, and select 
language packs:
The ArcGIS Pro download is the primary install file for the main ArcGIS Pro 
application. You must download this file if you wish to install ArcGIS Pro. 
The other two files are optional but recommended.
The ArcGIS Pro Offline Help option will install help files on your local machine, so 
you can access them without having an internet connection. By default, ArcGIS Pro 
accesses help information located on the ArcGIS Pro website, http://pro.arcgis.
com. This means that you will always see the most current help documentation for 
the version you are using. You will need to download and install this file if you will 
be using ArcGIS Pro in a disconnected environment and think you might need to 
access the Help documentation.

Chapter 1
[ 9 ]
By default, ArcGIS Pro allows you to run Python scripts inside the application 
without the need to download additional resources. However, if you wish to create 
scripts that will run outside ArcGIS Pro, that interact with other applications, or can 
be scheduled to run automatically, you will need to download the Python install files 
from the My Esri website.
If you cannot access your organization's Esri customer account through the My Esri 
website, you can request a 60-day trial from the Esri website at http://www.esri.
com/software/arcgis/arcgis-for-desktop/free-trial. This free trial includes 
ArcGIS for Desktop, ArcGIS Extensions, ArcGIS Online, and ArcGIS Pro. Once you 
activate your trial, you will be sent instructions to download the install files for ArcGIS 
Pro in addition to other applications included with the trial. These install files are the 
same ones that are available through the My Esri website linked to your organization.
Installing ArcGIS Pro
Now that you have downloaded the install files, you are ready to begin installing 
ArcGIS Pro. First, you will need to make sure that you have sufficient rights to 
install new software on your computer. If you do not, you will need to contact 
your IT department to see if they can provide assistance installing ArcGIS Pro. 
Then, perform the following steps:
1.	 To install ArcGIS Pro, click on the ArcGIS Pro file you downloaded. This will 
unzip the install files and start the installation process.
2.	 Once the install begins, you will first be asked to review and accept the 
license agreement from Esri. If you wish to install the software, you must 
accept the license.
3.	 Next, you will have to choose who will have access to the application, 
all users or just the current user. If you want to install such that all users 
can use ArcGIS Pro, the user installing the software must have full 
administrative rights.
4.	 Then, you will choose the install location. By default, ArcGIS Pro will be 
installed into C:\Program Files\ArcGIS\Pro\. It is recommended that 
you use the default location to avoid issues that could cause problems 
when running ArcGIS Pro after the installation.
5.	 Finally, you will be asked if you wish to take part in the Esri User Experience 
Improvement (EUEI) program. This will send Esri information about system 
crashes and other use information automatically if you choose to participate.
Once you have run the ArcGIS Pro installation and it is completed, you can install 
the ArcGIS Pro Offline Help and Python if needed. This installs in a similar manner 
as the main ArcGIS Pro.

Introducing ArcGIS Pro
[ 10 ]
Conducting a silent install for IT departments
ArcGIS Pro also supports a silent install, which IT staff can use to automate the 
install of ArcGIS Pro throughout an enterprise. This is done through the use of 
command line. To conduct a silent install of ArcGIS Pro for all users, use the 
following command line syntax:
msiexec.exe /i <setup staging location>\ArcGISPro.msi ALLUSERS=1 
INSTALLDIR="C:\MyArcGISPro\" /qb
The setup staging location is the location of the install files, which you downloaded 
and unpackaged. This can be a mapped drive or a Universal Naming Convention 
(UNC) path. The following are parameter settings, which can be used in the 
command line.
•	
INSTALLDIR: This parameter is not required. If it is not included in the 
command line for the silent install, ArcGIS Pro will install to the default 
location of C:\Program Files\ArcGIS\Pro\ if all users are specified.
If a current user is specified it will install to C:\Users\%UserProfile%\
AppData\Local\ArcGIS\Pro.
•	
AllUSERS: This parameter determines which users will be able to start and 
access the ArcGIS Pro application on the installed computer.
°°
AllUSERS: 1 equals all users will have access to ArcGIS Pro
°°
AllUSERS: 2 equals current user will have access to ArcGIS Pro
•	
ENABLEEUEI: This parameter controls the user's participation in the EUEI 
program. Participation in this program will send application usage and 
crash information to Esri automatically.
°°
ENABLEEUEI: 0 disables participation in the program
°°
ENABLEEEUEI: 1 enables participation in the program
•	
qb or qr or qn: This parameter controls the display of the UI when the install 
is being run:
°°
qb equals show basic user interface during install
°°
qr equals show reduced user interface during install
°°
qn equals show no user interface during install
All these parameters are case sensitive.

Chapter 1
[ 11 ]
Managing and assigning ArcGIS 
Pro licenses
Unlike ArcGIS for Desktop, ArcGIS Pro does not use traditional single use licenses or 
rely on a third-party license manager to manage concurrent use licenses. ArcGIS Pro 
licenses are managed through ArcGIS Online or Portal for ArcGIS.
The number and level of ArcGIS Pro licenses
Your ArcGIS Pro licenses are determined based on the number and level of the 
ArcGIS for Desktop licenses you or your organization own and have under current 
maintenance. So, if you have two licenses for ArcGIS for Desktop advanced, four 
licenses of ArcGIS for Desktop standard and 10 Licenses of ArcGIS for Desktop 
basic, you will have the same number and level of ArcGIS Pro licenses, which you 
can assign to users.
ArcGIS Pro has three license levels: basic, standard, and advanced. The functionality 
of the different license levels for ArcGIS Pro is very similar to that for the equivalent 
ArcGIS for Desktop license level. The following are a few of the functionality 
differences between the three license levels:
Basic
Standard
Advanced
Visualize spatial and tabular data
Yes
Yes
Yes
Edit Shapefiles
Yes
Yes
Yes
Edit personal or file geodatabase
Yes
Yes
Yes
Edit workgroup or enterprise 
geodatabase
No
Yes
Yes
Perform spatial and attribute queries
Yes
Yes
Yes
Create and use geodatabase 
topology
No
Yes
Yes
Create and use geometric networks
No
Yes
Yes
Create, manage and update 
relationship classes
No
Yes
Yes
Perform overlay analysis
Limited to union 
and intersect
Limited to 
union and 
intersect
Yes
Perform proximity analysis
Limited to buffer 
and multi-ring 
buffer
Limited to 
buffer and 
multi-ring 
buffer
Yes

Introducing ArcGIS Pro
[ 12 ]
To download a complete functionality matrix, go to Esri's product webpage at 
http://www.esri.com/software/arcgis/arcgis-for-desktop/pricing.
ArcGIS Pro also has extensions like ArcGIS for Desktop. Licenses for these 
extensions are also matched with the extensions for ArcGIS for Desktop. So, if you 
have one license of Spatial Analyst extension, you will also have one Spatial Analyst 
for ArcGIS Pro extension license.
You cannot purchase additional ArcGIS Pro licenses independently. If you wish to 
have additional licenses, you must purchase new ArcGIS for Desktop licenses at the 
level you need to provide the functionality required.
ArcGIS Pro uses a subscription licensing model that is tied to your annual ArcGIS 
for Desktop software maintenance. If you do not stay under a current maintenance 
agreement with Esri, you will lose access to ArcGIS Pro.
Managing ArcGIS Pro licenses
As we mentioned earlier, ArcGIS Pro licenses are managed through ArcGIS Online 
or Portal for ArcGIS. In order to assign or manage licenses, you must be designated 
as an administrator. If you are, you can assign ArcGIS Pro and extensions licenses to 
named users.
To manage or assign licenses you must perform the following steps:
1.	 Login to ArcGIS Online (www.argis.com) or Portal for ArcGIS.
2.	 Once logged in, you will need to click on Manage Licenses, as shown in the 
following screenshot:

Chapter 1
[ 13 ]
3.	 From the Manage Licenses page, you can then assign ArcGIS Pro and 
extension licenses to named users within your organization's ArcGIS 
Online account or Portal for ArcGIS by clicking on the link located 
under Licensed For:
4.	 After clicking on the link, you are taken to a page that allows you to assign 
the ArcGIS Pro level and extensions to the user. To assign an ArcGIS Pro 
license to the user, simply click on the radial button next to the level you 
wish to assign. At a minimum, you will need to have basic in order for 
ArcGIS Pro to run on your computer:
As you can see in the preceding figure, Tripp Corbin has been assigned an 
Advanced ArcGIS Pro license along with the Spatial Analyst, 3D Analyst, Network 
Analyst, Geostatistical Analyst, and Data Reviewer extensions.

Introducing ArcGIS Pro
[ 14 ]
If ArcGIS for Desktop is installed on the user's computer, the ArcGIS Pro license 
level does not have to match the ArcGIS for Desktop license level, the user may be 
running. These are independent from one another.
As an administrator, you can change the ArcGIS Pro licenses and extensions assigned 
to users as needed. You can assign licenses as new users are added or revoke licenses 
as older users are deactivated or removed.
Launching ArcGIS Pro
Now that you have installed ArcGIS Pro and have a license, it is time to launch 
ArcGIS Pro for the first time. You need to ensure that you are connected to the 
Internet because when you launch ArcGIS Pro, it will need to connect to ArcGIS 
Online or Portal for ArcGIS to make sure that you have a valid license.
Let's open ArcGIS Pro:
1.	 Open ArcGIS Pro. How you do this will depend on your OS and whether 
you have added shortcuts to your desktop or taskbar.
2.	 Once you start ArcGIS Pro, you will need to sign in to your ArcGIS Online 
or Portal account. This allows ArcGIS Pro to verify your license. You do 
have the option to allow ArcGIS Pro to remember your login credentials 
for ArcGIS Online, so you will not have to log in every time you launch 
ArcGIS Pro.

Chapter 1
[ 15 ]
After ArcGIS Pro verifies your login and license, it will take you to the window that 
allows you to start a new project or open an existing project. You will now open an 
existing project.
Downloading and installing exercise data
Before you can proceed further in the book and complete the exercises, you will 
need to download and install the exercise data. To do this, follow these steps:
1.	 Download the exercise data from Packt Publishing. In most cases, this will 
be downloaded to your Downloads folder unless you specify a different 
location.
2.	 Open Windows Explorer or File Explorer depending on which OS you 
are using. If you are using Windows 7 or 8.1, you will see an icon located 
on your task bar, which looks like a small file folder in a holder. This will 
open File Explorer.
3.	 Navigate to the location you downloaded the exercise data to. If you 
downloaded the data to the standard windows default location, you should 
be able to click on the Downloads option under Favorites in the tree located 
in the left-hand side of the File Explorer interface.
4.	 Double-click on the LearningArcGISPro.zip file.

Introducing ArcGIS Pro
[ 16 ]
5.	 Right-click on the IntroArcGISPro folder. Then, select Copy.
6.	 In File Explorer, now navigate to your C:\ drive often named Local Disk 
or OS. The C:\ drive may be found under this PC in the tree on the left-
hand side of the File Explorer interface.
7.	 Right-click on the C:\ drive and select New | Folder.
8.	 Name the new folder Student.
9.	 Right-click on the Student folder you just created and select Paste. This will 
copy the IntroArcGISPro folder to the Student folder you just created.
10.	 Close File Explorer once the copy is complete.
Opening an existing ArcGIS Pro project
ArcGIS Pro makes use of projects that can contain 2D and 3D data. You will now 
open an existing project and begin your first journey into ArcGIS Pro to help verify 
the successful install of ArcGIS Pro. You will get an opportunity to explore 2D and 
3D maps, a layout, and more:
1.	 In the ArcGIS Pro Open Project window, click on Open another project 
option as shown in the following screenshot:
2.	 Click on Computer under the Open pane. Then, select Browse under the 
Computer pane.
3.	 Navigate to C:\Student\IntroArcPro\Chapter1\IntroArcPro_Chapter1 
or the location you installed the exercise data and select IntroArcPro_
Chapter1.aprx.

Chapter 1
[ 17 ]
If the project opens successfully, you will see two map views located side by 
side showing a granite quarry. One is a traditional 2D map, and the other is 
a 3D map. These two views have been linked together, so when you zoom or 
pan in one, the other updates to match.
4.	 Click on the Explore tool.
5.	 Move your mouse pointer to one of the two map views and click your left 
mouse button and drag it to pan within the view. As you pan in one view, 
watch what happens in the other view.

Introducing ArcGIS Pro
[ 18 ]
Question: What happens when you use the Explore tool within 
the views?
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
As you can see, the two views are linked together. This keeps them in sync 
with one another as you move between them. This is one of the functions you 
will find in ArcGIS Pro. You do not have to link views, but it can be useful. 
You will learn how to configure view linking in a later chapter.
6.	 Using the Explore tool once again, click on a parcel in either view.
Question: What happens when you click on a parcel in one of the 
map views?
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
As you have now experienced, the Explore tool not only pans and zooms within the 
map views but will also retrieve information about the features in the map. Feel free 
to continue to investigate the ArcGIS Pro project and some of its functionality. When 
you are finished, close ArcGIS Pro without saving the project.
Summary
You successfully installed ArcGIS Pro. This new 64-bit hyperthreaded application 
from Esri provides an effective tool to visualize a range of data, including 2D and 
3D. This increased capability does require a greater amount of system resources to 
run effectively compared with the earlier ArcGIS applications.
ArcGIS Pro makes uses of a new licensing model. It uses a subscription model as 
opposed to traditional single user or concurrent licenses. The ArcGIS Pro licenses 
are tied to the annual maintenance for your traditional ArcGIS for Desktop licenses 
and are managed through your organization's ArcGIS Online account or Portal 
for ArcGIS.

[ 19 ]
Using ArcGIS Pro – 
Navigating through 
the Interface
Now that you have successfully installed ArcGIS Pro, it is time to begin examining 
how it works. ArcGIS Pro is the first Esri desktop product to make use of a ribbon 
interface, which has become common in many current desktop applications, such as 
Microsoft Word, Excel, and AutoCAD. The new ribbons make finding and accessing 
tools and functionality quicker and easier than the traditional drop-down menu and 
toolbar interface used by ArcGIS for Desktop.
So, you may ask yourself how the new ribbon style interface makes accessing tools 
and functionality quicker. This new interface is smart. It will present you with tools 
and information relevant to your current operation. When working in a layout, tasks 
associated with creating and printing a layout are presented. If you switch your 
focus to performing analysis, then a new series of menu options will be presented 
automatically that allows you to access analysis tools.
This automatic behavior is referred to as contextual menus or tabs. These smart 
ribbons present you with the tools you need when you need them. When you move 
on to other tasks, they automatically update accordingly. This not only puts the tools 
you need at your fingertips, but it also removes the need to have a large number of 
toolbars and windows open at one time, thus reducing screen clutter and opening up 
real-estate for other uses.

Using ArcGIS Pro – Navigating through the Interface
[ 20 ]
The interface can be further customized to meet your specific needs. You can group 
tools you use most commonly, so they are readily available at all times. You can make 
changes to the Quick Access Toolbar located at the top of ArcGIS Pro. You can also 
share these customizations with others in your organization. So, ArcGIS Pro can be 
even easier to use.
In this chapter, you will:
•	
Learn terminology associated with ArcGIS Pro ribbon menus
•	
Work with the ribbon menus and understand how the contextual tabs work
•	
Locate several commonly used tools in the ArcGIS Pro interface
•	
Learn how to move between maps, scenes, and layouts
•	
Learn how to customize the ArcGIS Pro interface
Understanding the new interface 
terminology
Anyone who has been working with GIS for any length of time knows that GIS has 
its own language. As your experience with GIS grows, this new language becomes 
second nature. You find yourself using words such as topology, projection, and 
buffer in conversations without realizing that you are doing it. While you may 
completely understand what you are saying non-GIS users may not. The new 
ArcGIS Pro ribbon interface will require you to expand your GIS dictionary.
The new interface used by ArcGIS Pro has a whole new set of words and phrases 
associated with it. In order to successfully use, navigate, and understand this 
interface, you need to make sure that you know what some of these are and 
what they mean.
The ArcGIS Pro interface terminology
The following table gives the definition of various terms used in ArcGIS Pro:
ArcGIS Pro terms
Definition
Ribbon
This is the rectangular menu area across the top of ArcGIS 
Pro. The ribbon is divided into tabs, which group related tools 
and functions. Some tabs are consistent, whereas others are 
contextual, which means that they will change depending on 
tasks being performed.

Chapter 2
[ 21 ]
ArcGIS Pro terms
Definition
Tab
This is a collection of related tools and functions accessed via 
the ribbon, and it is similar to toolbars in ArcGIS for Desktop. 
Tabs can be core or contextual. Core tabs are those that stay 
constant on the ribbon such as project and share. Contextual 
tabs will change and appear depending on the tasks users are 
currently performing. Examples of contextual menus include 
MAP, LAYOUT, APPEARANCE, and LABELING.
Pane
This is a dockable window that allows users to access 
information or tools. It is also similar to the dockable windows 
in ArcGIS for Desktop, such as CATALOG, SEARCH, 
ArcToolbox, and TABLE windows. Like the windows in 
ArcGIS for Desktop, panes can be opened and closed, pinned 
in place or set to auto hide.
Group on a tab
This is a subset of related tools located within a tab. An 
example of a group on a tab is LAYER, which contains 
multiple tools in order to add layers to a map and is located on 
the MAP tab.
Quick Access 
Toolbar
This is a collection of shortcuts to commonly used tools and 
commands. The Quick Access Toolbar is typically located in 
the top left-hand corner of the ArcGIS Pro interface though the 
position can be changed. Similar to the taskbar in Windows.
View
This is a window that allows you to view data and perform 
tasks. A view might be a 2D map, a 3D scene, a layout, or some 
other visualization of your data. This is similar to the Data and 
Layout views in ArcGIS for Desktop. However, in ArcGIS Pro, 
you can have multiple views and see them displayed at the 
same time.
These are some of the key terms you will need to understand as you begin to use 
ArcGIS Pro and navigate through its interface. As you start using the interface, 
I believe that you will find it much more intuitive than the one used by ArcGIS 
for Desktop, which hides much of its functionality through a myriad of toolbars 
and menus.
Using the interface
Now that you understand the key terminology associated with the new interface, 
it is time to start using it. You will start with using some of the tools in the core 
tabs on the ribbon. Then, you work with different views and the contextual tabs 
associated with them. Finally, you will investigate some of the panes.

Using ArcGIS Pro – Navigating through the Interface
[ 22 ]
Navigating the ribbon
You will now begin to investigate the ribbon. It is the rectangular area located at the 
top of ArcGIS Pro. It includes a series of tabs, group tabs, and tools as shown in the 
following screenshot:
When you first open a new project, you will typically see the PROJECT, MAP, 
INSERT, ANALYSIS, VIEW, EDIT, and SHARE tabs on the ribbon. Each tab 
contains tools associated with the name of the tab. For example, the MAP tab 
includes tools for navigating within the map, adding layers, selecting features, 
and accessing information about the features in the map.
Let's now begin taking a closer look at a couple of the most used tabs and some of 
the key tools located within that tab. You will look at others as you move through 
this book. You will start with the PROJECT tab.
The PROJECT tab
The PROJECT tab provides tools needed to manage the project and configure options. 
This tab allows you to create new projects, open existing projects, save your current 
project, and make a copy of your current project. You can also connect to different 
ArcGIS Online accounts or Portals for ArcGIS from this tab.

Chapter 2
[ 23 ]
New
The New tool will open a brand new project using the template you select. 
The template controls what is included within the project just as a map document 
template did within ArcMap. The default project templates included with ArcGIS 
Pro are Blank, Global Scene.aptx, Local Scene.aptx, and Map.aptx.
The following table gives their description:
Template
Description
Blank
This starts a new empty project. The new project will not contain 
any maps, scenes, or layouts. It will be a blank canvas, so you can 
build the project completely from scratch.
Global Scene.aptx
This starts a new project with a single 3D scene built on the entire 
world. This is similar to a new blank globe created with ArcGlobe, 
which is part of the 3D Analyst extension for ArcGIS for Desktop. 
A new empty project geodatabase will also be created within the 
folder containing the new project file.
Local Scene.aptx
This starts a new project with a single 3D scene, which is 
contained in a localized area. This is similar to scenes created 
with ArcScene including the 3D Analyst extension for ArcGIS for 
Desktop. It also creates a new blank project geodatabase within 
the folder containing the project file.
Map.aptx
This starts a new project containing a single 2D map and creates 
a blank project geodatabase in the same folder containing the 
project file.

Using ArcGIS Pro – Navigating through the Interface
[ 24 ]
Once you create and open a project, you can add whatever maps, scenes, or layouts 
you wish regardless of which template you start with. These templates just provide 
you with a helping hand. You can create your own custom templates as well. You 
will learn how to do that in a later chapter.
Save
The Save tool saves your project including any changes you have made to maps, 
layer properties, and layouts. This does not save edits you have made to features 
in your map. Edits you make to create new features or update existing features 
must be saved using a Save Edits tool located on the EDIT tab.
Save As
The Save As tool creates a copy of your project file with a new name. It does not 
create a copy of the data referenced by the original project. The new project will 
continue to point back to the same data sources used by the original project it was 
created from.
Portal
The Portal tool allows you to manage which portals you are connected to. This can 
include connection to ArcGIS Online or Portal for ArcGIS. The primary portal is 
used by ArcGIS Pro to determine if you have a valid license and what level and 
extensions you have the ability to use. Other portals can be used to access data, 
services, and basemaps, which can be used to create maps and perform analysis 
within ArcGIS Pro supplementing your own standard datasets.
Licensing
The Licensing tool allows you to see what ArcGIS Pro license level and extensions 
you have been granted. Once you know what license level and extensions are 
available, you can then determine what functions you will be able to perform in 
ArcGIS Pro. Remember that the ArcGIS Pro license level and extensions assigned 
to you do not have to be the same as the ArcGIS for Desktop licenses you use.
After your initial login to use ArcGIS Pro, you do have the option to use your license 
offline. This checks out the license to the computer you are currently using and no 
longer requires you to be logged in to ArcGIS Online or Portal for ArcGIS to use 
ArcGIS Pro. Do be careful when using this option. If the computer is lost or fails 
while the license is checked out for offline use, there is no easy way to get it back. 
You will need to contact Esri Support and have them resolve the issue.

Chapter 2
[ 25 ]
Options
The Options tool allows you to set various ArcGIS Pro user options giving you 
the ability to customize it. You can set different options for the specific project you 
are working in, such as the units or for the application in general such as a default 
basemap for all new maps or scenes added to a project. As you explore each option, 
you can click on the Learn more about link located at the bottom of the window for 
more information about the settings associated with that option.
The MAP tab
The MAP tab on the ribbon provides access to tools used to work with both 2D and 
3D maps. From this tab, you can add new layers to your map, select features, change 
your basemap, and so on. This tab combines functionality that was found on the 
Standard and Tools toolbars in ArcGIS for Desktop.
The MAP tab contains six groups: Clipboard, Navigate, Layer, Selection, Inquiry, 
and Labeling. Each group then contains tools associated with the name of the group. 
For example, the Selection group tab includes several tools that allow you to select 
features in the map using various methods. You can select features directly from 
the map or based on specific attribute values or based on the spatial relationships 
between features in one or more layers. You will now take a closer look at a few of 
the most commonly used tools.
The Navigate group
The Navigate group contains tools that allow you to navigate to locations within the 
map. This includes tools that allow you to zoom in to areas so that you can see more 
detail or to zoom out to see a greater area. It also has tools that allow you to return to 
specific areas within the map.

Using ArcGIS Pro – Navigating through the Interface
[ 26 ]
The Explore tool
The Explore tool is a multifunction tool that allows you to zoom and pan within 
the map. It also allows you to click on features within the map and retrieve attributes 
linked to the feature. This tool combines the functions of the zoom in, zoom out, pan, 
and identify tools found in ArcMap into a single tool.
You use this tool to navigate within your map using your mouse as follows:
•	
Left click on a feature: This opens the Identify pop-up window showing 
attributes linked to the feature.
•	
Left or right drag: Clicking and holding your left mouse button down 
and then dragging your pointer to the left and right pans your map view 
in that direction.
•	
Moving scroll wheel: This zooms map in and out. Scrolling the wheel 
away from you causes the map to zoom in. Scrolling the wheel toward 
you causes the map to zoom out.
•	
Right click and drag: This continuously zooms the map in or out depending 
on the movement of your mouse.
•	
Single right click: This opens a menu. The menu that appears will vary 
depending on where you right-click.
•	
Hold down scroll wheel and drag (3D map/scene only): This rotates and 
tilts the map view along 3D axis.
As you can see, this tool works best with a mouse that has a scroll wheel in between 
the right and left button. Other types of pointing devices can be used, but the 
functionality may be different depending on your hardware. Some of the buttons 
associated with this tool can be altered under the Options tool located on the 
PROJECT tab. For example, you can change the zoom direction of the scroll wheel.

Chapter 2
[ 27 ]
The Bookmarks tool
The Bookmarks tool allows you to zoom to save spatial locations within your active 
map. This allows you to quickly return to important locations, such as project areas, 
special event locations, key parcels, and so on. Each map or scene within your project 
will have its own set of unique bookmarks.
The drop-down arrow below the primary tool will allow you to access the 
bookmarks that have been saved with the active map or scene. This also provides 
access to tools in order to create new bookmarks and managing existing ones. 
There is no limit to the number of bookmarks each map or scene can have.
The Layer group
The Layer group contains tools in order to add new layers or data to your map. 
Some tools work with both 2D and 3D data. Others work best with one or the other. 
There are also tools in order to add nonspatial data to your map. These tools use 
either coordinate values or addresses to show the location of points.
The Add Data tool
This tool allows you to add new 2D or 3D layers to your maps. Added layers can 
reference various types of data and can come from different locations. It also allows 
you to add tabular data.

Using ArcGIS Pro – Navigating through the Interface
[ 28 ]
This tool is basically the same as the Add Data button in ArcMap. However, Esri has 
incorporated some additional options that the old button in ArcMap did not have. 
The options included with this tool in ArcGIS Pro are:
Options
Descriptions
Data
This option adds spatial or tabular data to a map. It can be used to 
add layers, which reference Shapefiles, geodatabase feature classes, 
and ArcGIS Server web services. Standalone tables can be added to 
a map from various sources as well, including dbase files, CSV files, 
database tables, and Excel spreadsheets.
X, Y Event Data
This allows you to add points to a map based on coordinates stored 
in a Standalone table. Each point will also be linked to the additional 
attributes or information associated with that record or row.
Route Events
This shows location of route between points of interest along a 
linear network.
Query Layer
This creates a query layer from an enterprise database based on 
an SQL select statement. This does not work with file or personal 
geodatabases.
Address Layer
This geocodes a table of addresses using a specified address locator 
creating a new geodatabase feature class or a Shapefile. 
The Add Preset tool
This tool is used to add new 3D layers to a scene with a predefined set of 
symbology settings.
Predefined properties are determined from a gallery of defined symbology. ArcGIS 
Pro comes with galleries for realistic trees, thematic trees, realistic buildings, ground 
(terrain), icon points, and thematic shapes. Using this tool to add layers makes 
visualizing data in a 3D environment easier, especially for those that may be new 
to working with 3D data.

Chapter 2
[ 29 ]
The Selection group
The Selection group contains various tools used to select data including Select, 
Select By Attributes, Select By Location, and Clear. These tools all work very 
much like their cousins found in ArcMap though with some subtle differences.
The Select tool
The Select tool allows you to select features from within a map or scene by clicking 
on a feature or drawing an area.
The drop-down arrow located at the bottom of the tool lets you select what type of 
area you want to draw. You have options to draw a rectangle, polygon, freehand 
lasso, circle, and line. This is similar to the Select Features tool in ArcMap.
The Select By Attributes tool
The Select By Attributes tool allows you to select features based on their attribute 
values. For example, you might want to select all parcels owned by Tripp Corbin or 
all sewer pipes made of ductile iron. This tool will allow you to do that.
Like the tool by the same name in Esri's older ArcMap application, it creates a SQL 
where clause. You create the clause in a tool pane normally located on the right-hand 
side of the interface.

Using ArcGIS Pro – Navigating through the Interface
[ 30 ]
The Select By Location tool
This tool allows you to select features in one or more layers based on 
spatial relationships.
For example, you might select all parcels located within 100 feet of a road which 
you know is going to have work done on it, so you can get a list of all those that live 
along the road. You might select all the roads that intersect or cross a floodplain so 
you know not to include those in an emergency evacuation plan.
The Inquiry group
The Inquiry group contains tools that allow you to retrieve some basic information 
about your map. You can measure lengths and areas in different units or retrieve 
some basic demographic data or even find a point of interest using the tools in 
this group.
The Infographics tool
This is a completely new tool that allows you to retrieve basic demographic data 
for the area you select in the map. It will retrieve information and graphs showing 
average household income or population ethnic makeup.

Chapter 2
[ 31 ]
This tool accesses Esri's GeoEnrichment service, which is connected through your 
ArcGIS Online login. So, this tool will require you to have an internet connection, 
be connected to ArcGIS Online, and have available ArcGIS Online credits to work. 
Using this tool will also cost you ArcGIS Online credits. You should always keep 
that in mind when using this tool. This tool can also be customized to show specific 
geographic locations, data collections, and how the data is aggregated.
The Measure tool
This tool allows users to measure length and area by simply clicking on locations 
within a map. If you are working within a 3D scene, you also have the option to 
measure vertical distances.
You can change the units used by this tool, so they are different from the units 
assigned to your map. Even if your map is in meters, you can have the Measure 
tool provide distances in feet or miles or kilometers. Area units can also be set. 
Unlike ArcMap, you can still measure areas when your map is in a geographic 
coordinate system.
The Locate tool
This tool allows you to locate a place using an address or common name. By default, 
this tool uses the Esri World Geocoder service from ArcGIS Online. This service 
requires you to have an active connection to ArcGIS Online to work. However, unlike 
the Infographics tool, it does not use credits. You can add and use your own address 
locators to your project, and they will then be available for use with this tool.
While the Locate tool uses an icon that is very similar to the Find tool in ArcMap, 
it is limited to just locating an address or common name. It does not have all the 
other functionality of the old Find tool. The Locate tool is tied directly to the address 
locators connected to the project. It is those locators that control what the Locate tool 
can locate or not.

Using ArcGIS Pro – Navigating through the Interface
[ 32 ]
Exercise 2A – working with the MAP tab
You will now get to take some of the tools we discussed for a test drive. You will see 
how they work within the new ribbon interface and some of the options associated 
with those tools first hand. You will start by opening an existing project and using 
the navigation tools.
Step 1 – opening a project
In this step, you will open a project that has already been created. This project 
includes a single 2D map with several layers for the imaginary City of Trippville:
1.	 Start ArcGIS Pro. Remember that you will need to make sure that you are 
connected to the Internet, so your license can be validated. ArcGIS Pro 
should remember your user login from Chapter 1, Introducing ArcGIS Pro. 
If not, log in to ArcGIS Online when asked to.
2.	 Once ArcGIS Pro starts, click on Open another project.
3.	 Click on Computer under the Open pane. Then, select Browse.
4.	 Navigate to the C:\Student\IntroArcPro\Chapter2 folder or the location 
you installed your exercise data.
5.	 Select the Ex 2A.aprx file and click on Select.

Chapter 2
[ 33 ]
If you have successfully opened the project, ArcGIS Pro should look as follows:
As you can see in the preceding image, this project contains a single 2D map with 
layers showing city limits, creeks, lakes, and parcels. Above the map is the ribbon 
that contains the tabs, group tabs, and tools. To the right of the map view is the 
Project pane. This pane allows you to access various items associated with the 
project including maps, databases, folders, and address locators. You will work 
with the Project pane throughout this book.
Step 2 – navigating in the map
Now that you have the project open, you will begin to explore the navigation tools 
on the MAP tab:
1.	 Click on the Bookmarks tool and select the Washington Park bookmark. 
This will zoom you to the location of Washington Park automatically.
2.	 Click on the Explore tool to make it the active tool.
3.	 Click on the parcel for Washington Park with your mouse's left button. 
Continue to hold the mouse button down and drag your mouse toward the 
lower left-hand corner of the map view until Washington Park is located in 
the lower left-hand corner. Then, release the mouse button.

Using ArcGIS Pro – Navigating through the Interface
[ 34 ]
You have just used the Explore tool to pan the map view. As you learned 
earlier in this chapter, the Explore tool has many uses. Now you will explore 
some of the other functions of this tool:
4.	 With the Explore tool still active, click on any parcel within the map view.
Question: What happens when you click on a parcel using the 
Explore tool?
_______________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________
5.	 Close the pop-up window that appears.
6.	 Click on the small drop-down arrow located under the Explore tool and 
select Visible Layers.
7.	 Click on the same parcel you did in task 4 earlier.
8.	 Look at the bottom of the information pop-up window. You should see 1 of 2 
located in the lower left-hand corner.
9.	 Click on the small drop-down arrow located to the right of 1 of 2. You should 
see a list of all visible features that overlap the location you clicked on.

Chapter 2
[ 35 ]
The list of features you see and the values shown will depend on 
where you clicked in the map. So, do not be surprised or worried 
if what you see in your ArcGIS Pro is different than the screenshot.
10.	 Click on one of the other values in the list and see what happens in the 
information pop-up window. You will need to click on one of the unique 
values listed and not just the layer name. For example, using the screenshot 
as a guide, you would need to click where it says PERK, not on Parcels.
Question: What happens when you click on one of the other values in 
the drop-down list?
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
The information window can also be resized and moved if needed. You can 
even move to another monitor or display. One of the interesting features of the 
information pop-up window is the ability to pin to the screen. This locks in the 
current values for that window and opens a new information pop-up when 
you click on other features with the Explore tool. Let's see how that works:
11.	 Close the information pop-up window.
12.	 Turn off the City Limits layer in the Contents pane by clicking on the 
checkmark next to the layer name. This ensures features from this layer will 
not show up in the information pop-up when you use the Explore tool.
13.	 With the Explore tool active, click on a parcel to open the information 
pop-up window.
14.	 Click on the pin to screen button located in the upper right-hand corner of 
the information pop-up window, as indicated in the following screenshot:

Using ArcGIS Pro – Navigating through the Interface
[ 36 ]
15.	 With the Explore tool still active, click on another nearby parcel.
16.	 Click on the blue title bar of the information pop-up and drag it to another 
location in the ArcGIS Pro interface.
You should now see two information windows, as illustrated in the following 
screenshot. Again, your actual values will most likely differ based on the 
parcels you selected in the map.
Pinning an information window to the screen allows you to open multiple 
information windows at one time, so you can easily see the attributes of 
multiple features at the same time. Feel free to continue to experiment with 
this functionality. Also, examine the buttons located in the lower right-hand 
corner of the information pop-up windows. Close all information popups 
once you are done experimenting.

Chapter 2
[ 37 ]
You will continue to explore some of the other functions associated with the 
Explore tool:
17.	 Click on the Full Extent tool located in the Navigate group on the MAP tab. 
It has an icon that resembles a small globe. This will zoom to the full extents 
of the map.
18.	 With the Explore tool active, place your mouse pointer in the middle of the 
map view and roll your scroll wheel away from you.
Question: What happens when you roll the scroll wheel away 
from you?
_______________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________
19.	 Now roll the wheel back toward you to zoom back out to see a larger area.
20.	 Click on the PROJECT tab located within the ribbon and select Options.
21.	 In the Project pane in the Options window, select Navigation located under 
Application.
22.	 Under the Navigation option, you will see different settings for navigation 
tools. Set the mouse wheel to roll forward to zoom out and click OK.
23.	 Click on the return arrow located in the upper left-hand corner of the 
PROJECT tab.
Move your mouse pointer to the center of the map view and roll your scroll wheel 
away from you and then back toward you again. The zoom has now been reversed 
because you changed the option. Feel free to change the zoom back to the original 
settings by repeating the process you used to change it. If you preferred this setting 
then you can keep it.

Using ArcGIS Pro – Navigating through the Interface
[ 38 ]
Step 3 – using the Infographics tool (optional)
Now, let's take a quick look at the Infographics tool. As mentioned earlier, this tool 
allows you to retrieve demographic information using Esri's GeoEnrichment Service 
from ArcGIS Online. This does use ArcGIS Online credits. However, the amount 
used for this step will be minimal. You should use less than one credit by the time 
you complete this step:
1.	 Zoom back to the full extent of the map using the Full Extent tool.
2.	 Click on the Infographics tool in the Inquiry group tab.
3.	 Click near the middle of the map.
The Infographics window will open displaying demographic information 
for the area.

Chapter 2
[ 39 ]
The first thing you will see is the Age Pyramid, which shows different age 
groups compared with the information for the geographic area indicated in 
the lower right-hand drop-down cell:
4.	 Move your mouse pointer over some of the blue or pink bars to see what 
happens. Then, move your mouse pointer over one of the dots located 
along the curved line located toward the end of the colored bars.
5.	 Now click on one of the arrows located on the right- and left-hand sides 
of the window. This will page you through different demographic data 
associated with the area shown in the map.
6.	 Once you are done examining the Infographics tool, click on the PROJECT 
tab and select Save As.
7.	 In the Save As window, navigate to C:\Student\IntroArcPro\My 
Projects. Name your project your name_Ex2A and click on Save.
8.	 Exit ArcGIS Pro.
So, you have now successfully opened an ArcGIS Pro project, retrieved data, and 
navigated within the map using the ribbon interface. Now you will move on to 
contextual tabs.
Contextual tabs
Now that you have had a chance to gain some experience using ArcGIS Pro and the 
ribbon, you hopefully have begun to understand the concepts of tabs. You will now 
begin to explore contextual tabs.
Contextual tabs are smart tabs that appear when you select an item within ArcGIS 
Pro. This could be a layer, a map, a layout, a table, and so on. When you select one 
of these items, a tab will appear on the ribbon, which contains tools specific to 
working with that item. For example, if you select a layer from the Contents pane, 
the FEATURE LAYER contextual tab will appear. You will examine the FEATURE 
LAYER contextual tab next. You will explore other contextual tabs throughout other 
chapters in the book.
The FEATURE LAYER contextual tab
The FEATURE LAYER contextual tab appears when you click on a layer within the 
Contents pane. It includes three tabs: APPEARANCE, LABELING, and DATA. 
Each of these allows you to access various properties associated with the layer 
you have selected.

Using ArcGIS Pro – Navigating through the Interface
[ 40 ]
The APPEARANCE tab
The APPEARANCE tab contains tools that control the display of the layer. You can 
change the symbology, set visibility scales, apply transparency, and so on.
You can see that there are five groups within the APPEARANCE tab. They include 
Visibility Range, Effects, Drawing, Extrusion, and 3D. Visibility Range, Effects, 
and Drawing will be available for all layers.
Extrusion and 3D groups will only be available when working with a 3D scene. 
Extrusion allows you to extend 2D features above a 3D surface, such as building 
footprints or light poles. The extruded layer must be in the 3D Layers category in 
the Contents pane. Face Culling allows you to see through parts of a 3D feature.
The LABELING tab
This tab allows you to access tools to add text labels to the features within the 
selected layer. The tools presented in this table will vary depending on what 
type of layer you have selected.
This tab contains six groups. These include Layer, Label Class, Visibility Range, 
Text Symbol, Label Placement, and Map. The Label tool in the Layer group will 
turn labeling on or off for the selected layer.
The Label Class group allows you to create different label classes for a group of 
features based on a SQL query statement. Each label class can have its own unique 
label settings. For example, you could create a label class based on the type for each 
road so that highways could be labeled using a different setting than a local city 
road. This can greatly expand the flexibility of labels.

Chapter 2
[ 41 ]
The Text Symbol group contains tools and settings, which control how a label is 
visualized. Here, you can change the font, size, and color. You can also choose to 
make the label bold, italicized, or underlined. ArcGIS Pro also includes several 
predefined label styles, which you can also choose to use from this group tab.
The Label Placement group controls the general placement of the label in relation to 
the feature being labeled. The options here will vary depending on whether you are 
working with points, lines, or polygons. For example, for a line layer, you will have 
the options to place the label above, below, or on the line. The options for a point or 
a polygon layer will be different.
The last group is Map. The tools located here control the drawing of the labels 
within the map. You can pause labeling to help speed up navigation within the map. 
You can view unplaced labels. One of the most important tools located in this group 
sets the labeling engine used by ArcGIS Pro. Like ArcMap, ArcGIS Pro uses one of 
the two labeling engines: Esri Standard Labeling Engine or Maplex. By default, 
ArcGIS Pro uses Maplex, which provides much greater control over labeling than 
the Standard Esri Label Engine.
Exercise 2B – working with 2D and 3D layers
It is now time to see how the FEATURE LAYER contextual tab works for you. In this 
exercise, you will use tools on the tab to make changes to layers within an existing 
project. You will change a layers symbology, labels, and more.
Step 1 – opening the project and adding layers
In this step, you will open a project that has already been created. You will then add 
some additional layers to a map:
1.	 Using the skills you have already learned, start ArcGIS Pro and open the 
Ex 2B project. It is located at C:\Student\IntroArcPro\Chapter2 or the 
location you installed the course data.
2.	 Click on the Add Data tool located in the Layer group of the MAP tab.
3.	 Expand the Project folder in the pane located on the right-hand side of 
the Add Data window. Then, select the Databases folder so you see two 
geodatabases: IntroArcGISPro Exercise 2A and Trippville_GIS.
4.	 Double-click on the IntroArcGISPro Exercise 2A geodatabase.

Using ArcGIS Pro – Navigating through the Interface
[ 42 ]
5.	 Select the bldg._footprints, RR_Tracks, and Street_Centerlines 
feature classes and click on the Select button. You can hold down your 
Ctrl key while clicking on each feature class to select and add multiple 
feature classes to a map at one time.
Step 2 – changing symbology
You have just added three new layers to the map. Now you need to adjust the 
symbology for the layers you added. You will change the railroad layer you 
added to use a common railroad symbol. You will similarly change the building 
footprints. Finally, you will adjust the road centerlines, so they are symbolized 
based on their condition:
1.	 Right-click on the bldg_footprints layer and select Properties.
2.	 Click on General located in the pane on the left-hand side of the 
Properties window.
3.	 Change the name to Buildings and click on OK. Note what happens 
to the layer in the Contents pane.

Chapter 2
[ 43 ]
When you right-clicked on the bldg_footprints layer, did you notice what 
happened to the ribbon? The FEATURE LAYER contextual tab automatically 
appeared providing access to the tools it contains. You will now use those 
tools to make adjustments to the Building layer you just renamed:
4.	 In the FEATURE LAYER contextual tab, select the APPEARANCE tab.
5.	 Click on the Symbology tool and, if necessary, select Single Symbol. 
This opens the Symbology pane on the right-hand side of the ArcGIS 
Pro interface. The Symbology pane allows you to make changes to the 
symbology settings for a layer.
6.	 Click on the small rectangular symbol located under Current symbol to open 
the Symbol Gallery.
7.	 Select the Gray Building Footprint symbol that is located next to the 
Airport Runway symbol. You can use another symbol if you prefer.
Question: What happens when you select the new symbol?
_______________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________

Using ArcGIS Pro – Navigating through the Interface
[ 44 ]
8.	 Now select the RR_Tracks layer in the Contents pane and watch what 
happens in the Symbology pane.
9.	 Using the same process mentioned earlier, change the symbology to the 
Railroad symbol.
10.	 Rename the RR_Tracks layer to Railroad using the same process you 
used to rename the Buildings layer.
11.	 Click on the PROJECT tab and select Save As.
12.	 Navigate to the C:\Student\IntroArcPro\My Projects folder and 
name your project <your name> Ex2B.
Now you will change the symbology for the road centerlines to reflect their 
condition. This will be a bit more challenging than changing a single symbol:
13.	 Using the skills you have already learned rename the Street_Centerline 
layer to Streets.
14.	 Select the APPEARANCE tab and click on the small arrow located below 
the Symbology tool. Choose Unique Values from the drop-down options.

Chapter 2
[ 45 ]
The Symbology pane will once again be opened on the right-hand side of 
ArcGIS Pro. It will look different than what it did when you were working 
with single symbols. It contains many more options and settings. These allow 
you to configure your symbology based on the attributes found in one or 
more fields:
15.	 In the drop-down box located next to Field 1, select Condition. Note that 
ArcGIS Pro automatically adds all values found in this field and assigns 
them a symbol.
16.	 Click on the symbol located next to Fair to open the Symbol Gallery.
17.	 Click on the Properties tab located at the top of the pane.
18.	 From the Color drop-down selection, set the color to an orange tone or 
another you prefer and set the width to 1 pt. Then, click on Apply.
19.	 Click on the return arrow located at the top of the Symbology pane to return 
to the symbology settings for the entire Streets layer.
20.	 Using the same method mentioned earlier make the following adjustments to 
the symbols for Good and Poor values.
°°
Good: Bright green color and width of 1.5 pt
°°
Poor: Bright red color and width of 3 pt
When you are done, your map should look similar to this:
21.	 Close the Symbology pane when you are done changing the symbology. 
Feel free to make changes to other layers in the map.

Using ArcGIS Pro – Navigating through the Interface
[ 46 ]
22.	 Save your project by clicking on the Save button located on the Quick Access 
Toolbar located at the very top left-hand side of the ArcGIS Pro interface.
After adjusting symbology using the FEATURE LAYER contextual tab, let's add 
some labels to the maps.
Step 3 – labeling
In this step, you will use the LABELING tab in the FEATURE LAYER contextual tab 
to add street names to the map. You will configure the labeling for the Streets layer 
to accomplish this task:
1.	 Select the Streets layer in the Contents pane.
2.	 Click on the LABELING tab in the FEATURE LAYER contextual tab.
3.	 Click on the Label tool to turn on labels for the Streets layer. You should 
see labels appear in the map once you click on the tool.
4.	 Within the Label Placement group tab select the North American Streets 
option. ArcGIS Pro will then use the placement properties defined by this 
placement style such as the road name appearing above the centerline and 
be curved to follow the road.
When you enabled labeling for the Streets layer, the Label Class pane 
also opened in the right-hand side of ArcGIS Pro in the same place the 
Symbology pane did. This pane allows you to refine various label settings.
5.	 In the Label Class pane, click on the Fitting Strategy button. It is the one 
that looks like a knight piece from chess. If you do not see the Label Class 
pane, you can right click on the layer and select Label Properties from the 
context menu.

Chapter 2
[ 47 ]
6.	 Click on the small arrow next to Reduce size to expand the options 
for that strategy.
7.	 Click on the check box next to the Reduce font size to enable this 
fitting strategy.
8.	 Set the Lower Limit to 5.0 pts and the Step interval to 1.0 pts.
This will allow ArcGIS Pro to automatically adjust the font 
size in order to get a road name to fit on the map. This will 
allow more road names to be displayed.
9.	 Zoom in and out to see how well your labels appear. Turn off the Reduce 
font size option and then zoom in and out again to see the impact that 
option has.
10.	 Save your project and close the Label Class pane.
Step 4 – working with a 3D layer
ArcGIS Pro also allows you to work with 3D data even if you don't have the 3D 
Analyst or Spatial Analyst extensions. In this step, you will add a layer containing 
building footprints to a 3D scene and then extrude that layer, so you can see the 
heights of the building:
1.	 In the Project pane located in the same place as the Symbology and Label 
Class panes, click on the little arrow next to Maps located at the top of the 
pane to expand its contents. If you don't see the Project pane, you may have 
accidentally closed it when you closed the other panes. You can reopen it by 
clicking on the VIEW tab and then the Project button.
2.	 Once you expand the Maps folder, you should see two maps: Map and 
Scene. Right-click on Scene and select Open Local View. This opens the 
3D Scene.

Using ArcGIS Pro – Navigating through the Interface
[ 48 ]
3.	 Press the scroll wheel on your mouse down and push your mouse away from 
you slightly to rotate the map view on the 3D plane until it looks similar to 
the following image:
4.	 Place your mouse pointer near the center of the parcels layer and roll 
your wheel away from you to zoom in. Continue to work with the scroll 
wheel until you get comfortable with how it allows you to navigate within 
a 3D Scene.
5.	 Click on the Add Data tool and navigate to the IntroArcGISPro Exercise 
2A.gdb file. Click on bldg_footprints feature class and click on Select.
6.	 Rename the bldg_footprints layer to Buildings using the same process 
you learned in previous steps.
7.	 Select the Buildings layer and drag it up to 3D layers. This will allow 
you to apply 3D symbology to this layer.
8.	 Click on the Bookmarks tool and select the Buildings bookmark. 
This will zoom you out, so you can see the buildings as they overlay 
the ground elevation.

Chapter 2
[ 49 ]
9.	 Select the Buildings layer once again and click on the APPEARANCE tab. 
Note that it looks quite a bit different from what you saw when working with 
a 2D map.
10.	 On the Extrusion group tab, click on Type and select Base Height. This will 
allow you to extrude the buildings based on their estimated height, so you 
can see the differing heights of each building in a 3D view.
11.	 In the drop-down window next to Type, set that to Est_HGT. This is the 
estimated height of each building.
Your map should now look similar to the following image. The colors of your 
buildings may be different because ArcGIS Pro assigns random colors to newly 
added layers:
You have just added and symbolized a 3D layer in ArcGIS Pro. You can now see the 
3D relationships between the different buildings within the city.
Challenge: Try to change the symbols for the buildings to 
one of the Gray Building Footprint symbols found 
in the Symbol Gallery.

Using ArcGIS Pro – Navigating through the Interface
[ 50 ]
Summary
In this chapter, you learned how to use the ArcGIS Pro ribbon interface and the 
terminology associated with it. As you saw that the ribbon provides easy and 
quick access to tools. The contextual tabs make specific tools associated with 
tasks and items available to you with minimum clicking or searching.
Many of the tools in the ribbon work in conjunction with panes that appear on 
the right-hand side of the interface. These panes provide access to settings and 
inputs used by the selected tool to refine its function.
Putting these tools to use, you were able to work with both 2D and 3D data. 
You were able to label features and change their symbology. You learned how the 
Explore tool has many functions, from navigating in the map to retrieving data.

[ 51 ]
Creating and Working with 
ArcGIS Pro Projects
ArcGIS Pro reintroduces the concept of projects to Esri users. Esri first introduced the 
concept of managing your GIS using project files with its ArcView GIS application. 
ArcView GIS used projects to manage map layouts, views, tables, data connections, 
and more within a single APR file. This allowed you to access everything associated 
with a project from a single location.
When Esri released ArcGIS in 1999, this was dropped. In its place, Esri decided to use 
separate individual files. You have map documents (MXD files) for ArcMap, which 
contain a single map with one or more data frames. So, for each map you needed, 
you would have to create a separate map document. You have scenes (SXD files) for 
ArcScene, which contained one local 3D view. All of this means you often have tens to 
hundreds of files to manage and keep track of which makes management much harder.
ArcGIS Pro projects greatly simplify GIS management. Projects allow you to 
consolidate all of the resources needed to complete a project in a single place. 
No longer will you need to search for the correct map document. You will just 
need to open the ArcGIS Pro project file for the project you are interested in, 
and all the maps, data connections, layouts, tools, and more will be there.
In this chapter, you will:
•	
Be introduced to ArcGIS Pro projects
•	
Understand how to create a project and what can be included within one
•	
Learn how to use and create project templates

Creating and Working with ArcGIS Pro Projects
[ 52 ]
Working with an ArcGIS Pro project
ArcGIS Pro utilizes project files in place of map documents and scenes to access 
GIS data, make maps, perform analysis, and share work. Project files have an .aprx 
file extension and include all the GIS resources that are needed for a given project. 
Projects can be created and shared on your local network so that others in the project 
team can quickly access the resources they need to complete their assigned tasks. 
You can even create a project package that can be shared via ArcGIS Online or Portal 
for ArcGIS or other cloud storage solutions.
Each project will have components and resources, which are associated with each 
specific project. Some of these will be common to multiple projects, whereas others 
will be unique to individual projects. So, even if a component or resource is linked 
to one project, it can be used in another project.
Projects also have their own terminology associated with them. It will be important 
to understand the terminology when working with projects. You will now begin 
exploring the terminology associated with projects and some of the component or 
resources that can be included in a project.
Understanding project terminology
Like the ArcGIS Pro application, projects in ArcGIS Pro have a vocabulary associated 
specifically with them. We will quickly define some of these terms, so you can begin 
to understand what they mean as you see them throughout this book, hear them at 
conferences, see them in Esri publications, and so on.
A project item
A project item is any item, component, or resource stored within an ArcGIS Pro 
project. Project items include maps, scenes, folder connections, database connections, 
ArcGIS server connections, Web Mapping Service (WMS) connections, toolboxes, 
locators, and more. These items are accessed within ArcGIS Pro from the Project 
pane or Project view.

Chapter 3
[ 53 ]
A portal item
A portal item is any item that is accessed via a designated portal. A portal is a 
connection to ArcGIS Online or Portal for ArcGIS. Portal items might include web 
maps, feature layer, tile layer, layer package, map package, and project package.
A project package
A project package is similar to a layer or map package. It bundles or zips all items 
associated with a project into one consolidated file. A project package can be used to 
share projects with others that may not be connected to your network or to archive a 
project. Project packages will have a PPKX file extension and may be stored in a local 
folder or uploaded to your portal.
The home folder
A home folder refers to the folder where the project file is stored. The home folder 
is where ArcGIS Pro creates the project-specific content unless the users specify 
a different location. The home folder can be changed only by saving a project to 
a different folder. The default home folder for new projects is C:\Users\%user 
name%\Documents\ArcGIS\Projects.
The default geodatabase
The default geodatabase is used by the geoprocessing tools as the automatic default 
workspace for the resulting output items of the tools. This means new feature classes 
resulting from the use of analysis, conversion, and other tools will automatically 
be saved to the default geodatabase unless you specify a different location. Any 
geodatabase can be used as the default geodatabase. When a new project is created, 
ArcGIS Pro will automatically create a new file geodatabase for the project in the 
home folder.
Using the Project pane
When you open a project or create a new project in ArcGIS Pro, the Project pane will 
be one of the first things you see. By default, it will be located on the right-hand side 
of the ArcGIS Pro interface opposite to the Contents pane.

Creating and Working with ArcGIS Pro Projects
[ 54 ]
The Project pane provides access to project items. From there, you can access maps, 
scenes, folder connections, layouts, database connections, and more and are all 
associated with the project. You can view the Project pane in two different modes: 
Outline or Gallery. The Outline mode is default and similar to looking at Details 
in Windows file explorer. The Gallery mode provides a thumbnail view of items 
along with the title.

Chapter 3
[ 55 ]
The Project pane contains three tabs at the top: Project, Portal, and Notifications. 
The Project tab allows you to access project items that are stored either within the 
project, such as maps or layouts, or that you have established a connection to for the 
project, such as a folder, a database, or a web connection. It should be mentioned that 
ArcGIS Pro does not support personal geodatabases. However, file, workgroup, and 
enterprise geodatabases are supported.

Creating and Working with ArcGIS Pro Projects
[ 56 ]
The Portal tab provides access to connections you have established to either ArcGIS 
Online or Portal for ArcGIS. Using this tab, you will then be able to access content 
that has been published and that you have permissions to use. This can include web 
maps, feature layers, and web apps. The Portal tab has three buttons located on it. 
The first button is My Content. This allows you to access content that was created 
by you in ArcGIS Online or Portal for ArcGIS. The second button is Groups. This 
button allows you to see the various groups you are a member of and content shared 
to those groups. The last button is All Portals. This allows you to see content shared 
with you in all portals you have connected other than your primary portal.
The Notifications tab contains messages from processes and tools used while you 
are working in your project. These messages are not saved and will be cleared if 
you open a new project or close ArcGIS Pro.
Exercise 3A – using the Project pane
Now that you have learned some of the terms associated with a project and been 
introduced to the Project pane, it is time for you to see it in action. In this exercise, 
you will work with Create a Map which shows the floodplains and drainage basins 
for the city of Union City. You will need to use the Project pane to establish several 
connections including a geodatabase and server to access additional information, 
which is needed to create the map. You will start with an existing project that already 
contains a basic map.

Chapter 3
[ 57 ]
Step 1 – open and save a project
In this step, you will open an existing project and save it. This will be the project you 
will continue to work with in this exercise:
1.	 Start ArcGIS Pro. Again remember that you will need an Internet connection 
and an access to ArcGIS Online.
2.	 Using the skills you have learned in past exercises, open the Ex 3A project 
located at C:\Student\IntroArcPro\Chapter3.
3.	 Using the skills you have learned, save the project as %your name% 
Ex3A (that is, Tripp Ex3A.aprx). Save the project to C:\Student\
IntroArcGISPro\My Projects.
If you have successfully opened the correct project and saved it, you should see 
the following:

Creating and Working with ArcGIS Pro Projects
[ 58 ]
Step 2 – navigating in the Project pane
Now that you have opened the project, you should see the Project pane located 
on the right-hand side of the ArcGIS Pro interface. In this step, you will see what 
content is already available in the Project pane:
1.	 In the Project pane, click on the small arrow head located to the left of 
maps to expand that section.
Question: What do you see listed under maps?
_______________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________
2.	 Expand the Database section using the same process.
Question: What do you see listed under Database?
_______________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________
3.	 Expand the ArcGIS Pro Exercise 3A geodatabase to see what feature 
classes it contains.
4.	 Compare the layers in the map to the feature classes in the geodatabase 
for the project.
Question: Does the map contain all layers that reference all the 
feature classes in the geodatabase?
_______________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________
Question: Does the project geodatabase contain feature classes 
that represent the floodplains or drainage basins?
_______________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________

Chapter 3
[ 59 ]
5.	 Expand the remainder of the sections within the Project pane to see the rest 
of the project items you currently have access to.
Question: What other items are currently available in 
this project?
________________________________________________
________________________________________________
6.	 Click on the Portal tab in the Project pane. By default, you start on the 
My Content button.
7.	 Explore the portal items that are available to you in My Content by moving 
your pointer over some of them.
It is possible that you may see nothing if you have never 
published any content to ArcGIS Online or Portal for ArcGIS. 
Later in this book, you will publish a map and project to ArcGIS 
Online. These will then show in your portal and My Content.
8.	 Click on the Groups button located on the Portal tab to see what groups you 
are a member of or have access to.
Question: What groups do you see?
_______________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________
Again you may see nothing here if no one has created groups for your organization 
in ArcGIS Online or Portal for ArcGIS. As your organization makes more use of 
those technologies, expect the list of groups to grow.
Step 3 – adding a database connection
In this step, you will add a connection to another geodatabase that contains 
additional data you need for this project:
1.	 Click back on the PROJECT tab in the Project pane.

Creating and Working with ArcGIS Pro Projects
[ 60 ]
2.	 Right-click on Databases and click on Add Database.
3.	 In the Select Existing Geodatabase window, navigate to C:\Student\
IntroArcPro\Databases. Select the UnionCity.gdb file and click on Open.
You should now see the UnionCity geodatabase in the Project pane below the 
ArcGIS Pro Exercise 3A project geodatabase. The UnionCity geodatabase 
contains additional layers, which you will need to add to your map.
4.	 Expand the UnionCity geodatabase, so you can see what feature classes 
it contains.
5.	 Select the floodplains feature class. Holding down your Ctrl key, 
also select the Watersheds feature class.
6.	 Right-click on one of the two selected feature classes and choose Add to 
Current Map.
Your map should look similar to this now. The colors maybe different depending on 
what colors ArcGIS Pro assigned to the new layers you add. Remember that ArcGIS 
Pro assigns a random color to new layers added to the map.

Chapter 3
[ 61 ]
You have just added two layers from a different geodatabase to the map after you 
made the connection to it. Although the layers are now visible in the map, you will 
need to make some adjustments to the layers to improve the readability of the map.
Step 4 – adjusting the layers
You will now make changes to the symbology and layer orders so that the map is 
easier to read. First, you will make changes to the layer draw order:
1.	 Select the Watersheds layer in the Contents pane located on the left-hand side 
of the ArcGIS Pro interface.
2.	 While holding your left mouse button down, drag the Watersheds layer, so it 
is below the Parcels layer in your layer list.
3.	 Now drag the Floodplains layer, so it is below the Parcels layer, but above 
the Watersheds layer.
4.	 Right-click on the Floodplains layer and select Zoom to Layer.

Creating and Working with ArcGIS Pro Projects
[ 62 ]
Now that you have the layers drawing in the order you want them, it is time 
to work on the symbology for each. You will need to add a new style to our 
project first which contains the symbol for the floodplains:
5.	 In the Project pane, right-click on Styles and select Add Style.
6.	 In the Add Style file window, navigate to C:\Student\IntroArcPro\
Chapter3. Then, choose ESRI.stylx and click on the Select button.
You have just added this new style to your project, which will allow you to 
use the symbols it contains for the layers in your map. Styles store symbols, 
colors, north arrows, scale bars, and other map elements, which are used to 
create maps and layouts:
7.	 Click on the symbology patch for the Parcels layer to open the Symbology 
pane. A symbology patch is the small sample symbol located just below the 
layer name in the Contents pane, as illustrated here:
8.	 Click on the Properties tab and set the Color to no color using the 
drop-down arrow.
9.	 Make sure that the Outline color is set to black and click on Apply.
10.	 Select the Floodplains layer in the Contents pane.
11.	 Select the APPEARANCE group tab from the ribbon.
12.	 Click on the Symbology drop-down arrow and select Unique Values. 
This will open the Symbology pane on the right-hand side of the 
ArcGIS Pro interface.
13.	 For Field 1, select SFHA. This field is used to specify if an area is in or out 
of the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA), which is also commonly referred 
to as the 100-year flood zone. You want to symbolize the areas that are in 
the SFHA.

Chapter 3
[ 63 ]
14.	 Click on the symbol patch located next to IN in the symbol grid.
15.	 At the top of the Symbology pane in the search function, type Flood and 
press the Enter key. You will need to be in Gallery and not Properties to 
do this.
16.	 Select the symbol named 100 Year Flood Overlay. Note that this is in 
the Esri style you added to the project. It is only available for you to use 
because you added it.
17.	 Click on the back arrow located in the top-left corner of the Symbology 
pane to return to the settings for the Floodplain layer.
18.	 Click on the symbol patch next to OUT in the symbol grid and set it to 
Hollow. Use the search function again if needed.
19.	 In the symbol grid, select where it says SFHA and type 100 Year 
Floodplain to replace it.
20.	 Click on More located in the right-hand side just above the symbol grid 
and deselect Show all other values. This removes that from appearing in 
the Contents pane and the legend.

Creating and Working with ArcGIS Pro Projects
[ 64 ]
So, now you have added a new style to the project and used a symbol 
contained in that style to update the symbology for the Floodplains layer. 
You have one last layer to adjust, the Watershed layer. You will now apply 
symbology to this layer using an existing layer file. A layer file stores the 
properties used to display a layer. You will learn more about layer files later 
in this book:
21.	 Select the Watersheds layer in the Contents pane.
22.	 Select the APPEARANCE tab in the ribbon.
23.	 Click on the Import tool. This will open the Geoprocessing pane in the 
right-hand side of the interface.
24.	 Click on the browse button located next to the Symbology layer.
25.	 Click on Folders located under Project in the left pane.
26.	 Select the Watersheds.lyrx file and click on the Select button.
27.	 Make sure that the following are set under the Symbology fields in the 
Geoprocessing pane:
°°
Type: Value_Field
°°
Source Field: WATERSHED
°°
Target Field: WATERSHED
28.	 Once you have verified the Symbology fields, click on the Run button 
located at the bottom of the Geoprocessing pane.
29.	 Save your project.
Step 5 – connecting to ArcGIS server
You are almost done. At the last minute, it has been decided that you need to add an 
aerial photograph to the map. You have been instructed to use aerials served up by 
Fulton County using ArcGIS for Server. So, you will need to first add a connection to 
the County's ArcGIS Server and then add the new aerial layer to the map:
1.	 Right-click in the Project pane somewhere that is blank.
2.	 Click on New ArcGIS Server connection.
3.	 For the server URL: type http://share.myfultoncountyga.us/ArcGIS10/
rest/services.
4.	 Leave User Name and Password blank and click on OK.
5.	 You should now see that servers have been added to your Project pane. 
Expand the Servers section to reveal the new connection you just added.

Chapter 3
[ 65 ]
6.	 Expand the ArcGIS10 on share.myfultoncountyga.us (user) (1) connection 
to reveal the map services that can be used via this connection.
As you can see, the County provides access to a wide range of map services 
that you can access and use in your maps. By publishing these map services 
to the Internet, the County is easily able to share its data with others that may 
need it including the cities within the County. By establishing a connection 
to this data within your project, you can now begin to use this published 
information as well. You will now do just that by adding the County 
published aerials to your map:
7.	 Right-click on the Aerial map service under the new server connection you 
just added.
8.	 Select Add to Current Map.

Creating and Working with ArcGIS Pro Projects
[ 66 ]
9.	 Now, let's adjust the Watersheds layer, so you can see the aerials 
underneath by applying a transparency. Select the Watersheds layer 
in the Contents pane.
10.	 Click on the APPEARANCE tab in the ribbon.
11.	 In the Effects group tab, set the transparency to 65.0%.
12.	 Save your project and close ArcGIS Pro.
So, you have experienced how the Project pane works. You added several connections 
to your project and used them to add more information to your map.
Creating a new project and project 
templates
As you have seen, projects are the core of ArcGIS Pro. They contain all things a user 
needs to complete GIS tasks required for the project. ArcGIS Pro will not even allow 
you to open the application without designating a project to open. So far, you have 
been working with existing projects in ArcGIS Pro.
These projects have already been set up and are ready for you to use. They have 
included maps, 3D scenes, and various connections. So, how do you create a new 
project from scratch? In this section, you will learn how to create a new project 
using one of the Esri-provided templates. Then, you will learn how to create your 
own template, which you can use to create new projects.

Chapter 3
[ 67 ]
Creating a new project with Esri templates
When you open ArcGIS Pro, you have the option to open an existing project or create 
a new one. If you choose to create a new one, you first select a template. The template 
automatically generates content and connections within the new project being 
created. The template can create maps, scenes, layouts, folder connections, database 
connections, and more.
In addition to what is created by the template, a new project-specific file geodatabase 
and toolbox are created in the home folder. Remember that the home folder is the 
folder you create the new project in. Your new project will set these as the default 
geodatabase and toolbox used by the new project automatically.
Esri has already created some templates you can use to begin creating new projects 
as soon as you install ArcGIS Pro. This includes four templates each with a specific 
use in mind:
Esri template name
General description
Map
This is for use with the 2D data primarily and automatically 
includes a 2D map that has the Esri topography basemap layer.
Global scene
This is for use with the 3D data that covers a large area primarily 
and automatically includes a 3D Global scene.
Local scene
This is for use with the 3D data that covers a smaller area 
primarily and automatically includes a 3D Local scene.
Blank
This creates a new completely empty project with no maps, 
scenes, or layouts.
To use one of these templates, you simply select it from the Create a new project pane 
in the ArcGIS Pro startup screen. You also have the option to select another project 
template, which you will learn about later. Let's now see how one of these work.
Exercise 3B – using an Esri template to create 
a new project
In this exercise, you will create a new project that will contain a local scene using 
some of the same data you used in the last exercise. You have been asked to create 
a 3D scene for the city of Union City showing the elevation change of the city and 
the locations of the basins.

Creating and Working with ArcGIS Pro Projects
[ 68 ]
Step 1 – creating a new project using the Local 
scene template
In this step, you will create and explore a new blank project that you created using 
the Local scene template:
1.	 Open ArcGIS Pro.
2.	 On the right-hand side in the Create a new project pane, select the Local 
Scene.aptx.
3.	 In the Create a New Project window, name your project %Your Name% 
Ex3B and set your location to C:\Student\IntroArcPro\My Projects. 
Your window should look similar to the following image:
4.	 Click on OK to open your new project.
Your new project should have opened with a new scene, which only contains 
a 2D Topographic basemap layer. You will now take a moment to explore 
what else was done automatically by using this Esri template:
5.	 Explore the Project pane and answer the following questions:
°°
Question: What is available or listed under Maps?
_________________________________________________
_________________________________________________
°°
Question: What is available or listed under Toolboxes?
_________________________________________________
_________________________________________________
°°
Question: What is available or listed under Databases?
_________________________________________________
_________________________________________________

Chapter 3
[ 69 ]
6.	 Continue to explore the remaining items in the Project pane until you have 
become completely familiar with the new project you created and what you 
currently have access to.
Now you will take a look at the backend of what happened when you 
created your new project, so you can see what ArcGIS Pro does when a 
new project is created. You will look at your project using your operating 
systems file explorer.
7.	 Open your file explorer application. If you are using Windows 7, 8, or 8.1, 
it is called file explorer and uses an icon that resembles a file folder in a file 
organizer. You can normally find it on the task bar or desktop. If you are 
using Windows XP, it is called My Computer.
8.	 Once you have opened your file explorer, navigate to C:\Student\
IntroArcPro\My Projects. You should see a folder inside the My Projects 
folder, which is named %Your Name% Ex3B. This folder was automatically 
created by ArcGIS Pro when you created the new project. This is your projects 
home folder.
9.	 Open the home folder, so you can see its contents. The home folder should 
contain several folders and files all of which were automatically generated 
by ArcGIS Pro when you created the new project.
Different templates will create different files and folders. 
Remember templates are created with specific purposes 
in mind, so each will be different to some extent.
10.	 Feel free to explore some of the folders more fully if desired. Once you are 
done, close your file explorer and return to ArcGIS Pro.

Creating and Working with ArcGIS Pro Projects
[ 70 ]
Step 2 – connecting to data sources and adding 
your surface
In this step, you will connect to the UnionCity geodatabase, which you used in the 
last exercise. You will then set up your scene to use the Digital Elevation Model 
(DEM) in that geodatabase as the elevation surface. The elevation surface serves as 
the ground level or height all other layers are overlaid on to within the 3D views 
provided for in a scene:
1.	 Right-click on your scene in the Contents pane and select Properties.
2.	 Click on the General option in the left-hand side window. Rename the scene 
Union City.
3.	 Click on the Coordinate system option in the left window. Then, click on the 
Import Coordinate System button located next to the Search cell.
4.	 In the Import Coordinate System window, navigate to C:\Student\
IntroArcPro\Databases\UnionCity.gdb. Select the DEM raster and 
click on the Open button. This sets your scene, so it will use the same 
coordinate system as the DEM and other layers you will add to the 
scene during this exercise.
5.	 Click on OK in the Map Properties window.
6.	 Using the skills you learned in the last exercise, add a database connection 
to the UnionCity.gdb in the Project pane. As you learned before, this allows 
you to use the data in this geodatabase within your project.
Before you add any layers to your scene, you need to define the elevation 
surface. By default, ArcGIS Pro uses Esri's world elevation model from 
ArcGIS Online. However, you can use your own if you have one. In this 
case, you do have your own digital elevation model, which is more accurate 
than Esri's model. So, you will now configure your scene to make use of your 
local more accurate DEM.
7.	 Right-click on the Union City scene and open its properties.
8.	 Go to the Elevation Surface option.
9.	 Expand the Ground surface, and you will see the default surface from 
ArcGIS Online.
10.	 Click on the add elevation surface button. This button is located to the far 
right of the Ground. It looks like a yellow folder with a + on top of it.

Chapter 3
[ 71 ]
11.	 In the add elevation source window, click on Databases in the left-hand pane.
12.	 Double-click on the UnionCity.gdb. Select DEM and click on the 
Select button.
You should now see the Union City DEM above the default ArcGIS 
Pro ground elevation. Since we are not concerned with areas outside 
the immediate Union City area in this scene, you will remove the 
default ArcGIS Pro ground surface:
13.	 Click on the small red X located next to the default ArcGIS Pro surface 
to delete it.
14.	 Click OK to close the Map Properties window.
15.	 Using the skills you learned in previous exercises, add the Floodplains 
and Watersheds feature classes to the scene.
16.	 Using the same process you followed in the previous exercise, adjust the 
symbology, so they are symbolized the same way they were in the Exercise 
3A – using the Project pane section.
Hint: You may need to connect to the Chapter3 
folder and add the Esri style.
17.	 Save your project.

Creating and Working with ArcGIS Pro Projects
[ 72 ]
18.	 Click on the MAP tab in the ribbon.
19.	 Click on the Add Data button and navigate to the Chapter3 folder
Hint: If you are connected to the Chapter3 folder, 
click on Folders and Chapter3.
20.	 In the Chapter3 folder, choose the 3D Buildings.lyrx file and click 
on Select.
You have just added a new layer to your scene using a layer file. As you can 
see, the layer was automatically assigned a specific symbology. This was 
because you used a layer file to add the data instead of going directly to the 
geodatabase and adding the feature class. A layer file contains predefined 
settings for a layer, including symbology, labeling, transparency, source, 
and more. They allow you to standardize layers for use in multiple maps:
21.	 Right-click on the Buildings layer you just added and select Zoom to Layer.
22.	 Using the Explore tool along with the scroll wheel on you mouse zoom 
into the area where the Whitewater Creek, Morning Creek, and Deep 
Creek Watershed basins intersect. Zoom in until your map looks similar 
to the following image:

Chapter 3
[ 73 ]
You can now see the buildings in 3D with a realistic facing applied. You can 
see what basin they are in, and if you pan around, you can also see which 
ones are in the 100-year floodplain.
23.	 Save your project and close ArcGIS Pro.
So, you have just created a new project using Esri's Local scene template and then 
built out the scene with layers and a local elevation surface. How do you create your 
own project templates for use by ArcGIS Pro users in your organization? You will 
investigate that next.
Custom project templates
In the previous exercise, you saw how useful a template can be to start a new project. 
Templates can standardize all projects you or your organization creates in ArcGIS 
Pro, so they access the correct databases, contain the appropriate styles, and have the 
proper layout elements. Project templates are really specialized versions of a project 
package that can be used to create new projects. They have an APTX file extension.
Project templates can be saved to several locations. You can save them to your 
computer, a network share, ArcGIS Online, or Portal for ArcGIS. The location 
where you save them will help determine who can use them.
Project templates saved to your computer generally can only be used by you. This 
can limit their value to an organization. However, since they are stored locally on 
your computer, they can be better suited for your personal use. This is because they 
can contain connections to local resources, which exist on your computer and others 
may not have access to. Also, if you include connections to secure data sources or 
files, you do not have to worry if other users will have permissions to access those 
locations.
You save project templates to a network share such as a folder on your file server or 
to ArcGIS Online, which can be used by others in your organization when creating 
new projects assuming that they have sufficient privileges to access the location. 
This allows you to standardize projects created by ArcGIS Pro users throughout 
your organization, which has several advantages:
•	
Templates can ensure common map layouts, which include standard title 
blocks, north arrows, logos, and legal disclaimers.
•	
Templates can ensure that everyone accesses the correct data sources, folders, 
styles, and toolboxes.

Creating and Working with ArcGIS Pro Projects
[ 74 ]
•	
Templates can ensure that data and files are saved to the proper locations by 
standardizing a common project structure.
•	
Templates can ensure that everyone uses the correct basemap when creating 
maps or scenes.
Those are just a few of the advantages of using templates within an organization. 
If you are going to save your templates to ArcGIS Online, there is a security concern 
you need to make sure to pay careful attention to, who you choose to share with.
If your organization has enabled sharing outside your organization, it is possible that 
others who are not in your organization may get access to your templates. When you 
create and save a template to ArcGIS Online, you are asked who you wish to share 
the template with. If you select everyone, then you will be sharing your template with 
all users that have access to ArcGIS Online. This includes those that are not part of 
your organization. This means ArcGIS Pro users not affiliated with your company or 
group will be able to use your template. This also means that they will be able to see 
everything you included in the template, such as database connections, logos, folder 
connections, layouts, and more. Access to your templates could represent a security 
breach waiting to happen if you are not careful. So, when you save a template to 
ArcGIS Online, make sure to pay attention to who you choose to share it with.
Exercise 3C – creating a custom project 
template
Now that you understand why you would want to create custom project templates, 
let's look at the how. In this exercise, you will create a custom project template, 
which you will save to your computer. This template will include a map, database 
connections, and more. Once you create the template, you will then create a new 
project that uses the template.

Chapter 3
[ 75 ]
Step 1 – create a project
All templates start as a project. So to create a new template, you must first have a 
project that contains all the standard settings to include in the template. So, you will 
start in this step by creating a new project using the blank template. This provides 
you with a blank slate upon which to build your template:
1.	 Start ArcGIS Pro.
2.	 On the right-hand side in the Create a new project pane, select Blank.aptx.
3.	 In the Create a New Project window, name your project %Your Name% Ex3C 
and set your location to C:\Student\IntroArcPro\My Projects.
4.	 In the Project pane, right-click on Database and select Add Database.
5.	 In the Select Existing Geodatabase window, navigate to C:\Student\
IntroArcPro\Databases and select Trippville_GIS.gdb to add it as a 
connected database.
6.	 Using the skills you have learned, add the ESRI.stylx style to the project.
Step 2 – setting up a default map in the template
Now that you have opened a new project and established some default connections 
to databases and styles, you will now create a default map, which will be included in 
the template. You will configure a new basemap and then set a default view extent:
1.	 Right-click on the Maps folder in the Project pane and select New Map.
2.	 On the MAP tab in the ribbon, click on the small drop-down arrow under 
Basemap and select Imagery.
3.	 In the Project pane, expand the Trippville_GIS geodatabase you 
connected to.
4.	 Expand the Base feature dataset and right-click on the City_Limit feature 
class. Select Add to Current Map.

Creating and Working with ArcGIS Pro Projects
[ 76 ]
Your map should zoom to the new City_Limit layer you just added, so it 
should look similar to the following image. Remember that the color for the 
City_Limit layer maybe different in your map because ArcGIS Pro assigns 
a random color to new layers unless you add the new layer using a layer file. 
Adding the City_Limit layer also assigned the coordinate system you wish 
to use for the map and in your template. Just as with ArcMap, the first layer 
you add to a map in ArcGIS Pro assigns the coordinate system to the map.
Now you will set this view extent to be the default for this map in 
your project:
5.	 Right-click on MAP in the Contents pane and select Properties.
6.	 In the Map Properties window, select Extent from the left-hand pane.
7.	 Click on the radial button next to Custom extent.

Chapter 3
[ 77 ]
8.	 Click on the drop-down menu located to the right of Calculate from 
and select Current visible extent so that your Map Properties: Map 
window looks like this:
9.	 Once you have verified that the extent has been properly set, click on OK.
10.	 Using the skills you have learned, make the following changes to the 
City_Limit layer:
°°
Symbology to a hollow fill
°°
Outline to Mars Red
°°
Outline width to 2 pt
°°
Rename the layer City Limits
11.	 Save your project.
Step 3 – adding a layout from an existing map 
document
You have one last thing you wish to add to your project before you save it as 
a template. You want to add a layout that you have been using in your map 
documents you created with ArcMap, another Esri application. This will allow 
your maps to look the same whether they are created in ArcGIS Pro or ArcMap:
1.	 Click on the INSERT tab in the ribbon.

Creating and Working with ArcGIS Pro Projects
[ 78 ]
2.	 Click on the small drop-down arrow located next to New Layout, and select 
Import a layout file..., which is located near the bottom of the window.
3.	 In the Import window, navigate to the C:\Student\IntroArcPro\Chapter3 
folder. Choose the Sample Layout.mxd file and click on Select.

Chapter 3
[ 79 ]
You have just imported the map layout, which was in the map document. 
This layout was created with ArcMap and is used by your organization 
as a standard layout for all maps you print. You will need to make some 
adjustments to this layout for it to work properly in ArcGIS Pro:
4.	 Right-click on Map Frame in the Contents pane and select Properties to open 
the Element pane on the right-hand side of the interface.
5.	 Make sure that the Options button is selected in the pane. It is the first one 
under the word Properties.
6.	 You should see two options, General and Map Frame. In the General option, 
rename the frame to Map Frame.
7.	 In the Map Frame option, click on the drop-down menu and select Map. 
When you do this, you should see that the map you created in Step 2 should 
appear in the layout. It should look like this now:
8.	 Now, we need to make adjustments to the legend. Select the legend in the 
Contents pane.
9.	 The Legend Tools contextual tab will appear on the ribbon. Select the 
Design tab.
10.	 Click on the small drop-down arrow next to Layers in the Map Frame group 
tab and click on the box next to City Limits to turn this layer on in the legend.
11.	 Set the Resize Behavior to Adjust columns using the drop-down menu.
12.	 In the Elements pane located on the right-hand side of the interface, select 
the Placement button located below the word Properties.

Creating and Working with ArcGIS Pro Projects
[ 80 ]
13.	 Make the following adjustments to the legend placement properties:
°°
Width: 1.75 in (Note: the height should automatically 
adjust to .55 in).
°°
X position: 8.65.
°°
Y position: 2.00.
Your layout should look very similar to this when you are done:
14.	 Close the Elements pane.
15.	 You will save a bookmark for this layout, so you can easily return to 
this location and scale. Select the Layout tab on the ribbon.
16.	 Choose Create Bookmark. In the Create Bookmark window, name 
your bookmark Print Layout and click on OK.
17.	 Close the Sample Layout and save your project.
Step 4 – saving a project as a template
Now that you have configured the project to have your standard database, style, 
and folder connection plus included a sample map and layout, which will be the 
common basis for new projects, you are ready to save your project as a template:
1.	 Click on the SHARE tab on the ribbon.
2.	 Select the Project Template button in the Save As group tab.

Chapter 3
[ 81 ]
3.	 The Create Project Template pane is displayed in the right-hand side of the 
interface. Under the Start Creating section, select Save template to file.
4.	 Click on the Browse button located under Name and Location to specify the 
location you will save the template at and the name you will give it.
The default location is located in your user profile and the ProjectTemplates 
folder. You will accept the default location so that the template appears in your 
list when you start ArcGIS Pro:
5.	 Name your template %your name% 2D Project Template (that is, Tripp 
2D Project Template) and click on Save.
6.	 You will now need to fill out the item description information for the template. 
The item description is a shortened form of metadata. Complete the following 
as indicated here:
°°
Summary: This serves as a template for 2D ArcGIS Pro projects 
and includes a single 2D map and a layout. It will also automatically 
connect to the Trippville_GIS geodatabase and add the Esri symbol 
style.
°°
Tags: 2D, Trippville, layout, map, template.
7.	 Click on the Analyze button to make sure that your template does not 
contain any issues that would prevent it from working properly. The Analyze 
button will automatically take you to the Messages tab in the pane. You 
should not see any errors or warnings. If you find any error, correct them as 
recommended by ArcGIS Pro.
8.	 Once you have no errors in the Messages tab, click on the Create button in 
the pane.
When ArcGIS Pro is done creating the template, you will see a message 
letting you know that it is complete.
9.	 Close ArcGIS Pro. You can choose to save the project if you desire, but it is 
not required.

Creating and Working with ArcGIS Pro Projects
[ 82 ]
Step 5 – creating a new project using a 
custom template
Now that you have created a custom project template, you need to know how to use 
it when you create a new project. In this step, you will use the project template you 
just created to create a new ArcGIS Pro project.
1.	 Start ArcGIS Pro.
2.	 In the Create a new project pane, you should see the new template you just 
created at the bottom of the list of available templates. Select the template 
you create in the last step.
3.	 Name your new project %your name% template test.
4.	 Set the save location to C:\Student\IntroArcPro\My Projects and 
click on OK.
Your new project should open with a map that looks very familiar. 
You should see the City Limits layer with the Imagery basemap.
5.	 Take some time to explore the Project pane. Look at what 
connections, maps, layouts, and styles are present.
6.	 When you are done exploring your new project, save it and close ArcGIS Pro.

Chapter 3
[ 83 ]
Summary
In this chapter, you learned how important the projects are when using ArcGIS 
Pro. They are the very core of the application. You have seen how they contain all 
the items associated with a project, including database connections, maps, styles, 
toolboxes, layouts, server connections, and more. By having all these in a project, 
it is much easier to access required resources.
You have created a new project and seen how you can expand it by adding new 
resources. A project is not limited to a single database, map, folder, or style. You can 
choose to make as many connections as you wish. The Project pane in ArcGIS Pro 
provides the tools and methods to access, add, view, or remove those resources.
Finally, you learned how a project template can be used to make creating new 
projects more efficient by preconfiguring various project items. You have the 
option to use one of the predefined ArcGIS Pro templates, or you can create 
your own custom templates.


[ 85 ]
Creating 2D Maps
One of the key functions of a GIS is to visualize data through the use of maps. Maps 
allow us to see and analyze the spatial relationships between features in one or more 
layers. Maps are created for many different reasons. Often, they are used to show the 
location of specific assets or to highlight attributes associated with features such as 
a parcel's zoning classification or a pipe size. Sometimes, they are used to show the 
results of analysis we have performed.
So, each map you create in ArcGIS Pro has a reason to exist. This purpose will help to 
dictate what layers you choose to include and how those layers are visualized. There 
is no limit on the number of layers a map can contain. However, it is possible to have 
so many layers in a map that it distracts from the purpose. As the author of the map, 
you must strike a balance between the amount of information you include in a map 
and its overall purpose.
Each layer in a map has a set of properties. This includes things such as the source, 
symbology, visibility ranges, coordinate system, and so on. When you create a map 
and add layers, you must configure many of these settings manually to ensure that 
your map is legible and supports the purpose of the map.
As you have already experienced, ArcGIS Pro allows you to create both 2D and 
3D maps within a project. In this chapter, you will focus on creating a 2D map. 
These have been the mainstay of GIS since it was first developed over 50 years ago. 
In this chapter, you will learn how to:
•	
Create a new 2D map within a project
•	
Use various methods to add new layers to your map
•	
Configure layer symbology using various methods
•	
Configure label settings
•	
Configure other layer properties

Creating 2D Maps
[ 86 ]
Creating and configuring 2D maps
ArcGIS Pro provides several methods to create new 2D maps within a project. You 
have already seen how creating a new project using a template can automatically 
create a new map. However, that is not the only way to create new maps within 
a project. There are several other methods to create or add maps to your projects. 
Remember that an ArcGIS Pro project can contain multiple maps.
A map only provides a canvas. You must add the content. This normally means 
adding layers, which represent the features you wish to display within your map. 
Just as there are multiple methods to create new maps, there is also more than one 
way to add new layers to a map.
You will now investigate different methods to create new maps and add layers.
Creating a new map
Maps are the primary way to visualize data in a geographical information system 
(GIS). With each project, there may be a need to have multiple maps. You may need 
a map that shows the general location of the project in relation to a larger area. For 
example, you may be working on a project to determine the location of a new water 
reservoir. You need to show the location of the proposed new reservoir within your 
county or city, so others can know where it will be generally located. Although this 
map is good at showing where the reservoir is located, it is at a scale that would 
make it hard to see the level of detail that might be needed by an engineer, planner, 
or surveyor. So, you might need another map that focuses on the site of the new 
reservoir, which shows its boundary, the parcel or parcels of land it is on, the 
elevation contours for the site, and so on.
To keep from making a single map too cluttered, you might actually need to 
create multiple maps that focus on one or two primary layers. Remember that 
a map should have a specific purpose. All layers within maps should support 
that purpose. It is possible to have too much information.

Chapter 4
[ 87 ]
So, how do you create new maps within ArcGIS Pro? One way is using the INSERT 
tab on the ribbon. From there, you can choose the New Map button as shown in the 
following screenshot:
Another way is to right-click on the Maps folder within the Project Pane and select 
New Map, as shown in the following screenshot:
Another way is to import an existing map. ArcGIS Pro allows you to import maps 
from map documents, map packages, and map files. Each of these has unique file 
extensions, as shown in the following table:
Item
File extension
Software used to create
Map document
MXD
ArcMap
Map packages
MPK or MPKX
ArcMap, ArcCatalog, or 
ArcGIS Pro
Map files
MAPX
ArcGIS Pro

Creating 2D Maps
[ 88 ]
When you import an existing map from one of these files, the new map it creates in 
your project will contain the layers along with all of their settings, such as symbology 
and labels, that were in the map you imported. This provides a way to help populate 
a new project with items quickly, so you can get to work faster. This is especially true 
for those that are migrating to ArcGIS Pro from ArcGIS for Desktop.
Exercise 4A – adding and configuring layers 
in a map
You have been asked by the Community and Economic Development Director for 
the City of Trippville to prepare several maps for a business that wishes to open 
a location in the city. He needs a map that shows the location of all commercial 
property in the city. Then, he wants a map that shows all commercial parcels over 
1 acre but less than 3 acres in size.
In this exercise, you will create a new project using the Map template. You will create 
the first map requested by the Director. This will require you to add and configure 
several layers using various methods. You will add the second map to the project in 
another exercise.
Step 1 – creating the project
In this step, you will create a project that will be used to develop the maps requested 
by the Community and Economic Development Director:
1.	 Start ArcGIS Pro.
2.	 In the Create a new project pane, which is located on the right-hand side of 
the ArcGIS Pro opening window, select the Map.aptx file.
3.	 Set the project location to C:\Student\IntroArcPro\My Projects by 
clicking on the Browse button located on the right-hand side of the Location 
cell and navigating to the My Projects folder as specified.
4.	 Name your project %your name% Ex4A (that is, Tripp Ex4A) and click on OK.
Now you need to connect to the folders and databases you need to use for 
this project. You will connect to the Trippville_GIS geodatabase and the 
folders that contain other files you need:
5.	 Expand Databases in the Project pane, so you can see the list of all 
connected databases.

Chapter 4
[ 89 ]
Question: What databases are currently connected to this project?
___________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
Question: Which geodatabase is the default geodatabase?
___________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
You will not need the Map database for this project, so you will remove that 
connection. Removing unneeded connections will help ensure that your 
project performs efficiently and responds faster.
6.	 Right-click on the Map database connection in the Project pane. Select Remove.
7.	 Now you need to connect to the Trippville_GIS database. Right-click on 
Databases in the Project pane and select Add Database.
8.	 In the Select Existing Geodatabase window, navigate to C:\Student\
IntroArcPro\Databases and select Trippville_GIS.gdb.
9.	 Finally, you need to connect to a folder that will contain files you will need to 
complete this project. Right-click on Folders in the Project pane. Select Add 
Folder Connection.
10.	 In the Add Folder Connection window, navigate to C:\Student\
IntroArcPro\. Then, select the Chapter4 folder and click on the Select button.
You have now connected to all the resources you will need to complete this 
project. Your Project pane should look like this if you have connected to all 
the project items as directed:
11.	 Save your project.

Creating 2D Maps
[ 90 ]
Step 2 – adding layers
Now that you have created your project, it is time to begin on the maps requested 
by the Community and Economic Development Director. You will start with the 
first map he requested, showing the location of all the commercially zoned property 
within the city.
You will use the map that was created when you generated your new project using 
the project template. You will add and configure a few layers using various methods:
1.	 The first layer you want to add is City Limits, so everyone will know 
which areas are in the City and which are out. In the Project pane, expand 
Databases and then the Trippville_GIS geodatabases.
2.	 Expand the Base feature dataset and select the City_Limits feature class. 
Holding your mouse button down, drag the City_Limits feature class into 
the map view. Once your mouse pointer is in the map view, release your 
mouse button.
City Limits have now been added to your map using a drag and drop 
method. This is one of the methods you can use to add a new layer from 
resources connected in the Project pane. Now you will need to change the 
symbology for the City_Limits layer:
3.	 Click on City_Limits in the Contents pane until a blue box highlights 
the layer name. Then, type City Limits to give the layer a new name, 
which will appear better in a legend.
4.	 Click on the symbol located below the City Limits layer name in the 
Contents pane to open the Symbology pane on the right-hand side of 
the interface.
5.	 Click on the Properties tab in the Symbology pane.
6.	 Make the following changes to the Appearance settings:
°°
Color: No color
°°
Outline Color: Black
°°
Outline Width: 3 pt

Chapter 4
[ 91 ]
The Appearance setting window looks as follows:
7.	 Once you verify that the settings are correct, click on Apply.
8.	 Click on the MAP tab on the ribbon.
9.	 Your map now has a single configured layer. Click on the Add Data button 
to add a few more layers.
10.	 Click on Databases in the Add Data window and then double-click on the 
Trippville_GIS geodatabase.
11.	 Double-click on the Base feature dataset.
12.	 Holding down your Ctrl key, select the County_Limit, Natwtr_Body, 
Natwtr_Stream, and RR_Tracks feature classes.
13.	 Click on the Select button to add these new layers to your map.
14.	 Make the following changes to the layers you just added using the skills 
you have learned so far:
°°
RR_Tracks
Name: Railroad
Symbol: Railroad (Hint: Look in the gallery)

Creating 2D Maps
[ 92 ]
°°
Natwtr_Stream
Name: Streams & Creeks
Color: Cretan Blue
Line Width: 1 pt
°°
County_Limit
Name: County Limit
Color: 60% Gray
Line Width: 2 Pt
Move County Limit layer below City Limits in the Contents pane
°°
Natwtr_Body
Name: Lakes & Ponds
Color: Yogo Blue
Outline Color: Cretan Blue
Outline Width: 1 pt
Move the Lakes & Ponds layer above the Streams & Creeks layer in 
the Contents pane
Your map should look like the following image:

Chapter 4
[ 93 ]
15.	 Save your project.
The last layer you need to add to this map to meet the request from the 
Director is a layer that shows all parcels zoned commercially. Luckily, another 
user has created a zoning layer file. As you have seen earlier, layer files can 
be used to set the symbology for a layer you already have in your map. It can 
also be used to add a new layer, which is already symbolized. You will use 
this layer file to add a zoning layer to the map and then limit it to only show 
those parcels with a commercial zoning classification. The zoning classes, 
which delineate commercial zoning, include GC, GC-S, and CBD. GC indicates 
a zoning of General Commercial. GC-S indicates General Commercial with 
special stipulations, and CBD is the central business district.
16.	 Expand folders in the Project pane.
Question: What folders are available in this project?
___________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
17.	 Expand the Chapter4 folder and right-click on the Trippville Zoning.lyr 
file. Select Add to Current Map.
You have added a layer that shows the zoning of all parcels in the City. 
Now it is time to limit the layer to only the commercial zoning classes.
18.	 Expand the symbology for the zoning layer in the Contents pane by clicking 
on the small arrow located to the left of the zoning layer. You can now see all 
the different zoning classifications and their corresponding symbology.
19.	 Select the APPEARANCE contextual tab in the ribbon.
20.	 Click on the Symbology drop-down menu and select Unique values to open 
the Symbology pane on the right-hand side of the interface.
21.	 Select the row for the PUD symbol settings in the grid.
22.	 Holding down your Shift key, click on the row containing Mobile Home Park 
to select all values from PUD to Mobile Home Park.
23.	 Right-click on one of the selected rows and select Remove.
24.	 You have just removed the selected values from the legend for your layer, 
so parcels with those values are no longer shown in the map. Repeat the 
same process to remove all values located below GC-S.

Creating 2D Maps
[ 94 ]
You have now isolated the commercially zoned parcels within the City as 
requested by your Director. Your map should now look like this:
25.	 Once you have verified that your map is correct, expand Maps in the 
Project pane.
26.	 Right-click on Map and in the Project pane select rename.
27.	 Rename the map Commercial Zoned Prop.
28.	 Save your project.
Exercise 4B – adding a new map to a project
In the previous exercise, you created the first map asked for by the Community and 
Economic Development Director. Now you need to create the second map. This map 
needs to show those commercial properties which are over 1 acre and less than 3 
acres in size. You will use the map you created in the last exercise as a starting point 
by copying it.

Chapter 4
[ 95 ]
Step 1 – creating the new map
In this step, you will create a new map in your project by copying the map you 
created in the last exercise:
1.	 Save your project as %Your Name% Ex4B in C:\Student\IntroArcPro\My 
Projects\Tripp Ex4A.
2.	 In the Project pane, expand Maps. Then, right-click on the Commercial 
Zoned Prop map you created earlier and select Copy.
3.	 Right-click on Maps in the Project pane again and select Paste, as shown 
in the following screenshot:
4.	 A copy of the Commercial Zoned Prop map should now appear under 
Maps in the Project pane. Right-click on the new map copy you just added 
and select Rename.
5.	 Rename the map Commercial Between 1 to 3 acres.
6.	 Right-click on the map you just renamed and select Open. This will open the 
new map you added in the view area, so you can see it
7.	 Save your project.

Creating 2D Maps
[ 96 ]
Step 2 – filtering a layer with a definition query
Now that you have created the new map in your project, you need to filter the 
Zoning layer, so it only shows those commercially zoned properties that are more 
than 1 acre and less than 3 acres:
1.	 Right-click on the Zoning layer in the Contents pane and select Properties.
2.	 Select Definition Query in the right pane in the Layer Properties window.
3.	 Click on the Add Clause button.
4.	 Verify that Values is selected in the upper-right-hand side of the window.
5.	 Set the Query field to ACRE_DEEDE by clicking on the small drop-down 
arrow and picking the field from the list.
6.	 Set the operator to is Greater Than again by clicking the small drop-down 
arrow and selecting the operator from the list.
7.	 Type 1 in the next cell after the operator.
8.	 Verify that your query looks like the graphic shown in the following 
screenshot and click on Add:
So, you have added the first query, which will limit the displayed properties, 
to only those greater than 1 acre. Now you need to add a second query, 
which limits it to those that are less than 3 acres.

Chapter 4
[ 97 ]
9.	 Using that same process, add another query that states ACRE_DEEDE is Less 
Than 3. It should look like the following image:
10.	 Once you have verified that your query has been built correctly, click on OK 
to apply the definition query
You have just added a filter to the Zoning layer, so only those commercially 
zoned parcels that are over 1 acre and less than 3 acres in size are shown in 
the map. However, you need to add some more layers to place the zoning 
information into context.
11.	 Save your project.
12.	 Expand Databases in the Project pane.
13.	 Expand the Trippville_GIS database and the Base feature dataset.
14.	 Right-click on the Parcels feature class and select Add to Current map.
15.	 In the Contents pane, drag the newly added parcels layer below the County 
Limit layer. You need to ensure that you are on the List by Drawing order 
in the Contents pane to do this. This is the first button at the top of the 
Contents pane.

Creating 2D Maps
[ 98 ]
You can now see the commercially zoned parcels that are between 1 and 3 
acres and how they relate to the rest of the parcels in and around the City.
Since ArcGIS Pro assigns random colors to new layers, you may 
need to adjust the symbology for the parcels layer so that the 
commercial zoning stands out more. Using the skills you have 
learned so far, adjust the symbology for the parcels so that it does 
not overpower the other layers, specifically the Zoning layer.
16.	 To also help the zoning layer stand out more, you need to change your 
basemap. Click on the Basemap button on the MAP tab. Select the Light 
Gray Canvas.
17.	 Click on the name for the Zoning layer, so the edit box appears around it. 
Rename the layer Commercial Properties 1 to 3 AC.
18.	 Right-click on the City Limits layer in the Contents pane and select 
zoom to layer.
19.	 In the scale box located on the bottom-left side of the map view, type 24000.
Your map should look similar to the map shown here. The color of the 
parcels may be different depending on what you chose.
20.	 After you have verified that your map looks similar, save your project.

Chapter 4
[ 99 ]
Step 3 – adding annotation to the map
You have now successfully created the map the Director asked for. However, after 
reviewing it with you, he has decided that he wants to see road names and points 
of interest added to the map as well.
Luckily, you already have an annotation feature class in the Trippville_GIS 
database which contains these. You will now need to add that annotation 
geodatabase to your map.
1.	 Expand Databases in the Project pane and then expand the 
Trippville_GIS geodatabase.
2.	 Expand the Base feature dataset, so you can see the feature classes it contains.
3.	 Click on Base_Anno and drag it into the map view to add it to your map.
4.	 Click on Bookmarks in the MAP tab on the ribbon and select 
New bookmark.
5.	 Name your new bookmark as Entire City 1:24000 and click on OK.
6.	 Zoom into your map until you are able to see the annotation layer you just 
added clearly.
7.	 Click on Bookmark again. This time, select the Entire City 1:24000 to return 
your map to the original view.
8.	 Save your project.
You have now successfully created the two maps requested by the Director. You 
created the first map that showed all the commercially zoned parcels within the City. 
You then created a new map, which limited the commercially zoned parcels to only 
those between 1 and 3 acres.
Exercise 4C – using map and layer files
The Director has decided that he wants an additional map added to this project. He 
needs to know the location of the City's sewer system in relation to the commercial 
properties that are between 1 and 3 acres. This is because the new business wants to 
be able to connect to the City's sewer system.
Luckily, you have a map file of the City's sewer system, which was created for 
another project. This will serve as a great starting point for this new map you need 
to add to your project. Map files allow you to share previously created maps, so they 
can be used in other projects without having to start all over with a blank map.

Creating 2D Maps
[ 100 ]
Once you import the map file, you will then need to add the commercial properties 
that are between 1 and 3 acres. To make this easier, you will create a layer file from 
the map you just created and then use that file to add the layer to the sewer map.
Step 1 – adding a new map using a map file
In this step, you will add a map of the City of Trippville's Sanitary Sewer system 
using an existing map file. This will add a new preconfigured map to your project, 
which you will add too:
1.	 If you closed ArcGIS Pro after the last exercise, launch the application and 
open the project %Your Name%Ex4B.
2.	 Right-click on Maps in the Project pane and select Import.
3.	 In the Import window, select Folder in the Project tree in the left-hand side 
of the window.
4.	 Double-click on the Chapter4 folder.
5.	 Select the Sanitary Sewer Map.mapx file and click on Select.
Your project should now have a new map that shows the location of the Trippville 
Sewer System, which looks as follows:

Chapter 4
[ 101 ]
Step 2 – creating and using a layer file
Now you need to add a layer showing the location of the commercial properties 
that are between 1 and 3 acres. You will create a layer file from the previous map 
you created and then use the layer file to add the new layer to the sewer map:
1.	 Select the tab for the Commercial Between 1 to 3 acres map in the View 
area. If you closed this map, expand Maps in the Project pane and right-click 
on the Commercial Between 1 to 3 acres map and select Open.
2.	 Right-click on the Commercial Properties 1 to 3 AC layer in the 
Contents pane. Select Save as Layer File.
3.	 Select Folders in the left-hand side pane under Project. Double-click 
on Chapter4.
4.	 Name the new layer file Commercial Prop 1 to 3AC and click on Save.
5.	 Click back on the Trippville Sanitary Sewer Map tab to activate it.
6.	 Click on the Add Data button located in the MAP tab on the ribbon.
7.	 Select Folders and then the Chapter4 folder.
8.	 Select the Commercial Prop 1 to 3AC.lyrx file you created and click on 
the Select button.
You have just added a layer showing the commercial properties that are between 1 to 
3 acres that are located in the City to your map. Now the Director will be able to see 
which of those parcels is near the sewer system and thus be able to have a City Sewer 
service. Using the layer file made adding this new layer much easier and ensures 
that the symbology was consistent with the other maps within the project. It is also 
possible to copy and paste a layer from one map to another within the same project. 
This method will also keep the symbology consistent between maps and scenes 
within the project.
Step 3 – labeling
Now the Director wants you to label the pipe sizes for the sewer system, so he can 
ensure that there is enough capacity to handle the load the new business may add 
to the system. You need to turn on and configure labeling for the sewer line layer:
1.	 Select the Sewer Lines layer in the Contents pane.
2.	 Now you need to determine which field contains the size of the sewer pipes. 
Right-click on the Sewer Lines layer and select the Attribute table. This will 
open the Attribute table in a pane located below the main map view.

Creating 2D Maps
[ 102 ]
3.	 Scroll through the available attribute fields to determine which field contains 
the pipe size.
Question: What is the field name or alias that contains the size of the 
sewer pipes?
____________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________
4.	 Close the Attribute table for the sewer lines.
5.	 Click on the LABELING tab in the ribbon.
6.	 Click on the Label button to turn on labels for Sewer Line layer.
7.	 Set the Field to the one you identified in the question mentioned earlier.
8.	 At the current full view of the map, it is hard to read the pipe sizes. So, 
you will set a scale visibility range for the labels, which will allow them to 
become visible at a scale that makes them easier to read. In the drop-down 
list located next to Out Beyond on the LABELING tab in the Visibility 
Range, select 1:10,000. The size labels should disappear.
9.	 Zoom in until the size labels appear.
10.	 To make the pipe size labels stand out a bit more, make them bold and 
adjust the color on the LABELING tab in the Text Symbol group tab.
11.	 The placement of the labels is not optimum, so you need to adjust the 
placement. Click on the small arrow with the line above it in the Label 
Placement group tab. You should see several placement options listed 
that were not shown before.
12.	 Select the Water (Line) placement option.
Step 4 – configuring label conflict and placement 
options
You have successfully added the pipe size labels to your map. However, there are 
some additional configuration options, which might improve how they look and 
perform. You will now make some adjustments to those:
1.	 Right-click on Sewer Lines layer and select Label Properties. This will open 
the Label Class pane on the right-hand side of the interface. This pane allows 
you to make further adjustments to the labeling configuration settings to 
refine their appearance.

Chapter 4
[ 103 ]
2.	 Click on the Position tab and then select the Conflict Resolution icon, 
which looks like three text boxes stacked on one another.
3.	 Expand Remove duplicate labels in the Label Class pane.
4.	 In the drop-down menu that appears underneath, select Remove within 
a fixed distance.
5.	 Set the search radius to 500 and the units to Map Units. It should look 
like this:
This makes the labels appear a little less cluttered. However, you are not 
done yet. There are still some adjustments, which will improve the labels.
6.	 Expand the Minimum feature size option in the Label Class pane.
7.	 Set the Minimum for labeling size to 100 and the units to Map Units. 
This will further reduce the clutter in the map.
8.	 Save your project.
Continue to try other labeling options to see how they can impact the placement of 
the labels and the overall appearance of the map. Pan and zoom to other places in 
the map to see if your settings still work well in different locations.

Creating 2D Maps
[ 104 ]
Challenge
The Community and Economic Development Director was so impressed with the 
maps you created that he has another project that he would like your help with. A 
company would like to open a new manufacturing center within the City. So, they 
are looking for a parcel that is zoned light or heavy industrial, which is near the 
railroad and can easily be provided with both a water and sewer service. The parcels 
need to be 5 to 10 acres.
Using the skills you have learned, create a new project that contains the following 
maps for this scenario:
•	
A map showing the location of all heavy and light industrial properties 
within the City (zoning codes HI and LI).
•	
A map showing the location of all industrial zone parcels between 
5 and 10 acres.
•	
A map showing the location of industrial zoned parcels between 5 and 10 
acres along with sewer system. Symbolize and label sewer system the same 
way you did in Ex 4C.
•	
A map showing the location of the industrial zoned parcels between 5 and 
10 acres along with the water lines and fire hydrants. Symbolize water lines 
based on their size. The symbology for the fire hydrants is up to you.
Summary
In this chapter, you learned how to create a new project and add multiple 2D 
maps to that project. You were introduced to several methods to add new maps to 
your project, including using a project template, adding a blank map, and using a 
preconfigured map file. Once you created the maps, you then used various methods 
to add new layers.
You learned how to use the Add Data button in the ribbon to add one or more 
layers to a single map. You also saw how you can add new layers directly from the 
Project pane using database and folder connections. The use of layer files to add 
preconfigured layers was also explored.
Once the layer was added, you were shown different methods to configure the 
symbology and labels for the layer. You learned how to use the attribute table 
to define different symbology, which allowed you to highlight specific values 
associated with the feature. You also learned how you could use symbology 
and definition queries to filter your layers, so you only displayed features with 
specific values.

[ 105 ]
Creating 3D Maps
As the world becomes a more crowded place, the need to view data in a 3D 
environment grows. With the infrastructure of a modern urban area expanding both 
up and down as well as out, the importance of seeing what is above and below the 
ground is becoming critical to planning new projects, responding to emergencies, 
and managing the infrastructure.
ArcGIS Pro allows users to create 3D maps natively. In the past, this required users 
to have extensions such as 3D Analyst for ArcGIS. This ability to create 3D maps 
opens up a whole new world and way to view your data quite literally. You can 
extrude data from above or below the ground to see things such as does an existing 
natural gas line interfere with the new sewer line that is being planned or will the 
new office building obstruct the view of the mayor. This opens the door to new 
levels of analysis that were not always possible with traditional 2D maps.
In this chapter, you will explore the following:
•	
How to create a new 3D map
•	
Use a custom elevation model as the surface of your map
•	
Extrude data above and below the ground level
3D maps
ArcGIS Pro allows you to easily add 3D maps to your projects. 3D maps are 
also referred to as scenes in ArcGIS Pro. When you add a new 3D map or scene 
to a project, you must first choose which type or view mode you wish to use. 
ArcGIS Pro supports two: global and local.

Creating 3D Maps
[ 106 ]
A global scene is designed to support large areas where the curvature of the earth 
has a noticeable impact. This might be used to show the track of a hurricane or the 
path of a gas pipeline, which crosses many states or countries.
The preceding image is an example of a global scene, which shows the airline flight 
paths over the east coast of the United States. The curvature of the earth certainly has 
an impact on these over long distances. Because of the extent of the area covered by a 
global scene, these typically use a geographic coordinate system.
A local scene is designed to display smaller areas where the curvature of the earth 
has less impact and most often uses a projected coordinate system. A local scene 
might be used by a city to show its downtown area or by engineers planning a new 
road extension with a bridge or by a cell phone company to site a new cell tower 
within a community.
The following image shows an example of a local scene that depicts the buildings 
in a specific project area. They have been extruded vertically based on their height 
to create a 3D view showing how each building is related to those surrounding it 
both horizontally and vertically.

Chapter 5
[ 107 ]
Warning: At the time this book was being written, there was a known 
issue with displaying 2D layers in a 3D scene, which uses a projected 
coordinate system and Esri's default world elevation surface. If you set 
your scene to use a projected coordinate system instead of a geographic 
coordinate system, your 2D layers will not be visible if you use the 
default Esri world elevation surface. To overcome this issue, you have 
two options. The first is to use your own local elevation model. The 
second is to use a geographic coordinate system in your scene. You may 
also want to visit http://my.esri.com or http://pro.arcgis.
com/en/pro-app/get-started/release-notes.htm to see if 
there are any patches for this or other issues.

Creating 3D Maps
[ 108 ]
Exercise 5A – creating a simple 3D scene
In this exercise, you will create a simple 3D scene using an Esri project template. 
You will add and extrude a layer, so it has height above the ground level.
Step 1 – creating a project and 3D scene
In this step, you will create a new project using one of the templates included 
with ArcGIS Pro. This template will include a local 3D scene automatically:
1.	 Open ArcGIS Pro.
2.	 From the Create a new project pane, select the Local Scene.aptx template. 
This template automatically generates a 3D scene in your new project.
3.	 Name your new project %your name%Ex5A and set the location to 
C:\Student\IntroArcPro\My Projects. Click on OK.
Your new project should open with a scene already created. In your Contents pane, 
you should see two categories: 2D and 3D layers. The 2D layers are draped across 
your ground surface. The 3D layers may be extruded above or possibly below the 
ground. In the next step, you will add a layer and make it 3D.
Step 2 – adding a layer
In this step, you will add several layers to your map. Some will remain 2D layers and 
will serve as a general backdrop. You will make the building layer 3D and extrude it 
to show the heights of the building:
1.	 Make the MAP tab active in the ribbon and select Add Data.
2.	 In the tree located in the left-hand side of the Add Data window, 
expand My Computer.
3.	 Select the C: drive in that same pane.
4.	 Double-click on Student, IntroArcPro, and lastly Databases.
5.	 Double-click on the Trippville_GIS geodatabase and the Base 
feature dataset.
6.	 While holding your Ctrl key down, select the following layers:
°°
City_Limit
°°
Parcels
°°
Buildings

Chapter 5
[ 109 ]
7.	 Click on the Select button once you are done.
The new layers are added to your scene and ArcGIS Pro automatically zooms 
you to the extent of the new layers you added.
8.	 Adjust the draw order of your layers in the Contents pane by dragging them 
into the following order:
°°
Buildings
°°
City_Limit
°°
Parcels
When completed, your Contents pane should look like the following:
9.	 Using the skills you have learned so far, set the symbology for the layers you 
just added to these settings:
°°
City_Limit
Color: no color
Outline Color: black
Outline width: 3 pt

Creating 3D Maps
[ 110 ]
°°
Parcels
Color: 10% Gray
Outline color: black
Outline width: 1 pt
°°
Buildings
Color: Dark Umber
Outline color: Black
Outline width: 1 pt
Your scene should now look very similar to the following:
10.	 Save your project.

Chapter 5
[ 111 ]
Step 3 – making a layer 3D
In this step, you will turn the Buildings layer from a 2D layer into a 3D layer. 
You will extrude the height of each building based on an attribute field to show 
how tall each building is:
1.	 Drag and drop the Buildings layer from the 2D category to the 3D category.
When you do this, you may note that parts of the building outlines 
disappear. That is because as a 3D layer parts of them are now below 
the elevation surface.
2.	 Make sure that you still have the Buildings layer selected and click on the 
APPEARANCE tab on the FEATURE LAYER contextual tab.
3.	 In the Extrusion group tab, click on the small drop-down arrow below the 
type and select Base Height.
Extruding a layer allows it to be displayed in 3D. It determines the 
method ArcGIS Pro will use to determine the height of features 
and how to display the height. The Base Height option will add 
the value of a specified field to each vertex of a feather to create 
the 3D view. There are four types of extrusion you can choose 
from in ArcGIS Pro. You will learn more about those later.
4.	 In the cell located next to the type, set the field or expression that will be 
used to extrude the buildings, so their true height is shown. Click on the 
small drop-down arrow and select Est_HGT.
Your building layer should now appear to have some depth.
5.	 Right-click on the Buildings layer and select Zoom to Layer.
6.	 Select the Explore tool on the MAP tab in the ribbon.
7.	 Move your mouse pointer near the center of the cluster of buildings.
8.	 Hold your scroll wheel down and then move your mouse toward the top 
of the scene to make it rotate along the z-axis. This allows you to see the 
extruded buildings displaying their height. Continue to rotate the map 
until you can clearly see the building's height.

Creating 3D Maps
[ 112 ]
Your scene should now look similar to this:
9.	 Continue to use your mouse to zoom, rotate, and pan within your new 3D 
scene. Experiment with how the navigation works in a 3D environment.
10.	 Save your project and close ArcGIS Pro.
Congratulations! You have just created your first 3D scene in ArcGIS Pro. For many 
of you, this may be the first 3D map you have ever created.
Elevations
When you create a 3D map within ArcGIS Pro, there are several elevations you need 
to be concerned about. You need to define a ground elevation. The ground elevation 
provides a baseline for all of your 3D data. It is the canvas to which all other layers 
are applied within your map.
Once you have identified your ground elevation, then you need to determine the 
elevations of your 3D features. These may be directly related to the ground or at 
an absolute elevation.

Chapter 5
[ 113 ]
Ground elevations
The ground elevation is used by ArcGIS Pro to represent the surface of the earth 
within the 3D scene you are creating. Each scene must have a ground surface 
specified. The ground surface cannot be deleted. It can be changed and does 
have various properties, which can be adjusted.
By default, ArcGIS Pro will use the Esri world elevation surface, which is 
published through ArcGIS Online. You can choose to use your own elevation 
surface if desired. Your own local surface is often much more accurate, so it will 
provide better results. Things you can use as a ground surface include a Digital 
Elevation Model, Triangulated Irregular Network, and web elevations surfaces.
Digital Elevation Models
Digital Elevation Model (DEM) is a raster dataset that represents the elevations over 
a defined extent. Raster data is made up of a series of equal-sized cells with each cell 
containing a numeric value. What the value represents will depend on the purpose 
of the raster. In the case of a DEM, the values raster cells represent are the average 
elevation for the area covered by the cell. The following is an example of a DEM:
If you were to zoom in on this DEM at some point, you would start to see individual 
squares, which are the cells that make up the raster data. The squares you see are now 
commonly referred to as a pixel even though that is not correct. Each cell is assigned 
the value of the averaged elevation it covers. The cell might be 1 x 1 foot or 2 x 2 m. 
It is the size of the cells that determines the resolution and plays a part in its accuracy.

Creating 3D Maps
[ 114 ]
How does the DEM know the average elevation for the areas covered by its cells? 
Like all GIS data, it can be derived from many different methods. It might be created 
based on elevation information acquired by a land surveyor. It might have been 
compiled by a photogrammetrist using stereo photography methods. It may have 
been interpolated using contour lines or some combination of all these methods.
Common raster formats are as follows:
•	
JPG, JPEG, JP2
•	
Tiff
•	
PNG
•	
SID (commonly called Mr. SID)
•	
ECW
•	
IMG
•	
GRID (Esri Native Raster Format)
•	
BMP (commonly called a bitmap)
Creating a DEM in ArcGIS Pro requires you to have the Spatial Analyst extension. 
However, if you already have access to a DEM, you can create a 3D scene and use 
it as your ground surface without the extension.
Triangulated Irregular Networks
Triangulated Irregular Network (TIN) is a vector-based representation of a 
surface. It is constructed from a series of nodes and lines, which form a network 
of adjacent triangles. The triangles form facets of a 3D surface, which include 
areas of the same elevation.
Here is an example of a TIN as it is being drawn. You can see the triangles that 
make up the TIN as it is being drawn:

Chapter 5
[ 115 ]
Once all the triangles are drawn, you are presented with what appears to be a 
solid surface. It is easy to see the elevation changes within the TIN, as shown in 
the following image:

Creating 3D Maps
[ 116 ]
Because a TIN is vector-based data it tends to be smaller in size to an equivalent 
DEM. However, due to their complexity, they can take much longer to draw or 
process when used in analysis.
Being vector-based TINs can be created from a range of input data, such as streams, 
ridge lines, roads, and so on. When the TIN is generated, these input features will 
remain in the same location and be matched with nodes or edges within the TIN. 
This can allow the TIN to achieve a high degree of accuracy and detail that is not 
normally possible with a DEM.
Creating a TIN does require you to have the 3D Analyst extension. However, if a 
TIN already exists, you may use ArcGIS Pro without an extension as a ground 
surface or a layer.
Extruding features
Extruding features is how you turn them from flat 2D shapes into 3D objects. 
It provides them with height. For example, you can extrude power poles or trees so 
that you can see how tall they are. Both of these are normally stored at point features. 
When you extrude them so they have height, they become vertical lines. You can 
see an example of buildings and power poles that have been extruded to create 3D 
features as follows:

Chapter 5
[ 117 ]
The buildings in this scene started as a 2D polygon layer, which just shows the 
footprint of the buildings on the ground. By extruding them, you can now see their 
height above the ground gaining a greater appreciation of the spatial relationships 
between them and other features. The power poles were a 2D point layer, which 
were extruded to show their height. Now, you can visualize the relationship 
between the buildings and the power poles.
ArcGIS Pro provides four methods for extruding features. The one you use will 
depend on what information you have for your features. The following table 
explains these four methods:
Extrusion type
Description
Requirements
Data types
Minimum height
This adds the extrusion 
height to the minimum 
z value producing a flat 
top feature.
This requires an 
attribute field 
that contains an 
elevation value 
for the lowest 
point of the 
feature along the 
ground surface.
Lines or 
polygons
Maximum height
This adds the extrusion 
height to the maximum 
z value producing a flat 
top feature.
This requires an 
attribute field 
that contains 
the elevation for 
a feature at its 
highest point 
along the ground 
surface.
Lines or 
polygons
Base height
This adds the extrusion 
to the base elevation of 
each feature vertex. The 
result may not be a flat 
top depending on the 
base heights of feature 
vertices.
No attribute 
fields are 
required. 
However, the 
extrusion can 
be based on a 
field such as 
measured height 
if available.
Points, lines, 
and polygons
Absolute height
Features are extruded 
to a specified height 
regardless of base 
elevations or other z 
values.
This requires an 
attribute field 
that contains the 
top elevation of 
each feature.
Points, lines, 
and polygons

Creating 3D Maps
[ 118 ]
Other methods to display 3D data
Extrusion is not the only method to display data in 3D. ArcGIS Pro includes many 
3D symbol styles, which can add a level of realism to your scenes. The 3D symbols 
are designed to display features using commonly expected textures, materials, and 
details. For example, they can provide buildings with a brick appearance or show 
a fire hydrant with a real looking hydrant like you would expect to see driving 
down the road. Often these symbols have built in 3D settings, which do not require 
extruding the features.
You can also use the CityEngine symbology rules to apply even more realistic 
symbology to your scenes. CityEngine is another application for Esri, which allows 
users to create advanced 3D renderings of their data.
The following is an example of what can be accomplished using the 3D symbology 
styles in ArcGIS Pro. Here, you can see a real looking streetscape, which includes 
buildings, fire hydrants, and power poles:

Chapter 5
[ 119 ]
Exercise 5B – creating a local scene
The Community and Economic Development Director is working on a presentation 
for a group of concerned citizens. He has asked you to create a 3D scene of the 
central downtown business district, which he can use in the presentation.
In this exercise, you will create a local scene to fulfill the Director's request. This scene 
will use a locally developed DEM, which is more accurate than the Esri world elevation 
model. You will then add and symbolize layers using the 3D symbology to create a 
more realistic scene.
Step 1 – open a project and add a local scene
In this step, you will open the last project you created and add a new local scene:
1.	 Start ArcGIS Pro.
2.	 Open the project you created in Exercise 5A. It should be in your list of 
recently opened projects.
3.	 In the Project pane, right-click on Maps and select New Scene.
4.	 Once the new scene is generated, right-click on it and select Rename.
5.	 Type Local Scene as the new name and press your Enter key.
You have just created a new scene in the project you created in the last 
exercise. Remember that a single project can contain multiple maps and 
scenes. This makes them easier to manage and access. By default, new scenes 
are created as global scenes. Now you will convert it to a local scene:
6.	 Click on the VIEW tab in the ribbon.
7.	 In the View group tab, select Local. This converts your scene to a local scene.
Step 2 – setting the ground surface
In this step, you will assign the DEM that the city engineer has provided as the 
ground surface. This DEM was created by the city engineer based on survey data 
he had collected by a professional surveyor:
1.	 In the Contents pane, right-click on Local Scene and select Properties.
2.	 In the Map Properties window, select Elevation Surface from the pane on 
the left-hand side.
3.	 Expand the ground surface by clicking on the small arrow located to the left. 
This will allow you to see the currently assigned ground surface.

Creating 3D Maps
[ 120 ]
Question: What is the name of the currently assigned ground surface?
______________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________
Question: What is the location of the currently assigned ground surface?
______________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________
4.	 Click on the add elevation source button. It looks like + on a 
yellow-filled polygon.
5.	 Expand My Computer and then select your C: drive.
6.	 Now navigate to C:\Student\IntroArcPro\Databases\Trippville_GIS.
gdb.
7.	 Select DEM.
Your Map Properties: Local Scene window should now look like this:
8.	 Click on the small red X located next to the WorldElevation3D/Terrain 3D 
surface to remove it. Since you are using your own DEM, which covers your 
area of interest you will not need it.
9.	 Click on OK to close the Map Properties window.
You have just set the ground surface for your scene to the DEM provided by the city 
engineer. Don't be concerned if your scene currently appears to be blank. This will be 
fixed as you add more layers to the scene.

Chapter 5
[ 121 ]
Step 3 – adding layers and setting symbology
Now that you have the ground surface defined, it is time to start adding the layers 
requested by the Director:
1.	 Using the skills you have learned, add the following layers to your scene.
°°
Buildings
°°
Fire_hyd
°°
Power_Poles
°°
Light_Poles
2.	 Drag the Buildings layer to the 3D category. The layer may disappear from 
the map display. You will fix this issue in a moment.
3.	 Double-click on the symbol patch located below the layer to open the 
Symbology pane on the right-hand side of the interface.
4.	 Ensure that the Gallery tab is selected. In the search area, type Building 
and then set the search to All styles.
5.	 Select International Building under Procedural Symbols.
6.	 Right-click on the Buildings layer in the Contents pane and select Zoom 
to Layer.
7.	 Make sure that the Explore tool is selected on the MAP tab in the ribbon.
8.	 Place your mouse pointer near the center of the buildings and depress the 
scroll wheel on your mouse. While holding your scroll wheel down, move 
your mouse-pointer toward the top of your scene to rotate your scene, so 
you can view the height of the buildings layer, which is now using the 3D 
symbology style you just applied.
9.	 Once you have rotated your scene, zoom in to get a closer look. You will 
note your buildings now have a much more realistic appearance than they 
had when you just extruded them in the last exercise.
10.	 Now drag the Light Poles layer to the 3D category. Again, they may also 
disappear from the map.
11.	 Click on the point symbol located below the layer name to open the 
Symbology pane.
12.	 In the Symbol pane, ensure that the Gallery tab is active.
13.	 In the search area type Light. You may also need to ensure that All styles is 
still set as the search option.
14.	 Select the Street Light 6 symbol as this most closely matches the ones used by 
the City of Trippville. (You can choose a different one if you wish.)

Creating 3D Maps
[ 122 ]
15.	 Right-click on the Light Poles layer in the Contents pane and select 
Properties.
16.	 Click on the Display option in the left-hand side pane.
17.	 Check the box that says Display 3D symbols in real-world units and 
click on OK. This will allow you to set the correct height on the light poles. 
The standard height of the light poles used in the City is 18 feet.
Before you can set the height for the light poles, you will need to make one 
more change to the project settings. By default, the 3D symbols use meters 
as the units for specifying height. You need to change this in the Project 
Options to feet:
18.	 Click on the PROJECT tab in the ribbon and select Options.
19.	 Click on Units under Project.
20.	 Expand the 3D Symbol Display Units and click on the radial button located 
at the end of the row for Foot_US in the grid as follows:

Chapter 5
[ 123 ]
21.	 Once you verify the setting, click on OK.
22.	 Click on the back arrow located on the upper-left-hand side of the Project 
window to return to your scene.
23.	 Save your project to ensure that the project settings changes are not lost if 
ArcGIS Pro encounters issues.
24.	 Click on the Properties in the Symbology tab ensuring that the Light 
Poles layer is still selected. If you do not see the Properties option in the 
Symbology tab, try clicking on the point symbol below the Light Poles 
layer in the Contents pane.
25.	 Click on the Layer button which looks like three stacked squares. It is located 
between the Symbol button, which resembles a paint brush, and the Structure 
button, which resembles a wrench.
26.	 Set the Height to 18 Ft and then click Apply.
27.	 Repeat this process for the Fire_Hyd and Power Pole layers. Use the 
following settings. Remember to set the 3D display settings to use real-world 
units in the layer properties for each layer:
°°
Fire_Hyd
°°
Symbol Search: Fire Hydrant
°°
Symbol: Fire Hydrant Red from 3D Street Furniture
°°
Height: 3 Ft
°°
Power Poles
°°
Symbol Search: Pole
°°
Symbol: Telephone Pole 1
°°
Height: 35 Ft

Creating 3D Maps
[ 124 ]
Your scene should now look similar to this depending on your rotation and 
zoom scale if you have correctly applied all the settings.
You are almost done. Now you need to apply a basemap that adds a more 
realistic back drop and apply a sky to the scene:
28.	 Click on the Basemap button on the MAP tab in the ribbon.
29.	 Select the Imagery basemap. This will allow you to use the aerial 
photography as a basemap, which will add a touch of realism to the scene.
30.	 Now to add the sky, you will apply a fill to the entire scene. Right-click on 
Local Scene in the Contents pane and select Properties.
31.	 Select the General option in the left-hand side pane of the Map 
Properties window.
32.	 Set the Background color to Sodalite Blue (you can choose a different color 
if you think another will work better) and click on OK.
33.	 Save your project.
34.	 Take some time to pan, rotate, and zoom within the scene you just created. 
It has a very realistic appearance, which is exactly what the Director was 
hoping to accomplish.

Chapter 5
[ 125 ]
Your final scene should look similar to this. Yours may be slightly different 
depending on your rotation and scale.
Congratulations, you have created a realistic looking 3D visualization of a 
downtown area.
Summary
As you saw, ArcGIS Pro supports some very powerful tools to visualize data in 3D. 
This opens new levels of understanding using your GIS data. You learned how you 
can create different scenes to support different spatial extents.
You also learned how you can use different methods to turn 2D data into 3D features 
using extrusion or 3D symbol styles. When using extrusion, you can illustrate the 
true height of features using one of the four methods supported in ArcGIS Pro. 
Using 3D symbols can add a level of visual realism to your scenes.
The key element to create a 3D scene is to define a ground surface. You learned that 
you can use the default Esri-provided world elevation surface or one of your own. 
If you decided to use your own, it can be a DEM or a TIN. Using your own ground 
surface can increase the accuracy of the elevation data within your scene and the 
relationships between features along the z-axis.


[ 127 ]
Creating a Layout
You have seen how you can create informative and interesting 2D and 3D maps 
using ArcGIS Pro. While these are impressive, they are not complete. The last step 
to producing any map is to put it in a frame with other information, which helps the 
viewer comprehend the data you are presenting. This frame is called a layout.
A single layout can contain one or many 2D or 3D maps. A single project may 
contain many layouts. It is usual to have many different layouts within a project to 
meet various needs and requirements. You might have a large layout to use during 
presentations and a smaller one to include in a report.
Each layout you create will include several elements, such as a north arrow, scale, 
and title, in addition to one or more map frames. What you need to include in your 
layout will depend on the story you are trying to impart to the viewers. Before you 
create your layout, you need to take some time to figure out:
•	
What is the purpose of this layout?
•	
How will it be used?
•	
Who will be using it?
The answers to these questions will impact how you design your layout. They will 
help you determine the size, scale, and details you need to include. So, some thought 
should be given before you even start building the layout in ArcGIS Pro.
While working within an organization, there is often a desire to use common styles 
when creating your layout so that each one is branded and identifiable as coming 
from your organization. This means that you want to ensure that everyone within 
your organization uses the same style north arrow, scale bar, and/or logo within 
the layouts they create. What you need is a template layout with these elements 
predefined. Not only will this help give all layouts created by your organization 
the same look and feel, but it can greatly increase the speed of printing and sharing 
maps or posters.

Creating a Layout
[ 128 ]
The one thing you always need to keep in mind is that the layout represents your 
final product. It will form the basis on which all your efforts are judged. It will not 
matter how good your data or analysis happens to be; if it is not presented in a clear 
and professional manner, it will be of little use. Designing a well-thought out layout 
will lend credibility to all your hard work. It allows you and all your efforts to shine. 
It is also an opportunity to let your creative side show. The one thing I always tell 
those who are new to GIS when they reach this point is "make it pretty." While this 
seems simple, there are plenty of examples of GIS maps, which fail to meet that 
simple guideline.
In this chapter, you will learn the following:
•	
What to consider when designing a new layout
•	
How to add a new layout to a project
•	
How to design a layout that contains one or more map frames
•	
How to create and use a layout template
Things you need to consider when 
designing a layout
Many ArcGIS users believe that once they complete their analysis or create their 
maps, they are done. They think that they will be able to quickly pull it all together in 
a quick layout and print it out. This is not always the case. As mentioned previously, 
the Layout frames all your hard work. As a result, it is important to put some 
thought and planning into the creation of a layout.
Generally speaking, there are three basic factors you need to address when creating 
a new layout. First is the purpose, why does this map exist. Second is the audience, 
who will be using the map. Third is the situation, how will it be used or presented.
All these three factors will impact how you design your layout. These will guide the 
size of the map, the orientation, content, and more.
Purpose
Each map or poster exists for a reason. It has some purpose. It may be trying to show 
the location of City Hall or what parcels are in the flood zone or how to get from one 
location to another. The purpose defines the overall theme of the map. It also helps 
determine what content needs to be included. Some common map purposes include 
the following:
•	
To show location of features

Chapter 6
[ 129 ]
•	
Highlight specific attributes associated with features, such as zoning 
classification, population size, pipe material, or road type
•	
Show spatial relationships between features in one or more layers
•	
Present the results of the analysis
•	
Meet legal requirements, such as the Official Land Use Map for a city or 
Tax Map for a county
It is now easy to see how the purpose will be a factor in determining the content of 
your layout. If you are creating a zoning map, you will certainly need a map frame 
that shows the zoning classification of each parcel. You will also need a legend 
that allows the map viewers to understand the different classifications. If this is the 
official zoning map for the city, you may also need to add places for city officials to 
sign the map and a date of adoption.
Based on the five purposes listed previously, try to determine the primary purpose 
for each of the following maps:
Purpose of Map 1: _______________________________________________

Creating a Layout
[ 130 ]
Purpose of Map 2: _______________________________________________

Chapter 6
[ 131 ]
Purpose of Map 3: _______________________________________________
The audience
The audience that will use and interpret your map will also impact its design. You 
should consider the following factors about your intended audience:
•	
Age
•	
Education or knowledge level
•	
Physical abilities or disabilities
If you are preparing a map for an older audience, you may need to make fonts bigger 
to make it easier to see. This may mean that you cannot put as much detail into a 
single map to avoid over-cluttering your map, which might mean that you need to 
create multiple maps for this audience. Age may also impact the choice of symbology 
styles you use. If you are making a map for a very young audience, you might want 
simple brightly colored symbols for example.
Age can also impact the methods you use to present the maps you create to ensure 
the greatest impact. Younger audiences tend to prefer digital media to printed maps. 
While older audiences tend to want printed maps rather than digital media.
The author's story: A
This true story helps to illustrate my point. A couple of years ago, 
I was assisting a County Property Appraiser's office when an older 
gentleman walked into the office. He was not happy about the appraisal 
of his property. The Chief Appraiser for this county walked him over 
to a computer and pulled up a map of the property in question and 
symbolized it based on appraised value along with some other values. 
The screen showed that this gentleman's parcel was appraised at the 
same value as equivalent neighbors nearby. The older gentleman 
would not however accept what the computer was showing him. 
While this was happening, I went to another computer in the back and 
printed a copy of the same map the Chief Appraiser was showing to 
the gentleman on the computer. I then took it out to the gentleman 
and reviewed it with him. Then, he was happy. The minute he could 
physically hold the map in his hands, it became real and had meaning. 
I told him that we would make sure that the computer had the 
same information as the printed map (which it already did) and the 
gentleman left happily.

Creating a Layout
[ 132 ]
The education and knowledge level of your intended audience will also have an 
impact on your map and layout design. For example, if you are creating a map of 
your sewer system for a group of civil engineers, they are going to need a lot of 
detail. They will want to know pipe sizes, flow direction, treatment capacities, and 
more. However, if you are creating a sewer map for the general public, that level 
of detail will confuse many because they do not have the engineering education or 
knowledge. The public is more likely to be just interested in knowing whether they 
have a sewer service.
Physical abilities or disabilities are something you should also take into account. Will 
the audience include a lot of people who wear glasses? Will some of them be color 
blind? These are factors to consider when designing your layout and maps.
Question: If you know your audience might include someone 
who is color blind, what can you do or change so that they could 
successfully use your map as well?
__________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________
The author's story: B
Here is another true story to help illustrate this point.
I was working with an engineer on a project to generate a street 
improvement plan for a city. During this project, each road in the 
city was inspected and scored. I then consolidated all this data 
and developed a simple ranking system of good, fair, and poor 
to determine which roads were in the greatest need of repair or 
upgrading. The engineer asked me to produce a map showing the 
location of the roads and their ranking. Since these were roads, I 
thought that I would use standard traffic light colors to identify the 
ranking of each road. I made all the good roads display green, the fair 
roads display yellow, and the poor roads display red. Then I presented 
the map to the project engineer. When I did this, he asked me which 
roads were ranked good and which ones were poor. I told him the 
good roads were green and the poor ones were red as the legend 
showed. He then informed me that he was color blind. He could not 
distinguish red and green. So, I had to go back and make adjustments 
to my design. I applied a line pattern to each rank in addition to the 
color so that the engineer could tell the ranking of each road segment.

Chapter 6
[ 133 ]
A situation
A situation is all about how your map will be presented and used. Will it be 
presented in a digital format or will it be printed? Will it be hung on a wall, used 
during a presentation or taken out into the field? Is this a legal document? If so, are 
there any defined requirements? All of these considerations will impact your design.
You may wonder why you would design a map differently if you are going to 
print it versus publish it digitally. Well, the simple answer is that each has its own 
limitations. When printing a map, you are limited by the capabilities of your printer. 
Is it color or just black and white? What sizes will it print? How much memory 
does it have? It does little good to design a color 36 inch by 48 inch map with aerial 
photography if all you have is a small desktop color printer that has only a couple 
megabytes of memory. Your map will overwhelm such a printer. Another thing you 
need to consider when printing maps, especially if you use an ink jet style printer, is 
paper quality. The quality of the paper you use in an ink jet printer has a big impact 
on the quality of your final output and even what you can print. Low-grade 20 lb 
bond paper will not produce a high-quality map. It will also not do well with a map 
that has a large amount of fill or aerial photos. The paper just cannot absorb the 
amount of ink that is applied, so it will become wrinkled and rip very easily. 
It might even damage your printer.
There are several options you have for publishing a map digitally. You can publish 
to a PDF file. This allows people without GIS software to view your creation on a 
wealth of devices and even add the map to a website without the need for special 
GIS web servers. PDFs can also be secured by setting a password to open them. 
Current versions of the PDF format even support layers and attribute data. This 
allows you to create an interactive map even for those without GIS software. When 
creating a PDF, you must consider the file's size. The more you include in a map and 
the higher the resolution, the larger the PDF becomes.
You can also publish your maps to ArcGIS Online or ArcGIS for Server. These 
allow even greater levels of access and functionality. However, these are web-based 
technologies, so you must always be concerned about performance when you are 
designing a map, which will be published in this manner. Simpler is always better. 
You will need to avoid complex symbology and labels whenever possible. Reducing 
the number of layers also helps.

Creating a Layout
[ 134 ]
Another popular way to present a map digitally is by using a projector. This is 
especially common when presenting the map at a meeting. Projectors tend to wash 
or fade colors. So, you may need to choose a more intense color palette for your map 
if you intend to project it. Also remember that projectors will impact the scale of 
your map. Though you set the map to one scale in ArcGIS Pro, the projected image 
will not always be at that same scale. Factors such as the projector's angle to the 
projection surface or the shape of the projection surface or settings on the projector 
itself, such as the Keystone, can cause the map scale to be skewed.
Those are just a few of the ways situation that might impact your map design. Let's 
see what other things you can think of, where a given situation might impact your 
design. Answer the following questions:
Question: You are preparing a map of your water system, which 
will be given to the field crews to help them locate the system in the 
field. The maps will be stored in their trucks and used in all kinds of 
weather. How might this impact your design? 
____________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________
Question: You are preparing the official zoning map for a city. 
This will be the legal zoning map as required by the City's zoning 
ordinance and will be hanging in City Hall for city officials and the 
citizens to use. What factors should you consider that might impact 
your design? 
___________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
Creating a layout in ArcGIS Pro
Now that you know what factors can impact the design of your layout, it is time to 
learn how to actually create a new layout in ArcGIS Pro. ArcGIS Pro supports several 
methods to create new layouts:
•	
You can start from scratch by adding a new blank layout to your project
•	
You can import an existing map document file that was created with ArcMap
•	
You can copy an existing layout within your project
•	
You can import a layout file as a template.
You will now explore a couple of these methods using the project you created in 
Exercise 4B and 4C. The Director has asked you to print a few of the maps you 
created in that exercise. So, you will create a layout for each map the Director 
wants printed.

Chapter 6
[ 135 ]
Exercise 6A – creating a simple layout
The Director wants you to print a copy of the map you created previously that 
identified commercial properties that were between 1 and 3 acres. He needs to use 
the map in a meeting he will have with the executives of the company looking to 
locate into the City along with other city officials.
Step 1 – open ArcGIS Pro and your project
The first step is to open the project in which you will be creating the layout. 
See the following:
1.	 Start ArcGIS Pro.
2.	 If you see the project %your name% Ex4B listed in the Open a recent 
project list, select it and proceed to step 2. Otherwise, click on Open another 
project.
3.	 Click on the computer located under Open.
4.	 Select the Browse button.
5.	 In the Open Project window, select your C: drive from the tree in the left-
hand side pane.
6.	 Navigate to C:\Student\IntroArcPro\My Projects\Tripp Ex4A and click 
on %your name% Ex4B.aprx. Then, click on the Select button.
Your project should open to a familiar map. You should see up to three tabs across 
the top of the map view area for each of the three maps you created in the exercises 
from Chapter 4, Creating 2D Maps.
Step 2 – adding a new blank layout
In this step, you will add a new blank layout to your project and then add a map 
frame, which will display the map that shows the commercial properties that are 
between 1 and 3 acres in size.
Since this map will be used in a meeting with multiple people, you will create a large 
layout. This will allow you to create a map that is easy for a group to view and use in 
a meeting. For this meeting, the Director only wants to focus on those parcels that are 
within the size limit specified. He does not need to see the entire City:
1.	 Activate the INSERT tab in the ribbon.
2.	 Click on the New Layout button in the Project group tab.

Creating a Layout
[ 136 ]
3.	 From the list of available layout options, select Architectural Landscape 
E 36" x 48".
You should now see a new blank layout present in your project. In addition, 
a new folder has been added to your Project pane named Layouts.
4.	 Click on the small drop-down arrow located below the Map Frame button 
located in the Map Frames group on the INSERT tab.
5.	 Select the Commercial Between 1 to 3 acres map as illustrated here:

Chapter 6
[ 137 ]
6.	 Click on the Full Extent button located in the Map group of the Layout tab. 
It looks like a small globe. This will zoom the map frame to the full extents.
7.	 Save your project.
Now that you have added the map frame to your layout, you need to size 
and position it, so you have room to add a title and other elements.
8.	 Right-click on the newly added map frame in the Contents pane and select 
Properties.
9.	 Click on the Placement button in the Element pane located to the right of the 
interface.
10.	 Make the following adjustments to the settings:
°°
Size:
Width = 46 in
Height = 30 in
°°
Position:
X = 1 in
Y = 4.5 in
11.	 Close the Elements pane.

Creating a Layout
[ 138 ]
Step 3 – displaying the desired area
Now that you have added the desired map to your layout and sized it appropriately, 
you need to focus on the area that contains the parcels of interest to the Director for 
his meeting. You should note that these parcels are concentrated on the east side of 
the City. So, you will need to zoom into that area:
1.	 In the Layout tab, select the Activate button located in the Map group.
2.	 The MAP tab should automatically appear with the Explore tool active. 
Using the Explore tool, click on a point that is located near the center of 
the commercial parcels, which are between 1 and 3 acres in size.
3.	 Using your scroll wheel and mouse, zoom your map until it looks similar 
to this:
This has gotten your map very close to where it needs to be, but the Director 
wants the map printed at a scale where one inch will equal an even number 
of feet, such as 400 or 500 feet. This will allow him to use a ruler to check 
distances between features in the map easily.

Chapter 6
[ 139 ]
4.	 Check the current scale of your map frame by looking at the scale window 
located in the lower left-hand corner of the map view.
Question: What is your current scale?
___________________________________
___________________________________
Your scale should be somewhere between 1:4600 and 1:5000. This is very 
close to a scale that would make 1 inch equal 400 feet. The 1:4800 scale is 
equal to 1 inch equaling 400 feet if your map is set to use feet as its units:
5.	 Type 1:4800 in the small-scale window.
6.	 If required, pan your map some more until all the parcels of interest are 
visible.
7.	 Once you have verified that all parcels of interest are visible, click on the 
Layout tab in the ribbon. Click on the Close Activation button.
8.	 Save your project.
Step 4 – adding other elements
You are very close to completing your layout. You just need to add a few more 
elements to your layout, such as a title, north arrow, legend, and scale:
1.	 Click on the INSERT tab on the ribbon. From here, you can insert various 
elements into your layout.
2.	 Using your scroll wheel, zoom into the lower center of your layout. This is 
where you will place the title.
3.	 Click on the small drop-down arrow located to the right of Dynamic Text 
and select Name of Map. You will use the name of the map you added to 
the layout as the title:

Creating a Layout
[ 140 ]
Dynamic text is text that references a specific property of the Map Frame, 
Project, Layout, or your computer system. Dynamic text will automatically 
update if the value for the specific property changes.
4.	 The Elements pane should automatically appear. Click on the Options 
button located in the Elements tab.
5.	 Expand the General option and rename this element Title.
6.	 In the Text window, delete Name of Map from the window and click 
on Apply.
7.	 Click on the Placement button in the Elements pane. Make the following 
adjustments to the Placement Properties:
°°
Width = 18.5 in
°°
Height = 1.5 in
°°
X = 14.75 in
°°
Y = 2 in
8.	 Now you need to insert a north arrow. Make sure that the INSERT tab is 
active and click on the drop-down arrow below North Arrow. Select a north 
arrow style you like, such as ArcGIS North 11. (I generally like to keep it 
simple since the north arrow is only one small element in a larger picture.)
9.	 In the Elements pane, adjust the size and position as follows:
°°
Width = 2.0 in
°°
Height = 2.5 in
°°
X = 2.8 in
°°
Y = 2.75 in
This will place a north arrow similar to ArcGIS North 11 in the lower left-
hand corner of the layout. If you choose a longer north arrow style such as 
ArcGIS North 4, you may need to make additional adjustments to the size 
and position to get the arrow to fit appropriately. Use your judgment as to 
what looks best. Remember that this is a chance for you to exercise some 
artistic flare.
10.	 Zoom in to the area between the north arrow and map title.
11.	 Insert a scale bar using the same basic method you use to insert the 
north arrow.
12.	 Select the Design tab in the Scale Bar Tools contextual tab. This tab allows 
you to control various design setting for the scale bar. Since the Director 
wants the scale to be based on inches you must make some adjustments 
to the scale bar.

Chapter 6
[ 141 ]
13.	 The scale 1:4800 is the same as 1 inch = 400 feet. So, you need to adjust your 
scale bar to show that. Change the Resize Behavior to Adjust number of 
divisions. This will keep the division spacing from changing allowing you to 
set it, so the divisions are shown in inch increments.
14.	 Set the Units to Feet.
15.	 Change the Division Value to 400. This sets the division increments so that 
they are 1 inch.
16.	 Now make the following changes to the Placement Properties in the 
Elements pane similar to the method you used to change the north arrow 
settings:
°°
Width = 4 in
°°
Height = 0.30 in (this can vary depending on which scale bar style 
you choose)
°°
X = 7.0 in
°°
Y = 2.5 in
17.	 Click on the Layout tab and click on the Full Extent button.
Your layout should now look similar to this. Your north arrow and scale bar 
may look different depending on which style you selected.
18.	 Save your project.

Creating a Layout
[ 142 ]
Challenge
Using the skills you have learned to insert a north arrow and scale bar, add a legend 
to your layout. Position the legend in the lower right corner of the layout to help 
balance its overall appearance. A legend has a few more components than a north 
arrow, so this may be a bit more complicated. You may want to go to http://pro.
arcgis.com/en/pro-app/help/layouts/add-a-legend.htm for hints or assistance.
Exercise 6B – creating and using a layout 
template
The Director was very happy with the map you made for his meeting and now wants 
another. He would like to have a map printed at the same size, but that shows all the 
commercially zoned parcels in the City.
In this exercise, you will use the layout you created in the last exercise to create a 
template file. You will then use that template to create a new layout.
Step 1 – saving a template file
In this step, you will create a template layout based on the layout you created in the 
last exercise:
1.	 Click on the Sharing tab on the ribbon.
2.	 Click on the Layout File button in the Save As group.
3.	 In the Save Layout as PAGX File window, select your C: drive and then 
navigate to C:\Student\IntroArcPro\My Projects.
4.	 Name the new layout file Layout Template and click on Save.
You have created a layout file that can be used as a template for other layouts. New 
layouts based on this template will contain all the same standardized elements.
Step 2 – creating a new layout using a layout file
You will now use the file you created in the previous step to add a new layout to 
your project:
1.	 Click on the INSERT tab in the ribbon.
2.	 Click on the small drop-down arrow located next to New Layout.
3.	 Select Import a layout file, which is located near the bottom of the 
displayed window.

Chapter 6
[ 143 ]
4.	 In the Import window, navigate to C:\Student\IntroArcPro\My Projects 
and select the Layout Template.pagx file you created in Step 1.
A new layout has been added to your project that looks exactly like the layout you 
created in the last exercise. Now you will need to configure the layout to display the 
correct map and make adjustments to a few of the elements.
Step 3 – configuring a new layout
In this step, you will configure the layout to display the map that shows all 
commercially zoned parcels in the city:
1.	 Select the Commercial Between 1 to 3 acres map frame in the Contents pane 
to open the Elements pane, so you can adjust properties.
2.	 Click on the Options button in the Elements pane.
3.	 Expand the Map Frame option if needed.
4.	 Click on the drop-down arrow for the Map option and select Commercially 
Zoned Prop. This assigns the correct map to display in the layout.
5.	 Change the element name to Commercially Zoned Property.
Therefore, the title appears with the word property spelled out fully; you 
need to change the name of the map that is being displayed since the title is 
dynamic text.
6.	 Select the Commercially Zoned Prop tab at the top of the map view. This 
will make that map visible.
7.	 In the Contents pane, right-click on Commercial Zoned Prop and select 
Properties.
8.	 In the General properties, rename the map Commercially Zoned Property 
and click on OK.
9.	 Click back on the new layout you have created (Hint: it may be named 
Layout2).
The title should now be changed to reflect the new name of the map displayed 
in the map frame. Now you need to adjust the scale of the map, so it displays 
all the commercially zoned property and the legend so it shows your layers:
10.	 Using the skills you have learned, change your scale to 1: 7200, so you can see 
all the commercially zoned properties in the City as desired by the Director.
11.	 Select the legend in the Contents pane.
12.	 Select the Design tab in the Legend Tools contextual tab.

Creating a Layout
[ 144 ]
13.	 Click on the Layers drop-down menu and turn on all layers by clicking in the 
box located next to each layer name.
You have just created a new layout using a layout file as a template. It automatically 
included the same style north arrow and scale bar. All the layout elements were 
properly positioned. After making some simple adjustments, you quickly created a 
new layout, which is ready for printing.
The challenge
You had to change the scale in the new layout you created so that the scale bar no 
longer has divisions, which are 1 inch in size. See if you can adjust the scale bar so 
that the divisions are once again 1 inch in size. It just happens that 1:7200 equals 
1 inch = 600 feet. If you need help or assistance, you can go to http://pro.arcgis.
com/en/pro-app/help/layouts/scale-bars.htm.

Chapter 6
[ 145 ]
Summary
You learned how to create simple but effective layouts to frame the 2D and 3D 
maps you create using ArcGIS Pro. Layouts allow you to present your efforts in a 
professional manner, allowing others to appreciate your efforts. This makes your 
analysis, maps, and data more useful to others and helps put all your hard work into 
perspective.
As you learned, before you create your layout, there are several factors you need to 
consider. These include purpose, audience, and situation. Each of these will impact 
the overall design of your layout. So, it is important to think these through before 
you start building your layout.
Each layout you create will contain several elements, which will need to be 
configured. You will need to choose which map or maps from your project to 
include, what north arrow to use, determine the scale, and more. The factors you 
considered will help to drive the inclusion or exclusion of some elements. To help 
standardize elements between layouts, you learned how to create a layout template. 
This will help brand your maps and speed their production.


[ 147 ]
Editing Spatial and Tabular 
Data
One of the favorite questions I am often asked from administrators, directors, and 
elected officials is "when will our GIS be done?" The honest answer is never. All the 
layers of information we store in a GIS are changing. New roads are built. Parcels are 
split and sold. New sewer lines are installed and more. All of these changes need to 
be incorporated into our GIS databases. To do this, you must be able edit your 
GIS data.
ArcGIS Pro allows you to edit your GIS data. You can add new features or modify 
existing features. You can also edit the structure of your GIS database. With ArcGIS 
Pro, you can create new feature classes, add new attribute fields, create new tables, 
add domains, and so on. It also supports editing of both 2D and 3D data.
ArcGIS Pro is still very much a work in progress. There are some data structures, 
such as topologies, geometric networks, and the Parcel Fabric, which cannot be 
edited with the current version of ArcGIS Pro, which is 1.1. It is expected that over 
time, as ArcGIS Pro continues to mature, that these limitation will be removed.
In this chapter, you will learn the following topics:
•	
How to create and manage feature templates
•	
How to create update spatial and tabular data
•	
Know which data types can be edited
•	
How to make changes to your geodatabase schema

Editing Spatial and Tabular Data
[ 148 ]
Editable data formats
ArcGIS Pro allows users to access and use a lot of data formats to make maps, perform 
queries, and so on. But using and accessing is far different from being able to edit. It is 
important to know the limits of ArcGIS Pro with certain common data formats.
Data formats – editable or not
The more you work in GIS, the more data formats you will encounter. Esri's ArcGIS 
Platform supports many of the most commonly used formats. However, as we said 
earlier, there is a big difference between being able to view and query data and being 
able to edit it.
The following table outlines some of the limits ArcGIS Pro has with various data 
storage formats you are likely to encounter on a regular basis:
Data format
Display
Edit
Comments
Personal 
geodatabase
No
No
File, workgroup, 
and enterprise (SDE) 
geodatabase
Yes
Yes
Workgroup and enterprise geodatabases 
require Standard or above license. 
Topologies, Geometric Network and Parcel 
Fabric editing not currently supported.
Shapefiles
Yes
Yes
Coverage
No
No
CAD files (DWG, 
DGN, and DXF)
Yes
No
ArcGIS Pro will display DWG files created 
with AutoCAD 2016 or earlier.
ArcGIS feature 
service
Yes
Yes
Published with ArcGIS Server.
ArcGIS feature layer
Yes
Yes
Published from ArcGIS Online or Portal with 
ArcGIS. Editing must be enabled.
Web map services
Yes
No
ArcGIS Pro can access web map services, 
including ArcGIS Server, ArcGIS Online, 
WMS, and WMTS.
Excel Spreadsheet
Yes
No
DBF file
Yes
Yes
Text files (TXT or 
CSV)
Yes
No

Chapter 7
[ 149 ]
This list is just those data types that are most frequently encountered with a focus 
on vector or tabular data. There are many other GIS data formats. Shapefiles and 
geodatabases are the primary spatial formats that ArcGIS Pro is designed to interact 
with completely. Even the geodatabase currently has some limits on what can be 
edited using ArcGIS Pro.
The personal geodatabase format is not supported in ArcGIS Pro. Esri 
has been slowly reducing support for this type of geodatabase, which 
is built on top of Microsoft Access Database technology. This is largely 
due to the limitations of Microsoft Access, which is restricted to 2 
Gigabytes in size and whose performance slows the larger the database 
gets. This is the reason Esri developed the file geodatabase.
It is strongly recommended that if you are still using personal geodatabases, you 
migrate them to a file workgroup or enterprise geodatabase, especially if you wish 
to begin using ArcGIS Pro or ArcGIS Online. These geodatabase types also offer 
much better performance and storage capacity. The following table shows a general 
comparison between the three types of geodatabase, which can be created with the 
ArcGIS Platform:
Personal
File
Workgroup/
Enterprise
Supporting database
Microsoft Access
Individual files 
designed by Esri
SQL Server Express, 
SQL Server, Oracle, 
DB2, Informix, and 
PostgreSQL
Storage size
2 GB (Performance 
degrades as size 
increases)
1 TB at the base of the 
database plus 1 TB 
per feature dataset
10 GB plus 
depending on 
supporting database
Number of editors
1
1 per feature dataset 
(if map references 
layers from multiple 
feature datasets, each 
dataset will be locked 
when editing)
10 or more 
depending on 
supporting database
How to know what format data is in
Now that you know that ArcGIS Pro allows you to work with multiple data storage 
formats, but you can only edit a few. How do you tell what format the data you are 
using is stored as? That is a good question.

Editing Spatial and Tabular Data
[ 150 ]
Just as ArcGIS Pro allows you to visualize your data, it also provides visual clues 
about the data you are working with. Different icons are displayed next to various 
types of data to help you easily identify the type of data you are working with. 
The following image illustrates some of the icons used by ArcGIS Pro to identify 
different types of data.
As you can see, ArcGIS Pro uses different icons to differentiate data types. For 
example, Shapefiles use green icons with a graphic to tell whether the Shapefile 
contains points, lines, or polygons. CAD files are identified with blue icons. DWG, 
DXF, and DGN files all use the same blue icons. ArcGIS does not distinguish 
between files created with AutoCAD, MicroStation, or one of the other many 
drafting and design software packages used by engineers and surveyors.
Some data formats support the storage of multiple data types, 
whereas others only allow users to store a single data type. For 
example, the geodatabase allows you to store points, lines, polygons, 
raster, and more within a single database, whereas a Shapefile will 
only allow you to store a single data type. A Shapefile will be a point 
or a line, or a polygon Shapefile. It cannot contain more than one data 
type in a single Shapefile.

Chapter 7
[ 151 ]
How to edit data using ArcGIS Pro
The world is ever changing, so your GIS needs to keep up with those changes. 
Whether it is splitting a parcel, adding a road, adding a new attribute field, or 
creating a new layer of data, it is important that your GIS data reflects the most 
current conditions of the real-world features it represents and meets the needs of 
your organization.
ArcGIS Pro contains various tools that allow you to do all of this. You can add new 
features to an existing layer. You can modify existing features to show changes. 
You can create new layers and tables. In other words, ArcGIS Pro allows your GIS 
to grow, change, and flourish as reality changes.
How to start editing features and attributes
To begin editing data in ArcGIS Pro is fairly easy. The first step is to open a project 
that contains layers, which reference data that is stored in an editable format, such as 
a Shapefile or geodatabase. From there, all you need to do is click on the EDIT tab in 
the ribbon. It is that easy.
For those that have been using ArcGIS for Desktop, this may seem too easy. What 
happened to start editing? In ArcGIS Pro, you no longer need to start editing. You 
can immediately start editing once your project is open. ArcGIS Pro also does not 
limit you to editing data in one workspace at a time. If your map contains layers 
that point to data stored in a geodatabase and as Shapefiles, you can edit them all at 
the same time. You no longer need to start and stop editing each time, you need to 
switch between workspaces.
What is a workspace? A workspace is the location in which your data is 
stored. It can be a database or a folder. So, a geodatabase is considered 
a single workspace. A folder that contains Shapefiles or other data files 
would be another workspace.
Preparing to edit
Before you actually start editing your data, you need to take some time preparing 
both your data and ArcGIS Pro. Generally speaking, you should take the time to do 
the following before you start editing:
1.	 Ensure that all the spatial data you plan to edit is in the same coordinate 
system. This avoids errors that can be caused due to transformation issues.

Editing Spatial and Tabular Data
[ 152 ]
2.	 Add and symbolize all layers you wish to edit to your map. The simpler you 
can keep the symbology for each layer in the map, the faster it will redraw as 
you pan and zoom during editing. Save the complex symbology for printing. 
Since ArcGIS Pro supports multiple maps in a single project, you may want 
to have one map you use to edit data and another to include in a layout 
for printing.
3.	 Simplify your attribute fields so that only those you need are visible. This 
will increase your efficiency and reduce the chance you mistakenly edit an 
attribute value that should not be changed.
4.	 Adjust Project Option settings for editing from the Project pane by:
°°
Ensuring that proper units are set for distance, angle, direction, 
and area
°°
Ensuring that edit settings are set as desired such as how and when 
to save.
5.	 Set which layers you wish to edit in the List by Edits within the Contents pane.
6.	 Set snapping options.
Taking the time to go through these steps before editing for the first time in a project 
will make editing easier and reduce the chance of errors.
The EDIT tab
The EDIT tab on the ribbon as shown in the following screenshot, is where you go 
when you want to begin editing your data. Here, you will find many of your most 
commonly used editing tools. The tools on this tab allow you to modify existing 
features or to help create new features. This tab not only allows you to edit spatial 
data but also attributes and standalone tables as well:
As you can see that the EDIT tab contains seven groups: Clipboard, Manage Edits, 
Snapping, Features, Selection, Tools, and Elevation. Now we will explore these 
groups and some of the tools.

Chapter 7
[ 153 ]
The following screenshot shows some tools in Clipboard:
The Clipboard group contains tools, which will copy or paste to and from your 
computer's clipboard. Using these tools, you can copy features in one layer to 
another or cut them from one layer and paste them into another. You can also use 
these tools to duplicate features in the same layer.
The following screenshot shows tools present in Manage Edits:
The Manage Edits group helps you control your edits. Here, you can save your edits 
or discard them. If you discard edits, ArcGIS Pro will revert all your data back to 
the way it was before the last time you saved. This means that it will undo all edits 
you have performed since you last saved your edits. Once you save your edits, you 
cannot discard or undo them. 
ArcGIS Pro does allow you to set up an automatic save under your Project Edit 
option. You can choose to automatically save at specific time intervals or after a 
number of operations. Setting up an automatic save can help ensure that you don't 
lose edits you have performed if your system or ArcGIS Pro were to crash. The 
drawback to auto-saving is that while it is saving you cannot work. You must wait 
for it to finish saving, so you want to make sure that you set a sensible interval if you 
choose to enable auto saves. Also, remember that you cannot undo any edit after 
it has been saved. So, if you mistakenly edited the wrong feature and ArcGIS Pro 
saves, you will need to manually reverse your edit or restore a backup of some sort.
The Templates button will open the Manage Templates pane on the right-hand side 
of the ArcGIS Pro interface. From this pane, you can manage your feature templates, 
which are used to create new features. Those will be discussed in more detail later.

Editing Spatial and Tabular Data
[ 154 ]
Finally, you can check the editing status of the maps in your project. It will tell you 
what layers are editable, which are not, and any warnings you should be aware of 
when editing the data referenced in that map.
The next group is Snapping. It includes a single button with a drop-down menu, 
which controls snapping and snapping options. Snapping allows you to easily draw 
features so that they maintain connections to other features on the same or a different 
layer while editing. From the Snapping group, you can set where you want to snap 
to new features or sketches to existing features.
A sketch is something you create while editing. It can represent a new 
feature such as a new street centerline or parcel polygon. Sketches 
can also be shapes you draw to modify or reshape existing features 
such as a line drawn to split a polygon. Sketches are temporary and 
only exist in the memory of your computer. If the sketch represents 
an update or change to one of your layers, it is not committed back to 
your GIS data until you save your edits. Once you save your sketch 
becomes a true feature. This is why you should save often.

Chapter 7
[ 155 ]
With Snapping enabled, you can snap to the end, edge, midpoint, intersections, and 
vertex of other features as shown in the following screenshot:
From the Snapping drop-down, you can also enable and disable Snapping. Holding 
down your space bar will also temporarily disable Snapping as long as it is held down.
The following screenshot shows tools present in the Features tab:
The Features group contains tools for editing features. You access the Create 
Features pane by clicking on the Create button. The Create Features pane contains 
the feature templates used to create new features in your layers. The Modify button 
opens the Modify pane, which includes tools to change existing features, such as 
Move, Rotate, Split, and many more. Finally, it is the Delete button, which erases 
selected features or records.

Editing Spatial and Tabular Data
[ 156 ]
The Selection group includes the tools to select features interactively within your 
map, viewing attributes and clearing your selection. The Select tool includes five 
different shapes, which can be drawn to select features for editing as shown in the 
following screenshot:
Most of these are self-explanatory with the exception of Lasso. The Lasso select tool 
allows you to draw a freeform polygon shape. The drawing follows the movement 
of your mouse pointer as long as you hold the left mouse button down. Releasing the 
mouse button completes the shape.
The Tools group contains tools for modifying features. You will use them when you 
need to perform tasks such as splitting a parcel which has been subdivided into more 
than one parcel. There are also tools for splitting a line, editing vertices, moving a 
feature, and merging features.
The last group is Elevation. This contains tools for editing 3D features.
Creating new features
Creating a new feature is a very common editing task. It might add a new road or a 
new sewer manhole or a new stormwater detention pond. As new things are built, 
we need to add them to our GIS. Creating new features require a feature template.

Chapter 7
[ 157 ]
Feature templates
Feature templates define the properties required to create a new feature. This includes 
the target layer, default construction tool, default attribute values, and symbology.
These templates are tied to your map's contents. So for each layer in your map, you 
will have a matching feature template. If you symbolize a layer with unique values, 
graduated colors, or graduated symbols, you will have a feature template for each 
unique symbol associated with that layer. For example, if you symbolize a parcel 
layer based on its zoning classification and there are three zoning classes: residential, 
commercial, and industrial, you will have three feature templates for that layer.
When you add a layer to your map or adjust the symbology, your available feature 
templates are adjusted to match. You can also manually create feature templates, 
adjust the properties of existing templates and delete templates. This is all 
accomplished in the Manage Templates pane.
There are two types of feature templates within ArcGIS Pro, feature templates, and 
group templates. You have already been learning about feature templates, so now 
let's take a quick look at group templates. Although a feature template will create 
a new feature on a single layer, a group template will create multiple features on 
multiple layers based on the rules you define. Within the group template, you will 
define a primary feature template. The primary feature template drives the creation 
of other features.
Exercise 7A – creating new features
In this exercise, you will update several layers based on a plat you have been given 
for a new subdivision, which has been built in the City of Trippville. This is part of 
your normal duties as the city's GIS specialist. The plat is from a local surveyor and 
has been scanned.
Using the information shown in the plat, you will need to update the sewer system 
layers, road centerlines, and parcels.
Step 1 – opening your project and preparing to edit
In this step, you take some time to make sure that everything is ready to begin 
editing. You will open your project to verify that the layers you need to update are 
editable. You will ensure that there are not any warnings or messages that might cause 
problems while you update the data. You will also verify other editing option settings:
1.	 Open ArcGIS Pro.

Editing Spatial and Tabular Data
[ 158 ]
2.	 Using skills you have learned, open the Creating new features.aprx 
located in C:\Student\IntroArcPro\Chapter7.
When the project opens, you should see a single map that contains the layers 
you will be updating. It should look very similar to this:
Now that your project is open, you need to verify a few settings:
3.	 Click on the List By Data Source button in the Contents pane to verify the 
location of the source data for the layers in your map.
Question: What geodatabase is being referenced by the layers and 
where is it located?
__________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________
4.	 Right-click on the Parcels layer and select Properties.
5.	 Select Source from the pane on the left-hand side of the Layer properties 
window.
6.	 Scroll down in the right-hand side pane until you see Spatial Reference and 
expand it by clicking on the open arrow head located next to it. This will 
show you what coordinate system this layer is in.

Chapter 7
[ 159 ]
Question: What coordinate system is the parcels layer in?
_____________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________
7.	 Using that same method check the remainder of the layers within the map. 
See what coordinate system they are in.
Question: Are all your layers within the same coordinate system?
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
ArcGIS Pro will allow you to edit data that is in different coordinate systems. 
However, the recommended best practice is to have all data being edited 
within the same coordinate system. This helps avoid errors caused by using 
different transformations.
Now it is time to set up the symbology for the layers you will be editing. 
For the most part, the current symbology will work. However, the Public 
Works Director wants the new sewer lines entered with the correct size 
and material. To make that process more efficient, it would be good to have 
a feature template with those default values defined ahead of time. Since 
feature templates are linked to the layers in your Contents pane, you will 
change the symbology for the sewer lines to be based on the pipe's size 
and material.
Luckily, there is already a layer file, which has the symbology settings 
already defined. You will be able to import those settings from the layer 
file without having to configure the symbology for the sewer_lines layer 
from the beginning:
8.	 Select the sewer_lines layer in the Contents pane.
9.	 Select the APPEARANCE tab.
10.	 Click on the Import tool located in the Drawing group. This will open the 
Geoprocessing pane to the right side of the interface.
11.	 Click on the Browse button located at the end of Symbology Layer.
12.	 In the Symbology Layer window, click on Folders located in the left pane of 
the window.
13.	 Double-click on the Chapter7 folder.

Editing Spatial and Tabular Data
[ 160 ]
14.	  Click on the Sewer Lines.lyrx file and the Select button.
Your Geoprocessing pane should now look like this:
15.	 Once you have verified that everything is filled out correctly, click on Run.
16.	 When the process has completed, close the Geoprocessing pane.
You have just used a layer file to import pre-set symbology for your Sewer 
layer, which allows you to distinguish each sewer pipe's size and material. 
If for some reason this did not work, you can right-click on the existing 
Sewer layer and select Remove. Then, go to the Project pane and the Folders 
connection. In the Chapter7 folder, you can right-click on the Sewer Lines.
lyrx file and choose Add to Current Map.
ArcGIS Pro 1.1 seems to have an intermittent issue importing symbology 
settings based on two or more fields. If you happen to experience this, 
you may remove the existing sewer_lines layer and use the Add 
Data button on the MAP tab to add the sewer_lines.lyrx as a new 
layer with the correct symbology. Hopefully, Esri will address this in 
future versions.
You are almost ready to start editing. There are a couple of other settings you 
need to check:

Chapter 7
[ 161 ]
17.	 Click on the PROJECT tab in the ribbon and select Options.
18.	 Select Units and verify that the following settings are chosen. If they are not, 
then select the correct units:
°°
Distance Units: Foot_US
°°
Angular Units: Degrees Minutes Seconds
°°
Area Units: Square_Foot_US
°°
Location Units: Foot
°°
Direction Units: Quadrant Bearing
°°
All Others: Accept assigned values
19.	 Select Editing in the left-hand side pane of the Options window.
20.	 If needed, expand the Session section in the right-hand side pane.
21.	 Ensure that Automatically Save Edits is not enabled. Since you are new to 
ArcGIS Pro, you don't want edits to be saved until you have verified them to 
be correct.
22.	 Also make sure to save edits when saving a project is not enabled.
23.	 Feel free to examine the other Editing options that are available. Once you 
are done exploring, click on OK.
24.	 Click on the Back arrow located in the top-left corner of the Project window 
to return to the main ArcGIS Pro interface.
You have one last thing to verify. You need to make sure that Snapping 
is enabled and what will be snapped too. You also need to verify the 
snapping tolerance:
25.	 Click on the EDIT tab in the ribbon.
26.	 Click on the small drop-down arrow located below Snapping.
27.	 Select Snapping options.
28.	 Set your XY tolerance to 10 Map Units.
29.	 Set your Snap tip color to Mars Red and click on OK.
30.	 Click on the arrow below Snapping once again. Verify what snapping 
position options are enabled.
Question: What snapping position options are enabled?
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________

Editing Spatial and Tabular Data
[ 162 ]
You can change the snapping tolerance and snapping positions as needed 
while you edit. As a new user, you will need to change those settings 
frequently as you try to find a happy medium that will work in most cases. 
Once you figure out what works best for you, you will not need to change 
the tolerance as often. The snapping positions will be changed much more 
frequently because they depend largely on what you are editing:
31.	 Ensure that Snapping is enabled by clicking on the Snapping button on the 
EDIT tab.
32.	 Set your snapping positions to endpoint and edge by clicking on the small 
arrow below Snapping and selecting those options.
33.	 Save your project.
You are now ready to begin editing. You have taken the time to ensure that your 
editing environment has been properly set up.
Step 2 – adding your source data
The surveyor had provided you with a paper copy of the plat for the new 
subdivision. The plat shows the layout of the parcels, streets, sewer, and water 
features in the new subdivision. Luckily, one of your other staff members scanned 
and georeferenced the scanned plat, so you can easily add it to your map.
ArcGIS Pro 1.1 does not support georeferencing like ArcGIS for 
Desktop's ArcMap does with the georeferencing toolbar. This 
functionality is planned for a future release. For those not familiar with 
the term georeferencing, it simply means identifying the location of a 
feature in a real-world coordinate system such as WGS 84, which is a 
type of latitude and longitude used by GPS, or Universe Trans Mercator 
(UTM), or one of the many other real-world coordinate systems.
The following steps will help you to add a scanned georeferenced plat to your map:
1.	 Click on the MAP tab in the ribbon. Then, select Bookmarks.
2.	 Choose the New Subdivision 1 bookmark to zoom you the location of the 
new subdivision.
3.	 In the Project pane, expand Folders and the Chapter7 connection.
4.	 Right-click on the Forrest Park Subdivision.jpg and choose Add to 
Current Map.

Chapter 7
[ 163 ]
Your map should now look like this. Your zoom scale and display area may be 
slightly different depending on the size of your monitor and its resolution.
There is no need to have the imagery base-map visible at this time. It will only slow 
you down as you pan and zoom during editing. So, turn off the imagery layer by 
unchecking the box next to the layer.
You have just added the scanned plat as a layer to your map. This will allow you to 
use it as a guide to add new features and update your GIS database. This is just one 
example of a data source you can use. There are many other ways you may acquire 
new information to use in your GIS.
Step 3 – drawing a new sewer line
Now that you have the plat added to your map to use as a guide, you will start 
drawing new features. You will start with simple lines and points that make up the 
sewer system:
1.	 Zoom into the northeast corner of the new subdivision, so you can see where 
the new sewer line connects to the existing sewer line.
2.	 Click on the EDIT tab in the ribbon.
3.	 Click on the Create button to open the Create Features pane on the right-
hand side of the interface.

Editing Spatial and Tabular Data
[ 164 ]
Question: What templates are available?
_____________________________________
_____________________________________
You will now add a new sewer line and manhole by tracing the features 
shown in the plat. Before you do that though, you will examine a feature 
template.
4.	 Right-click on the 8 inch PVC template in the Create Features pane and 
select Properties. This should open the Template Properties window for 
that template.
Question: What are some of the properties associated with the template?
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
5.	 Under Attributes look at the values next to Pipe Size and Material.
Question: What values are assigned to those fields for this template and 
where do you think they came from?
_______________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________
6.	 Since you are adding new pipes that were recently constructed, you will set 
the value for the Condition field to good for this template. Click in the cell 
next to condition and select Good from the drop-down list.
7.	 Click on OK to close the Template Properties window.
The reason you were presented with a drop-down list for the condition 
field is that it had a coded value domain assigned to that field. A 
coded value domain is a list of predefined accepted values, which can 
be entered into a field. When editing, you can only select a value that 
is included in the domain. This helps increase editing efficiency and 
reduces errors.

Chapter 7
[ 165 ]
Now that you have configured your feature template for the sewer lines, 
you are ready to begin drawing new features:
8.	 Select the 8 inch PVC template in the Create Features pane. You know to 
use this template because your development ordinance requires this size 
and pipe material for all new residential subdivisions.
9.	 Click on the end of the existing 8 inch ductile iron pipe near the intersection 
of the existing GA HWY 50 and the new Oak Place. You may need to verify 
that snapping is enabled if your cursor does not automatically snap to the 
end of the existing pipe.
10.	 Move your mouse to the manhole located to the west at the intersection of 
the new Oak Place and Pine Drive, as illustrated in the following screenshot 
and double–click:
If you forget to double-click or move your mouse away too fast and 
only single-click, you can press your F2 key to finish the sketch.

Editing Spatial and Tabular Data
[ 166 ]
You have just drawn one of the new sewer lines that were constructed for the new 
subdivision. Drawing the new features is only part of creating a new feature. Next, 
you need to update the attributes associated with the feature. The power of GIS 
comes from the combination of both spatial and attribute data, which allows you and 
others to ask your map questions and get answers. Those answers are only as good 
as the data. So, it is just as important to keep your features attributes up to date as it 
is to draw them correctly.
Step 4 – update attributes
Now you will update the attributes for the new feature you just created. Attributes 
are the information about that feature. They will vary from one feature to another 
and from one layer to another.
The following steps will guide you through how to update attributes:
1.	 Click on the Attributes button located in the Selection group of the EDIT tab 
in the ribbon. This will open the Attributes pane on the right-hand side of 
the interface.
The values for Pipe Size, Material, and Condition have already 
been assigned by the template you used to draw the line.
2.	 Click in the cell to the right of LINEID and type 1200. This field is used to 
identify each sewer line in the system, which can then be linked to a work 
order management system to track the maintenance history of each sewer 
line segment.
Challenge
Using the skills you just learned, draw the remaining sewer lines shown on the plat 
for the new subdivision. Assign the new pipes you draw sequential LINEID numbers. 
You will need to create individual pipe segments between each of the manholes 
shown on the source plat you are using to digitize the locations of the sewer lines.
Step 5 – drawing the manholes
Now that you have drawn the sewer lines, you need to add the new manholes as 
well. A manhole is generally located at the end of each pipe segment.

Chapter 7
[ 167 ]
To draw the manhole follow these steps:
1.	 Select the Create Features pane using the tab at the bottom of the right-hand 
side pane in the ArcGIS Pro interface.
2.	 Click on the Manhole template and ensure that the Point tool is select 
underneath the template name.
3.	 Click on the west end of the first pipe you drew in step 3 to add a new 
manhole.
4.	 Click on the Attributes tab located next to the Create Features tab.
You should now see all the attribute fields associated with the manhole layer. 
You do not have all the information to fill out all these now. However, you 
can update a couple of them by:
5.	 Clicking in the cell next to Condition and select Good from the drop-down list.
6.	 If you completed the earlier-mentioned challenge, continue to add the other 
manholes shown on the plat using the same process, setting the condition for 
each new manhole to Good.
7.	 After you are done with adding new manholes, turn off the Forrest Park 
Subdivision plat in the Contents pane to view your handy work.
If you completed the challenge and added all the new manholes, your map 
should now look like this:

Editing Spatial and Tabular Data
[ 168 ]
8.	 If you are happy with the new sewer features you have added, click on the 
EDIT tab and the Save button in the Manage Edits group. This will save 
your edits back to the Trippville_GIS geodatabase.
When editing, your edits are only shown on your computer and stored 
in the computer's memory. They are not committed to the source 
for the layer, so others can see them until you save your edits. Until 
they are saved, all edits are considered a sketch, which no one else 
can see. This also means that if your computer crashes or ArcGIS Pro 
fails for any reason before you save, all your edits will be lost and 
unrecoverable. So if you do not have the auto-save function enabled 
within the ArcGIS Pro options, make sure to save often.
Step 6 – adding the roads
Now that you have learned how to add simple new features, it is time to do 
something a bit more challenging. You will add the road centerlines and rights-
of-way. The first step will be to digitize the street centerlines and then use those 
to construct the rights-of-way.
The following steps will guide you through how to add roads to your map:
1.	 Turn the Forrest Park Subdivision plat back on, so it is visible once again.
2.	 Turn off the manhole and sewer_lines layers.
3.	 Turn on the Street_Centerlines layer.
4.	 Zoom into the northeast corner of the new subdivision where you first 
started drawing the new sewer lines in the last step.
5.	 Click on the Create Features tab in the pane on the right-hand side of the 
interface.
6.	 Select the Street_Centerlines template and ensure that the line tool 
underneath is active.
7.	 To draw your first centerline segment, start at the point where the plat 
shows Oak Place intersecting GA HWY 50. Click at that intersection to 
start drawing your first street segment.

Chapter 7
[ 169 ]
8.	 Move your mouse pointer to the location the plat shows Oak Place 
intersecting with Pine Drive. It should be in the same place as one of the new 
manholes you digitized earlier. Double-click at this location to draw the end 
of your first segment. Remember that if you only single-click, you can use the 
F2 key to finish the sketch.
9.	 Now edit the attributes for this segment, as shown here:
°°
ST_NAME = Oak Place
°°
RD_Class = City
10.	 Now you will draw your next segment by once again selecting the Street_
Centerlines template and then clicking on the end point for the segment you 
just completed.
11.	 Move your mouse pointer along the road centerline shown on the plat 
and single-click at a location just before it starts to curve. This should be a 
location near the O in Oak.
12.	 To draw the curve, you will use the Arc Segment tool. Look toward the 
bottom of the ArcGIS Pro interface for this tool on the toolbar that appeared 
when you started drawing the new street centerline segment as shown in the 
following screenshot:
13.	 This tool allows you to trace three points to define the arc in the centerline. 
Single-click just once past the O in Oak where the curve begins. Then, click 
near the estimated middle of the curve to define the center of the arc. Finally, 
click near the estimated end of the curve where the road straightens out once 
more to define the end of the arc. Reference the image after the following task 
14 if you need help.

Editing Spatial and Tabular Data
[ 170 ]
You have just drawn a curve that is embedded in the centerline for the road. 
This provides a truer representation of the road's location and geometry than 
digitizing a series of small straight segments would have. You still need to 
finish this segment:
14.	 Click on the Line tool located on the small toolbar where you found the Arc 
Segment tool. This will allow you to continue drawing the segment for this 
portion of Oak Place.
15.	 The segment should automatically start from the end of the arc you just 
drew. Move your mouse pointer to the estimated intersection of Oak Place 
and the small unnamed road that runs northwest and double-click to end 
the sketch.
16.	 Edit the attributes for this segment the same way you did the first.
17.	 Save your edits.
If you do not get the road to draw correctly the first time, do not be too 
concerned. It takes practice to become proficient using the drawing tools 
within ArcGIS Pro. As the saying goes, practice makes perfect.
18.	 Using the skills you have just learned, continue drawing the remainder of the 
street centerlines, as shown on the plat. Once completed your map should 
look very similar to the following screenshot if you turn off the Forrest Park 
Subdivision plat:

Chapter 7
[ 171 ]
Now to add the rights of way for the roads. You could do this the same way 
you drew the roads. However, since the rights of way are based on the road 
centerlines, it is often easier to use the centerlines as a framework to construct 
your rights of way.
If you were using Esri's older ArcMap application, you could simply use the 
Copy Parallel or Buffer Edit tools to accomplish this. However, ArcGIS Pro 
1.1 does not currently support those functions. So, instead you can use the 
Trace tool, which is located on the same toolbar you used to draw the arcs:
19.	 Click on the Snapping dropdown and enable Intersection Snapping since 
your right of way will start at the intersection of the existing right of way for 
GA HWY 50.
20.	 Click on the RW template. This is the template for the rights of way.
21.	 Select the Trace tool located underneath the template. It should be the last 
button in the list of tools.

Editing Spatial and Tabular Data
[ 172 ]
22.	 Click on where the centerline of Oak Place intersects the right of way for 
GA HWY 50.
23.	 After you have clicked on that intersection, press the letter O for offset. The 
Trace Options window should appear in the middle of your screen.
24.	 Set the options as shown in the following screenshot and click on OK:
25.	 Move your mouse pointer along the centerline of Oak Place until the right of 
way you are drawing intersects with the right of way for the small unnamed 
road shown on the plat. Double-click once you reach that point.
You have just drawn the northern right of way boundary for Oak Place. Now 
you will continue to draw the right of way for the small unnamed road using 
a different method. You have been provided with information on the specific 
measurements for the right of way for the small unnamed road, so you will 
use that to draw the right of way:
26.	 Ensure that the RW template is still selected with the Line tool active.
27.	 Click on the end of the northern right of way you just completed for Oak 
Place to start your sketch.

Chapter 7
[ 173 ]
28.	 Move your mouse to the northwest along the right of way shown on the 
Forrest Park Subdivision plat and right before you get to the start of the 
curve right-click to expose the menu as shown in the following screenshot:
29.	 Select Direction/Distance, so you can enter the specific bearing and distance 
for the right of way segment.
30.	 Enter a Direction of N49-52-25W and a Distance of 105 ft and press your 
Enter key.
31.	 Locate the End Point Arc Segment tool on the toolbar, which contained the 
other arc and line tool you have used in the past. You may need to click on 
the small drop-down arrow located next to the Arc Segment tool you used 
in the past.

Editing Spatial and Tabular Data
[ 174 ]
The End Point Arc Segment tool allows you to specify a starting and ending 
point for the arc and then a radius. In this exercise, you will just match it 
to the scanned plat. However, if you press the R key after identifying the 
starting and ending point, you can specify a specific radius:
32.	 Click on the end of the last segment you drew. Then, move to the end 
of the curve on the southwest side of the unnamed street.
33.	 Move your mouse pointer to the approximate center of the curve. 
The following screenshot illustration will help you:
34.	 Activate the Line tool once again and move your mouse pointer along the 
southwestern right of way for the unnamed road until you get near the 
intersection with the continuing right of way for Oak Place and then right-
click again to display the context menu.
A context menu is any menu that displays when you right-
click within the applications interface. These menus will 
vary depending on the location of your mouse pointer when 
you right-click.
35.	 Select Direction/Distance from the context menu and set the Direction to 
S49-52-25E and a Distance of 105 ft and press your Enter key. You have 
now completed drawing the right of way for the small unnamed road. If it 
does not match to the scanned plat perfectly that is OK.

Chapter 7
[ 175 ]
36.	 Continue drawing the remainder of the northern right of way for Oak Place 
using the same method you did for the first section. You need to go all the 
way around till you intersect back to the right of way with GA HWY 50. It 
should look like this when you are done:
Now that you have drawn the outside right of way for Oak Place, you need 
to draw the inside right of way to complete the process. This is what you will 
do next:
37.	 Zoom back to the area you were in when you started drawing the northern 
outer right of way for Oak Place.
38.	 Select the RW template in the Create Features pane. Activate the Trace tool.
39.	 Click on the intersection of the Oak Place centerline and the right of 
way for GA HWY 50.
40.	 Move your mouse pointer a short distance along the centerline of 
Oak Place and right-click.
41.	 Select Trace Options from the context menu that appears. This does 
the same thing as pressing the O button.
42.	 Set the trace options to the same settings you used previously.
43.	 Start moving your mouse pointer along the centerline of Oak Place. You 
should note that ArcGIS Pro is drawing the northern right of way again. 
Press your Tab key to shift it to the southern right of way.
44.	 Move your mouse pointer along the centerline of Oak Place until the new 
right of way line reaches the intersection of the southern right of way for 
Oak Place and the eastern right of way for Pine Drive.

Editing Spatial and Tabular Data
[ 176 ]
45.	 Using the skills you have now learned, draw the remaining rights of way 
lines shown on the Forrest Park Subdivision plat. Make sure to save your 
edits often.
46.	 Save your project. If you are not continuing to the Challenge, close 
ArcGIS Pro.
You have now seen how to add new features to layers within ArcGIS Pro and how to 
update the attributes for those features.
Challenge
Using the skills you have learned throughout the book, update the water lines and 
fire hydrants using the information shown on the Forrest Park Subdivision plat. Note 
that these layers are not in your map, so they will need to be added. The water lines 
in the new subdivision are all 6 inch PVC pipes.
Editing your schema
As the needs of your organization grow and change, it is important for your GIS to 
keep up. This means you will need to make changes to the database schema.
So what does the word schema mean? Simply put, it means the structure of a 
database. So schema is not just a GIS term, but it is also a term used for other 
databases as well. In the case of a GIS database, schema refers to things such as what 
feature classes are stored in the database, what attribute fields are linked to those 
feature classes, what domains are included in the database, are any tables or feature 
classes related, and so on.
ArcGIS Pro allows you to make some changes to your GIS data schema. It will allow 
you to add new feature classes, add fields and create domains. It does have some 
limitations currently such as you cannot create a topology or geometric network. 
Hopefully, as ArcGIS Pro continues to mature, those limitations will disappear.
Adding a field
Sometimes, changing your schema is as simple as adding a new field to an attribute 
table. A field is a column within a database table. The actual act of adding a field 
within ArcGIS Pro is not overly complicated, especially when compared to editing 
the spatial data. However, it does require some thought.
When adding a new field, you need to think through the properties that will be 
associated with that field such as name and field type.

Chapter 7
[ 177 ]
Field name
In a database table each field must have a unique name. That name cannot include 
spaces or special characters. Underscores are allowed. The allowed length of the field 
name will depend on the type of database. Is it a dBase, Access, or SQL Server table? 
Each of these have their own limitations.
As a rule of thumb, I have learned that keeping my field names limited to seven to 
eight characters works best. This will prevent field names from getting shortened if 
you export the data to a different format, which does not support the name length 
of your native database. This often happens when your GIS data is stored as a 
geodatabase, but you export to a Shapefile. Shapefiles store attributes in a dBase 
format, which does not support long field names. So, a field that is named 
parcel_indentification_number in your geodatabase may get renamed to 
parcel_in when exported to a Shapefile.
Alias
An alias is a more descriptive name for a field. An alias can contain special characters 
such as spaces and does not have the length restrictions associated with the field 
name. Aliases allow users to better understand the purpose of a field. By default, the 
alias is what is displayed when a table is opened in ArcGIS Pro.
Field data types
When you add fields to database, you must decide what type of data will be stored 
in that field. This is the field data type. There are several data types depending on the 
type of database you are working with. Here is a list of some of the most common 
data types you can use in ArcGIS Pro:
Name
Description
Comments
Text or String
Stores alphanumeric data. Fields 
can be up to 254 characters long. 
The default length in ArcGIS Pro is 
50 characters.
Does not provide the best 
database performance 
compared to other field 
types. Make sure to set the 
size as small as possible to 
conserve storage space.

Editing Spatial and Tabular Data
[ 178 ]
Name
Description
Comments
Integer (Long and 
Short)
Stores whole numbers meaning 
no decimal places. Difference 
between long and short integers 
varies somewhat depending on 
the database but generally short 
integers can store values between 
-33,000 to 33,000. Long integers will 
store values between -2.1 Billion to 
2.1 Billion approximately.
Provides the best 
performance of all field 
types. This makes them 
the most optimum type 
to use if overall database 
performance is a concern.
Float or Single
Stores decimal values out to 
approximately six to eight decimal 
places depending on the database.
Provides median database 
performance.
Double
Stores decimal values with 15 or 
more decimal places depending on 
the database.
Performance similar to 
Float.
Date
Stores date and time. Format will 
depend on database.
BLOB
Binary Large Object (BLOB) field. 
These are used to store data which 
does not fit one of the other field 
types. Not all databases support 
BLOBS.
Provides the worst 
performance of any field 
type. Can cause issues if 
exported to a database that 
does not support this type.
Raster
Stores images or pictures directly 
in the database. It is a specialized 
BLOB field.
Same issues as BLOB.
GUID
Global Unique Identifier (GUID) 
Provides a unique identifying value 
to all records and tables within the 
database that have this field type.
GUIDS are required if 
you plan to allow mobile 
or offline editing or use 
database replication.
Exercise 7B – adding a field and populating 
values
The Public Works Director has asked you to determine how long each road segment 
is in miles for a project he is working on. While you do have the road centerline data, 
it is not attributed with length in miles. So you will need to add a new field to store 
the length in miles and then calculate that value for each segment.

Chapter 7
[ 179 ]
Step 1 – adding the field
In this step, you will open your project and then add the new field, which will store 
the length of each road segment in miles.
1.	 Open ArcGIS Pro and the Create New Features project you used in the 
last exercise.
2.	 In the Project pane, expand Databases so you can see the two databases 
connected to this project.
3.	 Expand the Trippville_GIS database and the Base feature dataset.
4.	 Right-click on the Street_Centerlines feature class to expose the 
context menu.
5.	 Click on Design and select Fields as shown in the following screenshot:
6.	 A new tab should open in the main view area of the interface where the 
map was before. This new view shows the current attribute fields and their 
properties for the Street_Centerline feature class. At the bottom of the 
existing fields, you should see a row that says Click here to add a field.

Editing Spatial and Tabular Data
[ 180 ]
Question: What attribute fields are associated with the 
Street_Centerline feature class and what field types are they?
__________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________
7.	 Click on the Click here to add a field.
8.	 Name the field Len_Mi.
9.	 Then, click on the Alias cell and give the new field an alias of Length in miles.
10.	 Then, click on the Data Type cell and set it to a Float. You are using a 
single cell because the Director is looking for length in miles only out to 
two decimals.
11.	 Leave all other settings the same. The table should now look like this:
12.	 Once you have verified your new field has been added correctly, click on the 
Save button located on the Fields tab in the ribbon.
13.	 Close the Fields view.
You have just added a new field to the Street_Centerlines feature class, which 
you can use to store the length of each road segment in miles. However, that field is 
empty. You need to populate it.

Chapter 7
[ 181 ]
Step 2 – populating the field using the field 
calculator
In this step, you will populate the length of each road segment in miles into the field 
you just created. You could do this manually for each segment using some of the 
editing skills you have already learned. That would be very time consuming. There 
is a much more efficient way.
One of the fields you identified as being associated with the street centerlines 
was Shape_Length. So, you already have values showing the length of each road 
segment. It is in feet though so to populate your new field with the correct values in 
miles you need to convert feet into miles. ArcGIS Pro includes a tool called the field 
calculator, which will allow you to convert feet into miles, while at the same time, 
populate that value into the table for all features in the feature class:
1.	 If needed, activate the Map view in ArcGIS Pro by clicking on the tab at the 
top of the View area.
2.	 Right-click on the Street_Centerlines layer in the Content pane.
3.	 Select Attribute Table to open the Table window at the bottom of the interface.
4.	 Right-click on the new field you created. It should be shown using the alias 
you specified when you created the new field, Length in miles. Also note that 
the field is Null. Null which means it is empty. It has no values stored.
5.	 Select Calculate Field. This will open the Geoprocessing pane in the 
right-hand side of the interface.
6.	 Within the Fields box, double-click in Shape_Length. This will insert 
the name of the field with the correct syntax into the expression box located 
below the Fields and Helpers.
7.	 Click on the / symbol located below the Helpers box to add that to the 
expression. That symbol will divide the value stored in the Shape_Length 
field for each record by a value you will specify next.
8.	 In the expression box, type 5280 after the / symbol. That is the number of 
feet in a mile. Your expression should look like this:
9.	 Once you verify your expression, click on the Run button located at the 
bottom of the Geoprocessing pane.
10.	 When the process is complete, close the Geoprocessing pane.

Editing Spatial and Tabular Data
[ 182 ]
When the Calculate Field is complete, you should now see the field you created 
filled with values. If you scroll through the table, you will see that it calculated 
a length in miles for all the records in the table. The Calculate Field tool is very 
powerful and efficient way to populate a field.
If you are not proceeding to the next exercise, save your project and close ArcGIS Pro.
Importing a new feature class
Adding a field is just one change you can make to the schema of your GIS database. 
You can also add entirely new feature classes by creating a new one from scratch or 
importing it from another data source.
It is not uncommon to have data stored in other formats and locations, which would 
be beneficial in your GIS. Moving all those different data sources into a single GIS 
database makes them easier to use, find, and manage. ArcGIS Pro contains tools for 
importing, exporting, and converting data. This allows you to build a comprehensive 
GIS database, which can be integrated with other solutions.
Exercise 7C – importing a Shapefile
A local consultant was hired to locate all the water valves within the City of 
Trippville. They provided the Public Works Director with a Shapefile containing the 
water valves they located and attributes collected.
You now need to import this Shapefile into the City's geodatabase, so it is stored in 
the same location as the other feature classes that make up the City's water system.
Step 1 – open the project and add a layer
In this step, you will open the project you have been working with throughout this 
chapter. Then, you will add the Shapefile, which was provided to the Director from 
the consultant that contains the water valve data:
1.	 Open ArcGIS Pro and the Creating New Features project.
2.	 On the MAP tab in the ribbon click on the Add Data button.
3.	 Click on Folders in the left-hand side pane.
4.	 Double-click on Chapter7.
5.	 Select Water_Valves.shp and then click on the Select button.
You have now added the data collected by the consultant to your map. Now you 
need to export that to your geodatabase.

Chapter 7
[ 183 ]
Step 2 – export to geodatabase
Now you will export the Shapefile to a feature class in the City of Trippville's 
geodatabase. You will store the newly imported feature class in the Water feature 
dataset along with the other water system related feature classes:
1.	 Right-click on the Water_Valves layer you just added to your map.
2.	 In the displayed context menu, go down to data and select Export Features, 
as shown in the following image:
3.	 The Geoprocessing pane should open with the Copy Features tool. Click on 
the browse button located to the right of the Output Feature Class.
4.	 Click on Databases in the left pane of the Output Feature Class window.
5.	 Double-click on the Trippville_GIS geodatabase.
6.	 Double-click on the Water feature dataset.
7.	 In the cell next to Name type Water_Valves and click on Save.
8.	 Then, click on the Run button at the bottom of the Geoprocessing pane.

Editing Spatial and Tabular Data
[ 184 ]
When the Copy Features tool completes its run, you should see a second 
Water_Valves layer added to your map. This new layer is now using a new 
feature class that was created in your geodatabase as its source. You will now 
verify that:
9.	 Click on the List By Data Source button located at the top of the 
Contents pane.
10.	 Verify that you see a Water_Valves layer listed under the 
Trippville_GIS.gdb workspace and one in the Chapter7 folder.
11.	 Right-click on the Water_Valves layer in the Chapter7 folder and click 
on Remove. This removes the layer, which was based on the original 
Shapefile from the map, so only the one which references the City's 
primary geodatabase remains.
12.	 Save your project and close ArcGIS Pro.
You have just converted a Shapefile to a geodatabase feature class and verified that 
the conversion was successful. Importing the data that was in the Shapefile into your 
geodatabase created a new feature class, which is also a change to the schema.
Summary
The world is not a stagnant place so neither should your GIS. It must be able to keep 
up with the changes that happen all around us. In this chapter, you learned that 
ArcGIS Pro has many powerful tools, which allow you to keep your GIS current 
based on those changing needs and features.
You learned how to add new features using various editing tools within ArcGIS Pro. 
You were able to create new features and update their attributes to reflect their true 
nature. You experienced how feature templates can be used to create new features 
more efficiently by redefining values.
You also learned how to make changes to your database schema. You added a new 
field to an existing feature class and used the Calculate Field tool to populate that 
field with values. You also learned how you can import data into your geodatabase, 
so it is easier to access and manage.

[ 185 ]
Geoprocessing
You have learned that ArcGIS Pro has some powerful tools for visualizing and 
maintaining GIS data. But what about analyzing that information? Can it help you 
identify the land owners you need to contact along a road that will be repaired or 
get a count of customers within a given area? ArcGIS Pro has the tools to help you 
answer these types of questions and a whole lot more.
Answering questions such as these are done using geoprocessing tools within 
ArcGIS Pro. So what is geoprocessing? Put simply, it is the manipulation of data 
used inside ArcGIS. Geoprocessing tools can analyze data or convert data from 
one format to another or add an attribute field to a table or project data from 
one coordinate system to another. The sky is the limit on what you can do with 
geoprocessing tools.
In addition to the tools included in ArcGIS Pro, you can purchase extensions that add 
more capability to ArcGIS Pro. The geoprocessing framework also provides avenues 
to create your own custom tools using ModelBuilder, Python, and ArcObjects. 
You will learn more about ModelBuilder and Python in later chapters.
In this chapter, you will learn:
•	
What determines which geoprocessing tools you have
•	
How to access geoprocessing tools
•	
How to understand the analysis process
•	
How to use some of the most common geoprocessing tools for analysis
One thing to keep in mind as you begin to use geoprocessing tools is that most of 
them create new data. This means that even if you choose the wrong tool or use a 
bad setting in the tool, your original data is protected in most cases. This provides 
a level of protection and helps to put your mind at ease knowing the chance of 
damaging your data by doing the wrong thing is greatly decreased.

Geoprocessing
[ 186 ]
What determines which tools you can use?
There are two things that determine what geoprocessing tools will be available to 
you in ArcGIS Pro. The first is your licensing level. The second is what extensions 
you might have. Let's take a look at these two items and their impact on the 
geoprocessing tools that will be available for your use.
Licensing levels
If you remember from Chapter 1, Introducing ArcGIS Pro, ArcGIS Pro has three 
different licensing levels: Basic, Standard, and Advanced. The license level you 
have will directly impact the geoprocessing tools you will have access too.
The Basic level is the most limiting license level with the least amount of 
geoprocessing tools. With this level, you will be able to access simple analysis tools 
such as Buffer, Union, and Intersect. You will not be able to use tools that allow you 
to find the closest feature in another layer or that erase overlapping areas between 
two or more layers.
The Standard level includes a few more geoprocessing tools in addition to all the 
ones available at the Basic level. Many of these are focused on data management 
and maintenance. For example, the Standard level includes geoprocessing tools for 
creating relationship classes within a geodatabase. Standard also includes tools for 
managing an SDE geodatabase, such as tools that allow you to create a new database 
user or reconcile a version. More tools for creating and managing topologies and 
geometric networks will be added to future releases.
The Advanced license level has the greatest number of geoprocessing tools. 
It includes all the tools found in the Basic and Standard licenses plus additional 
analysis tools. The Advanced license will allow you to locate the nearest feature to 
another feature or calculate the distances between points. It also has tools that allow 
you to erase areas of overlap between two or more layer. These are just a couple of 
examples of analysis tools you will only find in the Advanced licensing level.
Here is a comparison of the number of geoprocessing tools found in the Basic and 
Advanced licensing levels of ArcGIS Pro. The Standard license's level will fall 
somewhere in between these two:
Basic
Advanced
Analysis
15
25
Cartography
0
7
Conversion
28
32
Data Management
206
265

Chapter 8
[ 187 ]
Basic
Advanced
Editing
0
12
Geocoding
7
7
Linear Referencing
7
7
Multidimension
8
8
Server
8
8
Space time pattern mining
4
4
Spatial Statistics
23
24
Total
306
399
Each licensing level has other limitations besides just which geoprocessing tools are 
available. You should check Esri's ArcGIS for Desktop Functionality Matrix to see a 
complete listings of the differences between the licensing levels. ArcGIS Pro will be 
slightly different as not all the functionality found in ArcGIS for Desktop has been 
ported into ArcGIS Pro. You can view the functionality matrix by going to http://
www.esri.com/~/media/Files/Pdfs/library/brochures/pdfs/arcgis1021-
desktop-functionality-matrix.pdf.
Extensions for ArcGIS Pro
Esri also has several extensions for ArcGIS Pro. These are included when you 
purchase the associated ArcGIS for Desktop extension. Extensions are add-ons for 
the core ArcGIS Pro product that provide extended functionality to all licensing 
levels. Each extension has a focused area of increased functionality that includes 
additional geoprocessing tools.
There are currently six different extensions that have been developed for ArcGIS Pro. 
Eventually, all the extensions that have been developed for ArcGIS for Desktop will 
also be ported to ArcGIS Pro. The current ArcGIS Pro extensions include:
•	
Spatial Analyst
•	
3D Analyst
•	
Network Analyst
•	
Geostatistical Analyst
•	
Data Reviewer
•	
Workflow Manager
The name of each extension helps to identify its purpose. To use these extensions, 
not only do you need to have purchased them but a license must also be assigned to 
the user in ArcGIS Online or Portal for ArcGIS. We will take a quick look at the first 
three extensions, which are the most commonly used.

Geoprocessing
[ 188 ]
Spatial Analyst
The Spatial Analyst extension is primarily used to perform spatial analysis using 
raster-based data, though it does have some vector analysis capability. Operations 
you perform with the Spatial Analyst extension include: terrain analysis with a 
digital elevation model (DEM), calculate slopes, determine watersheds, perform 
hydrological analysis, classify images, and more.
The Spatial Analyst extension includes more than 170 geoprocessing tools, which are 
found in a toolbox with the same name as the extension. These geoprocessing tools 
are organized into 20 different toolsets within the toolbox.

Chapter 8
[ 189 ]
3D Analyst
The 3D Analyst extension allows you to work with and analyze 3D data within 
ArcGIS Pro. It has many tools in common with Spatial Analyst. The big difference is 
3D Analyst is designed to work primarily with 3D vector data as opposed to raster 
data. It does have some ability to create and analyze raster data but that is not its 
strong suit. It is not uncommon to use 3D Analyst and Spatial Analyst together. 
For example, you might take 3D vector data such as elevation contours and use 3D 
Analyst to create a DEM for additional analysis with the Spatial Analyst extension.
3D Analyst allows you to work with many 3D datasets including triangulated 
irregular networks (TIN), lidar LAS datasets, and standard data formats. If your 
data does not have an elevation or height associated with it, 3D Analyst can drape 
your 2D data over a surface and then use the surface to calculate an elevation for 
your features in relation to the draped surface.
The 3D Analyst extension includes just over 100 geoprocessing tools grouped in 11 
toolsets. The 3D Analyst extension for ArcGIS Pro 1.1 does not support the display 
of a terrain dataset; however, it does allow for the creation of those datasets by the 
included geoprocessing tools. It is believed that future versions of ArcGIS Pro will 
fully support terrain datasets.

Geoprocessing
[ 190 ]
Network Analyst
The Network Analyst extension has tools for creating and analyzing network 
datasets. A network dataset is a collection of linear features that are connected 
by nodes which allow for bi-directional flow. These are typically associated with 
transportation-related networks such as roads or railroads or sidewalks or bike 
paths. These typically are not used for utilities as those normally are single-direction 
flow networks.
With Network Analyst, you can calculate the best routes for vehicles, determine 
service areas based on drive time requirements, find the nearest features along the 
network, and more. So you might use this extension to help site a new fire station 
based on the drive time coverage of existing fire stations.
The Network Analyst extension for ArcGIS Pro currently includes 20 geoprocessing 
tools organized in three toolsets.

Chapter 8
[ 191 ]
Exercise 8A – determining the license level 
and extension
As you have just learned, the license level of ArcGIS Pro and extensions you have 
been assigned will impact what you have the ability to do in ArcGIS Pro. So it is 
important to know what license level and extensions you have to work with.
In this short exercise, you will determine what license level you have and what 
extensions, if any, you have been assigned from within ArcGIS Pro. If you happen 
to be the administrator for your organization, you can also log in to ArcGIS Online 
or Portal for ArcGIS to determine what licenses have been assigned to each user. 
However, not everyone has administrative rights so it is important to know how 
you can determine this from ArcGIS Pro.
Step 1 – open ArcGIS Pro
The first step is to open ArcGIS Pro and then determine what license level you have 
available:
1.	 Open ArcGIS Pro as you have done in past exercises.
2.	 Click on About ArcGIS Pro located in the lower-left corner of the Open a 
recent project starting window.
The About ArcGIS Pro window shows you what version of ArcGIS Pro you are using. 
It also allows you to check to see if there are any software updates for ArcGIS Pro.
Question: What version of ArcGIS Pro are you using? 
________________________________________________
________________________________________________
Step 2 – determining the license level and extension
Now you will see what license level you have been assigned and if any extensions 
have also been assigned to you:
1.	 Click on Licensing in the left side pane.
2.	 Review what licenses are available to you. The section will tell you what 
license level is available and the middle section what extensions have been 
assigned to you.

Geoprocessing
[ 192 ]
Question: What license level of ArcGIS Pro do you have? 
__________________________________________________
__________________________________________________
Question: What extensions, if any, can you use?
__________________________________________________
__________________________________________________
3.	 Close ArcGIS Pro once you have answered the preceding questions.
Now you know what you have to work with when trying to perform analysis within 
ArcGIS Pro.
The analysis process
Analysis normally starts with a question. The question can be a simple one, such as: 
what is the total length of roads within the city? They can also be very complex, such 
as: I need to know where the best place is to locate my new business within the city 
so that it has a water and sewer service, is near major roads, and is in a location that 
will get business customers during the day and families in the evening.
These questions start you on the analysis process. This process is most often not linear. 
You will find that once you answer the initial question, it leads to other questions that 
start the process all over again. So the general analysis process looks like this:

Chapter 8
[ 193 ]
The initial question should cause you to ask other questions as well. The question 
period establishes the specifications of what needs to be answered and what data 
you will need to answer the question.
Once you know exactly what question you are trying to answer, you need to begin 
gathering the data you will need to perform the analysis. As you gather the data, you 
need to evaluate it. Does it have all the information you need? Is it in the format you 
need? Are the units the correct ones to answer the questions? These are all examples 
of things you need to consider as you gather the data you will use for your analysis.
Next, you will need to prepare your data for analysis. This may include simplifying 
it by clipping it to a specific area, projecting it to a different coordinate system, 
converting data formats, merging layers, generalizing information, or updating it.
Once you have prepared your data, you are then ready to begin your analysis. 
This can often require the use of multiple geoprocessing tools along with other 
tools such as selecting features based on attributes or locations.
After you have completed your analysis, you will need to present your findings. 
You can do that by creating a map and layout as you have already learned. ArcGIS 
Pro 1.2 is also going to allow you to create charts and graphs to display your results. 
This functionality is not supported in the current ArcGIS Pro 1.1 version.
Preparing data for analysis
As you gather and evaluate data for analysis, it is not unusual for the data to need 
some preparation work to get it into a state you can use for your analysis. For 
example, you may download data from ArcGIS Online that is in a different coordinate 
system than the primary one you use for your data. So you would need to project the 
downloaded data to the coordinate system you use for the rest of your data.
Common data preparation tasks include simplifying data, standardizing 
units, merging layers, and updating the data. So some of the most widely used 
geoprocessing tools to perform these tasks are:
•	
Clip
•	
Dissolve
•	
Project
•	
Append
•	
Merge
These tools are available at all licensing levels.

Geoprocessing
[ 194 ]
The Clip tool
The Clip tool is used to extract data based on the boundary of other data. For 
example, if you wanted to determine which portions of streets were located in the 
city limits, you could use the Clip tool to cut out the parts of the streets that are 
inside the city limits to their own layer. The Clip tool acts like a cookie cutter.
The Clip tool is found in the Analysis toolbox and the Extract toolset. It can be used 
to clip points, lines, or polygons. However, the clipping layer must be a polygon. 
Here is an example of the Clip tool in action:
In this example, you are trying to isolate the portions of the creeks and streams that 
are located inside the city limits. The creek and stream layer contains the location of 
all of them in the entire county. So you have clipped them using the city limits layer, 
which is a polygon. The result is a new layer that contains only those portions of the 
streams and creeks which are located inside the city limits.
The Dissolve tool
The Dissolve tool is used to simplify or generalize a data layer based on a common 
attribute value. So, for example, if you had a parcel layer that showed each parcel and 
each parcel was coded with its designated zoning classification but you wanted to 
know the total amount of area for each zoning classification within the city, you could 
use the Dissolve tool to create individual polygons for each zoning classification.

Chapter 8
[ 195 ]
The Dissolve tool is found in the Data Management Tools toolbox and the 
Generalization toolset. It works on points, lines, and polygons. Here is an 
illustration of the example that was just described:
As you can see, the initial parcel layer contained a large number of individual 
polygons that would have made determining the total area for each zoning 
classification difficult. Once you use the Dissolve tool, a new layer is created so that 
each zoning class has a single polygon. From there, it becomes much simpler to 
determine the total area for each zoning class.
The Project tool
The Project tool is used to transform or move a spatial layer from one coordinate 
system to another. It is important to know that when projecting data between 
coordinate systems, the actual coordinate values for your features must change. 
The Project tool will take your existing data and translate it into the new coordinate 
system using the proper math and translations to create a new layer that is in the 
designated coordinate system.
The Project tool is located in the Data Management Tools toolbox and the 
Projections and Transformations toolset. Certain tools and functions work best 
with different types of coordinate systems. There are two basic types of coordinate 
systems: Geographic and Projected. If you are trying to measure distances or areas 
then a projected coordinate system works best.

Geoprocessing
[ 196 ]
Even though ArcGIS Pro will project data on the fly so that even data that is in 
different coordinate systems will display together, it is a recommended best practice 
that you place all data you are analyzing into the same common coordinate system. 
This avoids errors caused by issues with differing units and transformations.
This tool should not be confused with the Define Projection tool, which is located 
in the same toolset. The Define Projection tool will assign a coordinate system to a 
feature class that is undefined or wrongly assigned. It does not actually project data 
to a new coordinate system. This is a common mistake for new ArcGIS users.
The Merge tool
The Merge tool will take data from two or more layers or tables and combine them 
into a new single output. This is useful if you get the same type of data from multiple 
sources or locations. For example, you are working with a regional emergency 
response group and you are trying to develop a regional evacuation plan. You 
receive road data from multiple jurisdictions. You can use the Merge tool to combine 
them all into a single layer.
The Merge tool can be found in the Data Management Tools toolbox and the 
Generalization toolset. The Merge tool can be used to combine points, lines, 
polygons, and even standalone tables. You can only merge like features, meaning 
you can only merge points with points, lines with lines, and polygons with polygons.
Here is another example of when you might want to use the Merge tool. You are 
responsible for inventorying all the fire hydrants within the city. So you go out over 
the course of several days collecting the locations of the fire hydrants. This results 
in a layer that shows all the locations collected daily. You wish to combine all the 
collected locations into a single layer.

Chapter 8
[ 197 ]
The Merge tool creates a new layer that includes all the features and attributes 
which were originally in the four separate layers. So now you have a single layer 
to manage, update, and analyze.
The Append tool
The Append tool is very similar to the Merge tool. It also combines data from 
multiple layers or tables into a single one. The big difference between these two tools 
is that Append is one of the few geoprocessing tools that actually changes the input 
data. It will add features or records to the target input.
You might use the Append tool if you have an existing layer of information and you 
just need to add newly acquired data to it. For example, continuing with the hydrant 
example, after merging the hydrants from the first four days you collected data, you 
go out and collect more hydrant locations. You wish to add those newly collected 
hydrants to the merged layer you created earlier.
The Append tool would work in this case. It would continue to add the newly 
collected hydrants to the existing data layer. It would not keep creating new layers 
that you would need to manage. This is illustrated in the following screenshot:
The Append tool is one of the geoprocessing tools that does edit or change your 
original input data.

Geoprocessing
[ 198 ]
Exercise 8B – using the Clip and Dissolve 
tools
The Public Works Director is working on a report that he must provide to the City 
Council to support his budget request. He needs to know the total length of each 
road within the City of Trippville. So he has asked you to provide him with those 
numbers.
Luckily, you already have the city limit and street data within your geodatabase. 
However, the street data extends outside the city limits and is broken down into 
individual road segments. So you will need to take some time to prepare the data 
before you can provide him with the numbers he needs.
Step 1 – evaluate the data
The Director has already provided you with the question and you have verified that 
you already have the data needed for the project. So now you just need to evaluate 
your data to verify the steps you need to complete the project.
In this step, you will open ArcGIS Pro and review the street and city limit data. You 
will make sure you have the information you need:
1.	 Start ArcGIS Pro and open the Ex8B.aprx file located in C:\Student\
IntroArcPro\Chapter8\Ex8B.
2.	 Once the project opens, you should see a map with two layers: City_Limit 
and Street_Centerlines. Notice that the streets extend outside of the 
city limits.
Question: What geoprocessing tool, which you have read about in 
this chapter, do you think you should use to create a layer that only 
contains the streets inside the city limits? 
___________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
3.	 Right-click on the Street_Centerlines layer and select Attribute Table.
4.	 The Director wants the total length for each road in the city. Review the table 
for the Street_Centerlines layer to see if there is a field that identifies what 
road each segment belongs to.
Question: What field identifies what road each segment belongs to? 
____________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________

Chapter 8
[ 199 ]
5.	 Close the table and save your project.
You have now evaluated your data to determine its suitability to provide the 
information requested by the Director. You know you will have to extract portions 
of the street centerlines that are located inside the city limits and that you have an 
identification field you can use to dissolve the street segments by to easily calculate 
their length.
Step 2 – clipping the streets
In this step, you will clip the street centerlines, creating a new layer that only 
contains the portions of the streets which are located inside the city limits:
1.	 Select the ANALYSIS tab in the ribbon.
2.	 From the Tools group located in the center of the ANALYSIS tab, select Clip. 
This should open the Geoprocessing pane in the right side of the interface.
3.	 Click on the small drop-down arrow located to the right of the cell for the 
Input Features and select the Street_Centerlines layer.
4.	 For the Clip Features, select the City_Limit using the same process.
5.	 Make sure your Output Feature Class is set to C:\Student\IntroArcPro\
Chapter8\Ex8B\Ex8B.gdb\Street_Centerlines_Clip.
6.	 Leave XY Tolerance blank.
Your Geoprocessing pane should look like this:
7.	 Once you have verified you have everything set correctly, click the Run 
button located at the bottom of the Geoprocessing pane.

Geoprocessing
[ 200 ]
When the Clip tool is complete, a new layer will be added to your map 
named Street_Centerlines_Clip.
8.	 Turn off or remove the Streets_Centerlines layer so you can better see the 
results of the Clip tool.
9.	 Right-click on the new layer you just created and select Attribute Table.
10.	 Right-click on the ST_NAME field and choose Sort Ascending. This will sort 
the records based on the name of each road.
Question: After sorting the records in the table, what do you 
notice about the number of segments for each road? 
_____________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________
So now you can see how the Clip tool created a new layer that only contains 
those portions of the road which are located inside the city limits. Your original 
layer remains untouched. You are almost ready to provide the Director with the 
information he needs. You still need to simplify the data so you can more easily 
calculate the total length of each road.
Step 3 – simplifying the data and calculating the 
total length
In this step, you will use the Dissolve tool to simplify the clipped road centerline 
layer you created in the last step. This will create another new layer in your map.
1.	 Click on the ANALYSIS tab in the ribbon.
2.	 Click on the Tools button in the Geoprocessing group. This will reactivate or 
open the Geoprocessing pane once again.
3.	 In the top of the Geoprocessing pane, select Toolboxes located to the right of 
Favorites. This will display a list of all the toolboxes included in ArcGIS Pro 
plus any extensions you have access to.
4.	 Expand the Data Management Tools toolbox.
5.	 Expand the Generalization toolset located in the Data Management 
Tools toolbox.
6.	 Double-click on the Dissolve tool.
7.	 Set the Input Features to Street_Centerlines_Clip using the same process 
you used for the Clip tool.

Chapter 8
[ 201 ]
8.	 Set the Output Feature Class to C:\Student\IntroArcPro\Chapter8\
Ex8B\Ex8B.gdb\Street_Centerlines_Dissolve_Name.
9.	 Set the Dissolve Field to ST_NAME.
Your Geoprocessing pane should look like this:
10.	 Once you have verified the Dissolve tool is properly configured, click the 
Run button.
11.	 A new layer is once again added to your map. Right-click on this layer in 
the Contents pane and select Attribute Table.
12.	 Right-click on the ST_NAME field and select sort ascending.
13.	 Scroll through the list of records. Pay attention to the number of records 
associated with each road name.
Question: How many records are there with the same road name? 
___________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
You now have the information ready to give to the Director. With the dissolve 
completed, you have a list of each road and its associated total length using the 
Shape_Length field.

Geoprocessing
[ 202 ]
Step 4 – exporting a table to Excel
The Director appreciates your efforts. However, he does not have ArcGIS Pro. So he 
has asked if you can export your results to an Excel spreadsheet. This will allow him 
to more easily incorporate your results into his report.
In this step, you will export the results of your efforts to an Excel spreadsheet using 
tools found in the Conversion toolbox:
1.	 Return to the Toolboxes list in the Geoprocessing pane.
2.	 Expand the Conversion Tools toolbox and then expand the Excel toolset.
3.	 Select the Table To Excel script tool. This particular tool is actually a Python 
script. The scroll icon located next to the tool name identifies it as such.
4.	 Set the Input Table to Street_Centerlines_Dissolve_Name.
5.	 Set the Output Excel File to C:\Student\IntroArcPro\Chapter8\Ex8B\
Street_Lengths_by_Name.xls.
6.	 Verify your Geoprocessing pane looks like the following image and click the 
Run button:
When the Table To Excel tool is complete, it does not add the resulting 
Excel spreadsheet to your map. If you wish to view your results, start 
Microsoft Excel and open the spreadsheet you just created. It should 
look very similar to the table you viewed in ArcGIS Pro.

Chapter 8
[ 203 ]
7.	 Close the Geoprocessing pane and save your project.
8.	 Close ArcGIS Pro.
Congratulations! You have just completed your first analysis project using 
ArcGIS Pro.
Other commonly used geoprocessing 
analysis tools
With more than 300 geoprocessing tools, you have only begun to scratch the surface 
of the types of analysis that you can perform with ArcGIS Pro. ArcGIS Pro includes 
tools that allow you to perform spatial analysis of your data. This is broken down 
into several toolsets including Overlay, Proximity, and Statistics within the 
Analysis toolbox.
Overlay analysis
Overlay analysis compares two or more layers and locating areas where they 
overlap one another. Depending on which tool you use, you can determine only the 
areas where they overlap or erase the areas where they overlap or combine the total 
areas of all the inputs.
The Overlay toolset includes the following tools:
Tool name
Minimum licensing level
Short description
Erase
Advanced
Clips out areas of overlap from input 
features
Identify
Advanced
Calculates areas of overlap and no 
overlap
Intersect
Basic
Returns area of overlap only
Union
Basic 
Combines total area of input polygons
Update
Advanced
Replaces area of overlap with new 
features
Spatial Join
Basic
Joins attributes from one feature to 
another based on spatial relationship
Symmetrical 
Difference
Advanced
Identifies areas where features do not 
overlap

Geoprocessing
[ 204 ]
ArcGIS Pro introduces a new Pairwise toolset that also performs overlay analysis. 
Tools in this toolset are designed to be used with extremely large datasets. They will 
provide simpler results than those created with the standard Overlay tools.
Now you will take a closer look at the two Overlay analysis tools that are available at 
all licensing levels: Union and Intersect.
Union
The Union tool takes the input of multiple polygon layers and combines all the 
information into a single feature class that contains all the data from the two or 
more input layers. It is important to remember this tool only works with polygons. 
It may not be used with points or lines. If you need to perform this type of analysis 
on points or lines, you would need to use the Identity tool.
You might want to use the Union tool if you wish to determine how much of each 
parcel was in a floodplain area and how much of each parcel was not in a floodplain 
area as illustrated in the following figure:
As you can see, the result is a new layer or feature class that attributes which part of 
each parcel is in the floodplain and which parts are not. Again, your original inputs 
are still intact.

Chapter 8
[ 205 ]
Intersect
The Intersect tool takes multiple input layers and returns a new layer that shows 
where the inputs overlap. The resulting layer attribute table will contain the 
combined attributes of all the inputs. This tool works with all feature types, points, 
lines, and polygons. If you input multiple feature types, you get to choose what your 
resulting output type will be.
You might use the Intersect tool if you are working on an emergency evacuation 
plan for your community. You need to determine which roads might be blocked due 
to flooding so you need to know which segments are in the floodplain. You can use 
the Intersect tool to overlay the street centerlines with the floodplains to locate where 
and how much of each road is in the greatest danger of flooding as illustrated in the 
following figure:
The resulting output of the Intersect tool in this scenario is a new layer that just 
contains portions of the streets which are located inside the floodplain area. As with 
other tools, your original input layers have not been changed in any way.

Geoprocessing
[ 206 ]
Proximity analysis
Proximity analysis compares, calculates, or shows distances between features in two 
or more layers. Proximity tools will generate distance buffers, locate nearest features, 
or calculate distances between features.
Tools included in the Proximity toolset include:
Tool name
Minimum license level
Short description
Buffer
Basic
Creates polygons around existing 
features at a set distance
Multiple Ring Buffer
Basic
Creates multiple buffer polygons at 
various distances
Create Thiessen 
Polygons
Advanced
Creates polygons around points 
showing areas of influence
Near
Advanced
Identifies how far nearest feature is 
between input and closest feature 
layers
Generate Near Table
Advanced
Creates a new standalone table that 
shows distances between features in 
two layers
Polygon Neighbors
Advanced
Identifies what polygons are next to 
source polygon along with calculating 
other associated information
We will now take a quick look at the Buffer and Multiple Ring Buffer tools.
Buffer
The Buffer tool is one of the most commonly used tools in ArcGIS. It creates a new 
polygon layer around the input layer based on a specified distance. The buffer 
distance can be a single value or be based on an attribute field in the attribute table 
of the features being buffered. You can choose to buffer any feature type. You can 
buffer points, lines, or polygons. However, the output will always be a polygon.

Chapter 8
[ 207 ]
Buffers are very useful. They can be used to help determine if features in one layer 
are within a distance of another layer. They can also help create features for other 
purposes such as creating the rights of way for roads or railroads as just illustrated. 
In that illustration, you can see that a new polygon layer has been created around 
the existing street centerlines all at a uniform distance. This new layer represents the 
rights of way for those roads. Also, each new polygon inherits the attribute values 
of the street that was buffered. This means the new polygons are attributed with the 
road name and any other attributes that were linked to the street segments.
One of the options you have when using the Buffer tool is to dissolve the 
overlapping buffers. If you choose to dissolve the overlapping buffers, any buffers 
that overlap will be merged into a single polygon. This reduces the number of 
features that are in the resulting layer. Also, if you choose to dissolve overlapping 
buffers, the new polygons will not contain the attribute information that was 
associated with the features which you buffered.

Geoprocessing
[ 208 ]
This illustration shows the difference between a buffer that is dissolved and one 
that is not. As you can see, the not dissolved example on the left contains many 
more polygons than the dissolved one on the right. The left example has many 
overlapping buffers so if they are dissolved, they become one.
Multiple Ring Buffer
The Multiple Ring Buffer tool is a Python script that runs the Buffer tool multiple 
times to create concentric buffer rings around the buffered features as illustrated in 
the following figure:
Like the standard Buffer tool, the Multiple Ring Buffer tool works with points, lines, 
and polygons but only outputs a new polygon layer. You also have the option to 
dissolve the overlapping buffers.
Now that you have had an opportunity to learn about some of the most commonly 
used analysis geoprocessing tools, let's give you a chance to put them into action.

Chapter 8
[ 209 ]
Exercise 8C – performing analysis
Remember back in Chapter 4, Creating 2D Maps, when the Community and Economic 
Development Director asked you to prepare several maps that showed the location 
of commercial properties that were between 1 and 3 acres. After his meeting with the 
business owners, he needs some more assistance with this project.
He needs you to locate commercial properties that are within 150 feet of existing city 
sewer lines and have at least 1 acre that is not in a floodplain.
Step 1 – locating commercial properties near 
sewer lines
The first step of your analysis will be to locate all commercial properties that are 
between 1 and 3 acres in size and are within 150 feet of an existing sewer line. 
Luckily, you have already identified the commercial properties that meet the size 
requirements in Chapter 4, Creating 2D Maps, so that part is done. So now you just 
need to determine which of them are within 150 of the sewer lines.
In this step, you will create a 150 foot buffer around the sewer lines in the city. 
Then you will perform a spatial selection to select all commercial properties 
between 1 and 3 acres that are touched by or intersect the buffer you create:
1.	 Start ArcGIS Pro.
2.	 Open project Ex8C.aprx located in C:\Student\IntroArcPro\Chapter8.
When the project opens, you should see a map that looks very familiar. 
It should look like the one you created in Chapter 4, Creating 2D Maps. 
This map already contains all the basic layers you need to perform your 
analysis. You can see the commercial properties between 1 and 3 acres, 
the sewer lines, and the floodplains. Now you will create the 150 foot 
buffer around the sewer lines:
3.	 Select the ANALYSIS tab in the ribbon.
4.	 Select the Buffer tool to open the Geoprocessing pane and Buffer tool 
parameters.
5.	 Using the skills you learned in the previous exercise, set the Input Features 
class to Sewer Lines.
6.	 Set your Output Feature Class to C:\Student\IntroArcPro\Chapter8\
Ex8B\Ex8B.gdb\sewer_lines_Buffer.
7.	 Set the Distance to 150 and the units to Feet.

Geoprocessing
[ 210 ]
8.	 Leave the Side Type, End Type, and Method with the default settings.
9.	 Set the Dissolve Type to Dissolve all features into a single feature. Since 
you do not need to know which sewer line is near which parcel, allowing 
ArcGIS Pro to dissolve the resulting buffer will make future analysis easier.
10.	 Verify your Geoprocessing pane looks like the following image and 
click Run:
Once the Buffer tool is complete, a new layer will be added to your map. 
This new layer will show the areas that are within 150 feet of the sewer lines. 
You will now use that new layer to select the commercial properties:
11.	 Click on the MAP tab in the ribbon.
12.	 Select the Select By Location button in the Selection group on the MAP tab.
13.	 If you left your Geoprocessing pane open, it will now display the Select 
Layers By Location parameters. Set the Input Feature Layer to Commercial 
Properties 1 to 3 AC.

Chapter 8
[ 211 ]
14.	 Set the Relationship to Intersect. This will select all the commercial properties 
between 1 and 3 acres that are overlaid by the sewer lines buffer layer.
15.	 Set the Selecting Features to sewer_line_Buffer.
16.	 Leave all other parameters with default settings.
17.	 Verify your Geoprocessing pane looks like the following image and 
click Run.
When Select By Location completes, you should have approximately 18 commercial 
properties selected. All of these are overlapped or touched by the sewer line buffer 
you created. This means they are all within 150 feet of an existing sewer line. You 
will now export those selected parcels to their own layer.

Geoprocessing
[ 212 ]
Step 2 – exporting selected parcels
Now that you have identified which commercial properties are within 150 feet of 
a sewer line, you will export those to a new feature class so you can use them for 
further analysis later. This will ensure you don't mistakenly change or corrupt the 
existing layer by accident:
1.	 Select the Commercial Properties 1 to 3 AC in the Contents pane.
2.	 Select the Data tab in the Feature Layer group.
3.	 Click on the Export Features button located in the Export group of the 
Data tab to display the parameters for the Copy Features tool in the 
Geoprocessing pane.
4.	 Input Features should automatically be set to Commercial Properties 1 
to 3 AC. If not, set it to that layer.
5.	 Set the Output Feature Class to C:\Student\IntroArcPro\Chapter8\
Ex8B\Ex8B.gdb\CommercialProp_near_sewer.
6.	 Verify your Geoprocessing pane looks like the following image and 
click Run:
When the Copy Features tool completes, a new layer is added to your 
map that contains only those commercial parcels you had selected. If you 
have features selected in a map or table, most geoprocessing tools will 
automatically only use those selected records within that tool.
7.	 Open the Attribute table for the CommercialProp_near_sewer layer that 
was just added to your map.

Chapter 8
[ 213 ]
8.	 Verify the table contains the same number of records as you had selected 
previously. It should be approximately 18.
9.	 Clear your selection by clicking on the Clear button in the Selection group 
on the MAP tab.
10.	 Close the table.
11.	 Turn off the sewer lines, sanitary sewer manholes, sewer_line_Buffer, 
and Commercial Properties 1 to 3 AC layers. You do not need to see 
those for the rest of your analysis. They might cause confusion.
12.	 Save your project.
Step 3 – determining how much of each commercial 
property is in the floodplain
Now that you have selected the commercial properties that are the required size and 
that are near the city's sewer system, it is time to calculate how much area of each of 
those parcels is within the floodplain. To do that, you will union the new layer you 
just created with the floodplains.
This will create a new layer that will split each commercial property into the part that 
is in the floodplain and that which is not:
1.	 Using skills you have already learned, open the attribute tables for both the 
CommercialProp_near_sewer and Floodplains layers. Take a moment 
to review what fields are located in each table and some of the values they 
contain. This will better help you understand the results produced by the 
Union tool.
2.	 Close the tables.
3.	 Click on the ANALYSIS tab in the ribbon.
4.	 Select the Union tool from the Tools group. The Geoprocessing pane will 
now display the parameters associated with the Union tool.
5.	 Set your Input Feature classes to CommercialProp_near_sewer and 
Floodplains.

Geoprocessing
[ 214 ]
6.	 Set your Output Feature Class to C:\Student\IntroArcPro\Chapter8\
Ex8B\Ex8B.gdb\Commercial_Floodplain_Union.
7.	 Once you verify your Geoprocessing pane looks like the following image, 
click Run:
 
When the Union tool completes, it will add a new layer to your map that 
includes features which are the combination of the two input layers. Your 
map should look similar to the following illustration. Remember that your 
colors might be different.

Chapter 8
[ 215 ]
The green layer in the preceding map is the result of the Union tool. 
Now, perform the following steps:
8.	 Open the Attribute table for the layer you just created and that was added 
to your map.
9.	 Sort Descending on the SFHA field. All those polygons that are attributed 
with IN are inside the floodplain. All those that are blank or NULL are 
outside.
10.	 You need to update the ACRE_CALC field to reflect the new acreage for the 
Commercial_Floodplain_Union. Right-click on the ACRE_CALC field.
11.	 Select Calculate Field.

Geoprocessing
[ 216 ]
12.	 In the expression cell located below where it says ACRE_CALC =, type the 
following expression: !Shape_Area! / 43560. This will convert the shape_
area field values that are in square feet to acres. It should look something 
like this when you are done:
When converting units using the field calculator as just done, it is also 
possible to just specify the specific unit you are converting to within 
your expression. For example, you could have also used the following 
expression in the preceding task: !Shape.Area@ACRES!. The word 
acres replaces the conversion factor. This makes it easier to convert 
units if you do not know the proper conversion factor to apply.
13.	 Click Run once you have verified your expression.
14.	 Close the table and save your project.

Chapter 8
[ 217 ]
Step 4 – selecting commercial parcels that are not 
in the floodplain
The one problem with using the Union tool in this process is that the resulting 
layer also includes parts of the floodplain polygons that did not overlap the 
commercial parcels. This means you need to either simplify the layer by removing 
those floodplain-only polygons or account for them in your query. If you had an 
Advanced license, you could have used the Identity tool instead; that would have 
avoided this next step.
In this step, you will select the commercial properties that have at least 1 acre or 
more not in a floodplain:
1.	 Click on the MAP tab in the ribbon.
2.	 Click on the Select By Attributes button. This will display the parameters 
for the Select By Attributes tool in the Geoprocessing pane.
3.	 Verify the Layer Name or Table View is set to Commercial_Floodplain_
Union. If not, set it accordingly.
4.	 Selection type should be set to New selection.
5.	 Click on the Add Clause button.
6.	 Set the field to Zoning and the following operator to Does Not Equal. 
For the value, select the blank option at the top of the list and click Add. 
This will eliminate the polygons that just represent floodplain areas which 
do not overlap the commercial properties.
7.	 Click the Add Clause button again.
8.	 Set the Field to ACRE_CALC and the following operator to is Greater Than or 
Equal to. Type 1.00 for the value and click Add. This selects all commercial 
parcels that are the right size.
9.	 Click the Add Clause button one more time.
10.	 Set the Field to SFHA and the operator to Does Not Equal. Then set the value 
to IN and click Add. This removes any areas that are inside the floodplain 
from your final selection.

Geoprocessing
[ 218 ]
11.	 Click the green check mark to validate your query. Your Geoprocessing pane 
should look similar to this:
12.	 Click Run once you verify everything is set properly.
When it is complete, you should have 13 commercial properties selected. 
These should all be larger than 1 acre in size and outside the floodplain.
13.	 Using the skills you have learned, export your selection to a new layer. 
Set the symbology for the new layer to something that stands out.
14.	 Turn off the Commercial_Floodplain_Union layer so your new layer 
stands out even more.
15.	 Save your project and close ArcGIS Pro.

Chapter 8
[ 219 ]
You have just identified the parcels within the city that meet the Director's 
requirements. You used various analysis and selection tools to answer his 
question. As you can see, it is not unusual to use multiple tools and methods 
to get the required answers to what may seem to be a simple question. Believe 
it or not, once you get familiar and comfortable with these tools, the process 
you just completed can be done in less than 10 minutes. It just takes practice.
Summary
ArcGIS Pro can be used to conduct spatial analysis to help answer a wealth of 
questions and concerns. It can help you see patterns and solutions. The powerful 
geoprocessing tools can be used with various types of data to get the answers you 
need to everyday problems.
In this chapter, you have learned what geoprocessing is and some of the tools 
that are available in ArcGIS Pro. You also learned how your licensing level and 
extensions can impact what tools are available to you when you need to perform 
analysis or manage GIS data.
This chapter also exposed you to some of the most commonly used analysis and 
data preparation tools. You conducted two separate analysis projects that provided 
hands-on experience with many of these tools and allowed you to see how they can be 
integrated with other tools you have already been exposed to in order to find answers.


[ 221 ]
Creating and Using Tasks
As you have now experienced firsthand, ArcGIS Pro contains a wealth of tools and 
methods for performing analysis, creating maps, and managing data. In many cases, 
there are two or three different ways to do the same thing. Also, many geoprocessing 
tools are very similar, such as Union, Intersect, and Identity. Although these are 
similar, each is designed to be used in specific circumstances.
All these different tools and methods make ArcGIS Pro a very powerful application. 
However, it can also make it confusing to new users and allows experienced users 
to perform functions very differently. This can result in inaccurate or wrong results. 
Things would be much similar if you could develop standardized workflows that 
everyone could use with step-by-step instructions required to complete specific tasks.
With ArcGIS Pro, you can do just this. They are called tasks. Tasks provide step-
by-step workflows, which can be saved with your project. There is no limit to the 
number of tasks you can save with your project. You are not limited to saving them 
in the project. You can save and share them to a network folder, ArcGIS Online, 
Portal for ArcGIS, and more.
In this chapter, you will learn the following topics:
•	
What a task is and considerations to take into account before creating one
•	
How to create a task
•	
How to use a task
What is a task?
Simply stated, a task is a series of preconfigured steps required to complete a specific 
process. Tasks can be very simple containing only three or four steps, or they can 
be very complex containing group tasks within a task, and each group can contain 
multiple steps. It is entirely up to you. Tasks allow you to be as detailed as you 
believe you need to be for your user audience.

Creating and Using Tasks
[ 222 ]
Tasks are stored as a Task Item within an ArcGIS Pro project. You will access your 
tasks from the Project pane. When you open a specific task, it will appear in a new 
pane named the Task pane.
Components of a task
Each task you create in ArcGIS Pro will consist of several components. The first is the 
Task Item, which is stored in the project. It is basically a folder to store related tasks 
within your project. You will access Task Items from the Project pane, as shown in 
the following image:
The second component is the Task Group. The Task Group is a subfolder within the 
Task Item in order to group related tasks by function or purpose. You can create 
Task Groups inside of other Task Groups just as you can create folders inside other 
folders in Windows. This allows you to create an organization structure to store your 
tasks, so they are easier to find and manage.

Chapter 9
[ 223 ]
The third component is the task itself. This is a collection of steps need to complete 
a given process, such as splitting a parcel or adding a new water line or geocoding a 
new address. Tasks can be stored inside a Task Group or Stand Alone.

Creating and Using Tasks
[ 224 ]
The last component is a step. A task will generally contain multiple steps. Steps refer 
to actions, buttons, geoprocessing tools, models, or scripts accessible in ArcGIS Pro. 
A common step would be to use the Explore tool to zoom to the location of a feature. 
Another example of a step would be once zoomed to the right area, selecting 
a given feature.
Each step is going to have several parameters you can set for that step, as illustrated 
later. You will provide general information regarding each step, such as a name, 
instructions for users to follow, and how the step will be run.
You can reference specific geoprocessing tools or commands within a step under 
actions. In the illustration, this step references the Select by Rectangle command. 
You have options to control which map and view the step should use. Finally, you 
can control the contents within that view via the step. You can decide which layers 
are visible, selectable, or editable.
You can have steps that simply provide instructions for the user and that run 
automatically. You can hide steps from users if desired. You will learn more 
about steps and how to create them later in this chapter.
Running a task
Tasks are run in the Task pane. The steps are presented to the user as they complete 
each one and more on to the next step. To get a task to open in the Task pane, you 
must first open the Task Item that contains the desired task you wish to run.

Chapter 9
[ 225 ]
Once you open the Task Item from the Project pane, the Task pane will open, and 
you will be able to select which task stored in the selected task item you wish to 
run. You may need to expand a Task Group in order to find the specific task you are 
looking for. When you find the specific task you wish to run, simply double-click on 
it within the Task pane to run it.
Now, let's give you a chance to experience what it is like to run a task.
Exercise 9A – running a simple task
In this exercise, you will run a simple task that takes you through the process of 
selecting a feature in the map.
Step 1 – start ArcGIS Pro and open a project
You first need to open a project that contains stored tasks. In this step, you will start 
ArcGIS Pro and open a project that has several tasks:
1.	 Start ArcGIS Pro.
2.	 Open the EX 9.asprx located in C:\Student\IntroArcPro\Chapter9.
When your project opens, you should see a single 2D map that contains 
layers representing the City Limits, Streets, and Parcels for the City of 
Trippville.
3.	 In the Project pane, expand the Tasks folder, so you can see the Task Items 
saved in this project.
Question: What Task Items do you see included in this project?
_______________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________
Step 2 – opening and running a task
In this step, you will open a Task Item and then run a task that steps you through the 
process of selecting a feature in the map:
1.	 Double-click on the Selecting Features Task Item in the Project pane.
2.	 The Project pane should open on the left-hand side of the ArcGIS Pro 
interface. Note the tasks included in this Task Item.

Creating and Using Tasks
[ 226 ]
Question: How many tasks are included in the Task Item you have 
opened and what are they?
___________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
3.	 Double-click on the Selecting Features in the Map task to open it.
4.	 Follow the instructions provided within the task's steps. When asked to 
zoom to an area in the map, you may zoom to any location for this exercise. 
Make sure to read and follow all the instructions.
Question: How many steps did this task have?
_________________________________________
_________________________________________
5.	 When you are done running the task, clear your selection.
6.	 Close the Task pane.
7.	 Close ArcGIS Pro without saving the project.
You have just experienced how a task works from the user's perspective. This was a 
very simple task. Tasks can be as complex or as simple as you want them to be. Feel 
free to try some of the other tasks included in this project.

Chapter 9
[ 227 ]
Creating tasks
Creating a task is not unlike creating a map or a layout. It requires some thought and 
planning to create a successful task. The time spent on the frontend of creating a task 
will alleviate a lot of frustration and headaches later for yourself and for those that 
use the tasks you create.
Just as you did before when creating a layout, you need to answer several questions:
•	
What is the purpose or goal of the task?
•	
What is the workflow that supports the purpose?
•	
How will it be used?
•	
Who is the audience for your task?
The answers to these questions will impact the design of your tasks. They will 
help determine the number of steps to include, which steps may need to be run 
automatically, the level of instruction you need to provide, what tools need to be 
included as a step, and more.
After answering those questions, you will then be ready to start creating your task. 
This may require you to start by creating a new Task Item and then creating tasks 
or Task Groups within that item or you can add new tasks to an existing Task Item.
As you create new tasks, you will use the Task Designer pane. The Task Designer 
allows you to add or modify steps. Steps are the heart of any task. They provide 
users with the instructions needed to complete the task. Steps themselves have 
several parameters, which you will need to configure as you create your task. 
Again, the answers to the questions mentioned earlier will help guide the creation 
of each step.
Before you begin creating a task, you will explore an existing task.
Exercise 9B – exploring a task
In this exercise, you will take a closer look at the task you ran in the Exercise 9A – 
running a simple task section. You will check whether it contains the number of steps 
you thought it did or whether there was more than met the eye.
Step 1 – open a project
In this step, you will open the same project you used in the last exercise. This will 
allow you to access the task you ran previously:
1.	 Open ArcGIS Pro and select Ex 9 from the list of previously opened projects.

Creating and Using Tasks
[ 228 ]
2.	 Expand the Tasks folder in the Project pane.
3.	 Verify that you see the Selecting Features Task Item in the Tasks folder.
Now that you have opened the correct project and verified that you see the Task Item 
you used in the last exercise, you will now learn how to open it for editing in the 
Task Designer.
Step 2 – opening a task in the Task Designer
You will now open the Task Item in the Task Designer. This will allow you to see all 
parameters, tasks, and steps included within the Task Item:
1.	 Right-click on the Selecting Features Task Item and select Edit in Designer. 
The Tasks pane opens in Designer mode on the left-hand side of the 
interface, and the Task Designer pane opens on the right-hand side of the 
interface.
2.	 Review the parameters for the Task Item in the Task Designer pane. 
Note that in addition to standard parameters, such as name, author, and 
description, you can also see what version of ArcGIS Pro is running and track 
the version of the task as you update and modify it.
3.	 Now you will make a couple of changes to this Task Item. Rename the Task 
Item as Selecting Features in ArcGIS Pro by typing that in to the cell 
located under Name.
4.	 Change the Authors Name to your own.
5.	 Change the description to the following: This task item contains 
various tasks that demonstrate different methods to select 
features within ArcGIS Pro.
6.	 Finally, enable Auto Increment of the Task Item version.
Note that there is no save button in the Task Designer. Changes are 
automatically applied when you click on another parameter, task or pane. 
This allows you to test the changes quickly. The actual changes are saved 
permanently when you save the project. If you close a project without saving, 
any changes you made to the Task Item and included tasks and steps will 
be lost.
7.	 Save your project.

Chapter 9
[ 229 ]
Step 3 – Reviewing a task's steps
Now that you have the Task Item opened in the Task Designer, you will now 
explore the steps of a specific task. In this case, it will be the same task you ran 
in the last exercise:
1.	 In the Tasks pane, select the Selecting Features in the Map task.
2.	 Click on the blue arrow that appears to the right of the task name to access 
the task's steps.
Question: How many steps do you see in this task?
______________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________
Question: How does this compare to the number of steps you counted 
when you ran the task in the last exercise?
______________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________
3.	 Select each step and review the General, Actions, Views, and Contents 
parameters associated with each step. They will be displayed in the Task 
Designer pane located on the right-hand side of the interface.
Question: Why do you think the number of steps you counted in 
the Exercise 9A – running a simple task section differs from the actual 
number of steps contained in this task?
______________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________

Creating and Using Tasks
[ 230 ]
4.	 Click on the back arrow located in the upper-left corner of the Tasks pane 
once you have reviewed each step.
5.	 Review the other tasks located within this Task Item and their associated steps.
6.	 Close the Tasks pane when you are done reviewing tasks.
7.	 Save your project and close ArcGIS Pro.
Now you have a much better idea of how a task is configured and the way steps 
work. Let's now start looking closer at the process to create a task.
Things to consider
As mentioned previously, you need to answer those four questions before you begin 
creating any task. The answers to those questions will guide much of the task design. 
So, how do those four questions impact or guide the design of your task?
What is the purpose or goal of the task?
Like a map, you are creating a task for a reason. It could be to show everyone in 
your organization the proper workflow to split a parcel so that everyone does it 
in the same way. It might be to develop a workflow to identify all parcels located 
within 300 feet of another parcel that is to be rezoned, so you can create a notification 
mailing list. Each of these represents a purpose.
The purpose will help you determine which tools will need to be referenced in your 
task. It will also help you answer the next question concerning the overall workflow 
that the task will address.
What is the workflow which supports the purpose?
The task workflow is the steps that will be included in the tasks. It is the tools and 
actions that will need to be performed in order to achieve the purpose and goal of the 
task. The workflow will determine the order of your steps within the tasks and when 
you use the tools your purpose has helped identify will be needed.
Think through your workflow carefully. Write down each step you believe will be 
required in the task and any tools associated with each step. Once you have the steps 
written down, you should verify that you have taken into account all the needed 
steps. It is not unusual for experienced users to forget a step because it is something 
they do automatically without even realizing that they do it. This means that a task 
may be incomplete or confusing depending on the audience using the task.

Chapter 9
[ 231 ]
One of the best ways to validate or even develop the initial workflow for a task is to 
work through the entire process manually within ArcGIS Pro. If you are validating a 
workflow, make sure to follow it exactly as you have written it down. This will help 
you to identify any steps you may have missed. Following your own instructions 
will be harder than you think. You will want to just do it. Do not fall into that trap. 
Take your time and do each step as you have it outlined. Remember that those that 
may use the task you create may not have the same level of experience with ArcGIS 
Pro as you do. So missing a tool or step that is intuitive to you may not be to others.
If you work through the process manually to actually develop the steps, then record 
each step as you do it. Make sure to note the tools associated with that step. Creating 
a document with screenshots can also be helpful as you do this. This helps ensure 
you remember all the requirements associated with a given step when you go to 
create the task.
How will the task be used?
There are several reasons you create a task. You may want to standardize a common 
workflow within your organization to ensure that everyone is doing it in the same 
way. You might want to use it as a training tool for new users. You may want to 
establish the best practice for your organization to ensure accuracy and efficiency.
The how will often be tied into the purpose and will impact the complexity and level 
of documentation needed for the task. For example, if you are creating a task that will 
be used to train new users, you will need to make sure to include exact step-by-step 
instructions with very thorough documentation on exactly what the user needs to do 
to complete the step. You will require many of the steps to be manual interactive ones, 
so the user learns the process completely and understands the reasons for each step.
However, if you are just trying to establish a common workflow within an 
organization of experienced users, you can often reduce the number of interactive 
steps and use automatic steps since the users are already familiar with ArcGIS Pro 
functionality. Also, due to that experience level, you are able to reduce the level of 
instructional documentation required for each step. Tasks created for training or to 
establish the best practices need more time to create as they typically require more 
efforts due to the overlevel of the complexity of their design and documentation.

Creating and Using Tasks
[ 232 ]
Another consideration, which falls under how the task will be used, is the license 
level required to perform the steps within a task. Steps often refer to the use of 
specific geoprocessing tools or ArcGIS Pro commands. As you have learned, some 
geoprocessing tools are only available with certain licensing levels or extensions. 
So, as you are developing a task, you need to always consider what license level 
or extensions are required to complete a task. If your task makes use of tools that 
require a specific license level or extension, you might want to include a step that 
has the user verify that they have the correct license level or extension needed to 
complete the task.
Who is the audience for the task?
Finally, you need to determine the audience for the task you are creating. Are they 
experienced ArcGIS Pro users or are they a new user? Are they someone who has 
used other GIS software? Are they computer savvy or not?
Obliviously, the level of experience and skill will impact your task design. The lower 
the skill and experience level, the more instructions you will need to provide. You 
may also need to include steps that would be intuitive to experienced users.
If your audience is a group that is familiar with another GIS software application 
such as ArcMap, you might need to include references to tools or processes in that 
application, so they can more easily relate ArcGIS Pro functionality to something 
they are familiar with. This may increase the amount of instructions you create for 
each step.
Now that you know what you need to consider before creating a task, it is time to 
learn how to actually create a task.
Creating a task
As you have learned, a task has several components. When creating a new task, you 
will need to create these components. The first step to create any task is to have a 
Task Item to contain it. This can be an existing or a new Task Item.

Chapter 9
[ 233 ]
Once you create or identify an existing Task Item that will contain your task, you 
then need to decide if you want the task to be standalone or contained within a Task 
Group. When do you need to make a task standalone and when should you store 
it in a Task Group? If the task you are creating is not related to other processes or 
workflows, it is good to leave it as standalone. However, if the task is part of a larger 
workflow or process, then it is a good idea to store those related tasks within a Task 
Group. This makes them easier to find. If you want to store your task within a Task 
Group, you would need to create it after you create the Task Item.
At this point, you are now ready to create your task. You will use the Task Designer and 
the answers to those four questions to create the task along with all the included steps.
Creating a Task Item
There are several ways to create Task Items. If this is the first Task Item you are 
adding to your project, you will go to the INSERT tab on the ribbon and select the 
Task button in the project group. This will create a new blank Task Item in your 
project, as illustrated here:

Creating and Using Tasks
[ 234 ]
If you already have Task Items in your project, then you can add new ones from the 
Project pane. You simply right-click on the Task folder and select New Task Item.
Creating a Task Group
If you decided that you want to store your task within a Task Group, you will need 
to create it within the Task Item. You will do this from the Tasks pane while in 
Designer mode.
Simply, click on the New Group button and fill in the parameters, as illustrated in 
the following screenshot:
Creating a task
Now you are ready to create the actual task. Remember that you can add tasks to 
existing Task Items and Task Groups. Creating a task is very similar to creating 
a Task Group. You will click on the New Task button in the Tasks pane while in 
Designer mode. You will then fill in the associated parameters, and the new task is 
created, as illustrated in the following screenshot:

Chapter 9
[ 235 ]
Exercise 9C – creating a task
In this exercise, you will create a new task in a project. In a later exercise, you will 
add steps to this task.
The purpose of the new task is to create a list of parcels located along a road. 
This will help the City notify those who live and work along the road when it is 
being repaired. This task will be used as a common workflow for existing and new 
GIS staff.
Step 1 – open is project and create a Task Item
In this step, you will open a project and then create the Task Item, which will contain 
the task created in a later step:
1.	 Start ArcGIS Pro and Open the Ex 9 project from your list of recently 
opened projects.
2.	 Expand the Tasks folder in the Project pane.
3.	 Right-click on the Tasks folder and select New Task Item. The Tasks and 
Task Designer panes will open automatically.
4.	 In the Task Designer pane, fill in the parameters of your new Task Item 
as follows:
°°
Name: Road Repair Tasks
°°
Author: your name
°°
Description: This task item contains tasks associated with 
road repair projects, such as generating notification 
lists, locating nearby parcels, calculating total 
lengths, and more
°°
Task version: 1.0.0
°°
Enable Auto Increment

Creating and Using Tasks
[ 236 ]
5.	 Save your project.
You have just created your first Task Item. Now you need to add a task to that item.
Step 2 – creating a new task
You are now ready to create the task that will serve as the container for the steps 
needed to create the list of parcels located along a road. You will create a standalone 
task for this exercise since it is the only task you will create. If this was part of a large 
set of tasks you were creating, you might create Task Groups to help organize them:
1.	 In the Tasks pane on the left-hand side of the interface, click on the New 
Task button.
2.	 In the Task Designer pane, fill in the parameters for the new task as 
indicated here:
°°
Name = Create list of nearby parcels
°°
Description = This task will step you through the process 
needed to create a list of parcels located along a road 
segment that will be repaired. The list will allow those 
who live and work along the road to be notified of the 
repair and how long it is expected to take.
3.	 Close the Task Designer pane.
Your Tasks pane should now look similar to this:

Chapter 9
[ 237 ]
4.	 Save your project and close the Tasks pane.
You now have created a task, but it is empty. You still need to add the steps to the 
task that tell users the process needed to produce the list of parcels located near the 
road segments that will be repaired.
Task steps
Steps are really the meat of your tasks. They provide the instructions to complete 
a process or workflow to the users. Steps can be simple text instructions that tell 
how to perform an action such as how to use the Explore tool to zoom to the area 
of interest. Steps can also be very complex. You can include specific tools, layer 
behavior, and selection controls within a step.
It is entirely up to you. The complexity of the steps and how many you need will 
be driven by the answers to those four questions. If you are trying to standardize 
a specific workflow for experienced users, you may increase the complexity of the 
step structure to automate it as much as possible. This will increase the efficiency of 
your team while also ensuring that everyone performs the process in the same way. 
If you are designing the task to be a training tool, you may want the steps to be more 
manual and instructional to allow the user to gain a better understanding of what 
tools are used and how they work.
So, let's take a closer look at the components that make up a step and what purpose 
they serve. This will provide you with a good understanding, so you can build 
effective steps within your tasks.
Components of a step
A single step can include several components depending on its purpose. You can include 
instructions for the user, determine how the step will run, link it to geoprocessing tools 
or commands, control view and layer behavior, and manage selections within a single 
step. Let's look at these components or parameters more closely.

Creating and Using Tasks
[ 238 ]
General
The first component of a step is the general information and behavior of the step. 
This includes the step Name, Tooltip, Instructions, and step run behavior as follows:
The Name of the step is what the user first sees listed in the task. The name should 
give the user a general idea what the step is supposed to accomplish such as Zoom to 
Area or Select parcel to edit.
Tooltips are pop-up windows that appear when you move your mouse pointer over 
the object in the question. This should provide more information for the user but still 
be limited to a short paragraph at the most. It will often be very similar to the name.
Instructions are one of the most important parameters of a step. They are where you 
provide the users with the instructions on what they need to do during the given 
step to complete it. These can be as long and detailed as you feel they need to be 
based on the purpose of the step and the intended audience. They should always be 
clear and easy to follow. Try to avoid using abbreviations or acronyms if possible 
since these can cause confusion.
Run/proceed instructions tell the user what they need to do once they have 
completed the instructions to proceed to the next step. For example, click on the 
Run button to start the step. Then, click on the Next Step button to continue.

Chapter 9
[ 239 ]
Finally, you will need to determine how the step will run. You have four basic 
options to choose from Manual, Auto Run, Auto Proceed, and Automatic:
Step Behavior
Description
Example of use
Manual
The user must manually click on the 
Run button to start the step and the 
Next Step button to proceed.
You want the user to 
activate the Explore tool 
and then zoom to a specific 
area. You are using this as 
a training tool, so you need 
them to see the Explore tool 
being activated for use.
Auto Run
Runs the command or geoprocessing 
tool automatically. User performs action 
with an associated tool and manually 
clicks on Next Step to proceed.
You want the user to select 
features from the map. 
So, you have linked the 
Select by Rectangle tool 
to the step, and it runs 
automatically; the user does 
not need activate it. They 
just select features from the 
map.
Auto Proceed
User clicks on the Run button to run the 
step, and it automatically advances to 
the next step when completed.
You want the user to buffer 
a feature, but the distance 
will be different depending 
on circumstances. The user 
would enter the appropriate 
buffer distance and then 
click on the Run button. 
When the buffer is complete, 
it automatically advances to 
the next step.
Automatic
Enter step runs without any user 
interaction. Automatic steps have the 
option to be hidden.
Your user is working in one 
map, and you need them to 
change to another. You can 
include an automatic step, 
which switches the current 
active map to a different one 
before you proceed to the 
next step. 

Creating and Using Tasks
[ 240 ]
Actions
The next component of a step is Actions. Actions allow you to link an ArcGIS Pro 
command or geoprocessing tool to the step. An ArcGIS Pro command is any button 
or tool you see in a ribbon, such as Add Data or Measure. Geoprocessing tools are 
any tools available in a toolbox including custom Python scripts or models you 
or others may have created. A step is not required to have an action. If the step is 
strictly instructional, it may not have an action.
When adding a command or geoprocessing tool to a step, you can accomplish 
that in two ways. First is to edit the action. This allows you to pick a command or 
geoprocessing tool from a list. You have the option to search using keywords.
Another method is to record. When you record, you simply find the command or 
geoprocessing tool you wish to use from the ArcGIS Pro interface and click on it. 
This is a great option if you have performed the step manually in the past and 
know exactly which tool you need.
You can also manage selections associated with a step as additional actions when the 
step starts, before running a command or when exiting the step. Within the step you 
can save a selection, modify a selection, create a new selection, or clear a selection.

Chapter 9
[ 241 ]
You can save currently selected features to a selection set. This selection set can then 
be used by later steps in the task. You can also save features created or modified by 
this or previous steps.
For example, if in a previous step you split a parcel into multiple parcels, which 
remained selected after being split and you wanted in a later step to edit the 
attributes for those new parcels, you could save the selection of those split parcels to 
a selection named Split Parcels, which could then be easily recalled in a later step.
You can also clear the selection or create a custom query to select features. The custom 
query is very similar to the Select by Attribute tool and a Definition Query, which 
you have used in previous chapters.

Creating and Using Tasks
[ 242 ]
The use of additional actions is also optional. A step may have no actions or 
additional actions defined. The step may just have a command or geoprocessing 
tool indicated. It may have just additional actions defined or a combination of a 
command/geoprocessing tool and additional actions. This means that a step can 
be as simple or complicated as you wish it to be.
Views
Views allow you to control what maps, scenes, or layouts are open and active within 
your project as you run the step. You will see all views that are contained in the 
project you have open. While you can have many views open at any one time, only 
a single one can be active.
The active view will be the one the step and defined actions are applied to. So, if you 
are creating a step to select a zoning polygon, you might want to make sure that the 
Zoning view is active. If your step has someone adding a north arrow to a layout, 
you would want the proper layout to be open and active. You may want to close 
some views to remove possible confusion by the user and to reduce the amount of 
computer resources, which might be used.
As you can see in the illustration, you can set these parameters manually for the step, 
capture them from the previous step, or based on your project's current settings as 
you create the step.

Chapter 9
[ 243 ]
Contents
Just as you can control which views are open and active, you can also control the 
layers within your active view. Within the step, you can control a layer's visibility, 
whether it is selectable or not, editable or not, snappable or not, is a selected layer 
and label visibility.
The level of layer control is very powerful. It ensures that you protect data and only 
work with the layers you need to in any given step. For example, if you are editing 
a parcel within a step, you would want to make sure that the parcels layer is set as 
the only editable layer. This will ensure that the user doesn't accidently edit the city 
limits or a street by accident.
Now that you have a much greater understanding of how steps are configured and 
work within a task, you are now ready to begin adding steps to the task you created 
in the previous exercise.

Creating and Using Tasks
[ 244 ]
Exercise 9D – adding steps to a task
In this exercise, you will add the steps to the previous task you created to walk users 
through the process of generating a list of parcels near a selected road segment, 
which is to be repaired so that the owners can be notified.
Step 1 – open task in the Task Designer
In this step, you will open the task you created in the Task Designer, so you can 
begin creating your steps:
1.	 Start ArcGIS Pro and open Ex 9 using the skills you have already learned.
2.	 Expand the Task folder in the Project pane.
3.	 Double-click on the Road Repair Tasks item you created in the last exercise. 
This will open the Tasks pane.
4.	 Right-click on Create list of the nearby parcels task and select Edit in 
Designer. The Task Designer pane should open on the right-hand side of 
the interface, and the Tasks pane should enter Designer mode.
You are now ready to begin adding steps. If this was not a classroom exercise, 
you would begin referencing your notes from the answers to those four questions 
you need to consider before creating a task. You would pay close attention to the 
workflow you outlined for question 2.
For the sake of the exercise, this has already been done, and you will just need to 
follow the exercise instructions.
Step 2 – adding a step to zoom
In this step, you will add a step that will instruct the user to zoom to the location 
of the road in question. You will have them use the Explore tool to zoom to the 
location.
1.	 Click on the New Step button in the Tasks pane. The new step is 
automatically listed in the Tasks pane, and the parameters for the step are 
displayed in the Task Designer pane.
2.	 Set the General parameters as follows:
°°
Name: Zoom to street using Explore tool
°°
Tooltip: Zoom to street to be repaired

Chapter 9
[ 245 ]
°°
Instructions: Using the Explore tool located on the MAP tab, zoom 
to the location of the street segment, which will be under repair in 
the map. If you are already zoomed to the correct area, you may skip 
this step.
°°
Run/Proceed Instructions: Once you have successfully zoomed to the 
location of the street, click on Next Step to proceed.
I personally like to make the name of any tools or buttons I call out in the 
instructions in a bold font. This helps the user spot them as important. 
So, in the instructions and Run/Proceed Instructions mentioned previously, 
I would have made Explore and Next Step a bold font.
3.	 In the Step Behavior, set this as an Auto Run step. You will be connecting 
the Explore tool as an action to this step. By making it an Auto Run, the step 
will automatically enable the Explore tool without the user having to. All the 
user will need to do is begin zooming to the proper area within the map.
4.	 Finally, for the general settings, set this as an optional step. This will allow 
the user to skip the step if they already are zoomed into the proper location 
for the street that will be repaired when they start the task.
You have configured the general parameters for this step. You will now link 
it to an action. The action will be the Explore tool.
5.	 Click on Actions located at the top of the Task Designer pane.
6.	 Move your mouse pointer to where it says <none>. Three icons should 
appear to the right. Click on the Edit icon.
7.	 Click on the drop-down arrow located to right of <none> in the Command/
Geoprocessing pane.
8.	 Select Command from the drop-down list.
9.	 Click on the Browser button that appears to the right of Selected Command.

Creating and Using Tasks
[ 246 ]
10.	 In the search area of the pop-up window, type Explore and select Explore 
(Open current explore tool) and click on OK.
11.	 Click on Done located at the bottom of the Task Designer pane.
You do not need to configure additional actions or change the settings for 
views or contents in this step since you are just having the user zoom to a 
location. So, you are done creating this step. Remember that there is no save 
task or step button. They are saved when you save the project.
12.	 Save your project.
Congratulations! You have created your first step. You are not done yet. You have 
more steps that need to be created to complete this workflow.
Step 3 – selecting the street segment
Now you need to add a step that instructs the user to select the road segment, which 
will be repaired. You will use the Select by Rectangle tool and instruct the user to 
select the road from the map.
1.	 Click on the New Step button in the Tasks pane to create another new step.
2.	 Compete the general parameters as follows:
°°
Name: Select Road Segment

Chapter 9
[ 247 ]
°°
Tooltip: Select road segment which will be repaired
°°
Instruction: Click on the Run button to start this step. Then using 
the Select by Rectangle tool, select the road segment from the map 
which is scheduled to be repaired. If you have already selected the 
road segment, you may skip this step.
°°
Run/Proceed Instructions: Once you have selected the road segment 
that is scheduled for repair, click on the Next Step button.
°°
Step Behavior: Manual
°°
Enable Optional to allow the user to skip if they have already 
selected a road segment.
3.	 Click on the Actions option at the top of the Task Designer pane.
4.	 Move your mouse pointer to the area that says <none> and click on the 
Record icon.
5.	 Click on the Select tool located in the MAP tab. Make sure that it is the Select 
by Rectangle. Note that this tool is automatically added as the action.
Since you will have the user select a feature on a specific layer in this step, 
you want to limit the selectable layers available when they run this step. As 
you learned earlier, you can do this through the Contents settings in a step.
6.	 Click on Contents located on the top of the Task Designer pane.
7.	 When this task is run, you want to make sure that the Streets layer is 
visible and selectable. Click on the – locate next to Streets under the 
Visibility column until it becomes a green check mark. Do the same for 
the Select column.
8.	 To ensure that no other layers are accidentally selected, you want to set the 
remaining layers to none selectable by clicking on the – in the Select column 
until they all have a red X.

Creating and Using Tasks
[ 248 ]
Your Task Designer pane should look like this when you are done:
9.	 Save your project.
You have now provided users with the instructions they need to zoom to the location 
of the road scheduled for repair and how to select it. Now you need to tell them how 
to select the surrounding parcels.
Step 4 – selecting nearby parcels
In this step, you will create a step that tells users how to select the parcels that are 
near the road segment they selected in the last step. You will be using the Select By 
Location command to do this:
1.	 Click on the New Step button once again to create the new step.
2.	 Set the general parameters as follows:
°°
Name: Select nearby parcels
°°
Tooltip: Select parcels that are near the road segment you selected in 
the previous step
°°
Instructions: Using the Select by Location tool, you will select 
parcels that are located within a distance of 100 feet from the selected 
road segment.

Chapter 9
[ 249 ]
Ensure that this tool is configured as follows:
°°
Input Feature Layer = Parcels
°°
Relationship = Within a Distance
°°
Selecting Layer = Streets
°°
Selection Distance = 100 feet
°°
Selection Type = New selection
Once you have verified that the settings are correct, click on the Run button
°°
Run/Proceed Instructions: Click Next Step to proceed.
°°
Step Behavior: Manual
3.	 Click on Actions, and using the Record option, set the command to Select by 
Location located in the MAP tab.
4.	 The Geoprocessing pane will open automatically. Since you are running this 
step manually, you can close it and return to the Task Designer pane.
5.	 Click on Contents. Set it so the Streets and Parcels will be visible and the 
Parcels will be the only selectable layer.
6.	 Save your project.
Now that the nearby parcels are selected, you have one last step to go. You will 
instruct users how to export the selected parcels to an Excel spreadsheet.
Step 5 – exporting selections to Excel spreadsheet
In this step, you will create a new step, which instructs users how to export the 
selected parcels to an Excel spreadsheet:
1.	 Click on the New Step button in the Tasks pane.
2.	 Set the general parameters as follows:
°°
Name: Export to Excel
°°
Tooltip: Exports selected parcels to an Excel spreadsheet
°°
Instructions: Complete the parameters for the Table to Excel 
geoprocessing tool as indicated here:
°°
Input Table: Parcels
°°
Output Table: C:\Student\IntroArcPro\Chapter9\
Parcels_TableToExcel.xls

Creating and Using Tasks
[ 250 ]
°°
Click on Run once you have verified your settings.
°°
Run/Proceed Instructions: Click on Finish to complete the task.
°°
Step Behavior: Run manually
3.	 Click on Actions and click on the Edit icon.
4.	 Set the Type of Command to Geoprocessing Tool.
5.	 Click on the Browse button next to the Selected Geoprocessing Tool.
6.	 In the Find tools cell type Excel.
7.	 Select the Table to Excel Python script and click on OK.
8.	 Ensure Embed is enabled and set the parameters as described in your 
instructions. The Task Designer pane should look as follows:
9.	 Once you have verified your settings, click on Done.
10.	 There is no need to change the views or contents settings, so close the Task 
Designer and save your project.
Your task is now complete. You have added all the steps required to select the 
parcels near a road segment that is scheduled for repair and then export them to an 
Excel spreadsheet. Now you need to test it.

Chapter 9
[ 251 ]
Step 6 – run your task
Now that you task is complete, you will run it to see how well it works. This will 
verify that the task contains all the steps needed to complete the desired process and 
to verify your instructions are clear and the steps flow as expected:
1.	 Using the skills you have learned to locate and run the task you just created. 
Follow the instructions in each step closely. See if they make sense and you 
end up with the expected results.
2.	 Make any adjustments to the task and its steps you believe are needed.
3.	 Save your project and close ArcGIS Pro.
Assuming everything ran as expected, you have just created your first complete task. 
You developed a workflow, so others will be able follow to accomplish a specific 
process using your step-by-step instructions.
Challenge
Using the skills you have learned in this chapter, select a previous exercise from this 
book or a common process from your office and develop a task or tasks to replicate 
that workflow.
Summary
In this chapter, you learned how tasks can be used to standardize processes, train 
new users, and establish best practices within your organization. You also gained 
an understanding of all the components that make up a task and considerations you 
need to take into account when creating your own tasks.
Finally, you worked through the process of creating a new task from the beginning 
for example, creating a task that exports the selected data to an Excel spreadsheet.


[ 253 ]
Automating Processes with 
ModelBuilder and Python
As you have now learned, performing analysis or editing a feature requires many 
steps. The more you use ArcGIS Pro, the more you will find yourself doing the 
same process again and again. You may also realize that some of the processes you 
do repeatedly really require very little interaction on your part beyond selecting 
a feature and then telling ArcGIS where to save the outputs.
Would it not be extremely beneficial if you could automate processes you do 
repeatedly? Create the proverbial Easy button where you simply click on a single 
tool, fill in a few parameters, and off the tool goes providing you with the results 
when it was done. That would certainly make your job easier.
With ArcGIS Pro, you can create Easy buttons or tools using ModelBuilder and 
Python scripts. Both of these allow you to create automated processes that can run 
multiple tools together in sequence or at the same time to complete an operation. 
ModelBuilder uses a visual interface to create automation models without the 
need to be a programmer. Python is the primary scripting language for the ArcGIS 
platform. With it you can create very powerful scripts that cannot only be used 
within ArcGIS Pro but also integrate processes across all components of ArcGIS 
including Server, Online, Extensions, and more. Creating Python scripts does 
require writing code.
In this chapter, you will learn:
•	
Differences between tasks, geoprocessing models, and Python scripts
•	
How to create and run a model
•	
Components of a model
•	
How to export a model to a Python script
•	
Basics of the Python language

Automating Processes with ModelBuilder and Python
[ 254 ]
Tasks, geoprocessing models, and 
Python scripts – what is the difference?
Having just learned about tasks in the last chapter and reading the introduction 
for this chapter, you may be wondering what the difference is between a task, a 
geoprocessing model, and a Python script? That is a great question.
To answer it, you must first understand what each one is. You already know 
what a task is, so we will now focus on gaining a better understanding of what a 
geoprocessing model and Python script are. Once you understand that, you can 
then understand the differences between the three.
Geoprocessing model
A geoprocessing model is a custom tool created within the ModelBuilder window 
that contains multiple geoprocessing tools along with their various parameters 
(inputs, outputs, options, and other values) which work together as part of an 
integrated process that will run as if it is a single tool.
The preceding illustration is a sample of a very simple model. It contains two 
geoprocessing tools that you learned about in Chapter 8, Geoprocessing. In the model, 
the Buffer tool creates buffered polygons around the Streets input. The resulting 
buffer polygons are then used to clip the parcels that are located inside the street 
buffer polygons. Since both of these geoprocessing tools reside inside the model, 
the user only has to run the model instead of having to run each tool individually. 
The model automatically runs the tools based on the parameters specified within 
the model. You will learn more about the components of a geoprocessing model 
and how to create one later in this chapter.

Chapter 10
[ 255 ]
Geoprocessing models can include geoprocessing tools, Python scripts, iterators, 
model-only tools, and other models. This allows them to be as simple or as complex 
as you need them to be to accomplish the process you have designed them to 
complete. The ModelBuilder window allows users to create geoprocessing models in 
a visual environment. No coding is required to build a model. Esri actually refers to 
ModelBuilder as a visual programming language.
Geoprocessing models can be created using ArcGIS for Desktop (ArcMap or 
ArcCatalog) or ArcGIS Pro. One downside to a geoprocessing model is that it can 
only be run from ArcGIS Pro or ArcGIS for Desktop. You cannot schedule them to 
run automatically at a specific date and time. At least not by themselves!
Python script
A Python script is also a custom tool that can run multiple geoprocessing tools along 
with their various parameters as part of an integrated process. However, unlike a 
model that does not require you to write programming code, Python scripts do. 
You must know the Python scripting language in order to create Python scripts. 
The following is a small snippet of a Python script created for ArcGIS:
#--------------------------------------------------------------
# Name:        Union Tool Sample Script
# Purpose:     Runs the Union Geoprocessing tool from ArcGIS
# Author:      Esri & Tripp Corbin
#
# Created:     09/15/2015
# Updated:     09/15/2015
#
# Usage: Union two feature classes
#---------------------------------------------------------------
# Import the system modules
import arcpy
from arcpy import env
# Sets the current workspace to avoid having to specify the full path
# to the feature classes each time
env.workspace = "C:\\student\\IntroArcPro\\Databases\\Trippville_GIS.
gdb"
#Runs Union Geoprocessing tool on 2 Feature classes
arcpy.Union_analysis (["Parcels", "Floodplains"], "Parcels_Floodplain_
Union", "NO_FID", 0.0003)

Automating Processes with ModelBuilder and Python
[ 256 ]
Python scripts have several advantages over a geoprocessing model. First, Python is 
not limited to ArcGIS. Python can actually be used to create scripts for many other 
applications such as Excel, SharePoint, AutoCAD, Photoshop, SQL Server, and more. 
This means you can use a Python script to run tools across multiple platforms to 
create a truly integrated process.
Second, Python scripts can be run from outside of ArcGIS. This means you can 
schedule them to run at specific times and days using your operating system's 
scheduler application. If your script does include ArcGIS geoprocessing tools, the 
script will require access to an ArcGIS license to run successfully but ArcGIS does 
not need to be open and active at the time the script is scheduled to run.
Third, Python can be used to create completely customized geoprocessing tools. It is 
not limited to just the geoprocessing tools you will find in the ArcGIS Pro toolboxes.
What is the difference?
Now that you have a much better understanding of what a task, geoprocessing 
model, and Python script are, you will be able to better understand the differences 
between them. Each can serve a purpose in standardizing and automating common 
workflows and processes.
The following grid will provide a clearer understanding of the differences between 
the three:
Task
Geoprocessing 
model
Python script
Run a single geoprocessing tool 
automatically
Yes – can run 
a single tool 
automatically as 
part of a step
Yes
Yes
Allow users to provide input to 
tools before running
Yes
Yes
Yes
Run multiple geoprocessing tasks 
automatically and in sequence
No
Yes
Yes
Be included in a task
No
Yes
Yes
Be included in a geoprocessing 
model
No
Yes
Yes
Provided a documented workflow
Yes
Yes 
No
Be run from outside of ArcGIS Pro
No
No
Yes
Integrate with other applications
No
No
Yes

Chapter 10
[ 257 ]
Task
Geoprocessing 
model
Python script
Be scheduled to run at specific 
times and days
No
No
Yes
Requires knowledge of 
programming language
No
No
Yes
Creating geoprocessing models
As mentioned earlier, geoprocessing models are custom tools you create from within 
ModelBuilder. ModelBuilder provides the graphical interface for building models as 
well as accessing additional model-only tools, iterators, environmental settings, and 
model properties.
Models are created for a number of reasons. The first and most common is to 
automate repetitive processes performed in ArcGIS Pro. If you have an analysis, 
conversion, or other process you perform on a regular basis, a model can be used 
as a way to automate it.
Secondly, you can use a model as a way to think through and flowchart a process 
within ArcGIS Pro. This can help you ensure you have considered all the tools and 
data you will need to complete a process. Once completed, the model then provides 
the tool for completing that process as well as the visual and textual documentation 
that explains how the process was performed.
You can share models with those in your organization so they can use it to perform 
the process. This can reduce your workload and allow you to concentrate on other 
tasks that require greater knowledge and skill levels. Because a model runs the 
geoprocessing tools contained within it automatically, you can create a model that 
is easy for other less GIS-savvy members of your organization to run themselves 
without needing a full understanding of ArcGIS Pro. This also helps standardize our 
methodologies, ensuring everything is done in a consistent and approved manner.
All of this helps to save us time and money through increased efficiency, which is 
ultimately the main power of ModelBuilder. Like tasks, models consist of multiple 
components and have their own terminology associated with them.
Model components and terminology
Before you can create a model, you need to understand the pieces and parts that 
make them up. Models include a series of connected processes. Each process includes 
a tool, which can be a geoprocessing tool, another model, or a Python script. Each 
tool has variables that serve as inputs or outputs.

Automating Processes with ModelBuilder and Python
[ 258 ]
The following figure is an example of a model with two processes:
As you can see in the preceding figure, the model contains two processes built 
around the Buffer and Union tools. Each of these tools has a number of variables 
feeding into them. Variables are identified by the blue and green ovals. Notice that 
the two processes are sharing a variable, Street_Buffer. That variable is an output 
of the Buffer tool but an input for the Union tool.
There are three basic types of variables that are included in a model. They are data, 
value, and derived variables. Data variables are existing data that is used as an input 
to a tool, script, or model. These can be layers in a map, standalone tables, text files, 
feature classes, Shapefiles, and more.
Value variables are additional information that a tool may use to run. In the case of 
the Buffer tool, the distance used to create the buffer is considered a value variable 
as are the options to dissolve, end type, and the other parameters found that appear 
when you run the Buffer tool normally in the Geoprocessing pane.

Chapter 10
[ 259 ]
Derived variables are the outputs of a process. Again, this can be a new layer, feature 
class, table, raster, or more, depending on the tool used in the process.
Since ModelBuilder is a visual programming language, you can distinguish variable 
types based on their colors. Although you can adjust these settings by default, data 
variables are a darker blue. Value variables are a lighter blue and derived variables 
are green.
Saving a model
If you wish to save a model you create so you can use it again or share it with others, 
you must save it in a custom toolbox that you create. Models cannot be saved in a 
system toolbox that is automatically included with ArcGIS Pro when it is installed.

Automating Processes with ModelBuilder and Python
[ 260 ]
When you create a new project, ArcGIS Pro automatically creates a custom toolbox 
for that project. It is stored in the project folder as a TBX file. This provides you with 
an easy to use place to store your models. This toolbox is also automatically linked to 
your project and accessible in the Project pane as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 10
[ 261 ]
You can also create custom toolboxes within a geodatabase so that they, along with 
your models and Python scripts, are stored with your GIS data as illustrated next. 
This is a good option if the models or tools that you save to the toolbox will be used 
in multiple ArcGIS Pro projects.

Automating Processes with ModelBuilder and Python
[ 262 ]
You can also create other custom TBX files besides the one that is automatically 
created with a new project. Using a custom TBX file is perfect if the tool and models 
you save to it will not only be used with multiple projects but also across multiple 
databases or in the case of consultants, multiple clients.
Using custom TBX files to store models also makes it easier to share them with others 
since they are smaller than a geodatabase, which also includes all the GIS data. TBX 
files can easily be e-mailed, uploaded to FTP sites, or placed in your ArcGIS Online 
account.
Now that you have a good general understanding of a model, its components, and 
how to save one, it is time to put that knowledge to use.
Exercise 10A – creating a model
A new ordinance was just passed to protect the streams in the Trippville area. It 
requires all new building or improvement projects to take place at least 150 feet from 
the centerline of all creeks or streams. This will hopefully protect the banks from 
erosion and reduce polluted runoff from reaching them.

Chapter 10
[ 263 ]
The Community and Economic Development Director has asked you to calculate 
the total area of each parcel that is inside the non-disturb buffer and how much of 
each parcel is outside. Since you will need to update this analysis anytime a new 
subdivision or commercial development is added, you have decided to create a 
model that you can run every time you need to perform these calculations.
In this exercise, you will create a simple model that will calculate how much of each 
parcel is inside and outside a non-disturb buffer area around the streams. This model 
will include a couple of geoprocessing tools and their associated variables.
Step 1 – open the project and the ModelBuilder 
window
The first step is to open the project and then the ModelBuilder window so you can 
begin creating the model performing the following steps:
1.	 Start ArcGIS Pro and open the Ex10.aprx project found in C:\Student\
IntroArcPro\Chapter10.
2.	 When the project opens, expand the Toolboxes folder in the Project pane.
3.	 Right-click on the Ex10 toolbox you see.
4.	 Select New and then Model.

Automating Processes with ModelBuilder and Python
[ 264 ]
ModelBuilder should now be open and the MODELBUILDER tab has appeared in 
the ribbon. The ModelBuilder window and tab are used together to create or edit 
models. The tab contains tools for saving the model, navigating in the ModelBuilder 
window, and adding content to the model.
You will now begin using these tools to create your model.
Step 2 – adding model components
In this step, you will begin adding tools and variables to your model. You will 
explore some of the different methods that can be used. You will start with adding 
the process that will generate the non-disturb buffers around the streams.
1.	 Click on the Tools button on the Insert group on the MODELBUILDER tab 
in the ribbon. This opens the Geoprocessing pane on the right side of the 
interface.
2.	 Click on Toolboxes at the top of the pane to expose the various toolboxes 
within ArcGIS Pro. These are your system toolboxes.
3.	 Expand the Analysis toolbox and then the Proximity toolset.
4.	 Drag and drop the Buffer tool from the Toolbox into the ModelBuilder 
window so that it looks like this:

Chapter 10
[ 265 ]
You have just added your first process to a model. Model processes will exist 
in one of three states: not ready to run, ready to run, and have been run. The 
process you just added is in the not ready to run state. ArcGIS Pro indicates 
that visually by displaying the tools and variables in gray. A process will be 
in the not ready to run state until all required variables have been defined. 
In the case of the Buffer tool, you have not yet defined the three variables 
required: input feature class, buffer distance, and output feature class. You 
will now do that:
5.	 The input feature class for the Buffer tool used in the model will be the 
Streams layer in your map. So you will now add that layer as a variable 
to the model. Select the Streams layer and drag it into the ModelBuilder 
window. It will be added as a blue oval.
6.	 Click somewhere within the blank space in ModelBuilder to deselect the 
Streams variable.
7.	 You now need to connect the Streams variable you just added to the Buffer 
tool. Click on the Streams variable and with your left mouse button still 
depressed move your mouse pointer until it is over the Buffer tool. Then 
release your mouse button.
8.	 A small popup menu should appear; select Input Features. You have just 
defined the input feature class for the Buffer tool.
9.	 Now, double-click on the Buffer tool in the ModelBuilder window. This 
will open the tools dialog window in MODELBUILDER so you can define 
additional variables.
10.	 In the distance field, type 150 and verify the units are feet.
11.	 The output should automatically be set to Natwtr_Stream_Buffer, which 
is being saved to C:\Student\IntroArcPro\Chapter10\Ex10.gdb\. Verify 
this is true by hovering your mouse over the output feature class name. This 
will be fine for this exercise so you will leave it as is without changing it.

Automating Processes with ModelBuilder and Python
[ 266 ]
12.	 Since the Director has not indicated that any of the stream attributes are 
important for the calculations, you will have the resulting buffers dissolve. 
Click on the drop-down arrow under Dissolve Type and select Dissolve all 
output features into a single feature.
The Buffer tool window should now look similar to this. Depending on 
what you may have done previously, the name of the input feature may 
be slightly different:
13.	 Click OK once you have verified your settings.
14.	 Click on the Auto Layout button on the MODELBUILDER tab.
Your model should now include a single completed process that is in the 
ready to run state. You can tell it is ready to run because the tool and all 
lined variables are now displayed with a colored fill that is not gray.

Chapter 10
[ 267 ]
Now, let's save your model to ensure your hard work is not lost in case 
something happens.
15.	 Click on the Properties button in the Model group on the MODELBUILDER 
tab.
16.	 Complete the properties as indicated here:
°°
Name = ParcelsStreamProtectionBuffer
°°
Label = Parcels Stream Protection Buffer Analysis
°°
Leave all other properties with default settings
17.	 Click OK.
18.	 Click the Save button located in the Model group on the MODELBUILDER 
tab to save the model. If you still have the Project pane open, you should see 
the name of the model change from Model to the Label you just entered.
The process you just created in the model will generate the buffer areas around the 
streams. Now you need to add another process that will calculate how much of each 
parcel is in and outside that buffer area. You will use the Union tool to union the 
parcels with the newly created stream buffer. This will create a new feature class that 
will split each parcel where it is overlapped by the stream buffer, thus allowing you 
to determine how much is in and outside the buffer.
Step 3 – adding another process
In this step, you will add another process to your model. This process will include 
the Union tool. You will then link this new process to the one you created in the 
last step:
1.	 Click on the Tools button in the MODELBUILDER tab again.
2.	 Expand the Overlay toolset in the Analysis toolbox.
3.	 Add the Union tool to your model using the same method you used to add 
the Buffer tool.

Automating Processes with ModelBuilder and Python
[ 268 ]
4.	 Using your scroll wheel, zoom out in the ModelBuilder window until you 
have room to move the Union tool so it and the Buffer tool will be visible.
5.	 With the Union tool and the Output Feature Class variable selected, use 
your mouse to move them so that they are located below the Buffer tool 
as shown next:
You have now added the Union tool to the model. Now you need to link it to 
the output from the Buffer tool and define the rest of its required variables:
6.	 Double-click on the Union tool to open the tool window.
7.	 In the Union tool window, click on the small arrow next to Input Features.
8.	 Check the Parcels layer and the Natwtr_Stream_Buffer model variable. 
Click Add as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 10
[ 269 ]
9.	 Make the output C:\Student\IntroArcPro\Chapter10\Ex10.gdb\
Parcels_StreamBuff_Union.
10.	 Click OK.
Your entire model should now be in the ready to run state and look 
similar to this:

Automating Processes with ModelBuilder and Python
[ 270 ]
Your layout may be different. That is acceptable as long as the proper 
connections are made and the processes are in the ready to run state.
11.	 Save your model and your project.
12.	 You may close ArcGIS Pro or leave it open if you plan to continue.
Running a model
After creating a model, of course you will want to run it. There are many ways to run 
a model. You can run the entire model, those processes in a ready to run state, or just 
a single process in the model.
If you wish to run the entire model, the easiest way to do that is to simply double-click 
on it from the toolbox it is stored in. This will run all processes in the model that are 
in the ready to run or have been run states. If you have allowed the users to provide 
values for some of the variables within the model, they will be prompted to enter those 
before the model is run. Otherwise, if you did not allow for user input, the model will 
just indicate that there are no parameters in the geoprocessing window and all you 
need to do is click the Run button. You will learn how to make a model interactive a 
little later in this chapter.
You can also choose to run the model or processes in the model from the 
ModelBuilder window. Clicking on the Run button in the MODELBUILDER tab 
will run all ready to run processes within the model. It will not run processes that 
are in the have been run or not ready to run states. This allows you to build and test 
a model as you go without being required to run the entire model.
Exercise 10B – running a model
Now that you know a little more about how to run a model, you will get to put that 
knowledge into practice. In this exercise, you will first run your model from within 
ModelBuilder. Then you will get to run it directly from the toolbox so you can see 
what your users will experience when they run the model.
Step 1 – running the model from ModelBuilder
In this step, you will run the model you created in the Exercise 10A – creating a model 
section from within ModelBuilder. You will also explore how to run individual 
processes so that you can test your model as you create it:
1.	 If you closed ArcGIS Pro after the last exercise, start ArcGIS Pro and open the 
Ex10.aprx project.
2.	 Expand the Toolboxes folder in the Project pane and then the Ex10 toolbox.

Chapter 10
[ 271 ]
3.	 Right-click on the model you created in Exercise 10A – creating a model 
and select Edit from the displayed context menu. This will open the 
ModelBuilder window.
If you created your model successfully in the last exercise and saved 
it, all processes should be in the ready to run state. This is indicated 
by all tools and variables having a solid color fill applied. If any are 
filled with gray or empty then you need to go back to the Exercise 10A – 
creating a model section and work back through the exercise.
4.	 Right-click on the Buffer tool in ModelBuilder. Select Run to run the Buffer 
tool with the connected variables you defined in the model. A small window 
will pop up inside ModelBuilder that displays the progress of the Buffer tool 
and will let you know when it is complete. When the tool is finished, notice 
what happens to the graphics for the Buffer tool and its associated variables.
Question: How have the graphics for the Buffer tool and its associated 
variables changed?
______________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________
The Buffer tool process is now in the has been run state. This means you have 
successfully run that process in the model. As you are beginning to learn, the 
state of a process will impact how it runs. Now that this process is in the has 
been run state, it will not run again if you click the Run button in the ribbon. 
The Run button will only run those processes that are in the ready to run 
state. Let's verify that though:

Automating Processes with ModelBuilder and Python
[ 272 ]
5.	 Close the popup window that appeared when you ran the Buffer tool.
6.	 Click the Run button in the Run group on the MODELBUILDER tab. 
Watch what happens to the model as it is run.
Question: Did the model try to re-run the Buffer tool?
____________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________
Question: What tool or tools did the model run when you clicked on 
the Run button and why?
____________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________
Step 2 – resetting the run state
In this step, you will learn how to reset the run state of all the have been run 
processes back to ready to run:
1.	 Click on the Validate button in the Run group on the MODELBUILDER tab 
in the ribbon.
Question: What happens to all the processes in the model that were in 
the have been run state?
______________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________
2.	 Click the Run button on the ribbon and watch how your model runs this 
time. All the processes will run this time because all of them are in the ready 
to run state.
Now you will actually verify that your model ran and created the feature 
classes it was supposed to in the project database.
3.	 Expand the Databases folder in the Project pane and then expand the Ex10 
geodatabase.
Question: What do you see in this database?
______________________________________________
______________________________________________

Chapter 10
[ 273 ]
4.	 Right-click on each feature class you see in the Ex10 geodatabase and select 
Delete until the database is empty. This will allow you to verify the model 
runs properly when you run it directly from the toolbox in the next step.
5.	 Close the ModelBuilder window. If asked to save the model, do so.
Step 3 – running the model from a toolbox
In this step, you will now run the model directly from the toolbox. This will be how 
most users will access and run models you create. Running the model using this 
method will allow you to have the same experience your users will when they run 
the model:
1.	 Make sure the Map view is active.
2.	 In the Project pane, expand the Toolboxes folder and the Ex10 toolbox.
3.	 Double-click on the Parcels Streams Protection Buffer Analysis 
model you created.

Automating Processes with ModelBuilder and Python
[ 274 ]
4.	 When you double-click on your model, it should open in the Geoprocessing 
pane. It will state that there are No Parameters. This is expected because you 
have not defined any variables as parameters that will accept user input. 
Click the Run button at the bottom of the Geoprocessing pane.
5.	 When the model is finished, return to the Project pane.
6.	 Expand the Databases folder and the Ex10 geodatabase. You may need to 
refresh the geodatabase view to see the results of your model. To do that, 
simply right-click on the geodatabase and select Refresh.
Question: What feature class is now in the Ex10 geodatabase and 
how does that compare to when you ran the model from inside 
ModelBuilder?
____________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________
When you ran the model from inside ModelBuilder, it produced two 
different feature classes within the Ex10 geodatabase. However, when 
you ran it from the toolbox, it only produced one. Why is that?
The answer is the feature class that was created by the Buffer tool in the 
model is considered as intermediate data. Intermediate data is any feature 
class or table that is created within a model that is then used by other tools 
and is not a final result of a series of linked processes.
When you run a model from a toolbox, it will automatically clean up after 
itself. This means it automatically deletes intermediate data that is created as 
the model runs. The only data it leaves is the final results of any processes in 
the model that are not intermediate data. The end result is you have the data 
that you need without also being left with a lot of partial datasets or layers 
that can clutter your database.
7.	 Save your project and close ArcGIS Pro.
Now you have created and run your first model. You can now run this model 
anytime you need to update the calculations for the areas of each parcel in and 
outside a floodplain.
Making a model interactive
So you have created your first model. It is a very efficient tool that will help 
you quickly update information. However, what happens if the buffer distance 
changes or the Director wants to look at different layers such as land use or just 
the commercial properties?

Chapter 10
[ 275 ]
Right now your model is hardcoded to a specific set of variables. If something 
changes, you will be forced to edit the model before it can be used. Wouldn't it be 
more effective to allow others to specify different values for the variables in the 
model when they run it? You can allow that. It simply requires you to designate a 
variable as a parameter within the model. This allows the user to provide a value 
before they run the model.
To designate a variable as a parameter so a user can specify a value when it is run, 
you simply right-click on the variable in ModelBuilder and select Parameter. When 
you do, a small capital P will appear next to the variable indicating it is now a model 
parameter as illustrated in the following screenshot:
In this example, you can see that the Parcels and Parcels_SteamBuff_Union 
variables are both marked as parameters. This will allow the user to select the values 
they wish to use for those variables. This means they will be able to union the stream 
buffers with another layer besides just the parcels layer and control where the results 
are saved to and the name it is given.
Making a model interactive can greatly increase its functionality. It will allow the 
model to be used in different scenarios and datasets. The downside is the more 
interactive you make a model, the greater the chance to introduce operator errors. 
Users may select the wrong input layer for a tool or forget where they set the final 
results to be saved. This can result in more problems than the model was designed to 
solve. So it is always a balancing act between flexibility and hardcoding to eliminate 
error sources.
Now, let's give you an opportunity to make your model interactive.

Automating Processes with ModelBuilder and Python
[ 276 ]
Exercise 10C – making a model interactive
The Director was impressed with the model you created. It allowed him to easily 
calculate the area of each parcel that was in and out of the stream protection area. 
The council is considering changing the buffer distance for the non-disturb area 
and the Director wants to look at the impact of several different distances. So he will 
need to be able to run the model in a way that allows him to specify different buffer 
distances and be able to save the overall results with different names so he 
can review the results of the different distances.
In this exercise, you will make the previous model you created interactive so that 
users can provide their own values to variables within the model. You will allow 
users to specify the buffer distance they want to use and the final output of the model.
Step 1 – marking variables as parameters
In this step, you will learn how to designate variables as parameters within a model. 
You will make the buffer distance and the output of the Union tool parameters 
within your model:
1.	 Open ArcGIS Pro and the Ex10.aprx project.
2.	 Expand the Toolboxes folder in the Project pane.
3.	 Expand the Ex10 toolbox and right-click on the Parcels Stream Protection 
Buffer Analysis model you created in a past exercise. Select Edit to open it in 
ModelBuilder.
4.	 Right-click on the output variable for the Union tool and select Parameter. 
A small P should appear beside the variable as shown in the following 
screenshot:
5.	 Save your model.

Chapter 10
[ 277 ]
By making the output of the Union tool a model parameter, users will now be able to 
choose where they will save the final output of the model and what it will be named. 
This is one of the two requirements the Director asked for. Now you need to allow 
users to specify a buffer distance.
The buffer distance is currently hardcoded into the model. You need to make it a 
parameter as you did the output of the Union tool. However, the buffer variable is 
hidden. So first you will need to make it visible within the model and then designate 
it as a parameter.
Step 2 – exposing hidden variables
In this step, you will expose the distance variable for the Buffer tool so you can make 
it a parameter:
1.	 Right-click on the Buffer tool in ModelBuilder.
2.	 Select Create Variable and then From Parameter. This will display a list of all 
hidden variables associated with the Buffer tool.
3.	 Select Distance [value or field] as shown in the following image:
The Distance variable is now visible in your model. Now that it is visible, 
you will be able to designate it as a parameter.

Automating Processes with ModelBuilder and Python
[ 278 ]
4.	 Move your mouse pointer so it is over the Distance variable you just added 
to our model. When your pointer changes to two crossed arrows indicating 
it is now in move mode, drag the Distance variable so it is above the Buffer 
tool as shown in the following screenshot:
5.	 Right-click on the Distance variable and select Parameter. The small capital P 
should now appear next to the distance variable indicating it is now a model 
parameter.
6.	 Save your model.

Chapter 10
[ 279 ]
Your model should now look very similar to this:
This model should now meet the requirements the Director asked for. He will now 
be able to use different distances from the streams and see the impact it will have on 
the parcels. He can save the result to a different name and location each time he runs 
the model.
The last step is to verify your work. You need to test run the model to see if it allows 
users to specify a distance and the output values.

Automating Processes with ModelBuilder and Python
[ 280 ]
Step 3 – running the model
In this step, you will run the model from the toolbox to make sure it will allow the 
Director to input a distance and specify where the output will be saved. Since you 
have not changed the overall logic or functionality of the model, there is no need to 
test the processes inside the model again:
1.	 Close the ModelBuilder view.
2.	 If needed, expand the Toolboxes folder and the Ex10 toolbox in the Project 
pane.
3.	 Double-click on the model you created to open it in the Geoprocessing pane.
Notice this time that when you open the model in the Geoprocessing 
pane, it looks different. Instead of saying No Parameters, it is asking 
for user input. The user can provide values for the two variables you 
designated as Parameters.
4.	 Change the value for the Parcels_Stream_Union variable to C:\Student\
IntroArcPro\Chapter10\Ex10.gdb\%Your Name%_Results (i.e. Tripp_
Results).
5.	 Change the Distance value to any value you wish that is not 150 feet. You 
can even change the units if you desire.
6.	 Click the Run button at the bottom of the Geoprocessing pane when you are 
done changing the values of the variables.
7.	 Once the model has finished running, close the Geoprocessing pane.
8.	 In the Project pane, verify the resulting output feature class is located in the 
Ex10.gdb.
9.	 Save your project and close ArcGIS Pro.
You have now created your first interactive model. This model provides more 
flexibility for the user, allowing them to investigate different scenarios.
Python
Python is the primary scripting language for the ArcGIS platform. It has replaced 
others, such as VB Script. ArcGIS Pro is currently compatible with Python 3.4, which 
is automatically installed when you install ArcGIS Pro.

Chapter 10
[ 281 ]
Python has been fully integrated with the ArcGIS Geoprocessing Application 
Programming Interface (API) via the ArcPy module. This means you can use the 
geoprocessing tools from within ArcGIS Pro within your scripts, allowing you to 
automate and schedule tasks.
Unlike ModelBuilder, Python is not limited to just the ArcGIS platform. It can be 
used to create scripts that access functions in other applications, the operating 
system, and the computer. This gives you the ability to create scripts that extend and 
integrate ArcGIS Pro's functionality across platforms and applications. As a result, 
Python is a very versatile tool in the GIS developer's arsenal.
Python scripts can be stored within ArcGIS toolboxes or in standalone folders as .py 
files. Unlike other programming languages such as C++ or Visual Basic, creating 
Python scripts doesn't require special application development software. You can use 
simple text editors such as Notepad or WordPad. There are several free integrated 
development environment (IDE) applications for Python such as PythonWin or 
IDLE. IDE applications provide a better development environment over text editors 
because they include automatic coding hints and debugging tools. When you install 
ArcGIS, it automatically installs Python and IDLE.
ArcGIS Pro also includes a Python window that can be used to write Python scripts, 
run tools using Python, and load a Python script to view the code. New Python 
developers often find the Python window helpful because of its integrated interface 
and autosuggest functionality that helps guide proper syntax.
Some Python basics
Since this is your first introduction to Python, it is a good time to introduce some 
fundamentals and best practices. These will serve you well as you begin to write 
your own scripts.
Commenting and documenting your scripts
When you begin creating a Python script, it is considered a best practice to include 
documentation within the code that will help other developers understand what is 
happening within the code and the purpose of specific parts of the script. This can 
also prove helpful to yourself if you have to come back to a script you wrote some 
time ago and need to make changes.

Automating Processes with ModelBuilder and Python
[ 282 ]
This code documentation is traditionally accomplished using commenting. Think 
of commenting code as a form of metadata stored within the code itself. It provides 
users and other programmers with the who, what, where, when, and whys they may 
need to successfully use, integrate, or edit a script you create. Different programming 
languages use different methods to comment code. Python uses the pound sign (#) to 
identify comment lines within its code as illustrated next:
Anytime Python encounters a line that starts with a #, it ignores that line and moves 
to the next. It will keep ignoring lines until it encounters one that does not have a # at 
the beginning.
It is also possible to use triple double quotations (""") to indicate a multiple line 
comment. Any text between the opening and closing triple quotes will be ignored.
Traditionally, the first group of lines in a Python script is used to provide basic 
information about the script such as its purpose, who created it, when was it created, 
what ArcGIS version it was created for, and so on. Providing this basic information is 
considered an industry best practice.

Chapter 10
[ 283 ]
Variables
Like a model, a Python script can contain variables. When you define a variable in 
Python, you give it a name and a value. Also similar to a model, the value assigned 
to a variable can be hardcoded, reference the result of another process, or be a 
function of the Arcpy or other module.
For example, you could define a variable that would be used as input for the Buffer 
tool as:
In_buf_fc = "C:\\GIS\\Trippville.gdb\\Base\\Natwtr_Stream"
This variable would then be used by the Buffer tool in a Python script as follows:
arcpy.Buffer_analysis (In_buf_fc, 
  "C:\\GIS\\Trippville.gdb\\Streams_Buffer", "125 Feet", "FULL", 
  "ROUND")
You can see the use of the defined variable has been highlighted in the sample 
Python code. In an actual script, you would not embolden the variable. That was 
just done in this example to help you see the use of the variable more easily.
Another very important thing to keep in mind when writing scripts is that Python is 
case sensitive. This means a variable named Mapsize is not the same as one named 
mapsize. To Python, those are two different and distinct objects. This is one of the 
most common causes of problems when writing and running Python scripts.
Python also has other restrictions when defining a variable within a script:
•	
Variable names must start with a letter. They cannot start with a number.
•	
Variable names cannot include spaces or other special characters. The one 
exception is an underscore (_).
•	
Variable names cannot include reserved keywords such as:
°°
Class
°°
If
°°
For
°°
While
°°
Return

Automating Processes with ModelBuilder and Python
[ 284 ]
Data paths
Often when you define a variable, access data, or save the results of a tool, you 
need to reference a specific file or data path. In a traditional Windows environment, 
this typically requires you to define the path using backslashes. For example, you 
have been accessing the data and exercises for this book by going to C:\Student\
IntroArcPro. This is an example of a path.
Unfortunately, you cannot use this common method of defining a path within a 
Python script. Backslashes are reserved characters within Python that are used to 
indicate an escape or line continuation. So when specifying a data path, you must 
use a different method. Python supports three methods for defining a path:
•	
Double backslashes – C:\\Student\\IntroArcPro
•	
Single forward slash – C:/Student/IntroArcPro
•	
Single backslash with an r in front of it – rC:\Student\IntroArcPro
You can use either of these methods when creating your own scripts. Although it is 
acceptable to use any of these within a single script, it is recommended you try to 
use the same method throughout the entire script. This will help you locate possible 
errors and fix them more quickly.
The ArcPy module
The ArcPy module is a Python site package that allows Python access to ArcGIS 
functionality. The level of functionality is limited to the ArcGIS Pro license level and 
extensions available to the user running the script.
Through the ArcPy module, Python cannot only be used to perform geoprocessing 
tasks using tools in the ArcGIS Pro system toolboxes or other custom tools but it can 
also execute other functions such as listing available datasets within a given location 
or describing an existing dataset. It can also create objects such as points, lines, 
polygons, extents, and more.
The ArcPy module contains several sub modules. These sub modules are specific-
purpose libraries containing functions and classes. These sub modules include data 
access (arcpy.da), mapping (arcpy.mp), a spatial analyst module (arcpy.sa), and 
Network Analyst (arcpy.na) modules. The spatial analyst and network analyst 
modules require access to ArcGIS extensions of the same name.

Chapter 10
[ 285 ]
The ArcPy module must be loaded into a script in order for Python to access ArcGIS 
Pro functionality. This is typically done at the very beginning of a new script using 
the following syntax:
import arcpy
This one line allows Python to access ArcGIS Pro tools and functions. Additional 
modules can also be loaded using that same line such as the operating system (os) or 
system (sys).
Locating Python syntax for a geoprocessing tool
To find the Python code needed to execute a specific geoprocessing tool, it is as 
easy as opening help for the tool. Esri has included sample Python code for all the 
geoprocessing tools in ArcGIS Pro and its extensions. This includes the proper syntax 
to use within a script along with a description of the variables that can be used with 
the tool. Help for a specific tool can be accessed in the Geoprocessing pane when the 
tool is opened by clicking on the small blue question mark located in the upper-right 
side of the pane.

Automating Processes with ModelBuilder and Python
[ 286 ]
The syntax in the Help tool will show you the proper format for the code along with 
a description of the possible variables that may be included. The following is an 
example of the syntax for the Union tool from the Esri help:
Help for all tools in ArcGIS Pro can be accessed from the ArcGIS Pro help online via 
the Tool Reference. The address to access it is http://pro.arcgis.com/en/pro-app/
tool-reference/main/arcgis-pro-tool-reference.htm.

Chapter 10
[ 287 ]
The help will also include code sample snippets that help put the syntax into context 
with a larger process. It is often possible to copy the sample code from the help and 
then paste it into your script. Then you can easily adjust the copied code to meet 
your needs.
The preceding screenshot is an example of a sample code snippet for the Union tool 
that is found in the help from Esri. As you can see, it provides an understandable 
example of the code in a real-world context. This provides a much better 
understanding of how the tool can be used within a custom script you might create. 
Notice the comments included within the code sample and how they help to provide 
a better understanding of the purpose of the various parts of the code.
Now it is time for you to try your hand at writing a simple Python script.
Exercise 10D – creating a Python script
The City of Trippville operates a GIS web application that allows citizens and elected 
officials to access parcel data. This GIS web application combines data from the city 
with other data layers from ArcGIS Online and Google Maps. As a result, the parcels 
must be projected from the local state plane coordinate system to the WGS 84 Web 
Mercator (Auxiliary Sphere) system. This is the common coordinate system used by 
Esri, Google, and Bing for GIS web applications and data.

Automating Processes with ModelBuilder and Python
[ 288 ]
You also update the Acres field as new parcels are added or combined before 
the new data is added to the web application. You use the Calculate Field tool to 
accomplish this with an expression that converts the Shape_Length field that is in 
feet to acres.
In the past, you have manually performed these operations. However, you will be 
going on vacation and the Director wants the parcel data to still be updated regularly 
while you are gone. He is able to copy the data to the web application but does not 
know how to perform the other operations. So he wants you to create an automated 
routine that can perform these operations automatically on a regular schedule.
Since he wants this routine to run on an automated schedule, you will need to write 
a Python script. A model will not work in this case. In this exercise, you will write 
a basic Python script that will calculate the acreage of each parcel and update the 
Acres field and then project the data from the state plane coordinate system it is 
currently in to the WGS 84 Web Mercator (Auxiliary Sphere).
Step 1 – open IDLE
In this step, you will open the IDLE application so that you can begin creating 
your script:
1.	 Click on your Windows Start button. This is normally located in the lower-
left corner of your screen in your task bar. Depending on your operating 
system, it may appear as four colored squares with or without the word Start 
next to it. In Windows 8.1 or 10, it appears as just four white squares.
2.	 In Windows 7, click on all programs. In Windows 8.1 or 10, click the small 
downward pointing arrow to access all installed programs or apps.
3.	 Navigate to the ArcGIS program group in the list of all programs. In 
Windows 7, you may need to expand the group to see the programs inside.
4.	 Locate the IDLE (Python GUI) application and click on it to launch 
the program.
You have now opened the Python IDLE application. You will write your 
script within this application. It will open with the shell window.
The shell window displays messages and errors generated by a script when 
it is run from IDLE. You do not actually write scripts within this window. 
This window is used primarily for testing and verifying results of scripts. 
To begin writing a script, you will need to open a new code window:

Chapter 10
[ 289 ]
5.	 Click File and New Window. This will open the code window you will use 
to write your script. You should now see the following:
6.	 Click Options in the top menu.
7.	 Select IDLE Preferences.
8.	 Click on the General tab and set Default Source Encoding to UTF-8.
9.	 Click Apply and OK.

Automating Processes with ModelBuilder and Python
[ 290 ]
Step 2 – writing the script
Now you will begin writing the script you need to accomplish the tasks you 
performed manually before. To start, you will insert some basic information 
concerning your script in accordance with best practices. Then you will import the 
ArcPy module and lastly write the code for the script:
1.	 First, you will save your empty script so it has a name. Click on File and 
then Save.
2.	 In the Save As window, navigate to C:\Student\IntroArcPro\Chapter10 
and name your file AcresWebProject.py. Click Save.
You have just saved your empty script. You should see the new name and 
path shown in the top of the code window
3.	 Now you will add the general information at the beginning of the script as 
comments. Remember the # identifies a comment within Python code. Type 
the following example code into the IDLE code window. The purpose should 
all be typed on a single line. If you split it on to multiple lines, you will need 
to place a # at the start of each line:
#************************************************
#Script Title: AcresWebProject.py
#Script Author: Your Name
#Script Created on: Today's date
#Last Updated on: Today's date
#Last Updated by: Your Name
#Purpose: This script calculates the parcels area in acres and 
updates the acres field. It then projects the parcels to the WGS 
84 Web Mercator coordinate system so it can be used within the 
City's web application.
#Software: ArcGIS Pro 1.1
#*****************************************************
4.	 Now you need to add the code line that imports the ArcPy module so the 
script can access the ArcGIS Pro tools. Add the following code to your script 
in the code window:
#Imports the ArcPy module for ArcGIS
import arcpy
5.	 Save your script by clicking File and Save. If you get a warning, just click 
on OK.

Chapter 10
[ 291 ]
Now you will define some variables within your script that specify the 
location of the parcels data and where to save the results of the Project tool.
6.	 Type the following code after the import statement in the code window:
#Specifies the input variables for the script tools
#If the data is moved or in a different database then these paths 
will need to be updated
Parcels = "C:\\Student\\IntroArcPro\\Databases\\Trippville_GIS.
gdb\\Base\\Parcels"
Parcels_Web = 
  "C:\\Student\\IntroArcPro\\Chapter10\\Ex10.gdb 
  \\Parcels_Web"
7.	 Save your script.
8.	 Now you need to begin adding the code for the tools you will need to run in 
the script. You will use the ArcGIS Pro help to get the proper syntax for the 
Calculate Field and Project tools. Then modify it so it works properly in 
your script.
9.	 Open ArcGIS Pro and Ex10.aprx.
10.	 Click on the ANALYSIS tab and Tools button.
11.	 In the Geoprocessing pane, click on Toolboxes located near the top of 
the pane.
12.	 Expand the Data Management Tools toolbox and the Fields toolset.
13.	 Select the Calculate Field tool.
14.	 Click on the Help button. It is the blue question mark in the upper-right 
corner.
15.	 You have opened the online tool reference for this tool. Click on Syntax.
16.	 Highlight and copy the syntax for the tool. It should read: CalculateField_
management (in_table, field, expression, {expression_type}, 
{code_block})
17.	 Go to the IDLE code window and paste the copied syntax onto a line below 
the variables you defined earlier.
18.	 Add a comment above the code you just pasted into the script that says: 
Calculates the area in acres for each parcel and updates the 
Acres field.
19.	 Now edit the code sample syntax you just pasted into the script as follows:
arcpy.CalculateField_management (Parcels, "Acres", 
  "!Shape_Area! / 43560", "PYTHON_9.3", "")

Automating Processes with ModelBuilder and Python
[ 292 ]
20.	 You have now defined the Calculate Field tool within a Python script so it 
includes all the variables it needs to run. Save your script.
21.	 Now you need to add the Project tool to the script and define its syntax 
properly. Using the same process you used for the Calculate Field tool, 
open the help for the Project tool and copy the syntax into your script. The 
Project tool is located in the same toolbox but is in the Projections and 
Transformations toolset.
22.	 Add an appropriate comment to the script above the code for the Project tool 
that will let others know its purpose similar to the comment you added for 
the Calculate Field tool.
23.	 Modify the Project tool code as follows (to make things easier, you can copy 
the syntax from the Project tool Sample.txt file in the Chapter10 folder):
arcpy.Project_management(Parcels, Parcels_Web, "PROJCS['WGS_1984_
Web_Mercator_Auxiliary_Sphere',GEOGCS['GCS_WGS_1984',DATUM['D_
WGS_1984',SPHEROID['WGS_1984',6378137.0,298.257223563]],PR
IMEM['Greenwich',0.0],UNIT['Degree',0.0174532925199433]],
PROJECTION['Mercator_Auxiliary_Sphere'],PARAMETER['False_
Easting',0.0],PARAMETER['False_Northing',0.0],PARAMETER['Centr
al_Meridian',0.0],PARAMETER['Standard_Parallel_1',0.0],PARAMETE
R['Auxiliary_Sphere_Type',0.0],UNIT['Meter',1.0]]", "WGS_1984_
(ITRF00)_To_NAD_1983", "PROJCS['NAD_1983_StatePlane_Georgia_
West_FIPS_1002_Feet',GEOGCS['GCS_North_American_1983',DATUM['D_
North_American_1983',SPHEROID['GRS_1980',6378137.0,298.25722
2101]],PRIMEM['Greenwich',0.0],UNIT['Degree',0.01745329251994
33]],PROJECTION['Transverse_Mercator'],PARAMETER['False_East
ing',2296583.333333333],PARAMETER['False_Northing',0.0],PARAM
ETER['Central_Meridian',-84.16666666666667],PARAMETER['Scale_
Factor', 0.9999],PARAMETER['Latitude_Of_Origin',30.0],UNIT['Foot_
US',0.3048006096012192]]")
24.	 Save your script.
Your script should look similar to this:

Chapter 10
[ 293 ]
25.	  Once you have verified your script and saved it, close IDLE.
An example of the completed python script has been included in the 
Python Sample folder located in the Chapter10 folder. You can use 
this sample to verify your code if needed.
Step 3 – adding the script to ArcGIS Pro and 
running it
Now that you have created a Python script, you need to add it to ArcGIS Pro and test 
it. In this step, you will add the script you just created to a toolbox in your project 
and then run it.
1.	 If necessary, start ArcGIS Pro and open the Ex10.aprx.
2.	 In the Project pane, expand the Toolboxes folder.
3.	 Right-click on the Ex10 toolbox and select New | Script.
4.	 Fill out the information for the new script as follows:
5.	 Name: CalcAcresProject
6.	 Label: Calculate Parcel Acres and Project to Web Mercator

Automating Processes with ModelBuilder and Python
[ 294 ]
7.	 Click on the Browse button located next to the Script File cell. Navigate to 
C:\Student\IntroArcPro\Chapter10 and select the AcresWebProject.py 
script you just created. Your window should now look like this:
8.	 Click OK once you have verified everything is set correctly.
The script will appear in the Ex10 toolbox. This means you can now run 
it in ArcGIS Pro. You must add all Python scripts you create to a toolbox 
before they are able to be used in ArcGIS Pro. For those with experience with 
ArcGIS for Desktop, it should be noted that ArcGIS Pro 1.1 does not support 
Python add-ins yet. That functionality may be added to a future version.
Now you will run the script to test and make sure it works as expected:
9.	 Double-click on the Python script you just added to the toolbox. This will 
open it in the Geoprocessing pane. Since you hardcoded all the variables 
into the script, it has no parameters that the user needs to define.
10.	 Click the Run button at the bottom of the Geoprocessing pane.
11.	 Once the script has completed running, return to the Project pane.
12.	 Expand the Databases folder and the Ex10.gdb. If the script ran successfully, 
you should see a new feature class named Parcels_Web. You may need to 
right-click on the Ex10 geodatabase and choose Refresh in order to see the 
new feature class that was created.

Chapter 10
[ 295 ]
If you do see the new feature class, congratulations! You have just created 
and run your first Python script. If your script did not run successfully, you 
may wish to compare it to the sample included in the Python Sample folder 
located in C:\Student\IntroArcPro\Chapter10\.
13.	 Save your project and close ArcGIS Pro along with IDLE if it is still open.
Summary
ArcGIS Pro contains two methods for automating and streamlining tasks: you create 
a model or a Python script. Which will work best will largely depend on your skills 
and how they will be used.
Models are created in ModelBuilder, which provides a graphical interface for 
creating tools that will automate a series of processes required to accomplish an 
analysis or other workflow. Each process within a model will include a tool that 
can be a geoprocessing tool, script, or another model, along with their associated 
variables. As you create a model, you can choose to make it interactive by 
designating variables as parameters. The biggest limitation of a model is that it 
can only be run from inside of ArcGIS Pro. This means it cannot be scheduled to 
run automatically.
Python scripts can be used to automate processes that can then be scheduled to run 
at specified times and dates. Unlike a model, creating Python scripts does require 
knowledge of the Python language and the ability to write code. In addition to the 
ability of Python scripts to be run on a schedule, they can also be used to access 
functionality from other applications other than ArcGIS Pro. This allows you to 
create scripts that can integrate the functionality of several different applications 
into a single automated script.
If you would like to learn more about creating Python scripts for ArcGIS, you might 
want to get Programming ArcGIS with Python Cookbook, Eric Pimpler, Packt Publishing.


[ 297 ]
Sharing Your Work
As you have learned throughout this book, ArcGIS Pro has very powerful tools to 
create amazing 2D and 3D maps and to perform a wealth of spatial analysis. This 
whole functionality means little if you cannot get the results of all this effort into the 
hands of those that need it.
This need to access the results of your GIS efforts is also being fueled by the growing 
use of geospatial and mobile technologies by the masses. Mostly everyone nowadays 
has a smart phone or tablet and has used some sort of mapping application, such 
as Google Maps, Waze, Bing maps, or the local county tax parcel application. This 
means that people are becoming much more geospatially and technology savvy. 
They expect to be able to access and use the data and analysis you provide.
ArcGIS Pro provides several methods and tools in order to share your GIS content 
with others. Which of the available tools or methods will work best depends on 
several factors. First is what is it you are trying to share. Is it data, an entire map, 
or a tool? The second is what software and skills your audience possesses and 
what you want to allow them to do with the shared content. Third consideration is 
whether they are able to connect to your GIS directly via your network.
In this chapter, you will learn the following topics:
•	
How to share GIS content with those on your network
•	
How to share GIS content with those not on your network
•	
How to export to other GIS data formats
•	
How to export to non-GIS data formats

Sharing Your Work
[ 298 ]
Sharing content with those on your 
network
Sharing content with those on your network is easy if they also have ArcGIS Pro, 
ArcGIS for Desktop, or some other GIS application. They will also need permissions 
and access to the databases, files, and folders used to store your GIS content.
If they have ArcGIS Pro
If other users on your network have ArcGIS Pro, they will be able to open the 
projects you create as long as they have access and permissions to the project and 
data sources used in the project. You can share layer, map, tasks, and layout files 
as well to standardize your content.
A layer file
A layer file in ArcGIS Pro has a .lyrx file extension. It stores all the property settings 
associated with a layer in a map, such as source, symbology, field visibility, labeling, 
definition queries, and more. Layer files allow you to standardize these settings, so 
the layer will appear the same across multiple maps and projects.
Using a layer file to add a new layer uses the same process as adding a layer using a 
feature class. However, instead of going to the geodatabase, Shapefile, CAD file, or 
raster, you select the layer file instead. When you do this, your layer will be added to 
your map with all the properties preconfigured, so you don't need to go back and set 
all the layer properties manually. This can save you a lot of time.
Creating a layer file is relatively easy. You simply select the layer in the Content 
pane. Then, you activate the SHARE tab and choose Layer File. From there, you fill 
out the required information and click on Save. It is that easy.
Why don't you give it a try?
Exercise 11A – creating a layer file and using it
In this exercise, you will create a layer file and then use it to add a new layer to a 
map within a project.
Step 1 – creating the layer file
In this step, you will create the layer file for the Trippville Zoning layer. It appears 
that several people have been using the Zoning layer in several maps but have 
been doing so with their own personal settings. This is causing confusion. So, the 
Community Development Director wants you to develop a standard based on the 
official zoning map for the city.

Chapter 11
[ 299 ]
1.	 Start ArcGIS Pro and open the Ex11.aprx project file located in C:\Student\
IntroArcPro\Chapter11.
2.	 Select the Zoning layer in the Contents pane.
3.	 Select the SHARE tab in the ribbon.
4.	 Click on the Layer File button in the Save As group. This will open the Save 
Layer(s) As LYRX File window.
5.	 Navigate to C:\Student\IntroArcPro\Chapter11 using the tree on the left-
hand side of the window.
6.	 Name the new LYRX file Trippville Official Zoning and click on Save.
You have just created a layer file for the Zoning layer as it appears in the official 
zoning map in the Ex11 project.
Step 2 – using the layer file to add a layer to a map
In this step, you will test the layer file you created to ensure that it works as 
expected. You will use it to add a new layer to a new blank map in your project.
1.	 In the Project pane, expand the Folders folder. Then, expand the Chapter11 
folder, so you can see its contents.
2.	 Right-click on the Trippville Official Zoning.lyrx file and select Add 
To New Map, as follows:

Sharing Your Work
[ 300 ]
A new map has just been added to your project, and it should contain the 
Zoning layer automatically symbolized the same way it was in the Official 
Zoning Map. Because you added the layer to the new map using the layer 
file, the symbology was already configured.
3.	 Save your project and close ArcGIS Pro.
Map files
Map files are similar to a layer file except they save the settings for an entire map. 
This includes all the layers shown in the Contents pane when that map is active and 
the settings for those layers. They can be based on a 2D or 3D map from an ArcGIS 
Pro project. Map files have a .mapx file extension. Similar to a layer file, map files 
also do not store or save the source data displayed in the map. Users must still have 
a connection to the data.
Map files allow you to share maps you create in ArcGIS Pro, so others can include 
them in their projects. This can save a lot of time because users will not need to create 
a map from scratch. They can simply import the map you created into their project 
and then make whatever adjustments they deem necessary.
Here is a common example of where a map file may be useful. You are working on 
a project within a city. You are creating a layout for the project that will show the 
primary project area and also contain a general location map that shows the project 
area in relation to the entire city. One of your colleagues is working on another 
project in the city and has already created a general location map of the city, which 
contains all the layers you need in addition to having all the symbology and label 
settings defined. You ask your colleague to create a map file for the general location 
map he is using, which you then import into your project. The imported map file 
is added to your project with all the layers preconfigured. You do not have to then 
spend your time creating this map and configuring the layers.
Adding a new map to your project from a map file is not difficult. Simply click on 
the INSERT tab in the ArcGIS Pro ribbon and then, select Import Map. From there, 
you simply navigate to the location of the map file and import it.
Creating a map file follows the same basic process as creating a layer file. You go to 
the SHARE tab in the ribbon. Instead of selecting Layer File, you select Map File.
For those who have been using ArcGIS for Desktop, remember that a map in ArcGIS 
Pro is not exactly the same as a map document. In an ArcGIS Pro project, you may 
have several maps along with separate layouts. When you create a map file in 
ArcGIS Pro, it will only contain the active map that was selected when you create the 
map file. This will not include any layouts that may include the map.

Chapter 11
[ 301 ]
The map file challenge
Using the skills you learned creating a layer file and the information mentioned 
earlier, create a map file based on the official zoning map in the Ex11 project. Then, 
open a new project and try to import the map file to create a new map within that 
project.
Layout files
Layout files allow you to share layouts you create so that they can be used as 
templates by yourself and others. Layout files will include all the elements you see in 
the layout, including maps, legends, borders, north arrows, scale bars, titles, logos, 
disclaimers, and more.
If the data referenced in the maps included in the layout is not accessible or in a 
different location, you will need to repair your data sources. Repairing a data source 
is simply resetting the properties of a layer to point to an accessible data sources. 
Layout files, such as layer and map files, do not store any GIS data.
To learn more about how to repair broken data links, you can go to 
https://pro.arcgis.com/en/pro-app/help/mapping/map-
authoring/repair-broken-data-links.htm.
The process to create and import layout files is very similar to the process used for 
map files. Again, it starts on the SHARE tab in the ribbon. Then, the Layout File 
button in the Save As group. Of course, you can only create a layout file if your 
project contains a layout.
The layout file challenge
Try exporting the layout included in the Ex11 project to a layout file. Then, open a 
new blank project or one of the previous projects you have worked with and import 
the layout file into the project. Here's a hint: try using the New Layout tool on the 
INSERT tab in the ribbon. Note what happens when you import the layout file.
If they don't have ArcGIS Pro
If you want to share your GIS content with those who don't have ArcGIS Pro, your 
options are much more limited. Depending on the software and abilities of your 
potential users, you can export your content to other GIS formats, non-GIS formats, 
or try publishing to ArcGIS Online, Portal for ArcGIS or ArcGIS Server as a web map 
or layer.

Sharing Your Work
[ 302 ]
Exporting to other GIS formats
ArcGIS Pro will allow to you to export your data to many different GIS formats, 
such as Shapefiles, Keyhole Mark-up Language (KML/KMZ), or CAD files (DWG, 
DXF, or DGN). Some of these allow you to export multiple layers into a single file, 
whereas others only support single layers.
Shapefiles are a very common GIS vector data format that originated with Esri. A 
Shapefile only stores a single layer or feature class. So, if you wish to use this format, 
you may need to export multiple layers each to its own Shapefile.
Most GIS-enabled applications, such as QGIS, Grass, MapWindow, and Map3D, are 
able to read and display Shapefiles. Some even have the ability to edit. In addition, 
most GPS/GNSS software applications and data collectors are also able to import 
and export Shapefiles. As a result, Shapefiles have become the de facto data sharing 
format for many.
The KML format is also popular. It is the format used by Google Earth, which 
is a free application. Exporting to KML would allow you to view your data in 
relationship to the data you see on Google's maps.
You will find the tools to export to these other GIS formats in the Conversion Tools 
toolbox and their individual toolsets. Each format has its own toolset.

Chapter 11
[ 303 ]
Exercise 11B – exporting to KML
The Director wants to be able to display the city's zoning layer over the imagery 
in Google Earth. So, he has asked you to export it to a KML file that he can use to 
accomplish this.
Step 1 – download and install Google Earth or Google 
Earth Pro
You will need to download and install Google Earth or Google Earth Pro. Both of 
these applications are free and available for download from the Internet. If you are 
installing the application on a work computer, you may need to get permission or 
help from your IT staff. If you already have it installed, you can skip this step.
1.	 Open your web browser (such as Google Chrome, Firefox, or Internet 
Explorer).
2.	 Go to https://www.google.com/earth/.
3.	 Click on the Explore option under either Google Earth or Google Earth Pro.
4.	 Click on the Desktop option located in the upper-right corner of the web page.
5.	 Read the short descriptions for both applications and choose which one you 
wish to download and install. For this exercise, either will work. However, 
I recommend going for Pro since it is now free and has greater capabilities.

Sharing Your Work
[ 304 ]
6.	 Accept the license agreement and download.
7.	 Once the install file downloads, you need to run it. Double-click on the 
downloaded install file located at the bottom of your browser if you use 
Chrome or Firefox as follows:
If you use Internet Explorer, just click on the Run button on the download 
bar, which appears at the bottom as follows:
8.	 Follow the instructions in the install routine accepting the default values.

Chapter 11
[ 305 ]
Step 2 – exporting to KML
In this step, you will export the zoning layer from the official zoning map in the Ex11 
project.
1.	 Open ArcGIS Pro and the Ex11 project if you closed it earlier.
2.	 Select the Official Zoning Map tab at the top of the view area to make it the 
active map.
3.	 Select the ANALYSIS tab from the ribbon.
4.	 Click on the Tools button in the Geoprocessing group.
5.	 In the Geoprocessing pane on the right-hand side of the interface, click on 
Toolboxes if it is not already active.
6.	 Expand the Conversion Tools toolbox and then the KML toolset.
7.	 Select the Layer To KML tool.
8.	 Click on the small drop-down arrow located to the left of the Layer input cell. 
Select the Zoning layer.
9.	 Make the Output File: C:\Student\IntroArcPro\Chapter11\Zoning_
Layer.kmz as follows:
10.	 Once you have verified that the Layer To KML tool is properly configured, 
click on the Run button located at the bottom of the Geoprocessing pane.

Sharing Your Work
[ 306 ]
This tool will produce a KMZ file. This may be confusing since it is called the Layer 
to KML file. So, why does it produce a KMZ instead? Well, a KMZ is a compressed 
KML. Compressing the KML makes it smaller and easier to upload to the Web or 
e-mail to someone. However, they contain the same data and will generally work 
interchangeably. You can open the KMZ file using an application such as WinZip 
or 7Zip to see the KML inside the KMZ file.
Step 3 – opening KML/KMZ in Google Earth
In this step, you will open the new KMZ file you just created in Google Earth to 
check whether it works. This will also allow you to understand the process if you 
need to provide instructions to the director.
1.	 Open Google Earth or Google Earth Pro by going to Start | All Programs | 
Google Earth (or Google Earth Pro) and selecting Google Earth (or Google 
Earth Pro). If you are using Windows 8.1 or 10, the process will be slightly 
different. Click on the Start icon and then the small down arrow. From there, 
navigate to the Google Earth group and select the application.
2.	 Feel free to explore the Start Up window that appears. When you are done, 
click on Close.
3.	 Open File Explorer or Windows Explorer depending on your operating 
system. You should be able to do this by clicking on the 
 icon located in 
your task bar, which resembles a small file folder in a silver file holder.
4.	 In File Explorer, navigate to the Chapter11 folder located in C:\Student\
IntroArcPro using the tree on the left-hand side of the Explorer window. 
Once you have opened the Chapter11 folder, you should see the Zoning_
Layer.kmz file you created in ArcGIS Pro.
5.	 Move and resize the Explorer Window and Google Earth, so they are both 
visible at the same time similar to the following image. If you are using 
multiple monitors, you can place the Explorer window on one and Google 
Earth on the other.

Chapter 11
[ 307 ]
6.	 Select the Zoning_Layer.KMZ file in Explorer. Drag and drop it into Google 
Earth. This should add the Zoning layer to Google Earth.
7.	 Close the Explorer window.
You should see that the Zoning layer for the City of Trippville has now been 
added to Google Earth. The symbology should be very close to what you 
saw in ArcGIS Pro. It will not be exact because the two applications apply 
symbology differently.

Sharing Your Work
[ 308 ]
Feel free to explore Google Earth and the layer you just added. See if you can 
find ways to add other types of data.
8.	 Close Google Earth once you are done exploring. You can save or discard 
your changes as desired.
9.	 In ArcGIS Pro, save your project and close the application.
You have just successfully exported your GIS data to another non-Esri GIS format, 
which you were then able to open in a completely different application. Now you 
will explore ways that you can export GIS data to non-GIS formats, so others without 
GIS software or skills can use it.
If you only wish to view a single KMZ or KML file, you can just 
double-click on the file in File Explorer, and it will automatically open 
with Google Earth as long as that is the default program assigned to 
that file type.
Exporting to non-GIS formats
ArcGIS Pro does support exporting maps, layouts, and tables to other non-GIS 
formats. This can allow others that don't have ArcGIS Pro to view what you 
have created.
Exporting maps and layouts
You can export maps and layouts to various types of vector graphic or raster 
formats. This includes the following:
•	
BMP: Raster
•	
EMF: Vector graphic
•	
EPS: Vector graphic
•	
GIF: Raster
•	
JPG or JPEG: Raster
•	
PDF: Vector graphic
•	
PNG: Raster
•	
SVG: Vector graphic
•	
SVGZ: Vector graphic
•	
TGA: Raster
•	
TIFF: Raster

Chapter 11
[ 309 ]
Many of these formats can then be easily opened in other applications, such as web 
browsers (for example, Chrome, Internet Explorer, or Firefox), free applications 
(Adobe Acrobat Reader and Microsoft Paint), or other GIS applications.
Most of the raster formats can also be embedded or inserted into documents, 
spreadsheets, and presentations. This allows them to be included in reports, studies, 
letters, exhibits, and more.
The PDF format actually supports some ability to create an interactive file. When you 
export to PDF, you have the option to include layers and/or attributes if you desire 
as illustrated later. This is under the Export Options..., as shown in the following 
screenshot:
PDFs also allow you to secure the file so that it requires a password to open it.

Sharing Your Work
[ 310 ]
Exporting tables
If you just need to export the attributes found in the Attribute table for a layer, you 
can export the information to various formats as well. This can be accomplished two 
ways. The first is from the Table pane, click on the options button at the upper-right 
corner and select Export as shown here:
The second way is to go straight to the Copy Rows geoprocessing tool, which is 
located in the Data Management Tools toolbox and the Tables toolset. Both methods 
end up producing the same result.
These methods will allow you to export an entire table or a set of selected records to 
another table. You have the option of exporting to:
•	
Geodatabase standalone table
•	
dBase (.dbf)
•	
Comma-delimited text file (.csv)
•	
Tab-delimited text file (.txt)
•	
Info
ArcGIS Pro will also allow you to export a table to a spreadsheet. You will need to 
use the Table to Excel Python geoprocessing script found in the Conversion Tools 
toolbox and the Excel toolset. This will allow you to export an entire table or a set of 
selected records to an Excel spreadsheet for others to use.
Sharing content with those not on your 
network
Sharing content with those not on your network is a bit more challenging. As you 
have learned, maps and layouts don't actually store the GIS data they reference. 
Instead, they point to the original data source. The data source can be a database 
stored within the project folder structure, or it might be located somewhere else 
entirely. It is even possible for a project, map, and layout to include multiple layers, 
all of which reference data in completely different sources.

Chapter 11
[ 311 ]
This is why, it is difficult to share your work with those that are not able to connect 
to the same resources as you. You can't just send them a map or layer file because 
neither of those include the underlying data. You could possibly zip the project 
folders together into a single file, which you could e-mail or put on an FTP site for 
download. But that only works if you have all the data you used within a project that 
is stored in the project structure.
If only you could create a file that packaged all the data you referenced in a project, 
map, or layer. Luckily, with ArcGIS Pro, you can do just that. It has tools that allow 
you to package the project, map, or layer together with its referenced data, so you 
can then share it with those not on your network.
Packages are also a great way to archive data. A package creates a snapshot of the 
data in the state it was in when you created the package. This provides you with a 
backup of the data at that point, which you can reference later as needed. This also 
means packages are disconnected from your live data. So, if you make changes to 
that data, you will need to recreate the package if you want it to include the changes.
Now you will explore the various packages you can create and how to create them. 
You will start with the smallest type of package, the layer package, and work your 
way up to the largest, being the project package.
A layer package
A layer package is very similar to a layer file. It too stores all the property settings for 
a layer so that when it is added to a map those settings are automatically applied. In 
addition to saving those settings a layer package also includes the data referenced by 
the layer. This means that a layer package can be shared with someone that does not 
have access to the source data. They can then add the layer package to a map and see 
the layer with your settings and the data in the state it was when it was packaged.
Because layer packages only include a single layer, they tend to be much smaller 
than other packages. This makes them more ideal for e-mailing to others. Creating 
a layer package is similar to creating a layer file. You select the layer in the map 
you wish to package. Then, select the SHARE tab in the ribbon. Next, you select 
the Layer button in the Package group. This will launch the packaging wizard.
Exercise 11C – creating a layer package
The Community Development Director has engaged the services of a consulting 
firm to help with the preparation of the city's long range comprehensive plan. The 
consulting firm needs a copy of the city's zoning layer. So, the Director has asked 
whether you can create a file that he can send to the consultant, which contains the 
standard city zoning symbology and data.

Sharing Your Work
[ 312 ]
In this exercise, you will create a layer package of the Zoning layer. Then, you will 
test to make sure that it works.
Step 1 – creating the layer package
In this step, you will create the Zoning layer package. You will work through the 
package wizard. You will provide all the data and input it needs to successfully 
create the package.
1.	 Start ArcGIS Pro and open the Ex11.aprx project.
2.	 Select the Official Zoning Map tab at the top of the view area to activate 
the map.
3.	 Select the Zoning layer in the Contents tab.
4.	 Select the SHARE tab in the ribbon.
5.	 Click on the Layer package tool in the Package group.
6.	 Select the Save package to a file option at the top of the Package Layer pane. 
Note that you can automatically upload a layer package to ArcGIS Online to 
share with those in or outside your organization.
7.	 Click on the Browse button at the end of the cell to provide a name and a 
location for the layer package file.
8.	 Using the tree on the left-hand side, navigate to C:\Student\IntroArcPro\
My Projects and name the package Trippville Zoning. Click on Save.
9.	 Type the following in for the Summary and Tags:
°°
Summary: Showing the zoning classifications of parcels 
in the City of Trippville.
°°
Tags: Zoning, Trippville, and Parcels

Chapter 11
[ 313 ]
The layer package pane should now look like this:
10.	 Click on the Analyze button to see if there will be any problems creating 
the package.

Sharing Your Work
[ 314 ]
The analysis of the layer should indicate a single error. The layer description 
is missing and is required for packaging. Since this is an error and not just a 
message, it must be fixed before you can proceed with creating the package.
11.	 Right-click on the error and select Change Layer Description from the 
presented context menu. This will open the Layer Properties window for 
the Zoning layer.
12.	 Add the following description in the Layer Propertied window – Zoning 
layer for the City of Trippville. Feel free to update any of the other 
missing values as well.
13.	 When you are done updating the layer properties, click on OK. The error 
should now have a green check mark in place of the red and white error icon.
14.	 Click on the Analyze button once again to ensure that there are no issues, 
which would cause the package creation to fail.
15.	 If no errors are returned, click on the Package button.
16.	 When the package is successfully created, close the Package Layers pane.
Now you need to verify that the package is indeed created successfully.

Chapter 11
[ 315 ]
Step 2 – testing the package
In this step, you will create a new map in your project and add the layer package you 
created to it.
1.	 In the Project pane, right-click on the Maps folder.
2.	 Select New Map from the presented context menu. A new map containing 
only a basemap should appear.
3.	 Click on the MAP tab in the ribbon.
4.	 Click on the Add Data button in the Layer group.
5.	 In the Add Data window, navigate to the C:\Student\IntroArcPro\My 
Projects folder. There, you should see the Trippville Zoning.lpkx file 
you just created.
6.	 Click on the Trippville Zoning.lpkx file and then the Select button.
The Zoning layer should now be visible in your new map. You will now 
verify the source of the Zoning layer.
7.	 Click on the List by Data Source button in the Contents pane.
8.	 If needed, resize the Contents pane, so you can see the entire path to the 
Zoning layer's data source.
Question: What is the path to the Zoning layer's data source?
_____________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________
Question: Is this different than the data source used by the 
Zoning layer you used to create the layer package?
_____________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________
9.	 Save your project and close ArcGIS Pro.
Congratulations, you just created and tested your first package. You now have the 
ability to share your layer data and settings with others. Now you will investigate 
a map package.

Sharing Your Work
[ 316 ]
A map package
As a layer package bundles the data for a layer together with its property settings, 
a map package will bundle all the data associated with the layers contained in a map 
plus the property settings for those layers. So, a map package bundles everything 
you see in a map together into a single file with a .mapx extension.
Map packages provide an easy way to share an entire map with others that may 
not be able to connect to your data sources. One thing to consider though is size. 
Because a map package will contain all the layers and their referenced data within 
a single file, it is possible for them to get very large. I have personally created one 
for a client that was over 20 GB in size. The reason it was so large is the client had 
pictures stored in the database of the features. In addition, the map included local 
aerial photography. So, when the map package was created, it included the layers, 
the layer properties, the attached pictures of the features, and the aerial photographs, 
which were used in the map.
Of course, that is not the norm and actually represents a worst case scenario for size 
when creating a map package. However, it does illustrate how map packages can 
be very large. When creating a map package, it is first best to remove any unneeded 
layers from the map to keep the map package size to a minimum. Turning off their 
visibility will not cut it. Invisible layers will still be included in the map package. 
They must be physically removed from the map.
Creating a map package follows the same basic process as creating a layer package. 
You activate the 2D or 3D map you wish to package and then proceed to the SHARE 
tab. You then click on the Map package tool and work through the wizard.
The map package challenge
Use the skills you learned creating a layer package and the information earlier to 
create a map package for the official zoning map contained in the Ex11.aprx project. 
Save the new map package to the same location you saved the layer package created 
in the Exercise 11C – creating a layer package section. Then, compare the size of the 
layer package to the size of the map package you created.

Chapter 11
[ 317 ]
Project packages
Project packages tend to be the biggest package you can create. Project packages 
bundle everything you include in a project into a single file. This includes maps, 
layers, data, toolboxes, tasks, attachments, geoprocessing history, and connections. 
Project packages will have a .ppkx file extension.
Because a project package literally includes everything that is part of a project, 
they tend to be large, certainly, much larger than either a map or layer package. 
This means that they are not typically well-suited to share via e-mail. However, it's 
possible to publish them to an FTP site for download, save to an external device, 
or even publish to ArcGIS Online. If you do publish to ArcGIS Online, you will be 
charged credits to store the package. The amount of credits you are charged will 
depend on the size. This is also true of layer and map packages, which you may 
publish to ArcGIS Online.
Project packages are a great way to archive a project once it is complete or as specific 
milestones are reached. They are a snapshot of the project at the time the package is 
created. Since it is all stored in a single file that makes them much easier to manage 
and backup.
Again, project packages are created using the same basic method as map or layer 
packages. You will be required to provide certain information, such as a summary, 
description and tags, before the package will be created successfully. Once created, 
a package can be successfully imported into ArcGIS Pro as a complete project, 
including the maps, layers, layouts, connections, and so on, that were included 
when the package was created. However, like the map and layer package, the newly 
imported project package will point to a copy of the original data sources and not the 
original data sources themselves.
The project package challenge
Using the skills and knowledge you have gained throughout this book, try creating 
a project package for one of the projects you have used as you worked through this 
book. Once created, compare the size of the project package to the size of the map 
and layer packages you created.

Sharing Your Work
[ 318 ]
Summary
In this chapter, you learned many different methods, which can be used to share 
your GIS content with others. You have seen how you can use project, map, and 
layer files to share and standardize content for those on your computer network 
that have access to the same data sources you do.
You also learned how you can export your content, so others without ArcGIS Pro can 
possibly access and use your data. This chapter showed how you can export your 
GIS data to non-GIS formats, so those without GIS software might be able to use 
information from your GIS in documents, reports, presentations, and spreadsheets.
Finally, you learned how you can share data with others not on your network using 
packages. Packages are not limited to just sharing data but can also be used to 
archive or back up important data at the specific states of existence, so they can 
be recalled if needed.

[ 319 ]
ArcGIS Pro Glossary
This is a glossary of commonly used terms associated with ArcGIS Pro and GIS. This 
is by no means a complete compilation of all terms you may encounter.
Annotation: Annotation is one option in ArcGIS in order to store text to place on 
your maps. With annotation, each piece of text stores its own position, text string, 
and display properties. Annotation is managed individually unlike labels, which 
are managed as a group. This means a user can change the properties of single 
annotation features, including color, font, size, bold, underlines, or italic.
ArcGIS: This is Esri's GIS platform that includes Desktop, Enterprise, Data, Mobile, 
and Web solutions. This can be deployed singularly or as an integrated solution. 
The ArcGIS Platform includes ArcGIS for Desktop (ArcMap and ArcCatalog),  
ArcGIS Pro, ArcGIS Server, ArcGIS Online, ArcPAD, ArcGIS Mobile for Windows, 
ArcGIS for Android and iOS, and so on.
ArcGIS for Desktop: This is Esri's primary Desktop GIS solution. It includes two 
applications—ArcMap and ArcCatalog. This is used to manage, maintain, visualize, 
and analyze data.
ArcGIS for Server: This is Esri's 64 bit GIS Server-side enterprise solution. It includes 
functionality to serve GIS resources via the Web or local area network, which can be 
accessed using web, mobile, or desktop applications. It also allows organizations to 
have a multiple user GIS database and includes several components, such as Web 
Adaptor, Spatial Database Engine (SDE), and Portal for ArcGIS.
ArcGIS Online: This is Esri's cloud solution to share maps, data, services, and 
applications with GIS users, elected officials, citizens, staff members, or the general 
public, whether or not they have GIS software.
ArcGIS Pro: This is Esri's newest Desktop GIS application. This 64-bit application 
uses a modern ribbon interface to manage, maintain, and analyze data.

ArcGIS Pro Glossary
[ 320 ]
ArcCatalog: This is an application included within ArcGIS for Desktop. It is used 
primarily to manage data. It is similar in concept to File Explore found in Microsoft 
Windows.
ArcMap: This is an application included within ArcGIS for Desktop. It is primarily 
used to visualize, edit, and analyze data.
Attribute: This is a specific characteristic (value) of a feature, such as a name, date, 
size, or material, that can be edited, deleted, and have operations performed on. 
Normally, it is associated and stored within an attribute table, which is automatically 
linked to a feature class in GIS.
Attribute Table: This is a database table that is linked to a collection of features in 
a feature class. Attribute Table stores specific information associated directly with 
the spatial features stored in a feature class. It can normally be identified by having 
a Shape, Shape_Length, and/or a Shape_Area field depending on data format and 
geometry type (point, line, or polygon).
Basemap: A layer or groups of layers that provide contextual information for 
primary layers in a map or a scene. Basemaps often include aerial photography, 
roads, railroads, political boundaries, natural water features, and points of interest. 
Basemaps cannot be edited or queried. However, they do redraw faster than normal 
operational layers and therefore can increase map performance. Esri provides several 
pre-canned basemaps via ArcGIS Online or you can create your own.
CAD: Computer-Aided Design (CAD) is used by engineers, land surveyors, and 
other design professionals to create the plans and drawings for their projects. It can 
be 2D and 3D. DXF, DWG, and DGN are common CAD formats.
Cardinality: This is a database term that refers to how many records in one table 
match to records in another table. There are four types of cardinality: one to one, one 
to many, many to one, and many to many. In ArcGIS, this will determine when you 
should use a join or a relate to link two tables.
Concatenate: This is to join two or more items. In GIS, this usually refers to joining 
the data found in two or more attribute fields together into a single field.
Contents pane: This displays a list of all layers or tables included within a map or 
scene. This also allows users to control layers and access functionality associated 
with them. It is similar to the Table of Contents in ArcMap.
Contextual tab: This tab contains tools related to a specific function. These tabs 
appear and disappear depending on what the user has selected with ArcGIS Pro.

Appendix A
[ 321 ]
Coverage: This is Esri's native data format for their older product, ArcInfo 
Workstation. It uses multiple folders and files to store both the spatial (location) and 
attribute (descriptive) data for geographic features. A single coverage can include 
multiple feature classes.
Data view: This is one of the two views within ArcMap, an application included 
with ArcGIS for Desktop. This is similar to a Map in ArcGIS Pro. It contains layers 
in the Table of Contents, which share a related theme or map purpose.
Datum: This is part of a coordinate system. Datums are used to tie the ellipsoid back 
to the true earth. There are two types of datums, horizontal and vertical. Horizontal 
datums can be local or earth centered. Common horizontal datums used in North 
America include NAD 27, NAD 83, and WGS 84.
Feature: This is any item contained in your spatial data (that is, a fire hydrant, a 
manhole, a parcel, a waterline, a building, and so on)
Feature class: The general meaning of this refers to a collection of features that 
share a common geometry (point, line, or polygon), attribute table, and spatial 
reference (coordinate system, datum, projection). It is normally associated with Esri's 
Geodatabase format but can be applied to other formats as well, including Shapefiles, 
which store a single feature class or CAD and coverages, which store multiple feature 
classes. In a Geodatabase, these can be standalone or grouped in a feature dataset.
Feature dataset: This is a collection of feature classes stored together in a 
geodatabase that share the same spatial reference; that is, they share a coordinate 
system, and their features fall within a common geographic area. Feature classes 
with different geometry types (points, lines, and polygons) may be stored together 
in a single feature dataset. Feature datasets are required for the use of geodatabase 
topologies and geometric networks.
Fields: These are the columns in a database table and are used to store values 
associated with records. These must have unique names that do not contain special 
characters with the exception of an underscore (_). Fields must also be assigned a 
data type that determines what type of information can be stored within the field. 
Common field types include Text, Date, Long Integer, Short Integer, Float, 
and Double.
Geodatabase: This is the native data format for ArcGIS. There are three basic types: 
personal, file, and SDE. SDE Geodatabases come in three types personal, workgroup 
and enterprise. Workgroup and enterprise geodatabases require ArcGIS for Server. 
Geodatabases store various types of geographic datasets including feature classes, 
tables, raster datasets, network datasets, topologies, address locators, custom 
toolboxes, and many others.

ArcGIS Pro Glossary
[ 322 ]
Geoprocessing: This means the manipulation of data within ArcGIS. Usually, it is 
associated with the use of geoprocessing tools. The process of converting, managing, 
and analyzing data is considered as geoprocessing.
Geoprocessing tools: These are tools that allow users to manipulate data within the 
ArcGIS Platform. Tool availability is determined by licensing levels and available 
extensions. They can be accessed in many different ways, including toolboxes, 
Python, ModelBuilder, and custom applications.
Geocoding: This is the act of turning an address into a point location. It requires the 
following three components: address or list of addresses, reference data (GIS data 
with address information), and a locator, which translates between the other two 
components.
Integer: This is a whole number; that is, it has no fractions or decimal values.
Join: This is one of the two ways to link two tables together in ArcMap or ArcGIS 
Pro. This requires a cardinality of one to one or many to one. It creates a virtual link 
between the two tables so that within your map document or ArcGIS Pro project, the 
two tables appear as one. You may then use the data from both tables to query, label, 
and symbolize features.
Labels: Labeling is an easy way to add descriptive text to features on your map. 
Labels are dynamically placed, and label text strings are based on feature attributes. 
You can turn labels on or off as a group. They can also be locked, so their locations 
stay fixed as you zoom or pan on your map.
Layer: This is any spatial or tabular data displayed or accessed within a map or scene. 
It is located in the Contents pane in ArcGIS Pro or the Table of Contents in ArcMap. 
Layers have properties, including Name, Symbology, Label Settings, Display 
settings, and Source Location. Layers do not store data. They point to or reference 
data stored as a Geodatabase, Shapefile, CAD file, coverage, or raster format.
Layer file: This is an external file that stores layer property settings, such as 
symbology, data source, display settings, and label settings, so that it may be easily 
used in other maps and by other users that have a connection to your GIS data. This 
has a .lyrx or .lyr file extension and is used to standardize layer settings within an 
organization.
Layer package: This is a file that contains a layer's property settings (symbology, 
labels, definition queries, field visibility, display, and so on) along with a copy of the 
referenced data. This is used to share layer information with those who do not have 
access to your data. It has either an .lpk or .lpkx file extension.

Appendix A
[ 323 ]
Layout or layout view: This is a virtual page where you design your final output 
map product. They can include maps, tables, graphics, legend, map scale, text, and 
north arrow.
Map: This is a collection of related layers within an ArcGIS Pro Project. It is similar to 
a data frame in an ArcMap map document.
Map document: This is a collection-related data frames, layers, and a layout used 
by ArcGIS for Desktop's ArcMap application. It is similar to a project file used by 
ArcGIS Pro though more limited. It has an .mxd file extension.
Map package: This is a file that contains layer settings, layout, and referenced data 
used by the original map document or map. It is used to share maps with those that 
cannot access your data. This has an .mpk or .mpkx file extension.
ModelBuilder: This is a visual programming interface found in ArcGIS for Desktop 
and ArcGIS Pro. It allows users to create tools to automate and standardize processes 
without having to know how to program.
NAD 27: This is North American Datum 1927. It is a local datum, which is located 
in Meades Ranch, Kansas. That is the approximate center of the continental United 
States.
NAD 83: This is North American Datum 1983. This is an Earth-centered datum. 
There is more than one version of this datum. It has been updated and adjusted 
many times.
Pane: This is a dockable window in the ArcGIS Pro interface, which contains 
information and access to tools or tool parameters. Commonly used panes include 
Contents, Geoprocessing, and Project.
Portal: This is a connection to ArcGIS Online or Portal for ArcGIS. It is used by 
ArcGIS Pro to manage licenses. Also, it provides an access to shared content stored 
in an organization's ArcGIS Online account or Portal for ArcGIS.
Project: This is used by ArcGIS Pro. Projects contain a collection of GIS resources 
used for a specific project, map, or analysis. They have an .aprx file extension.
Project: This is the act of converting data from one coordinate system to another. 
This can be done on the fly by ArcGIS or done permanently using the project 
geoprocessing tool.

ArcGIS Pro Glossary
[ 324 ]
Project package: This is a file that contains all items included in a single project 
including the referenced data. It is used to share projects with those that do not have 
access to your data or to archive projects at specific points in a project cycle. Since 
these contain everything found in a project, they can get very large. It has a .ppkx 
file extension.
Projection: This is the representation of the Earth's curved 3D surface on a 
2-dimensional surface (flat map). There are many types of projections. Each is 
designed to reduce distortion, which can be caused in four different properties: 
Shape, Area, Distance, and Direction. The projection is part of a projected 
coordinate system's definition.
Python: This is the primary scripting language for ArcGIS. Python is a programming 
language that allows you to create the script to help automate and schedule 
processes. Python is not only limited to ArcGIS but can also be used with many 
other applications.
Query: Basically, this is a question used to select features that have specific attribute 
values or relationships. Within ArcGIS, there are two basic types of selection queries: 
Select by Attribute and Select by Location. Select By Attribute will select features in 
a layer based on value criteria the user enters, such as Parcel Owner Name = John 
Smith or Pipe Size > 6. Select By Location sometimes refers to a spatial query, 
selects features in one or more layers based on their spatial relationship, such as all 
parcels within the city limits or all roads in a distance of 100 feet from a hospital.
Raster: This is a simple storage model for spatial data. It stores information using 
equal-sized cells. Each cell is assigned a number. This number can represent 
things such as counts, color, elevation, temperature, wind speed, average rainfall, 
population density, and so on. A raster is often associated with, but not limited to, 
aerial photography, Digital Elevation Models (DEMs), Land Use Classification, 
and Vegetation Classification.
Relate: This is one of the two ways to link two tables together in ArcMap or ArcGIS 
Pro. It can be used with any cardinality but recommended when you have a one to 
many or many to many cardinality. It links the two tables together so that when you 
select records in the primary table, the related records in the secondary table are 
highlighted. You cannot symbolize, query or label using data found in the secondary 
table when a relate is used.
Ribbon: This is the primary user interface used by ArcGIS Pro. It consists of a 
rectangular area located at the top of the interface, which contains various tabs. Each 
tab contains tools that access ArcGIS Pro functionality. Which tabs are visible will 
depend on the user's current actions and what is highlighted or selected within the 
interface.

Appendix A
[ 325 ]
Scene: This is a collection of related layer that can be viewed in 3D. These are stored 
within ArcGIS Pro Projects. They can also be created and viewed with ArcGlobe and 
ArcScene, which are part of the 3D Analyst extension for ArcGIS for Desktop. In this 
case, they are actually separate files with either a .3dd or .sxd file extension.
Shapefile: Shapefiles are the native format for Esri's ArcView 3.x and earlier. This 
format has become the de facto data transfer format for GIS. Many GIS and GPS 
packages have the ability to read, import, and export Shapefiles. A Shapefile stores a 
single feature class (that is, point, line, or polygon). Viewed as a single file by ArcGIS 
software, it is actually made up of multiple files (SHP, SHX, DBF, and others). 
Shapefiles are one of the two data formats that are editable within ArcGIS.
Spatial query: This is a query that uses the spatial relationship between features 
in one or more layers to select data. In ArcGIS, this is accomplished with Select By 
Location. This allows users to select features in one or more layers based on their 
spatial relationship, such as all parcels within the city limits or all roads at a distance 
of 100 feet from a hospital.
Standalone or nonspatial table: This is a database table that is used in ArcGIS but 
is not an attribute table. It may be joined or related to a layer to provide additional 
information about features. Normally, it does not contain shape, shape_length, or 
shape_area fields.
String: This is another word for text. It is used by many databases as a field type. It 
can also be used in various expressions in ArcGIS.
Symbology: This includes the use of color, line types, fill patterns, thickness, and 
styles to differentiate features on one or more layers. Symbology options will depend 
on whether the features are points, lines, or polygons.
Tab: This is a collection of related tools located within the ArcGIS Pro ribbon.
Table: This is a collection of data that is stored in rows and columns. Rows within a 
table are called records, and columns are called fields. Each field must have a unique 
name.
Task: This is a collection of steps needed to complete a process or workflow. It is 
used to standardize workflows, define best practices, and help train new users. 
It is stored within a Task Item in a project or can be shared as a task file with an 
esriTasks file extension.
Task Item: This is an organizational unit in an ArcGIS Pro project. This is used to 
store related tasks and Task Groups.

ArcGIS Pro Glossary
[ 326 ]
Topology: This generally means a mathematical model of how spatial features 
are related to one another. Do they connect? Are they next to each other? Do they 
overlap? In ArcGIS, it is a part of the geodatabase that defines rules on how features 
in one or more feature classes must relate to one another. A geodatabase topology 
can only be created within a feature dataset, and only the feature classes with that 
dataset can participate in the topology.
Vector: This is a simple storage model for spatial data. It stores information using 
specific coordinates as points, lines, or polygons.
WGS 84: This is both a datum and a geographic coordinate system. When used as 
a datum, it is an Earth-centered datum. As a geographic coordinate system, it uses 
degrees as its units. The United States GPS uses WGS 84 as its native coordinate system.

[ 327 ]
Chapter Questions 
and Answers
Chapter 1 – Introducing ArcGIS Pro
•	
What happens when you use the Explore tool within the views?
Both views pan and zoom together.
•	
What happens when you click on a parcel in one of the map views?
An informational pop-up window appears containing information about the 
parcel clicked on.
Chapter 2 – Using ArcGIS Pro – 
Navigating through the Interface
•	
What happens when you click on a parcel using the Explore tool?
A pop-up window appears that contains information about the parcel clicked on.
•	
What happens when you click on one of the other values in the 
drop-down list?
Information about that feature is now displayed in the popup.
•	
What happens when you roll the scroll wheel away from you?
The map zooms in. (Unless you have adjusted your options for ArcGIS Pro.)

Chapter Questions and Answers
[ 328 ]
•	
What happens when you select the new symbol?
The symbol used to visualize the building layer changes to the gray building 
footprint symbol, which was selected.
Chapter 3 – Creating and Working with 
ArcGIS Pro Projects
•	
What do you see listed under maps?
A single map called Map.
•	
What do you see listed under database?
ArcGIS Pro Exercise 3A.
•	
Does the map contain all layers which reference all the feature classes in the 
geodatabase?
No it does not.
•	
Does the project geodatabase contain feature classes that represent the 
floodplains or drainage basins?
No it does not.
•	
What other items are currently available in this project?
A project toolbox, multiple styles, connection to the Chapter3 folder, and Esri World 
Geocoder.
•	
What groups do you see?
Answers to this question will vary depending on the groups the user is a part of in 
ArcGIS Online or Portal for ArcGIS.
•	
What is available or listed under Maps?
Scene.
•	
What is available or listed under toolboxes?
%your name% 3B.
•	
What is available or listed under databases?
%your name% 3B.gdb.

Appendix B
[ 329 ]
Chapter 4 – Creating 2D Maps
•	
What databases are currently connected to this project?
%your name% Ex4A, and Map.
•	
Which geodatabase is the default geodatabase?
%your name% Ex4A.
•	
What folders are available in this project?
%your name% Ex4 and Chapter4.
•	
What is the field name or alias that contains the size of the sewer pipes?
Pipe size or size.
Chapter 5 – Creating 3D Maps
•	
What is the name of the currently assigned ground surface?
WorldElevation3D/Terrain3D.
•	
What is the location of the currently assigned ground surface?
http://elevation3d.arcgis.com/arcgis/services/WorldElevation3D/Terrain3D/
ImageServer.
Chapter 6 – Creating a Layout
•	
Purpose of Map 1:
Highlight specific attribute values associated with features.
•	
Purpose of Map 2:
Show location of features in the sewer system.
•	
Purpose of Map 3:
Show spatial relationships between parcels and wetlands.
•	
If you know your audience might include someone who is color blind, what 
can you do or change so that they could successfully use your map as well?
For line layers, you could use different patterns to represent different values or 
layers. For polygons, you could use different fill patterns, and for points, different 
marker symbols.

Chapter Questions and Answers
[ 330 ]
•	
You are preparing a map of your water system, which will be given to 
the field crews to help them locate the system in the field. The maps will 
be stored in their trucks and used in all kinds of weather. How might this 
impact your design?
Since this map is being used in the field, it might be better to keep the size limited. 
This may mean needing to produce a series of maps that show different parts of the 
system instead of using a single map. Since these are water system workers, who will 
be performing maintenance and repairs, they will need a higher level of detail than 
others. Scale will also be important since they will be using these maps to help them 
locate features while in the field. Given the all-weather use of these maps, they may 
need to be laminated. Lamination can also cause colors to fade, so a more intense 
color palette might be a good idea as well.
•	
You are preparing the official zoning map for a city. This will be the legal 
zoning map as required by the city's zoning ordinance and will be hanging 
in City Hall for city officials and the citizens to use. What factors should you 
consider that might impact your design?
Since this will be hanging in City Hall and used by multiple people, it should 
probably be designed as a large map. This would allow multiple people to view it 
at all times. Also given the number and variety of people who may view the map, 
it might be good to use a combination of patterns and colors to identify the zoning 
classifications. Being the legal official zoning map for the City, you would want to 
review the zoning ordinance to see if it spells out any specific requirements for the 
official zoning map, such as a required citation, signature lines, seals, and dates. You 
may also want to print this map on high-quality paper to ensure that the map is able 
to be printed at the best possible quality and will hold up over time.
•	
What is your current scale?
The answer will vary but should be somewhere between 1:4600 and 1:5000.
Chapter 7 – Editing Spatial and Tabular 
Data
•	
What geodatabase is being referenced by the layers and where is it located?
Trippville_GIS.gdb located in C:\Student\IntroArcPro\Databases.
•	
What coordinate system is the parcels layer in?
NAD 1983 StatePlane Georgia West FIPS 1002 Feet.
•	
Are all your layers within the same coordinate system?
Yes.

Appendix B
[ 331 ]
•	
What snapping position options are enabled?
Answers will vary depending on what may have been set and used in 
previous sessions.
•	
What templates are available?
Manhole, Parcels, RW, 8 inch Ductile Iron, 8 inch PVC, and 10 inch Clay.
•	
What are some of the properties associated with the template?
Name, Description, Tags, Target Layer, Drawing Symbol, Tools, and Attributes.
•	
What values are assigned to those fields for this template and where do you 
think they came from?
Pipe Size = 8 and Material = PVC. These values are coming from the symbology 
settings for that layer as shown in the Contents pane.
•	
What attribute fields are associated with the Street_Centerline feature class 
and what field types are they?
PREFIXDIR – Text, SUFFIXDIR – Text, Shape_Length – Double, RD_Class – 
Text, QUAD – Text, ST_NAME – Text, Shape – Geometry, ObjectID – ObjectID.
Chapter 8 – Geoprocessing
•	
What version of ArcGIS Pro are you using?
Answers will vary depending on the user's installed version. At the time the book 
was written, ArcGIS Pro 1.1.0 was the current version.
•	
What license level of ArcGIS Pro do you have?
Answers will vary depending on what has been assigned to the user.
•	
What extensions if any can you use?
Answers will vary depending on the user.
•	
What geoprocessing tool that you have read about in this chapter do you 
think you should use to create a layer that only contains the streets inside 
the city limits?
The Clip tool. This will create a new layer that only contains the streets that are 
within the City limits.
•	
What field identifies what road each segment belongs to?
ST_NAME.

Chapter Questions and Answers
[ 332 ]
•	
After sorting the records in the table, what do you notice about the number 
of segments for each road?
There are multiple segments for each road. Many have over 10 different segments, 
which will make calculating the total length more difficult.
•	
How many records are there with the same road name?
There is only one record for each road name.
Chapter 9 – Creating and Using Tasks
•	
What Task Items do you see included in this project?
Selecting features and editing parcels.
•	
How many tasks are included in the Task Item you have opened and what 
are they?
Three (3). Selecting features in the Map, Selecting features by attributes, and 
Selecting features based on location to other features.
•	
How many steps did this task have?
There were two active steps, which required user interaction.
•	
How many steps do you see in this task?
Four (4)
•	
How does this compare to the number of steps you counted when you ran 
the task in the last exercise?
There are more steps.
•	
Why do you think the number of steps you counted in Exercise 9A differs 
from the actual number of steps contained in this task?
Some of the steps in this task were set to run automatically and were hidden from the 
user, so they were not aware that they existed.
Chapter 10 – Automating Processes with 
ModelBuilder and Python
•	
How has the graphics for the Buffer tool and its associated variables changed?
 A drop shadow has been added to the yellow rounded square for the Buffer tool and 
the ovals for the variables.

Appendix B
[ 333 ]
•	
Did the model try to rerun the Buffer tool?
No it did not.
•	
What tool or tools did the model run when you clicked on the Run button 
and why?
The model only ran the Union tool with its associated variables because it was the 
only process in the ready-to-run state. The Buffer tool was in the Has been Run state, 
so it was not run again.
•	
What happens to all the processes in the model which were in the has been 
Run state?
They have all been reset to the Ready-to-Run state.
•	
Which feature class is now in the Ex10 geodatabase and how does that 
compare to when you ran the model from inside ModelBuilder?
There is only one feature class in the geodatabase: Parcels_StreamBuff_Union. When 
the model was run from ModelBuilder, it produced two feature classes not just one.
Chapter 11 – Sharing Your Work
•	
What is the path to the zoning layers data source?
C:\Users\%Your User Name%\Documents\ArcGIS\Packages\Trippville 
Zoning_CCA6670E-7141-4BCA-8D83-6617F5EDB909\p11\trippville_gis.gdb. 
(Your actual path may be slightly different depending on your OS and what other 
packages you may have opened in the past.)
•	
Is this different than the data source used by the Zoning layer you used to 
create the layer package?
Yes, the layer used to create the layer package references the Zoning feature class 
in the Trippville_GIS geodatabase located in the Databases folder included in the 
training data for the book. The Zoning layer that was added using the package.


[ 335 ]
Index
Symbols
2D and 3D layers
labeling  46, 47
layers, adding  41
project, opening  41
symbology, changing  42-46
working with  41-49
2D maps
annotation, adding to map  99
challenges  104
configuring  86
creating  86
label conflict, configuring  102, 103
labeling  101, 102
layer file, creating  101
layer file, using  99-101
layer, filtering with definition query  96-98
layers, adding  88-94
layers, configuring  88
map file, using  99, 100
new map adding, map file used  100
new map, adding to project  94
new map, creating  86-88, 95
placement options, configuring  102, 103
project, creating  88, 89
3D Analyst  189
3D maps
about  105-107
simple 3D scene, creating  108
3D scene
3D layer, creating  111, 112
creating  108
layer, adding  108-110
project, creating  108
A
Add Data tool
options  28
aerial photography  324
analysis
commercial parcels, selecting that are 
not in floodplain  217, 218
commercial properties, locating near 
sewer lines  209-211
commercial property, determining  213-216
data, preparing for  193, 194
defining  192, 193
performing  209
selected parcels, exporting  212
annotation  319
Application Programming Interface
 (API)  281
APR file  51
APTX file extension  73
ArcCatalog  1, 320
ArcGIS  319
ArcGIS for Desktop  1, 319
ArcGIS for Mobile  1
ArcGIS for Server  1, 319
ArcGIS Online
about  1, 319
URL  12
ArcGIS Pro
3D Analyst  189
about  1, 105, 147, 319
advantages  73
attributes, updating  166
challenge  142, 166, 176
data storage formats  148
desired area, displaying  138, 139

[ 336 ]
exercise data, downloading  15, 16
exercise data, installing  15, 16
existing ArcGIS Pro project, opening  16-18
extensions  187
hardware requirements  3
install files, downloading  5-9
installing  2, 9
launching  14, 15
layout, creating  134, 135
manholes, drawing  166-168
methods  117
minimum system requirements  2
Network Analyst  190
new blank layout, adding  135-137
new sewer line, drawing  163-166
opening  135, 191
operating system requirements  2, 3
other elements, adding  139, 140
preparing, for edit  157-162
project, opening  135, 157-162
recommendations, from author  4, 5
reference  286
roads, adding  168-175
silent install, conducting for IT
 departments  10
software requirements  3
source data, adding  162, 163
Spatial Analyst  188
URL  8
used, for editing data  151
ArcGIS Pro extensions
defining  187
ArcGIS Pro interface terminology
defining  20
Group on a tab  21
Pane  21
Quick Access Toolbar  21
Ribbon  20
Tab  21
View  21
ArcGIS Pro licenses
assigning  11
level  11, 12
managing  11-14
number  11, 12
ArcGIS Pro project
default geodatabase  53
defining  52
home folder  53
portal item  53
project item  52
project package  53
Project pane, using  53-56
working with  52
ArcGIS server
URL  64
ArcGlobe  1
ArcMap  1, 320
ArcPy module
about  283, 284
Python syntax, locating for 
geoprocessing tool  285-287
ArcScene  1, 51
attribute  320
Attribute Table  320
B
Basemap  320
broken data links
URL  301
Buffer tool  254
C
cardinality  320
CityEngine  118
Clip and Dissolve tools
data, evaluating  198, 199
data, simplifying  200, 201
streets, clipping  199, 200
table, exporting to Excel  202, 203
total length, calculating  200, 201
using  198
components, step
about  237
Actions  240-242
Contents  243
General  238, 239
Views  242
Computer-Aided Design (CAD)  320
concatenate  320
content
sharing, on network  298
sharing, with those not on network  310, 311

[ 337 ]
contextual menus  19
contextual tabs
2D and 3D layers, defining  41
about  39
FEATURE LAYER contextual tab  39
custom project templates
creating  74
default map, setting up  75-77
defining  73
layout, adding from existing map
 document  77-80
new project creating, custom 
template used  82
project, creating  75
project, saving as template  80, 81
D
data
editing  151, 152
editing, ArcGIS Pro used  151
data formats  149, 150
data sources
connecting to  70-73
data types, ArcGIS Pro
Date  178
Double  178
Float or Single  178
Integer (Long and Short)  178
Raster  178
Text or String  177
Data view  321
Datum  321
Define Projection tool  196
Digital Elevation Model (DEM)  70, 113, 114
E
Easy button  253
editable data formats
defining  148, 149
EDIT tab  152-156
elevations
3D data, displaying  118
about  112
features, extruding  116, 117
ground elevation  113
local scene, creating  119
Esri
about  149
URL  9
Esri Standard Labeling Engine  41
Esri templates
name, defining  67
new project, creating with  67
used, for creating new project  67
Esri User Experience Improvement (EUEI)  9
Explore tool
functions  26
using  26
extensions  187
extrusion type
absolute height  117
base height  117
maximum height  117
minimum height  117
F
Feature dataset  321
FEATURE LAYER contextual tab
APPEARANCE tab  40
LABELING tab  40
features
creating  156, 157
templates  157
field
alias  177
data types  177, 178
name  177
field calculator  181
file explorer  69
functionality matrix
URL  187
G
Geocoding  322
Geodatabase  321
GeoEnrichment service  31
geographical information system (GIS)  86
geographic coordinate system
URL  107
Geoprocessing
about  322
tools  322

[ 338 ]
geoprocessing analysis tools
Overlay analysis  203, 204
Proximity analysis tool  206
using  203
geoprocessing model
about  254
components, defining  257-259
creating  257
defining  254, 255
model, saving  259-262
versus Python script  256
versus tasks  256
geoprocessing tools
Append tool  197
Clip tool  194
Dissolve tool  194, 195
Merge tool  196, 197
Project tool  195, 196
georeferencing  162
GIS
functions, defining  85
GIS formats
exporting to  302
exporting, to KML  303-306
Google Earth or Google Earth Pro, 
downloading  303, 304
Google Earth or Google Earth Pro, 
installing  303, 304
KML/KMZ, opening in Google
 Earth  306-308
global scene  106
Google Earth or Google Earth Pro
URL  303
Graphics Processing Unit (GPU)  4
ground elevation
about  113
Digital Elevation Model (DEM)  113, 114
Triangulated Irregular Network
 (TIN)  114-116
I
Inquiry group
about  30
Infographics tool  30
Locate tool  31
Measure tool  31
integrated development environment 
(IDE)  281
Intel i7  2
interactive model
creating  274-276
hidden variables, exposing  277-279
variables, marking as parameters  276
interface
MAP tab, defining  32
ribbon, navigating  22
using  21
interface terminology
defining  20
J
Join  322
K
Keyhole Mark-up Language
 (KML/KMZ)  302
L
Land Use Classification  324
layer file, ArcGIS Pro
creating  298, 299
defining  298
used, for adding layer to map  299, 300
using  298
Layer group
about  27
Add Data tool  27, 28
Add Preset tool  28
layer package
about  311
creating  311-314
testing  315
layout
audience  131, 132
creating, in ArcGIS Pro  134
designing  128
purpose  128, 129
reference  142
situation  133
layout files
about  301

[ 339 ]
challenge  301
layout template
challenge  144
creating  142
new layout, configuring  143
new layout creating, Layout File used  142
template file, saving  142
using  142
license level and extension
determining  191, 192
licensing levels
Advanced level  186
Basic level  186
Standard level  186
local scene
about  106
adding  119
creating  119
ground surface, setting  119, 120
layers, adding  121-125
project, opening  119
symbology, setting  121-125
Local scene template
used, for creating new project  68, 69
M
map files
about  300
challenge  301
Maplex  41
map package
about  316
challenge  316
MAP tab
about  25
defining  32
Infographics tool, using  38, 39
Inquiry group  30
Layer group  27
map, navigating  33-37
Navigate group  25
project, opening  32, 33
Selection group  29
model
another process, adding  267-270
components, adding  264-266
creating  262, 263
ModelBuilder window  263, 264
project, opening  263, 264
running  270, 280
running, from ModelBuilder  270, 271
running, from toolbox  273, 274
run state, resetting  272
ModelBuilder script  253
MXD files  51
My Esri website
URL  5
N
Navigate group
about  25
Bookmarks tool  27
Explore tool  26
network
with ArcGIS Pro  298
without ArcGIS Pro  301
Network Analyst  190
network, with ArcGIS Pro
layer file  298
layout files  301
map files  300
new project
creating  66
creating, with Esri templates  67
non-GIS formats
maps and layouts, exporting  308, 309
tables, exporting  310
O
operating system (OS)  2
Overlay analysis tool
about  203, 204
Intersect tool  205
Union tool  204
Overlay toolset
tools, defining  203
P
photogrammetrist  114
PPKX file  53

[ 340 ]
product webpage, Esri
URL  12
project packages
about  317
challenge  317
Project pane, ArcGIS Pro
ArcGIS server, connecting to  64-66
database connection, adding  59-61
layers, adjusting  61-64
navigating  58, 59
project, opening  57
using  56
PROJECT tab
about  22
Licensing tool  24
New tool  23, 24
Options tool  25
Portal tool  24
Save As tool  24
Save tool  24
project templates
creating  66
Proximity analysis tool
Buffer tool  206, 207
Multiple Ring Buffer tool  208
Python
about  280, 281, 324
ArcPy module  284
data paths  284
defining  281
scripts, commenting  281, 282
scripts, documenting  281, 282
variables  283
Python script
about  253
adding, to ArcGIS Pro  293, 294
creating  287, 288
defining  255, 256
IDLE, opening  288, 289
running  293, 294
script, writing  290-292
versus geoprocessing model  256
versus tasks  256
Q
Quick Access Toolbar  20
R
raid system
about  5
RAID 0  5
RAID 3  5
RAID 5  5
Raster  324
raster formats  114
S
scale bars
reference  144
schema
editing  176
field, adding  176-180
field populating, field calculator 
used  181, 182
new feature class, importing  182
values, populating  178
Selection group
about  29
Select By Attributes tool  29
Select By Location tool  30
Select tool  29
Shapefile
about  150, 302, 325
exporting, to geodatabase  183, 184
importing  182
layer, adding  182
project, opening  182
silent install
about  10
parameters  10
Spatial Analyst  188
Spatial query  325
Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA)  62
Stormwater  156
surface, Digital Elevation Model (DEM)
adding  70-73
SXD files  51

[ 341 ]
T
tabs  19
task
about  221, 222
ArcGIS Pro, starting  225
audience  232
challenge  251
components  222-224
creating  227-235
exploring  227
goal, defining  230
nearby parcels, selecting  248, 249
new task, creating  236, 237
opening  225, 226
opening, in Task Designer  228
project, opening  225-235
running  224-251
selection, exporting to excel 
spreadsheet  249, 250
step, adding to zoom  244-246
steps, adding to  244
steps, reviewing  229, 230
street segment, selecting  246-248
Task Group, creating  234
Task Item, creating  233-235
using  231
versus geoprocessing model  256
versus Python script  256
workflow, defining  230, 231
TBX file  260
templates, New tool
Blank  23
Global Scene.aptx  23
Local Scene.aptx  23
Map.aptx  23
tool availability
determining  186
licensing levels  186, 187
topology  326
Triangulated Irregular Network
 (TIN)  114-116
U
Universal Naming Convention (UNC)  10
Universe Trans Mercator (UTM)  162
V
Vegetation Classification  324
W
Web Mapping Service (WMS)  52
WGS 84 Web Mercator
 (Auxiliary Sphere)  287
World Geocoder service  31

