
Learning IBM Bluemix
 
 
 
 
Demystify application development on cloud platform by
leveraging the power of IBM Bluemix
 
 
 
Sreelatha Sankaranarayanan
 
 
 
 
BIRMINGHAM - MUMBAI

Learning IBM Bluemix
 
Copyright © 2016 Packt Publishing
 
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or
transmitted in any form or by any means, without the prior written permission of the
publisher, except in the case of brief quotations embedded in critical articles or reviews.
Every effort has been made in the preparation of this book to ensure the accuracy of the
information presented. However, the information contained in this book is sold without
warranty, either express or implied. Neither the author, nor Packt Publishing, and its
dealers and distributors will be held liable for any damages caused or alleged to be caused
directly or indirectly by this book.
Packt Publishing has endeavored to provide trademark information about all of the
companies and products mentioned in this book by the appropriate use of capitals.
However, Packt Publishing cannot guarantee the accuracy of this information.
 
First published: October 2016
Production reference: 1171016
 
Published by Packt Publishing Ltd.
Livery Place
35 Livery Street
Birmingham B3 2PB, UK.
ISBN 978-1-78588-774-1
www.packtpub.com
 

Credits
Authors
 
Sreelatha Sankaranarayanan
Copy Editor
 
Safis Editing
Reviewers
 
Mohan P Annamalai
Project Coordinator
 
Izzat Contractor
Commissioning Editor
 
Pratik Shah
Proofreader
 
Safis Editing
Acquisition Editor
 
Nitin Dasan
Indexer
 
Tejal Daruwale Soni
Content Development Editor
 
Priyanka Mehta
Production Coordinator
 
Shraddha Falebhai
Technical Editors
 
Dhiraj Chandanshive
Cover Work
 
Shraddha Falebhai
 

About the Author
Sreelatha Sankaranarayanan has close to 16 years of experience in software engineering.
She has been with Phoenix Global Solutions (now Tata Consultancy Services) for close to 2.5
years. She is currently with IBM India and has been with them for the last 13.5 years.
During her career, she has been part of product development, support, and test teams,
primarily working on enterprise middleware products. In her most recent role, she was
responsible for evangelizing IBM's cloud platform as-a-service, Bluemix, and has worked
with System Integrators, academia, and IBM partners to enable and support them with the
adoption of IBM's cloud platform as-a-service, Bluemix. She has coauthored a redbook
entitled B2B Solutions using WebSphere Partner Gateway v6.0, authored some developerWorks
articles, and some blog posts on the Mobile Enterprise Application Platform (MEAP),
Internet of Things (IoT), and cloud platform as-a-service (Bluemix). You can find her on
Twitter at  @sreelathas and on LinkedIn at h t t p s : / / i n . l i n k e d i n . c o m / i n / s r e e l a t h a s .
 
I thank Packt Publishing and Nitin Dasan for providing me with the opportunity and
support to author this book. Special mention to the editorial reviewer, Priyanka Mehta, and
the technical reviewer, Mohan P Annamalai (IBM), who have worked to refine each of the
chapters in this book. We hope that you enjoy and learn as much as we, as author and
reviewers, have enjoyed and learned putting this book together.

About the Reviewer
Mohan P Annamalai is a senior manager at IBM India Private Ltd, with 16 years of
experience in the IT industry. He is currently responsible for driving the development
efforts for Mobile Foundation Service on Bluemix. Prior to this, he successfully managed the
efforts for setting up the IBM Push Notifications service on Bluemix. He was also
responsible for driving IBM Bluemix eco system from India Software Labs in the year 2014.
In this role, he worked with key IBM system integrators to gain interest on Bluemix. In his
role as the IBM Bluemix program manager, he played a pivotal role in gaining mind share
for IBM Bluemix among the developers and students in India. Apart from mobile and
cloud, Mohan led the delivery of the analytics service component to power analytics in
couple of key IBM solutions. He has also worked for Satyam Computer Services Limited.
He started his career as a J2EE developer in connectivity and integration products and
became a development manager in the same space.

www.PacktPub.com
For support files and downloads related to your book, please visit www.PacktPub.com. For
support files and downloads related to your book, please visit www.PacktPub.com.
Did you know that Packt offers eBook versions of every book published, with PDF and
ePub files available? You can upgrade to the eBook version at www.PacktPub.com and as a
print book customer, you are entitled to a discount on the eBook copy. Get in touch with us
at service@packtpub.com for more details.
At www.PacktPub.com, you can also read a collection of free technical articles, sign up for a
range of free newsletters and receive exclusive discounts and offers on Packt books and
eBooks.
h t t p s : / / w w w . p a c k t p u b . c o m / m a p t
Get the most in-demand software skills with Mapt. Mapt gives you full access to all Packt
books and video courses, as well as industry-leading tools to help you plan your personal
development and advance your career.
Why subscribe?
Fully searchable across every book published by Packt
Copy and paste, print, and bookmark content
On demand and accessible via a web browser

Table of Contents
Preface
1
Chapter 1: Saying Hello to IBM Bluemix
7
Understanding cloud service delivery models
8
Getting a step closer to understanding IBM Bluemix
11
Understanding the Bluemix architecture
12
Familiarizing yourself with Bluemix deployment models
14
Public Bluemix
14
Dedicated Bluemix
14
Local Bluemix
15
Getting an account on public Bluemix
16
Understanding the Bluemix dashboard
20
Key dashboard or Bluemix UI concepts
20
Account details
21
Organization
21
Managing your organization
22
Space
28
Creating your own Space
29
Managing your Space
30
Region
30
Summary
34
Chapter 2: Building and Deploying Your First Application on IBM
Bluemix
35
Cloud Foundry command line utility
36
Installing the Cloud Foundry command-line utility
36
Log in to Bluemix using cf cli
38
Log in to your Bluemix account
38
Building your first Hello World application and deploying it on Bluemix
40
Understanding some more Bluemix concepts
41
Creating your Hello World application on Bluemix using a boilerplate
47
Updating your application on Bluemix
61
Downloading the source files for your starter or Hello World application
62
Summary
66
Chapter 3: Extending an Application and Configuring for Continuous
Delivery Using DevOps Services
67
DevOps services and the delivery pipeline
68

[ ii ]
Configuring the delivery pipeline for your application
68
Creating the sample application
69
Learning to wire applications using Node-RED
71
The ibmiot node
74
The debug node
77
The function node
78
The switch node
79
The template node
80
Configuring continuous delivery for your application
81
Editing the source using a web editor
88
Extending the application
93
Summary
96
Chapter 4: Leveraging On-Premise Software for Applications on
Bluemix
97
Services under the Integrate category
98
Creating an application on Bluemix
100
Wiring and configuring the flow
105
Downloading and installing MongoDB
113
Starting the MongoDB daemon and working with MongoDB
114
Creating the Secure Gateway service instance
115
Configuring the Secure Gateway service instance
117
Summary
127
Chapter 5: Scaling Applications in Bluemix
128
Overview of scaling types supported in Bluemix
129
Vertical scaling
129
Horizontal scaling
130
Creating an application to scale on Bluemix
133
Configuring a load test for your application
135
Creating the BlazeMeter service instance
135
Creating the load test
137
Manually scaling your application
139
Scaling your application using the Auto-Scaling service in Bluemix
141
Creating the Auto-Scaling service instance
142
Binding the Auto-Scaling service instance to your application
144
Defining the scaling policy for your application
146
Summary
149
Chapter 6: Monitoring and Management in Bluemix
150
Overview of monitoring and management services in Bluemix
151
Monitoring and Analytics service
152
Creating the Monitoring and Analytics service instance
153

[ iii ]
Simulating events in your application
163
New Relic service
169
Creating the New Relic service instance
170
Binding the New Relic service to your application
173
Configuring the application to send events to the New Relic service
174
Simulating events in your application
182
Viewing reports in the New Relic dashboard for your monitored
application
183
Summary
185
Chapter 7: Compute Options on Bluemix
186
Cloud Foundry applications
187
Working with the eclipse plugin for Bluemix
187
Installing the eclipse plugin for Bluemix
187
Importing your Cloud Foundry application to Eclipse
194
Updating your application in Eclipse
199
Deploying updates to Bluemix using the Eclipse plugin
201
Containers
209
Creating an IBM Container with an existing image
210
Before you begin
210
Installing Docker
210
Installing Cloud Foundry CLI
212
Installing the IBM Containers Cloud Foundry plugin
213
Creating a container using the Bluemix dashboard
214
Working with the CF plugin for IBM Containers
220
Virtual servers
221
OpenWhisk
222
Installing the OpenWhisk CLI
223
Creating the trigger source for our demonstration
224
Creating an action
228
Creating a rule
231
Testing a rule
232
Summary
234
Chapter 8: Security Services on Bluemix
235
Overview of the security services in the Bluemix catalog
236
Access Trail security service
238
Creating the Access Trail service instance
238
Working with the Access Trail service
240
Single Sign On security service
243
Creating a Single Sign On service instance
243
Configuring the identity sources in Single Sign On
246

[ iv ]
Configuring the cloud directory
247
Configuring LinkedIn as an identity source
250
Configuring Google+ as an identity source
255
Create an application which will use the Single Sign On authentication
service
260
Modify the sample application to enable the use of the Single Sign On service
269
Integrating the Single Sign On service with your application
272
Seeing it all work together
276
Summary
282
Chapter 9: Microservices-based Application Development on Bluemix
283
Understanding the microservices architecture pattern
283
Developing a microservices-based application on Bluemix
285
Microservice 1
286
Microservice 3
287
Microservice 2
289
Wiring and configuring the flow
293
Seeing it all work together
315
Summary
317
Chapter 10: Mobile Application Development on Bluemix
318
Mobile category services
319
Creating a mobile application
320
Creating a mobile project
320
Running the application on an Android emulator
331
Integrating Push Notifications to the application
337
Creating the Push Notifications service instance
338
Configuring the Push Notifications service instance
340
Integrating the Push Notifications service with an application
343
Sending Push Notifications to your application
344
Summary
362
Index
364

Preface
Cloud computing is an important transformative force defining the technology landscape
today. Cloud computing has changed the way technology can be built and used for
business, industry, governance, academia, and the like. Cloud technology is also considered
as a key enabler to building innovations that define newer markets. Given the importance
and relevance of this space, it is but natural to consider talking about one such cloud
platform called Bluemix, which is a platform as-a-service (PaaS) offering from IBM.
This book is an attempt to compile illustrative descriptions for the different capabilities
offered by Bluemix. The intended audience for this book is developers who are relatively
new to the space of application development on a platform as-a-service environment. This
book also serves to jumpstart developers who want to learn and use IBM Bluemix.
This book gives you the levers to understand Bluemix as a platform, learn how to use the
value-added services on Bluemix, understand how to build, manage, and monitor
applications on Bluemix, discover the options of deployment on Bluemix, and above all,
witness the ease and the innovative approach to discover and cater to different types of use
cases solving problems in varied categories.
This book is written in a simple, appealing, explanatory format with sufficient visual aids in
the form of screenshots so that it is easy to follow even for those of you who are not very
technical. As the author of this book, I am certain that you will experience a learning that
you can build upon later; you will find that this provides an apt landing platform from
where you are equipped to take the plunge.
What this book covers
Chapter 1, Saying Hello to IBM Bluemix, covers cloud computing and cloud service delivery
models, and then lets us take a look at what Bluemix is. It also covers the different ways in
which the platform is offered, along with an introduction to the IBM Bluemix public
offering.
Chapter 2, Building and Deploying Your First Hello World Application on Bluemix, introduces
you to application building on IBM Bluemix. You will learn how to build a simple
application on Bluemix and deploy and run it.

Preface
[ 2 ]
Chapter 3, Extending an Application and Configuring for Continuous Delivery Using DevOps
Services, teaches you how to extend existing applications on Bluemix to build additional
functionality using some of the value-added services on Bluemix; this is illustrated along
with a sample application.
Chapter 4, Leveraging On-Premise Software for Applications on Bluemix, demonstrates a very
important aspect of modern application building environment, called hybrid cloud. We will
see how on-premise or local software or applications can be leveraged to integrate with
newer applications that are to be deployed on public cloud infrastructure.
Chapter 5, Scaling Applications in Bluemix, introduces you to application scaling. You will
learn about the scaling options supported on Bluemix: manual and auto-scaling.
Chapter 6, Monitoring and Management in Bluemix, discusses the different services that can
be used to monitor and manage applications. You will learn to work with the Monitoring
and Analytics service for a web application deployed on Bluemix. Additionally, the chapter
introduces readers to NewRelic, which is a third-party service on Bluemix.
Chapter 7, Compute Options on Bluemix, covers the different compute options available on
Bluemix, such as containers, Cloud Foundry applications, virtual servers, and Open Whisk.
Chapter 8, Security Services on Bluemix, talks about the security services available on
Bluemix and elaborates two of the available security services in Bluemix. You will learn
how to offload the web application authentication functionality to the Single Sign On
service on Bluemix.
Chapter 9, Microservices-based Application Development on Bluemix, talks about an
architecture pattern for application development on the cloud, called the Microservices
architecture pattern. You will also learn how to use Bluemix and services on Bluemix to
build and deploy applications that employ the microservices architecture.
Chapter 10, Mobile Application Development on Bluemix, introduces you to services offered on
Bluemix that are specifically for mobile application development. You will learn how to use
some of these services to build a simple mobile catalog application.

Preface
[ 3 ]
What you need for this book
Here's what you require for this book:
Cloud Foundry CLI (the latest version available)
Eclipse IDE (v4.4 or later)
Who this book is for
This book is aimed at developers seeking to learn application development and deployment
methods on IBM Bluemix. A basic knowledge of Java and Node.js is assumed.
Conventions
In this book, you will find a number of text styles that distinguish between different kinds
of information. Here are some examples of these styles and an explanation of their meaning.
Code words in text, database table names, folder names, filenames, file extensions,
pathnames, dummy URLs, user input, and Twitter handles are shown as follows: "You will
notice that the deployable artifact for your application is the  webApp.war file."
A block of code is set as follows:
@Override
protected void init(VaadinRequest vaadinRequest) {
  Responsive.makeResponsive(this);
  setLocale(vaadinRequest.getLocale());
  getPage().setTitle("MyVaadinApp");
  showMainView();
}
New terms and important words are shown in bold. Words that you see on the screen, for
example, in menus or dialog boxes, appear in the text like this: "Enter your LinkedIn
credentials and click Allow access."
Warnings or important notes appear in a box like this.

Preface
[ 4 ]
Tips and tricks appear like this.
Reader feedback
Feedback from our readers is always welcome. Let us know what you think about this
book—what you liked or disliked. Reader feedback is important for us as it helps us
develop titles that you will really get the most out of.
To send us general feedback, simply e-mail feedback@packtpub.com, and mention the
book's title in the subject of your message.
If there is a topic that you have expertise in and you are interested in either writing or
contributing to a book, see our author guide at www.packtpub.com/authors.
Customer support
Now that you are the proud owner of a Packt book, we have a number of things to help you
to get the most from your purchase.
Downloading the example code
You can download the example code files for this book from your account at h t t p : / / w w w . p
a c k t p u b . c o m. If you purchased this book elsewhere, you can visit h t t p : / / w w w . p a c k t p u b . c
o m / s u p p o r t and register to have the files e-mailed directly to you.
You can download the code files by following these steps:
Log in or register to our website using your e-mail address and password.
1.
Hover the mouse pointer on the SUPPORT tab at the top.
2.
Click on Code Downloads & Errata.
3.
Enter the name of the book in the Search box.
4.
Select the book for which you're looking to download the code files.
5.
Choose from the drop-down menu where you purchased this book from.
6.
Click on Code Download.
7.

Preface
[ 5 ]
You can also download the code files by clicking on the Code Files button on the book's
webpage at the Packt Publishing website. This page can be accessed by entering the book's
name in the Search box. Please note that you need to be logged in to your Packt account.
Once the file is downloaded, please make sure that you unzip or extract the folder using the
latest version of:
WinRAR / 7-Zip for Windows
Zipeg / iZip / UnRarX for Mac
7-Zip / PeaZip for Linux
The code bundle for the book is also hosted on GitHub at h t t p s : / / g i t h u b . c o m / P a c k t P u b l 
i s h i n g /Learning-IBM-Bluemix. We also have other code bundles from our rich catalog of 
books and videos available at h t t p s : / / g i t h u b . c o m / P a c k t P u b l i s h i n g /. Check them out!
Downloading the color images of this book 
We also provide you with a PDF file that has color images of the screenshots/diagrams used
in this book. The color images will help you better understand the changes in the output.
You can download this file from
http://www.packtpub.com/sites/default/files/downloads/LearningIBMBluemix_ColorI
mages.pdf.
Errata
Although we have taken every care to ensure the accuracy of our content, mistakes do
happen. If you find a mistake in one of our books—maybe a mistake in the text or the
code—we would be grateful if you could report this to us. By doing so, you can save other
readers from frustration and help us improve subsequent versions of this book. If you find
any errata, please report them by visiting h t t p : / / w w w . p a c k t p u b . c o m / s u b m i t - e r r a t a,
selecting your book, clicking on the Errata Submission Form link, and entering the details of
your errata. Once your errata are verified, your submission will be accepted and the errata
will be uploaded to our website or added to any list of existing errata under the Errata
section of that title.
To view the previously submitted errata, go to h t t p s : / / w w w . p a c k t p u b . c o m / b o o k s / c o n t e n
t / s u p p o r t and enter the name of the book in the search field. The required information will
appear under the Errata section.

Preface
[ 6 ]
Piracy
Piracy of copyrighted material on the Internet is an ongoing problem across all media. At
Packt, we take the protection of our copyright and licenses very seriously. If you come
across any illegal copies of our works in any form on the Internet, please provide us with
the location address or website name immediately so that we can pursue a remedy.
Please contact us at copyright@packtpub.com with a link to the suspected pirated material.
We appreciate your help in protecting our authors and our ability to bring you valuable
content.
Questions
If you have a problem with any aspect of this book, you can contact us at
questions@packtpub.com, and we will do our best to address the problem.

1
Saying Hello to IBM Bluemix
Ready to rock with IBM Bluemix? Not yet? Don't fret; we are here to take you through your
exciting journey to embrace the whole new paradigm of application development on cloud.
Before we take the plunge, let us equip ourselves with an understanding of some of the
concepts that are at the periphery but that are essential to build your know-how of IBM
Bluemix.
Heard of cloud computing? No? Well, we highly recommend you have a basic
understanding of what cloud computing is at this point, before we can move forward. If we
were to define it in simple terms, cloud computing is the method of creating a pool of
resources (compute, storage, and network) and offering it through a simple portal that
allows users to request the resources they want and get them provisioned in minutes, all
this at a cost that is charged against the actual usage metrics of the resources or on a period-
based consumption model.
Did you get it? No? Let us simplify it further.
Think of resources as compute, storage, and networking.
Now think of these resources being pooled and shared in a data center by what we call
cloud service provider or CSP.

Saying Hello to IBM Bluemix
[ 8 ]
As a user, you will need a certain compute, storage, and networking capacity to host your
application. In a non-traditional cloud world, you would go to the URL of the CSP, which
will take you to the self-service portal of his service. Through this portal, you will be able to
look at the available resources offered by the CSP, look at the costs at which each of them is
offered, and will also be able to request a combination of resources based on your
requirements. This custom compute capacity will be provisioned to you inside your tenancy
or account with the CSP cloud offering. You will then be able to access and work with your
resources through public Internet calls. This is a typical scenario of using cloud computing
on a public cloud. By public cloud, what is meant is that the resources are shared and
accessible by anyone on the public Internet, once they have a tenancy or account established
within the cloud offering. Tenancy will assure resource isolation between tenants. Public
cloud platforms are a popular way to explain the concept of cloud computing; however,
there are private and hybrid flavors of cloud computing that CSPs provide. We shall discuss
this further along in this chapter.
In this chapter, we will be looking at the following topics:
Understanding cloud service delivery models
Getting a step closer to understanding IBM Bluemix
Understanding Bluemix architecture
Familiarizing with Bluemix deployment models
Getting an account on public Bluemix
Understanding the Bluemix dashboard
Understanding cloud service delivery
models
Having understood the cloud computing model, let us graduate ourselves to the next level,
where we will get an understanding of the three different service delivery models in cloud,
which is to say in simple words, what can I get from a CSP?
To understand the cloud service delivery models, we need to focus on what we need from a
cloud platform and what is provided to us by a cloud service provider; together, they define
the as-a-service paradigm of the cloud or the cloud service delivery model.

Saying Hello to IBM Bluemix
[ 9 ]
What do we mean by as-a-service? As-a-service is a new business model, where the
consumer does not have to buy a product or solution in its entirety for lifetime use. In the
as-a-service model, a consumer buys the rights to use a product or solution for a defined
period, in its entirety; the period can be renewed or continued based on the consumer's
requirement. There is no lock-in or upfront huge investments needed in the as-a-service
model. Applied to IT, this as-a-service model is cost viable for most small to mid-size
organizations and start-ups. This has allowed for exploitation of software solutions to bring
in business transformation through rapidly developed ubiquitous and innovative
applications.
Let us take a look at what the cloud service delivery models are. In the broad category, we
have three cloud service delivery models; there have been other specific categories as well,
but to discuss all service delivery models is outside the scope of this book. The three cloud
service delivery models are as follows:
Infrastructure as-a-service (IaaS)
Platform as-a-service (Paas)
Software as-a-service (SaaS)
The following figure shows a pictorial definition of each of the as-a-service models. IT
within an enterprise consists of the nine broad layers of infrastructure components, such as
networking, storage, servers and virtualization, and middleware; application infrastructure
components such as operating system, and runtime; and a software stack of applications
and data:
Cloud service delivery models

Saying Hello to IBM Bluemix
[ 10 ]
In a traditional on-premise environment, all the layers are procured, managed, and
maintained by the consumer, who is typically an enterprise. If the consumer opts to not
invest in infrastructure and instead leverage infrastructure provided as a service by a cloud
service provider, then the consumer is operating in an infrastructure as-a-service model; the
stack above the infrastructure components are still procured, managed, and maintained by
him. This model is useful when there is a need for elasticity in infrastructure to support
ever-changing business demands. This model absolves the consumer of being locked down
by huge investments in infrastructure if he has to support a shrinkage in his needs. On the
other hand, it also helps the consumer expand his IT in response to the increase in business
need.
Taking this discussion to the next level, in the third stack from the figure, we see that in
addition to the infrastructure components, we also see a model where the cloud service
providers provide the application infrastructure components as a service along with the
infrastructure components. This model is called platform as-a-service. Essentially, what this
translates to is a multi-tenanted environment where development and deployment of
applications can be done collaboratively with the support of value-added software products
and solutions offered as a service on the same platform. This model is useful when the
consumer wants an easy bring up and tear down development environment, where quick
and dirty prototypes can be built. The prototypes can be graduated to a full-fledged
production-ready application that is hosted and maintained on the same platform. Again, as
with any other as-a-service model with PaaS too, the consumer is not vendor locked and  is
absolved of upfront huge license costs, when he is still evaluating technology, an exception
to this would be when the customer brings his own license (BYOL) to use a specific
software as-a-service on the PaaS.
Lastly, software as-a-service is a model where the entire application stack from the
infrastructure components all the way up to the application and application data are vendor
managed. The user is merely an end consumer of the software application.
As we move from a traditional, on-premise environment to a completely vendor managed
software stack, the flexibility and customizability options with the consumer decreases;
also, the control that the consumer will have on different layers of the stack decreases.
However, the lower costs and speed and agility with faster time to value are achieved as we
move from the traditional environments through the types of as-a-service models.

Saying Hello to IBM Bluemix
[ 11 ]
Getting a step closer to understanding IBM
Bluemix
Bluemix is an open source Cloud Foundry-based platform as-a-service offering from IBM.
Bluemix is not just a hosting of open source Cloud Foundry; Bluemix provides value
additions such as:
An intuitive dashboard to interact with the Cloud Foundry layer and to work
with Bluemix
A suite of enterprise middleware and software offered as services on Bluemix
IBM support for the platform and IBM services
Deployment models to choose from, such as public, dedicated, and local
Rich IBM community business partners offering value added services
Community support through the IBM developerWorks network
The following figure gives a high-level snapshot of what the Bluemix platform is composed
of; Bluemix is not limited to what follows, but this figure gives a simplistic view of the
components available on Bluemix for users to work with. Bluemix provides a rich and wide
set of IBM software offered as managed services; these include services for application
development and deployment known as DevOps services, services that enable hybrid
applications to be developed and hosted through the use of integration services, cognitive
services from Watson, Mobile services for mobile application development and
management, data and analytics services to work with application data, and a host of
runtime support for your applications, such as Java, NodeJS, Ruby, php, Python, Groovy,
and so on:

Saying Hello to IBM Bluemix
[ 12 ]
High-level view of what Bluemix oﬀers
You will also see here in the figure that Bluemix offers different compute options for your
applications, based on your needs. In addition to the Cloud Foundry-based applications,
you can also deploy your applications and host them on Bluemix by using a Docker
container or open stack-based virtual machines. IBM also has announced the IBM Open
Whisk compute environment, which is ideal for applications that are event-based. To know
more about the compute options in Bluemix, refer to h t t p s : / / w w w . b l u e m i x . n e t / d o c s / c o m
p u t e / i n d e x . h t m l.
Understanding the Bluemix architecture
Bluemix is a Cloud Foundry-based platform as-a-service offering from IBM. Cloud Foundry
is the open source standard for PaaS. To understand in-depth details on cloud foundry
internals, you can refer to h t t p : / / d o c s . c l o u d f o u n d r y . o r g /.

Saying Hello to IBM Bluemix
[ 13 ]
The following figure gives a high-level overview of Bluemix architecture. We will scope our
discussion to the public deployment model of Bluemix; however, for dedicated and local
Bluemix deployments (about which we shall learn more later in the chapter), the Bluemix
internals based on Cloud Foundry architecture remain the same; what would change is the
infrastructure on which Bluemix is hosted:
Bluemix high level overview
In the preceding figure, you can see that Bluemix is hosted on Softlayer infrastructure. An
application hosted on Bluemix would run within the VM on Softlayer, each of the VMs will
have resource isolation through containers, and each container will have the runtime and
framework components necessary to run an application.
Applications on Bluemix are monitored for their health and managed by an application
manager. Developers can use a browser or the cloud foundry command line client to work
with Bluemix. The details on Bluemix UI are discussed in future sections of this chapter; we
will also be discussing details on working with Bluemix using the cloud foundry command
line in future chapters.
Bluemix catalog offers services that are hosted on Bluemix or those that run outside of it.
Services are IBM provided, community-based, or third-party software or middleware that is
offered from the Bluemix platform as-a-service, which is, in other words, ready-to-use
software that is billed on a pay as you use model, without prior license purchase and so on.

Saying Hello to IBM Bluemix
[ 14 ]
Familiarizing yourself with Bluemix
deployment models
Bluemix is offered as a service in three deployment models. They are as follows:
Public Bluemix
Dedicated Bluemix
Local Bluemix
Public Bluemix
Bluemix is offered as a public multi-tenanted platform as-a-service offering. Public Bluemix
is available currently in three datacenters (at the time of writing this book). Public Bluemix
is great for startups, open community developers, freelance developers, students, and for
specific requirements of small to medium or even large enterprises. This is a great platform
for experimenting with technology, building the quick and dirty prototypes, and also, a
platform for building and hosting business applications that are not stringent on regulatory
and compliance requirements. As discussed in this chapter and for most of this book, we
will be using public Bluemix, which can be accessed from www.bluemix.net.
Dedicated Bluemix
Unlike public Bluemix, dedicated Bluemix is hosted on a single tenanted dedicated
Softlayer infrastructure. If you want a dedicated Bluemix setup, then the infrastructure
underlying this dedicated Bluemix is also dedicated to you. The hardware is not shared
with any other users. Dedicated Bluemix makes a hybrid environment possible, where you
can leverage the advantages of cloud development along with the data from within your
enterprise.
Dedicated Bluemix  can be set up to sit within your enterprise VPN network and user
identity management can be integrated to your enterprise identity management system.
This will allow dedicated Bluemix to be a platform that is truly dedicated and customizable
for your enterprise. Services on dedicated Bluemix can be customized based on what you
really need, as opposed to out of the box catalog.
Dedicated Bluemix is suitable for application deployments that have greater security,
regulatory, and compliance requirements. Also, in cases where there is a need to have
greater control over audit data or application data, this kind of Bluemix deployment is
suggested.

Saying Hello to IBM Bluemix
[ 15 ]
Apart from the regular Bluemix dashboard, dedicated Bluemix has what is called the admin
console. This is an operations console that the administrators of the dedicated Bluemix
environment within your organization can use to manage and administer the Bluemix
platform within their enterprise. The functions that can be carried out using the admin
console would be as follows:
User administration
Catalog management
Organization administration
View system/dedicated Bluemix updates or scheduled updates
Monitor the usage of resources across the organizations within the dedicated
Bluemix account
Access and view reports and logs for activities on the environment
Another important aspect worth mentioning about dedicated Bluemix is the syndicated
catalog. Dedicated Bluemix provides the ability for its users to use software services across
their public or dedicated Bluemix environments. A single palette of services catalog is
displayed to the dedicated Bluemix user, from where he can choose services that he would
like to use for his application. Dedicated services are marked with a red icon on the top
right, as shown in the following screenshot; the grayed-out service is one that is turned off
or made unavailable for the given organization in the dedicated Bluemix through the admin
console, which was discussed earlier. Services that are from public Bluemix syndicated to
the dedicated Bluemix catalog are shown in a separate category of services and they do not
have the red icon to the top right corner, as was the case with dedicated services.
The pricing and support models are also different from public Bluemix. To learn more
about dedicated Bluemix you can refer to h t t p : / / w w w . i b m . c o m / c l o u d - c o m p u t i n g / b l u e m i
x / d e d i c a t e d /.
Local Bluemix
Bluemix delivered as a service within the firewall boundaries of your enterprise on your
infrastructure or within your datacenter is called local Bluemix. You can imagine it to be a
private cloud offering a PaaS platform. The core Bluemix platform is the same across public,
dedicated, or local.

Saying Hello to IBM Bluemix
[ 16 ]
Local Bluemix is typically useful where the sensitivity, privacy, and security needs of
applications and application data is very stringent. An example would be government
agencies or government bodies; they are usually governed by very strict regulatory and
compliance standards and often would need hosting and operating environments that are
mostly under their control.
The architecture of Bluemix local is given in detail at h t t p : / / w w w . i b m . c o m / c l o u d - c o m p u t i
n g / b l u e m i x / l o c a l / i m g s / t h e - a r c h i t e c t s - g u i d e - t o - b l u e m i x - l o c a l . p d f.
The first step in your journey to learning Bluemix is to learn how to create
your own account on IBM Bluemix.
Getting an account on public Bluemix
Creating an account on Bluemix would be the first step for you to get access to a variety of
resources that you will use to create, deploy, and run your application. Throughout this
book, we will use the public multi-tenanted offering of IBM Bluemix to work with. Let us
learn on how to create your Bluemix account:
Ensure you have Internet connectivity, open your browser, and go
1.
to www.bluemix.net.
Click SIGN UP, as shown in the following screenshot:
2.
You can sign up for a 30-day free trial of Bluemix. Once you click SIGN UP, you
3.
will be taken to the page as follows; a couple of things that you should pay
attention to on this page are as follows:
You are providing information on this page to create an IBM ID; if you
already have an IBM ID, created as part of your work with any other
IBM products or offerings, then you can use it to log in to Bluemix. You
can then skip the sign up step. If you do not have an IBM ID, then
please follow the steps here to create one.

Saying Hello to IBM Bluemix
[ 17 ]
By the sign up process, you are entitled to the 30-day free trial of IBM
Bluemix. You will be able to log in to Bluemix and use all the resources
on it for free during this trial period:
Provide your details in the fields shown in the SIGN UP screen and click
4.
CREATE ACCCOUNT. This will create your IBM ID and you will get further
login information on your e-mail address that you have provided during sign up.
Once you click CREATE ACCOUNT, you will see the following page on
successful submission:

Saying Hello to IBM Bluemix
[ 18 ]
You will receive an e-mail, as shown in the following screenshot, for reference;
5.
you will need to first confirm your account by clicking the Confirm your account
link. Once this is done, you can log in to www.bluemix.net using your newly
created IBM ID and password. If you face any login-related issues, please log the
problem with h t t p : / / i b m . b i z / b l u e m i x s u p p o r t and the Bluemix support team
will get in touch with you to fix the issue:

Saying Hello to IBM Bluemix
[ 19 ]
On confirming the account, by clicking the Confirm your account link, you will
6.
see the following screen:
Click Log in to go to the Bluemix login page. Enter your newly created IBM ID
7.
and password to log in:

Saying Hello to IBM Bluemix
[ 20 ]
On logging in, you will be taken to your dashboard, as shown here:
8.
Congratulations! You have just completed the first step toward getting started with
Bluemix.
Understanding the Bluemix dashboard
In this section, let us try to understand some details about the Bluemix Dashboard. This is
essential in learning to work with IBM Bluemix.
Key dashboard or Bluemix UI concepts
In this section, we will learn about some of the key concepts used in Bluemix. Your Bluemix
account can be administered from the Bluemix console. Understanding of the concepts
within Bluemix, which are surfaced on the console, will help you learn how to plan the
usage of your account and the resources within it.

Saying Hello to IBM Bluemix
[ 21 ]
Account details
Clicking the icon to the extreme top-right of your dashboard will bring up information on
your Bluemix account:
The account details are shown as follows; it displays the account owner's name, registered
e-mail address, and organization. You will see your account details here.
Organization
Organization is an all-encompassing entity in the case of a public Bluemix account. This is
the topmost level in the hierarchy of entities that a user will work with on Bluemix. For a
public Bluemix user who has created a Bluemix account, he is the account owner and
organization is his topmost entity. Usually, the account owner's e-mail is defaulted to his
organization name. This can be edited by the account owner; we will see how to do that in
future sections:

Saying Hello to IBM Bluemix
[ 22 ]
Managing your organization
You can manage your organization by clicking the icon to the extreme top-right corner of
the console, also called the Account Details view:

Saying Hello to IBM Bluemix
[ 23 ]
This would bring up the following screen, where you can click Manage Organizations:
This will bring up the page from where you can administer your Bluemix organization:
There are three important concepts to be understood here under organization management.
You will see that there are three tabs here for USERS, DOMAINS, and QUOTA.

Saying Hello to IBM Bluemix
[ 24 ]
Organization management amounts to actions that you perform with respect to managing
the users and domains in the organization.
USERS
The account owner is the default user listed. Now, in a typical development environment,
you would want multiple users to be able to access and work on a given space within your
organization. This is a must for collaborative development needs. To enable this, you will
need to invite a user to your organization and assign him a space.
Click Invite a User; you will see the following screen, where you will need to enter the e-
mail address of the person you want to invite. You can assign the user you are inviting a
role within your organization, which is to manage your organization, or you can simply
choose to only give the user access to your space, as a developer:

Saying Hello to IBM Bluemix
[ 25 ]
The user you invite can have an account on Bluemix. You will see his user name listed
within your organization once you have invited the user. If you are inviting the user using
his e-mail address, which is linked to his IBM ID, then he will be added as a member; if the
user does not have an IBM ID, then an IBM ID is created for the user with the e-mail
address and he is added as a member. However, in our example, the user already has a
Bluemix account linked to the given e-mail address, so he will be added as a collaborator.
Click INVITE to invite the user. You will see a confirmation, as follows:
Within your organization, under the USERS tab, you will see the new user listed as follows:

Saying Hello to IBM Bluemix
[ 26 ]
The user that you have invited will be able to see your organization along with his own
organization in the account details page; from here he will be able to switch to your
organization and will be able to work with the space that you have assigned him to, as
shown in the following screenshot:
You can learn more about each of the user roles within an organization and a space by
clicking on Learn About Roles:

Saying Hello to IBM Bluemix
[ 27 ]
DOMAIN
Click the DOMAIN tab from the manage organizations page; you will see the default
system domain assigned, which in the case of the demo account would be  au-
syd.mybluemix.net. The public Internet route for your organization is defaulted to the
system domain, and the host in the route is usually your application name:
You will be able to add custom domains to your organization by clicking ADD DOMAIN.
You can associate your applications to use the custom domains instead of the default
system domain. The discussion of custom domains is outside the scope of this book. To
know more on custom domains, you can refer to the Bluemix documentation at
www.bluemix.net/docs.
QUOTA
Quota defines the resources allocated to an organization. This will provide information on
what is the maximum memory that can be used by applications across spaces in your
organization. Quota also provides the total number of cloud service instances that can be
created in your organization across spaces. Quota is allocated when the account is created.
You can increase your quota by moving to the pay as you go or subscription plans for your
Bluemix account. The following screenshot shows the quota for the demo account we are
using in this chapter; this would be similar to the quota on the trial account you have
created following the steps in this chapter:

Saying Hello to IBM Bluemix
[ 28 ]
Space
Space is a logical grouping of resources on the platform. Multiple Spaces can be created
within an organization. Doing so allows the account owner to invite other users to his
account and share resources with them by providing resource isolation; he does this by
assigning users to a given Space. While inviting users to work on a Space, he can also assign
roles for the users that would define what the users can do with the resources and the
platform. This is an essential concept, that makes collaborative development a possibility on
the platform. In addition, it gives the flexibility of maintaining similar but different
environments within the user account. One of the most popular needs to do this would be
for someone to isolate test environments from that of development and production. You
will notice dev is the default Space that is created for your organization:

Saying Hello to IBM Bluemix
[ 29 ]
Creating your own Space
You can create a new Space by clicking Create a Space and providing the name of your
Space in the dialog that comes up, as shown here:
Once your Space is created, you can see it listed to the left, as shown here:
You can work with your Space in the same way as you would with the default dev Space.
Both the Spaces in your organization have access to and can work with the same set of
resources of the platform.

Saying Hello to IBM Bluemix
[ 30 ]
Managing your Space
Go to the account details view and click Manage Organizations; you can select the Space
you want to manage, as shown here:
In the screenshot, you see that we have selected the mydev Space; the user and domain
details for this Space can be managed from here. You can remove users in your Space from
here. You can also delete the Space from here by clicking on DELETE.
Region
Region is an important concept that you need to understand; you see that the Region is
displayed in the account details page and this is a drop-down menu, which means that you
can switch the region for your account from here:

Saying Hello to IBM Bluemix
[ 31 ]
Region-based URLs
The access URLs for directly accessing your account on any of the three
data centers are as follows: 
h t t p s : / / c o n s o l e . n g . b l u e m i x . n e t (Dallas, US South)
h t t p s : / / c o n s o l e . e u - g b . b l u e m i x . n e t (London, UK) 
h t t p s : / / c o n s o l e . a u - s y d . b l u e m i x . n e t (Sydney, Australia)
Region implies the datacenter where the public Bluemix is hosted. Currently, at the time of
writing this book, public Bluemix is available in three datacenters, which can be seen by
expanding the drop-down menu on the account details page, explained in the previous
section:
The three datacenters are as follows:
Dallas, US South
London, United Kingdom
Sydney, Australia
Any user who creates an account on Bluemix is provided an ORG and default Space in one
the datacenters. However, the user can also access his account on any of the other
datacenters by creating a Space for his organization.
When you first sign up for your account and go to the login URL from your confirmation e-
mail, you will notice being redirected to one of the three URLs mentioned in the preceding
information box. That will give you the information on the datacenter where your account
and default Space exists.

Saying Hello to IBM Bluemix
[ 32 ]
The demo account used in this chapter is created in the Sydney, Australia datacenter, as you
would see from the account details screenshot where Sydney is selected as the default
Region. Now, if I would like to use Bluemix from another Region, say, US South for
example, I can change the drop-down value of the Region in the account details page to US
South. This will automatically redirect me to h t t p s : / / c o n s o l e . n g . b l u e m i x . n e t, which
you can witness in the address bar of the browser. Now, since this is a datacenter region
that I am going to for the first time since my account creation and since this is not the
default datacenter where my default Space was created, you will see the following in your
browser:
Working with different Regions 
Throughout this book, we will work across Regions on Bluemix and you
should now know how to switch your Region using the Bluemix console.
You will see here that you do not have a default Space in this datacenter. You are, however,
prompted to create one to continue to use your account on this datacenter.
Enter the name of the Space you would like to create in this region and click CREATE:

Saying Hello to IBM Bluemix
[ 33 ]
You will see that my mydev Space is created, and now I am on my account on the US South
datacenter.
The dashboard for you is displayed as shown in the screenshot. You will observe that the
dashboard that you saw when the region of this demo account was Sydney, Australia, is
slightly different from the dashboard in the US South region; this is because Bluemix is
continuously evolving as a platform. The latest and greatest set of capabilities of the
platform are first pushed to the US South datacenter, which is then incrementally and in a
phased manner pushed to the other datacenters.
Now let us switch the Region back to Sydney from the account details page.
The number of days your account will be active is indicated on your dashboard, as seen in
the following screenshot. Since we have signed up for the free trial period, you will see 30
days indicated in your dashboard. As you progress with Bluemix, with passing days on
your account, you will see a countdown to the number of days left for your account:

Saying Hello to IBM Bluemix
[ 34 ]
Clicking the icon showing the number of days left, as shown in the following screenshot, 
brings up the information on how you can upgrade your Bluemix account from being a trial
account to a paid account:
You can get more information on Bluemix pricing by going to www.bluemix.net/pricing/.
Summary
In this chapter, we have explored the cloud as-a-service delivery models and have seen how
Bluemix fits in the cloud service delivery model. We have also looked at the details of
Bluemix as the platform as-a-service offering and the need for it. We learned how to get an
account on the public deployment of Bluemix and also looked at the key concepts related to
the Bluemix account and account management from the dashboard.
We shall explore the dashboard further in our next chapter. Also in the next chapter, we
will learn about the cloud foundry command line utility and how to use it to work with
IBM Bluemix. What is more? Get excited to also learn how to build your first Hello World
application and deploy it on Bluemix.

2
Building and Deploying Your
First Application on IBM
Bluemix
After having got an understanding of what is Bluemix from the previous chapter, let us
now take the plunge. In this chapter, you will learn a few other important aspects of
working with IBM Bluemix. You will be introduced to the Cloud Foundry command-line
utility, which is a key component to work your way through the Bluemix platform. You will
also learn how to use the command-line utility to deploy a hello world application that you
will develop using the example in this chapter. This chapter will further discuss on how
you can develop a hello world application using the web IDE on the Bluemix platform and
how you can deploy changes to the application in an automated fashion using the DevOps
services on Bluemix. Sounds exciting? Yes? Let us get started.
In this chapter, we will be looking at following topics:
Cloud Foundary command line utility
Log in to Bluemix using cf cli
Building your first Hello World application and deploying it on Bluemix
Updating your application on Bluemix

Building and Deploying Your First Application on IBM Bluemix
[ 36 ]
Cloud Foundry command line utility
Bluemix is a PaaS platform, which is based on open standards. Bluemix at its core is Cloud
Foundry, which is an open source community-based project of open standards-based
platform as-a-service offering.
To know more about Cloud Foundry, you can go to h t t p s : / / w w w . c l o u d f
o u n d r y . o r g / l e a r n / f e a t u r e s /.
Cloud Foundry command line utility (cf cli) is an interface for the user to interact and
work with the Cloud Foundry platform, since Bluemix at its heart is Cloud Foundry, the cf
cli can be used to work with the Bluemix platform.
Installing the Cloud Foundry command-line utility
You can step through the following procedure to install the cf cli on your workstation or
desktop:
Go to h t t p s : / / g i t h u b . c o m / c l o u d f o u n d r y / c l i # d o w n l o a d s to download the
1.
latest version of cf cli installable for your operating system.
cf cli installable is available for Mac OS X, Linux, and Windows operating
systems. For updates on versions and support for operating systems, please make
sure to check h t t p s : / / g i t h u b . c o m / c l o u d f o u n d r y / c l i # d o w n l o a d s.
Follow the install instructions provided at h t t p : / / d o c s . c l o u d f o u n d r y . o r g / c f -
2.
c l i / i n s t a l l - g o - c l i . h t m l, for your operating system.

Building and Deploying Your First Application on IBM Bluemix
[ 37 ]
For example, installing from the  .pkg file on your Mac OS X would show the
following window on successful installation:
Make sure you check your installation by opening the command prompt (if
3.
Windows) or the terminal window (if Mac OS X) and typing the following
command:
      cf
If installed successfully, you will see the help contents displayed, as shown here,
4.
for example, when the command is run on a terminal window of Mac OS X:
      Last login: Mon Apr 18 12:19:04 on console
      xXXXX-MacBook-Pro:~ xxxxx$ cf
      NAME:
       cf - A command line tool to interact with Cloud Foundry
      USAGE:
       cf [global options] command [arguments...] [command options]
      VERSION:
       6.17.0+5d0be0a-2016-04-15
      GETTING STARTED:
       help                                   Show help
       version                                Print the version
       login                                  Log user in
       logout                                 Log user out
       passwd                                 Change user password
       target                                 Set or view the targeted org
                                              or space
      ...........
      ...........
      xXXXX-MacBook-Pro:~ xXXXX$

Building and Deploying Your First Application on IBM Bluemix
[ 38 ]
Log in to Bluemix using cf cli
After having installed cf cli, let us now learn how to log in to your Bluemix account using
the cf cli. In this chapter, we will use a terminal window to explain how to use cf cli; the cf
commands and steps explained are similar even if you were to use cf cli on Windows
command prompt or Linux terminal.
Log in to your Bluemix account
Follow the steps given to log in to your Bluemix account:
Open the terminal window and enter the following command:
1.
      cf login
On hitting Enter, you will see that you will be prompted to enter an API
2.
endpoint; this is required if you want to log in to a specific region. The API
endpoints are based on the regions where public Bluemix is available:
The API endpoint for Dallas, US region is
 https://api.ng.bluemix.net
The API endpoint for London, UK region is
 https://api.eu-gb.bluemix.net
The API endpoint for Sydney, Australia region is
 https://api.au-syd.bluemix.net
Since the account you have created in Chapter 1, Saying Hello to IBM Bluemix, is in
the Sydney, Australia region, we will provide the API endpoint as
 https://api.au-syd.bluemix.net:

Building and Deploying Your First Application on IBM Bluemix
[ 39 ]
Next, you will be prompted to enter your e-mail address, which is also your log
3.
in username, and your password. Once you provide these and hit Enter, your
authentication details will be validated. Once authenticated, you will see that you
will be logged in to your default target organization. You will then be provided
with options on the Space you would like to work with, within your Bluemix
organization:
Select the Space you want to work with by keying in 1 or 2 (from the options
4.
shown). Hit Enter and you will be successfully logged in to your space within
your organization on Bluemix where you can deploy your applications or work
with service instances or your applications. This completes your login to your
Bluemix account from cf cli, as shown in the following screenshot:

Building and Deploying Your First Application on IBM Bluemix
[ 40 ]
You can log in to any region where you have Space created for your organization,
by using the API endpoint. It can so happen that using  cf login may default to
the API endpoint you have used earlier. To override this option, you can use the
following command to log in:
      cf login -a https://api.ng.bluemix.net
The following screenshot shows the output of the preceding command:
Here you see that since there is only one space in the organization for the user in the US
region, the login command defaults the user to that Space, mydev.
There are a whole lot of operations you can do with cf cli, however we will learn more
about using cf cli in our subsequent sections, where we will look at building a hello world
application and deploying it on Bluemix.
Building your first Hello World application and
deploying it on Bluemix
In our first Hello World example we shall look at how easy it is to get started with a Hello
World application using Bluemix. For this we will use the Bluemix dashboard to work with
the platform. In the subsequent section we will look at using the same Hello World
application and we will learn to use cf cli to deploy the application on Bluemix.

Building and Deploying Your First Application on IBM Bluemix
[ 41 ]
Understanding some more Bluemix concepts
Before you start creating the Hello World application, there are a few aspects of the Bluemix
dashboard that need understanding. Log in to your Bluemix account by going to h t t p s : / / c
o n s o l e . a u - s y d . b l u e m i x . n e t. You will be taken to the dashboard, as shown in the
following screenshot:
You will see that from your dashboard you can work with applications and services.
Applications are deployable code that can be run on a compute environment on the
Bluemix platform. Applications are what you build and deploy.
Services are IBM, third-party or community software that is provided on the Bluemix
platform. Users can create service instances and can bind them to the applications they
develop and deploy on Bluemix. By doing this, their applications can leverage the
functionality of the software offered as services on the Bluemix platform. An example of a
service would be a database, which is a bare bones requirement for any modern or legacy
applications, that deal with data.
Virtual Servers or VMs, Containers, and OpenWhisk are compute
environments that provide options for users where they can deploy their
applications. Cloud Foundry is the default compute environment for the
Bluemix platform. At the time of writing this book the Sydney region does
not have support for Containers and OpenWhisk.

Building and Deploying Your First Application on IBM Bluemix
[ 42 ]
The following screenshot shows the compute environments that we discussed, available in
the US region:
Runtimes is the execution environment for your application code. For example, if you are
developing a Java Spring-based web application then the execution environment for your
application would require a web server or an application server that can run Java code
additionally you would also need the execution environment to have the necessary libraries
for the Spring framework, so that your application code can execute. This is typically what a
runtime would be.
The runtime options available can be seen by clicking on CATALOG option on the Bluemix
dashboard. At the time of writing this book the runtimes available are as shown in the
following screenshot:

Building and Deploying Your First Application on IBM Bluemix
[ 43 ]
Buildpacks are a mechanism to define runtime environment along with dependencies to
Cloud Foundry. Specifying a buildpack when deploying your application will make sure
that Cloud Foundry can get the necessary dependencies to build your execution
environment. Buildpack is an important mechanism of bringing in support for
programming languages and frameworks that are not claimed to be supported out of the
box on the Bluemix platform. We will learn more about it, later in this book. Community
Buildpacks, shown in the following screenshot, explains how and where to get the Cloud
Foundry-compatible buildpacks, so that you can deploy applications written in
programming languages or frameworks that are not supported out of the box on the
Bluemix platform:
The steps to deploy an application using Community buildpacks would be as follows:
Look up for a Cloud Foundry-compatible buildpack for your programming
1.
language or framework from h t t p s : / / g i t h u b . c o m / c l o u d f o u n d r y - c o m m u n i t y / c
f - d o c s - c o n t r i b / w i k i / B u i l d p a c k s.
Copy the GitHub URL for the buildpack you want to use.
2.
Use cf cli to log in to your Bluemix account, organization, and Space, where you
3.
would want to deploy your application.
Execute the following  cf command:
4.
    cf push {$APP_NAME} -b {$GIT_REPO_URL}
An example command would be :
   cf push timeticker -b https://github.com/spiegela/cf-buildpack-erlang

Building and Deploying Your First Application on IBM Bluemix
[ 44 ]
Bluemix is an evolving platform and it is important to note that the screenshots may look
different with the updates to Bluemix platform. The preceding screenshots on the runtimes
supported are from the classic view of Bluemix console. At the time of writing this book, we
have a newer version of the console that is available, which can be used by switching to it.
Click the Try the new Bluemix link, to work with the newer Bluemix console:
The runtimes for Cloud Foundry-based applications on Bluemix, as shown in the following
screenshot, is the newer version of the console:
In the rest of our chapters in this book, we will be using screenshots from
Bluemix newer console as well as the classic console. We will be providing
the information on if the screenshot if from newer or classic console. You
can use one of the options to work with your Bluemix console.

Building and Deploying Your First Application on IBM Bluemix
[ 45 ]
Boilerplates are application development patterns, which have been standardized across
categories and have been provided as templates for Bluemix user. The use of these
boilerplates to create an application expedites the application development by seamlessly
creating the necessary service instances and application stub with execution environment.
Let us understand this further by looking at one of the boilerplate example from the list of
supported boilerplate templates available on Bluemix, which is shown in the following
screenshot. This screenshot is from the newer Bluemix console:

Building and Deploying Your First Application on IBM Bluemix
[ 46 ]
Clicking one of the preceding boilerplates, say the Java Cloud Web Starter boilerplate,
would bring up the details related to this boilerplate as shown in the following screenshot:
Here you will notice that the boilerplate consists of a runtime for Java applications, which is
the IBM Liberty for Java application server; the boilerplate also contains the Cloudant
NoSQL DB as a service. Pricing plans are shown separately for the runtime and for the
Cloudant service, which you can see by selecting the Cloudant NoSQL DB service. When a
user selects this boilerplate to create an application, then the platform creates an execution
environment for his web application by provisioning Liberty for Java. Additionally, a
service instance of Cloudant NoSQL DB is created in the user space, an application stub in
Java is created and deployed in Liberty runtime. The application stub will have minimalistic
functions that involves talking to the Cloudant NoSQL DB service instance as well. What
this provides is a great starting point for the user to build web applications that uses an
application server and a database.
Similarly, you see that there are other boilerplates that allow you to get started with
creating applications using different programming languages, frameworks, or services. We
will be creating our first Hello World application using one of the boilerplates, and during
this exercise you will learn the process of using boilerplates, editing application stub, and
deploying and re-deploying application on Bluemix.

Building and Deploying Your First Application on IBM Bluemix
[ 47 ]
Creating your Hello World application on Bluemix using
a boilerplate
You can follow the steps given here to start creating your first application on Bluemix. We
will use the boilerplate as our getting started mechanism. We will be using the newer
Bluemix console for most of our screenshots in this section:
Log in to the Bluemix console or dashboard, use your IBM ID to log in, as was
1.
explained in Chapter 1, Saying Hello to IBM Bluemix.
At the time of writing this book, the URL to directly go to the new Bluemix
console in Sydney region is h t t p s : / / n e w - c o n s o l e . a u - s y d . b l u e m i x . n e t
/.
You will be taken to a landing page, as shown in the following screenshot:
2.

Building and Deploying Your First Application on IBM Bluemix
[ 48 ]
Click Compute, to be taken to the compute options available in your region. Since
3.
at the time of writing this book the only compute option available in the Sydney
region is CF Applications, which is the Cloud Foundry-based compute
environment for your applications. If we go to other regions, such as US and UK,
you will see additional compute options such as Containers, OpenWhisk, and
Virtual Servers. To build this application let us switch region to Dallas, US, as
explained in Chapter 1, Saying Hello to IBM Bluemix, and then let us go to
CF Applications under Compute:

Building and Deploying Your First Application on IBM Bluemix
[ 49 ]
Click the icon next to Get started now, as shown in the preceding screenshot. You
4.
will be taken to the page which displays all the supported runtimes and available
boilerplates:
You can choose to start your application creation by choosing a runtime or by
5.
choosing a boilerplate. In this section we will look at creating the application by
choosing a boilerplate. We will use the Personality Insights Java Web Starter
boilerplate:

Building and Deploying Your First Application on IBM Bluemix
[ 50 ]
You will be taken to the page which gives you more information on the
6.
boilerplate, such as the runtime and services that make up the boilerplate, as well
as pricing metrics for them.
During the running of this example, if your free trial account is valid, you
do not have to concern yourself with the pricing yet, you will be within
the free tier usage for the runtime and service. If you would like to use the
application or service beyond the free trial period, then refer to the
procedure of converting your trial Bluemix account to a paid account and
gain access to services with powerful and feature rich services along with
continued use of resources to keep your application live. You can refer to
www.bluemix.net/pricing.
As shown in the following screenshot, you will need to provide a unique name to
7.
your application in the App name: field, the Host name: field usually defaults to
the App name: field. You can leave the rest of fields with their default values.
Plans for runtime or service defines their respective charging metrics:

Building and Deploying Your First Application on IBM Bluemix
[ 51 ]
This is how a filled out screen would look, for example:
8.
Click Create at the bottom, this will create the service instance of Personality
9.
Insights, an execution environment with IBM Liberty for Java application server,
and an application stub in Java, that works with the Personality Insights service
instance:

Building and Deploying Your First Application on IBM Bluemix
[ 52 ]
The Create operation would take few seconds before it completes. Once this
10.
operation completes, you will see the following screenshot. You can see the status
of your application stub, as highlighted:
You can see in the preceding screenshot that you have three options on how you
11.
can work with your application stub. You are also provided inline instructions on
how you can get started with each of the following options:
Eclipse Tools for Bluemix
Command-line interface
Git
You can also see tabs to work with your deployed application, you can look at
12.
application logs, monitor your application, look at the application's use of the
runtime capacity, and so on, through the respective tabs provided in the
preceding screenshot, such as:

Building and Deploying Your First Application on IBM Bluemix
[ 53 ]
Overview: It gives a snapshot view of the application stats such as
number of instances, memory usage, activity logs and so on, as shown
in the following screenshot, which is for the application we created:

Building and Deploying Your First Application on IBM Bluemix
[ 54 ]
Runtime: It gives the information on the usage of the runtime capacity,
in our case, the memory allocated and used by the Java application as
the runtime charge metrics is the memory used by the application,
measured in GB Hour. This is shown in the Memory and Instances tab;
this information is similar to what we see under Runtime in the
preceding Overview screenshot. The Runtime tab also has two
additional tabs, Environment Variables and Files. Environment
Variables shows the information on variables used by the application
to connect to external services, as shown in the following screenshot:

Building and Deploying Your First Application on IBM Bluemix
[ 55 ]
Files: This tab shows the files relevant to buildpack (Liberty for Java in
this case), application-related files, log files related to application
staging and deployment on Bluemix, and so on, as shown in the
following screenshot:
Connections: It gives information on the services used by the
application and the credentials and associated information to connect
to the service instance:

Building and Deploying Your First Application on IBM Bluemix
[ 56 ]
Logs: It gives the handle to logs that can be filtered based on the
component it belongs to. The following screenshot shows the logs for
the application, based on selection from the drop-down shown:

Building and Deploying Your First Application on IBM Bluemix
[ 57 ]
Monitoring: It provides a visualization of the application availability
stats, as shown, for the application created, in the following screenshot:
Since your application status is Running, you will be able to launch your application by
clicking on View App, as shown in the following screenshot:
This will take you to the application URL or Route, which is a public URL for your
application, accessible over the Internet. In case of the application you have created, you
will be taken to its route, which is h t t p : / / j a v a - p i - h w -  1 . m y b l u e m i x . n e t. The application
brings up a UI that talks about the Personality Insights service and has a text box that
allows your application user to enter any text, which can be analyzed for personality traits,
leveraging the cognitive service of Personality Insights that you have used in your
application. There is default text that prepopulates this text box. When you launch your
application URL, when you hit on Analyze for this text, you will see the results of the
personality traits derived from this text, as shown in the following screenshots:

Building and Deploying Your First Application on IBM Bluemix
[ 58 ]
Personality traits after analyzing the default text is shown as follows:

Building and Deploying Your First Application on IBM Bluemix
[ 59 ]
Details on the analysis and visualization is provided as a result, as well:
This application can be used to cognitively understand unstructured text and analyze it to
look for personality traits to arrive at a view of personality data as derived from
unstructured data related to a given personality. For example, you can search for Wikipedia
text on any known personality, for example, in the following screenshots, we have
demonstrated the personality traits of Swami Vivekananda as derived by using your
application. The data on Swami Vivekananda we have input in the application is sourced
from Wikipedia.

Building and Deploying Your First Application on IBM Bluemix
[ 60 ]
The results are as shown in the following screenshot:
The accuracy of the results is higher depending on the volume of data
input and the quality of data.

Building and Deploying Your First Application on IBM Bluemix
[ 61 ]
Further analytics on the personality data is as shown in the following screenshot:
You have successfully created your first application on Bluemix. Next, we
will see how you can work with the source files to make changes to your
first application. Though this application is more than just a Hello World
application, we can call it a Hello World as this is as good as your starting
point on creating and deploying applications on Bluemix.
Updating your application on Bluemix
In this section, we will look at two aspects of application update, one is the update to the
application source, and the other is the update to the application deployment on Bluemix.

Building and Deploying Your First Application on IBM Bluemix
[ 62 ]
Downloading the source ﬁles for your starter or Hello World application
Follow these steps given to download the source files for your application:
Go to the Getting Started tab, as shown in the following screenshot; here, select
1.
the option of using the command-line interface:
On this page, you will find the steps to get started with your application code
2.
using the command line interface. Since we have already downloaded the cf cli,
we will only be downloading the application code now. Click the DOWNLOAD
STARTER CODE button, to download the source files for your application:

Building and Deploying Your First Application on IBM Bluemix
[ 63 ]
Move the downloaded files to a folder on your local machine, for example,
3.
projects:
It is important to understand the manifest.yml file. This is the file where
you can specify parameters to instruct cloud foundry at application
deployment time. You can define the number of instances, memory for
your application, services used, and so on, within the manifest.yml file.
To know more about the manifest file, refer to h t t p s : / / d o c s . c l o u d f o u n d
r y . o r g / d e v g u i d e / d e p l o y - a p p s / m a n i f e s t . h t m l.
You can open the  manifest.yml file, to see the deployable artifact for your
4.
application. This is how the manifest file for your application looks:

Building and Deploying Your First Application on IBM Bluemix
[ 64 ]
From the manifest file, you will notice that the deployable artifact for your
5.
application is the webApp.war file.
You can choose to make any change locally on the application file. For this
6.
example, we choose to change the default text input that appears on your
application screen. We will do this by modifying the  en.txt file, inside the
 WebContent/text folder. We shall edit the contents on this text file to show text
from Wikipedia on any other famous personality, for example, Adolf Hitler. Once
we edit and save locally the  en.txt file, we need to locally build the application
files, for which we will use ant:
Instructions on installing ant on your local machine is beyond the scope of
discussion here. You can refer to instructions here h t t p : / / a n t . a p a c h e . o r
g / m a n u a l / i n s t a l l . h t m l or to similar sites for information on installing
ant on your local machine.
Open a terminal window and change the directory to your project or application
7.
root folder, and log in to Bluemix using cf cli, as explained earlier. Now execute
the following command to push your application changes or updates to Bluemix:
      cf push java-pi-hw-01

Building and Deploying Your First Application on IBM Bluemix
[ 65 ]
The results of execution of the command will be as shown in the following
8.
screenshot:

Building and Deploying Your First Application on IBM Bluemix
[ 66 ]
Once your application update is completed, you can go to the application route
9.
or URL, to check if your update is reflected. In the following screenshot, you will
see that the default Text Input is now changed to the text that we updated in the
 en.txt file, from the application files:
Summary
In this chapter, we learned about installing and using the Cloud Foundry command-line
utility to work with Bluemix. Further, we learned about various concepts, such as services,
runtimes, boilerplates, and so on, related to the Bluemix platform. We took the first step in
application development and deployment by creating a starter or a Hello World application
using boilerplate on Bluemix. In this chapter, you also learned how to get the starter code
for your Hello World application and how to make changes to it locally, and how to push
the updated application to Bluemix; we used cf cli to demonstrate this. In the next chapter,
you will learn more ways and techniques to work with Bluemix and your applications. We
will see how by learning how to extend existing applications.

3
Extending an Application and
Configuring for Continuous
Delivery Using DevOps
Services
Ready to dive a little deeper into understanding the Bluemix platform? Yes? Great! Let us
get started by looking at what you will get to learn in this chapter. In this chapter, you will
learn how to compose an extensible application by using services from the Bluemix catalog;
we will take you through this using a sample application. We will also learn what
continuous delivery is and how would you should be configuring your application to
achieve continuous delivery using the DevOps services provided on the Bluemix platform.
You will also learn how to extend this application easily to incorporate more functional
capabilities.
In this chapter, we will be covering the following topics:
DevOps services and the delivery pipeline
Configuring the delivery pipeline for your application
Configuring continuous delivery for your application
Extending the application

Extending an Application and Configuring for Continuous Delivery Using DevOps Services
[ 68 ]
DevOps services and the delivery pipeline
The delivery pipeline is the mechanism for configuring continuous delivery in the agile
application development and deployment lifecycle. The delivery pipeline is a service in the
DevOps category. A suite of other services are also available under the DevOps category on
Bluemix. The services available in this category at the time of writing this book is as shown
in the following screenshot:
Configuring the delivery pipeline for your
application
Before we look at how to configure the delivery pipeline, we will need to create an
application that we will use for illustration. So let us get started by creating a starter
application by using a boilerplate, as we did in the previous chapter. This time, we will use
the Internet of Things boilerplate to create the starter application. We have chosen this
boilerplate for few reasons, as follows:
Understanding how to write applications that are wired and not coded
Getting a feel for writing or wiring applications in Node-RED
Using IBM's Internet of Things capabilities, which can be used to create
applications that work with device data.

Extending an Application and Configuring for Continuous Delivery Using DevOps Services
[ 69 ]
Creating the sample application
Having finished Chapter 2, Building and Deploying Your First Application on IBM Bluemix,
you will be now well-versed in creating an application using boilerplate; hence, we will not
be going through all the steps of application creation in detail in this section.
URLs for accessing the new Bluemix console are as follows:
Datacenter
URL
United States
h t t p s : / / c o n s o l e . n g . b l u e m i x . n e t /
United Kingdom h t t p s : / / c o n s o l e . e u - g b . b l u e m i x . n e t /
Sydney
h t t p s : / / c o n s o l e . a u - s y d . b l u e m i x . n e t /
Follow these steps to create the sample application; the sample application will be an
Internet of Things example application:
Log in to your Bluemix account and choose the Space where you want to create
1.
your application:
Make sure the region you are in is either US South or United Kingdom. Switch
2.
the region if you are in the Sydney region.
Click Compute.
3.
Choose Cloud Foundry Applications.
4.

Extending an Application and Configuring for Continuous Delivery Using DevOps Services
[ 70 ]
Click the + icon above Get Started Now:
5.
In the Search field, type  Internet of Things.
6.
Click the boilerplate displaying Internet of Things Platform Starter:
7.

Extending an Application and Configuring for Continuous Delivery Using DevOps Services
[ 71 ]
Fill out the fields as shown in the following screenshot. Make sure your App
8.
name is unique if your Host name is defaulted to the App name field:
You will see that SDK for Node.js is the runtime created, and Cloudant NoSQL
9.
DB is the database service that will be added to your Space once you click
CREATE.
Your application is created and started along with the services in the boilerplate-Cloudant
NoSQL DB, in this case:
Learning to wire applications using Node-RED
Before we look at the application we just deployed, let us understand what Node-RED is
and how to compose applications using the Node-RED editor.

Extending an Application and Configuring for Continuous Delivery Using DevOps Services
[ 72 ]
Node-RED is a community-based tool that is used to wire APIs, services, or devices in ways
that create innovative applications. Applications developed with Node-RED run on Node.js
runtime.
Find out more about Node-RED by going to h t t p : / / n o d e r e d . o r g.
Node-RED provides a browser-based editor to compose or wire applications. The
components that can be wired together are displayed in the editor palette and are called
nodes. The list of nodes available in the palette is extensible; you can write your own nodes,
add them to your Node-RED package, and even contribute them to the community.
To find out more about how to extend your Node-RED palette, you can
refer to h t t p : / / n o d e r e d . o r g / d o c s / c r e a t i n g - n o d e s /.
With this introduction to Node-RED, let us start from where we left off in our previous
section:
Click the route that is created for your application, which is h t t p : / / b m - l e a r n i n g
1.
-  3 -  1 . e u - g b . m y b l u e m i x . n e t, in the case of the following screenshot:

Extending an Application and Configuring for Continuous Delivery Using DevOps Services
[ 73 ]
On the page that is displayed after clicking the application route, click Go to your
2.
Node-RED flow editor:
This welcome page can be modified to suit your application, if you desire.
Click Go to your Node-RED flow editor to open the Node-RED editor:
3.

Extending an Application and Configuring for Continuous Delivery Using DevOps Services
[ 74 ]
To compose applications, you simply need to drag and drop the nodes
from the palette to the flow editor and wire them.
Double-click on each node to configure it.
4.
Click Deploy to deploy your application on Bluemix.
5.
Since we have used the Internet of Things boilerplate to reach the Node-RED editor, you
will see that a starter application has already been created by Bluemix.
This starter application reads device data using the IBM Internet of Things node. The device
data is expected to push temperature readings to the flow. This is then checked for its value,
and if the value is below a certain reference value, the output indicates safe limits. If the
temperature is above the reference range, the output indicates it as critical. In the starter
application, the output is pushed to the debug node, which can be seen in the debug
window. Let us first understand this flow in detail by looking at each node and its
configuration:
The ibmiot node
The ibmiot node is an input node that receives data from devices using IBM Internet of
Things Foundation. The detailed information on this node can be seen in the info tab after
selecting the node in the flow editor.

Extending an Application and Configuring for Continuous Delivery Using DevOps Services
[ 75 ]
Configuring the ibmiot node
Double-click on the node to open its configuration window, which is as shown in the
following screenshot:
You will see that you can specify the Authentication mechanism to connect to your device,
define the Input type for the trigger or data that you want to listen to, configure the Device
Id of the device you want to receive data from, and the node Name field, where you can
specify the name of your ibmiot node in the flow.
In this starter application example, we will be using a mock device for which we will be
using the quickstart facility of the IBM Internet of Things Foundation. Hence, you will see
that the Authentication field is left with the value of  Quickstart, Input Type with the
value of  Device Event, and Name with the value of  IBM Iot App In. To configure the
Device Id field, go to h t t p s : / / q u i c k s t a r t . i n t e r n e t o f t h i n g s . i b m c l o u d . c o m / i o t s e n s o r
/ to get a mock device.

Extending an Application and Configuring for Continuous Delivery Using DevOps Services
[ 76 ]
You will be provided with a simulated sensor device that outputs temperature, humidity,
and object temperature:
Do not close the browser where you have the simulated device running;
closing the browser would lose the device corresponding to the device ID
you got earlier.

Extending an Application and Configuring for Continuous Delivery Using DevOps Services
[ 77 ]
The identifier on the top right-hand corner, as shown in the following screenshot, is the
device identifier for this simulated device. This is the identifier that you will need to input
to the Device Id field in the ibmiot configuration dialog box:
Click Ok. This will enable the Deploy button. Click Deploy to deploy the change to
Bluemix:
The debug node
The output of any node is displayed on the debug tab of the sidebar of the flow editor by
using the debug node in the flow, as shown. In this starter application flow, two debug
nodes are wired, named device data and cpu status. The device data debug node outputs
the device data received by the ibmiot node. The cpu status debug node outputs the final
results as a result of execution of the logic written within the function nodes and formats
specified within the template nodes.

Extending an Application and Configuring for Continuous Delivery Using DevOps Services
[ 78 ]
The following screenshot shows the output from the two debug nodes in the flow, in the
debug editor, after the Device Id field is configured in the ibmiot node:
The function node
You can use the function node to write code to manipulate the message passed as a
JavaScript Object. For this starter application, the function node carries the code, as shown
in the following screenshot. The temperature is extracted from the message payload and
passed on to the next node:

Extending an Application and Configuring for Continuous Delivery Using DevOps Services
[ 79 ]
For more information about working with the function node, you can refer
to h t t p : / / n o d e r e d . o r g / d o c s / w r i t i n g - f u n c t i o n s . h t m l.
The switch node
This node is used to route messages based on the value of the property in the message
object. Routes are defined by defining rules on the switch node. The number of rules
defined creates an equal number of output endpoints on the node, which can be wired to
define individual flows paths. In this starter application, the switch node is used to check
the temperature value from the input message object and define rules based on the
temperature threshold value of 40 degrees:

Extending an Application and Configuring for Continuous Delivery Using DevOps Services
[ 80 ]
The template node
This node is used to display the property based on the template provided. In the starter
application flow, we see there are two template nodes, safe and danger. Both of these nodes
display the temperature property based on the template definition; the following screenshot
shows the configuration for the safe node:
The following screenshot shows the configuration for the danger node:

Extending an Application and Configuring for Continuous Delivery Using DevOps Services
[ 81 ]
Configuring continuous delivery for your
application
Let us see how we can configure the delivery pipeline for the application we just created, so
that any changes to the application can reflect automatically in the deployed application.
Complete the following steps to configure the delivery pipeline:
From the application Overview page, as described previously, click the Add Git
1.
Repo and Pipeline option, as shown in the following screenshot:

Extending an Application and Configuring for Continuous Delivery Using DevOps Services
[ 82 ]
This will create a Git Repository for you. You will need to provide an alias to
2.
associate your IBM ID with; this alias is used in Git repository paths and so on:
Once your alias is created and associated with your IBM ID, click Continue, as
3.
shown in the following screenshot:
Ensure that the checkbox next to Populate the repo with starter app package and
4.
enabe the Build & Deploy pipeline is checked. This will populate the Git
repository with the source code corresponding to this starter application:

Extending an Application and Configuring for Continuous Delivery Using DevOps Services
[ 83 ]
It will take few seconds to create your Git repository. Once the repository is
5.
created, you will see the Git URL below the GIT URL option for your application
repository from the Overview page under Continuous Delivery:
Click on the Git URL. This will take you to the Git repository for your
6.
application. You can see the source for this starter application in your repository:

Extending an Application and Configuring for Continuous Delivery Using DevOps Services
[ 84 ]
You can work on the source by clicking the EDIT CODE option. TRACK &
7.
PLAN can be used to configure capabilities to project manage your application.
This includes creating work items, assigning and tracking them, creating agile
sprint plans, and so on:
To configure the continuous delivery pipeline for building and deploying your
8.
application on Bluemix triggered by a source change, you can configure the
delivery pipeline by clicking BUILD & DEPLOY. The default pipeline configured
for your application is as shown in the following screenshot. You will see that a
build stage and a deploy stage is configured. The deploy stage contains a
deployment script, which has nothing but the cloud foundry commands (cf
commands) to push the application to Bluemix:
The build stage is configured to be triggered when there is a Git commit in the
repository identified by the Git URL.

Extending an Application and Configuring for Continuous Delivery Using DevOps Services
[ 85 ]
Go to JOBS from the screen shown in the following screenshot, to define the type
9.
of build you want to configure:
The available builder types are shown in the following screenshot:

Extending an Application and Configuring for Continuous Delivery Using DevOps Services
[ 86 ]
You can configure multiple jobs within the same stage by clicking ADD JOB, as shown in
following screenshot:
The types of jobs that you can configure within a stage are as follows:
Build
Deploy
Test
You can use the Test job type to configure tests that need to be run once the build for your 
application completes.
You can also use ENVIRONMENT PROPERTIES to define properties that need to be used
across your jobs from the screen, as shown in the following screenshot:

Extending an Application and Configuring for Continuous Delivery Using DevOps Services
[ 87 ]
For this illustration, we will use the default pipeline configuration with one build stage
using a Simple Builder type and one deploy stage, which will deploy the built application
to a space within your organization on Bluemix. Go to the deploy stage configuration by
clicking on the stage configuration icon, as shown in the following screenshot, and clicking
Configure Stage from the pop-up menu:
The deploy stage looks like the following screenshot:

Extending an Application and Configuring for Continuous Delivery Using DevOps Services
[ 88 ]
The supported deployments, as configured using the Deployer Type values, are as follows:
Cloud Foundry
Active Deploy-Begin
Deploys using IBM Active Deploy to deploy the application to Cloud Foundry or
the IBM Container service
Active Deploy-Complete
Deploys using IBM Active Deploy to deploy the application to Cloud Foundry on
Bluemix, the IBM Container service on Bluemix, or the IBM Virtual Machines
infrastructure on Bluemix
IBM Containers on Bluemix
You can edit the push command in the deployment script of the deploy stage for your
application.
You can also configure the deployment of your application to another region, organization,
and space by selecting the desired Target, Organization, and Space at the deploy stage.
Editing the source using a web editor
You can edit the application source using any of the development editors of your choice
locally, or you can also edit your application code using the web editor provided by IBM
DevOps services. The web editor provided on Bluemix is based on the Eclipse Orion
project:

Extending an Application and Configuring for Continuous Delivery Using DevOps Services
[ 89 ]
To edit the starter application code, click EDIT CODE on the page displayed by
1.
clicking on the Git URL for your application:
You can navigate through your source files using the navigation on the left. Once
2.
you select the source file that you want to modify, it opens up in an editor to the
right, as shown in the following screenshot:

Extending an Application and Configuring for Continuous Delivery Using DevOps Services
[ 90 ]
We will modify the  flow.json file to illustrate the continuous delivery. Modify
3.
the template node when the temperature goes above the threshold value. Change
the output from  Temperature ({{payload}}) is critical to
 Temperature ({{payload}}) is critical. You will need to take
safety measures. Click File | Save:
Click the Git icon, which is on the left-hand side of the editor, as shown in the
4.
screenshot. This will take you to the page that shows the changes to the files that
you just made. You can enter a commit message in the box shown and click
commit; this will make the changed file available under outgoing changes.

Extending an Application and Configuring for Continuous Delivery Using DevOps Services
[ 91 ]
You can click Push to push your changes to the master repository:
You can also work on this Git repository using the Git command line, or
other supported Git interfaces.
Go to Build & Deploy and you will see that the build stage has been triggered
5.
automatically with the source change pushed to master. Successful build has
triggered the deploy stage. Successful completion of the deploy stage shows the
updated application URL or route, as shown in the following screenshot:
To be able to view the application update that we just made, we will need to
6.
increase the temperature beyond the threshold value, which is 40 degrees
centigrade, as defined in the switch node, which we saw earlier.

Extending an Application and Configuring for Continuous Delivery Using DevOps Services
[ 92 ]
To change the temperature on the simulated device, go back to h t t p s : / / q u i c k s t
7.
a r t . i n t e r n e t o f t h i n g s . i b m c l o u d . c o m / i o t s e n s o r / and increase the
temperature on your device:
Make sure the device ID is the same as the one we used earlier. If you have
accidently closed the browser, you will need to note the new device ID
and edit the ibmiot node in your flow to receive data from the new device
ID.
Click the application route to view the application update, by going back your
8.
Node-RED editor and viewing the output in the debug tab.
In this section, we looked at a simple example of how to achieve continuous delivery for
your application by configuring the stages in the delivery pipeline.

Extending an Application and Configuring for Continuous Delivery Using DevOps Services
[ 93 ]
Extending the application
We will now look at how easy it is to extend your Node-RED application. To extend the
application, we will use a Cloudant NoSQL DB node in flow, so that when the temperature
exceeds the critical threshold, there is a database entry made in your configured Cloudant
database.
Complete the following steps to extend this application:
Add a Cloudant NoSQL DB service instance using the procedure we have
1.
discussed in previous chapters to add any service instance on Bluemix.
Once the Cloudant NoSQL DB service instance is added to your Bluemix
2.
organization and space, you will see it listed in your dashboard, as shown in the
following screenshot:
Go to your application route and go to the flow editor.
3.
Drag and drop the cloudant node from under the storage category in the palette
4.
to your flow editor.
Remove the wiring of the template node named  danger to the debug node.
5.
Wire the output node of  danger to connect to the cloudant input node.
6.

Extending an Application and Configuring for Continuous Delivery Using DevOps Services
[ 94 ]
Double-click on the cloudant node to configure the cloudant service instance; you
7.
will see that the service instance you have added to your Bluemix organization
and space gets listed:
To configure the Database field, you will need to first go to the Cloudant service
8.
instance you have created and click Launch to launch the cloudant console. From
here, you can create a new database, nodered. Provide the name of the database
you created in the cloudant node configuration:

Extending an Application and Configuring for Continuous Delivery Using DevOps Services
[ 95 ]
The flow for the extended application is as shown in the following diagram:
Click Deploy on the flow editor to deploy the updated application to Bluemix.
9.
To check the output, ensure that the temperature in your simulated device is
10.
above the threshold value configured, which is 40 degrees centigrade.
Go to the Cloudant console to view the databases, query the database  nodered.
11.
Ensure Include Docs is checked; you will see the entries from the  danger node
logged in to the cloudant database configured, as shown in the following
screenshot:

Extending an Application and Configuring for Continuous Delivery Using DevOps Services
[ 96 ]
Summary
In this chapter, we learned how to compose applications using the Node-RED editor, and
how to deploy the application on Node.js runtime on Bluemix. Applications that can be
composed, such as Node-RED applications, are easily extensible; the functionality of such
applications can be extended by wiring additional nodes to the flow. We also looked at how
to use the IBM DevOps services to configure a continuous delivery pipeline for your
application. In this chapter, you also learned about how to create a Git repository for your
application and how to use the web editor for working on your application source files.
In the next chapter, we will see how we can build applications on public Bluemix that
leverage on-premises software.

4
Leveraging On-Premise
Software for Applications on
Bluemix
In this chapter, we will learn about the services on Bluemix that allow a hybrid cloud
application development platform. We will learn, with an example, about how to use one of
the integration services on Bluemix to connect to an application or enterprise software that
is running locally on your desktop. In other words, these services are what allows for
connectivity to enterprise on-premise software from the public cloud environment.
In this chapter, we will cover the following topics:
Creating an application on Bluemix
Adding Watson services to the application
Installing and configuring an on-premise database
Creating the Secure Gateway service
Configuring the Secure Gateway service:
Adding Gateway
Adding Destination
Installing the Secure Gateway client
Updating the application to use the on-premise database
Seeing it all working together

Leveraging On-Premise Software for Applications on Bluemix
[ 98 ]
Services under the Integrate category
Bluemix provides a set of services under the category of Integrate. These services provide
the functionality to securely connect from applications on cloud to applications residing in a
trusted or secure environment. To view the set of services available, follow these steps:
Go to the welcome page, as shown in the following screenshot, and click
1.
Integrate:
Click the icon highlighted in the following screenshot to go to the catalog of
2.
services under the Integrate category:

Leveraging On-Premise Software for Applications on Bluemix
[ 99 ]
The services available on Bluemix, which provide the function of integrating
3.
cloud and enterprise on-premise resources, are shown in the following
screenshot:
The services shown in the preceding screenshot are those that are available
at the time of writing this book.
Let us next learn how to create an application that will use an on-premise resource, such as
a database, and how we can use one of the integration services on Bluemix to help achieve
this. In the process of this illustration, you will also have the opportunity to be briefly
introduced to the Watson set of cognitive services available on Bluemix and how they can
be used in the application used for this illustration.

Leveraging On-Premise Software for Applications on Bluemix
[ 100 ]
Creating an application on Bluemix
In this section, we will create a sample application on Bluemix by using one of the available
boilerplates. For this illustration, we will be using the Node-RED boilerplate. Follow the
steps to create the application:
Log in to Bluemix and from the welcome page, click Compute:
1.
Click on the icon highlighted in the following screenshot to take you to the
2.
options available on Bluemix to create a Cloud Foundry application:

Leveraging On-Premise Software for Applications on Bluemix
[ 101 ]
Select the Node-RED Starter boilerplate, as shown in the following screenshot:
3.

Leveraging On-Premise Software for Applications on Bluemix
[ 102 ]
Give your application a name, review the plans for the services that come with
4.
the boilerplate, and click Create:
Once your application is created and started successfully, you will see it on the
5.
dashboard, as shown in the following screenshot. Click Open URL to go to the
Node-RED editor, from where you can start wiring your application's
functionality:

Leveraging On-Premise Software for Applications on Bluemix
[ 103 ]
Click Go to your Node-RED flow editor:
6.
Start wiring your application on the editor using the nodes from the palette on
7.
the left.
For this illustration, we are going to read a Twitter feed and we are going
to find the sentiment of the tweets. We are also going to translate the same
tweet. We will persist all of this in the on-premise database that we will
configure later in the chapter.

Leveraging On-Premise Software for Applications on Bluemix
[ 104 ]
We will first wire the flow with the nodes that we need. We will then learn to
8.
configure each of these nodes individually. The flow we will wire for this
application is shown as follows:
You can see the flow wired in the Node-RED editor, as shown in the following
9.
screenshot; also indicated in the screenshot are the different parts of the editor,
which will be referred to in this chapter:

Leveraging On-Premise Software for Applications on Bluemix
[ 105 ]
Wiring and configuring the flow
Let us learn to wire and configure the flow:
In your empty editor pane, drag and drop the twitter output node from the nodes
1.
palette:
Configure the Twitter output node by double-clicking on the node after placing it
2.
in the editor pane. Give the node a name in the Name field. Add a Twitter
account credential by configuring the Twitter ID field, clicking the pencil icon
next to it. Provide a list of Twitter handles or hashtags that you would want this
node to read from the Twitter stream. Click Done once the configuration of the
node is complete:

Leveraging On-Premise Software for Applications on Bluemix
[ 106 ]
Next we want to analyze the sentiment of each of the tweets retrieved by the
3.
Twitter node, so let us drag and drop the sentiment node from the palette to the
editor pane. Let us then wire the Twitter node and the sentiment node by clicking
the endpoint on the Twitter node and dragging it to connect to the endpoint on
the sentiment node:
To configure the sentiment node, double-click on it and give it a name, as shown
4.
in the following screenshot:
Next we need to check on the value of the sentiment score of each tweet to make
5.
a decision to only work on those tweets that express a negative sentiment. The
sentiment node will analyze the content of each tweet and will output a JSON
file, which has what is called the sentiment score, and other details, such as what
is shown in the following code, for an example tweet:
        {
          "score": -9,
          "comparative": -0.36,
          "tokens":[
            "rt", "pmoindia", "saddened", "by", "the", "loss", "of",
            "lives", "due", "to", "a", "quake", "in", "italy",
            "condolences", "to", "bereaved", "families", "amp", "prayers",
            "with", "those", "injured", "pm", "nar"],
          "words": ["injured", "bereaved", "loss", "saddened"],
            "positive": [],
            "negative": ["injured", "bereaved", "loss", "saddened"]
         }

Leveraging On-Premise Software for Applications on Bluemix
[ 107 ]
We will use the value of the score in the sentiment analysis response to check
6.
whether the sentiment was negative, as in our application, we only want to
persist negative tweets. For this, let us add a switch node:
Double-click on the node to configure it. Give the node a name and change the
7.
property you want to monitor to msg.sentiment.score. Add a rule that checks for
this property value to be less than 0, if true; it would mean that the tweet had a
negative sentiment and that we would need to send it to the next part of the flow,
where we are going to do some more augmentation and write the tweets to a
persistent store, such as a database:

Leveraging On-Premise Software for Applications on Bluemix
[ 108 ]
You can add an additional rule to check whether the sentiment score value
is greater than 0; if true, you can wire any other appropriate action on such
tweets. For this illustration, we will ignore tweets with positive and
neutral sentiments.
Next let us drag and drop the language translation node from under the Watson
8.
category of nodes in the palette:
Before we can configure the language translation node, we will need to add the related
Watson service to the Bluemix space. Follow the steps to add the Watson service for
language translation:

Leveraging On-Premise Software for Applications on Bluemix
[ 109 ]
In your Bluemix dashboard, from the welcome page, click on the Watson
1.
category, as shown in the following screenshot:
Click on the icon shown in the following screenshot to see the catalog of Watson
2.
services:

Leveraging On-Premise Software for Applications on Bluemix
[ 110 ]
From the list of available services, click the Language Translator service:
3.
Review the information about the service and service plan, and click Create:
4.

Leveraging On-Premise Software for Applications on Bluemix
[ 111 ]
Once the service is created, you will be taken to the Manage screen, as shown in
5.
the following screenshot:
Go to the Service Credentials tab; you will see one credential created for the
6.
service. You can click on View Credentials. Make a note of the username and
password; we will need them when we configure the language translation node
in the Node-RED editor:

Leveraging On-Premise Software for Applications on Bluemix
[ 112 ]
Now let us go back to the Node-RED editor for our application where we just
added a language translation node. Let us now continue to wire and configure our
application.
Double-click the language translation node and configure it as shown in the
7.
following screenshot. Enter the username and password that you obtained in the
previous step. Give the node a name. Choose the Target language you want to
translate the content to. For this illustration, we will choose French. Click Done
once you complete the configuration:
We can also add a debug node from the output nodes category to see the output
8.
of the sentiment node in the debug console. If you want to see the payload,
choose Output as msg.payload; if you want to only see the sentiment, you can
choose Output to be msg.sentiment, as shown in the following screenshot:

Leveraging On-Premise Software for Applications on Bluemix
[ 113 ]
Drag and drop the mongodb node from under the storage category. Our
9.
application will persist the translated tweets in MongoDB:
Before we can configure the MongoDB node, we will need to complete a couple of things.
Firstly, since we are going to be using an on-premise database for this illustration, we will
need to download and install MongoDB locally. Secondly, since we need to establish
connectivity from a public cloud to an on-premise environment, we will need to add and
configure the integration service on Bluemix; we will be using the Secure Gateway service.
Downloading and installing MongoDB
To install MongoDB locally, you can download the latest version of MongoDB for your
operating system from h t t p s : / / w w w . m o n g o d b . c o m / d o w n l o a d - c e n t e r. You can download
the Community Server version. In this illustration, we will be showing the screenshots as
applicable to Mac OS.

Leveraging On-Premise Software for Applications on Bluemix
[ 114 ]
Starting the MongoDB daemon and working with MongoDB
Once you have installed MongoDB, follow these steps to start the MongoDB daemon:
Create the  data/db folder structure under the user's  home directory.
1.
Open the terminal window (or command prompt if your OS is Windows) and go
2.
to the folder where MongoDB is installed. Change directory to  /bin and execute
the following command:
     ./mongod --dbpath ~/data/db
This starts the MongoDB daemon. The following screenshot shows the output on
3.
the terminal window. Note the port number at which it is listening for
connections:
Let us open a new terminal window and change directory to  /bin under the
4.
MongoDB installation directory. This starts the MongoDB shell, where you will
see the following terminal output. This is where you can start executing
MongoDB commands:

Leveraging On-Premise Software for Applications on Bluemix
[ 115 ]
Let us create a database for our application; we will call it  mydb. Execute the
5.
following MongoDB command from the Mongo shell to create and switch to the
new database:
      use mydb
Create a collection by using the following command:
6.
      db.translatedtweets.insert({"SampleTweet" : "Example for a tweet"})
Make a note of the IP address of the host machine where this MongoDB instance
7.
is installed.
With this, we have installed and set up a local MongoDB instance for use by our
application. Let us now move on to the next important set of steps, where we will see how
to add and configure the Secure Gateway integration service on Bluemix, which will
provide the critical secure pipe between the public cloud and on-premise environments,
enabling us to have a hybrid cloud application development environment.
Creating the Secure Gateway service instance
Let us now learn how to create the Secure Gateway service instance on Bluemix. Follow
these steps to do this:
Go to the welcome page, as shown in the following screenshot, and click
1.
Integrate:

Leveraging On-Premise Software for Applications on Bluemix
[ 116 ]
Click the icon highlighted in the following screenshot to go to the catalog of
2.
services under the Integrate category:
Click Secure Gateway:
3.
Review the details of the service and clickCreate.
4.
Once the service is created, you can click on the service tile on the Bluemix dashboard to
configure it.

Leveraging On-Premise Software for Applications on Bluemix
[ 117 ]
Conﬁguring the Secure Gateway service instance
To configure the secure gateway service to create a gateway to your MongoDB destination,
follow these steps:
Click on the Secure Gateway service tile from the dashboard:
1.
In the Secure Gateway dashboard, under the Manage section, click Add
2.
Gateway, as shown in the following screenshot, to first add a gateway:

Leveraging On-Premise Software for Applications on Bluemix
[ 118 ]
Give a name to the gateway, uncheck the Require security token to connect
3.
clients and Token Expiration options, and click ADD GATEWAY:
The gateway is now added, as shown in the following screenshot. Click on this
4.
new gateway, mymongo, to add Destinations:

Leveraging On-Premise Software for Applications on Bluemix
[ 119 ]
Click Add Destination to add a new destination to the gateway you created.
5.
Select On-Premises, as shown in the following screenshot, then click Next:
Enter the hostname or IP address of the machine where you have locally installed
6.
MongoDB. Provide the port number where your MongoDB is listening for
connections. We obtained a port number earlier when we started the MongoDB
daemon. Once done, click Next:

Leveraging On-Premise Software for Applications on Bluemix
[ 120 ]
Choose the protocol as TCP. Click Next:
7.
Select the destination authentication type as None, then click Next:
8.
For this illustration, we will not be configuring an IP table, so click Next without
9.
making any changes in the screen as shown here:
Give a name to the destination you are going to create. Click Finish:
10.
The destination for your local MongoDB is created in the gateway, as shown in
11.
the following screenshot:

Leveraging On-Premise Software for Applications on Bluemix
[ 121 ]
Let us now install the secure gateway client on the local machine where
12.
MongoDB is installed. Make a note of your gateway ID, as shown in the
following screenshot. Click Add Client to start the installation of the secure
gateway client:
There are three different ways you can install and configure the secure gateway
13.
client. You can use a direct installation of the client by downloading the client
installable for your operating system from this screen, as shown here:
For this illustration, we will use the second option, which is by using Docker. As
14.
a pre-requisite for the next set of steps, you will need to download and install
Docker for your operating system. You can refer to h t t p s : / / w w w . d o c k e r . c o m / p r
o d u c t s / d o c k e r for the installable and installation instructions.
Once you have Docker installed locally, you can launch the Docker QuickStart
15.
Terminal (in Mac) or the boot2docker, based on your operating system, to start
Docker.

Leveraging On-Premise Software for Applications on Bluemix
[ 122 ]
Run the following command in the Docker terminal:
16.
      docker pull ibmcom/secure-gateway-client
This is required to get the latest version of the secure gateway client image. You
will see something like the following in the Docker terminal window:
Next run the following Docker command to start the container with the secure
17.
gateway client:
      docker run -it ibmcom/secure-gateway-client <Gateway ID>

Leveraging On-Premise Software for Applications on Bluemix
[ 123 ]
Replace the gateway ID with the gateway ID value indicated in the screenshot for
18.
Step 12.
You should get the results, as shown in the following screenshot:
To make sure you have the right permissions in the ACL to connect to your
19.
MongoDB instance, run the following command from the Docker terminal:
      acl allow <Hostname or IP address>:<Port>
The following screenshot shows the command on the terminal:

Leveraging On-Premise Software for Applications on Bluemix
[ 124 ]
Once the secure gateway client is up and running, you will see the status reflected
in the secure gateway client configuration screen. You will see that your gateway
is now connected to the remote resource, which is your local MongoDB instance:
You can also see the status on your gateway details screen, as shown in the
following screenshot:
Click the gear icon in your destination to view its details:
20.

Leveraging On-Premise Software for Applications on Bluemix
[ 125 ]
This opens the destination details, as shown in the following screenshot. Make a
21.
note of the Cloud Host : Port value; this will be required when we configure the
MongoDB node in our application, in the Node-RED editor:
Having completed the configuration of the Secure Gateway service instance to
connect to your on-premise MongoDB database, you can now resume editing
your application from where we left off.
Go back to the Node-RED editor for your application and double-click on the
22.
MongoDB node to configure it. Give the node a name. Provide the name of the
collection that we created earlier, using the Mongo shell, in the Collection field.
Select the insert operation. Check the checkbox for Only store msg.payload
object. To configure the MongoDB server details, click on the pencil icon next to
the Server field, as highlighted in the following screenshot. Click Done when the
configuration is complete:

Leveraging On-Premise Software for Applications on Bluemix
[ 126 ]
In the Server configuration, provide the Cloud Host : Port value which was
23.
obtained from Step 20, provide these as the MongoDB server host and port in the
Server configuration for the MongoDB node, as shown in the following
screenshot:
Now you have finished wiring the Node-RED application. You can deploy the
24.
completed flow to Bluemix by clicking Deploy, as shown in Node-RED editor
screenshot in Step 11 of the Creating an application on Bluemix section.
To verify whether your application is able to connect to your on-premise
25.
MongoDB database and insert translated Twitter data carrying negative
sentiments, you can go back to your Mongo shell and execute the following
command:
      db.translatedtweets.find()
You will see the tweets carrying negative sentiments and translated in French,
26.
fetched from your local MongoDB database, as shown here:

Leveraging On-Premise Software for Applications on Bluemix
[ 127 ]
Summary
In this chapter, we learned how to build an application that leverages on-premise resources.
We learned how to use the Secure Gateway integration service to achieve the secure
connectivity to the on-premise MongoDB database from your application hosted on
Bluemix, which is a public cloud. In this way, we saw how Bluemix provides a hybrid cloud
application development environment.
In the following chapter, we will learn how to scale the applications deployed on Bluemix
manually, or by using the related DevOps services provided on Bluemix.

5
Scaling Applications in Bluemix
In the previous chapter, we learned how to integrate applications deployed on Bluemix
with software that is deployed on-premise. In this chapter, we will look at what capabilities
are available in Bluemix to allow users to scale the applications deployed on Bluemix. We
will learn to configure scaling policies on an application deployed on Bluemix, such that the
application scales when under load. To begin with, we will try to understand what it means
when we say scaling, and what types of scaling are possible. This chapter will cover the
following topics:
Overview of scaling types supported in Bluemix
Creating an application that can scale
Configuring a load test for the application
Manually scaling your application
Scaling your application using the Auto-Scaling service in Bluemix:
Creating the Auto-Scaling service instance
Binding the Auto-Scaling service to your application
Defining the scaling policy for your application

Scaling Applications in Bluemix
[ 129 ]
Overview of scaling types supported in
Bluemix
Building scalable applications has become the de facto standard for modern web
applications. Applications need to be built to scale. Scaling of applications is required when
there is a need to meet increased activity within the application. Applications that scale are
highly available and responsive to requests. There are two types of scaling, as follows:
Vertical scaling
Horizontal scaling
Vertical scaling
When applications are deployed, they use compute resources to run. These compute
resources are:
CPU (processing)
RAM (memory)
Scaling applications by increasing the resources available to them in the same machine or
physical node is called vertical scaling; this is also known as scaling up. This method of
scaling is useful for applications that are designed and developed in such a way that they
cannot share state or data. Less modular applications, or applications with more tightly
coupled modules, usually have a need to scale within the same node or physical machine.
By vertically scaling these applications, there are more resources that are attached to, or
made available to, the application for use when there is an increase in load on the
application.
The flip side to vertical scaling is that the applications become a single point of failure,
which means that if there is a disruption to the physical node where the application resides
then the entire application becomes unavailable until the physical machine is restored.

Scaling Applications in Bluemix
[ 130 ]
The following figure shows an illustration of what scaling up, or vertical scaling, is:
Horizontal scaling
Horizontal scaling is also called scaling out. Unlike vertical scaling, in horizontal scaling,
resources are added to the application by scaling the application out to another node or
physical machine. The application that is scaled out to a new node gets the same set of
resources to work with. To use this scaling technique, it is important that the applications
are designed in such a way that the state and application data are shared across the nodes.
This makes it necessary for application design to externalize data stored in memory or local
file systems. Also, when applications are scaled out, it becomes necessary to have a load
balancer in front of the nodes so that the application requests are routed, based on routing
policies defined in the load balancer, to application instances or nodes.
The advantage of horizontal scaling over vertical scaling is that horizontal scaling does not
deplete the resources of a single physical machine or node. Also, by scaling out, the issue of
SPOF (single point of failure) is reduced, so applications that are designed to scale
horizontally are more available and have a better failover than applications that are
designed to scale vertically.

Scaling Applications in Bluemix
[ 131 ]
The following figure shows an illustration of the horizontal scaling, or scaling out, of an
application:
While developing cloud-native applications, it is important to consider the nature of
deployment on cloud. Most of the compute capacity provided on a cloud environment such
as Bluemix are transient in nature, which means that an application restart or restage does
not guarantee its deployment using the same set of resources. This makes it necessary for
applications that are developed as cloud-native to be designed in such a way that the state
between the application modules or the application data are stored in persistent stores and
not kept in memory or in local file storage.
In Bluemix, it is recommended that application data is persisted in external data stores,
preferably using one of the data services available in Bluemix. For persisting application
state between requests, such as for session objects, it is recommended to use the Session
Cache service on Bluemix. For persisting data that can be accessed easily and frequently, to
give an improved performance for your web application, instead of having to go to
databases or data stores each time, it is recommended to use the Data Cache service on
Bluemix:

Scaling Applications in Bluemix
[ 132 ]
From the dashboard shown in the preceding screenshot, you can click Get started now! to
view the services in the Bluemix catalog. Go to the Application Services category to view
the Session Cache and Data Cache services:

Scaling Applications in Bluemix
[ 133 ]
For details on working with Session Cache, you can refer to h t t p s : / / i b m .
b i z / B d r H 8 h. To learn how to use the Data Cache service, you can refer to h
t t p s : / / i b m . b i z / B d r H 8 3.
Creating an application to scale on Bluemix
We will use the Java Cloudant Web Starter boilerplate to create an application, which we
will use to demonstrate the scaling capabilities in Bluemix:
From the Bluemix dashboard, go to the Compute option and click on Get started
1.
now!, as shown in the following screenshot:
Select the Java Cloudant Web Starter boilerplate:
2.

Scaling Applications in Bluemix
[ 134 ]

Scaling Applications in Bluemix
[ 135 ]
Provide a name for your application. In this demo, the application name is
3.
 scalingdemo-b05307. Leave the other fields with their default values, as
shown in the following screenshot:
Click Create. This creates the starter application.
4.
Configuring a load test for your application
Before we learn about the scaling options on Bluemix, let us go ahead and create a load-test
scenario for the application we just created. This is required to simulate the conditions for
the application where the application would need to scale.
Creating the BlazeMeter service instance
We will use the BlazeMeter service to configure the load-test scenario:
From the Bluemix catalog, select BlazeMeter from the DevOps category of
1.
services, as shown in the following screenshot:

Scaling Applications in Bluemix
[ 136 ]
Click BlazeMeter and review the details of the service and the service plan:
2.

Scaling Applications in Bluemix
[ 137 ]
Click Create. A BlazeMeter service instance is created:
3.
Creating the load test
Using the next set of steps, we will create a load test using the BlazeMeter service:
Click OPEN BLAZEMETER DASHBOARD to open the BlazeMeter dashboard.
1.
Click Skip wizard, as shown in the following screenshot:

Scaling Applications in Bluemix
[ 138 ]
From the BlazeMeter dashboard, click Create Test:
2.
Click URL Test to create HTTP requests to your application simulating the user
3.
base and defining the time interval between requests:

Scaling Applications in Bluemix
[ 139 ]
Click Save. The load test for your application is created. You can run this test to
4.
simulate a load for your application.
To learn more about BlazeMeter, you can refer to h t t p : / / b i t . l y / 2 9 P 9 u g
E.
Manually scaling your application
In the application's Overview page, you will see the number of instances and the memory
allocated to each instance where your application runs:
Let us now learn how to manually scale the application on Bluemix. The following are the
steps to scale your application manually:
Click the + icon next to the instances to increase the number of instances where
1.
your application runs:

Scaling Applications in Bluemix
[ 140 ]
Click Save, to save the configuration:
2.

Scaling Applications in Bluemix
[ 141 ]
Using manual scaling, you can increase the resources attached to your application by
increasing the number of instances in which your application runs. Bluemix internally
scales out or horizontally scales your application when the number of instances is increased.
Bluemix has an internal load balancer, which handles the routing of requests to your
application across the instances. You can also choose to scale your application by increasing
the memory each instance will have. This is how you can scale your applications manually,
in Bluemix.
View the activity log on the Bluemix dashboard to see the application scale out under load;
you will see the information shown in the following screenshot:
To verify the application scaling, you can run load tests using the BlazeMeter service we
created earlier, or you can run load tests using JMeter.
Scaling your application using the Auto-
Scaling service in Bluemix
In the previous section, we learned how to scale our application manually. In this section,
we will learn about scaling applications automatically by using the Auto-Scaling service in
Bluemix.

Scaling Applications in Bluemix
[ 142 ]
Creating the Auto-Scaling service instance
The following are the steps to create the Auto-Scaling instance:
From the Bluemix catalog, select Auto-Scaling from the DevOps category of
1.
services, as shown in the following screenshot:

Scaling Applications in Bluemix
[ 143 ]
Click the Auto-Scaling service, review the service details, and click Create:
2.
The Auto-Scaling service is created. Since we have not yet bound the application
3.
to this service, you will see the message shown in the following screenshot:

Scaling Applications in Bluemix
[ 144 ]
Binding the Auto-Scaling service instance to your
application
Let us now bind the Auto-Scaling service to the application that we want to scale
automatically using the Auto-Scaling service:
Go to the application details page and click Connections:
1.

Scaling Applications in Bluemix
[ 145 ]
Click Connect Existing. The services that exist in your Bluemix space is
2.
displayed. Select the Auto-Scaling service instance that we just created:
Click Connect. You will be prompted to restage the application. Click Restage.
3.
The Auto-Scaling service instance is now bound to your application, as shown
here:

Scaling Applications in Bluemix
[ 146 ]
Defining the scaling policy for your application
Let us now learn how to use the Auto-Scaling service to define scaling policy, which will be
used to monitor and automatically scale your application:
Open the Auto-Scaling dashboard by clicking the service tile from under the
1.
Connections view of your application details page:
Click CREATE AUTO-SCALING POLICY to create the scaling policy for your
2.
application. As shown in the following screenshot, the policy is defined based on
the metrics selected from the Metric Type dropdown. The metric selected is
ResponseTime. You can configure the maximum number of instances the
application should scale out to. Using the policy, you can also define the scale-in
condition, which would release resources when the metric that is monitored is
within the desired limit.

Scaling Applications in Bluemix
[ 147 ]
The other metrics that can be monitored are Memory, Throughput, and Heap:

Scaling Applications in Bluemix
[ 148 ]
Click SAVE to save the scaling policy for your application.
3.
You can also edit the scaling policy to add more than one rule by clicking on
4.
ADD RULE. You can change the metric type on the policy to define different
conditions for your application, under which it should scale out.
Click Metric Statistics on the Auto-Scaling service dashboard to view the metrics
5.
status when your application is under load. The following is the screenshot of the
memory metric for your application when it is being monitored for the rule for
the memory metric. You can set the upper and lower threshold values to be the
ones that you would have defined in the policy.
You can run the load tests using the BlazeMeter service. You can look at the load
6.
test reports from the BlazeMeter dashboard:
Click the Scaling History tab on the Auto-Scaling dashboard to see the scaling
7.
logs for your application.

Scaling Applications in Bluemix
[ 149 ]
Summary
In this chapter, you learned about application scaling. You also learned about the scaling
options supported on Bluemix. Having followed the examples in this chapter, you have
learned to configure the Auto-Scaling service to automatically scale your applications on
Bluemix.
In the following chapter, you will learn how to use the monitoring and management
capabilities on Bluemix to monitor your application.

6
Monitoring and Management in
Bluemix
In this chapter, we will look at the services available in Bluemix that will users to monitor
and manage the applications deployed on the platform. We will also learn how to use the
monitoring and management services in Bluemix.
In this chapter, you will learn how to use some of these available monitoring and
management services to monitor various parameters of your application in Bluemix.
This chapter will cover the following:
Overview of monitoring and management services in Bluemix
Monitoring and analytics service:
Creating the Monitoring and Analytics service instance
Creating an application to monitor using the M&A service
Binding the M&A service to your application
Simulating events in your application
Viewing reports in the M&A dashboard for your monitored
application
New Relic service:
Creating the New Relic service instance
Binding the New Relic service to your application
Configuring the application to send events to the New Relic service
Simulating events in your application
Viewing reports in the New Relic dashboard for your monitored
application

Monitoring and Management in Bluemix
[ 151 ]
Overview of monitoring and management
services in Bluemix
Discussions in this chapter will be based upon the services that are
available in Bluemix at the time of writing this book (July 2016).
Some of the services that can be used to monitor and manage your applications on Bluemix
are the following:
Monitoring and Analytics, which is an IBM service
New Relic, a third-party service
JKool, a third-party service
IBM Alert Notification, which is an IBM service
When you log in to Bluemix, and select All Items, you will see Get started now!, as shown
in the following screenshot:

Monitoring and Management in Bluemix
[ 152 ]
From here you can click Get started now! to view the services in the Bluemix catalog. Go to
the DevOps category to view the monitoring and management services:
Let us now look in detail at how to use the Monitoring and Analytics service with your
application in Bluemix.
Monitoring and Analytics service
Using the Monitoring and Analytics (M&A) service, you can get the details on the
performance, availability and log analytics details for your application. In this section, we
will learn how to create the service instance and how to configure it to enable monitoring of
your application.
M&A service is currently only supported for Java applications on Liberty
Application Server and NodeJS applications.

Monitoring and Management in Bluemix
[ 153 ]
Creating the Monitoring and Analytics service
instance
When you log in to Bluemix, and select All Items, you will see Get started now! From here
you can click Get started now! to view the services in the Bluemix catalog. Once you are in
the Bluemix catalog, you can perform the following steps to create the M&A service
instance:
In the catalog, filter the services by typing  Monitoring and Analytics as
1.
shown here:
Click Monitoring and Analytics service. The service details are displayed as
2.
shown here:

Monitoring and Management in Bluemix
[ 154 ]
The available plan details of the M&A service are as shown in the following
3.
screenshot. Enhanced monitoring and management capabilities are offered under
the Diagnostics plan. For demonstration here we will use the Free plan:

Monitoring and Management in Bluemix
[ 155 ]
Click Create. The M&A service is created. You will see that there are no
4.
applications bound to the M&A service, hence you will see the message as shown
in the following screenshot displayed:
Let us now create a sample application which we can monitor using the M&A service that
we just created.
We will use the JavaCloudantWebStarter boilerplate to create an application that we will
use to demonstrate the monitoring capabilities of the M&A service:
From the Bluemix dashboard, go to the Compute option. Click on Get started
1.
now!, as shown in the following screenshot :

Monitoring and Management in Bluemix
[ 156 ]
Select the Java Cloudant Web Starter boilerplate:
2.
Provide a name for your application. In this demo the application name is
3.
 mnademo-b05307. Leave the other fields with their default values, as shown
here:

Monitoring and Management in Bluemix
[ 157 ]
Click Create. This creates the starter application.
4.
In this section, we will learn how to bind the M&A service you created with your
application:
Once the application is started, go to the Connections view of your application,
1.
as shown in the following screenshot:

Monitoring and Management in Bluemix
[ 158 ]
To bind the already created M&A service to the application, click Connect
2.
Existing.
Select the M&A service instance that was created earlier. Click Connect:
3.
You will be prompted to restage the application while binding the service
4.
instance to the application. Click Restage:
Binding and restaging of the application will take a few seconds. Please
wait patiently for the process to complete.

Monitoring and Management in Bluemix
[ 159 ]
You will now see the M&A service is bound to your application, as shown in the
5.
following screenshot:
Click the M&A service to open the M&A dashboard. Before we look at the
6.
various tabs in the M&A dashboard let us make one small configuration under
the Events tab:

Monitoring and Management in Bluemix
[ 160 ]
Select the gear icon on the top right corner and from the drop-down menu select
7.
Configure events policy. From the screen displayed, select all the applicable
events for which you would like to log events in M&A. Here we will select all the
allowed events:

Monitoring and Management in Bluemix
[ 161 ]
Click Next. Select all the Performance events:
8.
Click Done.
9.

Monitoring and Management in Bluemix
[ 162 ]
We can also configure e-mail IDs to receive notification e-mails when the
10.
configured events occur. For this click again on the gear icon in the Events tab
and this time select Configure notification:
Enter the e-mail IDs to which the notification e-mails should be sent when any of
11.
configured availability or performance event occur in your application:

Monitoring and Management in Bluemix
[ 163 ]
Click Done.
12.
Simulating events in your application
To simulate events in your application you can do any operations on your application. For
this demonstration we will do couple of things:
Access the application URL (https://mnademo-b05307.mybluemix.net/) and
1.
upload a sample file from the application console.
Go to the Bluemix dashboard and stop the application:
2.
Start the application after a minute or so:
3.

Monitoring and Management in Bluemix
[ 164 ]
Let us now look at what the M&A service offers as part of monitoring your application. We
will look at the M&A dashboard in this section:
Go to the M&A dashboard by clicking the M&A service from under your
1.
application, Connections view, as explained earlier.
In the Availability tab, you will see the application availability stats. Here you
2.
will see how many times the application URL was not accessible during a given
time range. The time range for which you would like to see the report can be
adjusted from the Viewing dropdown:
You also can see the response time stats for your application requests, as shown
3.
in the preceding screenshot.

Monitoring and Management in Bluemix
[ 165 ]
The Performance Monitoring tab shows the performance statistics for your
4.
application, as the starter application we have bound the service to, is a Java
application running on a Liberty server. You will see the JVM usage, Java heap
size usage, thread pool count, and garbage collection stats, as shown in the
following screenshot:
The Log Analysis tab enables you to query on the logs for your application:
5.

Monitoring and Management in Bluemix
[ 166 ]
For details on querying and analyzing the application logs from the Log
Analysis tab, you can refer to https://ibm.biz/BdrHvk.
You can filter log events based on the filter strings you can see to the left of the
6.
screen in the Log Analysis tab.

Monitoring and Management in Bluemix
[ 167 ]
For example, the logs for your application consist of  responseCode 200, and all
7.
occurrences of this can be filtered by selecting  200 under the response code. This
adds the filter string to the Search field. Click Search to see the relevant logs
which have logged a response code of  200. You can add more conditions to
build the filter string and filter the logs records you want to view:
In the Events tab, you will see an availability event logged. This was logged
8.
when we simulated an application downtime by stopping the application in the
previous section:

Monitoring and Management in Bluemix
[ 168 ]
Let us verify if the notification e-mail was sent as configured. Go to the inbox for
9.
the e-mail ID, which was configured in the step where we configured notification
for the events in the M&A service. The following screenshot shows the inbox
view for the ID that was configured in this demonstration. You will see there are
two e-mails received:
The first e-mail was received when the application URL was not available. This
10.
happened when we stopped the application. E-mail contents for the availability
event is as shown in the following screenshot:

Monitoring and Management in Bluemix
[ 169 ]
The second e-mail was received when the application URL was available again
11.
after being unavailable. This happened when we started the application after
stopping it. E-mail contents for this event is as shown in the following screenshot:
So we have learnt how to create, configure, and use the M&A service to monitor your
application across availability and performance. We also looked at the events monitored by
the service. If you choose the Diagnostics plan feature for the M&A service, you will be
able to monitor your application to the code level.
For additional details on the Diagnostics plan feature, you can refer to
https://ibm.biz/BdrHvt.
New Relic service
The New Relic service is a third-party service which can be used to monitor applications on
Bluemix. A user account in New Relic can be created by creating the New Relic instance
from Bluemix.

Monitoring and Management in Bluemix
[ 170 ]
Creating the New Relic service instance
To create the New Relic instance go to the Bluemix catalog using steps that we have carried
out earlier while creating the Monitoring and Analytics service. Follow the steps to create
the service instance:
Filter the services in the catalog by entering New Relic in the search field. Click
1.
New Relic service:
New Relic is offered under a Free plan. Click Create:
2.

Monitoring and Management in Bluemix
[ 171 ]
Once the service is created, go to the New Relic dashboard by clicking OPEN
3.
NEW RELIC DASHBOARD:
This will take you to the New Relic site. You will see a user space created for you.
4.
Click on the highlighted area, as shown in the following screenshot:

Monitoring and Management in Bluemix
[ 172 ]
Select Account Settings from the drop-down menu:
5.
The New Relic account details are shown for the user space created. You will see
6.
the New Relic license information to the right of this screen. Make a note of this
as it will be required in the configuration of our application so that it can send
events to New Relic:

Monitoring and Management in Bluemix
[ 173 ]
This completes the steps where we create the New Relic service instance to monitor our
application.
Binding the New Relic service to your application
In this section, we will carry out the steps to bind an application that we want to monitor to
the New Relic service instance we created. We will not be creating a new application for
this; we will continue to use the same application that we had created to demonstrate the
monitoring using the Monitoring and Analytics service:
From the application details page, go to the Connections view and select
1.
Connect Existing:
Select the New Relic service instance that we created. Click Connect:
2.

Monitoring and Management in Bluemix
[ 174 ]
Restage the application when you are prompted, by clicking Restage.
3.
You will see now the New Relic service is bound to the application that you want
4.
to monitor using the New Relic service:

Monitoring and Management in Bluemix
[ 175 ]
Configuring the application to send events to the
New Relic service
To be able to use the New Relic service to monitor your application, you will need to do
some configuration at the application deployment end, which is discussed in this section:
Go to the application Overview. Click the Add Git Repo and Pipeline option, as
1.
shown in the following screenshot:
This will create a project for your application in the Git repository. If you are not
already logged into IBM DevOps you will be prompted to log in. Use the same
credentials as your IBM ID, which you have used while logging in to Bluemix.

Monitoring and Management in Bluemix
[ 176 ]
Before proceeding with the repository creation you will be shown a prompt as
shown. Ensure that the checkbox against Populate the repo with the starter app
package and enable the Build & Deploy pipeline is checked:
Click CONTINUE.
2.
Once the repository is successfully created for your application, you will get a
3.
confirmation as shown here:

Monitoring and Management in Bluemix
[ 177 ]
Going back to the application Overview, you will now see the GIT URL link for
4.
your repository. Click EDIT CODE. This opens the Bluemix DevOps console:
Click BUILD & DEPLOY. This will take you to the pipeline configured
5.
automatically for your application when you had clicked the option to Add Repo
and Pipeline:

Monitoring and Management in Bluemix
[ 178 ]
You will see two stages in the pipeline. One is Build Stage and the other is
6.
Deploy Stage:
Click on the gear icon in Deploy Stage. Select Configure Stage:
7.

Monitoring and Management in Bluemix
[ 179 ]
The following screenshot shows the existing configuration of the stage:
8.
You will need to modify the Deploy Script terminal, to contain the following
9.
script:
      #!/bin/bash
      cf push "${CF_APP}" --no-start
      cf set-env "${CF_APP}" NEW_RELIC_LICENSE_KEY
        "${NEW_RELIC_LICENSE_KEY}"
      cf set-env "${CF_APP}" NEW_RELIC_APP_NAME "${CF_APP}"

Monitoring and Management in Bluemix
[ 180 ]
      cf start "${CF_APP}"
      # View logs
      #cf logs "${CF_APP}" -recent
Click Save after making the preceding change to Deploy Script in Deploy Stage.
10.
You will notice that we have added two new lines to the Deploy Script terminal.
11.
These are used to set the environment variables for the application. We will now
need to define these two environment variables with their values.
Go to your application details page, select the Runtime view. Go to
12.
the Environment Variables tab:
We will define the two variables under the User Defined properties. Click Add.
13.
Add the following two name value pairs and click Save:
        NEW_RELIC_LICENSE_KEY=<value got from New Relic site>
        NEW_RELIC_APP_NAME=<value of app name used in the deploy script,
          mnademo_b05307 in case of this example>

Monitoring and Management in Bluemix
[ 181 ]
The following screenshot shows the properties set for this demonstration:
Now go back to the IBM DevOps console and go to the pipeline for your
14.
application. Click the play icon to run Build Stage. Once the build completes,
click the play icon to run Deploy Stage:
Once Deploy Stage completes successfully, you are ready with your application
15.
to be monitored by New Relic:

Monitoring and Management in Bluemix
[ 182 ]
Before we can look at New Relic reports, let us simulate some activities within the
application.
Simulating events in your application
We will simulate activity in the application by going to the application URL
(https://mnademo-b05307.mybluemix.net) and performing some operations using the
application console, such as uploading the file and so on.

Monitoring and Management in Bluemix
[ 183 ]
Viewing reports in the New Relic dashboard for
your monitored application
We shall now go to the New Relic dashboard to view the monitoring reports from New
Relic for your application:
Go to the New Relic dashboard, as described earlier. In the dashboard, select
1.
APM. Here you will see your application listed, as shown in the following
screenshot:

Monitoring and Management in Bluemix
[ 184 ]
Click the application to view the monitoring reports for your application, as
2.
shown here:

Monitoring and Management in Bluemix
[ 185 ]
You can also look at reports from JVM monitoring for your application in
3.
addition to the other reports and stats that you can view based on the options
available from the left of the screen:
Summary
In this chapter, we learnt about the different services that can be used to monitor and
manage your applications. We learnt to work with the Monitoring and Analytics service for
a web application deployed on Bluemix. Additionally, we also learnt to work with New
Relic which is a third-party service on Bluemix.
You can also explore the Availability Monitoring service from the
Bluemix services catalog, to monitor the response time and uptime of your
application.
In the next chapter, we will learn about the different compute options available in Bluemix
and when to use them. We will also learn to develop and deploy applications on some of
the available compute options.

7
Compute Options on Bluemix
Compute capability provides Bluemix users with infrastructure resources with which they
can deploy and run their applications. There are different flavors of compute supported on
Bluemix. At the time of writing, the different compute options available are:
Cloud Foundry applications (also referred to as instant runtimes)
Containers (based on Docker)
Virtual servers (based on Open Stack APIs)
OpenWhisk (for event-based applications)
At the time of writing, OpenWhisk is offered as experimental.
When you log in to Bluemix, and select the Compute option, you will see the different
compute options available on Bluemix, as shown in the following screenshot:
In this chapter, we will learn more about these compute options. Let's start with Cloud
Foundry applications.

Compute Options on Bluemix
[ 187 ]
Cloud Foundry applications
As explained in earlier chapters, Bluemix is a Cloud Foundry-based platform as a service
offering, which means that its application infrastructure and automation is enabled by the
Cloud Foundry project.
In earlier chapters, we have seen how to work with Cloud Foundry-based applications on
Bluemix, we have also seen how we can work with cf cli or Bluemix UI to create Cloud
Foundry-based apps and deploy them on Bluemix. In this chapter, we will look at yet
another way to work with Cloud Foundry-based applications.
Working with the eclipse plugin for Bluemix
In this section, we will learn to use eclipse IDE for the development of apps and see how the
Bluemix plugin for eclipse facilitates for a seamless and easy integration with your public
Bluemix account.
Installing the eclipse plugin for Bluemix
The minimum version of eclipse required for the plugin is eclipse Luna (4.4.1) and above.
Refer to the plugin details at
https://marketplace.eclipse.org/content/ibm-eclipse-tools-bluemi
x.
Perform the following steps for plugin installation:
Having installed the supported version of Eclipse, open the Eclipse editor.
1.
Go to Help | Eclipse Marketplace.
2.
Enter  Bluemix in the Find field and click on Go.
3.
You will see the available plugins, as shown in the following screenshot.
4.
Click Install on the plugin highlighted in the following screenshot:
5.

Compute Options on Bluemix
[ 188 ]

Compute Options on Bluemix
[ 189 ]
Ensure the default options are left selected, as shown in the following screenshot:
6.
Review the license terms and select I accept the terms of the license agreements.
7.
Click Finish to start the plugin installation.
8.
Once the plugin installation is completed, you will be shown a prompt to restart
9.
Eclipse to complete the installation; select Yes to restart Eclipse.
Now let us configure Bluemix as a server that you can use directly from your Eclipse, which
is made possible by the plugin that you have just installed:
In Eclipse, open Servers View.
1.
See Eclipse Help for details on opening views in Eclipse.
To create a new server, right-click in Servers View and select New | Server.
2.

Compute Options on Bluemix
[ 190 ]
For the server type, expand IBM and select IBM Bluemix in the server creation
3.
wizard, as shown in the following screenshot:

Compute Options on Bluemix
[ 191 ]
You will now be prompted to enter the credentials to connect to your public
4.
Bluemix account, as shown in the following screenshot:
Creating an account in public Bluemix should be done before you
configure a new server in Eclipse, of the server type IBM Bluemix.
Click Validate Account to connect to your Bluemix account using the credentials
5.
and information you have provided. Once the account is validated, you will see a
list of your spaces and organizations in Bluemix, as shown in the following
screenshot. You can select the space you want to configure Eclipse to work with:

Compute Options on Bluemix
[ 192 ]
You will now see a new server configuration created, which you can use to deploy and
manage Cloud Foundry-based apps that you develop on your Eclipse editor locally:

Compute Options on Bluemix
[ 193 ]
Now let us look at an example application development experience from Eclipse and use
the Eclipse plugin to update the application on Bluemix. I will first create a Cloud Foundry
app from the Bluemix dashboard as explained in earlier chapters. I will then download this
app and show you an example update to the application and its redeployment to Bluemix,
using the Bluemix Eclipse plugin:
If you already have a Java application in Eclipse, then you can use it to
deploy on Bluemix, using the plugin you have installed.
Create the Cloud Foundry app from the Bluemix dashboard, using Java
1.
Cloudant Web Starter, which is a boilerplate:

Compute Options on Bluemix
[ 194 ]
Once the app is created, go to the Getting Started page, as shown in the
2.
following screenshot:
Click Download Starter Code, as shown in the following screenshot:
3.
The application used in this demo is downloaded as  B05307-07-01-eclipse.zip, you
will get the application archive named based on the name of the application you provide at
the time of creating it in Bluemix.
Importing your Cloud Foundry application to Eclipse
If you are using your own application and not the application from
Bluemix, then you can skip the steps in this section.
In order to import the Cloud Foundry application, you have to follow these steps:
Go to Eclipse and click File | Import.
1.

Compute Options on Bluemix
[ 195 ]
From the Import wizard, select the optionGeneral | Existing Projects 
2.
into Workspace, as follows:
Click Next.
3.
In the subsequent screen, select the option Select archive file.
4.

Compute Options on Bluemix
[ 196 ]
Click Browse to provide the path of the downloaded app archive location, which
5.
is the path to  B05307-07-01-eclipse.zip in this example:

Compute Options on Bluemix
[ 197 ]
Click Finish to complete the import of the application files to Eclipse.
6.
In your Java or JEE perspective of Eclipse, you will now see the new project,
 JavaCloudantApp, created as follows:
This is a sample Java web application that uses Cloudant NoSQL database as its backend.
The Cloudant NoSQL database configured in this application is a service on Bluemix. You
will see the service instance created in your Bluemix dashboard, when you created the
application.

Compute Options on Bluemix
[ 198 ]
If you are using your own application, then some of the things that would
be different from the example used here would be the services or
supporting software, such as the databases that your application is
designed to use. If your application uses such vendor provided supporting
software, then it is recommended that you figure out whether they are
supported as a service on Bluemix. If not, then you will need to program
your application with their equivalents, before you can use Eclipse to push
your local application to deploy on Bluemix.
You will also see a  manifest.yml file, which is the one used by Cloud Foundry during
deployment.
If you are using your own local application on Eclipse, then you will not
have this file. You can choose to create one in the format shown for this
sample application.
The content of the  manifest.yml file for this application is as follows:
If you intend to use any other services on Bluemix while updating or modifying your
application in Eclipse, make sure that you update the services section in your
 manifest.yml file to add the names of your services that the application uses.
These services with the given service names should exist in the Bluemix
space where you are deploying your application.

Compute Options on Bluemix
[ 199 ]
Updating your application in Eclipse
You can modify the application to your liking based on what you would want the
application to do. For explaining the process, we will make a minor update to the
application UI and carry out a local build, and then we shall redeploy the application to
Bluemix, using the plugin so that the update is available on your hosted application.
If you go to the existing application route, which is
 http://b05307-07-01-eclipse.mybluemix.net/ in the case of this sample demo, you
will see the following UI:
Now let us make a UI update to change the image on the ADD button. We will also change
the hover text on that button, which is currently showing Add record, to Add file category:
Choose an image file that you want to use instead of the ADD button.
1.
Copy that image file to the  images folder in Eclipse, as shown in the next
2.
screenshot. The  add_file.png file is my new image file in this example.
Open  index.html and make the edits, as shown in the following screenshot:
3.

Compute Options on Bluemix
[ 200 ]
Now we need to run the build locally for the changes to be built into the deployable
archive, which is  JavaCloudantApp.war in this case. You can delete the existing file
before building the app with changes, so that you will know that your changes are built
when this file is recreated:
Delete the existing  JavaCloudantApp.war archive, highlighted in the following
1.
screenshot:

Compute Options on Bluemix
[ 201 ]
Right-click on  build.xml, and select Run As | Ant Build to build the application
2.
with your changes:
Once the build is completed, you will see the  JavaCloudantApp.war archive
3.
created, as shown in the following screenshot:

Compute Options on Bluemix
[ 202 ]
Deploying updates to Bluemix using the Eclipse plugin
The deployment of updates involves the following steps:
Right-click on the project in eclipse and click Run As | Run on Server:
1.

Compute Options on Bluemix
[ 203 ]
In the wizard dialog, you can choose the existing server configuration, which was
2.
created earlier in this chapter for dev space in your Bluemix account.
If you want to deploy the application in any other space on Bluemix, or
another organization or region, you can do so by choosing the Manually
define a new server option. You need to ensure that the Bluemix services,
your application is dependent on, are configured in the space you are
planning to deploy in.
We will choose the existing server, as we are updating the application that
3.
already exists in the Bluemix space. This is the Space on Bluemix where the
configured server will deploy your application, using the Bluemix Eclipse plugin:

Compute Options on Bluemix
[ 204 ]
Click Next and your application will be selected to be configured on the server, as
4.
shown in the following screenshot:
Click Finish. This will open the application details dialog, which allows you to
5.
define how you would like your application to be deployed on Bluemix.

Compute Options on Bluemix
[ 205 ]
You can provide a new name to the application here and have it saved to your
6.
 manifest.yml file locally. In this case, since we are only updating an existing
application, we will leave the default values for the Name field:
If you are using any other web server runtime for your application, then
you can provide the buildpack URL for it in the Buildpack URL
field. Details on how to find a buildpack URL for your programming
language or framework runtimes was explained in earlier chapters.
Click Next. Deployment details can be changed in the subsequent dialog.
7.
However, for this example, we shall retain the defaults for this application
deployment:

Compute Options on Bluemix
[ 206 ]
If you want to use another URL for your updated application, you can
modify it in the Deployed URL field and click Validate to check whether
it is an available or valid URL to map to your deployed application.
Click Next.
8.

Compute Options on Bluemix
[ 207 ]
In the subsequent window, you will be able to configure additional Bluemix
9.
services that are available in the Bluemix space that you are deploying your 
application to. By default, the service that is specified in your  manifest.yml file
is pre-selected, as shown in the following screenshot:
Click Next.
10.
If your application uses any environment variables, you can define them in the
11.
subsequent dialog. For this example, we do not have any environment variables
to define:

Compute Options on Bluemix
[ 208 ]
Click Finish to start the deployment process. You can see the deployment logs in
12.
the Eclipse console, as shown in the following screenshot:

Compute Options on Bluemix
[ 209 ]
When the updated application URL is launched directly from the Bluemix dashboard or in
the Eclipse web browser, you will see your updates to the application reflected as follows:
So you have now learned how to work with Eclipse as your local IDE and use your Bluemix
account to deploy or host your applications, using the Eclipse Bluemix plugin.
Containers
You can run Docker containers on Bluemix by using the Containers compute option.
Containers are a great option when you require resource isolation and the portability of
your applications and application runtime environments. IBM Containers are based upon
Docker container technology. With containers, you have the ability to move dockerized or
containerized application environments quickly from development to test, pre-production
or production. Additionally, with containers, you can also build highly available
applications by using what is called container groups, which are clustered containers,
having the same application environment or built from same container image. You can also
enable auto recovery while creating a container group; by doing so, new container instances
are automatically created if and when any of the already existing containers in the container
group go down. A container group can be created even with a single instance of container.
To get a detailed understanding of how IBM Containers leverage Docker
technology, you can refer to h t t p s : / / i b m . b i z / B d r d 6 7.

Compute Options on Bluemix
[ 210 ]
If you are already a Docker user, you can bring your Docker images from Docker Hub to a
private registry hosted by IBM and you will be able to use the same images to create
containers on Bluemix that are same as the Docker containers you have worked on.
To know how to go about copying your images from Docker Hub to the
IBM registry, you can refer to h t t p s : / / i b m . b i z / B d r d U X.
Creating an IBM Container with an existing image
In this section, we will learn how to create an IBM Container instance from IBM-provided
images. To get the Liberty server in a container, we will build a container from an existing
image.
Before you begin
There are a few utilities that are required to be installed locally on your machine, so that
you can work with IBM Containers on Bluemix. Make sure you have the following
supported versions of utilities installed:
Docker version 1.6, 1.7, 1.8, 1.8.1, 1.9.0, 1.9.1, or 1.10.0
Cloud Foundry CLI version 6.14.0 to 6.16.0
IBM Containers Cloud Foundry plug in
Installing Docker
Based on the operating system you are using, you will need to follow the instructions from
the links shown here:
OS X: Get the Docker Toolbox at  h t t p s : / / g i t h u b . c o m / d o c k e r / t o o l b o x / r e l e a s
e s / d o w n l o a d / v 1 . 1  .  / D o c k e r T o o l b o x - 1 . 1  .  . p k g
Docker is installed along with Docker Toolbox
Windows: Get the Docker Toolbox at  h t t p s : / / g i t h u b . c o m / d o c k e r / t o o l b o x / r e
l e a s e s / d o w n l o a d / v 1 . 1  .  / D o c k e r T o o l b o x - 1 . 1  .  . e x e
Docker is installed along with Docker Toolbox
Linux: Refer to the documentation at h t t p s : / / d o c s . d o c k e r . c o m / e n g i n e / i n s t a
l l a t i o n /

Compute Options on Bluemix
[ 211 ]
The screenshots shown in this section will correspond to Docker installation steps on OS X:
Click on the link in the preceding table, corresponding to the OS you are using;
1.
here we will use the OS X related link to explain the steps. This will download
 DockerToolbox-1.10.0.pkg to your local system.
Double-click on the  .pkg file to start the installation of the Docker Toolbox.
2.
Follow the steps in the wizard to continue with the installation. The components
3.
installed as part of the Docker Toolbox installation are shown in the following
screenshot:

Compute Options on Bluemix
[ 212 ]
Once the installation is complete, you can start working with the Docker
4.
terminal. This completes the installation of Docker:
Installing Cloud Foundry CLI
The installation of Cloud Foundry CLI has been explained in an earlier chapter; if you are
reading this chapter after carrying out the exercises and demos from earlier chapters then
you should already have cf cli on your system. You can find the version of the cf cli by
opening the terminal window or command prompt, based on your OS, and typing the
following command:
      cf -v
The results of running this command would give you the information on the version of CF
CLI that you are using, such as what is shown here:

Compute Options on Bluemix
[ 213 ]
Installing the IBM Containers Cloud Foundry plugin
You will need to run the  cf command from the following table, based on the operating
system you are working on:
OS X
cf install-plugin
https://static-ice.ng.bluemix.net/ibm-containers-mac
Windows
64-bit
cf install-plugin
https://static-ice.ng.bluemix.net/ibm-containers-windows_x64.exe
Windows
32-bit
cf install-plugin
https://static-ice.ng.bluemix.net/ibm-containers-windows_x86.exe
Linux 64-
bit
cf install-plugin
https://static-ice.ng.bluemix.net/ibm-containers-linux_x64
Linux 32-
bit
cf install-plugin
https://static-ice.ng.bluemix.net/ibm-containers-linux_x86
Install Cloud Foundry command line (cf cli) plugin before you follow the
steps in this section to install the IBM Containers plug-in for cf cli.
The installation steps are as follows:
Open your command line or terminal window, based on your operating system,
1.
and type the command from the preceding table:
      cf install-plugin
        https://static-ice.ng.bluemix.net/ibm-containers-mac
The following screenshot shows the output generated:

Compute Options on Bluemix
[ 214 ]
The IBM Containers plugin for Cloud Foundry command line is installed. Type
2.
the following command to verify the installation was successful:
      cf plugins
The results of execution are displayed as shown in the following screenshot. You will see
the IBM Containers plugin listed as one of the  cf plugins installed:
Creating a container using the Bluemix dashboard
We will now learn to create a single container using the Bluemix dashboard.
You can also create scalable container groups on Bluemix; for detailed
steps on how to create them, you can refer to https://ibm.biz/BdrxyN.
The following are the steps to create a single container:
Log in to your Bluemix dashboard.
1.
Click Compute from the Dashboard Categories and select Containers:
2.

Compute Options on Bluemix
[ 215 ]
Click Get started now!, shown in the preceding screenshot.
3.
This is will display the container images that are available in the private Bluemix
4.
registry; we will choose to create a container with WebSphere Liberty installed,
so we will choose the ibmliberty image, shown in the following screenshot:
Enter the details in the following screen to create your container from the
5.
ibmliberty image. Enter the container name and choose a size for your container,
which defines the memory and storage capacity of the container you are creating.
You can also choose to bind a public IP to the container you are creating.

Compute Options on Bluemix
[ 216 ]
Click CREATE at the bottom of the screen to start the container creation:
6.

Compute Options on Bluemix
[ 217 ]
Once the container is created, you will see the Overview page for the container
7.
that you just created, as shown in the following screenshot:

Compute Options on Bluemix
[ 218 ]
If you have not yet requested a public IP, you can do so from the Overview page,
8.
by clicking the Request and bind a new public IP option, as shown here:
Once the public IP is bound to your container, you can see it as shown in the
screenshot here:

Compute Options on Bluemix
[ 219 ]
You can also bind Bluemix services to the container you have created. The
Connections tab will show the services that are bound to your container:
You can now see the container you have created in the dashboard view for your Containers
compute option, as shown here:

Compute Options on Bluemix
[ 220 ]
Working with the CF plugin for IBM Containers
Before you can start working with Cloud Foundry IBM Containers plugin, you will need to
run the following command from your terminal window or from the command prompt,
based on the operating system you are using:
  cf ic init
The results of execution of the command is show here:
To get the details on the container that you just created, so as to work with it using the
command line plugin, you will need to execute the following command:
  cf ic ps
This command will list all the containers you have created within your Bluemix
organization.
The result of execution of this command is shown in the following screenshot; you will see
the single container that we just created is listed along with other details about the container
such as its ID, name, and so on:

Compute Options on Bluemix
[ 221 ]
For a detailed reference on the cf cli IBM Containers plugin commands,
you can refer to https://ibm.biz/BdrxMD.
Virtual servers
Virtual servers are a solution to spawn computing resources with specifications that suite
your workload. IBM offers compute capability on Bluemix using virtual servers based on
Open Stack. Virtual servers give users the flexibility to develop and host applications in an
environment that is fully under their control, there are no restrictions in terms of operating
system, supporting software, or other resources when using virtual servers.
To learn more about how to create and use virtual servers, you can refer to
https://ibm.biz/BdrxM4.
From the Bluemix dashboard's Compute category, click Virtual Servers to go to the screen
where you can get started with virtual servers. Click Get started now! to start creating the
virtual server:
At the time of writing this book, virtual servers on Bluemix are in beta.
This beta support for new Bluemix users is closed, hence we will not be
able to take you through the steps of creating the virtual server on
Bluemix; however, to learn more about virtual servers and for steps to get
started with virtual servers, you can refer to the link provided earlier.

Compute Options on Bluemix
[ 222 ]
OpenWhisk
OpenWhisk is an event-driven compute platform. OpenWhisk allows application
developers to write and host application logic agnostic of the infrastructure on which it will
run. This application logic is then triggered through events that can come from Bluemix
services or other applications or sources. Such application logic are also called as actions.
The uniqueness of this compute platform is that it is triggered only when an event occurs,
which means that the trigger caused by an event will result in the application on
OpenWhisk to be deployed and executed; if no event occurs the application unit does not
run and hence does not use any infrastructure resources:
At the time of writing this book, OpenWhisk is in beta. To know the scope
for use and support for experimental services, you can refer to h t t p : / / i b m
. c o / 2 d M u 4 f 7.

Compute Options on Bluemix
[ 223 ]
You will see the editor, where you can write the application logic or actions. A sample Hello
World action written in JavaScript is provided. You can make changes to the file in the
editor and can run the action by clicking Run This Action:
The terminology that you will need to understand to work with OpenWhisk are as follows:
Actions: An application logic that runs when an event occurs is called an action.
Triggers: An event that triggers a certain action to occur is called a trigger.
Rules: A rule associates a trigger to an action. A rule defines what action happens
when a certain trigger occurs or is fired.
Sequence: An action can be defined in a way such that it is a sequence of
multiple actions.
You can work with OpenWhisk using the Bluemix UI, OpenWhisk CLI, or by using an iOS
mobile SDK. Here we will look at using the OpenWhisk CLI.

Compute Options on Bluemix
[ 224 ]
Installing the OpenWhisk CLI
The OpenWhisk tool is also called the wsk command line tool.
You will need to follow the steps at  https://ibm.biz/BdrxMfto to install wsk command
line tool.
Make sure pip is already installed on your system before you attempt to
install the wsk command line tool.
The results of executing the  pip install command for OpenWhisk on the system used
for this demo is as shown in the following screenshot:
You will need to copy the commands from the URL mentioned previously and run them in
your terminal window or command prompt, based on your operating system, to complete
the wsk tool installation and configuration.
Creating the trigger source for our demonstration
Let us learn how to use the Bluemix service as a trigger source. In the example that we used
earlier in this chapter, we created a CloudantNoSQLDB service instance on Bluemix, we
shall now learn how we can configure this Cloudant database as our trigger source. This
means that we would like to build a system where we would like some action to happen
when there is a change in the Cloudant database we have created earlier:
Go to your terminal window and type the following command to get the details
1.
of the services you have created within the space you are working on within your
organization in Bluemix:
      cf services

Compute Options on Bluemix
[ 225 ]
The result of execution of the command is shown here:
Make a note of the Cloudant service instance name, which is  B05307-07-01-
2.
eclipse-cloudantNoSQLDB, in this case.
Ensure that the OpenWhisk CLI namespace corresponds to your Bluemix
3.
organization and space. You can execute the following command to check the
namespace from your terminal window:
      wsk property get --namespace
The result of execution of this command gives you the  namespace property value
that is set in wsk, as shown in the following screenshot:
If the  namespace is not set, you can use the following command to set the
4.
property namespace:
      wsk property set --namespace <Bluemix_Org>_<Bluemix_Space>
You will need to create a package binding for your Cloudant service instance.
5.
To know more about Cloudant package you can refer to h t t p s : / / i b m . b i z
/ B d r x M M.
To create the package binding, execute the following command from the terminal
window:
      wsk package refresh

Compute Options on Bluemix
[ 226 ]
This results of this command are shown here:
You can create the fully qualified name of the package binding created for your
6.
Cloudant data source by executing the following command:
      wsk package list
The result of execution is as shown in the screenshot here:
Make a note of the package binding name from the results of the execution of the
preceding command.
To create the trigger, execute the following command:
7.
      wsk trigger create <name_of_your_cloudanttrigger>
      --feed /<package_binding_name_from_step_above>/changes
      --paramdbname<name_of_cloudant_database_created>
      --paramincludeDoc true
The name of the Cloudant database was  sample_nosql_db, from the example
that we created during the Eclipse plugin demonstration. You can use that as
 name_of_cloudant_database_created, in the preceding command.
 name_of_your_cloudanttrigger is the name you would want to give to the
trigger you are creating in this demo the name of the trigger created is
 B5307_07_CloudantTrigger, as shown here:

Compute Options on Bluemix
[ 227 ]
You can start polling for changes in your Cloudant database by executing this
8.
command:
      wsk activation poll
This will create the listener for any changes in your Cloudant database.
Go to the application URL of the application that we created and deployed earlier
9.
in this chapter using the Eclipse Bluemix plugin, which is
 https://b05307-07-01-eclipse.mybluemix.net/.
Here let us upload a file in the  Sample category and let us also create a new file
10.
category and add another file to this new category, as here:
Go to your terminal window where you have executed the command for polling
11.
the changes to Cloudant database. You will see that the events are created by the
trigger when there was a change to the Cloudant database from our actions in the
application:

Compute Options on Bluemix
[ 228 ]
Creating an action
Let us now look at creating a simple action that can be triggered when the data in the
Cloudant database changes. We will see the steps to create an action from the Bluemix
dashboard. You can create an action using the wsk command line tool as well:
Go to your Bluemix dashboard, and go to OpenWhisk under the Compute
1.
category on your Bluemix dashboard. Click Develop, as shown here:

Compute Options on Bluemix
[ 229 ]
The OpenWhisk editor opens, here you can see a Hello World action in
2.
JavaScript. Click Create An Action to create a new action:

Compute Options on Bluemix
[ 230 ]
In the screen shown here, enter the name of your new action. You can choose to
3.
code the action in any of the supported programming languages:
Since Bluemix is an evolving platform, you may see support for more
languages in future.
For this example, let us choose Javascript as the execution runtime and let us
4.
select Hello World in Javascript as the sample code, from the second dropdown,
as our starting point. Provide a name for your action and click Create Action.

Compute Options on Bluemix
[ 231 ]
My new action is now created as shown here, with the starter code; we shall
5.
modify the code to print the  _id value of the Cloudant document that is
modified:
You can modify the code in your action using the editor in your browser,
to build a functionality that you would want to achieve when a certain
trigger is fired.
Creating a rule
Rule creates the association or link between the trigger and action. Now that we have
created our trigger and our action, let us create a rule to link both, so that when our trigger
is fired (in our case caused by Cloudant database update), an action occurs, which is our
action created in the previous section, and executes. We will use the  wsk command line tool
to create the rule. Rules can be created from the dashboard as well. Before we create the rule
we should make a note of the name of the trigger and the action we would want to link. In
our case the trigger is  B5307_07_CloudantTrigger, and the action is
 B05307_alert_cloudant_update. Lets look at the steps to create a rule:
Execute the  wsk command to create the rule named  B5307-rule:
1.
      wsk rule create --enable B05307-rule B5307_07_CloudantTrigger
        B05307_alert_cloudant_update

Compute Options on Bluemix
[ 232 ]
The result of execution is shown in the following screenshot:
The rule is created and can be seen as active in the OpenWhisk editor as well.
2.
Testing a rule
Let us now test to see whether the trigger caused by a Cloudant update leads to the
execution of the JavaScript code which you have defined as part of your action:
Go to the application URL of the application that we created and deployed earlier
1.
in this chapter using the Eclipse Bluemix plugin, which is
 https://b05307-07-01-eclipse.mybluemix.net/, in our demo.
Let us delete the existing Sample category and create a new category with the
2.
name of  Sample, and let us upload a simple file to this category, as shown in the
following screenshot:
You can make any updates to the Cloudant database that you would like.
The preceding changes are for the sake of illustration.
This would have caused your trigger to fire and would have allowed your rule to
invoke your action.

Compute Options on Bluemix
[ 233 ]
Go to the OpenWhisk dashboard, Activity Log will display the output of the
3.
execution of your action code:
You will see that your action was triggered three times due to the updates you performed
on your application UI, hence you will see the action code executed three times. You will
see that it prints the document  _id value of the Cloudant document which was updated, as
shown here:

Compute Options on Bluemix
[ 234 ]
Summary
In this chapter, you learned about the different compute options offered on IBM Bluemix.
You also learnt about the differences between them and when to use which compute option.
You learnt how to work with the Eclipse Bluemix plugin to develop and deploy cloud
foundry applications. Further we learnt about creating a single container on Bluemix using
an existing image from IBM's private registry. Finally, you learnt about OpenWhisk
compute platform for building event-driven applications. This chapter would have given
you a good understanding on how to get started with the different compute options on
Bluemix. For further examples and how-to(s) you can refer to the links given in each of the
sections in this chapter.
In the next chapter, we will learn about the security services available on Bluemix and how
to use one of the security services in your application deployed on Bluemix, to provide an
authentication service for your application.

8
Security Services on Bluemix
In this chapter, we will look at what security services are available on Bluemix and how we
can use them to secure our application on Bluemix. Securing your web applications and
your cloud environment is a very important aspect of developing applications on cloud. In
this chapter, you will learn about the security services provided on Bluemix and how you
can configure one of the security services to provide an authentication service to your web
application.
Discussions in this chapter will be based upon the capabilities that are
available on Bluemix at the time of writing this book.
In this chapter, you will learn about the following topics:
Overview of security services in Bluemix
Access Trail security service
Creating the Access Trail service instance
Working with the Access Trail service
Single Sign On security service
Creating the Single Sign On service instance
Configuring the identity sources in Single Sign On
Configuring the Cloud Directory
Configuring LinkedIn as an identity source
Configuring Google+ as an identity source
Creating an application that will use the Single Sign On service as
an authentication service

Security Services on Bluemix
[ 236 ]
Modifying the sample application to enable the use of the Single
Sign On service
Integrating the Single Sign On service with your application
Overview of the security services in the
Bluemix catalog
Services under the Security category in the Bluemix catalog are as follows:
Access Trail, which is an IBM service, in beta at the time of writing this book
Application Security on Cloud is an IBM-provided service
Single Sign On is an IBM-provided service
Adaptive Security Manager (ASM) is a third-party service
When you log in to Bluemix and select the Security category, you will see the security
services created in your account:

Security Services on Bluemix
[ 237 ]
From here you can create a new security service instance by clicking the Get started now!
icon in the top-right corner, as shown in following screenshot:
Clicking the Get started now! icon, will display the security services available on Bluemix.
At the time of writing this book, the available security services are as shown in the
following screenshot:

Security Services on Bluemix
[ 238 ]
Let us now look at some of these security services, what they offer as security functions, and
how they can be used with your application on Bluemix.
Access Trail security service
Access Trail is an IBM service that allows you to monitor security within an IBM Cloud
environment.
This service is in beta at the time of writing this book.
Access Trail uses API call monitoring as the mechanism to monitor the IBM Cloud. When
using the Access Trail service, all API calls in the IBM Cloud are monitored and any
suspicious or unusual API activity is detected. Remedial measures to prevent the security
breaches are carried out by preventing the specific API activity in the IBM Cloud
environment. The Access Trail service captures API call logs, which is later used for filtering
and monitoring the API call activity in the IBM Cloud. All APIs from IBM Cloud runtimes,
services, applications, and user activity are logged.
You can read the blog at h t t p s : / / i b m . b i z / B d r F D t for more information
on Access Trail.
Creating the Access Trail service instance
In this section, we will learn how to create the Access Trail service instance and how to
configure it to monitor your cloud environment, in this case Bluemix:
Log in to your Bluemix account.
1.
Click Security category and from the security services dashboard, click Get
2.
started now!

Security Services on Bluemix
[ 239 ]
From the list of security services, select Access Trail, as shown in the following
3.
screenshot:
Click Create after reviewing the information shown on the screen, as shown in
4.
the following screenshot:

Security Services on Bluemix
[ 240 ]
Once the service instance is created, you will see the screen, as shown in the
5.
following screenshot, for the created service instance. The Log level option can be
selected to be among the options shown in the dropdown, as shown in the
following screenshot:
Working with the Access Trail service
You don't have to bind any application to the Access Trail service. You can manage any
space in your Bluemix account using the Access Trail service.
We will use the sample application that we developed in Chapter 2, Building and Deploying
Your First Application on IBM Bluemix, which was developed using the Personality Insights
Java Web Starter boilerplate. Assuming that this application (java-pi-hw-01) is on your
Bluemix space where the Access Trail service is created, let us launch the application URL
and perform a couple of actions on the application. This application makes calls internally
to Watson/Alchemy services. Let us look at the API calls logged as part of this activity:

Security Services on Bluemix
[ 241 ]
Open the Access Trail dashboard. You can configure the dashboard based on
1.
how you would like to see the reports. The following screenshot shows such a
sample API activity in the Bluemix space used for demonstration:
You can create queries based on what information you would like to filter out of
2.
the recorded API activity logs.
If you want to create your queries and filters for monitoring the activity
log in your Bluemix space, you can refer to h t t p s : / / i b m . b i z / B d r F D 7.

Security Services on Bluemix
[ 242 ]
Expanding the row in the Access Trail dashboard will give the details of the API
3.
calls that resulted from the activity we performed using our application (java-
pi-hw-01) URL. The details are as shown in the following two screenshots:
The remaining details are shown in the following screenshot, it is a continuation
of the content from the preceding screenshot:

Security Services on Bluemix
[ 243 ]
Single Sign On security service
In this section, we will learn about another useful security service on Bluemix, called Single
Sign On. We will learn to create the service instance, configure it, and integrate it with your
web application on Bluemix.
Creating a Single Sign On service instance
Let's see how to create a Single Sign On service instance:
Log in to your Bluemix account.
1.
Click the Security Category and from the Security Services dashboard, click Get
2.
started now!:

Security Services on Bluemix
[ 244 ]
From the list of security services, select Single Sign On, as shown in the
3.
following screenshot:

Security Services on Bluemix
[ 245 ]
Click Create after reviewing the information shown on the screen, as shown in
4.
the following screenshot:
Once the service instance is created, you will see the screen shown in the
5.
following screenshot, where you will be prompted to enter a name for your
service, which will be part of your service URL:

Security Services on Bluemix
[ 246 ]
Click Continue.
6.
You will see a screen where you can configure an identity provider that you can
7.
use to authenticate users to your application:
Supported identity providers are as follows:
SAML Enterprise, using which one can configure the enterprise identity source
using SAML tokens
Cloud Directory is a directory of users created and stored in Cloud, which can be
configured as an identity source to authenticate users to your application
Social login refers to sites such as LinkedIn, Facebook, Google+, and GitHub
Configuring the identity sources in Single Sign
On
In this section, we will see how to configure some of the supported identity sources in the
Single Sign On service.

Security Services on Bluemix
[ 247 ]
Configuring the cloud directory
Here we will learn the steps to configure your own cloud directory in Single Sign On:
To configure the Single Sign On service, let us create an identity source using the
1.
Cloud Directory option. Click Cloud Directory.
As shown in the following screenshot, provide a name for your cloud directory:
2.
Click the + icon to add users to the cloud directory:
3.

Security Services on Bluemix
[ 248 ]
Fill out the user details and click Save to add users to your cloud directory. Once
4.
users have been added, you can choose to group them under specific groups if
you wish to. For our demonstration, we will create a couple of users, as shown in
the following screenshot:
You can also do a mass import of users into the cloud directory by using the User
5.
Import icon. A CSV file with the user details can be imported into the directory
from the dialog, as shown in the following screenshot:

Security Services on Bluemix
[ 249 ]
You can click on the gear icon shown in the following screenshot to configure
6.
additional restrictions on user password length and format by selecting a
password policy. You can also create client credentials for API access:

Security Services on Bluemix
[ 250 ]
Configuring LinkedIn as an identity source
Here we will learn the steps to configure a social identity source such as LinkedIn in Single
Sign On:
From the Single Sign On dashboard, select LinkedIn as the identity source you
1.
want to configure:

Security Services on Bluemix
[ 251 ]
Provide a name for your LinkedIn identity source. To configure LinkedIn as your
2.
identity source, there are two steps that you need to follow, which are shown in
the following screenshot:
Follow the instructions in Step 1, go to the LinkedIn website, and register your
3.
application, which would need authenticated access through the user's LinkedIn
accounts. Once your application is registered, you will get a Client ID and Client
Secret keys, which are the authentication keys:

Security Services on Bluemix
[ 252 ]
Under the OAuth 2.0 of your LinkedIn configuration, you will need to provide
4.
the redirect URL. This is the URL that is provided to you under Step 1 in the
Single Sign On LinkedIn identity source configuration screen:
Provide this URL as Authorized Redirect URLs in the LinkedIn Authentication
5.
settings for your application and click Add:

Security Services on Bluemix
[ 253 ]
Save your application configurations on the LinkedIn website. Go back to the
6.
Single Sign On LinkedIn identity source configuration screen. Now we will need
to execute Step 2, which is to provide the Client ID and Client Secret keys we got
from LinkedIn by registering our application in earlier steps:
Click Save. You will see that the LinkedIn identity source is created and enabled:
7.

Security Services on Bluemix
[ 254 ]
Similarly, go ahead and create another identity source using Facebook, using the
8.
same set of instructions as followed for LinkedIn. Once you register your 
application on the Facebook website, you will get an App ID and App Secret,
which need to be provided as part of your identity source configuration in the
Single Sign On service, as shown in the following screenshot:
Click Save. You will see that the Facebook identity source is created and enabled:
9.

Security Services on Bluemix
[ 255 ]
Configuring Google+ as an identity source
Here we will learn the steps to configure Google+ as a social identity source in Single Sign
On:
From the Single Sign On dashboard, select Google+ as the identity source you
1.
want to configure:
Provide a name for your Google+ identity source, as shown in the following
2.
screenshot. To configure Google+ as your identity source, there are two steps that
you need to follow, which are shown in the following screenshot:

Security Services on Bluemix
[ 256 ]
Follow the instructions in Step 1, go to the Google+ website, and register your
3.
application, which would need authenticated access through the user's Google+
accounts.
Once the Google project is created, in the project Overview, click Enable to
4.
enable the Google+ API:
Select Credentials and click Create credentials:
5.

Security Services on Bluemix
[ 257 ]
Select OAuth client ID to configure OAuth credentials:
6.
Select the application type as Web application. Give a name to the credentials
7.
you are creating.

Security Services on Bluemix
[ 258 ]
Under the authorized redirect URIs, provide the callback URL from Step 2 of the
8.
configuration screen for the Google+ identity source, shown in the Single Sign On
service on Bluemix:
The OAuth credentials creation screen in Google+ will now be as shown in the
9.
following screenshot:

Security Services on Bluemix
[ 259 ]
Click Create. The OAuth credentials are created for your project. You can now
10.
copy your client ID and client secret keys:
The client ID and client secret keys from the preceding step are copied and
11.
provided in the configuration screen for Single Sign On using the Google+
identity source. Click Save. The Google+ identity source is configured on your
Single Sign On service instance:
Now you are ready to bind your Single Sign On service to your application on Bluemix and
use the authentication services from the configured identity sources for your application.

Security Services on Bluemix
[ 260 ]
Create an application which will use the Single
Sign On authentication service
To demonstrate the use of the authentication service, let us create a simple Vaadin
framework-based application. This also demonstrates the ability to run Vaadin applications
on Bluemix:
Open your Eclipse IDE. Go to Help | Eclipse Marketplace.
1.
Enter Vaadin in the Search field and click Go.
2.
Vaadin Plugin is returned in the results. Click Install to install the Vaadin plugin
3.
in Eclipse, so that you can work with Vaadin applications in Eclipse:

Security Services on Bluemix
[ 261 ]
Once you have the Eclipse Vaadin plugin installed and have restarted Eclipse, let
4.
us create a sample Vaadin project, which we will deploy on Bluemix. We will use
the out-of-the-box template projects. You can choose to make any changes to the 
application you want to.
In your Eclipse IDE, go to File | New | Vaadin 7 Project (Maven):
5.

Security Services on Bluemix
[ 262 ]
You will create the sample CRUD application using the Vaadin framework in
6.
Eclipse. Your server view was configured in Chapter 7, Compute Options on
Bluemix, for IBM Bluemix. In the Eclipse Server view, under the IBM Bluemix
server runtime, you can see the applications from dev space of your Bluemix org,
as shown in the following screenshot:

Security Services on Bluemix
[ 263 ]
The Vaadin sample application gets created and is shown in your Eclipse Project
7.
Explorer, as shown in the following screenshot. This is a multi-module Vaadin
application:
We will not go into the details of this application. We will use this as a
sample application with a web interface, which will authenticate users
using the application's own login module, and we will see how we can
bind a Single Sign On authentication service to decouple the user
authentication functionality from the application logic.
Now, to be able to build this Vaadin application locally, you will need to have the
8.
Maven plugin installed in Eclipse.
You can also choose to have Maven installed locally on your machine and
build the application from your terminal window.
Download the latest version of Maven from h t t p s : / / m a v e n . a p a c h e . o r g /

Security Services on Bluemix
[ 264 ]
d o w n l o a d . c g i.
Follow the installation instructions for your OS, as explained at h t t p s : / / m
a v e n . a p a c h e . o r g / i n s t a l l . h t m l.
For details on the Maven plugin for Eclipse and for help with installing it, you
9.
can refer to h t t p s : / / m a r k e t p l a c e . e c l i p s e . o r g / c o n t e n t / m a v e n - i n t e g r a t i o n -
e c l i p s e - l u n a - a n d - n e w e r.
You can also install the Maven plugin for Eclipse from Help | Eclipse
Marketplace in your Eclipse.
Before you can deploy the application on Bluemix, you will need to build the
10.
application locally to create the deployable  .war file. Instructions in this section
will assume that you have the Eclipse plugin for Maven installed.
If you are using Maven locally, outside of Eclipse, you will need to adapt
the following instructions appropriately and use the  mvn commands.

Security Services on Bluemix
[ 265 ]
Expand the sample Vaadin application created. You will find the  pom.xml file,
11.
which contains the build definitions for Maven. Right-click on the  pom.xml file
and select Run As | Maven install from the menu:

Security Services on Bluemix
[ 266 ]
Once the build runs successfully, you will see the deployable  .war file created
under the  target folder, as shown in the following screenshot:
Now to deploy the application to Bluemix. Go to the  cf command line and
12.
execute the following command, after logging in to your Bluemix organization
and space (where you have created the Single Sign On service):
      cf push <unique-application-name>
        -p myapplication-ui-1.0-SNAPSHOT.war
An example command for this demo is as follows:
      cf push myvaadinapp-b05307 -p myapplication-ui-1.0-SNAPSHOT.war

Security Services on Bluemix
[ 267 ]
Make sure you change the directory in your terminal window to the folder
where the deployable  .war file is.
Successful execution of the preceding command will deploy the Vaadin
13.
application on Bluemix and start it. The dump of the command execution is as
shown in the following screenshot:
Now you access your application using the application route or URL, which in
14.
the case of this demonstration is h t t p s : / / m y v a a d i n a p p - b  5 3  7 . m y b l u e m i x . n e t.

Security Services on Bluemix
[ 268 ]
You will see the application login screen, which is part of the authentication
15.
functionality built into the application:
We see that this sample application allows for an admin user to log in with any
16.
password, so let us type the username as  admin and password as  admin, and
click Login. Once logged in, you will see an inventory of products, as shown in
the following screenshot. You can perform CRUD (create, retrieve, update, and
delete) operations on the products here:

Security Services on Bluemix
[ 269 ]
Let us now look at how to integrate the Single Sign On service in Bluemix with your
application so that the user authentication functionality is decoupled from your application.
You can use the plug and play approach to build user authentication into your application.
Modify the sample application to enable the use of the
Single Sign On service
In this section, we will learn about the minor changes that should be incorporated into the 
application code and deployment artifacts so that the security constraints are defined.
We will see how to define servlet security using annotations:
In Eclipse, go to your application servlet definition. Open the file, MyUI.java,
1.
present at  myapplication-
ui/src/main/java/com/example/myapplication/samples/.
If your JEE application has a  web.xml file, you can define servlet security
in the  web.xml file as well.
Go to the bottom of the class where  MyUIServlet is defined. Add the
2.
 ServletSecurity annotation to the servlet definition, as shown here:
        @ServletSecurity(@HttpConstraint(rolesAllowed = {"user"}))
          public static class MyUIServlet extends VaadinServlet {
          }
This annotation ensures that all HTTP methods on the servlet are securely
accessible by users whose roles are defined as user.
We will need to make one more change in the  MyUI.java file. Earlier, we
3.
discussed that what we want to eventually achieve is to replace the
authentication function in the application with Single Sign On. So, let us
comment out the piece of code that shows the user login screen when the
application URL is launched (Screenshot in Step 15 of previous section). The
following is the code change in the  init method:
        @Override
        protected void init(VaadinRequest vaadinRequest) {
          Responsive.makeResponsive(this);
          setLocale(vaadinRequest.getLocale());
          getPage().setTitle("MyVaadinApp");

Security Services on Bluemix
[ 270 ]
          showMainView();
          /*if (!accessControl.isUserSignedIn()) {
            setContent(new LoginScreen(accessControl, new LoginListener() {
              @Override
              public void loginSuccessful() {
                showMainView();
              }
            }));
          } else {
            showMainView();
          }*/
        }
You will see that in the code snippet, we have commented out the portion where
4.
the login screen is displayed for user login. We will go directly to the application
page where the inventory is displayed (showMainView();). Save the file.
Now we will need to make one more change to a deployment artifact, which is in
5.
 ibm-application-bnd.xml. Create the  myapplication-
ui/src/main/webapp/META-INF/ibm-application-bnd.xml file.
Copy the following contents to the  ibm-application-bnd.xml file:
6.
        <?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
        <application-bnd xmlns:xsi=
          "http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
          xmlns="http://websphere.ibm.com/xml/ns/javaee"
          xsi:schemaLocation="http://websphere.ibm.com/xml/ns/javaee
http://websphere.ibm.com/xml/ns/javaee/ibm-application-bnd_1_0.xsd"
          version="1.0">
          <security-role name="user">
            <special-subject type="ALL_AUTHENTICATED_USERS"/>
          </security-role>
        </application-bnd>
Save the file. Now let us build a new war file and update the application
7.
deployment on Bluemix. Right-click on the  pom.xml file under
 myapplication, as explained earlier. Select Run As | Maven clean. This will
remove the .war file that was created previously.
Now select Run As | Maven install, on the  pom.xml file under
8.
 myapplication.
Once the build runs successfully, you will see the deployable  .war file created
9.
under the  target folder.
To deploy the application to Bluemix, go to the cf command line and execute the
10.
following command, after logging in to your Bluemix organization and space
(where you have the Single Sign On service created):

Security Services on Bluemix
[ 271 ]
      cf push <unique-application-name> -p
        myapplication-ui-1.0-SNAPSHOT.war
Example command for this demo is as follows:
      cf push myvaadinapp-b05307 -p myapplication-ui-1.0-SNAPSHOT.war
Make sure you change directory in your terminal window to the folder
where the deployable .war file is.
Successful execution of the preceding command will update the Vaadin
11.
application on Bluemix and start it. The dump of the command execution is as
shown in the following screenshot:
Now our application is updated with the changes we made. The next step is to bind the
Single Sign On service to your application.

Security Services on Bluemix
[ 272 ]
Integrating the Single Sign On service with your
application
Once your application is ready and your Single Sign On service is configured and bound to
your application, it is time to integrate the service to your application. Follow the steps in
this section to integrate the configured Single Sign On service to your application:
Go to your application from the Bluemix dashboard and click the application tile:
1.
Go to the Connections view for your application, as shown in the following
2.
screenshot:

Security Services on Bluemix
[ 273 ]
Since we have already created and configured the Single Sign On service, click
3.
Connect Existing.
This will display the existing services within your Bluemix organization and
4.
space. Choose the Single Sign On service instance and click Connect:
You will be prompted to restage your application during the binding of the
5.
service to the application. Click Restage:

Security Services on Bluemix
[ 274 ]
When your application is getting restaged, you can look at the logs by going to
6.
the Logs view, as shown in the following screenshot:
After the application is successfully restaged, you will see the Single Sign On
7.
service instance under the Connections view for your application, as shown in
the following screenshot:

Security Services on Bluemix
[ 275 ]
Click the service tile from under the Connections view to open the Single Sign
8.
On service dashboard. We will now integrate the service to work with your
application.
You will now see an Integrate tab. Click on Integrate to configure the integration
9.
between the Single Sign On service and your application:
You will see a default callback URL. Leave it unchanged. You can choose to use
10.
any or all of the configured identity sources for your application by unchecking
or checking the identity sources listed.

Security Services on Bluemix
[ 276 ]
For this demo, let us choose to only have two identity sources supported for your
application, which are Cloud Directory and LinkedIn:
Click Save. The following prompt indicates successful configuration. Click OK:
11.
Seeing it all work together
Let us now see in action how the Single Sign On authentication service is leveraged to
authenticate users to your web application:
Go to your application URL. In the case of this demonstration, it is h t t p s : / / m y v a
1.
a d i n a p p - b  5 3  7 . m y b l u e m i x . n e t.
You will see an automatic redirection of the application URL in the browser
2.
address bar. You will now see the screen shown in the following screenshot:

Security Services on Bluemix
[ 277 ]
You will see that the user of your application is now shown two login options:
3.
they can now sign in using a cloud directory or LinkedIn account, both of which
are the configured identity sources in your Single Sign On service.
Now, as a user, let us select Sign in with B05307-Cloud Directory:
4.
You will now be shown the screen shown in the following screenshot, where you
5.
can enter the username and password. The user name and password are
validated against the cloud directory you have created in the Single Sign On
service:

Security Services on Bluemix
[ 278 ]
Enter the credentials for one of the users we created while configuring B05307-
6.
Cloud Directory in the Single Sign On service:
Click Login. You will see that you are taken directly to the product inventory list:
7.

Security Services on Bluemix
[ 279 ]
Now let us clear the browser cache and attempt to launch the application URL
8.
again. This time, select Sign in with B05307-LinkedIn:
You will get the following prompt to enter your LinkedIn credentials:
9.

Security Services on Bluemix
[ 280 ]
Enter your LinkedIn credentials and click Allow access. As seen in previous
10.
steps, the name of the application used in this demo to register the application in
LinkedIn is  mysecuritydemo.
You will see that you are taken directly to the product inventory list:
11.
You can go back to the Single Sign On service dashboard from the Connections
12.
view in your application details screen and from the Integrate tab, you can check
to include Google+ as another identity source for your application.
If you launch your application URL, you will now see the additional option of
13.
using Google+ for authentication to your application. Select Sign in with B05307-
Google:

Security Services on Bluemix
[ 281 ]
You will be prompted to enter your Google user credentials:
14.
You will see that you are taken directly to the product inventory list:
15.

Security Services on Bluemix
[ 282 ]
Summary
In this chapter, we discussed the security services available in Bluemix and we delved
deeper into using two of the available security services in Bluemix. We learned how to
offload your web application authentication functionality to the Single Sign On service in
Bluemix. We also learned how to configure different kinds of identity sources in Single Sign
On, and saw how they can be integrated to work with your application running on
Bluemix.
In the next chapter, we will learn about microservice architecture and why Bluemix is a
great platform for building applications that use microservice architecture.

9
Microservices-based
Application Development on
Bluemix
In this chapter, we will learn about an architecture pattern for application development on
cloud, called the microservices architecture pattern. We will also learn how to use Bluemix,
and services on Bluemix, to build and deploy applications that employ the microservices
architecture. In a nutshell, we will learn about the following topics:
Understanding the microservices architecture pattern
Developing a microservice-based application on Bluemix.
Understanding the microservices
architecture pattern
The microservices architecture pattern is a method to develop applications that are
composed of smaller applications, each of which is developed as a small service and has
independent lifecycle management. These smaller services are loosely coupled together to
form a larger application. When you consider whether an application should use
microservices architecture, you should carefully evaluate whether it makes sense for the
smaller functions to exist as independent microservices. Since each of the constituent
micorservices in a microservices-based application has its own lifecycle management, you
will have DevOps for each of the services managed independently.

Microservices-based Application Development on Bluemix
[ 284 ]
One of the things you need to consider before you break your application down into 
microservices is the granularity required. Breaking it down into too many granular units
would increase the operations overhead, while breaking it down into too few units would
increase the application's complexity and failure points. Careful consideration of the
requirements, outcome, and operations overhead would need to be taken before any
application can be considered for design using a microservices pattern.
In a microservices pattern, each of the services should be able to achieve a certain viable
functional completeness. The means to share data between each of these microservices will
have to be consistent and reliable, and independent of any failures that may occur in any of
the constituent microservices at any point in time.
This architectural pattern is a very useful pattern for application development on cloud
platforms such as Bluemix. Application developers can now leverage portions of
functionality from value-added services on such cloud platforms and can build only the
application logic that is required for their business. This expedites application development
timelines and provides the impetus required to bring innovative applications to the market
faster than would otherwise be the case.
The following screenshot shows the visual representation of what a monolithic application
is, as opposed to what a microservices-based application is:
You will see that the monolithic application has all the necessary functionality built into the
same deployable module or unit, which eventually runs on the same infrastructure.
However, in the case of a microservices-based application, you will see that each of the
functions of the application is broken down as a deployable application unit, and each of
them can run in their own infrastructure. The failure of one microservice does not bring all
the other microservices down. The composition of individual microservices forms the new
microservice-based application.

Microservices-based Application Development on Bluemix
[ 285 ]
Since each of the microservices is a deployable unit by itself and has an independent and
individual DevOps, or lifecycle, you will notice that each of the microservices can also be
scaled individually, as opposed to the need to scale the entire application, in the case of a
monolithic application. This gives the ability to only scale those services that consume
greater resources with increase in load. Microservices that are low or static in resource
consumption in response to load increase or decrease can be configured to scale to a lesser
number of nodes, or can afford to not have additional nodes associated, as shown in the
following screenshot:
There are various published resources on microservices architecture; you
can refer to them for detailed understanding of this pattern. Some of the
resources you can use are
http://microservices.io/patterns/microservices.html and http://ma
rtinfowler.com/articles/microservices.html.
Developing a microservices-based
application on Bluemix
Having gained an understanding of what Bluemix is and what it offers from the previous
chapters, and now having gained an understanding of the microservices pattern, you will
be able to get a perspective on why Bluemix is a platform that is suitable for microservices-
based application development. Let us immediately get into discussing an application use
case that we will illustrate in this section, which will also help to bring forth the concept of
microservices and help with your understanding of this.

Microservices-based Application Development on Bluemix
[ 286 ]
In this section, we will build an application leveraging concepts and applications that we
have developed and learned in previous chapters. We will be using the application we
developed in Chapter 4, Leveraging On-Premise Software for Applications on Bluemix in which
we retrieved a certain Twitter feed, translated it into French, did some sentiment analysis on
it, and then persisted it in a MongoDB database that existed locally on your workstation.
This will form one application, or microservice, for us. Next, we will build another
application, which will retrieve persisted negative tweets from MongoDB (which is updated
by our first microservice). We will augment the tweets retrieved by first translating them
back to English, and then we will use the cognitive function of tone analysis to find the
social tone scores for each of the retrieved tweets. We will then create a formatted output of
the tweets with their social tone scores, which will be obtained by a user sending an HTTP
request. At the same time, we will have this application call out to an  OpenWhisk trigger,
which we created in Chapter 7, Compute Options on Bluemix. This application will be our
microservice 2, and the  OpenWhisk trigger, which will execute a configured action, will be
our microservice 3. All of these microservices together will form our microservices based
application. As we can see, each of the three microservices in our example are independent
deployable units, can be scaled individually, can run without dependencies on each other,
and each of them runs on its own infrastructure units.
Let us now go step by step and build our microservices-based application.
Microservice 1
The first microservice for this illustration is the application you built in Chapter 4,
Leveraging On-Premise Software for Applications on Bluemix. We will not be going over the
steps for building this application again in this section. If you followed Chapter 4,
Leveraging On-Premise Software for Applications on Bluemix, before reaching here, then you
will already have this application deployed in your Bluemix account. If not, please go back
to Chapter 4, Leveraging On-Premise Software for Applications on Bluemix, follow the steps to
create the application that retrieves tweets from the configured Twitter stream, analyzes the
tweet sentiment, separates out the negative-sentiment tweets, and persists them in
MongoDB, which is configured on a local system.
Let us now proceed to the next section, assuming you have this step completed and 
microservice 1 is available to you.

Microservices-based Application Development on Bluemix
[ 287 ]
Microservice 3
Before going into the development of microservice 2, let us make sure we have microservice
3 available. If you followed Chapter 7, Compute Options on Bluemix, before reaching here,
you will already have created the  OpenWhisk Cloudant trigger, any action that needs to
occur when the trigger occurs, and finally, the rule that associates the trigger and the action.
In the action, we will make a small modification for this example, since the  Cloudant
trigger that will invoke this action will not be returning an  _id, which we used to print in
the action when we executed it in the example in Chapter 7, Compute Options on Bluemix.
We will modify the action to just print a string to indicate that the trigger, called from our
microservice 2, has executed the action code.
The action code from Chapter 7, Compute Options on Bluemix, will be as shown in the
following screenshot:

Microservices-based Application Development on Bluemix
[ 288 ]
We will be modifying it to look like the following screenshot. Click Make it Live once you
have edited the action code:
You can customize the action code to do anything useful that you want.
We are using this simple action merely to illustrate the functionality and
method of using OpenWhisk applications.
Let us go into the next part of this illustration, which is to create microservice 2.
If you have not followed the OpenWhisk example in Chapter 7, Compute
Options on Bluemix, please go back to Chapter 7, Compute Options on
Bluemix, and create the trigger, action, and rule as explained there. This is
required before you can follow the steps to create microservice 2.

Microservices-based Application Development on Bluemix
[ 289 ]
Microservice 2
Please follow the steps in this section only after you have completed the sections on
microservice 1 and microservice 3.
Let us now create a new application that will act as microservice 2 in our illustration of a
microservices-based application. Follow the steps given here to create the application:
Log in to Bluemix and on the welcome page, click Compute:
1.
Click on the icon highlighted in the following screenshot to take you to the
2.
options available on Bluemix to create a Cloud Foundry application:

Microservices-based Application Development on Bluemix
[ 290 ]
Select the Node-RED Starter boilerplate, as shown in the following screenshot:
3.

Microservices-based Application Development on Bluemix
[ 291 ]
Give your application a name, review the plans for the services that come with
4.
the boilerplate, and click Create:
Once your application is created and has started successfully, you will see it in
5.
the dashboard, as shown in the following screenshot. Click Open URL to go to
the Node-RED editor, from where you can start wiring your application
functionality:

Microservices-based Application Development on Bluemix
[ 292 ]
Click Go to your Node-RED flow editor:
6.
Start wiring your application on the editor using the nodes from the palette on
7.
the left.
We will first wire the flow with the nodes that we need. Then we will learn to
8.
configure each of these nodes individually. The flow we will wire for this
application is as shown in the following screenshot:

Microservices-based Application Development on Bluemix
[ 293 ]
Wiring and configuring the flow
Let us learn to wire and configure the flow:
Drag and drop an http input node from the nodes palette onto your empty editor
1.
pane:

Microservices-based Application Development on Bluemix
[ 294 ]
Double-click on the http node to configure it, then give the node a name and a
2.
URL, which will be used by the application user to trigger the flow we will be 
wiring in the application. Ensure the HTTP method is selected as GET:
Next, drag and drop a function node from the nodes palette:
3.
Double-click the function node to configure it. Give the node a name, such as
4.
 Query MongoDB, as this is the node where we will be defining some of the
parameters that are necessary to build the query to retrieve stored records from
MongoDB. As seen in the following screenshot, we are restricting the number of
records returned by the query by defining  msg.limit. Here, we have limited it
to  30 records. Next, we want the query to fetch the last few records each time it
is run, so we will ensure this happens by defining  msg.sort. We can also choose
to just get the payload field from the query and can ignore the other fields by
defining  msg.projection, as shown in the following screenshot:

Microservices-based Application Development on Bluemix
[ 295 ]
Wire the http and function nodes together. Next, drag and drop the mongodb
5.
node from the palette, shown in the following screenshot:

Microservices-based Application Development on Bluemix
[ 296 ]
Double-click on the mongodb node to configure it. Since this node is going to
6.
query MongoDB to fetch data, make sure you set the Operation field as find.
Provide the Server and Collection information as configured in Chapter 4,
Leveraging On-Premise Software for Applications on Bluemix, when configuring the
MongoDB node in the application:
Your server configuration should look like that shown in the following
7.
screenshot, similar to how we had configured it in Chapter 4, Leveraging On-
Premise Software for Applications on Bluemix, when configuring the mongodb node.
Make sure you are selecting the same database that was used in the application
(microservice 1) to persist translated tweets:

Microservices-based Application Development on Bluemix
[ 297 ]
Now wire the configuredmongodb node to the function node, as shown in the
8.
following screenshot:
To test the flow when you are wiring it, attach a debug node to the output
of the last node in the flow and see the output in the debug console.
To invoke the flow, you can go to a browser and access the GET URL of
the HTTP node you have configured in the flow. For this illustration, it
would be
 https://analyse-twitemotion-b05307.mybluemix.net/translat
edtweets.
If you deploy and run the flow we have created so far, we will get an output such
9.
as that shown here, which is the payload field for 30 documents from MongoDB:
      [ { "payload": "Ce clown a manifestementjamaisentenduparler del'
          expression "vide clang plus les navires"
          https://t.co/YTM6brhVSQ" },
        { "payload": "@revieweroPeut-êtreelleestmelo-dramatizing pour son
          incapacité à effectueren raison de problèmesd'aptitude sur ce
          jour @narendramodi" },
        { "payload": "RT @PMOIndia: attristépar la perte de vies due à un
          séismeenItalie. Condoléances aux famillesendeuillées&prières avec
          les blessés: PM @nar ..." },
        { "payload": "@14Mohjas RT: JungleRaj Au
          Gujarat\n@narendramodisivous
          ne pouvez pas contrôler les troubles
          sociauxdanstoutel'Indevousdevezvolunteerlydémissionner." },
        { "payload": "@daveakash2 RT: aucune accusation de sédition sur
          @narendramodi n @manoharparrikar???
          #NavyInfoLeaksParrikarSleeps" },
        { "payload": "@HemantNoida2015 RT: @yadavakhileshacheteursjaha Sir
          ye #kaisaPradeshUttar Pradesh# korahehaiaurpilleraucune action

Microservices-based Application Development on Bluemix
[ 298 ]
          de côtéur. Https:/ ..." },
        { "payload": "@narendramodi l ....]
You will notice that we are indeed getting the tweets in French from our
10.
MongoDB (inserted into the database by microservice 1). Let us proceed further
with our application (microservice 2) and try to format the results in such a way
that we can do more augmentation on the data retrieved. Continuing with our
application build, let us drag and drop another function node to the editor.
Double-click on it to write the code that will format the results:
The code entered in the preceding function node is provided as follows:
      varstr="";
      for (var j = 1; j <msg.payload.length; j++){
        str+=msg.payload[j].payload+"~";
      }
      msg.payload=str;
      return msg;
You will now see the post execution of the flow, the output being one
11.
string with all the tweets separated by  "~" (which was set in the code), as shown
in the following screenshot of the debug console:

Microservices-based Application Development on Bluemix
[ 299 ]
Now to be able to do any kind of analysis or augmentation of the results, we will
12.
need to split the results into individual tweets. For this, drag and drop the split
node to the editor and wire it to the function node we created in the previous
step:

Microservices-based Application Development on Bluemix
[ 300 ]
You will now see the post execution of the flow, the output being individual
13.
tweets set as a string onto  msg.payload, in the flow:

Microservices-based Application Development on Bluemix
[ 301 ]
Now we will make use of value-added services from Bluemix, which in
their own capacity can be considered as additional microservices that
would make up this application. For the sake of this discussion, we will
just call them Bluemix services. So, in this application, we want to convert
the tweet text back to English, so we will use the language translation
node, such as the one we used in Chapter 4, Leveraging On-Premise
Software for Applications on Bluemix, for our microservice 1 application.
Here, the assumption is that you already have the Watson Language
Translation service added to your Bluemix account, which you would
have done in Chapter 4, Leveraging On-Premise Software for Applications on
Bluemix.
Drag and drop the language translation node to the current flow, double-click on
14.
the node to configure it, use the credentials from the service in your Bluemix
account, and choose English as Target and French as Source:

Microservices-based Application Development on Bluemix
[ 302 ]
Wire the language translation node to the split node. Deploy and execute the
15.
flow by hitting the http GET URL of the http input node, you will see the
following output in the debug console:

Microservices-based Application Development on Bluemix
[ 303 ]
Next let us update the application flow to augment the results we would want to return to
the user. We will use the Watson category service on Bluemix, Tone Analyzer, to analyze
the tone of each of the tweet retrieved, and we will then display the tweet, along with the
social tone score, for each of them.
Follow the steps given to first add the Tone Analyzer service instance to your Bluemix
account so that you get the credentials required to configure the service in your application
flow:
From the Bluemix welcome page, click Watson and then click Tone Analyzer
1.
from the catalog of services under the Watson category:

Microservices-based Application Development on Bluemix
[ 304 ]
Give the service instance a name, review the plan details, and click Create:
2.

Microservices-based Application Development on Bluemix
[ 305 ]
You will see the following service instances created on your dashboard, under the
3.
Watson category:
Click the Tone Analyzer tile to view the details. Go to the Service Credentials
4.
tab, click View Credentials on the credentials for the service, and make a note of
the username and password, as shown in the following screenshot:

Microservices-based Application Development on Bluemix
[ 306 ]
Go back to the Node-RED editor for your application and drag and drop the tone
5.
analyzer v3 node from the palette:
Double-click the node to configure it. Give the node a name and select the values
6.
as shown in the following screenshot for Tones, Sentences, and Content Type.
Configure the Username and Password options with values obtained from the
service credentials, as obtained in the previous step:

Microservices-based Application Development on Bluemix
[ 307 ]
Wire the tone analyzer v3 node to the language translation node. Execute the
7.
flow to see the output from the tone analyzer v3 node. You will see that the
output from this node is returned in  msg.response, as shown in the following
screenshot:

Microservices-based Application Development on Bluemix
[ 308 ]
Now that we have processed each tweet retrieved, and have obtained the social
8.
tones for them, let us now format the result in such a way that we can create a
display for each tweet against its social tone in a tabular format. Drag and drop a
function node to the flow editor and double-click on it to add the code that will
format the results, such as that shown here. The results of the execution of the
flow are as shown in the debug console, as shown in the following screenshot:
The code entered in the function node is as follows:
      var payload = msg.payload;
      varstr = msg.response.document_tone.tone_categories[0].tones;
      varfinalstr = "";
      for (vari = 0; i < str.length; i++) {
        finalstr += str[i].tone_name + " : " + str[i].score + ", ";
      }
      finalstr = finalstr.substring(0, finalstr.lastIndexOf(","));
      msg.payload = "<tr><td width='60%' style='background-color: #AECD10;>
        <p><span style='color: '#fff;' font-weight: bold;
          display: inline-block; padding: 3px 10px; border-radius: 5px;'>
          <blockquote><em>" + payload + "</em></blockquote></span></p></td>
      <td width='40%' style='background-color: #CC9FC5;'><p>
        <span style='color: #000;' display: inline-block;

Microservices-based Application Development on Bluemix
[ 309 ]
          padding: 3px 10px; font-weight: bold; border-radius: 5px;'>
          <em>" + finalstr + "</em></span></p></tr>";
      return msg;
You can add a delay node to introduce a small wait time till all the individual
9.
messages are available. This is optional:
Next we will need to add a join node so that we can club the individual
10.
 msg.payload into one  msg.payload:

Microservices-based Application Development on Bluemix
[ 310 ]
Double-click on the join node to configure it, as shown in the following
11.
screenshot. Choose the Mode option to be Manual, configure Combine each to
msg.payload and to create to a String:
To embed the msg.payload option from the join node into an HTML page, you
12.
can drag and drop a template node to your flow. This is where you will write the
HTML for your page containing the results:
Double-click on the template node to configure it. This is where you will add the
13.
following code:
      <style type="text/css">
        .tg  {border-collapse:collapse;border-spacing:0;
           border-color:#aaa;margin:0px auto;}
        .tg td{font-family:Arial, sans-serif;font-size:14px;
           padding:10px 5px;border-style:solid;
           border-width:1px;overflow:hidden;word-break:normal;

Microservices-based Application Development on Bluemix
[ 311 ]
           border-color:#aaa;color:#333;background-color:#fff;}
        .tgth{font-family:Arial, sans-serif;font-size:14px;
          font-weight:normal;
          padding:10px 5px;border-style:solid;border-width:1px;
          overflow:hidden;word-break:normal;border-color:#aaa;
          color:#fff;background-color:#f38630;}
        .tg .tg-huo9{font-size:15px;font-family:"Lucida Console",
          Monaco, monospace !important;;vertical-align:top}
        .tg .tg-fz6y{font-size:14px;font-family:"Lucida Console",
          Monaco,  monospace !important;;vertical-align:top}
        .tg .tg-yw4l{vertical-align:top}
         th.tg-sort-header::-moz-selection { background:transparent; }
         th.tg-sort-header::selection      { background:transparent; }
         th.tg-sort-header { cursor:pointer; }table th.tg-sort-header:after
         { content:''; float:right; margin-top:7px; border-width:0 4px 4px;
           border-style:solid;  border-color:#404040 transparent;
           visibility:hidden; }
         table th.tg-sort-header:hover:after { visibility:visible; }
         table th.tg-sort-desc:after,tableth.tg-sort-asc:after,
         tableth.tg-sort-asc:hover:after { visibility:visible;
           opacity:0.4; }
         table th.tg-sort-desc:after { border-bottom:none;
           border-width:4px 4px 0;}
         @media screen and (max-width: 767px)
           {.tg {width: auto !important;}
           .tg col {width: auto !important;}.tg-wrap {overflow-x: auto;
           -webkit-overflow-scrolling: touch;margin: auto 0px;}}
      </style>
      <div class="tg-wrap">
        <h2 style="color: #2e6c80;">Tweets analyzed for their
          social tones:</h2>
        <table>
          </thead>
          <table id="tg-FUkU8" class="tg">
            <thead>
              <tr>
               <td style='background-color: #33314B;'>
                 <center>
                   <h2><b><em><font color='#fff';>Tweets</font>
                     </em></b></h2>
                 </center>
               </td>
               <td style='background-color: #33314B;'>
                 <center>
                   <h2><b><em><font color='#fff';>Social Tones</font>
                     </em></b></h2>
                 </center>
              </td>

Microservices-based Application Development on Bluemix
[ 312 ]
            </tr>
          </thead>
        {{{payload}}}
      </table>
    </div>
    <script type="text/javascript" charset="utf-8">
      varTgTableSort=window.TgTableSort||function(n,t)
    {"use strict";function r(n,t){for(var e=[],o=n.childNodes,i=0;
      i<o.length;++i)
    {var u=o[i];if("."==t.substring(0,1)){var a=t.substring(1);
      f(u,a)&&e.push(u)}
    else u.nodeName.toLowerCase()==t&&e.push(u);var c=r(u,t);e=e.concat(c)}
    return e}function e(n,t)
    {var e=[],o=r(n,"tr");return o.forEach(function(n)
    {var o=r(n,"td");t>=0&&t<o.length&&e.push(o[t])}),e}function o(n)
    {return n.textContent||n.innerText||""}function i(n)
    {return n.innerHTML||""}function u(n,t){var r=e(n,t);return r.map(o)}
    function a(n,t){var r=e(n,t);return r.map(i)}
    function c(n){var t=n.className||"";return t.match(/\S+/g)||[]}
    function f(n,t){return-1!=c(n).indexOf(t)}function s(n,t)
      {f(n,t)||(n.className+=" "+t)}
    function d(n,t){if(f(n,t)){var r=c(n),e=r.indexOf(t);
      r.splice(e,1),n.className=r.join(" ")}}
    function v(n){d(n,L),d(n,E)}function l(n,t,e)
      {r(n,"."+E).map(v),r(n,"."+L).map(v),e==T?s(t,E):s(t,L)}
    function g(n) return function(t,r)
      {var e=n*t.str.localeCompare(r.str);
      return 0==e&&(e=t.index-r.index),e}}
    function h(n){return function(t,r)
      {var e=+t.str,o=+r.str;return e==o?t.index-r.index:n*(e-o)}}
    function m(n,t,r){var e=u(n,t),o=e.map(function(n,t)
      {return{str:n,index:t}}),i=e&&-1==e.map(isNaN).indexOf(!0),
      a=i?h(r):g(r);
      return o.sort(a),o.map(function(n){return n.index})}
        function p(n,t,r,o)
      {for(vari=f(o,E)?N:T,u=m(n,r,i),c=0;t>c;++c)
      {var s=e(n,c),d=a(n,c);
      s.forEach(function(n,t){n.innerHTML=d[u[t]]})}l(n,o,i)}
    function x(n,t){var r=t.length;t.forEach(function(t,e)
      {t.addEventListener("click",function(){p(n,r,e,t)}),
      s(t,"tg-sort-header")})}var T=1,N=-1,E="tg-sort-asc",
      L="tg-sort-desc";return function(t){var e=n.getElementById(t),
        o=r(e,"tr"),i=o.length>0?r(o[0],"td"):[];
        0==i.length&&(i=r(o[0],"th"));
      for(var u=1;u<o.length;++u){var a=r(o[u],"td");
      if(a.length!=i.length)return}x(e,i)}}
      (document);document.addEventListener("DOMContentLoaded",function(n)
      {TgTableSort("tg-FUkU8")});

Microservices-based Application Development on Bluemix
[ 313 ]
      </script>
The payload from the previous node is embedded by means of  {{{payload}}},
highlighted in the preceding code. This is a mustache template form for extracting
msg.payload from the node input. Specify three pairs of braces to ensure that the
HTML content that is part of the incoming msg.payload is not ignored.
Next, we are ready to complete the flow by adding an http response node to the
14.
flow. This is required if the flow has an HTTP input node. Drag and drop an http
response node from the palette:
The application is almost done, but there is one thing we still want to do, which is
to leverage the functionality obtained by using the  OpenWhisk action, which is
our microservice 3. Follow the steps given to build this into your application:
Drag and drop the OpenWhisk node onto your flow editor:
15.

Microservices-based Application Development on Bluemix
[ 314 ]
Double-click on the OpenWhisk node to configure your existing  OpenWhisk
16.
trigger. We will be using the  B05307_07_CloudantTrigger trigger that we
configured in Chapter 7, Compute Options on Bluemix. Click the pencil icon next to
Service to configure the OpenWhisk service:
The configuration screen for the OpenWhisk service is as shown in the following
17.
screenshot:
To get Auth Key for the OpenWhisk service, you can use the OpenWhisk CLI
wsk, which was explained in Chapter 7, Compute Options on Bluemix, to execute
the following command:
      wsk property get --auth
Use the whisk auth key that is returned to configure the auth key in the
OpenWhisk node.

Microservices-based Application Development on Bluemix
[ 315 ]
Refer to Chapter 7, Compute Options on Bluemix, OpenWhisk section, for
details on executing the  wsk commands.
Similarly, to get the namespace, execute the following  wsk command:
      wsk property get ---namespace
Wire the configured OpenWhisk node to the output of the template node in the
18.
flow. This completes our application. The complete flow is as shown in the
following screenshot:
Seeing it all work together
Now we have three applications, two Cloud Foundry applications and one OpenWhisk
application, running as independent applications, with their own life cycle and DevOps.

Microservices-based Application Development on Bluemix
[ 316 ]
As an application end user, we are giving our microservices-based end users an application
URL they can hit to view negative tweets on a monitored Twitter handle, along with their
scores against social tone. For this application to function as intended, we need our
microservice 1 to be running, microservice 2 to be running, and eventually, to achieve any
added value or extended functionality independent of microservices 1 and 2, we need our
microservices 3 to be available and running. In the current scenario, microservice 3 does not
add value to the existing use case, but it nevertheless provides a handle to implement any
function without having to edit or update microservices 1 and 2. Follow the steps given
here to see the results:
Go to a browser and hit the application URL, which is
1.
 https://analyse-twitemotion-b05307.mybluemix.net/translatedtwe
ets in this case.
You will see a response on your browser, as shown in the following screenshot:
2.
Go to your Bluemix dashboard and navigate to OpenWhisk dashboard. You will
3.
see the activity log indicating the execution of your OpenWhisk action, triggered
by microservice 2 triggering your  B05307_07_CloudantTrigger trigger:

Microservices-based Application Development on Bluemix
[ 317 ]
This completes the illustration of microservices-based application development on Bluemix.
Summary
In this chapter, you learned about the microservices architecture pattern. You should now
be able to differentiate between a monolithic application and an application that is
composed of microservices. You also learned about how Bluemix, as a cloud platform,
provides the ability to seamlessly develop microservices-based applications. Going a step
further, you can attempt to configure scaling policies on each of the applications separately
and see it perform. Also, you will note that a failure to any one microservice does not bring
down the other microservices. You can explore further and build various interesting and
innovative microservices-based applications on Bluemix by leveraging the value-added
services that Bluemix offers.
In the next chapter, we will look at another exciting set of services on Bluemix, these are
services in Mobile category, which help with mobile application development.

10
Mobile Application
Development on Bluemix
In the previous chapter we learnt about the architecture pattern for application
development on cloud, called Microservices architecture pattern. We also learnt how to use
Bluemix and services on Bluemix to build and deploy applications that employ the
microservices architecture.
In this chapter, we will learn to develop a simple mobile client application using Bluemix,
and we will also learn the use of Bluemix services with the mobile applications. You will
also see how easy it is to get started with your mobile application development using the
template applications provided out of the box in the mobile dashboard on Bluemix.
Discussions in this chapter will be based upon the capabilities that are
available on Bluemix at the time of writing this book.
In this chapter, we will be covering the following topics:
Learn about the mobile category services available on Bluemix
Create a mobile application using the mobile dashboard on Bluemix
Integrate the Push Notifications service to your mobile application
Send push notifications to your mobile application and see it all working together

Mobile Application Development on Bluemix
[ 319 ]
Mobile category services
Services under the Mobile category, as seen in the Bluemix catalog, are as follows:
Mobile Analytics: This is an IBM service
Mobile Application Content Manager: This is an IBM service
Mobile Client Access: This is an IBM service
Mobile Foundation: This is an IBM service
Push Notifications: This is an IBM service
Mobile Quality Assurance: This is an IBM service
TestdroidCloud: This is a third-party service
Twilio: This is a third-party service
Kinetise: This is a third-party service
When you log in to Bluemix and select the Mobile category, you will be taken to what is
known as the Mobile Dashboard:
From here you can create a new mobile project, or you can add a mobile service instance by
clicking the Get started now! icon in the top-right corner, as shown in the following
screenshot:

Mobile Application Development on Bluemix
[ 320 ]
Clicking the Get started now! icon will display the mobile services available on Bluemix. At
the time of writing this book, the available mobile services are as shown in the following
screenshot:
An in-depth description of these services is outside the scope of this book.
To learn more about each of these mobile services, refer to h t t p s : / / i b m . b
i z / B d r b m c.
Let us look at how to create a simple mobile application and how we can configure the
application to use some of the services provided by Bluemix.
Creating a mobile application
In this section, we will learn how to create a new mobile project on Bluemix and how to
modify it to suit your requirements. Later in this section, you will also learn how we can
configure the mobile service Push Notifications to send notifications to a mobile device
running the application.

Mobile Application Development on Bluemix
[ 321 ]
Creating a mobile project
Once you have logged into the Bluemix organization and space where you want to create
the mobile application, you can follow the steps given here to create the new mobile
application:
From the mobile dashboard, Projects, click on New Project to start creating your
1.
mobile project:
There will be options for the type of application you want to create; based on the
2.
choice made, a template or starter application will be created for you. By default
the Empty App template is selected. For our discussion in this chapter, we will be
creating a catalog application. Therefore, as shown in the following screenshot,
choose Store Catalog and click Create:

Mobile Application Development on Bluemix
[ 322 ]
Once the application is created, you can edit it to suit your application
3.
requirements. For our demonstration, we will be creating a store catalog for
beauty products.
Similarly, you can modify this application to create a catalog for any
category of products or services.
Once you open the project in edit mode, you can see the various levers you can
4.
work with, as shown in the following screenshot:

Mobile Application Development on Bluemix
[ 323 ]
To modify the UI or UX of the application, we will use the Design function, with
5.
which you will be able to modify how your application looks and behaves. The
following screenshot shows what you will see for the catalog application you just
created. You will notice that each of the existing screens can be modified from
here, and you can also add new screens to your application:
We will use the Data option to build the data store for your application. Given
6.
that we are building a store catalog for beauty products, we should modify and
add content to the data store from here, so that we populate it with the required
products and product details. The following screenshot shows what you will see
for the catalog application you just created. You will notice that you can edit the
existing rows, add new rows, or remove existing rows from here:

Mobile Application Development on Bluemix
[ 324 ]
To change the catalog application to an application that catalogs beauty products,
7.
go ahead and make changes to the Design and Data sections of your mobile
project. The following screenshot shows the sample data populated for beauty
products; you can manually add content relevant to your application:

Mobile Application Development on Bluemix
[ 325 ]
You can make changes to the screen names and other details on your application
8.
screens using the Design editor. The modified screens for the beauty product
catalog used for this demonstration are as shown in the following screenshot:
Note that we have not discussed the detailed steps to make modifications
to the catalog application here; this is left to your own creativity. The
Design editor is intuitive and will guide you through making the changes
that you would want.

Mobile Application Development on Bluemix
[ 326 ]
In Project Settings, you can further define how your application appears in terms
9.
of the colors used for text, action bar, background, and so on. You can also see
your application Bundle Identifier and upload a logo for your application here:

Mobile Application Development on Bluemix
[ 327 ]
You will also notice that you can add IBM MobileFirst Foundation SDK to your 
10.
application and leverage the capabilities provided by the Foundation platform
within your application. If you already have a licensed version of the IBM
MobileFirst Foundation product, you can also use the Mobile Foundation service
on Bluemix:
To learn more about the Mobile Foundation service and how to use it,
refer to h t t p s : / / i b m . b i z / B d r b a n.

Mobile Application Development on Bluemix
[ 328 ]
Once you are sure that you have made the application changes necessary to build
11.
your own catalog, in this case the catalog for beauty products, then you can go to
Get Code and download the source code and the application bundle or apk
based on the OS you want to use to run your application:
For this demonstration we will be using the Android platform. Select Android, as
12.
shown in the following screenshot:

Mobile Application Development on Bluemix
[ 329 ]
Click Get Code. You will see that your application code is being generated:
13.
You will see that this also compiles the application code:
14.
Once this completes, you can see that you are provided with options to download
15.
the source code for your application or the APK file, since the platform we
selected was Android. You can also try the application on your Android device
by using the Try it! option, as shown in the following screenshot:
Click Try it! and you will see a QR code for your application, which can be
16.
scanned using an Android device. You can then see your catalog application
running on your device:

Mobile Application Development on Bluemix
[ 330 ]
As shown in the screenshot of Step 15, click Download apk to download the apk
17.
for your application. You can use any Android device to launch your application
by copying this apk to the device. Click Source code to download the source code
for your application. The source code is required if you would like to further
modify your application source and rebuild it before running it on a device. You
will see the following structure for the downloaded apk and source code files:

Mobile Application Development on Bluemix
[ 331 ]
Running the application on an Android
emulator
In this section, we will learn how to run the application you just created in an Android
emulator using Android Studio.
You can download the latest version of Android Studio for your OS from
https://developer.android.com/studio/index.html. For instructions on
how to install and work with Android Studio, refer to
https://developer.android.com/studio/install.html.
Assuming you have installed Android Studio, follow the instructions given here to work
with the application code that you downloaded in the previous section:
Click File | Open from the menu in Android Studio, as shown in the following
1.
screenshot:
Browse to the source code folder you downloaded in the previous section.
2.
Choose the project folder, which is  B05307 in this demo. Once the studio opens
the mobile project, you will see the following resources and structure in your
studio window:

Mobile Application Development on Bluemix
[ 332 ]
To run the application, click the play icon, as shown in the following screenshot:
3.
You will be prompted to select the emulator type and launch it, as shown in the
4.
following screenshot:
If you do not find the desired virtual device type, you can click the highlighted
5.
button and create the virtual device you want to use. Click the highlighted button
shown in the preceding screenshot; this will open the dialog shown in the
following screenshot, where you can click Create Virtual Device to create the
virtual device with the chosen target API version and architecture. You can then
select this device and launch the emulator:

Mobile Application Development on Bluemix
[ 333 ]
The emulator launches your application and you will see the application on the
6.
emulated device. The welcome or start page for your application is displayed in
the following screenshot:

Mobile Application Development on Bluemix
[ 334 ]
Clicking Lip Balms on the app will open the lip balm variants available in the
7.
store, as designed previously:

Mobile Application Development on Bluemix
[ 335 ]
You can view the details of each of the products by clicking on the individual
8.
product; the details page will be displayed, as shown in the following screenshot:

Mobile Application Development on Bluemix
[ 336 ]
Similarly, you can view the other available products from the list, such as Body
9.
Scrubs, as shown in the following screenshot:

Mobile Application Development on Bluemix
[ 337 ]
The details page for Rose and Olive Body Scrub is as shown in the following
10.
screenshot:
Integrating Push Notifications to the
application
In the previous section, we learned how to create a mobile application from a template, how
to customize it, and how to download it and work with it on your local Android Studio. In
this section, we will learn how to extend your mobile application so that it can receive push
notifications from the server.

Mobile Application Development on Bluemix
[ 338 ]
Push Notifications is an asynchronous way of sending messages to application users'
devices. To enable this, we will use the Push Notifications service on Bluemix.
Creating the Push Notifications service instance
Let us first create the Push Notifications service instance. Follow the steps given here to
create the service instance:
Log in to Bluemix, and select the Mobile category to go to the Mobile dashboard:
1.
From here you can add a mobile service instance by clicking the Get started now!
2.
icon in the top-right corner, as shown in the following screenshot:

Mobile Application Development on Bluemix
[ 339 ]
Clicking the Get started now! icon will display the mobile services available on
3.
Bluemix. Select Push Notifications:
Review the details of the service, select the Basic service plan, and click Create:
4.

Mobile Application Development on Bluemix
[ 340 ]
The service instance created is displayed in the Mobile dashboard under the
5.
Services tab, as shown in the following screenshot:
Next let us configure the Push Notifications service instance.
Configuring the Push Notifications service instance
In this section, we will see how we should configure the Push Notifications service instance
so that it can be used to send notifications to your catalog application. Follow the steps
given here to configure your Push Notifications service instance:
From under the Services tab in the Mobile dashboard, click the Push
1.
Notifications service instance we created:

Mobile Application Development on Bluemix
[ 341 ]
Go to the Configure section, as shown in the following screenshot. Here you will
2.
see a button called Mobile Options:
Click Mobile Options. You will see the details required to configure your
3.
application to integrate to this Push Notifications service instance. Make a note of
the App Route and the App GUID fields, as shown in the following screenshot:
Further below on the Configure screen, you will need to configure GCM (Google
4.
Cloud Messaging) credentials. Since our application is an Android app we will be
using GCM as the asynchronous messaging service provider.

Mobile Application Development on Bluemix
[ 342 ]
To read further on GCM, refer to
https://developers.google.com/cloud-messaging/.
You will first need to create a GoogleAPI project and enable API on it. You will
5.
then need to create a Server Key. For more details about how to do this, refer to
https://ibm.biz/Bdr8VK.
Once you have the sender ID and API key available for your GoogleAPI project,
6.
you can continue with the configuration of your Push Notifications service
instance. Update the Sender ID and API Key created under the GCM credentials
in your Push Notifications service, as shown in the following screenshot:
This completes the configuration of the Push Notifications service. Let us now learn how to
integrate the Push Notifications service instance with the application.

Mobile Application Development on Bluemix
[ 343 ]
Integrating the Push Notifications service with an
application
Go back to the Mobile dashboard and follow the steps given here:
From under the Projects tab, select Edit on the store catalog application we 
1.
created earlier in this chapter:
In the application edit view, go to the Push section. For the option to Enable
2.
notifications for this project, pull the slider to ON, as shown in the following
screenshot:

Mobile Application Development on Bluemix
[ 344 ]
Next you will need to configure the App ID and App Route URL fields; this
3.
information was obtained when we configured the Push Notifications service
instance in the previous section, under the Mobile Options of your Push
Notifications Configure screen. Provide those values here, as shown in the
following screenshot:
This completes the steps to integrate the Push Notifications service with your application.
Let us now see them work together.
Sending Push Notifications to your application
We will use the same method of testing this in Android Studio using an Android emulator.
Follow the steps given here to see all of this working together:
You will need to download the source code again using the Get Code option we
1.
discussed previously:

Mobile Application Development on Bluemix
[ 345 ]
Open the downloaded source code in Android Studio using the steps described
2.
previously.
Once the project is opened, launch the app in a selected AVD (Android Virtual
3.
Device), which acts as the Android emulator. You will see the application
launched as before, as shown in the following screenshot:

Mobile Application Development on Bluemix
[ 346 ]
Now let's simulate the condition where the application distributors or the store
4.
owners want to inform their customers of certain updates or discounts via app
notifications. For this we will go to the Push Notifications service instance from
the mobile dashboard:
Click the service tile to open it and go to the Send Notifications section, as
5.
shown in the following screenshot:
This is where you can type a notification message and send it to applications that
have registered to receive notifications, in other words, apps that are installed on
host devices.

Mobile Application Development on Bluemix
[ 347 ]
Notifications can be sent based on device operating systems, tags
subscribed to, and so on. For the sake of simplicity, here we will
demonstrate this feature with Send To selected and retaining the default
value of All Devices. For more information on tag-based authentication,
refer to https://ibm.biz/Bdr8J3.
Let's now type two separate notification messages and send them to all devices
6.
where the app is installed. Two notification messages are shown in the following
screenshots:
Click SEND. Now type the next notification message, as shown in the following
7.
screenshot:

Mobile Application Development on Bluemix
[ 348 ]
Click SEND. You will see the success message on the screen, as shown in the
8.
following screenshot, if the notifications were successfully sent out from the Push
Notifications service:

Mobile Application Development on Bluemix
[ 349 ]
Let's now go back to the Android emulator we launched our application with in
9.
Step 3 of this section. You will now see two stars appearing in the notification
tray, as shown in the following screenshot:
You can click on the notification alerts to see the notification details, as shown in
10.
the following screenshot:

Mobile Application Development on Bluemix
[ 350 ]
So, with this we learned how to configure your mobile application to use the Push
Notifications service on Bluemix, to receive app notifications. Next let us learn how to
modify the application code to format the notification message display:
To format your notification view, you will need to modify the
1.
 StoreCatalogScreen1Fragment class in your source code. This is where you
will implement the  MFPPushNotificationListener interface. The modified
 StoreCatalogScreen1Fragment class would be as follows:
      package com.ibm.mobileappbuilder.storecatalog20150911132549.ui;
      import android.app.AlertDialog;
      import android.content.Context;
      import android.content.DialogInterface;
      import android.os.Bundle;

Mobile Application Development on Bluemix
[ 351 ]
      import android.util.Log;
      import com.ibm.mobileappbuilder.storecatalog20150911132549.R;
      import com.ibm.mobilefirstplatform.clientsdk.android.push.
        api.MFPPush;
      import com.ibm.mobilefirstplatform.clientsdk.android.push.
        api.MFPPushNotificationListener;
      import com.ibm.mobilefirstplatform.clientsdk.android.push.api.
        MFPSimplePushNotification;
      import java.util.ArrayList;
      import java.util.List;
      import ibmmobileappbuilder.MenuItem;
      import ibmmobileappbuilder.actions.StartActivityAction;
      import ibmmobileappbuilder.util.Constants;
      /**
      * StoreCatalogScreen1Fragment menu fragment.
      */public class StoreCatalogScreen1Fragment extends
        ibmmobileappbuilder.ui.MenuFragment implements
        MFPPushNotificationListener{
          private MFPPush push = null;
          private Context _this;
          private static final String TAG = "StoreCatalogScreen1Frag";/**
      * Default constructor
      */
      public StoreCatalogScreen1Fragment(){
        super();
      }
      // Factory method
      public static StoreCatalogScreen1Fragment newInstance(Bundle args) {
        StoreCatalogScreen1Fragment fragment = new
          StoreCatalogScreen1Fragment();
        fragment.setArguments(args);
        return fragment;
      }
      @Override
      public void onCreate(Bundle savedInstanceState) {
        super.onCreate(savedInstanceState);
        _this = getActivity();
        // MFPPush is initialized in PushNotificationsApplication.class
        push = MFPPush.getInstance();
        // Option for receiving push notifications
        push.listen(this);
      }
      // Menu Fragment interface
      @Override
      public List<MenuItem>getMenuItems() {
        ArrayList<MenuItem> items = new ArrayList<MenuItem>();
        items.add(new MenuItem()
          .setLabel("Lip Balms")

Mobile Application Development on Bluemix
[ 352 ]
          .setIcon(R.drawable.jpg_lbgreentea353)
          .setAction(new StartActivityAction(LipBalmsActivity.class,
             Constants.DETAIL))
        );
        items.add(new MenuItem()
          .setLabel("Soaps")
          .setIcon(R.drawable.png_soaps511)
          .setAction(new StartActivityAction(SoapsActivity.class,
            Constants.DETAIL))
        );
        items.add(new MenuItem()
          .setLabel("Body Scrubs")
          Icon(R.drawable.png_screenshot20160816at11825pm255)
          .setAction(new StartActivityAction(BodyScrubsActivity.class,
            Constants.DETAIL))
        );
        return items;
      }
      @Override
      public intgetLayout() {
        return R.layout.fragment_list;
      }
      @Override
      public intgetItemLayout() {
        return R.layout.storecatalogscreen1_item;
      }
      @Override
      public void onPause() {
        super.onPause();
        if (push != null) {
          push.hold();
        }
      }
      @Override
      public void onResume() {
        super.onResume();
        if (push != null) {
          push.listen(this);
        }
      }
      public void showAlertMsg(final String title, final String msg) {
        Runnable run = new Runnable() {
          @Override
          public void run() {
            // Create an AlertDialog Builder, and configure alert
            AlertDialog.Builder builder = new
              AlertDialog.Builder(_this);
            builder.setTitle(title)

Mobile Application Development on Bluemix
[ 353 ]
            .setMessage(msg)
            .setPositiveButton("Okay",
              new DialogInterface.OnClickListener() {
              @Override
              public void onClick(DialogInterface dialog, int which) {
                Log.i(TAG, "Okay was pressed");
              }
            });
            // Create the AlertDialog
            AlertDialog dialog = builder.create();
            // Display the dialog
            dialog.show();
          }
        };
        getActivity().runOnUiThread(run);
      }
      @Override public void
        onReceive(MFPSimplePushNotificationmfpSimplePushNotification) {
        Log.i("Push Notifications", mfpSimplePushNotification.getAlert());
        String alert = "" + mfpSimplePushNotification.getAlert();
        showAlertMsg("Arudra Store Catalog", alert);
      }
You will need to rebuild and relaunch your application in Android Studio. Your
2.
updated application is launched, as shown in the following screenshot:

Mobile Application Development on Bluemix
[ 354 ]
Let us go back to the Push Notifications service, the Send Notifications screen.
3.
Type the notification message shown in the following screenshot and click
SEND:

Mobile Application Development on Bluemix
[ 355 ]
Go back to the application you launched in Step 2 of this section. You will now
4.
see the notification displayed as an alert. This is due to the changes we made to
the way notification views should be created in the
 StoreCatalogScreen1Fragment class:
With this, we learned how to modify the Android application in Android Studio. We also
learned how to customize how the push notification message should appear to the
application user, on their device. Until now we have been sending notification messages to
the application using the Push Notifications service instance UI on Bluemix. Alternatively,
we can use REST APIs to send notification messages to client applications. This method is
largely useful when you want to automate the process of sending notifications triggered by
some backend activity. Let us take a quick look at the use of REST APIs to send a
notification message to the store catalog application.

Mobile Application Development on Bluemix
[ 356 ]
You will need a REST client to perform the next set of steps. You can use any commercially
available REST client. For this demonstration, we are using Postman, which is a Chrome
browser extension.
You can download Postman from h t t p : / / b i t . l y / 1 H C O C w F.
Before you start working with REST APIs, it is recommended that you
understand the API syntax and samples by going through the API
documentation at h t t p s : / / i b m . b i z / B d r 5 K u and h t t p s : / / i b m . b i z / B d r 5 K
9.
To learn how to send push notifications using REST APIs, carry out the following steps:
Open your REST client and type the complete URL that is used to send a
1.
notification; use the URL format shown in the following screenshot. You can
replace the App ID in the URI with your own App ID. Also, make sure your Push
Notifications service is available on Bluemix, the region is specified in the URL
domain, and configure the Headers section as shown in the following screenshot:
To get the App Secret key, go to Service Credentials in your Push Notifications
2.
service instance, as shown in the following screenshot:

Mobile Application Development on Bluemix
[ 357 ]
In the REST client, once you have configured the Headers section, go to the Body
3.
section; here you can paste the following message JSON as the request body.
Note that we have not specified any device IDs in the request JSON, which means
that this notification will be sent to all devices registered to receive notifications
for this application:
     {
       "message": {
         "alert": "Grab your discount of 10% on all products !",
       },
       "target": {
         "deviceIds": [],
         "platforms": ["G"],
         "tagNames": [],
         "userIds": ["anonymous"]
        }
      }
To learn more about the request message syntax, refer to
https://ibm.biz/Bdr8AT.

Mobile Application Development on Bluemix
[ 358 ]
Make sure the URL is correct and that the HTTP method is  POST. Click Send.
4.
You will see the response for a successful send of the notification message, as
5.
shown in the following screenshot:
Go back to the application you have launched using Android Studio. You will see
6.
the notification received, as shown in the following screenshot:

Mobile Application Development on Bluemix
[ 359 ]
Next let us see how to use the same API method to send a notification to a specific device.
For details on the API syntax and samples, go through the API
documentation at h t t p s : / / i b m . b i z / B d r 5 K 9.
For this we will need to do one additional step, which is to find the device IDs for the
devices that are registered to receive push notifications. For this, execute the REST API to
GET the devices registered:
In the REST client, once you have configured the Headers section, make sure the
1.
URL is correct and that the HTTP method is  GET. Click Send.

Mobile Application Development on Bluemix
[ 360 ]
You will see the response for a successful  GET, as shown in the following
2.
screenshot. You can see the device IDs returned as a response to the  GET request:
Now, using the same REST client, change your URL to the one that is used to
3.
send push notifications. Use the following code in the request JSON message; you
will notice that this time, the device ID is specified to be one of the values we got
by executing the API to retrieve the devices that are registered:
      {
        "message": {
          "alert": "Grab your discount of 10% on all products !",
        },
        "target": {
          "deviceIds": [75813d5d-f756-3b75-a2dc-389cbaf4fcfd],
          "platforms": ["G"],
          "tagNames": [],
          "userIds": ["anonymous"]
        }
      }
Make sure the URL is correct and that the HTTP method is POST. Click Send.
4.

Mobile Application Development on Bluemix
[ 361 ]
You will see the response for a successful send of the notification message, as
5.
shown in the following screenshot:
Go back to the application you have launched using Android Studio. You will see
6.
the notification received, as shown in the following screenshot:

Mobile Application Development on Bluemix
[ 362 ]
With this, we have also learned how to work with REST APIs to send push notifications to
your mobile client application.
Summary
In this chapter, we learned how we can easily develop, customize, and extend a mobile
application using the capabilities on Bluemix. We also learned how to use one of the value-
added mobile services on Bluemix, Push Notifications, and how to use it with your
application. You also learned how to extend your mobile application locally to build
features or value into the application after starting from a quick starter or template
application, provided on Bluemix.

Mobile Application Development on Bluemix
[ 363 ]
With this chapter, you have completed the basics of the IBM Bluemix cloud platform. If you
have followed the steps to work with Bluemix as discussed in each of the chapters in this
book, then you are equipped to begin your journey to explore further and to discover the
other powerful and useful services and capabilities of the Bluemix platform. This book is an
attempt to introduce you to Bluemix and to enable you to get your hands dirty. You have
now scratched the surface, go ahead and dive deep. Discover the power of Bluemix
platform as a service and what it has to offer to define the applications and workloads of the
future. Experience the convergence of path defining technologies such as cognitive
(Watson), Internet of Things, Mobile, and DevOps to name a few, on a single platform, IBM
Bluemix.
It is time to sign off; we are concluding this book with the belief that we have got you
started well on your cloud journey, with this book. We recommend you continue the
process of learning and leverage your learnings to define technology and business.

Index
A
Access Trail security service
   about  238
   reference  238
   working with  240, 241, 242
Access Trail service instance
   creating  238, 239, 240
account
   obtaining, on public Bluemix  16, 20
Adaptive Security Manager (ASM)  236
Android emulator
   mobile application, running on  331, 333, 334,
335, 336, 337
Android Studio
   reference  331
ant
   reference  64
API endpoint for Dallas
   reference  38
API endpoint for London
   reference  38
API endpoint for Sydney
   reference  38
application logs
   querying, reference  166
application, creating on Bluemix
   about  100, 102, 103
   flow, configuring  105, 106, 108, 109, 111, 112
   flow, wiring  105, 106, 108, 109, 110, 111, 112,
113
   MongoDB daemon, starting  114
   MongoDB, downloading  113
   MongoDB, installing  113
   MongoDB, working with  114
   Secure Gateway service instance, configuring 
117, 118, 119, 120, 121, 123, 124, 125, 126
   Secure Gateway service instance, creating  115,
116
application
   Auto-Scaling service instance, binding  144
   creating, for scaling in Bluemix  133, 135
   load test, configuring  135
   manual scaling  139
   scaling policy, defining  146, 148
   scaling, with Auto-Scaling in Bluemix  141
as-a-service  9
Auto-Scaling service instance
   binding to application  144
   creating  142
Auto-Scaling service
   used, for scaling application in Bluemix  141
B
BlazeMeter service instance
   creating  135
BlazeMeter
   reference  139
Bluemix architecture
   high-level overview  13
Bluemix catalog
   security services  236, 237
Bluemix console
   reference  47
Bluemix dashboard
   about  20
   key dashboard  20
Bluemix documentation
   reference  27
Bluemix pricing
   reference  34
Bluemix space
   reference  241
Bluemix UI concepts

[ 365 ]
   about  20
   account details  21
   organization  21
   region  30, 32, 33, 34
   space  28
Bluemix
   about  11, 12, 36
   account login link  41
   application to scale, creating  133, 135
   application, creating  100, 101, 102, 104
   Auto-Scaling service, used for application scaling 
141
   benefits  11
   boilerplates  45
   buildpacks  43
   concepts  41, 42, 44
   deployment models  14
   Hello World application, building  40
   Hello World application, creating with boilerplate 
47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 59,
61
   Hello World application, deploying  40
   Hello World application, updating  61
   high-level view  11
   logging in  38, 39, 40
   logging in, with Cloud Foundry command line
utility (cf cli)  38
   management services  151
   monitoring services  151
   reference  12, 50
   supported scaling types  129
boilerplate
   about  45, 46
   used, for creating Hello World application on
Bluemix  47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56,
57, 59, 61
buildpacks
   about  43
   reference  43
C
cf cli IBM Containers plugin
   reference  221
Cloud Foundry applications
   about  187
   importing, to Eclipse  194, 195, 196, 197
Cloud Foundry command line utility (cf cli)
   about  36
   installation link  36
   installing  36, 37
   reference  36
   used, for logging in Bluemix  38
Cloud Foundry
   reference  36
cloud service delivery models  8, 9
cloud service provider (CSP)  7
Cloudant package
   reference  225
containers  209, 210
continuous delivery
   configuring, for application  81, 83, 86, 88
D
dedicated Bluemix
   about  14, 15
   admin console  15
   reference  15
delivery pipeline
   about  68
   application, wiring with Node-RED  71
   configuring, for application  68
   sample application, creating  69
deployment models, Bluemix
   about  14
   dedicated Bluemix  14, 15
   local Bluemix  15, 16
   public Bluemix  14
DevOps services  68
Diagnostics plan feature
   reference  169
Docker hub
   image copying, reference  210
Docker Toolbox
   on Linux, reference  210
   on OS X, reference  210
   on Windows, reference  210
Docker
   reference  121
domain  27

[ 366 ]
E
Eclipse plugin, for Bluemix
   expanding  190
   installing  187, 189, 191, 193
   working with  187
Eclipse plugin
   application, updating  199, 200, 201
   Cloud Foundry, importing  194, 195, 197, 198
   used, for deploying updates to Bluemix  202,
204, 205, 207, 209
F
function node
   reference  79
G
GCM
   reference  341
H
Hello World application
   building, in Bluemix  40
   creating, on Bluemix with boilerplate  47, 48, 49,
51, 52, 54, 55, 57, 59, 61
   deploying, in Bluemix  40
   source files, downloading for starter  62, 63, 66
   updating, on Bluemix  61
I
IBM Container, creating
   Bluemix dashboard, using  214, 215, 217, 218,
219
   Cloud Foundry CLI, installing  212
   Docker, installing  210, 212
   IBM Containers Cloud Foundry plug-in, installing 
213, 214
   steps  210
IBM Container
    CF plugin, working with  220
   creating, with existing image  210
   reference  209
identity source
   configuring, in Single Sign On security service 
246
Integrate category
   services  98, 99
IoT Sensor
   reference  92
J
JavaCloudantWebStarter  155
JMeter  141
K
Kinetise  319
L
load test
   configuring, for application  135
   creating  137
local Bluemix
   about  15, 16
   reference  16
login-related issues, Bluemix
   reference  18
M
management services
   in Bluemix  151
manifest file
   reference  63
Maven plugin for Eclipse
   reference  264
microservice 1  286
microservice 2  289
microservice 3  287
microservices architecture pattern  283, 284, 285
microservices based application
   building, on Bluemix  285, 286, 287, 288, 289,
291, 292, 294, 296, 297, 300, 301, 302, 303,
304, 305, 306, 307, 308, 310
   implementing  316
Mobile Analytics  319
Mobile Application Content Manager  319
mobile application
   creating  320
   Push Notifications service, integrating with  343,
344

[ 367 ]
   Push Notifications, integrating to  337
   Push Notifications, sending to  344, 347
   running, on Android emulator  331, 333, 334,
335, 336, 337
mobile category services  319, 320
Mobile Client Access  319
Mobile Foundation
   about  319
   reference  327
mobile project
   creating  321, 323, 324, 326, 327, 328, 329,
330
Mobile Quality Assurance  319
mobile services
   reference  320
MongoDB daemon
   starting  114
MongoDB
   installation link  113
   working with  114
monitored application
   reports, viewing in Monitoring and Analytics
(M&A) dashboard  164
   reports, viewing in New Relic dashboard  183
Monitoring and Analytics (M&A) dashboard
   reports, viewing for monitored application  164,
165, 169
Monitoring and Analytics (M&A) service
   about  152
   building, to application  157, 159, 160, 161, 162
   events, simulating in application  163
   instance, creating  153
   used, for creating application to monitor  155
monitoring services
   in Bluemix  151
N
New Relic dashboard
   reports, viewing for monitored application  183
New Relic service
   about  169
   application configuration, for sending events  175
   binding, to application  173
   events, simulating  182
   instance, creating  170
Node-RED application
   extending  93, 94, 95
Node-RED
   debug node  77, 78
   function node  78
   ibmiot node  74
   ibmiot node, configuring  75, 76
   reference  72
   switch node  79
   template node  80
   used, for wiring applications  72
O
OpenWhisk
   about  222
   action, creating  228, 229, 230, 231
   actions  223
   installing  224
   reference link  222
   rule, creating  231
   rule, testing  232, 233
   rules  223
   sequence  223
   trigger source, creating  224, 226
   triggers  223
organization
   about  21
   managing  22, 23
P
Postman
   reference  356
public Bluemix
   about  14
   account, obtaining on  16, 20
   reference  14
Push Notifications service instance
   configuring  340
   creating  338, 339, 340
Push Notifications service
   integrating, with mobile application  343, 344
Push Notifications
   about  319
   integrating, to mobile application  337
   sending, to mobile application  344, 346, 347

Q
quota  27
R
region  30, 32
region-based URLs  31
request message syntax
   reference  357
S
scalable container
   reference  214
scaling
   horizontal scaling  130, 131
   types  129
   vertical scaling  129, 130
security services, Bluemix catalog
   about  236, 237
   Access Trail security service  238
   Single Sign On security service  243
Session Cache
   reference  133
Single Sign On authentication service
   application, creating for using  260, 261, 262,
263, 264, 266, 268
Single Sign On security service
   about  243
   application implementation  276, 277, 278, 279,
280, 281
   cloud directory, configuring  247, 248, 249
   Google+, configuring as identity source  255,
256, 257
   identity sources, configuring in  246
   integrating, with application  272, 273, 276
   LinkedIn, configuring as identity source  250,
251, 252, 254
   sample application, modifying for  269
Single Sign On service instance
   creating  243, 245, 246
space
   about  28
   creating  29
   managing  30
SPOF (single point of failure)  130
T
tag-based authentication
   reference  347
TestdroidCloud  319
Twilio  319
U
users
   managing  24, 25, 26
V
virtual servers
   about  221
   reference  221
W
web editor
   used, for editing source  88, 90

