
LEARNING
How to Learn Faster, Become a Genius
And Remember Anything
 
 
 
 
By Alex Right
(c) Copyright by «5-K-WORDS» – 2015

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         Your brain starts the work on the
implementation of any life goals and
desires - to improve your health, get rid of
bad habits, to develop relationships with
people, to make a successful business, to
bring well-being, love, happiness and
prosperity to life!!!

TABLE OF CONTENTS:
Introduction.
Chapter 1 - Our brain. Secrets of the main “CPU".
Chapter 2 - Kelly's methodology of activation genius
zones of your brain.
Chapter 3 - Smart Brain Exercise based on the Schulte
tables.
Chapter 4 - The everyday program of training your brain
with Kelly's intellectual exercises.
Chapter 5 - Working with intelligent simulator based on
the tables Schulte.
Conclusion.
 

Copyright 2015 by «5-K WORDS» (с) – All rights reserved.
No part of this book may be reproduced in any form without permission in writing from the author,
reviewers may quote a brief passage in a review.
This book is designed to provide information and motivation to our readers. It is sold with the
understanding that publisher is not engaged in rendering any type of psychological, legal, or any other kind
of professional advice.  The content of each article is the sole expression and opinion of its author, and not
necessarily that of the publisher. No warranties or guarantees are expressed to implied by the publisher's
choice to include any of the content in this volume. Neither the publisher nor the individual author(s) shall
be liable for any physical, psychological, emotional, financial, or commercial damages, including, but not
limited to, special, incidental, consequential of the damages. Our views and rights are the same: You are
responsible for your own choices, actions, and results. Adherence to all applicable laws and regulation,
including international, federal, state and local laws governing professional licensing, business practices,
advertising and all other aspects of doing business in any jurisdiction is the sole responsibility of the
purchase of reader.  Neither the author nor the publisher assumes any responsibility or liability whatsoever
on the behalf of the purchaser or reader of this materials. Any perceived slight of any individual or
organization is purely unintentional.

Introduction.
 
This book is required, without exception, by everyone who cares about their
health and the productivity of the brain. Students need to develop the ability to
handle vast amounts of information quickly, and easily move from the
development of new subjects to their practical application, to develop knowledge
of the most easy and effective way to achieve "excellent" in all their exams, to
discover and nurture new talent.
This book will help engineers and office workers to develop the ability to
communicate with different people on any topic, gain self-confidence and
determination to make important decisions, to achieve outstanding success in
their work
It will present information to entrepreneurs attracted by the ability to
effectively manage their business, quickly and efficiently solve any problems,
achieve success in any financial enterprises and to calculate any situation several
moves ahead.
The book will be indispensable for the pensioners who want to improve their
health and discover the joy of a long happy life, to maintain an excellent
intellectual and physical form throughout their life.
As scientists have already long known, the activity of the brain - is the key
to success and prosperity in any case, any activity, and any situations. This is
the key to solving problems!
This is not fiction. This is reality!
With 5-10 minutes of exercise a day, you will develop truly phenomenal
abilities that are inherent in every human being. Moreover, by having the right
tools, you get the opportunity to train at any time and in any place convenient for
you.
Do not doubt that very soon you will witness a rapid positive change in your
life, career and family relationships. This acquired knowledge will make your
brain super-productive and help you better manage your life and will ensure the
preservation of a clear mind and health for many years.
Be among the lucky and successful people!

Chapter 1 – Our brain! Secrets of the main “CPU".
 
Researchers have long known this about the human brain: this priceless
organ most actively develops in the first years of life.
From birth to one year, baby learns and processes the amount of information
that is never dreamed of by an adult. Stormy brain activity continues through to
the ages of three to seven years, we still maintain a high enough potential, but
after that - the rate of development of our mental abilities are reduced
considerably.
Neuroscientists have come to this sad conclusion: from 20 years of age the
human brain goes into a stage of aging. How can you stop the process?
The answer lies on the surface - just as we delay the aging process of the
body. This requires regular exercise. This allows us to maintain muscle tone,
mobility and joint flexibility, responsiveness and endurance for many years. By
forcing your body to work, we constantly keep it in good shape! The point here
is not about sports records - moderation and regularity are the two ingredients
for success!
Similarly, to preserve the activity of the brain requires regular exercise. After
all, it is subject to the same laws of nature as all other organs and systems of
man.
 
It is with regular exercise that "the mind" can keep the brain in good
shape, active and in working condition! And if you are young and healthy in
our brains, then the whole body is healthy and young.
 
After a series of studies of the human brain, neuroscientists have uncovered
shocking information: most of us, throughout our life, do not use a tenth of the
brain’s resources. People live, eat, sleep, communicate, do their job, while only
10% of their brain cells are functional and active!
But it’s not all that bad. It is proven that the people, who are able to put into
operation at least 10-15% of your gray matter, significantly stand out from the
rest. It is their mind and intelligence that enable them to become leaders, and
high reaction speed and enterprise ensure success in any business! With their
abilities to engage in constructive dialogue and the ability to anticipate all
scenarios they rapidly march up the corporate ladder, moving forward in science
and make important discoveries. These people are successful! And all this is

thanks to the active work of the brain. An actively working brain gives a person
a better chance of a long, active life.
The discoveries of scientists confirm: the constant work of the brain stimulates
the activity of all organs and systems of the body, is an important condition for
a full life and good health.
Constant mental work is the key to a long and active life. This is a serious
argument for us to start exercising to wake your brain reserve without delay.
Striking changes and the results are not long in coming, if you dedicate 5 to 10
minutes a day to the execution of simple tasks. It seems unbelievable: in the
times when we decide to solve mathematical questions, memorize words or find
the figures on a small plate, the brain gets a lot of pulses, there is a real
transformation!
In the course of exploring the unique training methods for the brain,
researchers from different countries, almost simultaneously, found that the
positive changes affect not only the intellectual activity of people who worked
with brain exercises. Changes were observed in all.
So, positive changes were seen in a person's character - to have more
discretion, a penchant for deep analysis, irritability and nervousness disappeared.
They became more positive in communication with others, increased the ability
to cooperate, even in people who previously could not work as a team.
But these positive developments are not limited. The vast majority of people
involved in the part of the technique, which involves solving mathematical
questions, over time, found a different feeling of music. They began to perceive
music in a deeper more meaningful way. And some of them have themselves
successfully learned to play musical instruments.
What is the secret of such a powerful impact of simple exercises on brain
structure?
The answer to this question is provided by science: encouraging certain areas
of the brain into activity, we encourage increased blood flow to the entire body.
In other words, this daily "charge" provides delivery to the brain, of a large
amount of nutrients and oxygen. And this is exactly what it needs to maintain
"good shape"! Most scientists working in the field of medicine, claim that "the
will of" the brain can significantly improve immunity and strengthen the
body in the fight against diseases. Even those that have traditionally been
considered incurable. The fact is that in the central and peripheral nervous
systems are constantly collecting and processing information on the state of
every cell in the human body. All these processes are carried out in the brain and

the nervous system with the help of neurons - specialized cell conductors of
information in the form of electrical signals. It is obvious that the better the state
of these cells, the faster the exchange of information between the brain and all
the organs and systems of the body.
It is clear that age-related changes that affect brain cells, in particular
neuronal cell death, significantly reduce the rate of the brain's response to
information about the general state of the organism. These adverse processes are
exacerbated by stress, psycho-emotional stress, smoking, lack of exercise and
poor diet. All these factors lead to oxygen starvation of the brain and nerve cell
death at a tremendous speed.
What can we do?
 
We have to save our main health management "Staff" - the brain!
Working on specially designed exercises where you learn, stimulates the brain, it
helps supply the brain cells with oxygen and, therefore, the preservation of
health.

Answers to the questions related to the use of the brain exercises
What is it that I will do when using these universal techniques?
Using the exercises of the Patrick Kelly techniques and Schulte tables you
get to play an active job with the huge potential of the brain that is usually, in the
normal state, not activated. This way you can improve attention and memory,
develop your skills, increase IQ, as well as to achieve a significant improvement
in your physical health.
Are there any restrictions on sex, age, type of activity for the application of
this technique?
Absolutely no restrictions exist! Kelly’s techniques and brain exercises with
Schulte tables are available to everyone. Performing these exercises can be men
and women, children and the elderly, doctors, managers, military officers,
teachers - people of all professions.
Perhaps such an effective technique requires long and painstaking daily
work?
Working with brain exercises will take a minimum amount of your time.
Only 5-10 minutes a day gives great results.
Do I need to work with the special equipment for this training?
Working with these unique methods is very simple - you do not need wires,
batteries or power sources. All that you need for an effective exercise, you will
find in this book.
Do I need to make special preparations for the revitalization of the brain
during the training?
Drops and pills are not necessary. You yourself are able to awaken dormant
cells of your brain.
Will I have to master the special techniques of breathing when working with
trainers? Will you need to learn meditation, do some exercises?
No, no special exercise and diving into the subconscious is not required. For
qualitative development of techniques you need only three skills: reading,
writing and arithmetic. Of course, you already have them.

Do these techniques anything to do with coding?
Absolutely nothing! In the process of working with exercises, outside
influence on your brain does not occur. You just get hold of alternative ways of
processing and storing information, methodically performing the recommended
exercises every day. Because of this, every day more and more parts of the
cortex of your brain will be included in the active job.
Does the active use of exercises for the brain cause harm to my health?
The method does not include anything complex, controversial, and even
potentially dangerous. This natural method of training the brain shows
absolutely everything and gives guaranteed results! And your health, as a result
of the regular performance of all described in the book of exercises, can only
improve.
Will I not feel stress or fatigue after such training?
The brain exercises offered in the book are so simple that they cannot cause
fatigue - in fact, the performance of these tasks practically requires no effort.
The only cause of stress can be a wrong posture in the classroom. All you need
is one: sit back and place a book in a position comfortable for your eyes, and the
problem is solved!
How long will I have to wait for the effects of exercise?
Waiting is almost not necessary. These exercises are, not without reason,
called super-efficient: even with a few minutes of training you will feel that your
brain awakens, and you deal with all tasks much more quickly.

Chapter 2 - Kelly's methodology of activation genius
zones of your brain.
 
The aim of the research of Dr. Kelly was to identify ways to effectively
influence those areas of the cortex, which provide higher nervous system
activity. Observations of the operation of various areas of the brain showed that
the biophysical activity of these cortical areas may be the same for each person
when performing various operations, for example, counting dollar bills or simply
from one to ten. Regarding the actions of the corresponding area of the brain
demonstrates identical activity - devices capture the almost complete
coincidence of the work areas of the brain.
In view of these data, Dr. Kelly began working on the creation of both
simple, versatile and safe methods of influence on the brain. Scientists are
working with people of different ages and backgrounds, using a variety of
options for jobs, scrupulously fixing the results by using very sensitive
equipment. The work lasted for several years.
Studies have confirmed his assumption that training with the help of simple
exercises, constantly activating areas of the brain, allows for such activity areas
of the cerebral cortex that people can easily cope with more complex tasks. That
has been found as a way of acupressure on specific areas of the brain to
significantly improve their performance.
For example, if that area of the cortex, which is engaged in solving
mathematical problems with prime numbers, as well as abstract problems
during training will periodically work on simple arithmetic operations, then
it increases the capacity of the brain when aimed at solving more complex
abstract problems.
This system can rightly be called a health-preventive, as it allows the speed
of mental reactions to significantly increase, improves memory and gives the
ability to develop logical thinking. To do this, you do not need special physical,
time or material costs.
Among the positive results of the work with the exercises are, improvement
in work and study, the increase in memory capacity and speed of mental
reactions were observed. A series of experiments confirmed: exercises, selected
by Dr. Kelly, for a long period, is the beginning of the desired changes in the

human body not only to the emotional and intellectual, but also on a
physiological level.
Most of the participants of the experiment on the development of the Kelly
exercises pointed out in addition to progress in intellectual activity, the effects of
improvement: the normalization of weight, reducing the symptoms of
psychosomatic diseases (such as asthma, allergies, and stuttering), reduced
alcohol and nicotine dependence... It is important to note that during the
experiment, the researchers carefully monitored to ensure that none of the
participants did not use any special treatment tools.
Supporting the activity of certain areas in the cortex of their brain, each
person can at, any age, keep fit and healthy, as well as find it easy to cope with
the tasks of high complexity. Patrick Kelly was able to create a set of exercises
that can be considered the perfect stimulant of the brain.
The unique brain trainer Kelly, rightfully called it the method of the new
generation. It allows you to spend a minimum of effort to awaken your brain
and set it up on a wave of constant activity.

Description of the basic compound exercises
Kelly training is suitable for daily activities for any person. Those jobs that are
offered in it for the regular training of the brain consist of a simple example, and
will not cause difficulties for the person who knows how to read, write and
count. It is based on the following principle.
Minimum effort - maximum results!
Frequency of classes
It is a prerequisite for brain training that the procedure consists of daily
activities. In addition to expanding capacity and potential of the brain, it allows
you to keep it constantly "alert". Ideally, it is best to allocate the same time
during each day.
Different speed - different results
The brain works differently when solving simple examples of slow and fast
pace. If during the execution of mathematical calculations one was to carry out a
tomography scan of his brain, we can see that the higher the speed at which the
brain works, the more the area of the activated areas.
So, at a leisurely pace, simple calculations in the works include some
important parts of the work, but it is necessary to increase speed - Almost half of
the brain is involved.
The structure of the Patrick Kelly brain exercises includes the
following:
●      examples of the simplest mathematical operations;
●      consecutive counting awakens speech activity;
●      remembering unconnected activity within the meaning of simple
words;
●      simultaneous visual word recognition and comprehension of values,
which activate different areas of the cortex in both hemispheres of the
brain.
The basic set of exercises is specifically designed for those people who want
to simultaneously develop their intellectual capacity and significantly increase
their vitality. All proposed assignments are so simple and practical that they are
ideal for beginners and those who have already started on this amazing
technique.
It includes tasks of the following types.

Quick Counting out loud from 1 to 120
In this case, you have to recite every word loud and clear. If you are confused in
the process of counting, then call the correct number and continue to be
considered further. While this exercise is very effective for training the frontal
lobe of the cerebral cortex, it is necessary to remember that the speed is very
important here!
2. Exercises on memorizing words
You are offered a set of 30 simple words, not logically related to each other.
Within 2 minutes, you should read them and try to memorize the maximum
amount. To check the record from memory on the sheet. At the same time it does
not matter in what order you write these words. Then count the number of words
correctly recorded and record this number in the appropriate box.
3. Examples of mathematical calculations
You are invited to solve a number of examples of the simplest arithmetic
operations. Begin to perform the task at a pace that is comfortable for you, and
gradually increase the speed to the maximum possible. In this case, it is
important not so much the correctness of the results, as the speed of the thinking
process.
4. Assignments Stroop Test
This original test was developed in 1935 by American John Ridley Stroop.
He offered the job, which is based on the difference in logical and visual
perception of colors. Psychologists have quickly appreciated the uniqueness of
the test and began to actively use it in their practice. The structure of the Stroop
test is original and at the same time very simple: you are encouraged to read the
words, the names of the primary colors, typed letters in different colors. In this,
the meaning of the word can match the color of the font, or may be different
from it. So, seeing the word "blue", typed letters in red, you have to read the
word "blue" to yourself, and say the name of the color "red" out loud.
The fact is that our brain perceives the text and color in different ways,
cycling through the different the areas of the cerebral hemispheres, and such
work with the Stroop-test becomes a great training for their integrated
development.
 
Important:
Do not try to create a similar exercise on your own, coming up with simple
examples or words to remember. The opinion of the incoherence of all tasks is

a  mistake-each of them is made  according to the particular system and
carries a certain meaning. All these schemes are designed in complex
experiments, and should not be changed arbitrarily.
 
The sequence of assignments
To achieve optimal results, you should perform the tasks as follows.
1. The first preliminary assessment of efficiency of the brain and record
results.
Then proceed to the next exercise.
2. Perform tasks in cycles of weeks:
5 days - Monday to Friday - every day to solve mathematical examples,
The 6th day - Saturday - exercise to memorize words and a quick score,
The 7th day - Sunday - follow the Stroop test.
Activities that you perform on Saturday and Sunday are chosen in a special
way, on the one hand, to put into operation certain parts of the cerebral cortex,
and on the other - to get an objective assessment of the progress which has
occurred during the previous week.
3. At the end of the course evaluate the results. To do this, use your records
of the table to take account of the results, the most important indicators of
exercises are in the math. We should not compare their results with someone
else. Everyone - individuality, and your success allows you to best develop your
ability.
It is also important to pay attention to the time it took to perform daily tasks
(mathematical account) for at least the last three days.
If you can produce mathematical calculations
●      In 1 minute or less - you are brilliant! We hope that, thanks to this
book, you've finally seen how.
●      1,5 minutes - your IQ is higher than most people, but there is always
room for growth, isn’t there?
●      2 minutes - a great result, but we need a little more practice.
The whole course of exercises is designed for 70 days or, respectively, for 10
weeks. Specifying you can make or before the first day of the course, or on the
first day.
 
To ensure that the results do not disappoint you, do not forget to:
●      do all tasks on a daily basis in the sequence which is recommended in

the book;
●      observe the time of the day - get enough sleep and alternate periods of
mental work with physical activity;
●      eat healthy and balanced meals. Your brain and your body should be
getting everything you need to complete the work.
Regular practice is very important as is the order of the exercises - it was
designed based on the results of extensive research!
A great option is if you can set aside time to do these during the morning,
with a fresh mind. Try to maintain them in one and the same time - in this case,
they will soon become a habit, like sleeping and washing.
After you perform all the tasks of the course, take a break for two weeks and
go to the next chapter of the book - an exercise based on the Schulte tables. In
the future, you can alternate between training exercises, taking breaks of
between 1-3 weeks. This will help you to constantly maintain not only your
brain, but also keep the whole body in good shape.
 

Chapter 3 - Smart Brain Exercise based on the
Schulte tables.
 
This exercise perfectly complements the first method. And the effectiveness
of their use is proven, both individually and sequentially.
This intelligent trainer will change your view of all similar techniques as
specific activation of attention allows you to master the ability to increase
the rate of your intelligence, and in seconds, to extract all the information
from the depths of memory, quickly and accurately making decisions.
With it, you can "pump up" parameters of the attention that is needed above
all as key components of intellectual abilities. They run certain processes in the
brain, so that the ratio of human intelligence is greatly increased.
Warning - the ability of consciousness to organize the information that
comes from outside and distribute it on the basis of importance and significance,
depending on the tasks that a person puts in front of him at the moment.
Getting the ability to control their attention, man becomes the master of
his mind, he can move to things that are important and meaningful to him,
or pass unnecessary things.
Living in today's world, every day presents us with new challenges.
Naturally, we want to solve them all with the maximum benefit for ourselves.
How well we can implement it depends on several factors, primarily on
intelligence, memory and attention. The significance of memory is known to
all. Without it, as they say, even to leave the house is not necessary. But it is
important to understand that focus is precisely the powerful coordinator of
memory and, therefore, the cornerstone of success. Agree, that to successfully
address a specific problem in any field (from the exam or the final game of chess
- up to negotiations for the sale of the plant for hundreds of millions of dollars)
we have, at a given point in time, to choose the important details from the vast
amount of information, focus on them, keep them in mind, and to isolate all
extraneous stimuli. Only then our brains will work accurately and clearly, and as
soon as possible to find the right solution.
The speed of thought processes and, ultimately, their performance is
directly dependent on the parameters of attention!
We know about the lucky ones who, from birth, have the ability to hold in
mind a million facts, not to be distracted during important negotiations, the focus
at any one time and manage his brain, causing him to work "at full speed",

whenever it is needed... These people are a bit like a rule - they are in first place
in the list of the richest people on the planet. What about the rest? Those who do
not want to accept the fact that success in any field - is only for a chosen few?
An intelligence exercise developed by scientists, based on the Schulte tables
allows anyone to get the process of attention control. With this method, each of
us can learn in the required time and in the right situation bring their intellect to
super operating condition and instantly get the desired result!
There are many techniques that train the mind to develop different properties
(size, concentration, distribution, etc). It is not that they are ineffective; many of
them allow you to train a variety of properties of attention that will certainly
come in handy in life.
However, none of these techniques gave tools to the right time "to include"
the consideration to instantly reveal their own intellectual potential, activate the
memory and repeatedly reinforce the ability to quickly and correctly make a
decision. The intelligence exercise based on the Schulte tables suggests a whole
new approach to the development and training of these qualities.
When we talk about the effectiveness of attention, we mean the intensity and
concentration, volume and switching speed and stability. All of these
characteristics exist in close connection with each other, therefore, by increasing
one of them, we are working on the process of attention in general.
Typically, attention is described by the following characteristics.
The intensity of the attention - the ability of a person to keep the attention
on one or other object for a long time.
The amount of attention - the number of objects that people can
simultaneously cover with sufficient clarity.
The focus - deliberate release of a specific object and the direction of
attention to it.
The distribution of attention - a person's ability to perform multiple
activities simultaneously.
The switching of attention- the ability to quickly take attention "off" of
some units and include in the new matching the changed conditions.
The stability of the attention - the length of time during which a person can
keep their attention on the subject.
The distractibility of attention - involuntary movement of focus from one
object to another.
Doing intellectual exercises with Schulte tables contributes to mastering
skills and  quickly connecting attention. The training will help you in the

first place, to significantly increase the speed of attention switching and
volume - the number of objects that a person can store in short-term
memory.
As a result, you can:
●      at any time, in seconds multiply intellectual capacity, bringing the
hidden reserves of the brain;
●      activate the memory and to extract from it all the necessary
information;
●      quick selection of a million possible only the solution that brings
success!
Super trainer "Device"
An intelligence exercise based on the Schulte tables presented sets of tables
for different types of workouts. "Methods of numbers search technique" (or
"Schulte Tables") was originally developed as a psychodiagnostic method for
studying the properties of attention.
Sami table is a matrix consisting of 25 cells (5 vertical and 5 horizontal). In
every cell in random order is inscribed a number from 1 to 25. Before the
trainees is the task - as soon as possible to find the numbers or direct sequence of
1 to 25, or in reverse - from 25 to 1.
This procedure is used by practical psychologists in their research.
But not so long ago, scientists observed that a simple «solve» table has a
powerful positive effect on the development of attention, intelligence and
memory.
First, while working with Schulte tables develops volume (parallel rather
than sequential) account when the characters in the field of view are perceived
simultaneously and sequentially converted. This discovery became widely used
in teaching speed reading and expanding the field of view.
Secondly, it was noted that the state of a man working with Schulte tables,
similar to meditation. And in such a state as possible revealed all our inner
potential, including the intelligence and memory.
The secret of the striking results
The mechanism of action of intelligence exercises based on the Schulte
tables on the brain can be compared with nanotechnology. You influence the
finest processes in your brain, including the work of those reserves, which most
people do not use in everyday life.
According to the most recent scientific research, in order to use our brains a
hundred percent for the solution of the problem and to achieve the maximum

success in resolving any issue, you need to:
1. Increase the blood flow in certain areas of the brain (frontal
lobes).This ensures maximum availability of all intellectual processes
that occur in the cerebral cortex during the decision-making process.
2. Mobilize memory so that all information related to the issue being
addressed, came out of the long-term memory store in the operational
memory. That is literally waking associative links that are relevant to the issue.
This will avoid wasting precious seconds to recall, as all the necessary
information to "lie on the method”.
3. Right to focus on the task at hand. One task requires concentration, to
literally see or hear nothing but that; another - switching attention; third -
simultaneous access to multiple information fields.
 
Superefficient for 5 minutes a day
An intelligence exercise based on the Schulte tables is not just exercise for
keeping your brain in good shape. This - "mandatory program" for those who
want to achieve maximum results in any case.
Just five minutes working with tables for five to ten days - and your
intellectual capacity is increased many times over due to activation of the
latent reserves of the brain and your memory offers all the information you
need in seconds.
Do the exercises whenever you need to focus and limit the concentration on
the task when you need to wake up your brain and prepare it to perceive
important information, to pull out of his mind important information before you
are going to start to learn new skills, and so on.
An intelligence exercise based on the Schulte tables can become your
"magic wand" literally in every situation.
For example, before an important meeting, interview, exam date, driver's
license test, competition, carrying out any physical or mental exercises - in any
situation where you need to limit the concentration and the inside of your mind
determines your achievements, you do not need to panic or to resort to using
affirmations, telling yourself that you will succeed (although this is also a good
idea). You will take out this book, work on an intelligence exercise for 5-7
minutes and having become confident and prepared, make a productive step
towards your career, health and success.
The work on this technique creates a particular pattern of brain activity that
increases the effect of any intellectual and volitional effort many times, which

you will take with you later. Thousands of people have been tested: the effect of
the use of this technique comes instantly!
Features of the exercise are not yet fully understood, but it is now clear
that humanity has in it’s hands, an amazing tool.
How to work with an intelligence exercise?
Try to perform the training at about one and the the same time - such
regularity promotes greater efficiency. When and at what time you are going to
do will depend on your personal preference.
Before you start training sit so that you feel comfortable. Keep the book in
front of you at a distance, so that the eyes are not strained. Perform the following
steps.
1. Determine the mood (for details see below).
2. Turn on the stopwatch.
3. Get to work on the first table.
4. Once you have found the number 25, turn off the stopwatch and record the
results in the graph below the table 1. It is necessary to record your first result. In
the future, you can record your results on any piece of paper, to compare with
the original.
5. Go to the following table.
6. Once you have passed the 4 tables, take a break for 10-20 minutes. Then do
the remaining tables in the same manner.
To consolidate the results you can perform training with the same series of
tables again that day.
 
The method works with a Schulte table
So, before you is the table of a number of cells in which are the randomly
arranged numbers from 1 to 25.
Your job is to, locking eyes in the middle of the table, with your peripheral
vision to find all the numbers in ascending order (descending). What do you
need?
1. Place the table at a comfortable distance from your eyes as if reading a
book - 30-35 cm.
2. Fix your gaze on the central square. Imagine that in the very middle is the
point. It is on this point you should fix your eyes.
3. Then, still looking at the middle of the table, try to see figure 1. It is - to
"see" and not "look." Your job now is not making eye movements to detect the

cell in which the unit is.
4. Once you see the number 1, just slowly and carefully keeping your sight
in the central point, locate number 2. Proceed until you reach 25. After finding
the next number you do not need to call it either out loud or to yourself just fix
on it and move on to the presence of the following one.
 
Important:
Do not rush - the rate for you is not important now. The first day of work
with the table can take several minutes. But do not let that bother you - a few
days of training, and you will significantly improve your score!
If you cannot keep looking at one point in the first week of classes, you
can allow yourself to slowly slide view in rows from top to bottom. It also only
uses peripheral vision. But in any case, do not move the eyes to the right or to
the left.
If you have started to make the horizontal motion of the eyes, for a moment
break away from the table, turn your view on a remote object and get some rest.
After this, re-start the performance of the exercises from the very beginning, no
matter what stage you left off.
On average, working on a single table takes 25-30. As training the search is
being phased out, and some people reduced to 11-12, and in some cases - to 7-8.
In a healthy person, and rested on each table takes about the same time.
Increased time to retrieving the numbers in the last table may be a sign of
fatigue. As the training speed of finding the numbers gradually increases.
It is interesting to trace the behavior of the eye movements when working
with tables.
The picture shows a recorded eye movements of a man with no instructions
about the rules for working with tables. The total search time of all the figures –
are 60. As can be seen from the figure, it looks like brute force as he passes from
digit to digit.
 

The following figure registered a more advanced search technology figures.
The student seeks to keep in view the central field of the table, fixing the
peripheral vision all the other numbers. Hours tables in this case are 15-20
seconds.
 
 
Finally, the figure below - an example of the search for numbers from 8-11.
Here sight is actually still capturing the central part of the table.
 

 
Of course, you may not be able to cover the entire eye chart.
In the initial stage of training you need, when you look at the table, to
easily see the central figure and the figures that are located at the corners of
a square.
Once you learn it, the retina begins the active stimulation of the peripheral
zones of the formation of so-called "neural ensembles." This subset of
interconnected neurons enable qualitative "read" and process the information
that lies in the reserve areas of the field of view.
At that moment, when you look at the table so the eye, as it were
photographed it all completely and sends the image into a matrix memory of the
brain for further processing. Then you have, in fact, to not look for the place
where the figure necessary to you, and remember its position on this "photo."
Everything you wanted to know about the sessions with intelligence exercise
What do I need to work with the trainer on the basis of the Schulte
tables?
●      Tables Schulte (given below).
●      Stopwatch (available in any mobile phone).
●      Pencil or pen to record the results.
●      A piece of paper to record results.
How to train with Schulte tables?
Each workout consists of three approaches; during each you master the 4
tables. Between approaches make a break for 5-10 seconds, try at this time to not
get distracted, just sit with your eyes closed.

For greater efficiency before each workout is necessary to conduct a special
feeling to work with a trainer (see. The following section "Internal configured to
work tables ") depending on the purpose and objectives of the exercise
How many times a day do I need to exercise?
For best results it is desirable to do 1-2 training sessions a day.
We can restrict ourselves, and one daily training, then to achieve maximum
results, you will spend a little more time.
You yourself determine the amount of training, according to your capacity,
well-being and status. If you understand that you are tired or in a hurry, in
employment - follow it to the next day.
How many tables for the one training do I need to do?
For the one training it’s necessary to attempt not less than 12 tables.
For a time I was given to work on a single table?
In the beginning training time spent on one table is determined by your
individual characteristics and fitness. Your task - to learn how to pass a table in
no more than 30 seconds, the most important task - no more than 15-20 seconds.
If you calmly go through the table for 20 seconds and quickly, it means that
the restructuring of your brain has already begun.
How long do I have to train to get the first results?
If you spend two training sessions per day, the first results can be felt after
the basic course in five days. At one training session per day (or if you do not
regularly), the results appear after 10-12 days of work.
After a basic course (5 days) have to make a break for your brain to adapt to
the regime of his new work. In the future, it is desirable to carry out a training of
2-3 days in order to maintain the health of the brain to a new level. Believe me,
when you are involved in the process, it will be easy!
 
Possible difficulty while working with tables Schulte
When working with tables, you may encounter the following events.
1. You cannot for a long time to find a figure in the table, and you might
even think that it is missing.
In fact it is not. The tables present all the numbers from 1 to 25.
This phenomenon is due to the uneven pace of our mental activity, and
usually happens when you go from single digits to double-digits.

2. Time to work with each table increases when you «solve» multiple
tables in a row.
This is only due to your tiredness. In a healthy and rested person while
working on each table is about the same. Therefore, in this case it is necessary to
interrupt the training and to start it after a rest.
3. During the lessons the tables hurt your eyes.
Chances are you have the wrong table in front of you. Once again, read the
instructions carefully, check the distance and position of the table in front of the
eyes.
It is also the reason may be that you are actively seeking translate opinion
digits. You should try not to move your eyes, otherwise you reach the desired
effect.

Work on the maintenance of intellectual form and blitz training
These training necessary to start after you've passed the main course. They
are intended to ensure that the result achieved by you on the disclosure of your
intellectual potential remains at the proper level.
Maintaining intellectual form using the exercise
to maintain a form of intellectual enough to train 2-3 times a week, at any
convenient for you day and time. You can use for the same set of tables, as in the
main course.
Work tables may be the same as in the basic course, and can be modified to
work with them, for example, in one workout the problem table is to locate the
numbers 1-25, and the other - in the opposite order.
Blitz workout with intelligence exercise based on the Schulte tables
Blitz workout designed for instant activation of intelligence and memory in
case you need to put yourself in excellent shape to an important intellectual
event. Just five minutes of training with tables Schulte, and you are ready for an
important conversation, making a serious decision, you collected and confident!
For blitz training you can use any number of tables, to activate the
intellectual capacity and memory needed for problem solving it should not be
less than three. Keep always at hand this book, because it is your indispensable
assistant to act competently and effectively in any situation.
Recommendations for blitz training
1. Try to rest, there is nothing to distract you from your workout.
2. Sit down so that you feel comfortable.
3. Gain the spirit to enter the training.
4. Open any number of tables.
5. For three approaches solve all the tables in the series.
6. Take a break at 30-40.
7. Open your eyes and again solve table, but are now looking for the
numbers in reverse order (25 to 1).
8. Spend the mood for a way out of the training.
Now you are ready to succeed in any business!
Get ready to work with tables
Before you start working on the intelligence exercise, it is important to hold

the right attitude to work with tables. The mood before training puts you in a
state similar to meditative. It most fully reflects your intellectual potential and
intuition (which is especially important for the blitz training), and the results of
studies conducted in this state, fixed for a long time.
For the main courses and maintain intellectual form is the same attitude. The
same attitude you use to blitz workout. After the blitz workout you need a
different mindset. It aims to prepare you to act decisively and to fix a state
winner.
The mood before the main courses, the maintenance of intellectual form and
prompt exercise
Sit comfortably, close your eyes, take a deep breath and tune in to a wave of
relaxation.
Think about how all the muscles relax your body - from head to toe. Feel
how well your body as you are comfortable. You do not have to worry; you can
breathe a sigh of relief and let yourself relax. Breathing…
Balance your breath, feel its rhythm. Listen to the sounds around you. All
these sounds are not important, ignore them, they do not need to pay attention.
Everything you hear on, allowing you to relax even more and more fully.
Exhale, release the tension from every cell, the particles of your body, mind
or thoughts. Allow it to stress disappear. Feel the flow of your disturbing
thoughts slowly begins to dry out, disappear, he disappears, and you relax.
Relax all the muscles of the face, especially the jaw. Relax your jaw, open
them so that between the teeth was a small distance; relax the facial area. It is
going to stress and fatigue, so make sure that your jaw is relaxed.
Feel like the spirit flows through you like a stream in pleasant relaxation.
Relax your muscles in the temporal part of the head; think about how your
muscles relax. Feel how relaxed they are, and the more you relax, the easier you
will float and sink deeper and deeper into a state of total relaxation.
You go to relax. Now bring in the relaxed state of the muscles of the
forehead. Feel what they are smooth, smooth, relaxed. Give your eyes a rest, too.
Imagine how comfortable your eyelids, they are poured by gravity, they are
heavy and relaxed. Now let all the muscles in your neck and shoulders relax.
Feel with them falls heavy, very heavy load, you feel a great relief, you easily
and you relax even more.

All your muscles relax the neck and shoulders; Feel the flow of soothing
relaxation. Feel like it is coming down on your back, lower and lower into the
lower part of your body.
All the muscles relax, feel with each breath your body slides down, lower
and lower, into a state of complete rest. Give your muscles relax, relax them
even stronger. Let all the muscles of the shoulders and arms relax, let your hand
relax to the fingertips.
Feel the weight of your hands swell, become heavy, very heavy, heavy and
relaxed, your hands is very convenient. You may feel a tingling in the fingertips.
It is very good. If you feel that your hands are warmer, it is also a good sign.
Feel that you are barely able to pick them up, your hands are so relaxed, and they
are very heavy, heavy and relaxed.
Now, inhale and relax your chest muscles. Exhale, relax all the muscles of
the abdomen, and let them relax all the muscles of the legs. Feel relaxed all the
muscles in your feet, you feel on your feet relax all the muscles are relaxed
completely, to the fingertips. Feel good and comfortable to your body, it floats,
feel how your body floats, it is weakened more and more, your body is
completely relaxed.
Stay in a state of relaxation for 1-2 minutes. Then take a deep breath, open
your eyes start to work on the exercise.
The mood after the blitz workout
Five times take a deep breath, and then exhale.
Mentally tell:
1. I am calm...
2. My forces have recovered...
3. In the whole body I feel energized...
4. Thoughts crisp, clear...
5. I am ready to act ... I took like a refreshing shower...
6. Around the body runs a pleasant chill and coolness...
7. I take a deep breath ... blow ... Cool ...
8. I lift my head (or wake up) ... I opened my eyes ...

every sentence must be repeated 5-10 times.
Business, career, professional activity
For example, you have an important meeting, during which what will be
addressed are important to you. Naturally, you worry how it will go? Will you be
able to competently explain the interlocutors their arguments, clearly describe
the situation, to justify their requests? How not to lose, showing the calculations,
graphs and charts? How to keep in mind the columns of numbers and do not mix
them up?
You will be much easier to cope with the excitement and all the tasks before
the speech if you are just a few minutes to work out intellectual exercises based
on the Schulte tables. This will be enough for you to feel the clarity of mind:
your intelligence will be most focused on solving the problems, memory and
attention extremely activated.
You will amaze results - meeting will take place without a hitch, you'll enjoy
navigate the sea of numbers and words, and your arguments are compelling.
Study, exams
Intelligence exercises based on the Schulte tables suit perfectly, those who
are still learning - pupils and students as well as adults who need to learn new
knowledge.
Before you reveal textbooks and overlaid lecture notes, to devote a few
minutes of training to exercises. Then immediately proceed to the study of the
material, and you immediately feel the difference. You will be surprised how
easily you will "catch" the essence of the texts, instantly memorizing formulas.
They will fit into your mind in orderly rows, and you will not be a problem, if
necessary, remove them from there.
You will greatly enhance the speed of reading and notably increase your
short-term memory -Similarly, remembering, focused on more long-term, will be
more profound: in the months and years you will remember not only the overall
scheme of study, but also a lot of details.
Health healing practices
If you want to maintain your health for years to come, you need to give him
enough attention. To keep the body in good shape, he needs constant exercise.
You pick and choose what suits you best - swimming, running, aerobics,
Chinese gymnastics...

But even more important to maintain their mental health, and are come to the
aid quieter techniques - meditation and auditory training. These techniques are,
incidentally, help to maintain fitness and well act on the psyche.
But all this combine, how to find time for classes in our world, life at
breakneck speed?
It's very simple. A few minutes of training of brain training based on the
Schulte tables before the session anger management - and your mind open for
the adoption of new information. It will literally soak up every word
affirmations, slamming him into the deepest layers and programming you
success and good luck.
Improving the efficiency of any Business:
Before you begin to study new material, or a repetition of the old, be sure to
work out some brain exercises based on the Schulte tables.
You put a task to master the technique of speed reading? Excellent!
Psychologists claim that intelligence exercises based on the Schulte tables - are
the best assistant in this. Why? The answer is simple.
Before the start of classes you perceive the text as well as all people -
moving look at the lines. This visual acuity is greatest in the central region of the
retina (by the way, this area even has an appropriate name - "zone of clear
vision"). Everything that is outside the borders of this zone is perceived
peripheral vision blurred, indistinct.
Classes on intelligence exercises based on the Schulte tables allow
expanding the field of view, and thus significantly increasing the amount of
information that you can perceive in the same time.
In order to increase the speed read fundamentally important two things: the
ability to simultaneously capture the text look more space and the ability to read
characters are not sequentially, one after the other, and to perceive and recognize
their "parallel."
Both of these skills great coaches work with tables Schulte. Regular
exercises for a few minutes a day significantly increase the angle of your view.
As a result, you will not perceive the text line by line, and paragraphs and even
pages.

Tip
The more you do the mental activity, the more you need to sleep to dream
the brain could recycle the resulting information for the day and recover the
spent energy. If you regularly do not get enough sleep, your intellectual capacity
will be reduced.
It is advisable to sleep at least eight hours a day, and if for some reason is
not possible, then at least once a week you need to sleep - that is sleep as much
as you want, let though it will be ten to twelve hours. Need to sleep in a well
ventilated area, as the brain for the rest and recuperation need oxygen, and if it is
not enough, you will feel sleepy, no matter how much you slept

Chapter 4 - The everyday program of training your
brain with Kelly's intellectual exercises.
Preliminary tests to evaluate your brain.
 


Stroop-Test 1
Read the text below silently as quickly as possible, while saying (out loud) the
color of each word you read. If you make a mistake, say the correct color and
continue. Time yourself while doing the exercise and record it in min. and sec.
(e.g. 
2 
min, 
35 
sec.) 




 




Day 7
Stroop-test-2
Read the text below silently as quickly as possible, while saying ( out loud) the
color of each word you read. If you make a mistake, say the correct color and
continue. Time yourself while doing the exercise and record it in min. and sec.
(e.g. 
2 
min, 
35 
sec.) 








Day 14
Stroop-test 3
Read the text below silently as quickly as possible, while saying (out loud) the
color of each word you read. If you make a mistake, say the correct color and
continue. Time yourself while doing the exercise and record it in min. and sec.
(e.g. 
2 
min, 
35 
sec.) 







Day 21
Stroop-test -4

Read the text below silently as quickly as possible, while saying ( out loud) the
color of each word you read. If you make a mistake, say the correct color and
continue. Time yourself while doing the exercise and record it in min. and sec.
(e.g. 
2 
min, 
35 
sec.) 







Day-28

Stroop-test-5
Read the text below silently as quickly as possible, while saying ( out loud) the
color of each word you read. If you make a mistake, say the correct color and
continue. Time yourself while doing the exercise and record it in min. and sec.
(e.g. 
2 
min, 
35 
sec.) 



 




Day-35
Stroop-test-6

Read the text below silently as quickly as possible, while saying ( out loud) the
color of each word you read. If you make a mistake, say the correct color and
continue. Time yourself while doing the exercise and record it in min. and sec.
(e.g. 
2 
min, 
35 
sec.) 







Day 42
Stroop-test 7
Read the text below silently as quickly as possible, while saying ( out loud) the

color of each word you read. If you make a mistake, say the correct color and
continue. Time yourself while doing the exercise and record it in min. and sec.
(e.g. 
2 
min, 
35 
sec.) 







Day 49
Stroop-test 8
Read the text below silently as quickly as possible, while saying ( out loud) the

color of each word you read. If you make a mistake, say the correct color and
continue. Time yourself while doing the exercise and record it in min. and sec.
(e.g. 
2 
min, 
35 
sec.) 







Day-56
Stroop-test – 9
Read the text below silently as quickly as possible, while saying ( out loud) the

color of each word you read. If you make a mistake, say the correct color and
continue. Time yourself while doing the exercise and record it in min. and sec.
(e.g. 
2 
min, 
35 
sec.) 







Day-63
Stroop-test 10
Read the text below silently as quickly as possible, while saying (out loud) the

color of each word you read. If you make a mistake, say the correct color and
continue. Time yourself while doing the exercise and record it in min. and sec.
(e.g. 
2 
min, 
35 
sec.) 







Day 70
Stroop-test -11

Read the text below silently as quickly as possible, while saying ( out loud) the
color of each word you read. If you make a mistake, say the correct color and
continue. Time yourself while doing the exercise and record it in min. and sec.
(e.g. 
2 
min, 
35 
sec.) 

Tables for Profitability Analysis





Chapter 5 - Working with intelligent simulator based
on the tables Schulte.
How to make a Schulte table.
To make this unique exercise perform at it’s best, you have to invest a little
preparatory work. Cut squares of paper ten sizes 25 to 25 centimeters. Divide
them into 25 cells with sides 5 by 5 centimeters, and type in the number of these
cells in accordance with samples presented in the book. The numbers should be
black (portray them in black ink, markers or paint). Make them clear and large
enough. Position number exactly in the center of each cell.
 
Do not be lazy, fabricate the table, so you create the perfect tool for training
the brain, which will benefit not only you but also your family, friends and
acquaintances.


















 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


Conclusion.
In conclusion you have at your complete disposal, the unique tools that
provide the ability to awaken the unused area of your brain and turn it into
active, to develop creativity, to effectively solve any of life's challenges with
talent to set goals and achieve them.
The knowledge gained will help you better manage your life; find answers to
all the questions, to generate many wonderful creative ideas.
You can continue to engage in the proposed method indefinitely, conquering
new highs, perfect in your chosen business. Surely, you've been able to do to
ensure their effectiveness and the combined action of the whole body. By
learning to control your mind and changing ourselves, we change our lives and
the world around us!
And remember that it is the key to record stability of your results.
Good luck, and do not doubt in your success!
 
If you enjoy this book, PLEASE take the time to share your thoughts and
post an objective review on Amazon. It was greatly appreciated.
YOU CAN ALSO DOWNLOAD MY BOOK
«TRANSCENDENTAL MEDITATION: How to Relieve Stress, Improve
Sleep and Achieve Happiness with Real Technique of Meditation»
HERE
http://amzn.to/1O5yPcA

