
Committee on Programs for Advanced Study of Mathematics and Science
in American High Schools
Jerry P. Gollub, Meryl W. Bertenthal,
Jay B. Labov, and Philip C. Curtis, Editors
Center for Education
Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education
National Research Council
NATIONAL ACADEMY PRESS
Washington, DC

NATIONAL ACADEMY PRESS • 2101 Constitution Avenue N.W. • Washington, DC 20418
NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Governing Board of
the National Research Council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the National
Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine. The
members of the committee responsible for the report were chosen for their special competences
and with regard for appropriate balance.
This study was conducted under an award from the National Science Foundation and the
United States Department of Education (Award # ESI-9817042). Any opinions, findings, conclu-
sions, or recommendations expressed in this report are those of the members of the committee
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the sponsors.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Learning and understanding : improving advanced study of mathematics and
science in U.S. high schools / Committee on Programs for Advanced Study
of Mathematics and Science in American High Schools, Center for
Education, Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education ;
Jerry P. Gollub ... [et al.], editors.
       p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
  ISBN 0-309-07440-1
 1.  Mathematics--Study and teaching (Secondary)—United States. 2.
Science—Study and teaching (Secondary)—United States. 3.  Advanced
placement programs (Education)  I. Gollub, J. P., 1944- II. National
Research Council (U.S.). Committee on Programs for Advanced Study of
Mathematics and Science in American High Schools.
  QA13 .L38 2002
  507.1'073--dc21
                                                            2002006487
Additional copies of this report are available from
National Academy Press
2101 Constitution Avenue, NW
Box 285
Washington, DC 20055
800/624-6242
202/334-3313 (in the Washington Metropolitan Area)
<http://www.nap.edu>
Copyright 2002 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America.
Suggested citation:
National Research Council. (2002). Learning and understanding: Improving advanced study of
mathematics and science in U.S. high schools. Committee on Programs for Advanced Study of
Mathematics and Science in American High Schools. J.P. Gollub, M.W. Bertenthal, J.B. Labov,
and P.C. Curtis, Editors. Center for Education, Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences and
Education. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.

National Academy of Sciences
National Academy of Engineering
Institute of Medicine
National Research Council
The National Academy of Sciences is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating society
of distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated
to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general welfare.
Upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress in 1863, the Academy
has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal government on scientific and
technical matters. Dr. Bruce M. Alberts is president of the National Academy of
Sciences.
The National Academy of Engineering was established in 1964, under the charter
of the National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engi-
neers. It is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members,
sharing with the National Academy of Sciences the responsibility for advising the
federal government. The National Academy of Engineering also sponsors engineer-
ing programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages education and research,
and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. Dr. Wm. A. Wulf is president
of the National Academy of Engineering.
The Institute of Medicine was established in 1970 by the National Academy of
Sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in the
examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. The Institute acts
under the responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciences by its congres-
sional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon its own initiative,
to identify issues of medical care, research, and education. Dr. Harvey V. Fineberg is
president of the Institute of Medicine.
The National Research Council was organized by the National Academy of Sci-
ences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology with the
Academy’s purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal government.
Functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the Academy, the
Council has become the principal operating agency of both the National Academy of
Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering in providing services to the gov-
ernment, the public, and the scientific and engineering communities. The Council is
administered jointly by both Academies and the Institute of Medicine. Dr. Bruce M.
Alberts and Dr. Wm. A. Wulf are chairman and vice chairman, respectively, of the
National Research Council.


v
COMMITTEE ON PROGRAMS FOR
ADVANCED STUDY OF MATHEMATICS AND
SCIENCE IN AMERICAN HIGH SHOOLS
JERRY P. GOLLUB, Cochair, Department of Physics, Haverford College
PHILIP C. CURTIS, Jr., Cochair, Department of Mathematics, University of
California, Los Angeles
CAMILLA BENBOW, Peabody College of Education and Human
Development, Vanderbilt University
HILDA BORKO, School of Education, University of Colorado, Boulder
WANDA BUSSEY, Department of Mathematics, Rufus King High School,
Milwaukee, WI
GLENN A. CROSBY, Department of Chemistry, Washington State University
JOHN A. DOSSEY, Department of Mathematics (retired), Illinois State
University
DAVID ELY, Department of Biology, Champlain Valley Union High School,
Hinesburg, VT
DEBORAH HUGHES HALLETT, Department of Mathematics, University of
Arizona
JOHN K. HAYNES, Department of Biology, Morehouse College
VALERIE E. LEE, School of Education, University of Michigan
STEPHANIE PACE MARSHALL, President, Illinois Mathematics and Science
Academy
MICHAEL E. MARTINEZ,* Department of Education, University of
California, Irvine
PATSY W. MUELLER, Department of Chemistry, Highland Park High
School, IL and Regina Dominican High School, Wilmette, IL
JOSEPH NOVAK, Department of Education (Emeritus), Cornell University;
Institute for Human and Machine Cognition, University of West Florida
JEANNIE OAKES, Graduate School of Information Studies, University of
California, Los Angeles
VERA C. RUBIN, Department of Terrestrial Magnetism, Carnegie
Foundation of Washington (through November 2, 2000)
ROBIN SPITAL, Science Department, The Bolles School, Jacksonville, FL
CONRAD L. STANITSKI, Department of Chemistry, University of Central
Arkansas
WILLIAM B. WOOD, Department of Molecular, Cellular, and
Developmental Biology, University of Colorado, Boulder
*Michael Martinez was an active member of the committee from its inception until August
1, 2001, when he began a position as program officer in the Directorate for Human Resources
at the National Science Foundation. National Research Council rules prevented Dr. Martinez
from contributing to the final preparation of the report after assuming this position.

vi
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
JAY B. LABOV, Study Director, Center for Education
MERYL W. BERTENTHAL, Senior Program Officer
JOHN SHEPHARD, Research Assistant
ANDREW E. TOMPKINS, Senior Project Assistant
ALEXANDRA BEATTY, Senior Program Officer (until November 1999)
RICHARD J. NOETH (until January 2000)
MARILEE SHELTON, Program Officer, Board on Life Sciences (until
November 2000)

vii
MEMBERS OF THE
DISCIPLINARY CONTENT PANELS*
Biology
WILLIAM B. WOOD, Committee Liaison and Chair, Department of
Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, University of
Colorado, Boulder
ROBERT A. BLOODGOOD, Department of Cell Biology, University of
Virginia
MARY P. COLVARD, Department of Biology, Cobleskill-Richmond High
School, NY
PATRICK G. EHRMAN, Department of Molecular Biotechnology, University
of Washington
JOHN JUNGCK, Department of Biology, Beloit College
JAMES H. WANDERSEE, Department of Curriculum and Instruction,
Louisiana State University
Chemistry
CONRAD L. STANITSKI, Committee Liaison and Chair, Department of
Chemistry, University of Central Arkansas
ARTHUR B. ELLIS, Department of Chemistry, University of Wisconsin,
Madison
PATRICIA METZ, Department of Chemistry, United States Naval Academy
JOHN C. OLIVER, Department of Chemistry, Lindbergh High School, St.
Louis, MO
DAVID PYSNIK, Chemistry Department, Sydney High School, Sydney, NY
A. TRUMAN SCHWARTZ, Department of Chemistry, Macalester College
GLENDA M. TORRANCE, Chemistry Department, Montgomery Blair High
School, Silver Spring, MD
Physics
ROBIN SPITAL, Committee Liaison and Chair, Science Department, The
Bolles School, Jacksonville, FL
S. JAMES GATES, JR., Physics Department, University of Maryland,
College Park
DAVID M. HAMMER, Physics Department, University of Maryland,
College Park
*Biographical sketches for members of the four disciplinary content panels are included as
an appendix with each panel report.

viii
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
ROBERT C. HILBORN, Department of Physics, Amherst College
ERIC MAZUR, Department of Applied Physics, Harvard University
PENNY MOORE, College of Mathematical and Physical Sciences, Ohio
State University
ROBERT A. MORSE, Physics Department, St. Albans School,
Washington, DC
Mathematics
DEBORAH HUGHES HALLETT, Committee Liaison and Chair, Department
of Mathematics, University of Arizona
HAROLD BOGER, Department of Mathematics, Crenshaw High School,
Los Angeles, CA
MARILYN P. CARLSON, Department of Mathematics, Arizona State
University
ROGER HOWE, Department of Mathematics, Yale University
DANIEL J. TEAGUE, Department of Mathematics, North Carolina School of
Science and Mathematics, Durham, NC
ALAN C. TUCKER, Department of Applied Mathematics and Statistics, State
University of New York, Stony Brook

ix
Preface
The United States has compiled a remarkable record of excellence and
leadership in science, mathematics, and technology over the past half cen-
tury. Effective mathematics and science education at the advanced high school
level is critical if this record is to continue. In addition, quality science and
mathematics education is important in preparing students to succeed in higher
education and to be informed citizens.
This report is the product of a 2-year study of programs for advanced
science and mathematics education in U.S. high schools. Recent research on
learning and program design served as the basis for the analysis. This emerging
knowledge was used to evaluate the Advanced Placement (AP) and Interna-
tional Baccalaureate (IB) programs and to examine specific ways in which
these and other programs of advanced study can be made more effective
and more accessible to all students who might benefit from them.
The study committee comprised professional educators, teachers with
experience in the AP and IB programs, university scientists and mathemati-
cians, experts in learning and talent development, and authorities on access
and equity in education. Their diverse perspectives resulted in an interdisci-
plinary approach to the analysis and assessment of programs for advanced
study. We appreciate the cooperative efforts of the study committee to achieve
a balance among these different perspectives.
This study was particularly complex for several reasons. First, the com-
mittee was charged by the National Research Council (NRC) to consider
advanced study in depth in four disciplines: biology, chemistry, physics, and
mathematics (with an emphasis on calculus). The committee therefore con-
vened diverse panels of experts in each of these fields, and their extensive
reports form an important part of the study results, grounding the analysis in
the classroom practice of advanced study programs.1 A second source of
complexity in the study was the fact that the AP and IB programs must be
1The four panel reports are available online as pdf files at www.nap.edu/catalog/10129.html.

x
PREFACE
examined in the context of the entire system of education in the United
States. These programs have important effects on school curricula and staff-
ing starting in the middle-school years, and they also influence and are
shaped by trends in higher education. A third source of complexity was the
dilemma of how to deal with extensive disparities in access to advanced
study that have the effect of excluding many students, especially minorities
and residents of impoverished communities, while continuing to ensure that
traditionally advantaged students are served effectively.
All members of the committee contributed generously to the study, both
to discussions held during and between meetings, and, by providing draft
text or comments, to the process of preparing this report. Four committee
members also served as panel chairs, drafted the respective panel reports,
and responded to reviews: William Wood, biology panel; Conrad Stanitski,
chemistry panel; Robin Spital, physics panel; and Deborah Hughes Hallett,
mathematics panel. Their exceptional efforts contributed substantially to the
success of this project. We also acknowledge important scholarly work on
access and equity by Valerie Lee and Jeannie Oakes. In addition, we note
the central contributions of Camilla Benbow, Hilda Borko, John Dossey,
Stephanie Pace Marshall, Michael Martinez, and Joseph Novak, who as a
group developed the material presented in Chapters 6 and 7 and guided the
analyses of Chapters 8 and 9. We thank David Ely, Patsy Mueller, Robin
Spital, and Wanda Bussey, the members of the committee who are teachers
of the AP and IB programs, for helping the committee understand today’s
high school settings. Finally, we acknowledge Glenn Crosby’s contributions
to our discussions of teacher education and professional development.
The NRC’s Center for Education provided exceptional support for this
project. Project director Jay Labov and senior program officer Meryl Bertenthal
worked tirelessly to seek out the extensive information required by the study
committee and to help overcome obstacles to achieving consensus. They
also contributed substantially to the process of drafting this report and guid-
ing the panel reports successfully through the stringent NRC review process.
We appreciate as well the capable efforts of John Shephard and Andrew
Tompkins, our research and project assistants. Leslie Ann Pierce, an experi-
enced AP and IB teacher, served as consultant to the committee and contrib-
uted to the report. Program officer Marilee Shelton and consultant Billy
Goodman assisted in the early phases of the project.
We acknowledge the helpfulness of the staff of the AP and IB, who
provided the committee with extensive information. Their commitment to
the long-term improvement of these programs and their receptiveness to the
committee’s ideas were evident. Although this report constitutes a strong
critique in many respects, its recommendations should not be regarded ei-
ther as questioning the importance of these programs or as conflicting with
improvement efforts already in progress. The active collaboration of many

PREFACE
xi
different groups will be required to implement the recommendations of this
study.
This study is part of a major commitment by the NRC to use its expertise
in the service of science and mathematics education. The committee antici-
pates that the report will be useful to all those concerned with improving
educational quality and equity, including program developers, science and
mathematics teachers, university scientists, policymakers, school administra-
tors, and parents.
Jerry W. Gollub and Philip C. Curtis, Cochairs


xiii
Acknowledgments
The committee and staff thank the many individuals and organizations
that gave generously of their time and expertise to help with this study.
First, we acknowledge the support of the National Science Foundation
and the U.S. Department of Education, Office of Educational Research and
Improvement. We particularly thank Janice Earle of the National Science
Foundation and Patricia Ross of the Office of Educational Research and
Improvement of the Department of Education for the support and encour-
agement they provided to this committee during the past 36 months.
We acknowledge the important contributions of the 22 individuals who,
as members of four disciplinary content panels, conducted in-depth analy-
ses of the Advanced Placement (AP) and International Baccalaureate (IB)
programs in mathematics, chemistry, biology, and physics. Our sincerest
thanks go to Robert A. Bloodgood, University of Virginia; Harold Boger,
Crenshaw High School, Los Angeles, California; Marilyn P. Carlson, Arizona
State University; Mary P. Colvard, Cobleskill-Richmond High School, NY;
Patrick G. Ehrman, University of Washington; Arthur B. Ellis, University of
Wisconsin, Madison; S. James Gates, Jr., University of Maryland, College
Park; David M. Hammer, University of Maryland, College Park; Robert C.
Hilborn, Amherst College; Roger Howe, Yale University; John Jungck, Beloit
College; Eric Mazur, Harvard University; Patricia Metz, United States Naval
Academy; Robert A. Morse, St. Albans School, Washington, DC; Penny Moore,
Ohio State University; John C. Oliver, Lindbergh High School, St. Louis, Mis-
souri; David Pysnik, Sydney High School, Sydney, New York; Truman
Schwartz, Macalester College; Daniel J. Teague, North Carolina School of
Science and Mathematics, Durham, North Carolina; Glenda M. Torrance,
Montgomery Blair High School, Silver Spring, Maryland; Alan C. Tucker,
State University of New York, Stony Brook; and James H. Wandersee, Loui-
siana State University.
We are grateful to Lee Jones, director of the AP program, and Paul
Campbell, associate director of the International Baccalaureate Organisation

xiv
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
of North America (IBNA), for providing program materials and data through-
out the study. They attended several committee meetings and workshops as
invited guests, organized presentations to the committee, and answered on-
going questions about their respective programs. Their cooperation was critical
to our efforts.
When this study began, the IB program was less familiar than the AP
program to most committee members. We thank the many individuals who
provided the committee with in-depth information about the IB program.
David Roylance, IB coordinator, Jeb Stuart High School in Fairfax, Virginia,
presented an overview of the IB program model. The committee obtained
insight into the structure, organization, and goals of IB science and math-
ematics curricula, instructional models, assessment, and professional devel-
opment opportunities from Jonathan Knopp, Rufus King High School, Mil-
waukee, Wisconsin; Ken Fox, Smoky Hill High School, Aurora, Colorado;
Arden Zipp, State University of New York at Courtland; and IBNA associate
director Paul Campbell. We acknowledge as well the ongoing help received
from IBNA staff members George Pook, Roger Brown, Jeff Thompson, and
Helen Drennen.
Individually and collectively, members of the committee benefited from
discussions with experts in a variety of fields. We especially thank James
Pellegrino, University of Illinois at Chicago, and José Mestre, University of
Massachusetts at Amherst, who helped expand our understanding of the
relevance of research on human cognition to the design and evaluation of
advanced study programs. Their advice helped the committee conceptualize
the model presented in this report for the design and evaluation of advanced
study programs.
Results from the Third International Mathematics and Science Study
(TIMMS) contributed to the motivation for this study. We wish to thank
Michael Martin, TIMSS international deputy study director, and Patrick
Gonzales, National Center for Education Statistics, U.S. Department of Edu-
cation, for helping the committee understand the TIMMS results.
Many individuals aided the committee’s work by participating in a series
of information-gathering workshops that were held in conjunction with sev-
eral of the committee’s meetings. The following individuals participated in a
committee workshop addressing the design and development of AP pro-
grams and assessments in mathematics and science: Dr. John Smarrelli, chair,
AP Biology Committee, Loyola University, Chicago; Dr. Robert Cannon, chief
faculty consultant, AP Biology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill;
Dr. Thomas P. Dick, chair, AP Calculus Committee, Oregon State University;
Dr. Larry Riddle, chief faculty consultant, AP Calculus, Agnes Scott College;
Dr. William H. Ingham, chair, AP Physics Committee, James Madison Univer-
sity; Patrick Polley, chief faculty consultant, AP Physics, Beloit College; Beth
Nichols, assessment specialist, Educational Testing Service; Chancey Jones,

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
xv
assessment specialist, Educational Testing Service; Ann Marie Zolandz, as-
sessment specialist, Educational Testing Service; and Rick Morgan, measure-
ment statistician, Educational Testing Service. Howard Everson, The College
Board vice-president for Teaching and Learning, was also instrumental in
helping the committee understand the mission and goals of the AP program.
Bernard L. Madison, professor of mathematics, University of Arkansas,
Fayetteville, and a member of the College Board’s Commission on the Fu-
ture of the Advanced Placement Program, provided the committee with an
overview of the commission’s findings and recommendations.
Three individuals—Peter O’Donnell, president of the O’Donnell Foun-
dation in Dallas, Texas; Carolyn Bacon, executive director of the Founda-
tion; and Gregg Fleisher, president, Advanced Placement Strategies—spoke
with the committee about an innovative program that engages students,
teachers, and schools in an effort to increase the number of traditionally
underrepresented Texas students who take AP courses and succeed on AP
examinations.
We also acknowledge several consultants who contributed significantly
to the project. Carolyn Callahan, University of Virginia, helped the commit-
tee understand the roles of AP and IB in meeting the needs of gifted and
talented students. Karen Boeschenstein, Office of Undergraduate Admission
at the University of Virginia, assisted the committee in interpreting data that
was gathered through an informal survey of deans of admission (see Chap-
ters 2 and 10). Bert Green, The Johns Hopkins University, helped the com-
mittee with an independent evaluation and interpretation of the College
Board’s AP validity studies (see Chapter 10). Julie Heifetz, Moss Rehabilita-
tion Center in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, interviewed AP and IB students
from different schools.
Many individuals within the National Research Council (NRC) assisted
the committee. We are grateful for the support of Bruce Alberts, president of
the National Academy of Sciences, who took a particular interest in this
study and provided support and encouragement along the way. Alexandra
Beatty drafted the original proposal for the project, and Richard Noeth was
study director in the early months of the project. We thank Michael Feuer,
director of the Center for Education, for his support and encouragement,
and Kirsten Sampson Snyder, who shepherded the four panel reports and
the main committee report through the NRC review process, and Yvonne
Wise for processing the report through final production. Genie Grohman
gave valuable assistance in thinking about the organization of this report,
and Judy Koenig contributed to the assessment sections of the report. Rona
Briere capably edited the final version. Naomi Chudowsky, study director of
the Cognitive Foundations of Assessment Committee, shared with us early
drafts of her committee’s report and consulted with us about our conceptual
model for the design and evaluation of advanced study programs. Brenda

xvi
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Buchbinder managed the finances of the project, and Viola Horek, adminis-
trative officer for the Center for Education, provided important assistance.
This report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen for
their diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with proce-
dures approved by the NRC’s Report Review Committee. The purpose of this
independent review is to provide candid and critical comments that will
assist the institution in making the published report as sound as possible and
to ensure that the report meets institutional standards for objectivity, evi-
dence, and responsiveness to the study charge. The review comments and
draft manuscript remain confidential to protect the integrity of the delibera-
tive process. We wish to thank the following individuals for their participa-
tion in the review of this report:
Jo Boaler, Stanford University
Stephen B. Dunbar, University of Iowa
Martin L. Johnson, University of Maryland
Joel J. Mintzes, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
Carolyn J. Morse, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Harris Sokoloff, University of Pennsylvania
Patsy Wang-Iverson, Research for Better Schools
James A. Watts, Southern Regional Education Board
Although the reviewers listed above have provided many constructive
comments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the conclusions
or recommendations nor did they see the final draft of the report before its
release. The review of this report was overseen by Royce W. Murray and
Melvin C. George. Appointed by the NRC, they were responsible for making
certain that an independent examination of this report was carried out in
accordance with institutional procedures and that all review comments were
carefully considered. Responsibility for the final content of this report rests
entirely with the authoring committee and the institution.
In addition, the following individuals served as reviewers for the four
panel reports included as supporting documentation in this volume:
Biology:
Neil A. Campbell, University of California, Riverside
Warren Hunnicutt, St. Petersburg Junior College, FL
Charles Lytle, North Carolina State University
Randy McGonegal, Palm Harbor University High School, Palm Harbor, FL
Duncan MacQuarrie, Tacoma Public Schools, Tacoma, Washington

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
xvii
Chemistry:
William R. Robinson, Purdue University
Keith Sheppard, Columbia University
Myra Thayer, Fairfax County Public Schools, Virginia
David Thissen, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Physics:
Susan A. Agruso, Charlotte-Mecklenburg School District, North Carolina
Arthur Eisenkraft, Foxlane High School, Bedford, NY
Mark Headlee, United World College, Montezuma, NM
William H. Ingham, James Madison University
Kris Whelan, Plano Independent School District, Plano, TX
Mathematics:
John R. Brunsting, Hinsdale Central High School, Hinsdale, IL
Miriam Clifford, Caroll College, Waukesha, WI
Renee Fish, Palm Harbor University High School, Palm Harbor, FL
Michael J. Kolen, University of Iowa
Thomas W. Tucker, Colgate University
Although the reviewers listed above have provided many constructive
comments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the conclusions
or recommendations of the panel reports, nor did they see the final drafts of
the reports before their release. The review of these reports was overseen by
Philip C. Curtis. Appointed by the NRC, he was responsible for making
certain that an independent examination of these reports was carried out in
accordance with institutional procedures and that all review comments were
carefully considered. Responsibility for the final content of these reports
rests entirely with the authoring panels and the institution.
As a final note, we would like to acknowledge that when copyright
permissions were being sought from various sources, the IBO pointed out
several inaccuracies in our listing of their programs. Since this report was
already in the final stages of printing when these errors were noted, we
correct them here for the entire report and extend our apologies to the IBO:
The “program guides” to which we refer throughout the main report as well
as the content panel reports should instead be labeled as “subject guides” in
specific disciplines (e.g., Chemistry guide).  The IB Diploma Programme is
one of three academic programs. The IBO is now using the U.S. spelling of
“Organization” as part of its official name rather than “Organisation” that is
presented throughout this report. Finally, it also should be noted that per-
mission to reprint AP materials does not constitute review or endorsement
by the Educational Testing Service or the College Board of this publication
as a whole or of any questions or testing information it may contain.


xix
Contents
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
1
1. INTRODUCTION
17
Background, 18
Brief Overview of the Programs, 20
What Is Advanced Study?, 22
The Student Clientele for Advanced Study, 23
Study Charge and Approach, 24
Audiences for the Report, 26
Overview and Structure of the Report, 26
2. CONTEXT OF ADVANCED STUDY
28
Policy Context, 29
Educational Context, 36
Disparities in Opportunities to Pursue and Succeed in
Advanced Study, 47
Connections Between Advanced Study and
Higher Education, 51
Epilogue, 63
3. THE ADVANCED PLACEMENT PROGRAM
64
Overview, 64
AP Curriculum, 66
AP Instruction, 71
AP Assessment, 75
AP Professional Development, 79

xx
CONTENTS
4. THE INTERNATIONAL BACCALAUREATE PROGRAMME
83
Overview, 83
IB Curriculum, 86
IB Instruction, 92
IB Assessment, 94
IB Professional Development, 100
5. OTHER OPPORTUNITIES AND APPROACHES
TO ADVANCED STUDY
103
Alternatives for Providing College-Level Learning in
High School, 103
Enrichment Activities, 113
Conclusion, 116
6. LEARNING WITH UNDERSTANDING:
SEVEN PRINCIPLES
117
Seven Principles of Human Learning, 118
Conclusion, 129
ANNEX 6-1 Characteristics of High-Ability Learners and
Implications for Curriculum and Instruction, 130
7. DESIGNING CURRICULUM, INSTRUCTION,
ASSESSMENT,  AND PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT
134
Curriculum, 135
Instruction, 137
Assessment, 141
Teacher Professional Development, 146
From Framework to Advanced Study Programs, 152
8. ANALYSIS OF THE AP AND IB PROGRAMS
BASED ON LEARNING RESEARCH
154
Principled Conceptual Knowledge, 156
Prior Knowledge, 160
Metacognition, 164
Differences Among Learners, 166
Motivation, 168
Learning Communities, 170
Learning in Context, 172
Concluding Remarks, 174

CONTENTS
xxi
9. ANALYSIS OF AP AND IB CURRICULUM,
INSTRUCTION,  ASSESSMENT,  AND
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT
176
Curriculum, 176
Instruction,178
Assessment, 180
Professional Development, 183
Conclusion, 184
10. USES, MISUSES,  AND UNINTENDED CONSEQUENCES
OF AP AND IB
185
High Stakes, 185
Quality Control, 188
Access and Equity, 191
College Credit and Placement, 192
Conclusion, 196
11. RECOMMENDATIONS
197
Recommendation 1: The Primary Goal of
Advanced Study, 197
Recommendation 2: Access and Equity, 198
Recommendation 3: Learning Principles, 199
Recommendation 4: Curriculum, 199
Recommendation 5: Instruction, 200
Recommendation 6: Assessment, 201
Recommendation 7: Qualified Teachers and Professional
Development, 201
Recommendation 8: Alternative Programs, 202
Recommendation 9: The Secondary–College Interface, 202
Recommendation 10: Changes in the AP and IB Programs, 203
REFERENCES
206
APPENDIX A: Overview of Panel Findings and
Recommendations
229
APPENDIX B: Biographical Sketches of Committee
Members
253

xxii
CONTENTS
APPENDIX C: Statement of Task
259
INDEX
261
CONTENT PANEL REPORTS*
Biology
273
Chemistry
337
Physics
393
Mathematics
483
*Content Panel Reports are not printed in this volume but are available online.  Go to http://
www.nap.edu and search for Learning and Understanding.

LEARNING AND
UNDERSTANDING


1
Executive Summary
This report presents results of a 2-year effort by a National Research
Council (NRC) committee to examine programs for advanced study of math-
ematics and science in U.S. high schools. The committee focussed on the
two most widely recognized programs in the United States, and the only two
of national scope: Advanced Placement (AP) and International Baccalaure-
ate (IB). The committee also identified alternatives to IB and AP and ad-
dressed specific questions about advanced study.1 The committee’s state-
ment of task and study questions are found in Appendix C.
While international comparisons of the performance of advanced stu-
dents served as a catalyst for the study, its primary motivator was the im-
proved, research-based understanding of teaching and learning that has
emerged recently, and its application to improving advanced study. In ap-
proaching its charge, the committee considered advances in the cognitive
and learning sciences. The committee also examined research about the AP
and IB programs using information provided by the College Board and the
International Baccalaureate Organisation (IBO). Neither the AP or IB pro-
grams nor independent researchers, however, have yet gathered or pub-
lished critical data that the committee sought. Therefore, the committee also
relied on materials and expert testimony from AP and IB program officials
and teachers for some of the data used in its analyses. More studies are
needed to address the many issues that are raised by this report.
1The committee found that defining “advanced study” for secondary students is surpris-
ingly difficult. Establishing a clear definition is problematic in part because these programs
share a number of the objectives of other high school courses. Although many equate acceler-
ated content (e.g., college-level material) with secondary-school advanced study, the commit-
tee concluded that acceleration alone does not define a quality program. Indeed, the inclusion
of too much accelerated content can prevent students from achieving the primary goal of
advanced study: deep conceptual understanding of the content and unifying concepts of a
discipline.

2
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
The committee found that existing programs for advanced study are
frequently inconsistent with the results of the research on cognition and
learning. This report describes how program developers, schools, and edu-
cators can remedy this situation by considering all components of educa-
tional programs: curriculum, instruction, ongoing and end-of-course assess-
ments, and teacher preparation and professional development.
Also examined in depth is the issue of equal access to advanced study.
Advanced study is no longer only for an elite audience of exceptionally
talented and privileged students; participation has become almost the norm
for students seeking admission to selective colleges. Yet minorities, inner-
city and rural students face serious limitations in accessing programs. These
broader populations of students who could benefit from advanced study are
currently limited by their prior educational opportunities, their schools’ abil-
ity to provide effective learning environments, and the availability of quali-
fied and effective teachers. Improvements in these areas could significantly
expand the population that can be served effectively by advanced study.
Expertise on the committee included scientist-researchers, secondary
teachers of AP and IB, science and mathematics educators working on teacher
education and issues of access and equity, cognitive scientists, and educa-
tional administrators. Panels of experts in the disciplines (biology, chemis-
try, physics, and mathematics) also advised the committee. The four panel
reports provided a critical basis for the committee’s analysis and may be
used independently of this volume. They are available online2 and are sum-
marized in Appendix A.
This report is intended for many audiences concerned with high school
science and mathematics education in general and advanced study in par-
ticular, including program developers, high school and higher education
faculty, university and high school administrators, policymakers, and par-
ents.
CONTEXT OF ADVANCED STUDY
Advanced study has wide-ranging effects on curricula, teachers, and
students, therefore, advanced courses must be considered within a broader
context that includes the schools where the courses are offered, preceding
grade levels, and higher education. Advanced study in science and math-
ematics makes special demands on facilities, financial resources, and per-
sonnel at both the middle- and high school levels.
2At http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10129.html.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
3
Components
Teachers. Students learn best from teachers with strong content knowl-
edge and pedagogical skills. Lack of access to high-quality teachers may
preclude some students, especially minorities and those living in poverty,
from pursuing advanced study. All 50 states require licensing of public school
teachers; none requires special certification for those providing advanced
study. High school teachers see themselves as subject area specialists. They
teach up to 175 students per day, and have little opportunity to work with
colleagues to improve curriculum or instruction. They frequently cite inad-
equate support, lack of student motivation, and student discipline problems
as reasons for leaving teaching.
Coordination. Academic preparation for advanced study begins in
middle school. Mathematics and science courses in these grades often lack
focus, cover too many topics, repeat material, and are implemented incon-
sistently. In mathematics, states are moving toward offering algebra in eighth
grade. Increasing numbers of middle schools are instituting integrated sci-
ence curricula that de-emphasize disciplines. Middle and high school teach-
ers rarely have opportunities to coordinate curricula or instruction for grades
7–12.
Curricular Differentiation. More than 80 percent of middle schools
and many high schools direct or allow students to choose their classes in
mathematics, science, and other subjects. Other schools offer core curricula
that are narrowly focused on academic subjects and allow students few
choices. Early differential placement steers some students away from rigor-
ous academic programs. Research indicates that constrained curricula are
more effective and equitable in helping students pursue advanced study.
Sequencing. The typical progression of courses in high school math-
ematics leading to calculus is Algebra I, geometry, Algebra II, trigonometry,
and precalculus. Most state high school graduation requirements also in-
clude 2 years of science, although college-bound students traditionally take
more, usually biology, chemistry, and then physics.
Standards. In science, standards developed by the American Associa-
tion for the Advancement of Science and the National Research Council call
for increased emphasis on inquiry and in-depth study of fewer topics. In
mathematics, the standards from the National Council of Teachers of Math-
ematics emphasize learning of concepts and helping students understand
mathematics more deeply. Forty-nine states have developed standards and

4
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
curriculum frameworks in mathematics and science. All 50 states test their
students and 27 states hold schools accountable for results. The AP and IB
programs are not predicated on state or national standards in any subject
area, but can complement standards-based reform efforts. Both provide
nationally recognized external measures of student achievement, but schools
can implement the programs in ways that conform to local or state stan-
dards.
Students. High school students face competing time pressures. Typical
students work 15–20 hours per week, spend 20–25 hours socializing, 5 hours
in extracurricular activities, and 15 hours watching television. Significant
numbers of students—particularly those from low-income families—think
so much about problems at home that they cannot concentrate in school.
Unequal Access
There is an enduring belief that advanced study confers advantages to
students in college; thus, ever-increasing numbers enroll in AP courses and
IB programs. However, access to advanced study is uneven. Some high
schools offer multiple sections in many AP subjects; others provide none.
These differences are associated with school size and location, and the avail-
ability of AP and IB in a school decreases as the percentage of minority or
low-income students increases, especially in mathematics and science. Even
where available, students from underrepresented and low-income groups
take advanced courses less frequently than students from other groups.
Effective strategies for improving student participation in advanced study
include eliminating low-level courses with reduced academic expectations,
enhancing professional development for teachers, hiring qualified teachers
for rural and inner-city schools, providing information to parents about long-
term benefits of participating in such programs, and increasing student access
to skilled counselors and mentors.
High School–College Interface
To understand the role AP and IB play in college admission decisions,
the committee surveyed deans of admission. The survey revealed that par-
ticipation in these programs is of greatest importance for admission to the
most selective colleges. Deans view such participation as an indication of
students’ willingness to accept academic challenges, but stated that the lack
of such courses at an applicant’s high school typically does not adversely
influence admission if a student succeeded in the most challenging courses
available at his or her school.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
5
AP and IB examinations are administered each May, but scores are not
available until July. Therefore, examination grades from the senior year do
not influence college admission, but are used in credit and placement deci-
sions. Students also use these credits to reduce course loads or to meet
prerequisite or distribution requirements. As a result, some students may not
have to take college courses in specific subject areas, such as mathematics
or science. Some institutions minimize this practice by requiring that stu-
dents enroll in courses at higher levels than those taken in high school. A
survey of mathematics and biology departments revealed that the vast ma-
jority award credit and advanced placement for AP, and sometimes IB; the
amount awarded usually depends on the student’s score.
OVERVIEW OF THE PROGRAMS
Advanced Placement
Developed in 1955, AP is the predominant national program for ad-
vanced courses in U.S. high schools. Eleven separate courses are available in
eight mathematics and science subjects. The College Board provides topic
outlines for AP courses, generated largely by surveying colleges and univer-
sities. However, teachers are allowed considerable leeway in implementa-
tion. Elective, end-of-course examinations are designed to be comparable
with “typical” introductory college-level courses in a subject area. Originally,
the program served only top students from a few high schools. Today, ap-
proximately 62 percent of U.S. high schools offer AP. In May 2001, students
took more than 450,000 AP examinations in mathematics and science.
International Baccalaureate
The IB program was developed in the late 1960s to provide an interna-
tional standard of secondary education for children of diplomats and others
stationed outside their countries. One goal was to prepare students for uni-
versity work in their home countries. The IBO authorizes participating high
schools; schools must offer a full IB Diploma Programme and cannot offer
only a subset of IB courses. While some students take individual IB courses
as they would an honors course, most are diploma candidates, taking a
program of six or seven courses over two years.
Final examinations are part of the integrated IB Diploma Programme.
Assessment consists of both external and internal components designed to
measure content knowledge, depth of understanding, and use of specific
higher-level cognitive skills for each subject. In May 2001, students from 272
U.S. public and private schools took 50,745 IB examinations, of which roughly
13,000 were in mathematics and science. Teachers also provide internal as-

6
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
sessments of students’ practical skills (for example, laboratory investigations
in science, portfolios in mathematics), which are judged against established
IBO assessment criteria.
Alternative Approaches
Other opportunities for advanced study in high school are available
through local-, state-, and nationally sponsored programs. These include
collaborative programs between high schools and postsecondary institutions,
specialized schools for high-ability learners, distance learning programs, re-
search internships, and academic competitions. Many programs award col-
lege credit to high school students, but less is known about transferability of
credits earned in these alternate programs compared with qualifying scores
on AP or IB examinations.
DESIGNING PROGRAMS BASED ON RESEARCH
ON LEARNING AND PEDAGOGY
The goal of advanced study is to promote development of deep concep-
tual understanding and the ability to apply knowledge appropriately. Ac-
cordingly, the committee developed a framework to guide its analysis of
advanced study and to evaluate the degree to which existing programs ac-
complish this goal. This model also can guide the development of new
programs.
The concept of “learning with understanding” is concerned with knowl-
edge and how it is organized. Effective instruction is focusesd on enabling
learners to uncover and formulate the deep organizing patterns of a domain,
and then to actively access and create meaning around these organizing
principles. Learning with understanding also helps students develop the ability
to evaluate the relevance of particular knowledge to novel problems and to
explain and justify their thinking. As students learn and practice these skills
of critical reflection, they become able to apply knowledge in multiple con-
texts, develop adaptive expertise, and serve as active members of learning
communities.
Seven Principles of Human Learning
Seven research-based principles of learning can provide a framework
for designing effective curriculum, instruction, and assessment—three facets
of classroom activity that teachers can orchestrate to promote learning with
understanding. These principles also underlie the design of effective prepa-
ration and professional development for teachers, which, along with cur-

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
7
riculum, instruction, and assessment, helps create a system that focuses on
student learning:
1. Learning with understanding is facilitated when knowledge is related
to and structured around major concepts and principles of a discipline.
2. A learner’s prior knowledge is the starting point for effective learn-
ing.
3. Metacognitive learning (self-monitoring) is important for acquiring
proficiency.
4. Recognizing differences among learners is important for effective teach-
ing and learning.
5. Learners’ beliefs about their ability to learn affect learning success.
6. Practices and activities in which people engage during learning shape
what is learned.
7. Socially supported interactions strengthen one’s ability to learn with
understanding.
Design Principles: Curriculum, Instruction, Assessment,
and Professional Development
The committee’s framework for appraising advanced study programs
encompasses the intentional and systematic design of curriculum, instruc-
tion, assessment, and professional development within the context of ad-
vanced study. Consideration of these program elements is based on the
principles of learning and on theory and research on instructional programs.
Education systems frequently address each element separately, but all four
must be aligned and work together synergistically to facilitate deep concep-
tual understanding. The following examples of design principles for curricu-
lum, instruction, and assessment reflect what is known about human learn-
ing:
• Effective mathematics and science curricula are coherent, focus on
important ideas within the discipline, and are sequenced to optimize learn-
ing. They provide ample opportunities for exploring ideas in depth and for
developing familiarity with the discourse and modes of inquiry of the disci-
pline.
• Teaching for understanding begins with careful consideration of stu-
dents’ thinking. It employs multiple representations and tasks. Effective teach-
ers create learning environments that foster development of students’ under-
standing and skills. They orchestrate classroom discourse in which students
conjecture, present solutions, and argue about the validity of claims.

8
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
• Assessment for understanding is aligned with instruction and with
desired learning outcomes. It is multifaceted and continuous and includes
both content and process dimensions of performance.
Successful implementation of advanced study that promotes learning
with understanding also depends upon creating opportunities for teachers’
continual learning, and requires sufficient resources to support professional
development. Effective professional development for mathematics and sci-
ence teachers emphasizes deep understanding of content and discipline-
based methods of inquiry, provides multiple perspectives on students as
learners, and develops teachers’ subject-specific pedagogical knowledge. It
treats teachers as active learners, builds on their existing knowledge and
beliefs, and occurs in professional communities where there are opportuni-
ties to discuss ideas and practices as colleagues.
ANALYSIS OF AP AND IB PROGRAMS BASED ON
LEARNING RESEARCH
Although the AP and IB programs predate contemporary learning re-
search, it is important to use the principles emerging from that research to
assess and improve the programs. The committee’s analysis of these pro-
grams, based on these principles of learning and supported by the reports of
the four disciplinary panels, yielded the following findings:
• Principled conceptual knowledge—Although the AP and IB programs
espouse an emphasis on concepts and key ideas, this intention is largely
unrealized in the sciences. Excessive breadth of coverage (especially in 1-
year science programs) and insufficient emphasis on key concepts in final
assessments contribute significantly to the problem in all science fields. Al-
though emphasis on learning concepts and key ideas is more evident in
mathematics, further improvement is needed, particularly in the assessments,
which frequently focus on procedural knowledge at the expense of concep-
tual understanding.
• Prior knowledge—Except for mathematics, these programs do not
specify clearly what prior knowledge is needed for success or help teachers
to build on what students already know or to recognize student misconcep-
tions. In all subjects, efforts to prepare students properly in the years pre-
ceding advanced study are often inadequate. Too many students, especially
in physics, take a 1-year advanced course as their first course in the disci-
pline—an inappropriate situation.
• Metacognition—Advanced study can increase students’ metacognitive
skills, but many programs and courses do not help students develop these
skills.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
9
• Differences among learners—AP and IB teachers who employ a vari-
ety of pedagogical approaches are likely to reach a broader range of learn-
ers. Using several sources of evidence of student progress also can provide
a more accurate picture of what students know compared with any single
measure, such as an examination. The single end-of year examinations and
summary scores, as found in AP, do not adequately capture student learning.
• Motivation—Students have varied motives for enrolling in advanced
study. Designing programs that are consistent with the findings of learning
research can increase students’ motivation to succeed in advanced study,
encourage them to believe in their own potential, and increase the propor-
tion of students who take and succeed in the course and final examinations.
• Learning communities—Teamwork and collaborative investigation are
especially important in advanced study. The breadth of course content and
the generally short duration of laboratory periods in many schools may be
inadequate for such activities. Better use of the Internet and technologies for
collaborative learning is needed.
• Situated learning—Students need opportunities to learn concepts in
a variety of contexts. The AP and IB programs currently do not emphasize
interdisciplinary connections sufficiently or assess students’ ability to apply
their knowledge in new situations or contexts. Additionally, advanced study
courses might make better use of laboratory experiences by requiring stu-
dents to plan experiments, decide what information is important, select ex-
perimental methods, and review results critically. These courses might also
draw upon local resources (e.g., science-related industries) to give students
experience with varied practices in mathematics and science.
Although AP and IB programs currently are not well aligned with learn-
ing principles, they can be revised with this research in mind. The resulting
transformations are likely to make the programs more successful in enhanc-
ing deep conceptual learning and make them more accessible to additional
students.
ANALYSIS OF AP AND IB PROGRAMS WITH
REGARD TO CURRICULUM, INSTRUCTION,
ASSESSMENT, AND PROFESSIONAL
DEVELOPMENT
Curriculum
Students can study topics in depth and develop conceptual understand-
ing only if curricula do not present excessive numbers of topics. Currently,
AP and IB programs are inconsistent with this precept. In their written mate-
rials the College Board and the IBO acknowledge the importance of depth

10
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
and focus, but the breadth of topics covered in their curriculum guides and
assessments conveys a different message. Additionally, the College Board
models AP course outlines on typical college introductory courses, rather
than on the best college courses or educational practices based on research
on learning and pedagogy. Since college-level courses vary substantially in
content and pedagogy, this approach limits the potential quality of AP courses.
Instruction
Individual teachers have substantial leeway in implementing AP or IB
courses. Therefore, the nature and quality of instruction vary considerably
from classroom to classroom. AP and IB programs depart from the model of
instruction outlined above by not providing adequate guidance concerning
excellent teaching practices in advanced study.
Assessment
The central principle for designing assessments that foster deep concep-
tual understanding is that they must be aligned with learning goals and with
curriculum and instruction derived from those goals. Because AP and IB
assessments exert a powerful influence on curriculum and instruction, it is
especially important to ensure that they are designed to foster deep concep-
tual understanding.
A striking inadequacy of the AP and IB programs is the lack of detailed
research about what their examinations actually measure, including the kinds
of thinking that the examinations elicit. This concern touches on the tests’
validity and the appropriateness of the inferences drawn from test scores.
For both the AP and IB programs, certain kinds of validity research are
lacking, including attention to the broader social consequences (or conse-
quential validity) of their assessments.
Because high-stakes assessments strongly influence instruction, it is im-
perative to understand the connections between assessment and instruction
in both programs. If instruction is to enhance understanding, assessments
should not be predictable from year to year, nor should their content or form
be capricious. Assessments in some AP and IB courses are relatively predict-
able.
Professional Development
At present, neither the College Board nor the IBO supports systematic
and continuing professional development for teachers. Professional devel-
opment opportunities vary in quality and focus and do not consistently re-

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
11
flect the notions of learning, instruction, curriculum, and assessment pre-
sented in this report. The College Board does not adequately monitor pro-
fessional development programs that support AP; teachers’ participation in
such programs is voluntary. The College Board and the IBO have made
progress in providing Web-based resources, workshops, and mentorships,
but many teachers still lack access to such resources and opportunities.
Accepting greater responsibility for teacher professional development is
a daunting challenge for the College Board and the IBO, whose missions
historically have been much more limited in focus. Without improved pro-
fessional development, however, other efforts to improve advanced study
are likely to founder.
USES, MISUSES, AND UNINTENDED
CONSEQUENCES OF AP AND IB
Some misuses of AP and IB test scores may have unfortunate conse-
quences, though these have not been studied in detail. For example, in an
attempt to quantify the extent to which high schools challenge students, top
public high schools have recently been ranked based on the number of AP
and IB tests taken. AP and IB assessment data also have been used inappro-
priately to evaluate teachers or to compare schools. Because of this, the
committee is concerned that teachers may emphasize to their students the
mechanics of preparing for a test, rather than learning and understanding of
important principles. Coverage of content may be superficial and opportuni-
ties for inquiry-based experiences insufficient. The committee also has learned
that some teachers discourage students from taking AP or IB courses (or the
final examinations) when poor performance is anticipated. This form of
limiting access occurs in many educational settings, including the most com-
petitive high schools.
Data from AP and IB test scores by themselves cannot support infer-
ences about teacher quality and effectiveness. Students come to advanced
courses with different levels of skill and mastery of content that make it
difficult to determine the effects of a teacher’s work on student achievement
in any particular year. Nor should such data be used to measure school
quality. Some schools offer other options that are equally rigorous but more
suited to their students.
Unlike the IBO, the College Board has no clear standards as to what
constitutes an AP course. With the growth of AP as a perceived standard of
excellence and school quality, the incentive to use the AP name inappropri-
ately also has increased. Some schools may label non-AP courses as AP,
while others may sponsor AP courses without providing proper facilities and
personnel resources.

12
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
Students can be affected adversely when preparatory courses are com-
pressed or when students are allowed to skip prerequisite courses without
first demonstrating mastery before taking an AP course. However, efforts to
prepare students for advanced study often stimulate improvements in pre-
requisite courses; and this is to be strongly encouraged.
Advances in technology make it possible to create online AP courses
and to provide other online support, such as professional development for
AP and IB teachers. The potential for growth in this area is virtually unlim-
ited, but so is the potential for problems if suitable quality controls are not
established. For example, students who take an AP science course online
and earn a qualifying score on the examination may earn college credit or
placement without having had any advanced laboratory experience.
Decisions about awarding college credit or advanced placement for quali-
fying scores on AP and IB examinations are best made on an individual
basis, using multiple sources of information. Decisions based on sampling
average student performance in courses at typical colleges is not strong
enough to infer that all, or even most, AP or IB students who earn a particu-
lar examination score are qualified for either credit or placement.
RECOMMENDATIONS
Recommendation 1:
The Primary Goal of Advanced Study
The primary goal of advanced study in any discipline should be for
students to achieve a deep conceptual understanding of the discipline’s con-
tent and unifying concepts. Well-designed programs help students develop
skills of inquiry, analysis, and problem solving so that they become superior
learners. Accelerating students’ exposure to college-level material, while ap-
propriate as a component of some advanced study programs, is not by itself
a sufficient goal.
Recommendation 2: Access and Equity
Schools and school districts must find ways to integrate advanced study
with the rest of their program by means of a coherent plan extending from
middle school through the last years of secondary school. Course options in
grades 6–10 for which there are reduced academic expectations (i.e., those
that leave students unprepared for further study in a discipline) should be
eliminated from the curriculum. An exception might be made for courses
designed to meet the needs of special education students.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
13
Recommendation 3: Learning Principles
Programs of advanced study in science and mathematics must be made
consistent with findings from recent research on how people learn. These
findings include the role of students’ prior knowledge and misconceptions
in building a conceptual structure, the importance of student motivation and
self-monitoring of learning (metacognition), and the substantial differences
among learners.
Recommendation 4: Curriculum
Curricula for advanced study should emphasize depth of understanding
over exhaustive coverage of content. They should focus on central organiz-
ing concepts and principles and the empirical information on which those
concepts and principles are based. Because science and technology progress
rapidly, frequent review of course content is essential.
Recommendation 5: Instruction
Instruction in advanced courses should engage students in inquiry by
providing opportunities to experiment, analyze information critically, make
conjectures and argue about their validity, and solve problems both indi-
vidually and in groups. Instruction should recognize and take advantage of
differences among learners by employing multiple representations of ideas
and posing a variety of tasks.
Recommendation 6: Assessment
Teachers of advanced study courses should employ frequent formative
assessment of student learning to guide instruction and monitor learning.
External, end-of-course examinations have a different purpose: they certify
mastery. Both types of assessment should include content and process di-
mensions of performance and evaluate depth of understanding, the primary
goal of advanced study (see Recommendation 1).
Recommendation 7:
Qualified Teachers and Professional Development
Schools and districts offering advanced study must provide frequent
opportunities for continuing professional development so teachers can im-
prove their knowledge of both content and pedagogy. National programs
for advanced study should clearly specify and monitor the qualifications

14
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
expected of teachers. Professional development activities must be adequately
funded and available to all teachers throughout their teaching careers.
Recommendation 8: Alternative Programs
Approaches to advanced study other than AP and IB should be devel-
oped and evaluated. Such alternatives can help increase access to advanced
study for those not presently served and result in the emergence of novel
and effective strategies.
Recommendation 9: The Secondary–College Interface
9(a): When awarding credit and advanced placement for courses be-
yond the introductory college level, institutions should base their decisions
on an assessment of each student’s understanding and capabilities, using
multiple sources of information. National examination scores alone are gen-
erally insufficient for these purposes.
9(b): College and university scientists and mathematicians should modify
their introductory courses along lines similar to those proposed in this report
for high school advanced study. Departments should carefully advise under-
graduates about the benefits and costs of bypassing introductory courses.
Recommendation 10:
Changes in the AP and IB Programs
The following substantial changes in the AP and IB programs are rec-
ommended:
10(a): The College Board should abandon its practice of designing AP
courses in most disciplines primarily to replicate typical introductory college
courses.
10(b): The College Board and the IBO should evaluate their assess-
ments to ensure that they measure the conceptual understanding and com-
plex reasoning that should be the primary goal of advanced study. Programs
of validity research should be an integral part of assessment design.
10(c): Both the College Board and the IBO should take more responsi-
bility for ensuring the use of appropriate instructional approaches. Specify-
ing the knowledge and skills that are important for beginning teachers and
providing models for teacher development are likely to advance teacher
effectiveness.
10(d): The College Board should exercise greater quality control over
the AP trademark by articulating standards for what can be labeled an AP

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
15
course, desirable student preparation for each course, strategies for ensuring
equity and access, and expectations for universal participation in the AP
examinations by course participants. When necessary, the College Board
should commission experts to assist with these tasks.3 These standards should
apply whether AP is offered in schools or electronically.
10(e): The College Board and the IBO should provide assistance to
schools in their efforts to offer high-quality advanced courses. To this end,
the College Board should provide more detailed curriculum, information
about best practices for instruction and classroom assessment, and strategies
for enhancing professional development opportunities.
10(f): The College Board and the IBO should offer more guidance to
educators, policymakers, and the general public concerning proper uses of
their examination scores for admission, placement, and teacher evaluation.
They should also actively discourage misuse of these scores.
10(g): The College Board and the IBO should develop programs of
research on the implementation and effectiveness of their programs.
3The committee notes that the College Board has used this strategy in the past. For ex-
ample, in 1997 the National Task Force on Minority High Achievement was convened to assist
the College Board in outlining recommendations for substantially increasing the number of
African American, Latino, and Native American undergraduates who achieve high levels of
academic success.


17
1
Introduction
Excellence in science and mathematics education is a critical need and
goal for the United States. Programs for advanced study, particularly the
Advanced Placement (AP) and International Baccalaureate (IB) programs,
are major contributors to science and mathematics education at the high
school level. Large numbers of high school students seek access to these
courses, and many colleges use them in their admission decisions. High
school curricula are strongly affected by these programs, since schools often
structure their courses in the middle-school and early high school years to
facilitate participation in advanced study.
This report presents the results of a 2-year effort by a committee of the
National Research Council (NRC) to examine programs for advanced study
of U.S. high school mathematics and science (calculus, biology, chemistry,
and physics). As part of the scope of the study, the NRC asked the commit-
tee to “. . . explore the current status of high school mathematics and sci-
ence education by means of an in-depth look at programs designed for
advanced students, such as the AP and IB programs.” The study focuses on
AP and IB because these are the only advanced secondary science and
mathematics programs of national scope. However, the availability of and
participation in these programs are highly variable, with large differences
among schools and their student populations.
The primary purpose of this report is to use the results of recent re-
search on learning, curriculum, instruction, assessment, and professional
development as lenses to examine educational programs for advanced sec-
ondary science and mathematics in the United States. We are now in a posi-
tion to ask whether the AP, IB, and other programs of advanced study as
currently implemented are as effective as possible, and how they might be
improved.

18
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
BACKGROUND
The National Science Foundation and the U.S. Department of Education
commissioned this study following the publication of a disappointing as-
sessment of the performance of U.S. students in advanced mathematics and
physics, which was part of the Third International Mathematics and Science
Study (National Center for Education Statistics [NCES], 1998). This interna-
tional comparison appeared to show that U.S. students of advanced math-
ematics and physics lagged behind their counterparts in other countries.
However, a more recent study indicates that this pessimistic assessment may
have been unwarranted because the original sampling included many stu-
dents that should not have been classified as being in “advanced” courses.
Indeed, a second administration of the test to U.S. students enrolled in AP
calculus and AP physics showed that, in this sample, the AP calculus stu-
dents performed better than those in all other countries, and the perfor-
mance of the AP physics students was substantially above the mean of the
other countries (Gonzalez, O’Connor, and Miles, 2001). One important les-
son from these comparisons is that the percentage of U.S. students taking
bona fide advanced courses is too small compared with other countries.
Although international comparisons served as a catalyst for this study,
the need to undertake the study was clear for other reasons as well. Perhaps
most important, a greatly improved understanding of the conditions for suc-
cessful teaching and learning has emerged in recent years. These advances
have been summarized in several NRC reports, including How People Learn:
Brain, Mind, Experience, and School (Expanded Edition) (NRC, 2000b). The
present analysis demonstrates that programs for advanced study are fre-
quently inconsistent with the findings of this body of research on cognition
and learning. We show how program developers can remedy this situation
by considering all the components of educational programs when develop-
ing their courses: curriculum, instructional methods, ongoing (curriculum-
embedded) and end-of-course (summative) assessments, and opportunities
for teacher preparation and professional development.
Another factor contributing to the urgency of this study is the rapid
growth of the AP and IB programs. In 2000, there were 433,430 AP exams
taken in math and science, compared with only 164,333 in 1990 (College
Entrance Examination Board [CEEB], 2000c),1 and the number is expected to
continue to grow rapidly in the future. The IB program had about 19,000
degree candidates in 2000, and roughly 13,000 IB exams were taken in the
1The College Board, which oversees the AP program, does not keep track of who or how
many students enroll in AP courses, but estimates that about 30–40 percent of students enrolled
in a course do not take the exam. If that holds true for all courses, then 433,000 AP exams in
science and mathematics translate to about 580,000 enrollments.

INTRODUCTION
19
sciences and mathematics in the United States that year.2 Clearly, these are
no longer programs only for an elite audience; participation in some form of
advanced study has become almost the norm for students seeking admission
to the most selective colleges. Advanced study programs can affect students’
future opportunities, and the quality and availability of these programs have
become central concerns.
As the United States becomes more diverse, racial and socioeconomic
gaps persist in high school students’ access to and success in advanced
study. While minority participation in advanced mathematics and science
courses has increased substantially during the past 20 years (National Sci-
ence Foundation [NSF], 1999), inner-city and rural schools, especially those
with high percentages of minority and poor students, are still less likely to
offer these courses (Ma and Willms, 1999). Many schools in low-income
communities remain ill equipped to provide advanced study, in part be-
cause they are less likely than schools with greater resources to have highly
qualified teachers or sufficient laboratories, equipment, and other curricu-
lum materials (Darling-Hammond, 2000; Ferguson, 1991, 1998; Greenwald,
Hedges, and Laine, 1996; Murnane, 1996; Wright, Horn, and Sanders, 1997).
In addition to these gaps, there are parallel disparities in access within ra-
cially and ethnically diverse schools. In these schools, African American,
Hispanic, and Native American students and those of low socioeconomic
status are much less likely than white or Asian American students to enroll in
upper-level mathematics and science courses even when such courses are
available (Atanda, 1999; Horn, Nunez, and Bobbitt, 2000; Ma and Willms,
1999). Those who do enroll are much less likely to fare as well as white or
Asian American students on national examinations. These facts represent a
major challenge for advanced study programs.
A number of additional trends and concerns make this an appropriate
time to analyze programs for advanced study of science and mathematics:
• Changes in science and mathematics—Rapid advances (e.g., the tre-
mendous progress in molecular biology) mean that traditional course con-
tent may be inadequate for the future.
• Demands for accountability—There is increasing pressure from
policymakers and the public for school accountability, and participation in
advanced study is often used as a measure of school quality.
• Connections to earlier years and higher education—Since learning of
science and mathematics tends to be hierarchical, advanced programs in
2These numbers are estimates based on IB Worldwide Statistics.

20
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
these subjects have major implications for the earlier years of schooling and
vice versa. Similarly, as introductory college courses evolve and their em-
phases change (see, for example, NRC, 1999d), it is important to review the
secondary courses that precede them.
• Teacher shortages—A teacher shortage of immense proportions is
projected to emerge in the next few years in many districts. These shortages
are likely to be particularly acute for science and mathematics (National
Commission on Mathematics and Science Teaching for the 21st Century,
2000; NCES, 2000b). Teaching in advanced programs requires extensive knowl-
edge of both subject matter content and pedagogical methods. Thus it is
unclear how the staffing needed to implement and maintain the quality of
these programs will be provided in the future. This problem is especially
severe in schools with large populations of minority and poor students,
where shortages of qualified science and mathematics teachers are already
daunting (National Commission on Mathematics and Science Teaching in
the 21st Century, 2000).
• Economic forces—The increasing demands of a knowledge-based
economy add to the importance of providing advanced courses in math-
ematics and science for as many students as are motivated and prepared to
enroll in them.
• Information technology—Advances in information technology are
transforming work, teaching, and learning, creating new opportunities for
instructional delivery. For example, distance learning is now being used to
deliver advanced study programs to schools that have few resources, small
student populations, or insufficient numbers of teachers to offer a program
within the school.
• Assessment—Better understanding of the uses and impact of assess-
ment with regard to classroom dynamics and student learning creates op-
portunities for fundamentally changing and improving programs of advanced
study (see, for example, NRC, 2001a).
BRIEF OVERVIEW OF THE PROGRAMS
The AP program was launched in 1955 by the College Entrance Exami-
nation Board, commonly referred to as the College Board,3 to provide col-
lege-level courses for advanced high school students. The program currently
consists of 35 courses in 19 subjects, including 11 courses in 7 science and
mathematics subjects.4 An individual school can choose to offer any number
3The College Board is an independent, not-for-profit membership organization. Member-
ship includes colleges, universities, and secondary schools.
4See http://apcentral.collegeboard.com/courses/overviews/ (February 11, 2002).

INTRODUCTION
21
and combination of these courses. The AP program is built around elective,
end-of-course examinations that are graded on a five-point scale. The Col-
lege Board produces content outlines for its courses, largely by surveying
colleges and universities about the content of their introductory courses.
The national AP examinations are used by many colleges and universities as
a basis for granting credit or advanced placement to incoming students.
Additional information about the AP program is provided in Chapter 3.
The IB program was developed in the late 1960s to provide an interna-
tional standard of secondary education for a mobile population—primarily
the children of diplomats and others stationed outside their home countries
for extended periods. One goal was to prepare these students to qualify for
university admission in their home countries after schooling abroad. As with
the AP program, a final examination developed by the International Bacca-
laureate Organisation5 (IBO) is a major component of an assessment process
that helps determine eligibility for university admission. The examination is
supplemented by teacher-devised classroom assessments, such as a portfo-
lio of laboratory reports. Schools cannot choose to offer individual IB courses;
they must provide a program of interrelated courses that students seeking
the IB diploma take during their junior and senior years. While some stu-
dents take individual IB courses much as they would an honors course,
approximately two-thirds are diploma candidates, taking a full program of
six or seven courses over the 2-year period. A detailed course outline and
specific goals are provided for the courses. Additional information about the
IB program is provided in Chapter 4.
As a consequence of the growing belief that all students should have
access to quality educational programs, many states and the federal govern-
ment have advocated an expansion of programs such as AP. Former U.S.
Department of Education Secretary Richard Riley called for at least one AP
course in every school by 2002 and an additional course incorporated into a
school’s AP offerings each year for the remainder of the decade.6 While
Governor of Texas, George W. Bush said, “Making Advanced Placement
available to students across Texas is one of the best ways to challenge stu-
dents academically” (Callahan, 2000, [from AP Program 1999, p. 16]). Many
states have advisory councils and other structures in place specifically to
promote and improve AP offerings.
The U.S. education system has changed dramatically since these pro-
grams were first established, and the programs and their assessments are
now being used in ways that initially were neither anticipated nor intended.
The leaders of these programs are aware of the need for reform. For ex-
5The IBO is a not-for-profit educational foundation based in Geneva, Switzerland.
6See www.ed.gov/Speeches/02-2000/20000211.html (February 11, 2002).

22
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
ample, in 2000 the College Board convened a Commission on the Future of
the Advanced Placement Program, asking it to focus on ways of maintaining
the integrity and quality of the program while improving equity of access to
accommodate greater student diversity.7
WHAT IS ADVANCED STUDY?
The committee found that defining “advanced study” for secondary stu-
dents is surprisingly difficult. Establishing a clear definition of advanced
study is problematic in part because these programs share many of the
objectives of other high school courses. For example, all courses in math-
ematics and science, whether “advanced” or not, should encourage students
to think about concepts in addition to factual information. Similarly, all courses
should engage students in scientific or mathematical reasoning.
A number of overlapping definitions are often used to characterize ad-
vanced study for high school students in the United States. Some have tended
to equate advanced study with accelerated or college-level learning. How-
ever, the committee finds this definition insufficient because as discussed in
detail later in this report, the inclusion of too much accelerated content can
prevent students from realizing the important goal of attaining deep concep-
tual understanding.8
Furthermore, introductory courses at colleges and universities often do
not take advantage of the greatly improved understanding of the conditions
for successful teaching and learning mentioned earlier. As a result, they are
not necessarily good models for emulation at the high school level. It is
possible to enrich students’ learning beyond what is typically found in sec-
ondary curricula in other ways—for example, by adding depth or rigorous
analysis, applications to new domains, or opportunities for investigation.
Thinking of advanced study entirely in the context of obtaining college credit
and placement is unnecessarily limiting.
For purposes of this report, therefore, the committee adopted a focus on
helping students achieve deep conceptual understanding as the primary goal
of advanced study. At the same time, committee recognizes that accelerated
exposure to college-level content has an appropriate place in some pro-
7The sponsors of these programs have acknowledged and appreciate the importance of
increased access for underserved students. However, it is probable that offering courses alone,
without providing support systems for both students and teachers and appropriate prerequisite
education in the earlier years, would prove unsuccessful. These issues are discussed at length
in Chapter 2, this volume.
8Conceptual understanding involves the creation of rich integrated knowledge structures
around an underlying concept. Understanding is not a static point in learning, but rather a
continually developing mental activity.

INTRODUCTION
23
grams, provided it is well integrated with the primary goal of nurturing
conceptual understanding.
THE STUDENT CLIENTELE
FOR ADVANCED STUDY
For whom are programs of advanced study appropriate? Again the an-
swer is not straightforward. This study did not examine programs intended
only for the most exceptional learners, who might constitute at most a few
percent of the student population. Exceptional learners sometimes require
opportunities that differ significantly from what is needed or effective for
other able and well-motivated students; they may need earlier access to
advanced material and a faster pace (see Annex 6-1).
While it is important to provide challenging opportunities for the most
talented students, the primary concern of this study is with programs avail-
able to a broader group of highly motivated students with solid academic
preparation. This population is limited at least in part by the adequacy of
students’ prior educational opportunities, the ability of their schools to pro-
vide effective learning environments, and the availability of qualified and
effective teachers. It is the committee’s consensus that improvements in these
areas could enlarge significantly the group of students for whom advanced
study programs such as AP and IB are a realistic choice. Therefore, instead of
asking, “For whom is advanced study appropriate?” we think it much more
useful to ask, “How can high school science and mathematics education at
both the introductory and advanced levels be improved so that a larger num-
ber of students will have access to advanced study and a realistic chance of
succeeding once enrolled?” Achieving this goal will require fundamental
changes in curriculum, approaches to teaching and learning, assessment
tools, and teacher preparation and professional development. Both school
systems and institutions of higher education will have to change in signifi-
cant ways.
The pathways leading to advanced study begin early. If a student has
not developed a sound conceptual understanding of algebra, geometry, and
functions, for example, he or she may be lost even in a well-taught calculus
class. The committee envisions a future in which the conceptual understand-
ing and habits of mind essential to advanced study are successfully nurtured
among a greater number of students than at present. In this hoped-for fu-
ture, early tracking of some students into academically weak courses is avoided
so that each child has a suitable opportunity to develop and demonstrate his
or her individual academic abilities and talents.
It should be noted that the early high school years are important as well
for students who do not go on to advanced study. The programs reviewed

24
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
in this report have a profound influence on the course structure and course-
taking patterns of all students throughout the high school years. Moreover,
AP and IB teachers—who are often among the best in their schools—are a
critical resource for the entire high school system.
STUDY CHARGE AND APPROACH
The charge to the committee was as follows:
. . . to consider the effectiveness of, and potential improvements to, pro-
grams for advanced study of mathematics and science in U.S. high schools.
In response to the charge, the committee will consider the two most widely
recognized programs for advanced study: the Advanced Placement (AP)
and the International Baccalaureate (IB) programs. In addition, the commit-
tee will identify and examine other appropriate curricular and instructional
alternatives to IB and AP. Emphasis will be placed on the mathematics,
physics, chemistry, and biology programs of study.
The committee was charged with answering the following questions:9
1. What does research tell us about the ways in which high school
students learn science and mathematics?
2. To what extent do the AP and IB programs in mathematics and sci-
ence incorporate current knowledge about cognition and learning in their
curricula, instruction, and assessments?
3. To what extent do AP and IB programs encourage teaching approaches
that are consistent with current research on effective instructional practices?
4. How do final assessments generally, and AP and IB assessments in
particular, influence instructional practice?
5. What does research tell us about how teachers learn to teach, and
about effective professional development opportunities?
6. What is the impact of student assessment on the learning process,
and how could student assessment be used to improve student learning in
advanced courses?
7. To what extent do the IB and AP programs reflect the best in current
thinking about content and curriculum for teaching mathematics and sci-
ence?
8. How can the goal of equitable and broad access to programs for
advanced study best be pursued?
9The full text of the committee’s statement of task can be found in Appendix C; only a
subset of the questions to be addressed is presented here.

INTRODUCTION
25
9. How does the interface with higher education affect programs for
advanced study in secondary schools?
In approaching its charge, the committee considered research about
how people learn and gain expertise in a discipline. The committee found
surprisingly sparse empirical data about either the AP or IB programs. For
example, systematic information is lacking about how the AP and IB pro-
grams are actually implemented in U.S. high schools. Systematic data about
the AP and IB examinations are also scarce, as is information about the long-
term effects of AP and IB participation on student learning and achievement.
Because neither independent researchers nor the AP or IB programs have
gathered and published much of the data the committee sought for this
study, it was necessary to use instead available program materials and ex-
pert testimony from program officials and experienced AP and IB teachers.
As this report notes throughout, more studies are sorely needed to address
the many issues and questions raised herein.
The committee was composed of scientist-researchers, secondary teach-
ers having considerable experience with both the AP and IB programs, sci-
entists and educators with expertise in the preparation of teachers and in
issues of access and equity, experts in the cognitive sciences, and educa-
tional leaders. (Biographical sketches of the committee members are pro-
vided in Appendix B.) The committee held seven 2- to 3-day meetings over
a period of 2 years, convened several small-group meetings, and interacted
extensively between meetings. Representatives of the AP and IB programs
and experts on science learning met with the committee. Deans of admis-
sion and chairs of science and mathematics departments in a diverse group
of colleges and universities were surveyed about their uses of AP scores.
These surveys and their results are described in Chapters 2 and 10, this
volume.
Given the differences among the four disciplines under the committee’s
charge, panels of experts in each of the disciplines were convened to advise
the committee. Each panel included at least one representative from each of
the following categories: an expert on pedagogy in the discipline, an accom-
plished university teacher-scholar, a secondary teacher involved in advanced
programs, and an educational researcher with a strong base in the disci-
pline. The panels met for two 2-day sessions during the summer of 2000.
The charge to the panels, the set of questions they were asked to consider,
and a summary of their findings are included in Appendix A. Each of the
panel reports was submitted to a group of independent reviewers for analy-
sis and improvement, using procedures identical to the review process for
all NRC reports. The panels’ analyses and recommendations were an impor-
tant source for the information on which the analyses, conclusions, and

26
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
recommendations of this report are based. The names and institutional affili-
ations of the panel members are provided in the front matter of the report.
To keep the size of this volume reasonable, only summaries of the panels’
findings and recommendations are included in Appendix A; the full text of
their reports is available online for reading or downloading.10
AUDIENCES FOR THE REPORT
This report is intended to be useful to a variety of audiences concerned
with high school science and mathematics curricula in general and advanced
study in particular. Those who determine the shape of advanced study pro-
grams should find many opportunities to improve their programs along the
lines suggested in this report. High school teachers should be interested in
the analysis, which they can use both to develop useful teaching ideas and
to press for changes in their schools that will enhance advanced study op-
portunities and make the programs effective for more of their students. It is
hoped that university faculty members will see the importance of interacting
with their secondary school colleagues and of encouraging deep conceptual
understanding among their students, especially those who might become
teachers. It is also hoped that university administrators will better appreciate
the influence of their policies regarding admission and credit or placement
for advanced study on both high schools and their students. Middle school
and elementary school teachers should attain a better understanding of what
they can do to prepare their students for advanced study at a later time and,
in so doing, to enhance academic opportunities for all students. The report
should be of value as well to policymakers and administrators at both the K–
12 and university levels, who have a vital role to play in promoting the
practices that research has shown to be effective and in providing the re-
sources their teachers need to make advanced study successful for larger
numbers of students. Finally, this report is intended to assist parents in being
informed advocates for educational quality in science and mathematics.
OVERVIEW AND STRUCTURE OF THE REPORT
Chapter 2 provides essential background for this report, including the
policy context of advanced study, the roles of middle schools and high
schools in preparing students for these programs, and problems related to
the supply of qualified teachers. It also addresses issues of equity and access
to advanced study programs, factors that affect the success of students who
enroll in advanced study, and the interface of secondary advanced study
10At www.nap.edu/catalog/10129.html/.

INTRODUCTION
27
with colleges and universities. Chapters 3 and 4 introduce the AP and IB
programs in some detail, while Chapter 5 provides a brief overview of some
alternative advanced study programs. Chapter 6 summarizes the results of
research on human learning that are critical for the present analysis. Chapter
7 extends these findings to the design of curriculum, instruction, assessment,
and professional development as they relate to advanced study.
The report next turns to a detailed analysis of programs for advanced
study, an analysis that is influenced strongly by the panel reports in the four
individual disciplines. Chapter 8 presents an analysis of the programs from
the perspective of research on learning, while Chapter 9 considers them
from the perspective of curriculum, instruction, assessment, and professional
development of teachers. Chapter 10 examines appropriate and inappropri-
ate uses of these programs and their assessments of students. Finally, Chap-
ter 11 presents the committee’s recommendations for change.

28
2
Context of Advanced Study
There are approximately 36,0001 public and private high schools in the
United States (National Center for Education Statistics [NCES], 2001a). As a
result of the U.S. tradition of local control of education, these schools vary
widely along many dimensions, such as size, availability of facilities and
resources, student and teacher characteristics, staffing levels, teacher prepa-
ration and qualifications, and stated goals and missions. Public, private, and
parochial schools set their own educational standards2 and are accountable
to different oversight agencies. They implement widely varying curricula
and administer different assessments, which are selected by their districts’ or
states’ boards of education or boards of trustees. Local school boards orga-
nize their schools and implement policies related to ability grouping, course
offerings, and staffing patterns in ways that reflect their differing missions,
educational goals, and local political concerns and priorities. Thus, “high
school” in the United States must be understood as a diverse array of institu-
tions in which students, even those attending the same school, may have
vastly differing opportunities and experiences, depending on their course of
study.
Students’ school experiences and academic achievement are most af-
fected by the overall culture and atmosphere of their school, the organiza-
tion and content of their school curriculum, and the training and qualifica-
tions of the teaching force they encounter during the course of their educa-
tional career (NCES, 2000b). It has been consistently demonstrated that dis-
parities among schools along these dimensions have a profound effect on
students’ abilities to prepare for and fully participate in advanced study op-
portunities.
1This figure excludes special education, alternative, and other schools not classified by
grade span.
2Public school standards are usually established by local boards of education, which fol-
low polices established by state boards of education.

CONTEXT OF ADVANCED STUDY
29
Advanced study does not exist in isolation. As advanced study programs
are currently structured in the United States, they have wide-ranging effects
on the curricula, teachers, and students in the schools where they are of-
fered. In turn, they are affected by political, educational, and social contexts
that shape their implementation in schools. This chapter reviews the policy
context of advanced study (including its financing), its educational context
(including student preparation for advanced study in both middle and high
school and teacher preparation), disparities in opportunities for different
groups of students to pursue and succeed in advanced study, and the con-
nections between advanced study and higher education.
POLICY CONTEXT
Immediately following the release of A Nation at Risk by the National
Commission on Excellence in Education (1983), intense public interest was
generated in improving the achievement of U.S. secondary school students
by reforming and restructuring U.S. high schools. Although most states and
school districts have adopted the commission’s recommendations for strength-
ening state and local high school graduation requirements,3 U.S. high schools
still face intense criticism from those involved in higher education,
policymakers, education reformers, and the public for continuing to gradu-
ate significant numbers of students who are neither well prepared for col-
lege nor able to enter the workplace with the technological and problem-
solving skills demanded by the new economy (American Federation of Teach-
ers [AFT], 1999; Kaufman, Bradby, and Teitelbaum, 2000; National Associa-
tion of Secondary School Principals [NASSP], 1996; National Commission on
the High School Senior Year [NCHSSY], 2001a, 2001b; Powell, Farrar, and
Cohen, 1985; Sizer, 1992).
High schools may not be failing to the degree that some of these reports
indicate (see for example, Berliner and Biddle, 1996). However, the Math-
ematics and Science Report Cards of the National Assessment of Educational
Progress (NAEP)4 and data gathered from state education testing and the
SAT I and II suggest that the schools are doing a less than stellar job in
challenging all students to achieve at the same high levels.
In 1999 Richard Riley, then U.S. Secretary of Education, declared it was
time to change U.S. high schools so they would be better aligned with the
3The Five New Basics recommended by the commission included 4 years of English; 3
years of mathematics; 3 years of science; 3 years of social studies; one-half year of computer
science; and, for the college-bound, 2 years of foreign language.
4Available at http://www.nces.ed.gov/nationsreportcard/ (February 10, 2002).

30
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
demands and needs of modern times.5 The needed changes, according to
Riley, must include high expectations for all students, rigorous curricula,
support for students who need help in meeting higher standards, an educa-
tional structure that is flexible in meeting students’ needs, and well-prepared
teachers who have adequate opportunities for professional development
and the time to work together in achieving student and school goals. In light
of all of the recent criticism leveled at high schools, many policymakers and
educators have turned to AP6 and IB to improve their academic programs
(see for example, The National Education Goals Panel, Promising Practices,
Goal 3,7 and legislation in Virginia8 and California9). Rod Paige, current U.S.
Secretary of Education, has continued the Department of Education’s sup-
port for AP in 2001–2002 by providing $6.5 million in grants to 18 states, the
District of Columbia, and Guam so that thousands of students from low-
income backgrounds can prepare for and take AP examinations.10 Several
states also have adopted policies to support IB that are similar to those
for AP.
In the view of many educators and policymakers, AP and IB comple-
ment the nation’s decentralized system of educational governance and the
different approaches that states and districts have adopted with regard to
academic standards, curriculum, and instruction. That is, AP and IB are na-
tional programs that are controlled locally. Both programs provide a basic
structure, quality standards, and nationally recognized external measures of
student achievement, but states and individual schools can decide which
students are able to take the courses, who is qualified to teach them, and
how the courses will be taught.
At least 26 states provide legislative support to AP programs in their
schools by subsidizing examination fees or costs for teacher education, pro-
5Riley, 1999, available at www.ed.gov/Speeches/09-1999/990915.html (February 11, 2002).
6Secretary Riley called on all schools to add one AP course to their curricular offerings for
each of the next 10 years (ending in 2010) so that every student in every high school in the
United States could have access to at least ten AP courses. The Federal AP Incentive Act (1999)
provided funds to help low-income students pay the fees for AP examinations.
7The National Education Goals Panel uses an increase in the number of AP examinations
receiving a grade of 3 or higher per 1,000 students in grades 11 and 12 to recognize schools
with promising practices (http://www.negp.gov [February 11, 2002]).
8Virginia’s Board of Education established an accountability system that requires every
school division in the Commonwealth to offer at least two AP courses (www.pen.k12.va.us
[February 11, 2002]).
9Spending $20.5 million to make at least one AP class available for every high school
student by the fall of 2000, although at first this might mean the students’ going to a different
location or watching the class on closed-circuit television (http://www.cisco.com/warp/public/
779/govtaffs/people/issues/educational_reform.html [November 26, 2001]).
10Additional information about this support is available at http://www.ed.gov/PressReleases/
10-2001/10012001b.html (October 26, 2001).

CONTEXT OF ADVANCED STUDY
31
viding funds for materials and supplies for AP courses, offering incentives
for initiating AP courses or hosting training sessions, encouraging or man-
dating publicly funded colleges and universities to accept AP credit, and/or
supporting professional development opportunities. State policies related to
IB are less well established.11
For many years, policymakers have focused on making advanced-level
courses available to all students who are interested in participating. That
goal has not yet been accomplished, but educators and policymakers have
increased their efforts to provide many more students with equitable oppor-
tunities to learn and succeed in these courses. As discussed later in this
chapter, the success of these efforts will depend on whether educational
leaders assign top priority to increasing the number of underrepresented
minority students who both are enrolled in advanced study and achieve at
high levels.
The Role and Influence of Standards and Accountability
Reform is an ongoing and recurring theme in American education. The
latest wave of educational reform, highlighted by calls for standards and
accountability, began a little more than a decade ago. These efforts, which
have garnered the broad-based support of education policymakers, busi-
ness leaders, many educators, and the public, rest on three basic tenets: (1)
all students should be held to the same high standards for learning; (2) high
standards should serve as a basis for systems of assessment that can be used
for the purpose of accountability; and (3) consequences should be imposed
on schools, teachers, and sometimes students when students do not meet
the established standards (Linn, 2000).
In the early 1990s, attempts at developing national standards for several
subject areas met with varying degrees of success. The American Association
for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) published Benchmarks for Science
Literacy (1993), which contains science content standards based on a previ-
ous publication, Science for All Americans (AAAS, 1989). These publications
outlined what the citizens of the United States should know about science.
In 1996, the National Research Council (NRC) published the National Sci-
ence Education Standards (NSES), a consensus document based on input
from hundreds of scientists, science educators, and professional societies.
The NSES relate to science content, teaching, teacher development, assess-
ment, and the infrastructure required to support effective science education.
11The committee noted that Florida has instituted a state scholarship program that allows
Florida students who graduate with an IB diploma to attend any state university for free. Cali-
fornia recently enacted legislation that grants sophomore standing in college to students who
earn an IB diploma in high school.

32
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
Both documents call for fundamentally different approaches to teaching and
learning science for students in grades K–12, with emphasis on inquiry and
in-depth study of fewer topics than was characteristic of most science edu-
cation programs at the time.
In mathematics, the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics (NCTM)
has taken the lead in developing content standards for grades K–12 (NCTM,
1989, 2000). Like their counterparts in science, the national mathematics
standards emphasize teaching and learning concepts and helping students
understand mathematics much more deeply. Both the national science and
mathematics standards leave decisions about specific curriculum to the dis-
cretion of the teacher, school, or district.
Based in part on these efforts, during the past decade 49 states and the
District of Columbia have established statewide academic standards for what
students should know and be able to do in at least some subjects; many
states also have developed curriculum frameworks to support their stan-
dards. All 50 states currently test how well their students are learning, and 27
states hold schools accountable for results (Education Week, 2001).
This expectation for academic standards and measuring of student
achievement has again assumed national prominence with the passage in
January 2002 of the No Child Left Behind Act, which requires all states to test
children in reading and mathematics every year while they are in grades 3–
8. National expectations for assessing science achievement will begin in the
2007–2008 school year. Schools will be held accountable for the results.
The question now, after a decade of standards-based reform, is whether
this approach achieves the results envisioned by policymakers and educa-
tors. Some contend that the assessments being used to measure achieve-
ment are narrowing the curriculum and discouraging high-quality instruc-
tional practices. These critics contend that greater gains in learning would
occur if policymakers and educational decision makers focused more on
equity in educational funding, teacher quality, and professional develop-
ment, and less on testing. Supporters of standards-based reform point out
that test scores are on the rise in a number of districts, including those that
have shown low achievement in the past, and that a focus on accountability
has forced teachers and schools to attend to the learning and achievement
of all students, not just those at the top.
The AP and IB programs complement standards-based reform efforts at
the advanced level. Both programs provide content-rich curricula and na-
tionally recognized external measures of student achievement, but can be
implemented by states and individual schools in ways that conform to local
standards and link with other curricular offerings.

CONTEXT OF ADVANCED STUDY
33
Financing Advanced Study Programs at the Local Level
Implementing, expanding, and supporting high-quality advanced study
programs in science and mathematics requires resources that some school
districts have difficulty providing. Such is the case particularly in rural areas
and urban school districts that are supported by a limited property tax base
and serve a large number of high-poverty or minority students. There is
substantial variation in available fiscal resources across states, as well as
among districts within states. For example, Rubenstein (1998) found that
within some districts, schools with higher levels of student poverty some-
times receive lower allocations of both money and other educational re-
sources than more affluent schools within the same district.12
Establishing and supporting high-quality advanced study programs also
means that school districts must allocate sufficient resources for teacher pro-
fessional development, instructional resources, and adequate student prepa-
ration at the middle school level. Indeed, disparities in school funding can
exacerbate the already low level of access to advanced study courses for
students who reside in high-poverty localities. Some states, such as Indiana,
South Carolina, California, and Texas, have implemented state funding ini-
tiatives to ensure that advanced study opportunities will be equitably distrib-
uted across all of the states’ schools and school districts.
Teacher Qualifications, Certification, and Challenges
In the quest for greater student achievement, state governments have
undertaken reforms that have as their goal better teaching and learning for
all students (Council of Chief State School Officers [CCSSO], 1998). Despite
these reforms and the hard work of school and school district personnel,
gaps still exist between desired and actual student achievement. These gaps
can be attributed largely to disparities in the qualifications and distribution
of the teacher workforce (Darling-Hammond, 2000).
Teaching quality matters. Numerous studies of the effects of teachers on
student achievement have revealed that the availability and effectiveness of
qualified teachers are strong contributors to observed variances in student
learning (Jordan, Mendro, and Weerasinghe, 1997; Sanders and Rivers, 1996;
Wright, Horn, and Sanders, 1997). There is broad consensus that students
learn more from teachers with strong academic skills than from those with
12Two reports by the NRC’s Committee on Education Finance (NRC, 1999a, 1999c) exam-
ine the link between school finance and student achievement and educational attainment.
Readers interested in issues of school finance as they relate to student achievement are encour-
aged to review these reports.

34
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
weaker academic skills (see for example, Ballou, 1996; Ferguson and Ladd,
1996; Hanushek, 1996). Further, the effects of teachers on student learning
appear to be additive and cumulative, and affected students may not be able
to compensate for being taught by an unqualified teacher (NCES, 2000b).
Results of a recent survey of secondary school teachers, students, school
administrators, and parents also indicate that students who experience top-
quality teaching are more likely than those who experience poor teaching to
have high expectations for their futures (Markow, Fauth, and Gravitch, 2001).
Data drawn from the Fast Response Survey System (as cited in NCES,
2000b) show that the highest-poverty schools and those with the greatest
concentrations of minority students have nearly twice the proportion of in-
experienced teachers as schools with the lowest poverty levels and concen-
trations of minority students (20 versus 11 percent). Also troubling are stud-
ies showing evidence of strong bias in the assignment of students to teach-
ers of different levels of effectiveness (Jordan et al., 1997). For example,
African American students are nearly twice as likely to be assigned to the
most ineffective teachers and half as likely to be assigned to the most effec-
tive teachers as white or Asian students (Sanders and Rivers, 1996). It also
should be noted that new teachers, who increasingly are expected to have
credentials in specific subject areas, leave high-poverty schools at a rate far
greater than teachers in affluent suburban schools (NCES, 2000b).
High turnover rates and inexperienced teachers not only have an effect
on student learning, but also deprive new teachers of mentors. A high pro-
portion of experienced colleagues in a school can provide strong resources
for advice and guidance to new teachers, as well as offer opportunities for
experienced teachers to discuss their practices and learn from the experi-
ences of others.
Darling-Hammond, Wise, and Klein (1999) discuss what is required of
teachers if the gap in student achievement is to be closed and the goals of
reform are to be met:
The new mission for education requires substantially more knowledge and
radically different skills for teachers . . . . In order to create bridges be-
tween common, challenging curriculum goals and individual learners’ ex-
periences and needs, teachers must understand cognition and the many
different pathways to learning. They must understand child development
and pedagogy as well as the structure of subject areas and a variety of
alternatives for assessing learning . . . teachers must be prepared to ad-
dress the substantial diversity in the experience children bring with them to
school—the wide range of languages, cultures, exceptionalities, learning
styles, talents and intelligences that in turn [require] an equally rich and
varied repertoire of teaching strategies. (p. 2)

CONTEXT OF ADVANCED STUDY
35
Teacher Certification
All 50 states and the District of Columbia require public school teachers
to be licensed. Requirements for regular licenses vary by state. However, all
states require a bachelor’s degree with a minimum grade point average,
completion of an approved teacher-training program with a prescribed number
of subject and education credits, and supervised practice teaching. One-
third of the states currently require training in the use of information tech-
nology as part of the teacher certification process. Other states require teachers
to obtain a master’s degree in education, which involves at least a year of
additional coursework after earning a bachelor’s degree with a major in a
subject other than education.
Many states offer alternative teacher licensure programs for those who
have a bachelor’s degree in the subject they will teach, but lack the educa-
tion courses required for a regular license. Such programs were originally
designed to ease teacher shortages in certain subjects, such as mathematics
and science. Under other programs, states may issue emergency licenses to
individuals who do not meet requirements for a regular license when schools
cannot attract enough qualified teachers to fill positions. No states require
special licensing for advanced study teachers. Further, the committee did not
identify any colleges or universities that currently offer teacher preparation
programs specifically designed for prospective teachers of advanced study.13
Teacher Shortages
Impending teacher shortages and the concomitant need to educate and
retain more qualified teachers to staff the nation’s schools have been pre-
dominant legislative and policy themes. Recently, some education policy
experts have stated that the problem is more the distribution of qualified
teachers than a teacher shortage. For example, these experts say that while
there is a teacher shortage in secondary and middle schools, there is no such
shortage in elementary schools; while there is a strong need for more single-
subject teachers, especially in mathematics, physical science, special educa-
tion, and bilingual education, there is no shortage of multisubject teachers or
teachers of English or social studies; and while fast-growing cities in the
South and dense urban areas will have a need for more teachers, suburban
and more affluent schools will experience few shortages (Bureau of Labor
Statistics, 1999; Eubanks, 1996; Ingersoll, 1999).
13According to Education Week (2001), the College Board is experimenting with develop-
ing a three-credit course colleges can offer to prospective AP teachers.

36
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
The committee takes the position that qualified teachers are the back-
bone of both high-quality advanced study programs and the gateway courses
leading to advanced study. Consequently, teacher shortages in mathematics
and science and the dearth of teachers willing to teach in high-poverty and
rural areas have implications for both access to and the quantity and the
quality of advanced study programs available to students across the country.
Education policy experts agree with this appraisal and suggest that govern-
ment agencies, colleges and universities, and school districts initiate and
support efforts to attract and retain qualified teachers in specific subjects and
for particular geographic regions (National Commission on Mathematics and
Science Teaching for the 21st Century, 2000; National Commission on Teaching
and America’s Future [NCTAF], 1996; NRC, 2000a).
Attracting the number of new teachers needed to the profession and
retaining current teachers is a major challenge for the nation. In addition,
given the challenges teachers face in the classroom (as discussed later in this
chapter), the United States has not been willing to compensate teachers at
levels comparable to those of people in other professions with similar levels
of education, training, and expertise. The AFT reports that beginning teach-
ers with a bachelor’s degree earned an average of $25,700 in the 1997–1998
school year; those with a master’s degree earned slightly more. The esti-
mated average salary of all public elementary and secondary school teachers
during the 1998–1999 school year was $40,574 (AFT, 2001). This salary is
considerably less than that earned by other white-collar professionals (see
Table 2-1).
EDUCATIONAL CONTEXT
Preparing for Advanced Study: Middle Schools
Academic preparation for advanced study begins in middle school. How-
ever, middle schools face a number of factors that compromise their ability
to impart to as many students as possible the desire and preparation neces-
sary to aspire to advanced study.
TABLE 2-1
Trends in Teacher Salaries Compared with Average Annual Salaries of
Selected White-Collar Occupations, 1999
Buyer/
Computer
Contract
Systems
Full Prof.
Assistant Prof.
Accountant
Specialist
Attorney
Analyst
Engineer
Public
Public
Teacher
III
III
III
III
IV
Doctoral
Comprehensive
$40,574
$49,257
$57,392
$69,104
$66,782
$68,294
$78,830
$41,940
SOURCE: Adapted from http://www.aft.org/research/survey99/tables/tableII-5.html (January 29, 2002).

CONTEXT OF ADVANCED STUDY
37
Educators, policymakers, and researchers have recently begun to focus
considerable attention on middle-level education because of several widely
held concerns. Specific concerns include a lack of focus on core academic
courses; teachers without the appropriate training to teach young adoles-
cents, especially those with special needs who are placed in general class-
rooms; appropriate approaches to teaching challenging academic material
to students in this age group; and a much greater emphasis than in primary
schools on ability grouping, which restricts high-poverty and minority stu-
dents’ access to challenging curricula and high-quality instruction and effec-
tively precludes many of these students from participating in advanced study
in high school (NCES, 2000a).
Middle School Mathematics and Science
The mathematics and science curricula for middle school students vary
widely both within and among states (CCSSO, 1999). In mathematics, two-
thirds of the states report that fewer than half of their students are in the
traditional grade 8 mathematics curriculum by the time they reach that grade;
the majority are enrolled in algebra-based mathematics (CCSSO, 1999). States
are moving toward providing eighth-grade students with greater exposure
to algebra topics, whether in full-fledged Algebra I or in pre-algebra courses.
However, McKnight et al. (1987), Porter, Kirst, Osthoff, Smithson, and
Schneider (1993), and Shaughnessy (1998) all found that the course titles
provide only a rough indication of the content students actually receive.
In science, most seventh-grade students are studying life sciences or a
biology-based curriculum, while most eighth-grade students are focusing on
a mix of earth science and physical science (Schmidt, McKnight, Cogan,
Jakewerth, and Hourang, 1999). CCSSO reports that a growing proportion of
middle schools are instituting integrated or coordinated science programs.
Integrated science programs, which intentionally blur the disciplinary lines
among biology, chemistry, earth science, and physics, treat science as an
integrated whole, based on the position that science learning during the
middle school years should not be separated by discipline. Coordinated
science curricula treat the disciplines of biology, chemistry, physics, and
earth science individually, for perhaps 9 weeks each, and focus on the
overarching ideas in science that can be studied in terms of each discipline
rather than focusing on facts and details, as is more typical of traditional
courses in these subjects. Finding qualified instructors for integrated and
coordinated middle school science courses is often difficult because many
science teachers at this level have not been prepared adequately in even
one area of science.
Schmidt, Finch, and Faulkner (1992) analyzed a random sample of eighth-
grade state curriculum guides in mathematics and science and concluded

38
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
that the curricula lacked focus, covered too many topics, were repetitious
from grade to grade, and were implemented inconsistently across schools
and classrooms, resulting in highly uneven exposure to a range of important
curricular topics. This lack of rigor and coherence can have enduring long-
term consequences for students, whether or not they decide to pursue ad-
vanced study later in high school.
If middle school is one of the gateways to advanced study (the other
being introductory high school courses), it stands to reason that middle
school and high school mathematics and science teachers should have struc-
tured opportunities to plan together and make decisions about the content
and focus of the science and mathematics curricula for grades 7–12. How-
ever, a majority of high school teachers never interact with their peers from
elementary and middle schools on the crucial issue of curricular alignment.14
Fewer than 30 percent of middle school teachers report having had any
contact with high school teachers in their discipline with regard to curricu-
lum structure, content, or design (NCHSSY, 2001a, p.16).
Even where school districts encourage and facilitate such vertical inte-
gration, however, their efforts can be compromised by the fact that today’s
students are far more mobile than ever before. The transience of the U.S.
population will continue to confound efforts to provide well-defined aca-
demic pathways through the various grade levels that would enable more
students to take advantage of advanced studies in high school.
Challenges of Middle School Teaching
A great deal of research conducted over the past 15 years has led to the
conclusion that “in-field” teachers (those holding certification in the subject
area to which they are assigned) not only know more content than their
“out-of-field” colleagues, but also are better able to communicate that knowl-
edge to students in their classrooms (Darling-Hammond, 2000). However,
mathematics and science teachers in middle schools are far more likely to be
teaching mathematics or science classes without certification in the subject
area as compared with high school teachers (NCES, 2000b). This lack of
certification in specific subjects can have profound effects on preparing middle
school students for higher-level or advanced work in high school.
14Through its Vertical Teams Initiative, the College Board provides a vehicle for cross-grade
contact (see Chapter 3, this volume). In the Vertical Teams approach, teachers from the middle
school level up through AP work with one another to ensure that students are prepared to
participate successfully at the advanced level by aligning curricula and developing content-
specific teaching strategies.

CONTEXT OF ADVANCED STUDY
39
Ability Grouping in Mathematics
Schmidt et al. (1999) note that 82 percent of 13-year-olds in the United
States are in schools offering two or more differently titled mathematics
classes for students at the same grade level, each with different expectations
for student learning. These students from different middle-grade courses
sometimes funnel into the same high school courses, leading to a lack of
continuity in their mathematics education. Of even greater concern is that
this early mathematics placement contributes to sorting students into differ-
ent “pipelines,” some of which lead away from rigorous academic courses
and programs. As noted below in the discussion of disparities in opportuni-
ties to pursue and succeed in advanced study, this problem is compounded
for minority students and those of low socioeconomic status.
Early ability grouping at the middle school level has the most pronounced
effect in mathematics because of the cumulative and sequential nature of the
curriculum. Once students are placed in a mathematics sequence, it is very
difficult for them to move to a more advanced sequence without doubling
up (taking two mathematics courses during the same year) or attending
summer school for an intensive and fast-paced version of a typical yearlong
course. Summer school courses, because they are compressed, often do not
provide a solid foundation of understanding for further study (see the report
of the mathematics panel).
Several recent reports indicate that the process of determining which
students will take advanced courses in high school begins with their place-
ment in the first algebra course (Gamoran, 1987; Horn, Nunez, and Bobbitt,
2000; NCHSSY, 2001a).15 Once considered a ninth-grade course, algebra is
becoming an eighth-grade option in increasing numbers of school districts,16
and some districts offer it to a small number of seventh graders.17
Placement in algebra is based most often on the results of standardized
tests, teacher recommendations, and parental requests. It is not uncommon,
however, for parental requests to take precedence over test scores. Studies
have shown that, although counselors and school administrators use test
scores or current mathematics placement to bar low-income students from
high-level courses, they permit middle-class students with similar qualifica-
tions to enroll when parents intervene on their children’s behalf (Orfield and
15Some research indicates that ability grouping begins much earlier than middle school,
perhaps even as early as elementary school.
16In 1998, 18 percent of U.S. eighth-graders were enrolled in Algebra 1.
17This shift is beginning to place great strain on middle schools, as well as many of the
teachers in those schools who may not have received appropriate preparation or professional
development for teaching this subject well to younger students (NRC, 1998, 2000a).

40
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
Paul, 1995; Paul, 1995; Romo and Falbo, 1996), even though parents some-
times push for class options for which their children may not be prepared or
ready.
While mathematics is often the subject in which students initially are
separated by perceived ability, this division occurs throughout the curricu-
lum. Because this system of matching students to courses begins even be-
fore high school, many low-income and minority students (as well as other
students who have been inappropriately accelerated) enter high school un-
prepared for demanding science and mathematics courses.
During the last two decades, attempts have been made to dismantle
formal “tracking” systems for students. Few principals today would admit to
tracking in their schools. However, the differentiation of students by ability
that tracking was intended to address persists in the form of nonacademic
courses and varying levels of specific academic courses (such as Algebra 1,
Honors Algebra 1, Algebra 1: Parts 1 and 2, Basic Algebra, Introduction to
Algebra, Business Algebra [Lucas, 1999; Powell et al., 1985]), coupled with
allowing students to choose which course or series of courses to take.
Preparing for Advanced Study: High School
Curriculum
The curriculum of most high schools is organized around subject areas:
English, mathematics, science, social studies, and fine and performing arts.
Typically, academic courses are offered at multiple levels of difficulty, and
students are grouped for instruction on the basis of earlier performance,
perceived ability, student persistence, or parental request. In most compre-
hensive high schools, there are fairly distinct curricula for those who are
college bound and those who are not. Even among those headed for col-
lege, decisions are made continually about whether a particular student should
take the more rigorous AP and honors courses or the traditional academic
versions of those courses. These different “college preparatory” classes are
often characterized by different grading scales18 and degrees of depth. Many
18In some schools, the four-point grade-point average (GPA) system has been replaced by
a weighted system. In a weighted system, final letter grades earned in honors or advanced
courses are assigned a higher number of points to be used in the calculation of GPAs. For
instance, using a four-point system, A = 4, B = 3, C = 2, and D = 1, whereas in one type of
weighted system, A = 4.5, B = 3.5, C = 2.5, and D = 1.5. Thus, grades earned in honors or
advanced courses help increase students’ GPAs. Weighted grades were first devised to entice
students to take more-rigorous classes without fear of hurting their class rank or GPA. Some
colleges and universities readjust these weighted GPAs to their own systems when making
decisions about which students to admit. There are many variations on this formula. Schools
often devise a system that reflects their unique beliefs and goals.

CONTEXT OF ADVANCED STUDY
41
students describe these alternative pathways as differing in tone and pur-
pose, with the higher-level classes drawing more serious students who are
more likely to stay on task (NCHSSY, 2001a; Office of Educational Research
and Improvement [OERI], 1999).
Most comprehensive U.S. high schools offer a vast array of courses, and
students are allowed to choose freely among them. This diversification and
differentiation of curriculum is intended to address the differing abilities,
interests, and preparation of the student body. However, diversification and
freedom of choice also allow many students to choose poorly and conse-
quently to leave school underprepared for either college or work (AFT,
2001; Frome, 2001; NCHSSY, 2001a).19 More-rigorous state high school gradu-
ation requirements have helped address these concerns, but the continuing
availability of many low-level academic courses and their effects on stu-
dents’ course-taking patterns and achievement remain a significant problem
for students, schools, higher education, and prospective employers.
While most high schools organize their curriculum as described above,
others take a different approach, offering a core curriculum. Such a set of
course offerings is quite narrowly focused and composed mainly of aca-
demic courses, and the students have very few choices among them. Elec-
tives are typically academically oriented courses. A student is more likely to
take academic courses if he or she is assigned to them, if enrolling in such
courses is considered the norm among students at a school, or if there are
few (or no) undemanding courses available. This core curriculum approach
is one way schools might try to address disparities in course-taking patterns
among students; research on other promising practices is greatly needed.
Lee and colleagues have evaluated the relative efficacy of the above
alternative curriculum structures, defined as “differentiated” and “constrained,”
respectively, in both public and Catholic schools (Lee, 2001; Lee, Burkam,
Chow-Hoy, Smerdon, and Geverdt, 1998; Lee, Croninger, and Smith, 1997).20
Using two different nationally representative longitudinal datasets and mul-
tilevel analysis methods, they evaluated the effects of curriculum structure
and other student- and school-related variables on two outcomes: (1) learn-
ing in mathematics during the high school years and (2) distribution of learning
in a school according to students’ social class. The studies demonstrated that
19Although almost 70 percent of high school graduates now go on to college, only about
28 percent of them complete a bachelor’s degree, and only 8 percent complete an associate’s
degree by the time they reach age 28 (NCES, 2001a). Of the high school graduates who go to
college, approximately 30 percent need to take a remedial course in basic subjects such as
English and algebra before they can begin college coursework (Kirst, 2000).
20The constrained curriculum model is more common in Catholic than in public schools in
the United States (Bryk, Lee, and Holland, 1993; Lee, 2001; Lee and Bryk, 1989).

42
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
the constrained curriculum was both more effective (i.e., it induced higher
levels of learning among all students in the school) and more equitable (i.e.,
socioeconomic status was less strongly correlated with learning in schools
with a constrained curriculum). Indeed, holding all students to the same
high standards and eliminating low-level academic courses is recommended
by many organizations, including the NASSP (1996), the Southern Regional
Education Board (Bottoms, 1998; Kaufman et al., 2000), the AFT (2000), the
NCHSSY (2001a, 2001b), and the American Youth Policy Forum (2000).
A constrained curriculum does not imply an absence of differentiation
among students. Rather, differentiation in constrained curricula is related to
the pace at which students progress through the curriculum, not the content
of the courses. As a result, some students may graduate from high school
having completed calculus, while others may take longer to master algebra
or geometry and graduate having completed only Algebra II. It is important
to reiterate that both the path and the content of the courses along the path
are the same, or nearly so, for all students, regardless of their future educa-
tional plans or perceived abilities (an exception might be made for classes
designed to meet the needs of special education students). What differs is
the time and support students need to move along the path and how far
they progress. To be successful, some students will require additional aca-
demic support, such as “double dosing” (taking the same course over more
than one class period). Such students may have to skip some other activity
in their school day to do so, but after-school and Saturday academic classes,
tutoring, and summer “bridge” classes can help them develop academic
competencies (e.g., analytic reading and writing) or give them a head start
on the curriculum they will be expected to learn should they pursue ad-
vanced coursework. The idea is that remediation is reduced as students
demonstrate greater learning and achievement. Additionally, some school
districts, understanding that students differ in the amount of time they may
need to complete high school graduation requirements when expectations
are high, have opted to allow their students to complete high school in 3, 4,
or 5 years in accordance with individual achievement and educational needs
(see, e.g., Johnston, 2000). This flexibility is consistent with recommenda-
tions made by the American Youth Policy Forum (2000).
High School Mathematics and Science
Many states have set 3 years of high school mathematics as a require-
ment for high school graduation, following the recommendation of the Na-
tional Commission on Excellence in Education (1983) (Education Week, 2000).
Research on patterns of student achievement in mathematics and science
demonstrates that the amount of time spent in instruction and the number

CONTEXT OF ADVANCED STUDY
43
and level of courses taken are strongly related to achievement (Adelman,
1999; Jones, Davenport, Bryson, Bekhuis, and Zwick, 1986; Jones, Mullis,
Raizen, Weiss, and Weston, 1992).
The typical progression of courses in high school mathematics leading
to calculus begins with Algebra I and is followed (although not always in
this order) by geometry, Algebra II, trigonometry, analysis or precalculus,
and calculus.21 Table 2-2 indicates the number of students taking higher-
level mathematics classes in 1998 and the changes in the percentage of
students doing so between 1990 and 1998.
National consensus standards for mathematics and science have been
available for the past decade (American Association for the Advancement of
Science [AAAS], 1993; NCTM, 1989, 2000; NRC, 1996) and frequently have
served to guide individual states in developing their own standards, curricu-
lum frameworks, and assessments to improve learning in these subjects. In
many states, however, standards in mathematics and science have been de-
veloped in the context of local political considerations and needs rather than
with an eye to regional or national cooperation and consensus, or remain
enmeshed in debates about the appropriate ways in which students should
learn these subjects. Thus, expectations for what students should know and
be able to do vary greatly among states (Gandal, 1997).
It should be noted that instructional time and course taking in math-
ematics and science vary widely among U.S. schools. Such variation relates
to ability (Benbow and Stanley, 1982; Benbow and Minor, 1986), but also is
correlated with students’ socioeconomic status (Goodlad, 1984; Horn, Hafner,
and Owings, 1992; Lee, Bryk, and Smith, 1993; McKnight et al., 1987; Oakes,
1990). While the data reported in Table 2-2 for mathematics and in Table 2-
3 for science do not reveal differences in course taking among students of
different racial and ethnic groups, such is the case primarily because many
21There are numerous remedial and basic mathematics courses below Algebra I, and some
10 percent of public high school graduates in 1998 never progressed beyond them (NCES,
1998).
TABLE 2-2
Percentage of All High School Students Taking Higher-Level Mathematics
Courses by Graduation, 1998 and Change 1990 to 1998
Geometry or Integrated
Algebra 2 or Integrated
Trigonometry or
Calculus or
Mathematics 2
Mathematics 3
Precalculus
AP Calculus
% Change
% Change
% Change
% Change
1998
1990 to 1998
1998
1990 to 1998
1998
1990 to 1998
1998
1990 to 1998
72%
+11%
63%
+14%
39%
+10%
12%
+3%
SOURCE: Adapted from CCSSO (1999).

44
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
states do not report data in this fashion. Of the 13 states that do report
mathematics enrollment by race/ethnicity, enrollment of African American
and Hispanic students in higher-level mathematics courses lagged behind
that of whites and Asians in the same courses in all cases.
Most state high school graduation requirements include the completion
of at least 2 years of science (Education Week, 2000), although college-
bound students traditionally take more. These students usually take science
in the sequence of biology, chemistry, and physics, with some taking earth
science before biology. Physics is the least frequently selected science, often
because most students have completed their graduation requirements in
science by the junior year.
Table 2-3 indicates the number of high school students who had taken a
specific science course by the time they graduated in 1998 and the changes
in the percentages of students in those courses between 1990 and 1998.
Although the increases in enrollment in upper-level science courses are not
as dramatic as those for higher-level courses in mathematics, Table 2-3 indi-
cates that more students now enroll in chemistry and physics. Recently,
there has been an effort to change the order in which science courses are
taught, with physics serving as the introduction to the science course se-
quence (Roy, 2001). Should this effort gain momentum, the numbers of
students who graduate with a credit in physics could rise dramatically dur-
ing the next decade.
Several states have recently implemented integrated or coordinated sci-
ence programs for ninth- or ninth- and tenth-grade students. Students leav-
ing an integrated or coordinated science program often go on to more spe-
cialized or advanced science courses during their last 2 years of high school
(CCSSO, 1999). This move toward integrating science during the first 2 years
also may account for the small decrease in the number of students who have
taken biology, since that course is typically offered to ninth or tenth graders.
Challenges of High School Teaching
There are approximately 1.4 million teachers of grades 9–12. These sec-
ondary school teachers see themselves primarily as subject area specialists.
TABLE 2-3
Percentage of All High School Students Taking Higher-Level Science Courses
by Graduation, 1998 and Change 1990 to 1998
Biology
Chemistry
Physics
1998
% Change 1990 to 1998
1998
% Change 1990 to 1998
1998
% Change 1990 to 1998
92%
-3
54%
+9%
24%
+4%
SOURCE: Adapted from CCSSO (1999).

CONTEXT OF ADVANCED STUDY
45
In general, high school teachers are members of subject-based departments
that operate quasi-independently within a high school. Most academic de-
partments are directed by department chairs, who make decisions about
curriculum, instructional materials, textbooks, and teaching assignments.
Secondary school teachers typically are responsible for five periods of
instruction per day.22 Teaching responsibilities for high school teachers gen-
erally exceed 100 students and in some districts reach nearly 175 students.
With such high enrollments, it is difficult for many high school teachers to
know their students well or to adjust pedagogy to meet individual students’
needs, particularly when there are special needs. Within the average school
day, most high school teachers have 13 minutes of instructional planning
time for every assigned teaching hour, and consequently have little opportu-
nity to work with colleagues on curricular or instructional planning (Darling-
Hammond, 1999b; NCTAF, 1996).
In a study of teachers’ work, Louis (1992, p. 150) reports that what
matters most to secondary school teachers is time. To be effective, teachers
need time to remain abreast of changes in their subject areas and in the
pedagogy related to their disciplines. They need time to plan effectively and
collaboratively, to receive and analyze feedback about their teaching, and to
reflect on their own teaching practice. However, many high school teachers
report that they have little time during the school day to interact with other
teachers (Choy et al., 1993, p. 128).
The National Institute on Student Achievement, Curriculum, and Assess-
ment (OERI, 1999) describes two different teacher approaches to dealing
with the lack of time for activities besides teaching. Some teachers indicate
that they do what they can during school hours; what is not finished during
the school day remains uncompleted. Others extend their working hours far
beyond contract time to allow for collaboration and planning with other
teachers, for grading, or for preparing for their own classes. In urban schools,
teachers may not be able to remain in their buildings after hours because of
safety concerns, making it even more difficult for any collaborative planning
or collegial interactions to take place.
Secondary school teachers are more likely than teachers at other levels
to report feeling isolated and unsupported (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 1999;
NCES, 2000b; OERI, 1999). They also report that there are many competing
demands on their own and their students’ time that interfere with instruc-
tion. High school teachers who leave the profession frequently cite as their
major reasons for doing so concerns about inadequate support from their
school’s administration; nonacademic demands, such as cafeteria duty; poor
student motivation to learn; and student discipline problems (National Sci-
22This varies in schools that use alternative scheduling options.

46
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
ence Teachers Association [NSTA], 2000). Isolation is an especially frequent
complaint of advanced study teachers, who are often the only members of
their departments assigned to teach particular classes, such as AP physics or
IB chemistry. Efforts to combat this isolation have led both the College Board
and the International Baccalaureate Organisation (IBO) to establish online
teacher education and support networks.
Students
The U.S. Department of Education (NCES, 2001a) estimates that there
will be more than 15 million students in grades 9–12 in public and private
high schools in the United States in the fall of 2002 and an additional 235,000
home-schooled students in these grade equivalents (Parent Survey of the
National Household Education Surveys Program, as cited in Basham, 2001).
The majority of secondary school students say that seeing friends is the most
important reason for going to school; only a quarter of secondary school
students cite academics as the most important reason (Hart Research Associ-
ates, 1999).
The popular media have reported on the stress many high school stu-
dents feel because of the competing demands placed on their time—de-
mands that both detract from and enrich their academic endeavors (see for
example, Hart Research Associates, 1999; Schneider, 1999; Springer and Peyser,
1998; Noonan, Seider, and Peraino, 2001; Hong, 2001; Gratz, 2000). For
example, in the United States approximately 60 percent of high school sopho-
mores and 75 percent of seniors are employed (Bachman and Schulenberg,
1993; Steinberg and Dornbusch, 1991). It is now commonplace for students,
particularly those bound for college, to work 15–20 hours per week during
the academic year to earn spending money. In addition, as compared with
their counterparts in other countries, U.S. teenagers spend a disproportion-
ate amount of their free time each week in activities that not only fail to
support learning, but may actually undermine it. On average, U.S. teens
spend 20–25 hours socializing, 5 hours participating in extracurricular activi-
ties, and 15 hours watching television during each week of the school year
(NCHSSY, 2001a).
Students in advanced study programs are more frequently caught be-
tween competing demands on their time as compared with other U.S. high
school students. They are involved in field trips that take them out of their
academic classes. They are also tapped regularly for academic competitions,
honor society committees, student government planning and activities, and
fundraising for clubs, all of which remove them from the classroom or im-
pinge on needed study time after school. These students often also play in
school orchestras or march in school bands, and they frequently assume
leadership positions with school clubs or serve as editors for school publica-

CONTEXT OF ADVANCED STUDY
47
tions.23 Many of these students consistently carry the maximum number of
academic subjects allowed by their schools’ schedules, often starting on
their homework as late as 10:00 pm. Added to all of this activity is a rushed
school schedule that includes a 25–30 minute lunch period in a crowded
cafeteria as the only break in the day. Problems at home and with friends
and concerns about school safety and personal well-being distract many
secondary school students from their academic pursuits. Fully 25 percent of
secondary school students report that it is difficult for them to concentrate in
class because they are worried about problems at home. This finding is most
prevalent among low-income students: 55 percent of these students versus
17 percent of students whose families have few economic worries report
that they think so much about home that they cannot concentrate in school
(Hart Research Associates, 1999).
Moreover, 40 percent of students say that students who interrupt classes
with bad behavior are a major problem that interferes with learning. Indeed,
many parents and students view advanced study courses as temporary ha-
vens from such disruptions. Almost a quarter of the students surveyed said
that teachers not knowing or caring about them as individuals is a big prob-
lem as well.
DISPARITIES IN OPPORTUNITIES TO PURSUE
AND SUCCEED IN ADVANCED STUDY
Students’ educational opportunities and achievement are strongly tied
to the beliefs and values of those who educate them (Rosenthal, 1987;
Rosenthal, Baratz, and Hall, 1974; Rosenthal and Rubin, 1978; Rutter,
McNaughan, Mortimore, and Ouston, 1979). Offering advanced courses in
most if not all academic subjects is one way to give students the message
that teachers and administrators view participation in higher education as
expected and attainable, and that they value the efforts and persistence
required to prepare for college.
Most students perform poorly when their teachers do not believe in
their abilities, in large part because such beliefs translate into fewer learning
opportunities (Lee, 2001; Lee and Smith, 1996; Raudenbush, 1984; Rosenthal
and Jacobson, 1968). Many teachers set different learning objectives for stu-
dents according to perceptions of their abilities. For example, mathematics
and science classes taught by teachers who report that their students are of
“high” ability focus on developing reasoning and inquiry skills, whereas
23While these activities are voluntary, and many more students than those in advanced
study participate, advanced study students are disproportionately represented among partici-
pants. Some attribute this situation to the public’s perception of college admission practices.

48
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
classes in which teachers report that their students are of “low” ability em-
phasize instead the importance of mathematics and science in daily life
(Gamoran, Nystrand, Berends, and LePore, 1995; Oakes, 1990; Raudenbush,
Rowan, and Cheong, 1993; Weiss, 1994). All too often, students who are
seen as being of low ability are disproportionately poor or of color (Ingersoll,
1999; Oakes, 1990). Differentiation of coursework and content by the per-
ceived ability of students is characteristic of both formal and informal track-
ing in most U.S. secondary schools.
Disparities in Participation
High school students can take an advanced class in science and math-
ematics only if (1) their school offers such classes, (2) the school provides
them access to the courses, and (3) they are prepared for such courses. A
recent study in California revealed that AP offerings in that state’s 1,100 high
schools vary greatly (Oakes et al., 2000): 13 percent offer multiple sections
of more than 15 different AP courses; 30 percent provide only single sec-
tions of 2 or 3 different AP courses; and 16 percent offer no AP classes at all
(Carnevule, 1999; Hebel, 1999). Although these differences in AP offerings
are associated with several factors, such as school size and location, there
also is a clear correspondence between the availability and breadth of a high
school’s AP course offerings and its racial composition. Regardless of the
size of the school, the availability of AP courses decreases as the percentage
of African Americans, Hispanics, or students of low socioeconomic status in
the school population increases, as compared with comprehensive public
high schools that serve predominantly white and middle-class students (see
Table 2-4). This differential access to AP classes is most stark and most
consequential in mathematics and science. The problem also is compounded
by the fact that even when schools do offer high-quality advanced math-
ematics and science courses, students of color and those of low socioeco-
nomic status are much less likely to enroll in them (Atanda, 1999; Horn et
al., 2000; Ma and Willms, 1999; Oakes, 1990).
As noted earlier, parental involvement can play a strong role in students’
course selections. Students are more likely to take higher-level mathematics
and science courses if their parents are highly educated and knowledgeable
about the college admission process and help guide their children’s course
selection (Ekstrom, Goertz, and Rock, 1988; Horn et al., 2000; Lee and Ekstrom,
1987; Useem, 1992). When asked to explain the disproportionate enrollment
of whites and Asians in advanced classes as compared with other racial or
ethnic groups, however, educators attributed this disparity to students’ abil-
ity or wise choice of courses without considering the influence of parents on
these decisions (Oakes and Guiton, 1995). Some faculty members dismissed

CONTEXT OF ADVANCED STUDY
49
the disproportionate representation of Hispanics in lower-level courses, even
those whose test scores were comparable to the scores of higher-placed
white and Asian students, attributing the disparities to differences in stu-
dents’ motivation and choices or to cultural differences in educational values
or family support. And studies of schools under court-ordered desegregation
have found them to have course placement practices that result in consis-
tently skewed enrollments in favor of white or Asian students over and
above what can be explained by measured achievement (Welner, 2001).
Disparities in Outcomes
Even when minority students participate in high-level courses such as
AP, end-of-course test results reveal significant differences in outcomes for
students from different racial and ethnic groups (see Table 2-5). The dispar-
ity in scores on AP assessments between African American, Hispanic, and
Native American students on the one hand and white and Asian students on
the other are large (as they are for most standardized tests). Additionally, the
proportion of minority students who earn scores of 4 and 5 on AP assess-
ments is small (AP examinations are scored on a scale of 1–5, with 5 being
the highest score).
It is unclear whether these disparities result from assessments that are
biased or reflect others factors, such as the multiple inequities that affect
minorities long before they are able to take AP courses or assessments. In
any case, education policymakers, school officials, and college leaders must
evaluate and implement educational reforms that will improve the academic
achievement of economically and educationally disadvantaged students. As
a means of improving outcomes, the College Board and many school dis-
tricts are focusing on improving teaching and learning in the courses that
lead to advanced study. As described earlier, this means school districts must
redesign the organization and structure of their schools and the allocation of
resources to meet the educational needs of all students.
TABLE 2-4
School Racial/Ethnic Disparities in Mathematics and Science Offerings in
California, 1998-1999
Proportion African American and Hispanic
Number of AP Math/Science Offerings
Greater than 70 percent
3.8
Less than 30 percent
5.3
SOURCE: Adapted from Oakes et al. (2000).

50
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
Some of the most effective strategies for improving student success in
advanced study go far beyond merely adding more advanced study classes
in high schools with underserved student populations (although access to
these classes is important). Strategies that have proven effective include re-
ducing class size (Grissmer, 1999); eliminating low-level academic courses
that do not prepare students academically (Frome, 2001; NASSP, 1996); en-
hancing professional development to help teachers incorporate research-
based instructional, curricular, and assessment strategies in their classrooms
(see Chapter 7, this volume); hiring and retaining qualified teachers to teach
in rural and inner-city schools; providing information to parents about the
long-term benefits of students’ participation in rigorous academic programs
TABLE 2-5
Mean Scoresa and Standard Deviationsb on Selected Advanced Placement
Examinations, Categorized by Subject and Racial/Ethnic Group
Chicano,
American
Black/
Puerto Rican,
Asian/
Indian/
African-
and Other
Asian
Other and
National
Subject
Alaskan
American
Hispanicc
American
White
Not Statedd
Average
AP biology
2.68
2.12
2.32
3.28
3.15
3.18
3.08
[1.23]
[1.17]
[1.29]
[1.31]
[1.26]
[1.32]
[1.30]
AP chemistry
2.17
2.00
2.08
3.07
2.86
2.94
2.84
[1.21]
[1.14]
[1.24]
[1.36]
[1.33]
[1.36]
[1.35]
AP Physics B
2.44*
1.77
1.98
2.75**
2.82
2.77**
2.73
[1.23]
[1.05]
[1.20]
[1.32]
[1.28]
[1.31]
[1.30]
AP Physics C:
3.05**
2.33
2.62
3.26**
3.32
3.21**
3.25
Mechanics
[1.54]
[1.32]
[1.41]
[1.38]
[1.34]
[1.37]
[1.37]
AP Physics C:
3.11**
2.52
2.74
3.30**
3.35
3.13*
3.29
E&M
[1.63]
[1.26]
[1.39]
[1.43]
[1.39]
[1.37]
[1.40]
AP Calculus AB
2.54
2.12
2.41
3.09
3.11
3.09
3.03
[1.33]
[1.23]
[1.33]
[1.34]
[1.30]
[1.33]
[1.33]
AP Calculus BC
3.20*
2.77
3.10
3.66
3.63
3.65**
3.60
[1.55]
[1.42]
[1.48]
[1.38]
[1.36]
[1.38]
[1.38]
SOURCE: Adapted from College Entrance Examination Board (2000c).
aThe differences between any given group mean and the national mean are significant at .01 except where
indicated: *difference between group mean and national mean is significant at .05; **difference between group
mean and national mean is not significant.
bGiven in brackets.
cThis column shows the weighted mean and standard deviation as calculated from three groups reported by
the College Board—Chicano/Mexican American, Puerto Rican, and Other Hispanic.
dThis column shows the weighted mean and standard deviation as calculated from two groups reported by
the College Board—Not Stated and Other and Not Stated.

CONTEXT OF ADVANCED STUDY
51
(Dornbusch, 1994; Eccles and Harold, 1996);24 implementing and support-
ing supplementary educational opportunities; and increasing student access
to skilled counselors and mentors who can help them plan and implement
strategies for educational attainment and achievement.
CONNECTIONS BETWEEN ADVANCED STUDY
AND HIGHER EDUCATION
High School–College Interface Coordination
and Articulation
Most people agree that an important goal of high school is to prepare
students for further education and future work. However, a high school
diploma currently does not guarantee success in either domain. This situa-
tion derives partly from a decentralized and disconnected system of K–12
education in which students encounter differing sets of requirements and
expectations as they move from elementary school to the middle grades and
on to high school. The disjuncture is exacerbated further by the lack of
articulation and coordination between secondary and higher education in
terms of what students need to succeed academically in college (Kirst, 1998).
In 1999 almost 66 percent of high school graduates nationwide had
completed some college by the time they reached age 28. This number
represents an enormous increase as compared with the proportion of 28-
year-olds who had completed some college in 1971 (43 percent). Yet despite
this increase in matriculation, the proportion of high school graduates who
have completed a baccalaureate degree by the time they reach age 28 has
risen by only 10 percentage points (NCES, 2000a).
Many policymakers and higher education faculty view students’ inad-
equate preparation for the rigorous demands of college as a failure on the
part of high schools. Others contend that the situation represents not a fail-
ure on the part of high schools, but a misunderstanding of what it means to
be prepared. The diverse nature of colleges and the corresponding diversity
of their academic offerings and expectations contribute markedly to this lack
of understanding. Given this diversity, teachers and guidance counselors
can be unclear about what students should know and be able to do before
they begin college work.
A cursory review of the placement examinations administered to incom-
ing freshmen at many institutions is all that is required to reveal just how
varied these expectations are. Even in the same state, each public institution
24See also The National Coalition for Parent Involvement in Education at http://
www.ncpie.org/Resources/Subject_HigherEducation.html (February 11, 2002).

52
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
of higher education often has a different set of expectations for placement of
students in its system, making it doubly difficult for high schools to know
just what preparing their students for college means (Kirst, 1998). This lack
of understanding may leave some students with limited college options many
years before they are ready to make such a choice.
What is clear, however, is a pervasive and enduring belief that AP or IB
courses offer an advantage to students in the college admission process.
This belief has led to ever-increasing numbers of students enrolling in mul-
tiple AP courses or seeking IB Diplomas (see Chapters 3 and 4, this volume).
The popular media, college guidebooks, and even the colleges themselves
promote the potential positive edge in admission gained from participation
in these programs.
Advanced Study as a Link
Between High School and College
Advanced study programs such as AP span the boundaries of secondary
and higher education. The content and structure of advanced study pro-
grams and the learning experiences they offer to high school students can
provide one of the foundations for academic success in higher education.
Students and their parents look to these programs to facilitate students’ ad-
mission to college, to help them succeed in college-level work once admit-
ted, and to yield college credit and the possibility of proceeding directly to
more advanced courses when the students matriculate in college. High school
teachers expect these programs to provide motivated and well-prepared
students with opportunities to gain the prerequisite content knowledge and
habits of mind that will make them successful in college.
In turn, colleges and universities want to enroll highly qualified students
who have the background and motivation to succeed in college courses.
They want students who are well prepared and well educated. Colleges and
universities look to and rely on advanced study to prepare students for the
rigors of higher education. High school advanced study courses in science
and mathematics are particularly important in establishing a foundation on
which to build further study in these disciplines. Students, parents, high
school guidance counselors, and even some college faculty may view these
introductory courses in science and mathematics as “gatekeepers.” Science
and mathematics are among the most hierarchical subjects in higher educa-
tion and typically require sequential courses of study extending over many
years. If the advanced study programs that serve as introductions to these
disciplines are not well constructed, subsequent learning is likely to be ad-
versely affected.

CONTEXT OF ADVANCED STUDY
53
The availability of both government and private funds has begun to
catalyze fundamental changes in the ways science and mathematics are taught
at the undergraduate level, especially in introductory courses (see, for ex-
ample, NRC, 1999d; Rothman and Narum, 1999). Cutting-edge concepts and
skills from the disciplines are being integrated into introductory classes and
laboratories. Information technologies increasingly are being woven into the
fabric of teaching and learning for large numbers of undergraduates. How-
ever, this teaching and learning revolution has yet to reach many campuses,
and advanced high school courses in the sciences continue to be modeled
on traditional approaches. This tendency is reinforced in AP science courses
by the College Board’s practice of basing its course outlines on surveys of
institutions that accept large numbers of AP students. This practice can rein-
force the status quo for AP courses instead of encouraging change to reflect
emerging best practices in the disciplines involved.25
The Role of Advanced Study in College Admission Decisions
How Admission Decisions Are Made. Although much is known about
how colleges make admission decisions, there is clearly a limit to what can
be known about actual practices across institutions. The committee recog-
nizes that many different individuals ultimately make these decisions, and
that the decisions they make are based on particular circumstances and
available information of varying quality. Thus, the discussion below can
explore only in part the full range of processes and practices involved.
The primary role of admission officers at all colleges and universities is
to assemble a class from among the qualified applicants. In some states,
legislative mandates determine who must be admitted to public colleges and
universities. For example, the Top 10 Percent Law (officially House Bill 588)
guarantees that Texas high school graduates who rank in the top 10 percent
of their senior class will be admitted to any state institution of higher learn-
ing. At other postsecondary institutions, both public and private, admission
decisions are made primarily on the basis of numerical formulas that include
a student’s high school grade-point average (GPA), class rank, completion of
specified numbers of courses, and performance on the ACT (American Col-
lege Testing Program) or SAT I and sometimes one or more SAT II subject
tests. Some of these institutions also consider information on applicants’
25An exception to this trend is in AP calculus, which is based on emerging research about
teaching and learning in that subject. This difference between calculus and the science subjects
that were investigated by the committee is considered in greater detail in Chapter 10 and in the
panel reports prepared for this study (a summary of these reports is provided in Appendix A;
the full reports can be found at http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10129.html).

54
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
experiences, extracurricular activities, talents, and backgrounds. Students
who meet established standards are typically admitted as long as space is
available. This approach to admissions allows institutions to identify quali-
fied applicants efficiently from a very large pool. With this approach, AP and
IB play a role only when grades earned in those classes are given extra
weight in computing GPAs or establishing class rank. Students who do not
have access to AP or IB courses are at a disadvantage in this type of admis-
sion process unless provisions are in place to give equal weight to other
kinds of advanced courses available to them. Thus, colleges and universities
that use a formula to make admission decisions often give special consider-
ation to grades earned in honors or college preparatory courses as well as to
AP and IB grades.
In contrast with both of the systems described above, some institutions,
particularly those interested in shaping their incoming classes in accordance
with institutional goals and priorities, use a very different approach. Admis-
sion officers at these colleges individually read applications (sometimes more
than once), consider information about students that is more subjective in
nature, and examine how each student might contribute to the values and
goals of the institution. Evaluations of students in these situations usually
take into account both what an individual applicant has accomplished and
the context of the high school from which he or she will graduate. For
example, students who take no honors or AP classes at schools that offer
such programs are viewed differently from those who take no such classes
at schools where they are unavailable. Similarly, those who attend schools
where participation in extracurricular activities is limited by school policy
are not evaluated with the same expectations for participation as those who
attend high schools that encourage participation in a wide variety of activi-
ties. School profiles,26 reports of admission officers who visit many high
schools, and the academic reputations of particular schools are used to pro-
26A profile is a concise overview of the high school and its offerings. Profiles vary in
quality, but a good one will indicate the highest-level courses offered in each academic area,
describe the levels available (for example, honors, gifted and talented, college preparatory,
remedial) for each grade, and make clear the degree of challenge. This profile allows an admis-
sion reader to compare the applicant’s transcript against the offerings of the school. In addition
to course-level information, a profile also includes demographic information about both the
school and the community; economic information, including percentage of school population
on free or reduced lunch; the diversity of the student body; the percentage of graduates attend-
ing 4-year colleges; educational options in the community (mentorships or access to college
courses taught on local college campuses, for example); college acceptance lists (where previ-
ous graduates were accepted or matriculated); SAT/ACT ranges; GPA distribution; and AP or IB
score distributions by subject that serve as important indicators of how well the high school
classes are aligned with the AP or IB program syllabi.

CONTEXT OF ADVANCED STUDY
55
vide admission officers with needed information about the high schools
attended by applicants.
The Roles of AP and IB in the Admission Process. To better under-
stand the role played by AP and IB courses and examination results in col-
lege admission decisions, the committee conducted an informal survey of
deans of admission from 264 U.S. colleges and universities.27 Approximately
half responded. The survey was designed to shed light on three broad issues
related to the college admission process: (1) how AP and IB courses on an
applicant’s transcript are used in admission decisions, (2) the extent to which
applicants’ chances for admission are affected if they do not take IB or AP
courses because the courses are not offered at their high schools, and (3) the
role played in admission decisions by AP and IB examination grades or by a
lack of reported results.
The survey revealed that, regardless of their specific goals, the most
important priority for admission officers at selective schools is to admit stu-
dents who can take advantage of the academic strengths of the institution as
well as contribute to the education of their peers. Because past performance
is deemed a strong predictor of future performance, admission officers care-
fully review applicants’ transcripts to determine how well and to what extent
the applicants have taken advantage of the school- and community-based
opportunities available to them in high school.28 Admission personnel gen-
erally view the presence of AP or IB courses on a transcript as an indicator
of the applicant’s willingness to confront academic challenges.29
The presence of AP and IB courses on a student’s transcript (if such
courses are available at the applicant’s high school) is of greatest importance
for admission to highly selective schools seeking students who have taken
27Using the 1994 Carnegie classifications for ranking undergraduate institutions, schools
were placed into four broad categories: national universities, national liberal arts colleges,
regional universities, and regional liberal arts colleges. Institutions from these four categories
were then sorted by their selectivity in the admission process, as defined by the percentage of
applicants admitted. Surveys were sent to the 50 most selective national liberal arts colleges and
the 50 most selective national universities, as well as every seventh school on the remaining
lists (a total of 264 institutions). Reminders were sent to deans who had not returned their
survey forms by the deadline. This process resulted in a return of surveys from 133 institutions.
Admission selectivity among the sample of surveys that were completed ranged in percentage
of applicants accepted from a low of 11 percent to a high of 100 percent.
28Admission officers use two primary sources of information for determining what was
available to students at different high schools: first-hand information gathered by admission
staff during recruiting trips, and the high school profile, discussed above.
29AP and IB courses may also serve as indicators of the quality of the academic program
offered by the applicant’s high school and hence assist in comparing students from different
schools.

56
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
maximum advantage of the academic opportunities available to them. AP
and IB courses are somewhat less important factors for admission at colleges
where a larger percentage of applicants are admitted. Nonetheless, many of
these colleges use the presence of AP and IB courses as an indicator of the
strength of the applicant’s academic preparation. AP and IB play little to no
role in admission decisions at colleges where the vast majority of applicants
are accepted.
There are generally two types of high schools that do not offer AP or IB
courses. First are both public and private schools that, for institutional rea-
sons, elect not to offer AP and IB and instead provide their own rigorous
curricula. Many of these high schools have national reputations for excel-
lence, and admission officers know the levels of challenge the students in
these schools experience. Second are schools typically located in areas where
sufficient resources or qualified personnel are not available to mount such a
program or where the demand for such courses is deemed to be low. The
committee was concerned primarily with the outcome for students from this
second group.
When asked what the effect on admission decisions is if AP or IB classes
are not available at an applicant’s high school, deans from virtually every
college or university replied that a lack of AP or IB courses at an applicant’s
high school would not have an adverse effect on a student’s gaining admis-
sion to their institution if the student had taken the most challenging courses
that were available and done well in them. Some admission officers indi-
cated that they might look for evidence that students lacking access to rigor-
ous opportunities in school tried instead to participate in similar kinds of
academic opportunities outside of school. A very small number of deans
indicated that there might be indirect consequences for students from schools
with limited advanced course offerings. For example, a small number of
deans reported that they are more likely to “dip deeper” into a class (i.e.,
accept students with a lower class rank) in high schools with solid academic
programs than in schools with less solid programs. Thus, the number of AP
and IB courses is sometimes used as an indicator of a school’s academic
commitment. Of course, while offices of admission consciously avoid penal-
izing students who do not have access to advanced study courses or pro-
grams in their high schools, the lack of access to such courses also could
result in students’ from these schools being less prepared and less successful
if they are admitted to selective institutions.
The survey also addressed the issue of students who have access to AP
and IB courses at their high schools but choose not to enroll in them. Deans
from the most selective schools responded consistently that this decision
would likely place an applicant at a disadvantage. When evaluating a student’s
program against a high school’s course offerings, the most selective schools
effectively require, in the absence of some compelling reason, that success-

CONTEXT OF ADVANCED STUDY
57
ful applicants take the most demanding curriculum available to them. For
some students, this may mean they are expected to take four to six AP
courses during their high school years or three higher-level IB courses dur-
ing their senior year. It also implies that students who attend schools where
AP and IB courses are offered as junior year options are expected to have
taken such courses in their junior year as well.
AP and IB Examination Grades
and the Admission Process
AP and IB examinations are administered each May, and scores are not
usually available until July. Therefore, final examination grades for AP and
IB courses taken during the senior year of high school are not a factor in
admission decisions, although they are a factor in credit and placement
decisions. Many educators contend that this makes it easy for seniors to
reduce their level of commitment to academics once admission letters have
been mailed, sometimes as early as December of the senior year for those
students who have applied for early decision or rolling admission.
If an applicant has taken AP or IB classes in tenth or eleventh grade but
has not submitted scores, deans at most of the more selective colleges and
universities included in the committee’s survey indicated that they interpret
the student’s decision cautiously. Many observed that AP examinations are
expensive and that applicants may not have taken them for financial rea-
sons. Others noted that teaching is uneven from school to school and that it
would be unfair to make assumptions about an applicant on the basis of
information not provided. If, however, a student fails to submit scores, he or
she has, in the words of one respondent, “missed a chance to strengthen the
application.” A few of the most selective schools actively search for AP or IB
scores on an applicant’s transcript; deans from these schools mentioned that
the lack of an examination score would be addressed in a student interview
if the opportunity arose.
Given the increase in the number of examinations being administered to
sophomores and juniors, it is anticipated that examination scores may play a
greater role in the admission process in the future. Deans from colleges and
universities familiar with the IB program noted to the committee that the
practice of some high schools of providing predicted scores30 was helpful in
the evaluation of an applicant.
30IB teachers are required to submit “predicted grades” for each student before the year’s
end. Predicted grades are used for a variety of purposes, including teacher evaluation and
determination of grade distributions. The decision whether to release predicted grades to stu-
dents, and presumable to colleges, is left to the individual high schools (IBO, 2000d). See
additional details in Chapter 4, this volume.

58
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
College Credit and Placement Based on Advanced Study
The College Board and the IBO do not award credit or mandate specific
placements, although both provide some guidance about appropriate prac-
tice. Thus individual colleges and universities (or departments within them)
decide whether to award credit for AP and IB examination scores they re-
gard as sufficiently high.
More than 2,900 colleges and universities accept AP test scores, and
approximately 750 postsecondary institutions recognize IB scores. IB stu-
dents traditionally have more difficulty than their AP counterparts obtaining
college credit or placement for their scores. This situation is changing some-
what as colleges become more familiar with IB course content and require-
ments and gain more experience with IB students. However, because of the
lingering reluctance of some schools to grant credit or placement for IB,
some IB students also take AP assessments. This is a challenging undertak-
ing for IB students because both sets of examinations are administered in
May, and the dates may overlap.
Reducing Time to Degree
One of the factors contributing to the rapid increase in AP and IB enroll-
ments is the perceived potential benefit of earning inexpensive college cred-
its that can reduce time to degree and consequently decrease overall tuition
costs.31 The extent to which students actually take advantage of this oppor-
tunity for acceleration in college and the resulting savings in tuition, is not
well documented, however. Some students spend the same amount of time
as other undergraduates, using these credits instead to reduce overall course
loads, to pursue coursework that their schedules would not otherwise allow,
or to take additional courses in a subject area.
Using AP and IB for Placement
or Exemption from Required Courses
As noted above, in addition to being able to graduate early, students can
use their AP and IB credits to reduce overall course loads or to meet college
prerequisite or distribution requirements, freeing time in their schedules to
31Approximately 1,400 institutions offer sophomore standing to students with sufficient AP
credit (College Board, http://www.collegeboard.org/ap/students/benefits/soph_standing.html
[November 27, 2001]). Increasing numbers of colleges (for example, state universities in Califor-
nia, Florida, and Washington) are awarding credit and sophomore standing to IB students with
IB diplomas.

CONTEXT OF ADVANCED STUDY
59
take courses they find more interesting or challenging.32 Indeed, for many
high-achieving students, the opportunity to place out of introductory courses
and move directly into upper-level classes is a greater motivator than early
graduation. Some colleges explicitly support this use of AP and IB scores by
offering upper-level course placement to students who earn qualifying scores
even if the institution does not award credit. Many high school counselors
and teachers encourage their students to use their AP and IB credits in this
manner when they enter college, especially when the introductory courses
they would otherwise be required to take are large lecture classes or are
perceived not to be sufficiently challenging.
At the same time, using credits from these examinations to fulfill distri-
bution requirements means that students can potentially graduate from col-
lege without ever having taken courses in certain subject areas. For ex-
ample, a student with AP biology credits may never have to take another
course in science. Some institutions have attempted to minimize this prac-
tice, requiring that students address the school’s distribution requirements
by enrolling in courses that are at higher levels than those taken in high
school.
In contrast, some students decide not to use their AP or IB credits to
place out of introductory courses because they believe they will benefit
from taking the subjects again in college. The biology, physics, and chemis-
try panels that provided information for this study agreed that most students
would benefit from retaking these courses in college. The mathematics panel
did not agree, suggesting that there is typically little benefit for qualified AP
or IB students in retaking introductory calculus in college unless their insti-
tutions require them to do so.
Students also may forego upper-level placement because they want to
avoid the risk of doing poorly in upper-level courses during their first year in
college or because they believe retaking a course in college would result in
their receiving a higher grade than if they enrolled in a more advanced
course. Deans from a very small number of institutions participating in the
committee’s survey indicated that they offer transitional courses to students
who place out of introductory-level courses but do not advance to the next
course because of either the student’s own decision or that of the institution.
It may also be noted that students who take AP and IB courses and then
repeat those same courses in college present a particular challenge to col-
lege faculty. It can be difficult to teach these students in the same class with
those who may have only a basic understanding of the subject.
32Some colleges do not allow students to use AP or IB credits to fulfill distribution or major
requirements; others grant AP or IB credit for first-year courses only after students have suc-
cessfully completed a second-level course in the same subject.

60
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
Institutional Decisions
In general, colleges and universities make decisions about granting AP
and IB credit and placement in the same way they decide about accepting
credits from other colleges. That is, university or department officials con-
sider the content of the course, its perceived difficulty, associated laboratory
activities (in the case of science courses), and the student’s level of achieve-
ment. They compare the course with similar offerings at their own institu-
tions. Placement (rather than credit) decisions also may take into account
the capabilities of the particular student and may be aided by the use of a
department’s own placement test. This process is consistent with recom-
mendations made by the College Board to its member institutions. In some
publicly funded institutions,33 the granting of credit for a given AP or IB
score may be legislatively mandated or set by institutional policy.
The IBO does not provide guidelines for colleges to use in making
decisions about credit or placement. IB is an international program, and
consequently IB students attend colleges in many countries, each with its
own standards and examination policies. However, the IBO offers to assist
administrators and department heads at U.S. colleges or universities who are
unfamiliar with the IB program in making appropriate decisions with regard
to the acceptance of IB examination scores for credit or placement.
In science, decision making at the department level may involve inter-
viewing the student and reviewing his or her high school course syllabus
and laboratory notebooks. In other departments, examination scores alone
may suffice. In mathematics, most departments accept an AP examination
score in calculus without question. This practice is the result of faculty expe-
rience with what AP students know and are able to do, and the similarity
between AP and college calculus courses.
Denial of Credit or Placement
Although the College Board encourages colleges to award academic
credit for an AP score of 3 or higher, and the American Council for Educa-
tion endorses this stance (College Entrance Examination Board, 2000a), nearly
half of the colleges in the United States that accept AP credits do not abide
by the College Board’s standards (Lichten, 2000). Lichten found that while
most 4-year colleges accept 4’s and 5’s for credit, only 55 percent accept 3’s.
Overall, only 49 percent of AP test takers receive college credit, even though
33This point applies only to publicly funded institutions.

CONTEXT OF ADVANCED STUDY
61
two-thirds of them are qualified for college credit according to the College
Board.34
There are various reasons for the reluctance of some colleges to award
college credit as generously as entering students have come to expect and as
frequently as the College Board recommends. For example, university fac-
ulty and administrators may not believe that students taking AP courses have
undertaken work that is equivalent to the courses at their institution or that
students have engaged the concepts of the discipline as deeply as they
would in college.
Variability of Credit and Placement Decisions
Survey of Mathematics and Biology Departments. To gain a better un-
derstanding of the ways in which postsecondary institutions make credit and
placement decisions about AP and IB, the committee sent an informal ques-
tionnaire about these issues to the departments of biology and mathematics
at 131 colleges and universities.35 The respondents represented national uni-
versities and liberal arts colleges, as well as regional colleges and universi-
ties located in the Midwest, North, South, and West. The institutions that
responded included research universities, colleges, highly selective institu-
tions, and institutions with open-admission policies.
It is important to note that a precise interpretation of the survey data
was difficult. Response rates were less than ideal. The survey questions
unfortunately did not probe sufficiently for detail or allow respondents to
qualify their answers. Nevertheless, the data do provide useful information
about how placement decisions are actually made.
The majority of the biology departments that responded to the survey
offer two different introductory biology courses—one designed for potential
majors and the other for everyone else. Other survey findings include the
following:
34The College Board is currently studying the validity of a grade of 3 on AP examinations.
35Departments of biology and mathematics to which survey forms were sent were selected
from a list of schools gathered from the Gourman Report: A Rating of Undergraduate Programs
in American Universities (Gourman, 1999). Also selected were departments in every third school
from the alphabetical list of the Oberlin Conference schools and every seventh school from the
Carnegie Foundation’s listings of institutions of higher education by institutional type (Bach-
elors I and II, Masters I and II, and Doctoral I and II institutions—available at http://
www.carnegiefoundation.org). This process resulted in the selection of 131 schools. The chairs
of the biology and mathematics departments from these institutions were sent the questionnaire
by electronic mail. Responses were received from 43 chairs (33 percent) from departments of
biology and 59 chairs (45 percent) from departments of mathematics.

62
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
• The vast majority of these departments award college credit for AP,
and sometimes for IB.36
• The amount of credit awarded almost always depends on the score
earned. For example, a student with an AP score of 5 or an IB score of 7
might earn up to eight credits (the equivalent of two semester courses with
laboratory), while a student with a score of 3 or 4 might earn only earn four
credits.
• Some departments are willing to accept an AP score of 3 or an IB
score of 5, but the majority look for 4’s or 5’s on AP tests and 6’s or 7’s on IB
tests. Two institutions grant credit or placement only for an AP 5 or an IB 7.
• Credit and placement policies at most institutions do not vary signifi-
cantly between majors and nonmajors.
• A small proportion of the schools reported using indicators other
than the test scores in making placement or credit decisions. In order of
descending frequency, these additional factors are student interviews, place-
ment tests, the high school’s reputation, and the student’s laboratory manual.
• Only two of the schools that responded have developed a special
course as a transition to higher-level science for students with AP or IB
credits.
Approximately half of the mathematics department chairs that responded
to the survey indicated that their departments offer only one sequence of
calculus. The others offer different sequences—one for mathematics, engi-
neering, and physical science majors and the other for life science and other
majors. A variation on this last organizational structure is a third sequence
for business majors. Additional survey findings are as follows:
• A large majority of the mathematics departments offer credit to stu-
dents with qualifying AP scores without considering any additional factors.
However, almost a third require a departmental test and/or an interview
with the student before determining placement in courses beyond the intro-
ductory level.
• Mathematics departments routinely offer credit for scores of 4 and 5
on AP Calculus AB or BC examinations. Among the schools that accept IB,
most consider a score of 5 or higher on the Higher Level examination to be
acceptable.37
36Many of the biology departments were unfamiliar with the IB program and had never
been asked to consider an IB score for credit or placement. These institutions restricted their
responses to AP.
37Many respondents did not know of a policy for accepting IB credits, and some of the
departments reported that they do not award IB credit.

CONTEXT OF ADVANCED STUDY
63
• Very few departments indicated that they would accept any scores
from the IB Standard Level course in Mathematics Methods.
• Special sections of mathematics (both higher-level calculus and other
areas of mathematics) are sometimes offered to students who score 4 or
higher on an AP calculus examination. This practice is most common among
schools that emphasize mathematics and engineering.
EPILOGUE
From the perspective of higher education, advanced study in mathemat-
ics and science has both advantages and disadvantages. In theory, both the
AP and IB programs should lead to learning of science and mathematics
content at a more advanced and deeper level than would occur if students
had taken only introductory high school courses in these subjects. Further-
more, by creating de facto standards for the kinds of knowledge and skills
students are expected to learn in a subject area, these programs allow col-
leges and universities to gauge more easily the academic experiences that
applicants and entering students have had during their high school years as
compared with students who did not enroll in these courses or programs.
As detailed in Chapters 3 and 4, however, the academic experiences of
the students in these programs can be highly variable. Additionally, some
college-bound students may not have access to such opportunities even
where they do exist. Therefore, it remains a challenge to provide appropri-
ate college courses for this broad array of first-year students. This is a con-
cern in particular for smaller institutions that cannot offer a large number of
options for incoming students in each discipline.

64
3
The Advanced Placement Program
The Advanced Placement (AP) and International Baccalaureate (IB) pro-
grams are the two most widely known and nationally recognized models for
advanced study. Students in AP and IB courses are provided opportunities
for both acceleration and advanced study in high school mathematics and
science. Both AP and IB are examination-based programs, designed for well-
prepared and highly motivated students in their last 2 years of high school.
Both certify a student’s level of knowledge with a score on an end-of-course
assessment that is recognized and valued nationally and internationally. And
both programs are being challenged by a rapid expansion in the number of
participating schools and students and by uses of test scores that probably
were unforeseen when the programs were first established nearly 50 years
ago.
Despite their ostensible similarities, the two programs are actually quite
different with respect to their goals, their organization, and the ways in
which they assess student learning. This chapter presents a detailed review
of the AP program; a similar review of the IB program is provided in Chapter
4, this volume. The first section gives an overview of the AP program; the
sections that follow address in turn AP curriculum, instruction, assessment,
and professional development.
OVERVIEW
The AP program is the predominant national model for advanced courses
in high school. It was established in 1955 to challenge able and well-pre-
pared secondary students with college-level work. Supported by the Educa-
tional Testing Service (ETS), the College Board develops AP course descrip-
tions and yearly end-of-course examinations that represent an attempt to
mirror the coverage typical of college-level introductory courses. On the
basis of demonstrated achievement on the examinations, students may be

THE ADVANCED PLACEMENT PROGRAM
65
awarded college credit or advanced placement in higher-level college courses
(see Chapter 2, this volume). A high school can elect to offer one or more
AP courses simply by scheduling the courses and assigning a teacher.
Individual students can elect to take any number of AP courses, as their high
school allows, and there is no requirement from the College Board that
students who take AP courses and receive the AP designation on their high
school transcript take the examination.1
The College Board has developed an AP Diploma that is being offered
in the academic year 2000–2001 in 20 school districts across the United
States. To earn the diploma, students must complete five AP courses and
receive a qualifying score (3) on each of the five examinations. The five
courses must include at least one in each of the core areas of mathematics,
science, language arts, and history, along with one AP elective course. The
College Board plans to offer the AP Diploma in all schools in the 2001–2002
school year.
During the past 45 years, the AP program has grown from a small pro-
gram that served only the top students from largely suburban public and
private high schools to one that now is available in a much more diverse
group of approximately 62 percent of the nation’s high schools. The pro-
gram experienced a decade of rapid growth during the 1990s as the number
of students taking AP examinations increased from 206,000 to more than
760,000 a year. The number of examinations administered in a year rose
from 277,000 in May 1990 to 1,277,000 in May 2000 (College Entrance Ex-
amination Board [CEEB], 2000c).
In its report Access to Excellence, the Commission on the Future of the
Advanced Placement Program (CFAPP) (CFAPP, 2001) describes significant
challenges to the program that have accompanied this rapid growth. Since
approximately 34 percent of students enrolled in AP courses do not take the
AP examinations, the first challenge noted is how the program can maintain
the quality of courses and examinations and the validity of the AP credential.
Second, students from urban, rural, and poor districts are underrepresented
among those who take the AP examinations, and minority students are less
likely than other students to take AP courses when they are offered and to
achieve success on the examinations. Therefore, the commission notes the
critical importance of finding ways to increase the equity of access to AP
courses. The report sets forth goals and recommendations that would broaden
the aim of the program by positioning it to enable many more students to
experience college-level courses and earn college credit while in high school.
1Some states and school districts require that students who receive an AP credit on their
transcript take the corresponding AP examination. This requirement is most common in dis-
tricts where students receive financial support for taking the examinations.

66
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
At the same time, the commission emphasizes that the AP program needs to
adhere to the following set of expectations to maintain program quality and
oversight:
• While continuing to reflect college-level expectations and coopera-
tion between schools and colleges, AP courses and examinations also should
reflect changes in the disciplines and in pedagogy and provide models of
effective instruction.
• The reliability of the AP examinations in measuring student achieve-
ment at the introductory college level must be ensured.
• Standards for AP programs in schools and school systems, for AP
teachers, and for teachers’ professional development should be formulated
and implemented.
• The program should focus on expanding access for underserved
schools and populations by strengthening the preparation of students in
courses that precede AP courses.
AP CURRICULUM
Consistent with the purpose of the program, AP courses are designed to
be equivalent to general introductory college courses with respect to the
range and depth of topics covered, the kinds of textbooks used, the kinds of
laboratory work done by students, and the time and effort required of stu-
dents (CEEB, 2001a). A course description for each AP course briefly out-
lines the topics that may be included on the end-of-course examination,
describes the examination format, and provides sample questions. The course
description and teacher’s guide for each AP subject area are available for a
fee to teachers, who can use them as the basis for developing the curriculum
for their own courses (course descriptions can now be downloaded from
the College Board’s Web site for free). Individual teachers are given great
leeway in structuring AP courses for their classrooms. Thus, the curriculum
for AP courses varies from classroom to classroom in both design and imple-
mentation, including which topics are emphasized, how the topics are re-
lated, how the content is sequenced, and how much time is spent on labo-
ratory activities.
Development of AP Courses
College faculty members in each discipline, along with experienced AP
teachers, are recruited by the College Board to serve on a development
committee for each AP course. The traditional strategy for determining the
content and skills to be covered in an AP course and on the AP examination

THE ADVANCED PLACEMENT PROGRAM
67
has been to survey the department faculty from colleges and universities
receiving the most AP score reports in a discipline. The faculty who serve on
the subject-specific development committees synthesize the information from
these surveys and construct a course description they believe best repre-
sents the consensus view of the college-level introductory course (CFAPP,
2001, p. 22). The development committee for a course develops both the
topic outline and, with help from ETS experts, the course examinations. The
committee prepares the course description for each subject and compiles a
list of the textbooks used most frequently in the corresponding college course.
Development committees for AP science courses may also recommend labo-
ratory activities that are representative of work done by college students in
the corresponding introductory course. This entire process is repeated every
5 to 6 years.
One result of this process is that until curricular changes have become
common in introductory college courses, those changes are not reflected in
the AP course descriptions and examinations. Thus, some disciplinary lead-
ers have contended that, with the growth in AP participation and the program’s
influence on high school curricula, the AP course development process has
the potential to slow the implementation of desirable curricular reforms.
In contrast, the development of AP calculus during the 1990s provides a
model for implementing rather than impeding curricular change. The AP
Calculus Development Committee used a broader, more forward-looking
strategy for revising the description and the examination specifications for
this course by collaborating with experts in mathematics content, curricu-
lum, and pedagogy. The committee became an active participant in the
calculus reform movement at the college level and the National Council for
Teachers of Mathematics–driven standards movement at the precollege level.2
According to CFAPP, “We believe that such strategies must be replicated
whenever AP course descriptions are reviewed and revised. Leaders in the
disciplines, pedagogy, and research must all play a role in order to create
the highest quality curriculum possible” (CFAPP, 2001, p. 12). This commit-
tee concurs with that recommendation.
Content of AP Courses
Each AP course description, or acorn book to use the popular term,
includes a topic outline. The major topics on the outline for biology, chem-
istry, and physics are accompanied by percentages. However, the percent-
2More information about the AP calculus development process is available at AP Calculus
for a New Century by Dan Kennedy, http://www.collegeboard.org/ap/calculus/new_century/
index.html (November 26, 2001).

68
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
ages may have different meanings for different subjects. For example, in the
course description for AP biology, the percentages for each major topic and
subtopic to be covered in a course are indicated (CEEB, 2001a, pp 5–6). In
the course description for AP physics, the “percentage goals for the exami-
nation” are given (CEEB, 2001d, pp.16–20). In AP chemistry, the percent-
ages indicate “the approximate proportion of questions on the multiple-
choice portion of the examination that pertain to that topic” (CEEB, 2001c,
pp. 6–8).
A listing of subtopics is provided for each major topic. The portion of
the AP chemistry topic outline related to chemical bonding illustrates the
level of detail provided by the topic outlines for each subject (CEEB, 2001c,
p. 6):
B. Chemical Bonding
1. Binding forces
a. Types: ionic, covalent, metallic, hydrogen bonding,
van der Waals (including London dispersion forces)
b. Relationships to states, structure, and properties of matter
c. Polarity of bonds, electronegativities
2. Molecular models
a. Lewis structures
b. Valence bond: hybridization of orbitals, resonance, sigma and
pi bonds
c. VSEPR [valence shell electron pair repulsion]
3. Geometry of molecules and ions, structural isomerism of simple
organic molecules and coordination complexes; dipole moments
of molecules; relation of properties to structure
The topic outline is intended to indicate the scope of the course, but not
necessarily the order or depth in which topics are taught. Teachers are told
that although the examination is based on the outline, they may wish to add
further topics (CEEB, 2001b, p. 12).
Laboratory Requirement for AP Science Courses
Because each AP course is developed independently, information on
laboratory work provided to teachers of AP science courses varies among
disciplines. There is a common recommendation that at least one double
period per week in AP chemistry and AP physics and two double periods
per week in AP biology be spent in laboratory work. The AP physics course
description does not recommend specific laboratory exercises, but rather
presents survey results on laboratory emphases in typical introductory col-

THE ADVANCED PLACEMENT PROGRAM
69
lege physics courses and describes the diversity of approaches used. The
May 2002–May 2003 course description for AP chemistry includes A Guide
for the Recommended Laboratory Program for Advanced Placement Chemis-
try (CEEB, 2001c, pp. 36–51). The guide recommends 22 laboratory activi-
ties,3 with the qualification that it is unlikely that every student will complete
all 22 activities while enrolled in an AP chemistry course (CEEB, 2001c, pp.
45–49). Students who have completed a first-year chemistry course will likely
have been exposed to many of these activities prior to the AP course. For AP
biology teachers, an AP biology student laboratory guide and accompanying
teacher’s guide are available. Like the recommended chemistry activities,
many of the biology laboratories will likely have been part of a first-year
biology program. Biology teachers are encouraged to substitute alternative
investigations as appropriate if they will enable students to meet the objec-
tives stated in the guide.
While the importance of including laboratory work in the curriculum is
emphasized to teachers, the interrelationships among curriculum, assess-
ment, and instruction are also highlighted. The AP physics course descrip-
tion suggests that laboratory experiences should help students understand
the topics being considered in the course and may improve test perfor-
mance overall (CEEB, 2001d, p. 8). The description for AP chemistry states,
“Data show that student scores on the AP Chemistry Exam improve with
increased time spent in laboratory. This correlation is expected to be even
stronger now that a question concerned with laboratory experiences is in-
cluded on the examination each year” (CEEB, 2001c, pp. 43–44). Recent
guidelines given to the AP science course development committees include
a charge to assess knowledge about laboratory skills and experimentation.
Additional Guidance Provided to Teachers
About Curriculum Development
The College Board asks AP biology teachers to stress understanding of
concepts rather than memorization of terms and technical details. The ratio-
nale provided is that students who understand the topics on a conceptual
level will do better on the national examination. Teachers are told that the
AP biology examination will assign increasingly less weight to specific facts,
and that students should be encouraged to focus on understanding impor-
tant relationships, processes, mechanisms, and potential extensions and ap-
plications of concepts. According to the College Board, questions on future
3The recommended activities include some processes and procedures that can often be
combined and incorporated into a single laboratory investigation.

70
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
examinations can be expected to test students’ ability to explain, analyze,
and interpret biological processes and phenomena more than their ability to
recall specific facts (CEEB, 1999a). With regard to the issue of depth vs.
breadth, the AP physics course description states, “concentration on basic
principles of physics and their applications through careful and selective
treatment of well-chosen areas is more important than superficial and ency-
clopedic coverage of many detailed topics” (CEEB, 2001d, p. 4).
Although the stated goals for AP courses emphasize the importance of
depth of understanding of fundamental concepts, the materials provided to
teachers give little specific and detailed advice for designing a coherent
curriculum. The AP biology course description goes the furthest in articulat-
ing the principal concepts underlying the discipline and in organizing knowl-
edge around them: “Emphasizing concepts over facts makes the content of a
biology course less overwhelming and more meaningful. A biology course
has more structure and meaning when the key concepts for each topic are
placed in the broader context of unifying themes” (CEEB, 2001a, p. 4). To
this end, the course description identifies three main subject areas that are
crosscut by eight biological themes. The College Board presents a brief,
open-ended framework for conceptual knowledge and encourages teachers
to continue the articulation and organization of knowledge themselves (see
Table 3-1).
TABLE 3-1
Some Applications of the Energy Transfer Theme to the Three Main Subject
Areas
III. Organisms and
Theme
I. Molecules and Cells
II. Heredity and Evolution
Populations
Plants transform light energy
A cell must spend energy to
Energy flows from producers
into chemical energy.
transcribe and translate a
to consumers in an
gene because entropy
ecosystem.
decreases as monomers are
organized into complex
macromolecules.
III. Energy
A proton gradient across
Energy released by the
Ion pumps in membranes
Transfer
membranes powers the
hydrolysis of ATP is used by
reestablish a transmembrane
synthesis of ATP in
cells in DNA synthesis,
resting potential after a
mitochondria, chloroplasts,
transcription, and translation.
neuron fires an impulse or a
and prokaryotes.
muscle fiber contracts.
SOURCE: Adapted from CEEB (2001a, p. 17).
NOTES: ATP = Adenosine Tri-Phosphate. The College Board encourages teachers to continue identifying ways
in which the eight major themes can be applied to the three major subject areas.

THE ADVANCED PLACEMENT PROGRAM
71
The teacher’s guide for AP biology (Schofield, 2000) encourages teach-
ers to develop a curriculum for conceptual or thematic understanding. The
guide illustrates a shift in emphasis of AP biology examination questions
away from factual listings of information, as illustrated by the 1989 free-
response question about cell energetics, and toward conceptual understand-
ing, as illustrated by the 1995 question. The following examples are taken
from that guide (Schofield, 2000, pp. 24–25).
Factual free-response question about cellular energetics from
the 1989 AP biology examination:
Explain what occurs during the Krebs (citric acid) cycle and electron trans-
port by describing the following:
a. The location of the Krebs cycle and electron transport chain in the
mitochondria
b. The cyclic nature of the reactions in the Krebs cycle
c. The production of ATP and reduced coenzymes during the cycle
d. The chemiosmotic production of ATP during electron transport
Conceptual-thematic free-response question about cellular
energetics from the 1995 AP biology examination:
Energy transfer occurs in all cellular activities. For three of the following five
processes involving energy transfer, explain how each functions in the cell
and give an example. Explain how ATP is involved in each example you
choose:
• Cellular movement
• Active transport
• Synthesis of molecules
• Chemiosmosis
• Fermentation
AP INSTRUCTION
Little is known, other than anecdotally, about what actually happens in
AP classrooms as teachers engage with students in the teaching–learning
process. Teachers make decisions every day and in every class period about
what to teach and how. Many factors influence these decisions, including
teaching philosophies; experience with various teaching strategies; the
teacher’s own educational background, experience, and familiarity with vari-
ous topics in the discipline; and student outcomes. In typical honors courses,

72
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
teachers generally feel freer to follow their own interests and pursue topics
within the broad course outline in which their content knowledge is most
secure. In AP courses in which teachers focus on preparing their students for
success on an AP examination, there is internal accountability if students
take the external examination (Herr, 1993), although little can be said about
accountability if large numbers of students in the course do not take the test.
Differences among schools also influence how a course is implemented.
Scheduling and length of class periods, available facilities and resources,
and existing state standards and assessments for courses preceding the AP
course all help shape a course differently in each locality.
AP Course Descriptions and Teacher’s Guides
AP program materials address instruction only in a very general way.
For example, a letter to teachers from Gasper Caperton, President of the
College Board, is included as a preface to the May 2002–May 2003 course
descriptions for AP biology, calculus, chemistry, and physics. He states, “This
AP Course Description provides an outline of content and description of
course goals, while still allowing teachers the flexibility to develop their own
lesson plans and syllabi, and to bring their individual creativity to the AP
classroom.” Consistent with this message, for example, the May 2002–May
2003 AP physics course description features a message from the develop-
ment committee encouraging the following broad instructional goals (CEEB,
2001d):
• Basic knowledge of the discipline of physics, including phenomenol-
ogy, theories and techniques, and generalizing principles.
• Ability to ask physical questions and to obtain solutions to physical
questions by use of qualitative and quantitative reasoning and by experi-
mental investigation.
• Fostering of important student attributes including appreciation of
the physical world and the discipline of physics, curiosity, creativity and
reasoned skepticism.
• Understanding connections of physics to other disciplines and to so-
cietal issues. (p. 3)
The course descriptions in the other subjects also provide statements of
goals and emphases that suggest a focus for instruction, such as the value of
active learning, but do not address strategies or specific models for instruc-
tion in any detail.
Instructional strategies that might be employed effectively in achieving
the instructional goals specified for AP courses may be among the teaching

THE ADVANCED PLACEMENT PROGRAM
73
strategies and techniques included with the sample course outlines pre-
sented in the AP teacher’s guides. However, the following two examples of
strategies provided by teachers in the teacher’s guide for AP biology (Schofield,
2000) are indicative of the degree of variability in instruction that might be
found in AP biology classrooms:
“The primary goal of the class is to ensure that students leave having expe-
rienced an intense course of college-level biology. I do this mainly through
lectures and discussions, during which time students are able to ask plenty
of questions.” (p. 45)
“I try to provide my students with a variety of teaching techniques that
encourage both independent and group activities.” The strategies described
by this teacher include student discussion of journal and newspaper ar-
ticles, student presentations of course topics, use of computer simulation
software and a yearlong independent experimental research project. (pp.
58–59)
The section of the May 2002–May 2003 course description for AP chem-
istry entitled A Guide for the Recommended Laboratory Program for Ad-
vanced Placement Chemistry (CEEB, 2001c, pp. 36–51) clearly states goals
for the laboratory program that include inquiry and student experimenta-
tion:
The program of laboratory investigations should be seen as a cyclic con-
tinuum of inquiry rather than a linear sequence of steps with a beginning
and an end . . . the ideal program should not only allow students to gain
experience with traditional laboratory exercises, . . . but also provide op-
portunities for students to carry out novel investigations. (CEEB, 2001c, pp.
39–40).
The stated goals for laboratory work (CEEB, 2001c) encourage students
to:
• Think analytically and to reduce problems to identifiable, answerable
questions.
• Design and carry out experiments that answer questions.
• Draw conclusions and evaluate their validity.
• Propose questions for further study.
• Communicate accurately and meaningfully.
The teacher’s guide for AP chemistry (Mullins, 1994) describes a variety
of laboratory programs, but does not address the context in which they
might be effective in meeting the stated goals. Most of the programs de-
scribed in the guide are based on typical published manuals for college-
level introductory chemistry laboratory programs that prescribe both a pur-
pose and a step-by-step procedure for students and allow few opportunities

74
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
for inquiry or student-designed investigations. Some course descriptions in-
clude laboratory components that may be more effective in providing these
opportunities, including “small-scale inquiry labs” (Mullins, 1994, p. 74) and
preparation of a botanically based universal indicator (p. 86).
Similarly, the stated goal for the 12 biology laboratory investigations is
to encourage higher-level thinking and provide opportunities for students to
learn concepts, acquire skills, and engage in problem solving. The manuals,
however, while providing important information to teachers about materials
and procedures that are essential features of a biology laboratory program,
specify the questions to be investigated, as well as step-by-step procedures.
They provide no guidance to teachers about establishing a laboratory pro-
gram that would enable student inquiry and no support for the goal stated in
the AP Biology course description that students gain personal experience in
scientific inquiry.
The report from the CFAPP is also relatively silent about instruction. It
recommends only that the College Board set high standards for AP course
delivery and provide demonstrations via video and other media of “best
practice” teaching approaches (CFAPP, 2001, p. 10).
Messages About Instruction Conveyed by AP
Examinations
Recent guidelines given to the development committees for AP science
courses include a charge to assess knowledge about laboratories and experi-
mentation. One of the free-response questions on each AP science examina-
tion will be a laboratory question. The format of the second section of the
chemistry examination was changed in 1999 with the introduction of a re-
quired laboratory-based question. The 1999 question referred to a traditional
experiment designed to determine the molar mass of an unknown gas. Com-
mentary on the question in the 1999 released exam for AP chemistry states
that the goal of the question is to determine whether students understand
how an experiment works, as well as the chemistry behind it. Students hav-
ing performed the experiment (or a similar one involving the determination
of moles of a gas collected over water) in the laboratory may have had an
advantage, as the question asked them to explain the purpose of steps in the
experiment and list measurements that must be made. However, the ques-
tion also could have been answered on the basis of knowledge of variables
needed in the calculation, without a student’s having actually completed the
laboratory. And although one of the stated goals for the AP chemistry labo-
ratory program is for students to design and carry out experiments, students
have not yet been asked to design an experiment on an AP chemistry exami-
nation. Thus the program materials may be sending conflicting messages,

THE ADVANCED PLACEMENT PROGRAM
75
since the examination questions indicate that experience with designing
experiments is not necessary for success.
AP ASSESSMENT
The AP examinations, administered nationally in May of each year, pro-
vide the foundation for curriculum and instruction in AP courses. They are
timed examinations, with about 50 percent of the total time devoted to mul-
tiple-choice questions and the rest to free-response, essay, or problem-solv-
ing questions.4 Students can elect to have their examination scores reported
to their choice of colleges, where the scores may be considered in decisions
about placement in a college course, awarding of credit for the introductory
course in the subject, or both (see Chapter 2, this volume).
AP courses are intended to represent general introductory-level college
courses. The AP examinations are designed to allow students to demon-
strate mastery of the concepts and skills learned in the course, enabling
some students to undertake, as freshmen, second-year work in the sequence
at their institution or to register for courses in other fields for which the
general course is a prerequisite.5 Consequently, AP examinations must be
valid and reliable measures of student achievement at the college level.
“Continued acceptance by colleges and universities of the validity of the
content of AP courses, the validity and reliability of the AP Examinations,
and the integrity of the scoring process is critical to AP’s success” (CFAPP,
2001, p. 6).
How AP Examinations Are Developed
Content specifications for AP examinations are determined during the
development of AP courses. The development committee for each AP course
is responsible for deciding the general content of the examination and the
ability level to be tested. The examination is constructed using the topic
percentages from the AP course descriptions as a guideline for the distribu-
tion of questions. The development committee helps write and review test
questions, as well as materials (including the AP course descriptions) that
4These percentages do not necessarily reflect the weighting of scores as a final examina-
tion grade is determined.
5The policies of colleges and universities vary widely with respect to the score they will
accept to award credit or placement and how that score translates into college credit or place-
ment. Indeed, individual departments within an institution of higher education often have very
different policies and expectations. This issue is considered in greater detail in Chapter 2 this
volume.

76
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
are distributed to schools. The committees also help create and give final
approval for each examination.6
The committees, representing both secondary- and college/university-
level teachers, work closely with ETS content specialists and psychometri-
cians to ensure that the examination scores will mean the same thing to from
year to year and from student to student. AP validity studies are designed to
validate the use of AP for college credit by measuring the comparability of
student knowledge of content and processes with that of students in intro-
ductory-level college courses (see Chapter 10, this volume, for a discussion
of these studies). Most of the multiple-choice questions are written by com-
mittee members and pretested in college classes to obtain some estimate of
the degree of difficulty and comparability with college courses. For optimal
measurement, the AP development committee endeavors to design a multiple-
choice section such that the average raw score is between 40 and 60 percent
of the maximum possible raw score. Questions at varying levels of difficulty
are included. Using many questions of medium difficulty ensures that clear
distinctions will be made between students earning grades of 2 and 3 on the
one hand and 3 and 4 on the other (CEEB, 2000b, p. 1). Some previously
administered questions are included to link the current form of the examina-
tion to previous forms, thus maintaining reliability from year to year and
examination to examination. The committees write, select, review, and re-
fine free-response questions. One important aspect of test development is
determining which item type and format are best for assessing a given topic
or skill area. AP development committee members work with AP content
experts and ETS statisticians to make this determination. Free-response ques-
tions are designed so that students will have to use analytical and organiza-
tional skills to solve problems, predict the products of chemical reactions,
and formulate answers to questions (CEEB, 2000b, p. 2). The College Board
does not, however, employ systematic research to determine the validity of
test items in measuring cognitive processes.7
As questions are being written and refined, the development commit-
tees propose preliminary scoring standards that are based on consistent cri-
teria from year to year. The committees also develop a formula for assigning
composite scores based on differential weights for the multiple-choice and
free-response questions.
6see http://www.collegeboard.org/ap/techman/whois/apdevcom.htm (November 26, 2001).
7The committee has been informed that an effort is presently under way by the College
Board to begin the collection of validity data.

THE ADVANCED PLACEMENT PROGRAM
77
How AP Examinations Are Scored
In scoring, the number of correct and incorrect answers in the multiple-
choice section of an examination is determined, and a correction for guess-
ing is applied. The procedures for scoring the free-response sections are
similar to those used by other testing programs to score essays or con-
structed-response items. Faculty consultants score the free-response ques-
tions during AP readings, which are held at various sites (usually college
campuses) throughout the United States each June.8 Because it is essential
that students’ responses be scored consistently, “a great deal of attention is
paid to the creation of detailed scoring guidelines, the thorough training of
all faculty consultants, and various ‘checks and balances’ applied through-
out the AP Reading.”9 Composite scores are created using formulas devel-
oped by each development committee.
AP uses a five-point scale for awarding final grades on the examina-
tions. The qualification for college credit that is described for each AP grade
is shown in Table 3-2. As indicated, those students who earn a score of 3, 4,
or 5 are described by the College Board as qualified for credit and/or enroll-
ment in advanced courses at colleges and universities.
Boundaries for awarding AP grades are reset annually at a grade-setting
session for each examination. Participants in these sessions usually include
the chief faculty consultant, the AP director or associate director from the
ETS, the College Board director or associate director of the AP program, ETS
content experts for the discipline, and an AP program statistician. Grade
distribution charts for each examination are available on the subject pages of
the AP Web site.10
TABLE 3-2
College Board Recommendations Regarding Students  Qualifications for
Receiving College Credit, Placement, or Both
AP Grade
Qualification
5
Extremely well qualified
4
Well qualified
3
Qualified
2
Possibly qualified
1
No recommendation
SOURCES: CEEB (2001a, 2001b, 2001c, 2001d).
8All of the examinations from a subject area are graded at the same site.
9See http://www.collegeboard.org/ap/techman/chap3/scorefc.htm (February 11, 2002).
10See http://apcentral.collegeboard.com/courses/overviews/ (February 11, 2002).

78
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
How Examination Results Are Reported
AP grade reports are sent in July to the college(s) designated by the
student, to the student’s secondary school, and to the student. The report
includes the grade earned and an interpretation of that grade for each AP
exam taken by the student in the current year. A report to AP teachers is sent
for each examination taken by five or more students at participating schools.
The report compares these students’ performance with that of the national
candidate group. Mean scores for the multiple-choice questions grouped by
four or five major topics and for each free-response section are compared.
The free-response booklets of a school’s senior AP students are released to
the schools after October 15 of the year in which the exam is taken if the
booklets have not already been requested by a postsecondary institution.
The free-response questions on the AP examinations are released to
students and teachers after the exam has been administered. They are also
posted on the AP Web site, along with scoring guidelines and student samples
with scoring commentary, after the examinations have been graded.
Entire released examinations, including both the multiple-choice and
free-response sections, are published about every 5 years for each subject.11
The publication provides the following:
• Multiple-choice questions and answer key, and the percentage of
candidates who answered each question correctly.
• Free-response questions and scoring guidelines.
• Sample student responses with commentary (the actual scores these
students received, with a brief explanation).
• Statistical information about students’ performance on the examina-
tion.
How the College Board Determines Whether
AP Examinations Accomplish Their Purpose
AP examinations must be valid and reliable measures of students’ achieve-
ment at the college level. Colleges need to know that the AP grades they
receive for their incoming students represent a level of achievement equiva-
lent to that of students who take the corresponding introductory course in
college. The College Board conducts college comparability studies to con-
firm that the AP grade scale is properly aligned with current college stan-
dards. Periodically, instructors from some of the 200 colleges receiving the
largest number of AP grades for an examination administer the AP examina-
11Free-response questions are released annually.

THE ADVANCED PLACEMENT PROGRAM
79
tion or portions thereof to college students who are completing the corre-
sponding college course. The performance of the college students on the
examination is compared with that of the AP students. When AP grades are
set, the composite score cut points are established so that the lowest com-
posite score for a grade of 5 is roughly equal to the average composite score
of college students earning a grade of A. The lowest composite score for a
grade of 4 is roughly equal to the average composite score for students with
a grade of B. The average composite score of students receiving a grade of
C is used to set the lowest AP grade of 3. Similar logic is used in setting the
lowest composite score for a grade of 2 (Morgan and Ramist, 1998).
AP PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT
What Is Known About the Preparation and Credentials
of AP Teachers
Very little is known about the teaching experiences and preparation of
teachers who are teaching AP courses. The College Board is currently con-
ducting a survey of AP teachers with the goal of describing their characteris-
tics and identifying teacher attributes that affect the success of students.12
Until the results of this study are available, information about the teachers
involved with the AP program must be based on descriptions provided in
program materials.
The College Board (CFAPP, 2001, p. 6) states, “AP is an enterprise that
relies on a culture of dedication, volunteerism, and altruism among AP teach-
ers.” The College Board (CFAPP, 2001, p. 2) estimates that there were ap-
proximately 100,000 teachers teaching AP classes in the United States during
the 1999–2000 school year. Assigning teachers to AP courses is usually a
school-level decision; the College Board does not certify teachers and has
relatively little to say about the matter of teacher qualifications. School ad-
ministrators attending an AP workshop reported that arbitrary assignment of
teachers to AP courses is used only when absolutely necessary and that in
many cases, teachers apply specifically to take an AP assignment (Burton,
Bruschi, Kindig, and Courtney, 2000).
Professional Development Experiences of AP Teachers
Although the College Board does not require participation in AP profes-
sional development activities, each of the AP teacher’s guides encourages
such participation. Stipends and travel support may come from local schools
12See http://www.collegeboard.org/ap/research/abstract24.html (February 11, 2002).

80
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
or school districts or from the states and the federal government, or a teacher
may receive no support at all. Consequently, many of the teachers who
participate in AP professional development activities do so on their own
time and at their own expense.
The two principal types of professional development available to AP
teachers nationally are 1- and 2-day AP workshops offered by the College
Board’s regional offices and AP summer institutes, usually 5 days long and
offered by a variety of independent agencies. During the 1999–2000 aca-
demic year, more than 56,000 AP teachers (about 56 percent of the approxi-
mately 100,000 teachers teaching AP classes in the various disciplines) par-
ticipated in professional development workshops and summer institutes
(CFAPP, 2001, p. 2). Teachers who participate may have widely differing
professional development experiences, depending on which workshop or
summer institute they attend. Recognizing the variability in content and un-
even quality of the workshops and summer institutes, the College Board
recently developed and implemented quality standards for AP workshop
consultants and AP summer institutes (College Board, 2000, 2001).
Generally, teachers, guidance counselors, and school administrators at-
tend the 1- or 2-day workshops to learn the rudiments of teaching an AP
course and to be apprised of the latest developments and expectations for
each course. Major topics covered include the following:
• Advice on preparing students for the AP examinations.
• Practical information on starting or revising an AP course.
• Insights into the structure, content, and grading of the AP examina-
tions.
• New technology applications.
• Updates from the College Board and the ETS.
AP teachers attending the summer institutes explore a variety of instruc-
tional strategies that can be employed both to help their students learn and
understand the material and to prepare them for success on the national
examination. The strategies discussed range from covering every topic to
emphasizing concepts, principles, and a “scientific attitude,” and from teacher-
centered, content-based lecture delivery to a variety of student-centered
pedagogies (Burton et al., 2000). AP science teachers attending summer
institutes often perform and discuss laboratory activities with the guidance
of experienced AP instructors. They follow actual laboratory procedures;
learn to handle equipment and materials; and discuss time frames, pitfalls,
possible shortcuts, reasonable laboratory results, good follow-up questions,
and ways of integrating the laboratory experience most profitably into the
classroom setting (Schofield, 2000, p. 13). Fifty summer institutes responded
to a 1999 survey in which directors were asked to provide evaluation data

THE ADVANCED PLACEMENT PROGRAM
81
about their workshops. Workshop participants from these 50 programs indi-
cated that sharing ideas and experiences, networking, and having good dis-
cussions with other teachers were of the activities of most value to them.
Many of the participating AP teachers reported feeling isolated and unsup-
ported after they left the institutes and workshops, as most of them returned
to schools where they were the only AP teacher in a discipline (Burton et al.,
2000).
Experienced AP teachers often cite the experience of serving as a faculty
consultant for the annual AP reading as a highly valued professional devel-
opment experience. In June 2000, approximately 5,000 college faculty and
high school teachers participated in the 1-week sessions. The College Board
cites three of the most common reasons given by readers for applying to
return after their first experience:13
• High school and college faculty exchange ideas on an equal playing
field.
• Networks are established among participants.
• Practice gained in establishing and applying rubrics makes partici-
pants better teachers.
The CFAPP recommends that teacher professional development become
the area of greatest emphasis for technological investment and develop-
ment: “Technology can supplement face-to-face workshops and institutes,
providing ongoing support to teachers throughout the year” (CFAPP, 2001,
p. 11). Services currently provided to teachers by the College Board include
an AP electronic mailing list for each discipline—AP Central; the College
Board’s online site for the AP program, with information about AP courses,
publications, workshops, and summer institutes; and videoconferences with
the teachers who develop the AP courses and examinations. The College
Board presents no information about local professional development activi-
ties available for AP teachers, but AP teacher’s guides for the individual
disciplines refer teachers to their respective professional organizations, which
often sponsor sessions on AP at state and national conventions.
The CFAPP report warns that the current models for AP professional
development are and will continue to be insufficient. An estimated 100,000
new AP teachers will be needed between now and the end of the decade,
and many of them will be teaching AP for the first time. The commission
states: “The College Board, working in cooperation with schools, school
systems, colleges and universities, governments and others, must make an
unconditional commitment to teacher professional development. Without
13See http://www.collegeboard.org/ap/readers/index.html (November 26, 2001).

82
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
this commitment, access to AP will not improve and quality will decline”
(CFAPP, 2001, p. 10). Specific recommendations include (1) developing and
implementing a mentoring system using experienced and retired AP teach-
ers as mentors, (2) identifying successful strategies for preparing teachers to
teach AP, and (3) evaluating and incorporating new models of professional
development that support instructional and curricular changes. The commis-
sion also recommends that the College Board expand the development and
implementation of the AP Vertical Teams program. This program focuses on
collaborative planning workshops at which teachers in grades 7–12 are in-
volved in redesigning middle school and high school curricula to give stu-
dents good preparation for AP and other advanced courses.

83
4
The International Baccalaureate
Programme
Given the differences in their origins and goals, it is not surprising that
the International Baccalaureate (IB) and Advanced Placement (AP) programs
differ significantly. This chapter presents a detailed review of the IB pro-
gram; a similar review of the AP program is provided in Chapter 3. The first
section gives an overview of the IB program; the sections that follow ad-
dress in turn IB curriculum, instruction, assessment, and professional devel-
opment.
OVERVIEW
The International Baccalaureate Organisation (IBO), a nonprofit educa-
tional foundation headquartered in Geneva, Switzerland, was founded in
the 1960s with the mission of fostering in member schools international
understanding and responsible world citizenship, as well as intellectual rigor
and high academic achievement (IBO, 1997a). The IB Diploma Programme
consists of a comprehensive precollege curriculum for highly motivated stu-
dents in the last 2 years of high school that allows students to fulfill the
requirements of various educational systems and aims to incorporate the
best elements of many different national models (IBO, 1997a). Each of the
IB courses in mathematics and the experimental sciences incorporates a
formative internal assessment component and culminates in an internation-
ally administered external examination. Students who complete the program
and receive qualifying scores on the examinations are awarded the IB Di-
ploma.1
1Although the IBO does not represent its courses as replacements for college courses,
some college and university policies allow for granting credit or placement. A database listing
these institutions and describing their policies can be accessed at the IBO Web site at http://
www.ibo.org/ibo/index.cfm/en/ibo/services/universities (November 28, 2001).

84
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
The requirements for the IB Diploma are designed to engage students in
an integrated program of studies as they complete courses and examinations
in one subject from each of six different subject groups.2 Students study
some subjects in depth by selecting at least three but no more than four
courses at the Higher Level (HL) and explore others more broadly at the
Standard Level (SL). This approach represents a deliberate compromise be-
tween the early specialization preferred in some national systems and the
breadth found in others (IBO, 1998b, p. 2, 2001a, 2001b, 2001c, p. 1). HL
courses are 2-year courses. SL courses may be completed in 1 year if sched-
uling allows for the required number of hours, although many IB schools
offer 2-year SL courses.3
In contrast to the AP program, which aims to provide discrete college-
level courses for students in high school, the IB courses are part of an
integrated program designed to prepare students for college. The IB math-
ematics program offers a selection of mathematics courses designed to meet
the varying needs, interests, and abilities of college-bound high school stu-
dents. The IB Mathematical Methods SL course is designed to provide a
sound mathematical background for students who expect to study subjects
at the university level that have a significant mathematical content. The IB
Mathematics HL and Further Mathematics SL courses offer more rigorous
preparation. Another fundamental difference between the AP and IB math-
ematics programs is that the IB mathematics courses are not calculus courses;
rather, they focus on many advanced mathematics topics that may include
calculus.4 Similarly, students are offered both HL and SL courses in each of
the experimental sciences; this accommodates students with a strong inter-
est in science while also providing sound preparation in science for those
who wish to focus on other subjects.
Three additional requirements are designed to give IB Diploma candi-
dates the opportunity to pursue their own interests while at the same time
developing a broad understanding of the bases of knowledge in both the
humanities and the sciences. Theory of Knowledge is a 2-year course of
study unique to IB and mandatory for every diploma candidate. “It chal-
lenges students and their teachers to reflect critically on diverse ways of
knowing and areas of knowledge, and to consider the role which knowl-
edge plays in a global society. It encourages students to become aware of
2Language (a student’s first language and a study of world literature), a second modern
language, the social sciences, the experimental sciences, mathematics, and the arts and elec-
tives.
3For IB courses, 240 hours of teaching is recommended for HL courses and 150 hours for
SL courses.
4For a detailed discussion of the content of these courses, including their calculus compo-
nent, and an analysis of how they fit into typical U.S. high school mathematics programs, see
the report of the mathematics panel, available at http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10129.

THE INTERNATIONAL BACCALAUREATE PROGRAMME
85
themselves as thinkers . . .” (IBO, 2000b, p. 3). The curriculum for the course
centers on a series of questions, including those designed to help students
understand the nature of knowledge in mathematics and the sciences.5
IB Diploma candidates must also satisfy the Extended Essay require-
ment by undertaking original research and writing an essay of some 4000
words. This requirement offers students the opportunity to investigate a
topic of special interest and acquaints them with the independent research
and writing skills expected at the university level. It allows them to deepen
their study by investigating a topic that was introduced in one of their higher-
level courses or to add breadth to their program by studying a subject not
included in their diploma courses. A third requirement—the Creativity, Ac-
tion, and Service requirement (CAS)—encourages students to become in-
volved in extracurricular activities.
A student who satisfies the Theory of Knowledge, Extended Essay, and
CAS requirements and achieves a cumulative score of at least 24 points on
the six examinations (each of which is graded on a scale from 1 to 7) is
awarded the IB Diploma. An IB Certificate is awarded to students who take
any number of individual IB courses and the subsequent examinations, but
do not fulfill all of the requirements for the diploma.
During the past three decades, an increasing number of U.S. high schools
have joined IB schools worldwide in offering the Diploma Programme. In
May 2000, 18,511 students from 255 U.S. public and private schools took
50,745 IB examinations. Approximately two-thirds of those students were
candidates for the IB Diploma,6 and one-third were certificate candidates
(May 2000 Summary). Although these students represent less than 2 percent
of U.S. high schools, their increasing numbers indicate that the IB program is
experiencing a period of rapid growth in this country. The number of IB
examinations administered in the United States has increased by an average
16 percent annually every year since 1994. The number of schools applying
to International Baccalaureate of North America (IBNA) has tripled over the
5The central questions examined include the following: How do I or how do we know
that a given assertion is true, or a given judgment is well grounded? How is knowledge gained?
What role does personal experience play? Do we construct reality, or do we recognize it? How
is a mathematical proof different from, or similar to, justifications accepted in other areas of
knowledge? Has technology, for example computers and electronic calculators, influenced the
knowledge claims made in mathematics? Is the scientific method a product of western culture
or is it universal? To what extent can science be understood through the study of just one
discipline, for example physics? Are the models and theories created by scientists accurate
descriptions of the natural world, or are they primarily useful interpretations for prediction,
explanation, and control of the natural world? (IBO, 2000b, pp. 3–4)
6According to Paul Campbell, director for programs, International Baccalaureate of North
America (IBNA) (personal communication), approximately 70 percent of diploma candidates
earn the IB Diploma.

86
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
past several years and has been stable recently at 50 to 60 applications per
year.7
A high school must offer all the components of the diploma program
and be authorized by the IBO to use IB curriculum and assessment materi-
als, register candidates for the IB examinations, and qualify them for the IB
Diploma. U.S. schools that are interested in joining the IBO complete a self-
study and submit a formal application to IBNA. Receipt of the application is
followed by an on-site visit by representatives from IBNA that focuses on
evaluating faculty commitment and qualifications; physical facilities, includ-
ing the library and science laboratories; and commitment at the school level.
The process of becoming an IB school can take 2 years or more as IBNA
evaluates the ability of both the school and the school district to commit
resources to providing the administrative structure, faculty, and facilities
needed to support the offering of the IB Diploma Programme. IBNA main-
tains a relationship with member schools that includes monitoring test regis-
tration and administration.8 Every 5 years, each IB school conducts a self-
evaluation and submits a school review to IBNA.
IB CURRICULUM
IB mathematics and science courses are designed to be components of
an integrated program, and this objective is reflected in the curriculum ma-
terials. The IB program guides for courses in each discipline, including math-
ematics and the experimental sciences, present common aims and objec-
tives. A discussion of the program model, a description of the examination,
and detailed information and guidance for teachers about meeting the inter-
nal assessment requirements are common to all of the subject guides for
experimental science. The guides also provide a topic outline and a detailed
syllabus for each course. Teachers use the guides as the basis for determin-
ing the structure of their curriculum. Thus like the curriculum for AP courses,
the curriculum for IB courses, as it is designed and implemented, can vary
from school to school in sequence and emphasis. However, the specificity of
the IB syllabus and the requirements for the IB internal assessment lead to
less variability in the content of the curriculum and the nature of the labora-
tory and other practical experiences provided to students than is the case in
the corresponding AP courses. The extent to which the IBO specifies cur-
riculum for IB courses is described in detail in the discussion that follows.
7Paul Campbell, director of programs, IBNA (personal communication).
8Schools are not able to maintain membership in the IBO without registering students in
IB courses for the examinations and ensuring the security of the examinations.

THE INTERNATIONAL BACCALAUREATE PROGRAMME
87
Development of IB Courses
The IB course development process is guided by the IBO’s vision of a
rigorous, comprehensive, and balanced college preparatory curriculum. A
curriculum review committee with international membership is responsible
for articulating, implementing, and maintaining the vision in each subject
area. The International Baccalaureate Curriculum and Assessment Centre
(IBCA) in Cardiff, Wales, has primary responsibility for curriculum develop-
ment. IBCA staff representatives, most of whom are former IB teachers,
work with teachers representing IB schools from around the world on the
curriculum review committees. The committees for all subjects in a disci-
pline convene jointly at IBCA because changes in the mathematics or ex-
perimental sciences programs impact all of the subjects in that discipline.
The role of the curriculum review committees encompasses identifying top-
ics to be included, as well as reviewing the assessment structure and writing
the assessment statements for each topic. The mathematics curriculum re-
view committees are also responsible for specifying presumed knowledge
and skills for each IB mathematics course.
An important distinguishing feature of IB curriculum review is the sys-
tematic involvement of classroom teachers in a “consultative process” (IBO,
1999d). The recent revision of the IB Experimental Sciences curriculum illus-
trates the process well. The process began with a review of responses to
questionnaires sent to each IB biology, chemistry, and physics teacher. Teach-
ers were asked about the instructional time spent on each topic in the sylla-
bus and on laboratory work for each topic, as well as about the technology
resources available to them. The biology, chemistry, and physics curriculum
committees then made revisions to the diploma guides for each subject.
Revised versions of the guides were posted on a password-protected Web
site for further teacher review and comment before being published.
Content of IB Courses
The IB Diploma Programme Guide for each subject includes a detailed
topic outline. It provides IB teachers with some guidance in identifying fun-
damental concepts by grouping “essential principles of the subject” in mate-
rial designated as the core.9 The core topics are common to both the SL and
HL courses in a subject, with additional topics being specified for the latter.
9In the experimental sciences, 80 hours of instruction is recommended for core material in
SL courses, with an additional 55 hours for HL courses. In mathematics courses, 105 hours is
recommended for SL and 195 hours for HL courses.

88
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
The guides also provide outlines for optional topics.10 Teachers of each
IB experimental science subject at an IB school must collaboratively select
two options to include in their curriculum. Options are generally selected on
the basis of teachers’ backgrounds and areas of expertise, as well as avail-
able local resources. The options for IB mathematics courses allow for studying
a topic in more depth. Teachers select one option, and the selection made
can determine the nature of the course, resulting in very different experi-
ences for students. In the United States, for example, the Mathematics Meth-
ods SL option Further Calculus is often selected over the other two op-
tions—Statistical Methods and Further Geometry—to provide students with
a course that is comparable to the AP Calculus AB course. The experimental
science courses offer options that allow in-depth study of a topic, such as
the physics options Astrophysics and Relativity. Many, like the physics op-
tion Biomedical Physics, focus on interdisciplinary topics. Schools are also
allowed to submit an option of their own design for approval. That some
schools have taken advantage of this opportunity is indicated by the addi-
tion of Medicine and Drugs, previously a local option, to the most recent
revision of the IB program guide for chemistry.
The IB program guides provide considerable information about what
students are expected to know by specifying assessment statements, expressed
in terms of learning outcomes, for each topic in the experimental science
courses. The guides also give estimated teaching hours for each topic, but
do not recommend a sequence for the presentation of topics. To illustrate
the considerably greater detail provided in the IB guides than in the AP
course descriptions, the treatment of ionic bonds in IB chemistry can be
contrasted with the AP topic outline for Chemical Bonding included in Chapter
3, this volume. The latter outline simply lists “ionic” as one of the binding
forces that might appear on the AP chemistry examination. AP chemistry
teachers must infer the desired depth of treatment of the topic by reviewing
old examination questions. In contrast, the Programme Guide for IB Chem-
istry (IBO, 2001b, p. 51) gives the following six assessment statements for
the same topic:
Topic 4: Bonding
4.1
Ionic Bond (2 hours)
4.1.1
Describe the ionic bond as the result of electron transfer
leading to attraction between oppositely charged ions.
4.1.2
Determine which ions will be formed when metals in
groups 1, 2, and 3 lose electrons.
10Mathematics courses include one 35-hour option. Experimental science courses include
two options—15 hours each in SL courses and 22 hours each in HL courses.

THE INTERNATIONAL BACCALAUREATE PROGRAMME
89
4.1.3
Determine which ions will be formed when elements in
groups 6 and 7 gain electrons.
4.1.4
State that transition metals can form more than one ion.
Restrict examples to simple ions e.g., Fe2+ and Fe3+.
4.1.5
Predict whether a compound of two elements would be
mainly ionic or mainly covalent from the position of the
elements in the periodic table, or from their electronega-
tivity values.
4.1.6
Deduce the formula and state the name of an ionic
compound formed from a group 1, 2, or 3 metal and a
group 5, 6, or 7 non-metal.
The assessment statements for experimental science use 26 action verbs
to indicate expectations for each topic. Some of these verbs are highlighted
in bold in the preceding example (“describe,” “determine,” “state,” “predict,”
and “deduce”). The guides define each verb and associate it consistently
throughout the syllabus and on the IB examinations with one of three con-
tent objectives:
• Demonstrate an understanding.
• Apply and use.
• Construct, analyze, and evaluate.
Use of the action verbs conveys important information to teachers about the
expectations for depth and breadth of content. Teachers and students are
expected to be familiar with the definitions of these verbs. They must be
aware that, for example, “predict” and “deduce” are associated with the third
objective (construct, analyze, and evaluate) and require deeper understand-
ing than “state,” which is associated with the first objective (demonstrate an
understanding) and requires only memorization.
Laboratory Requirement for
IB Experimental Sciences Courses
The IB program has more to say about laboratory experimentation than
does the AP program, as the score for a student’s laboratory work (assessed
internally by the teacher and moderated externally by the IBO) makes up 24
percent of a student’s final examination score. The program guides do not
recommend any specific laboratory exercises, but provide general guidance
for the design of a laboratory program. The Vade Mecum: Procedures Manual
for IB Coordinators and Teachers specifies that the laboratory activities in IB
Experimental Sciences courses must include hands-on investigations in the

90
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
laboratory or in the field, as well as problem-solving activities involving data
analysis (IBO, 2000d, p. 4). At least 25 percent of the teaching program (not
including time spent writing up the experiments) must be devoted to the
Practical Scheme of Work (PSOW, described in greater detail below).11 Teach-
ers are provided extensive detail about the criteria for the internal assess-
ment of laboratory work, as they must offer opportunities for their students
that match the relevant assessment criteria. Specific criteria for the internal
assessment guide science teachers in setting the stage for students to design
and carry out their own experiments.
The IB internal assessment for the experimental sciences uses eight as-
sessment criteria to evaluate the work of both HL and SL candidates (Table
4-1). These are described in the guide for each of the IB experimental sci-
ences courses. For a particular criterion, a student’s laboratory work is judged
to see whether the requirements for different aspects of the criterion have
been fulfilled completely, partially, or not at all. For example, forming a
hypothesis is one of the three aspects of the planning (a) criterion. The
following example (Table 4-2) is given in the guide for each of the IB ex-
perimental sciences courses.
11At least 60 hours for HL students and 40 hours for SL students (IBO, 2000d, p. 3), which
includes 10–15 hours that candidates must spend on their Group 4 project (IBO, 2000c, p. 3).
TABLE 4-1
Summary of Eight Assessment Criteria for IB Experimental Sciences and Two
or Three Aspects of Each Criterion
Assessment Criteria
Aspects
Planning (a)
Defining the problem or research question; formulating a hypothesis or
prediction; selecting variables.
Planning (b)
Selecting appropriate apparatus or materials; designing a method for the
control of variables; designing a method for the collection of sufficient
relevant data.
Data collection
Collecting and recording raw data; organizing and presenting raw data.
Data processing and presentation
Processing raw data; presenting processed data.
Conclusion and evaluation
Drawing conclusions; evaluating procedure(s) and results; improving the
investigation.
Manipulative skills
Carrying out techniques safely; following a variety of instructions.
Personal skills (a)
Working within a team; recognizing the contributions of others; exchanging
and integrating ideas.
Personal skills (b)
Approaching scientific investigations with self-motivation and
perseverance; working in an ethical manner; paying attention to
environmental impact.
SOURCES: Adapted from IBO (2001a, 2001b, 2001c).

THE INTERNATIONAL BACCALAUREATE PROGRAMME
91
The guides also provide a discussion of the criteria to guide teachers. “It
is generally not appropriate to assess planning (a) for most experiments or
investigations found in standard textbooks, unless the experiments are modi-
fied. It is essential that students be given an open-ended problem to investi-
gate” (IBO, 2001a, 2001b, 2001c, p. 24). A separate publication, Teacher
Support Material: Experimental Sciences—Internal Assessment (IBO, 1999e),
provides teachers with exemplars of student laboratory reports that fulfill all
aspects of the criteria completely, as well as examples of those that do not.
Teachers of the various experimental science subjects in an IB school
must jointly submit to the IBO a PSOW, a summary of all the investigative
activities their students carry out. Each PSOW must include at least a few
complex investigations that make greater demands on the students than
those posed by simple experiments. It must also include the date and a brief
description of each investigation and an estimate of the time spent. The
PSOW is accompanied by a copy of the instructions given to students for
each activity. A script of any verbal instructions offered also must be in-
cluded. These materials are used in moderating the internal assessment grades
to ensure, for example, that if students are offered credit for planning, the
teacher has not given them procedures. “The main criticism made by mod-
erators was that the investigations were too directed with no real freedom
for the candidates to develop the investigation for themselves” (IBO, 1998a).
The PSOW also must include an interdisciplinary project involving all of the
IB science students at a school in identifying and investigating an issue of
local interest. The project requirements emphasize sharing of concepts and
theories from across the disciplines, as well as the processes involved in
scientific investigation, rather than products.
The PSOW is evaluated yearly, and teachers receive feedback and sug-
gestions for improvement. More detail about the scoring and moderation of
the internal assessment and about the feedback the IBO provides to schools
on their laboratory programs is provided later in this chapter.
TABLE 4-2
Example of Expectations of Students to Meet the Requirements of One Aspect
of the Planning (a) Criterion
Formulating a Hypothesis or Prediction
Complete
Partial
Not at all
Relates the hypothesis or
States the hypothesis or prediction
Does not state a hypothesis or
prediction directly to the research
but does not explain it.
prediction.
question and explains it,
quantitatively where appropriate.
SOURCES: Adapted from IBO (2001a, 2001b, 2001c).

92
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
IB INSTRUCTION
There is variation from classroom to classroom in what is actually taught
in an IB course, how much of the topic outline is covered, how much time
is devoted to different topics, and what instructional strategies are used.
However, the detail provided in the IB guides regarding expected student
outcomes directs teachers toward the use of specific instructional strategies.
Teachers are told that internal assessment tasks should be built into class-
room teaching whenever possible. Internal assessments should form part of
the learning experience of the students and should not be seen as an addi-
tion to the teaching schedule (IBO, 1999b).
IB Programme Guides and Teaching Notes
IB mathematics programme guides provide general guidance on instruc-
tion, but also offer specific suggestions about instructional strategies. The
objectives for students given in the mathematics program guides include the
following:
• Organize and present data in graphic, tabular, and/or diagrammatic
form.
• Formulate a mathematical argument, and communicate it clearly.
• Recognize patterns and structures in a variety of situations.
• Use appropriate technological devices as mathematical tools.
Teaching notes for each topic in the syllabus for each mathematics course
provide suggestions for teachers, while stating that “it is not mandatory that
these suggestions be followed” (IBO, 1998b, p. 9). The following are ex-
amples of alternative strategies presented in the teaching notes for the Math-
ematical Methods SL guide: “an informal investigative/experimental approach
to statistical inference is envisaged” (IBO, 1997b, p. 21), and “problems
might be best solved with the aid of a Venn diagram or tree diagram, without
the explicit use of these formulae” (IBO, 1997b, p. 18). The teaching notes
also include suggestions for linking content to help students see connec-
tions, such as linking the study of the second derivative in the Further Calcu-
lus option to the study of exponents and logarithms in the core content
(IBO, 1997b, p. 23).
The experimental sciences guides do not address instruction directly,
other than to indicate consistently that there is no single best approach to
teaching IB courses and that teachers should provide a variety of ways of
acquiring information that can be accepted or rejected by each student,
allowing different routes through the material (IBO, 2001a, 2001b, 2001c, p.
11). The IB program guide for chemistry tells chemistry teachers, for ex-

THE INTERNATIONAL BACCALAUREATE PROGRAMME
93
ample, that the “chemistry course includes the essential principles of the
subject but also, through selection of options, allows teachers some flexibil-
ity to tailor the course to meet the needs of their students” (IBO, 2001b, p.
35). References to instruction also appear in annual subject reports, such as
the following example from the 1999 IB chemistry subject report (IBO, 2000a):
The main areas of weakness involved applications of principles to specific
situations. This process is always a challenge to students. Students need to
be exposed repeatedly to the application of basic concepts to new situa-
tions. This can be done through examples used in the classroom, by home-
work assignments which provide a variety of appropriate situations requir-
ing skills beyond recall of information, and by tests and examinations which
use questions similar to those used in the IB examination. (p. 401)
As indicated in the discussion of curriculum, the use of action verbs in
the experimental science assessment statements informs teachers about the
depth of treatment required. Teachers then make decisions about the best
way to prepare their students for the required outcomes. For example, “de-
scribe the ionic bond as the result of electron transfer leading to attraction
between oppositely charged ions” (IBO, 2001b, p. 51) means students must
be able to recall the definition of ionic bond. Teachers then make individual
instructional decisions about the most effective ways to help their students
learn this information. At a level requiring deeper understanding, the ability
to “predict molecular polarity based on bond polarity and molecular shape”
(IBO, 2001b, p. 52) is an outcome that cannot be achieved by memorizing a
breadth of detail, but only by building the necessary understanding during a
variety of practical experiences with molecular shapes, bond character, and
electronegativities. Teachers must decide how best to accomplish this and
are guided by the assessment statement to set up a variety of situations in
which students can build understanding and experience.
Messages About Instruction Conveyed
by IB Examinations
In specifying aspects of a subject to be assessed, the IB internal assess-
ment criteria require that teachers structure the classroom and laboratory
environment so that students have the opportunity to acquire and develop
the skills to be evaluated.
IB mathematics teachers are encouraged to integrate the internal assess-
ment assignments for the mathematics portfolio into their teaching. Related
teaching and learning strategies discussed in the Mathematical Methods SL
guide (IBO, 1997b, p. 51) include the following:

94
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
Candidates need to be provided with the opportunities to experiment, ex-
plore, make conjectures and ask questions. Ideally, the atmosphere in the
classroom should be one of enquiry.
Small groups could work through some relatively simple assignments in
order to learn skills associated with portfolio activities.
Students may be unaware of certain strategies associated with experimenta-
tion, or “playing,” which are an important part of investigative work, par-
ticularly if they have only experienced more formal modes of working.
Similarly, IB experimental science teachers are given guidance in pro-
viding a variety of practical experiences for their students. Sample laboratory
investigations are offered and analyzed in the IB Teacher Support Material:
Experimental Sciences—Internal Assessment (IBO, 1999e). The program
guides provide direction for preparing students for experimentation without
specifying laboratory activities. For example, “the teacher might present the
aim of an investigation generally in the form ‘investigate the factors that
affect X.’ Students should be able to realize that certain factors will influence
X and clearly . . . identify a focused research question” (IBO, 1999e, p. 4).
The criteria for personal skills (a) require that a teacher assess a student’s
work within a team, defined as follows: “Teams, whose members collabo-
rate, can be formed with a wide variety of people. The views of all team
members are respected and actively sought” (IBO, 1998a). Teachers must
therefore provide opportunities for students to learn how to work effectively
in teams. Teachers are encouraged to use the online curriculum center to
share ideas about possible investigations and add resources to the relevant
sections of the online subject guides.
IB ASSESSMENT
Assessment in IB mathematics and science courses has two compo-
nents—external and internal. The external assessment consists of a written
examination that is administered internationally over a period of 2 days in
May of each year (in November for split-session schools). The examination
tests knowledge of both the core and optional topics. The internal assess-
ment component comprises the teacher’s formative assessment of students’
practical work (laboratory investigations in science courses and portfolios in
mathematics courses) judged against established assessment criteria. This
component is conducted by teachers within the school environment and is
moderated externally by the IBO. In the experimental sciences, the external
and internal assessments make up 76 percent and 24 percent of the final
examination mark, respectively. IB teachers submit internal assessment marks
and a predicted final examination grade for each of their students. The latter
is the teacher’s prediction of the grade the candidate will achieve in the

THE INTERNATIONAL BACCALAUREATE PROGRAMME
95
subject, based on all the evidence of a candidate’s work and the teacher’s
knowledge of IB standards (IBO, 2000d, p. F14).
The IB assessments are designed to gauge the educational achievement
of candidates against the range of objectives specified for each subject. The
structure of each written external examination paper “allows candidates to
demonstrate their achievement in terms of content knowledge, depth of
understanding and use of specific higher level cognitive skills, as described
by the subject objectives.”12
The internal assessment component addresses skills that cannot be dem-
onstrated satisfactorily within the context of a written examination. As stated
in the guides, the purpose of the internal assessment for the IB mathematics
portfolio is to “provide candidates with opportunities to be rewarded for
mathematics carried out under ordinary conditions, that is, without the time
limitations and stress associated with written examinations” (IBO, 1998b, p.
47). The requirements for the internal assessment in the experimental sci-
ences are focused on the candidates’ skills in laboratory investigation, in-
cluding planning; data collection and processing; evaluation of procedures
and results; manipulative skills; and personal skills, including working with
a team (IBO, 2001a, 2001b, 2001c, pp. 20–22).
How IB Assessments Are Developed
Examinations for each IB course are written by chief examiners and
deputies and are overseen and approved by the examination board at IBCA.
Teams of experienced senior examiners prepare the examinations for each
administration in a process that is coordinated and overseen by IBO aca-
demic staff. Separate examinations are developed for SL and HL courses in a
subject area. Single senior examiners normally write individual examination
questions, which are directly linked throughout the examination develop-
ment process to the assessment statements and the objectives to be mea-
sured as outlined in the program guides for each subject. “The questions are
not field tested, partly because it is difficult to find a suitable trial group of
candidates without the possibility of compromising security. New questions
are written for each examination session—they are not banked.” Moreover,
“for each session, the senior examining team aims to prepare a different
form of the examination which is of the same standard of demand as in
previous sessions. In practice it is very difficult to achieve a high level of
precision.”13
The IBO also does not calculate the internal reliability of the examina-
12George Pook, assessment director, IBCA (personal communication, May 31, 2001).
13George Pook, assessment director, IBCA (personal communication, May 31, 2001).

96
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
tions, as it is not one of the assumptions of IB assessment that all the items
in each written examination paper will assess the same trait. Thus, high
correlation of a candidate’s performance on different parts of the assessment
is not expected. Like the College Board, the IBO does not make use of
systematic validity research regarding the cognitive characteristics of its ex-
aminations.
As part of the curriculum development and review process in each sub-
ject, the IB curriculum committees specify and describe the internal assess-
ment criteria. The examiners in each subject meet to develop common un-
derstandings about how to assess each of the criteria. The IBO communi-
cates the assessment details to classroom teachers and moderators in each
subject through program materials and workshops.
The assessment structure for each subject is reviewed periodically as
part of an overall curriculum review. Proposals for revisions to the assess-
ments are developed by the curriculum review committees through a pro-
cess similar to that described for curriculum review. The proposals are then
reviewed by the Diploma Review Committee, which consists of chief exam-
iners representing each subject group and senior academic staff from the
IBO.
After each examination session, candidates’ responses are scrutinized
closely to determine whether they are in line with expectations for each
question. Additionally, all IB teachers are asked to complete feedback forms
following the examinations, answering questions about both the emphases
of the examination and the content and form of individual questions. Much
attention is paid to teachers’ comments about the suitability of examination
papers in achieving the intended objectives. Information gained in this man-
ner is fed into the examination development process for future sessions.
How IB Assessments Are Scored
The IB grading system is criterion referenced. Each student’s perfor-
mance is measured against seven grade descriptors, given in the form of
levels of performance that candidates should be able to demonstrate. The
different levels of performance are closely related to the course objectives
and are clearly specified for mathematics and the experimental sciences.
The descriptors are equally applicable to both HL and SL examinations. As
an example, grade descriptors 7, 4, and 1 for the experimental sciences
follow (IBO, 1999c):
Grade 7
Excellent performance
Displays comprehensive knowledge of factual information in the syllabus
and a thorough command of concepts and principles. Selects and applies
relevant information in a wide variety of contexts. Analyzes and evaluates

THE INTERNATIONAL BACCALAUREATE PROGRAMME
97
data thoroughly. Constructs detailed explanations of complex phenomena
and makes appropriate predictions. Solves most quantitative and/or quali-
tative problems proficiently. Communicates logically and concisely using
appropriate terminology and conventions. Shows insight or originality. Dem-
onstrates personal skills, perseverance and responsibility in a wide variety
of investigative activities in a very consistent manner. Works very well within
a team, and approaches investigations in an ethical manner, paying full
attention to environmental impact. Displays competence in a wide range of
investigative techniques, paying considerable attention to safety, and is fully
capable of working independently.
Grade 4
Satisfactory performance
Displays reasonable knowledge of factual information in the syllabus, though
possibly with some gaps. Shows adequate comprehension of most con-
cepts and principles but with limited ability to apply them. Demonstrates
some analysis or evaluation of quantitative and qualitative data. Solves ba-
sic or routine problems but shows limited ability to deal with new or diffi-
cult situations. Communicates adequately but responses may lack clarity
and include some repetitive or irrelevant material. Demonstrates personal
skills, perseverance and responsibility in some investigative activities, al-
though displays some inconsistency. Works within a team and generally
approaches investigations in an ethical manner, with some attention to en-
vironmental impact. Displays competence in a range of investigative tech-
niques, paying some attention to safety, although requiring some close
supervision.
Grade 1
Very poor performance
Recalls fragments of factual information and shows very little understand-
ing of any concepts or principles. Rarely demonstrates personal skills, per-
severance or responsibility in investigative activities. Does not work within
a team. Rarely approaches investigations in an ethical manner, or shows
awareness of the environmental impact. Displays little competence in in-
vestigative techniques, generally pays no attention to safety, and requires
constant supervision (IBO, 1999c).
The senior evaluating team uses these descriptors when determining the
examination marks, which reflect the combined raw scores for the written
examinations and the internal assessments. Examiners look to assign candi-
dates the grade that matches their performance most comprehensively by
determining the various grade boundaries for the raw scores the candidates
achieve. Each time the examinations are administered and marked, the se-
nior examiners meet to decide what marks equate to the same level of
performance as in previous sessions.
The process begins by using the grade boundaries suggested by exam-
iners on the basis of their reading of student responses on the written exami-
nation. Individual examiners mark students’ responses on the examinations

98
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
using a set of assessment criteria or mark schemes, which are accompanied
by notes about the range of content that might be expected. Scripts with raw
scores just below or above the proposed boundaries are reread carefully
and evaluated with reference to the criteria described above. Inter-examiner
reliability is ensured by a system of moderation in which each examiner
sends a sample of his or her marking to a more senior examiner for check-
ing. If the senior examiner’s remarking of the sample indicates a slight dis-
parity in standards, a statistical adjustment based on linear regression is
made to all of the assistant examiner’s marks. If there is substantial disagree-
ment or inconsistency, all of the assistant examiner’s work is remarked.
Analysis of these moderation samples indicates that in the vast majority of
cases, different examiners’ marks are within 5 percent of each other, and
that in very few cases is the difference more than 10 percent.14
Schools submit marks for internal assessment to IBCA by a given dead-
line in April of each year. A moderation process is also used to ensure
reliability and an equivalent standard among schools for the internal assess-
ment marks in both mathematics and the experimental sciences. Each school
must submit for moderation five marked sets of candidates’ work in each
subject, selected to represent the full range of quality of work submitted by
students in that subject. If the moderators’ remarking of the students’ work
samples indicates a disparity in standards, a statistical adjustment is made to
all the internal assessment marks of the teacher involved, and a moderator
who is an experienced IB teacher remarks the work. In mathematics, for
example, each moderator reviews about 50 portfolios. Each then sends a
sample of five sets of student work to a senior moderator, who repeats the
grading and sends samples of that work to a principal moderator in each
subject. The senior moderator also sends a report to the IBO for inclusion in
the chief examiner’s report.
How Examination Results Are Reported
IBCA communicates examination results directly to the secondary schools.
The schools, in turn, are responsible for ensuring that the results are com-
municated to candidates. IBNA communicates the results to colleges and
universities. The results include scores on each examination taken, as well
as marks for the Theory of Knowledge course and the Extended Essay and
cumulative scores for diploma candidates. A profile of candidates’ grades is
available to schools for each examination session. The profile is only for
candidates whose examinations are entered by that school and includes
predicted grades; examination grades, including marks for each paper; and
14George Pook, assessment director, IBCA (personal communication, May 31, 2001).

THE INTERNATIONAL BACCALAUREATE PROGRAMME
99
internal assessment grades, indicating any adjustments made. All sections of
the examination papers are made available to teachers for use in their class-
rooms 24 hours after the testing date.
The IBO publishes yearly detailed reports for each subject that include
mark bands for each score, general comments on the application of mark
schemes to free-response problems, and comments on the strengths and
weaknesses of the candidates in the treatment of individual questions. The
subject reports also describe areas of the program and examination that
appeared to be difficult for candidates, as well as areas in which candidates
appeared to be especially well prepared. Recommendations are offered for
teachers regarding assistance and guidance that should be provided for fu-
ture candidates. Examples from the May 2000 chemistry subject report in-
clude the following: “Overall, it appeared that the weaker candidates . . . did
not fully understand the concept of intermolecular forces and typically de-
scribed covalent bond strengths as affecting boiling points. This is some-
thing that teachers might place greater emphasis on in class” (IBO, 2000c,
p. 5).
The subject report also includes a detailed discussion of the internal
assessment and recommendations directed at improving the laboratory pro-
gram. For example, the May 2000 report states: “Overall most schools pre-
sented a suitable Practical Scheme of Work, although some schools pre-
sented programs that were significantly deficient, either in the total experi-
mental hours completed or in the degree of syllabus coverage . . . . The
depth and breadth of the experiments was generally found to be good. New
teachers are clearly considering the depth of the syllabus when designing
experiments, at times with limited resources. These efforts are recognized
and applauded” (IBO, 2000c, pp. 17–18). The biggest problem continues to
be in providing students with opportunities to demonstrate the internal as-
sessment planning (a) and planning (b) criteria: “These skills cannot be
properly assessed if teachers provide students with the purpose, hypothesis
and/or procedures for experiments. Some teachers consistently gave far too
much direction in their instructions (purpose, method, data table, sample
calculations etc.). Candidates have been deprived of the opportunity to de-
sign realistic methods for the control of variables. Teachers must use open-
ended questions in order to facilitate the assessment of Planning (a) and
Planning (b)” (IBO, 1999a, p. 414).
Yearly detailed narrative reports are made available to individual schools,
for a fee, on the performance of their students as a group for each subject
examined. The reports include comments on students’ general examination
techniques, along with suggestions for improvement, comments on overall
performance in each section of the examination, analysis and evaluation of
candidates’ performance on individual questions, and recommendations and
guidance for future candidates. Examiners write these reports at the time of

100
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
marking and then add statistical data and a description of the mark schemes
(IBO, 2000d, p. B1). The reports are substantial (7–10 pages) and include
the following detailed information:
• Comments on the candidates’ approach to answering the questions
on each test paper, with suggestions for improvement.
• Quantitative information on the numbers of candidates answering
particular questions.
• Comments on the overall performance of candidates in relation to all
portions of each examination paper.
• An analysis and evaluation of candidates’ performance on individual
questions in relation to the marking scheme.
• Recommendations and guidance for future candidates.
Each school can also receive a Moderation Report on the Internal Assess-
ment that provides information on the differences between the teachers’
marks for their students and the marking by the moderator for the internally
assessed samples of work. This information lets teachers know whether they
are applying the standards correctly (i.e., the average mark awarded by the
teacher is within 10 percent of the average mark awarded by the moderator)
and consistently (i.e., the correlation between teacher and moderator marks
is 0.85 or greater). Also provided are written comments from the moderators
on feedback forms for each subject (International Baccalaureate Form 4/IAF,
Internal Assessment Feedback Form: Group 4). These comments are pro-
vided in the form of responses to questions about clerical/procedural de-
tails, as well as the students’ experimental work, including the following:
• Were the investigations/projects appropriate for the assessment of
particular criteria?
• Was the practical program of the correct duration?
• Was the syllabus coverage (core, additional high level, and options)
appropriate?
• Was the practical scheme of work of appropriate complexity?
IB PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT
What Is Known About the Preparation and Credentials
of IB Teachers
Because the credentials of prospective IB teachers are submitted as part
of a school’s application for membership in the IBO, initial staffing decisions
and teaching assignments for IB courses are made as part of a comprehen-
sive school plan. IB teaching assignments may be given to experienced or

THE INTERNATIONAL BACCALAUREATE PROGRAMME
101
novice teachers. The IBO has established neither teacher qualifications nor
standards for faculties, although the application process does ensure that, at
least initially, prospective IB teachers attend an IB workshop (see the next
subsection). The IBO also does not certify teachers and is not involved in
monitoring staffing changes after a school has become an IB school. Conse-
quently, there is not much more information available about the qualifica-
tions of IB teachers than exists for AP teachers.
Professional Development Experiences of IB Teachers
One prerequisite for a school’s obtaining permission to offer the IB
program is that every teacher who will teach IB courses must attend a 3- to
5-day workshop offered by IBNA. Teachers new to an already authorized
school also must attend an IB workshop, preferably before they begin to
teach IB courses. In addition, the IBNA regional office is responsible for
conducting weeklong professional development workshops for IB teachers
and administrators during the summer, as well as 3- to 5-day workshops
during the school year. IBNA has also facilitated the establishment of re-
gional organizations for IB schools. These organizations are supported by
IBNA in holding conferences and workshops several times each year. Schools
and/or school districts budget resources annually to support attendance by
teachers and administrators at these sessions, which are held both nationally
and regionally. Experienced IB teachers typically work with representatives
from IBNA to prepare materials for and plan and conduct the sessions.
Both the conferences and workshops focus on providing guidance and
resources for the implementation of IB programs and development of course
curricula. Workshops focus on general topics unique to IB, including the
following:
• Restructuring of the school schedule and course registration to ac-
commodate IB course requirements.
• Internal assessment.
• Restructuring of the ninth- and tenth-grade curriculum to prepare
students for IB courses.
• Characteristics of IB students.
• Use of international examples and illustrations in the curriculum.
Experimental science workshops focus on designing laboratory experi-
ences that will enable students to meet specific internal assessment criteria.
The most recent focus has been on the planning criteria, as the IB examiners
have found that the practical work done in most classrooms does not afford
students opportunities to practice the skills needed in planning their own

102
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
experiments. In most mathematics workshops, time is spent on preparing
teachers to teach an unfamiliar and expanded mathematics curriculum, in-
cluding vectors and matrices; probability and statistics; and the optional
topics—statistics, abstract algebra, and further geometry.
A dialogue exists between IB teachers and the IBO that is not a feature
of the AP program. Every teacher completes feedback forms following each
examination, answering questions about both the emphases of the exami-
nation and the content and form of individual test items. The results are
summarized by IBCA and provided both to teachers and to the develop-
ment committees, driving changes in curriculum and instruction the follow-
ing year, as well as in the assessment instrument itself. After the examina-
tions have been graded, each teacher receives a subject report (general
comments about all of the student responses worldwide on the examina-
tion) and a school report (specific comments about their students’ perfor-
mance on the written examination and internal assessment, as well as com-
ments and suggestions about the practical program in each discipline at the
school). The comments provided to the schools and teachers serve as the
impetus for corresponding changes in the instructional program aimed at
improving students’ test scores. Additionally, the IBO maintains an online
curriculum site so IB teachers can receive the most current information
about the curriculum.

103
5
Other Opportunities and Approaches
to Advanced Study
Advanced Placement (AP) courses and International Baccalaureate (IB)
programs are designed to meet the educational needs of high school stu-
dents who are motivated and prepared for academic challenges beyond
those that characterize most high school curricula. They are the only two
nationally recognized, comprehensive, multisubject programs offered for this
purpose in the United States. This chapter reviews other current opportuni-
ties for advanced study and some of the more common alternative models
for providing college-level learning to high school students. It also describes
some of the more widely recognized enrichment programs that provide op-
portunities for advanced study in settings other than classrooms, including
internships and mentorships and academic and research competitions.1 Many
students, even those enrolled in AP, IB, or other formal programs, take ad-
vantage of some of these enrichment activities.
ALTERNATIVES FOR PROVIDING
COLLEGE-LEVEL LEARNING IN HIGH SCHOOL
There are many opportunities for high school students to engage in
college-level learning through local and state-sponsored programs. Some of
these alternative programs follow the AP content outlines; others do not.
Although many of the programs award college credit to high school stu-
dents, less is documented about the transferability of credits earned by stu-
dents in these alternative programs than is the case for credits earned through
1Some students who pursue independent study document their learning and eligibility for
college credit by taking one of the subject tests offered as part of the College-Level Examination
Program (CLEP). Traditionally, CLEP examinations have been taken by adults who have been
out of school for a long time. However, the College Board is beginning to encourage high
schools to offer both AP and CLEP opportunities to their students (http://www.collegeboard.org/
clep/clephs/html/hs004.html [November 27, 2001]).

104
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
qualifying scores on AP or IB examinations. As a result, an increasing num-
ber of students who participate in alternative college-level learning pro-
grams or in courses taught in specialized schools that do not offer AP classes
document their achievement for college credit and/or placement by taking
AP examinations in the appropriate subject area.2 (IB does not allow stu-
dents to take subject examinations unless they have completed the corre-
sponding course at a school authorized to offer the IB program.)
The committee did not have the information or resources needed for a
careful evaluation of the effectiveness of any of these alternative opportuni-
ties, but does note that such evaluation is necessary because there is tremen-
dous variability among these programs, even those ostensibly designed for
the same purpose. Further, there are no standardized external assessments,
such as those used in the AP and IB programs, to measure student learning
or the quality of the programs themselves. The committee suggests that
systematic evaluation of these models be conducted to provide objective
data about their quality and their effects on students, teachers, high schools,
colleges, and universities.
Collaborative Programs
With the exception of AP, the most prevalent option for college-level
learning has evolved from collaborative efforts among universities, 2- or 4-
year colleges, and high schools. In some cases, the colleges, universities, or
high schools involved initiate these collaborations; others are mandated by
state legislatures or other policymaking entities. Although these collabora-
tions differ in terms of funding sources, site of instruction, faculty, class
composition, and the use of technology (Russell, 1998), they frequently take
one of the following forms:
• College courses taught in high schools.
• Dual-enrollment options.
• Concurrent enrollment options.
• Prematriculation enrichment programs designed for specific groups
of students, including talented, minority, and able but underprepared or
unmotivated students.
Rationales for promoting college-level learning for high school students
include (1) strengthening the high school curriculum and raising expecta-
tions for high school students; (2) decreasing the total number of credits
students need to complete college, thus reducing, at least potentially, both
the time required for the baccalaureate and costs to parents, students, and
2Lee Jones, College Board director of AP programs (personal communication), 2001.

OTHER OPPORTUNITIES AND APPROACHES TO ADVANCED STUDY
105
taxpayers; and (3) offering the potential to enrich students’ undergraduate
college experiences by reducing the need to take some introductory courses
and allowing earlier entry into more-advanced courses, facilitating double
majors, and permitting students to enroll in a more enriched array of elec-
tives (Greenberg, 1992; Johnstone, 1993). Others point to the positive social
consequences of college and high school partnerships, asserting that such
partnerships provide opportunities for students who attend schools where
AP, honors, and gifted-and-talented courses are not readily available (Tafel
and Eberhart, 1999).
College Courses Taught in High School
College courses taught in high school are typically the product of coop-
erative educational program agreements between high schools and colleges
to offer college courses for credit in the high school. The postsecondary
institutions are usually responsible for the curricular content and for stan-
dards, administrative support, and program monitoring. High school faculty,
supervised by college faculty, frequently teach these courses.3
Both college and high school administrators and faculty have been rais-
ing concerns about the widespread implementation of these types of pro-
grams. Their concerns revolve around the following:
• Qualifications of the teachers who teach the courses.
• Policies for awarding college credit.
• Characteristics of a “qualified” student.
• Impact on the high schools’ curricula.
• Difficulties associated with maintaining an atmosphere in high schools
that is commensurate with the instructional/social setting and expectations
of a college class.
• Impact on the workload of high school teachers selected to teach
university-level courses.
• Instructional models that stress teacher-dominated class discussions
to cover the scope of a college course.
• Costs.
Dual Enrollment
Dual-enrollment options usually involve high school students taking
college courses that allow them to earn both college credit and credit to-
3Syracuse University’s Project Advance is one of the oldest and most widely recognized
programs of this type. Information about this program can be accessed at http://supa.syr.edu/
(November 27, 2001).

106
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
ward a high school diploma so that high school graduation is not delayed.
These programs enable students to attend nearby colleges, sometimes at
reduced tuition rates. State departments of education and/or local school
boards certify the majority of dual-enrollment programs. In most cases, stu-
dents attend the college as full-time students and use the college credits
obtained to meet high school graduation requirements. At least 38 states
have formal dual-enrollment agreements between public high schools and
community colleges (Reisberg, 1998), and according to data gathered by the
State Higher Education Executive Officers (Russell, 1998), the phenomenon
shows no signs of abating. Tech Prep,4 2+2,5 and middle-college high school6
programs are usually built around dual-enrollment agreements. Yet a recent
report published by the Association of American Colleges and Universities
(Johnstone and Del Genio, 2001) finds fault with a number of these dual-
enrollment arrangements, including those between 2-year colleges and high
schools.
Concurrent Enrollment
Concurrent-enrollment programs allow high school students to take
courses at local colleges or universities for credit while still in high school.
One key difference between college courses taught in high school and con-
current enrollment is that students in the latter programs enroll in courses
either taught by college faculty at the college’s campus or delivered to the
high school site by the college, whether through visits by faculty or elec-
tronically. In some cases, school districts cover a portion of the tuition costs,
especially if they are unable to meet the educational needs of particular
4Tech Prep is a nationwide career development system that provides a high school student
with a planned program of study that incorporates academic and career-related courses articu-
lated between the secondary and postsecondary levels. The program leads to a diploma, de-
gree, or 2-year apprenticeship certificate. All partners (secondary, postsecondary, and private
sector) develop a Tech Prep program cooperatively. The program may also articulate from a
community college to a 4-year baccalaureate degree. The program most typically provides
technical preparation in a career field such as engineering; technology; applied science; a
mechanical, industrial, or practical art or trade; agriculture; health occupations; business; or
applied economics.
52+2 programs allow students to complete 2 years of a vocational program in high school
and the second 2 years at a community college.
6Students at middle-college high schools usually take high school and college courses on
a community college campus. The programs began as a means to serve capable but unsuccess-
ful students. Their purpose is to serve as a transition between high school and college for at-risk
youth.

OTHER OPPORTUNITIES AND APPROACHES TO ADVANCED STUDY
107
students. Students who participate in concurrent-enrollment programs typi-
cally earn college credit for their coursework,7 but may or may not earn high
school graduation credit. The decision to award high school graduation credit
is almost always made by the local school district.
Frequently, students who take advantage of this type of arrangement
have exceeded the offerings of their home high school in a particular disci-
pline or want to take a course in a discipline not offered at the high school.
Concurrent-enrollment opportunities are quite common in mathematics, par-
ticularly in geographic areas where there may not be enough students to
offer courses such as AP calculus or those beyond AP calculus, such as
Multivariate Calculus, Linear Algebra, or Differential Equations. In these cases,
students may be allowed to enroll in a nearby college mathematics course
with the district covering the college tuition or, in some cases, with the
college offering reduced or free tuition as a community service. Students
who participate in concurrent-enrollment programs usually attend high school
full time and college part time.
Concurrent-enrollment options are quite prevalent in colleges. Accord-
ing to a 1997 State Higher Education Executive Officers’ survey,8 approxi-
mately 90 percent of postsecondary institutions admit qualified high school
students to college courses prior to graduation through concurrent-enroll-
ment agreements. As of 1997, 204,790 students had participated in dual-
enrollment, college-in-high-school, or concurrent-enrollment programs dur-
ing the previous school year. In addition, many colleges and universities
offer programs that enable academically advanced and highly motivated
students to pursue college-level course work on a part-time basis through
early morning, late afternoon, and summer classes. They do so in the belief
that concurrent-enrollment programs permit students to supplement high
school work with more advanced material, to pursue interests, or to build on
special talents. Some colleges also report that they gain from concurrent-
enrollment programs an opportunity to recruit highly able students to their
campuses for full-time study after graduation from high school.
The proliferation of dual-enrollment and concurrent-enrollment programs
has sparked debate among professors about whether students are unwisely
7Colleges routinely accept the credits they have awarded to high school students in their
concurrent-enrollment programs. However, transferability to other institutions is generally at
the discretion of the receiving institution. In many cases, concurrent-enrollment credits are not
deemed transferable if students also use such credits to meet high school graduation require-
ments.
8A complete version of the data gathered in the survey, including detailed summaries of
the status of college-level learning policies and programming within all 50 states, is available
through University Microfilms International, Publication No. 9833590, Volume/Issue 59-05A,
300 North Zeeb Rd., P.O. Box 1346, Ann Arbor, MI 48106-1346.

108
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
skipping entry-level classes at the colleges they ultimately attend and ending
up in advanced courses for which they are under- or unprepared. A primary
concern cited is the lack of standardized plans of instruction for the courses
offered in these programs. Also noted is the lack of any general measure of
the quality the curriculum or the instruction that could be used in determin-
ing whether to award credit or advanced standing to students who earn
credit in such programs (Reisberg, 1998).
College-Sponsored Enrichment Programs
College-sponsored enrichment programs are designed to serve specific
populations of students, including talented, minority, and underprepared or
unmotivated students. Most postsecondary institutions in the United States
offer such programs. The configuration of the programs varies among insti-
tutions, but they usually take the form of precollege summer programs or
year-long programs and activities that provide enrichment and motivation
for students who are underrepresented (e.g., women and minorities in sci-
ence and engineering)9 or those who are not fully served through conven-
tional programs (e.g., gifted and talented students).10
Precollege summer programs offer students the opportunity to earn col-
lege credit in residential summer school programs while living on college
campuses. Students usually attend these programs during the summer fol-
lowing the tenth or eleventh grade. Participants typically take regular col-
lege courses along with undergraduates from the host institution and other
colleges. These programs are usually designed to provide academic enrich-
ment, foster independence, and promote good work habits.
Specialized Schools
Another vehicle for providing advanced study to secondary students is a
specialized school. Most states and many school districts have developed
specialized schools that bring together academically talented students and
offer them an educational experience geared to their high abilities and their
need for peers who share their interests. Specialized schools have prolifer-
ated across the country in response to research demonstrating that high-
9For example, the Summer High School Apprenticeship Research Program (SHARP) Pro-
gram is a national enrichment and support effort aimed at increasing the numbers of qualified
minority students in sciences and engineering by offering internships and mentorships to quali-
fied students. (See the discussion of internships and mentorships later in this chapter.)
10The Center for Talented Youth at The John Hopkins University is an example of a
program designed to provide academic enrichment to highly gifted students through flexibly
paced courses.

OTHER OPPORTUNITIES AND APPROACHES TO ADVANCED STUDY
109
ability students develop greater expectations, feel better about themselves,
and engage in higher-level processing or discourse when working with other
students of similar abilities (Fuchs, Fuchs, Hamlett, and Karns, 1998).
Programs designed to meet the needs of these high-ability learners in-
clude governors’ schools, both academic year and summer programs; resi-
dential and day academies that specialize in mathematics, science, and tech-
nology; charter schools;11 schools-within-a school;12 and magnet schools.13
Admission to most of these programs is highly competitive and selective.
The configuration of these specialized schools varies markedly from institu-
tion to institution. Some of the programs embrace innovative curricula and
instructional approaches; others incorporate and/or expand on programs
such as AP or IB; while still others use some of the college-level learning
options described above.
There are 58 secondary schools that belong to The National Consortium
for Specialized Secondary Schools of Mathematics, Science and Technol-
ogy.14 In addition, there are hundreds of other specialized schools, some of
which focus on mathematics and science, which are not members of that
organization.
Distance Learning
Technology has created myriad opportunities to provide advanced study
options for students who otherwise might not have access to such programs.
As with the other opportunities described in this section, distance learning is
a rapidly growing national phenomenon that is configured in a variety of
ways, depending on a program’s mission and available technology.
11A publicly funded school that is formed by legislation rather than by the standard school
incorporation process. It has the autonomy to make decisions concerning structure, curriculum,
and educational emphasis and is held accountable for the academic achievement of its students
by means of its charter (www.uscharterschools.org [November 23, 2001]).
12A separate and autonomous unit formally authorized by the board of education and/or
superintendent that plans and runs its own program, has its own staff and students, and re-
ceives its own separate budget. The school-within-a-school usually reports to a district official
instead of being responsible to the building principal except in matters of safety; teachers and
students typically are affiliated with the school-within-a-school as a matter of choice (Raywid,
1995).
13A school or education center that offers a special curriculum capable of attracting sub-
stantial numbers of students of different racial backgrounds. A key feature of magnet schools is
a specialty curriculum designed to embrace a subject matter or teaching methodology not
generally offered to students of the same age or grade level under the same local education
agency, such as a science–technology center or a center for the performing arts (Magnet School
Assistance Program, Title V, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act, as amended
in 1994).
14More information can be found at: http://www.ncsssmst.org/ (November 27, 2001).

110
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
For many years, distance learning was used to meet the needs of home
schoolers, students seeking independent study options for acceleration or
graduation, and those in rural areas who did not have access to enriched
educational options. The movement has grown exponentially during the
past decade. State departments of education, commercial enterprises, col-
leges and universities, and high schools are the most frequent sponsors of
distance-learning opportunities.
Televised courses were one of the first strategies used for distance learn-
ing. For many years, courses were broadcast on network television for adult
learners who did not have access to schools. In the past decade, state de-
partments of education have been tapping this resource to provide courses
not otherwise available to high school students, particularly in small and
rural schools. Although attempts have been made to make televised courses
more interactive, they still rely almost exclusively on a lecture format. Teach-
ers conduct classes from electronic classrooms, and students participate by
watching the classes at home or at school. Computers, telephones, and fax
machines allow students to communicate with the instructor and to ask
questions for clarification, but responses are not always immediate. New
technology is poised to change this situation. High-speed data networks and
online discussions have made communication with telecourse faculty during
live broadcasts easier to manage, and the combined use of computers, video
cameras, and microphones has created opportunities for live, interactive
dialogue between students and faculty that can be heard by other students
in different locations. Nonetheless, little is known about the quality of learn-
ing that can be supported by televised courses, and the committee notes that
further research on this strategy is necessary.
In discussing the viability of using televised courses for the advanced
study of science, the committee noted several additional problems. These
include providing laboratory experiences primarily by demonstration.15 The
committee believes research is needed to evaluate the effectiveness of this
practice in supporting learning with understanding and that alternatives should
be investigated if necessary. Another concern is the inability of telefaculty to
gain a clear understanding of students’ conceptions and misconceptions and
to adjust teaching to reflect students’ initial understandings. Additionally,
there is little opportunity in the context of a televised lecture to encourage
the development of students’ metacognitive skills.
15Alternatives to demonstration include the use of regional centers for laboratory work
and agreements with high schools and colleges to offer the laboratory component. In these
cases, students must report to a central location at specified times. Other alternatives include
the use of micro laboratories that can be conducted by students in their homes.

OTHER OPPORTUNITIES AND APPROACHES TO ADVANCED STUDY
111
Web-Based Courses
Web-based courses are offered over the Internet. Internet-based dis-
tance learning makes it possible for commercial enterprises, as well as
nonprofits such as universities, to deliver courses to students on a for-profit
basis. Some of these offerings are single courses;16 others are part of a sys-
tem, such as a virtual high school or university. A compelling feature of
online courses, according to many observers, is their flexibility and accessi-
bility. Students can download a lecture when it is convenient to do so and
can have access to data, demonstrations, and immediate feedback when
they need them. In some cases, interactive features are used; for example,
students can be given an assessment and its results used to tailor instruction
for them.
The committee found that the number of Web-based courses is increas-
ing rapidly but that there is little empirical data to support their creators’
claims of effectiveness in achieving the stated learning objectives. In fact,
issues noted above with regard to televised courses also exist for many Web-
based courses. In addition, students enrolled in Web-based courses often
work alone, without other students or a teacher present (see Chapter 6, this
volume, for a discussion of the social nature of learning).17 More research is
needed to evaluate the quality of learning that is supported by Web-based
courses and the ways in which technology can be used to support learning
with understanding. Indeed, there has recently been some concern expressed
that AP courses taught via the Internet are not adequately preparing students
for the examination (Carr, 2001; Kuehn, 200118). The College Board is inter-
ested in taking a more active role in monitoring Web-based AP courses to
ensure that program standards are being met (CFAPP, 2001).
Many of the committee’s concerns related to the effectiveness of Web-
based courses used for advanced study in mathematics and science are ech-
oed in a report recently released by the Web-Based Education Commis-
sion.19 This report acknowledges that the Internet has great potential to
16APEX Learning Systems and Class.com are examples of Web-based programs offered by
for-profit organizations. The effectiveness of these programs in achieving their goals has re-
cently been questioned by parents, students, and teachers, who have found the learning out-
comes to fall short of what was promised by the program developers (Carr, 5/25/2001).
17Televised courses offered in high schools frequently have a teacher’s assistant in the
classroom with students as they are viewing the course on television.
18Available at http://www.californiastar.com/courses.html (January 15, 2001).
19The Web-based Education Commission was established by the Higher Education Act
Amendments of 1998. Its 16 members were appointed by President Clinton, Education Secre-
tary Richard Riley, and the Democratic and Republican leadership of Congress. The full report
is available at http://www.ed.gov/offices/AC/WBEC/FinalReport/ (November 23, 2001).

112
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
address many challenges facing schools and students, but emphasizes that
content available for learning on the Web currently is variable in quality:
some is excellent, but much is mediocre. To date, a great deal of emphasis
has been placed on developing the technology, but “. . . dazzling technol-
ogy has no value unless it supports content that meets the needs of learners”
(Education Commission to the President of the United States, 2000, p. 12).
Virtual high schools are a rapidly increasing phenomenon (Carr, 2000).
Many evolve from virtual universities and are sponsored by a postsecondary
institution. Illinois, Maryland, Michigan, New Mexico, Utah, and West Vir-
ginia have all started or are planning to start statewide virtual high schools.
States that have previously had such programs in place include California,
Florida, Indiana, Kentucky, Massachusetts, and Nebraska. While all of the
state virtual high schools are organized and financed slightly differently,
many appear to adhere to a model in which the virtual high school is a
division of the virtual university and shares the same infrastructure.
Nearly all university-sponsored virtual high schools started with AP-level
courses, but they now are drawing on a variety of different sources to sup-
ply the online courses offered. Several plan to purchase courses from APEX
Online Learning, which focuses on creating and delivering online AP courses;
others are developing their own courses by contracting with teachers or
schools for the use of courses created by virtual high schools in other states
(Carr, 2000).
A model for a virtual high school that is not affiliated with a single
college or university is the Virtual High School Project, a collaboration among
high schools from around the country. In exchange for contributing a small
amount of teaching time, a participating school can offer its students
NetCourses ranging from advanced academic to technical and specialized
courses. Schools donate computers, Internet connectivity, and staff time.
Each school also provides a site coordinator who is responsible for project
management and support of teachers and students at the local school. Teachers
must successfully complete The Teachers Learning Conference, a graduate-
level NetCourse designed to expose participants to educational strategies
and technologies for NetCourse teaching.
Computer-Based Multimedia Courses
Computer-based multimedia courses combine online technology with
CD-ROM, video conferencing, electronic communication, Web-based labo-
ratory, and other technologies. These courses allow for self-paced instruc-
tion that is tailored to the individual’s needs; students can spend as little or
as much time as necessary to master a concept. Some include contact with
live tutors.

OTHER OPPORTUNITIES AND APPROACHES TO ADVANCED STUDY
113
The Education Program for Gifted Youth (EPGY) at Stanford University
sponsors a computer-based, multimodel delivery system that exemplifies
this approach. The courses use a combination of CD-ROM and Internet
technologies to provide students with a multifaceted, highly individualized
learning environment. The courses are organized around lectures that are
computer-based and multimedia, consisting of voice accompanied by syn-
chronized graphics. The program is designed to allow flexible pacing of
instruction. Students who demonstrate ready mastery move quickly through
a course, while slower learners receive additional instruction. Formative evalu-
ation of student progress through ongoing data collection and analysis is a
key component of the program and is used to adjust instruction for indi-
vidual students. In all courses, lectures are followed by exercises in which
students answer questions that are evaluated by the computer. Additional
computer-based instruction and practice are provided to students whose
responses to these questions indicate that they need further assistance. In
addition, human instructors provide support to these and other students by
telephone and electronic mail, as well as through a virtual classroom. To
participate in a virtual classroom, students connect via the Internet, using
voice and shared whiteboard conferencing software to create a real-time
interactive lecture environment.
The committee did not have the opportunity to fully evaluate the Stanford
program, but notes that it appears to be a promising model worthy of further
evaluation. In evaluating this or other computer-based programs, the focus
should be on how well the curricula, instruction, and companion assess-
ment techniques align with the principles of learning with understanding
detailed in Chapter 6 of this volume. Student achievement—the ultimate
indicator of program effectiveness—should be measured by assessing not
only students’ command of factual knowledge, but also their conceptual
understanding of the subject matter and their ability to apply that knowl-
edge to learning new concepts.
ENRICHMENT ACTIVITIES
Even in schools with strong curricular and instructional resources, edu-
cators seek to create activities that will enhance and enrich student learning.
With the exception of some national academic and research competitions,
most of these activities are the product of collaborations involving individual
localities; postsecondary institutions; professional organizations; or research
entities, such as the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA)
or the National Institutes of Health (NIH). Enrichment activities are typically
targeted at high-ability learners, students with strong interests or talent in a

114
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
particular discipline, and members of groups who are underrepresented in
particular occupations.
Internships and Mentorships
Eminent individuals tend to have been profoundly influenced by a single
or several mentors or role models (Goertzel, Goertzel, and Goertzel, 1978;
Kaufmann, Harrel, Milam, Woolverton, and Miller, 1986; Torrance, 1984).
Internships and mentorships can provide students with such experiences.
Internship programs expose students to research and career develop-
ment opportunities through placement in research facilities or industries.
These placements can be during the summer, part time during the school
year, or longer term. Research facilities, large government agencies, local
colleges, and university scientists all sponsor internships. NIH and NASA
both offer research opportunities to high school students. Individual teach-
ers frequently arrange for their students to participate in internships and
research activities in local laboratories or universities. The committee learned
of many teachers who have marshaled the resources of their communities to
provide meaningful experiences for science and mathematics students. We
recognize the extraordinary amount of time and energy required to arrange
these types of activities and commend the efforts of these individuals.
There are also numerous summer enrichment opportunities that enable
students to participate in specialized and challenging programs of advanced
study. Some of these programs are designed to address the needs of high-
ability learners seeking opportunities to work on problems that are not strictly
defined so they can help structure their own learning experiences. An ex-
ample of this type of program is the nationally recognized Arnold Ross
program for advanced mathematics students, held annually at Ohio State
University.20 Another nationally recognized initiative is the Program in Math-
ematics for Young Scientists at Boston University.21 Others, such as the Uni-
versity of California’s Early Outreach Program, focus on compensatory and
motivational activities that encourage and support students in efforts to be
successful in more advanced curricula.22 Many U.S. colleges and universities
sponsor this type of program.
20Additional information about this program is available at http://www.math.ohio-state.edu/
ross/ (November 23, 2001).
21Additional information about this program is available at http://math.bu.edu/INDIVIDUAL/
promys/indice.html (November 23, 2001).
22See http://uga.berkeley.edu/apa/APA%20Home/eaop/default.htm (November 23, 2001).

OTHER OPPORTUNITIES AND APPROACHES TO ADVANCED STUDY
115
Academic and Research Competitions
Many students participate in activities that require them to develop ex-
pertise through self-directed research or intense study of a topical area and
then demonstrate their learning by participating in a competition. Some aca-
demic and research competitions are geared toward participation by teams
of students; others are designed for individual participants. The goal of most
academic competitions is to provide a competitive outlet for students who
are particularly talented or interested in an area or subject by encouraging
them to engage in problem-solving activities that are complex and challeng-
ing. Examples of these types of programs include science fairs, mathematics
and science Olympiads, the Intel and Duracell/National Science Teachers
Association science competitions, inventors’ competitions, and bridge-build-
ing competitions. External judging is usually a component of these pro-
grams. Coaching and mentorship are important aspects of the preparation
students receive.
Critics of such competitions cite disparities in the resources available to
students and the negative aspects of encouraging competitiveness instead of
the cooperation that is more in keeping with the way modern science is
conducted in the field. Some worry about the lack of participation by stu-
dents who have the ability to undertake such work but have not had oppor-
tunities in their schools to demonstrate this ability. Thus, these critics say,
the competitions reward those who already have access to greater resources
and opportunities. Proponents cite the unique opportunity these activities
provide for students to engage in problem-solving activities not typically
available through classroom curricula.
Alternative Curricular and Instructional Approaches
Students and schools differ in many ways that are important to teaching
and learning. Consequently, no single course structure or approach, includ-
ing those as widely used as AP and IB, can meet the educational needs of
every high school student who is ready for advanced study. For example,
not all schools have adequate resources (physical, financial, or human) to
teach high-quality AP courses, and implementing IB requires a level of
schoolwide commitment that not all schools are prepared or able to under-
take. Additionally, the goals and objectives of individual schools vary in
accordance with their local communities’ educational values and beliefs.
State educational standards that describe what students who are educated in
the state should know and be able to do at particular grade levels play an
important role in determining what is taught and the way instruction and
curriculum are organized. This variation underscores the need for alterna-
tives to the AP and IB programs.

116
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
The committee suggests, however, that before adopting any curriculum
for advanced study, those responsible for selecting programs do two things.
The first is to evaluate the programs under consideration for alignment with
the principles of learning outlined in this and other reports, such as How
People Learn: Brain, Mind, Experience, and School (Expanded Edition) (Na-
tional Research Council, 2000b). In so doing, it is important to ensure that
the program not only moves students along the learning continuum by in-
creasing their content knowledge, but also fosters a deep conceptual under-
standing of the subject matter. Second is to assess whether the school has
the necessary infrastructure and resources to implement the program suc-
cessfully, including qualified teachers and adequate time and money to pro-
vide ongoing, high-quality professional development opportunities for mem-
bers of the staff who will be responsible for implementing the program (see
Chapter 7, this volume).
CONCLUSION
The two extant national models for advanced study (AP and IB) cannot
meet the educational needs of all students. The committee learned of many
advanced study alternatives that have been developed by individual schools
and school districts, sometimes in conjunction with universities. While the
committee applauds local efforts to develop original advanced study pro-
grams, we believe such programs are not enough, and additional national
programs are needed. This call for more national programs stems from re-
search identifying the benefits that accrue when students and teachers are
part of national educational efforts.
In calling for more national programs, the committee wishes to be quite
clear that we are not asking for more programs that merely replicate those
that already exist. Rather, the committee urges universities, policymakers,
and curriculum specialists to encourage the development, evaluation, and
dissemination of information about promising alternatives that can help in-
crease access to advanced study for students from diverse backgrounds and
communities, as well as those whose learning styles or interests are not
adequately addressed by existing national programs.

117
6
Learning with Understanding:
Seven Principles
During the last four decades, scientists have engaged in research that
has increased our understanding of human cognition, providing greater in-
sight into how knowledge is organized, how experience shapes understand-
ing, how people monitor their own understanding, how learners differ from
one another, and how people acquire expertise. From this emerging body of
research, scientists and others have been able to synthesize a number of
underlying principles of human learning. This growing understanding of
how people learn has the potential to influence significantly the nature of
education and its outcomes.
The committee’s appraisal of advanced study is organized around this
research on how people learn (see, for example, Greeno, Collins, and Resnick,
1996; National Research Council [NRC], 2000b; 2001a; Shepard, 2000). Our
appraisal also takes into account a growing understanding of how people
develop expertise in a subject area (see, for example, Chi, Feltovich, and
Glaser, 1981; NRC, 2000b). Understanding the nature of expertise can shed
light on what successful learning might look like and help guide the devel-
opment of curricula, pedagogy, and assessments that can move students
toward more expert-like practices and understandings in a subject area. To
make real differences in students’ skill, it is necessary both to understand the
nature of expert practice and to devise methods that are appropriate to
learning that practice.
The design of educational programs is always guided by beliefs about
how students learn in an academic discipline. Whether explicit or implicit,
these ideas affect what students in a program will be taught, how they will
be taught, and how their learning will be assessed. Thus, educational pro-
gram designers who believe students learn best through memorization and
repeated practice will design their programs differently from those who hold
that students learn best through active inquiry and investigation.
The model for advanced study proposed by the committee is supported
by research on human learning and is organized around the goal of fostering

118
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
learning with deep conceptual understanding or, more simply, learning with
understanding. Learning with understanding is strongly advocated by lead-
ing mathematics and science educators and researchers for all students, and
also is reflected in the national goals and standards for mathematics and
science curricula and teaching (American Association for Advancement of
Science [AAAS], 1989, 1993; National Council of Teachers of Mathematics
[NCTM], 1989, 1991, 2000; NRC, 1996). The committee sees as the goal for
advanced study in mathematics and science an even deeper level of concep-
tual understanding and integration than would typically be expected in in-
troductory courses.
Guidance on how to achieve learning with understanding is grounded
in seven research-based principles of human learning that are presented
below (see Box 6-1).1 In Chapter 7, these principles are used as the frame-
work for the design of curricula, instruction, and assessments for advanced
study—three facets of classroom activity that, when skillfully orchestrated by
the teacher, jointly promote learning with understanding. These principles
also serve as the foundation for the design of professional development, for
it, too, is a form of advanced learning.
The design principles for curriculum, instruction, assessment, and pro-
fessional development provide one of the organizing frameworks of the
committee’s analysis of the AP and IB programs (see Chapters 8 and 9, this
volume). While it could be argued that all components of the educational
system (e.g., preservice training and leadership) should be included (and
we believe they should), our analysis was limited to these four facets. Al-
though this framework was developed to assess current programs of ad-
vanced study, it also can serve as a guide or framework for those involved in
developing, implementing, or evaluating new educational programs.
SEVEN PRINCIPLES OF HUMAN LEARNING
Principle 1: Principled Conceptual Knowledge
Learning with understanding is facilitated when new and
existing knowledge is structured around the major concepts
and principles of the discipline.
Highly proficient performance in any subject domain requires knowl-
edge that is both accessible and usable. A rich body of content knowledge
about a subject area is a necessary component of the ability to think and
1The research on which these principles are based has been summarized in How People
Learn: Mind, Brain, Experience and School (Expanded Edition) (NRC, 2000b).

SEVEN PRINCIPLES
119
solve problems in that domain, but knowing many disconnected facts is not
enough. Research clearly demonstrates that experts’ content knowledge is
structured around the major organizing principles and core concepts of the
domain, the “big ideas” (e.g., Newton’s second law of motion in physics, the
concept of evolution in biology, and the concept of limit in mathematics)
(see, for example, Chi et al., 1981; Kozma and Russell, 1997). These big
ideas lend coherence to experts’ vast knowledge base; help them discern
the deep structure of problems; and, on that basis, recognize similarities
with previously encountered problems. Research also shows that experts’
strategies for thinking and solving problems are closely linked to rich, well-
organized bodies of knowledge about subject matter. Their knowledge is
connected and organized, and it is “conditionalized” to specify the context
in which it is applicable.
If one conceives of advanced study as moving students along a con-
tinuum toward greater expertise, then advanced study should have as its
goal fostering students’ abilities to recognize and structure their growing
body of content knowledge according to the most important principles of
the discipline. Therefore, curriculum and instruction in advanced study should
be designed to develop in learners the ability to see past the surface features
of any problem to the deeper, more fundamental principles of the discipline.
BOX 6-1 Seven Principles of Learning
1.
Learning with understanding is facilitated when new and existing knowledge
is structured around the major concepts and principles of the discipline.
2.
Learners use what they already know to construct new understandings.
3.
Learning is facilitated through the use of metacognitive strategies that iden-
tify, monitor, and regulate cognitive processes.
4.
Learners have different strategies, approaches, patterns of abilities, and learn-
ing styles that are a function of the interaction between their heredity and their
prior experiences.
5.
Learners’ motivation to learn and sense of self affects what is learned, how
much is learned, and how much effort will be put into the learning process.
6.
The practices and activities in which people engage while learning shape what
is learned.
7.
Learning is enhanced through socially supported interactions.

120
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
Curricula that emphasize breadth of coverage and simple recall of facts
may hinder students’ abilities to organize knowledge effectively because
they do not learn anything in depth, and thus are not able to structure what
they are learning around the major organizing principles and core concepts
of the discipline. Even students who prefer to seek understanding are often
forced into rote learning by the quantity of information they are asked to
absorb.
Principle 2: Prior Knowledge
Learners use what they already know to construct new un-
derstandings.
When students come to advanced study, they already possess knowl-
edge, skills, beliefs, concepts, conceptions, and misconceptions that can
significantly influence how they think about the world, approach new learn-
ing, and go about solving unfamiliar problems (Wandersee, Mintzes, and
Novak, 1994). People construct meaning for a new idea or process by relat-
ing it to ideas or processes they already understand. This prior knowledge
can produce mistakes, but it can also produce correct insights. Some of this
knowledge base is discipline specific, while some may be related to but not
explicitly within a discipline. Research on cognition has shown that success-
ful learning involves linking new knowledge to what is already known.
These links can take different forms, such as adding to, modifying, or reor-
ganizing knowledge or skills. How these links are made may vary in differ-
ent subject areas and among students with varying talents, interests, and
abilities (Paris and Ayers, 1994). Learning with understanding, however, in-
volves more than appending new concepts and processes to existing knowl-
edge; it also involves conceptual change and the creation of rich, integrated
knowledge structures.
If students’ existing knowledge is not engaged, the understandings they
develop through instruction can be very different from what their teacher
may have intended; learners are more likely to construct interpretations that
agree with their own prior knowledge even when those interpretations are
in conflict with the teacher’s viewpoint. Thus, lecturing to students is often
an ineffective tool for producing conceptual change. For example, Vosniadou
and Brewer (1992) describe how learners who believed the world is flat
perceived the earth as a three-dimensional pancake after being taught that
the world is a sphere.
Moreover, when prior knowledge is not engaged, students are likely to
fail to understand or even to separate knowledge learned in school from
their beliefs and observations about the world outside the classroom. For

SEVEN PRINCIPLES
121
example, despite instruction to the contrary, students of all ages (including
college graduates) often persist in their belief that seasons are caused by the
earth’s distance from the sun, rather than the sun’s tilt on its axis, which
affects the amount of solar energy striking the northern and southern re-
gions of the earth as it orbits the sun (Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astro-
physics, Science Education Department, 1987). Roth (1986) similarly found
that students continued to believe plants obtain food from the soil, rather
than making it in their leaves, even after they had been taught about photo-
synthesis; this belief persisted since many failed to recognize that the carbon
dioxide extracted from the air has weight and makes up most of a plant’s
mass.
Effective teaching involves gauging what learners already know about a
subject and finding ways to build on that knowledge. When prior knowl-
edge contains misconceptions, there is a need to reconstruct a whole rel-
evant framework of concepts, not simply to correct the misconception or
faulty idea. Effective instruction entails detecting those misconceptions and
addressing them, sometimes by challenging them directly (Caravita and
Hallden, 1994; Novak, 2002).
The central role played by prior knowledge in the ability to gain new
knowledge and understanding has important implications for the prepara-
tion of students in the years preceding advanced study. To be successful in
advanced study in science or mathematics, students must have acquired a
sufficient knowledge base that includes concepts, factual content, and rel-
evant procedures on which to build. This in turn implies that they must have
had the opportunity to learn these things. Many students, however, particu-
larly those who attend urban and rural schools, those who are members of
certain ethnic or racial groups (African American, Hispanic, and Native Ameri-
can), and those who are poor, are significantly less likely to have equitable
access to early opportunities for building this prerequisite knowledge base
(Doran, Dugan, and Weffer, 1998; see also Chapter 2, this volume). Inequi-
table access to adequate preparation can take several forms, including (1)
lack of appropriate courses (Ekstrom, Goertz, and Rock, 1988); (2) lack of
qualified teachers and high-quality instruction (Gamoran, 1992; Oakes, 1990);
(3) placement in low-level classes where the curriculum focuses on less
rigorous topics and low-level skills (Burgess, 1983, 1984; Nystrand and
Gamoran, 1988; Oakes, 1985); (4) lack of access to resources, such as high-
quality science and mathematics facilities, equipment, and textbooks (Oakes,
Gamoran, and Page, 1992); and (5) lack of guidance and encouragement to
prepare for advanced study (Lee and Ekstrom, 1987).
Students who lack opportunities to gain important knowledge and skills
in the early grades may never get to participate in advanced classes where
higher-order skills are typically taught (Burnett, 1995). Consequently, these

122
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
students may be precluded very early in their school careers from later par-
ticipation in advanced study—even when they are interested and motivated
to enroll. In essence, they are “tracked away.” The end result is that many
students are denied access to important experiences that would prepare
them to pursue the study of mathematics and sciences beyond high school.
Principle 3: Metacognition
Learning is facilitated through the use of metacognitive strat-
egies that identify, monitor, and regulate cognitive processes.
To be effective problem solvers and learners, students need to deter-
mine what they already know and what else they need to know in any given
situation. They must consider both factual knowledge—about the task, their
goals, and their abilities—and strategic knowledge about how and when to
use a specific procedure to solve the problem at hand (Ferrari and Sternberg,
1998). In other words, to be effective problem solvers, students must be
metacognitive. Empirical studies show that students who are metacognitively
aware perform better than those who are not (Garner and Alexander, 1989;
Schoenfeld, 1987).
Metacognition is an important aspect of students’ intellectual develop-
ment that enables them to benefit from instruction (Carr, Kurtz, Schneider,
Turner, and Borkowski, 1989; Flavell, 1979; Garner, 1987; Novak, 1985; Van
Zile-Tamsen, 1996) and helps them know what to do when things are not
going as expected (Schoenfeld, 1983; Skemp, 1978, 1979). For example,
research demonstrates that students with better-developed metacognitive
strategies will abandon an unproductive problem-solving strategy very quickly
and substitute a more productive one, whereas students with less effective
metacognitive skills will continue to use the same strategy long after it has
failed to produce results (Gobert and Clement, 1999). The basic metacognitive
strategies include (1) connecting new information to former knowledge; (2)
selecting thinking strategies deliberately; and (3) planning, monitoring, and
evaluating thinking processes (Dirkes, 1985).
Experts have highly developed metacognitive skills related to their spe-
cific area of expertise. If students in a subject area are to develop problem-
solving strategies consistent with the ways in which experts in the discipline
approach problems, one important goal of advanced study should be to
help students become more metacognitive. Fortunately, research indicates
that students’ metacognitive abilities can be developed through explicit in-
struction and through opportunities to observe teachers or other content
experts as they solve problems and consider ideas while making their think-
ing visible to those observing (Collins and Smith, 1982; Lester et al., 1994;

SEVEN PRINCIPLES
123
Schoenfeld, 1983, 1985). Having students construct concept maps2 for a
topic of study can also provide powerful metacognitive insights, especially
when students work in teams of three or more (see Box 6-2 for a discussion
of concept maps). It is important to note that the teaching of metacognitive
skills is often best accomplished in specific content areas since the ability to
monitor one’s understanding is closely tied to the activities and questions
that are central to domain-specific knowledge and expertise (NRC, 2000b).
Principle 4: Differences Among Learners
Learners have different strategies, approaches, patterns of
abilities, and learning styles that are a function of the inter-
action between their heredity and their prior experiences.
Individuals are born with potential that develops through their interac-
tion with their environment to produce their current capabilities and talents.
Thus among learners of the same age, there are important differences in
cognitive abilities, such as linguistic and spatial aptitudes or the ability to
work with symbolic quantities representing properties of the natural world,
as well as in emotional, cultural, and motivational characteristics.
Additionally, by the time students reach high school, they have acquired
their own preferences regarding how they like to learn and at what pace.
Thus, some students will respond favorably to one kind of instruction, whereas
others will benefit more from a different approach. Educators need to be
sensitive to such differences so that instruction and curricular materials will
be suitably matched to students’ developing abilities, knowledge base, pref-
erences, and styles. (Annex 6-1 illustrates some of the ways in which cur-
riculum and instruction might be modified to meet the learning needs of
high-ability learners.)
Appreciation of differences among learners also has implications for the
design of appropriate assessments and evaluations of student learning. Stu-
dents with different learning styles need a range of opportunities to demon-
strate their knowledge and skills. For example, some students work well
2Concept maps are two-dimensional, hierarchical representations of concepts and rela-
tionships between concepts that model the structure of knowledge possessed by a learner or
expert. The theory of learning that underlies concept mapping recognizes that all meaningful
learning builds on the learner’s existing relevant knowledge and the quality of its organization.
The constructivist epistemology underlying concept maps recognizes that all knowledge con-
sists of concepts, defined as perceived regularities in events or objects or their representation,
designated by a label, and propositions that are two or more concepts linked semantically to
form a statement about some event or object. Free software that aids in the construction of
concept maps is available at www.cmap.coginst.uwf.edu.

124
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
FIGURE 6-1
Concept map made by an advanced biology student early in the study of
meiosis and genetics. Note that several concepts are not integrated into the student’s
knowledge structure, and he has the misconception that meiosis is sexual reproduction.
SOURCE:  J. Novak (Jan. 2001) personal correspondence. Used with permission.
BOX 6-2
Use of Concept Maps
Figures 6-1 and 6-2 are examples of actual concept maps constructed by a high school
student. Figure 6-1 was made at the beginning of the study of meiosis and shows that
the student did not know how to organize and relate many of the relevant concepts.
The student equated meiosis with sexual reproduction and was not clear on how meio-
sis relates to homologous chromosomes. These maps are presented without editing.
sexual 
reproduction
meiosis
homologous 
chromosomes
fertilization
pollination
gametes
genetics
probability
Punnett 
Square
law of 
segregation
law of 
independent 
assortment
law of unit 
characters
law of 
dominance
genes on 
homologous 
chromosomes 
that separate 
during gamete 
production
characteristics 
determined by 
a pair of genes 
located in 
chromosmes in 
the nucleus
dominant 
genes 
prevent 
expression 
of 
recessive
genes
chance of 
how genes 
are 
presented 
in the sex 
cells
two of 
these join in
involved
with
involved
with
is
has in
Mendels 
Laws of 
Genetics

SEVEN PRINCIPLES
125
FIGURE 6-2
Concept map drawn by the same student at the end of the study unit on
meiosis. Note that the original misconceptions about the nature of meiosis have been
remediated, and more concepts have been integrated into the student’s knowledge structure.
SOURCE:  J. Novak (Jan. 2001) personal correspondence. Used with permission.
Figure 6-2, a concept map made at the end of the study, reveals an elaborated, inte-
grated understanding of the process. The student now has integrated the meanings of
meiosis and sexual reproduction, homologous chromosomes, and other concepts. While
some concept meanings still appear a bit fuzzy, the student has clearly made progress
in the development of understanding, and his knowledge structure can serve as a good
foundation for further study.
sexual 
reproduction
meiosis
homologous 
chromosomes
Mendels 
laws of 
genetics
pollen
fertilization
when 
the 
pollen 
joins 
with
 the 
eggs
pollination
law of 
segrigation
law of 
independent 
assortment
law of unit 
characters
law of 
dominance
probability
  
reproduce 
through
Organisms
happens to 
create 
sexual 
cells for
gametes
a device used to 
show the possible 
outcomes 
of a cross
genes on 
homoglouse 
chromosomes 
that separtes
during 
gamete
production
chance of 
how genes 
are 
presented
in the sex
 cells
this law
characteristics 
determined by 
a pair of genes 
located on 
chromosomes 
in the 
nucleus
dominate 
genes 
prevent 
expression 
of 
recessive 
genes
possible 
outcomes 
that can be 
determined
Punnett 
Square
genetics
is always the 
same with 
every new 
reproduction
the sex 
cells
can 
be made 
in any 
random 
assortment 
each time 
reproduction 
occurs
by
is not applied 
the same way 
if the genes 
are on the 
same 
chromosomes
this is used 
in this 
situation as 
well as the
regular one
says that 
gametes 
are 
produced 
randomly 
according 
to the genes
this law states 
about 
homologus 
chromosomes
states
states
states
states
is 
male
includes
includes
includes includes
is
splits in
two of
these join in
are in
follows

126
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
under pressure, while the performance of others is significantly diminished
by time constraints. Some excel at recalling information, while others are
more adept at performance-based tasks. Some express themselves well in
writing, while others do not. Thus using one form of assessment will work
to the advantage of some students and to the disadvantage of others (Mintzes,
Wandersee, and Novak, 2001; O’Neil and Brown, 1997; Shavelson, Baxter,
and Pine, 1992; Sugrue, Valdes, Schlackman, and Webb, 1996).
Principle 5: Motivation
A learner’s motivation to learn and sense of self affects what
is learned, how much is learned, and how much effort will be
put into the learning process.
Humans are motivated to learn and to develop competence (Stipek,
1998; White, 1959). Motivation can be extrinsic (performance oriented), for
example to get a good grade on a test or to be accepted by a good college,
or intrinsic (learning oriented), for example to satisfy curiosity or to master
challenging material. Regardless of the source, learners’ level of motivation
strongly affects their willingness to persist in the face of difficulty. Intrinsic
motivation is enhanced when learning tasks are perceived as being interest-
ing and personally meaningful and are presented at the proper level of
difficulty. A task that is too difficult can create frustration; one that is too
easy can lead to boredom.
Research has revealed strong connections between learners’ beliefs about
their own abilities in a subject area and their success in learning about that
domain (Eccles, 1987, 1994; Garcia and Pintrich, 1994; Graham and Weiner,
1996; Markus and Wurf, 1987; Marsh, 1990; Weiner, 1985). Some beliefs
about learning are quite general. For example, some students believe their
ability to learn a particular subject or skill is predetermined, whereas others
believe their ability to learn is substantially a function of effort (Dweck,
1989). Believing that abilities are developed through effort is most beneficial
to the learner, and teachers and others should cultivate that belief (Graham
and Weiner, 1996; Weiner, 1985). The use of instructional strategies that
encourage conceptual understanding is an effective way to increase stu-
dents’ interest and enhance their confidence about their abilities to learn a
particular subject (Alaiyemola, Jegede, and Okebukola, 1990; Cavallo, 1996).
Cultivating the belief among a broad range of students that the ability to
learn advanced science and mathematics is, for the most part, a function of
effort rather than inherited talent, ability, and/or intelligence has other ben-
efits as well. For example, the belief that successful learning in advanced
study is a matter of effort fosters risk taking in course selection and pro-
motes students’ motivation to succeed in challenging situations (Novak and

SEVEN PRINCIPLES
127
Gowin, 1984). A belief in the value of effort is especially important for stu-
dents who are traditionally underrepresented in advanced study. For stu-
dents to maintain their beliefs about the role of effort in successful perfor-
mance, teachers and other school personnel must act in ways that do not
contradict students’ sense that they are capable of understanding science
and mathematics and that sustained effort will produce such understanding,
even though there may be struggles along the way.
Several recent studies document the power of a high school culture that
expects all students to spend time and effort on academic subjects and is
driven by a belief that effort will pay off in high levels of academic achieve-
ment for everyone, regardless of prior academic status, family background,
or future plans. When such norms and expectations are held in common for
all students, they define the school’s culture. In such settings, remediation of
skill deficits takes on a different character, teachers are able and willing to
provide rigorous academic instruction to all students, and all students re-
spond with effort and persistence (Bryk, Lee, and Holland, 1993; Lee, 2001;
Lee, Bryk, and Smith, 1993; Lee and Smith, 1999; Marks, Doane, and Secada,
1996; Rutter, 1983).
Principle 6: Situated Learning
The practices and activities in which people engage while
learning to shape what is learned.
Research on the situated nature of cognition indicates that the way people
learn a particular domain of knowledge and skills and the context in which
they learn it become a fundamental part of what is learned (Greeno, 1993;
Lave, 1991). When students learn, they learn both information and a set of
practices, and the two are inextricably related. McLellan (1996, p. 9) states
that situated cognition “involves adapting knowledge and thinking skills to
solve unique problems . . . and is based upon the concept that knowledge
is contextually situated and is fundamentally influenced by the activity, con-
text, and culture in which it is used.” Learning, like cognition, is shaped by
the conventions, tools, and artifacts of the culture and the context in which
it is situated.
Because the practices in which students engage as they acquire new
concepts shape what and how the students learn, transfer is made possible
to the extent that knowledge and learning are grounded in multiple contexts
(Brown, Collins, and Duguid, 1989). Transfer is more difficult when a con-
cept is taught in a limited set of contexts or through a limited set of activities.
When concepts are taught only in one context, students are not exposed to
the varied practices associated with those concepts. As a result, students
often miss seeing the concepts’ applicability to solving novel problems en-

128
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
countered in real life, in other classes, or in other disciplines. It is only by
encountering the same concept at work in multiple contexts that students
can develop a deep understanding of the concept and how it can be used,
as well as the ability to transfer what has been learned in one context to
others (Anderson, Greeno, Reder, and Simon, 1997).
If the goal of education is to allow learners to apply what they learn in
real situations, learning must involve applications and take place in the con-
text of authentic activities (Brown et al., 1989). J. S. Brown and colleagues
(1989, p. 34) define authentic activities as “ordinary practices of a culture”—
activities that are similar to what actual practitioners do in real contexts. A. L.
Brown and colleagues (1993) offer a somewhat different definition: given
that the goal of education is to prepare students to be lifelong learners,
activities are authentic if they foster the kinds of thinking that are important
for learning in out-of-school settings, whether or not those activities mirror
what practitioners do. Regardless of which definition is adopted, the impor-
tance of situating learning in authentic activities is clear. Collins (1988) notes
the following four specific benefits: (1) students learn about the conditions
for applying knowledge, (2) they are more likely to engage in invention and
problem solving when learning in novel and diverse situations and settings,
(3) they are able to see the implications of their knowledge, and (4) they are
supported in structuring knowledge in ways that are appropriate for later
use.
Teachers can engage learners in important practices that can be used in
different situations by drawing upon real-world exercises, or exercises that
foster problem-solving skills and strategies that are used in real-world situa-
tions. Such an approach provides language, activities, and procedures that
can acculturate students into the community of scholars and lifelong learn-
ers. Problem-based and case-based learning are two instructional approaches
that create opportunities for students to engage in practices similar to those
of experts. Technology also can be used to bring real-world contexts into
the classroom. The committee emphasizes that with all of these approaches,
care must be taken to provide multiple opportunities for students to engage
in activities in which the same concept is at work; otherwise learning could
become overly contexualized.
Principle 7: Learning Communities
Learning is enhanced through socially supported interactions.
Learning can be enhanced when students have the opportunity to inter-
act and collaborate with others on instructional tasks. In learning environ-
ments that encourage collaboration among peers, such as those in which
most practicing scientists and mathematicians work, individuals build com-

SEVEN PRINCIPLES
129
munities of practice, have opportunities to test their own ideas, and learn by
observing others. Research demonstrates that opportunities for students to
articulate their ideas to peers and to hear and discuss others’ ideas in the
context of the classroom is particularly effective in bringing about concep-
tual change (Alexopoulou and Driver, 1996; Carpenter and Lehrer, 1999;
Cobb, Wood, and Yackel, 1993; Kobayashi, 1994; Towns and Grant, 1997;
Wood, Cobb, and Yackel, 1991). Social interaction also is important for the
development of expertise, metacognitive skills, and formation of the learner’s
sense of self.
The social nature of learning has important implications for the conse-
quences of the ways in which students are grouped for instruction. For
example, students who are placed in low-track classes often have less time
to collaborate and interact around instructional tasks. Research indicates that
teachers in low-track science and mathematics classes spend more time than
teachers in higher-track classes on routines, and more frequently provide
seatwork and worksheet activities that are designed to be completed inde-
pendently (Oakes, 1990). Additionally, teachers in higher-track classes often
orchestrate more frequent and varied opportunities for students to partici-
pate in small-group problem-solving activities than are provided by teachers
in lower-track classes, who tend to focus on behavior management and on
maintaining control during learning activities. Some might contend that teach-
ers in both types of classes are responding to the needs of their students.
However, teachers must strike a balance between providing the structure
that is often appropriate for low-ability students and the active engagement
that allows these students to learn at deeper levels.
Newmann and Wehlage (1995) identify teaching strategies that promote
intellectual quality and authenticity. One of the most powerful strategies is
the “substantive conversation,” in which students engage in extended con-
versational exchanges with the teacher and/or peers about subject matter in
a way that builds an improved or shared understanding of ideas or topics.
The authors stress that such subject matter conversations go far beyond
reporting facts, procedures, or definitions; they focus on making distinc-
tions, applying ideas, forming generalizations, and raising questions. Ac-
cording to the results of research by Gamoran and Nystrand (1990), the
opportunities for such substantive engagement are far fewer in low-track
than in higher-track classes.
CONCLUSION
The seven principles of learning set forth in this chapter are not ends in
themselves. Their usefulness lies in the guidance they provide for the design
of curriculum, instruction, assessment, and professional development for

130
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
advanced study that fosters in students a deep conceptual understanding of
a domain. The next chapter articulates design principles for advanced study
that draw on these principles of learning.
ANNEX 6-1
CHARACTERISTICS OF HIGH-ABILITY LEARNERS
AND IMPLICATIONS FOR CURRICULUM AND
INSTRUCTION
Differences among learners have implications for how curriculum and
instruction should be structured.3 Provided below is an example of how a
better understanding of learning can assist teachers in structuring their cur-
ricula and instruction more appropriately to meet the needs of a particular
group of students. Different strategies would most likely be used to meet the
needs of other students, although there might be some overlap.
Characteristic: High-ability learners display an exceptionally rich knowl-
edge base in their specific talent domain. Within that domain, they tend to
achieve formal operational thought earlier than other students and to dis-
play advanced problem-solving strategies. High-ability learners are also able
to work with abstract and complex ideas in their talent domain at an earlier
age.
Implication: High-ability learners are ready to access the high school
mathematics and science curriculum earlier than other students. Thus the
high school mathematics and science sequence should be offered to them
beginning in middle school.
Characteristic: High-ability students pick up informally much of the
content knowledge taught in school, and as a result, that knowledge tends
to be idiosyncratic and not necessarily organized around the central con-
cepts of the discipline.
Implication: Assessment of what the learner has already mastered
through diagnostic testing is critical. Instruction needs to build on what is
already known and on previous experiences, filling in the gaps and correct-
3The information in this section is drawn from research on gifted and talented learners
(see, for example, Association of the Gifted and Talented, 1989; Berger, 1991; Boyce et al., 1993;
Dark and Benbow, 1993; Feldhusen, Hansen, and Kennedy, 1989; Johnson and Sher, 1997;
Maker, 1982; VanTassel-Baska et al., 1988; Tomlinson, 1995; VanTassel-Baska, 1998).

SEVEN PRINCIPLES
131
ing misconceptions. It also must help the student organize his or her knowl-
edge around the central ideas of the discipline. A full course in a content
area often is not needed; either it could be skipped, with gaps being filled in
as needed, or the curriculum compacted. “The proper psychology of talent
is one that tries to be reasonably specific in defining competencies as mani-
fested in the world, with instruction aimed at developing the very compe-
tencies so defined” (Wallach, 1978, p. 617).
Characteristic: High-ability learners learn at a more rapid rate than
other students and can engage in simultaneous rather than only linear pro-
cessing of ideas in their talent domain.
Implication: The pace at which the curriculum is offered must be ad-
justed for these learners. The curriculum also must be at a more complex
level, making interdisciplinary connections whenever possible. That is, the
curriculum should allow for faster pacing of well-organized, compressed,
and appropriate learning experiences that are, in the end, enriching and
accelerative.
Characteristic: Many high-ability students will have mastered the con-
tent of high school mathematics and science courses before formally taking
the courses, either on their own, through special programs, or through Web-
based courses.
Implication: Opportunities for testing out of prerequisites should be
provided. Many high-ability students could be placed directly in an AP sci-
ence course, skipping the typical high school–level prerequisite, or begin
the IB program earlier than is typical.
Characteristic: High-ability students often can solve problems by alter-
native means and not know the underlying concept being tapped by a test
item (e.g., can solve an algebra problem but not know algebra).
Implication: Assessments should not be solely in multiple-choice for-
mat; students must be able to show their work in arriving at a solution.
Characteristic: The motivation of high-ability students to achieve often
becomes diminished because of boredom in school, resulting in underachieve-
ment.
Implication: Because one facet of effective teaching involves assessing
the student’s status in the learning process and posing problems slightly
exceeding the level already mastered (Hunt, 1961), it is important to provide
curricula for high-ability students that are developmentally appropriate for
them. Doing so will not only meet the intellectually talented student’s edu-
cational needs, but also facilitate his or her development of good study
skills, more realistic self-concepts, and achievement motivation. Growth in

132
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
achievement motivation and self-efficacy arises out of challenge and satis-
faction in mastering tasks that appropriately match capabilities.
Characteristic: The capacity for learning of high-ability students is un-
derestimated and thus becomes underdeveloped, especially if learning crite-
ria lack sufficient challenge, and curriculum is not adequately knowledge
rich and rigorous.
Implication: Curriculum must be targeted at developing especially deep
and well-organized knowledge structures that with time will begin to ap-
proximate those of experts. Doing so will foster cognitive development,
higher-level thinking skills, and creativity. The depth of the curriculum should
allow gifted learners to continue exploring an area of special interest to the
expert level. Curricula for these students should enable them to explore
constantly changing knowledge and information and develop the attitude
that knowledge is worth pursuing in a global society.
Characteristic: High-ability children are advanced in their critical and
creative thinking skills. They tend to spend much more time up front (i.e.,
metacognitively) than in the execution phase of problem solving.
Implication: The basic thinking skills to be developed in high-ability
students are critical thinking, creative thinking, problem finding and solving,
research, and decision making. Those skills should be mastered within each
content domain.
Characteristic: High-ability students prefer unstructured problems in
which the task is less well defined. They also like to structure their own
learning experiences. They do not require careful scaffolding of material or
step-by-step learning experiences to master new material or concepts; in
fact, they become frustrated with such approaches.
Implication: Opportunities to identify and solve problems should be
provided. Interdisciplinarity, greater in-depth exploration of areas of inter-
est, and autonomous learning should be encouraged. Meaningful project
work in content areas, in which real-world products are generated, is appro-
priate as it allows students the opportunity to create on their own and to
apply and expand ideas learned in class. To facilitate such work, curricula
should encourage exposure to, selection of, and use of specialized and ap-
propriate resources.
Characteristic: High-ability students have the capacity to make con-
nections easily among disparate bodies of knowledge and to deal effectively
with abstractions and complexity of thought.
Implication: Curricula ought to emphasize providing students with a
deep understanding of the important concepts of a discipline and how they

SEVEN PRINCIPLES
133
are organized, as well as identify important pathways between disciplines so
that separate facets of knowledge are understood as being integrated. Cur-
ricula should allow for the development and application of productive thinking
skills to instill in students the capacity to reconceptualize existing knowl-
edge and generate new knowledge.
Characteristic: Eminent persons tend to have been profoundly influ-
enced by a single individual, such as an educator. Students in the top math-
ematical/science graduate programs have reported research experiences
during high school at unusually high levels. Those who are precocious in
creative production tend to exhibit outstanding achievement in adult life.
Implication: Mentorships, internships, or long-term research opportu-
nities should be provided for advanced students.
Characteristic: High-ability students who become productive adults in
a domain have passed through that domain’s specific stages. Doing so took
them much time and sustained effort, with the talent development process
having begun well before secondary school.
Implication: Accelerated learning experiences are critical, given that
the development of talent proceeds from practice and mastery of increas-
ingly more difficult and complex skills at an individual rate, and mastery of
a domain’s knowledge base and the concomitant reorganization of cognitive
structures are both necessary for creativity.
Characteristic: High-ability students develop greater expectations, feel
better about themselves, and engage in higher-level processing or discourse
when working with other students of similar ability.
Implication: High-ability students need the challenge and stimulation
of being together for at least part of every school day, with expectations set
high enough to challenge their potential ability to meet them.

134
7
Designing Curriculum,
Instruction, Assessment, and
Professional Development
The previous chapter describes seven principles that support learning
with understanding. This chapter explores the implications of those prin-
ciples for the intentional and systemic design of four key elements of the
educational system—curriculum, instruction, assessment, and professional
development—to promote learning with understanding within the context
of advanced study. It is critical to recognize that programs for advanced
study share many of the objectives of other programs in the same discipline;
these design principles, therefore, also apply to the design and development
of mathematics and science courses at all levels.
While each of the four key elements is addressed separately here, in
practice they work together synergistically and need to be aligned in mutu-
ally supportive ways. Without such alignment and interdependence, deep
conceptual understanding is more difficult to achieve. For example, if teach-
ers focus on teaching “big ideas” but the related assessments measure stu-
dents’ knowledge of discrete facts, it is impossible to know the extent to
which students genuinely understand core concepts. The systemic and dy-
namic relationship among the four elements also means that changes in one
element affect and require changes in the others.
In addition, it is essential to recognize the critical role of the learning
environment in fostering learning with understanding. The learning environ-
ment of the school and the classroom in which these components of educa-
tional programs interact affects the degree to which teachers can integrate
curriculum, instruction, and assessment to promote learning with under-
standing (National Research Council [NRC], 2000b).

CURRICULUM, INSTRUCTION, ASSESSMENT, AND PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT
135
CURRICULUM
A curriculum for understanding is intentionally designed around the
organizing principles and essential concepts of the domain and provides
opportunities for in-depth exploration in a variety of contexts (design prin-
ciples for curriculum are summarized in Box 7-1). Such a curriculum empha-
sizes depth of understanding over breadth of coverage. It is designed to
provide genuine opportunities for high-quality instruction and multiple points
of entry into mathematics and science (Au and Jordan, 1981; Brown, 1994;
Heath, 1983; Tharp and Gallimore, 1988).
Research reveals that experts’ knowledge is organized around core con-
cepts or organizing principles that guide their thinking in their area of exper-
BOX 7-1 Principles of Curriculum for Understanding
A mathematics or science curriculum for advanced study that promotes learn-
ing with understanding:
• Structures the concepts, factual content, and procedures that constitute
the knowledge base of the discipline around the organizing principles (big ideas) of
the domain.
• Links new knowledge to what is already known by presenting concepts in
a conceptually and logically sequenced order that builds upon previous learning
within and across grade levels.
• Focuses on depth of understanding rather than breadth of content cover-
age by providing students with multiple opportunities to practice and demonstrate
what they learn in a variety of contexts.
• Includes structured learning activities that, in a real or simulated fashion,
allow students to experience problem solving and inquiry in situations that are
drawn from their personal experiences and real-world applications.
• Develops students’ abilities to make meaningful applications and generali-
zation to new problems and contexts.
• Incorporates language, procedures, and models of inquiry and truth verifi-
cation that are consistent with the accepted practice of experts in the domain.
• Emphasizes interdisciplinary connections and integration and helps students
connect learning in school with the issues, problems, and experiences that figure
prominently in their lives outside of the classroom.

136
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
tise; expert knowledge is not simply a list of facts and formulas (Chi, Feltovich,
and Glaser, 1981; Kozma and Russell, 1997; NRC, 2000b; see also Chapter 6,
this volume). Therefore, in designing a curriculum for understanding, the
key concepts and processes of the discipline should be clearly identified,
explicated, and organized in a coherent fashion around the big ideas (Mintzes,
Wandersee, and Novak, 1998; National Council of Teachers of Mathematics
[NCTM], 1995; NRC, 1996). In addition, the interrelationships among topics
should be clearly articulated to provide a framework teachers can use in
developing and setting goals for their students’ learning (American Associa-
tion for the Advancement of Science [AAAS], 2001).
The organization of curriculum plays a critical role in helping students
reconstruct misconceptions and see connections between what they are cur-
rently learning and what they have learned before. Curriculum for under-
standing represents more than a collection of activities or bits of informa-
tion: it provides for the holistic performance of meaningful, complex tasks in
increasingly challenging environments (Resnick and Klopfer, 1989). A cur-
riculum for understanding takes the shape of topical strands that are highly
interconnected in ways that are consistent with the knowledge structure
used by experts in tackling complex tasks in their discipline (Marin, Mintzes,
and Clavin, 2000).1
The deep disciplinary understanding of experts encompasses a vast
amount of knowledge, but generally only a subset of that knowledge is used
in the solution of any given problem. Experts not only have acquired exten-
sive and deep knowledge and conceptual understanding, but also are skilled
at discerning, identifying, and retrieving knowledge that is relevant to the
solution of a particular problem. Their knowledge is organized into mean-
ingful patterns and structures and is conditionalized (situated), meaning that
what they know is accompanied by a specification of the contexts in which
it is useful (Glaser, 1992; Simon, 1980). Many curricula and instructional
materials, however, are not designed to help students conditionalize their
knowledge. For example, textbooks are more likely to tell students how to
do something than to help them understand the conditions under which
doing it will be useful (Simon, 1980, p. 92). Having students work in labora-
tory settings is a familiar strategy for helping them develop conditionalized
knowledge that supports problem solving. Well-designed laboratory experi-
ences also encourage students to apply their knowledge and skills to con-
crete, real-world problems or novel situations (Resnick, 1994).
1See also the proceedings of From Misconceptions to Constructed Understanding, the
Fourth International Misconceptions Seminar, at http://www.mlrg.org/proc4abstracts.html (No-
vember 27, 2001).

CURRICULUM, INSTRUCTION, ASSESSMENT, AND PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT
137
Students presented with vast amounts of content knowledge that is not
organized into meaningful patterns are likely to forget what they have learned
and to be unable to apply the knowledge to new problems or unfamiliar
contexts (Haidar, 1997). Curriculum for understanding provides ample op-
portunity for students to apply their knowledge in a variety of contexts and
conditions. This helps them transfer their learning to new situations and
better prepares them for future learning (Bransford and Schwartz, 2000).
Providing students with frequent opportunities to apply what they learn in
multiple contexts requires a reallocation of instructional time. Allowing time
for in-depth learning means decisions must be made about what knowledge
is of most worth. For this reason, the curriculum needs to specify clearly the
appropriate balance between breadth and depth of coverage in terms of
student learning outcomes.
It is well accepted that students draw on their families, communities,
and cultural experiences to create meaning and understanding. When cur-
riculum is designed to build on students’ experiences, teachers are able to
engage students’ prior knowledge, expose and restructure their knowledge
and remediate misconceptions, and enhance motivation to learn. If students
are able to draw on their cultural, social, and historical experiences in prob-
lem-solving situations, they are more likely to deepen their understanding.
This can be accomplished by design through structured activities that, in real
or simulated fashion, allow students to experience problem solving and
inquiry in situations drawn from their personal experiences.
An effective curriculum allows for incorporating socialization into the
discourse and practices of academic disciplines and provides frequent op-
portunities for students to apply the modes of inquiry and truth verification
strategies and processes characteristic of each domain. An appreciation of
the distinctive features of disciplines, however, should not lead to their iso-
lation from each other or from the everyday world. Rather, strong curricu-
lum design emphasizes interdisciplinary connections, integration, and au-
thenticity in the relationship between learning in and out of school. These
features not only make learning more challenging, exciting, and motivating,
but also help students develop their abilities to make meaningful connec-
tions by applying and transferring knowledge from one problem context to
another. The emphases of a curriculum for supporting learning with under-
standing are presented in Table 7-1.
INSTRUCTION
Instruction in advanced courses in mathematics and science should en-
gage students in a variety of learning activities that are purposefully de-
signed to connect with what they already know and motivate them to work

138
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
toward developing deeper understanding. Instruction should focus students
on the central concepts and fundamental principles of the discipline. It also
should assist them in constructing a framework for organizing new informa-
tion as they explore concepts in depth and in a variety of contexts and
develop problem-solving strategies common to the discipline (Novak, 1991).
The design principles for instruction are summarized in Box 7-2.
TABLE 7-1
Characteristics of Curriculum for Student Understanding
Less Emphasis on
More Emphasis on
Lists of topics to be covered
Underlying disciplinary principles and processes sequenced to
optimize learning
Isolated concepts presented in relation to
Continuity and interdisciplinary integration through emphasis on
a single context or topic with no
the relationships of unifying concepts and processes to many
connection to other topics
topics
Individual teachers working in isolation
Collaborative teams including content and pedagogy experts
Coverage of as many topics as possible in
Understanding of concepts in expanded and more flexible time
a limited and fixed amount of time
periods
Example: A curriculum guide specifies
Example: A curriculum specifies four statements of essential
that 8 percent of the advanced biology
knowledge about the production and utilization of energy in cells
course should include topics related to
that are critical to building an understanding of the processes of
cell energy, including cellular respiration
photosynthesis and respiration. Prior relevant knowledge
and photosynthesis. The teacher
possessed by students is assessed using quizzes or student
schedules 1 week for a unit on cellular
concept maps. The teacher schedules 3 days for activities that
respiration. During this time, students
focus on this knowledge. A rubric is written so that both teacher
carry out a variety of activities and
and students know how the knowledge will be demonstrated.
laboratory exercises in class and
Students carry out a variety of activities in class and complete
complete out-of-class assignments.
out-of-class assignments. At the same time, they must demonstrate
At the end of the week they take a unit
their knowledge of each of the four specified outcomes before they
test. The class goes on to the next unit,
can receive credit for the unit. Students continue to work on
photosynthesis.
essential knowledge and present evidence when they are ready,
even as activities for the next unit may be beginning.
Curriculum developed for one course at a
Curriculum that is well articulated between the elementary grades
time without articulation among the levels
and between high school and college and makes recognized
of schooling
connections with other disciplines
A rigid, prescribed, static curriculum
Curriculum that can be adapted to meet the diverse needs of
students and situations
No relationship between NRC,s National
Standards-driven changes in courses, leading to advanced high
Science Education Standards/NCTM,s
school and introductory college courses through modification of
Principles and Standards for School
content and pedagogy at the advanced course and college levels
Mathematics and programs for advanced
study or college courses
SOURCES: Adapted from ACS (1997); NRC, (1996); and NSTA, (1996).

CURRICULUM, INSTRUCTION, ASSESSMENT, AND PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT
139
BOX 7-2 Principles of Instruction for Understanding
Teaching for conceptual understanding in advanced mathematics and science
courses:
• Maintains students’ focus on the central organizing themes and underlying
concepts of the discipline.
• Is based on careful consideration of what students already know, their ideas
and ways of understanding the world, and the patterns of practice they bring with
them into the classroom.
• Focuses on detecting, making visible, and addressing students’ often frag-
ile, underdeveloped understandings and misconceptions.
• Reflects an understanding of differences in students’ interests, motiva-
tions, preferences, knowledge, and abilities.
• Is designed to provide the appropriate degree of explicitness for the situa-
tion and the abilities of the learners.
• Recognizes students’ preferences for and varying abilities to process dif-
ferent symbol systems, such as language (written and spoken), images, and nu-
merical representations, by employing multiple representations during instruction.
• Engages students in worthwhile tasks that provide access to powerful math-
ematical and scientific ideas and practices; moves students to see past the surface
features of problems to the deeper, more fundamental principles; and develops
their conceptual understanding and skills.
• Structures learning environments in which students can work collaboratively
to gain experience in using the ways of thinking and speaking used by experts in
the discipline.
• Orchestrates classroom discourse so that students can make conjectures,
present solutions, and argue about the validity of claims, thus helping them ex-
plore old understandings in new ways, reveal misconceptions, and generalize and
transfer their learning to new problems or more robust understandings.
• Provides explicit instruction in metacognition as part of teaching in the dis-
cipline.
• Uses various kinds of formal and informal formative assessments to moni-
tor students’ understanding and target instruction effectively.
• Creates expectations and social norms for the classroom that allow stu-
dents to experience success and develop confidence in their abilities to learn.

140
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
The selection of instructional strategies and activities should be guided
by knowledge of learners and should recognize and build on individual
differences in students’ interests, understandings, abilities, and experiences.
Instruction should take into account common naive concepts held by stu-
dents, as well as the effects of their cultural and experiential backgrounds on
their learning. It also should reflect the teacher’s own strengths and interests
and consideration of available local resources. Activities and strategies should
be continually adapted and refined to address topics arising from student
inquiries and experiences.
It is important for instruction in advanced courses in mathematics and
science to engage students in inquiry using a variety of activities and strate-
gies, including experimentation, critical analysis of various sources of infor-
mation, and the application of technology in problem solving. In this way,
students combine knowledge in the domain with reasoning and thinking
skills as they are engaged collaboratively in asking questions, constructing,
testing and analyzing explanations, communicating the explanations, and
considering alternatives (Townes and Grant, 1997).
One of a teacher’s primary responsibilities is to select and develop sig-
nificant and meaningful problems, learning experiences, projects, and inves-
tigations for students. Learning experiences are worthwhile when they rep-
resent concepts and procedures; foster skill development, reasoning, and
problem solving; and help students make connections among mathematical
and scientific ideas and to real-world applications (NCTM, 1991). Such expe-
riences prompt the learner to see past the surface features of a problem to
deeper, more fundamental principles. They “lend themselves to multiple
solution methods, frequently involve multiple representations, and usually
require students to justify, conjecture, and interpret” (Silver and Smith, 1996,
p. 24). The design of such tasks is complex, requiring teachers to take ac-
count of students’ knowledge and interests, of the ways students learn par-
ticular mathematical or scientific ideas, and of common points of confusion
and misconceptions about those ideas (Borko et al., 2000).
Accomplishing this complex endeavor requires a qualified teacher. The
National Board for Professional Teaching Standards (NBPTS) describes a
qualified teacher as one who effectively enhances student learning and dem-
onstrates the high level knowledge, skills, abilities, and commitments re-
flected in the following five core propositions:2
• Teachers are committed to students and their learning.
• Teachers know the subjects they teach and how to teach those sub-
jects to students.
2See http://www.nbpts.org (November 22, 2001).

CURRICULUM, INSTRUCTION, ASSESSMENT, AND PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT
141
• Teachers are responsible for managing and monitoring student learn-
ing.
• Teachers think systematically about their practice and learn from ex-
perience.
• Teachers are members of learning communities.
To promote understanding, explicit instruction in metacognition should
be integrated into the curriculum. Thus, instruction should create tasks and
conditions under which student thinking can be revealed so that students,
with their teachers, can review, assess, and reflect upon what they have
learned and how. Additionally, teachers should make their reasoning and
problem-solving strategies visible to students whenever possible (Collins
and Smith, 1982; Lester et al., 1994; Schoenfeld, 1983, 1985).
Effective instruction in advanced courses should involve building and
nurturing a community of learners. A community of learners encourages
students to take academic risks by providing opportunities for them to make
mistakes, obtain feedback, and revise their thinking while learning from
others with whom they are engaged in inquiry and cooperative problem-
solving activities.
To nurture the capacity of students to generalize and transfer their learn-
ing to new problems, teachers must help students explore old understand-
ings in new ways. To this end, teachers must draw out misconceptions in
order to challenge and displace them (Blumenfeld, Marx, Patrick, Krajcik,
and Soloway, 1997; Caravita and Hallden, 1994; Jones, Rua, and Carter, 1998;
NRC, 2000b; Pearsall, Skipper, and Mintzes, 1997;).
Since intrinsic motivation is self-sustaining, instruction should be planned
so as to maximize the opportunity for developing a strong intrinsic motiva-
tion to learn. Students benefit when they can experience success and de-
velop the confidence of a successful learner—one who has the tools to ask
relevant questions, formulate problems and reframe issues, and assess his or
her own knowledge and understanding (Alaiyemola, Jegede, and Okebukola,
1990; Stipek, 1998). Table 7-2 illustrates the emphases of instructional prac-
tices to support learning with understanding.
ASSESSMENT
Educational assessments can be designed for any number of purposes,
from conducting large-scale evaluations of multiple components of educa-
tional programs to measuring individual students’ mastery of a specified
skill. Understanding assessment results requires that the user draw infer-
ences from available data and observations that are supported by the assess-
ment. Three key concepts related to assessments—reliability, validity, and
fairness—underlie a user’s ability to draw appropriate inferences from the

142
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
TABLE 7-2
Characteristics of Instruction for Student Understanding
Less Emphasis on
More Emphasis on
Presenting scientific knowledge through lecture, text,
Guiding students through active and extended inquiry
and demonstration, with activities centered on the
and facilitating student-centered learning
teacher
The same learning experiences for all students
Appropriate matching of strategies and learners
based on awareness of individual student’s prior
knowledge, abilities, and interests
Strategies that have students working alone
Strategies that incorporate collaboration among
students and foster the development of classroom
learning communities
“One-size-fits-all” instructional strategies
Multiple strategies designed to enhance
understanding
Establishing blocks of time and designing lessons such
Flexible scheduling and learning experiences that
that all students are required to learn the same thing in
provide students with enough time, space, resources,
the same way at the same rate
guidance, and feedback for learning
Students doing numerous, often simplistic and
Students conducting extended investigations and
unconnected laboratory activities and being exposed
inquiry and having opportunities to progress through
to many different procedures
cycles of assessment and revision
Focusing on elaborate, equipment-intensive laboratory
Focusing on interactions between students and
exercises
materials, as well as teacher–student and student–
student interactions
Laboratory exercises in which students are provided
Laboratory and inquiry experiences in which students
with all relevant background and procedures and are
are challenged to formulate questions that can be
asked to follow the steps, fill in the data, and answer a
answered experimentally, propose and support
few questions, after which the class moves on
hypotheses, plan procedures, design data tables and
data analyses, evaluate and discuss results, and
repeat experiments with modifications
Teachers monitoring laboratory work to ensure that
Teachers acting as facilitators for laboratory
the steps of the procedure are being followed correctly
experimentation; advising students on what essential
measurements must be taken; discussing sample
sizes; suggesting equipment that is available for use
during the experiment; coaching students in
techniques and protocols; and, within the limits of
safety, allowing students to make mistakes and try
again
Example: The teacher’s lecture centers on presenting
Example: The teacher poses a question: “If the rate of
and explaining rate expressions and factors that affect
a forward reaction is faster than the rate of a reverse
forward and reverse reactions. Keq calculations are
reaction, will the system ever come to equilibrium?”
shown. The teacher demonstrates color changes in a
Students are asked to construct a model for such a
reversible reaction. LeChatelier’s principle is reviewed,
system, in which particles can be moved between two
and students predict equilibrium shifts on the basis of
containers at different rates, and to use this model to
hypothetical changes in reactants, products, and
collect data needed to answer the question. The
conditions. Student misconceptions about the nature
common student misconception that equilibrium
of equilibrium remain uncovered and unchallenged.
means equal amounts in each container is challenged
as students develop an understanding of the principle
of equilibrium.
SOURCES: Adapted from ACS (1997); NRC (1996); NSTA (1996).

CURRICULUM, INSTRUCTION, ASSESSMENT, AND PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT
143
results. A brief discussion of each is provided in Box 7-3 (for further detail
see, American Educational Research Association [AERA]/American Psycho-
logical Association [APA]/National Council on Measurement in Education
[NCME], 1999; Feldt and Brennan, 1993; Messick, 1993; NRC, 1999b).
Assessment is a critical aspect of effective teaching and improved edu-
cation (NBPTS, 1994; NCTM, 1995; NRC, 2001a; Shepard, 2000). It is impor-
tant to note, however, that assessment does not exist in isolation, but is
closely linked to curriculum and instruction (Graue, 1993). Thus as empha-
sized earlier, curriculum, assessment, and instruction should be aligned and
integrated with each other, and directed toward the same goal (Kulm, 1990;
NCTM, 1995; Shepard, 2000). In advanced mathematics and science, that
goal is learning with understanding.
This section reviews design principles for two types of assessments:
those that measure student achievement at the end of a program of study,
such as AP Physics, and those that are used by teachers to provide feedback
to students, guide instruction, and monitor its effects throughout the course
of study (see Box 7-4 for a summary of the design principles for assess-
ment). To guide instruction, teachers need assessments that provide specific
BOX 7-3 Reliability, Validity, and Fairness
Reliability generally refers to the stability of results. For example, the term
denotes the likelihood that a particular student or group of students would earn the
same score if they took the same test again or took a different form of the same
test. Reliability also encompasses the consistency with which students perform
on different questions or sections of a test that measure the same underlying
concept, for example, energy transfer.
Validity addresses what a test is measuring and what meaning can be drawn
from the test scores and the actions that follow (Cronbach, 1971). It should be
clear that what is being validated is not the test itself, but each inference drawn
from the test score for each specific use to which the test results are put. Thus, for
each purpose for which the scores are used, there must be evidence to support
the appropriateness of inferences that are drawn.
Fairness implies that a test supports the same inferences from person to per-
son and group to group. Thus the test results neither overestimate nor underesti-
mate the knowledge and skills of members of a particular group, for example,
females. Fairness also implies that the test measures the same construct across
groups.

144
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
information about what their students are learning and what they do and do
not understand. Of primary importance if a test is to support learning is that
students be given timely and frequent feedback about the correctness of
their understandings; in fact, providing such feedback is one of the most
important roles for assessment. There is a large body of literature on how
classroom assessment can be designed and used to improve learning and
instruction (see for example, Falk 2000; Shepard 2000; Wiggins, 1998; Niyogi,
1995). Concept maps, such as those discussed in Box 6-2 in Chapter 6, are
one example of an assessment strategy that can be used to provide timely
BOX 7-4 Principles of Assessment for Understanding
The following principles of assessment can be applied both to assessments
designed to assist learning (curriculum-embedded or formative assessments) and
those designed to evaluate student achievement at the end of a unit of study
(summative assessments). Effective assessments for measuring students’ learn-
ing with understanding in advanced mathematics and science are:
• Based on a model of cognition and learning that is derived from the best
available understanding of how students represent knowledge and develop com-
petence in a domain.
• Designed in accordance with accepted practices that include a detailed
consideration of the reliability, validity, and fairness of the inferences that will be
drawn from the test results (see Box 7-3). This is especially important when the
assessment carries high stakes for students, teachers, or schools.
• Aligned with curriculum and instruction that provide the factual content,
concepts, processes, and skills the assessment is intended to measure so the
three do not work at cross-purposes.
• Designed to include important content and process dimensions of perfor-
mance in a discipline and to elicit the full range of desired complex cognition, in-
cluding metacognitive strategies.
• Multifaceted and continuous when used to assist learning by providing mul-
tiple opportunities for students to practice their skills and receive feedback about
their performance.
• Designed to assess understanding that is both qualitative and quantitative
in nature and to provide multiple modalities with which a student can demonstrate
learning.

CURRICULUM, INSTRUCTION, ASSESSMENT, AND PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT
145
and informative feedback to students (Edmondson, 2000; Rice, Ryan, and
Samson, 1998).
End-of-course tests are too broad and too infrequently administered to
provide information that can be used by teachers or students to inform
decisions about teaching or learning on a day-to-day basis. The power of
such tests lies in their ability to depict students’ attainment of larger learning
goals and to provide comparative data about how the achievement of one
student or one class of students compares with that of others.3 Ultimately,
end-of-course tests are often used to shape teachers’ instructional strategies
in subsequent years. Thus, the content of the tests should be matched to
challenging learning goals and subject matter standards and serve to illus-
trate what it means to know and learn in each of the disciplines.
Because advanced study programs in the United States are strongly in-
fluenced by high-stakes assessment, the committee is especially concerned
with how this form of assessment can be structured to facilitate learning with
understanding. It is well known that such assessments, even coming after
the end of instruction, inevitably have strong anticipatory effects on instruc-
tion and learning. Thus if high-stakes assessments fail to elicit complex cog-
nition and other important learning outcomes, such as conceptual under-
standing and problem solving, they may have negative effects on the teach-
ing and learning that precede them. In designing such assessments, then,
both psychometric qualities and learning outcomes should be considered.
If end-of-course tests are to measure important aspects of domain profi-
ciency, test makers need to have a sophisticated understanding of the target
domain. They must understand the content and the process dimensions that
are valued in the discipline and then design the test to sample among a
broad range of these dimensions (Millman and Greene, 1993). Doing so is
complicated, however, by the fact that an assessment can only sample from
a large universe of desirable learning outcomes and thus can tap but a
partial range of desirable cognitions. Consequently, concerns will always
arise that a particular assessment does not measure everything it should, and
therefore the inferences drawn from it are not valid. Similarly, the selection
of tasks for an assessment may be criticized for measuring more than is
intended; an example is word problems on mathematics tests that require
high levels of reading skill in addition to the mathematics ability that is the
target of the assessment. To ensure the validity of inferences drawn from
tests, a strong program of validity research must be conducted on all exter-
nally designed and administered tests. The higher the stakes of the test, the
more critical is this research and the more frequently it must be reviewed
(AERA/APA/NCME, 1999).
3In the case of such tests as the AP and IB examinations, the results are used additionally to
guide decisions about college placement and credit.

146
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
Test design and construction includes consideration of which forms of
complex thinking fairly reflect important aspects of domain proficiency. As-
sessments that invoke complex thinking should target both general forms of
cognition, such as problem solving and inductive reasoning, and forms that
are more domain-specific, such as deduction and proof in mathematics or
the systematic manipulation of variables in science. Because metacognition
is such an important component of experts’ performance, both classroom-
based and end-of-course assessments should be designed to evaluate stu-
dents’ use of metacognitive strategies (NRC, 2001a).
Given that the goals of curriculum and assessment for advanced study
are to promote deep understanding of the underlying concepts and unifying
themes of a discipline, effective assessment should reveal whether students
truly understand those principles and can apply their knowledge in new
situations. The ability to apply a domain principle to an unfamiliar problem,
to combine ideas that originally were learned separately, and to use knowl-
edge to construct new products is evidence that robust understanding has
been achieved (Hoz, Bowman, and Chacham, 1997; Perkins, 1992).
Meaningful assessment also includes evidence of understanding that is
qualitative and quantitative in nature, and provides multiple modalities and
contexts for demonstrating learning. Using multiple measures rather than
relying on a single test score provides a richer picture of what students
know and are able to do. The characteristics of assessments that support
learning with understanding are presented in Table 7-3.
TEACHER PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT
One of the most important factors influencing student achievement, if
not the most important, is teacher expertise (see Shepard, 2000; National
Commission on Mathematics and Science Teaching for the 21st Century, 2000;
National Center for Education Statistics [NCES], 2000a; Darling-Hammond,
2000). Thus, the key to implementing the committee’s vision of learning
with deep conceptual understanding is having highly skilled teachers who
can effectively put into practice the strategies suggested earlier in the discus-
sion of instruction for understanding. This observation is particularly true
when one is implementing well-structured external programs that build on
the regular curriculum already in place at a school. Most teachers, even
those regarded as excellent, would have to change their beliefs and prac-
tices significantly to teach in a manner consistent with the committee’s con-
ceptual framework (Haidar, 1997; Jones et al., 1998; Ryder, Leach, and Driver,
1999; Schoon and Boone, 1998; Southerland and Gess-Newsom, 1999). Such
change cannot occur unless teachers are given ample opportunity and sup-
port for continual learning through sustained professional development, as

CURRICULUM, INSTRUCTION, ASSESSMENT, AND PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT
147
TABLE 7-3
Characteristics of Assessment for Understanding
Less Emphasis on
More Emphasis on
Summative examinations—unit tests and the final
Formative assessments—ongoing assessment of teaching
examination
and learning
High-stakes tests that impact college entrance and
Learning assessments that drive program changes in the
placement and drive unintended program change
direction of the goal for advanced studies
Assessments that measure students’ ability to
Assessments that evaluate understanding and reasoning
recall facts
Assessment as something that is done to students
Students participating in developing and analyzing the
and that provides information to teachers about
results of assessments
students
Private communication of students’ ideas and
Classroom discourse including argument and explanation
understandings to the teacher/examiner
of students’ ideas and understandings
Example: During a unit on cell structure, biology
Example: Students participate in varied assessment
students participate in lecture/discussions,
activities throughout the unit. A brief oral examination
complete reading assignments, use electron
tests understanding of a reading assignment. A teacher
micrographs to examine cell ultrastructure, and
uses a check sheet during microscope work to assess
conduct related practical investigations involving
skills. Laboratory data records are evaluated individually
microscopic examination of a variety of cell types
as the students are working on the investigations. A short
and scale drawings. At the end of the unit
multiple-choice test on identifying and naming cell parts is
laboratory write-ups are collected, and a unit test
given, marked, and discussed. Students prepare a
is administered.
concept map illustrating the relationship between cell
structure and function and are asked to explain their
thinking to a small group. The group gives feedback, and
each student performs a self-assessment of the quality of
his or her concept map. The class develops a rubric that
will be applied to a unit examination essay question
comparing prokaryotic and eukaryotic cell structures.
A unit test, of which the essay is one component, is given.
Assessing discrete, easily measured information
Assessing what is most highly valued—deep, well-
structured knowledge
Example: A multiple-choice question asking
Example: A free-response question involving this
students to select the weak base given a set of
scenario: The student is given four 0.10 M solutions
chemical formulas.
labeled A, B, C, D; a conductivity probe; and a pH probe.
One of the solutions is a weak acid, one a strong
acid, one a weak base, and another a strong base.
The student is asked to characterize each solution,
describing both the method developed to solve
the problem and the results.
Student dependence on using algorithms
Students communicating thought processes
One right or wrong answer
Partial credit for various subtasks and many possible
paths to a successful outcome
Unintended uses of results
Clear relationships between the decisions and the data
SOURCES: Adapted from ACS (1997); NRC (1996); NSTA (1996).

148
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
well as the opportunity to try out and reflect upon new approaches in the
context of their own classrooms (Putnam and Borko, 1997).
Because the standards and frameworks driving reform efforts do not
provide specific guidelines for teaching, the implementation of reform vi-
sions, including that described in this report, poses a considerable challenge
for teachers and school administrators responsible for curriculum and in-
struction. Moreover, the changes demanded of teachers are not a simple
matter of learning new teaching strategies: “Learning to practice in substan-
tially different ways from what one has oneself experienced can occur nei-
ther through theoretical imaginings alone nor unguided experience alone”
(Darling-Hammond, 1999a, p. 227). Thus the success of current reform
efforts—in secondary mathematics and science, as well as other curricular
areas—in fostering learning with understanding depends on creating oppor-
tunities for teachers’ continual learning and providing sufficient professional
development resources to exploit these opportunities (Darling-Hammond,
1996, 1999b; Sykes, 1996).
Unfortunately, current professional development for U.S. teachers can
be described only as inadequate:
Sadly and short-sightedly, however, professional development is too often
treated not as a necessity but as a luxury item on the school budget. Many
people erroneously believe that teachers are not working unless they are
standing in front of a classroom. In fact, preparation time, individual study
time, as well as time for peer contact and joint lesson planning, are vital
sources of both competence and nourishment for all teachers. But teachers
are granted precious little time for any of these activities. . . . High quality
professional development ought to be the lifeblood of American teaching;
instead, it is used only to provide the occasional transfusion. (National
Commission on Mathematics and Science Teaching for the 21st Century,
2000, p. 27)
Nothing has promised so much and been so frustratingly wasteful as the
thousands of workshops and conferences that led to no significant change
in practice when teachers returned to their classrooms. (Fullan, 1991, p. 315)
To teach advanced mathematics or science well, teachers need to know
their subjects deeply and extensively, know their students and understand
how they learn, and know the pedagogical techniques specific to their sub-
jects. These three domains of professional knowledge form the core content
of professional development for teachers (NCTM, 2000; Schulman, 1986).
Teachers use this knowledge to listen carefully to students and examine
their work in order to identify understandings and misunderstandings and
frame appropriate learning activities for each student (NCTM, 1991; NRC,
1996). Box 7-5 summarizes the design principles for professional develop-
ment of teachers.

CURRICULUM, INSTRUCTION, ASSESSMENT, AND PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT
149
BOX 7-5 Principles of Effective Professional Development
Effective professional development for teachers of advanced study in science
and mathematics:
• Focuses on the development of teachers’ subject matter knowledge, knowl-
edge of students, and subject-specific pedagogical knowledge.
-
Emphasizes deep conceptual understanding of content and discipline-
based methods of inquiry.
-
Provides multiple perspectives on students as learners.
-
Develops teachers’ subject-specific pedagogical knowledge.
• Treats teachers as active learners who construct their own understandings
by building on their existing knowledge and beliefs.
• Is grounded in situations of practice.
• Takes place in professional communities where teachers have the opportu-
nity to discuss ideas and practices with colleagues.
• Uses with teachers’ instructional strategies and assessment practices that
teachers are expected to use with students.
• Is most effective when teachers take an active role.
• Is an ongoing, long-term effort spanning teachers’ professional lives.
Professional development should emphasize more than the fundamen-
tal facts, concepts, and procedures of a discipline. It also should help teach-
ers understand the particular methods of inquiry in their discipline, know
discipline-specific ways to reason and communicate, and understand the
relationships of the discipline to other school subjects and to societal issues
(NCTM, 1991; NRC, 1996).
Professional development should also help teachers understand students
as learners by providing opportunities to examine students’ thinking about
mathematics and science. Excellent professional development addresses such
issues as how students think and behave, what they already know and be-
lieve, and what they find interesting. Issues of race, gender, age, and socio-
economic background also are germane, as is an understanding of students’
common preconceptions and misconceptions. In addition, teachers should
expect to receive a strong foundation of pedagogical content knowledge
from effective professional development. Such knowledge might include
instructional and classroom organization strategies, materials and resources

150
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
(including technology), alternative ways to represent concepts and strate-
gies or assess student understanding, and methods of fostering classroom
discourse and communication.
High-quality professional development treats teachers as teachers should
treat their students, including acknowledging that learning is an active pro-
cess wherein learners construct new understandings based on what they
already know and believe. There is considerable evidence that existing knowl-
edge and beliefs play an important role in how teachers learn to teach, how
they teach, and how they think about teaching in new ways (Cohen and
Ball, 1990; Prawat, 1992; Putnam and Borko, 1997). If professional develop-
ment is to support meaningful change in teaching and teachers, it must
address teachers’ existing knowledge and beliefs, just as teachers are ex-
pected to address prior knowledge in their students in order to promote
learning with understanding. What teachers know and believe will influence
their interpretation and enactment of new ideas for teaching.
Moreover, professional development instructors are role models who
contribute to teachers’ evolving visions of what and how to teach. Although
they ought to model the kinds of practices they expect teachers to use in
their own classrooms, all too often teacher educators, like K–12 educators,
revert to what they know best—the ways they were taught themselves. The
result is professional development activities that promote traditional views
of schooling and uninspired, didactic teaching methods.
Because knowledge is integrally connected with the contexts in which it
is acquired and used, teacher learning ought to be situated in practice. There
are numerous ways to accomplish this, with advantages for different compo-
nents of teacher learning (Putnam and Borko, 1997). One approach is to
conduct professional development at the schools—and largely in the class-
rooms—where participants teach. Doing so enables the teacher and staff
developer to work together to interpret classroom events in light of various
ideas about teaching, learning, and subject matter. A second approach is to
have teachers bring experiences from their classrooms, such as samples of
students’ work or videotapes of classroom activities, to workshops. Away
from the classroom, teachers have opportunities to develop a reflective per-
spective on teaching by considering different points of view on their own
teaching practice and that of others. Other activities, such as detailed study
of the discipline, may best occur away from the classroom. Settings such as
summer workshops free teachers from the daily demands of having to think
about the immediate needs of their students and classrooms.
A combination of experiences situated in different settings may be the
most powerful way to foster meaningful change in teachers’ thinking and
practice (Putnam and Borko, 1997). The recommendations of the National
Commission on Mathematics and Science Teaching for the 21st Century (2000)

CURRICULUM, INSTRUCTION, ASSESSMENT, AND PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT
151
provide one model for multifaceted professional development. Central to
the commission’s recommendations are summer institutes designed to ad-
dress pressing needs, such as enhancing teachers’ subject matter knowl-
edge, introducing new teaching methods, and integrating technology into
teaching. Also recommended are ongoing inquiry groups. Teachers need to
form learning communities in which they can explore problems of practice
that occur during the school year and engage in continuing discussion to
enrich their knowledge of subject matter, students, and teaching.
Professional development, as characterized here, typically occurs in pro-
fessional communities, not in isolation. This model is consistent with a view
of cognition as developing within a social context that provides the lan-
guage, concepts, and modes of thought with which people make sense of
the world. If teachers are to be successful in developing new practices, they
need opportunities to participate in, as McLaughlin and Talbert (1993, p. 15)
put it, “a professional community that discusses new teacher materials and
strategies and that supports the risk taking and struggle entailed in trans-
forming practice.” Through their participation in such professional commu-
nities, as well as through other means of communication, such as books,
professional journals, and electronic networks, teachers come to understand
and think in ways that are common to those communities while also helping
the thinking of the community to develop and change.
Because learning is a developmental process that takes time and hard
work, teachers’ professional development needs to continue throughout their
careers, and teachers need to accept responsibility for their own learning
and growth. If teachers view themselves as agents of change, responsible for
improving teaching and learning in their schools, they may be more likely to
take advantage of high-quality professional development. Professional de-
velopment, in turn, should support and encourage teachers in accepting
such responsibilities.
In sum, tomorrow’s students will have very different needs from those
of today as a result of new knowledge in the various disciplines, new tech-
nologies, and new workplace demands. To meet those needs, teachers must
constantly revise their practice and reflect on teaching and learning. To this
end, teachers need professional development that provides opportunities
for them to expand their knowledge, to experiment with new ideas about
teaching and learning, to receive feedback about their teaching, and to work
with others to effect positive changes in mathematics and science education
(NCTM, 1991; NRC, 1996; Putnam and Borko, 1997). Lifelong learning expe-
riences can provide teachers with the opportunity to continually consider
and contribute to the evolving knowledge base of teaching and learning
(NRC, 1996). Table 7-4 summarizes the emphases of professional develop-
ment programs that promote understanding.

152
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
FROM FRAMEWORK TO
ADVANCED STUDY PROGRAMS
The development of educational programs that foster learning with con-
ceptual understanding, as outlined in this chapter, could be seen as idealiza-
tion that cannot be achieved in practice; the committee sees it as an impera-
tive. The changes in education proposed here represent a significant depar-
ture from current practice in most schools and from most of the preparation
and professional development that teachers and school administrators have
received. Implementing such changes will not require reforming, but rather
transforming the entire social and institutional context for learning, includ-
ing school culture, leadership practices, and pedagogical practice. The more
aligned the institutional and social context for learning is with the committee’s
conceptual framework for analyzing and designing advanced study, the more
likely it is that the innovations we advocate will be sustained over time and
enhance student achievement.
TABLE 7-4
Characteristics of Effective Teacher Professional Development
Less Emphasis on
More Emphasis on
Sporadic learning opportunities
Continuous ongoing, connected learning experiences
Transmission of knowledge and skills by lecture
Inquiry into teaching and learning
Isolation of teachers, classrooms, and disciplines
Interdisciplinary inquiry that extends beyond the
classroom
Separation of science/mathematics content knowledge
Discipline-specific pedagogy
and teaching knowledge
Separation of theory and practice
Integration of theory and practice in school settings
Individual learning, as teachers of an advanced subject
Collegial and collaborative learning in a professional
are physically and temporally isolated from other
community and time for teachers to interact during the
teachers of the same advanced subject
school day and year
Teacher as technician and consumer of knowledge
Teacher as reflective practitioner and producer of
knowledge
Teacher as target of change
Teacher as source and facilitator of change
Reliance on external or internal expertise only
Mix of internal and external expertise
Fragmented, one-shot workshops
Long-term, coherent plans incorporating 1- to 2-week
summer institutes with follow-up during the school
year
SOURCES: Adapted from ACS (1997); NRC (1996); NSTA (1996).

CURRICULUM, INSTRUCTION, ASSESSMENT, AND PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT
153
The committee has come to a sobering conclusion: given what is now
known about human learning, transformation of advanced study is impera-
tive. Accordingly, the committee presents in this report a framework and a
set of guidelines for assessing and designing advanced study. This frame-
work was constructed on the basis of current knowledge about how people
learn and about the nature of subject matter expertise. Advanced study pro-
grams that are aligned with this framework and the attendant principles will
foster deep, robust conceptual understanding. They also will make such
deep learning accessible to a broader range of students, because the prin-
ciples of learning and of program design set forth here (1) recognize mul-
tiple ways of thinking and (2) support a wide range of perspectives and
practices in the school curriculum. The complex, authentic, multidimen-
sional learning opportunities that could be designed following the committee’s
model could make it possible for all children to discover and use their unique
strengths to engage in learning at a deep conceptual level.

154
8
Analysis of the AP and IB Programs
Based on Learning Research
In this chapter, what is known about how people learn, especially the
principles of learning presented in Chapter 6, is used as a lens for analyzing
and assessing the Advanced Placement (AP) and International Baccalaureate
(IB) programs in mathematics and science. In Chapter 9, this analysis is
extended with respect to the design principles of curriculum, instruction,
assessment, and professional development presented in Chapter 7. The analy-
sis highlights some major strengths and shortcomings in the programs as
currently implemented in U.S. high schools and indicates directions for change
that would help bring the program elements into closer alignment with the
principles of learning set forth in Chapter 6 and with the goals of advanced
study. Although the analysis is often critical, the committee recognizes that
these advanced programs challenge some of the nation’s most talented and
highly motivated students and some of its most capable and creative high
school teachers to accomplish more than is generally expected of a high
school education. Both programs have provided models of high expecta-
tions for students and of recognized and valued external assessments of
student achievement. Regular and even honors courses are often not suffi-
ciently challenging for many of the best students in the sciences and math-
ematics.
The AP and IB programs are dynamic and were moving toward signifi-
cant change even as the present study was being conducted, as exemplified
by the report of the Commission on the Future of the Advanced Placement
Program (CFAPP) (2001) and the revision of the IB Experimental Sciences
curriculum, discussed in Chapters 3 and 4, respectively. Both programs are
being adapted to serve broader purposes than those for which they were
originally designed. Sometimes, however, the programs are misused through
no fault of their developers, as discussed in Chapter 10.
Another set of caveats is in order. Neither the College Board nor the
International Baccalaureate Organisation (IBO) articulates the principles of
learning on which its program is based. This is understandable, as both

ANALYSIS OF THE AP AND IB PROGRAMS
155
programs were created well before the nature of human cognition and learning
became the focus of intensive research or the potential for using this re-
search to inform the design of educational programs was emphasized. None-
theless, now that research is providing a clearer picture of how people
learn, it is important to use this information to consider how to improve the
programs’ courses, assessments, and professional development activities.
Systematic information is lacking about the AP and IB programs as they
are actually implemented in U.S. high schools, including the instructional
strategies used in individual classrooms, the structure of the syllabi in differ-
ent schools, the quantity and quality of the facilities available, the prepara-
tion of teachers who teach the courses, and the ways in which students are
prepared prior to advanced study.1 What is known, however, is that there is
wide variation among teachers and schools. Yet data on the nature of this
variation and its effect on student learning are scant, as is information about
the cognitive processes elicited by the AP and IB assessments. Because im-
portant data about the programs have not yet been published by either the
programs or independent researchers, the committee focused its analysis on
what the programs say they do, using available program materials such as
course guides, released examinations, teacher manuals, program goals and
mission statements. and expert testimony from program officials and experi-
enced AP and IB teachers.2
The discussion in this chapter is organized around the seven principles
of learning set forth in Chapter 6 and is based on the evidence noted above,
as well as the findings of the four panels that conducted in-depth appraisals
of the AP and IB programs in mathematics, biology, chemistry, and physics
for this study.3 The analysis is focused on determining the extent to which
the AP and IB curricula in science and mathematics and the associated in-
struction and assessments are aligned with the principles of learning and
goals for advanced study outlined in previous chapters. This analysis (and
that of Chapters 9 and 10) serves as the foundation for the recommendations
offered in Chapter 11 for improving advanced study in general and the AP
and IB programs in particular. In presenting these analyses, we emphasize
that AP and IB are different programs designed for different purposes, and
1The College Board is beginning to undertake some new research related to how the AP
courses are implemented in schools. See www.collegeboard.org/ap/research/index.html (No-
vember 28, 2001). The IBO has also established a research committee to oversee studies on the
nature of learning in IB classrooms. See www.ibo.org (February 8, 2002).
2The College Board and the IBO provided the committee with a considerable range of
program materials, such as mission statements; course outlines; teacher guides; sample syllabi;
released examinations; scoring rubrics; and research results from studies conducted under the
auspices of their researchers, as well as by independent researchers.
3A summary of the panels’ findings and recommendations is given in Appendix A; and the
full panel reports are available online at www.nap.edu/catalog/10129.html.

156
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
therefore that findings related to one program do not necessarily apply to
the other.
PRINCIPLED CONCEPTUAL KNOWLEDGE
A vital goal of advanced study is to help students progress from novice
understanding toward deeper understanding of the fundamental content and
unifying concepts of a discipline and toward greater expertise in the pro-
cesses of inquiry and problem solving. Because they lack an organizing
structure, novices tend to approach problems by seeking formulas or algo-
rithms they have used in the past, by focusing on surface features of the
problems, or by relying on their intuitions and preconceptions. Experts, on
the other hand, think in terms of core concepts and underlying principles in
approaching and solving problems. The evidence gathered for this report
indicates that, in constructing their programs, AP and IB do not make ad-
equate use of what is known about differences in the ways in which experts
and novices structure knowledge. The committee’s findings in this area are
based on several key observations about the programs.
Breadth Versus Depth
According to the mathematics panel, the breadth of coverage in AP
Calculus is appropriate. The curriculum for the IB Mathematical Methods
Standard Level (SL) and Mathematics Higher Level (HL) courses, however,
encompasses an introduction to elementary calculus (similar to the AP
program’s AB-level calculus course) and additional areas of study that the
teacher selects from among available options. The small number of hours
suggested for study of each topic (20 hours for Mathematical Methods SL
and 50 hours for Mathematics HL according to the IBO’s 1998 course de-
scriptions) leads to the concern that students study each topic only at a
procedural level.
The inclusion of too much content is a major issue in the sciences,
especially the AP sciences. The 2-year format of the IB HL science courses
makes the issue of breadth of content coverage less of a concern for these
courses. However, the 1-year IB SL science courses suffer from some of the
same shortcomings as the AP science courses in this regard.
The content that is expected to be taught and ultimately assessed in the
final examinations for many of the AP and IB HL science courses is quite
broad. According to the findings of the biology, physics, and chemistry pan-
els, most teachers, especially AP teachers, find they have insufficient time for
more than superficial coverage of some topics before moving on to others.
These three science panels are unanimous in expressing their concern that,

ANALYSIS OF THE AP AND IB PROGRAMS
157
in an effort to prepare students for an examination by covering all of the
topics on the course outline, teachers may place undue emphasis on the
presentation and memorization of disconnected facts.
In the science disciplines, both AP and IB materials emphasize con-
cepts, key ideas, and unifying themes. However, the biology, chemistry, and
physics panels emphasize that this commitment is largely unrealized in the
programs’ assessments. Although the science panels find that the examina-
tions do not adequately assess depth of conceptual understanding and place
disproportionate emphasis on recall, the panels are encouraged by the fact
that the College Board is moving toward making improvements in this area.
The 2002–2003 AP biology course description states, “Questions on future
AP Biology Examinations can be expected to test students’ ability to explain,
analyze, and interpret biological processes and phenomena more than their
ability to recall specific facts” (College Entrance Examination Board [CEEB]
2001a, p. 7). Although the IB examinations sample the range of assessment
statements included in the syllabus for each course, the science panels cite
as weaknesses what they consider to be undue emphasis on factual knowl-
edge and failure to target misconceptions and adequately measure concep-
tual understanding.
In their review of the influence of external tests on the curricula pro-
vided in the schools of several nations, Madaus and Airasian (1978) con-
clude that “most studies have found that the proportion of instructional time
spent on various objectives was seldom higher than the predicted likelihood
of their occurrence on the external exam” (p. 21). Since both AP and IB
courses are designed to prepare students for high-stakes, end-of-course as-
sessments, an instructional focus on “big ideas” will likely remain unrealized
until these assessments focus on key concepts in each domain, as has oc-
curred to a considerable extent in AP calculus.
When an advanced course occupies only a single year, as in the AP
program, the broad scope of the curriculum and the demands of the assess-
ments can create a conflict between two goals: providing the broad base of
content knowledge that is perceived to be necessary for the exam, and
promoting conceptual understanding that provides the framework for future
learning and application of knowledge. Program developers can continue to
address this issue by devising focused curricula and by working to equip
teachers to make judgments that support depth of understanding.
Organizing Complex Content
A second observation of the committee and the panels is that the topic
outlines for AP and IB science courses sometimes provide insufficient guid-
ance to teachers about how to organize the enormous amount of recom-

158
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
mended content around important central ideas. The course objectives are
not uniformly structured to reflect the organizing themes of the discipline;
each objective is presented in isolation, rather than as part of a larger net-
work. Yet it is precisely this network—the connections among objectives—
that is important (National Research Council [NRC], 2000b).
In biology, for example, although the AP course description explicitly
addresses principles and themes, teachers are merely given a brief, open-
ended framework for conceptual knowledge using themes that cut across
different topics and must organize the content themselves. The committee is
concerned that students, given the sheer volume of material with which they
are confronted in a typical AP biology course, may be unable to use the
organizing themes effectively, even when they know what those themes are.
Being able to state a theme or memorize a statement is a far cry from under-
standing it.
The IB Biology Guide, like the guide for all of the IB experimental
sciences, identifies “essential principles of the subject” that are common to
both the SL and HL courses in a discipline, but the assessment statements
used to define what should be taught are grouped by topic rather than
thematically. Here also teachers are expected to organize and integrate the
material on their own. While it is important not to specify course designs too
rigidly, further guidance on organizing the recommended content might pro-
duce more consistent results—especially when teachers are undergoing
changes in their practice.
In contrast, in the opinion of the mathematics panel, the topics in the AP
calculus syllabi are appropriate and well connected. In its current formula-
tion, AP calculus pays careful attention to the central concept of function
and to connecting the common ways (numerical, graphical, analytical, and
verbal) of representing functions. There is likewise careful attention to
developing the main concepts of differentiation and integration, including
several interpretations of and applications for each.
Examinations and Conceptual Learning
The AP and IB examinations could be improved if they required stu-
dents to demonstrate a deeper level of conceptual understanding to earn
passing grades. Two of the panels (calculus and chemistry) attribute this
problem, of limited depth, at least for AP, in part to the relatively predictable
nature of many items on the respective examinations. This characteristic
allows or even encourages teachers to instruct students on how to answer
particular types of questions, a practice that might not occur if tests con-
sisted of widely varied items whose solutions required the integrated appli-
cation of key principles.

ANALYSIS OF THE AP AND IB PROGRAMS
159
For example, the mathematics panel is concerned that teachers may be
encouraged to focus on teaching their students specific problem types in-
stead of engaging them in modeling and problem-solving activities that would
lead to greater understanding of the underlying concepts of the subject. As a
result, students could compute a right answer in a limited range of situations
but be unable to explain why their solution is correct. Students who do not
understand the concepts underlying procedures will have difficulty using
mathematics to solve unexpected problems or applying their knowledge in
other disciplines, such as physics or economics, or in real-world settings.
The mathematics panel notes that the AP examination has improved
under the new syllabus. The effort to promote conceptual understanding by
asking nonstandard questions and requiring verbal explanations is an excel-
lent step in the right direction. The fact that there is now a wider variety of
applications of integration (and not from a prescribed list) encourages stu-
dents to think about the meaning of an integral. The panel recognizes and
applauds the fact that that the College Board is taking such steps to encour-
age more modeling activities (applications) and to make its tests less predict-
able (see, for example, CEEB, 2001b). The mathematics panel notes that
many problems on the IB mathematics examinations could also be solved
procedurally if students were taught to do so or if they had solved enough
practice problems. The panel concludes, however, that there is such a broad
range of topics that it would be difficult for students to do well on the
examination as a whole without understanding the underlying concepts.
Indeed, the panel’s analysis of the IB examinations suggests that consider-
able conceptual understanding is required for students to do well. It ap-
pears, however, that opportunities are missed throughout the exam to con-
nect procedural knowledge with conceptual knowledge; this emphasis on
procedural knowledge could lead to superficial instruction in IB classrooms.
The science panels call for final assessments that are better tests of con-
ceptual understanding, with less emphasis on students’ ability to remember
discrete facts, formulas, and procedures. The inclusion of novel tasks that
require the application of key principles could encourage teachers to focus
on students’ development of conceptual understanding and ability to make
interdisciplinary connections. The use of a wider range of assessment strat-
egies also might encourage effective instruction (Rice, Ryan, and Samson,
1998). The science panels note that both AP and IB are taking positive steps
in this direction. For example, some AP science examinations ask students
to design experiments and to demonstrate their solutions to problems. Do-
ing well on this task requires that students have significant prior experience
with designing experiments to solve a variety of problems. Teachers thus
have an excellent incentive to engage students more regularly in these types
of activities.

160
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
PRIOR KNOWLEDGE
Research on cognition has strongly confirmed the importance of prior
knowledge for all aspects of thinking and learning. One reason prior knowl-
edge is important is almost self-evident: new knowledge is built on what
learners already know. Thus before entering AP or IB courses, students
need a solid knowledge base.4 To focus the curriculum and instruction ap-
propriately (a critical factor in maintaining student motivation, as well as in
developing understanding), teachers need a clear idea of the depth of knowl-
edge, skills, and experiences their students bring to the classroom.
Prerequisites
Both the AP and IB programs provide fairly detailed information about
the necessary prerequisite knowledge and skills in mathematics.5 However,
neither the College Board nor the IBO clearly specifies the competencies
students must master in advance in the sciences. In both mathematics and
the sciences, the College Board suggests (but does not require) that students
complete a previous course or combination of courses before enrolling in
AP sciences. Schools are free to adhere to these suggestions or not. State-
ments about the need for such courses are of limited value for several rea-
sons. First, similarly titled courses vary widely in content and rigor, so stu-
dents may not have the necessary background even if they follow this ad-
vice. Second, some students acquire the knowledge and skills necessary for
success through independent study or related experience, not through tradi-
tional course taking. Finally, even when prerequisites are clearly specified, it
may be difficult to ensure that students have met them.
The IBO does not specify any prerequisites for the experimental sci-
ences. IB HL courses are taught over 2 years. Therefore, the IBO does not
believe it necessary to specify prerequisite courses for the experimental sci-
ences, assuming that a 2-year course of study provides ample opportunity
for students to both build a solid foundation in the discipline and pursue
advanced work. However, these courses also are built on prior knowledge
to some extent, and this is worth specifying.
Identifying the prerequisite student knowledge and skills needed for
success in each course is of considerable importance to schools in providing
adequate preparatory experiences (tools for gauging student mastery of these
skills would also be useful). A clear articulation of the body of necessary
4Interestingly, it has been shown that good science instruction in grades 1 and 2 can
strongly influence learning throughout the high school years (Novak and Musonda, 1991; Sneider
and Ohadi, 1998).
5The IBO calls these skills “presumed knowledge.”

ANALYSIS OF THE AP AND IB PROGRAMS
161
prior knowledge could help teachers and counselors advise students about
their readiness to take specific AP or IB courses, and appropriate assess-
ments could help them identify areas of weakness that should be addressed
before advanced study begins. The programs attempt to provide this infor-
mation to varying degrees. However, identifying the full range of prerequi-
site content knowledge, conceptual understanding, and skills is a complex
task requiring the combined efforts of experts from the science disciplines,
cognitive psychologists, master teachers, and staff from the advanced study
programs. The committee believes that the benefits for student learning are
well worth the effort. At the same time, while this task is important, it is also
essential that prerequisites not become barriers to participation for students
from particular ethnic or socioeconomic groups (see Chapters 2 and 10, this
volume).
An alternative to the use of more testing to measure readiness for ad-
vanced study might be to adopt a developmental approach, such as that
devised by the Australian Council for Educational Research. Central to this
approach are models of learning known as progress maps, which provide a
sequential description of skills and knowledge indicating both the goal and
the steps necessary to achieve it. Readiness for AP or IB courses could be
calibrated with a position on such a map (as cited in NRC, 2001a, p. 181).
Use of such an approach also might be beneficial for students seeking to
prepare themselves for advanced work through independent study.6
The American Association for the Advancement of Science’s (AAAS)
Project 2061 program for science literacy recently produced an atlas of learning
maps that indicate the interrelationships among science concepts. Although
limited in scope at present, these maps provide a useful set of guidelines for
building upon science concepts as students advance through school (AAAS,
2000). Adapting aspects of these maps could assist experts in developing
appropriate measures of prior knowledge and readiness for advanced study.
Coordination of Courses
The fact that students need to acquire certain prerequisite knowledge
and skills before participating in advanced study implies that greater atten-
tion should be paid to across-grade curricular and instructional planning. If
advanced study is viewed as an extension of the regular curriculum, it fol-
lows that students’ success in such programs depends on knowledge and
skills acquired much earlier.
6To date, progress maps have been developed primarily for elementary and middle school
mathematics and science. If they are to be useful for the purpose proposed here, teams of
experts will be required for their development. Examples of progress maps can be found at
www.acer.org/.

162
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
For example, the study of calculus logically builds on foundational knowl-
edge acquired in previous courses in mathematics. Yet the mathematics panel
points out that there are not enough checks in the system to ensure that
students have mastered the algebra, trigonometry, and precalculus concepts
and skills necessary for success in calculus and in courses beyond. The
performance of many AP calculus students is undermined by the fact that
they do not learn precalculus thoroughly, or learn adequately how to solve
problems and think mathematically. This situation is not a defect of the AP
calculus course per se, but of the system in which it is embedded.
An example of prior foundational knowledge is the periodicity of trigo-
nometric functions, such as sine and cosine. While these are not calculus
concepts, an understanding of these functions is needed in the study of
calculus. If these ideas are learned poorly or not at all in previous coursework,
the calculus teacher must devote valuable instructional time to their devel-
opment, or some students will experience difficulty.
The science panels argue that a syllabus for a year-long advanced course
that also serves as an introduction to the discipline allows too little time for
students to develop the depth of conceptual understanding that should be
the fundamental goal of advanced science courses. Thus they unanimously
recommend that students study the biology, chemistry, or physics that is
suggested for grades 9–12 in the National Science Education Standards (NRC,
1996) before enrolling in advanced high school courses in those disciplines.7
At the same time, to ensure that students who complete introductory courses
do not face excessive redundancy in subsequent courses requires active
coordination among teachers at different grade levels.
Implications of Prior Knowledge for Instruction
Because prior knowledge is so important to students’ ability to under-
stand new material, care must be taken to structure advanced courses around
a coherent curriculum. That is, the presentation of topics must be sequenced
so that the concepts and processes imparted to students gradually become
more complex (AAAS, 2000). Neither the AP course descriptions (see for
example, CEEB, 2001b, p. 8) nor the more detailed IB program guides pro-
vide guidance on sequencing concepts or topics. In fact, the IB Chemistry
Guide notes that the order in which topics are presented on the course
outlines does not constitute a recommended sequence: “It is up to the indi-
vidual teachers to decide on an arrangement which suits their circumstances”
7All of the panels agree that there are exceptions to this general rule. For example, particu-
larly precocious students or those who have had significant experiences outside of the class-
room related to the discipline might be able to skip the first course.

ANALYSIS OF THE AP AND IB PROGRAMS
163
(IBO, 2001b, p. 35).8 Similar statements are included in IB program guides
for mathematics, biology, and physics (IBO, 2001a, p. 5; IBO, 2001c, p. 9).
This flexibility can be a strength in the hands of good teachers because they
can adjust their activities in response to what their students understand. On
the other hand, less-experienced AP or IB teachers may try to follow college
textbooks too closely, and according to the chemistry panel, their doing so
could contribute to the problem of excessive breadth.
Misconceptions and Formative Assessment
One important subset of prior knowledge involves misconceptions and
naive theories, as discussed in Chapter 6. Even well-performing students
often retain and use deeply flawed prior beliefs. The AP and IB programs
could address this problem in several ways. First, using emerging research
on student misconceptions, they could include in their course guides infor-
mation about typical misconceptions that students may already harbor or
that may arise during study of each of the topics included in the courses.
There is considerable research and detailed description of the common types
of misconceptions held by learners in mathematics and physics (see for
example, Driver, Squires, Rushworth and Wood-Robinson; 1994; Gabel, 1994;
Minstrell, 2000b). Information might be provided in the teachers’ guides
about these common misconceptions, as well as strategies that could be
used to address them. Second, a focus on detecting and addressing common
misconceptions in content areas could be built into professional develop-
ment programs. Third, items could be included in the AP and IB final assess-
ments that would reveal common misconceptions, thus focusing teachers on
the goal of identifying and remediating misconceptions that persist even
after instruction. While the AP physics examination now does this to some
extent, the mathematics panel notes that AP calculus examinations miss op-
portunities to include questions that address common student misconcep-
tions, such as those that arise in attempting to understand the derivative,
slope fields, and functions.
One effective strategy for identifying student misconceptions, especially
those that endure after instruction, is the use of curriculum-embedded (for-
mative) assessment, which enables teachers and students to set intermediate
goals for learning and to select appropriate materials and tasks for pursuing
those goals. Formative assessment can also provide information about stu-
dents’ preconceptions and misconceptions, thereby informing subsequent
instructional choices (see, for example, Kozma and Russell, 1997; Mestre,
1994; Minstrell, 2000a; NRC, 2001a). The College Board and the IBO could
8Similar statements are found in AP course guides and teacher’s guides.

164
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
develop or help teachers develop the tools needed for this purpose. Al-
though some excellent teachers apply this strategy already, it probably can-
not be presumed that most do so.
The IBO helps teachers integrate formative assessments of students’ prac-
tical (laboratory) work and portfolios into instruction on an ongoing basis.
However, it does not provide guidance on the development or structure of
other forms of ongoing assessment. The AP program provides no explicit
guidance on the structure or development of classroom-based assessments,
although course guides and teachers’ guides mention the usefulness of such
measures. The panel’s appraisal of professional development materials pro-
vided by the AP and IB programs indicates that classroom assessment re-
ceives limited attention.
Lacking appropriate interim assessments, many teachers use previously
released final examination questions throughout the school year to measure
student achievement. This strategy may be useful for predicting students’
performance on the AP or IB examinations or providing practice with the
test format and item types, but it is of little use as a tool for identifying
misconceptions or appraising students’ conceptual understanding because
the test items are not designed for this purpose. AP and IB teachers also
would benefit from professional development opportunities directed toward
improving their knowledge of common misconceptions and assisting them
with the development of activities or formative assessments that could be
used to detect and address those misconceptions. Experienced teachers of
advanced study would be needed to staff such workshops.
METACOGNITION
Advanced study courses present a significant opportunity for providing
students with instruction in metacognition, or self-monitoring of learning
(Mintzes, Wandersee, and Novak, 2000). Research has shown that strong
metacognitive skills are characteristic of experts in any field, as well as of
effective school-age learners, and that they are developed most effectively
in the context of a discipline. For example, White and Frederickson (1998)
demonstrate that teaching students metacognitive strategies in physics im-
proves their understandings of the concepts of that discipline. Similarly,
Schoenfeld (1983, 1984, 1991) shows that a metacognitive approach to in-
struction improves students’ heuristic methods for mathematical problem
solving.
Minimally, AP and IB course materials should recognize proficiency in
metacognition as a goal of advanced study. Teachers should elicit
metacognitive activity in classroom discourse by posing questions and mod-
eling reasoning. In addition, suitable opportunities for students to demon-

ANALYSIS OF THE AP AND IB PROGRAMS
165
strate metacognitive strategies should be built into curricular materials and
assessments. The goal should be to help students become proficient in moni-
toring their own thinking and learning.
Although the AP course outlines and professional development pro-
grams for mathematics and science teachers currently pay little explicit at-
tention to metacognition, the teachers’ guides suggest that teachers help
students develop skills that are important components of metacognitive strat-
egies. For example, according to the teacher’s guide for AP chemistry (Mullins,
1994, p. 8), “It would be unreasonable to expect that all AP students come
into the class with strong analytical and critical thinking skills; therefore the
AP teacher must strive to strengthen these skills within the students. A pro-
cess of problem solving should be continually modeled and reinforced.”
Likewise, the teacher’s guide for AP calculus (Kennedy, 1997, p. 48) sug-
gests that “teacher modeling of questioning and exploration, multiple ap-
proaches to problem solving, correct use of terminology, clarity of work,
and openness to the ideas of others are all essential.” The committee views
these suggestions as positive steps toward addressing the important role of
metacognition. However, the statements in the teacher’s guides are isolated,
and the committee believes the importance of metacognition currently is
substantially underrepresented in both the teacher’s guides and the types of
questions students encounter on the final AP examinations in science. As is
the case for principled conceptual knowledge, an instructional emphasis on
metacognition will not be realized until that emphasis is reflected in the
assessments.
The committee views as promising the fact that in future AP calculus
examinations, students will be required to justify and explain their solutions
to all calculator problems. Scoring rubrics will consider both the correctness
of the solution and whether the reasons for using the selected procedures
are justified. Given the strong influence of the assessments on the content
and structure of curriculum and instruction, it is likely that AP calculus teachers
will provide frequent opportunities for students to make their thinking vis-
ible. The committee commends the AP calculus development committee for
its attention to this important principle of learning and encourages other AP
development committees to follow suit.
The IB program also provides significant opportunities for students to
learn and develop metacognitive skills. As discussed in Chapter 4, the IB
Theory of Knowledge course9 is designed to provide students with knowl-
edge about cognitive processes and strategies, practice in using those strat-
egies, and opportunities to evaluate the outcomes of their efforts. “It encour-
9This course is a requirement for students seeking an IB Diploma (see Chapter 4, this
volume, for other requirements).

166
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
ages students to become aware of themselves as thinkers, to become aware
of the complexity of knowledge, and to recognize the need to act responsi-
bly in an increasingly interconnected world” (IBO, 2000b, p. 3).
DIFFERENCES AMONG LEARNERS
The existence of differences among learners and the extraordinary com-
plexity of such differences have implications for how educational programs
are structured, how students are taught, and how learning is assessed. They
are also relevant to teacher professional development.
Research on how students differ in knowledge representation and ex-
pression is difficult work that is not yet complete. Nonetheless, programs
such as AP and IB can begin to address student variations by building corre-
sponding variability into their curricula and assessments and by addressing
learner differences as part of their professional development opportunities
for teachers. While variety will not ensure a perfect match of instruction or
curriculum to the preferences or abilities of each student, it will likely pro-
vide many more students with opportunities to learn in ways best suited to
their strengths, at least some of the time.
AP or IB teachers who creatively mix pedagogical approaches with sen-
sitivity to the profile of learners in particular classes are likely to reach a
broad range of students with varying learning modes and may motivate
more students as well. The IB program guides for the experimental sciences
recognize the importance of this tenet by indicating that there is no single
best approach to teaching IB courses and that teachers should provide a
variety of ways of acquiring information that can be accepted or rejected by
each student, allowing different routes through the material (IBO, 2001a,
2001b, 2001c, p. 11). A combination of approaches is also likely to result in
students learning the same concepts in multiple ways, a strategy that is
conducive to building deep understanding. An example of such a strategy is
the current “rule of four” emphasis in calculus, which suggests that students,
with the help of their teachers, see the links among four representations of
mathematics: numerical, graphical, symbolic, and verbal.
Using Differences Among Learners in Assessment
As discussed in Chapter 6, students with different learning styles may
need different ways to demonstrate their knowledge and skills. For ex-
ample, some students work well under pressure, while the performance of
others is significantly diminished by time constraints. Some students ex-
press themselves well in writing, while others do not. Using one form of
assessment will work to the advantage of some students and to the disad-

ANALYSIS OF THE AP AND IB PROGRAMS
167
vantage of others. Research (see, for example, Linn, 2000; Mintzes et al.,
2000; NRC, 2001a) also indicates that the use of different measures admin-
istered over a period of time will offer a more accurate picture of what
students know than any single measure can provide (Linn and Hsi, 1999).
Using information gathered from multiple sources shows respect for the
diversity among learners.
The internal assessment that is part of all of the IB experimental science
courses and the portfolio that is part of the IB mathematics courses are
examples of how large-scale assessment can incorporate the results of differ-
ent types of measures into a final evaluation of student achievement. How-
ever, the scores earned on the internal assessment and the portfolio are not
reported separately, but are combined with scores earned on the written
final examination and contribute only a fraction of the student’s total score.
Therefore, some information is lost that might be useful in providing a fuller
picture of students’ capabilities.
The AP reporting levels of 1 to 5 do not differentiate well among stu-
dents at higher levels of achievement. A score of 5 putatively represents a
commendable level of proficiency, but it fails to capture just how proficient
a student is or what a student knows qualitatively. At all levels of achieve-
ment on the AP assessments, the score by itself does not speak to what
students actually understand. For example, a student who earns a 3 on an
AP biology examination might know a great deal about a few topics or less
about many things. A student who earns a score of 1 might either know little
or have failed to make an effort on the examination. The physics panel
addresses this issue at length, indicating that two students who earn scores
of 5 can have vastly different levels of understanding. Scores on the 2000 AP
Physics B examination that result in a 5 range from 104 to 180. The panel
states unequivocally that students at the higher end of the score range are far
more competent than those at the lower end. Institutions receiving student
scores could benefit from information that reflects this difference. The com-
mittee notes that even students who achieve a score of 5 could have serious
gaps or inconsistencies in their understanding, and these gaps ought to be
revealed as well.
With some planning and effort, the College Board could do much better
in assigning qualitative meaning to summary scores.10 One possibility is that
a numerical summary of performance—say a score of 4—could be linked to
a description of what students who earn that score are likely to understand.
10The committee notes that the reporting structure of an assessment cannot be modified
without considering whether the test can support the inferences that will be drawn from the
reported scores. If they cannot, changes may have to be made in the test itself. This requires
long-range planning and changes that must be made at the test development stage.

168
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
It also may be possible to review the specific responses of examinees and
evaluate them for gaps in understanding, or to provide subscores for specific
skill and knowledge areas. Currently, most AP examinations do not include
enough items targeting the same concept or skill to allow development of a
meaningful subscore for individuals.11 An exception is the AP Calculus BC
exam, which already provides a useful subscore indicating proficiency on
the AB section of the material. To develop useful subscores on other exams,
the assessments might have to cover less material more deeply or include
more items. Reducing the breadth of material covered on the assessments
could potentially accomplish two important goals: providing more meaning-
ful and useful information about student performance, and reducing the
breadth of content teachers are expected to cover and students are expected
to learn in AP classes.
MOTIVATION
Learners’ academic motivation influences their choices about which tasks
to undertake, the persistence with which they pursue these tasks, the level
of effort they expend, and their thoughts about the usefulness of the tasks
and their performance on them. Eccles and colleagues (Eccles, Wigfield, and
Schiefele, 1998) organized research about motivation into three broad ques-
tions students might ask themselves when confronted with a new task: Can
I do this task? Do I want to do this task and why? What do I have to do to
succeed on this task? These questions are used below to frame an analysis of
the ways in which the AP and IB programs help or impede students in
developing and maintaining their motivation in advanced study programs.
Believing in the Possibility of Success
Factors that contribute to students’ sense that they can be successful in
AP or IB courses have been discussed earlier in this report. These factors
include students’ positive beliefs about their own competence, their expec-
tations for success or failure, their sense of control over the outcomes, their
belief that others think they are competent, their belief that support of vari-
ous kinds is available if they need it, and a strong sense that what they have
learned before is adequate preparation for the challenges they will face in
AP or IB. The IBO’s Middle Years Programme and the College Board’s Verti-
cal Teams, Equity 2000, and Pathways Programs are designed to help stu-
dents believe they can be successful in AP and IB courses.
11Currently the College Board provides aggregate subscore information to teachers of
classes in which five or more students sit for the examination. The IBO provides similar feed-
back to its teachers.

ANALYSIS OF THE AP AND IB PROGRAMS
169
Deciding to Enroll in an Advanced Course
Many able high school students and others take AP and IB courses
because they seek opportunities to challenge themselves academically—
opportunities that might otherwise not be available in high school courses.
Others select these courses because they believe extrinsic rewards will ac-
crue to them for doing so. These rewards include, for example, a potential
advantage in the college admission process at competitive colleges,12 oppor-
tunities for academic recognition, the possibility of earning college credit,
and the possibility of placing out of introductory college courses.13 Most
students, however, are motivated by a combination of internal and external
factors.
Some students take these courses because their parents want them to
do so. Parents’ reasons may include those mentioned above, as well as
beliefs that AP and IB courses are taught by better teachers and produce
more learning, that there are fewer discipline problems in these courses,
and that students will have greater access to resources and opportunities in
these courses than in others. Peers also exert a strong influence on stu-
dents’ decisions on whether to enroll. Students who are members of peer
groups that value AP or IB participation are probably more likely to enroll
even when they are not personally interested in a course. This observation
may have serious implications for able students who attend schools where
their peers do not value academic achievement. Still others take AP and IB
classes because no other options exist in their high schools. This is particu-
larly the case in mathematics: students who complete precalculus often
have no other choice but to take AP or IB calculus if they want to continue
with mathematics.14
Investing Effort for Success
Even when students are prepared to take AP or IB courses and have
determined that they want to do so, they still must ask themselves whether
12Responses to a survey of college admission officers conducted by the committee clearly
indicate that student perceptions in this area are accurate and that the more selective a college
is in terms of admission, the more important it is that a student participate in AP and IB courses
if their high school offers such courses (see Chapter 2, this volume).
13The committee conducted a survey of biology and mathematics departments at a sample
of colleges and universities to ascertain how AP test scores are used for placement and credit
(see Chapter 2, this volume).
14In September 1986, the Mathematical Association of America and the National Council of
Teachers of Mathematics released a joint statement advocating that calculus courses taken in
high school be at the college level, in other words, at the level of AP or IB. The statement was
published in Calculus for a New Century (Steen, 1988).

170
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
they are willing to expend the effort required for success. Researchers have
begun to examine the relationships among motivation, cognition, and the
social context in which learning takes place. The results of some of this
work suggest that educational programs designed in accordance with the
principles of learning described in this report can enhance students’ motiva-
tion to engage in advanced study even when considerable effort is involved.
Research also has shown that when computers, teachers, and peers are inte-
grated as learning partners, not only does greater achievement result, but
also more positive affective changes occur (Canas, Ford, Novak, Hayes, and
Reichherzer, 2001; Linn and Hsi, 1999).
Motivation and the Final Examination
It is interesting to note that a far larger percentage of IB than AP students
take the final examinations.15 The IBO promotes the idea that IB courses
prepare students for success in college and in real life. The examinations,
students are told, are an integral part of the course and are the best way for
them to demonstrate to themselves and others that they have achieved com-
petence. In contrast, AP materials focus primarily on the usefulness of AP
test scores for college credit and placement. If students lose interest in earn-
ing credit or placement or the colleges at which they plan to matriculate do
not accept AP credits,16 they may choose not to sit for the examinations.
The College Board is concerned about the number of students who do
not take the AP examinations and is considering ways to address this issue
(CFAPP, 2001). All four of the panels and the committee believe that sitting
for the examinations should become an integral part of AP courses (see
Chapter 11). Otherwise, students will miss an important opportunity to vali-
date their performance, colleges and universities will lack information that
can be highly useful in deciding on appropriate placements, and AP will be
less credible as a rigorous program for high school students.
LEARNING COMMUNITIES
Learning is mediated by the social environment in which students inter-
act with others. Although students also learn individually, research indicates
15Virtually all IB students take the examinations (Campbell, 2000). In contrast, only two-
thirds of AP students sit for the examinations. (This is an overall estimate provided by the
CFAPP [2001], but the committee does not know the extent to which this figure varies across
disciplines. It may be, for example, that almost everyone who takes AP U.S. history sits for the
examination, but only 25 percent of AP chemistry students do so, or vice versa.)
16Students generally receive acceptance to college prior to the May AP examination dates.

ANALYSIS OF THE AP AND IB PROGRAMS
171
that learners benefit from opportunities to articulate their ideas to others and
listen to and challenge each other’s ideas, and in so doing reconstruct their
thinking. Teamwork and collaborative investigations similar to those in which
professional scientists engage help students refine important concepts and
principles and apply them in real-world contexts. Students build on the
learning of others through interaction. For example, students who are using
an ineffective problem-solving strategy can learn by observing others who
are using more productive methods.
The panels see learning communities as an important avenue for stu-
dents to develop advanced understanding in their disciplines. The panels
recognize the importance of discourse to both student construction of un-
derstanding and scientific discovery (Dunbar, 1995). They are concerned,
however, that the push to cover too much content during the course of a
school year can discourage teachers from permitting students to engage in
lengthy discussions, ask questions, make conjectures, and challenge each
others’ ideas. The science panels’ reviews of the broad scope of AP and IB
course outlines, sample course syllabi, school scheduling options, and their
own experiences lead them to believe that in many (but not all) AP and IB
science classrooms, a lecture format is used extensively. Lectures can be an
efficient tool for transmitting information, but they are not very useful for
eliciting students’ misconceptions, helping them understand the conditions
for which principles are valid, or providing them with opportunities to prac-
tice skills and receive feedback. Traditional lecture formats limit the ability
of students to be active participants in their own learning because they
cannot control the pace of the information that is being presented, and
interaction between lecturer and learner is limited at best.
The science panels are also concerned that students’ opportunities to
engage in collaborative work with peers in the laboratory components of
science courses may be limited by the brevity of the periods within which
the laboratories must be offered in today’s high schools. They note that most
college students engaged in the same courses have laboratory periods that
are 2 to 3 hours long. The panels commend the College Board for advocat-
ing longer laboratory periods (CEEB, 2001a, 2001c, 2001d), but are skeptical
about the frequency with which schools are able to implement this sugges-
tion because of other scheduling constraints. The science panels note that a
reduction in the breadth of science curricula could allow more time for
collaboration and inquiry.
The panels note approvingly that the internal assessment criteria for IB
experimental science courses require teachers to structure the classroom and
laboratory environments so that students have opportunities to acquire and
develop skills in working with a team. It is likely that both the AP and IB
programs could make more deliberate use of interactions in promoting stu-
dents’ understanding of science and mathematics through such strategies as

172
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
group case studies, project-based science activities, and use of technology that
facilitates discourse (Ryder, Leach, and Driver, 1999). Finally, it may be noted
that although class time is limited, collaboration can be encouraged outside of
class on homework and other assignments, at the discretion of the teacher.
LEARNING IN CONTEXT
The situative perspective recognizes that learning occurs best in the
context of performing problem-oriented tasks analogous to those encoun-
tered in real work environments. Active, inquiry-based learning should there-
fore be a major component of the learning environment.
There are many instructional techniques teachers can use to situate learn-
ing, such as case-based or problem-based instruction and simulations. How-
ever, as mentioned in Chapter 6, care must be taken with all of these ap-
proaches to provide multiple opportunities for students to engage in activi-
ties in which the same concept is at work; otherwise learning could become
overly contextualized, and students might not be able to discern its useful-
ness in solving different types of problems. The IB program recognizes this:
“Students need to be exposed repeatedly to the application of basic con-
cepts to new situations. This can be done through examples used in the
classroom, by homework assignments which provide a variety of appropri-
ate situations requiring skills beyond recall of information, and by tests and
examinations which use questions similar to those used in the IB examina-
tion” (IBO, 1999a, p. 401). There are two primary reasons, however, why
multicontext learning is unlikely to occur in AP and IB classrooms: there is a
great deal of material to cover in preparation for the examinations, and the
AP and IB assessments do not measure students’ understanding of underly-
ing principles in unfamiliar contexts frequently enough.
In the real world, problems are not organized neatly into discipline-
specific packages. Thus from the situative perspective, advanced study teachers
should provide opportunities for students to explore the interdisciplinary
connections relevant to complex tasks. Doing so not only makes learning
more interesting and motivating, but also develops students’ capacity to
generalize their learning. In this regard, the mathematics panel concludes:
The AP program does not make a sufficient attempt to connect calculus
with other fields in a realistic way. There is a tendency to use applications
of rather ritualistic and formulaic kinds, and of limited difficulty. The test
concentrates on a few prescribed applications (e.g., determination of vol-
umes) or gives applications that consist largely of interpretation of symbols
or computations in a new context. Its problems have a “whiff” of applica-
tion, but they are often jarringly unreal at a deeper level.17
17See the panel’s report at www.nap.edu/catalog/10129.html.

ANALYSIS OF THE AP AND IB PROGRAMS
173
While the IB external assessment lacks realistic connections to other
disciplines, the IB portfolio, which was added to the mathematics program
in 2000, includes a modeling exercise that emphasizes interdisciplinary con-
nections with science. The committee and the mathematics panel applaud
this new emphasis and encourage the IBO to expand this emphasis to the
external assessment. The IB science courses include interdisciplinary topics
in some of the topic options and in the required Group 4 interdisciplinary
project (see Chapter 4, this volume, for more information about the IB Group
4 Project). In addition, the selection of curricular options in IB experimental
science courses is based on resources that are available locally. For ex-
ample, an IB chemistry curriculum in a school with access to a university’s
analytical laboratory might include higher physical organic chemistry or
modern analytical chemistry. Similarly, a curriculum in a school located in
an area where there are chemical manufacturing plants could include the
Chemical Industries option. Thus students develop knowledge that is situ-
ated in the relationships, practices, and tools of a community. The AP sci-
ence curricula do not encourage links to other science disciplines, probably
as a result of the independent development of each AP course.
The laboratory components of AP and IB science courses can provide
excellent opportunities for teachers to situate learning in activities that re-
flect the kinds of thinking and problem solving in which scientists engage.
The physics panel notes that experimental work in advanced courses should
provide experience with the ways scientists use experiments, both for gath-
ering data to build theoretical models and for exploring the applicability of
these models to new situations. Although both the AP and IB programs
emphasize the central role laboratory experiences should play in students’
learning, the science panels note that the potential for helping students learn
how science is conducted is not realized to an optimal extent in either pro-
gram. For example, the biology panel notes that the AP required biology
laboratories tend to be more “cookbook” (i.e., a set of prescribed proce-
dures) than inquiry-based and consequently do not replicate the ways scien-
tists work. The physics panel is similarly concerned about the “cookbook”
nature of many physics laboratories commonly used in schools. In these
laboratories, students do not have adequate opportunities to make the kinds
of decisions scientists make from the conception of an experiment to the
critical review of its results.
Another aspect of situated cognition as related to laboratory work is the
ability to use instrumentation. The science panels note that skilled use of
instrumentation is an important aspect of the context in which scientific
discovery occurs. Through the use of authentic activities, including labora-
tory work and the skilled use of appropriate instrumentation, the situated
nature of learning is respected. Students are less likely to memorize words
or phrases that hold no meaning except for helping them obtain high exam

174
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
scores or grades. Instead, learning can be embedded in more authentic con-
texts and realistic activities, using tools appropriate to the subject. The biol-
ogy panel notes that the AP biology laboratory exercises do not require
much instrumentation. The physics panel indicates that neither AP nor IB
curricula reflect the growing use of computer modeling for the study of
physics.
IB science and mathematics assessments, as a function of the internal
assessment18 and portfolio19 components, respect the situated nature of learn-
ing better than do AP assessments.20 This is because the AP examinations
rely exclusively on a single assessment that uses only multiple-choice and
free-response questions to measure student achievement. The chemistry panel
contends that paper-and-pencil assessments, such as the AP examinations,
are not sufficient to measure students’ understanding of laboratory methods
or interpretation of laboratory data. The biology and physics panels concur.
The mathematics panel, while appreciative of the portfolio component of
the IB mathematics courses, does not believe the portfolio alone eliminates
the need to include on the final examinations questions that require students
to use their knowledge and skills to solve real and unfamiliar problems.
CONCLUDING REMARKS
This chapter has presented an analysis of programs for advanced study
through the lens of research on learning, as summarized in Chapter 6. The
focus has been on the themes of conceptual learning, prior knowledge,
differences among learners, motivation, learning communities, and the con-
text of learning. In general, although the programs have important strengths,
they do not yet effectively utilize what is known about how people learn. In
many instances, they insufficiently emphasize conceptual learning that uses
inquiry-based methods, nor do they adequately take into account the impor-
tance of prior knowledge (including student preparation in earlier courses).
Some of the courses are too broad to allow mastery. Most could do more to
help students gain the ability to apply their learning in unfamiliar situations.
18The internal assessments in the experimental sciences are focused on the candidates’
skills in laboratory investigation, which include planning, data collection and processing, evalu-
ation of procedures and results, and manipulative skills and personal skills, which include
working with a team (IBO, 2001a, 2001b, 2001c, pp. 20–22).
19The purpose of the mathematics portfolio is to “provide candidates with opportunities to
be rewarded for mathematics carried out under ordinary conditions, that is, without the time
limitations and stress associated with written examinations” (IBO, 1998b, p. 47).
20As discussed in Chapter 4, the IB internal assessment allows teachers to evaluate stu-
dents as they use their knowledge and skills to solve real problems in settings other than
testing.

ANALYSIS OF THE AP AND IB PROGRAMS
175
Although the analysis here has included examples from the four disci-
plines on which this study is focused, the discussion has been fairly general.
Readers who are interested in one of the disciplines in particular will find an
in-depth assessment in the corresponding panel report. Readers are encour-
aged to peruse these reports individually or to examine the summary of their
findings presented in Appendix A.
Chapter 9 examines the AP and IB programs from a different but related
point of view: the four elements of educational programs—curriculum, in-
structional methods, ongoing and end-of-course assessments, and opportu-
nities for teacher preparation and professional development. The discussion
in that chapter considers the extent to which these elements of the AP and
IB programs nurture deep conceptual understanding among students—the
committee’s view of the primary goal for advanced study.

176
9
Analysis of AP and IB Curriculum,
Instruction, Assessment, and
Professional Development
This chapter reviews the AP and IB curricula and associated instruc-
tional strategies, assessments, and professional development opportunities
to identify those features that are consistent with the design principles set
forth in Chapter 7. Also examined are the ways in which the four program
elements interact to support or undermine students’ attainment of the deep
conceptual understanding that is the goal of advanced study. In presenting
this analysis, the committee acknowledges that there are many teachers in
the United States who, by virtue of their experience and pedagogical skills,
are able to overcome many of the program deficiencies discussed. We also
recognize, however, that an improved program would only serve to en-
hance the capabilities of these teachers. Additionally, for the many teachers
who are not as skilled or experienced, it is important that the curricula and
related assessments and teacher preparation for these courses be aligned
more completely with what is known about learning to ensure high stan-
dards and quality instruction for all AP and IB students.
CURRICULUM
Depth Versus Breadth
The committee’s analysis of the AP and IB programs reveals some fun-
damental characteristics that are incompatible with a curriculum designed to
foster deep conceptual understanding. The first major discrepancy, which
applies equally to AP and IB, relates to the “less is more” concept in curricu-
lum design. The idea is simple: only if a curriculum is not overly broad in
terms of the number of topics to be studied is it possible to study topics in

AP AND IB CURRICULA
177
sufficient depth to develop deep conceptual understanding. This idea is
consistent with national standards in mathematics and science for grades K–
12 (American Association for the Advancement of Science [AAAS], 1993;
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics [NCTM], 2000; National Re-
search Council [NRC], 1996). While the written materials produced by the
College Board and the International Baccalaureate Organisation (IBO) ac-
knowledge the importance of depth and focus, the daunting scope of the
curriculum guides and the associated assessments in some subject areas
sends a very different message. One notable exception is the revised AP
calculus syllabus, which reflects an appropriate balance between breadth
and depth.
Curriculum Development
AP course outlines (and assessments) are designed to mirror the content
of typical college-level introductory courses (see Chapter 3, this volume). AP
courses are intended to be an acceptable substitute for the introductory
courses offered at more than 2,000 colleges and universities. Because AP
courses cannot duplicate all of these college offerings, AP development com-
mittees try to make the courses maximally similar to as many of their college
counterparts as possible. If one makes the commonsense assumption that
college-level courses vary substantially in quality, such an approach will
limit the development of high-quality AP courses. Average and excellent are
incompatible. By focusing on average rather than exemplary programs, the
development process results in an almost certain regression to the mean. A
far better goal for the development of AP courses would be to design them
in accordance with the principles articulated in this report. Further, sug-
gested instructional strategies should reflect the range of best practices in
both high school and college courses instead of emulating college courses
across a range of quality and content. Throughout the development process,
the goal of fostering learning with deep conceptual understanding must
always be pursued.
AP course content is determined using data supplied by college and
university department officials who respond to a survey distributed by the
College Board. According to College Board officials, the response rate to
these surveys is rather low—approximately 40 percent. Thus the responses
of a small number of college and university departments may have an undue
influence on what is taught in advanced courses across the nation. Design-
ing AP courses to reflect a typical college course also means that until cur-
ricular changes become common in introductory college courses, these
changes will not be included in AP. On the other hand, because IB courses
are developed differently (see Chapter 4, this volume), they can be more
responsive than AP courses to changes in the disciplines.

178
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
The committee notes that in the 1990s, the College Board began experi-
menting with other development strategies. In 1994, 23 nationally recog-
nized experts in the area of calculus reform were brought together to work
with the development committee in redesigning the AP calculus curriculum.
The give and take and varying perspectives of these experts helped create a
course that did not simply replicate a typical college course, but reflected
current consensus on best practices in mathematics teaching and curriculum
design.1 The collaborative model used to develop AP calculus offers insight
into how course development procedures could be modified to improve
programs. The best possible outcome is that a focus on quality will result in
university and AP courses having reciprocal effects on one another.
Variability
As noted earlier in this volume (see Chapters 3, 4, and 8), AP and IB
courses in the same discipline vary from school to school and even from
classroom to classroom. Individual teachers are given substantial leeway in
implementing AP or IB courses in their classrooms. While flexibility in cur-
ricula is an attractive feature for many experienced teachers, allowing them
to be creative in their instructional approaches, the result is that college and
university faculty face the same problems as AP and IB teachers in being
unable to determine what incoming students know and are able to do.
Research on the nature and effectiveness of various practices in AP and
IB classrooms is scant. Little is known, except anecdotally, about how AP
and IB classrooms are organized, how the courses are implemented, and
how they relate to existing school and district curricular offerings. School
differences also affect how a course is implemented. The length of class
periods, available facilities, and existing state standards, for example, all
help shape the courses differently in each locality. Research is needed to
understand these differences and their effects on student learning and achieve-
ment.
INSTRUCTION
Both the AP and IB programs depart significantly from the committee’s
framework for designing effective programs for advanced study by failing to
address the element of instruction adequately. Neither the College Board
nor the IBO gives sufficient attention to identifying and modeling aspects of
1For a complete history of the reform of AP calculus, see http://apcentral.collegeboard.com/
article/0,1281,150-155-0-8019,00.html (February 2, 2001).

AP AND IB CURRICULA
179
instruction that foster learning with understanding. Further, neither program
presents explicit models of the nature and range of excellent teaching in AP
or IB classrooms. Sample syllabi, Internet discussion groups, professional
development activities, and other resources provided by the College Board
and the IBO are of varying quality, represent limited perspectives on excel-
lent instruction, and do not adequately take into account variability among
students and schools.
Because both AP and IB courses are designed to prepare students for
external, standardized final examinations, instruction in AP and IB class-
rooms is typically directed toward that goal. Unfortunately, the broad scope
of the AP and IB curricula, the significant number of examination questions
that appear to require only rote learning, and the predictability of the ques-
tions included on some examinations may lead teachers to focus their atten-
tion on presenting information and teaching problem types, rather than fa-
cilitating active student involvement in learning.
Worthwhile Tasks
One of the primary responsibilities and challenges facing teachers of AP
and IB courses is the selection and development of worthwhile problems,
exercises, tasks, projects, and investigations that can simultaneously develop
conceptual understanding, prepare students for successful performance on
the examination, and address the varying abilities and preferences of stu-
dents in the classroom. Currently, AP and IB materials provide little assis-
tance for meeting this challenge.
Promotion of High-Quality Instruction
High-quality instruction in AP and IB science and mathematics courses
depends on the availability of qualified teachers. The committee found that
neither the College Board nor the IBO has clearly defined the preparation
and qualifications of AP or IB teachers; doing so could contribute signifi-
cantly to the quality of instruction in the programs.
Schools and districts also have an important role to play in promoting
high-quality instruction in AP and IB classrooms; the College Board and the
IBO cannot do it alone. High-quality instruction depends on many things,
such as adequate instructional resources and laboratory facilities; a structure
that allows enough time for instruction; ongoing availability of high-quality
professional development opportunities; and support from administrators,
parents, and educational policymakers.
Most important, schools and districts must recognize that effective teaching
in AP and IB classrooms requires time. Advanced study teachers, like other

180
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
effective teachers, need time to remain abreast of changes in their subject
areas and in the pedagogy related to their disciplines. AP and IB teachers
need time to prepare their classes, carefully grade and comment on student
work, and engage in collaboration and lesson planning with other teachers
(see Chapter 2, this volume). For example, Ma (1999) indicates that teachers
in China spend more time preparing lessons than teaching them. Time for
collaborative planning is an important part of teachers’ school hours in China.
In the United States, teachers average approximately 13 minutes of planning
time for every instructional hour (Darling-Hammond, 1999b; National Com-
mission on Teaching and America’s Future, 1996).
ASSESSMENT
AP and IB courses are designed to prepare students for standardized
final examinations. Teachers select curriculum materials and gear instruction
to prepare their students for success on these examinations, and students
focus their learning on the concepts and content they believe they will en-
counter on the assessments. It is important, therefore, to better understand
whether these assessments are aligned or in conflict with the principles of
learning with understanding and the design principles of assessment.
Examination Design and Development
As noted earlier (see Chapter 3, this volume), AP examinations are de-
signed by development committees for each of the disciplines in consulta-
tion with statisticians and psychometricians to create examinations that meet
accepted standards for technical quality (American Educational research
Association [AERA]/American Psychological Association [APA]/National Council
on Measurement in Education [NCME], 1999).2 Thus, the development pro-
cess incorporates the judgments of both disciplinary and psychometric ex-
perts. IB examinations are designed differently, in a manner similar to that
which might be used by teachers who have a sophisticated understanding of
their discipline (see Chapter 4, this volume). Thus, the development of IBO
assessments depends heavily on the expertise and professional judgment of
master teachers and less on psychometric calibrations. These differences
between the two programs’ assessments should be considered in light of the
ways students’ examination scores will be used and the kinds of inferences
users expect to support with the scores.
2Readers who are interested in a more detailed discussion of test construction are referred
to other sources (see, for example, AERA/APA/NCME, 1999; Millman and Greene, 1989).

AP AND IB CURRICULA
181
Support for Inferences Drawn from Assessment Results
As noted in Chapter 6, validity research is a vital component of any
high-quality assessment program. Validity involves what an examination mea-
sures and the meaning that can be drawn from the scores and the actions
that follow (AERA/APA/NCME, 1999; Cronbach, 1971). For each purpose for
which the scores are used, there must be evidence to support the inferences
drawn. In the case of AP, for example, the College Board wants users to
draw the inference that students’ performance on AP examinations is indica-
tive of their mastery of material taught in a typical college course in the
subject. The IBO wants users to draw the inference that students who earn
an IB Diploma through their performance on six IB examinations3 are ad-
equately prepared for postsecondary work in many countries.
“The process of validation involves accumulating evidence to provide a
sound scientific basis for the proposed score interpretations” (AERA/APA/
NCME, 1999, p. 9). The AP Technical Manual describes two common inter-
pretations of AP scores: (1) a good AP grade indicates that the student would
benefit from entering a course more advanced than the usual first-year course,
and (2) an AP grade indicates that the student should receive credit for a
college course that he or she has not taken.4 The IBO does not describe the
appropriate interpretations of IB grades other than to say that they reflect
students’ mastery of course content that is designed to prepare them for
postsecondary learning.
Given these desired interpretations, validation studies for the AP and IB
assessments should include systematic evaluation of such factors as whether
the right skills and knowledge are being measured and in the right balance;
whether the cognitive processes required by the test are representative of
the ways knowledge is used in the discipline; the extent to which the test
measures students’ knowledge of the broader construct that is the target of
instruction, as opposed to their knowledge of specific test items; whether
the scoring guidelines focus on student understanding; and whether the test
scores accurately represent different levels and kinds of understanding.
The committee’s analyses of the test items and the course syllabi on
which the tests are based yielded information about content coverage. How-
ever, no data were available for evaluating whether the tests measure impor-
tant cognitive skills. This is because neither program has systematically gath-
ered data to document that test items on its examinations measure the skills
they purport to measure. In making determinations about the validity of
3There are additional requirements for an IB Diploma (see Chapter 4, this volume).
4See www.collegeboard.org/ap/techman/chap5/ (November 28, 2001).

182
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
inferences, it is necessary to know, for example, that test items intended to
measure problem solving do in fact tap those skills and do not just elicit
memorized solutions or procedures. There are a number of ways to collect
such data. For example, cognitive laboratories might be conducted during
which examinees would “think aloud” as they responded to test questions.
Information from such laboratories gives test developers insight into the
thought processes used by students to derive answers to test questions.
Validity evaluation should consist of more than a haphazard set of re-
search studies. A sound validity evaluation should integrate “various strands
of evidence into a coherent account of the degree to which existing evi-
dence and theory support the intended interpretations of test scores for
specific uses” (AERA/APA/NCME, 1999, p. 17). Yet the committee’s analysis
indicates a surprising lack of information about what the AP and IB assess-
ments actually measure. To date, neither program has implemented a strong
program of validity research. The committee found only a few validity stud-
ies conducted with AP or IB data. For example, Morgan and Ramist (1998)
examine college course-taking patterns for AP students; Morgan and
Maneckshana (2000) compare performance in advanced-level courses for
AP and non-AP students; and Eugene Carson reports on a small study at
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University that compared the overall
grade point averages of IB students with those of AP students and students
who participated in neither program.5 While these studies may be useful,
they do not represent pieces of an integrated research program (see Chapter
10, this volume, for a discussion of these studies).
Consequential Validity of AP and IB Assessments
Very little evidence is available for evaluating the consequential validity6
of the AP and IB assessments. With regard to this aspect of validity, relevant
questions might include whether typical examinees become more or less
interested in the domain as a result of their experience and whether they are
more or less likely to pursue further study than those who do not sit for the
examination. In the context of this report, one might ask how students who
participate in AP and IB fare in college relative to other students and what
the effect is on colleges of the ever-increasing numbers of students entering
postsecondary institutions with college credit earned on AP or IB examina-
tions. Equity concerns should also be considered, that is, whether the as-
sessment unintentionally produces inequities of achievement or attitude in
either the short or long term. While Morgan and Ramist (1998) begin to
5Available at http://www.rvcschools.org [August 2000]..
6Consequential validity refers to the consequences or uses of assessment results.

AP AND IB CURRICULA
183
address some of these questions, additional studies are needed. Information
about the consequential effects of AP and IB assessments are especially
important as these programs expand and become a more significant compo-
nent of U.S. education.
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT
A common theme of the four panel reports that also emerged through-
out the committee’s deliberations is the crucial importance of professional
development for enhancing teachers’ content knowledge in their subject
areas. As noted in Chapter 7, this volume, a strong grounding in subject
matter knowledge is fundamental to good teaching and should be a primary
goal of professional development activities. It is unrealistic to ask teachers to
cultivate a deep, principle-based understanding among their students unless
they themselves have such understanding. However, the ideal role of pro-
fessional development for advanced study goes far beyond ensuring that
teachers know their subject areas well. Effective professional development
also enhances teachers’ subject-specific pedagogical knowledge and pro-
vides them with multiple perspectives on students as learners. It is grounded
in situations of practice; takes place in professional communities; actively
involves teachers; and is an ongoing, long-term component of their profes-
sional lives. The committee believes that without well-designed and ongo-
ing professional development, it is difficult for teachers to provide high-
quality instruction that is aligned with curriculum and assessment to support
the goal of learning with understanding. The committee notes that neither
AP nor IB professional development opportunities are sustained and that
teacher participation in both programs is voluntary.
The mathematics and science panels note that the summer programs
offered by AP are highly variable in focus and organization, as well as in
quality. The mathematics panel expresses concern that many AP and IB
mathematics teachers have insufficient professional development opportu-
nities to derive both mathematical content and pedagogical knowledge or to
receive help in implementing modifications to the programs. Having reviewed
a significant sampling of AP summer institute materials (1998–2000), the
panel finds that many of the workshops did not adequately address substan-
tive issues relevant to teaching calculus. The science panels note that few of
the AP workshops, even those that emphasized laboratory experiences,
focused on inquiry.7 The panels commend the IBO for its professional
development activities related to internal assessments that focus on inquiry.
7Inquiry includes laboratory investigation, but also a broad array of information gathering,
appraisal, and testing of ideas toward the goal of understanding science deeply.

184
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
The College Board and the IBO are just beginning to fully develop
vehicles for establishing professional communities of learners among geo-
graphically separated teachers. The primary means being used are discus-
sion groups and databases that can be accessed on the Internet. However,
the committee notes that both the College Board and the IBO have regional
organizations for teachers. Some are more active than others, and each pro-
vides different types of activities. For example, the IBO has a vibrant group
in Florida that runs its own conferences, and the College Board, through its
regional offices (notably in the southwest), provides opportunities for teach-
ers in the regions to work with colleagues in professional development
activities throughout the school year. Nonetheless, there are too few oppor-
tunities for teachers to interact with colleagues on issues important to teach-
ing. This is especially true in high schools where AP or IB teachers in a
particular discipline may be the only members of their departments who
teach these courses.
The National Commission on Mathematics and Science Teaching for the
21st Century (2000, pp. 27–28) provides some suggestions that could be-
come part of AP and IB Web-based efforts. These include the creation of (1)
an online professional journal that would encourage teachers of advanced
mathematics and science to engage in publishable research and to share
new teaching strategies with colleagues, both nationally and internationally;
(2) a dedicated database of teaching ideas, plans, and other resources; (3) an
interactive online resource for conversations, meetings, and idea sharing;
and (4) interactive videos for observing good teachers and critiquing teach-
ers’ own efforts, for mentoring, and for online instruction. Research is needed
to determine the effectiveness of such Web-based mechanisms for teacher
professional development.
CONCLUSION
The committee has advocated the use of a model that can help sponsors
of advanced study programs make decisions on how their programs can
best improve in the years ahead. This model includes both principles of
learning and design principles for curriculum, instruction, assessment, and
professional development. The committee believes that if programs of ad-
vanced study, such as AP and IB, were to place principles of learning at the
center of their own implicit models, the programs would improve in quality
and effectiveness with regard to fostering deep understanding. Program quality
would also be enhanced if the programs were to recognize the systemic and
mutually interactive nature of curriculum, instruction, assessment, and pro-
fessional development. With care, persistence, and a strong guiding model,
advanced study programs could become worthy beacons for all of American
education.

185
10
Uses, Misuses, and Unintended
Consequences of AP and IB
This chapter examines a number of ways in which the Advanced Place-
ment (AP) and International Baccalaureate (IB) programs and their assess-
ment results are used. Some of these uses are appropriate and intended by
the program sponsors; others are not. Unintended uses are making these
programs high stakes in terms of their consequences for students, for teach-
ing and learning, and for schools.
HIGH STAKES
In 1998, Newsweek published a list (Mathews, 1998a) entitled “The 100
Best High Schools in America.”1 This list, which ranks public high schools
according to the number of AP and IB tests taken, divided by the number of
graduating seniors, was drawn from the book Class Struggle: What’s Wrong
(and Right) with America’s Best Public High Schools (Mathews, 1998b). The
ostensible purpose of the list, now published annually for Washington area
schools in the Washington Post, is to quantify the level of challenge high
schools provide to their students. The author of the list acknowledges that
such rankings have their limitations, but believes it is better to have such a
tool, even one that may be misleading, than to have no means of comparing
schools and motivating parents and students to demand more from their
schools (Mathews, 1998b).
The practice of ranking schools by the number of AP or IB tests admin-
istered, as Newsweek does, or using students’ scores on AP or IB exams for
evaluating teachers or comparing the quality of teachers and schools, as
some parents, school administrators, or policymakers may do, is making
these programs high stakes in ways the program developers never intended.
1The list does not include public schools that admit more than half of their student body
through a competitive process that includes examinations or other academic criteria.

186
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
Such misuses of AP and IB assessments are both educationally inappropriate
and counter to the Standards for Educational and Psychological Testing (Ameri-
can Educational Research Association [AERA]/American Psychological Asso-
ciation [APA]/National Council on Measurement in Education [NCME], 1999).
Moreover, neither the College Board nor the International Baccalaureate
Organisation (IBO) has to date provided sufficient guidance to counter many
of these misuses. This section considers some of the unintended conse-
quences of these practices.
Effects on Students
Making decisions about the effectiveness of teachers or the quality of
their teaching primarily on the basis of AP or IB test scores may have unin-
tended consequences for students. For example, if teachers are evaluated on
the basis of AP or IB test results, they may discourage certain students from
taking AP or IB courses because they believe those students will not per-
form well, or they may counsel students for whom they anticipate a low
grade to skip the final examination. Such practices can deny students the
opportunity to try an AP or IB course or to validate what they have learned
in comparison with nationally or internationally established standards.
Effects on Teaching and Learning
Teachers who are evaluated on the basis of student test results are more
likely to teach to the test than to teach what they deem important (see, for
example, Koretz, 1988, 1996; Koretz, Linn, Dunbar, and Shepard, 1991; Linn,
Graue, and Sanders, 1990; Shepard, 1990; Shepard and Cutts-Dougherty,
1991). The committee acknowledges that the nature of the AP and IB pro-
grams makes teaching to the test the norm; the test specifications are the
curriculum (see Chapter 3, this volume). However, the committee does not
believe the AP and IB tests reviewed for this study sampled broadly and
deeply enough across the full range of content knowledge, conceptual un-
derstanding, processes, and skills valued in the respective disciplines to make
teaching to the test an appropriate strategy for developing the level of con-
ceptual understanding that should be the goal of advanced study.
Therefore, the panels and the committee view teaching to AP and IB
tests as potentially interfering with teaching what is truly important for en-
hancing student learning. For example, the mathematics panel notes that the
AP and IB examinations have overemphasized procedure and under-
emphasized application and conceptual understanding. The chemistry panel
also identifies a lack of contextual problems in the AP examinations. The
biology and physics panels find that both the AP and IB assessments cover
too much content, and the chemistry panel decries the lack of attention to

USES, MISUES, AND UNINTENDED CONSEQUENCES
187
important interdisciplinary connections. The biology and chemistry panels
note a lack of test items that measure laboratory skills on the AP examina-
tions, and the physics panel indicates that neither AP nor IB assessments
require students to apply what they learn in class to solve new or novel
problems. In sum, teaching to AP and IB tests for the purpose of raising test
scores can lead to superficial coverage of a broad base of content knowl-
edge, to teachers ignoring the importance of meaningful inquiry-based and
laboratory experiences (AP only), and to students feeling that what they are
learning in school has little application to the real world.
Effects on Teachers
Inferences about teacher quality and effectiveness cannot be supported
by data drawn solely, or even primarily, from AP and IB test scores. One
important reason for this is that students come to AP and IB classrooms with
different levels of skill and mastery of content that make it difficult to deter-
mine the effects of a single teacher’s work on student achievement in any
particular year. A well-prepared group of students might, for example, earn
high scores on their AP or IB final examinations even if the quality of the
teaching in their class was low. Similarly, an underprepared group of stu-
dents might do quite poorly on AP or IB assessments because of their previ-
ous preparation, despite the valiant efforts of a highly qualified and dedi-
cated AP or IB teacher. Although this is the case for all subjects, it appears to
be especially true for advanced mathematics because of the hierarchical and
sequential nature of the subject.
Effects on Schools
Ranking Schools by the Number of AP or IB Tests Taken
Policymakers and others often rely on numbers, rankings, comparisons
of standardized test results, and other quantifiable data to draw conclusions
about the state of education in the United States. The media report these
data as valid and scientific, and the public uses them as a basis for making
important decisions and judgments.
For example, the annual list described at the beginning of this chapter
has been used by many as a measure of overall school quality. The list has
taken on a life of its own. It is now so important to be included among the
top 100 schools on the list that some competitive high schools not included
have posted disclaimers on their Web sites indicating why this is the case.2
2An example is City Honors High School in Buffalo, New York; see http://
cityhonors.buffalo.k12.ny.us/city/news/1999-00/0003/news0003newsw/news0003newsw.html
(January 11, 2002).

188
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
Many others that are listed among the top 100 openly publicize their ranking
as a sign of excellence.
Using the number of AP and IB examinations or number of AP and IB
courses offered in a school as a measure of school quality also penalizes in
the arena of public opinion schools that have chosen, because of different
educational values or priorities, to offer other rigorous options to their stu-
dents. Ignoring the value of these alternative approaches can stifle creativity
and innovation in the development of new programs. Such alternative ap-
proaches could be as rigorous as AP or IB and also be more suitable to the
student body served by a particular school.
Additionally, ranking schools by the proportion of students who take
AP or IB examinations ignores the central issue of how many of those stu-
dents are adequately prepared through high-quality courses to succeed on
the exams. The committee notes that among states and school districts where
all AP students are required to take the examinations, a notable number of
students may not complete the examination or answer test questions consci-
entiously.
Evaluating School Quality by the Numbers
The fundamental objective of education is to promote the academic
growth of each student. Evaluations of school quality should help identify
those schools that are accomplishing this goal and those that are not. When
assessment scores are used to evaluate schools, efforts must be made to
determine whether the scores are indicative of growth (or lack of growth)
that is due to the quality of the instructional program, or merely reflect
students’ home environments, external learning experiences, and available
resources. There are many schools that provide high-quality instruction in
school districts where resources are scarce whose students continue to grow
academically. There are other schools in which test scores are high, but the
quality of instruction may not be as good as in schools with lower test
scores. The higher assessment scores may be more reflective of the students’
other opportunities than of the quality of the school itself. In sum, relying
solely, or even primarily, on AP or IB test scores to evaluate school quality
reflects a failure to recognize that there are substantive differences in educa-
tional institutions across the nation (see Chapter 2, this volume), while also
ignoring the varying characteristics of the students who attend these schools.
QUALITY CONTROL
With increasing calls for educational quality and accountability, educa-
tors and policymakers alike have turned to AP or IB to improve the quality

USES, MISUES, AND UNINTENDED CONSEQUENCES
189
of their schools and curricula. The pressure to introduce or expand AP or IB
offerings in high schools can have a number of unintended consequences.
For example, schools that claim to offer advanced study programs may or
may not be able to support such programs adequately, and the resulting
courses may be far from what is intended by the program sponsors. Ensur-
ing the quality and integrity of the AP and IB programs is a complex en-
deavor that it is frequently affected by factors beyond the control of either
the College Board or the IBO.
Standards and Regulation of Courses
The IBO carefully regulates which schools can offer IB courses and how
those courses must be structured. As a result, schools are unable to offer IB
courses or the IB Diploma without the imprimatur of the IBO.
In contrast, the College Board has no clear standards for what consti-
tutes an AP course or the schools that offer them. This lack of consistency
invites misuse of the AP name. For example, schools have been known to
label non-AP courses as AP in an effort to make their students more com-
petitive for admission to college. Others may have instituted AP courses
without ensuring that they have the facilities and personnel needed to offer
a college-level program. Consequently, all four of the panels call on the
College Board to certify or regulate AP programs and teachers.
Curriculum Compression
The committee found that schools’ efforts to prepare students for AP
and IB science and mathematics courses often help stimulate improvements
in the prerequisite courses, and that this is an important and positive effect
of these programs. However, there also may be some unintended conse-
quences. For example, some students may be adversely affected when schools
compress preparatory courses in order to prepare as many students as pos-
sible for AP or IB courses. Compression can occur by reducing coverage of
specific subjects in a curriculum to provide adequate time for advanced
study or by beginning the high school sequence of courses earlier in a
student’s career.
To illustrate the point, strong preparation is important in mathematics
because of the hierarchical and cumulative nature of the subject. However,
the mathematics panel notes that there is considerable anecdotal evidence
that some students intending to take calculus are rushed through prerequi-
site courses without thoroughly learning the preparatory material. Math-
ematical sophistication takes time to develop, and knowledge of a catalog of
mathematical facts and techniques is not sufficient. The mathematics panel

190
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
notes that most of the students who do poorly in AP or IB calculus did not
learn their algebra well enough. These students probably would have been
better served by spending more time learning algebra and saving calculus
for college. At the same time, there are students who are ready for a rigorous
calculus course in high school. Schools need to maintain a delicate balance
between meeting the needs of this latter group and pushing too many stu-
dents into advanced mathematics before they are ready. Achieving this bal-
ance is not easily accomplished.
Compression of the curriculum also can occur when students are al-
lowed to skip prerequisite courses and take an AP course as a first course.
Among the sciences, AP physics is the course students most frequently se-
lect as a first course in the discipline. Data obtained from the College Board
(College Entrance Examination Board [CEEB], 2000d) indicate that almost
half of all AP physics test takers had had no prior experience with physics
before enrolling in the AP course. Thus, the AP course had to cover both a
year of high school physics and a year of college physics, making in-depth
examination of any topic nearly impossible.
Participation in Examinations
The IBO expects that all students who take IB courses will take the
associated examinations. The IBO uses student performance on its examina-
tions to monitor and improve the overall quality of IB programs in different
countries and schools. In contrast, the four panels note that the College
Board has not developed examination policies or expectations for students’
participation in the AP examinations. Because the examinations provide the
only external evidence that schools are preparing students in a manner con-
sistent with the College Board’s expectations, the panels suggest that a clearly
articulated policy is necessary if the College Board is to maintain quality
control of the AP name.
Online Courses
As discussed in Chapter 5, advances in technology have made it pos-
sible for colleges, universities, technology companies, and other nonprofit
and for-profit organizations to create and distribute AP courses and other AP
support services, such as professional development for AP teachers, online.
Although the reach of these online courses has to date been small relative to
other AP opportunities, their potential for growth is unlimited. The biology
and chemistry panels are particularly concerned that students who take AP
courses online and earn a qualifying score on the examination could earn
college credit or placement without having had any hands-on laboratory

USES, MISUES, AND UNINTENDED CONSEQUENCES
191
experience.3 They call on the College Board to set quality standards for
online laboratory components of science courses. It may be noted that, be-
cause only authorized schools can provide IB courses, laboratories, and
examinations, third-party providers currently cannot offer programs that carry
the IB name.
ACCESS AND EQUITY
Disparities in access to AP and IB courses for students who live in inner-
city and rural areas are a serious educational and social problem that is
discussed throughout this report. However, other students in the United
States also lack meaningful access to these courses because their schools
deny them the opportunity to enroll.
Limiting Students’ Access to AP and IB
Limiting students’ access to advanced study occurs in all kinds of educa-
tional settings, including the most competitive high schools in America—
schools with adequate resources, qualified teachers, and well-prepared stu-
dents (Mathews, 1998b). These schools, while typically advocating college
preparation for everyone, have created layers upon layers of curricular dif-
ferentiation such that only a select group of students are allowed entrance
into certain AP and honors courses; other students are placed in less presti-
gious courses4 (Attewell, 2001; Mathews, 1998b; Oakes and Wells, 2001).
In a recent study, Attewell (2001) finds that many high-achieving stu-
dents from elite high schools are not able to take the AP courses they would
have been able to take had they attended less prestigious schools. He at-
tributes this phenomenon to the fact that many elite high schools provide
their best students with opportunities to participate in AP and honors courses
while denying access to others. He finds further that, as a function of these
placement policies, many highly able students who attend elite high schools
are less likely than similar students in other high schools to take advanced
mathematics or science courses or examinations. Schools limit participation
in part, Attewell contends, because restricting access to AP to the strongest
students guarantees that the school’s overall pass rate on the final examina-
3Strategies for providing laboratory experiences to online students are discussed in
Chapter 5.
4Mathews (1998b) estimates that each year, 25,000 interested and adequately prepared
students in the United States are told they cannot take AP or IB courses. He further speculates
that another 75,000 or more students who have the ability to do well in such courses do not
elect to take them because no one encourages them to do so.

192
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
tions will be very high, boosting their reputation with the top colleges they
care most about influencing.
The committee agrees that AP and IB are not appropriate for all stu-
dents. Some are not prepared for or do not want to take college-level courses
in high school, and such courses are not appropriate for all high school
students. However, research shows that there are few rigorous options out-
side of these classes, especially in high schools with well-developed AP and
IB programs (Callahan, 2000). Thus, students who are denied access to or
choose not to take these classes are forced to enroll in what are often far less
challenging options.
Prerequisites
Prerequisites are frequently used as gatekeepers to regulate enrollment
in AP and IB courses. Sometimes this practice is deemed necessary because
there is limited space. In other cases, the school simply wants to control
which students take the courses to maintain quality (as represented, for
example, by high test scores). The committee reviewed more than 100 cur-
riculum guides prepared by individual high schools for their students, par-
ents, and teachers. This review revealed that prerequisite requirements for
enrollment in AP or IB courses range from open admission to highly restric-
tive criteria such as PSAT scores above a certain threshold, all A’s in courses
leading up to the AP courses, uniformly high teacher recommendations, and
evidence of consistently high levels of motivation or excellent work habits.
Many of these guides also contain statements to the effect that students who
take courses for which they are not recommended must have signed permis-
sion from a parent absolving the teacher and the school from responsibility
if the student does not succeed. If measures are to be used to extend or
restrict access to AP and IB courses, the committee urges that schools dem-
onstrate that their criteria for entry to advanced study are valid predictors of
student success.
COLLEGE CREDIT AND PLACEMENT
AP Program
Throughout this report, the committee has challenged the assumption
that AP courses uniformly reflect the content coverage and conceptual un-
derstanding that is developed in good college courses. We now ask whether
students who place out of introductory courses in college on the basis of
their AP scores are as well prepared for further study as their peers who take
the introductory courses in college.

USES, MISUES, AND UNINTENDED CONSEQUENCES
193
The College Board has conducted several studies to investigate this ques-
tion. Recently, Morgan and Ramist (1998) examined the performance of AP
and non-AP students in second-level courses in 25 subjects at 21 colleges.
These subjects included sciences and mathematics, as well as many others.
Breland and Oltman (2001), using data published by Morgan and Ramist
(1998), examined the performance in upper-level courses of students who
took AP comparative government and politics and AP economics. The con-
clusion of both of these studies was that students who earned qualifying
scores on AP examinations appeared to earn grades in second-level courses
that were as good as those earned by students who took the first-level course
in college. However, this conclusion is true only for an overall average. Fur-
ther, it was implicitly assumed in these studies that any student with a score
of 3 or better on the AP examination would be allowed to take the second-
level course. The committee knows from its department survey (see Chapter
2, this volume) that this is not the case. Thus a more precise conclusion for
these studies is that students with qualifying AP scores who were exempted
from first-year courses in college appeared, on average, to earn grades in
second-year courses that were no lower than those earned by students who
took the introductory courses in college.
With the assistance of an educational statistician,5 the committee exam-
ined the assumptions, methods, and conclusions of these two studies. This
examination revealed that the methodology used in conducting the studies
makes it difficult to determine how often and under what circumstances
there is a positive advantage for AP students relative to non-AP students in
second-level courses. There are two principle reasons for this difficulty:
• The investigators based their conclusions on averages of grades that
were computed across classes and institutions to obtain overall averages. No
effort was made to control for differences in the types and quality of the
institutions involved in the study or for how well the AP courses matched
the introductory courses students had placed out of in the different institu-
tions.
• No attempt was made to control for differences among students that
could be related to their performance in second-level courses. Examples of
such differences include SAT scores (both SAT I and SAT II in the relevant
subjects), high school grade point average, whether or not the students
intended to major in the subject, and the quality of their overall high school
curricula. No evidence is provided in the study reports as to whether stu-
5The committee’s analysis of the College Board studies was conducted by Bert F. Green,
professor of psychology, Emeritus, The Johns Hopkins University.

194
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
dents with the same credentials, apart from the AP examination score, also
could skip the introductory-level courses with the same positive results in
the next-level course.
In conclusion, the methodology used by the investigators to gather and
analyze their data makes it difficult to determine whether any apparent ad-
vantage held by AP students over non-AP students is a function of the col-
leges they attend, the classes they enter, their own academic backgrounds
and abilities, or the quality of the AP courses they took in high school.
Further, there is no way to determine, from the data provided, the number of
classes among the various colleges in which non-AP students outperformed
AP students. It is possible that AP students were at a disadvantage in some
classes or at some colleges.6
The committee’s analysis of the College Board studies indicates that
colleges and universities should not automatically award advanced place-
ment to students with specified AP scores and assume that they will be
successful.7 Rather, it is more consistent with the evidence developed by the
College Board for colleges to adopt policies that consider students individu-
ally and in combination with the requirements of the courses into which
they seek placement.
IB Program
The practice of awarding university credit and placement for IB Higher
Level (HL) courses dates back to at least 1973, when the National Council on
the Evaluation of Foreign Student Credentials recommended that U.S. col-
leges and universities accept IB HL8 examination grades for college credit
6It might have been more useful to treat the study as a meta-analysis, with each class in
which there were AP and non-AP students being treated as a datum. In this scenario, each class
would furnish an advantage or disadvantage for AP students with respect to their non-AP
classmates. If each class were treated as a datum, standard deviations could be reported, and
other class-level characteristics, such as size, instructional methodologies, and the degree to
which knowledge gained in a first-level class was important for success in the second-year
course, could be analyzed with respect to the performance of AP and non-AP students. Perhaps
AP students do better only in small classes, or at selective colleges, or when inquiry is empha-
sized. Perhaps they do not do better when material from first-level courses is emphasized or
when there is a poor match between the AP courses and the introductory courses taught at their
colleges.
7The Morgan and Ramist and Breland and Oltman studies tell us only that on average,
students who are exempted from introductory courses get grades that are as good as those of
students who take the first course in college. They do not tell us whether AP students at a
particular institution who are exempted from that college’s introductory courses have the same
depth of understanding of a subject area as students who take the first course at that college.
8IB HL courses are taken over a 2-year period (see Chapter 4, this volume).

USES, MISUES, AND UNINTENDED CONSEQUENCES
195
when foreign students present such grades. Since that time, more than 750
colleges have established policies to accept IB HL credits from students
worldwide. According to Paul Campbell, associate director of the Interna-
tional Baccalaureate Organisation of North America (IBNA) (personal com-
munication, March 2000), the number of institutions accepting IB examina-
tion scores for credit or placement has increased as a result of individual
students petitioning colleges on a case-by case, college-by-college basis.
In seeking credit and placement, many students cite evidence that IB HL
courses are comparable to similar AP courses for which colleges and univer-
sities routinely grant credit and placement. However, the committee could
find no systematic studies that have examined the validity of the claim that
AP and IB courses are comparable.9 Additionally, the IBO does not design
its courses to be similar to introductory college courses, so it is difficult to
determine how comparable the two are. Additionally, we know of no sys-
tematic studies that compare how well students who score differently on IB
examinations perform in upper-level college courses or whether their per-
formance varies by discipline.10 It is therefore unclear to what extent ad-
vanced placement in upper-level college courses is merited on the basis of
IB examination scores alone.
More evidence is needed to understand the consequences for students
and colleges of awarding advanced placement for AP or IB examination
scores. The evidence appears to support the interpretation that a student
who earns a high AP score will earn a good grade in an upper-level course
in that discipline. However, no evidence has been developed to demon-
strate that students who earn qualifying scores on AP or IB examinations
have achieved a depth of understanding of the subject comparable to that
obtained by students taking the introductory college-level courses. Conse-
quently, the disadvantages that accrue to AP and IB students who decide not
9The only study purporting to address the issue of AP and IB comparability was con-
ducted at Case Western Reserve University, where the scores of students who took both AP and
IB examinations in the same subject area were compared. The findings indicated that students
who scored a 6 or 7 on IB HL examinations scored a 4 or 5 on the AP examination in the same
subject area; the reverse was not the case. It may be assumed that all of these students took the
IB course and not the AP course since students cannot take an IB examination without having
taken the corresponding IB course. The methodology used in the study was not specified.
10The committee found a summary of isolated studies that examine the overall perfor-
mance of IB students in college. Some of these studies were conducted at Virginia Polytechnic
Institute and State University, University of Florida, and Marquette University.  One study that
looked at IB students’ performance in upper-level science and mathematics courses revealed
that IB students outperformed all other students in terms of overall grade point average and/or
grades in upper-level courses (Guild of IB Schools, www.rvcschools.org [August 2000]). How-
ever, it is difficult to determine the validity of the study results because information about the
methodology used by the investigators is incomplete.

196
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
to take an introductory college course in a subject before going on to a
second-level course are not known.
CONCLUSION
The potential for misinterpreting and misusing test results and other
aspects of the AP and IB programs is high and likely to become higher
unless countermeasures are taken. The consequences of such misuses ex-
tend to students, teachers, high schools, and institutions of higher educa-
tion.
The misuse of scores and programs appears less widespread for the IB
than for the AP program. This difference likely results from the IBO’s main-
taining tighter control over its program. In addition, the IB program is of-
fered in far fewer schools in the United States than the AP program, making
it more difficult to use data on the former program to draw inappropriate
comparative inferences about the quality of schools or teachers. Until the
College Board makes a concerted effort to educate the media, policymakers,
and the public about correct and incorrect interpretations and uses of its
examination results, the kinds of abuses described here, and the conse-
quences associated with them, will almost certainly continue and will prob-
ably increase.
As this report demonstrates, advanced study programs have an enor-
mous influence on virtually all other components of the education system in
the United States. As the programs are currently structured, some of these
influences have worked to improve education. However, serious shortcom-
ings persist. It is incumbent upon all individuals and institutions with a stake
in improving advanced study and making it accessible to many more stu-
dents to do so systematically, collaboratively, and in ways that are consistent
with emerging research about learning and effective program design. The
next chapter offers a series of recommendations for accomplishing these
goals. This set of recommendations emerges from the committee’s analysis
of existing programs of advanced study; the way these programs influence
and are affected by other components of the education system in the United
States; and whether the programs’ current structures are consistent with the
principles of learning and the design principles of curriculum, instruction,
assessment, and professional development set forth in this report.

197
11
Recommendations
Chapters 6 and 7 of this report present a framework for examining pro-
grams of advanced study. This framework is based on extensive research on
student learning and the implications of that research for the design and
integration of curriculum, instruction, assessment, and professional develop-
ment. In Chapters 8 and 9 this framework is used to analyze the Advanced
Placement (AP) and International Baccalaureate (IB) programs; areas in which
there is alignment with the principles of learning are highlighted, as are
aspects of the programs that deviate from those principles. Chapter 10 pro-
vides further analysis through an examination of the uses, misuses, and
unintended consequences of the AP and IB programs and examination re-
sults.
The present chapter presents a set of recommended actions that could
significantly improve existing programs for and approaches to advanced
study and serve as the basis for the design of alternatives. Italic type is used
to highlight particular groups to which the recommendations are directed.
However, given the diversity and decentralized nature of the educational
system in the United States, the committee leaves specific implementation
strategies to local and state education agencies. Similarly, program develop-
ers must also decide how to execute our recommendations within the unique
structures of their respective organizations. The committee’s first and most
important recommendation articulates a principle concerning the goals of
advanced study and is addressed to all those involved in developing or
teaching advanced study courses.
RECOMMENDATION 1:
THE PRIMARY GOAL OF ADVANCED STUDY
The primary goal of advanced study in any discipline should be
for students to achieve a deep conceptual understanding of the

198
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
discipline’s content and unifying concepts. Well-designed programs
help students develop skills of inquiry, analysis, and problem solving
so that they become superior learners.
It is not enough for students to achieve familiarity with factual content
alone; they need to understand the central ideas of the discipline in order to
build a conceptual framework for further learning and apply what they have
learned to new situations and to other disciplines. A consequence of this
principle is that accelerating students’ exposure to college-level material,
while appropriate as a component of some secondary advanced study pro-
grams, is not by itself a sufficient goal. Except for a small number of highly
able students, courses that pursue acceleration as the sole objective may
proceed too quickly for many students to develop deep conceptual under-
standing.
RECOMMENDATION 2: ACCESS AND EQUITY
Schools and school districts must find ways to integrate advanced
study with the rest of their program by means of a coherent plan
extending from middle school through the last years of secondary
school. Course options in grades 6–10 for which there are reduced
academic expectations (i.e., those that leave students unprepared for
further study in a discipline) should be eliminated from the curricu-
lum. An exception might be made for courses designed to meet the
needs of special education students.
Many additional students could benefit from participation in advanced
study given improved preparation in earlier years and wider program avail-
ability. As documented in Chapter 2, certain racial and ethnic groups (in-
cluding African American and Hispanic students) are substantially
underrepresented among matriculants in advanced courses and among AP
test takers, though the causes for this are unclear. A coherent plan that
extended across grade levels and schools within a district could enable a
higher proportion of potentially qualified students to benefit from advanced
study. By treating all students as potential participants while in grades 6–10,
schools could help even those who do not eventually enroll in advanced
study to emerge with strong foundations in mathematics and science.
The positive effects on student achievement of a high school curriculum
that stresses high levels of academic learning for all students have been
demonstrated empirically (Lee, 2001; Lee, Burkam, Chow-Hoy, Smerdon,
and Geverdt, 1998; Lee, Croninger, and Smith, 1997). The committee there-
fore recommends that high schools eliminate low-level, “dead-end” math-

RECOMMENDATIONS
199
ematics and science courses,1 which do not afford students the opportunity
to prepare adequately for advanced study. Additional support will be needed
to make this recommended action work for some students.
Access to advanced study is currently limited in many schools, espe-
cially those that are located in rural areas, urban centers, and other localities
that enroll large proportions of low-income and minority students. States,
school districts, and program developers (those who design courses for ad-
vanced study) must work to expand these opportunities to all schools. Fi-
nally, districts, with the support of advanced study programs, must provide
substantial professional development opportunities for teachers, invest ap-
propriately in laboratory facilities and materials, and develop academic sup-
port systems for those students who need them.
RECOMMENDATION 3: LEARNING PRINCIPLES
Programs of advanced study in science and mathematics must be
made consistent with findings from recent research on how people
learn. These findings include the role of students’ prior knowledge
and misconceptions in building a conceptual structure, the impor-
tance of student motivation and self-monitoring of learning
(metacognition), and the substantial differences among learners.
Program developers should collaborate with discipline experts, researchers
in pedagogy and cognitive science, and master teachers to examine existing
programs and develop new ones. They should ensure that the components
of their programs (curriculum, instruction, assessment, and professional de-
velopment) are consistent with what is known about how people learn and
work together to foster students’ conceptual understanding.
RECOMMENDATION 4: CURRICULUM
Curricula for advanced study should emphasize depth of under-
standing over exhaustive coverage of content. They should focus on
central organizing concepts and principles and the empirical infor-
1The committee chose not to cite such courses specifically by name because (1) the
decentralized nature of U.S. education means that school districts title their courses in accor-
dance with their own unique curriculum structure, and labeling conventions making it difficult
to name with accuracy all the possible courses to which we refer; and (2) similarly titled courses
offered in different school districts could be very different (for example, a course called “gen-
eral chemistry” could provide adequate preparation for advanced study in one district but not
in another). The committee chose, therefore, to define low-level courses as those that leave a
student unprepared for further study in the discipline.

200
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
mation on which those concepts and principles are based. Because
science and technology progress rapidly, frequent review of course
content is essential.
Curricula should be focused on a reasonable number of concepts that
can be studied in depth during the time allotted. Integration of the advanced
study curriculum with earlier courses is essential, because building on ear-
lier experiences can contribute to achieving both breadth of knowledge and
depth of understanding over a period of years. It may sometimes make
sense for advanced courses to extend over multiple school years to allow
sufficient time for this process, as occurs in the IB program.
Identifying organizing principles and structuring them appropriately for
advanced learners is labor-intensive and requires varied expertise. There-
fore, effective curriculum development must be a collaborative effort con-
ducted by teams of experienced teachers working with curriculum special-
ists and experts in the disciplines, in cognitive theory, and in pedagogy. The
teams need to use a systematic approach to the development process that is
aligned with the principles of learning set forth in this report and that in-
volves repeated cycles of design, trial teaching with students, evaluation,
and revision.
RECOMMENDATION 5: INSTRUCTION
Instruction in advanced courses should engage students in inquiry
by providing opportunities to experiment, analyze information criti-
cally, make conjectures and argue about their validity, and solve prob-
lems both individually and in groups. Instruction should recognize
and take advantage of differences among learners by employing mul-
tiple representations of ideas and posing a variety of tasks.
While the quality of instruction depends on the knowledge, creativity,
and sensitivity of teachers, program developers can do much to suggest pos-
sible strategies, and school administrators need to provide both material
resources and opportunities for professional development if high-quality
teaching is to be achieved. Effective ways to use the Internet and other
electronic resources should be encouraged and evaluated. In general, the
committee recommends careful alignment of instruction with the National
Science Education Standards (NRC, 1996) and the standards proposed by
the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics (NCTM, 1991) and the
National Board for Professional Teaching Standards (NBPTS, 2001).

RECOMMENDATIONS
201
RECOMMENDATION 6: ASSESSMENT
Teachers of advanced study courses should employ frequent for-
mative assessment of student learning to guide instruction and moni-
tor learning. External, end-of-course examinations have a different
purpose: they certify mastery. Both types of assessment should in-
clude content and process dimensions of performance and evaluate
depth of understanding, the primary goal of advanced study (see Rec-
ommendation 1).
Since end-of-course assessments strongly influence instruction, program
staff must ensure that these assessments measure students’ depth of under-
standing and their ability to transfer knowledge to unfamiliar situations. Pro-
grams should report the results of their end-of-year assessments in sufficient
detail so the results are useful to students in evaluating what they have
learned, to colleges in advising students accurately on their course options,
and to schools and teachers in improving their advanced study courses and
programs. Combining the results of several different indicators instead of
relying solely or primarily on the results of a single high-stakes examination
can provide a more accurate picture of student achievement.
Program staff should assist teachers in developing formative assessments
that measure student progress toward desired learning outcomes. While class-
room assessment is primarily the responsibility of teachers, programs can
favorably affect student progress and increase teacher effectiveness by sug-
gesting appropriate strategies and providing examples.
RECOMMENDATION 7: QUALIFIED TEACHERS
AND PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT
Schools and districts offering advanced study must provide fre-
quent opportunities for continuing professional development so teach-
ers can improve their knowledge of both content and pedagogy. Na-
tional programs for advanced study should clearly specify and moni-
tor the qualifications expected of teachers. Professional development
activities must be adequately funded and available to all teachers
throughout their teaching careers.
Professionals in most demanding fields require continuing education to
maintain and improve their knowledge over time. The same applies to teach-
ers. Professional development should emphasize deep understanding of
content and discipline-based methods of inquiry, provide multiple perspec-
tives on students as learners, and develop teachers’ subject-specific peda-
gogical knowledge and skills. It should treat teachers as active learners,

202
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
build on their existing knowledge, and take place in professional communi-
ties where colleagues have the opportunity to discuss ideas and practices.
Many groups can contribute effectively to teacher professional develop-
ment. Discipline-based professional associations should help identify the
knowledge and skills required for excellent teaching. Researchers should
investigate the effects of different levels of teacher professional develop-
ment on student learning and achievement in advanced study. University
and college science and mathematics departments and schools of education
must work collaboratively to develop discipline-specific approaches to teacher
preparation and continuing professional development. States, in monitoring
the quality of local education, should collect and report data on the qualifi-
cations of teachers of advanced study. National programs of advanced study
should assume greater responsibility for assisting schools, districts, and states
in developing professional development programs and in upgrading their
own programs in the ways suggested in this report.
RECOMMENDATION 8: ALTERNATIVE
PROGRAMS
Approaches to advanced study other than AP and IB should be
developed and evaluated. Such alternatives can help increase access
to advanced study for those not presently served and result in the
emergence of novel and effective strategies.
Some small-scale alternatives are described in Chapter 5. However, there
is much room for new ideas. Funding and research agencies should encour-
age the development of additional advanced study options and should col-
lect and disseminate information about existing alternatives that might be-
come national models.
Little has been said in this report about the special needs of very high-
ability students (the top few percent in mathematics and science). However,
the committee urges funding agencies to sponsor research related to the
learning needs of these exceptional students and to support educators in the
development of innovative strategies for meeting those needs.
RECOMMENDATION 9:
THE SECONDARY–COLLEGE INTERFACE
9(a): When awarding credit and advanced placement for courses
beyond the introductory college level, institutions should base their
decisions on an assessment of each student’s understanding and ca-
pabilities, using multiple sources of information. National examina-
tion scores alone are generally insufficient for these purposes.

RECOMMENDATIONS
203
Legislatures should avoid imposing laws or regulations requiring public
colleges and universities to award credit for specified minimum scores on
AP or IB examinations. Offices of college admissions should emphasize that
taking advanced study courses without doing well in them or without taking
the exams is insufficient. Program developers should clearly discourage any-
one from using their programs and assessment results to draw inappropriate
inferences about teachers, schools, and communities.
9(b): College and university scientists and mathematicians should
modify their introductory courses along lines similar to those pro-
posed in this report for high school advanced study. Departments
should carefully advise undergraduates about the benefits and costs
of bypassing introductory courses.
It is still common in some introductory college science and mathematics
courses to cover large numbers of topics relatively superficially and with
little connection to the world in which the topics are applied, thereby en-
couraging memorization at the expense of developing deep understanding
of concepts and principles. These courses need to be brought into align-
ment with Recommendations 4 through 6, in part because teachers’ ideas
about how to teach science and mathematics come from their own college
experiences.
Many students who participate in secondary advanced study later enroll
in introductory college courses. Therefore, these college courses need to
evolve so that they will continue to be appropriate for audiences with di-
verse preparation.
RECOMMENDATION 10: CHANGES IN THE AP
AND IB PROGRAMS
10(a): The College Board should abandon its practice of designing
AP courses in most disciplines primarily to replicate typical intro-
ductory college courses. The committee endorses recent moves by the
College Board in this direction. As noted in particular in the report prepared
by the calculus panel for this study, the College Board now bases AP calcu-
lus on expected outcomes and emerging best practices in college and uni-
versity courses, rather than on lists of topics to be covered and tested. This
approach, embraced by most of the mathematics professional communities,
can serve as a model for revisions in other subject areas.
10(b): The College Board and the IBO should evaluate their as-
sessments to ensure that they measure the conceptual understanding
and complex reasoning that should be the primary goal of advanced

204
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
study. Programs of validity research should be an integral part of assess-
ment design.
10(c): Both the College Board and the IBO should take more re-
sponsibility for ensuring the use of appropriate instructional ap-
proaches. Specifying the knowledge and skills that are important for
beginning teachers and providing models for teacher development
are likely to advance teacher effectiveness.
10(d): The College Board should exercise greater quality control
over the AP trademark by articulating standards for what can be la-
beled an AP course, desirable student preparation for each course,
strategies for ensuring equity and access, and expectations for uni-
versal participation in the AP examinations by course participants.
When necessary, the College Board should commission experts to assist
with these tasks.2 These standards should apply whether AP is offered in
schools or electronically.
10(e): The College Board and the IBO should provide assistance to
schools in their efforts to offer high-quality advanced courses. To this
end, the College Board should provide more detailed curriculum, informa-
tion about best practices for instruction and classroom assessment, and strat-
egies for enhancing professional development opportunities.
10(f): The College Board and the IBO should offer more guidance
to educators, policymakers, and the general public concerning proper
uses of their examination scores for admission, placement, and teacher
evaluation. They should also actively discourage misuse of these scores.
10(g): The College Board and the IBO should develop programs of
research on the implementation and effectiveness of their programs.
This research should address such questions as the following: What is the
preparation of teachers in these programs? What instructional strategies are
actually used in practice, as indicated by classroom observation? How effec-
tive are the AP and IB professional development activities? How do the
programs affect other school offerings and the curricula of the preceding
years? How do students who participate in the AP and IB programs fare in
college as compared with students lacking this experience? How are their
choices of college courses affected? How do students fare who take the
2The committee notes that the College Board has used this strategy in the past. For ex-
ample, in 1997 the National Task Force on Minority High Achievement was convened to assist
the College Board in outlining recommendations for substantially increasing the number of
African American, Latino, and Native American undergraduates who achieve high levels of
academic success.

RECOMMENDATIONS
205
courses but not the exams? What is the impact on colleges of the large
numbers of students earning credit through advanced study? Answers to
such questions are urgently needed if the programs are to improve. Given
the large and growing investment in this segment of secondary education, a
substantial research effort is justified. Both public and private agencies should
be prepared to assist in sponsoring this research. The various parties, includ-
ing the agencies and the programs, should consider how to ensure indepen-
dent review of the results. The College Board and the IBO should develop
ways to incorporate the results of this recommended research systematically
into the ongoing improvement of their programs.

206
References
Adelman, C. (1999). Answers in a toolbox: Academics, intensity, attendance patterns,
and bachelor’s degree attainment. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Educa-
tion, Office of Educational Research and Improvement.
Alaiyemola, F.F., Jegede, O.J., & Okebukola, P.A.O. (1990). The effect of a metacognitive
strategy of instruction on the anxiety level of students in science classes. Inter-
national Journal of Science Education, 12(1), 95-99.
Alexopoulou, E., & Driver, R. (1996). Small group discussion in physics: Peer interac-
tion modes in pairs and fours. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 33(10),
1099-1114.
American Association for the Advancement of Science. (1989). Science for all Ameri-
cans: A Project 2061 report on literacy goals in science, mathematics, and tech-
nology. New York: Oxford University Press.
American Association for the Advancement of Science. (1993). Benchmarks for sci-
ence literacy. New York: Oxford University Press.
American Association for the Advancement of Science. (2000). Atlas of scientific
literacy. Washington, DC: Author.
American Association for the Advancement of Science. (2001). Atlas of scientific
literacy. Washington, DC: American Association for the Advancement of Sci-
ence, Project 2061, and National Science Teachers Association.
American Chemical Society. (1997). Chemistry in the national science education stan-
dards: A reader and resource manual for high school teachers. Washington, DC:
Author.
American Educational Research Association. (1999). Class size: Issues and new find-
ings [Special Issue]. Education Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 21(2).
American Educational Research Association, American Psychological Association, &
National Council on Measurement in Education. (1999). Standards for educa-
tional and psychological testing. Washington, DC: American Educational Research
Association.
American Federation of Teachers. (1999). Making standards matter. Washington, DC:
Author.
American Federation of Teachers. (2000). Doing what works: Improving big city school
districts. Washington, DC: Author.

REFERENCES
207
American Federation of Teachers. (2001). Survey and analysis of teacher salary trends
1999. Washington, DC: Author.
American Youth Policy Forum. (2000). High schools of the millennium. Washington,
DC: Author.
Anderson, J.R., Greeno, J.G., Reder, L.M., & Simon, H.A. (1997). Perspectives on
learning, thinking, and activity. Educational Researcher, 29(4), 11-13.
Association of the Gifted and Talented. (1989). Standards for programs involving the
gifted and talented. Reston, VA: The Council for Exceptional Children.
Atanda, R. (1999). Do gatekeeper courses expand education options? Washington, DC:
U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics.
Attewell, G. (2001). The winner-take-all high school: Organizational adaptations to
educational stratification. Sociology of Education, 74(4), 267-296.
Au, K.H., & Jordan, C. (1981). Teaching reading to Hawaiian children: Finding a
culturally appropriate solution. In H. Trueba, G.P. Guthrie, & K.H. Au (Eds.),
Culture in the bilingual classroom: Studies in classroom ethnography (pp. 139-
152). Rowley, MA: Newbury House.
Bachman, J.G., & Schulenberg, J. (1993). How part-time work intensity relates to
drug use, problem behavior, time use, and satisfaction among high school se-
niors: Are these consequences or merely correlates? Developmental Psychology,
29(2), 220-235.
Ballou, D. (1996). Do public schools hire the best applicants? The Quarterly Journal
of Economics, III(1), 97-133.
Basham, P. (2001). Home schooling: From the extreme to the mainstream. Public
Policy Sources, The Fraser Institute, (51).
Benbow, C.P., & Minor, L.L. (1986). Mathematically talented males and females and
achievement in the high school sciences. American Educational Research Jour-
nal, (23), 425-436.
Benbow, C.P., & Stanley, J.C. (1982). Consequences in high school and college of sex
differences in mathematical reasoning abilities: A longitudinal perspective. Ameri-
can Educational Researcher, 19, 598-622.
Berger, S.L. (1991). Differentiating curriculum for gifted students. (ERIC Digest Number
E510). Reston, VA: Clearinghouse on Handicapped and Gifted Children.
Berliner, D., & Biddle, B. (1996). The manufactured crisis: Myths, fraud, and the
attack on America’s public schools. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Blumenfeld, P.C., Marx, R.W., Patrick, H., Krajcik, J., & Soloway, E. (1997). Teaching
for understanding. In B.J. Biddle, T.L. Good, & I.F. Goodson (Eds.), The interna-
tional handbook of teachers and teaching, volume II (pp. 819-878). Dordrecht,
Netherlands: Kluwer.
Borko, H., Peressini, D., Romagnano, L., Knuth, E., Yorker, C., Wooley, C., Hovermill,
J., & Masarik, K. (2000). Teacher education does matter: A situative view of
learning to teach secondary mathematics. Educational Psychologist, 35, 193-
206.
Bottoms, G. (1998). Things that matter most in improving student learning. Atlanta,
GA: Southern Regional Education Board.

208
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
Boyce, L.N., Bailey, J.M., Sher, B.T., Johnson, D.T., Van Tassel-Baska, J., & Gallagher,
S.A. (1993). Curriculum assessment guide to science materials. Williamsburg,
VA: College of William and Mary, Center for Gifted Education.
Bransford, J.D., & Schwartz, D.L. (2000). Rethinking transfer: A simple proposal with
multiple implications. In A. Iran-Nejad, & P. D. Pearson (Eds.), Review of re-
search in education (volume 24, pp. 61-101). Washington, DC: American Educa-
tional Research Association.
Breland, H.M., & Oltman, P.K. (2001). An analysis of Advanced Placement (AP) ex-
aminations in economics and comparative government and politics. College
Board Research Report 2001-4; ETS RR-01-17. New York: College Entrance Ex-
amination Board.
Brown, A.L. (1994). The advancement of learning. Educational Researcher, 23(8), 4-
12.
Brown, A.L., Ash, D., Rutherford, M., Nakagawa, K., Gordon, A., & Campion, J.C.
(1993).  Distributed expertise in the classroom.  In G. Salomon (Ed.), Distributed
cognitions: Psychological and educational considerations (pp. 188-228). Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press.
Brown, J.S., Collins, A., & Duguid, P. (1989). Situated cognition and the culture of
learning. Educational Researcher, 18(1), 32-42.
Bryk, A.S., Lee, V.E., & Holland, P.B. (1993). Catholic schools and the common good.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Bureau of Labor Statistics. (1999). Occupational outlook handbook. Washington, DC:
U.S. Department of Labor.
Burgess, R.G. (1983). Experiencing comprehensive education: A study of Bishop
McGregor School. London: Methuen.
Burgess, R.G. (1984). It’s not a proper subject: It’s just Newsom. In I. Goodson & S.
Ball, Defining the curriculum. London: Falmer Press.
Burnett, G. (1995). Alternatives to ability grouping: Still unanswered questions. ERIC
Digest Number 111. New York: Clearinghouse on Urban Education.
Burton, N.W., Bruschi, B., Kindig, L., & Courtney, R. (2000). Draft interim report of
advanced placement research project—Documentation and evaluation of ad-
vanced placement summer institutes: Advanced placement new teacher needs
study. New York: College Entrance Examination Board.
Callahan, C. (2000). The historical role of Advanced Placement and International
Baccalaureate programs for talented students in American high schools. Paper
presented at Committee on Programs for Advanced Study of Mathematics and
Science in American High Schools meeting, March 26, Irvine, CA.
Campbell, P. (2000). International Baccalaureate Programme. Paper presented to
the Committee on Programs for Advanced Study of Math and Science in Ameri-
can High Schools, March 26, Irvine, CA.
Canas, A., Ford, K., Novak, J., Hayes, P., & Reichherzer, T. (2001). Online concept
maps: Enhancing collaborative learning by using technology with concept maps.
The Science Teacher, 68(2), 49-51.
Caravita, S., & Hallden, O. (1994). Re-framing the problem of conceptual change.
Learning and Instruction, 4, 89-111.

REFERENCES
209
Carnevule, D. (1999). ACLU sues California over unequal access to Advanced Place-
ment courses. Chronicle of Higher Education, 45(48).
Carpenter, T.P., & Lehrer, R. (1999). Teaching and learning mathematics with under-
standing. In E. Fennema, & T.A. Romberg (Eds.), Classrooms that promote math-
ematical understanding (p. 1932). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Carr, M., Kurtz, B.E., Schneider, W., Turner, L.A., & Borkowski, J.G. (1989). Strategy
acquisition and transfer among German and American children: Environmental
influences on metacognitive development. Developmental Psychology, 25, 765-
771.
Carr, S. (2000). More states create virtual high schools. The Chronicle of Higher Edu-
cation, 47(3), A40.
Carr, S. (2001). South Dakota finds mixed results with online AP courses. The Chronicle
of Higher Education, 47(37), A40, May.
Cavallo, A.M.L. (1996). Meaningful learning, reasoning ability, and students’ under-
standing and problem solving of topics in genetics. Journal of Research in Sci-
ence Teaching, 33(6), 625-656.
Chi, M.T.H., Feltovich, P.J., & Glaser, R. (1981). Categorization and representation of
physics problems by experts and novices. Cognitive Science, (5), 121-152.
Choy, S.P., Bobbitt, S.A., Henke, R.R., Medrich, E.A., Horn, L.J., & Lieberman, J.
(1993). America’s teachers: Profile of a profession. (NCES 93-025). Washington,
DC: U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics.
Cobb, P., Wood, T., & Yackel, E. (1993). Discourse, mathematical thinking, and
classroom practice. Contexts for learning: Social cultural dynamics in children’s
development. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Cohen, D.K., & Ball, D.L. (1990). Relations between policy and practice: A commen-
tary. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 12, 331-338.
College Board. (2000). Advanced placement program, workshop consultant endorse-
ment policy. New York: Author.
College Board. (2001). Advanced placement program, institute endorsement policy.
New York: Author.
College Entrance Examination Board. (1997). A guide for the recommended labora-
tory program for Advanced Placement chemistry. New York: Author.
College Entrance Examination Board. (1999a). Advanced placement course descrip-
tion, biology, 2000, 2001. New York: Author.
College Entrance Examination Board. (1999b). Advanced placement course descrip-
tion, calculus, 2000, 2001. New York: Author.
College Entrance Examination Board. (1999c). Advanced placement course descrip-
tion, physics, 2000, 2001. New York: Author.
College Entrance Examination Board. (1999d). Advanced placement technical manual
2000. New York: Author.
College Entrance Examination Board. (2000a). College and university guide to the
Advanced Placement Program. New York: Author.
College Entrance Examination Board. (2000b). Released exam 1999, AP chemistry.
New York: Author.
College Entrance Examination Board. (2000c). 2000 National summary reports. New
York: Author.

210
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
College Entrance Examination Board. (2000d). Unpublished responses from student
questionnaire administered in May 2000. New York: Author.
College Entrance Examination Board. (2001a). Advanced placement course descrip-
tion, biology, May 2002, 2003. New York: Author.
College Entrance Examination Board. (2001b). Advanced placement course descrip-
tion, calculus, 2002, 2003. New York: Author.
College Entrance Examination Board. (2001c). Advanced placement course descrip-
tion, chemistry, 2002, 2003. New York: Author.
College Entrance Examination Board. (2001d). Advanced placement course descrip-
tion, physics, 2002, 2003. New York: Author.
Collins, A. (1988). Cognitive apprenticeship and instructional technology. (Technical
Report No. 6899). Cambridge, MA: BBN Labs.
Collins, A., & Smith, E. (1982). Teaching the process of reading comprehension. In
D.K. Detterman, & R.J. Sternberg (Eds.), How and how much can intelligence be
increased? Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Commission on the Future of the Advanced Placement Program. (2001). Access to
excellence: A report of the Commission on the Future of the Advanced Placement
Program. New York: College Entrance Examination Board.
Council of Chief State School Officers. (1998). Key state policies on K-12 education:
Standards, graduation, assessment, teacher licensure, time and attendance.
Washington, DC: Author.
Council of Chief State School Officers. (1999). State indicators of science and math-
ematics 1999: State trends and new indicators from the 1997-98 school year.
Washington, DC: Author.
Cronbach, L.J. (1971). Test validation. In R.L. Thorndike (Ed.), Educational measure-
ment (2nd ed.). Washington, DC: American Council on Education.
Damon, W., & Eisenberg, N. (1998). Handbook of child psychology (5th ed.). New
York: Wiley.
Dark, V.J., and Benbow, C.P.  (1993).  Cognitive differences among the gifted:  A
review and new data.  In D.K. Detterman (Ed.), Current topics in human intel-
ligence (vol. 3, pp. 85-120). New York: Ablex.
Darling-Hammond, L. (1996). What matters most: A competent teacher for every
child. Phi Delta Kappan, (78), 193-201.
Darling-Hammond, L. (1999a). Educating teachers for the next century: Rethinking
practice and policy. In G.A. Griffin (Ed.), The education of teachers: 98th year-
book of the National Society for the Study of Education (pp. 221-256). Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Darling-Hammond, L. (1999b). Target time toward teachers. Journal of Staff Develop-
ment, 20(2).
Darling-Hammond, L. (2000). Teacher quality and student achievement: A review of
state policy evidence. Education Policy Analysis Archives, 8(1).
Darling-Hammond, L., Wise, A.E., & Klein, S.P. (1999). A license to teach. San Fran-
cisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Dirkes, M.A. (1985). Metacognition: Students in charge of their thinking. Roeper Re-
view, 8(2), 96-100.

REFERENCES
211
Doran, B.J., Dugan, T., & Weffer, R. (1998). Language minority students in high
school: The role of language in learning biology concepts. Science Education,
82(3), 311-331.
Dornbusch, S.M. (1994). Off the track. Presidential address at the biennial meeting of
the Society for Research on Adolescence, San Diego, CA.
Dossey, J. (1998). Making algebra dynamic and motivating: A national challenge
(keynote address). In National Research Council, The nature and role of algebra
in the k-14 curriculum, proceedings of a national symposium (pp. 17-22). Wash-
ington, DC: National Academy Press.
Driver, R., Squires, A. Rushworth, P., & Wood-Robinson, V. (1994). Making sense of
secondary science: Research into children’s ideas. New York: Routledge.
Dunbar, K. (1995). How scientists really reason: Scientific reasoning in real-world
laboratories. In R.J. Sternberg, & J.E. Davidson (Eds.), The nature of insight (pp.
365-395). Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Dweck, C.S. (1989). Motivation. In A. Lesgold, & R. Glaser (Eds.), Foundations for a
psychology of education. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Eccles, J.S. (1987). Gender roles and women’s achievement related decisions. Psy-
chology of Women Quarterly, 11, 135-172.
Eccles, J.S. (1994). Understanding women’s educational and occupational choices.
Psychology of Women Quarterly, 18, 585-610.
Eccles, J.S., & Harold, R. (1996). Family involvement in children’s and adolescents’
schooling. In B. Booth, & J. Dunn (Eds.), Family-school links: How do they affect
educational outcomes. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Eccles, J.S., Wigfield, A., & Schiefele, U. (1998). Motivation to succeed. In W. Damon,
& N. Eisenberg (Eds.), Handbook of child psychology, Vol. IV: Social and person-
ality development (pp. 1017-1095). New York: Wiley.
Edmondson, K. (2000). Assessing science understanding through concept maps. In J.
Mintzes, J. Wandersee, & J. Novak (Eds.), Assessing science understanding (pp.
19-40). San Diego: Academic Press.
Education Commission to the President of the United States. (2000). Report of the
Web-based Education Commission to the President of the United States. Washing-
ton, DC: Author.
Education Week. (1999).  Quality counts 1999.  Rewarding results, punishing failure.
[Special issue, January].
Education Week. (2000). Quality counts 2000: Who should teach? [Special issue,
January].
Education Week. (2001).  Quality counts 2001  A better balance: Standards, tests, and
the tools to succeed. [Special issue, January].
Ekstrom, R.B., Goertz, M., & Rock, D.A. (1988). Education and American youth.
Philadelphia: Falmer Press.
Eubanks, S.C. (1996). The urban teacher challenge: A report on teacher recruitment
and demand in selected great city schools. Belmont, MA: Recruiting New Teach-
ers, Inc.
Falk, B. (2000). The heart of the matter: Using standards and assessment to learn.
Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.

212
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
Feldhusen, J., Hansen, J., & Kennedy, D. (1989). Curriculum development for GCT
teachers. GCT, 12(6), 12-19.
Feldt, L.S., & Brennan, R.L. (1993). Reliability. In R.L. Linn ( Ed.), Educational mea-
surement (3rd ed., pp. 105-147). Washington, DC: American Council on Educa-
tion.
Ferguson, R.F. (1991). Paying for public education. Harvard Journal on Legislation,
(28), 465-498.
Ferguson, R.F. (1998). Can schools narrow the black-white test score gap? In C.
Jencks, & M. Phillips (Eds.), The black-white test score gap. Washington, DC: The
Brookings Institution.
Ferguson, R.F., & Ladd, H.F. (1996). How and why money matters: An analysis of
Alabama schools. In H.F. Ladd (Ed.), Holding schools accountable: Performance-
based reform in education. Washington, DC: The Brookings Institution.
Ferrari, M., & Sternberg, R.J. (1998). The development of mental abilities and styles.
In D. Kuhn, & R. Siegler (Eds.), The handbook of child psychology (5 ed., vol. 2:
Cognition, Perception, and Language, pp. 899-946). New York: Wiley.
Flavell, J.H. (1979). Metacognition and cognitive monitoring: A new area of cogni-
tive-developmental inquiry. American Psychologist, 34, 906-911.
Frome, P. (2001). High schools that work: Findings from the 1996 and 1998 assess-
ments. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education, Planning and Evaluation
Service.
Fuchs, L.S., Fuchs, D., Hamlett, C.L., & Karns, K. (1998). High achieving students’
interactions and performance on complex mathematical tasks as a function of
homogeneous and heterogeneous pairings. American Educational Research Jour-
nal, 35, 227-268.
Fullan, M.G. (1991). The new meaning of educational change. New York: Teachers
College Press.
Gabel, D. (Ed.). (1994). Handbook of research on science teaching and learning.
New York: MacMillan.
Gamoran, A. (1987). The stratification of high school learning opportunities. Sociol-
ogy of Education, 60(3), 135-155.
Gamoran, A. (1992). The variable effects of high school tracking. Sociology of Educa-
tion, 57(4), 812-828.
Gamoran, A., & Hannigan, E.C. (2000). Algebra for everyone? Benefits of college-
preparatory mathematics for students with diverse abilities in early secondary
school. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 22(3).
Gamoran, A., & Nystrand, M. (1990). Tracking, instruction, and achievement. Paper
presented at the World Congress of Sociology, Madrid, Spain.
Gamoran, A., Nystrand, M., Berends, M., & LePore, P.C. (1995). An organizational
analysis of the effects of ability grouping. American Educational Research Jour-
nal, 32(4), 687-715.
Gandal, M. (1997). Making standards matter 1997: An annual fifty-state report on
efforts to raise academic standards. Washington, DC: American Federation of
Teachers.
Garcia, T., & Pintrich, P.R. (1994). Regulating motivation and cognition in the class-
room: The role of self-schemas and self-regulatory strategies. In D. Schunk, & B.

REFERENCES
213
Zimmerman (Eds.), Self-regulation of learning and performance: Issues and
educational application (pp. 127-154). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Garner, R. (1987). Metacognition and reading comprehension. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Garner, R., & Alexander, P. (1989). Metacognition: Answered and unanswered ques-
tions. Educational Psychologist, 24, 143-158.
Glaser, R. (1992). Expert knowledge and processes of thinking. In D. F. Halpern
(Ed.), Enhancing thinking skills in the sciences and mathematics (pp. 63-75).
Hillsdale, NJ : Erlbaum.
Gobert, J.D., & Clement, J.J. (1999). Effects of student-generated diagrams versus
student-generated summaries on conceptual understanding of casual and dy-
namic knowledge in plate tectonics. Journal of Research in Science Teaching,
36(1), 39-53.
Goertzel, M., Goertzel, V., & Goertzel, T. (1978). 300 eminent personalities. San Fran-
cisco: Jossey-Bass.
Gonzalez, E.J., O’Connor, K.M., & Miles, J.A. (2001). How well do advanced place-
ment students perform on the TIMSS advanced mathematics and physics tests?
Chestnut Hill, MA: Boston College, Lynch School of Education, International
Study Center.
Goodlad, J.I. (1984). A place called school: Promise for the future. New York: McGraw-
Hill.
Gourman, J.  (1999).  The Gourman report:  A rating of undergraduate programs in
American and international universities.  New York:  Random House.
Graham, S., & Weiner, B. (1996). Theories and principles of motivation. In D.C.
Berliner, & R.C. Calfee (Eds.), Handbook of educational psychology (pp. 63-84).
New York: Macmillan.
Gratz, D.B. (2000). High standards for whom? Phi Delta Kappan. May 2000. 81(9).
Graue, M.E. (1993). Integrating theory and practice through instructional assessment.
Educational Assessment, 1, 293-309.
Greenberg, K.H. (1992). Research and mediated learning: Implications for program
implementation. Paper presented at the conference on Mediated Learning in
Health and Education: Forging a New Alliance, St. Petersburg, FL.
Greeno, J.G. (1993). Number sense as situated knowing in a conceptual domain.
Journal in Research in Mathematics Education, (22), 170-218.
Greeno, J.G., Collins, A.M., & Resnick, L.B. (1996). Cognition and learning. In D.
Berliner, & R. Calfree (Eds.), Handbook of educational psychology (pp.15-46).
New York: Macmillan.
Greenwald, R., Hedges, L.V., & Laine, R.D. (1996). The effects of school resources on
student achievement. Review of Educational Research, 66(3), 361-396.
Grissmer, D. (1999). Class size: Issues and new findings [Special Issue]. Education
Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 21(2).
Haidar, A.H. (1997). Prospective chemistry teacher’s conceptions of the conservation
of matter and related concepts. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 34(2),
181-197.
Hanushek, E. (1996). A more complete picture of school resource policies. Review of
Educational Research, 66(3), 397-409.

214
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
Hart, P.D. Research Associates. (1999). Shell Education Survey. Study #5487. Wash-
ington, DC: Author.
Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics, Science Education Department (1987).
A private universe (Video). Cambridge, MA: Science Media Group.
Heath, S.B. (1983). Ways with words: Language, life, and work in communities and
classrooms. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hebel, S. (1999). AP courses are new target in struggle over access to college in
California. Chronicle of Higher Education, 46(14).
Herr, N.E. (1993). The relationship between advanced placement and honors science
courses. School Science and Mathematics, 93, 183-187.
Hoffman, L. (1998). Overview of public elementary and secondary schools and dis-
tricts: School year 1996-97. Education Statistics Quarterly, NCES No. 98204, Sep-
tember 29.
Hong, L.K. (2001). Too many intrusions on instructional time. Phi Delta Kappan,
82(9).
Horn, L., Hafner, A., & Owings, J. (1992). A profile of American eighth-grade math-
ematics and science instruction. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Educa-
tion, National Center for Education Statistics.
Horn, L., Nunez, A., & Bobbitt, L. (2000). Mapping the road to college: First genera-
tion students’ math track, planning strategies, and context of support. (NCES
2000-153). Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education, National Center for
Education Statistics.
Hoz, R., Bowman, D., & Chacham, T. (1997). Psychometric and edumetric validity of
geomorphological knowledge which are tapped by concept mapping. Journal
of Research in Science Teaching, 34(9), 925-947.
Hunt, J.M. (1961). Intelligence and experience. New York: Ronald Press.
Ingersoll, R.M. (1999). The problem of underqualified teachers in American second-
ary schools. Educational Researcher, 28(2), 26-37.
International Baccalaureate North American.  (2000).  International Baccalaureate
North American statistical summary—May 2000 examination session.  New York:
Author.
International Baccalaureate Organisation. (1997a). IB guide to the diploma programme,
1997. Geneva, Switzerland: Author.
International Baccalaureate Organisation. (1997b). Mathematical methods standard
level. Geneva, Switzerland: Author.
International Baccalaureate Organisation. (1998a). IB experimental sciences internal
assessment clarifications. Geneva, Switzerland: Author.
International Baccalaureate Organisation. (1998b). IB mathematics HL diploma
programme guide 1998. Geneva, Switzerland: Author.
International Baccalaureate Organisation. (1998c). IB mathematics HL. Geneva, Swit-
zerland: Author.
International Baccalaureate Organisation.  (1998d). Mathematical methods standard
level. Geneva, Switzerland: Author.
International Baccalaureate Organisation.  (1998e). IB further mathematics standard
level.  Geneva, Switzerland: Author.

REFERENCES
215
International Baccalaureate Organisation. (1999a). 1999 IB chemistry subject report.
Geneva, Switzerland: Author.
International Baccalaureate Organisation. (1999b). IB coordinator notes. Geneva,
Switzerland: Author.
International Baccalaureate Organisation. (1999c). IB diploma grade descriptors group
4. Geneva, Switzerland: Author.
International Baccalaureate Organisation. (1999d). IB experimental sciences course
revisions. Geneva, Switzerland: Author.
International Baccalaureate Organisation. (1999e). Teacher support material: Experi-
mental sciences—internal assessment. Geneva, Switzerland: Author.
International Baccalaureate Organisation. (2000a). Experimental sciences chemistry
curriculum review report. Geneva, Switzerland: Author.
International Baccalaureate Organisation. (2000b). IB theory of knowledge. Geneva,
Switzerland: Author.
International Baccalaureate Organisation. (2000c). May 2000 chemistry subject re-
port. Geneva, Switzerland: Author.
International Baccalaureate Organisation. (2000d). Vade mecum. Geneva, Switzer-
land: Author.
International Baccalaureate Organisation. (2001a). IB diploma programme guide: Bi-
ology, 2001. Geneva, Switzerland: Author.
International Baccalaureate Organisation. (2001b). IB diploma programme guide:
Chemistry, 2001. Geneva, Switzerland: Author.
International Baccalaureate Organisation. (2001c). IB diploma programme guide:
Physics, 2001. Geneva, Switzerland: Author.
Johnson, D.T., & Sher, B.T. (1997). Resource guide to mathematics curriculum mate-
rials for high-ability learners in grades k-8. Williamsburg, VA: College of William
and Mary, Center for Gifted Education.
Johnston, R.C. (2000). Rochester plan adds flexibility to high school. Education Week,
19(43), 18-19.
Johnstone, D.B. (1993). Enhancing the productivity of learning. AAHE Bulletin, 46(4),
3-8.
Johnstone, D.B., & Del Genio, B. (2001). College-level learning in high school: Pur-
poses, policies, and practical implications. Washington, DC: Association of Ameri-
can Colleges and Universities.
Jones, L.R., Mullis, I.V.S., Raizen, S.A., Weiss, I.R., and Weston, E.A.  (1992).  The 1990
science report card: NAEP’s assessment of fourth, eighth, and twelfth graders.
Princeton, NJ: Educational Testing Service.
Jones, L.V., Davenport, E.C., Bryson, A., Bekhuis, T., & Zwick, R. (1986). Mathematics
and science test scores as related to courses taken in high school and other
factors. Journal of Educational Measurement, 23(3), 197-208.
Jones, M.G., Rua, M.J., & Carter, G. (1998). Science teacher’s conceptual growth
within Vygotsky’s zone of proximal development. Journal of Research in Sci-
ence Teaching, 35(9), 967-985.
Jordan, H., Mendro, R., & Weerasinghe, D. (1997). Teacher effects on longitudinal
student achievement: A report on research in progress. Paper presented at the
annual CREATE meeting, Indianapolis, IN.

216
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
Kaufman, P., Bradby, D., & Teitelbaum, P. (2000). High schools that work and whole
school reform: Raising academic achievement of vocational completers through
the reform of school practice. Southern Regional Education Board. Berkeley, CA:
University of California at Berkeley, National Center for Research in Vocational
Education.
Kaufmann, F., Harrel, G., Milam, C.P., Woolverton, N., & Miller, J. (1986). The nature,
role, and influence of mentors in the lives of gifted adults. Journal of Counseling
and Development, 64, 576-578.
Kennedy, D. (1997). Teachers guide, AP calculus. New York: College Entrance Ex-
amination Board.
Kirst, M.W. (1998). Improving and aligning k-16 standards, admissions, and fresh-
man placement policies. Stanford, CA: Stanford University, National Center for
Postsecondary Improvement.
Kobayashi, Y. (1994). Conceptual acquisition and change through social interaction.
Human Development, 37, 233-241.
Koretz, D. (1988). Arriving in Lake Wobegon: Are standardized tests exaggerating
achievement and distorting instruction? American Educator, 12(2), 8-15, 46-52.
Koretz, D. (1996). Using student assessments for educational accountability. In E.A.
Hanushek & D.W. Jorgenson (Eds.), Improving the performance of America’s
schools (pp. 171-196). Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Koretz, D., Linn, R.L., Dunbar, S.B., & Shepard, L.A. (1991). The effects of high-stakes
testing: Preliminary evidence about generalization across tests. Presented at The
Effects of High Stakes Testing symposium annual meetings of the American
Educational Research Association and the National Council on Measurement in
Education, Chicago, April.
Kozma, R.B., & Russell, J. (1997). Multimedia and understanding: Expert and novice
responses to different representation of chemical phenomena. Journal of Re-
search in Science Teaching, 34(9), 949-968.
Kuehn, P. (2001). Online AP courses are not the answer. California Star News, No-
vember 15, 2000. Available at www.californiastar.com/courses.html (February
11, 2002).
Kulm, G. (1990). Assessing higher order thinking in mathematics. Washington, DC:
American Association for the Advancement of Science.
Lave, J. (1991). Situating learning in communities of practice. In L. Resnick, J. Levine,
& S. Teasley (Eds.), Perspectives on socially shared cognition (pp. 63-83). Wash-
ington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Lee, V.E. (2001). Restructuring high schools for equity and excellence: What works.
New York: Teachers College Press.
Lee, V.E., & Bryk, A.S. (1989). A multilevel model of the social distribution of high
school achievement. Sociology of Education, 62(3), 172-192.
Lee, V.E., Bryk, A.S., & Smith, J.B. (1993). The organization of effective secondary
schools. Review of Research in Education, 19, 171-268.
Lee, V.E., Croninger, R.G., & Smith, J.B. (1997). Course-taking, equity, and mathemat-
ics learning: Testing the constrained curriculum hypothesis in U.S. secondary
schools. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 19(2), 99-121.

REFERENCES
217
Lee, V.E., & Ekstrom, R. (1987). Student access to guidance counseling in high school.
American Educational Research Journal, 24, 287-310.
Lee, V.E., & Smith, J.B. (1996). Collective responsibility for learning and its effect on
gains in achievement for early secondary school students. American Journal of
Education, 104(2), 103-147.
Lee, V.E., & Smith, J.B. (1999). Social support and achievement for young adoles-
cents in Chicago: The role of school academic press. American Educational
Research Journal, 36(4), 907-945.
Lee, V.L., Burkam, D.T., Chow-Hoy, T., Smerdon, B.A., & Geverdt, D. (1998). High
school curriculum structure: Effects on coursetaking and achievement in math-
ematics for high school graduates—An examination of data from the National
Education Longitudinal Study of 1988. (NCES Working Paper No. 98). Washing-
ton, DC: U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics.
Lester, F.K. Jr., Masingila, J.O., Mau, S.T., Lambdin, D.V., dos Santon, V.W., & Raymond,
A.M. (1994). Learning how to teach via problem solving. In D. Aichele, & A.
Coxford (Eds.), Professional development for teachers of mathematics (pp. 152-
166). Reston, VA: National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.
Lichten, W. (2000). Whither advanced placement? Education Policy Analysis Archives,
8(29), 1-19.
Linn, M.C., & Hsi, S. (1999). Computers, teachers, peers: Science learning partners.
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Linn, R. (2000). Assessment and accountability. Educational Researcher, 29, 4-16.
Linn, R.L., Graue, M.E., & Sanders, N.M. (1990). Comparing state and district results
to national norms: The validity of the claims that “everyone is above average.”
Educational Measurement: Issues and Practice, 9(3), 5-14.
Louis, K.S. (1992). Restructuring and the problem of teachers’ work. In A. Lieberman
(Ed.), The changing contexts of teaching: Ninety-first yearbook of the National
Society for the Study of Education (pp. 138-156). Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Lucas, S.R. (1999). Tracking inequalities: Stratification and mobility in American
schools. New York: Teachers College Press.
Ma, L. (1999). Knowing and teaching elementary mathematics: Teachers’ understand-
ing of fundamental mathematics in China and the United States. Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Ma, L., & Willms, J.D. (1999). Dropping out of advanced mathematics: How much do
students and schools contribute to the problem. Educational Evaluation and
Policy Analysis, 21( 4), 365-383.
Madaus, G.F., & Airasian, P. (1978). A post hoc technique for identifying between
program differences in achievement. Studies in Educational Evaluation, 4(1), 1-
8.
Maker, C.J. (1982). Curriculum development for the gifted. Rockville, MD: Aspen.
Marin, B.L., Mintzes, J.J., & Clavin, I.E. (2000). Restructuring knowledge in biology:
Cognitive processes and metacognitive reflections. International Journal of Sci-
ence Education, 22(3), 303-323.
Markow, D., Fauth, S., & Gravitch, D. (2001). MetLife survey of the American teacher,
2001. New York: MetLife.

218
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
Marks, H.M., Doane, K.B., & Secada, W.B. (1996). Support for student achievement.
In F.M. Newmann & Associates (Ed.), Authentic achievement: Restructuring schools
for intellectual quality. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Markus, H., & Wurf, E. (1987). The dynamic self-concept: A social psychological
perspective. Annual Review of Psychology, 38, 299-337.
Marsh, H.W. (1990). A multidimensional, hierarchical model of self-concept: Theo-
retical and empirical justification. Educational Psychology Review, (2), 77-172.
Mathews, J. (1998a). 100 best high schools in America. Newsweek, March 30.
Mathews, J. (1998b). Class struggle: What’s wrong (and right) with America’s best
public high schools. New York: Times Books.
McKnight, C.C., Crosswhite, F.J., Dossey, J.A., Kifer, E., Swafford, J A., Travers, K.J., &
Cooney, T.J. (1987). The underachieving curriculum: Assessing U.S. school math-
ematics from an international perspective. Champaign, IL: Stipes.
McLaughlin, M., & Talbert, J.E. (1993). Contexts that matter for teaching and learn-
ing: Strategic opportunities for meeting the nation’s educational goals. Stanford,
CA: Stanford University, Center for Research on the Context of Secondary School
Teaching.
McLellan, H. (1996). Being digital: Implications for education. Educational Technol-
ogy, 36(6), 5-20.
Messick, S. (1993). Validity. In R.L. Linn (Ed.), Educational measurement (3 ed., pp.
13-103). Washington, DC: American Council on Education.
Mestre, J. (1994). Cognitive aspects of learning and teaching science. In S. Fitzsimmons,
& L. Kerpelman (Eds.), Teacher enhancement for elementary science and math-
ematics: Status, issues, and problems. Washington, DC: National Science Foun-
dation.
Milgram, R.M. (1989). Teaching gifted and talented learners in regular classrooms.
Springfield, IL: Charles C. Thomas.
Millman, J., & Greene, J. (1993). The specification and development of tests of achieve-
ment and ability. In R.L. Linn (Ed.), Educational measurement (3 ed., pp. 335-
366). New York: American Council on Education.
Minstrell, J. (2000a). The role of the teacher in making sense of classroom experi-
ences and effecting better learning. In D. Klahr, & S. Carver (Eds.), Cognition
and instruction: 25 years of progress. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Minstrell, J. (2000b). Student thinking and related assessment: Creating a facet-based
learning environment. In Committee on the Evaluation of National and State
Assessments of Educational Progress. N.S. Raju, J.W. Pellegrino, M.W. Bertenthal,
K.J. Mitchell, and L.R. Jones (Eds.) Grading the nation’s report card: Research
from the evaluation of NAEP (pp 44-73). Division of Behavioral and Social Sci-
ences and Education, National Research Council. Washington, DC: National Acad-
emy Press
Mintzes, J., Wandersee, J., & Novak, J.D. (1998). Teaching science for understanding.
San Diego: Academic Press.
Mintzes, J., Wandersee, J., & Novak, J.D. (2000). Assessing science understanding.
San Diego: Academic Press.
Mintzes, J.J., Wandersee, J.H., & Novak, J.D. (2001). Assessing science understanding
in biology. Journal of Biological Education, 35(3), 119-124.

REFERENCES
219
Morgan, R., & Maneckshana, B. (2000). Advanced placement students in college: An
investigation of their course-taking patterns and college majors. New York: Col-
lege Entrance Examination Board.
Morgan, R., & Ramist, L. (1998). Advanced placement students in college: An inves-
tigation of course grades at 21 colleges. Unpublished Statistical Report No. SR-
98-13. Princeton, NJ: Educational Testing Service.
Mullins, J. (1994). Teachers guide, AP chemistry. New York: College Entrance Exami-
nation Board.
Murnane, R.J. (1996). Staffing the nation’s schools with skilled teachers. In E.A.
Hanushek, & D.W. Jorgenson (Eds.), Improving America’s schools: The role of
incentives (pp. 241-258). Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
National Association of Secondary School Principals. (1996). Breaking ranks: Chang-
ing an American institution. Reston, VA: Author.
National Board for Professional Teaching Standards. (1994). What teachers should
know and be able to do. Detroit, MI: Author.
National Center for Education Statistics. (1992a). The 1990 science report: NAEP’s
assessment of fourth, eight, and twelfth graders. Washington, DC: U.S. Depart-
ment of Education.
National Center for Education Statistics. (1992b). A profile of American eight-grade
mathematics and science instruction. (NCES 92-486). Washington, DC: U.S. De-
partment of Education.
National Center for Education Statistics. (1998). Pursuing excellence: A study of U.S.
twelfth-grade mathematics and science achievement in international context.
(NCES 98049). Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education.
National Center for Education Statistics. (2000a). The condition of education 2000.
(NCES 2000-62). Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education, Office of Edu-
cational Research and Improvement.
National Center for Education Statistics. (2000b). Monitoring school quality: An indi-
cators report. (NCES 2001-30). Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education.
National Center for Education Statistics. (2001a). Digest of education statistics 2000.
(NCES 2001-034. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education, Office of Edu-
cational Research and Improvement.
National Center for Education Statistics. (2001b). 1998 National Assessment of Educa-
tional Progress (NAEP) high school transcript study. (NCES 2001477). Washing-
ton, DC: U.S. Department of Education.
National Commission on Excellence in Education. (1983). A nation at risk: The im-
perative for educational reform. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Of-
fice.
National Commission on Mathematics and Science Teaching for the 21st Century.
(2000). Before it’s too late: A report to the nation from the National Commission
on Mathematics and Science Teaching for the 21st century. Jessup, MD: Educa-
tion Publications Center.
National Commission on Teaching and America’s Future. (1996). What matters most:
Teaching for America’s future. New York: National Commission on Teaching
and America’s Future, Teachers College, Columbia University.

220
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
National Commission on the High School Senior Year. (2001a). The lost opportunity
of senior year: Finding a better way (preliminary report). Washington, DC: Au-
thor.
National Commission on the High School Senior Year. (2001b). Raising our sights: No
high school senior left behind. Washington, DC: Author.
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics. (1989). Curriculum and evaluation
standards for school mathematics. Reston, VA: Author.
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics. (1991). Professional standards for teach-
ing mathematics. Reston, VA: Author.
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics. (1995). Assessment standards for school
mathematics. Reston, VA: Author.
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics. (2000). Principles and standards for
school mathematics. Reston, VA: Author.
National Education Goals Panel. (2001). Promising practices: Progress toward the
goals, 2000. Washington, DC: Author.
National Research Council. (1996). National science education standards. National
Committee on Science Education Standards and Assessment. Coordinating Council
for Education. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
National Research Council. (1998). The nature and role of algebra in the k-14 cur-
riculum:  Proceedings of a national symposium.  National Council of Teachers
of Mathematics and Mathematical Sciences Education Board. Washington, DC:
National Academy Press.
National Research Council. (1999a). Equity and adequacy in education finance: Issues
and perspectives. Committee on Education Finance. H.F. Ladd, R. Chalk, & J.S.
Hansen, (Eds.). Commission on Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education.
Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
National Research Council. (1999b). High stakes: Testing for tracking, promotion,
and graduation. Committee on Appropriate Test Use. J.P. Heubert & R.M. Hauser,
(Eds.). Commission on Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education. Washing-
ton, DC: National Academy Press.
National Research Council. (1999c). Making money matter: Financing America’s
schools. Committee on Education Finance. H.F. Ladd & J.S. Hansen, (Eds.). Com-
mission on Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education. Washington, DC:
National Academy Press.
National Research Council. (1999d). Transforming undergraduate education in sci-
ence, mathematics, engineering, and technology. Committee on Undergraduate
Science Education. Center for Science, Mathematics, and Engineering Educa-
tion. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
National Research Council. (2000a). Educating teachers of science, mathematics, and
technology: New practices for the new millennium. Committee on Science and
Mathematics Teacher Preparation. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
National Research Council. (2000b). How people learn: Brain, mind, experience, and
school (Expanded ed.). Committee on Developments in the Science of Learning.
J.D. Bransford, A.L. Brown, & R.R. Cocking, (Eds.). Commission on Behavioral
and Social Sciences and Education. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.

REFERENCES
221
National Research Council. (2001a). Knowing what students know: The science and
design of educational assessment. Committee on the Foundation of Assessment.
J. Pellegrino, N. Chudowsky, & R. Glaser, (Eds.). Division of Behavioral and
Social Sciences and Education. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
National Research Council. (2001b). Testing teacher candidates: The role of licensure
tests in improving teacher quality. Committee on Assessment and Teacher Qual-
ity. K.J. Mitchell, D.Z. Robinson, B.S. Plake, & K.T. Knowles, (Eds.). Division of
Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education. Washington, DC: National Acad-
emy Press.
National Research Council. (2002a). Learning and understanding:  Improving ad-
vanced study of mathematics and science in U.S. high schools—Report of the
content panel for biology.  Available at www.nap.edu/catalog/10365html.
National Research Council. (2002b). Learning and understanding:  Improving ad-
vanced study of mathematics and science in U.S. high schools—Report of the
content panel for chemistry.  Available at www.nap.edu/catalog/10364html.
National Research Council. (2002c). Learning and understanding:  Improving ad-
vanced study of mathematics and science in U.S. high schools—Report of the
content panel for physics.  Available at www.nap.edu/catalog/10361html.
National Research Council. (2002d). Learning and understanding:  Improving ad-
vanced study of mathematics and science in U.S. high schools—Report of the
content panel for mathematics.  Available at www.nap.edu/catalog/10380html.
National Science Foundation. (1999). Women, minorities, and persons with disabili-
ties in science and engineering: 1998. (NSF 99-338). Arlington, VA: Author.
National Science Teachers Association. (1996). NSTA pathways to the science stan-
dards (high school). Arlington, VA: Author.
National Science Teachers Association. (2000). Science teacher credentials, assign-
ments, and job satisfaction: Results of a survey. Arlington, VA: Author.
Newman, F.M., & Wehlage, G.G. (1995). Successful school restructuring: A report to
the public and educators by the Center on Organization and Restructuring of
Schools. Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin-Madison, School of Education,
Wisconsin Center for Education Research, Center on Organization and Restruc-
turing of Schools.
Niyogi, N.S. (1995). The intersection of instruction and assessment: The classroom.
Princeton, NJ: Educational Testing Service.
Noonan, D., Sieder, J.J. & Peraino, K. (2001). Stop stressing me. Newsweek, January
29, 137(5).
Novak, J. D. (1985). Metalearning and metaknowledge strategies to help students
learn how to learn. In L.H.T. West, & A.L. Pines (Eds.), Cognitive structure and
conceptual change (pp. 189-209). Orlando, FL: Academic Press.
Novak, J.D. (1991). Clarify with concept maps. The Science Teacher, 58(7), 45-49.
Novak, J.D. (1998). Learning, creating, and using knowledge: Concept maps as fa-
cilitative tools in schools and corporations. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Novak, J.D. (2002). Meaningful learning: The essential factor for conceptual change
in limited or in appropriate propositional hierarchies leading to empowerment
of learners. Science Education, 86(4), 548-571.

222
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
Novak, J.D., & Gowin, D.B. (1984). Learning how to learn. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Novak, J.D., & Musonda, D. (1991). A twelve-year longitudinal study of science
concept learning. American Educational Research Journal, 28(1), 117-153.
Nystrand, M., & Gamoran, A. (1988). A study of instruction as discourse. Madison:
University of Wisconsin-Madison, Wisconsin Center for Education Research.
O’Neil, Jr., H.F., & Brown, R.S. (1997). Differential effects of question formats in math
assessments on metacognition and affect. (CSE Technical Report 449). Los Ange-
les: University of California at Los Angeles, Center for Research on Evaluation,
Standards, and Student Testing, Center for the Study of Evaluation.
Oakes, J. (1985). Keeping track: How schools structure inequality. New Haven, CT:
Yale University Press.
Oakes, J. (1990). Multiplying inequalities: Race, social class, and tracking on stu-
dents’ opportunities to learn mathematics and science. Santa Monica, CA: RAND.
Oakes, J., Gamoran, A., & Page, R.N. (1992). Curriculum differentiation: Opportuni-
ties, outcomes, and meanings. In P. Jackson (Ed.), Handbook of research on
curriculum (pp. 570-608). New York: Macmillan.
Oakes, J., & Guiton, G. (1995). Matchmaking: Tracking decisions in comprehensive
high schools. American Educational Research Journal, 32(1), 3-34.
Oakes, J., Rogers, J., McDonough, P., Solorzano, D., Mehan, H., & Noguera, P. (2000).
Remedying unequal opportunities for successful participation in advanced place-
ment courses in California high schools. Unpublished paper prepared for the
American Civil Liberties Union of Southern California.
Oakes, J., & Wells, A.S. (2001). The comprehensive high school, detracking, and the
persistence of social stratification. Draft manuscript, UCLA.
Office of Educational Research and Improvement. (1999). The education system in
the United States: Case study findings. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Edu-
cation.
Orfield, G., & Paul, F. (1995). High hopes and long odds: A major report on Hoosier
teens and the American dream. Indianapolis, IN: Indiana Youth Institute.
Paris, S.G., & Ayers, L.R. (1994). Becoming reflective students and teachers with port-
folios and authentic assessment. Washington, DC: American Psychological Asso-
ciation.
Paul, F. (1995). Academic programs in a democratic society: Structured choices and
their consequences. Advances in Educational Policy, 2.
Pearsall, N.R., Skipper, J., & Mintzes, J.J. (1997). Knowledge restructuring in the life
sciences: A longitudinal study of conceptual change in biology. Science Educa-
tion, 81, 193-215.
Perkins, D.N. (1992). Smart schools: From training memories to educating minds.
New York: Free Press.
Pintrich, P.R., & Schrauben, B. (1992). Students’ motivational beliefs and their cogni-
tive engagement in classroom academic tasks. In D. Schunk, & J. Meece (Eds.),
Student perceptions in the classroom: Causes and consequences (pp. 149-183).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Porter, A.C., Kirst, M.W., Osthoff, E.J., Smithson, J.L., & Schneider, S.A. (1993). Re-
form up close: An analysis of high school mathematics and science classrooms.

REFERENCES
223
Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin-Madison, School of Education, Wisconsin
Center for Education Research, Center on Organization and Restructuring of
Schools.
Powell, A.G., Farrar, E., & Cohen, D.K. (1985). The shopping mall high school: Win-
ners and losers in the educational marketplace. Boston, MA: Houghton-Mifflin.
Prawat, R.S. (1992). Teachers’ beliefs about teaching and learning: A constructivist
perspective. American Journal of Education, 100, 354-395.
Putnam, R.T., & Borko, H. (1997). Teacher learning: Implications of new views of
cognition. In B.J. Biddle, T.L. Good, & I.F. Goodson (Eds.), The international
handbook of teachers and teaching (vol. II, pp. 1223-1296). Dordrecht, Nether-
lands: Kluwer.
Raudenbush, S.W. (1984). Magnitude of teacher expectant effects on pupil IQ as a
function of the credibility of expectancy induction: A synthesis of findings from
18 experiments. Journal of Educational Psychology, 76(1), 85-97.
Raudenbush, S.W., Rowan, B., & Cheong, Y.F. (1993). Higher order instructional
goals in secondary schools: Class, teacher, and school influences. American
Educational Research Journal, 30(3), 523-553.
Raywid, M.A. (1995). Alternatives and marginal students. In M.C. Wang, & M.C.
Reynolds (Eds.), Making a difference for students at risk: Trends and alterna-
tives (pp. 119-155). Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press.
Reisberg, L. (1998). Some professors question programs that allow high-school stu-
dents to earn college credits: Proliferation of dual enrollment and increase in
Advanced Placement raise doubts about rigor. The Chronicle of Higher Educa-
tion, 44(42).
Resnick, L. (1994). Situated rationalism: Biological and social preparation for map-
ping. In L. Hirschfeld, & S. Gelman (Eds.), Mapping the mind: Domain specific-
ity in cognition and culture. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Resnick, L.B., & Klopfer, L.E. (1989). Toward the thinking curriculum: Current cog-
nitive research. Washington, DC: Association for Supervision and Curriculum
Development.
Rice, D.C., Ryan, J.M., & Samson, S.M. (1998). Using concept maps to assess student
learning outcomes in the science classroom: Must different methods compete?
Journal of Research in Science Education, 35(10), 1103-1127.
Riley, R.W. (1999). Annual back-to-school address: Changing the American high school
to fit modern times. The National Press Club, Washington, DC (September 15).
Romo, H., & Falbo, T. (1996). Hispanic high school graduation: Defying the odds.
Austin, TX: University of Texas Press.
Rosenthal, R., Baratz, S.S., & Hall, C.M. (1974). Teacher behavior, teacher expecta-
tions, and gains in pupils’ rated creativity. Journal of Genetic Psychology, 124,
115-121.
Rosenthal, R. (1987). Pygmalion effects: Existence, magnitude, and social impor-
tance. Educational Researcher, 16(9), 37-41.
Rosenthal, R., & Jacobson, L. (1968). Pygmalion in the classroom. New York: Holt,
Rinehart, & Winston.
Rosenthal, R., & Rubin, D.B. (1978). Interpersonal expectancy effects: The first 345
studies. Behavior and Brain Science, 3, 377-415.

224
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
Roth, K.J. (1986). Conceptual-change learning, and student procession of science
texts. (The Institute for Research on Teaching, Research Series No. 167.) East
Lansing, MI: Michigan State University.
Rothman, F., & Narum, J. (1999). Then, now, and in the next decade: A commentary
on strengthening undergraduate science, mathematics, engineering, and tech-
nology education. Washington, DC: Project Kaleidoscope.
Roy, K.R. (2001). A district that puts physics first: A Connecticut school district puts
Lederman’s vision to the test. In New Horizons in Mathematics and Science Edu-
cation, ENC Focus Magazine, 8(4). [Available at Eisenhower National Clearing-
house, http://www.enc.org].
Rubenstein, R. (1998). Resource equity in the Chicago public schools: A school-level
approach. Journal of Education Finance, 23(4), 468-489.
Russell, A.B. (1998). Statewide college admissions, Student preparation, and
remediation. Policies and programs: Summary of a 1997 SHEEO survey. Denver,
CO: State Higher Education Executive Officers.
Rutter, M. (1983). School effects on pupil progress: Research findings and policy
implications. Journal of Child Development, 54, 1-29.
Rutter, M., McNaughan, B., Mortimore, P., & Ouston, J. (1979). Fifteen thousand
hours: Secondary schools and their effects on children. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Ryder, J., Leach, J., & Driver, R. (1999). Undergraduate science student’s images of
science. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 36(2), 201-219.
Sanders, W.L., & Rivers, J.C. (1996). Cumulative and residual effects of teachers on
future student academic achievement: Research progress report. Knoxville, TN:
University of Tennessee, Value-Added Research and Assessment Center.
Schmidt, B.J., Finch, C.R., & Faulkner, S.L. (1992). Helping teachers to understand
their roles in integrating vocational and academic education: A practitioner’s
guide. (MDS-276). Berkeley, CA: University of California at Berkeley, National
Center for Research in Vocational Education.
Schmidt, W.H., McKnight, C.C., Cogan, L.S., Jakewerth, P.M., & Hourang, R.T. (1999).
Facing the consequences: Using TIMSS for a closer look at U.S. mathematics and
science education. Dordrecht, Netherlands: Kluwer.
Schneider, B. (1999). The ambitious generation. Education Week. April 14, 18(31).
Schoenfeld, A.H. (1983). Problem solving in the mathematics curriculum: A report,
recommendation and annotated bibliography. Mathematical Association of
America Notes, (1).
Schoenfeld, A.H. (1984). Episodes and executive decisions in mathematical problem
solving. In R. Lesh, & M. Landau (Eds.), Acquisition of mathematics concepts
and processes. New York: Academic Press.
Schoenfeld, A.H. (1985). Mathematical problem solving. Orlando, FL: Academic Press.
Schoenfeld, A.H. (1987). What’s all the fuss about metacognition? In A.H. Schoenfeld
(Ed.), Cognitive science and mathematics education. Hillside, NJ: Erlbaum.
Schoenfeld, A.H. (1991). On pure and applied research in mathematics education.
Journal of Mathematical Behavior, 10, 263-276.
Schofield, C. (2000). Teacher’s guide, AP biology. New York: College Entrance Exami-
nation Board.

REFERENCES
225
Schoon, K.J., & Boone, W.J. (1998). Self-efficacy and alternative conceptions of sci-
ence preservice elementary teachers. Science Education, 82(5), 553-568.
Schulman, L.S. (1986). Those who understand: Knowledge growth in teaching. Edu-
cational Researcher, 15(2), 4-14.
Shaughnessy, M.F. (1998). An interview with Rita Dunn about learning styles. The
Clearing House, 71(3), 141-145.
Shavelson, R.J., Baxter, G.P., & Pine, J. (1992). Performance assessments: Political
rhetoric and measurement reality. Educational Researcher, 21(4), 22-27.
Shepard, L., & Cutts-Dougherty, K. (1991). Effects of high-stakes testing on instruc-
tion. Paper presented at the annual joint meeting of the American Educational
research Association and the National Council on Measurement in Education,
Chicago, IL.
Shepard, L.A. (1990). Inflated test score gains: Is the problem old norms or teaching
the test? Educational Measurement: Issues and Practice, 9(3), 15-22.
Shepard, L.A. (2000). The role of assessment in a learning culture. Educational Re-
searcher, 29(7), 4-14.
Silver, E.A., & Smith, M.S. (1996). Building discourse communities in mathematics
classrooms. Communication in mathematics. Reston, VA: National Council of
Teachers of Mathematics.
Simon, H.A. (1980). Problem solving and education. In D. T. Tuma, & R. Reif (Eds.),
Problem solving and education: Issues in teaching and research. Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Sizer, T. (1992). Horace’s compromise: The dilemma of the American high school.
Boston: Houghton-Mifflin.
Skemp, R. (1978). Relational understanding and instrumental understanding. Arith-
metic Teacher, 26(3), 9-15.
Skemp, R. (1979). Intelligence, learning, and action. New York: Wiley.
Sneider, C.I., & Ohadi, M.M.  (1998).  Unraveling students’ misconceptions about
earth’s shape and gravity.  Science Education, 82(2):265-284.
Southerland, S.A., & Gess-Newsom, J. (1999). Preservice teachers’ views of inclusive
science teaching as shaped by images of teaching, learning, and knowledge.
Science Education, 83(2), 131-150.
Springer, K. & Peyser, M. (1998). The rat race begins at 14: Stressed-out kids aiming
for top colleges refuse to slow down. Newsweek. March 30, 131(13).
Steen, L.A. (Ed.). (1998).  Calculus for a new century:  A pump, not a filter, a national
colloquium, October 28–29, 1987.  (MAA Notes Series #8).  Washington, DC:
Mathematical Association of America.
Steinberg, L., & Dornbusch, S.M. (1991). Negative correlates of part-time employ-
ment during adolescence: Replication and elaboration. Developmental Psychol-
ogy, 27(2), 304-313.
Stipek, D.J. (1998). Motivation to learn: From theory to practice (2 ed.). Boston: Allyn
and Bacon.
Sugrue, B., Valdes, R., Schlackman, J., & Webb, N. (1996). Patterns of performance
across different types of items measuring knowledge of Ohm’s Law. (CSE techni-
cal report 405.) Los Angeles: University of California at Los Angeles, Center for

226
LEARNING AND UNDERSTANDING
Research on Evaluation, Standards, and Student Testing, Center for the Study of
Evaluation.
Sykes, G. (1996). Reform of and as professional development. Phi Delta Kappan, 77,
465-467.
Tafel, J., & Eberhart, N. (1999). Statewide school-college (K-16) partnerships to im-
prove student performance. Denver, CO: State Higher Education Executive Of-
ficers.
Tharp, R.G., & Gallimore, R. (1988). Rousing minds to life: Teaching, learning, and
schooling in social context. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Tomlinson, C.A. (1995). How to differentiate instruction in mixed-ability classrooms.
Alexandria VA: Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development.
Torrance, E.P. (1984). Mentor relationships: How they aid creative achievement, en-
dure change and die. New York: Bearly.
Townes, M.H., & Grant, E.R. (1997). “I believe I will go out of this class actually
knowing something”: Cooperative learning activities in physical chemistry. Jour-
nal of Research in Science Teaching, 34(8), 819-835.
Useem, E. (1992). Middle school and math groups: Parent’s involvement in children’s
placement. Sociology of Education, 65(4), 263-279.
Van Zile-Tamsen, C.M. (1996). Metacognitive self-regulation and the daily academic
activities of college students. Buffalo, NY: State University of New York at Buf-
falo, unpublished doctoral dissertation.
VanTassel-Baska, J. (1998).  Characteristics and needs of talented learners.  In J.
VanTassel-Baska (Ed.), Excellence in educating gifted and talented learners (3rd
ed., pp.173-192).  Denver: CO: Love.
VanTassel-Baska, J., Feldhusen, J., Seely, K., Wheatly, G., Silverman, L., & Foster, W.
(1988). Comprehensive curriculum for gifted learners. Needham Heights, MA:
Allyn and Bacon.
Viadero, D.  (2001).  AP program assumes larger role.  Education Week, 20(32), April
25.
Vosniadou, S. & Brewer, W.F. (1992). Mental models of the earth: A study of concep-
tual change in childhood. Cognitive Psychology, 24(4), 535–85.
Wallach, M.A. (1978). Care and feeding of the gifted. Contemporary Psychology, 23,
616-617.
Wandersee, J.H., Mintzes, J J., & Novak, J.D. (1994). Research on alternative concep-
tions in science. In D. Gabel (Ed.), Handbook of research on science teaching
and learning: A project of the National Science Teachers Association (pp. 177-
210). New York: Macmillan.
Weiner, B. (1985). An attributional theory of achievement, motivation and emotion.
Psychological Review, 92(4), 548-573.
Weiss, I. (1994). A profile of science and mathematics education in the United States:
1993. Chapel Hill, NC: Horizon Research.
Welner, K.G. (2001). Legal rights, local wrongs: When community control collides
with educational equity. Albany, NY: State University of New York Press.
White, B.Y., & Frederickson, J.R. (1998). Inquiry, modeling, and metacognition: Mak-
ing science accessible to all students. Cognition and Instruction, 16(1), 3-118.
White, R.W. (1959). Motivation reconsidered: The concept of competence. Psycho-
logical Review, 66, 297-333.

REFERENCES
227
Wiggins, G. (1998). Educative assessment: Designing assessments to inform and im-
prove student performance. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Wood, T., Cobb, P., & Yackel, E. (1991). Change in teaching mathematics: A case
study. American Educational Research Journal, 28(3), 587-616.
Wright, S.P., Horn, S.P., & Sanders, W.L. (1997). Teacher and classroom context ef-
fects on student achievement: Implications for teacher evaluation. Journal of
Personnel Evaluation in Education, 11, 57-67.
Zimmerman, B. (1989). A social cognitive view of self-regulated academic learning.
Journal of Educational Psychology, 23, 614-628.


229
Appendix A
Overview of Panel Findings
and Recommendations
INTRODUCTION
A major goal of this project was to understand advanced study as it is
currently implemented in the sciences and mathematics. Accordingly, the
National Research Council (NRC) charged the committee with examining
advanced study in biology, chemistry, physics, and mathematics (with an
emphasis on calculus). The largest advanced study programs for high school
students in these disciplines are part of the Advanced Placement (AP) and
International Baccalaureate (IB) programs. Because the four subjects are so
different, four independent panels of experts in these disciplines were con-
vened to advise the committee.
Panel Composition and Charge
The four panels were assembled using the normal process for appoint-
ing all NRC committees: a slate of qualified individuals was identified on the
basis of recommendations from a variety of sources and submitted to the
NRC for approval. Each panel included an educational researcher with a
strong base in the discipline, an accomplished university teacher–scholar in
the discipline, and a secondary teacher involved with advanced programs in
the discipline. A member of the study committee chaired each panel, and a
senior member of the committee’s staff provided assistance and expertise at
each of the panel meetings. The chair of each panel served as liaison to the
committee. The names of the panel members and chairs are listed at the
front of this report.
The charge to the panels (reproduced in Annex A-1 at the end of this
appendix) included addressing all the major areas under the full committee’s
charge, including evaluation of the AP and IB programs in light of what is
known about cognition and learning and the nature of the particular disci-

230
APPENDIX A
pline, identification of major conceptual issues that should serve as curricu-
lar foci, means of balancing breadth and depth, interdisciplinary connec-
tions, quality of assessments, teaching methodology, comparison with na-
tional standards, and preparation of high school students for further study at
the college level. The panels were not asked to consider programs other
than AP and IB because of time limitations.
Each panel met for two 2-day sessions during the spring and summer of
2000. Prior to each meeting, panel members received general information
about the AP and IB programs, as well as materials more specific to their
disciplines. These materials included curriculum guidelines; questions from
final examinations that had been released by the College Board and the
International Baccalaureate Organisation (IBO); and, for the science panels,
laboratory manuals used in AP and IB science courses. Panel members also
examined other information about research on learning, curriculum, assess-
ment, and teacher education and professional development. Copies of sa-
lient national reports, such as National Science Education Standards (NRC,
1996) and Principles and Standards for School Mathematics (National Coun-
cil of Teachers of Mathematics, 2000), were provided as well. Panel mem-
bers also applied their personal knowledge and experience with the two
programs in formulating findings and recommendations.
Review and Interpretation of Panel Findings and
Recommendations
The chair of each panel assumed responsibility for drafting a report and
consulting with panel members to incorporate their suggestions and secure
their agreement on the report contents. Each panel report underwent an
independent, monitored review by reviewers external to the NRC. The chair
of each panel then assumed primary responsibility for preparing the panel’s
response to review, along with appropriate changes.
The panels’ findings and recommendations represent the consensus of
the panel members. Reviewers agreed that the findings are well substanti-
ated. The committee acknowledges, however, that different groups of ex-
perts might have arrived at somewhat different recommendations regarding
desirable changes. In other words, there may be several solutions to some of
the problems that were noted.
Since the recommendations of the panels are discipline-specific, the
committee did not have the expertise to consider each recommendation in
detail. However, the panels’ findings were an important part of the evidence
used by the committee in analyzing advanced study programs and in reach-
ing agreement on the recommendations presented in Chapter 11 of this
report.

OVERVIEW OF PANEL FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
231
As might be expected when four groups of disciplinary experts evaluate
educational programs in their subject areas, there are both substantial com-
mon elements and significant differences among the panel findings. Prob-
lems found to be critical in one discipline are not necessarily important in
others. Since each panel undertook its work altogether independently of the
others, the common elements are particularly worthy of note. Following a
review of some of these common elements, the findings and recommenda-
tions of the four panels are presented.1
COMMON ELEMENTS IN THE PANELS’ FINDINGS
All of the panels find considerable merit in both the AP and IB pro-
grams, which provide challenging opportunities for motivated students that
might not otherwise be available. The panels also note major deficiencies in
both programs that they believe need to be addressed. The AP calculus
program is further along in the process of improvement than are the AP
science programs.
Research on Learning: All of the panels agree that the AP and IB
programs are not yet effectively utilizing what is known about how people
learn in developing their courses and their assessments. The science panels
also note that the programs are not consistent with national standards such
as those presented in National Science Education Standards (NRC, 1996).
Although the programs emphasize the importance of higher-order learning
and thinking, the amount of content to be covered and assessed, particularly
in the sciences, tends to encourage rote memorization rather than concep-
tual learning. The programs do not yet stress the need for teachers to under-
stand and correct students’ misconceptions. The science panels note that the
AP program misses important opportunities to promote interdisciplinary
connections between mathematics and the sciences and between different
sciences. At present, the IB program does a somewhat better job of recog-
nizing these linkages through its Group 4 Project and its internal assess-
ments in the sciences.
Examinations: AP and IB curricula are designed to prepare students
for successful performance on end-of-course examinations. The content and
structure of the examinations, therefore, have a profound effect on what is
taught and how in AP and IB classrooms. The science panels agree that the
examinations for AP and IB have some deficiencies. Most serious of these is
1The full report of each panel, including substantial analysis and supporting material, is
available online at www.nap.edu/catalog/10129.html. Those interested in a particular discipline
should download the corresponding report.

232
APPENDIX A
that, in the science panels’ judgment, exam questions do not test conceptual
understanding adequately, a situation that adversely affects learning to the
extent that classroom instruction is guided by the examinations. The math-
ematics panel indicates that both the AP and IB mathematics assessments
require conceptual understanding, but both examinations could focus on
assessing such understanding to a greater degree. Making the AP calculus
examinations less predictable, for example, would encourage teachers to
teach concepts rather than problem types.
Evolution of Course Content and Technology: The biology and chem-
istry courses in the AP and IB programs do not adequately reflect the evolu-
tion of these disciplines over the last two decades. The physics courses also
include substantial amounts of older material, but the physics panel does
not judge this to be a compelling problem relative to other concerns. Tech-
nological advances, especially in the application of computers, are causing
major changes in all of the disciplines and generating novel instructional
possibilities that are not yet adequately reflected in course content.
Teacher Preparation: All four panels note that neither the College
Board nor the IBO has provided clear expectations for teacher preparation,
that qualified teachers are in short supply, and that better teacher prepara-
tion is a prerequisite for substantial program improvement.
Student Preparation: All of the panels note the potential for inad-
equate student preparation for advanced study. In some cases preparation
time has become compressed to allow time for the advanced programs.
Indeed, as the programs have grown, they have affected the entire high
school science and mathematics curriculum. Furthermore, a significant num-
ber of students are taking AP science courses as the first course in the disci-
pline, particularly in physics. Additional discussion of these issues is pre-
sented in Chapters 2 and 10 of this report.
The Secondary–Postsecondary Interface: Finally, all the science
panels believe there is insufficient cooperation and communication between
high schools and universities with regard to structuring secondary advanced
study for students who will enroll in advanced science and mathematics
courses when they enter college. The mathematics panel, on the other hand,
views cooperation and collaboration between high schools and colleges as a
strong point of the AP program. The mathematics panel credits the College
Board with facilitating communication among all stakeholders with regard
to the teaching of calculus. In all disciplines increased cooperation could
lead to improvements in the structure of secondary advanced programs,
better teacher preparation and professional development, and college course
sequences that are appropriate for students having different experiences in
high school.

OVERVIEW OF PANEL FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
233
BIOLOGY PANEL
Principal Findings
Curriculum
Finding: The AP course outline is not up to date, and it overemphasizes
environmental, population, and organismic (EPO) biology at the expense of
molecular, cell, developmental (MCD) and evolutionary biology. Although
similarly out of date, the IB curriculum achieves a more appropriate balance
between the EPO and MCD areas. The AP curriculum should include more
on the process of science, including the responsible conduct of research,
and the core IB curriculum should include more evolutionary biology. The
core curricula of both programs should be updated to include concepts from
current areas of rapid progress, such as genomics, cell signaling, mecha-
nisms of development, and molecular evolution.
Finding: A major problem with the AP course is that pressure to cover
all of biology in less than a year precludes in-depth study and leads to
superficial knowledge. In contrast, the IB program allows time for some in-
depth study by subdividing the curriculum into core and options, and by
allowing 2 years for the Higher Level (HL) course. The AP course needs to
include more options, both in the curriculum and on the tests, to make the
breadth covered manageable. One solution would be to have two AP
courses—one emphasizing EPO and the other MCD biology—both with sig-
nificant evolutionary emphasis.
Finding: Both AP and IB have stated themes around which the courses
are theoretically organized. The eight themes of the AP curriculum mix phi-
losophy and content, with some redundancy in the content themes, but
appear to be adequate for their stated purpose. In the IB curriculum, there
are only four stated themes, which surprisingly do not include two that
appear essential—energy transfer and heredity. Themes in both courses are
intended to provide integration of different topics, but the extent to which
these themes are used in presenting subject matter generally depends on
decisions made by individual teachers. Particularly in AP courses, better
integration of topics is needed.
Finding: Meaningful learning in biology must involve inquiry-based
laboratory experiences that require students not simply to carry out a tech-
nique or learn a laboratory skill, but also to pose questions, formulate hy-
potheses, design experiments to test those hypotheses, collaborate to make
experiments work, analyze data, draw conclusions, and present their analy-
ses and conclusions to their peers.

234
APPENDIX A
Finding: There is little evidence of interdisciplinary emphasis in the AP
course outline. In contrast, the entire IB program, including its biology com-
ponent, rests on the importance of interdisciplinary connections in learning.
The IB program is exemplary and far superior in this regard. The AP pro-
gram should consider changes that would promote interdisciplinary learn-
ing.
Instruction and Professional Development
Finding: AP courses and to a somewhat lesser extent IB courses gener-
ally rely on the traditional transmission–reception mode of instruction rather
than a constructivist model in which students develop their own conceptual
framework through inquiry-based, problem-centered active learning (as rec-
ommended in the National Science Education Standards [NRC, 1996]). Both
programs need to effect changes in the teaching approaches used.
Finding: The way the AP and to a lesser extent the IB courses are taught
is inconsistent with current knowledge in several ways: rapid-fire course
coverage at the expense of depth of understanding; continued reliance on
the traditional passive-learner, transmission–reception model of learning;
failure to specifically target common known misconceptions; limited use of
history as a route to understanding in the context of people and society;
failure to keep pace with new technological and instrumentation opportuni-
ties, such as learning through computer modeling of biological systems and
hand-held data collection and analysis equipment for field work; over reli-
ance on multiple-choice and fill-in-the-blank test questions; and limited ex-
periential and inquiry-based learning in the laboratory, including the “per-
suasion of peers” phase crucial to the scientific process. In general, the
application of research-based learning theory to the design of instruction
and assessment is lacking.
Finding: A greater emphasis on inquiry-based learning in AP and IB
courses might motivate more students to pursue further training in biology
and biology-related careers.
Finding: Many teachers at the secondary level are unprepared to teach
college-level biology with regard to content knowledge, and many schools
that offer AP programs do not have the resources to support adequate labo-
ratory instruction. The College Board should evaluate and certify AP schools
and teachers in some manner.
Finding: More in-service preparation and support are needed, and more
attention should be paid to pedagogy in manuals and workshops, particu-
larly for AP teachers.

OVERVIEW OF PANEL FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
235
Assessment
Finding: AP and IB final examinations primarily measure rote learning
when assessing students’ mastery of content knowledge, concepts, and ap-
plications. However, in the IB assessment process, evaluation of a portfolio,
laboratory notebooks, and other work provides more perspective. The AP
exam should include more free-response questions and evaluation of labo-
ratory work, and the examinations for both programs should test more con-
cept knowledge. With regard to application of knowledge to other courses
and situations, the AP exam is limited by a lack of interdisciplinary empha-
sis, while the IB assessments include such applications. As noted above, the
AP course and exam would benefit from more interdisciplinary emphasis.
Finding: The perceived need for comprehensiveness and the single
high-stakes exam of the AP program in particular encourage teachers to
promote rote learning in order to cover all the necessary material.
Finding: Both the AP and IB examinations emphasize assessment of
what is easily measured: rote learning of facts and concepts, rather than
what is most highly valued—hierarchically structured conceptual knowl-
edge and understanding of scientific processes.
The Secondary–Postsecondary Interface
Finding: University-sponsored outreach programs can be a major re-
source for high school advanced biology programs and should be encour-
aged. More communication between high schools and universities—in both
directions—would be helpful in fulfilling the needs of both institutions and
in developing curricula and assessments.
Finding: There are many concerns with the use of AP and IB scores for
granting of advanced placement. Some top-ranked colleges do not accept
either AP or IB credit or both. For a variety of reasons discussed above,
some AP and IP biology courses are not of high enough quality to be appro-
priate for college credit. The AP biology course as presently constituted is
too EPO-oriented to be an appropriate substitute for a first-year college
MCD-oriented biology course.
Finding: Because of the lack of in-depth study in many AP courses,
students who place out of first-year college courses may be at a disadvan-
tage later at institutions where the introductory course is taught effectively.
The available data on how well the AP courses prepare students for ad-
vanced work in the field may be misleading.

236
APPENDIX A
Recommendations
Overall Recommendation: The College Board should certify schools
and teachers that wish to offer AP biology courses and should provide suit-
able training opportunities for prospective AP biology teachers. The College
Board should also develop procedures for ongoing assessment of AP pro-
grams and teachers through regular sampling of student work; such sam-
pling should also be used for assessment of student achievement in addition
to the final examinations.
Overall Recommendation: Certification and assessments of both the
AP and IB programs by the College Board and the IBO, respectively, should
be designed to ensure that changing emphases in standards for teaching,
professional development, assessment, and content, as set forth in the Na-
tional Science Education Standards (NRC, 1996), are being implemented.
Teacher preparation and in-service workshops in both programs should place
more emphasis on pedagogy—how to facilitate student-centered, problem-
oriented, inquiry-based learning—and on recent results of research on cog-
nition and learning.
Overall Recommendation: Colleges and universities should be strongly
discouraged from using performance on either the AP or IB examination as
the sole basis for automatic placement out of required introductory college
courses for biology majors and distribution requirements for nonmajors.
Curriculum
Recommendation: Students should in general not be allowed to take
AP biology as a first science course in high school. A prior biology course
should be a prerequisite for AP biology, and a prior chemistry course should
be strongly urged as well. In schools where the latter is impractical, chemis-
try should be a corequisite course.
Recommendation: Both the AP and IB curricula should be updated to
include topics of major current interest in biology, such as cell signaling,
development, genomics, molecular systematics, and their evolutionary im-
plications.
Recommendation: The AP curriculum should be better balanced, with
more emphasis on molecular and cell biology. The IB core topics should
include more evolutionary biology.
Recommendation: The College Board should seriously consider offer-
ing two different AP biology courses, one emphasizing MCD and the other
EPO biology, with two corresponding exams. These courses should go into
depth in one of these areas of emphasis and present the basics of the other.
Both courses should include a strong emphasis on evolution.

OVERVIEW OF PANEL FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
237
Recommendation: More curricular flexibility should be built into the
AP program so that students can study fewer areas in greater depth than is
possible with the current overemphasis on breadth of coverage.
Recommendation: The AP program should place more emphasis on
laboratory work by developing a new and larger set of innovative, inquiry-
based laboratories that conform to the National Science Education Stan-
dards (NRC, 1996) and by including more laboratory-based questions on the
exam. Enough laboratories should be available so that teachers have the
opportunity to select among them according to their interests and those of
their students, and the laboratory-related questions on the AP exam should
be general enough so that teachers have real flexibility in deciding which
laboratories to offer. In addition, the AP program should include a manda-
tory 1-week workshop on laboratory pedagogy for beginning teachers of AP
biology and should provide more ongoing laboratory training for estab-
lished teachers.
Recommendation: Assessments of schools and teachers should include
determination of the amount and quality of the laboratory experience being
provided. Scheduling of at least one 2-hour laboratory period per week
should be strongly urged as a criterion for certification of an AP biology
course.
Recommendation: The AP program should promote more interdisci-
plinary activities that relate AP biology to other academic work, as well as
local and regional issues.
Assessment
Recommendation: The AP program should modify its assessment pro-
cess to incorporate evaluation of laboratory portfolios and other samples of
student work prior to the examination. There also should be more questions
on the exam designed to test understanding of major concepts and the pro-
cess of laboratory research, with less emphasis on rote memorization of
facts.
Recommendation: To provide feedback, the AP program should make
individual students’ exam answers available to their teachers after the ex-
aminations have been evaluated.
The Secondary–Postsecondary Interface
Recommendation: More attention should be paid to the interface be-
tween advanced high school and college biology teaching. In particular,
more communication and collaboration should be encouraged between col-
lege and university departments and high school teachers of biology. Col-

238
APPENDIX A
leges and universities are potential sources of enrichment and resources for
high school courses, and college instructors can benefit from the teaching
experience of high school teachers. The need for reform is systemic. Like
the AP and IB programs, colleges and universities should revise or improve
introductory biology courses as necessary to bring them into line with the
recommendations made in this report for high school advanced study courses.

OVERVIEW OF PANEL FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
239
CHEMISTRY PANEL
Principal Findings
Finding: The AP and IB final examinations are formulaic and predict-
able in their approaches and question types from year to year. Thus, with
sufficient practice on how to take such examinations and enough drill on
major concepts that the examinations are likely to test, students can score
well without actually understanding the major concepts associated with the
topics being tested.
Finding: The AP and IB chemistry courses do not yet recognize the
increasingly interdisciplinary nature of modern chemistry; its incorporation
of important related fields, such as materials science and biochemistry; and
the opportunities presented by such fields to teach related chemical con-
cepts in a contextual manner.
Finding: The AP and IB examinations do not reflect recent develop-
ments in chemistry and in the teaching of chemistry at the college/university
level.
Recommendations
Overall Recommendation: Advanced study options in high school
chemistry should not necessarily be tied to the potential for earning college/
university credit.
Overall Recommendation: Advanced study of chemistry at the high
school level should provide students with a coherent, rigorous course that
promotes further scientific literacy and prepares students to become part of
a highly technological workforce, regardless of whether they continue studying
chemistry at the college level.
Overall Recommendation: Advanced study in chemistry need not be
based on AP or IB. Many top high schools for mathematics and science offer
alternatives, which should continue to be explored. Where appropriate, col-
lege credit can be sought on the basis of passing the placement examination
administered by many college or university departments.
Curriculum
Recommendation: Any high school course in chemistry that is labeled
as advanced study, whether it is structured according to an established cur-
riculum and assessment (such as AP or IB) or otherwise, should enable
students to explore the chemistry concepts and laboratory practices intro-
duced in the first-year high school course in greater depth and, where ap-
propriate, to conduct some form of research or independent inquiry. Under

240
APPENDIX A
the guidance of a qualified advanced study instructor, desirable features of
such advanced study would include some combination of these characteris-
tics: application of basic ideas regarding complex materials, systems, and
phenomena; use of modern instrumentation, methods, and information re-
sources; integration of concepts within and between subject areas, including
extensions to other disciplines; use of appropriate mathematical and techno-
logical methods; extended use of inquiry-based experimentation; develop-
ment of critical thinking skills and conceptual understanding; use of appro-
priate tools for assessment of student performance that reflect current best
practices; and promotion of communication skills and teamwork.
Recommendation: With rare exceptions, students should not take ad-
vanced chemistry as their first chemistry course in high school.
Recommendation: To be effective, advanced courses in chemistry must
reflect recommendations in the areas of content, pedagogy, and assessment
embodied in the National Science Education Standards (NRC, 1996).
Instruction
Recommendation: Qualified AP or IB teachers should have a B.S. or
B.A. degree in chemistry (which includes a two-semester physical chemistry
course sequence with laboratories), and preferably an M.A. or M.S. degree
in chemistry. The chemistry panel does not view a B.S. in science education
as being adequate preparation for these teachers, nor does the College Board.
Recommendation: A qualified advanced study chemistry instructor
should have experience with effective current and emerging approaches to
teaching and assessment in the subject and their applications to the AP and
IB chemistry courses.
Recommendation: AP or IB chemistry teachers should have a working
familiarity with teaching technologies (e.g., Web, electronic media, labora-
tory instrumentation) and their appropriate uses.
Professional Development
Recommendation: Required periodic, funded professional development
opportunities, including content instruction, research participation, and peda-
gogy workshops, should be provided for teachers of advanced courses in
chemistry. This recommendation is consonant with the National Commis-
sion on Mathematics and Science Teaching for the 21st Century’s description
of professional development as “a planned, collaborative, educational process
of continuous improvement for teachers that helps them to do five things:
(1) deepen their knowledge of the subject(s) they are teaching; (2) sharpen
their teaching skills in the classroom; (3) keep up with developments in their

OVERVIEW OF PANEL FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
241
fields, and in education generally; (4) generate and contribute new knowl-
edge to the profession; and (5) increase their ability to monitor students’
work so they can provide constructive feedback to students and appropri-
ately redirect their own teaching” (National Commission on Mathematics
and Science Teaching for the 21st Century, 2000, p. 18).
Recommendation: Professional development opportunities, such as the
experience of teaching courses or laboratories at colleges or universities and
undertaking original research in industry, at government laboratories, or in
collaboration with college faculty, would be particularly valuable for AP and
IB chemistry teachers. High school–system personnel policies should en-
courage rather than inhibit such professional development activities during
the academic year.
Recommendation: AP and IB chemistry teachers can profit from dis-
cussions with each other. School districts and schools should find ways to
initiate and sustain such dialogue and to share it with a wider audience.
Communication about areas of common interest between chemistry facul-
ties in high schools and those teaching general chemistry in institutions of
higher education would be extremely helpful for both communities (see
also the recommendations under Vision 4 in Transforming Undergraduate
Education in Science, Mathematics, Engineering, and Technology [NRC,
1999d]).
Recommendation: AP and IB chemistry teachers should be participat-
ing members of professional organizations such as the National Science Teach-
ers Association and the American Chemical Society’s Division of Chemical
Education.
The Secondary–Postsecondary Interface
Recommendation: Institutions awarding AP examination–based course
credit or advanced placement in chemistry should consider doing so only
for a grade of 4 or 5, not for a grade of 3.

242
APPENDIX A
PHYSICS PANEL
Principal Findings
Overall Finding: The most important goals of advanced physics in-
struction are independent of the particular topics studied. Advanced physics
instruction should be aimed at generating excitement and enthusiasm for
further study in physics, at achieving deep conceptual understanding of the
subject matter covered, and at instilling in students the scientific habits of
mind that are important for their further education in science. Learning any
particular physics subject matter is of lesser importance.
Overall Finding: There are far too few data on the long-term outcomes
of physics education to allow important decisions about the physics educa-
tion of large numbers of students to be made with confidence.
Curriculum
Finding: The study of Newtonian mechanics provides an ideal frame-
work for developing the scientific habits of mind and deep conceptual un-
derstanding that are the primary goals of advanced physics instruction. More-
over, familiarity with Newtonian mechanics is universally expected of stu-
dents who have completed an advanced high school physics program.
Finding: The AP Physics B curriculum is too broad for a 1-year course;
it allows insufficient time to develop deep conceptual understanding. The IB
Physics Higher Level (HL) course covers largely the same material over 2
years—an ideal pace.
Finding: The current AP physics curriculum does not encourage the
inclusion of interdisciplinary content in AP physics programs. The IB phys-
ics program includes interdisciplinary content as an integral part of the IB
program.
Instruction
Finding: More well-qualified teachers are desperately needed for ad-
vanced physics programs. With the continued growth of such programs
across the nation, there is a severe shortage of qualified individuals to teach
them.
Finding: The preparation and skill of the teacher are the principal fac-
tors that determine the ultimate success or failure of advanced physics in-
struction. Thorough understanding of the subject matter is a necessary but
not sufficient condition for good physics teaching. Teachers must also be
trained in the special pedagogy of physics.

OVERVIEW OF PANEL FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
243
Finding: Skilled physics teachers continuously diagnose the understand-
ing of their students and change their objectives and strategies as that diag-
nosis indicates. It is impossible to assess the understanding of students with-
out requiring them to explain their reasoning.
Finding: Thorough understanding of the subject matter is a necessary
but not a sufficient condition for good physics teaching.
Finding: Traditional “cookbook” methods of laboratory instruction, in
which students follow narrowly defined procedures to verify well-known
principles, have little effect on students’ conceptual understanding. In con-
trast, substantial improvements in understanding are possible through rigor-
ous, interactive laboratory experiences.
Assessment
Finding: Current final assessments place too much emphasis on techni-
cal problem-solving skills and insufficient emphasis on deep conceptual
understanding. For example, very rarely do the scoring rubrics of either AP
or IB physics examinations provide for the deduction of credit for incorrect
reasoning; correct final results nearly always receive full credit. Also, both
AP and IB physics examinations contain too many multipart questions that
lead students through the solution instead of requiring students to demon-
strate their understanding by solving the problem on their own. On the
whole, IB examinations are somewhat more conceptual in nature than their
AP counterparts; recent AP examinations are much better in this regard than
those of earlier years.
Finding: The scoring of written examinations must emphasize the evalu-
ation of student understanding. Therefore, a rigid scoring rubric in which
points are awarded for very specific correct responses to small parts of each
question is not appropriate because it reduces the reader’s ability to respond
to a student’s thinking (both correct and incorrect) not anticipated by the
rubric.
Finding: The pace of IB physics final examinations is much more lei-
surely than that of their AP counterparts. In general, AP physics examina-
tions require students to do too much in too short a time.
Recommendations
Overall Recommendation: Given the scarcity of data on the long-term
outcomes of physics education, an effort should be made as soon as pos-
sible to follow the progress of physics students over a period of many years.

244
APPENDIX A
Student Preparation
Recommendation: Before enrolling in an advanced physics course in
high school, students should have studied the physics that is suggested as a
requirement for high school graduation in the National Science Education
Standards (NRC, 1996). This requirement can be satisfied with the first year
of a 2-year physics program (the approach adopted by the IB program).
Recommendation: Before taking advanced physics, students should
be fluent in mathematics through the precalculus level. In particular, by the
time they are ready to study advanced physics, students should be skilled in
algebraic manipulation and have a firm grasp of basic trigonometry. Empha-
sis should also be placed on the use of proportions to solve problems,
estimation skills, the use of international units, and scientific notation (pow-
ers of 10).
Curriculum
Recommendation: All advanced physics programs should aim to de-
velop deep conceptual understanding of the topics studied. It is essential
that whatever topics are chosen be addressed in depth, with an emphasis on
conceptual understanding rather than on technical problem-solving skills.
Students must learn that physics knowledge is built on general principles
and gain the confidence to apply those principles to unfamiliar situations.
Recommendation: All students of advanced physics should study a
nationally standardized one-semester unit in Newtonian mechanics. This unit
should have the coverage of current AP Physics C Mechanics (including
rotational dynamics), but should not require formal calculus. It should re-
place the multiple versions currently offered.
Recommendation: In a 1-year advanced physics program, students
should study only one major area of physics in addition to Newtonian me-
chanics.
Recommendation: The AP Physics B program is too broad and should
be eliminated as a 1-year course.
Recommendation: Meaningful real-world (laboratory) experiences
should be included in all advanced physics programs. There is ample evi-
dence that traditional “cookbook” laboratories do not meet this standard.
Recommendation: Advanced courses should have greater interdisci-
plinary content and make increasing use of cyberspace and information
technology. Modern developments in both science and society as a whole
indicate that physicists will be increasingly called upon to address problems
that cross the boundaries between traditional disciplines. At the same time,
the explosion of information technology provides a vast array of possibilities
for improving advanced physics instruction. Teachers and administrators

OVERVIEW OF PANEL FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
245
should be aware of these developments and help advanced physics pro-
grams expand their involvement in both areas over time.
Instruction and Professional Development
Recommendation: A concerted effort should be made throughout the
physics community to contribute to the preparation and ongoing profes-
sional development of highly skilled physics teachers. Peer assessment pro-
grams should be implemented for certification and continuing assessment of
physics teaching skill.
Recommendation: The panel strongly recommends that explanations
of reasoning be required from the first day of an advanced course so that
providing such explanations quickly becomes automatic for all students in
whatever they do throughout the course.
Recommendation: Information technology should be used to create
networks that will enable high school and college faculty and other profes-
sionals to share information useful for advanced physics teaching.
Assessment
Recommendation: The scoring of written examinations must empha-
size the evaluation of student understanding. As noted above, a rigid scoring
rubric in which points are awarded for very specific correct responses to
small parts of each question is not appropriate; rather, the reader should
evaluate the student’s response as a whole. A maximum score should be
given only for complete and clear physical reasoning leading to the correct
conclusions. The recent trend toward increased emphasis on conceptual
understanding should continue.
Recommendation: The standards for success on final assessments should
be raised. The panel believes that if its recommended curriculum changes
are implemented, successful students will know the material in the new,
more manageable curricula thoroughly. Therefore, the panel recommends
high standards of performance on the new final examinations.
Recommendation: The panel recommends that sufficient time be al-
lowed for students to complete an entire examination. Final examinations
must measure what students know, not how quickly they can recall and
apply that knowledge.

246
APPENDIX A
MATHEMATICS PANEL
Principal Findings
Overall Finding: The AP and IB programs are both designed to meet
the educational needs of highly motivated and well-prepared students, but
the origins, goals, purposes, missions, organizations, and structures of the
two programs are very different. These differences contribute to variations
in the educational expectations, opportunities, and experiences of students
and teachers participating in the two programs.
Curriculum
Finding: The AP calculus curricula are largely sound. The recently re-
vised syllabi with more emphasis on conceptual understanding have signifi-
cantly improved the program, although further change in this direction is
desirable. The panel also finds the focus on reasoning to be less than is
needed.
Finding: The IB mathematics curricula are largely sound. The portfolio
requirement, with its emphasis on applications of mathematics, is likely to
introduce a focus on modeling that will benefit IB students. However, the
calculus section of the syllabi do not place enough emphasis on conceptual
understanding. The panel also has some concern that the breadth of the
curricula, although an attractive feature of the program, could lead to super-
ficial learning.
Instruction and Professional Development
Finding: Neither the College Board nor the IBO explicitly articulates in
its published materials what it considers to be excellent teaching in math-
ematics.
Finding: Adequate preparation of teachers for courses leading to calcu-
lus or other advanced study options is a critical factor in enabling students to
succeed in the advanced courses.
Finding: The availability of high-quality professional development ac-
tivities and the establishment of support networks for AP and IB mathemat-
ics teachers are crucial to promoting and maintaining excellence in these
programs.
Finding: U.S. teachers have few opportunities to deepen their under-
standing of mathematics during the school year, and opportunities during
the summer, while useful, tend to be disconnected from everyday teaching.

OVERVIEW OF PANEL FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
247
Assessment
Finding: AP and IB curricula are designed to prepare students for suc-
cessful performance on end-of-course examinations. The content and struc-
ture of the examinations, therefore, have a profound effect on what is taught
and how it is taught in AP and IB classrooms.
Finding: The AP examinations have improved under the current syllabi.
The effort to promote conceptual understanding by asking nonstandard ques-
tions and requiring verbal explanations is excellent. For example, the fact
that there is now a wider variety of applications of integration (and not from
a prescribed list) encourages students to think about the meaning of an
integral. The inclusion of graphing problems involving a parameter focuses
attention on the behavior of a family of functions. The variety of representa-
tions of a function—by a graph and a table as well as by a formula—pro-
motes better understanding of the concept of function. However, the exam
is still predictable enough for many students to do respectably well by mas-
tering question types rather than concepts. The exam does not include enough
problems that focus on conceptual understanding. More problems are needed
that involve multiple steps, test technical skills in the context of applied
problems, ask for interpretation and explanation of results, include substan-
tial realistic applications of calculus, and test reasoning or theoretical under-
standing.
Finding: The IB exam benefits from being more varied than the AP
exams. However, a few exam questions are at too low a level as they ask
students to perform algorithms specified in the problem. The exam should
include more problems that focus on conceptual understanding, and does
not include enough problems that test whether students know which algo-
rithm to apply (e.g., integration by substitution), test technical skills in the
context of applied problems, ask for interpretation and explanation of re-
sults, and include substantial realistic applications.
Finding: The problems on the AP and IB assessments are too predict-
able. This encourages teachers to focus on helping students recognize and
solve particular problem types. A less predictable examination would en-
courage instruction focused on the development of students’ critical think-
ing and problem-solving abilities.
Finding: Both AP and IB examinations lack good applications and con-
nections to the real-world uses of mathematics. The IB examinations appear
weaker than the AP examinations in this regard.
Finding: Students who do not take the examination at the conclusion of
an AP or IB course miss the opportunity to pull the material together for
themselves. They also have a negative effect on the experience of other
students by making the course appear to be less serious.

248
APPENDIX A
Impact of Calculus
Finding: The adequacy of the preparation students receive before tak-
ing calculus has an effect on whether they can understand or merely do
calculus. Without understanding, students cannot apply what they know
and do not remember the calculus they have learned.
Finding: Many teachers and schools are under great pressure to com-
press algebra and trigonometry so they can prepare as many students as
possible for calculus. Sometimes students spend too little time mastering the
prerequisite knowledge and skills. The performance of many calculus stu-
dents is undermined by the fact that they do not learn pre-calculus thor-
oughly or learn to solve problems and think mathematically. Thus, the rush
to calculus may curtail their future options to pursue mathematics, science,
and engineering. It is important to realize that it is not the structure or cur-
riculum of AP calculus that causes this problem, but the ways in which the
program are used.
Finding: There are not enough checks in the system to ensure that
students have the prerequisite algebra, trigonometry, and precalculus skills
necessary for success in calculus and courses beyond.
Finding: The courses that precede calculus are often designed to help
students make a smooth transition to an AP course. The topics and speed of
prerequisite courses are determined by what is needed for AP. Even schools
that do not offer AP calculus usually teach from books and curricula that are
used in other schools to prepare students for this course. Thus, the AP
curriculum influences many more courses and many more students than
those who take the AP examinations.
Finding: Most college and university placement and credit practices
that are based on student performance on AP or IB calculus examinations
are reasonable.
Finding: Data on the number of AP and IB courses offered by schools
and the results of the examinations are sometimes used in ways for which
they were not intended, thus creating situations that can be detrimental to
student learning (see also Chapter 10, this volume).
Recommendations
Preparation of Students
Recommendation: All calculus taught in high school should be at a
college level.
Recommendation: All students who enroll in AP calculus should have
had at least 4 years of college preparatory mathematics prior to AP calculus.

OVERVIEW OF PANEL FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
249
The structure of IB mathematics courses is different, and this recommenda-
tion is not applicable to them.
Recommendation: Strategies must be developed to ensure that stu-
dents who enroll in calculus have an adequate background in algebra and
trigonometry for subsequent work in mathematics and science.
Instruction and Teacher Professional Development
Recommendation: On-going professional development opportunities
should be improved, expanded, and made available to all AP and IB teach-
ers.
Recommendation: Schools that choose to offer AP and IB programs
must find ways to encourage all teachers to take part in professional devel-
opment, perhaps by providing time during the school day rather than on
nights and weekends.
Recommendation: The College Board should consider developing pro-
cedures to certify AP calculus teachers.
Assessment
Recommendation: The AP and IB examinations should vary more from
year to year. If teachers expect that major ideas will be assessed rather than
specific problem types, it is likely that instruction will encourage the devel-
opment of students’ critical thinking and problem-solving abilities. The AP
and IB examinations must strike a balance between judging students’ con-
ceptual understanding by asking unfamiliar probing questions, and alarming
teachers and students with a strange and unfamiliar test.
Recommendation: Both the AP and IB programs should maintain and
increase their focus on conceptual understanding in their assessments.
Recommendation: To assess computational and procedural knowledge,
students should be asked questions that demonstrate their ability to use
these procedures in solving complex problems.
Recommendation: All students enrolled in AP and IB courses ordi-
narily should take the relevant external examinations as part of the course
requirements.
Recommendation: Both AP and IB examinations should place more
emphasis on realistic applications, including those in which students must
set up the mathematical model.

250
APPENDIX A
ANNEX A-1
CHARGE TO THE CONTENT PANELS
Charge to the Parent Committee and Content Panels: The charge to
the committee is to consider the effectiveness of, and potential improve-
ments to, programs for advanced study of mathematics and science in Ameri-
can high schools. In response to the charge, the committee will consider the
two most widely recognized programs for advanced study: the Advanced
Placement (AP) and the International Baccalaureate (IB) programs. In addi-
tion, the committee will identify and examine other appropriate curricular
and instructional alternatives to IB and AP. Emphasis will be placed on the
biology, chemistry, physics, and mathematics programs of study.
Charge to Content Panels: The content panels are asked to evaluate
the AP and IB curricular, instructional, and assessment materials for their
specific disciplines.
Below is a list of questions that the content panels will use to examine
the curriculum, laboratory experiences, and student assessments for their
specific subject areas. The content panels will use these questions to issue a
report to the committee about the effectiveness of the AP and IB programs
for educating able high school students in their respective disciplines. In
answering these questions, the content panels should keep in mind the
committee’s charge and study questions.
The panels should focus on the following specific issues in advising the
committee:
I. CURRICULAR AND CONCEPTUAL
FRAMEWORKS FOR LEARNING
Research on cognition suggests that learning and understanding are fa-
cilitated when students: (1) have a strong foundation of background knowl-
edge, (2) are taught and understand facts and ideas in the context of a
conceptual framework, and (3) learn how to organize information to facili-
tate retrieval and application in new contexts (see, for example, NRC, 2000b).
1. To what degree do the AP and IB programs incorporate current knowl-
edge about cognition and learning in mathematics and science in their cur-
ricula, instructions, and assessments?
2. To what degree is the factual base of information that is provided by
the AP and IB curricula and related laboratory experiences adequate for
advanced high school study in your discipline?
3. Based on your evaluation of the materials that you received, to what
extent do the AP and IB curricula and assessments balance breadth of cov-

OVERVIEW OF PANEL FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
251
erage with in-depth study of important topics in the subject area? In your
opinion, is this balance an appropriate one for advanced high school learners?
4. Are there key concepts (big ideas) of your discipline around which
factual information and ideas should be organized to promote conceptual
understanding in advanced study courses (e.g., Newton’s Laws in physics)?
To what degree are the AP and IB curricula and related laboratory experi-
ences organized around these identified key concepts?
5. To what degree do the AP and IB curricula and related laboratory
experiences provide opportunities for students to apply their knowledge to
a range of problems and in a variety of contexts?
6. To what extent do the AP and IB curricula and related laboratory
experiences encourage students and teachers to make connections among
the various disciplines in science and mathematics?
II. THE ROLE OF ASSESSMENT
Research and experience indicate that assessments of student learning
play a key role in determining what and how teachers teach and what and
how students learn.
1. Based on your evaluation of the IB and AP final assessments and
accompanying scoring guides and rubrics, evaluate to what degree these
assessments measure or emphasize:
(a) students’ mastery of content knowledge;
(b) students’ understanding and application of concepts; and
(c) students’ ability to apply what they have learned to other courses
and in other situations.
2. To what degree do the AP and IB final assessments assess student
mastery of your disciplinary subject at a level that is consistent with expec-
tations for similar courses that are taught at the college level?
III. TEACHING
Research and experience indicate that learning is facilitated when teach-
ers use a variety of techniques that are purposefully selected to achieve
particular learning goals.
1. How effectively do the AP and IB curricula and assessments encour-
age teachers to use a variety of teaching techniques (e.g., lecture, discus-
sion, laboratory experience and independent investigation)?
2. What preparation is needed to effectively teach advanced mathemat-
ics and science courses such as AP and IB?

252
APPENDIX A
IV. EMPHASES
The National Science Education Standards (NRC, 1996) and the NCTM
Standards (NCTM, 2000) propose that the emphases of science and math-
ematics education should change in particular ways (see supplemental ma-
terials).
1. To what degree do the AP and IB programs reflect the recommenda-
tions in these documents?
V. PREPARATION FOR FURTHER STUDY
Advanced study at the high school level is often viewed as preparation
for continued study at the college level or as a substitute for introductory-
level college courses.
1. To what extent do the AP and IB curricula, assessments, and related
laboratory experiences in your discipline serve as adequate and appropriate
bases for success in college courses beyond the introductory level?
2. To what degree do the AP and IB programs in your discipline reflect
changes in knowledge or approaches that are emerging (or have recently
occurred) in your discipline?
3. How might coordination between secondary schools and institutions
of higher education be enhanced to optimize student learning and contin-
ued interest in the discipline?

253
Appendix B
Biographical Sketches of
Committee Members
JERRY P. GOLLUB (Cochair) is John and Barbara Bush Professor in the
Natural Sciences (Physics) at Haverford College. He is a member of the
National Academy of Sciences (NAS), a fellow of the American Academy of
Arts and Sciences, and a recipient of a research award from the American
Physical Society. His research focuses on nonlinear and nonequilibrium phe-
nomena, including instabilities and pattern formation in fluids, chaotic dy-
namics and turbulence, and granular materials. He is coauthor of Chaotic
Dynamics: An Introduction, an undergraduate textbook. Since 1981 he has
also been affiliated with the University of Pennsylvania, where he is a mem-
ber of the graduate groups in both physics and mechanical engineering. Dr.
Gollub has served as Provost of Haverford College and currently chairs its
Physics Department. He has served on the advisory board of the National
Science Resources Center, curriculum developers for schools, and has been
a member of the National Research Council’s (NRC) Commission on Physical
Sciences, Mathematics, and Applications. He received his Ph.D. in experi-
mental condensed matter physics from Harvard University.
PHILIP C. CURTIS, JR. (Cochair) is Professor of Mathematics Emeritus at the
University of California at Los Angeles, where he has taught mathematics
since 1955. He has served as vice chair and chair of the University of Califor-
nia Board of Admissions and Relations with Schools, chairman of the faculty
of the UCLA College of Letters and Science, chair of the UCLA Mathematics
Department, director of the UCLA Teaching Interns Program in Mathematics,
and chair of the Committee for Mathematics and Science Scholars. Dr. Curtis
has served on the NRC’s Study Group on Guidelines for Mathematics Assess-
ment. He received his Ph.D. from Yale University.
CAMILLA BENBOW is Dean of the Peabody College of Education and Hu-
man Development at Vanderbilt University. Her field is educational psychol-
ogy, and her research has focused on the optimal development of talent,

254
APPENDIX B
strategies for teaching gifted and talented students, and academic achieve-
ment in math and science. She has also served as director of the Iowa Talent
Search Program and as codirector for the Study of Mathematically Preco-
cious Youth at The Johns Hopkins University, at Iowa State University, and
now at Vanderbilt. In addition, she has directed other studies and programs
for gifted and talented and mathematically precocious youth. Dr. Benbow
received her M.A. in psychology and her M.S. and Ph.D. in education from
The Johns Hopkins University.
HILDA BORKO is a professor in the School of Education at the University of
Colorado at Boulder. Her field is educational psychology, and her research
has focused on teacher cognition and teacher learning. Specific interests
have included teachers’ understanding of education reform, teacher prepa-
ration and professional development, and instruction and assessment. Dr.
Borko has served on numerous professional committees. In addition to her
service editing and reviewing for professional publications, she has pub-
lished extensively on many aspects of teacher preparation and learning to
teach. She received her M.A. in the philosophy of education and her Ph.D.
in educational psychology from the University of California at Los Angeles.
WANDA BUSSEY is Mathematics Department chair and teacher of Interna-
tional Baccalaureate Higher Level Mathematics at Rufus King High School in
Milwaukee, Wisconsin, where she has taught since 1979. She assisted the
school in instituting and developing its IB program and is an IB Senior
Teacher. She has also served as an assistant examiner for the IB Examina-
tions Office. Her work in that capacity has entailed curriculum development,
modeling of her school’s program for others, and presentations at IB work-
shops around the country. Ms. Bussey has taught calculus at Marquette Uni-
versity and at the University of Wisconsin and is a recipient of the Tandy
Technology Scholar Teacher of the Year award. She received her M.S. in
mathematics from the University of Wisconsin, Milwaukee.
GLENN A. CROSBY is Professor of Chemistry and Materials Science Emeritus
at Washington State University. His research has focused on investigation of
the electronic excited states of metal complexes; design of materials for solar
energy storage; investigation of photochemical reactions; and design of semi-
conducting, photoconducting, and paramagnetic solids. Dr. Crosby has re-
ceived numerous awards for his teaching and has been active in the devel-
opment of science programs for high school students and professional de-
velopment programs for teachers. He received his Ph.D. in physical chemis-
try from the University of Washington.

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES OF COMMITTEE MEMBERS
255
JOHN A. DOSSEY is Distinguished University Professor of Mathematics Emeri-
tus at Illinois State University. His research interests include evaluation in
mathematics education, international mathematics education, and assess-
ment in mathematics education. Dr. Dossey served as president of the Na-
tional Council of Teachers of Mathematics during the writing of that
organization’s standards for school mathematics. He has also chaired the
Conference Board of the Mathematical Sciences and the U.S. Commission on
Mathematical Instruction at the NRC, as well as the College Board’s Math-
ematical Sciences Advisory Committee. He has served on the NRC’s Board
on International Comparative Studies in Education, which has devoted con-
siderable attention to the Third International Mathematics and Science Study.
Dr. Dossey received his Ph.D. in mathematics education from the University
of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign.
DAVID ELY is a teacher of Advanced Placement Biology at Champlain Valley
Union High School in Hinesburg, Vermont. He has been an exam reader for
the AP biology program for 7 years and has been involved in the develop-
ment of Vermont’s science framework and assessments. Mr. Ely has been
named National Science Teachers Association/Shell Outstanding National
Science Teacher of the Year and has received the Distinguished Teacher
Award from the White House Commission on Scholars, as well as many
other teaching awards. He received his B.A. and M.A.T. in zoology from the
University of Vermont.
DEBORAH HUGHES HALLETT is a professor of mathematics at the Univer-
sity of Arizona; from 1991 to 1998 she was a professor of Practice in the
Teaching of Mathematics at Harvard University. She was a principal investi-
gator for the National Science Foundation (NSF)–funded Bridge Calculus
Consortium. She has served on committees for the Graduate Record Exami-
nation and the Massachusetts state mathematics framework review process,
and on the Mathematics and Science Teacher Education Program (MASTEP)
Advisory Board, an NSF-funded program to improve teacher training in Cali-
fornia. Dr. Hughes Hallett served on the NRC’s Committee on Information
Technology in Undergraduate Education. A Fulbright Scholar, she received
M.A. degrees from both Harvard University and the University of Cambridge,
England.
JOHN K. HAYNES is David Packard Professor of Science and chair of the
Biology Department at Morehouse College. He is also an adjunct professor
of Physiology at Brown University. He has served on a number of panels
concerned with education issues, including that for the Undergraduate Bio-

256
APPENDIX B
logical Sciences Education Program of the Howard Hughes Medical Insti-
tute. Dr. Haynes served on the NRC’s Committee on Undergraduate Science
Education and has been a councilor in the Biology Division for the Council
on Undergraduate Research. He serves as chair of the Minorities Affairs Com-
mittee of the American Society for Cell Biology. He received his Ph.D. in
developmental biology from Brown University.
VALERIE E. LEE is a professor of education at the University of Michigan.
Her research has focused on school size and the development of more per-
sonalized social relations in schools. She has also studied high school re-
structuring, factors that influence achievement, ability tracking, and academic
behaviors. Some of her research has targeted the development of high-achiev-
ing minority students and gender differences in mathematics and science
achievement. Dr. Lee received her Ed.D. from Harvard University.
STEPHANIE PACE MARSHALL is founding president of the Illinois Math-
ematics and Science Academy and has served in that capacity since 1986. A
former Superintendent of Schools in Batavia, Illinois, she has also served as
president of the Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development
International, and was founding president of the National Consortium for
Specialized Schools of Mathematics, Science, and Technology. Dr. Marshall
received her M.A. in curriculum and philosophy from the University of Chi-
cago and her Ph.D. in educational administration and industrial relations
from Loyola University in Chicago.
MICHAEL E. MARTINEZ joined the NSF in September 2001 as a program
officer in the Division of Research, Evaluation, and Communication. He is
currently on leave from the University of California, Irvine, Department of
Education, where he teaches courses in the psychology of learning and
intelligence, evaluation and assessment, and research methods. A former
high school science teacher, Dr. Martinez received his Ph.D. in Educational
Psychology from Stanford University in 1987. He then joined the Division of
Research at the Educational Testing Service in Princeton, New Jersey, where
he developed new forms of computer-based testing for assessment in sci-
ence, architecture, and engineering. This work led to two U.S. patents. In
1994–1995, Dr. Martinez was a Fulbright Scholar at the University of the
South Pacific in the Fiji Islands. He now conducts research on the nature of
proficiency in science and mathematics and on the nature and modifiability
of intelligence. He has published in such journals as Educational Psycholo-
gist, the Journal of Educational Measurement, and the Journal of the Ameri-
can Society for Information Science. His first book, Education as the Cultiva-
tion of Intelligence, was published in 2000 by Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES OF COMMITTEE MEMBERS
257
PATSY W. MUELLER taught science at Highland Park High School in High-
land Park, Illinois, from 1966 until 2001, when she accepted a position teaching
science at Regina Dominican High School in Wilmette, Illinois. For the past
24 years, Ms. Mueller has taught both Honors Chemistry and the Advanced
Placement Chemistry course. She has conducted numerous AP summer in-
stitutes since 1991, including week-long sessions for other AP Chemistry
teachers. Ms. Mueller has served as a member of the American Chemical
Society’s (ACS) Test Development Committee and the College Board’s Chem-
istry Test Development Committee. She has received the Tandy Technology
Award and been named a Siemens Scholar, both in recognition of her excel-
lence in teaching. Ms. Mueller received her B.S. in chemical education from
the University of Illinois and her M.S. in chemistry from Clarkson.
JOSEPH NOVAK is visiting senior research scientist at the Institute for Hu-
man and Machine Cognition at the University of West Florida. Previously he
was professor of science education and Professor of Biological Sciences
Emeritus at Cornell University, where he taught from 1969 to 1998. Dr. Novak
has conducted research on teaching and learning in science and other areas.
His research team developed the concept mapping tool now being used
widely in schools and corporations. His recent books include Learning,
Creating and Using Knowledge; Teaching Science for Understanding; and
Assessing Science Understanding (with Joel Mintzes and James Wandersee).
He has received numerous honors, including the first award for outstanding
research contributions to science teaching from the Council of Scientific
Society Presidents. Dr. Novak received an M.S. in science education and a
Ph.D. degree in science education and biology from the University of Min-
nesota.
JEANNIE OAKES is Presidential Professor of Education in the Graduate School
of Information Studies at the University of California at Los Angeles. She
directs UCLA’s Institute for Democracy, Education, and Access and the Uni-
versity of California’s All Campus Collaborative on Research for Diversity.
She has also served as a consultant and Senior Social Scientist for the Educa-
tion and Human Resources Program at RAND in Santa Monica. Dr. Oakes’s
research has focused on resources and learning opportunities in U.S. schools,
school reform, tracking, school organization, and curriculum. She received
her M.A. in American studies from the California State University in Los
Angeles and her Ph.D. in education from UCLA.
VERA RUBIN is an observational astronomer in the Department of Terrestrial
Magnetism at the Carnegie Institution of Washington and a member of the
National Academy of Sciences. She is a recipient of the National Medal of

258
APPENDIX B
Science and was honored at the Academy’s first annual Women in Science
and Engineering program. She is a former member of the Board on Physics
and Astronomy and has served on many other NRC bodies. She earned her
Ph.D. from Georgetown University.
ROBIN SPITAL is a teacher of Honors and Advanced Placement Physics at
The Bolles School in Jacksonville, Florida. His career began at Illinois State
University in Normal, where he was assistant professor of physics. He subse-
quently worked in the private sector as principal development engineer for
the AAI Corporation in Hunt Valley, Maryland, and as principal scientist for
Pfizer Medical Systems. Dr. Spital received his Ph.D. in theoretical high-
energy physics from Cornell University.
CONRAD L. STANITSKI is professor of chemistry and chair of the Chemistry
Department at the University of Central Arkansas. His principal focus is inor-
ganic chemistry and general chemistry for science and nonscience majors.
He is currently Chair of the ACS Division of Chemical Education, was a
member of the ACS Committee on Education, has directed numerous ACS
teacher-training workshops, is an NSF proposal reviewer, and has been an
invited speaker and workshop leader in seven foreign countries. Dr. Stanitski
has authored or coauthored several highly regarded textbooks in the field,
including Chemistry in Context: Applying Chemistry to Society; The Chemical
World: Concepts and Applications; Chemical Principles; Chemistry in the
Community; and Chemistry for Health-Related Sciences: Concepts and Appli-
cations. He received his B.S. in science education from Bloomsburg State
College, his M.A. in chemistry education from the University of Northern
Iowa, and his Ph.D. in inorganic chemistry from the University of Connecti-
cut.
WILLIAM B. WOOD is professor of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental
Biology at the University of Colorado, Boulder, where he formerly served as
department Chair. He is a member of the NAS, a fellow of the American
Academy of Arts and Sciences, and a recipient of the NAS Molecular Biology
Award. His current research focuses on the mechanisms by which cell fates
and patterns are determined during embryonic development of the nema-
tode C. elegans, using techniques of genetics, cell biology, and molecular
biology. Dr. Wood was lead author of the widely used textbook Biochemis-
try: A Problems Approach, which helped introduce problem-based learning
to biochemistry; he subsequently spearheaded the development of a gradu-
ate core course in molecular, cellular, and developmental biology that served
as a model for many departments around the country. He received his Ph.D.
in biochemistry from Stanford University.

259
Appendix C
Statement of Task
The charge to the committee is to consider the effectiveness of, and
potential improvements to, programs for advanced study of mathematics
and science in American high schools. In response to the charge, the com-
mittee will consider the two most widely recognized programs for advanced
study: the Advanced Placement (AP) and the International Baccalaureate
(IB) programs. In addition, the committee will identify and examine other
appropriate curricular and instructional alternatives to IB and AP. Emphasis
will be placed on the mathematics, physics, chemistry, and biology pro-
grams of study.
I. LEARNING
1. What does research tell us about how high-school aged students learn
science and mathematics? Does this process differ significantly for the most
advanced students?
2. To what extent do the AP and IB or other programs for advanced
students incorporate current knowledge about cognition and learning in
mathematics and science in their curricula, instruction, and assessments?
How could research on cognition and learning be used to improve these
programs?
3. What is the impact of student assessment on the learning process in
mathematics and science? How could student assessment be used to im-
prove student learning in advanced courses?
II. TEACHING
1. What does research tell us about effective instructional practices for
high-school aged students generally, and for advanced students in particu-
lar?

260
APPENDIX C
2. To what extent do AP and IB programs encourage teaching practices
that are consistent with current research on effective instructional practices?
Are there alternative programs that are more effective in this regard?
3. How do final assessments generally, and AP and IB assessments in
particular, influence instructional practices?
4. What academic qualifications are needed to teach advanced science
and mathematics courses, and how are teachers actually selected?
5. What does research tell us about how teachers learn to teach, and
about effective professional development practices? What does this research
imply about the nature and quality of professional development opportuni-
ties for teachers offered by programs of advanced study, including AP and
IB?
III. CURRICULUM AND STANDARDS
1. To what extent do the IB and AP programs reflect the best in current
thinking about content and curriculum for teaching mathematics and sci-
ence? Are any alternative programs superior in some respects?
2. How do the content and performance standards of the AP and IB
programs compare with one another and with the NRC National Science
Education Standards or those of the Mathematical Association of America or
the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics?
3. To what extent do programs such as AP and IB help to promote and
elevate academic standards in high schools, both within individual subject
areas and generally?
How do AP and IB standards compare with those used by other programs
for advanced study in science and mathematics? How do AP and IB stan-
dards compare with those of other technologically advanced nations?
IV. CONTEXT AND CONSEQUENCES
1. How do the beliefs and values about the purpose of secondary school-
ing held by the American public influence what courses high schools offer,
access to these courses, how the courses are taught, and what students learn
in them, particularly in advanced courses in mathematics and science?
2. What constraints do the culture and resources of American high schools
typically place on programs for advanced study?
3. How can the goal of equitable and broad access to programs for
advanced study best be pursued?
4. How does the interface with higher education affect programs for
advanced study in the secondary schools?

261
Index
A
AAAS. See American Association for the
Advancement of Science
Ability grouping in mathematics, in
preparing for advanced study in
middle school, 39-40
Academic competitions, for enrichment, 115
Access to advanced study, 191-192
implementing prerequisites, 192
inequalities in, 4
limiting students’ access to AP and IB,
191-192
recommendations, 12, 198-199
Access to Excellence, 65
Accountability
demands for, 19, 30n
role and influence of, 31-32
ACT. See American College Testing Program
Admissions. See College admission decisions
Advanced critical and creative thinking skills,
in high-ability learners, 132
Advanced Placement (AP) program, 1, 20-21,
64-82. See also AP and IB programs
assessment, 75-79
Calculus Development Committee, 67
college credit and placement in, 192-194
course descriptions and teacher’s guides,
72-74
curriculum, 66-71
instruction, 71-75
professional development, 79-82
role in college admission decisions, 55-57
Technical Manual, 181
using for placement or exemption from
required courses, 58-59
Advanced study
components of, 3-4
connections between advanced study
and higher education, 51-63
context of, 2-5, 28-63
defining, 1n, 22
disparities in opportunities to pursue and
succeed in, 47-51
educational context, 36-47
financing programs at the local level, 33
as a link between high school and
college, 52-57
opportunities and approaches to, 103-116
overview of, 5-6, 22-23
policy context, 29-36
primary goal of, 1n
role in college admission decisions, 53-57
secondary-postsecondary interface, 4-5
unequal access to, 4
urgent need to transform, 153
AERA. See American Educational Research
Association
AFT. See American Federation of Teachers
Alternative means of problem solving, by
high-ability learners, 131
Alternatives for providing college-level
learning in high school, 103-113
collaborative programs, 104-105
college courses taught in high schools,
105
college-sponsored enrichment programs,
108
concurrent enrollment, 106-108
curricular and instructional approaches
for enrichment, 115-116
distance learning, 109-110

262
INDEX
dual-enrollment, 105-106
overview of, 6
recommendations, 14, 202
specialized schools, 108-109
web-based courses, 111-113
American Association for the Advancement
of Science (AAAS), 3, 31, 43, 177
Project 2061, 161
American College Testing (ACT) Program, 53
American Educational Research Association
(AERA), 180-182, 186
American Federation of Teachers (AFT), 36,
42
American Psychological Association (APA),
180-182, 186
American Youth Policy Forum, 42
AP. See Advanced Placement program
AP and IB effects on schools, 187-188
evaluating school quality by the
numbers, 188
ranking schools by the number of AP or
IB tests taken, 187-188
AP and IB programs, 8-11, 154-184, 259-260
assessment, 10, 180-183
context and consequences, 260
differences among learners, 9, 166-168
examination grades and the admission
process, 57
instruction, 10, 178-180
learning, 259
learning communities, 9, 170-172
learning in context, 172-174
limited access to, 191-192
metacognition, 8, 164-166
motivation, 9, 168-170
principled conceptual knowledge, 8, 156-
159
prior knowledge, 8, 160-164
professional development, 10-11, 183-184
situated learning, 9
teaching, 259-260
APA. See American Psychological Association
APEX Learning Systems, 111n, 112
Assessment, 7-8, 20
findings, 235, 243, 247
formative, 163-164
internal, 92
recommendations, 13, 201, 237-238, 245,
249
for understanding, 8, 144, 147
Assessment in AP and IB programs, 10, 180-
183
consequential validity of AP and IB
assessments, 182-183
examination design and development,
180
support for inferences drawn from
assessment results, 181-182
Assessment in the AP program, 75-79
College Board determinations about AP
examinations and their purpose, 78-
79
College Board recommendations about
granting college credit for AP
examinations, 77
developing examinations, 75-77
reporting examinations, 78
scoring examinations, 77
Assessment in the educational system, 141-
146
reliability, validity, and fairness, 143
Assessment in the IB programme, 94-100
criteria for IB experimental sciences
courses, 90
developing assessments, 95-96
reporting assessments, 98-100
scoring assessments, 96-98
Association of American Colleges and
Universities, 106
“Average” defined, 177
B
Benchmarks for Science Literacy, 31
Biology panel, 233-238
principal findings, 233-235
recommendations, 236-238
Boredom, of high-ability learners, 131-132
Boston University, Program in Mathematics
for Young Scientists, 114
Breadth versus depth, of principled
conceptual knowledge, 156-157
Bush, George W., 21
C
Calculus
findings of the mathematics panel on
impact of, 248

INDEX
263
history of AP reform, 178n
Calculus Development Committee, 67
Calculus for a New Century, 169n
Campbell, Paul, 85n, 195
Capacity for learning, underestimated in
high-ability learners, 132
Caperton, Gasper, 72
Carnegie classifications, for ranking
undergraduate institutions, 54
Carson, Eugene, 182
CCSSO. See Council of Chief State School
Officers
CEEB. See College Entrance Examination
Board
Center for Talented Youth, 108n
Certification of teachers, 35
CFAPP. See Commission on the Future of the
Advanced Placement Program
Changes in the AP and IB programs, 14-15,
203-205
College Board and IBO assessment
practice, 14, 203-204
College Board and IBO developing
research in the implementation of
their programs, 15, 204-205
College Board and IBO providing
assistance to schools, 15, 204
College Board and IBO providing
guidance in the use of examination
scores, 15, 204
College Board and IBO responsibility for
appropriate instructional approaches,
14, 204
College Board exercising quality control
over the AP trademark, 14-15, 204
College Board practice in designing AP
courses, 14, 203
recommendations, 14-15, 203-205
Charter schools, 109
Chemistry panel, 239-241
principal findings, 239
recommendations, 239-241
Class Struggle: What’s Wrong (and Right)
with America’s Best Public High
Schools, 185
Class.com, 111n
CLEP. See College-Level Examination
Program
Clinton, William, 111n
Collaborative programs, providing college-
level learning in high school, 104-105
College admission decisions
process of, 53-55
recommendations, 203
role of advanced study in, 53-57
role of AP and IB in, 55-57
College and university scientists and
mathematicians, modifying their
introductory courses, 14, 203
College Board, 1, 9-10, 15n, 18n
assessment practice, 14, 203-204
Commission on the Future of the
Advanced Placement Program, 22, 65,
81-82, 154
determining whether AP examinations
accomplish their purpose, 78-79
developing research in the
implementation of its programs, 15,
204-205
Equity 2000, 168
exercising quality control over the AP
trademark, 14-15, 204
granting students college credit for AP
examinations, 77
membership in, 20n
Pathways Programs, 168
practice in designing AP courses, 14, 53,
203
providing assistance to schools, 15, 204
providing guidance in the use of
examination scores, 15, 61, 204
recommendations concerning assessment
practice, 14, 203-204
recommendations concerning assistance
to schools, 15, 204
recommendations concerning guidance
in the use of examination scores, 15,
204
recommendations concerning research in
the implementation of their programs,
15, 204-205
recommendations concerning
responsibility for appropriate
instructional approaches, 14, 204
responsibility for appropriate
instructional approaches, 14, 204
support from the Educational Testing
Service, 64
Vertical Teams initiative, 38n, 82n, 168
College courses taught in high school, 105
College credit and placement, 192-196
AP program, 192-194

264
INDEX
based on advanced study, 58-61
denial of credit or placement, 60-61
IB program, 194-196
institutional decisions, 60
reducing time to degree, 58
using AP and IB for placement or
exemption from required courses, 58-
59
College Entrance Examination Board
(CEEB), 18, 20, 157, 190. See also
College Board
College-high school interface. See
Secondary-postsecondary interface
College-Level Examination Program (CLEP),
103n
College-sponsored enrichment programs, in
high schools, 108
Commission on the Future of the Advanced
Placement Program (CFAPP), 22, 65,
81-82, 154
Committee on Education Finance, 33n
Components of advanced study, 3-4
coordination, 3
curricular differentiation, 3
sequencing, 3
standards, 3-4
students, 4
teachers, 3
Computer-based multimedia courses, 112-113
Concept maps, 124-125
in assessment, 144
Conceptual knowledge, principled, 118-120
Conceptual learning, in principled
conceptual knowledge, 158-159
Concurrent enrollment, providing college-
level learning in high school, 106-108
Connections among disparate bodies of
knowledge, high-ability learners’
capacity to make easily, 132-133
Consequential validity, of AP and IB
assessments, 182-183
“Constrained” curriculum model, 41
Content
of AP courses, 67-68
of IB courses, 87-89
Content panels, 250-252
biology panel, 233-238
charge to, 250
chemistry panel, 239-241
curricular and conceptual frameworks for
learning, 250-251
emphases, 252
mathematics panel, 246-249
physics panel, 242-245
preparation for further study, 252
role of assessment, 251
teaching, 251
Coordination
of advanced study, 3
of courses, 161-162
Core curriculum approach, 41
Council of Chief State School Officers
(CCSSO), 33, 37, 44
Course content, evolution of, 232
Creative thinking skills, high-ability learners
advanced in, 132
Critical thinking skills, high-ability learners
advanced in, 132
Curricular differentiation, in advanced study,
3
Curriculum, 7-8
in the educational system, 135-137
findings, 233-234, 242, 246
preparing for advanced study in high
school, 40-42
recommendations, 13, 199-200, 236-237,
239-240, 244-245
for understanding, 135, 138
Curriculum compression, and quality control
for AP and IB, 189-190
Curriculum in AP and IB programs, 9-10,
176-178, 260
curriculum development, 177-178
depth versus breadth, 176-177
variability, 178
Curriculum in the AP program, 66-71
content of AP courses, 67-68
development of AP courses, 66-67
guidance provided to teachers about
curriculum development, 69-71
laboratory requirement for AP science
courses, 68-69
Curriculum in the IB programme, 86-91
assessment criteria for experimental
sciences courses, 90
content of IB courses, 87-89
development of IB courses, 87
expectations of students to meet
assessment criteria for experimental
sciences courses, 91
laboratory requirement for IB
experimental sciences courses, 89-91

INDEX
265
D
Day academies, 109
Denial of credit or placement, 60-61
Design of educational systems, 134-153
assessment, 141-146
curriculum, 135-137
from framework to advanced study
programs, 152-153
instruction, 137-141
professional development, 146-152
Design of programs
assessment, 7-8
based on research on learning and
pedagogy, 6-8
curriculum, 7-8
instruction, 7-8
professional development, 7-8
seven principles of human learning,
6-7
Development
of AP courses, 66-67
of AP examinations, 75-77
by high-ability learners of greater
expectations when working with
others of similar ability, 133
of IB assessments, 95-96
of IB courses, 87
Differences among learners, 9, 166-168
a principle of human learning,
123, 126
using differences among learners in
assessment, 166-168
Disparate bodies of knowledge, high-ability
learners making connections easily
among, 132-133
Disparities in opportunities to pursue
and succeed in advanced study,
47-51
in outcome, 49-51
in participation, 48-49
racial/ethnic disparities in advanced
placement scores by subject, 50
school racial/ethnic disparities in
mathematics and science offerings,
49-51
Distance learning, providing college-level
learning in high school, 109-110
Dual-enrollment, providing college-level
learning in high school, 105-106
E
Early mastery of high school math and
science, by high-ability learners, 131
Early Outreach Program, 114
Economic forces, 20
Education Program for Gifted Youth (EPGY),
113
Education Week, 32, 35n, 42, 44
Educational context of advanced study, 36-
47
preparing for advanced study in high
school, 40-47
preparing for advanced study in middle
school, 36-40
Educational Testing Service (ETS), 64, 76
End-of-course examinations, 145
Energy transfer theme, applications to three
main subject areas, 70-71
Enrichment activities for advanced study,
113-116
academic and research competitions, 115
alternative curricular and instructional
approaches, 115-116
internships, 114
mentorships, 114
Enrollment in an advanced course, 169
EPGY. See Education Program for Gifted
Youth
Equity, 182, 191-192
Equity 2000, 168
ETS. See Educational Testing Service
Examinations
design and development, 180
end-of-course, 145
in principled conceptual knowledge,
158-159
and quality control for AP and IB, 190
recommendations, 231-232
“Excellence,” 177
Exemption from required courses, using AP
and IB for, 58-59
Expectations of students, to meet assessment
criteria for IB experimental sciences
courses, 91
F
Fairness, 143
Fast Response Survey System, 34

266
INDEX
Financing advanced study programs at the
local level, 33
Formative assessment, misconceptions
about, 163-164
Funding agencies, recommendations, 202
G
Goal 3, 30
Goal of advanced study, primary, 12, 197-
198
Governors’ schools, 109
Grade-point average (GPA) system, 40n
Guidance provided to teachers by AP, about
curriculum development, 69-71
Guide for the Recommended Laboratory
Program for Advanced Placement
Chemistry, A, 69, 73
H
High-ability learners, 130-133
advanced in their critical and creative
thinking skills, 132
developing greater expectations and
engaging in higher-level processing
when working with others of similar
ability, 133
displaying exceptionally rich knowledge
base in their specific talent domain,
130
having the capacity to make connections
easily among disparate bodies of
knowledge, 132-133
having the propensity to be profoundly
influenced by a single mentor, 133
having their capacity for learning
underestimated, and thus become
underdeveloped, 132
learning at a more rapid rate than other
students, 131
often able to solve problems by alternate
means, without understanding the
underlying concepts, 131
often having mastered high school math
and science before formally taking
the course, 131
often losing motivation to achieve
because of boredom, 131-132
picking up informally much of the
content knowledge taught in school,
130-131
preferring unstructured problems in
which the talk is less well defined,
132
High-level processing, high-ability learners
engaging in when working with
others of similar ability, 133
High-quality instruction, promotion of, 179-
180
High school-college interface. See
Secondary-postsecondary interface
High school mathematics and science
early mastery by high-ability learners,
131
preparing for advanced study, 42-44
High school preparation for advanced study,
40-47
curriculum, 40-42
students, 46-47
teaching challenges, 44-46
High stakes for AP and IB, 185-188
effects on schools, 187-188
effects on students, 186
effects on teachers, 187
effects on teaching and learning, 186-187
Higher-level mathematics and science
courses, percentage of all high school
students taking, 43-44
How People Learn: Brain, Mind, Experience,
and School, 18, 116, 118n
Human learning, seven principles of, 118-
129
I
IB. See International Baccalaureate
Programme
IB Diploma Programme Guide, 87
IBCA. See International Baccalaureate
Curriculum and Assessment Centre
IBNA. See International Baccalaureate of
North America
IBO. See International Baccalaureate
Organisation
Inferences drawn from assessment results,
support for, 181-182
Information technology, 20
evolution of, 232

INDEX
267
Institutional decisions, 60
awarding credit and advanced placement
for courses beyond the introductory
college level, 14, 202-203
Instruction, 7-8
in the educational system, 137-141
findings, 234, 242-243, 246
recommendations, 13, 200, 240, 245, 249
for understanding, 7, 139, 142
Instruction in AP and IB programs, 10, 178-
180
assigning worthwhile tasks, 179
promotion of high-quality instruction,
179-180
Instruction in the AP program, 71-75
AP course descriptions and teacher’s
guides, 72-74
messages about instruction conveyed by
AP examinations, 74-75
Instruction in the IB programme, 92-94
IB programme guides and teaching
notes, 92-93
messages about instruction conveyed by
IB examinations, 93-94
“predicted grades,” 57n, 94-95
Internal assessment, 92
International Baccalaureate Curriculum and
Assessment Centre (IBCA), 87, 98
International Baccalaureate of North America
(IBNA), 85-86
International Baccalaureate Organisation
(IBO), 1, 9, 21, 83
assessment practice, 14, 203-204
developing research in the
implementation of its programs, 15,
204-205
Middle Years Programme, 168
providing assistance to schools, 15, 204
providing guidance in the use of
examination scores, 15, 204
recommendations concerning assessment
practice, 14, 203-204
recommendations concerning assistance
to schools, 15, 204
recommendations concerning guidance
in the use of examination scores, 15,
204
recommendations concerning research in
the implementation of their programs,
15, 204-205
recommendations concerning
responsibility for appropriate
instructional approaches, 14, 204
responsibility for appropriate
instructional approaches, 14, 204
International Baccalaureate (IB) Programme,
1, 83-102. See also AP and IB
programs
assessment, 94-100
college credit and placement in, 194-196
curriculum, 86-91
guides and teaching notes, 92-93
instruction, 92-94
professional development, 100-102
role in college admission decisions, 55-57
using for placement or exemption from
required courses, 58-59
Internships, for enrichment, 114
J
Johns Hopkins University, The, Center for
Talented Youth, 108n
Jones, Lee, 104n
K
Knowledge
“presumed,” 160n
principled conceptual, 118-120
prior, 120-122
L
Laboratory requirements
for AP science courses, 68-69
for IB experimental sciences courses, 89-
91
Learners. See also High-ability learners
differences among, 123, 126
Learning
capacity of high-ability learners
underestimated, 132
in context, 172-174
effects of AP and IB on, 186-187
by high-ability learners, 130-131
informal, of content taught in school,
130-131

268
INDEX
rapid, 131
seven principles of human, 118-129
situated, 127-128
with understanding, 119
Learning communities, 9, 170-172
a principle of human learning, 128-129
Learning principles, recommendations, 13,
199
Learning research, analysis of AP and IB
programs based on, 8-9, 154-175
Learning with understanding, 7-8, 117-133
characteristic of high-ability learners, 130-
133
concept maps, 124-125
seven principles of human learning, 118-
129
Legislative initiatives, 30. See also individual
laws
recommendations, 203
Limited access to AP and IB, 191-192
Links between advanced study and higher
education, 51-63
admission decisions, 53-55
advanced study as a link between high
school and college, 52-57
AP and IB examination grades and the
admission process, 57
college credit and placement based on
advanced study, 58-61
role of advanced study in college
admission decisions, 53-57
role of AP and IB in admission process,
55-57
secondary-postsecondary interface
coordination and articulation, 51-52
variability of credit and placement
decisions, 61-63
Low motivation to achieve, of high-ability
learners, 131-132
M
Magnet schools, 109
Mathematical Association of America, 169n,
260
Mathematics. See also Calculus
changes in, 19
Mathematics and science courses
hierarchical nature of, 19-20
high school, 42-44, 131
higher-level, 43-44
middle school, 37-38
school racial/ethnic disparities in, 49-51
Mathematics courses, ability grouping in, 39-
40
Mathematics panel, 246-249
principal findings, 246-248
recommendations, 248-249
Mentorships
for enrichment, 114
high-ability learners’ propensity to be
influenced by, 133
Messages about instruction
as conveyed by AP examinations, 74-75
as conveyed by IB examinations, 93-94
Metacognition, 8, 164-166
a principle of human learning, 122-123
Middle school mathematics and science, 37-
38
Middle school preparation for advanced
study, 36-40
ability grouping in mathematics, 39-40
teaching challenges, 38
Misconceptions, 136
and formative assessment, 163-164
Moderation Report on the Internal
Assessment, 100
Motivation, 9, 168-170
believing in the possibility of success,
168
deciding to enroll in an advanced course,
169
the final examination, 170
investing effort for success, 169-170
low in high-ability learners, 131-132
a principle of human learning, 126-127
Multimedia courses, computer-based, 112-
113
N
NAEP. See National Assessment of
Educational Progress
NASSP. See National Association of
Secondary School Principals
Nation at Risk, A, 29
National Aeronautics and Space
Administration, 113-114
National Assessment of Educational Progress
(NAEP), 29

INDEX
269
National Association of Secondary School
Principals (NASSP), 42
National Board for Professional Teaching
Standards (NBPTS), 140, 200
National Center for Education Statistics
(NCES), 18, 28, 43n
National Coalition for Parent Involvement in
Education, 51n
National Commission on Excellence in
Education, 29
National Commission on Mathematics and
Science Teaching for the 21st
Century, 150, 184, 240
National Commission on the High School
Senior Year (NCHSSY), 42
National Consortium for Specialized
Secondary Schools of Mathematics,
Science and Technology, 109
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics
(NCTM), 3, 32, 43, 169n, 177, 200,
260
National Council on Measurement in
Education (NCME), 180-182, 186
National Council on the Evaluation of
Foreign Student Credentials, 194
National Education Goals Panel, 30
National Institute on Student Achievement,
Curriculum, and Assessment, 45
National Institutes of Health, 113-114
National Research Council (NRC), 1, 3, 17,
31, 43, 117
Committee on Education Finance, 33n
National Science Education Standards
(NSES), 31, 162, 200, 230-231, 234,
237, 240, 244, 260
National Science Foundation, 18
National Science Teachers Association
(NSTA), 45-46
National Task Force on Minority High
Achievement, 15n, 204n
NBPTS. See National Board for Professional
Teaching Standards
NCES. See National Center for Education
Statistics
NCHSSY. See National Commission on the
High School Senior Year
NCME. See National Council on
Measurement in Education
NCTM. See National Council of Teachers of
Mathematics
NetCourses, 112
Newsweek, 185
No Child Left Behind Act, 32
NRC. See National Research Council
NSES. See National Science Education
Standards
NSTA. See National Science Teachers
Association
O
Office of Educational Research and
Improvement (OERI), 41
Ohio State University, 114
Online courses, and quality control for AP
and IB, 190-191
Organization of complex content, in
principled conceptual knowledge,
157-158
Outcome of advanced study, disparities in,
49-51
Overview
of panel findings and recommendations,
229
of the programs, 5-6, 20-22
P
Paige, Rod, 30
Participation in advanced study, disparities
in, 48-49
Pathways Programs, 168
Physics panel, 242-245
principal findings, 242-243
recommendations, 243-245
Policy context of advanced study, 29-36
financing advanced study programs at
the local level, 33
role and influence of standards and
accountability, 31-32
teacher qualifications, certification, and
challenges, 33-36
Practical Scheme of Work (PSOW), 90-91
“Predicted grades” in the IB programme,
57n, 94
Preparation and credentials
of AP teachers, 79
of IB teachers, 100-101
Preparation for advanced study
in high school, 40-47
in middle school, 36-40

270
INDEX
Prerequisites
for AP and IB, 192
and prior knowledge, 160-161
“Presumed” knowledge, 160n
Principled conceptual knowledge, 8, 156-159
breadth versus depth, 156-157
examinations and conceptual learning,
158-159
organizing complex content, 157-158
a principle of human learning, 118-120
Principles and Standards for School
Mathematics, 230
Principles of human learning, 118-129
differences among learners, 123, 126
learning communities, 128-129
metacognition, 122-123
motivation, 126-127
principled conceptual knowledge, 118-
120
prior knowledge, 120-122
situated learning, 127-128
Prior knowledge, 8, 160-164
coordination of courses, 161-162
implications for instruction, 162-163
misconceptions and formative
assessment, 163-164
prerequisites, 160-161
a principle of human learning, 120-122
Professional associations, recommendations,
202
Professional development, 7-8
in the educational system, 146-152
effective, 149, 152
findings, 234, 246
recommendations, 240-241, 245, 249
Professional development in the AP
program, 79-82
experiences of AP teachers, 79-82
preparation and credentials of AP
teachers, 79
Professional development in the IB
programme, 100-102
experiences of IB teachers, 101-102
preparation and credentials of IB
teachers, 100-101
Program design, based on research on
learning and pedagogy, 6-8
Program developers, recommendations, 199-
200, 203
Program in Mathematics for Young Scientists,
114
Program staff, recommendations, 201
Project Advance, 105n
Promising Practices, 30
Promotion of high-quality instruction, 179-
180
PSOW. See Practical Scheme of Work
Q
Qualified teachers and professional
development, recommendations, 13-
14, 201-202
Quality control for AP and IB, 188-191
curriculum compression, 189-190
online courses, 190-191
participation in examinations, 190
standards and regulation of courses, 189
R
Racial/ethnic disparities
in advanced placement scores, by
subject, 50
in mathematics and science offerings,
school-level, 49-51
Recommendations, 12-15, 197
access and equity, 12, 198-199
alternative programs, 14, 202
assessment, 13, 201, 237-238, 245, 249
from the biology panel, 236-238
for changes in the AP and IB programs,
14-15, 203-205
from the chemistry panel, 239-241
college admission decisions, 203
curriculum, 13, 199-200, 236-237, 239-
240, 244-245
examinations, 231-232
funding agencies, 202
instruction, 13, 200, 240, 245, 249
interpretation of, 230-231
learning principles, 13, 199
from the mathematics panel, 248-249
from the physics panel, 243-245
for the primary goal of advanced study,
12, 197-198
professional associations, 202
professional development, 240-241, 245,
249
program developers, 199-200, 203
program staff, 201

INDEX
271
qualified teachers and professional
development, 13-14, 201-202
review of, 230-231
school administrators, 200
secondary-postsecondary interface, 14,
202-203, 232, 241
student preparation, 232, 244, 248-249
teacher preparation, 232
Reduction of time to degree, 58
Regulation of courses, and quality control
for AP and IB, 189
Reliability, 143
Reporting
of AP examinations, 78
of IB assessments, 98-100
Required courses, using AP and IB for
placement or exemption from, 58-59
Research competitions, for enrichment, 115
Residential academies, 109
Rich knowledge base, high-ability learners
displaying, 130
Riley, Richard, 21, 29, 30n, 111n
Ross, Arnold, 114
S
Salaries, trends in teacher, 36
School administrators, recommendations,
200
School profiles, 54
School quality
effects of AP and IB on, 187-188
evaluating by the numbers, 188
ranking by the number of AP or IB tests
taken, 187-188
Schools-within-a-school, 109
Science. See also Mathematics and science
courses; individual disciplines
changes in, 19
Science for All Americans, 31
Scoring
of AP examinations, 77
of IB assessments, 96-98
Secondary-postsecondary interface
in advanced study, 4-5
college and university scientists and
mathematicians modifying their
introductory courses, 14, 203
coordination and articulation, 51-52
findings, 235
institutions awarding credit and
advanced placement for courses
beyond the introductory college level,
14, 202-203
recommendations, 14, 202-203, 232, 241
Sequencing, of advanced study, 3
Seven principles of human learning, 118-129
differences among learners, 123, 126
learning communities, 128-129
metacognition, 122-123
motivation, 126-127
principled conceptual knowledge, 118-
120
prior knowledge, 120-122
situated learning, 127-128
SHARP. See Summer High School
Apprenticeship Research Program
Shortages of teachers, 20, 35-36
Situated learning, 9
a principle of human learning, 127-128
Solving problems by alternate means, by
high-ability learners, 131
Southern Regional Education Board, 42
Specialized schools, providing college-level
learning in high school, 108-109
Standards
for advanced study, 3-4
and quality control for AP and IB, 189
role and influence of, 31-32
Standards for Educational and Psychological
Testing, 186
Stanford University, Education Program for
Gifted Youth, 113
State Higher Education Executive Officers,
106-107
Student clientele for advanced study, 23-24
Students
in advanced study, 4
effects of AP and IB on, 186
preparing for advanced study in high
school, 46-47
recommendations for preparation of, 232,
244, 248-249
Success
believing in the possibility of, 168
investing effort for, 169-170
Summer High School Apprenticeship
Research Program (SHARP), 108n
Survey of mathematics and biology
departments, regarding credit and
placement decisions, 61-63

272
INDEX
Syracuse University, Project Advance, 105n
T
Tasks, assigning worthwhile, 179
Teacher preparation. See also Professional
development
recommendations, 232
Teachers
of advanced study, 3
certification of, 35
effects of AP and IB on, 186-187
in high school, 44-46
in middle school, 38
qualifications of, 33-36
shortages of, 20, 35-36
trends in salaries of, 36
Teachers Learning Conference, 112
Teaching. See Instruction
Tech Prep, 106
Televised courses, 110
Top 10 Percent Law, 53
Transforming Undergraduate Education in
Science, Mathematics, Engineering,
and Technology, 241
2+2 programs, 106
U
Understanding, learning with, 119
Unequal access, to advanced study, 4
University of California, Early Outreach
Program, 114
Unstructured problems, preference of high-
ability learners for, 132
U.S. Department of Education, 18, 21, 29-30,
46
Uses, misuses, and unintended
consequences of AP and IB, 11-12,
185-196
access and equity, 191-192
college credit and placement, 192-196
high stakes, 185-188
quality control, 188-191
V
Vade Mecum: Procedures Manual for IB
Coordinators and Teachers, 89
Validity, 76n, 78, 143, 182
consequential, of AP and IB assessments,
182-183
Variability of credit and placement decisions,
61-63, 75n
survey of mathematics and biology
departments, 61-63
Vertical Teams Initiative, 38n, 82
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State
University, 182
W
Washington Post, 185
Web-based courses, 111-113
computer-based multimedia courses, 112-
113
Web-Based Education Commission, 111
Weighted system of GPAs, 40n
Workshops, 80-81

273
Content Panel Report:
Biology


275
1
Introduction
The National Research Council’s (NRC) Committee on Programs for Ad-
vanced Study of Mathematics and Science in American High Schools (parent
committee) formed a biology panel to evaluate and compare the Advanced
Placement (AP), International Baccalaureate (IB), and alternative programs
for advanced study in biology with regard to content, pedagogy, and out-
comes. The panel held two meetings, in April and June 2000, for the pur-
pose of formulating answers to the questions under its charge from the
parent committee (see Appendix A). The panel was chaired by a member of
the parent committee, who served as liaison to the committee and consoli-
dated the panel’s findings and recommendations into this report. Panel mem-
bers also included two master teachers with extensive experience in teach-
ing high school biology and four university professors—an educator with
interests in biology, two biologists with primary interests in education, and a
biologist with primary interests in university-level teaching and research (for
biolographic sketches, see Appendix B).
The panel’s conclusions are based on published evidence and the per-
sonal expertise of the panel members, as well as discussions with three
consultants: an additional IB teacher who has worked extensively with the
International Baccalaureate Organisation (IBO), an Educational Testing Ser-
vice (ETS) consultant for the AP Biology Test Committee, and a Washington,
D.C. area AP teacher. The panel drew on a variety of published sources, in
particular on material from the College Board and the ETS (AP program); the
IBO; and previous NRC reports, including Fulfilling the Promise: Biology
Education in the Nation’s Schools (NRC, 1990); National Science Education
Standards (referred to below as NSES; NRC, 1996a) and its recent addendum
Inquiry and the National Science Education Standards (INSES; NRC, 2000b);
and How People Learn: Brain, Mind, Experience, and School (HPL; NRC,
1999) and its addendum How People Learn: Bridging Research and Practice
(HPL2; NRC, 2000a). All panel members provided written contributions that
were incorporated or excerpted in this report. The final report was reviewed

276
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
and approved by the panel members, and all the conclusions presented
herein represent the panel’s consensus opinions. Some of the arguments for
these conclusions are based on anecdotal evidence and the experience of
individual panel members, as well as published studies; we have tried to
indicate clearly the nature of our sources as appropriate in the text.
As important as the panel’s specific responses to the questions under its
charge is its consensus opinion that major systemic changes are overdue in
biology teaching, not only in high schools but also in primary schools and
colleges. The AP and IB courses, while including some of the best education
in the subject currently available at the secondary level, tend in general to be
out of date, too broad, and too inflexible in their curricula. Moreover, they
often ignore the results of recent research on science learning, pedagogy,
and assessment and do not conform to the pedagogical standards of the
NSES and INSES. The panel judges IB to be superior to AP in many respects,
but making AP more like IB will not be enough; rather, systemic changes are
required in the preparation of teachers and the teaching of biology at all
levels. For example, the panel concurs with the view (NRC, 1996b, 2000b;
Horn, Nunez, and Bobbitt, 2000) that many of the current shortcomings of
both primary and secondary school courses stem directly from the mode of
instruction experienced by high school teachers as college students. Col-
lege-level introductory courses are also a substantial part of the problem
because their content has been driving the AP biology curriculum in particu-
lar.
Systemic change in the teaching of mathematics was recently initiated
with support from the National Science Foundation. One result has been
striking changes in AP calculus instruction, demonstrating that the College
Board can be responsive to reform efforts. A similar systemic initiative is
under way in chemistry. The panel concludes that efforts to improve the AP
and IB programs should be part of a broad initiative to reform biology
teaching, as outlined in the NSES and the recent report of the Glenn Com-
mission (National Commission on Mathematics and Science Teaching for the
21st Century, 2000). We are encouraged that the recent recommendations of
the Commission on the Future of the Advanced Placement Program [AP
Commission], (2001), discussed further below, appear likely to move the AP
program in this direction.
Chapter 2 of this report defines what constitutes advanced high school
biology, briefly describes the AP and IB programs, and lists some character-
istics the panel would recommend for an ideal advanced biology course at
the secondary level. Chapters 3 through 5 present the panel’s responses to
each of the questions under its charge (see Appendix A), under headings
that correspond closely to the questions as posed. (Since many of the ques-
tions in the charge overlap, this format results in some inevitable redun-
dancy.) The discussion focuses on the AP and IB programs because they are

BIOLOGY
277
the most widespread and influential and are the programs for which most
information is available and because the panel had neither the time nor the
resources necessary to address alternative programs in any depth. We evalu-
ate the status of these two programs, compare them, and make recommen-
dations for change. The first question in the panel’s charge was, “To what
degree do the AP and IB programs incorporate current knowledge about
cognition and learning in mathematics and science in their curricula, instruc-
tions, and assessments?” We deal separately with the three aspects of this
question in Chapters 3 and 4. Chapter 6 presents a summary and discussion
of the panel’s three primary and eleven secondary recommendations.

278
2
Advanced Study in Biology:
Ideal and Reality
An advanced high school biology course should reflect the current ex-
citement in the field of biology, where the field is now, where it is going,
and the increasing extent to which it impinges on our daily lives. An ad-
vanced course should be up to date and broad enough to give students an
overall picture of the field but should not attempt to be comprehensive,
since doing so is impossible in a 1-year biology course at any level. Ad-
vanced study in biology should be demanding, not in the sense of covering
all or even any particular areas of biology, but rather in requiring students to
read and comprehend a college-level text and science articles at the level of,
for example, Scientific American; solve problems; carry out meaningful ex-
periments; collect, analyze, and interpret real data; write coherently about
their conclusions; relate these conclusions to real-life situations and their
other academic coursework; and take some responsibility for their own learn-
ing. Students should not just acquire biological knowledge, but rather expe-
rience the process of biological science, including generation of hypotheses
from observations, design of experiments, encounters with unexpected re-
sults, collaborative learning and laboratory work with other students and
teachers, and presentation of their analyses and conclusions for critical re-
view by their peers.
To meet these expectations, both students and teachers need to be ad-
equately prepared. Students should have taken a prior biology course or at
least a prior chemistry course, preferably both. Students, unless they are
exceptional, should not take advanced biology as their first high school
science course; most should be juniors or seniors, so they will be mature
and experienced enough to take advantage of the advanced work. Teachers
should have at least a bachelor of arts or bachelor of science degree in a
biological discipline, as well as the appropriate educational credentials. They
should also have participated in at least one summer workshop of at least a
week’s duration as specific preparation in both the pedagogy and the labo-

BIOLOGY
279
ratory approaches for an advanced problem-oriented, student-centered biol-
ogy course.
The Advanced Placement (AP) and International Baccalaureate (IB) bi-
ology courses embody the above ideal to different extents, partly because
the two programs were developed to serve quite different purposes (as
discussed in greater detail in the full report of the parent committee). Here
we provide merely a brief summary.
The AP program was initiated in 1955 by the College Board to provide
college-level courses for advanced students in high schools. A major goal of
the program has been academic acceleration, providing these students with
credits that can be used to place out of introductory courses and shorten the
time to a college degree. Colleges use a single high-stakes assessment, the
national AP examination administered by the College Board through the
Educational Testing Service (ETS), as the basis for granting credit and ad-
vanced placement. The exam tests knowledge of topics taught in a small
sample of college introductory biology courses (see Chapter 3), and the AP
courses are designed and taught to maximize student performance on the
exam; therefore, relatively few college introductory courses drive the con-
tent and pedagogy of AP courses.
The IB Programme was developed in the late 1960s to provide an inter-
national standard of secondary education primarily for the children of Ameri-
can, British, and European diplomats and international businesspeople, al-
lowing these children to qualify for university admission in their home coun-
tries after undergoing schooling abroad. As with AP, a summative high-stakes
exam developed by the International Baccalaureate Organisation is a major
component of the assessment process that determines eligibility for univer-
sity admission, but it is supplemented by several formative assessments,
such as a portfolio of laboratory reports, that are also used for student evalu-
ations. Although strong performance in IB courses is used to grant advanced
placement at many universities, the focus of the IB program is on providing
a high-quality, interdisciplinary university preparatory education rather than
fulfilling specific university course requirements. Because it is not constrained
by university curricula, IB is freer than the AP program to evolve at its own
pace and in its own directions.
The AP and IB courses in biology and several other fields are clearly
here to stay. They are becoming increasingly popular in American high
schools among school administrators, school boards, teachers, students, and
parents for many reasons, including the following:
• For high schools and school systems, because these programs are widely
recognized and judged by national or international examinations, offering
AP or IB courses can enhance a school’s reputation and help in recruiting

280
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
and retaining superior students and may attract more resources from state
government.
• For teachers, AP and IB are generally the most prestigious courses,
providing the most resources, attracting the best students, and often offering
opportunities for further professional development.
• For students, the courses provide more challenging learning opportu-
nities as well as enhanced credentials for college admission.
• For parents, the courses hold the promise of not only improved chances
for college admission but also college credit, with possible savings in tuition
costs.
Because of their growing popularity, AP and IB courses represent an
excellent opportunity to optimize learning in biology for many of the nation’s
best students. However, the panel believes that realizing such optimization
will require substantial changes in the way the courses are organized and
taught.
The panel’s analysis of current AP and IB courses is based primarily on
the published course outlines. We are greatly encouraged by the recent
report of the AP Commission with regard to the future of AP (Commission
on the Future of the Advanced Placement Program, 2001), in particular its
recommendation that research leaders in the scientific disciplines and in
pedagogy be engaged to ensure that current reforms and best practices are
reflected in AP courses (see Chapter 3). We are well aware that some highly
qualified teachers are able to transcend the current prescribed AP and IB
curricula, teach state-of-the-art biology, meet many of the content and peda-
gogical standards set forth in the National Science Education Standards
(NSES), and offer courses to which some of the criticisms elaborated below
do not apply. For the many teachers who are not prepared to take such
initiatives, however, it is important that the curricula and teacher preparation
for these courses be upgraded and assessed to ensure high minimum stan-
dards of content, laboratory experience, and pedagogy, with the eventual
goal of meeting the NSES.

281
3
Quality and Content of
the Learning Experience for Students
HOW IS ADVANCED BIOLOGY BEING TAUGHT?
Advanced Placement (AP) courses and to a somewhat lesser extent In-
ternational Baccalaureate (IB) courses generally rely on the traditional trans-
mission–reception mode of instruction, rather than a constructivist model in
which students develop their own conceptual framework through inquiry-
based, problem-centered active learning, as recommended by the National
Science Education Standards (NSES). Changes in teaching approach are
needed in both programs, as discussed in Chapter 4.
Additional problems with AP courses, discussed in the following sec-
tions, are that they attempt to cover too many areas in a single year; they are
often taught in one standard 47-minute period per day, which makes mean-
ingful laboratory experience almost impossible; and they are driven by the
need to prepare students for the AP examination rather than by concern for
an optimal student learning experience. These conclusions are based on the
panel’s conversations with AP teachers, the written guides for teachers of AP
courses, and the emphasis on coverage in the AP tests.
WHAT BIOLOGY IS BEING TAUGHT?
The AP course outline is not up to date, and it overemphasizes environ-
mental, population, and organismic (EPO) biology at the expense of mo-
lecular, cell, and developmental (MCD) and evolutionary biology. Although
similarly out of date, the IB curriculum achieves a more appropriate balance
of the EPO and MCD areas. The AP curriculum should include more on the
process of science, including the responsible conduct of research, and the
core IB curriculum should include more evolutionary biology. The core cur-
ricula of both programs should be updated to include concepts from current
areas of rapid progress, such as genomics, cell signaling, mechanisms of
development, and molecular evolution.

282
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
How Are the Curricula Developed?
It should be noted that the above criticisms and suggestions are also
applicable to many introductory-level college biology courses. Since a major
stated goal of the AP program is to allow students to place out of these
courses, the AP curriculum is designed to include all the subject areas that
might be encountered in any such introductory course (see the following
section). To formulate the course outline, the College Board sends a curricu-
lum survey questionnaire every 5 years to several hundred colleges and
universities that have a history of granting AP credit. In the most recent
survey (Educational Testing Service [ETS], personal communication, 1997),
about 500 institutions were contacted, and only 56 responded. Of these 56,
only about 6 are institutions that might generally be recognized as having
first-rank biology programs (University of California at Berkeley, Carnegie-
Mellon University, the University of Washington at Seattle, Cornell Univer-
sity, Dartmouth College, and Brandeis University), and 16–20 might be con-
sidered second-rank. Therefore, the AP curriculum has been based on a
sample that is (1) very small and (2) not representative of the nation’s best
colleges and universities.
The recent report of the AP Commission (Commission on the Future of
the Advanced Placement Program, 2001) recommends that the College Board
change this approach to course development substantially as mentioned
above, replacing the current survey-based curriculum with course outlines
based on input from leaders in the biological disciplines, as well as peda-
gogy, “to ensure that current reforms and best practices are reflected in AP”
(p. 12). This more proactive stance is intended to position AP as a lever for
positive change in curriculum and instruction. The panel strongly endorses
this change, which will undoubtedly help in addressing some of the con-
cerns regarding AP that are discussed below.
The IB curriculum is formulated by an international consortium and also
revised on a 5-year cycle. The consortium consists primarily of experienced
IB teachers, most of whom are present or past examiners or moderators. (IB
does not publish the committee rosters.) As noted earlier, because the IB
curriculum is not constrained by the need to prepare students in specific
areas for an advanced placement exam, it tends to be less comprehensive
and more flexible than its AP counterpart, with 12 percent of class time
allocated for options and 25 percent mandated for laboratory work over a 2-
year period.
Keeping Up to Date
Biology is in an explosive phase of development. Almost every day
there are articles in the newspaper about some new advance in biomedical

BIOLOGY
283
knowledge. Four of the most exciting areas of biological research today are
the following:
• Genomics. Sequencing of the complete genomic DNA of humans and
other organisms is making it possible to count the number of genes required
for control of development and physiology and ultimately to determine the
functions of all these genes.
• Mechanisms of development. This work is addressing how genes and
their encoded proteins control the development of a fertilized egg into an
adult organism.
• Cell signaling. Researchers are learning how cells talk to each other
via signals from transmitting cells to receptors at the cell surfaces of receiv-
ing cells, as well as working out the pathways of interacting proteins that
transduce a signal to the cytoskeleton and nucleus of the receiving cell to
activate specific behaviors and changes in gene expression.
• Evolution and the relatedness of organisms at the molecular level. Re-
searchers have come increasingly to realize that all organisms utilize not
only similar molecules but also entire homologous systems of signaling and
response for the same purposes in development and physiology.
Modern aspects of these topics are largely lacking from the AP and IB course
syllabi.
Although it can be argued that secondary-level courses do not need to
be up to the minute to be educationally valuable, courses that omit these
topics lose an opportunity to engage students with issues in biology that are
related to their daily lives.
Sample Suggestions
The following are some suggestions for addressing the shortcomings
noted above:
• Expand discussion of the fluid mosaic model of membranes (dating
from the 1970s) to include ligands, receptors, and signal transduction.
• Extend Mendelian genetics and the concept of mapping to the nucle-
otide sequence level.
• Use the rapidly advancing knowledge of developmental mechanisms
as a review and synthesis of everything students have learned previously
about gene expression, cell motility, signaling, and so on.
• Introduce the concepts of protein databases, sequence comparisons
of homologous proteins, and building of sequence-based evolutionary trees.
In the IB course outline, almost all the material on evolution is in the
optional curricular materials. Given that evolution provides the conceptual

284
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
framework for most of modern biology, it is essential that evolution be
taught as a core subject and a basis for practical problem solving in all
advanced high school biology courses.
As with any curricular reform, such changes are likely to pose chal-
lenges to the structuring of existing and time-honored courses. Difficult de-
cisions will have to be made about how to accommodate these critical tenets
of modern biology. By condensing and making greater attempts to integrate
topics, however, many of these concepts can be introduced in ways that
build upon other components of the courses and within the time allotted to
teach them.
Balance
Table 3-1 compares the amount of time prescribed for three broad bio-
logical subject areas in the AP and IB curricula of 180 hours total (excluding
the mandated 60 hours of laboratory in the IB course), and Table 3-2 shows
time spent on more specific topics. Despite the explosive advances in MCD
and evolutionary biology over the past 20 years, the overall distribution of
time spent in the three major subject areas in Table 3-1 has not changed
since the mid-1980s for the AP curriculum. In the AP course, 50 percent of
class time is still spent on organismic biology and ecology and 32 percent on
the structure of plants and animals (Table 3-2). This distribution does not
reflect the current balance of emphasis in either biological research, the best
instruction at the college level, or future career options for students. It is out
of date and does not leave adequate time for teaching of cell and molecular
biology.
TABLE 3-1
Distribution of Class Time in Major Biological Subject Areas in
IB and AP Courses
% of IBa
Subject Area
% of APb
22
Molecules and cells
25
31
Heredity and evolution
25
35
Structure of plants and animals, ecology
50
12
Optional topics
0
SOURCES:
aBased on information from International Baccalaureate Organisation ([IBO] 1996), see Table 3-2. Figures in
this column are percentages of nonlaboratory class time (75% = 181 hours); they do not include laboratory
periods, which are mandated to be 25% of total time (59 hours; see Table 3-2). The evolution component (12%) of
heredity and evolution is an optional topic.
bFrom ETS (1999, pp. 3–5). Percentages of total class time, including laboratory.

BIOLOGY
285
TABLE 3-2
Percentages and Hours of Class Time Spent on Various Subareas of Biology in IB and AP Courses
Total Teaching Time
% of
% of
IB Teaching
AP Teaching
Time Specified
Prescribed
Time Specified
for a Concept
Teaching
AP Teaching
for a Concept
(total hours 240)
Hours
IB Curriculum Topics (1:, etc.) That Correspond to AP Concepts
Concepts
(total hours 180)
5
12
2: chemistry of life (12 hr)
Chemistry
7
5
12
1: cells (8), 7: cells (4)
Cells
10
6
15
4.2: photosynthesis and respiration (5),
Energy
8
9: cell respiration and photosynthesis (10)
9
22
3: genetics (11), 10: genetics (11)
Heredity
8
5
12
2.7: genetic engineering, DNA fingerprinting, gene therapy (3)
Molecular Genetics
9
8: nucleic acids and proteins (9)
9
22
Option D: evolutiona
Evolution
8
3
7
13: classification and diversity (7)
Diversity
8
4
10
16: plant science
Structure of Plants
32
and Animals
16
38
5: human health and physiology (17),
Human Physiology
0b
11: human reproduction (5), 12: immune system (6),
14: nerves and muscles (6), 15: excretion (4)
49
4: ecology (9)
Ecology Optionsc
10
9
22
(evolution counted above)
0
E: neurobiology/ behavior;
F: applied plant/animal science,
G: ecology and conservation
Total: 75
181
100
continues

286
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
Laboratory
% of IB
Prescribed
% od
Time in Labs
Laboratory
AP Time in Labs
(240 hours)
Hour
B Curriculum Topics (1:, etc.) That Correspond to AP Concepts
Laboratory Program
(180 hours)
 4
10
Group 4
0
Interdisciplinary
Inquiry Lab Project
 7
16
Options laboratory work
14
33
6: investigations (15), 17: investigations (18)
Laboratory Program
12 prescribed labs
Total: 25
59
0d
SOURCES: Adapted from IBO (1996), ETS (1999).
aFrom IB optional topics. Note that teaching evolution is an option in the IB program.
bCovered under the concept Structure of Plants and Animals,  which includes discussion of functions.
cIB options can be used to create flexibility and modify emphasis in the curriculum. For example, basic human health and physiology is built into the core IB
curriculum, but the optional topics include considerably more material on human physiology, physiology of exercise, and human nutrition. Good coverage of cell
biology exists in the core curriculum, but additional material on cell biology and cell physiology is provided in the optional curricular materials. Basic nerve and
muscle biology is covered in the core curriculum, but an additional unit of neurobiology and behavior is optionally available. The same two-tier system exists for
ecology.
dLaboratory time not specified (see the discussion later in this chapter).
TABLE 3-2
Continued

BIOLOGY
287
BREADTH VERSUS DEPTH
A major problem with the AP course is that pressure to cover all of
biology in less than a year precludes in-depth study and leads to superficial
knowledge. In contrast, the IB program allows time for some in-depth study
by subdividing the curriculum into core and options and by allowing 2 years
for the Higher-Level (HL) course. The AP course needs to include more
options, both in the curriculum and on the tests, to make its breadth man-
ageable. One solution would be to have two AP courses—one emphasizing
EPO and the other MCD biology—both with significant evolutionary em-
phasis.
Coverage of Topics in the AP and IB Courses
As noted above, because of the importance of scores on the compre-
hensive AP examination, AP instructors are under pressure to cover all of
biology within a year, necessitating a fairly superficial treatment. Little time
is available to explore any topics in depth. Although the ETS maintains that
students do not need to know all topics well to be successful on the exam,
many instructors, especially those who are less experienced, feel they must
cover all the material.
In contrast, the IB curriculum builds in considerably more flexibility.
First, there is a distinction between Subject Specific Core (SSC) and Addi-
tional Higher Level (AHL) material. Even together, these two categories do
not cover all topics on the course outline and do not occupy the full instruc-
tional time, which also includes 12 percent set aside for optional topics to be
chosen by the teacher. The range of optional curricular material (Table 3-2)
allows IB instructors some level of control over the composition of their
courses and the relative weights given to different areas of biology.
The IB program further alleviates the breadth versus depth problem by
extending the IB Biology HL course over 2 years, thereby allowing more
time for in-depth study of at least selected topics. Even for the 1-year AP
course, less comprehensiveness should be acceptable if all entering students
have had a previous survey course in introductory high school biology. The
panel is pleased to note that a nonscientific survey of students taking the AP
exams indicated that about 78 percent had had a full 2 years of biology,
implying that they had taken a comprehensive biology course before taking
the AP course.1 As noted in Chapter 2, the panel believes this figure should
1In an ETS questionnaire administered with the 1999 AP Biology exam, 61,952/79,212
students reported that they had taken biology for 2 years or more in grades 9–12, including
their current courses. These data are limited in value as they are self-reported and were not
verified, and students were not able to receive clarification of questions they did not under-
stand.

288
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
be increased toward 100 percent. Finally, the IB course outline prescribes in
some detail the degree of depth that should be achieved, whereas the AP
course outline does not, although the same degree of depth knowledge may
be demanded on the exams (see the examples in Appendix C).
As noted earlier, one approach to decreasing comprehensiveness and
allowing more time for in-depth learning in the AP program would be to
offer two separate courses—one emphasizing MCD and the other EPO biol-
ogy (with evolution included in both). The panel finds the need for de-
creased breadth more compelling than the arguments against separation put
forward previously by the College Board (AP Biology Teacher’s Guide, 1995,
p. 16). Some consequences of separation would be as follows:
• Increased costs to a school system if staffing, teacher training, and
laboratory resources had to be provided for both courses. While this would
probably not pose a significant problem for larger schools that already offer
multiple sections of AP biology, it could be a significant burden for smaller
school systems. However, the latter schools could choose to offer only one
of the two courses.
• The need to develop separate AP tests for the two areas.
• Most significant, and representing the major stumbling block to any
proposal for reform of the AP curriculum, scores on such restricted tests
could no longer be considered as qualification to place out of a more com-
prehensive college introductory course. In fact, however, many of the bet-
ter college biology programs have realized the impossibility of teaching a
meaningful comprehensive introductory course and are instead offering
alternative courses that are restricted along just these lines or further (see
Chapter 5).
The “Less Is More” Paradox
The study of biology is of necessity broad; biology encompasses a huge
variety of organisms and can be studied at many different levels of organiza-
tion. In this regard, two pedagogical implications of the breadth versus depth
issue are specific to biology. First, the study of evolution depends on the use
of comparative methodologies and analysis across broad phylogenetic spec-
tra. Synthesis and integration depend on inferring robust generalizations
from diverse samples. This approach is applicable at many levels, from
multiple sequence alignments in bioinformatics and molecular evolution to
the use of morphological, behavioral, and ecological characters in phyloge-
netic classification. Second, biologists are deeply committed to preserving
and appreciating biodiversity. If students are not able to understand the
valuable contributions of diverse plants for food, clothing, fiber, housing

BIOLOGY
289
materials, and pharmaceutically active drugs, not to mention their aesthetic
and historical importance for art, culture, and landscape, we will be missing
a critical opportunity for environmental education.
On the other hand, recent research on learning indicates that often “less
is more”; in other words, more real learning takes place if students spend
more time going into greater depth on fewer topics, allowing them to expe-
rience problem solving, controversies, and the subtleties of scholarly inves-
tigation. More is not always better from other perspectives as well; for ex-
ample, Shenk (1997) describes how we are being buried by information
overload. Students need to learn critical data mining skills so they can find
relevant information and distinguish meaningful from irrelevant data. Until
they understand enough biology to focus on the key concepts in new mate-
rial, they are likely to be swamped by details and unable to experience
science as a process of creative thinking and problem solving.
The panel therefore recommends that more curricular flexibility be built
into the IB and particularly the AP programs so that students can experience
sustained, in-depth study of fewer areas. This study should be built around
“big ideas” (as discussed below) and an understanding of the experimental
method. It should be tightly integrated with similarly focused, in depth,
inquiry-based laboratory experiences (also discussed below). Students need
to be encouraged to think about the interrelatedness of the various disci-
plines of biology and the importance of interdisciplinary approaches to solv-
ing scientific problems. Emphasis should be placed on students’ ability to
incorporate material they are learning into a meaningful conceptual frame-
work.
Thus although some degree of breadth is necessary and desirable as
argued above, it should be defined by the degree of integration among differ-
ent topics, not the number of topics covered. If students understand the pro-
cess of science and the hierarchy of interrelationships among topics they
have studied in depth, learning new biological knowledge is easy because it
fits into a conceptual framework that is already in place. Consequently, the
selection of particular topics covered in a course is less important than ac-
tivities designed to build understanding of science processes and a concep-
tual hierarchy, and courses need not strive for comprehensiveness of subject
matter. Eliminating the use of AP and IB exam scores for automatic place-
ment out of specific college courses, as recommended in Chapter 6, would
allow advanced secondary-level courses, particularly AP, to evolve in this
direction.
We argued in the preceding section that new and current subject matter
should be introduced into the AP and IB biology curricula, while we have
maintained in this section that these programs attempt to cover too many
topics already. This is the paradox that makes curriculum design difficult,
particularly for biology courses. We would resolve it by urging that currently

290
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
exciting subject matter relevant to students’ everyday lives be included in
the choice of recommended topics for consideration by teachers but that
teachers be encouraged to apply the “less is more” principle and choose
those areas for in-depth study that will create the most meaningful learning
experience for students.
THEMES AND CONCEPTS
Both the AP and IB programs have stated themes around which the
courses are theoretically organized. The eight themes of the AP curriculum
mix philosophy and content, with some redundancy in the content themes,
but appear adequate for their stated purpose. In the IB curriculum, there are
only four stated themes, which surprisingly do not include two that appear
to be essential—energy transfer and heredity. Themes in both courses are
intended to provide integration of different topics, but the extent to which
they are followed in presenting subject matter depends on the individual
teacher. Particularly in AP courses, better integration of topics is needed.
Table 3-3 compares the stated themes of the AP biology course, the IB
biology course, and the NSES Life Sciences content standards for grades 9–
12. Equivalent or related themes are listed in the same row to the extent
possible (heredity in the AP themes is subsumed under continuity and change).
As seen from the disparities, these lists are somewhat arbitrary. The IB list
TABLE 3-3
Comparison of Stated Themes from AP and IB Biology Courses and the NSES
AP
IB
NSESa
Science as a process
Understanding scientific inquiry
Evolution
Evolution
Biological evolution
Energy transfer
Matter, energy, and organization
in living systems
Relationship of structure to function
Structure and function
Continuity and change
Molecular basis of heredity
Regulation
Equilibrium within systemsb
The cell
Interdependence in nature
Universality vs. diversity
Interdependence of organisms
Behavior of organisms
Science, technology, and society
Science and technology in local,
national, and global challenges
SOURCE: Adapted from IBO (1996), ETS (1999), and National Research Council [NRC] (1996a).
aThis list includes the six Life Sciences content standards, as well as one from Science as Inquiry and one
from Science in Personal and Social Perspectives, all for grades 9–12 (NRC, 1996a).
bEquilibrium is apparently used by the IB program (misleadingly) to mean steady state or homeostasis.

BIOLOGY
291
appears to have two glaring omissions, mentioned above. On the other
hand, it could be argued that the AP list includes too many themes. There is
some redundancy in the AP themes (e.g., between evolution and continuity
and change), and some of their applications to the three major subject areas
appear contrived.
More important than the specific themes listed is the way they are used.
Recent research on learning (NRC, 1999) has documented the common-
sense realization that experts in a given field have their knowledge orga-
nized into a hierarchical conceptual structure, with key concepts (“big ideas”)
at the top, derivative ideas and topical knowledge below, and common
themes connecting the concepts. An expert learning new knowledge can fit
it into the appropriate place within the structure. To become expert learners,
students must construct their own hierarchy, organizing topical knowledge
under the appropriate concepts. Their instructors and instructional materi-
als, therefore, need to emphasize the themes and big ideas and distinguish
them from related topical knowledge.
The AP biology course description is introduced with a helpful defini-
tion of themes, concepts, and topics and how they are related in building a
conceptual structure (ETS, 1999, pp. 2–3). It points out the importance of
emphasizing key concepts over specific topical information and the way
recurrent themes can be used to provide connections in the study of differ-
ent topic areas. It claims “increasingly, the AP Biology Examination will
emphasize the concepts and themes of biology and will place less weight on
specific facts.” The panel hopes this is the case and that teachers will be
encouraged to use themes to integrate diverse topics in the course. At present,
however, there is little emphasis on such integration in the AP course out-
lines, recommended laboratories, and teacher preparation materials (see
Chapter 4), so that integration depends on the initiative of the individual
teacher. In particular, while the process of science is a stated AP theme, it
appears clear from the outline that most AP laboratories are not inquiry
based, so students have little chance to experience this process (see the next
section).
Several of the same comments apply to the IB themes. The term “equi-
librium” is used misleadingly to mean steady state or homeostasis. The ru-
bric of themes and topics presented in the program description (National
Commission on Mathematics and Science Teaching for the 21st Century,
2000, pp. 7–14) again appears somewhat contrived in spots, and again the
extent to which teachers use the themes in presenting subject matter is
unclear. Nevertheless, with its more detailed course outline, the IB course
appears to do a better job of integration, which is further enhanced by the
Group 4 interdisciplinary project and the interdisciplinary thinking that per-
vades the IB program (as discussed later in this chapter).

292
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
The NSES content standards include topical areas as well as themes and
therefore are not directly comparable, but there is nevertheless considerable
overlap with AP and IB. One AP teacher who met with the panel gave her
students the interesting assignment of comparing and trying to relate the AP
themes and NSES standards as a way to understand them more clearly.
The above comments point to the need for more detailed guidance and
development for AP biology teachers. This is a theme to which we return in
subsequent sections.
LABORATORY WORK AND VARIETY OF
LEARNING EXPERIENCES
Meaningful learning in biology must involve inquiry-based laboratory
experiences that require students not simply to carry out a technique or
learn a laboratory skill but also to pose questions, formulate hypotheses,
design experiments to test those hypotheses, collaborate to make experi-
ments work, analyze data, draw conclusions, and present their analyses and
conclusions to their peers (NRC, 1996a).
One of the major differences between the AP and IB programs is the
extent to which they meet these ideals. The AP laboratory exercises tend to
be “cookbook” rather than inquiry based. They are not emphasized or tested
adequately on the exam and hence may be neglected. Written assignments
that could integrate laboratories with the curriculum are not required. Schools
are not evaluated by the College Board for adequate laboratory facilities.
Although the IB laboratories are also largely not inquiry based, 25 percent of
time in laboratories is mandated, portfolios describing students’ laboratory
work are an integral part of the basis for evaluation, an extended writing
assignment is required, and schools applying for IB status are initially re-
viewed and certified as having adequate laboratory resources and facilities.
Yet both programs need more inquiry-based laboratory work. Learning ex-
periences should be aligned with those set forth in the NSES. Although in-
cluding laboratory performance in the AP exam is probably impractical, a
portfolio of laboratory work should be made part of a student’s record, and
universities should be encouraged to evaluate portfolios in advanced place-
ment decisions. AP should certify that school facilities and resources can
support college-level laboratory instruction before allowing courses to be
designated as AP. The initial evaluation and continued surveillance of stu-
dent work carried out by the IB program (see below) provide an appropri-
ate model for implementing this recommendation.
The AP manual suggests “since one-fourth to one-third of the credit in
comparable college courses is derived from laboratory work, AP courses

BIOLOGY
293
should likewise emphasize laboratory work.” However, there are several
problems with the 12 recommended AP laboratories:
• They are highly prescribed, not inquiry based. The required labora-
tory write-ups involve filling in data tables or blanks, along with some “short”
more extended responses. A sample AP laboratory is described in Appendix
D. It is extremely directed; a student could work through it without gaining
any understanding of what has occurred at the molecular level and its sig-
nificance.
• Although the AP biology course outline specifies that all 12 laborato-
ries should be carried out, there is no check on whether the laboratories are
completed. Questions dealing with laboratory material comprise only a small
proportion of the exam. Moreover, many questions assess content knowl-
edge related to the laboratory rather than protocol and process skills, so that
the information can be obtained from reading or lecture without conducting
the laboratory. (A few questions are better; for example, there should be
more questions like those dealing with the photosynthesis laboratory.) Vid-
eos of the laboratories being carried out by others are available to familiarize
students with protocols. Therefore, it is impossible to tell from AP test results
whether students have actually performed laboratory exercises. The panel
heard anecdotal evidence that teachers wishing to maximize preparation
time for the exam minimize the laboratories and may skip some altogether.
Therefore, meaningful laboratory experiences are not guaranteed by the AP
program but rather depend on the skill and initiative of individual teachers.
• The 12 laboratories for which information is provided to teachers are
an unnecessarily restricted set. Teachers who would like to use alternative
laboratories may have neither a ready source for the necessary equipment
and protocols nor the experience to use them. The limited teacher develop-
ment available (see Chapter 4) is restricted to the 12 recommended laborato-
ries.
• The AP program has no mechanism for certifying that teachers are
competent to teach the laboratories or, just as important, that a school has
the resources to support them with the required equipment and supplies.
Consequently, students in poorer schools may be limited to learning about
laboratories through videotapes and the textbook.
In contrast, the IB laboratories are much less prescribed and require that
students play a more active, investigative role (see Appendix D). Laboratory
portfolios are used for formative assessment throughout the course in docu-
menting student understanding of laboratory practices and student accom-
plishment. There are many laboratories from which to choose, and the teacher
is given considerable latitude in their selection. Schools and teachers must
be initially certified before they are allowed to offer an IB biology course,

294
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
and their ongoing performance is assessed through sample laboratory re-
ports that must be submitted periodically to IB international headquarters.
The IB laboratories offered may differ from school to school, depending on
teacher preparation and availability of resources. However, the initial evalu-
ation process demands that each school plan an acceptable series of labora-
tories commensurate with its resources before certification is granted.
To address the above problems, the panel makes the following recom-
mendations:
• Both programs should move toward including more inquiry-based
laboratory work in accordance with the NSES. Laboratory work should in-
volve students in the active learning of science by doing science. The AP
laboratories in particular should include more activities that engage students
in analysis of complex data, modeling, data mining, generation of hypoth-
eses and experimental designs, and statistical analysis. There should be built-
in opportunities for reflection and peer review of work, as well as collabora-
tions among students, faculty, and experts from the community.
• The College Board should assess courses and schools directly rather
than only through the performance of their students on the AP exam. The
AP program should include a certification mechanism to ensure that teach-
ers of AP biology are qualified and that schools have the resources to sup-
port planned laboratory investigations. Because meaningful laboratory teach-
ing is almost impossible in a single class period, schools wishing to offer AP
biology should be strongly urged to schedule at least one uninterrupted 2-
hour period per week for laboratory work.
• The AP exam should include more questions that assess student un-
derstanding of laboratory protocols and processes, understanding that can
be gained only by actually carrying out experiments. In addition, the AP
exam should include assessment of a portfolio of laboratory work by the
ETS in addition to the summative exam.
• Extensions to the 12 recommended AP laboratories should be pro-
vided so that students and teachers can go beyond the basic exercises if they
have the time and resources to do so.
• The AP program should provide or accept many more alternative
well-tested laboratories, which could be distributed via CDs and the Internet,
to give teachers a choice in the laboratories they present. Teachers should
be encouraged not to limit themselves to the 12 currently provided AP labo-
ratories. The Web is already an important source of laboratory exercises
through sites such as those of Access Excellence (Genentech Corp.), CIBT
(Cornell Institute for Biology Teachers), ABLE (Association of Biology Labo-
ratory Educators), and ACUBE (Association of College and University Biol-
ogy Educators). Access information for these Web sites is provided in Ap-
pendix E. Alternative laboratories could be grouped into categories and teach-

BIOLOGY
295
ers asked to conduct a certain minimum number of laboratories from each
category. In addition to AP and IB teachers and students, college and univer-
sity scientists should be involved in the development of additional appropri-
ate laboratories, including laboratory and field exercises. Both ethics and
environmental responsibility should be addressed in laboratory work. It would
be useful to consider the development of laboratory blocks in which a group
of progressive laboratory exercises is built around a model organism suit-
able for molecular genetic analysis, such as yeast, the alga Chlamydomonas,
the nematode C. elegans, or the fruit fly Drosophila. These organisms have
many advantages for use in advanced high school biology laboratories, in-
cluding (1) they are inexpensive to grow and maintain, (2) they are conve-
nient for genetic experiments, and (3) there are national genetic stock cen-
ters from which a variety of mutants is available without charge.
• The AP program should provide or certify more teacher development
and ongoing support in relation to laboratory teaching for both the 12 AP
laboratories and alternatives. The IBO, which already provides considerable
support for IB laboratories through its 3-day teacher training workshops,
should consider expanding that support. The best mechanism for doing so
may be university-based weeklong workshops. All prospective AP teachers
should be required to attend at least one weeklong workshop before being
allowed to commence teaching AP biology. The CIBT program at Cornell
University is a model. Such programs often are able to provide loan equip-
ment, supplies, and reagents in addition to teacher training. The AP and IB
programs should evaluate and certify such college- and university-based
workshops for their teachers.
INTERDISCIPLINARY EMPHASIS
There is little evidence of interdisciplinary emphasis in the AP course
outline. In contrast, the entire IB program, including its biology course, rests
on the importance of interdisciplinary connections in learning. The IB pro-
gram is exemplary and far superior in this regard. The AP program should
consider changes that would promote interdisciplinary learning.
Interdisciplinary activities in the IB program include an extended essay
and a course required of all students on the Theory of Knowledge, which
ties together all six groups of courses in the curriculum (IBO, 1996). Another
particularly desirable interdisciplinary requirement is the Group 4 laboratory
project, in which students from several different advanced courses (e.g.,
biology, chemistry, physics) work together as a group to solve an experi-
mental problem, often a local one involving the environment or the commu-
nity (see the brief description in Appendix D). While restructuring the AP

296
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
program in the near future along more interdisciplinary lines may not be
practical, small steps could easily be taken in this direction, such as:
• Combining advanced biology and chemistry into a 2-year course team-
taught by a biology teacher and a chemistry teacher.
• Involving students from two or more AP science courses in joint in-
terdisciplinary, community-oriented, problem-solving laboratories.
ASSESSMENT
With regard to mastery of content knowledge, concepts, and applica-
tions (see the charge to the panel in Appendix A), both the AP and IB exams
test primarily rote learning.2 In the IB assessment process, evaluation of a
portfolio, laboratory notebooks, and other work provides more perspective.
The AP exam should include more free-response questions and evaluation
of laboratory work, and both should test more concept knowledge. With
regard to application of knowledge to other courses and situations, the AP
exam is limited by a lack of interdisciplinary emphasis, while the IB assess-
ments include such applications. As recommended above, the AP course
and exam would benefit from more interdisciplinary emphasis.
Excessive use of multiple-choice and fill-in-the-blank questions assess-
ing factual details on both AP and IB examinations encourages the rote
learning of many facts at the expense of understanding larger concepts. It is
encouraging to note that the AP biology exam was redesigned in the mid-
1990s to include more free-response or essay questions and fewer short-
answer questions and that there are plans to increasingly emphasize con-
cepts and themes and deemphasize retention of specific facts (Commission
on the Future of the Advanced Placement Program, 2001, p. 3). Both exams
should move in this direction. Additional improvements could include the
following:
• More questions that assess laboratory skills, e.g., scenario questions
requiring analysis of datasets, quantitative analysis, and testing of multiple
working hypotheses.
• For AP exams, document-based questions (already used in IB exams)
requiring students to read a brief biology article and write about it.
2Based on reports of teachers interviewed and the panel’s inspection of recent AP and IB
exams.

BIOLOGY
297
• Open-ended questions with no prescribed answers, asking students
to discuss a currently exciting topic they have studied. Questions of this type
would promote study of such topics in the AP course.
However, the panel’s primary recommendation is that assessment in the AP
program should be extended to include formative evaluations of laboratory
notebooks, presentations to peers, and other activities during the course in
addition to the final high-stakes summative examination.
Finally, as pointed out above, there is a great need in the AP program
for assessment not only of students but also of teachers and schools that
offer AP biology courses to ensure minimum standards of quality.

298
4
Teachers and Teaching
IS CURRENT KNOWLEDGE OF LEARNING AND
PEDAGOGY BEING APPLIED?
The Advanced Placement (AP) and to a lesser extent the International
Baccalaureate (IB) biology courses are taught inconsistently with current
knowledge in several ways, some touched on earlier and more discussed
below. Inconsistencies include rapid-fire course coverage at the expense of
depth of understanding; continued reliance on the traditional learner-pas-
sive, transmission–reception model of learning; failure to specifically target
common known misconceptions; limited use of history as a route to under-
standing in the context of people and society; failure to keep pace with new
technological and instrumentation opportunities, such as learning through
computer modeling of biological systems and hand-held data collection and
analysis equipment for field work; overreliance on multiple-choice and fill-
in-the-blank test questions; limited experiential and inquiry-based learning
in the laboratory, including the “persuasion of peers” phase crucial to the
scientific process; and in general, lack of an overall research-based learning
theory that can drive the design of instruction and assessment.
Classroom practice should be driven by research on learning and teach-
ing. Following are key findings from How People Learn: Bridging Research
and Practice (HPL2; National Research Council [NRC], 2000a, pp. 10–15):
• Teachers need to probe students’ prior knowledge and engage it in
their teaching.
• To develop confidence in an area of inquiry, students need to build a
sound conceptual framework and structure it in ways that facilitate retrieval
and application.
• Students need to learn how to monitor their own understanding
(metacognition) and take an active role in their own learning.

BIOLOGY
299
These findings have concomitant implications for teaching (NRC, 2000a, pp.
15–19):
• Teachers must be aware of students’ prior and evolving knowledge.
Therefore, more emphasis should be placed on formative assessment.
• Fewer topics must be taught but in greater depth and with more
examples, in order to yield a sound conceptual foundation.
• Teaching of metacognitive skills should be integrated with discipline-
based instruction.
HPL2 stresses that “a benefit of focusing on how people learn is that it
helps bring order to a seeming cacophony of choices” (p. 18). It continues
with a variety of recommendations that are updated in Inquiry and the Na-
tional Science Education Standards (INSES; NRC, 2000b). For example, INSES
suggests that inquiry is simultaneously a way of teaching and learning, a
way of answering questions, and intrinsic to scientific investigation. Thus,
learners should (pp. 13, 25):
• Be engaged by scientifically appropriate questions.
• Use evidence to build explanations.
• Weigh alternative scientific explanations.
• Communicate and justify their explanations.
The AP and IB programs need to move toward reflecting this transfor-
mation from curricula that are directed by the teacher (as transmitter and
corrector), the text, exams, and material to curricula that are learner di-
rected. Doing so will involve attention to (1) student knowledge construc-
tion based on investigation, analysis, and problem solving; (2) peer review
and collaboration to continuously monitor student knowledge; and (3) ef-
forts to address real problems of the local community and ecosystem. On
average during a calendar year, students spend less than one-seventh of
their time in school. During waking hours, they spend four times as much
time in their homes and communities than in school (including more time
watching television than in school; see NRC, 2000a, p. 23). Thus, “a focus
only on the hours that students currently spend in school overlooks the
many opportunities for guided learning in other settings.”
TEACHER PREPARATION AND PROGRAM
QUALITY
Many teachers at the secondary level are unprepared with regard to
content knowledge to teach college-level biology, and many schools that
offer AP programs do not have the resources to support adequate labora-

300
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
tory instruction. The College Board should evaluate and certify AP schools
and teachers in some manner similar to that in which the International
Baccalaureate Organisation (IBO) initially evaluates and certifies its schools
and teachers.
Some of these issues have been addressed in Chapters 2 and 3. Through
its application and interview process, the  IBO ensures that new IB schools
are qualified and that schools have the necessary resources for the program’s
required laboratory activities. Once an IB school has been certified, the IBO
monitors teachers through its internal assessment program. For AP schools,
however, these issues represent basic concerns, including the following:
• Teachers who have not been certified to teach an AP course except
by a local school system and may not even have a B.A.-level education in
biology are teaching courses that can receive college credit. (Data are not
currently available on what proportion of AP biology teachers do not hold a
B.A. degree in biology. The panel strongly urges the College Board to obtain
these data and make them available.)
• An inexperienced teacher can be assigned to an AP course at the last
minute, with no laboratory experience and no preparation beyond the “Acorn
Book” (Educational Testing Service, 1999) and a set of previous exam ques-
tions.
These concerns should be addressed by:
• Mandatory evaluation. While some teachers with a B.A. degree in
biology and some experience are undoubtedly capable of teaching college
freshman–level biology, others may not be. An M.A. degree in biology, in-
volving some experience with research, would clearly be preferable for teach-
ing the kinds of inquiry-based laboratories that would conform to the NSES
and INSES. However, rather than mandating a certain level of preparation,
the panel reiterates its recommendation that the AP program institute an
assessment process, including teacher interviews, that teachers and schools
would have to undergo before offering an AP biology course for the first
time.
• Mandatory teacher preparation. The panel reiterates that no teacher
should be assigned or certified as above to teach an AP biology course
without having had the opportunity to participate in at least a 1-week sum-
mer workshop focused primarily on laboratory activities.
TEACHER DEVELOPMENT AND SUPPORT
More inservice teacher preparation and support are needed, and more
attention should be paid to pedagogy in manuals and workshops, particu-

BIOLOGY
301
larly for AP teachers. Neither the IB nor AP program requires or offers much
in the way of continuous professional development of teachers as a prereq-
uisite for participating and remaining in the program.3 According to anec-
dotal evidence gathered by the panel, most teachers have little opportunity
to collaborate with one another in developing adaptations and implementa-
tions of more progressive curricular approaches. The AP workshops cur-
rently offered by the College Board are 1-day or half-day meetings that focus
primarily on recent developments in the AP examination and how to pre-
pare students for the exam. Both programs need
• More instruction in and discussion of inquiry-based learning and peda-
gogy in general in the materials prepared for teachers, following the guide-
lines of the NSES and INSES (see the preceding section).
• More frequent workshops that include discussion of recent develop-
ments in biology and pedagogy.
• More training and ideas for laboratory activities, including the recom-
mended or alternative laboratories, disseminated through workshops, CDs,
or Internet sources (see Chapter 3).
• More involvement of the programs in establishing peer support groups
for teachers in the same locale and perhaps via the Internet for geographi-
cally isolated teachers. (IB already does this to some extent via the IBO
Online Curriculum Center.)
INFLUENCE OF CURRICULA AND ASSESSMENTS
ON TEACHING APPROACHES
As noted earlier, the perceived need for comprehensiveness and the
single high-stakes exam of the AP program in particular encourage teachers
to promote rote learning in order to cover all the necessary material. Both
curricula, but that of AP in particular, are burdened by the perceived need to
cover many areas of biology and enable students to achieve high scores on
an exam that assesses their breadth of knowledge. Consequently, both cur-
ricula emphasize memorization of facts and promote strategizing for the
exam and even repeated rehearsals of test taking, often at the expense of
gaining a meaningful understanding and appreciation of biology. The panel
learned anecdotally that students’ specific results on both the AP and IB
examinations are not made available to teachers for feedback on the effec-
tiveness of their teaching. However, IB teachers do have access to analyses
of student responses by section and question for each participating exami-
nation group. Such information can be valuable to teachers by allowing
3Based on teacher interviews and review of AP and IB materials by the panel.

302
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
them to assess the effectiveness of their teaching within specific areas of the
curriculum. To move in a more constructive direction, we reiterate our rec-
ommendations that:
• The exams should include more data analysis and problem-solving
questions that emphasize understanding of concepts rather than factual knowl-
edge of specific topics. More free-response questions would also be desir-
able, although we realize that such questions add substantially to the cost of
administering the exams. It appears inevitable that to some extent the exams
will always drive instruction in the courses; if the exams can be changed, it
will be easier for the courses to evolve in constructive directions. Individual
students’ exam answers should be made available to their teachers.
• Assessments other than the final summative exam—for example, re-
view of laboratory portfolios—should be carried out in evaluating the per-
formance of AP students.
• Performance on AP and IB exams should no longer be used by col-
leges to allow automatic placement out of specific introductory courses, so
that curricula of college introductory courses will no longer drive the con-
tent of the AP and IB courses and exams. The rationale for this recommen-
dation is developed further in Chapter 6.
CHANGING EMPHASES IN ASSESSMENT:
ARE THE NSES RECOMMENDATIONS BEING
FOLLOWED?
The recommendations in the NSES with regard to assessment are not
being followed to a sufficient extent. For example, both AP and IB exams
emphasize assessment of what is easily measured: rote learning of facts and
concepts rather than what is most highly valued—hierarchically structured
conceptual knowledge and understanding of scientific processes.
Table 4-1 summarizes the NSES recommendations for changing the stan-
dards for assessment (NRC, 1996a). It is clear from the previous discussion
that many of these standards are not being followed most of the time. The
panel’s recommendations above and in Chapter 6 are intended to help move
the AP and IB assessments in these directions.
ALTERNATIVE COURSES AND PROGRAMS
As noted earlier, the panel had neither sufficient time nor adequate
resources to allow in-depth analysis of alternative programs in advanced
biology beyond those of AP and IB. Among the exemplary programs that
may be leading the way in advanced secondary-level science education are
those at the Austin Academy of Mathematics and Science, the Bronx High

BIOLOGY
303
School of Science, the Illinois Mathematics and Science Academy, the North
Carolina School of Science and Mathematics, and the Virginia Governor’s
Schools. Forward-looking characteristics of these schools include flexibility
and fluidity in the classroom environment. There is also less focus on the
teacher as the source of information and more on students working inde-
pendently or in collaborative groups, guided by extensive use of contracts
for specified projects. Projects often involve generating new knowledge and
solving real problems related to the local or regional environment. In gen-
eral, there is more emphasis on teaching the tools and methods of learning
and less on specific content.
COORDINATION BETWEEN HIGH SCHOOLS AND
COLLEGES
University-sponsored outreach programs can be a major resource for
high school advanced biology programs and should be encouraged. More
communication between high schools and universities—in both directions—
would be helpful in fulfilling the needs of both institutions and in develop-
ing curricula and assessments.
An increasing number of universities are sponsoring outreach programs
for local and regional K–12 educators. Several such programs are supported
by the Howard Hughes Medical Institute and the National Science Founda-
tion. These programs can provide important regional foci for teacher devel-
opment in connection with advanced high school courses in biology. They
typically offer workshops for teachers; provide laboratory materials for use
in the schools; and involve faculty, graduate students, and sometimes under-
graduates who work in the classrooms with a regular teacher to provide
enrichment science instruction.
TABLE 4-1
NSES Recommendations for Changing Standards for Assessment
Less emphasis on:
More emphasis on:
Assessing what is easily measured
Assessing what is most highly valued
Assessing discrete knowledge
Assessing rich, well-structured knowledge
Assessing scientific knowledge
Assessing scientific understanding and reasoning
Assessing to learn what students do not know
Assessing to learn what students do understand
Assessing only achievement
Assessing achievement and opportunity to learn
End-of-term assessments by teachers
Students’ ongoing assessments of their own work
and that of others
Development of external assessments by
Teachers involved in the development of external
measurement experts alone
assessments
SOURCE: NRC (1996a).

304
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
One example, described earlier, is the Cornell Institute for Biology Teach-
ers. Another is the outreach program of the Department of Molecular Bio-
technology at the University of Washington, Seattle. Students participating in
this program sequenced small segments of the human genome and submit-
ted them to the central databases of the Human Genome Project. Another
excellent outreach program in the Seattle area is sponsored by the Fred
Hutchinson Cancer Center. The Washington University School of Medicine
in St. Louis provides a summer teachers’ workshop on DNA laboratories,
followed by a continuing program of support. When ready to use one of the
laboratories, a participating teacher contacts the outreach office and is loaned
a kit that includes all the reagents and equipment needed. Graduate stu-
dents from the Hughes-supported “Science Squad” from the department of
MCD Biology at University of Colorado, Boulder, assist teachers in the Den-
ver area with specialized laboratories and classes using resources supplied
by the program. A “teaching to learn, learning to teach” program at Univer-
sity of California, Davis gives undergraduate biology majors academic credit
for assisting local teachers and has inspired many participants to adopt K–12
teaching as a career goal. The BioQUEST Curriculum Consortium at Beloit
College provides teacher workshops and curricular materials emphasizing
the use of computers in laboratory simulations, quantitative data analysis,
problem posing, and problem solving.
In general, these programs provide an important link between univer-
sity and high school biology instructors. The panel believes further liaison
activities and exchanges of information in both directions, as already prac-
ticed in some programs, would benefit both constituencies, particularly in
university communities.
There are a number of other ways in which universities can support
advanced biology teachers or their schools. Examples are as follows:
• In schools where qualified teachers or resources are not available,
teaching of AP courses by local university faculty using university facilities.
• Furnishing of ideas and materials for laboratory exercises by univer-
sity faculty to local teachers (or not so local, via the Internet).
• Guest discussions or lectures by university faculty, known to be ef-
fective with high school students, who can serve as role models with re-
search experience.
• Research opportunities for advanced students and teachers who want
to get a taste of laboratory investigation.
• Surplus laboratory equipment and supplies.
• Research results (e.g., in the form of video-recorded observations or
datasets) for discussion and analysis in AP classes.
• Online access to university library materials.

BIOLOGY
305
Additional ways in which university faculty can benefit science teaching in
high schools are discussed in the NRC report entitled The Role of Scientists in
the Professional Development of Science Teachers (NRC, 1996b).
At the same time, advanced biology teachers and their schools have
much to offer universities. Examples include the following:
• Teaching experience for research associates, graduate students, and
undergraduates who may be considering teaching as a career or just enjoy it
(or both).
• Talented students and teachers interested in research apprenticeships
during the summer or the academic year.
• Discussion of effective teaching practices. The Hughes program has
released a video showing how university faculty can learn from master teachers
at the secondary level.
There are also a number of useful joint activities for university faculty
and teachers of advanced biology:
• Discussions and cooperative development of curricula. Most univer-
sity faculty who teach introductory courses in biology are unfamiliar with
the advanced biology taught in high schools.
• Discussions and cooperative development of laboratory experiences.
A university researcher may have an experimental organism or problem that
a creative high school teacher can see how to exploit as a learning tool.
• Discussion and cooperative development of outreach activities and
grant applications for their support.
• Joint teaching of an AP course by a secondary teacher and a univer-
sity faculty member.
• Regular joint social activities, perhaps in the form of a “biology learn-
ing club,” at which university and high school biology faculty could get to
know one another and discuss common interests and concerns. In most
university communities, there is little contact between the two groups.
Finally, as emphasized elsewhere in this report, there is a need for sys-
temic reform of biology teaching, not just at the secondary level but throughout
the education system, to conform to recent knowledge about how people
learn and to the NSES. Many college introductory courses suffer from the
same shortcomings as those identified in this report for high school ad-
vanced study courses, such as too much emphasis on comprehensive cover-
age and rote memorization of facts and too little active, inquiry-based, or
problem-based learning. Colleges and universities should revise or improve
introductory biology courses as necessary to bring them into line with the

306
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
recommendations made in this report for high school advanced study courses.
Rectifying the current situation is important for two reasons. First, college-
level introductory courses contribute to problems with AP courses in par-
ticular because the content of those courses has been driving the AP biology
curriculum. Second, inadequacies of many primary as well as secondary
school courses may stem directly from the mode of instruction experienced
by teachers as college students.

307
5
Outcomes
USE OF AP AND IB COURSES FOR ADVANCED
PLACEMENT
There are many concerns with the use of Advanced Placement (AP) and
International Baccalaureate (IB) scores for granting of advanced placement.
Some top-ranked colleges do not accept either AP or IB credit or both. For
a variety of reasons discussed above, some AP and IB biology courses are
not of high enough quality to be appropriate for college credit. And the AP
biology course as presently constituted is too environmental, population,
and organismic (EPO) oriented to be an appropriate substitute for a first-
year college molecular, cell, and developmental (MCD)-oriented biology
course.
Colleges and universities use performance in AP and IB biology, prima-
rily as measured by test scores, in a wide variety of ways (see the discussion
of results from the parent committee’s survey of deans of admission in Chap-
ter 2 of the committee’s full report). In some states, state law mandates
certain amounts of college credit for students who pass the AP test with
specified scores. At the other extreme, some universities offer neither credit
nor advanced placement for achievement in AP or IB programs, believing
that their own introductory courses are essential for later success in the
biology major (see the discussion in the next section). Between these ex-
tremes, some offer credit toward graduation but no advanced placement,
while others offer advanced placement but no credit toward graduation.
These discrepancies in the ways AP and IB scores are used is one of the
panel’s reasons for believing that the use of the programs for automatic
advanced placement could be eliminated without affecting the programs’
other existing and potential benefits (see Chapter 6).

308
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
PREPARATION FOR ADVANCED COLLEGE
COURSEWORK
Because of the lack of in-depth study in many AP courses, students who
place out of first-year college courses may be at a disadvantage later at
institutions where the introductory course is effectively taught. The available
data on how well the AP courses prepare students for advanced work in the
field may be misleading.
The panel concluded that allowing students to place out of introductory
biology courses automatically on the basis of AP and IB test scores is a poor
idea. The rationale for advanced placement rests on three assumptions: (1)
that most AP and IB biology courses are highly similar, (2) that most college
and university introductory courses are highly similar, and (3) that most AP
and IB courses are equivalent to college-level introductory courses. All three
assumptions are invalid.
Regarding the uniformity of AP and IB courses, evidence discussed above
and self-reported data from AP examinees suggest that significant numbers
of AP students do not perform laboratory exercises.4 Different school sys-
tems differ widely in their abilities to provide teacher preparation and in-
service training for AP teachers, in the quality of their laboratory facilities, in
their equipment and supply budgets, and in their scheduling and allocation
of time for AP courses. Neither teacher qualifications nor school resources
and facilities are certified by the AP program; the result is an extreme lack of
uniformity in the quality of AP courses. IB courses are more likely to be
uniform in quality, for reasons discussed previously.
Regarding the uniformity of college-level introductory courses, there is a
growing trend at colleges and universities to create integrated biology pro-
grams for majors in which no course is designated as “the introductory course.”
At the many universities that still offer broader designated beginning courses,
there are now often two different tracks or majors in biology—one MCD
oriented and one EPO oriented—with appropriately different introductory
courses. At many universities, therefore, allowing biology majors to bypass a
required course on the basis of AP and IB examinations, which test for
broad superficial knowledge of all areas of biology, is inappropriate. With
regard to nonmajors, those at some universities can be exempted from a
biology distribution requirement on the basis of a high AP or IB test score.
4In an Educational Testing Service (ETS) questionnaire administered with the 1999 AP
Biology exam, 8,708/78,745 students reported spending no time doing laboratory work for AP
Biology class. These data are limited in value, however, as they were self-reported and were not
verified, nor were students able to receive clarification of questions they did not understand.

BIOLOGY
309
The panel believes it is similarly unwise to allow students to fulfill entire
distribution areas in a college education using AP or IB placement credits
(see Chapter 6).
Regarding the equivalence of high school and college instruction, there
is no doubt that the best AP and IB courses are superior to many introduc-
tory college courses. Given the variation mentioned above among AP courses
in particular, however, it appears clear that an assumption of equivalence
between all AP and IB courses and college-level introductory courses can-
not be valid. Evidence sometimes cited to support equivalence was pre-
sented in an ETS research study by Morgan and Ramist (1998). The results of
this study indicated that, at a limited sample of colleges and universities, AP
students with test scores of 3, 4, or 5 who bypassed their introductory col-
lege biology course performed as well (or better) in advanced college biol-
ogy courses as students who had taken the introductory course. While the
panel does not doubt these findings, we note that this study did not control
for student quality. An alternative interpretation of the findings could be that
AP courses attract the brightest and most highly motivated students, who do
better in advanced courses simply because they are superior learners. This
effect would be amplified at institutions where the majority of superior in-
coming students are granted advanced placement, thereby depleting the
introductory courses of such students. Therefore, the panel believes this
study neither validates nor invalidates the claim that AP courses are equiva-
lent to first-year college introductory courses. To our knowledge, no compa-
rable studies have been carried out on students granted advanced place-
ment based on an IB course in high school. Clearly, more and better re-
search is needed on this important point. The panel therefore makes the
following recommendations:
• Biology majors should not, in general, be allowed to use AP or IB
biology test scores as the sole basis for automatic placement out of an intro-
ductory college-level course or any other specific required course.
• Nonmajors should not be allowed to bypass a subject-area distribu-
tion requirement on the basis of AP or IB test scores alone.
• AP and IB test scores should be used only to grant elective credit
toward a college degree.
The rationale for these recommendations is further elaborated in Chapter 6.
TURNING STUDENTS ON TO BIOLOGY
Greater emphasis on inquiry-based learning in AP and IB courses would
motivate more students to pursue further training in biology and biology-

310
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
related careers in research, teaching, or biotechnology. Although a skilled
teacher can teach within the AP framework and still involve students in a
way that excites them, the emphasis on passing the exam and the resulting
shallowness of the curriculum encourage rote learning that is unlikely to
turn students on to biology. The IB program, with more emphasis on in-
depth study and inquiry-based laboratory work, appears to do a better job in
this regard. Motivation in the AP course is primarily extrinsic, resulting from
the desire to excel and the pressure of the high-stakes examination, while
motivation in the IB course appears more likely to be intrinsic, resulting
from intellectual involvement with the material. Many of the recommenda-
tions made above—for better teacher preparation, more emphasis on in-
quiry-based laboratories and big ideas, and less comprehensiveness and
rote learning of specific facts—would promote more intrinsic motivation
and consequently more excitement about the study of biology in the AP
course.

311
6
Summary and Discussion of
Recommendations
PRIMARY RECOMMENDATIONS
This section presents the three recommendations the panel considers
most important, along with a summary discussion of each.
Recommendation 1
1. The College Board should certify schools and teachers that wish
to present Advanced Placement (AP) biology courses and should pro-
vide suitable training opportunities for prospective AP biology teach-
ers. The College Board should also develop procedures, such as those
used by the International Baccalaureate Organisation (IBO) in the IB
program, for ongoing assessment of AP programs and teachers
through regular sampling of student work; such sampling should also
be used for assessment of student achievement in addition to the fi-
nal examinations.
The panel realizes that implementation of such a system is a daunting
undertaking. Whereas the IBO presently oversees about 350 programs in the
United States, the College Board must deal with about 7,000 programs, and
this number is growing. Nevertheless, we believe strongly that a more orga-
nized system of preservice training and certification will be necessary to
achieve greater uniformity in the quality of AP biology instruction.
2. Certification and assessments of both the AP and IB programs
by the College Board and the IBO, respectively, should be designed to
ensure that changing emphases in standards for teaching, professional
development, assessment, and content, as set forth in the National
Science Education Standards (NSES), are being implemented. Teacher
preparation and inservice workshops in both programs should place

312
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
more emphasis on pedagogy—how to facilitate student-centered, prob-
lem-oriented, inquiry-based learning—and on recent results of re-
search on cognition and learning.
Justification for this recommendation is presented throughout the re-
port. It should be noted that implementation of this recommendation is not
dependent on greatly increased resources for less wealthy schools. Inquiry-
based learning does not require access to expensive equipment or elaborate
methods. Inquiry-based laboratories can be conducted on a low budget, as
many excellent AP teachers have demonstrated.
3. Colleges and universities should be strongly discouraged from
using performance on either the AP or IB examination as the sole
basis for automatic placement out of required introductory college
courses for biology majors and distribution requirements for
nonmajors.
Several arguments for this recommendation have been presented earlier
in this report. This recommendation may at first appear to run counter to the
major purpose of the AP program as well as to its name. On the contrary,
however, as discussed below, its implementation would have many desir-
able consequences and few disadvantages for both programs.
Distinguishing Automatic Advanced Placement from
College Credit
The term “advanced placement” is often taken to mean the following:
for majors in biological sciences, exempting students from specific courses
normally required for the major, and for nonmajors, exempting students
from general distribution requirements in the life sciences. The term can also
denote the granting of either elective credit or general unit credit, which
advances the student toward graduation on the basis of college-level work
done in high school.
The panel is recommending only discontinuation of automatic advanced
placement in the first sense, that is, the practice of exempting students from
a required course on the basis of AP or IB exam scores alone. We do not
discourage granting such advanced placement on a case-by-case basis (i.e.,
nonautomatically) if the decision to do so is made responsibly by the rel-
evant college department. This means that a college or university depart-
ment should determine according to its own criteria that there is a good fit
between the student’s high school course and the required course in ques-
tion in terms of both level and subject matter and that granting credit is in

BIOLOGY
313
the best interests of the individual student. Such criteria are already used for
granting transfer credit between colleges; they should be applied to ad-
vanced placement decisions as well.
Many college departments already use such criteria to grant or refuse
advanced placement to incoming first-year students. The panel reiterates
that its recommendation applies only to those that offer advanced place-
ment automatically. A few states have passed legislation that mandates auto-
matic advanced placement based on exam scores alone in all public col-
leges. Such legislation works against the best interests of students and should
be strenuously opposed.
Benefits of Implementing This Recommendation
Several undesirable aspects of the AP and IB programs discussed in this
report tend to be maintained by a complex set of historical precedents;
vested interests; and interdependencies among schools, school boards, state
governments, teachers, parents, students, universities, the Educational Test-
ing Service (ETS) and the College Board, and the IBO. Implementing this
recommendation would cut this Gordian knot, freeing both programs to
evolve in desirable directions and greatly facilitating the implementation of
other changes recommended by the panel. It would sever the current link
between the AP (and to a lesser extent the IB) examination and the content
of first-year college courses in biology (as perceived by the respondents to
the flawed AP survey; see Chapter 3), which provides an inappropriate stan-
dard by which to base the biology taught in high schools. This in turn would
free the AP exam in particular, but also the IB exam, to evolve into better
instruments for assessing the understanding of important concepts and the
process of science, reasoning power, and analytical ability, with less empha-
sis on knowledge of specific biology facts. Such decoupling could also allow
decreased emphasis on the exam itself, with incorporation of more forma-
tive assessments performed during the course into the judgment of student
performance. These changes would have the effect of freeing the AP cur-
riculum in particular, but also the IB curriculum, from the current preoccu-
pation with comprehensiveness, allowing more in-depth, inquiry-based ex-
ploration of selected topics depending on the interests and skills of indi-
vidual teachers and the local and regional environments of particular schools.
Disadvantages of Maintaining the Status Quo
Several arguments can be made against the current practice of granting
automatic advanced college placement on the basis of AP and to a lesser

314
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
extent IB examination scores alone. These arguments, reiterated from above,
include the following:
• The lack of depth in many AP courses leads to superficial knowledge
rather than real understanding of biology, which may handicap students in
subsequent biology courses.
• Colleges and universities differ widely in the nature and emphases of
their introductory courses. The assumption that the AP program can provide
universal preparation for any college-level introductory course is unrealistic.
• Since the AP program does not certify teachers or schools, an AP
course may be taught by an inexperienced instructor without either a degree
or sufficient disciplinary knowledge in biology, and with inadequate facili-
ties and resources for laboratory work. Advanced placement or even college
credit based on such courses is not appropriate.
• Use of AP and IB test scores to excuse nonbiology majors from all
subject-area distribution requirements is based on the invalid assumption
that AP and IB courses are generally equivalent to college-level courses. In
addition, this use of AP scores undermines the concept of requiring breadth
in a university-level education.
Lack of Negative Effect on Current and Potential Benefits
of the AP and IB Programs
If this recommendation were implemented, none of the major benefits
of the AP and IB programs to their various constituents would be lost:
• For universities, superior performance in AP or IB courses would
remain a good predictor of success in college-level work.
• For schools, AP and IB courses would still represent high-profile en-
richment programs that increase a school’s prestige and attract better stu-
dents, better teachers, and possibly additional state support.
• For teachers, AP and IB courses would still attract the best students
and extra resources and would present superior opportunities for profes-
sional advancement, including higher pay and earlier promotion as elite
teachers.
• For parents, AP and IB courses would continue to provide challeng-
ing academic work with the best teachers for their children, enhanced cre-
dentials for college admission and scholarship support, and college credit
that could be used to shorten time to degree and hence decrease tuition
costs.
• For students, AP and IB courses would continue to provide challeng-
ing academic work with the best teachers, experience with and preparation

BIOLOGY
315
for college-level work (assuming a qualified teacher), and enhanced creden-
tials for college admission. And if the panel is correct, the average quality of
these courses as learning experiences should become considerably better.
• For the College Board and the IBO, we surmise that since AP and IB
courses and examinations would continue to benefit all of the constituents
listed above, both programs would be likely to continue their growth and
popularity.
In short, there would be no significant decrease in the value of AP and
IB biology courses if this recommendation were implemented, and in fact
the value might increase if the panel’s predicted improvement in the present
courses were to take place.
Prospects for Implementing This Recommendation
No organization or agency is in a position to mandate such a recom-
mendation; universities are free to use the results of AP and IB examinations
in any way they like within the constraints of state laws. However, given the
enormous popularity of the AP program among its many constituencies and
the increasing number of IB programs, the College Board and the IBO should
have considerable leverage that could be used to promote meaningful change
in high school biology education. Therefore, the panel strongly urges that:
• The College Board and the IBO discourage the use of examination
scores alone for granting of automatic advanced placement out of required
introductory college biology courses for science majors.
• The College Board and the IBO make clear that their assessments are
designed to measure not eligibility for exemption from a specific biology
course, but rather ability to succeed at college-level coursework and labora-
tory work in biology. Advanced placement in the form of elective credit
toward a college degree is therefore appropriate, while placement out of an
introductory required course for science majors is not.
SECONDARY RECOMMENDATIONS
Recommendations 4 through 14, which address specific concerns with
the AP and IB programs, are reiterated below from preceding chapters in the
order of their appearance. To avoid further redundancy, the chapter in which
each is discussed is indicated in parentheses.
4. Students should in general not be allowed to take AP biology as
a first science course in high school. A prior biology course should be

316
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
a prerequisite for AP biology, and a prior chemistry course should be
strongly urged as well. In schools where the latter is impractical, chem-
istry should be a corequisite course. (Chapters 2 and 3)
5. Both the AP and IB curricula should be updated to include top-
ics of major current interest in biology, such as cell signaling, devel-
opment, genomics, molecular systematics, and their evolutionary
implications. (Chapter 3)
6. The AP curriculum should be better balanced, with more em-
phasis on molecular and cell biology. The IB core topics should in-
clude more evolutionary biology. (Chapter 3)
7. The College Board should seriously consider offering two dif-
ferent AP biology courses, one emphasizing molecular, cellular, and
developmental (MCD) and the other environmental, population, and
organismic (EPO) biology, with two corresponding exams. These
courses should go into depth in one of these areas of emphasis and
present the basics of the other. Both courses should include a strong
emphasis on evolution. (Chapter 3)
8. More curricular flexibility should be built into the AP program
so that students can study fewer areas in greater depth than is pos-
sible with the current overemphasis on breadth of coverage. (Chap-
ter 3)
9. The AP program should place more emphasis on laboratory
work by developing a new and larger set of innovative, inquiry-based
laboratories that conform to the NSES and by including more labora-
tory-based questions on the exam. Enough laboratories should be
available so that teachers have the opportunity to select among them
according to their interests and those of their students, and the labo-
ratory-related questions on the AP exam should be general enough so
that teachers have real flexibility in deciding which laboratories to
offer. In addition, the AP program should include a mandatory 1-week
workshop on laboratory pedagogy for beginning teachers of AP biol-
ogy and should provide more ongoing laboratory training for estab-
lished teachers. (Chapters 3 and 4)
10. Assessments of schools and teachers (see Recommendation 1
above) should include determination of the amount and quality of
laboratory experience being provided. Scheduling of at least one 2-
hour laboratory period per week should be strongly urged as a crite-
rion for certification of an AP biology course. (Chapter 3)
11. The AP program should promote more interdisciplinary ac-
tivities that relate AP biology to other academic work as well as local
and regional issues. (Chapter 3)
12. The AP program should modify its assessment process to in-
clude evaluation of laboratory portfolios and other samples of stu-

BIOLOGY
317
dent work prior to the examination. There should also be more ques-
tions on the exam designed to test understanding of major concepts
and the process of laboratory research, with less emphasis on rote
memorization of facts. (Chapters 3 and 4)
13. To provide feedback, the AP program should make individual
students’ exam answers available to their teachers after the exams
have been evaluated. (Chapter 4)
14. More attention should be paid to the interface between ad-
vanced high school and college biology teaching. In particular, more
communication and collaboration should be encouraged between
college and university departments and high school teachers of biol-
ogy. Colleges and universities are potential sources of enrichment
and resources for high school courses, and college instructors can
benefit from the teaching experience of high school teachers. The
need for reform is systemic. Like the AP and IB programs, colleges
and universities should revise or improve introductory biology courses
as necessary to bring them into line with the recommendations made
in this report for high school advanced study courses. (Chapter 4)
POSSIBLE IMPACT OF THE PANEL’S
RECOMMENDATIONS
Most of the panel’s suggestions for improving the teaching of advanced
biology in high schools are not new ideas. Why should these recommenda-
tions have more impact than similar suggestions made earlier? The panel
believes several new factors substantially increase the chances for significant
reform of biology teaching in the coming years.
Almost a century ago, in 1910, a committee report of the Central Asso-
ciation of Science and Mathematics Teachers made the following sugges-
tions for improving biology courses (Hurd, 1961, pp. 25–26):
1. More emphasis on “reasoning out” rather than memorization.
2. More attention to developing a “problem-solving attitude” and a “prob-
lem-raising attitude” on the part of students.
3. More applications of the subject to the everyday life of the pupil and
the community.
4. More emphasis on the incompleteness of the subject and glimpses
into the great questions yet to be solved by investigators.
5. Less coverage of the territory; the course should progress no faster
than pupils can go with understanding.

318
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
Likewise, more than a decade ago, a National Research Council (NRC) re-
port entitled Fulfilling the Promise: Biology Education in the Nation’s Schools
addressed biology teaching and the AP program in particular (NRC, 1990).
This report identified many of the shortcomings noted in the present report
and made many of the same recommendations presented herein—most of
which have not been implemented in the interim (see Appendix F).
As noted, however, the panel believes several recent developments have
created a more favorable climate for implementation of the recommenda-
tions presented in this report:
• National Science Education Standards (NRC, 1996a) and its recent
practical addendum, Inquiry and the National Science Education Standards
(NRC, 2000b), are beginning to have an impact on biology teaching at all
levels.
• Recent results of research on cognition and learning are becoming
more widely disseminated and accepted, particularly since being made more
accessible in two recent NRC reports—How People Learn: Brain, Mind, Ex-
perience, and School (NRC, 1999) and its practical companion volume How
People Learn: Bridging Research and Practice (NRC, 2000a).
• The vast potential of the Internet for disseminating free information,
ideas, and educational resources of all kinds to teachers and students is just
beginning to be exploited.
• There is currently a general awareness among the American public
that the education of the nation’s scientists in particular must be improved
markedly if the United States is to compete effectively in the global economy.
This raised consciousness is reflected in other recent studies besides the
present one; an example is the recent impressive report of the National
Commission on Mathematics and Science Teaching for the 21st Century,
chaired by former Senator John Glenn (National Commission on Mathemat-
ics and Science Teaching for the 21st Century, 2000).
Three solid findings about how humans learn can make a big difference
if used to drive course design and teaching. The principles of adapting in-
struction to students’ current knowledge, monitoring students’ conceptual
development continuously, and integrating metacognitive tasks and skills
(self-assessment by students of their own levels of understanding) with ac-
tive learning of science content have great potential to improve the process
of education in biology as well as other sciences. The panel believes that
with the above resources to back up the current efforts of reformers, it
should be possible to bring about systemic changes in the way biology is
taught at all levels and, in the process, to improve the effectiveness of AP
and IB biology courses in the ways recommended herein.

319
References
Commission on the Future of the Advanced Placement Program. (2001). Access to
excellence: The report of the Commission on the Future of the Advanced Place-
ment Program. New York: The College Board.
Educational Testing Service. (1999). Advanced placement program course descrip-
tion: Biology. New York: Author.
Hurd, P.D. (1961). Biology education in American secondary schools. BSCS Bulletin
#1. Baltimore: AIBS/Waverly Press.
International Baccalaureate Organisation. (1996). International Baccalaureate biol-
ogy. Geneva, Switzerland: Author.
Morgan, R., & Ramist, L. (1998). Advanced placement students in college: An investi-
gation of course grades at 21 colleges. ETS Report #SR-98-13. New York: Educa-
tional Testing Service.
National Commission on Mathematics and Science Teaching for the 21st Century.
(2000). Before it’s too late: A report to the nation from the National Commission
on Mathematics and Science Teaching for the 21st Century. Jessup, MD: Educa-
tion Publications Center.
National Research Council. (1990). Fulfilling the promise: Biology education in the
nation’s schools. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
National Research Council. (1996a). National science education standards. National
Committee on Science Education Standards and Assessment, Coordinating Council
for Education. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
National Research Council. (1996b). The role of scientists in the professional develop-
ment of science teachers. Committee on Biology Teacher Inservice Programs.
Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
National Research Council. (1999). How people learn: Brain, mind, experience, and
school. Committee on Developments in the Science of Learning, ed. J.D. Bransford,
A.L. Brown, and R.R. Cocking. Commission on Behavioral and Social Sciences
and Education. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
National Research Council. (2000a). How people learn: Bridging research and prac-
tice. Committee on Developments in the Science of Learning, ed. J.D. Bransford,
A.L. Brown, and R.R. Cocking. Commission on Behavioral and Social Sciences
and Education. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.

320
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
National Research Council. (2000b). Inquiry and the national science education stan-
dards: A guide for teaching and learning. Center for Science, Mathematics, and
Engineering Education. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Shenk, D. (1997). Data smog: Surviving the information glut. San Francisco: Harper.

321
Appendix A
Charge to the Content Panels from the
Parent Committee
Charge to the Parent Committee and Content Panels: The charge to
the committee is to consider the effectiveness of, and potential improve-
ments to, programs for advanced study of mathematics and science in Ameri-
can high schools. In response to the charge, the committee will consider the
two most widely recognized programs for advanced study: the Advanced
Placement (AP) and the International Baccalaureate (IB) programs. In addi-
tion, the committee will identify and examine other appropriate curricular
and instructional alternatives to IB and AP. Emphasis will be placed on the
mathematics, physics, chemistry, and biology programs of study.
Charge to Content Panels: The content panels are asked to evaluate
the AP and IB curricular, instructional, and assessment materials for their
specific disciplines.
Below is a list of questions that the content panels will use to examine
the curriculum, laboratory experiences, and student assessments for their
specific subject areas. The content panels will use these questions to issue a
report to the committee about the effectiveness of the AP and IB programs
for educating able high school students in their respective disciplines. In
answering these questions, the content panels should keep in mind the
committee’s charge and study questions.
The panels should focus on the following specific issues in advising the
committee:
I. CURRICULAR AND CONCEPTUAL
FRAMEWORKS FOR LEARNING
Research on cognition suggests that learning and understanding are fa-
cilitated when students: (1) have a strong foundation of background knowl-
edge, (2) are taught and understand facts and ideas in the context of a
conceptual framework, and (3) learn how to organize information to facili-

322
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
tate retrieval and application in new contexts (see, e.g., How People Learn
[National Research Council (NRC, 2000a)]).
1. To what degree do the AP and IB programs incorporate current knowl-
edge about cognition and learning in mathematics and science in their cur-
ricula, instructions, and assessments?
2. To what degree is the factual base of information that is provided by
the AP and IB curricula and related laboratory experiences adequate for
advanced high school study in your discipline?
3. Based on your evaluation of the materials that you received, to what
extent do the AP and IB curricula and assessments balance breadth of cov-
erage with in-depth study of important topics in the subject area? In your
opinion, is this balance an appropriate one for advanced high school learn-
ers?
4. Are there key concepts (big ideas) of your discipline around which
factual information and ideas should be organized to promote conceptual
understanding in advanced study courses (e.g., Newton’s laws in physics)?
To what degree are the AP and IB curricula and related laboratory experi-
ences organized around these identified key concepts?
5. To what degree do the AP and IB curricula and related laboratory
experiences provide opportunities for students to apply their knowledge to
a range of problems and in a variety of contexts?
6. To what extent do the AP and IB curricula and related laboratory
experiences encourage students and teachers to make connections among
the various disciplines in science and mathematics?
II. THE ROLE OF ASSESSMENT
Research and experience indicate that assessments of student learning
play a key role in determining what and how teachers teach and what and
how students learn.
1. Based on your evaluation of the IB and AP final assessments and
accompanying scoring guides and rubrics, evaluate to what degree these
assessments measure or emphasize:
a) students’ mastery of content knowledge;
b) students’ understanding and application of concepts; and
c) students’ ability to apply what they have learned to other courses
and in other situations.
2. To what degree do the AP and IB final assessments assess student
mastery of your disciplinary subject at a level that is consistent with expec-
tations for similar courses that are taught at the college level?

BIOLOGY
323
III. TEACHING
Research and experience indicate that learning is facilitated when teach-
ers use a variety of techniques that are purposefully selected to achieve
particular learning goals.
1. How effectively do the AP and IB curricula and assessments encour-
age teachers to use a variety of teaching techniques (e.g., lecture, discus-
sion, laboratory experience and independent investigation)?
2. What preparation is needed to effectively teach advanced mathemat-
ics and science courses such as AP and IB?
IV. EMPHASES
The NRC’s National Science Education Standards and the National Coun-
cil of Teachers of Mathematics’ Standards 2000 propose that the emphases of
science and mathematics education should change in particular ways (see
supplemental materials).
1. To what degree do the AP and IB programs reflect the recommenda-
tions in these documents?
V. PREPARATION FOR FURTHER STUDY
Advanced study at the high school level is often viewed as preparation
for continued study at the college level or as a substitute for introductory-
level college courses.
1. To what extent do the AP and IB curricula, assessments, and related
laboratory experiences in your discipline serve as adequate and appropriate
bases for success in college courses beyond the introductory level?
2. To what degree do the AP and IB programs in your discipline reflect
changes in knowledge or approaches that are emerging (or have recently
occurred) in your discipline?
3. How might coordination between secondary schools and institutions
of higher education be enhanced to optimize student learning and contin-
ued interest in the discipline?

324
Appendix B
Biographical Sketches of Biology Content
Panel Members
Robert A. Bloodgood is a professor in the Department of Cell Biology at
the University of Virginia School of Medicine.  His research focuses on mecha-
nisms of cell motility and cell surface-cytoskeleton interactions.  Using im-
munological, biochemical and genetic approaches, his lab examines how
the movement of plasma membrane glycoproteins contributes to whole cell
locomotion. In addition to his scientific research, Dr. Bloodgood has taken
an unusually active interest in education.  He has worked with the under-
graduate education groups Coalition for Education in the Life Sciences (CELS)
and Project Kaleidoscope, representing the Federation of American Societies
for Experimental Biology (FASEB) and the American Society for Cell Biol-
ogy. For a number of years, he was chair of the Education Committee for the
American Society for Cell Biology.  Dr. Bloodgood also has taken a specific
interest in precollege education, as indicated by his service as a Charlottesville
City School Board member and a member of the Science Education Task
Force, a group of University of Virginia faculty that evaluated the science
education programs in the Charlottesville Public Schools. Teacher training
also has been a focus of Dr. Bloodgood’s interest; for five years, he was
director of a Summer Teacher Research Fellowship Award Program (funded
by National Science Foundation [NSF] Teacher Enhancement and private
foundation grants) that placed high school teachers in research laboratories
nationwide. Dr. Bloodgood received his Ph.D. in Cell Biology from the Uni-
versity of Colorado at Boulder.
Mary P. Colvard is a biology teacher retired from the classroom after 31years.
She presently works as a consultant to the New York State Education De-

BIOLOGY
325
partment.  Her excellence in teaching has been recognized through awards,
such as the Radio Shack National Teacher Award, Science Teachers Associa-
tion of New York State Eastern Section Service Award, Access Excellence
Award, Science Teachers Association of New York State Fellow, Sigma Xi
Outstanding Science Teacher, and an Outstanding Biology Teacher in New
York State award.  Ms. Colvard has been active in biology education at the
state and national levels as well.  For example, she is a leader in the National
Association of Biology Teachers (NABT) and the Science Teachers Associa-
tion of New York State and has participated in the Howard Hughes Medical
Institute undergraduate grant directors meetings and in the National Re-
search Council (NRC) Committee on Undergraduate Science Education.  Ms.
Colvard earned her M.Ed. in Secondary Biology from the State University of
New York at Oneonta.
Patrick Ehrman is a retired teacher who is proposing a high school local
systemic change grant (LSC) to the NSF.  The LSC will service science teach-
ers in five districts in the greater Seattle area.  He has been recognized for his
teaching excellence through the Shell Science Teacher of the Year Award
from the National Science Teachers Association (NSTA), the Presidential Award
for Excellence in Education and the NABT award for Molecular Biology
Teaching.  Mr. Ehrman has experience with the International Baccalaureate
program as the inner city school where he taught employed it as they devel-
oped into a magnet school.  Mr. Ehrman believes that inquiry-based learning
is very important and established a biotechnology research program de-
signed to attract at risk children into science.
John R. Jungck is the Mead Chair for the Sciences and a Professor of Biol-
ogy at Beloit College.  He also is principal investigator of the BioQUEST
(Quality Undergraduate Educational Simulations and Tools in Biology) Cur-
riculum Consortium. Dr. Jungck is a theoretical/mathematical biologist with
interests in molecular evolution and science education.  Dr. Jungck has long
been active in education issues.  He is editor of The BioQUEST Library,
education editor of the Bulletin of Mathematical Biology, and on the edito-
rial boards of several other journals. The BioQUEST Curriculum Consortium
Program has brought thousands of biology educators and software develop-
ers together to produce and field test curricular materials and modules for
learning long-term strategies of research.  Project Kaleidoscope chose
BioQUEST as a “Model Program” that works as well as other awards. His
honors include an Ohaus Award for Outstanding Innovations in College
Science Teaching, a Mina Shaugnessy Award, and Life Member of the Asso-
ciation of College and University Biology Educators.  Dr. Jungck is an Ameri-
can Association for the Advancement of Science  (AAAS) Fellow, a fellow of
the National Institute of Science Education, and a former Fulbright Fellow to

326
Thailand. Dr. Jungck served on the NRC Committee on Information Technol-
ogy in Undergraduate Science Education.
James H. Wandersee is a graduate faculty member in the Department of
Curriculum and Instruction at Louisiana State University, where he is the
Wm. LeBlanc Alumni Association Professor of Biology Education.  His re-
search group, the 15º Laboratory, focuses on visual cognition, the graphic
representation of biological knowledge, and visual approaches to learning
biology. Trained as a botanist, Dr. Wandersee is especially interested in stu-
dent and public understanding of plants, and he has served as a plant sci-
ence lecturer at the Royal Botanic Gardens—Kew.  He also has coauthored
books on mapping biology knowledge, bioinstrumentation, teaching sci-
ence for understanding, and assessing science understanding.  Dr. Wandersee
is a AAAS Fellow in the biological sciences section, past secretary and trea-
surer of the NABT, and past science program chair of the American Educa-
tional Research Association.  He served for 5 years as the associate editor of
the Journal of Research in Science Teaching and 3 years as North American
Editor of the International Journal of Science Education.  He has been rec-
ognized for his contributions to education in being named Louisiana State
University’s Educator of the Year and receiving LSU’s first university-wide
Excellence in Teaching Award.  He has taught high school biology and other
sciences in an urban setting for 10 years, college biology/botany for 10
years, and research-university, graduate-level, science education courses
(mainly biology education courses) for 13 years.
William B. Wood (committee liaison and chair) is professor of Molecu-
lar, Cellular, and Developmental Biology at the University of Colorado, Boul-
der, where he formerly served as department chair.  He is a member of the
National Academy of Sciences (NAS), a fellow of the American Academy of
Arts and Sciences, and a recipient of the NAS Molecular Biology Award.  His
current research focuses on the mechanisms by which cell fates and patterns
are determined during embryonic development of the nematode C. elegans,
using techniques of genetics, cell biology, and molecular biology.  Dr. Wood
was lead author of the widely used textbook Biochemistry:  A Problems
Approach, which helped introduce problem-based learning to biochemistry;
he subsequently spearheaded the development of a graduate core course in
molecular, cellular, and developmental biology that served as a model for
many departments around the country.  He received his Ph.D. in biochem-
istry from Stanford University.

327
Appendix C
Comparison of Specifics in the IB and AP
Course Outlines and Corresponding
Examination Questions
The International Baccalaureate (IB) program has a detailed course
outline and prescription for the depth of teaching. While the Advanced
Placment (AP) program may demand the same depth or more through
its assessment, it is not clearly evident in the course outline.
Example—Cell membrane architecture:
• IB specifically requires teaching of the fluid mosaic model: phospho-
lipid bilayer, cholesterol, glycoproteins, and intrinsic and extrinsic proteins.
The course must include how amphipathic phospholipids maintain mem-
brane structure, but nothing about what the intrinsic proteins are (e.g., re-
ceptors for cell signaling).
• AP instructs the teacher to cover the “current model of the molecular
architecture of membranes.”
Example—Cell membrane transport:
• IB specifically requires defining diffusion and osmosis and describ-
ing passive transport, including osmosis (permeability, non- and partial per-
meability). IB also mandates that students be able to describe active trans-
port across membranes, including the roles of protein carriers, adenosine
triphosphate (ATP), and a concentration gradient. Students are expected to
know about carrier-assisted transport and the importance of favorable con-
centration gradients for facilitated transport; to predict conditions for active
transport with examples; to understand membrane pumps without biochemical

328
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
details; and to compare endocytosis and exocytosis, phagocytosis and pi-
nocytosis, and vesicle-mediated transport. Students must also be able to
explain the dynamic relationships among the nuclear membrane, rough en-
doplasmic reticulum Golgi apparatus, and cell surface membrane. They must
be able to describe ways in which vesicles are used to transport materials
within a cell and to the cell surface, as well as membrane proteins and their
positions within membranes. (Students can use a series of diagrams to dem-
onstrate structure relationships and how materials are moved. They must
know about channel proteins and the flow of materials through channels or
vesicles. Knowledge of the chemical nature of materials is not required.
Mention of pores and the fact that some intrinsic proteins are anchored is
also expected.) Students should be able to outline the functions of mem-
brane proteins as antibody recognition sites, hormone binding sites, cata-
lysts for biochemical reactions, and sites of electron carriers. (Again, nothing
is included about the most important class—receptors for cell signaling—
except in the oblique reference to hormone binding sites.)
• AP requires that students be able to detail how the structural organi-
zation of membranes provides for transport and recognition and the mecha-
nisms by which substances cross membranes. They must also address how
variations in the structure account for functional differences among mem-
branes.
Questions on the AP and IB exams are comparable in the degree
of detail expected.
Examples—AP exam questions related to cell membranes (May
1999 exam, series of questions based on an illustration):
17. Membranes are components of all of the following except a (A)
microtubule, (B) nucleus, (C) Golgi apparatus, (D) mitochondrion, (E) lyso-
some.
31. All of the following are typical components of the plasma mem-
brane of a eukaryotic cell except (A) glycoproteins, (B) cytochromes, (C)
cholesterol, (D) phospholipids, (E) integral proteins.
61. Which of the following cellular processes is coupled with the hy-
drolysis of ATP? (A) Facilitated diffusion, (B) Active transport, (C)
Chemiosmosis, (D) Osmosis, (E) Na+ influx into a nerve cell.
Questions 114–116 refer to an experiment in which a dialysis-tubing bag is
filled with a mixture of 3 percent starch and 3 percent glucose and placed in
a beaker of distilled water. After 3 hours, glucose can be detected in the
water outside of the dialysis-tubing bag, but starch cannot.

BIOLOGY
329
114. From the initial conditions and results described, which of the fol-
lowing is a logical conclusion? (A) The initial concentration of glucose in the
bag is higher than the initial concentration of starch in the bag. (B) The
pores of the bag are larger than the glucose molecules but smaller than the
starch molecules. (C) The bag is not selectively permeable. (D) A net move-
ment of water into the beaker has occurred. (E) The molarity of the solution
in the bag and the molarity of the solution in the surrounding beaker are the
same.
115. Which of the following best describes the conditions expected after
24 hours? (A) The bag will contain more water than it did in the original
condition. (B) The contents of the bag will have the same osmotic concen-
tration as the surrounding solution. (C) Water potential in the bag will be
greater than water potential in the surrounding solution. (D) Starch mol-
ecules will continue to pass through the bag. (E) A glucose test on the
solution in the bag will be negative.
116. If, instead of the bag, a potato slice were placed in a beaker of
distilled water, which of the following would be true of the potato slice? (A)
It would gain mass. (B) It would neither gain nor lose mass. (C) It would
absorb solutes from the surrounding liquid. (D) It would lose water until
water potential inside the cells is equal to zero. (E) The cells of the potato
would increase their metabolic activity.
Essay: Communication occurs among cells in a multicellular organism. Choose
three of the following examples of cell-to-cell communication, and for each
example, describe the communication that occurs and the types of responses
that result from the communication.
• Communication between two plant cells.
• Communication between two immune cells.
• Communication either between a neuron and another neuron or be-
tween a neuron and a muscle cell.
• Communication between a specific endocrine gland cell and its tar-
get cell.

330
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
Examples—IB questions related to cell membranes:
[November 1999 Paper One (multiple choice), #2]:
2. The cells of plant roots can take up ions from the soil against the
concentration gradient. What is the process used? (A) Osmosis. (B) Passive
transport. (C) Diffusion. (E) Carrier-assisted transport.
[November 1999 Paper Two]:
Part A (Extended Response) #2 A. Draw the structure of a nephron. B. Iden-
tify where most active transport occurs and identify one specific location
where active transport occurs in plants. C. Define water potential. D. Explain
the process of water uptake in roots by osmosis. E. List three abiotic factors
which affect the rate of transpiration in a typical terrestrial mesophytic plant.
Part B (Extended Response) A. List three functions of lipids. B. Outline the
production of ATP by chemiosmosis in the mitrochondrion. C. Explain the
process of muscle contraction.

331
Appendix D
Laboratory Experience in AP and IB
Biology Courses
The AP manual (Educational Testing Service, 1999) suggests “since one-
fourth to one-third of the credit in comparable college courses is derived
from laboratory work, AP courses should likewise emphasize laboratory
work.” There are 12 recommended laboratory exercises:
Lab 1—Diffusion and Osmosis
Lab 2—Enzyme Catalysis
Lab 3—Mitosis and Meiosis
Lab 4—Plant Pigments and Photosynthesis
Lab 5—Cell Respiration
Lab 6—Molecular Biology
Lab 7—Genetics of Organisms
Lab 8—Population Genetics and Evolution
Lab 9—Transpiration
Lab 10—Physiology of the Circulatory System
Lab 11—Animal Behavior
Lab 12—Dissolved Oxygen and Aquatic Primary Production
The AP laboratories are not inquiry based and involve little instrumenta-
tion. The write-up varies from laboratory to laboratory and involves prima-
rily filling in the data table and/or blanks along with providing some “short”
extended responses. There is no external check on whether the laboratories
are completed.
An example is AP Lab 6, Molecular Biology. Lab 6a demonstrates bacte-
rial transformation using E. coli and the pAMP plasmid. Students are given a
step-by-step procedure. The analysis consists of four questions: #1 is a cell
count; #2 is a comparison; #3 leads students through a calculation of the
transformation efficiency; and #4 is open ended and asks students to discuss
factors influencing transformation efficiency. Lab 6b is called “Restriction
Enzyme Cleavage of DNA and Electrophoresis.” Students are told to conduct

332
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
the lab following directions provided either by their teacher or by the kit
they are using. Students do not perform their own digest; they merely load
DNA that has been digested for them. They are provided with a photo of a
gel carrying size markers and asked to represent graphically the relationship
between migration rate and fragment length. They then analyze their own
gels to determine the size of their fragments by measuring the migration
rates.
The IB program requires that 25 percent of the teaching hours “be spent
following an internally assessed scheme of practical/investigative work, re-
lated to all aspects of the program including the options.” The subject and
design of the labs are at the teacher’s discretion. These are used to create a
portfolio and must be written using a specified format. The “criteria” are as
follows:
Planning (a)
Defined problem(s), research question(s); formulated
hypothesis(es); selected any relevant variables.
Planning (b)
Designed realistic procedures to include appropriate
apparatus, materials, methods for both the control
of variables and collection of data.
Data collection
Observed and recorded raw data with precision and
presented them in an organized way (using a range
of appropriate scientific methods/techniques).
Data analysis
Transformed, manipulated and presented data (in a
variety of appropriate ways) to provide effective
communication.
Evaluation
Evaluated the result(s) of experiment(s) and evalu-
ated procedure(s); suggested modifications to the
procedure(s), where appropriate.
A summative evaluation is done of the following three skills:
Manipulative skills
Carried out a range of techniques proficiently with
due attention to safety; followed instructions.
Personal skills (a)
Worked within a team; recognized contributions of
others; encouraged the contributions of others.
Personal skills (b)
Approached experiments/investigations/projects and
problem-solving exercises with self-motivation and
perseverance and in an ethical manner; paid due
attention to the environmental impact.
The portfolio accounts for 24 percent of the student’s final grade, de-
rived from the internal assessment by the teacher. The teacher grades both

BIOLOGY
333
the Group 4 project (interdisciplinary investigation) and the labs, which to-
gether constitute the portfolio.
IB teachers are required to submit a description (“practical scheme of
work”) of laboratory work done in their class to an external examiner. The
examiner moderates the overall practical scheme of work experienced by
the students and provides feedback to teachers and schools on their compli-
ance with the IBO internal assessment requirements. Portfolios from indi-
vidual students are sampled by the examiners to enhance standardization of
grades across the program.
There is no laboratory in the IB program that is directly comparable to
the above AP example. Teachers may select any molecular genetic activities
they wish. However, teachers are provided with an “inquiry template” that
specifies what components a laboratory should include. Recommended com-
ponents are Background Information, Question/Hypothesis, Design/Proce-
dure, Data Collection, Data Analysis, Evaluation, and Manipulative and Per-
sonal Skills. Students are charged to work collaboratively but with individual
accountability and to pay attention to the ethical and environmental implica-
tions of the investigation. Not all laboratories must include all the above
components, but each component must be assessed twice during the course
(and teachers are encouraged to “address” each component multiple times).

334
Appendix E
Some Useful Web Sites for
Advanced Biology Courses
For obvious reasons, no listing of such sites can be complete, as the
Web resources relevant to biology teaching are expanding daily. Presented
below is a sampling of useful sites known to the panel as of this writing.
Simple searches by readers will turn up many additional valuable resources.
American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS):
http://aaas.org/
Association of Science and Technology Centers:
http://www.astc.org/
BioQUEST Curriculum Consortium:
http://bioquest.org
Biological Sciences Curriculum Study
http://www.bscs.org
Cornell Math and Science Gateway:
http://www.tc.cornell.edu/Edu/MathSciGateway/
Discovery:
http://www.discovery.com/
Edvotek (The Biotechnology Education Company)
http://www.edvotek.com
Entrez
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Entrez
Instructional Materials in Science Education:
http://www.ncsu.edu/imse/

BIOLOGY
335
Microscopy Primer:
http://micro.magnet.fsu.edu/primer/index.html
National Association of Biology Teachers:
http://www.nabt.org
National Center for Biotechnology Information
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov
National Sciences Teachers Association:
http://www.nsta.org
National Science Education Standards:
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/4962.html
Teaching about Evolution and the Nature of Science:
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/5787.html
National Science Foundation Student Summer Opportunities:
http://www.ehr.nsf.gov/ehr/esie/studentops.htm
National Science Foundation Teacher Enhancement Summer Opportunities:
http://www.ehr.nsf.gov/ehr/esie/teso/
Exploratorium:
http://www.exploratorium.edu
Eisenhower National Clearinghouse:
http://www.enc.org
Lawrence Hall of Science:
http://www.lhs.berkeley.edu
Access Excellence:
http://www.gene.com/ae
Cells Alive:
http://www.cellsalive.com
National Center for Biotechnology Information:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov
The On-Line Biology Book:
http://gened.emc.maricopa.edu/bio/bio181/BIOBK/BioBookTOC.html

336
Appendix F
Conclusions and Recommendations from
the 1990 NRC Report
Fulfilling the Promise: Biology Education
in the Nation’s Schools
(1) “We are concerned that the AP biology course has been modeled on
introductory college biology courses that for many students are notoriously
poor educational experiences. The time has come to stop designing cur-
ricula by the process of serial dilution, in which the high school course is a
thin version of the college course, and the middle school course is a thin
version of the high school course.” (p. 85)
(2) “... [s]erious problems, both philosophical and practical, attend the
AP biology program” (p. 85). To paraphrase:
• Covers too many aspects of biology in too short a time.
• Requires “teaching to the examination.”
• Diverts academically able students from other high school courses to
a college-level focus.
(3) We are skeptical whether AP biology is commonly able to provide
an exposure equivalent to that offered in most colleges” (p. 86).
(4) The report therefore made recommendations (pp. 86–87):
• A consensus needs to be reached as to what the AP biology
course should be. The present policy of modeling the AP course after
a composite view of college courses is missing opportunities for gen-
erating a unique high-school experience, providing a more realistic
introduction to experimentation, and providing better college prepa-
ration. Although the recent inclusion of quantitative experimenta-

BIOLOGY
337
tion in the AP Program was needed and is commendable, an intro-
ductory college course may not be the soundest educational experi-
ence for students who have time for a second course in biology in
high school. Whether the AP course will develop into a strong com-
ponent of biology education or will itself become an obstacle to re-
form is unclear. A national body of educators, high-school and col-
lege biology teachers, and scientists should make specific recommen-
dations about the AP curriculum, examination, and college credit. (See
also Chapter 8.) The College Board should be asked to study fully its
own record of success, follow up on the college placement of stu-
dents, and assess compliance of high schools with its recommenda-
tions for prerequisites.
• Whatever their form, AP or other advanced biology courses
should not be taken instead of chemistry, physics, or mathematics.
Nor should they become the “honors” section, taken in lieu of the
first high-school course in biology. The AP biology course should be
taken as late in high school as possible, preferably in the senior year,
to enable the subject to be taught as an experimental science to stu-
dents whose maturity is close to that of college freshmen. Even a prop-
erly designed AP course in biology is inappropriate for younger stu-
dents and for those without maximal preparation in mathematics and
the physical sciences.
• We suggest that the terminal-year AP biology course provide
intensive treatment of a few topics in molecular biology, cell biology,
physiology, evolution, and ecology. Emphasis should be on experi-
mental design, experimentation and observation, data analysis, and
critical reading. Thus, the course cannot be modeled after existing
college courses, which broadly cover all biology. Engaging students
in direct investigations of natural phenomena without attempting to
“cover” the subject matter of the introductory college biology course
is judged by this committee to be more educationally sound than the
current program. A rigorous examination devoted to problem solv-
ing that requires the application of biological concepts should ac-
company such a revision.
• This course should be taught only by teachers both capable of
providing a sophisticated and broad knowledge of biology and hav-
ing the ability, training, experience, resources, and time to oversee
an independent experimental approach. For example, a teacher who
has not had first-hand experience in independent research should
not be assigned to teach AP biology. Specific inservice training and
certification should be used to ensure that only qualified teachers teach
the AP course. The College Board should take initiatives to see that
the program meets those more demanding specifications, but school

338
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
administrators must understand and cooperate as well. If AP science
courses are to be offered, there should be a line item in the school
budget to support them, and they should not be given at the expense
of regular science laboratory activities.
• The premise that AP courses provide college credit is not nec-
essarily flawed; however, the nature of what the credit is for needs
examination. A second course giving instruction in scientific reason-
ing, based on experimental design, and using sophisticated physical,
chemical, and mathematical, as well as biological, principles would
in fact provide better preparation for college than the present broad
review. Colleges and high schools should both recognize the value of
a second course in experimental science taken at the end of high
school. Such a course need not be sponsored by the College Board or
be designated “advanced placement.”

339
Content Panel Report:
Chemistry


341
1
Introduction
The National Research Council’s Committee on Programs for Advanced
Study of Mathematics and Science in American High Schools (parent com-
mittee) formed a chemistry panel to compare and evaluate the Advanced
Placement (AP), the International Baccalaureate (IB), and alternative pro-
grams for advanced study in chemistry with respect to their pedagogy, con-
tent, assessments, and outcomes (the charge to the panel is presented in
Appendix A). The chemistry panel met twice (in June and July 2000) to
address its charge from the parent committee. The panel was chaired by a
member of the parent committee, who served as liaison to the committee
and consolidated the panel’s findings and recommendations into this report.
Panel members also included high school chemistry teachers with AP, IB,
and New York State Regents examination experience, along with experi-
enced college and university chemistry professors noted for their work in
chemical education (for biographical sketches, see Appendix B).
Neither independent researchers nor the AP or IB program has pub-
lished systematic data about the programs. Thus few data on the ways in
which AP and IB courses are actually implemented in U.S. high schools, the
long-term consequences to students who take AP or IB courses, or the ef-
fects of an increasing number of students who arrive at college with multiple
AP and IB credits to use toward advanced placement or to meet graduation
requirements were available to the panel. Because important data about the
programs have not yet been published by either the programs or indepen-
dent researchers, the panel focused its analysis on what the programs say
they do, using available program materials such as course guides, released
examinations, teacher manuals, program goals, and mission statements.
The chemistry panel carefully reviewed a substantial volume of back-
ground materials related to the AP and IB programs; those materials are
listed in Appendix C. The findings and recommendations reached by the
panel and presented in this report were consensus opinions, arrived at by
reading the background materials and holding extensive discussions. Panel

342
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
members also contributed written materials that were incorporated into this
final report.
The remainder of this report is divided into four chapters. Chapter 2
presents an overview of advanced study in chemistry for high school stu-
dents. Chapters 3 through 5 respond to the questions under the panel’s
charge. Chapter 3 focuses on the students who enroll in the AP chemistry
course and the IB program, what is taught and how well it is being taught,
the grade levels at which these advanced courses are offered, and the back-
ground and prerequisites needed to take and succeed in the courses. Chap-
ter 4 addresses those who teach AP and IB chemistry courses, including
their academic preparation, credentials, and appropriateness for the task.
Chapter 5 provides an analysis of the assessments and outcomes associated
with the AP chemistry course, the IB chemistry program, and their affiliated
examinations. Throughout these chapters, key findings appear in italic type.
The report concludes in Chapter 6 with a summary and recommendations
regarding the AP chemistry course and the IB program, including the panel’s
consideration of whether advanced study options in high school should be
associated with opportunities for students to earn college or university credit.

343
2
Overview of Advanced Study Programs in
Chemistry in U.S. High Schools
CHARACTERISTICS OF AP CHEMISTRY
In addition to recommending that at least 290 minutes per week be
allotted to Advanced Placement (AP) chemistry courses, the College Board
characterizes the AP chemistry course as follows:
The AP chemistry course is designed to be the equivalent of the general
chemistry course usually taken during the first college year. For some stu-
dents, this course enables them to undertake, as freshmen, second-year
work in the chemistry sequence at their institution or to register in courses
in other fields where general chemistry is a prerequisite. For other students,
the AP chemistry course fulfills the laboratory science requirement and
frees time for other courses.
AP chemistry should meet the objectives of a good general chemistry course.
Students in such a course should attain a depth of understanding of funda-
mentals and a reasonable competence in dealing with chemical problems.
The course should contribute to the development of the students’ abilities
to think clearly and to express their ideas, orally and in writing, with clarity
and logic. The college course in general chemistry differs qualitatively from
the usual first secondary school course in chemistry with respect to the
kind of textbook used, the topics covered, the emphasis on chemical calcu-
lations and the mathematical formulation of principles, and the kind of
laboratory work done by the students. Quantitative differences appear in
the number of topics treated, the time spent on the course by students, and
the nature and variety of experiments done in the laboratory. Secondary
schools that wish to offer an AP chemistry course must be prepared to pro-
vide a laboratory experience equivalent to that of a typical college course
(College Entrance Examination Board [CEEB], 1999a, p. 1).1 (Note: Italics
added for emphasis by the College Board.)
1These publications are commonly referred to as Acorn Books because of the distinctive
logo on their covers.

344
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
Thus by design, AP chemistry courses (and all other AP courses) are
modeled after typical college-level introductory courses in the discipline. As
a result, these high school courses are supposed to follow trends in college-
level introductory general chemistry (not introductory chemistry, which typi-
cally denotes remedial or nonscience major chemistry courses).
The College Board goes on to say that:
The AP chemistry course is designed to be taken only after the successful
completion of a first course in high school chemistry. A survey of students
who took the 1986 AP Chemistry Examination indicates that the probability
of achieving a grade of 3 or higher on the AP Chemistry Examination is
significantly greater for students who successfully complete a first course in
high school chemistry prior to undertaking the AP course. Thus it is strongly
recommended that credit in a first-year high school chemistry course be a
prerequisite for enrollment in an AP chemistry class. (CEEB, 1999a, p. 1)2
(Note: Italics added for emphasis by the College Board.)
Whether schools offering AP courses follow this recommendation probably
depends on local practice. In any case, the chemistry panel unanimously
agrees that, unless truly exceptional circumstances dictate, students should
not take advanced chemistry as their first chemistry course in high school.3
Although the College Board also recommends against this practice, it does
happen, and the panel believes it is detrimental to the student, who is aca-
demically short changed by such circumstances. It is in the first course that
the requisite concepts are learned and the laboratory skills developed that
are needed to legitimize advanced study in the second high school chemis-
try course.4
An appropriate background in mathematics is needed to succeed in AP
chemistry, and the College Board addresses this matter as well: “In addition,
the recommended mathematics prerequisite for an AP chemistry class is the
2The College Board (2001b) reports that in 2001 of the 55,000 students taking AP Chemis-
try, 3,000 were in the ninth or tenth grades, and 28,000 were in the eleventh grade. However, it
is unclear from these data what percentage of students take AP Chemistry as their first course in
the subject. Of the 28,000 students in the eleventh grade taking AP Chemistry, it is possible that
many or most of them took introductory chemistry in the tenth grade. Additional research is
needed to determine the actual proportion of students who take AP Chemistry as their first
course in the subject.
3Exceptional circumstances that would enable some students to succeed in an advanced
course in chemistry as their first exposure to the discipline could include students who have
had unusual preparation in science and mathematics or who have proven that they can acquire
the concepts taught in introductory chemistry on their own. The panel emphasizes that such
exceptions would be made only in very rare cases.
4There are few data on the extent to which this practice occurs. The panel believes that
gathering such data is important and calls on the College Board to gather and publish data
describing the ways in which their courses are implemented in schools and the effects of those
courses on student learning and achievement.

CHEMISTRY
345
successful completion of a second-year algebra course” (CEEB, 1999a, p. 1).
(Note: Italics added for emphasis by the College Board.)
The College Board also is explicit regarding the place of AP chemistry in
the total science curriculum: “The advanced work in chemistry should not
displace any other part of the student’s science curriculum. It is highly desir-
able that a student have a course in secondary school physics and a four-
year college preparatory program in mathematics” (CEEB, 1999a, p. 2).
Because of the structure of the AP program, the AP chemistry course
can be a stand-alone course offered by a high school in the absence of any
other AP course offerings at that high school or other high schools in the
district. Moreover, students who enroll in and complete AP chemistry, or any
other AP courses, are not required by the College Board to take the AP
examination developed by the College Board and administered by the Edu-
cational Testing Service.5
Administered each May, the AP chemistry examination takes 3 hours
and consists of 2 sections. The first section (90 minutes) consists of 75 mul-
tiple-choice questions and represents 45 percent of the final grade. The
College Board uses some common multiple-choice questions from year to
year as a consistency check on the performance of the students taking the
exam. The second section of the examination (also 90 minutes) represents
55 percent of the final grade and consists of several short-answer and essay-
style questions that purportedly provide for a more in-depth assessment of
students’ understanding of chemistry principles. The questions may require
calculations, a short essay response, or the determination of reaction prod-
ucts. Section II contains both required questions to which all students must
respond and opportunities for students to choose two of four additional
questions that they think they are best prepared to answer.6 The examina-
tions are collected and sent to a central location, where they are graded by
a national team of graders.7 All of the examinations are graded during a 1-
week period. The College Board has developed procedures to ensure uni-
formity in the scoring process.8 The AP score (1–5) is determined by a com-
plex formula that factors in how well others who took the test performed,
how scores were distributed over the past 3 years, and how well college
5Although the College Board has no such requirement, some state and local school dis-
tricts are now requiring students to take the examination. In these circumstances, the district or
state sometimes pays for part or all of the costs to students of taking the exams.
6For example, in 2001 the AP Chemistry examination required that students answer ques-
tions 1, 4, 5, and 6 and allowed them to choose between questions 2 and 3 and between
questions 7 and 8.
7Graders are drawn from a pool of experienced high school AP teachers and college
faculty with expertise in the discipline. Individuals are nominated or apply to become graders.
8For example, more than one grader reads each paper, and large discrepancies between
assigned scores are resolved by third and sometimes fourth readers.

346
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
students at the end of their introductory course performed on the AP exami-
nation.
CHARACTERISTICS OF THE IB PROGRAMME
AND IB CHEMISTRY
Whereas the AP program is a collection of individual, unrelated courses,
the International Baccalaureate (IB) Diploma Programme is a comprehen-
sive 2-year curriculum consisting of six academic areas.9 IB courses may be
taken at either the Standard Level (SL) or Higher Level (HL).10 Chemistry is
included with Group 4, the Experimental Sciences. IB Diploma candidates
must take one subject from each of the six subject areas, with at least three
and not more than four being HL. The other courses taken are SL. Thus, a
chemistry student can take either the HL or SL version of the IB chemistry
course and related examination. IB students are permitted to take two sci-
ence subjects simultaneously from Group 4.
Students can and do take individual IB courses without working toward
an IB Diploma. These students are known as certificate candidates, as op-
posed to diploma candidates. Only diploma candidates are required to take
one subject from each area, as well as to fulfill additional requirements.
Approximately 65 percent of IB students work for and complete the require-
ments for a diploma.
IB Diploma candidates must also complete three other requirements: (1)
the interdisciplinary Theory of Knowledge course; (2) an extended essay of
approximately 4000 words; and (3) participation in the school’s Creativity,
Action, Service (CAS) program involving sports, artistic pursuits, and com-
munity service work. Unlike the AP program, the IB program seeks to pro-
vide interdisciplinary preparation for university work rather than attempting
to meet particular university course requirements, although strong perfor-
9Although AP courses are not traditionally offered as an integrated program, the panel
notes that for several years the College Board has offered an International Diploma for Ad-
vanced Placement. This program is designed for students who plan to pursue undergraduate
studies outside the United States or Canada. The total number of students seeking this diploma
is relatively small. To earn the diploma students take four AP courses in three different subject
areas and must receive an average grade of 3 or higher. In 2000, the College Board initiated a
pilot test of a new AP Diploma that is similar to the IB Diploma in many respects. To qualify for
this diploma, students must take one AP course from each of the following areas: languages
and literatures, sciences, mathematics, history, and social sciences. They must also take one
additional AP course in any area. In addition, students must earn an average grade of 3 on all
exams taken. Additional information is available at http://www.collegeboard.org/ap/students/
benefits/int_diploma.html [4/24/02].
10SL courses entail 150 hours of class time, while HL courses require 240 hours. HL courses
are generally taught over 2 years.

CHEMISTRY
347
mance in IB courses is used to grant advanced placement at colleges and
universities (International Baccalaureate Organisation [IBO], 1999).
All Group 4 subjects include required practical (laboratory) work, which
makes up a significant portion of the course.11 Although this laboratory
work focuses primarily on the assessment of laboratory skills, it also offers
opportunities for students to perform experiments and experience first-hand
the benefits and limitations of scientific methodology. Individual teachers
plan the Practical Scheme of Work (PSOW) for students in their classes.
Thus, the laboratory experiences of students in different IB classrooms will
vary. The PSOW should represent the breadth and depth of the subject
syllabus, but students are not required to conduct an investigation for each
topic in the syllabus. To ensure quality and to foster improvements, teachers
are required to submit copies of their PSOW annually to the IBO for mod-
eration and feedback.
As noted above, the College Board recommends that at least 290 min-
utes per week be allotted for an AP chemistry class (174 total hours per year,
assuming a 36-week academic year). Of this total, 54 hours is recommended
for laboratory work. By comparison, IB recommends a total of 240 hours for
HL and 150 hours for SL courses per academic year. Of this time, it is recom-
mended that 60 hours for HL courses and 40 hours for SL courses be de-
voted to investigative activities that, along with the Group 4 project, com-
prise the internal assessment (IA) component of the course.
A common core curriculum applies to both HL and SL chemistry courses.
The core material taken by SL students is a subset of the HL program. At the
SL level, the core topics make up about 60 percent of the material, while at
the HL level the core represents 75 percent of the covered topics. Both SL
and HL students also study optional topics that their teacher selects from
among a list of topics included in the course syllabus. SL students study
three options of 20 hours each, while HL students study two options of 30
hours each chosen by the school. The only option available exclusively to
SL students is higher physical organic chemistry (15 hours). Options avail-
able to both SL and HL students (15 and 22 hours, respectively) include
medicines and drugs, human biochemistry, environmental chemistry, chemical
industries, and fuels and energy. The options available to HL students only
(22 hours) are modern analytical chemistry and further organic chemistry.
Additional hours of internally assessed practical work are required for both
SL and HL options.12 Further, both SL and HL students must spend 10–15
11The IBO recommends that 25 percent of the course be devoted to practical (laboratory)
work.
12SL options require an additional 5 hours of practical work that is internally assessed;
options that are suitable for both SL and HL require an additional 5 hours for SL students and 8
hours for HL students; and options exclusively for HL students require 8 hours of internally
assessed practical work.

348
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
hours on an interdisciplinary Group 4 project, which is a common element
of all IB science programs and constitutes 10 hours of the internally assessed
practical scheme of work.13
The IB chemistry examination is given annually and is taken at either
the SL or HL, depending on the student’s course of study. The SL exam
consists of three papers. The first paper (0.75 hour) consists of 30 multiple-
choice questions. The second paper (1 hour) contains short-answer ques-
tions and brief calculations in Part A and offers students a choice of answer-
ing one of two more extended questions in Part B. The remaining paper
(1.25 hours) consists of one or two questions based on the course options
completed by an individual student. The HL examination also comprises
three papers with the same distribution as that of the SL examination but
with topics examined in greater depth. The time allotted for the first HL
paper is 1 hour, for the second 2.25 hours, and for the third 1.25 hours.
IB examinations are sent to examiners around the world who mark and
return them to the IBO offices in Cardiff, Wales. During the grading process,
examiners measure each student’s performance against seven grade descrip-
tors, given in the form of levels of performance that candidates can demon-
strate on the examination. To ensure uniformity in the grading across exam-
iners who are not centrally located, a representative sample of graded ex-
aminations from individual examiners is sent to the chief examiner for mod-
eration. IB examination grades (1–7) are based on established criteria that
represent an absolute standard of quality; thus, the interpretation of a student’s
performance is criterion referenced. A grade of 7 represents “excellent per-
formance,” while grades of 4 and 1 represent “satisfactory” and “very poor”
performance, respectively. All IB group subjects, including chemistry, have
a significant IA component involving laboratory work and a project, which
constitutes 24 percent of a student’s final grade. The IA component is inter-
nally assessed at the student’s school by the teacher and is also externally
moderated by the IBO. Final IB scores for each student are a combination of
the results of the IA and the external scoring of the examination papers but
are reported to the school as a single total.
QUALIFICATIONS FOR TEACHING ADVANCED
HIGH SCHOOL COURSES IN CHEMISTRY
To provide a chemistry course consistent with the criteria noted above
for an advanced study course in chemistry at the high school level, those
13The Group 4 project is an interdisciplinary activity that involves all of the IB science
students at the school in identifying and investigating an issue, usually of local interest. The
project requirements emphasize sharing concepts and theories from across the disciplines and
the processes involved in scientific investigation, rather than producing products.

CHEMISTRY
349
who teach such a course must be adequately prepared. The chemistry panel
takes this to mean a B.S. or B.A. degree in chemistry and preferably an M.A.
or M.S. degree in chemistry. The preparation of AP and IB chemistry teachers
is discussed in detail in Chapter 4.
DEFINITION OF ADVANCED STUDY IN
CHEMISTRY FOR HIGH SCHOOL STUDENTS
The chemistry panel agrees that the prerequisite first-year high school
course in chemistry should provide students with an introduction to the
atomic-scale view of matter, including its connection to macroscopic physi-
cal and chemical properties and to the language used to express these rela-
tionships, using the periodic table as an organizing entity. Moreover, as
befits the nature of chemistry as an experimental science, the introductory
(first-year) course should include experimentation and the use of scientific
methodology.
Members of the panel also agree that any high school course in chemis-
try that is labeled as advanced study, whether or not it is structured accord-
ing to an established curriculum and assessment such as AP or IB, should
enable students to develop the ability to explore the chemistry concepts and
laboratory practices introduced in the first-year course in greater depth and,
where appropriate, to conduct some form of research. Under the guidance
of a qualified advanced study instructor, desirable features of such advanced
study would include some combination of the following characteristics:
• Application of basic ideas to more complex materials, systems, and
phenomena
• Use of modern instrumentation, methods, and information resources
• Integration of concepts within and between subject areas, including
extensions to other disciplines
• Use of appropriate mathematical and technological methods
• Extended use of inquiry-based experimentation
• Development of critical thinking skills and conceptual understanding
• Use of appropriate tools for assessing student performance and atti-
tude that reflect current best practices
• Promotion of communication skills and teamwork
These characteristics are consistent with visions for undergraduate educa-
tion articulated in the National Science Foundation’s (NSF) Shaping the Fu-
ture (1996) and the National Research Council’s Transforming Undergradu-
ate Education in Science, Mathematics, Engineering, and Technology (1999)
reports. These two reports summarize what undergraduate science, math-
ematics, engineering, and technology courses, including introductory courses

350
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
in chemistry, should encompass if they are to serve the dual objectives of
enhancing scientific literacy and providing adequate preparation for a di-
verse, talented technical workforce.
Catalyzed by programs sponsored by NSF, the American Chemical Soci-
ety, and other organizations concerned with improving undergraduate sci-
ence education, some college and university chemistry courses are being
revamped to achieve the objectives that those reports recommend (see, e.g.,
ChemConnections;14 Chemistry: Structure and Dynamics [Bodner, Rickard,
and Spencer, 1999]; Landis and Peace [1998]; The Chemical World: Concepts
and Applications, 2nd edition [Moore, Stanitski, Wood, Kotz, and Joest, 1998];
and the Discovery Chemistry curriculum developed at the College of the
Holy Cross15). However, many faculty who oversee undergraduate programs
in chemistry have not yet confronted and addressed these issues.
FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS
Although exceptions exist among schools and teachers, the chemistry
panel finds that in general the material taught in advanced courses (as speci-
fied in the guidebooks provided by the College Board and the IBO) fail to
meet many of the criteria outlined in the previous section. In addition, the
panel finds the AP and IB final examinations to be formulaic and predictable
from year to year in their approaches and question formats. Thus, with
sufficient practice in taking such examinations and enough drill on the ma-
jor concepts that the examinations are likely to test, students can score well
primarily by rote, without actually understanding the major concepts associ-
ated with the topics being tested.
The panel also agrees that laboratory work should be a significant com-
ponent of an advanced chemistry course, and assessment of laboratory skills
should be a major part of the final examinations. However, the examinations
reviewed for this study led the panel to conclude that the AP and IB final
examinations do not adequately test understanding of laboratory techniques
or the interpretation of laboratory data. In fact, it was only recently that the
College Board added a question to the AP assessment that purportedly tests
laboratory-based knowledge and skills. The panel notes that the final IB
examination does emphasize laboratory-based knowledge and skills through
assessments other than the final examination. For example, the IBO recom-
mends that 25 percent of the time in the course be spent on investigations
and projects and that 24 percent of the final grade be awarded for this
component. Additionally, all IB science examinations contain a required
data analysis question on the second paper.
14http://mc2.cchem.berkeley.edu/ [4/23/02].
15http://www.holycross.edu/departments/chemistry/discovery/ [4/23/02].

351
3
Quality and Content of the Learning
Experience for Students
MOTIVATION FOR TAKING ADVANCED COURSES
IN HIGH SCHOOL
The motivation to take an Advanced Placement (AP) or International
Baccalaureate (IB) chemistry course comes from a wide range of external as
well as internal sources. Some students simply enjoy science, and such courses
offer the opportunity to learn about chemistry in greater depth than is of-
fered by a first-year course. Other students may want to take the most rigor-
ous program of studies offered by their high school (with less regard for the
specific courses taken); others may want to develop an academic profile that
is sufficiently competitive to gain admission to highly selective colleges. Still
others may enroll more from parental or peer pressure than from a real
desire to undertake a second course in chemistry. Students and parents
increasingly may see the completion of these courses as a way to enhance a
student’s transcript when applying for college admission (College Entrance
Examination Board [CEEB], 1994). Parents may also believe that students in
AP and IB courses have access to better teachers and more resources and
that the atmosphere will be more academically focused than in other courses.
Completing an AP chemistry course and passing the examination at the
minimum level designated by individual colleges and universities may make
a student eligible to earn college course credit, to place out of first-semester
or first-year college chemistry, or to receive credit for completion of a gen-
eral education or distribution requirement in science. Depending on the
options available at the receiving institution and which option is selected, a
student may be able to reduce the amount of matriculation time required for
a degree, thereby saving tuition and other fees. Likewise, although the IB
program was not designed to offer students opportunities for college credit,

352
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
increasing numbers of colleges and universities are now offering such credit
to IB students who have earned specified scores.16
IMPACT OF ADVANCED CHEMISTRY COURSES
ON THE CURRICULUM
The availability of a selection of AP courses, including AP chemistry,
provides opportunities for students to extend their knowledge and academic
skills beyond those required by first-tier courses. Despite these advantages,
however, the existence of AP courses can also create curricular difficulties.
The AP program of courses can have two negative effects on the overall
high school science curriculum.17 The first of these is compression of that
curriculum. Although there is variation among schools, the first-year chemis-
try course has generally been offered during the junior year. However, schools
offering a range of AP science courses have helped foster a national shift
toward offering biology to ninth-grade students and chemistry to tenth-grade
students so the final 2 years of high school can be used for advanced work,
including AP chemistry. Alternatively, this shift allows for making physics
available in the eleventh grade, thereby offering opportunities to focus on
advanced work in the twelfth grade. The panel believes that such a shift
does not coincide well with the academic preparation and intellectual skills
of high school freshmen and sophomores and therefore believes that the
science concepts being taught may be too abstract for the age of many
students at that level.
Curriculum compression may also prevent students from being able or
electing to take the full range of first-year courses in science (biology, chem-
istry, and physics) during their high school years. Such students may substi-
tute AP biology or AP chemistry for first-year physics, thereby leaving them
with significant lacunae in their quantitative understanding of physical sci-
ence concepts. This practice is contrary to the College Board’s recommenda-
tion (CEEB, 1999a, p. 2). Moreover, those who take first-year chemistry as
sophomores but elect not to take AP chemistry in their junior or senior year
have a 2-year hiatus between their study of high school chemistry and the
time at which they enter college and major in a discipline requiring them to
take general chemistry. This time lag, extended in chemistry by 1 year be-
16If a particular college requests help, the International Baccalaueate Organisation (IBO)
will work with the institution to develop appropriate policies related to credit and placement
decisions that are based on IB examination scores (see, http://www.ibo.org [4/24/02]).
17The issues associated with compression of curriculum are discussed in detail in Chapter
10 of the parent committee’s report. The present discussion serves only to raise the issue as it
may pertain to chemistry.

CHEMISTRY
353
cause of curriculum compression, can cause difficulty for some students in
making the transition from high school to college chemistry.
Advanced mathematics is the gateway to advanced science, particularly
advanced chemistry and physics. The College Board recommends that stu-
dents taking AP chemistry previously have completed 2 years of algebra and
1 year of geometry in addition to having taken the first-year chemistry course.
To take AP chemistry as a junior, a student must complete these mathematics
prerequisites by the end of the sophomore year. Thus, these mathematics
requirements also compress the mathematics curriculum. The result is that
Algebra I must be completed in eighth grade. Given the small percentage of
minority and rural youth who either have access to or enroll in Algebra I in
grade 8, the need to have completed these courses by the end of grade 10 in
effect sets up a de facto homogenous grouping of students that continues
throughout the 4 years of high school. Such tracking has serious implica-
tions with regard to which students are able to take advantage of advanced
courses in chemistry and other sciences and thereby raises issues of access
and equity with regard to the benefits of college admission, credit, and
placement that currently accrue to students who have such opportunities for
advanced study (see Chapters 2 and 10 in the parent committee’s report for
more discussion of these issues).
COURSE CONTENT
The IB curriculum, in some sense, flanks the AP course, with expecta-
tions that are either higher or lower than those for AP chemistry. The IB
Standard Level (SL) course is at a lower level than AP with respect to the
content coverage; the IB Higher Level (HL) course is at a somewhat higher
level than AP in terms of the topics discussed, especially in light of the HL
options. The AP curriculum deals in greater depth than IB with concepts
related to kinetic molecular theory, chemical kinetics, and equilibrium. In
contrast, the IB curriculum at least introduces concepts from organic chem-
istry, an area generally not included in the AP course. The IB courses also
provide students with some opportunities to develop conceptualizations of
the material presented; most such opportunities are lacking in AP courses.
In IB courses, chemical concepts are often taught within a context, and
examination questions are designed to assess several aspects of a concept,
not merely one or two. To cite one example, enthalpy changes in solution
are linked to thermal changes, as well as experimental design and sources of
error. Bond dissociation energies are associated with environmental changes
such as stratospheric ozone depletion. In these aspects, the IB course is
broader in content and outlook than its AP counterpart. A comparison of the
differences between the two approaches is summarized in Table 3-1.

354
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
MATERIALS USED
A list of suggested textbooks is given in the Advanced Placement Pro-
gram Course Description: Chemistry (CEEB, 1999a, 2001a). These suggested
textbooks are among those most frequently used in introductory college
chemistry courses. In many cases, especially in classes taught by inexperi-
enced teachers, the textbook forms the basis of the AP chemistry course. In
an effort to finish the book, many of these teachers may try to cover all of
the text before the May examination date. The broad scope of these text-
books contributes to an emphasis on breadth of coverage at the expense of
depth of understanding.
Because of the unique structure of the IB chemistry courses, the IBO
maintains that there are no suitable textbooks that can serve as the basis for
its courses. Instead, the IBO publishes and disseminates a document, Chem-
istry Bibliography, which lists general resources. It is divided into Pre-IB,
Core/General, Core and Higher Level, Organic, and General/Organic text-
books. It lists resources for each option and suggests sources for practical
work (laboratories), comprehension exercises/review material, post-IB, and
demonstrations, as well as periodicals and a list of data/useful sources of
TABLE 3-1
Comparison of AP and IB Chemistry Courses
AP
IB
1 level
2 levels: SL or HL
1 year
1 or 2 years for SL; 2 years for HL
Less conceptualization of topics
Deeper conceptualization of topics
Molecular-level interpretation of KMT (kinetic
More descriptive (macroscale) approach to KMT
molecular theory)
More quantitative treatment of kinetics and
Less quantitative treatment of kinetics and
equilibrium
equilibrium, but better conceptualization of
the topics
No organic chemistry, biochemistry, or
Organic chemistry, biochemistry, and
environmental chemistry
environmental chemistry concepts covered in
SL and HL
Consideration of phase diagrams, colligative
No consideration of phase diagrams, colligative
properties, and Nernst equation
properties, and Nernst equation
Minimum of 90 minutes per week recommended
Laboratory work required, making up 25% of
(not required), preferably in one session, to be
teaching time; required Group 4 project
spent engaged in laboratory work
(student-designed research investigation)
makes up 10 hours of work. (The project’s
intention is that students analyze a topic or
problem that can be investigated in each of
the science disciplines offered by a school.
The topic can be set in a local, national, or
international context.)
SOURCE: Adapted from CEEB (2001a) and IBO (2001).

CHEMISTRY
355
information (including Web sites). Teachers are encouraged to select the
materials that best align with the common core and optional topics that they
teach in their classrooms.
LABORATORY WORK
The average length of a high school class per day (42–58 minutes) poses
a challenge with regard to the amount of material that can be presented and
actually learned in advanced chemistry courses. Increasingly, schools have
adopted block-scheduling options, allowing up to 90 minutes for class and
laboratory sessions. Even with this additional time allotted to laboratory
work, however, time can be a true barrier to meaningful laboratory activi-
ties, especially those that are investigative in nature rather than applying a
confirmatory or validation approach to preexisting knowledge. Investigative
laboratories can occupy large amounts of time, and the amount of time
recommended by the College Board for more traditional laboratories may
not be sufficient for these new paradigms and approaches. In addition, col-
lege and university chemistry courses typically have affiliated weekly 3- or
4-hour laboratory periods during which students can perform actual investi-
gative experimentation that includes multiple trials, replications, and the
examination and evaluation of varying methodologies. This raises questions
about the alignment of students’ AP laboratory experiences with those avail-
able to college students. The panel notes that increasing numbers of high
schools are working to find innovative ways of extending opportunities for
laboratory work, which the panel commends.18 The panel applauds the Col-
lege Board’s clearly expressed guidelines that AP chemistry courses need to
have a weekly extended laboratory period.19 The College Board explicitly
states that “it is not possible to complete high-quality AP laboratory work
within standard 45-to-50 minute periods” (CEEB, 1999a, p. 35) (emphasis in
original). The College Board recommends that a minimum of 90 minutes
weekly be spent in laboratory instruction, preferably in one session. It would
18One reviewer of this report pointed out that a serious curricular problem is the increas-
ing tendency for high schools to condense the AP course into one semester through the use of
block scheduling. The panel contends that, to benefit most from the AP chemistry experience,
students should take the course throughout an entire academic year. The panel views as coun-
terproductive any attempt to complete the AP chemistry course in one semester. The panel
contends that the material in a college-level chemistry course contains too many concepts to be
mastered in this truncated period of time. A one-semester course also does not allow the
practice time needed to fully grasp what are for most high school students sophisticated chemi-
cal and affiliated mathematical concepts.
19The College Board recommends but does not require that students participate in particu-
lar types of laboratory experiences.

356
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
be desirable to know what percentage of AP chemistry courses follow this
recommendation.
High school chemistry laboratory experiences are of mixed quality as a
result of variations in resources, time available for faculty to set up and
maintain laboratory experiments, and the academic background of faculty
who teach these courses. When done at all, laboratory work can tend more
toward verification than problem-solving investigations. The chemistry panel
believes it would be desirable to avoid the former exercises and instead
emphasize inquiry-based experiments. Moreover, teachers and administra-
tors would likely pay more attention and commit more time and resources
to enhancing laboratory experiences if the culminating AP examination
stressed and tested for the knowledge, skills, and techniques that are gained
primarily, if not exclusively, through laboratory experiences.
The IB examination has more laboratory-based questions than its AP
counterpart, but still relatively few. Unlike the AP program, however, IB
includes a student’s laboratory grade as a component of the final course
grade. It should be noted that the IB program also requires students to
prepare portfolios in which they demonstrate their ability to plan, design,
and analyze scientific experiments. While these components of the portfolio
may draw on experiences in addition to those from the laboratory, they
contribute to the student’s development of skills and understanding of scien-
tific procedures provided by laboratory experiences. Finally, the IB program
requires teachers to submit a detailed description of the Practical Scheme of
Work (PSOW) completed by all students, as well as examples of work from
each individual student. Guidelines for assessing laboratory work are de-
tailed extensively in the IB Diploma Programme Guides.
The chemistry panel notes that in 1999 the AP examination introduced a
required laboratory-based question in the free-response section (CEEB, 1999b).
Should this question continue to be structured so as to assess students’ un-
derstanding of laboratory techniques and data acquisition, this will be a
positive step. The panel believes, however, that all of the subparts of the
laboratory-based question should be directed to laboratory techniques, ex-
perimental design, and data acquisition and interpretation, rather than to
theoretical constructs. Because the AP examination contains only one ques-
tion about laboratory work, including experimental techniques, an AP stu-
dent could score well enough on the other parts of the examination to earn
college credit without ever having undertaken any of the suggested labora-
tory work.
The chemistry panel heard anecdotal accounts of AP chemistry teachers
who omit or defer laboratory activities to review previous AP examinations.
In such circumstances, laboratory work, if done at all, is crammed into the
course after students have taken the AP examination. This deplorable prac-
tice appears to result from teachers recognizing and taking advantage of the

CHEMISTRY
357
lack of laboratory questions on the examination. Such practices disregard
the validity of laboratory work as a means of introducing, reinforcing, con-
solidating, and amplifying chemistry principles. The fact that a number of
colleges and universities require proof of sufficient chemistry laboratory work
before granting credit or placement out of the general chemistry course
indicates that laboratory work is a weak link in the AP course because of the
variability in the way the laboratory component is administered.
In contrast, the IBO requires that teachers assess student work, with
samples being sent to the IBO for moderation. The IBO allows only 2–3
hours of work to be carried out after the deadline, which prevents teachers
from leaving laboratory work until the end of the course. Further, the IBO
provides detailed guidelines and rubrics for assessing practical work (IBO,
2001, pp. 15–32).
CURRICULUM AND METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
Given the broad scope of the AP and IB chemistry curricula, it can
logically be inferred that large components of AP and IB chemistry courses
may be taught by the traditional method of “filling the open vessel”—lec-
ture, note taking, and assessment by recall. These practices are in stark
contrast with the constructivist model of learning recommended by the Na-
tional Science Education Standards (NSES) (National Research Council [NRC],
1996) and other recent reports (NRC, 2000b). Those studies clearly demon-
strate that students learn more deeply when they develop an understanding
of the material while undertaking inquiry-based, problem-centered activi-
ties. Based on the materials examined, the chemistry panel agrees that nei-
ther AP nor IB appears to emphasize such approaches to learning. Rather,
the breadth of topics included in AP and IB course outlines and syllabi
indicates that far too much emphasis is being placed on covering a large
body of information deemed necessary for success on the examination.20
The kinds and levels of questions that appear on both the AP and IB
examinations reinforce the emphasis on broad but shallow coverage of top-
ics. Thus, an overarching, largely unintended, but nevertheless real and per-
verse effect is that the exam-driven nature of both programs may cause the
development of intellectual curiosity in students to fall victim to the pace of
the courses—all in the name of “rigor.”
The chemistry panel also is concerned that the current system of basing
the AP chemistry course on typical or average general chemistry courses
20The panel notes that the IB’s internal assessment component is not taught in a traditional
manner and is consistent with the recommendations and emphases for teaching and learning in
the NSES.

358
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
(using information gathered through surveys of chemistry departments at
colleges and universities that receive the greatest number of AP candidates
[see, e.g., CEEB, 1999a]) precludes incorporating emerging best practices
that are beginning to appear in some college-level chemistry courses. Fur-
ther, because AP courses are based on average college general chemistry
courses, these changes will not be reflected in AP courses until changes in
college-level chemistry become widespread.
A far better model would be to base AP chemistry courses on best
practices in the teaching of college chemistry, even if the resulting course
were less similar to typical college courses than is now the case. The panel
notes that neither the AP nor IB chemistry course as yet accurately reflects
recent efforts to restructure and change teaching and learning in general
chemistry at the college/university level. Among such changes are emphases
on “less is more” in terms of course coverage, a wider variety of assessment
techniques, small-group and inquiry-based learning, and inquiry-based labo-
ratories (NRC, 1999). The AP and IB chemistry courses also do not yet recog-
nize the increasingly interdisciplinary nature of modern chemistry; its in-
corporation of highly important related fields, such as materials science and
biochemistry; and the opportunities presented by such fields to teach related
chemical concepts in a contextual manner. It is important to note that the
College Board established the Commission on the Future of the Advanced
Placement Program (CFAPP) to make recommendations regarding the future
of the AP program. The commission recommends in its recent report, Access
to Excellence: A Report of the Commission on the Future of the Advanced
Placement Program (CFAPP, 2001), that leaders in the subject disciplines,
pedagogy, and research be engaged to ensure that current reforms and best
practices are reflected in AP examinations.
QUALITY CONTROL
To be successful, an AP chemistry course should be initiated only after a
school’s administrators and faculty have carefully considered the valid rea-
sons for offering such a course. Such consideration should be followed by a
thorough analysis of the resources—personnel, facilities, and supplies—avail-
able at the school to support the course. While these considerations would
appear obvious, high schools are not bound by them (CEEB, 1999a). A
school can offer an AP chemistry course by administrative fiat, even when
the personnel, facilities, and supplies available for the purpose are not up to
the expectations of the College Board, as noted in the Acorn Book for chem-
istry. It is not unreasonable to expect the College Board to exercise some
control over where AP chemistry courses are offered and who teaches them.
It is therefore encouraging to note that Access to Excellence, completed after
the chemistry panel had conducted its deliberations, contains the recom-

CHEMISTRY
359
mendation to develop and implement standards for AP programs in schools
and school systems, for AP teachers, and for professional development work-
shops and institutes for AP teachers. Access to Excellence also recommends
that the College Board take a more proactive approach to leading educa-
tional reform by changing the emphasis of the AP program from one of
replicating typical college courses to one of emulating best practices in the
discipline. The report further recommends that leaders in the subject disci-
plines, pedagogy, and research be engaged to ensure that current reforms
are reflected in AP examinations. The chemistry panel endorses these rec-
ommendations fully and is pleased to learn that the College Board is willing
to serve as a forum and vehicle for stimulating educational reform.
The College Board’s expectations for teacher qualifications are explicit:
“if the objectives of a college-level general chemistry course are to be achieved,
the teaching should be done by a teacher who has completed an under-
graduate major program in chemistry including at least a year’s work in
physical chemistry” (CEEB, 1999a, p. 3). However, the College Board does
not have a means of verifying that AP chemistry teachers have these mini-
mum qualifications or certifying them as competent to teach AP-level courses
and associated laboratory activities. This lack of oversight and control is in
addition to the College Board’s lack of a mechanism for determining whether
a school has adequate facilities and supplies before allowing it to offer an
AP chemistry course. Nor does a mechanism exist for making such a deter-
mination once an AP chemistry course is being taught or for preventing a
school from continuing to offer the course if the school is found lacking
until the shortcomings are addressed. The CFAPP (2001) does not recom-
mend certification of schools or teachers, but recommends instead that the
College Board develop and disseminate AP quality standards for teachers,
schools, and school systems. The commission also recommends that the
College Board undertake a rigorous and systematic program of research to
validate that (1) AP examinations actually test what is covered in the corre-
sponding college courses and (2) students who earn specific scores on AP
examinations have indeed mastered subject matter at a level equivalent to
that of students who take these courses in college.
In contrast, before a school is authorized to offer an IB chemistry course,
the school must be authorized to offer the complete IB Diploma Programme.
One factor in this authorization process is an evaluation of the qualifications
of the people who will teach the individual IB courses. In the sciences, a
school that is seeking authorization also must demonstrate a plan for an
acceptable set of laboratory activities relative to its resources. Sample labora-
tory reports must be sent periodically to IBO headquarters for critical review
(IBO, 1999). It should be noted, however, that IB program administrators
provide minimal oversight to ensure that the program standards are main-
tained over time. However, assistant examiners who encounter schools ex-

360
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
periencing difficulties with the program try to inform the IBO of these situ-
ations. Further, in the sciences, ongoing evaluation of a school’s program
continues through the IBO’s moderation of sample laboratory reports and
teachers’ PSOWs that are submitted annually. Feedback is provided to the
schools and teachers to promote improvements.
Students cannot take the IB examination without having taken the course.
In contrast, students can register to take the AP chemistry exam without ever
having taken an AP course, although this is not typically the case. The ob-
verse is also true: students who take an AP chemistry course are not re-
quired by the College Board to take the examination. The College Board
tracks only those students who take the examination. Although it does not
have precise data about the number of students enrolled in AP courses, the
College Board estimates that approximately 63 percent of students who are
taking a course designated as AP sit for the AP examination in that subject.
This, however, is the estimate for AP courses in toto. Currently, data are not
available from the College Board for individual subject areas, such as chem-
istry. Consequently, the percentage of those students taking an AP chemistry
course who do not take the AP exam is not known.21 Accordingly, the panel
believes that statements by the College Board about the quality of AP chem-
istry courses are suspect because they fail to account for the many AP courses
nationwide in which large numbers of students may not take the examina-
tion. In addition, the AP examination results are not available until after the
end of the academic year. Thus the final grade received in an AP chemistry
course is not specifically linked with the student’s performance on the AP
examination. Furthermore, since AP examination scores are not available
until students have completed the course, there can be no grade-related
consequence in the course from not taking the AP examination or, if taken,
from doing poorly.
The panel also notes that commercial vendors, some of them linked
with a university (e.g., the Michigan State University program), now offer AP
courses on the Internet to individual students. This new development allows
students who pay the necessary fees to take an AP course independently of
whether their school offers an AP course in the same subject. Internet-based
courses are self-pacing. The pace and calendar are established by the exami-
nation date, should the student choose to take the examination. In courses
with a laboratory component, such as chemistry, arrangements for labora-
tory work may be irregular. In some situations, the laboratory work is done
at a nearby campus or high school during weekends or other periods when
several laboratory experiments are conducted in an intense burst of work. In
these circumstances, the timing of laboratory activities may not correlate
21The College Board recently began to gather such data from school AP coordinators.

CHEMISTRY
361
well with the chemical principles being studied at that point. Simulations of
laboratory experiments are also used, although current simulations offer no
opportunity for students to gain facility and dexterity in the proper manipu-
lation and use of laboratory equipment.
COURSE CONTENT AND EXAMINATIONS
The 75 multiple-choice questions on the AP chemistry examination (Sec-
tion I) match closely the objectives stated in the Acorn Book for an AP
chemistry course. Despite the rather long list of chemical topics and con-
cepts to be included in the AP curriculum, Section II of the examination asks
questions evaluating a more limited set of topics. In addition, the panel finds
that the topics tested in both parts of the examination are rather predictable
from year to year and formulaic in the way in which the concepts are que-
ried,22 especially in Section II. Certain topics and the style of questions ad-
dressing them change little from year to year. One example is the standard
question in Section II, Part B of the AP examination that is related to reac-
tions and writing of their affiliated chemical equations. (Although this ques-
tion could perhaps be described as a laboratory-based question, the panel
believes that students can answer the question correctly by sheer rote memory
without ever having done any of the laboratory work.) Given this type of
predictability in the examination’s coverage from year to year, together with
teachers who are very familiar with the general content and structure of the
test, students may be able to earn high scores on the examination without
actually having mastered all the material. This is especially true when stu-
dents are given a choice of which questions to answer in Section II.
Some of the IB questions are identical in content to the chemical sys-
tems described and covered in the syllabus, thus requiring only rote learning
with little mastery or understanding. In fact, there is an injunction from the
IBO to IB instructors against using chemical systems other than those on the
examination when teaching a given topic.
AP examinations ask less than IB exams about the application of con-
cepts, especially with respect to new contexts or chemical systems. There is
heavy emphasis on algorithmic solutions, rather than the extension or appli-
cation of concepts to new, unfamiliar but equivalent situations. Few of the
questions test students’ abilities to predict or explain observations. For ex-
ample, students could successfully write and balance sets of chemical equa-
tions with little understanding of the principles of chemical reactivity in-
volved and no knowledge of the associated phenomena. The tests assess
22In large part, this level of predictability is based on the Educational Testing Service’s
emphasis on and close monitoring of exams to maximize their reliability from year to year.

362
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
primarily the acquisition of information, as opposed to analyzing students’
understanding, application, and extension of concepts. The examinations
thus do little to encourage inquiry-based learning.
The chemistry panel drafted samples that demonstrate how questions
taken from the 1999 AP chemistry examination could be modified to accom-
plish several objectives: requiring critical thinking, combining qualitative and
quantitative aspects of a chemical system within a given question, and ap-
plying concepts to chemical systems and situations not previously encoun-
tered. The suggested modified questions are presented in Appendix D. By
using the approaches illustrated by these types of questions, the AP and IB
programs would encourage teachers to teach in less algorithmic ways and
students to learn in a different, more inquiry-based manner as recommended
by the NSES.
The AP examinations have yet to address the shift in increasing numbers
of introductory college/university chemistry courses toward including appli-
cations in biochemistry, materials science, or environmental chemistry. The
IB program and examinations include some applications in biochemistry
and environmental chemistry but still lack attention to materials science.

363
4
Teachers and Teaching
TEACHER PREPARATION AND PROGRAM
QUALITY
It should be self-evident that to teach a subject well requires at least a
solid academic background in and working knowledge of the subject matter
being taught. In addition to knowing the subject matter, however, a skilled
chemistry teacher has the pedagogical insights necessary to present chemi-
cal concepts most effectively to different students. Clearly, no less should be
expected of those who teach Advanced Placement (AP) or International
Baccalaureate (IB) chemistry. To provide a chemistry course in line with the
criteria for an advanced study course in chemistry at the high school level
noted in Chapter 2, those who teach such a course must be adequately
prepared. The chemistry panel takes this minimum level of preparation to
mean a B.S. or B.A. degree in chemistry that includes a full year of physical
chemistry. This view of the panel is congruent with that of the College Board,
which recommends that an AP chemistry teacher have completed an under-
graduate major in chemistry, including a year’s work in physical chemistry
(College Entrance Examination Board, 1999a, 2001a). This expected level of
preparation also is consistent with recommendations from the National Sci-
ence Teachers Association (1998) and the finding of the National Commis-
sion on Mathematics and Science Teaching for the 21st Century that “the
most consistent and powerful predictors of higher student achievement in
mathematics and science are (a) full certification of the teacher and (b) a
college major in the field being taught” (2000, p. 18). The members of the
chemistry panel would extend this recommendation to state that high school
teachers who offer advanced courses in chemistry should also have earned
an M.A. or M.S. degree in chemistry, although the panel recognizes that real-
izing this goal would be difficult given the current and expected future short-
ages of science teachers.

364
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
The reality is, however, that there is enormous variability in the subject
matter preparation and backgrounds of chemistry teachers in the United
States. There are well-prepared and experienced teachers who teach AP
chemistry at the level expected by the College Board. Yet despite growing
demands for AP and IB chemistry courses in more schools and in more
states, the pool of teachers actually qualified to teach the courses is small
(Blank, 1992). As the number of schools desiring to offer these courses
increases while the pool of qualified teachers fails to keep pace, a point will
be reached at which the ability of many schools to offer quality AP or IB
chemistry courses will be seriously compromised. If such is the case, the
very credibility of many AP and IB chemistry courses may be called into
question.
Within the past decade, a significant effort has been made nationally to
change the way in which chemistry and other science teachers are certified
(National Research Council [NRC], 1997). A shift in an increasing number of
states has led to the requirement that teachers have either a college major or
a defined number of designated academic credits in the subject matter of the
field to be taught (National Science Board, 1998). Currently, 29 states require
that high school teachers have a degree in the subject matter they teach,
rather than an education degree. As of 1993, 63 percent of all grade 9–12
teachers of science had a major in science, while nearly three-quarters (72
percent) had a major in science or science education. Although encourag-
ing, these data fail to take into account the fact that two-thirds of all states
permit a “broad-field” secondary science certification, which certifies teach-
ers to teach across a range of science subjects (chemistry, physics, biology,
and earth or space science). In at least eight states, the broad-field certifica-
tion encompasses the same number of semester credit hours as the states’
single-science certification (Blank, 1992). Of the nearly 65 percent of those
with a major in science who are teaching science in grades 9–12, almost
one-third are doing so under a broad-field secondary science certification.
More than half of teachers teaching physical science classes (chemistry, phys-
ics, earth science, or space science) do not have an academic major or minor
in any one of the physical sciences (NRC, 2000a, pp. 50–51). Additionally,
data from the Council of Chief State School Officers ([CCSSO], 1997) indicate
that approximately half (53 percent) of those teaching chemistry do so as
their primary teaching assignment.
These data raise serious questions concerning the adequacy of academic
background preparation for many of those who teach even the first-year
course in chemistry, let alone advanced courses in the subject. Additional
research is required to document the relationship between teaching effec-
tiveness in introductory courses and student performance in advanced courses.
However, it appears logical that students in first-year courses who are taught
by underprepared chemistry teachers are more likely to lack the founda-

CHEMISTRY
365
tional concepts and skills needed to complete advanced study work suc-
cessfully, as compared with students whose teachers have mastered content
knowledge and effective pedagogical approaches to teaching chemistry. The
effect is compounded if the same teachers who teach the first-year courses
inadequately are assigned to teach the advanced study chemistry course as
well.
TEACHER SELECTION, DEVELOPMENT, AND
SUPPORT
Many high schools have only one chemistry teacher. As noted, this indi-
vidual also is likely to teach other science courses (CCSSO, 1997). For an AP
chemistry teacher in this situation, the AP assignment increases the number
of required course preparations as well as the number of different laboratory
preparations, along with their attendant difficulties. If this teacher also teaches
nonchemistry courses (biology or physics, for example), he or she must
remain informed about developments in those subject areas as well. Per-
force, this reduces the amount of time the teacher has to remain abreast of
developments in chemistry and thus adequately prepared for the AP chem-
istry course.
As noted earlier, the chemistry panel believes strongly that an AP or IB
chemistry course cannot be taught appropriately by an instructor whose
background in the content of the subject is insufficient. For example, it is the
panel’s position that a B.S. in science education does not adequately pre-
pare an individual to accept an AP or IB chemistry assignment without com-
pleting further coursework in chemistry. This view, too, is consonant with
the recommendation of the College Board that a teacher of AP chemistry
have an undergraduate major in chemistry.
Data are unavailable about the exact qualifications and academic prepa-
ration of current AP or IB chemistry teachers. The way in which those who
teach AP or IB chemistry are selected or assigned to do so also appears to
vary considerably among schools. First-year teachers, veteran teachers, and
those whose experience levels fall anywhere between these extremes may
be given this assignment. In many school districts, seniority appears to play
a significant role in the selection—even when the individual selected through
seniority is not as well prepared as less senior colleagues.
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT
The College Board offers a variety of professional development oppor-
tunities to support AP chemistry teachers. Such support includes summer
institutes, workshops, and seminars. New AP chemistry teachers are invited

366
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
to attend 1- or 2-week summer institutes to learn the rudiments of teaching
an AP course, its laboratory component, and the College Board’s expecta-
tions for the course. There are also 1-day seminars held regionally to update
AP chemistry teachers on teaching developments and changes in the AP
courses or examinations. In addition, teachers from schools that participate
in AP courses are invited to videoconferences where they can learn from
those who develop AP examinations and review AP courses. And an online
discussion group is available for AP chemistry teachers to share syllabi, com-
pare teaching strategies, and discuss substantive issues related to the content
of the course or chemistry in general. Frequently, college instructors partici-
pate in these discussions, providing a forum for discussions between high
school and college faculty around the teaching of chemistry. Participation in
the regional workshops and online discussion groups is free.
AP summer institutes are not free. The College Board supports some of
them, and schools sometimes bear the costs for their teachers to attend, but
not always. Absent such support, the length of the institutes (1 or 2 weeks)
and their associated costs (travel, registration, meals, housing), if not cov-
ered by a school, district, or state, are a disincentive for teachers to attend,
particularly when such attendance is voluntary and outside of paid contract
hours. The structure and format of these institutes vary. Most offer sessions
on pedagogy and an orientation to the AP chemistry course, its laboratory,
and the AP examination. However, the institutes do not address the major
shortcoming of some AP teachers noted above—an inadequate background
and the lack of a deep understanding of the chemistry principles necessary
to teach the AP course material successfully. As noted above, a deep con-
ceptual understanding of the content and unifying concepts of chemistry is
a critical requirement for effective teaching in the discipline.
The panel encourages the College Board to provide a substantial and
sustaining level of guidance and oversight for the preparation of teachers,
student learning, and support by school systems so that high school AP
chemistry courses can be of the high quality espoused by the College Board.
Such efforts might include expanded and enhanced support for teachers, the
establishment of creative partnerships for teacher professional development,
and the development of comprehensive services for schools and school
systems to help them design and implement successful AP programs. Rec-
ommendations contained in Access to Excellence support the panel’s views
in this regard (Commission on the Future of the Advanced Placement Pro-
gram, 2001, pp. 9–11):
• Provide unconditional support for preparing teachers, schools, and
school systems to offer high-quality AP programs—teachers’ needs are para-
mount (Recommendation 2).

CHEMISTRY
367
• Expand and enhance direct support for teachers (Recommendation
2a).
• Develop creative partnerships and tools to enhance teacher profes-
sional development (Recommendation 2b).
• Promote the development of online support for teachers (Recom-
mendation 2c).
• Develop comprehensive services to help administrators, principals,
and counselors design and implement successful AP programs (Recommen-
dation 2d).
The IB program also holds professional development workshops for
teachers. All new IB teachers are required to attend one of these workshops,
preferably before they begin teaching. Most IB experimental science teach-
ers agree that these workshops are critical for new teachers because of the
complexity of the Group 4 subject syllabi and the requirements for the Prac-
tical Scheme of Work and the Internal Assessment (IA). IB teacher work-
shops for the experimental sciences frequently focus on designing labora-
tory experiences that will enable students to meet the specific IA criteria.
Additionally, these workshops help new teachers develop strategies for
managing the record-keeping activities that are demanded by the Interna-
tional Baccaaureate Organisation. International Baccalaureate of North America
is responsible for conducting these workshops, but they most often are de-
signed and led by experienced IB teachers. It is important to note that these
workshops often are held in remote locales, making travel to attend them
expensive and difficult and thereby reducing the number of attendees.

368
5
Outcomes of AP and IB Chemistry Courses
USE OF AP AND IB CHEMISTRY EXAMINATION
SCORES BY COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES
Colleges and universities vary significantly in the ways in which they
handle credit and placement decisions based on Advanced Placement (AP)
and International Baccalaureate (IB) chemistry examination scores (College
Entrance Examination Board [CEEB], 1994). The options include the follow-
ing:
• No advanced placement or college credit granted
• Advanced placement granted, but no credit given
• College credit given, but no advanced placement
• College credit and advanced placement given
Some states legislate the awarding of particular levels of college or univer-
sity credit to students with specified minimum AP scores. Statewide higher
education systems in some states have well-articulated, shared policies among
their institutions regarding credit and advanced placement for students meeting
system-wide AP score standards; systems in other states leave the matter to
the discretion of the institution or individual departments. Examples of the
credit and advanced placement practices listed above are cited in the College
and University Guide to the Advanced Placement Program booklet from the
College Entrance Examination Board (1994).
DEGREE TO WHICH AP AND IB CHEMISTRY
PROGRAMS REFLECT EMERGING KNOWLEDGE
OR APPROACHES IN CHEMISTRY
The consensus opinion of the chemistry panel is that neither the IB nor
AP examination reflects several significant recent developments in the focus

CHEMISTRY
369
of chemistry research and in the teaching of chemistry at the college/univer-
sity level. Practice in the field of chemical research has shifted to incorporate
work at the intersection of chemistry with disciplines that in the past have
been viewed as different from mainstream chemistry—biology, engineering,
materials science, and environmental science. Major research programs now
exist in materials science, bioinorganic and biopolymer chemistry, atmo-
spheric chemistry, and nanotechnologies. To prepare students to understand
such interdisciplinary research, increasing numbers of college and university
general chemistry textbooks and laboratory curricula are incorporating or-
ganic and biochemical moieties to teach general chemistry principles, thus
breaking down the artificial barriers among subdisciplines and using these
developments as opportunities to teach related chemical principles in a more
contextual manner (see, e.g., ChemConnections modules;23 Chemistry: Struc-
ture and Dynamics [Bodner, Rickard, and Spencer, 1999]; The Chemical World:
Concepts and Applications, 2nd edition, [Moore, Stanitski, Wood, Kotz, and
Joest, 1998]; Landis and Peace, [1998]); and the Discovery Chemistry curricu-
lum from the College of the Holy Cross24). These textbooks and laboratory
experiments also cover exciting new developments in materials science,
such as those developed at the University of Wisconsin, Madison.25 Because
they offer a different focus and context for introductory chemistry courses,
the authors of these texts have made the difficult decisions about what sub-
ject matter to deemphasize so that faculty will have sufficient time to teach
the concepts these texts emphasize.
The AP topic outline and the associated examination do not yet reflect
such changes. Although the College Board introduced aspects of organic
chemistry into the AP chemistry course in 1997, no questions about organic
chemistry or biochemistry have yet appeared on the national examination.
In contrast, the IB program does include some organic chemistry, biochem-
istry, and environmental chemistry, in part because it reflects a broader,
international curricular base whereby students learn chemistry through a
more holistic, spiral approach. Questions that are related to chemical prin-
ciples of materials science are not part of either the IB or AP examinations.
The chemistry panel believes that to be effective, advanced courses in
chemistry must reflect recommendations in the areas of content, pedagogy,
and assessment incorporated in the National Science Education Standards
(NSES) (NRC, 1996). Current practices in the way AP and IB chemistry pro-
grams assess student learning on the written final examinations do not ap-
pear to be responsive to the changes in emphasis suggested by the NSES for
assessment, teaching, professional development, or content. The AP and IB
23http://mc2.cchem.berkeley.edu [4/23/02].
24http://www.holycross.edu/departments/chemistry/discovery/index.html [4/23/02].
25See http://mrsec.wisc.edu [4/23/02].

370
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
examinations continue to assess primarily the acquisition and retention of
information as distinct from understanding, applications, and extensions of
concepts. The exams offer little reinforcement of inquiry-based learning in
these examinations. As noted above, the IB program does meet many of the
NSES criteria through its Internal Assessment protocol (e.g., portfolio assess-
ment, use of rubrics, data analysis questions). The chemistry panel urges AP
and IB staff and teachers to compare their current practices in instruction
and testing against the changing emphases articulated in the NSES and the
related recommendations of the American Chemical Society in Chemistry in
the National Science Education Standards (1997) (e.g., emphasis on unify-
ing concepts; use of inquiry-based teaching; cooperative and collaborative
learning strategies; and incorporation of organic, environmental, and bio-
chemistry topics). The AP program is silent with respect to recommending
or supporting any particular teaching methodology. Its approach is outcome
driven, with success being measured by examination scores, which in turn
are content rather than concept driven. The chemistry panel is disappointed
that AP, as the predominant national-level advanced study program in the
United States, has apparently not considered as part of its responsibilities the
promotion of approaches and innovations in teaching and learning that are
more aligned with recommendations in the NSES.
At the same time, however, the College Board is not likely to be success-
ful in making such changes if it does so unilaterally. The College Board will
require overt and explicit support and encouragement for such reforms from
professional societies, from college and university faculty who teach intro-
ductory chemistry courses, and from college admission offices that are pre-
pared to accept students who take these kinds of revised courses.
SUCCESS IN CHEMISTRY BEYOND THE
INTRODUCTORY LEVEL
Given the variability of AP and IB courses as implemented in different
high schools, as well as the variability among college chemistry courses at
different institutions, the success of individual AP students in higher-level
college courses is also likely to vary considerably. During the past 25 years,
several studies (all conducted under the auspices of the College Board)26
have attempted to examine whether students who take AP courses in high
school are successful in college and whether they are as well prepared as
their non-AP counterparts for second- and third-level college courses in the
26These studies are published as in-house documents only. They have not been peer
reviewed and do not appear in any scholarly publications, such as professional journals. This
issue also is addressed in Chapter 10 of the report of the parent committee.

CHEMISTRY
371
discipline. While the data appear to indicate that AP students on average are
well prepared, the methodology used in these studies makes it difficult to
ascertain whether student success can be attributed to the AP program or to
other factors, such as the colleges they attend, the classes they take, or their
own academic backgrounds and abilities (see Appendix E). The panel there-
fore takes a cautious approach to accepting the findings of these studies.

372
6
Summary and Recommendations
The Advanced Placement (AP) and International Baccalaureate (IB) chem-
istry courses now being offered are taught effectively according to the ex-
pectations of the College Board and the International Baccalaureate
Organisation (IBO) in some, but by no means all, schools. The content of
the courses is bound inextricably to the nature and corpus of questions on
the affiliated AP and IB examinations, which the chemistry panel finds to be
flawed, as described in previous chapters. It should be noted that there is a
growing tendency for IB chemistry classes in the United States to be offered
as 1-year courses, in order to conform to U.S. high school timetables. This
practice contrasts with that of other countries, where virtually all IB chemis-
try classes are taught over 2 years. Thus, in many IB chemistry courses
offered in the United States, too much information may be crammed into the
course for the time available. The following sections summarize the panel’s
findings and recommendations regarding the AP and IB chemistry courses
and examinations and the qualifications and professional development of
those who teach the courses.
FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
REGARDING THE AP AND IB COURSES AND
EXAMINATIONS
1. The chemistry panelists agree that advanced study options in
high school chemistry should not necessarily be tied to the potential
for earning college/university credit. The chemistry panel views these
as two separate issues:
(a) The panel members are unanimous in agreeing that advanced
study of chemistry at the high school level should provide students
with a coherent, rigorous course that promotes further scientific lit-

CHEMISTRY
373
eracy and prepares students to become part of a highly technological
workforce, regardless of whether they continue studying chemistry
at the tertiary level.
(b) An advanced chemistry course that meets criterion (a) should
be organized and delivered such that it would be equivalent to the
two-course college/university general chemistry sequence and such
that college credit could be sought based on passing the placement
examination that is administered by college or university departments
of chemistry. That is to say, advanced study in chemistry need not be
based on AP or IB. Indeed, many of the nation’s top high schools for
mathematics and science offer advanced courses that are neither AP
nor IB based. Other legitimate alternatives should be explored.
2. Institutions awarding AP examination–based course credit or
advanced placement should consider doing so only for a grade of 4 or
5, not for a grade of 3. The College Board is currently conducting
studies on the validity of a grade of 3 for the awarding of college credit,
and the panel applauds this effort. However, until that study is com-
plete, it remains unclear whether students who have earned a score
of 3 have achieved sufficient understanding of the subject matter at a
level comparable to college courses to merit credit and placement out
of the introductory course.
3. The chemistry panel recommends that to be effective, advanced
courses in chemistry must reflect recommendations in the areas of
content, pedagogy, and assessment contained in the National Science
Education Standards (National Research Council [NRC], 1996).
FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
REGARDING THOSE WHO TEACH AP AND IB
CHEMISTRY COURSES
1. The chemistry panel recommends that to be a qualified AP or
IB teacher the teacher must have a B.S. or B.A. degree in chemistry
(which includes a two-semester physical chemistry course sequence
with laboratories) and preferably an M.A. or M.S. degree in chemis-
try. The chemistry panel does not view a B.S. in science education as
being adequate preparation for these teachers, nor does the College
Board.
2. A qualified advanced study chemistry instructor should have
experience with effective current and emerging approaches to chem-
istry teaching and assessment in the subject and their applications to
the AP and IB chemistry courses.

374
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
3. The qualified AP or IB chemistry teacher should have a work-
ing familiarity with teaching technologies (e.g., Web, electronic me-
dia, laboratory instrumentation) and their appropriate uses.
4. There should be required periodic, funded professional devel-
opment opportunities, including content instruction, research par-
ticipation, and pedagogy workshops, for teachers of advanced courses
in chemistry. This recommendation is consonant with the Glenn
Commission’s description of what constitutes professional develop-
ment: “a planned, collaborative, educational process of continuous
improvement for teachers that helps them to do five things: (1) deepen
their knowledge of the subject(s) they are teaching; (2) sharpen their
teaching skills in the classroom; (3) keep up with developments in
their fields, and in education generally; (4) generate and contribute
new knowledge to the profession; and (5) increase their ability to
monitor students’ work, so they can provide constructive feedback to
students and appropriately redirect their own teaching” (National
Commission on Mathematics and Science Teaching for the 21st Cen-
tury, 2000, p. 18).
5. Professional development opportunities, such as the experi-
ence of teaching courses or laboratories at colleges or universities
and undertaking original research in industry, at government labora-
tories, or in collaboration with college faculty, would be particularly
valuable for AP and IB chemistry teachers. High-school system per-
sonnel policies should encourage rather than inhibit such professional
development activities during the academic year.
6. AP and IB chemistry teachers can profit from discussions with
each other. School districts and schools should find ways to initiate
and sustain such conversations and to share them with a wider audi-
ence. Communication about areas of common interest between chem-
istry faculties in high schools and those teaching general chemistry
in institutions of higher education would be extremely helpful for
both communities (see also the recommendations under Vision 4 in
Transforming Undergraduate Education in Science, Mathematics,
Engineering, and Technology [NRC, 1999]).
7. AP and IB chemistry teachers should be participating members
of professional organizations such as the National Science Teachers
Association and the American Chemical Society’s Division of Chemi-
cal Education. Through such participation, teachers gain a sense of
belonging to a community of professionals who are similarly inclined
to excel in their teaching. They gain access to colleagues and resources
that would have been largely inaccessible without membership.

375
References
American Chemical Society. (1997). Chemistry in the national science education stan-
dards: A reader and resource manual for high school teachers. Washington, DC:
American Chemical Society, Education Division.
Blank, R.K. (1992). State data on teacher supply, equity, and qualifications. In E.E.
Boe, and D.M. Gilford (Eds.), Teacher supply, demand, and quality: Policy is-
sues, models, and data bases (pp. 139–152). Washington, DC: National Academy
Press.
Bodner, G., Rickard, L., & Spencer, J. (1999). Chemistry: Structure and dynamics.
New York: John Wiley & Sons.
College Entrance Examination Board. (1994). College and university guide to the
advanced placement program. New York: Author.
College Entrance Examination Board. (1999a). Advanced placement program course
description: Chemistry, May 2000, May 2001 [acorn book]. New York: Author.
College Entrance Examination Board. (1999b). Released exam: 1999 AP chemistry.
New York: Author.
College Entrance Examination Board. (2001a). Advanced placement program course
description: Chemistry, May 2002, May 2003 [acorn book]. New York: Author.
College Entrance Examination Board. (2001b). Advanced placement program na-
tional summary report: May 2001. New York: Author.
Commission on the Future of the Advanced Placement Program. (2001). Access to
excellence: A report of the Commission on the Future of the Advanced Placement
Program. New York: College Entrance Examination Board.
Council of Chief State School Officers. (1997) State indicators of science and math-
ematics education 1997. Washington, DC: Author.
Damji, S. & Zipp, A. (2000a). Diploma years programme teacher training workshops:
Fall 1999-spring 2000: Chemistry book 1, Chemistry and the IB, examinations,
practical work. New York: International Baccalaureate North America (IBNA).
International Baccalaureate Organisation. (1996). Diploma programme guide: Chem-
istry. Geneva, Switzerland: Author.
International Baccalaureate Organisation. (1999). Teacher’s support material: Experi-
mental science internal assessment. Geneva, Switzerland: Author.

376
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
International Baccalaureate Organisation. (2001). Diploma programme guide: Chem-
istry (for first examinations in 2003). Geneva, Switzerland: Author.
Landis, C.R., & Peace, G.E. (1998). The new traditions consortium: Shifting from a
faculty-centered paradigm to a student-centered paradigm. Journal of Chemical
Education, 75(6), 741–744.
Moore, B., & Spencer, B. (1999). ChemConnections modules. New York: John Wiley
& Sons.
Moore, J., Stanitski, C., Wood, J., Kotz, J.C., & Joest, M.D. (1998). The chemical world:
Concepts and applications (2nd ed.). Fort Worth: Saunders College.
Mullins, J. (1994). Teacher’s guide to the advanced placement course in chemistry.
New York: College Entrance Examination Board and Educational Testing Ser-
vice.
National Commission on Mathematics and Science Teaching for the 21st Century.
(2000). Before it’s too late: A report to the nation from the National Commission
on Mathematics and Science Teaching for the 21st Century. Washington, DC: US
Department of Education.
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics. (2000). Principles and standards for
school mathematics. Reston, VA: Author.
National Research Council. (1996). National science education standards. National
Committee on Science Education Standards and Assessment. Coordinating Council
for Education. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
National Research Council. (1997). Improving teacher preparation and credentialing
consistent with the national science education standards. Washington, DC: Na-
tional Academy Press.
National Research Council. (1999). Transforming undergraduate education in sci-
ence, mathematics, engineering, and technology. Committee on Undergraduate
Science Education. Center for Science, Mathematics, and Engineering Educa-
tion. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
National Research Council. (2000a). Educating teachers of science, mathematics, and
technology: New practices for the new millennium. Committee on Science and
Mathematics Teacher Preparation. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
National Research Council. (2000b). How people learn: Brain, mind, experience, and
school (Expanded ed.). Committee on Developments in the Science of Learning.
J.D. Bransford, A.L. Brown, and R.R. Cocking, (Eds.). Washington, DC: National
Academy Press.
National Science Board. (1998). Science and engineering indicators. Arlington, VA:
Author.
National Science Foundation. (1996). Shaping the future. Arlington, VA: Author.
National Science Teachers Association. (1998). Standards for science teacher prepa-
ration. Collaboration with the Association for the Education of Teachers in Sci-
ence. Arlington, VA: National Science Teachers Association. Available at http://
www.nsta.org/main/pdfs/nsta98standards.pdf [4/23/02].
Ricci R. (1998) Inquiry-based laboratory experiments. Dubuque, IA: McGraw-Hill.

377
Appendix A
Charge to the Content Panels from the
Parent Committee
Charge to the Parent Committee and Content Panels: The charge to
the committee is to consider the effectiveness of, and potential improve-
ments to, programs for advanced study of mathematics and science in Ameri-
can high schools. In response to the charge, the committee will consider the
two most widely recognized programs for advanced study: the Advanced
Placement (AP) and the International Baccalaureate (IB) programs. In addi-
tion, the committee will identify and examine other appropriate curricular
and instructional alternatives to IB and AP. Emphasis will be placed on the
mathematics, physics, chemistry, and biology programs of study.
Charge to Content Panels: The content panels are asked to evaluate
the AP and IB curricular, instructional, and assessment materials for their
specific disciplines. Below is a list of questions that the content panels will
use to examine the curriculum, laboratory experiences, and student assess-
ments for their specific subject areas. The content panels will use these
questions to issue a report to the committee about the effectiveness of the
AP and IB programs for educating able high school students in their respec-
tive disciplines. In answering these questions, the content panels should
keep in mind the committee’s charge and study questions.
The panels should focus on the following specific issues in advising the
committee:
I. CURRICULAR AND CONCEPTUAL
FRAMEWORKS FOR LEARNING
Research on cognition suggests that learning and understanding are fa-
cilitated when students: (1) have a strong foundation of background knowl-
edge, (2) are taught and understand facts and ideas in the context of a
conceptual framework, and (3) learn how to organize information to facili-
tate retrieval and application in new contexts (see, e.g., National Research
Council [NRC], 2000b).

378
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
1. To what degree do the AP and IB programs incorporate current knowl-
edge about cognition and learning in mathematics and science in their cur-
ricula, instructions, and assessments?
2. To what degree is the factual base of information that is provided by
the AP and IB curricula and related laboratory experiences adequate for
advanced high school study in your discipline?
3. Based on your evaluation of the materials that you received, to what
extent do the AP and IB curricula and assessments balance breadth of cov-
erage with in-depth study of important topics in the subject area? In your
opinion, is this balance an appropriate one for advanced high school learn-
ers?
4. Are there key concepts (big ideas) of your discipline around which
factual information and ideas should be organized to promote conceptual
understanding in advanced study courses (e.g., Newton’s laws in physics)?
To what degree are the AP and IB curricula and related laboratory experi-
ences organized around these identified key concepts?
5. To what degree do the AP and IB curricula and related laboratory
experiences provide opportunities for students to apply their knowledge to
a range of problems and in a variety of contexts?
6. To what extent do the AP and IB curricula and related laboratory
experiences encourage students and teachers to make connections among
the various disciplines in science and mathematics?
II. THE ROLE OF ASSESSMENT
Research and experience indicate that assessments of student learning
play a key role in determining what and how teachers teach and what and
how students learn.
1. Based on your evaluation of the IB and AP final assessments and
accompanying scoring guides and rubrics, evaluate to what degree these
assessments measure or emphasize:
a) students’ mastery of content knowledge;
b) students’ understanding and application of concepts; and
c) students’ ability to apply what they have learned to other courses
and in other situations.
2. To what degree do the AP and IB final assessments assess student
mastery of your disciplinary subject at a level that is consistent with expec-
tations for similar courses that are taught at the college level?

CHEMISTRY
379
III. TEACHING
Research and experience indicate that learning is facilitated when teach-
ers use a variety of techniques that are purposefully selected to achieve
particular learning goals.
1. How effectively do the AP and IB curricula and assessments encour-
age teachers to use a variety of teaching techniques (e.g., lecture, discus-
sion, laboratory experience, and independent investigation)?
2. What preparation is needed to effectively teach advanced mathemat-
ics and science courses such as AP and IB?
IV. EMPHASES
The NRC’s National Science Education Standards (NRC, 1996) and the
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics’ Standards (2000) propose that
the emphases of science and mathematics education should change in par-
ticular ways (see supplemental materials).
1. To what degree do the AP and IB programs reflect the recommenda-
tions in these documents?
V. PREPARATION FOR FURTHER STUDY
Advanced study at the high school level is often viewed as preparation
for continued study at the college level or as a substitute for introductory-
level college courses.
1. To what extent do the AP and IB curricula, assessments, and related
laboratory experiences in your discipline serve as adequate and appropriate
bases for success in college courses beyond the introductory level?
2. To what degree do the AP and IB programs in your discipline reflect
changes in knowledge or approaches that are emerging (or have recently
occurred) in your discipline?
3. How might coordination between secondary schools and institutions
of higher education be enhanced to optimize student learning and contin-
ued interest in the discipline?

380
Appendix B
Biographical Sketches of
Chemistry Content Panel Members
Conrad L. Stanitski  (committee liaison and chair) is professor of chem-
istry and chair of the Chemistry Department at the University of Central
Arkansas.  His principal focus is inorganic chemistry and general chemistry
for science and nonscience majors.  He is currently chair of the American
Chemical Society (ACS) Division of Chemical Education, was a member of
the ACS Committee on Education, has directed numerous ACS teacher-train-
ing workshops, is a (National Science Foundation) NSF proposal reviewer,
and has been an invited speaker and workshop leader in seven foreign
countries.  Dr. Stanitski has authored or coauthored several highly regarded
textbooks in the field, including Chemistry in Context:  Applying Chemistry
to Society; The Chemical World:  Concepts and Applications; Chemical Prin-
ciples; Chemistry in the Community; and Chemistry for Health-Related Sci-
ences:  Concepts and Applications.  He received his B.S. in science education
from Bloomsburg State College, his M.A. in chemistry education from the
University of Northern Iowa, and his Ph.D. in inorganic chemistry from the
University of Connecticut.
Arthur B. Ellis is Meloche-Bascom Professor of Chemistry at the University
of Wisconsin at Madison.  In addition to receiving numerous teaching awards,
including the NSF’s Director’s Award for Distinguished Teaching Scholars,
Dr. Ellis is currently involved in the creation of innovative instructional ma-
terials that integrate materials science into the chemistry curriculum.  His
research on the electro-optical properties of semiconductor interfaces has
led to the development of new classes of on-line chemical sensors.  He is
currently serving a 2-year appointment to the National Research Council’s
(NRC) Committee on Undergraduate Science Education.  Dr. Ellis received
his Ph.D. from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in inorganic chem-
istry.  In July 2002, he will join the NSF as director of the chemistry division.

CHEMISTRY
381
Patricia A. Metz is an assistant professor of chemistry at the United States
Naval Academy.  She specializes in the teaching and learning of chemistry
and conducts research on curriculum development, instructional design,
conceptual understanding, and assessment.  She is responsible for the devel-
opment of original guided-inquiry biochemistry and general chemistry labo-
ratory classes for both chemistry and nonchemistry majors.  Dr. Metz has
published several articles related to instructional methods and diagnostic
techniques.  She received her Ph.D. from Purdue University in chemistry
education.
John C. Oliver is a science teacher and department chair at Lindbergh High
School in Saint Louis, Missouri, where he has taught a range of biology and
chemistry classes, including both AP and IB chemistry.  His teaching efforts
have been recognized by awards, such as the Woodrow Wilson National
Fellowship and local and regional high school teaching awards from ACS.
Mr. Oliver actively pursues a variety of enrichment coursework in such fields
as physics, chemistry, laboratory techniques, and chemistry education and is
a member of numerous professional organizations.  He received his M.A.T.
in science education from Webster College in Saint Louis and an A.B. in
zoology from the University of Missouri at Columbia, with a minor in chem-
istry.
David Pysnik is a chemistry instructor at Sidney Central Schools in Sydney,
New York.  He teaches the New York Board of Regents Chemistry, which is
similar in content to the AP program, but he does not teach AP chemistry.
Mr. Pysnik focuses on teaching through a research-based approach and has
worked as a research associate at Ithaca College for the last 20 summers.  He
has developed mobile laboratory programs and has won the Catalyst Award
from the Chemical Manufacturers Association, the Tandy Technology Schol-
ars Award, the ACS Northeast Regional Award in High School Chemistry
Teaching, and the Presidential Award for Excellence in Science and Math-
ematics Teaching.  Mr. Pysnik received his B.S. from Juniata College and his
M.S. from Indiana University.
A. Truman Schwartz is DeWitt Wallace Professor of Chemistry at Macalester
College, where he previously served as chair of the chemistry department
and dean of faculty.  His research interests include chemical education, the
history of science, and the physical chemistry of macromolecules.  Professor
Schwartz has contributed to several national curriculum reform projects, in-
cluding the first two editions of Chemistry in Context: Applying Chemistry to
Society and ChemConnections.  On temporary assignment, he served as
deputy director of the Teacher Preparation and Enhancement Division of the
NSF.  He has been honored with numerous teaching awards at the college,

382
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
state, and national levels. Professor Schwartz received a B.A. from the Uni-
versity of South Dakota, M.A. at Oxford University as a Rhodes Scholar and
a Ph.D. in physical chemistry from the Massachusetts Institute of Technol-
ogy.
Glenda M. Torrence is a science resource teacher at Montgomery Blair
High School in Maryland, where she is actively involved with curriculum
development for new and pre-existing courses, interdisciplinary coopera-
tion with the mathematics and technology departments, and the implemen-
tation of assessment methodologies for the chemistry department.  She has
taught chemistry courses at the University of Maryland at College Park and
was nominated for the Presidential Teaching Award.  Dr. Torrence received
her Ph.D. in physical chemistry from the State University of New York at
Buffalo.

383
Appendix C
Background Materials
Provided to the Panel
American Chemical Society. (1997). Chemistry in the national science edu-
cation standards: A reader and resource manual for high school teachers.
Washington, DC: American Chemical Society, Education Division.
Armand Hammer United World College of the American West. (1999). Group
4 internal assessment: Summer 1999 international baccalaureate teacher
workshop. Montezuma, NM: Author.
Burton, N.W., Bruschi, B., Kindig, L, & Courtney, R. (2000). Educational
Testing Service draft interim report: Advanced placement new teacher
needs study. Unpublished draft.
College Entrance Examination Board. (1990a). Advanced placement program
course description: Chemistry, May 1991, May 1992 [acorn book]. New
York: Author.
College Entrance Examination Board. (1990b). The 1989 advanced place-
ment exam in chemistry and its grading. New York: Author.
College Entrance Examination Board. (1992). Advanced placement program
course description: Chemistry, May 1993, May 1994 [acorn book]. New
York: Author.
College Entrance Examination Board. (1994). College and university guide to
the advanced placement program. New York: Author.
College Entrance Examination Board. (1995). Advanced placement program
course description: Chemistry, May 1996, May 1997 [acorn book]. New
York: Author.
College Entrance Examination Board. (1999a). Advanced placement program
course description: Chemistry, May 2000, May 2001 [acorn book]. New
York: Author.
College Entrance Examination Board. (1999b). 5-year set of free-response
questions, Chemistry: 1995-1999. New York: Author.
Commission on the Future of the Advanced Placement Program. (2001).
Access to excellence: A report of the Commission on the Future of the Ad-

384
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
vanced Placement Program. New York: College Entrance Examination
Board.
Damji, S., & Zipp, A. (2000a). Diploma years programme teacher training
workshops: Fall 1999–spring 2000: Chemistry book 1, chemistry and the
IB, examinations, practical work. New York: International Baccalaureate
North America.
Damji, S., & Zipp, A. (2000b). Diploma years programme teacher training
workshops: Fall 1999-spring 2000: Chemistry book 2, extended essays, mark-
ing, miscellaneous. New York: International Baccalaureate North America.
International Baccalaureate Organisation. (1990). Chemistry, revised
programme: May 1992 examinations onwards. Geneva, Switzerland: Au-
thor.
International Baccalaureate Organisation. (1995). International baccalaure-
ate chemistry higher level May 1995 exam—M95/420/H(1-3). Geneva, Swit-
zerland: Author.
International Baccalaureate Organisation. (1996a). Diploma programme guide:
Chemistry. Geneva, Switzerland: Author.
International Baccalaureate Organisation. (1996b). IB chemistry specimen
papers—specpap/420/H(1-3) and markschemes (for tests starting in 1998).
Geneva, Switzerland: Author.
International Baccalaureate Organisation. (1998a). Experimental sciences—
Internal assessment clarifications. Geneva, Switzerland: Author.
International Baccalaureate Organisation. (1998b). Group 4 grade descrip-
tors. Geneva, Switzerland: Author.
International Baccalaureate Organisation. (1999a). International baccalau-
reate chemistry higher level May 1999 exam—M99/420/H(1-3). Geneva,
Switzerland: Author.
International Baccalaureate Organisation. (1999b). Markscheme May 1999
chemistry higher level—M99/420/H(1-3)M. Geneva, Switzerland: Author.
International Baccalaureate Organisation. (1999c). Teacher support material—
Experimental sciences. Geneva, Switzerland: Author.
International Baccalaureate Organisation. (2000). International baccalaure-
ate chemistry higher level May 2000 exam—M00/420/H(1-3). Geneva, Swit-
zerland: Author.
Mullins, J. (1994). Teacher’s guide to the advanced placement course in chem-
istry. New York: College Entrance Examination Board and Educational
Testing Service.
National Commission on Mathematics and Science Teaching for the 21st
Century. (2000). Before it’s too late: A report to the nation from the Na-
tional Commission on Mathematics and Science Teaching for the 21st
Century. Washington, DC: US Department of Education.
National Research Council. (1996). The role of scientists in the professional

CHEMISTRY
385
development of science teachers. Committee on Biology Teacher Inservice
Programs. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
National Research Council. (1999). Transforming undergraduate education
in science, mathematics, engineering, and technology. Committee on Un-
dergraduate Science Education. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
National Science Foundation. (1996). Shaping the future. Washington, DC:
Author.

386
Appendix D
Suggested Modifications of
Examination Questions
This appendix presents examples of the chemistry panel’s suggested
modifications to the questions on the Advanced Placement (AP) chemistry
1999 examination, Section II, to make the questions more contextual; to
probe more carefully the depth of student understanding; to seek to assess
higher-order thinking skills; to require the applications of chemistry prin-
ciples in an enlarged or new context; and to enjoin students to link concepts
to chemical systems and macroscale phenomena, not merely see chemistry
principles as isolated facts. In particular cases below, the original question is
given, followed by its suggested modification.
AP CHEMISTRY 1999, SECTION II, PART A,
QUESTION 1
Original Question
NH3(aq) + H2O(l) ↔  NH4
+(aq) + OH–(aq)
In aqueous solution, ammonia reacts as represented above. In 0.0180 M
NH3(aq) at 25°C, the hydroxide ion concentration [OH–] is 5.60 × 10–4 M. In
answering the following, assume that temperature is constant at 25°C and
that volumes are additive.
(a) Write the equilibrium-constant expression for the reaction repre-
sented above.
(b) Determine the pH of 0.0180 M NH3(aq).
(c) Determine the value of the base ionization constant, Kb, for NH3(aq).
(d) Determine the percent ionization of NH3 in 0.0180 M NH3(aq).
(e) In an experiment, a 20.0 mL sample of 0.0180 M NH3(aq) was placed
in a flask and titrated to the equivalence point and beyond using 0.0120 M
HCl(aq).

CHEMISTRY
387
(i)
Determine the volume of 0.0120 M HCl(aq) that was added to
reach the equivalence point.
(ii)
Determine the pH of the solution in the flask after a total of
15.0 mL of 0.0120 M HCl(aq) was added.
(iii) Determine the pH of the solution in the flask after a total of
40.0 mL of 0.0120 M HCl(aq) was added.
(SOURCE: CEEB, 1999b, p. 42)
Suggested Modification
The panel would suggest leaving much of question 1 alone, although it
could stand to be condensed somewhat. As written, it tests the student’s
fundamental understanding of Kb, buffers, and titration stoichiometry. One
or more of the following additional questions might be added:
Sketch a titration curve for part (e) using the information from (b), (c), and
(d)
and/or
compare the base strength and give the rationale for strength based on the
type of site and associated structure for one or two other more obscure
bases, given their respective Kb’s.
AP CHEMISTRY 1999, SECTION II, PART A,
QUESTION 2
Original Question
Answer the following questions regarding light and its interactions with
molecules, atoms, and ions.
(a) The longest wavelength of light with enough energy to break the
Cl-Cl bond in Cl2(g) is 495 nm.
(i)
Calculate the frequency, in s–1, of the light.
(ii) Calculate the energy, in J, of a photon of the light.
(iii) Calculate the minimum energy, in kJ mol–1, of the Cl-Cl bond.
(b) A certain line in the spectrum of atomic hydrogen is associated with
the electronic transition in the H atom from the sixth energy level (n = 6) to
the second energy level (n = 2).

388
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
(i)
Indicate whether the H atom emits energy or whether it absorbs
energy during the transition. Justify your answer.
(ii) Calculate the wavelength, in nm, of the radiation associated
with the spectral line.
(iii) Account for the observation that the amount of energy associ-
ated with the same electronic transition (n = 6 to n = 2) in the He+ ion is
greater than that associated with the corresponding transition in the H atom.
(SOURCE: CEEB, 1999b, p. 43)
(NOTE: On the exam, students were asked to answer either this question or
the next question concerning reaction rates, but not both.)
Suggested Modification
A question containing some of the information assessed in the original
version of Question 2 but considerably extended might look like this. This
question now relates to a chlorofluorocarbon compound known as CFC-12
or Freon-12.
The Lewis structure of the CFC-12 molecule is: [structure would be given]
(a) Give the correct chemical name for this compound.
(b) Describe the geometrical shape of the compound and estimate the
Cl-C-Cl angle.
(c) Identify the type of hybridization exhibited by the central carbon
atom.
(d) The energy of the C-Cl bond is 327 kJ/mol bonds; the energy of the
C-F bond is 485 kJ/mol bonds. Explain this difference.
or alternatively
(e) The energy of the C-Cl bond is 327 kJ/mol bonds. Would you pre-
dict the energy of the C-F bond to be higher or lower? Explain your answer.
(f) Calculate the frequency, in s–1, of the radiation required to break a C-
Cl bond.
(g) Calculate the wavelength (in nm) of the radiation required to break
a C-Cl bond.
(h) Radiation of this wavelength falls within which region of the spec-
trum?
(i) What is the practical significance of the fact that radiation breaks C-Cl
bonds in CFCs?

CHEMISTRY
389
AP CHEMISTRY 1999, SECTION II, PART B,
QUESTION 4
Original Question
Write the formulas to show the reactants and products for any FIVE of
the laboratory situations described below. Answers to more than five choices
will not be graded. In all cases a reaction occurs. Assume that solutions are
aqueous unless otherwise indicated. Represent substances in solution as
ions if the substances are extensively ionized. Omit formulas for any ions or
molecules that are unchanged by the reaction. You need not balance the
equations.
Example: A strip of magnesium is added to a solution of silver nitrate.
Ex:
Mg
+
Ag+
→
Mg2+
+
Ag
(a) Calcium oxide powder is added to distilled water.
(b) Solid ammonium nitrate is heated to temperatures above 300°C.
(c) Liquid bromine is shaken with a 0.5 M sodium iodide solution.
(d) Solid lead(II) carbonate is added to a 0.5 M sulfuric acid solution.
(e) A mixture of powdered iron(III) oxide and powdered aluminum
metal is heated strongly.
(f) Methylamine gas is bubbled into distilled water.
(g) Carbon dioxide gas is passed over hot, solid sodium oxide.
(h) A 0.2 M barium nitrate solution is added to an alkaline 0.2 M potas-
sium chromate solution.
(SOURCE: CEEB, 1999b, p. 45)
Suggested Modification
The panel would like to see the reaction/equation question tied more
closely to phenomena and laboratory observation. In each of the cases be-
low, the original version (a, b, c, etc.) and a suggested revision (a′, b′, c′,
etc.) are given. (The panel also is not convinced that requiring ionic equa-
tions is the most appropriate strategy.)
(a) Calcium oxide powder is added to distilled water.
(a′) Calcium oxide powder is added to distilled water. Write the equa-
tion for the reaction and indicate whether the final solution will have a pH
less than, equal to, or greater than 7.

390
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
(b) Solid ammonium nitrate is heated to temperatures above 300°C.
(b′) The vapors from 6 M HCl and 6 M NH3 combine to form a white
cloud. Write the equation for the reaction.
(c) Liquid bromine is shaken with a 0.5 M sodium iodide solution.
(c′) 5.0 mL of a 0.5 M solution of sodium iodide is shaken with 5.0 mL of
a water solution of bromine and 5.0 mL of hexane, C6H14. Describe what
you would observe, and write an equation representing the reaction.
(d) Solid lead(II) carbonate is added to a 0.5 M sulfuric acid solution.
(d′) 0.5 M sulfuric acid is added to a small quantity of lead(II) carbonate
in a test tube. Describe the first thing you would notice, and write an equa-
tion representing the reaction.
(e) A mixture of powdered iron(III) oxide and powdered aluminum
metal is heated strongly.
(e′) A mixture of powdered iron(III) oxide and powdered aluminum
metal is ignited with a burning piece of magnesium. Sparks, flames, and a
pool of molten metal are formed. Write the equation for the reaction. What
is the molten metal, and what does this imply about the reaction?
AP CHEMISTRY 1999, SECTION II, PART B,
QUESTION 6
Original Question
Answer the following questions in term of thermodynamic principles
and concepts of kinetic molecular theory.
(a) Consider the reaction represented below, which is spontaneous at
298 K.
CO2(g) + 2 NH3(g) → CO(NH2)2(s) + H2O(l)
∆H °298 = –134 kJ
(i)
For the reaction, indicate whether the standard entropy change,
∆S°298, is positive, or negative, or zero. Justify your answer.
(ii) Which factor, the change in enthalpy, ∆H°298, or the change in
entropy, DS°298, provides the principal driving force for the reaction at 298
K? Explain.
(iii) For the reaction, how is the value of the standard free energy,
∆G°, affected by an increase in temperature? Explain.
(b) Some reactions that are predicted by their sign of ∆G° to be sponta-
neous at room temperature do not proceed at a measurable rate at room
temperature.

CHEMISTRY
391
(i)
Account for this apparent contradiction.
(ii) A suitable catalyst increases the rate of such a reaction. What
effect does the catalyst have on ∆G° for the reaction? Explain.
(SOURCE: CEEB, 1999b, p. 47)
Suggested Modification
The panel suggests that Section II, Part B, Question 6 of the AP chemis-
try exam, which deals with thermodynamic principles and KMT concepts,
could be directed to higher levels of thinking in part (a) by relating a simple
system, such as an ice cube melting, to enthalpy, entropy, and free energy.
The student could be asked to explain the process using the above terms
and appropriate equations. Part (b) could be similar but related to some-
thing common, such as the possible oxidation of sucrose, which has a large
negative free energy. The student could discuss why the sugar does not
spontaneously combust on the kitchen table since the free energy is favor-
able. Included in the explanation would be descriptions of the differences
between thermodynamic and kinetic stability.
AP CHEMISTRY 1999, SECTION II, PART B,
QUESTION 7
Original Question
Answer the following questions, which refer to the 100 mL samples of
aqueous solutions at 25°C in the stoppered flasks shown above (four par-
tially full flasks are shown, each containing an equal volume of 0.10 M
solutions of NaF, MgCl2, C2H5OH, and CH3COOH, respectively).
(a) Which solution has the lowest electrical conductivity? Explain.
(b) Which solution has the lowest freezing point? Explain.
(c) Above which solution is the pressure of water vapor greatest? Ex-
plain.
(d) Which solution has the highest pH? Explain.
(SOURCE: CEEB, 1999b, p. 48)
(NOTE: On the exam, students were asked to answer either this question or
the next question concerning principles of chemical bonding and molecular
structure, but not both.)

392
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
Suggested Modification
The panel suggests the following modified question:
Modification 1. Do not have all solutions be 0.10 M. Instead use 0.010 M
NaF, 0.050 M MgCl2, 0.10 M C2H5OH, and 0.20 M CH3COOH. This change
requires a student to think more critically about the nature of these solutions
to answer the subsequent questions correctly. More discrimination is re-
quired to differentiate acetic acid from NaF and from MgCl2 solution behav-
ior.
Modification 2. If the stoppers were removed from the flasks, from which
flask would the solute escape most readily? Explain the answer.
Modification 3. The contents of which flask(s) could be used as reactant(s)
in an esterification reaction? Explain.
This would become a more challenging question if varying concentra-
tions of the compounds in water were used. This change would make the
question quantitative and more difficult. The quantitative nature of question
7 would make it less appropriate as a companion for question 8. These two
questions should be of like nature and degree of difficulty. To avoid the
quantitative aspect of concentration calculation, it would be appropriate to
ask the student to identify the type of substance for each question and to
write a dissociation, ionization, hydration equation (as necessary) for these
substances in water and discuss their relative activity.
These three items are examples of particulate representations linked to
symbolic representations or macroscopic phenomena. Such questions are
not part of the AP or IB examinations.
1. Which particulate representation corresponds to the equation?
2 SO2 + O2 → 2 SO3
+
(C)
(B)
+
(E)
+
(D)
+
(A)
+

CHEMISTRY
393
2. Which would best represent a mixture of the gases helium and chlo-
rine?
(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)
(E)
3. If the contents of these two beakers are poured into a third beaker,
what will the resulting mixture look like?
(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)
(E)
Co2+
S2-
Na+
Cl-
This is an example of an error analysis-type item.
4. A student titrated 10.00 mL of fruit juice with 12.84 mL of 9.580 × 10–2 M
NaOH. Which step is NOT correct in this calculation of mass of citric acid in
1.00 mL of juice?
C3H5O(COOH)3 + 3 NaOH → Na3(C3H5O(COO)3 + 3 H2O
(a) Moles NaOH = (12.84 mL) (9.580 × 10–2 mol/L).
(b) Moles citric acid = (1.230 mol NaOH) (1 mol citric acid/3 mol
NaOH).
(c) Mass citric acid in sample = (0.4100 mol citric acid) (192.12 g/mol
citric acid).
(d) Mass citric acid in 1 mL fruit juice = (78.77 g citric acid)/(10.00 mL
fruit juice).
(e) All the steps are correct.

394
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
This is an example of a laboratory-related item.
5. Consider a laboratory exercise in which you prepare approximately
200 mL of a pH = 4.35 buffer. The chemicals available for your use are: 1M
solutions of acetic acid, ammonium acetate, ammonium chloride, aqueous
ammonia, hydrochloric acid, sodium acetate, and sodium hydroxide (acetic
acid Ka = 1.8 × 10–5 and ammonia Kb = 1.8 × 10–5).
(a) Which chemicals will you use to make your buffer? Explain your
choice; use chemical equations where appropriate.
(b) How much of each chemical will you need? Show calculations to
support your answer.
(c) Outline the procedure you will follow to make your buffer. In-
clude specific equipment and glassware you will use.
(d) How will you prove that you successfully prepared the buffer?
ADDITIONAL SUGGESTIONS FOR SECTION II,
PART B
The following are some other suggestions for Section II, Part B that are
not specifically tied to the 1999 version of the examination.
(1) A 0.2 M sulfuric acid is added to a 0.2 M solution of barium nitrate.
Describe what happens and write an equation representing the reaction.
(2) A small piece of solid potassium is added to 500 mL of water in a
beaker. The potassium fizzes, dances about, and bursts into flame.
(a) Write an equation representing the reaction.
(b) A drop of phenolphthalein solution is added to the resulting solu-
tion. What would you observe? Explain.
The panel also suggests that a useful addition would require students to
identify reactions as examples of one or more of the following types of
reactions: acid/base, oxidation/reduction, decomposition, combination, pre-
cipitation, gas evolution, double displacement, electron transfer, and proton
transfer. (This list could be expanded or reduced.)

395
Appendix E
Research Agenda for Advanced Studies in
High School Chemistry
The chemistry panel identified a number of topics on which research is
needed with respect to advanced studies in high school chemistry:
1. How do students who take advanced courses in high school chemis-
try move through their college studies (e.g., choice of major, continued in-
terest and enrollment in chemistry), and how well do they succeed com-
pared with students who do not take these programs? Longitudinal data are
needed to address these questions.
2. What are the actual costs for implementing, sustaining, updating, and
upgrading advanced courses in the experimental sciences? Surveys of teach-
ers are needed to determine actual costs.
3. Is there a difference in the academic success of students whose school
districts spend more money on these programs (e.g., for staff development,
materials, and modern equipment and facilities) compared with districts that
spend less?
4. How much is information technology being integrated into advanced
study courses, and what are the requirements for achieving such integration?
5. To what extent do the Advanced Placement (AP) and International
Baccalaureate (IB) courses reflect current approaches to teaching and learn-
ing in introductory college courses?
6. How much variation exists in the granting of college credit and place-
ment in courses to students who take advanced courses in high school?
7. What are the effects of the current ordering of prerequisite and ad-
vanced courses in science?
8. Do advanced programs favor some kinds of students over others?
9. What backgrounds, credentials, and professional experience charac-
terize teachers who are involved with these programs? Do these differences
translate into how well students learn and achieve in the courses?

396
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
10. What percentage of students who take AP chemistry take it as their
first course in chemistry? How well do these students fare in the course and
subsequently in college chemistry courses?
11. What proportion of students who take AP or IB chemistry do not
take the examinations? What effect does the resulting lack of information
about student learning have on the quality and quality control of the AP
program in individual schools and on the AP program overall?
12. Are there advantages to having schools offer clusters of advanced
study courses as opposed to isolated courses? What is the impact of not
doing so (for example, in small high schools that can support only one or
two advanced study courses that may not be connected with each other)?
13. Are there “critical masses” in the number of teachers in a school
who teach advanced study courses? In other words, do differences in oppor-
tunities for isolated teachers to communicate with colleagues translate into
differences in learning and achievement of their students?
14. Are there “critical masses” in the number of students who enroll in
advanced study courses? Are students who enroll in such courses either
individually (e.g., through distance learning courses) or in small numbers at
an advantage or disadvantage relative to students who are enrolled in very
large classes?
15. What percentage of schools have prerequisites or other screening
procedures for entry into advanced study courses? Do more stringent re-
quirements for entry into such courses translate into differences in scores on
the respective assessments?
16. What kinds of physical facilities, equipment and instrumentation,
and support for laboratories are available to teachers and students in ad-
vanced study programs in the experimental sciences? Do differences in the
level and availability of such resources have an impact on student learning
and performance?
17. Are there differences in student performance on advanced study
examinations in districts or states that provide incentives to students to do
well as compared with students in districts or states that do not offer these
kinds of incentives?

397
Content Panel Report:
Physics


399
1
Introduction
The National Research Council’s Committee on Programs for Advanced
Study of Mathematics and Science in American High Schools (parent com-
mittee) formed a physics panel to provide advice on the effectiveness of and
potential improvements to programs for the advanced study of physics in
American high schools. Appendix A presents the parent committee’s charge
to the panel. The physics panel met twice (in May and July 2000) to address
its charge from the parent committee. The panel was chaired by a member
of the parent committee, who served as liaison to the committee and con-
solidated the panel’s findings and recommendations into this report.  Panel
members included experienced college and university physics professors
noted for their work in physics education, as well as high school physics
teachers (for biographical sketches, see Appendix B).
To develop a framework for its recommendations, the panel began with
a thorough discussion of recommended practices that it would expect to
find in a good advanced high school physics program. Chapter 2 presents a
summary of the panel’s review. Using the model that emerged from that
discussion, the panel evaluated the two dominant advanced high school
programs—Advanced Placement (AP) and International Baccalaureate (IB)—
to determine the extent to which they encourage the use of those recom-
mended practices in their physics courses. The results of this evaluation are
presented in Chapter 3, along with the panel’s recommendations for im-
provements to both programs.
Although the panel lacked sufficient time to consider all possible alter-
natives to the AP and IB programs, it did consider one alternative approach,
presented in Chapter 2. The panel recognizes that each high school is a
unique environment with its own strengths and limitations. Thus there is
unlikely to be a single advanced program that could reasonably be imple-
mented with complete uniformity across the nation. Instead, the panel sug-
gests that high schools and school districts offering advanced physics in-
struction adopt a program that has the general characteristics described in

400
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
Chapter 2 but is flexible enough to be implemented in a school’s or district’s
specific context.
Chapters 4, 5, and 6 examine three topics of importance to the panel’s
review of advanced study programs in physics: Chapter 4 looks at the crucial
role played by teaching and learning; Chapter 5 summarizes changing em-
phases in physics and their impact on advanced physics instruction; and
Chapter 6 addresses the linkage between advanced high school physics
programs and college physics programs. Each of these chapters includes the
panel’s specific recommendations in the respective area. Finally, Chapter 7
summarizes the panel’s main findings and overall recommendations.

401
2
Recommended Practices for
Advanced Physics Instruction
WHAT IS AN ADVANCED PHYSICS PROGRAM?
The term “advanced” is taken here to mean study that is substantially
beyond the level of the physics required for high school graduation under
the National Science Education Standards (NSES) (National Research Coun-
cil [NRC], 1996). Although the goal of an Advanced Placement (AP) physics
course is to substitute for a physics course that would otherwise be taken in
college, that is certainly not the only possible reason for undertaking or
offering an advanced program of study in high school. In some cases, tradi-
tional high school–level courses are simply not sufficiently challenging to
interest the brightest students. In many cases, students undertake advanced
study to enhance their college applications. In still other cases, students may
be interested in particular areas of physics that are not covered in available
high school–level courses (as discussed later in this chapter). Certainly, the
particular program adopted by each high school will depend a great deal on
exactly what goals that program is intended to meet.
PREREQUISITES FOR AN ADVANCED HIGH
SCHOOL PROGRAM
The panel recognizes that the level of preparation of students entering
advanced physics programs varies widely from high school to high school.
Nevertheless, we believe that there are two fundamental prerequisites most
entering students should meet:
• Prior to enrolling in an advanced physics course in high school, stu-
dents should have studied the physics that is suggested as a requirement for
high school graduation in the NSES (NRC, 1996). This requirement can be
satisfied with the first year of a 2-year physics program. This is the approach
adopted by the International Baccalaureate (IB) program (as discussed in

402
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
Chapter 3). If a 1-year advanced course is the first time that entering students
encounter physics, the usual result is a packed schedule that allows too little
time to develop the depth of understanding that is the fundamental goal of
the program.1
• Students should be fluent in mathematics through the precalculus
level (see the discussion below). In particular, by the time they are ready to
study advanced physics, students should be skilled in algebraic manipula-
tion and have a firm grasp of basic trigonometry. Emphasis should also be
placed on the use of proportions to solve problems, estimation skills, the
use of international units, and scientific notation (powers of 10). Acquiring
all necessary mathematical skills may well take several years of study before
a student enters the advanced physics program. The panel encourages high
school physics teachers to work closely with the mathematics departments
of their schools to develop the necessary courses of instruction.
Mathematics is the language used to describe the fundamental laws of
physics. Just as it is very difficult to teach physics to students who barely
understand English (or the language of instruction), it is equally difficult to
teach physics to students who do not “speak mathematics.” At the level of
advanced physics study in high school, speaking mathematics consists pri-
marily of facile manipulation of algebraic equations and an intuitive grasp of
the significance of those equations. For example, students should have no
doubt that linear relationships lead to straight-line graphs and that the pres-
ence of curvature in a graph implies that the relationship cannot be linear.
While knowledge of calculus is unquestionably helpful in the study of
advanced physics, it is not absolutely essential. Ideas such as the derivative
and integral can be introduced in physics classes by discussing the slope of
tangent lines and the area under curves. However, the level of mathematical
skill of students may well play a role in the selection of optional physics
topics (as discussed later in this chapter).
THE MOST IMPORTANT OBJECTIVES
There was strong consensus within the panel that the most important
objectives for advanced study in high school physics are not tied to particu-
lar topics in physics. The panel is far more concerned with promoting more
general dispositions, abilities, and habits of mind. In particular, advanced
study in physics should help students further develop the following:
1The panel acknowledges that there are circumstances under which it is appropriate for
students to take advanced physics as a first-year physics course. This may apply to exception-
ally talented students or to students in schools where scheduling considerations leave no rea-
sonable alternative. Nevertheless, most students would be well advised to begin their study of
physics with a sound high school–level course.

PHYSICS
403
• Excitement, interest, and motivation for further study in physics
• Facility with mathematics as a means of communicating, examining,
and refining ideas
• Scientific imagination and creativity
• Scientific habits of mind or the abilities and inclinations:2
–To look for and examine assumptions hidden in the student’s own
and others’ reasoning
–To seek precision and clarity in forming and communicating ideas,
including the use of mathematics
–To design and conduct empirical investigations to answer scientific
questions
–To identify and reconcile inconsistencies between the student’s un-
derstanding and observations
–To develop, implement, test, and revise models of physical phe-
nomena
–To develop and learn to work within a framework of theoretical
principles
DESIGNING A CURRICULUM TO MEET
THESE OBJECTIVES
The Central Role of Newtonian Mechanics
Although the objectives listed in the previous section can be met through
a thorough study of many different areas of physics, some commonality
among programs is clearly desirable, especially when advanced programs
serve as substitutes for physics courses in college. Given the central role of
Newtonian mechanics in physics, both historically and conceptually, the
panel recommends that any advanced study of physics include Newtonian
mechanics. Mechanics provides an ideal framework for achieving the objec-
tives cited above. At the same time, familiarity with mechanics is universally
expected of students entering college who have completed an advanced
high school physics program.
Maximizing the Commonality of Advanced Programs in
Newtonian Mechanics
Because the study of Newtonian mechanics serves as the foundation of
any good program of advanced physics study, the panel recommends that
2We note that the Theory of Knowledge course included in the IB program (see Chapter 3)
deals with the habits of mind listed here. This is an advantage of the IB program; since it is a
program rather than a course, one teacher need not do everything.

404
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
the set of topics addressed be standardized as much as possible across the
nation. While the exact details of such a nationwide mechanics syllabus can
be agreed upon at a future time, the panel makes the following two recom-
mendations:
• The syllabus should include the study of rotational dynamics. It is
important for students to learn to apply the laws of mechanics to extended
bodies, not just point particles. Not only is the physics content important,
but the study of rotational dynamics also presents substantial intellectual
challenges that help prepare students for the challenges of their future higher
education.
• There should be no distinction made between the study of mechan-
ics with and without calculus. Whether or not the mathematical background
of the students includes calculus, the concepts necessary for physics [e.g.,
(lim/∆t → 0) of (∆x/∆t)] can and should be introduced.
The primary goal of the study of Newtonian mechanics is to develop
conceptual understanding, rather than the ability to perform complex math-
ematical manipulations. For example, it is not necessary for advanced high
school students to learn how to calculate the moment of inertia of a cylinder
about some given axis, but it is important for them to understand rotational
kinetic energy and angular momentum.
The Role of Calculus in the New Common
Mechanics Unit
The panel stresses that the new mechanics unit recommended above is
by no means a noncalculus introduction to mechanics. Indeed, the concepts
of calculus are absolutely essential to the physics subject matter. Specifically,
the panel emphasizes the following points:
• Teachers with qualified students are encouraged to use formal calcu-
lus. Such students are eager to apply their mathematical prowess and should
be encouraged to do so. It is likely that such students would continue their
calculus-based study of physics in a second-semester course such as AP
Physics C Electricity and Magnetism.3
3AP Physics C Mechanics and AP Physics C Electricity and Magnetism are one-semester
calculus-based courses, each leading to its own separate AP examination. AP Physics B is a
two-semester noncalculus course leading to a single comprehensive AP Physics B examination.
For a detailed discussion of the AP Physics program, see Chapter 3.

PHYSICS
405
• The final examination for the new unit would not require students to
use formal calculus. In all other respects, however, the new examination
should be at about the same level as the current exam for AP Physics C
Mechanics. This recommendation is in harmony with the current trend on
that examination: less reliance on technical mathematics and increasing
emphasis on conceptual physics (see Chapter 3).
• The final examination for the new unit would test students’ knowl-
edge of the concepts of both differential and integral calculus required to
develop the physics. For example, students would be required to know that
instantaneous velocity can be obtained as the slope of the graph of displace-
ment versus time and that the work done by a force that varies as a function
of position can be obtained from the area under the force curve.
Comparison of the New Mechanics Unit with Current
AP Mechanics
Students who today would study AP Physics Mechanics C would find
the new unit to be very much in line with their expectations for that course.
There would be less emphasis on formal mathematics and more on concep-
tual understanding, but the general level of the treatment of the physics
would be the same as that of current AP Physics C Mechanics. All the impor-
tant physics currently found in AP Physics C Mechanics would still be cov-
ered and tested on the final examination.
Students who today would study AP Physics B would find the new
mechanics unit to be a more comprehensive and in-depth treatment of the
subject than that found in current Physics B courses, primarily because of
the inclusion of rotational dynamics. Therefore, the primary effect for AP
Physics students of the creation of a common mechanics unit as recom-
mended by the panel would be to raise the standards in mechanics for
Physics B to the level of Physics C.
Coverage of Other Areas of Physics
The breadth of material included in introductory college courses almost
always requires rapid, superficial treatment. Unfortunately, the emphasis on
breadth to the exclusion of depth is also growing at the secondary level, as
more states are adopting encompassing frameworks and standards for sci-
ence instruction. The panel believes, however, that for students to appreci-
ate physics as a field of inquiry, it is more important for them to develop
depth of understanding in the areas they study than to study any particular
areas. The amount of additional material beyond Newtonian mechanics that
can be covered in a particular course depends on its length. For a 1-year

406
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
program, the panel believes strongly that students should study at most one
other major area of physics.4 In a 2-year program, the number of topics can
be increased as long as the essential goal of depth of understanding is at-
tained.
Additional Areas That Match Instructors’ Talents
and Resources
The panel believes that advanced physics programs should be able to
choose from among various options the extra topics that best meet their
needs. We offer the following possible optional topics for illustration only; a
detailed list of options and a syllabus for each need to be carefully devel-
oped:
• Electricity and magnetism/circuits
• Models of light and sound (geometrical optics, mechanical waves,
physical optics)
• Complex systems (thermal and statistical physics, computer-assisted
conceptualization, chaos)
• Atomic, nuclear, and particle physics
Again, we are not proposing here the specific makeup of these other
options; we are proposing that they be developed. In each case, physics
teachers and students would be motivated to pursue greater depth of cover-
age in a limited area. We note that the ability to develop such options gives
advanced high school instruction the flexibility needed to address emerging
areas of physics, as discussed below.
Second Semester Options
In this section, we provide additional detail on some optional curricula
that could be used in the second semester of an advanced physics program.
In describing these options, we assume that students have already com-
pleted the new common mechanics unit discussed above. Our goal is not to
specify these curricula completely; that is a task for other organizations, such
as the College Board and the International Baccalaureate Organisation (IBO).
Rather, the brief summaries below are intended to give the reader a better
understanding of the overall content and goals of these example courses.
4The panel is aware that many current AP Physics C programs spend the entire academic
year on mechanics. We have no objection to this practice, which may well provide the extra
time necessary for those students to achieve the depth of understanding that is the central
objective of advanced physics study.

PHYSICS
407
AP Physics C Electricity and Magnetism. This existing semester course
is already familiar to many readers; it is the usual follow-up for students who
take the current AP Physics C Mechanics course during the first semester.
The content of the course is specified in the 2000/2001 edition of the Ad-
vanced Placement Course Description: Physics, published by the College
Board (1999a) and known as the Acorn Book. (See Chapter 3 for a detailed
discussion of the AP Physics program.)
The course is highly mathematical and covers Maxwell’s equations in
integral form. There are numerous applications of calculus, as well as an
introduction to direct-current circuits. Capacitance and inductance are intro-
duced, and the time dependence of currents and voltages in simple circuits
is studied. The panel recommends decreased emphasis on the technical
mathematical details and more emphasis on conceptual understanding. How-
ever, there is nothing to prevent this curriculum from being used as a sec-
ond-semester option in its present form.
Biomedical Physics. The IBO has already defined a syllabus for the
study of this topic in the IB Diploma Programme Guide: Physics (IBO, 2001).
(See Chapter 3 for a detailed discuss of the IB physics program.) This
noncalculus course covers the following major topics:
• Fluid statics, fluid flow, and the physics of the cardiovascular system
• Rotational statics, with application to the muscular-skeletal system
• Hearing—normal function, defects, and correction
• Radiation—types, sources, properties, and detection
• Medical imaging
• Biological effects, hazards, dosimetry, and diagnostic uses of radioac-
tive sources
The course is currently designed to be covered in 30 hours, or approxi-
mately half a semester. Therefore, if the course were used as a semester
option, several of these very interesting topics could be covered in greater
depth, consistent with the fundamental goal of achieving deep conceptual
understanding.
Special and General Relativity. This is another area for which the IBO
has already created a detailed syllabus for a noncalculus course. The major
topics covered by that syllabus include the following:
• Frames of reference and Galilean relativity
• Postulates and fundamental concepts of special relativity
• Historical context and experimental support for special relativity
• Postulates and fundamental concepts of general relativity
• Experimental support for general relativity (IBO, 2001)

408
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
Once again, the course is designed to be covered in 30 hours. However,
this rich and intensely interesting subject lends itself to in-depth study in a
myriad of ways. Indeed, a relativity option is likely to generate excitement
and motivation for further study in physics—a key goal of advanced physics
study cited earlier.
Fields at the Forefront of Current Physics Research
as Optional Topics
One of the frustrating aspects of conventional physics instruction for
new students is that they must spend years studying classical physics before
they learn about fields at the forefront of current physics research. The teacher
of an advanced high school program might well choose to use the time
available after completing the required mechanics foundation to explore
one of these fields.
Unlike conventional advanced physics study, which attempts to acceler-
ate students in classical physics, the goal here would be advancement by
enrichment. Such enrichment is an excellent way to generate enthusiasm for
further study in physics, which, as noted above, is a key goal of any ad-
vanced high school physics program.
Examples of such enrichment might include a course on special and
general relativity along the lines of Taylor and Wheeler’s (2001) Spacetime
Physics; a course that looks at quantum mechanics from a qualitative point
of view; a course investigating nonlinear dynamics; a course in electricity
and magnetism using a laboratory-based approach, such as the ZAP! Pro-
gram by Morrison, Morrison, and Pine (1996); and a course in the history of
particle physics, from the discovery of the electron to the confirmation of
quarks. The intent of such courses would be to explore the topic with a
depth and breadth commensurate with the mathematical sophistication of
the students taking the course and the expertise of the teacher.
There are several potential advantages to this type of enrichment:
• The topics involved would often be exciting and speculative, appeal-
ing to students’ taste for the exotic, and could motivate students to work and
think at a more sophisticated level.
• Students would have more opportunities to exercise their critical and
creative abilities than is the case in the highly defined and codified curricu-
lum typical of the present AP and IB programs.
• Students could be better able to grasp the big picture of what is
taking place in current physics research and to decide whether they want to
be a part of that effort.
• Some course designs could provide real opportunities for long-term
student-designed experiments and open-ended investigations.

PHYSICS
409
• Students and teachers would have an incentive to use the Internet to
identify research being done, to try out simulations, and to participate in
distance learning opportunities or in organized forums addressing particular
course topics in which researchers might cooperate as participants.
• Students and teachers might have an incentive to work with profes-
sionals from outside the school with expertise appropriate to the course,
promoting both learning and broader collegial connections. College courses
may already exist that could be adapted to create such courses.
There are also potential difficulties with such undertakings:
• The offerings might have to compete with more conventional ad-
vanced courses for a limited number of students.
• Colleges would be unlikely to grant credit or placement for these
course offerings, since their content probably would not match that of col-
lege courses.
• Schools might not be willing to allocate the human and material re-
sources needed to develop such courses.
• Teachers with sufficient expertise to teach the courses might not be
available.
In addition to the above difficulties, no mechanism currently exists to
validate that these course offerings provide the appropriate depth of under-
standing for advanced high school physics programs. Development of a
mechanism for reviewing, certifying, and disseminating curricula and for
training and certifying teachers in the use of such curricula would therefore
be an essential part of advancement by enrichment. One possible approach
would be for the American Physical Society and the American Association of
Physics Teachers (AAPT) to establish a joint committee to operate as a Clear-
inghouse for Advanced Programs in Physics (CAP). Curriculum developers
would submit proposed curricula to the CAP, which would then review
them for quality of physics content, pedagogy, and interest to students. A
curriculum passing the review would be certified as a CAP-Physics curricu-
lum. Curriculum submitted during development might be issued a provi-
sional certificate and reviewed again when in final form.
Once a curriculum had been granted a certificate, its developers could
offer summer training institutes for teachers, subject to standards for such
institutes issued by the CAP. Such standards might mandate a minimum time
for the training and the makeup of the instructional staff. Teachers that com-
pleted the training satisfactorily, which might well involve passing a final
examination on content, would be certified to offer the course in their schools.
A school offering such a course, taught by a certified instructor, would be
able to indicate the course on student transcripts as a CAP course.
Since CAP courses would not be designed to substitute for college courses,
the CAP would not need to operate a testing program. It would, however,

410
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
serve as an information source on available certified curricula and on sum-
mer institute programs for teacher certification. On the other hand, curricu-
lum development groups might wish to have their own testing program, and
test data could serve as additional evidence that a curriculum was suitable
for CAP certification.
The key advantage of the CAP concept is that it would bring together
many existing programs rather than having them continually reinvented by
different groups. Most current curriculum projects that would be suitable for
submission to the CAP already have teacher training provisions. The CAP
would add nationally recognized certification of quality and disseminate
certified curricula to schools across the nation.
Inclusion of Meaningful, Challenging, Real-World
Experiences
Science at its heart is the process of how we come to know about and
understand the physical world around us, including how living things inter-
act with and are part of that world. What distinguishes science from other
ways of thinking is reliance on evidence about the physical world and the
importance of reproducible, principled consistency in judging the truth and
utility of conjectures, laws, and theories. The panel strongly believes that all
science courses at all levels—including advanced science courses in high
schools—should include a significant component of experience with real-
world phenomena and the way scientific conceptions are tested against ob-
servations of those phenomena. The panel acknowledges that in practice
the interplay between theory and experiment is often complex. The impor-
tant point is that science requires both components, and science instruction
should reflect that interplay.
At the advanced high school physics level, students should already have
had considerable experience with these activities in earlier physics and physi-
cal science courses5 in the form of laboratory exercises, demonstrations, and
perhaps even independent investigations. The panel believes that advanced
physics courses should provide additional experiences for students in for-
mulating their own conjectures and explanations, as well as in making the
connections between real-world phenomena and the concepts, principles,
and theories developed by the scientific community.
5As noted earlier, there are special circumstances under which it may be appropriate for
students to study advanced physics as a first-year physics course. In such cases, students may
have no previous experience with laboratory physics, although it is highly likely that they will
have laboratory experience in other sciences. It is the responsibility of the instructor to design
the laboratory portion of the course to reflect prior student experience.

PHYSICS
411
What form should these additional real-world experiences take? Evi-
dence6 indicates that traditional “cookbook” methods of laboratory instruc-
tion, in which students follow narrowly defined procedures to verify well-
known principles, have little effect on students’ conceptual understanding;
on the other hand, substantial improvements in understanding are possible
through rigorous, interactive laboratory experiences. Although much has
been made of the need for “hands-on” activities in science, it is clear that
what really matters is not “hands-on” but “minds-on.” Cookbook labs are
ineffective because students typically do very little thinking while they are
working their way through the list of step-by-step instructions. Cookbook
labs are mind-numbing experiences that lead students to describe their labo-
ratory work as boring or a waste of time (NRC, 1997b). Indeed, in view of
the fact that the time spent doing cookbook labs could be spent doing
something more productive, it is doubtful that doing cookbook labs is better
than doing no laboratory work at all.7
The research evidence against cookbook labs is not overwhelming, but
we know of no research in their favor. The panel believes that the issue
should be looked at from this point of view: What evidence is there that
cookbook labs are of sufficient value to justify the enormous amount of time
spent on them in physics programs across the nation? As far as we know, no
evidence comes anywhere close to justifying this huge investment of effort.
Experimental work in advanced courses should provide experience with
the way scientists use experiments—both for gathering data to build theo-
retical models and for exploring the applicability of these models to new
situations. To that end, exploration of phenomena should generally precede
and motivate the formal introduction of theoretical concepts. Moreover, stu-
dents should make as many scientific decisions as possible, from the con-
ception and design of the experiment all the way through the analysis, pre-
sentation, and critical review of the results.
The panel urges teachers of advanced physics courses to consider using
a wide range of experiences, including the following (also see Box 2-1):
• Open-ended labs that require students to make decisions about what
to observe, how to observe it, and how to interpret the data
• Labs that focus on allowing students to confront preconceptions and
reconcile them with actual observations, with less emphasis on numerical
data acquisition and analysis
6An excellent discussion of effective laboratory instruction can be found in Science Teach-
ing Reconsidered (NRC, 1997b, pp. 16–20).
7In the AP Physics Video Conference of November 10, 2000, cookbook labs were labeled
as the lowest of five levels of lab work. The hope was expressed that AP physics students
would rapidly progress to higher levels in which they would take increasing responsibility for
the design and analysis of experiments.

412
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
• Demonstrations that encourage students to predict what is going to
happen and then follow up with discussion that reconciles predictions and
observations
• Take-home labs that can be done with relatively simple equipment
and everyday items
• Exercises that work with data available on the Internet (e.g., data on
sunspots gathered over many years as an indicator of periodic cycles in
sunspot activity)
The panel would argue that a specific list of experiments is not useful;
there are too many variations in the availability of time and equipment for
such a list to be helpful. Both the College Board and the IBO provide lists of
BOX 2-1 Useful Resources for Developing Real-World Experiences
Although by no means exhaustive, the following is a list of some resources
that members of the panel have found particularly helpful in developing meaning-
ful real-world experiences. More information about many of these resources is
given in Chapter 4:
•
Edge, R.D. (1987). String and sticky tape experiments. College Park, MD:
American Association of Physics Teachers.
•
Sokoloff, D.R., Laws, P. W., and Thornton, R.K . (1994). Real time physics:
Active learning laboratories: mechanics. Medford, MA: Tufts University.
•
Sokoloff, D.R., Laws, P. W.,  and Thornton, R.K . (1997). Real time physics:
Active learning laboratories: Electric circuits. Eugene, OR: Department of Physics,
University of Oregon.
•
Physics Teaching Resource Agents (PTRA) materials: available at the AAPT
Web site.8
•
Chabay, R.W., and Sherwood, B.A. (1999). Electric and magnetic interac-
tions. New York: Wiley.
•
CASTLE curriculum materials and experiments (capacitors, light bulbs, and
batteries) (available through Pasco Scientific, Roseville, CA).
•
Steinber, M., and Wainwright, C.L. (1993). Teaching electricity with mod-
els—The CASTLE Project. Physics Teacher, 31, 353.
8Further information can be found by going to http://www.aapt.org [4/17/2002] and click-
ing on Programs and then PTRA.

PHYSICS
413
labs that are commonly used in advanced secondary school physics courses,
as well as in introductory college and university physics courses. Those lists
can serve as a rough guide for teachers, although innovation is certainly to
be encouraged. The panel also recommends that teachers of advanced courses
be familiar with the AAPT’s position papers on The Role of Laboratory Activi-
ties in High School Physics and The Goals of the Introductory Physics Labora-
tory, which describe aspects of the goals of experimental work in more
detail.9
The way the experience is designed is more important than the specific
topic. For example, a lab dealing with pendulum motion could be con-
structed as a rote exercise in data gathering to verify the dependence of the
period of the pendulum’s oscillatory motion on the length of the pendulum,
but it would be better to design the experience as scientific inquiry. For
example, the teacher might point out that some recent speculations about a
so-called “fifth fundamental force” or extra space–time dimensions for grav-
ity predict that the period of the pendulum motion should depend on the
nature of the material of the pendulum bob—iron might behave differently
from brass. The teacher might then ask what measurements should be car-
ried out to test that idea and how well those measurements can be used to
reject or confirm the idea. Still better would be a lab in which students
would play with some pendulums first and then themselves come up with
questions to ask about pendulum motion.
USE OF ASSESSMENTS THAT MEASURE DEPTH
OF UNDERSTANDING
Assessments are a very important feature of any advanced physics pro-
gram. Scoring well on a final examination is a tangible goal that both stu-
dents and teachers can strive to achieve. Success on such examinations leads
to feelings of triumph and looks good on college applications. In many
cases, examination scores are also a major component of the school
administration’s evaluation of teacher performance.
Because of the high stakes involved, it is too often the assessments,
rather than educational goals, that drive the instructional process. A prime
example is the AP Physics B examination with its vast coverage of subject
matter (see Chapter 3). In view of this fact, it is imperative that the assess-
ments used accurately measure depth of understanding, the primary goal of
advanced physics instruction. Unless the assessments encourage and reward
students and teachers for exploring physics deeply in the ways described
9These papers are available at the AAPT Web site—http://www.aapt.org [4/23/02]—under
“AAPT Statements and Policies.”

414
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
above, they will not do so; instead, they will do what is necessary to score
well on the assessments. Ensuring that tests emphasize conceptual under-
standing is an important way to encourage better teaching practices.
In the next section, we offer some general recommendations for creat-
ing desirable written examinations. Written examinations are the most prac-
tical means of assessing the performance of a large number of candidates
but are certainly not the only means. In particular, we draw the reader’s
attention to the internal assessment component of the IB physics program
discussed in Chapter 3.
Designing Good Written Examinations
A good written examination in an advanced physics program should:
• Emphasize conceptual questions, rather than mathematical
techniques. Here we are not distinguishing questions that are conceptual
from those that are mathematical; conceptual questions may well involve
mathematics. Rather, we are distinguishing questions that assess conceptual
understanding from those that assess mainly technical mathematical skill.
• Require explanation of the candidate’s reasoning. The goal of
an advanced course is not just to provide the correct answer but also to
communicate the reasoning process that leads to that answer.
• Eliminate free-response questions that lead students through
arguments by means of multiple interdependent parts. Instead, shorter
questions that call for original reasoning in a complex unfamiliar setting are
desirable. Open-ended questions posed in a real-life setting can help
strengthen the connection between physics and the world around us and
are thus recommended.
• Construct multiple-choice questions that reflect common stu-
dent misconceptions. Research is required to determine adequate distracters
(incorrect multiple-choice answers). Ideally these distracters should be ob-
tained from answers given previously by students to free-response ques-
tions. Additional improvements include multiple-choice questions that have
more than one correct answer (multiple-completion questions) and mul-
tiple-choice questions that require not only the selection of a correct answer
but also the selection of a correct justification.
• Allow sufficient time for most well-prepared students to com-
plete every question. Emphasis must be placed on what a student knows—
not how quickly the student can recall and use that knowledge.10
10We are not suggesting that AP physics examinations be untimed. We simply want to
provide sufficient time for well-prepared students to demonstrate their knowledge without
being rushed.

PHYSICS
415
• Use innovative kinds of questions that probe depth of under-
standing. Many alternative forms of assessment exercises exist, and some
of these have been shown to be valuable. For example, students could be
asked to score or rank a number of student solutions to a free-response
question. Such an exercise would require not only understanding the ques-
tion posed but also distinguishing among different models and recognizing
the correct one.
• Written examinations cannot accurately assess laboratory skills
and should not attempt to do so. However, questions involving analysis
and interpretation of data are both reasonable and desirable. In addition,
students can be asked to outline the design of simple experiments based on
their general knowledge. Since there is no required list of experiments that
all students must perform, such questions must not depend too strongly on
the specifics of any particular experimental technique. Recent AP physics
examinations contain many good examples of questions that satisfy these
criteria.
Need for Improved Scoring Techniques
The scoring of written examinations must emphasize the evaluation of
student understanding. A rigid scoring rubric in which points are awarded
for highly specific correct responses to small parts of each question is not
appropriate because it reduces the reader’s ability to respond to student
thinking (both correct and incorrect) not anticipated by the rubric. Rather,
the reader should evaluate the student’s response as a whole. A maximum
score should be given only for complete and clear physical reasoning lead-
ing to the correct conclusions. Lower scores should be given for missing or
erroneous reasoning, even if the conclusions reached are correct.
To understand this recommendation, it is important to distinguish be-
tween the allocation of maximum possible scores to different parts of the
test and scoring rubrics of the type we decry. It is surely reasonable to
allocate 10 points to problem 1, 15 points to problem 2, and so on. Similarly,
it is reasonable to further subdivide the maximum possible credit for prob-
lem 1 among parts 1a, 1b, and 1c, as long as these parts are truly indepen-
dent of each other. What is not reasonable, in our view, is to allocate 1 point
for the statement of Newton’s second law, 1 point for solving the resulting
equations, 1 point for the numerical answer, and so on. Such rigidity makes
it impossible to properly evaluate the student’s reasoning, which is what we
should be most interested in. Similar difficulties arise if parts 1a, 1b, and 1c
are interdependent, since that will often allow students to answer the parts
in many different orders and a wide variety of ways. If a question contains
multiple interdependent parts (a practice against which the panel has ar-
gued above), it is better to evaluate the entire question as a whole.

416
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
To be clear, we are not advocating the abolition of all standardization of
grading. Maintaining consistency in grading is indispensable to the fairness
of the examination. Rather, we are advocating more flexible rubrics of the
kind given on the College Board Web site in, say, U.S. History or English
Literature. General guidelines are desirable; rigid rules for awarding each
point are not. Moreover, we applaud the care shown by both the AP and IB
programs in monitoring the consistency of the grading process and would
expect such monitoring to continue.
Importance of High Standards for Success on Final
Examinations
If the smaller and more manageable curriculum proposed earlier in this
chapter were adopted, we would expect successful students to know the
material in that curriculum thoroughly. Therefore, we recommend high stan-
dards of performance on the final examination for these students. While it is
beyond the scope of the panel’s work to propose specific standards, we
believe the standards for awarding grades should be substantially higher
than those currently in use by the two dominant programs. Currently, stu-
dents can earn a grade of 5 in AP Physics B with raw scores that range
anywhere from 106 to 180 points.11 The panel is unanimous in asserting that
this range is too broad; students who earn scores at the upper end of the
range are better qualified than those at the lower end of the range. While
this wide score range might serve a purpose in the current AP Physics pro-
gram by allowing teachers to focus on some aspects of the curriculum at the
expense of others without their students being penalized, a narrower score
range would be more appropriate in the context of the more manageable
curriculum proposed by the panel.
Less is known about the marking of IB assessments than about the
scoring of AP examinations. However, the range of scores, particularly at the
top, raises similar concerns about IB standards. The panel notes that IB
students can obtain top marks on their examinations by earning 57 percent
of the points for a 6 and 70 percent of the points for a 7.12
Additional evidence that standards for success on AP physics examina-
tions should be higher can be found in an abstract by Howard Wainer of the
Educational Testing Service that appeared recently (March 2001) on the Col-
lege Board Web site. It states that students who were allowed to skip their
first course in physics by virtue of success on the AP examination did not do
11Data based on the 1998 Released Examinations published by the College Board (1999b).
12The IB figures were estimated from information supplied by the IBO to the panel in the
subject report for May 1999 (IBO, 1999b).

PHYSICS
417
as well as students without AP experience in their second college physics
course. This is particularly troubling in view of the fact that students with AP
experience usually are among the most successful academically and nor-
mally outperform non-AP students. In fact, according to the abstract, AP
students outperformed non-AP students in all but three disciplines: physics,
economics, and U.S. government.

418
3
Extent to Which the AP and IB Programs
Implement Recommended Practices
This chapter presents a critical review of the Advanced Placement (AP)
and International Baccalaureate (IB) programs in light of the recommended
practices set forth in Chapter 2. Before proceeding, it is important to make
note of the differing backgrounds and goals of AP and IB physics.
Today, the AP and IB physics programs constitute the two most signifi-
cant factors in defining what is meant by advanced study of physics in the
United States. Most students entering the postsecondary education system
each year who are identified as having completed an advanced physics
course have participated in these two programs.
The reasons for the creation of the two programs were substantially
different, and this led naturally to substantial differences in their approaches
to advanced physics instruction. All judgments made in any comparison of
the programs must be viewed through the lens of their distinctive histories
and present structures.
THE AP PHYSICS PROGRAM
In this section, we respond directly to the questions under the panel’s
charge (see appendix) related to curriculum and assessment for the AP physics
program. Where necessary, we distinguish between AP Physics B, a broad
survey course without calculus, of the type often taken by students majoring
in biology or health-related fields; and AP Physics C, a calculus-based intro-
ductory course in mechanics and electricity and magnetism, of the type
generally taken by students concentrating in the physical sciences or engi-
neering.
We note at the outset that both AP Physics B and AP Physics C are 1-year
courses that are often taken by high school students as a first physics course,13
13The College Board supplied the panel with the results of the background questions
asked of the 1998 AP physics examination candidates. Approximately two-thirds of the 24,000

PHYSICS
419
although that is not recommended by the College Board. As noted in Chap-
ter 2, many students spend their entire academic year studying just the me-
chanics portion of AP Physics C. The additional time available makes it more
reasonable to use advanced mechanics as a first course in physics.
Degree to Which the Factual Base of Information
Provided by the AP Curriculum and Related Laboratory
Experiences Is Adequate for Advanced High School
Study in Physics
There is no question that the factual base of information provided by
the AP physics curriculum and related laboratory experiences is fully ad-
equate for a good advanced program. This factual base for AP physics is
determined by the College Board through a poll of a large number of col-
leges to determine the content of their first-year physics courses (College
Entrance Examination Board [CEEB], 2001).
The College Board does not mandate any specific laboratory experi-
ences. Instead, it makes the general statement that in introductory college
courses approximately 20 percent of the credit awarded can be attributed to
laboratory performance (CEEB, 2001, p. 10). In addition, the effectiveness of
laboratory experiences is greatly dependent on the particular implementa-
tion of laboratory instruction in each individual high school (see Chapter 2).
Therefore, it is impossible to determine the adequacy of laboratory experi-
ences definitively for the entire AP physics program.
Extent to Which the AP Curriculum and Assessments
Balance Breadth of Coverage with In-Depth Study of
Important Topics in Physics
AP Physics C is a reasonable-sized 1-year physics course with respect to
the content covered. It is, in fact, one implementation of the model pre-
sented in Chapter 2—Newtonian mechanics with an electricity and magne-
Physics B candidates had taken only two or fewer semesters of physics in high school prior to
attempting the examination. The situation is reversed for Physics C, with about three-fifths of
the candidates having taken three or more semesters of physics prior to the examination. The
number of 1998 Physics B candidates was approximately twice the number of Physics C candi-
dates, so that well over half of all 1998 AP physics candidates had taken two or fewer semesters
of physics prior to attempting their examinations. About half of the Physics C candidates (6,000
students) took only the mechanics and not the electricity/magnetism exam. About half of this
mechanics-only group had taken two semesters or fewer of physics in high school. This sug-
gests that a substantial number of students are using AP Physics C Mechanics as a first-year
physics course.

420
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
tism option. Indeed, students are examined separately on mechanics and
electricity and magnetism and can choose to take either or both examina-
tions. AP Physics C is appropriately balanced between breadth and depth.
However, it makes mathematical demands that are not appropriate for all
students.
By contrast, AP Physics B is a gigantic course that is nearly impossible to
cover properly in a single year. It encourages cursory treatment of very
important topics in physics in a way the panel believes is inappropriate for
an advanced high school course. Such a large amount of material should
clearly be spread over 2 years. If the recommendations presented in Chapter
2 were implemented, AP Physics B would cease to exist as a 1-year program.
We emphasize that an advanced physics curriculum should focus more
on conceptual understanding and less on mathematical manipulation. For
example, it is much more important that students understand intuitively the
consequences of shorting out a circuit element than that they be able to
solve numerous simultaneous linear equations obtained from Kirchhoff’s
laws. To better illustrate the difference between these two kinds of knowl-
edge, Box 3-1 presents a case study done by Professor Eric Mazur of Harvard
University, a member of this panel (Mazur, 1997).
Degree to Which AP Physics Courses Are Organized
Around Key Concepts to Promote Conceptual
Understanding
As discussed in Chapter 2, Newtonian mechanics should provide the
conceptual foundation for all advanced physics programs. Both AP courses
have a substantial mechanics component, but AP Physics C Mechanics, with
its coverage of rotational dynamics, is closer to the Newtonian mechanics
foundation recommended for all advanced high school physics programs in
Chapter 2. On the other hand, we believe that the current AP Physics C
Mechanics curriculum contains excessive mathematical complexity that should
be eliminated in favor of increased emphasis on conceptual understanding.
Degree to Which the AP Physics Curriculum and Related
Laboratory Experiences Provide Opportunities for
Students to Apply Their Knowledge to a Range of
Problems in a Variety of Contexts
The AP curriculum provides ample material for problem solving. In-
deed, problem solving is an indispensable part of any advanced physics
course. However, the range and variety of contexts of problems can vary

PHYSICS
421
BOX 3-1 Excerpt from Peer Instruction: A User’s Manual

422
CONTENT PANEL REPORT

PHYSICS
423
SOURCE: Mazur (1997).

424
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
substantially among specific implementations at different high schools. There-
fore, the opportunities advanced students have to apply their knowledge to
problems in a variety of contexts depend upon the particular AP physics
program in which they are enrolled.
Extent to Which the AP Physics Curriculum and Related
Laboratory Experiences Encourage Students and
Teachers to Make Connections Among the Various
Disciplines in Science and Mathematics
The connection between physics and mathematics is very strong, and
both AP physics courses call upon students to use their mathematical skills
to the fullest. Indeed, it is not unusual for students to say after they have
taken AP physics that they appreciate the great value of mathematics for the
first time.
On the other hand, the AP physics program does not encourage stu-
dents and teachers to connect physics with other areas of science. Rather,
such connections are made at the discretion of individual teachers or high
schools. These decisions may be shaped by such factors as opportunities for
departments to interact or plan courses together or by the textbooks se-
lected for the course.
Laboratory experiences can indeed be used to make interdisciplinary
connections. Yet because the nature of laboratory experiences varies sub-
stantially among the implementations of AP physics at different high schools,
it is impossible to answer this question for the AP physics program as a
whole. For a thorough discussion of the importance of laboratory experi-
ences in advanced physics study, see Chapter 2.
Extent to Which Final Assessments in AP Physics
Measure or Emphasize Students’ Mastery of Content
Knowledge
The coverage of topics on the Physics B examination is excessively
broad. The coverage of topics on the Physics C examination is appropriate,
although the nature of the questions (discussed below) may encourage in-
structional approaches that emphasize mathematical technique rather than
conceptual understanding. In that case, students may experience the course
as a nonhierarchical litany of facts and formulas (Eylon and Reif, 1984)—
effectively too broad and shallow.
On both AP Physics B and C examinations, the standards for success are
low. Indeed a 5, the highest possible score, can be obtained for a score of
about 60 percent of the total points available, and a 4 is sometimes given for

PHYSICS
425
scores under 40 percent. The College Board justifies this as a way of allow-
ing students to skip examination questions on topics they may not have
covered in class. This justification appears plausible for AP Physics B, with
its very broad curriculum; however, it is difficult to see how this reasoning
can be applied to AP Physics C, with its much narrower curriculum. Allow-
ing students to skip unfamiliar questions on the examinations can be viewed
as a means of permitting instructors who are so inclined to pursue fewer
topics in greater depth. The panel members’ experiences in preparing stu-
dents for high-stakes examinations lead us to suspect, however, that few
instructors adopt this strategy (this is a question for study) and that the
breadth of the examinations is strong motivation for breadth of coverage in
instruction.
If the curriculum changes recommended in Chapter 2 were adopted,
student mastery of content knowledge could be accurately assessed with
improved examinations. At present, the need for the examination to reflect
the broad content of the curriculum accurately and consistently, coupled
with the low standards discussed above, means that mastery is not being
assessed. It is the nature of high-stakes testing that if the test does not assess
mastery, teachers will not teach mastery, and most students will therefore
not gain it.
Extent to Which Final Assessments in AP Physics
Measure or Emphasize Students’ Understanding and
Application of Concepts
Many of the questions on previous AP physics examinations value tech-
nique over conceptual understanding. However, the trend on recent AP
physics examinations has definitely been in the direction of increasing the
emphasis on conceptual understanding—as it should be. Examples of prob-
lems taken from previous AP examinations are presented below. We also
note that because the entire final assessment in AP physics is by means of a
single written examination, it is not possible to assess the laboratory skills of
AP physics students (see Chapter 2).
In general, AP physics examinations require students to do too much in
too short a time. Either the time should be lengthened or the amount of
material reduced so that students can complete the entire examination. The
time issue is important not only because it affects the reliability of the assess-
ment but also because it influences the instructional practices used in pre-
paring students to take the examination. Preparing students to answer many
questions in a short amount of time may not be conducive to instilling in
them good scientific habits of mind (see Chapter 2).
The following subsections present four sample problems taken from
actual AP physics examinations (CEEB, 1994a, 1994b, 1999b). The examples

426
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
taken from the 1993 exams are the kind of technical problems of which we
have been critical, while those taken from the 1998 exams are good prob-
lems that emphasize conceptual understanding.
A key issue in these examples is the role of mathematics in good free-
response questions. We stress that there are two very different aspects of the
use of mathematics in physics problems. First is the translation of parts of
physical reality into mathematical models that are usually expressed in the
form of equations. Skill in this kind of translation is an important indicator of
deep conceptual understanding of physical principles, and its assessment
with examination questions is entirely appropriate. Second is the manipula-
tion of the mathematical models to arrive at final results. Skill in this use of
mathematics certainly has value but has little to do with the conceptual
understanding of physics. Good mathematical examination questions should
therefore emphasize skill in the translation of physical reality into mathemat-
ics and downplay the subsequent mathematical manipulations. The panel’s
remarks about the examples given in the following subsections should be
viewed in light of this principle.
The reader may ask why we do not also present sample multiple-choice
questions. It could be argued that, especially since calculators are not per-
mitted on the multiple-choice portion of the AP examinations, many mul-
tiple-choice questions are conceptual in nature. However, the panel believes
a reliable assessment of the understanding of students can be made only by
requiring students to explain their reasoning and then carefully evaluating
those explanations, as discussed in Chapter 2. Since the panel regards the
assessment of understanding as the primary goal of examinations, the ex-
amples given below are taken from the free-response portion of the exami-
nations.
1993 AP Physics B, Problem 2. This problem (see Figure 3-1) calls for
the direct use of the formulas for the electric field and potential of point
charges, with a small amount of vector addition required in one part. It is
more of a mathematics problem than a physics problem. Although impor-
tant physical principles play some role (superposition of electric fields and
the connection between work and potential energy), the problem could be
answered correctly by a student who had memorized the relevant formulas
and techniques. The problem is thus a poor tool for assessing conceptual
understanding.
1998 AP Physics B, Problem 6. This problem (see Figure 3-2) is simi-
lar to the questions asked in the Force Concept Inventory (Hestenes, Wells,
and Swackhamer, 1992). There is nothing to calculate, yet the problem tests
extremely important concepts in projectile motion and Newton’s laws.

PHYSICS
427
FIGURE 3-1  1993 AP Physics B problem 2

428
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
FIGURE 3-1  1993 AP Physics B problem 2 (continued)
SOURCE:  (CEEB, 1994a).

PHYSICS
429
FIGURE 3-2  1998 AP Physics B problem 6
SOURCE:  (CEEB, 1999b)

430
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
1993 AP Physics C Mechanics, Problem 2. This problem (see Figure
3-3) is almost entirely a mathematics problem, involving the solution of an
elementary differential equation that many AP Physics students would know
from memory. The first two parts contain a rudimentary application of
Newton’s second law.
1998 AP Physics C Electricity and Magnetism, Problem 3. This ques-
tion (see Figure 3-4) is full of important physics. Newton’s laws must be
used to express the balance between the component of the weight along the
incline and the magnetic force. Faraday’s law, Lenz’s law, and Ohm’s law are
all necessary in different parts of the question. Although there is a con-
siderable amount of mathematics involved in part (d), part (e) is a good
qualitative question that can be answered from different points of view. We
stress that mathematics may be well be necessary to answer some good
examination questions, but it is essential that the question focus on impor-
tant physical concepts.
Extent to Which Final Assessments in AP Physics
Measure or Emphasize Students’ Ability to Apply What
They Have Learned to Other Courses and in Other
Situations
The AP physics examinations do very little to measure or emphasize
students’ ability to apply what they have learned to other fields and situa-
tions. The exams are strictly limited to narrowly defined physics content.
However, the questions posed sometimes ask students to apply the physical
principles they know to situations they may not have previously encoun-
tered.
Summary of the Panel’s Evaluation of the AP Physics
Program
• The AP Physics B program is too broad and should be eliminated as
a 1-year course.
• The mechanics components of AP Physics B and C should be merged
into a single common mechanics component (see Chapter 2).
• AP Physics students in a 1-year program should complete the me-
chanics program and study at most one other major area of physics. They
should be examined separately in each area; standards for success should be
high.
• Examinations should emphasize conceptual understanding rather than
mathematical manipulation. Recommendations for improving examinations
are given in Chapter 2.

PHYSICS
431
FIGURE 3-3  1993 AP Physics C Mechanics,  problem 2

432
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
FIGURE 3-3  1993 AP Physics C Mechanics, problem 2 (continued)
SOURCE:  (CEEB, 1994b)

PHYSICS
433
• Accomplishing the necessary improvements will require a willing-
ness to alter radically the philosophy of AP Physics examinations. During
the transition, the meaning of examination scores will change, so that they
may not be consistent with scores on earlier exams. It will therefore be
necessary to give up consistency in the statistics of examination scores from
year to year as the transition occurs.
THE IB PHYSICS PROGRAM
In this section, we respond directly to the questions under the panel’s
charge (see appendix) related to curriculum and assessment for the IB phys-
ics program. By IB physics we mean the Higher Level (HL) IB Physics course,
a 2-year course. In contrast to AP physics, the curriculum for IB physics is
spelled out quite thoroughly by the International Baccalaureate Organisation
(IBO), down to the number of hours to be spent teaching each rather small
division of subject matter.14 For example, 1 hour of teaching time is allocated
to the introduction of vectors and scalars, the addition of coplanar vectors
by graphical means, and multiplication of vectors by scalars (IBO, 1996,
p. 22). In all phases of the course, students are required to spend approxi-
mately 25 percent of their time following an internally assessed scheme of
practical/investigative work (106).
Schools pay an annual fee to the IBO in order to offer IB courses, and
the IBO vigorously enforces its detailed standards for each of its courses
offered by a school through periodic inspections and evaluations. IB credit
is available only to students who have both completed the IB course and
received an acceptable score on the final IB assessment. Again, this practice
contrasts sharply with the AP program, in which any student who pays the
examination fee can take an AP examination in any subject.
Degree to Which the Factual Base of Information
Provided by the IB Curriculum and Related Laboratory
Experiences Is Adequate for Advanced High School
Study in Physics
There is no question that the factual base of information provided by
the IB physics curriculum and related laboratory experiences is fully ad-
equate for a good advanced program. The factual base for IB physics is
14The careful specification of the IB physics curriculum, however, should not be construed
as requiring either a particular order of instruction or definite teaching times. The new IB
Physics Guide for first examinations in 2003 makes clear that this detailed information is in-
tended only as a guide (IBO, 2001, p. 4).

434
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
FIGURE 3-4  1998 AP Physics C Electricity/Magnetism, problem 3
SOURCE:  (CEEB, 1999b)

PHYSICS
435
approximately the same as that for AP Physics B, except that the time allot-
ted is a much more reasonable 2 years.
As in the case of AP physics, the IB program does not mandate the
completion of specific laboratory exercises. However, IB physics students
must spend 25 percent of their time doing practical/investigative work “over
a prolonged period”15 (IBO, 1996, p. 106). This time need not be devoted
entirely to conventional laboratory exercises; computer simulation studies
would also be acceptable, for example. However, because teachers of ad-
vanced physics courses need to be able to adjust their teaching objectives
and techniques in response to their continuing evaluation of the under-
standing of their students (see Chapter 4), the panel believes the 25 percent
requirement is too inflexible.
Extent to Which the IB Curriculum and Assessments
Balance Breadth of Coverage with In-Depth Study of
Important Topics in Physics
Because the IB physics program spans a 2-year period, it does not suffer
from the same problems as AP Physics B. The material can reasonably be
covered in considerable depth in a 2-year course.
IB physics contains no calculus and as a result cannot pursue the de-
tailed study of electric and magnetic fields found in AP Physics C. The panel
believes that the mathematical study of electricity and magnetism should be
an available option in the IB program that could be selected by an instructor
with mathematically advanced students.16
Degree to Which IB Physics Courses Are Organized
Around Key Concepts to Promote Conceptual
Understanding
As noted above, the panel believes Newtonian mechanics should pro-
vide the conceptual foundation for all advanced physics programs. IB phys-
ics contains a strong Newtonian mechanics component. In addition, there
are already a number of well-defined optional topics that can be selected by
individual IB instructors, as recommended in Chapter 2.
15This practical work is internally assessed and must last for at least two-thirds of the time
the course is taught.
16At one time, the IB program contained an Electricity and Magnetism option that required
calculus. The option was dropped because it was not popular. This does not prevent IB teach-
ers from using calculus with mathematically advanced students; however, current IB examina-
tions do not contain questions that require the use of calculus.

436
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
The mechanics component of IB physics currently includes rotational
dynamics, as recommended in Chapter 2. However, the new IB physics
syllabus (IBO, 2001), which applies to any student starting the 2-year pro-
gram in August 2001 or later, does not include this topic.
Degree to Which the IB Physics Curriculum and Related
Laboratory Experiences Provide Opportunities for
Students to Apply Their Knowledge to a Range of
Problems in a Variety of Contexts
The IB curriculum provides ample material for problem solving. Indeed,
as noted earlier, problem solving is an indispensable part of any advanced
physics course. As with the AP program, however, the range and variety of
contexts of problems can vary substantially among specific implementations
at different high schools. Therefore, the opportunities advanced students
have to apply their knowledge to problems in a variety of contexts depends
upon the particular IB physics program in which they are enrolled.
Extent to Which the IB Physics Curriculum and Related
Laboratory Experiences Encourage Students and
Teachers to Make Connections Among the Various
Disciplines in Science and Mathematics
As noted earlier, the connection between physics and mathematics is
very strong, and the IB physics course calls upon students to use substantial
mathematical skills. However, the IB physics course does not use calculus.
Some of the IB options, such as Biomedical Physics and Historical Phys-
ics, connect physics with other disciplines. In addition, all students are re-
quired to carry out a Group 4 project in which students are encouraged to
combine concepts from different disciplines in a collaborative, investigative
experience (IBO, 2001, pp. 27–32). There is great flexibility in the choice of
projects and the types of work required; it is therefore difficult to evaluate
the educational impact of the Group 4 project requirement.
Extent to Which Final Assessments in IB Physics
Measure or Emphasize Students’ Mastery of Content
Knowledge
The IB HL Physics final assessment is much more extensive than its AP
counterpart. There are three written papers that together account for 76
percent of the student’s final IB score (given on a 1–7 scale): a 1-hour sec-

PHYSICS
437
tion consisting of 40 multiple-choice questions; a 21/4-hour free-response
section containing one data-based question, several short-answer questions,
and one extended-response question; and a 11/4-hour free-response section
on the two optional topics studied (IBO, 2001, p. 14). Students have minimal
freedom in selecting which questions to answer on the second paper. In
contrast, students are required to answer all questions on the AP examina-
tions.
The pace of the IB examinations is much more leisurely than that of the
AP examinations, which require a student to complete 70 multiple-choice
questions in 90 minutes and then six to eight free-response problems in a
further 90 minutes. Of course, a precise comparison of the time pressure
involved in different examinations requires a careful comparison of the ques-
tions asked on each exam. Nevertheless, the panel reviewed a considerable
number of examinations in each program and is confident in its assessment
that IB examinations create far less time pressure than AP examinations.
The IB examination also allows a 10-minute reading time for written
papers. During this time, students can review the paper to decide what
questions to answer but cannot do any written work. The exam time starts
after the reading time. The panel applauds the longer time allowed in the IB
case; as discussed in Chapter 2, we firmly believe in giving students the time
they need to think.
The questions on the IB physics examinations are generally of a more
conceptual nature than those on the AP physics examinations (as discussed
below), another feature the panel applauds. Nevertheless, the written IB
physics examinations suffer from many of the same problems discussed in
Chapter 2:
• Too many questions have multiple parts that lead students through
the solution.
• Insufficient attention is paid to reasoning in the scoring rubrics. Too
rarely is credit deducted for incorrect statements.
• Rigid scoring rubrics need to be replaced by an overall evaluation of
the totality of each student’s response.
• The standards for success on IB examinations are comparable to those
on AP examinations—far too low, in the opinion of the panel.
The remaining 24 percent of each student’s IB score comes from an
internal assessment made by the IB teacher of the student’s laboratory work.
To make this assessment, the teacher applies a set of stringent criteria that
are carefully spelled out by the IBO (2001, pp 15–26). The IBO requires
sample papers from schools to verify that these criteria are being applied
correctly. Thus the IB final examination provides for an assessment of labo-
ratory skills—something entirely lacking in the AP program. However, the

438
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
larger question remains of whether the laboratory investigations of IB stu-
dents are really meaningful educational experiences. If they are not, they are
not worth assessing.
Extent to Which Assessments in IB Physics Measure or
Emphasize Students’ Understanding and Application of
Concepts
As mentioned in the preceding section, IB physics examinations gener-
ally place more emphasis on conceptual understanding than their AP coun-
terparts, as illustrated by the two examples given below. However, this em-
phasis is still insufficient to enable a reliable assessment of such understand-
ing for the reasons discussed earlier.
Figure 3-5 is question #A2 from paper 2 of the November 1999 IB Phys-
ics HL examination. There is nothing to calculate, yet the question tests
students’ understanding of Newton’s second law in a variety of settings. It is
an excellent conceptual question.
Figure 3-6 is question #B3 from the same examination paper. Part (a) of
the problem begins with two “plug-in” uses of the formulas for projectile
motion, but then continues with a graph in which students need to demon-
strate their understanding of the oscillatory nature of the motion of the ball.
The problem then continues with two short essay parts in which students
have to explain physical principles. Part (b) is largely an exercise in the use
of simple formulas, but part (c) contains another short essay question that
tests students’ understanding of angular momentum conservation.
Extent to Which Final Assessments in IB Physics
Measure or Emphasize Students’ Ability to Apply What
They Have Learned to Other Courses and in Other
Situations
The final assessments in IB physics do little to measure or emphasize
students’ ability to apply what they have learned to other fields and situa-
tions. Yet they perhaps do somewhat more than the AP examinations in this
regard because of the inclusion of optional units that are interdisciplinary in
nature.
Summary of the Panel’s Evaluation of the IB Physics
Program
• The IB physics program is a good 2-year course. With respect to the
pace at which it addresses topics, covering largely the same material as AP
Physics B, it may be ideal.

PHYSICS
439
FIGURE 3-5  November 1999 IB Physics HL, paper 2, question A2.
SOURCE: (IBO, 1999a)

440
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
FIGURE 3-6  November 1999 IB Physics HL, paper 2, question B3

PHYSICS
441
FIGURE 3-6  November 1999 IB Physics HL, paper 2, question B3 (continued)

442
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
FIGURE 3-6   November 1999 IB Physics HL, paper 2, question B3 (continued)

PHYSICS
443
FIGURE 3-6  November 1999 IB Physics HL, paper 2, question B3 (continued)
SOURCE: (IBO, 1999a)

444
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
• The IB curriculum’s fixed minimum allocations of time to activities
such as “practical investigative work” and the Group 4 project are somewhat
troubling; it is far from clear that all the mandated activities are educationally
worthwhile. Also, such fixed time allocations are in conflict with the teacher’s
need to adjust instructional strategy in response to a continually changing
diagnosis of student understanding (see Chapter 4).
• The IB Physics course contains no calculus and therefore cannot delve
as deeply as AP Physics C into electromagnetic theory.
• The IB physics examinations are more conceptually based than the
AP physics examinations and give students sufficient time to think but suffer
from many of the same faults of construction as the AP exams.
• Unlike the AP program, the IB program can assess laboratory skills
by means of the internal assessment process.

445
4
Teaching and Learning in
Advanced Physics Programs
In the preceding chapters, advanced high school physics programs are
discussed as if they can be separated from the particular teachers and stu-
dents involved. Adopting this point of view greatly simplifies the discussion
and makes it possible to draw some important conclusions. Nevertheless,
the panel is convinced that the success of a given advanced high school
physics program depends much more on the teachers and students than on
the curriculum or other general program characteristics. We stress that in
truth there is no such thing as the Advanced Placement (AP) physics program
or the International Baccalaureate (IB) physics program. Rather, as noted
earlier, the implementation of these programs varies widely from school to
school and teacher to teacher, and these variations often have a much greater
impact on the education of the students than the choice of which program to
implement. In this chapter, we examine the characteristics of teachers and
students that give rise to these critical variations in the implementations of
AP and IB physics. Based on this examination, we offer several recommen-
dations for improving the overall quality of advanced high school physics
instruction.
THE TEACHERS OF AP AND IB PHYSICS
In the opinion of the panel, the most important factors in determining
the quality of advanced physics instruction in high school are the talent and
preparation of the teacher.17 To achieve widespread high-quality advanced
physics instruction, it is necessary to provide for both recruitment of highly
qualified college students into the teaching profession and strong, substan-
17The importance of the teacher is supported by objective evidence. When the Force
Concept Inventory examination was given to the classes of teachers with poor preparation in
physics and also to the teachers themselves, it was found that students’ scores never exceeded
the score of their teacher.

446
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
tive preservice and inservice professional development of physics teach-
ers.18
Competitiveness of Salaries of Physics Teachers
While both beginning and average teachers’ salaries have improved rela-
tive to inflation since the 1980s (Neuschatz and McFarling, 1999), the present
competition for technical expertise makes salary an important factor in at-
tracting new teachers to the profession. It is difficult to see how enough
well-qualified college students can be attracted to the teaching of advanced
physics courses when a similar amount of training would allow them to earn
much higher salaries in other positions.
Low salaries not only make it difficult to attract people to the teaching
profession but also lead to a general lack of respect for teachers. “If you
could do something else, you wouldn’t be here” is a far too common conclu-
sion reached by students, parents, and others about the teachers they de-
pend on for education.
Role of AP and IB Organizations in the Training and
Credentialing of Teachers
At present, neither the AP nor the IB program requires any special cre-
dentials or teacher preparation for teaching its courses other than what is
required by the school and the state in which the school is located. The IB
program does require teachers to be trained in IB procedures when a school
first joins the IB program; this initial training also includes a content work-
18In May 1999, the Council of the American Physical Society adopted the following state-
ment:
AIP-Member Society Statement on the Education of Future Teachers: The scientific
societies listed below urge the physics community, specifically physical science and
engineering departments and their faculty members, to take an active role in improv-
ing the pre-service training of K–12 physics/science teachers. Improving teacher
training involves building cooperative working relationships between physicists in
universities and colleges and the individuals and groups involved in teaching physics
to K-12 students. Strengthening the science education of future teachers addresses
the pressing national need for improving K–12 physics education and recognizes that
these teachers play a critical education role as the first and often-times last physics
teacher for most students. While this responsibility can be manifested in many ways,
research indicates that effective pre-service teacher education involves hands-on,
laboratory-based learning. Good science and mathematics education will help create
a scientifically literate public, capable of making informed decisions on public policy
involving scientific matters. A strong K–12 physics education is also the first step in
producing the next generation of researchers, innovators, and technical workers
(http://www.aps.org/statements/99.1.html [4/17/2002]).

PHYSICS
447
shop for teachers. In addition, the IB program provides numerous optional
content workshops for IB physics teachers at locations around the world.
A number of institutions offer 1- or 2-day AP workshops or summer
institutes, but these are not required of teachers offering AP courses. The
panel suggests that the College Board and the International Baccalaureate
Organisation (IBO) consider whether requiring such workshops or intro-
ducing some form of mandatory or optional credentialing would improve
the quality of preparation of teachers of their programs.
A recent American Institute of Physics survey (Neuschatz and McFarling,
1999) notes that about one-third of high school physics teachers have a
degree in physics or physics education, and an additional one-sixth have a
minor in physics. Almost all the rest have degrees either in another science
or in mathematics. Many report being inadequately trained to use computers
in the laboratory and the classroom, and only half report taking part in any
physics workshop, meeting, or course during the year preceding the survey.
The panel believes such training deficiencies are a major cause of unsuc-
cessful outcomes in advanced physics teaching.
Involvement of College and University Physics and
Engineering Faculty in the Training of Teachers of
Advanced High School Physics
The National Science Education Standards (National Research Council
[NRC], 1996) contain detailed standards for the professional development of
science teachers. The panel urges the cooperation of the entire physics com-
munity in the recruitment and training of physics teachers who meet those
standards. In particular, we join the American Institute of Physics, the Ameri-
can Physical Society, the American Association of Physics Teachers, and
other physics organizations in calling on college physics and engineering
faculty to take an active role in the training of teachers for advanced high
school physics programs.19
The panel concurs with the opinion of Robert Watson, director of the
Division of Undergraduate Education at the National Science Foundation,
that if science departments in colleges and universities were more hospi-
table to students who wanted to become teachers, not only would those
students be better prepared to go into teaching but a much stronger cadre of
students would be attracted to teaching (NRC, 1997a, p. 4). Physics depart-
ments need to treat high school physics teaching as an honorable specializa-
tion for an undergraduate physics major and provide both undergraduate
19See the December 1999 Statement on the Education of Future Teachers at www.AIP.org.

448
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
and graduate courses of study aimed at the preparation and continued
professional development of skilled physics teachers.
Physics departments should pose the prospect of high school teaching
as an option in advising students, perhaps in conjunction with a local phys-
ics teacher who could provide perspective on such a career choice. Physics
majors specializing in education should take the same foundational courses
as conventional physics majors, replacing some elective or specialized
coursework with courses of similar rigor that probe in depth the problems of
learning and teaching physics. Such courses should include the use of tradi-
tional techniques, as well as modern teaching techniques based on research
on physics education. Recognizing that a substantial fraction of all under-
graduate physics majors will end up instructing others in some fashion at
some time in their careers, a course in teaching and learning would be a
useful addition to the physics major in general, although the details of such
a course would vary. The panel notes that some programs of this type are
already in operation (see, for example, Roelofs, 1997).
Preparation Needed to Teach Advanced Physics Courses
Effectively
There is no doubt that to teach advanced physics effectively a strong
background in physics content is absolutely essential. Teachers who do not
understand the subject themselves cannot possibly develop deep concep-
tual understanding of physical principles in their students.
However, a thorough understanding of the subject matter is not suffi-
cient. A teacher must also be skilled in the specialized pedagogy of physics.
Physics teachers need to be trained to understand their students’ view of the
physical world (which is often radically different from that of physicists) and
adjust their teaching techniques accordingly (as discussed below).
EFFECTIVE TEACHING IN ADVANCED PHYSICS
PROGRAMS
Another reason for the varying degrees of success among teachers is
that different teachers teach in different ways. A great deal of research has
been done to identify the most and least effective teaching practices for
educating students of science. In this section, we summarize the main results
of that research from the point of view of advanced physics instruction.
Findings of Research on How People Learn
A number of summaries of the implications of recent research on learn-
ing for the teaching of science have been prepared. The panel notes and

PHYSICS
449
endorses the NRC (2000) report How People Learn: Brain, Mind, Experience,
and School: Expanded Edition. Adapting and elaborating these findings spe-
cifically for the study of physics leads to the following implications for effec-
tive instruction.
1. Teachers must draw out and work with students’ current un-
derstandings, including those students bring with them to the course
and those they develop as the course progresses.
There is a robust consensus in education research, including a substantial
body of work specific to introductory physics (Champagne, Gunstone, and
Klopfer, 1985; Clement, 1982; Hake, 1998; Hestenes, Wells, and Swackhamer,
1992; McDermott and Redish, 1999), that to be effective, instruction must
elicit, engage, and respond substantively to student understandings. There
are now a number of examples of curricula and materials designed to sup-
port productive interaction with student understandings (as discussed later
in this chapter), and there is evidence that these approaches can achieve
progress in understanding not possible for most students with traditional
methods.
2. Teachers must address students’ metacognitive skills, habits,
and epistemologies.
Students need to understand not only the concepts of physics but also
the nature of knowledge and learning (Halloun, 1998; Hammer, 1995; Hewson,
1985; McDermott, 1991; Redish, Steinberg, and Saul, 1998; Reif and Larkin,
1991; White and Frederiksen, 1998). Many students arrive at physics courses,
including advanced courses, expecting to learn by memorizing formulas
disconnected from each other, as well as from the students’ experiences of
the physical world. Effective instruction challenges these expectations, help-
ing students come to see physics learning as a matter of applying and refin-
ing their current understanding. Students must learn to identify and examine
assumptions hidden in their reasoning; to monitor the quality and consis-
tency of their understanding; to formulate, implement, critique, and refine
models of physical phenomena; and to make use of a spectrum of appropri-
ate representational tools. By the end of an advanced course, students should
have developed a rich sense of the coherent, principled structure of physics
and be both able and inclined to apply those principles in unfamiliar situa-
tions. In short, effective instruction should work toward the objectives iden-
tified in Chapter 2.
Many teachers start off well by explaining to their students that success
in studying physics depends on learning and applying general principles,
rather than on memorizing many unrelated facts and formulas. Talk, how-
ever, is cheap. Too many teachers follow up these commendable words by

450
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
evaluating their students on the basis of their skill in solving problems that
are handled most efficiently by just such memorization. Teachers must de-
sign the assessments in their courses to make the statement that “success
depends on learning and applying general principles” a reality.
3. Effective teachers are sophisticated diagnosticians of student
knowledge, reasoning, and participation.
How teachers respond to student thinking depends critically on what
they perceive in that thinking, on what they interpret to be the strengths and
weaknesses of the student’s understanding and approach.20 Effective teach-
ers continually gather information to support this ongoing assessment from
several different sources: written work on assignments, tests and quizzes,
classroom discussions, and contact with students outside the classroom. They
ask students to explain their reasoning throughout their work. Upon gaining
new insights into student understanding, effective teachers adapt their in-
structional strategies and objectives. For this reason, teachers must be trained
both to make accurate diagnoses of student thinking and to devise effective
responses to that thinking (as discussed earlier).
4. Teachers must teach a smaller number of topics in greater
depth, providing many examples in which the same concept is at
work.
This is a common refrain in findings from education research, often
expressed in the slogan “less is more.” In part, this precept is an implication
of the previous two: drawing out and working with student understandings
and addressing metacognitive skills and habits all take time, and this neces-
sitates a reduction in the breadth of coverage. Education research also yields
the robust finding that coming to understand a concept requires multiple
encounters in multiple contexts. This finding is reflected across innovations
in physics curricula (see the discussion later in this chapter).
A related consideration is that effective teaching requires limiting class
sizes to a reasonable number. Drawing out, evaluating, and working to im-
prove student understandings is a highly individualized process that is nearly
impossible to perform adequately in oversized classes.
These admonitions from education research are not controversial, but
their generality may allow multiple, superficial, and possibly conflicting in-
20For an extended discussion and example of diagnosis in a high school physics class, see
Hammer (1997). For an account of facets-based diagnosis, see Minstrell (2000). Diagnoser, a
software tool designed to support facets-based diagnosis of student thinking, is available at
http://depts.washington.edu/huntlab/diagnoser [4/23/02].

PHYSICS
451
terpretations. If these points are to be meaningful, it is essential that they be
discussed with respect to specific instances of learning and instruction (ex-
amples include Minstrell, 1989; Hammer, 1997; Roth and Lucas, 1997; and
van Zee and Minstrell, 1997).
Special Considerations in Advanced Physics Instruction
The panel acknowledges that there are students who are successful at
learning under almost any circumstances, that these students often appear in
advanced courses, and that for them the implications of the previous section
may not be as critical. However, such students do not appear to constitute
the majority of those enrolled in advanced courses. Moreover, even the best
students would benefit from the recommendations of the research discussed
above.
With these considerations in mind, the panel’s first concern regarding
advanced courses is that the breadth of the curriculum often leaves very
little time to do anything but introduce new subject matter. Therefore, a
serious attempt to improve instructional practices will require giving up cov-
erage of some material. The panel’s recommendations for accomplishing
this are presented in Chapter 2.
The panel’s second concern is that the emphasis in advanced courses
on solving typical textbook problems as opposed to conceptual discussion
and debate tends to encourage rather than challenge student perceptions
that physics knowledge comprises disconnected factual units rather than a
principled system of ideas. Although skill in problem solving is an important
objective of any advanced physics program, conceptual understanding must
be the objective of highest priority.
Extent to Which the AP and IB Curricula and
Assessments Encourage Teachers to Use a Variety of
Teaching Techniques
As described in Chapter 3, the College Board leaves the way in which
AP physics is taught entirely to the particular implementation of AP physics
in each school. There are no requirements that must be met before students
can take the AP examinations. Although the College Board does offer advice
to teachers in various publications, it is entirely up to the particular school
whether to accept or reject that advice. The only means the College Board
has of encouraging teachers to use a variety of techniques is through the
construction of the examinations. Recent examinations have tended to em-
phasize conceptual understanding and real-world situations to a greater de-
gree than earlier examinations. To the extent that a variety of teaching tech-

452
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
niques is necessary to prepare students to answer these kinds of questions,
the use of such varying techniques is encouraged.
In contrast, the IBO spells out in great detail the time to be spent doing
different kinds of activities in IB physics courses. For example, 25 percent of
instructional time is to be spent by students pursuing a program of “practical
work” (see Chapter 3). Moreover, a great deal of written material is available
to IB teachers containing detailed suggestions for carrying out these activi-
ties. Thus the IBO most definitely encourages the use of a variety of teaching
techniques and in fact goes a long way toward mandating the use of such a
variety.
Whether the use of that variety is effective in the IB program, however,
is entirely another matter. As discussed earlier, teachers need to be free to
adjust their teaching techniques and objectives as they continually diagnose
the state of understanding of their students. The IB program’s prescriptions
of time to be spent in various activities may deprive teachers of the flexibility
they need. The panel is skeptical that such inflexible prescriptions are ap-
propriate for advanced physics instruction.
The panel has been informed through personal testimony and anec-
dotal evidence that some experienced IB physics teachers do not feel con-
strained to follow these time prescriptions. The panel considers the full use
of whatever flexibility is available to be entirely appropriate.
Differences Between High School Physics Instruction in
the United States and Other Countries
In light of the poor performance of U.S. students on the physics portion
of the Third International Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS) as com-
pared with students from other developed countries (see National Center for
Education Statistics, 1998), certain characteristics of the U.S. physics educa-
tion program need serious reconsideration and further study. To be clear,
the panel is not endorsing TIMSS as the way to measure success in physics
education; rather, we believe the lower scores of American students are a
good reason to explore what can be learned from the methods of physics
instruction used in other TIMSS countries.
Perhaps the most obvious difference between physics instruction in the
United States and other countries is the number of secondary school years
devoted to physics study. In most TIMSS countries, students develop their
physics knowledge over a period of many years, rather than the traditional 1
year commonly offered in the United States. The system used by other coun-
tries appears to be more consistent with the findings of education research
that coming to understand a concept requires multiple encounters in mul-
tiple contexts.

PHYSICS
453
One possibility for American programs to consider is moving the single
year to a different position in the traditional “layer-cake sequence.” Doing so
might change the mathematical level at which physics is taught or might
involve students at a different stage of cognitive development. It might also
facilitate the use of physics in interdisciplinary high school science classes
such as those encompassing biology and physics.
Another alternative is to offer physics along with other scientific disci-
plines in an integrated or coordinated course for the first 2 years of high
school and then offer further physics study in the junior or senior year at an
advanced level. This approach is similar to that of science programs in most
comparison countries. Additional years of integrated science courses in the
third and fourth high school years is another possibility. Given the scarcity
of comparison data on these sequences and the fact that many schools in the
United States are making the transition to integrated courses as a result of
exciting new curricular offerings, this is an excellent time to examine these
issues.
A second significant area of difference between physics instruction in
the United States and other TIMSS countries lies in the recruiting, training,
professional development, and status of physics teachers. The salary situa-
tion for American secondary school physics teachers is particularly troubling
(as noted earlier). First, the difference in salary between positions attainable
by physics majors (e.g., computer programmer, laboratory technician) and
the position of beginning teacher is much greater in the United States than in
most comparison countries. Second, the comparison with professions unre-
lated to physics is no better. In Japan, for example, secondary school teach-
ers are in the top 20 percent of the professional salary scale; in the United
States, they are in the bottom 20 percent. Salary issues related to recruitment
and retention need to be addressed for the U.S. physics teaching profession
before we find ourselves with far too few qualified teachers or mentors.
A third area of difference is reflected in the fact that some of the TIMSS
content involves topics not commonly covered in U.S. physics courses. One
example, thermodynamics, not only is poorly understood by many physics
teachers and therefore avoided but also is often left to chemistry teachers as
a part of their curriculum. Although the United States is generally perceived
to teach more science topics in less depth than is the case in other countries,
physics topics beyond mechanics and electricity and magnetism are often
mentioned in a highly perfunctory fashion. U.S. students may well have no
experience with these topics, especially on exams. Other examples are the
lack of emphasis on statistics and statistical analysis and the lower factual
content in U.S. textbooks compared with many European high school texts.
More data are needed to determine whether these and other mismatches put
U.S. students at a disadvantage.

454
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
U.S. students also appear to spend more class time doing laboratory
work and to do more independent work than their counterparts in other
countries. Although many believe these uses of student time encourage the
development of creative, bold, and imaginative physicists, the time spent in
the laboratory may diminish that devoted to other physics class activities,
such as problem solving, which may in turn affect test scores.21
Finally, unlike the United States, many comparison countries have ex-
tensive evaluation and assessment programs. Since most foreign countries
have national educational assessments, their evaluation processes may be
more efficient and meaningful in such disciplines as physics. Some pro-
grams have been in place for at least 100 years, involve highly trained teach-
ers as external graders, and publish school scores publicly. The availability
of long-term student assessment data may be an important factor leading to
the educational success of those programs.
THE STUDENTS OF AP AND IB PHYSICS
This section examines how the nature of the student body affects educa-
tional outcomes in advanced physics instruction. The students who take AP
and IB physics courses come from a wide variety of academic, cultural, and
socioeconomic backgrounds. This diversity can only increase as both pro-
grams continue to expand in size. An effective implementation of AP or IB
physics must take into account the background of the students enrolled in
that particular implementation.
The Problem of Widely Varying Levels of Academic
Preparation and Ability
Variations in abilities and preparation levels make teaching an advanced
physics program more difficult for both teacher and students. When the
ability or preparation of some students is far below the expected prerequi-
site level for advanced study, the teacher is faced with the unenviable choice
of either decreasing the extent or depth of content coverage to accommo-
date those poorly prepared students, thereby failing to meet the needs of the
students who are adequately prepared; or teaching the course at the level
appropriate for the adequately prepared students, thereby failing to meet
the needs of those who are poorly prepared.
The panel wishes to emphasize that preparation must include more than
background knowledge and related skills. It must also include the develop-
21This observation is offered only as a possible contributing factor to the low TIMSS scores
of American students. Naturally, we are far more interested in developing creative scientists
than in catching up on test scores.

PHYSICS
455
ment of mature work habits. Students who do not complete their homework
or are generally unwilling or unable to put forth sustained high levels of
effort are unlikely to succeed in advanced physics study in high school and
may have effects on other students’ learning that cannot be ignored.
It is not possible to avoid inappropriate placement situations entirely—
nor would doing so be desirable. Students who want to try a difficult course
because they are genuinely interested should be encouraged to do so, pro-
vided they are made fully aware of the commitment of time and effort they
are about to make. For some of these students, a well-taught and challeng-
ing advanced course in physics could spark learning and interest that had
previously gone unrecognized. On the other hand, seriously underqualified
students should be discouraged from taking advanced physics. Doing poorly
in a course for which a student is not prepared often discourages the student
from further study in the field and certainly will not enhance his or her
application to college.
These are complex issues with no easy solutions, and we recognize that
not everyone will share our views. The panel recommends discretion in the
assignment of students to advanced courses,22 so that the teacher is able to
maintain the integrity of the course as an advanced treatment of the con-
cepts being covered. For example, in solving projectile motion problems, a
comprehensive treatment is commonly not accessible to some fraction of
the class simply because they do not know how to solve quadratic equa-
tions. The panel believes appropriate members of each school’s staff should
be involved in decisions about admitting individual students to the school’s
advanced physics program. Of course, the school staff should consult with
students and their parents and consider their views carefully in the delibera-
tions, as appropriate. School personnel, students, and parents should be
clear about what constitutes adequate preparation for an advanced physics
program. Such preparation might include background knowledge and re-
lated skills, such as mature work habits.
At first glance, it may appear most fair to deny admission to underprepared
students. However, many students lack the necessary preparation because
of limited educational opportunities beyond their control. Moreover, as noted
above, some of these students may experience an academic awakening when
provided with such opportunities. The panel believes it is the job of the
school staff to identify those underprepared students who are likely candi-
dates for such experiences and admit them to the advanced physics program
regardless of prerequisites. Doing so may require extensive interviews with
22Normally, this discretion is exercised by the school administration. The standards set by
the administration should reflect the best interests of the students in that particular school. The
panel believes failure to exercise such discretion can make it impossible to run a successful
advanced physics program.

456
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
the student, the student’s parents and teachers, and others who know the
student well. Making these judgments is not easy, but we believe it is within
the capability of a skilled educational staff.
Ultimately, the way to expand access to advanced physics is to reform
the education system so that all students will be able to experience a rigor-
ous academic program that will allow them to study advanced physics in
their late high school years if they choose to do so.
Role Played by the Culture of the American High School
Students do not take advanced physics in a vacuum. They are constantly
interacting with the surrounding high school environment, which places
substantial demands on them physically, intellectually, socially, and morally.
Since the study of advanced physics is itself a demanding pursuit, there is a
constant struggle between the advanced physics program and other activi-
ties for the attention of students. To be successful, an advanced physics
program must adapt itself to the particular high school environment and find
a way to use whatever time students can devote to the program to best
educational advantage.
Competing activities that place demands on the time of advanced phys-
ics students include part-time employment; athletics; community service;
music and drama; college visits; television and movies; computer activities,
including Web surfing; family vacations; and social events. Much of the pres-
sure to engage in these activities comes from colleges and universities. In a
desire to enhance their college applications, students often undertake an
enormous variety of activities that leave them too little time for their studies.
Pulled in so many directions at the same time, these students have a low
attention span, both in class and in doing their homework.
It must also be recognized that English is not always the native language
of advanced physics students. Since the concepts of advanced physics are
new and difficult for many students, a poor command of English can cause
serious problems for those who are otherwise quite well prepared for the
course. Even for native English speakers, the specialized use of common
words such as momentum or work often leads to confusion. Those effects
are exacerbated among students for whom English is a second language. In
addition, cultural influences can affect how students think about science:
reasoning by analogy or by strict linear logic; memorization of specific cor-
rect responses or generalization; problem solving by induction or by deduc-
tion; or needing to learn through hands-on apprenticeship to gain one as-
pect of a skill before moving on to the next step (Kolodny, 1991). Cultural
prohibitions permeate some societies; for example, values that discourage
assertiveness, outspokenness, and competitiveness in some cultures result

PHYSICS
457
in behavior that can be interpreted as being indifferent, having nothing to
say, or being unable to act decisively (Hoy, 1993; NRC, 1997b, p. 59). The
problems engendered by these cultural differences are often beyond the
ability of teachers of advanced courses to handle on their own. In many
such cases, support from other members of the school staff is essential.
Finally, we note that advanced programs should use the resources of
the community to maximum advantage. In many cases, local corporations
are willing to make substantial contributions of equipment for the use of
advanced physics programs. They also often run special programs and com-
petitions that are highly stimulating to advanced students. Government labo-
ratories and colleges can have a large positive impact on advanced pro-
grams as well by giving students the opportunity to meet practicing scien-
tists and explore laboratories in which research at the forefront of physics is
taking place. Teachers of advanced courses should avail themselves of these
special opportunities in their communities.
ALTERNATIVE CURRICULAR MATERIALS FOR
ADVANCED PHYSICS INSTRUCTION
Many excellent advanced physics courses can be developed using tradi-
tional physics texts because a skilled teacher can modify the material to
incorporate interactive engagement techniques (Hake, 1998) that enhance
student learning. It would be better, however, to have curricular materials
that directly support interactive engagement. This section describes several
examples of such materials to demonstrate the variety of alternative resources
available and to provide some concrete examples of what is meant by inter-
active engagement. The panel makes no claim of completeness in our list-
ing, nor are we endorsing any particular set of materials.23
Most of the following materials have been developed and studied by
researchers in physics education. In several cases, there is a significant body
of evidence of improvements in student learning:24
• Real Time Physics (Sokoloff, Laws, and Thornton, 1994, 1997) is a
guide to microcomputer-based laboratory work designed to enhance stu-
23More information about the materials, along with links to the publishers, can be found at
the Web site of the American Association of Physics Teachers’ Physical Sciences Resource
Center, www.psrc-online.org [4/17/02]. Many of the publishers maintain Web sites of resource
materials that may be useful to teachers.
24This evidence is not specific to advanced high school physics courses. However, it is
reasonable to expect that results from introductory college-level courses should generally ap-
ply.

458
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
dents’ conceptual understanding of introductory physics topics. Studies of
students using these materials have shown marked improvements in their
understanding of concepts of kinematics and dynamics (Thornton and
Sokoloff, 1990, 1998).
• “Physics Tutorials” (McDermott and Shaffer, 2002) are a combination
of written exercises and simple experiments that can enhance student un-
derstanding of introductory physics topics. Designed primarily for use in
introductory college courses to supplement conventional curricula, these
tutorials would be appropriate and valuable for use in advanced secondary
courses. The most complete set of such materials is that of the University of
Washington Physics Education Group (McDermott, Shaffer, and Somers, 1994;
Shaffer and McDermott, 1992; and Wosilait, Heron, Shaffer, and McDermott,
1999).
• A Modeling Method for High-School Physics Instruction (Wells,
Hestenes, and Swackhamer, 1995) focuses on having students actively en-
gaged in defining, building, understanding, and testing mathematical mod-
els of physical phenomena. Students compare their models with both tradi-
tional models and the results of experiments. The method focuses on model
building, testing, and deployment (using the model in new situations) as a
key scientific activity (Halloun, 1996).
• The Workshop Physics Activity Guide (Laws, 1997) is used as the main
text for a 1-year calculus-based physics course (a traditional physics text can
be used as a reference). The course features the use of integrated computer
tools that students, working in small groups, use to collect, display, and
analyze data and to develop mathematical models describing physical phe-
nomena. Based on the results of physics education research, the guide uses
a four-part learning cycle to have students (1) predict the results of an ex-
periment, (2) reflect on the actual results and refine their predictions, (3)
develop mathematical models with appropriate equations to describe the
experiment, and (4) perform experiments to test the models (Laws, 1989,
1991, 1999).
• Electric and Magnetic Interactions (Chabay and Sherwood, 1999) is a
calculus-based introductory physics course that emphasizes the develop-
ment of conceptual models and scientific explanations of electricity and
magnetism phenomena. Kits of scotch tape, batteries, lightbulbs, one-farad
capacitors, and so on are used for “desk-top experiments” that introduce
phenomena before students build detailed mathematical and conceptual
models. The authors are just completing a text, Matter and Interactions (2002),
to be used in the first semester of an introductory physics course. That text
also emphasizes conceptual models and scientific explanations reinforced
by computational studies of mechanical systems.
• Six Ideas That Shaped Physics (Moore, 1998) is a calculus-based course
that organizes physics topics around six big ideas. Each chapter includes

PHYSICS
459
many conceptual questions useful for in-class engagement, as well as a good
collection of physics problems that require students to synthesize topics.
The latter are particularly useful for collaborative learning groups. The book
includes a good introduction to relativity, a section on quantum mechanics,
and a section on thermal physics emphasizing a statistical mechanics ap-
proach. Early versions of the text were evaluated through the Introductory
University Physics Program.25
• Physics: A Contemporary Perspective (Knight, 1997) claims to be the
first complete calculus-based introductory physics textbook reflecting the
results of physics education research. It emphasizes a balance of qualitative
and quantitative reasoning, multiple representations of knowledge, and a
systematic approach to problem solving. A companion student workbook
helps students develop conceptual and graphical understanding.
• The CASTLE curriculum materials developed by Pasco Scientific in-
clude material for investigating electricity, including batteries, lightbulbs,
compass needles, and large capacitance capacitors. The focus is on develop-
ing conceptual models of electrical effects, particularly in circuits.26
• C3P: Comprehensive Conceptual Curriculum for Physics is a high
school curriculum that draws on materials from a variety of sources, includ-
ing videos, inquiry methods, and laboratory experiments.27
• Although not traditionally part of advanced physics courses in high
schools, quantum physics may well be used as an optional or enrichment
topic. A set of materials called Visual Quantum Mechanics has been devel-
oped by Dean Zollman and colleagues in the Kansas State physics education
research group. The materials include simple experiments that illustrate ba-
sic quantum physics phenomena using light-emitting diodes, glow sticks,
and other inexpensive equipment. Computer programs help students build
conceptual models to explain the results of the experiments.
• Several publishers are revising traditional textbooks to take into ac-
count the results of physics education research. These revised texts empha-
size student engagement in developing conceptual understanding, as well
as improved approaches to problem solving. Already published is Physics
for Scientists and Engineers (Serway and Beichner, 2000). In addition, a team
of physics education researchers is producing a new version of Fundamen-
tals of Physics (Halliday, Resnick, and Walker, 2000). This version is still in
progress and should not be confused with the sixth edition of the textbook
released in July 2000.
• Some other resources that might be used in an advanced high school
physics course include the following:
25A report on these evaluations can be found in Coleman, Holcomb, and Rigden (1998).
26More information can be found on the Web at http://www.pasco.com [4/17/2002].
27For further information, see the Web site http://phys.udallas.edu [4/17/2002].

460
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
–PRISMS (Physics Resources and Instructional Strategies for Motivat-
ing Students)—The primary materials include a teacher’s guide with 120
activities for use with introductory physics students.28
–PTRA Workshops and Manuals—The Physics Teacher Resource Agents
program (sponsored by the American Association of Physics Teachers and
the National Science Foundation) has developed a series of workshops and
teacher resources for most of the topics taught in high school physics. The
majority involve hands-on projects for students, as well as other teaching
materials.29
–String and Sticky Tape Experiments (Edge, 1987).
–Conceptual Physics (Hewitt, 1999).
–Active Physics (Eisenkraft, 1999)—This text is designed to be used
as a “physics first” course, where students in ninth or tenth grade take phys-
ics before chemistry or biology. All of the units focus on applications of
physics in everyday life, such as automobiles, home heating, and sound
reproduction, with many hands-on activities.
28Further information is available at http://www.prisms.uni.edu [4/17/2002].
29Further information can be found at the American Association of Physics Teachers Web
site by going to http://www.aapt.org [4/17/2002] and clicking on Programs and then PTRA.

461
5
Changing Emphases in Physics and Their
Impact on Advanced Physics Instruction
The panel notes two changes in the practice of physics that should
eventually be reflected in instruction in advanced physics courses in high
school: the increasing use of computers in a variety of ways and a growing
emphasis on interdisciplinary connections.
INCREASING USE OF COMPUTERS
The availability of easy-to-use numerical computation tools, graphical
analysis programs, symbolic manipulation programs (e.g., MathCad, MAPLE,
Mathematica), computer-based data acquisition, simulation programs, and
the like is leading to dramatic changes in the practice of research in physics.
As a result, there is somewhat less emphasis on detailed analytic calculations
in many areas of physics research and an explosion of work in such areas as
nonlinear dynamics and the study of complex systems, in which numerical
and graphical tools are absolutely essential because traditional analytic meth-
ods fail. The panel argues that these same tools have the potential to effect
major changes in the nature of introductory physics instruction.
The beginnings of those changes can be seen in the widespread use of
computer-based and calculator-based data acquisition in introductory phys-
ics laboratory work. Computer simulations are also beginning to be used as
a way of allowing students to explore actively the predictions and range of
validity of various models of the physical world. These tools help introduc-
tory physics students build a better conceptual understanding of physical
phenomena by actively exploring models and their predictions. Finally, and
most provocatively, researchers have begun to pursue the use of computer
programming as a medium and language for the study of introductory phys-
ics. In a manner that reflects the growing role of computational modeling in
physics research, students may benefit by using computer programming as a
means to express, explore, and refine ideas in physics (diSessa, 2000; Sherin,
diSessa, and Hammer, 1993; Wilensky and Resnick, 1999).

462
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
The panel sees little in the current Advanced Placement (AP) and Inter-
national Baccalaureate (IB) curricula that reflects these changes in the prac-
tice of physics. We note that although many AP and IB teachers do make use
of computers in a variety of ways, neither the AP nor the IB examination
assesses the use of computer tools. Accordingly, the panel makes the following
recommendations:
• Advanced high school physics curricula should, over a period of time,
evolve to include more use of computer tools in ways that are effective in
physics instruction.
• Physics education researchers and others should continue to study
the use of computers in introductory physics instruction (including advanced
high school courses) to identify those uses that are particularly effective in
promoting the instructional goals identified elsewhere in this report.
Eventually, cyberspace and information technology (CIT) may completely
change the way new physical theories are developed. Instead of analytical
models, theorists will use computer programs to conceptualize physical sys-
tems that cannot be adequately represented by traditional analytical methods.
Students need exposure to such computer-assisted conceptualization as early
as possible in their education. Therefore, the panel recommends that an
appropriate unit in computer-assisted conceptualization be developed as
soon as possible and made available to teachers of advanced physics courses
as a possible optional topic (see Chapter 2 for a discussion of optional topics).
Capability for Rapid Information Sharing Among
Physics Teachers
The primary opportunity afforded by the ever-expanding Internet is its
promise of a new method of communication by which groups focused on
particular sets of issues can rapidly interact to develop innovations. Teachers
of advanced high school physics courses could form such groups to share
and enrich their pedagogical skills. The opportunity now exists to create a
national electronic clearinghouse of information relating to secondary school
physics instruction. Box 5-1 presents a short list of some Internet groups that
are already active.
Introducing Students to the Benefits of the Internet
Teachers of advanced high school physics are ideally positioned to in-
troduce their students to the use of the Web and cyberspace technologies for
carrying out research. Thus, the training of more computer-savvy profes-

PHYSICS
463
BOX 5-1 Internet Groups for Physics Teachers
The following are some active Internet groups for physics teachers. The de-
scriptions of these groups are taken from the article “Communities of On-Line
Physics Educators” by Dan MacIsaac (2000):
• PHYS-L (Forum for Physics Teachers) is the largest with about 650 mem-
bers and has the broadest membership. The list has a homepage located at http:/
/purcell.phy.nau.edu, and this page links to archives of all postings since February
1996 and to list members’ personal Web pages at http://members.xoom.com/exit60.
Together these form an outstanding set of resources.
• PHYSHARE (Sharing Resources for HS Physics Teachers) has about 600
subscribers and focuses on high school physics teaching issues. The list adminis-
trative address is listserv@lists.psu.edu, and postings must be made to
physhare@lists.psu.edu.
• PhysLrnR (Physics Learning Research List) has about 475 subscribers and
is focused on professional research into physics learning. This list maintains a private
archive for postings, accessible to subscribers only. PhysLrnR maintains a large
collection of specialist literature on Physics Education Research (PER) on an ftp
server at ftp://physlrnr.idbsu.edu/plrserve/pub/physlrnr. The list administrative (or
control) address is listserv@listserv.boisestate.edu, and postings must be made to
PhysLrnR@listserv.boisestate.edu.
• TAP-L is a smaller list specializing in design and construction of physics
laboratory and demonstration apparatus. Members are mainly college and univer-
sity physics department demonstration and lab coordinators, and PIRA (Physics
Instructional Resource Association) members. Postings are archived since 1999,
and there is a list Web page at http://members.odyssey1.net/kctipton/tapfaq.html.
Uniquely, this list runs a web ring of web sites run by the demonstration and labo-
ratory coordinators at several dozen universities and colleges. The list administra-
tive (or control) address is listproc@listproc.appstate.edu, and postings must be
made to tap-l@listserv.appstate.edu.
• AP-PHYSICS is a list run by the College Board specializing in the teaching of
AP Physics. Information on subscribing is available on the College Board’s website
at http://www.collegeboard.org/ap/listserv/list.html.
SOURCE: Adapted from MacIsaac (2000). Also available on the Internet as a pdf
file: http://purcell.phy.nau.edu/phys-l/TPTApr00art.pdf [4/23/02].

464
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
sionals could be naturally encouraged within advanced physics programs. If
this is to occur, of course, computers will have to be widely available in
classrooms, and their presence brings new concerns along with opportuni-
ties. The arrival of computers in the classroom is so new that there has not
yet been a definitive evaluation of their impact on the learning process,
either in general or within the advanced physics community
Revolution in Scientific Publishing
A revolution in scientific publishing is under way. Physics journals in
particular are rapidly migrating toward electronic formats. Already some
major U.S. laboratories have begun to phase out their actual libraries in favor
of electronic access. Similar experiments have begun at the physics libraries
of some of the nation’s research universities. The whole physics publishing
enterprise has been radically changed by the creation of electronic archives
such as the Los Alamos http://www.lanl.gov. A decade ago only the single
field of theoretical particle physics used this model. Today most fields of
physics, mathematics, and other scientific disciplines are using it, and it has
spread to the medical community through the recent creation of a server
sponsored by the National Institutes of Health. It is clear that working re-
search scientists already have a new manner of carrying out research. Both
national and international collaborative scientific research efforts are sup-
ported through cyberspace. New research is created, posted on servers, and
downloaded by other scientists, who then synthesize it and create their own
new results at a more rapid pace than ever before.
Cyberspace Technology in College and High School
Classrooms
In colleges and universities, experimentation with cyberspace technol-
ogy and “new-technology classrooms” is beginning. Computers have already
made their way into the traditional college physics laboratory, most signifi-
cantly in the acquisition and analysis of data. In addition, many college
instructors make themselves available to their students via e-mail, enabling
questions and discussions to be undertaken at the convenience of both
student and instructor. Literature searches are now often done electronically.
These developments have implications for the education of secondary
school students currently engaged in the advanced study of physics. Various
computer software programs are available for the tasks of communication
(electronic mail, browsing on the Web, presentational tools, text editing,
slide presentation [e.g., Power Point], and IR [infrared] personal response)
and computer-assisted conceptualization (modeling environments, spread-

PHYSICS
465
sheets, symbolic manipulation, mathematical graphing, computer-aided de-
sign, simulation and visualization, and data collection and analysis). All of
these tools are used for a wide variety of research carried out by physicists.
The panel recommends that these modern research tools be introduced as
extensively as possible into advanced high school physics programs. The
panel notes that many high schools are already using a number of these
tools, especially software for data acquisition and analysis.
Communication Among Constituencies with an Interest
in Physics Research or Education
The rapid speed of communication via CIT presents new opportunities
for a closer relationship between the physics research and teaching commu-
nities. Many researchers at universities, government laboratories, and other
organizations have created Web sites that are freely accessible and designed
precisely for the purpose of making their research more available to the
general public. The same can be said for the American Physical Society and
other professional organizations of physicists.
It is therefore possible, as never before, to introduce topics of ongoing
research to secondary school students currently studying advanced physics.
Using CIT, researchers can best communicate the excitement of their re-
search activity as they grapple with the scientific problems that lie at the
boundaries of knowledge in the field. This excitement, when transmitted
properly to students, can be a tremendous motivating factor leading them to
consider scientific research as a career.
In addition, the Web allows easy access to university physics courses
from outside university classrooms. Many professors offer Web-based mecha-
nisms for their own students to monitor their courses. Often, course syllabi,
homework assignments and solutions, and the like are made available via
an appropriate Web site. Such mechanisms also offer exciting new possibili-
ties for more closely linking physics instruction within the universities to that
in secondary education programs. The panel recommends that CIT be used
in the teaching of advanced high school physics to highlight current state-of-
the-art research, thereby encouraging young people to join the nation’s sci-
entific workforce.
Future Uses of CIT in Advanced Physics Programs
There are a number of ways in which CIT poses challenges to be met in
future advanced physics instruction. In this section, we outline the research
needed to answer the question: “What might be the form of an advanced
physics course in the year 2010?”

466
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
Because the possibilities are so vast, any categorization of the issues
involved in answering this question is to some extent arbitrary. Neverthe-
less, we provide the following list of issues to provide a framework within
which to conceptualize and begin to formulate specific goals and recom-
mendations for the electronic advanced physics classroom of the not-too-
distant future. The list is not meant to be exhaustive and is sure to grow as
the nation’s educational leadership becomes increasingly aware of the enor-
mous opportunities presented by CIT:
• What is the appropriate use of CIT in teaching advanced physics
courses?
• In the teaching of advanced physics courses, how is it possible to
foster a higher level of skill in the use of modern CIT to acquire, analyze,
disseminate, and present data and information?
• Is it possible to use CIT to close the gap between calculus-based and
algebra-based physics courses by developing new computer-based modes
of thinking about and handling conceptual and quantitative models of physical
reality?
• What is the best way to foster the development of high-quality CIT-
based materials (e.g., hypertext) that will support the teaching of advanced
physics courses?
• What is the appropriate level of teacher training necessary for the
effective use of CIT in an advanced physics course?
• What are the appropriate standards of student attainment and profi-
ciency in the use of CIT that should be required of a student enrolled in a
high-quality advanced physics course?
• What is the appropriate use of the Web as a medium for delivering
distance learning in an effort to provide advanced physics instruction to the
broadest possible population of students that can benefit from such training?
Potential Use of CIT to Administer Final Examinations in
Future Advanced Physics Programs
In the not-too-distant future, CIT may be able to provide an efficient
means of administering and scoring final examinations in advanced pro-
grams. If such a process is implemented, the panel makes two recommenda-
tions:
• It is absolutely essential that students retain the ability to return to
and modify their answers to previous questions as they take the examina-
tion. Physics is a subject in which careful consideration and reconsideration
are often required to find a correct solution to a problem. A fair physics test
must reflect that essential feature of the discipline.

PHYSICS
467
• The implications of adaptive questioning (in which succeeding ques-
tions depend on the responses given by the student to earlier questions)
need to be carefully studied. The panel is skeptical that adaptive schemes
can be devised that are truly fair to all candidates.
INTERDISCIPLINARY CONNECTIONS
An important issue for a field as ancient as physics is how it adapts to
the needs of society in a given place and time. The field of physics today
faces a period of transition. Among the most important reasons for this are
the following:
• The period in which a primary national need for defense was fulfilled
by physicists in creating, developing, and upgrading nuclear weapons has
ended.
• A period in which technology is a primary driver of the national
economy has begun.
• A period in which other areas of science, such as microbiology and
genetics, will undergo rapid progress has also begun.
• The increasing availability, power, and sophistication of computa-
tional hardware and software will make possible novel quantitative descrip-
tions of the physical universe. Society in general appears to be rapidly be-
coming more and more knowledge based. Enormous quantities of informa-
tion are instantly available on ubiquitous computers. (See the discussion in
the preceding section.)
Under these circumstances, the tasks that are undertaken by the field of
physics must change both to meet the demands of society and to maintain
the vitality of the field itself. Physicists, and the people trained by them, will
need to be able to apply the body of knowledge developed within physics
to totally new areas. In other words, physicists will be asked to become
more interdisciplinary; they will have to apply their special knowledge and
methods to problems that cross the boundaries of traditional disciplines.
This fact has substantial implications for the training of the future physicists
presently engaged in the advanced study of physics at the secondary level. It
therefore makes sense to examine the two dominant advanced physics pro-
grams to determine the extent to which they provide suitable training to
students along interdisciplinary lines.
The AP physics program appears to stick closely to the traditional cur-
riculum that has been the hallmark of the field during the last 50 years.
There appears to be no attempt within the program to address the increasing
importance of applying physics knowledge across traditional field bound-
aries.

468
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
On the other hand, the IB program has several features that naturally
allow students to begin to confront interdisciplinary issues. First, the IB pro-
gram provides interdisciplinary options (biomedical physics, historical phys-
ics) that teachers may choose. Second, many questions from past IB exami-
nations have an interdisciplinary flavor. Finally, during the Group 4 project
component of the IB program, a collaborative group of students creates its
own scientific investigation. Such projects can easily involve applying knowl-
edge and methods from several different scientific fields.
Increased interdisciplinary content could be added to advanced courses
by developing more separate units such as the biomedical physics unit found
in the current IB program. Alternatively, the advanced course might choose
examples illustrating how fundamental physical principles apply to a wide
variety of areas. For example, the elastic properties of DNA molecules might
be used to discuss the range of validity of Hooke’s law for spring forces.
Biological cell membranes could be used to construct interesting examples
of electrical potential differences and electric fields.
The panel, in agreement with the National Research Council’s (NRC)
National Science Education Standards (NSES) (NRC, 1996), recommends that
all advanced high school physics curricula include some experience with
interdisciplinary applications of physics.
COMPARISON OF AP AND IB PHYSICS WITH
EDUCATION STANDARDS
Extent to Which the AP and IB Physics Programs Reflect
the Recommendations of the National Science Education
Standards
The panel did not have sufficient time to make a detailed assessment of
the extent to which the AP and IB Physics programs incorporate the recom-
mendations of the NSES (NRC, 1996). The short answer to the question is
“not much.” As noted earlier, IB physics encourages interdisciplinary con-
nections to some extent as recommended by the NSES.
Since most advanced courses in physics are designed to mimic college-
level courses, and since the college-level courses are not (for better or worse)
specifically designed with the NSES in mind, there is no immediate need for
the advanced courses to be tightly tied to the standards. However, as more
and more high schools adopt curricula in line with the NSES, college courses
may evolve to take into account the new background that students then
bring with them. We would then expect high school advanced courses to be
redesigned as well.

PHYSICS
469
Extent to Which the AP and IB Physics Programs Reflect
the Recommendations in the National Council of
Teachers of Mathematics Standards 2000
The National Council of Teachers of Mathematics recently published
Principles and Standards for School Mathematics (NCTM, 2000). This docu-
ment presents five principles and a series of standards to guide the teaching
and learning of K–12 mathematics. The standards are grouped into several
categories: Numbers and Operations, Algebra, Geometry, Measurement, Data
Analysis and Probability, Problem Solving, Communication, Connections and
Representations. Throughout the Principles and Standards is an emphasis on
understanding, “Students must learn mathematics with understanding, actively
building new knowledge from experience and prior knowledge.” Indeed,
“learning with understanding” may well be the clarion call of the entire
document. The standards are intended as goals to be met by all K–12
students.30
These standards do not directly address the issue of advanced physics
study in high school. They do, however, provide a strong foundation on
which advanced courses can be built. Certainly, it is desirable that any stu-
dent undertaking the study of advanced physics in high school have met the
NCTM standards before beginning that course. It should also be noted that
high school physics courses in general, and advanced physics courses in
particular, help students solidify their knowledge and skills in mathematics.
Advanced physics courses are of special value in reinforcing skills in Mea-
surement, Data Analysis and Probability, Problem Solving, Communication,
and Connections and Representations.
30More information on the standards can be found at the NCTM Web site: http://nctm.org/
standards/introducing.htm [4/23/02].

470
6
Connecting Advanced High School Physics
Programs with College Physics Programs
One of the principal rationales for advanced study in secondary schools
is to enable capable and motivated students to do work that is beyond the
normal secondary school level. Advanced study both removes an artificial
cap on these students’ learning in high school and facilitates their future
learning in colleges and universities. Clearly, our success in nurturing our
most talented students depends on just how well we accomplish this task.
QUALITY OF PREPARATION OF AP AND IB
PHYSICS STUDENTS FOR FURTHER STUDY
The College Board presents evidence that students who do well on the
Advanced Placement (AP) physics examinations perform in physics courses
beyond the introductory level as well as, or perhaps even a bit better than,
students who first encounter introductory physics in the standard college or
university course (see, for example, College Entrance Examination Board,
1994c). About 10 years ago, one panel member administered the AP Physics
B exam to students in that member’s introductory college physics course.
There was a good correlation between the students’ performance on the AP
exam and their grades in the college course.
Both these pieces of evidence can be interpreted as showing that scores
on the AP physics exams are good predictors of success in college physics
courses beyond the introductory level. Of course, one might legitimately
question whether that is the primary raison d’être of advanced high school
courses. One could argue, however, that for those students for whom col-
lege placement or credit is a goal the AP courses are reasonable substitutes
for most introductory college-level courses.
The International Baccalaureate (IB) physics curriculum is not designed
to be a substitute for college-level work. However, the panel believes the IB
physics curriculum provides fine preparation for introductory college-level

PHYSICS
471
work in physics. In terms of content, the IB physics curriculum is roughly
equivalent to that of AP Physics B.
The demonstrated success of many highly qualified AP students in col-
lege courses beyond the introductory level confirms that these students can
be as well prepared as those taking the introductory college course. How-
ever, there is evidence to suggest that the College Board’s estimation that a
score of 3 on an AP examination indicates a student is qualified for advanced
placement may be too generous, and in practice most selective colleges
require a score of 4 or 5 for placement or credit (Lichten, 2000). This latter
practice is consistent with the panel’s recommendation that a higher stan-
dard for qualification on a more conceptually oriented, less rushed examina-
tion would be an improvement (see Chapter 2). From this point of view, the
successful skipping of introductory college courses by AP students might be
construed as an indictment of introductory college physics courses rather
than as an endorsement of AP courses.
DEPENDENCE OF COLLEGE PHYSICS PROGRAMS
ON KNOWLEDGE GAINED FROM ADVANCED
HIGH SCHOOL PHYSICS PROGRAMS
From the point of view of many college physics departments, there are
serious problems with the interface between advanced high school pro-
grams and college physics programs. The content of AP courses is designed
as an aggregate of the content of many large introductory science courses at
major universities. Since these university courses vary widely, “averaging”
their content into a single high school course produces a topic outline with
greater diversity than any single university course. This holds especially true
for the AP Physics B courses. As a result, the AP courses generally cover a
content range that is very broad but not very deep. The courses tend to
encourage memorization and technical problem solving without deep con-
ceptual understanding, though that is of course not their intent. It is well
established that learning of this kind is not easily generalized to new situa-
tions. Thus, the potential of physics education to contribute to the develop-
ment of capable problem solvers is not fully realized.
In addition, there are many obstacles to creating a college-level instruc-
tional environment in secondary schools. For example, the rapid expansion
of the AP program has caused a severe shortage of adequately trained teach-
ers capable of teaching AP courses well (see Chapter 4). For these and other
reasons, many of those responsible for granting advanced placement or
credit in the colleges and universities doubt at present that students scoring
3 or 4, or in some cases even 5, on AP physics examinations actually have
had experiences warranting the granting of such placement or credit, and
some decline to do so. In addition, as noted earlier, many students who have

472
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
taken AP courses do not even take the AP examinations. The net result of
this situation is that many students who have supposedly done college-level
work in secondary school are destined to repeat that work once they enter
college. Some even decide not to continue in physics rather than follow that
path. While some of these students benefit from the college physics courses
taken after an AP experience, the lack of coordination between secondary
and higher physics education is problematic.
IMPROVEMENTS IN COLLEGE PHYSICS
INSTRUCTION THROUGH A BETTER INTERFACE
WITH ADVANCED HIGH SCHOOL PROGRAMS
College courses are subject to the same criticism of excessive breadth
that has been made of advanced high school programs, as has been empha-
sized many times in the physics education research literature.31 These courses
often fail both in improving students’ conceptual understanding and in mo-
tivating them to continue. If high school programs of advanced study were
to focus on a somewhat narrower but widely shared range of content, and if
the learning process were to emphasize conceptual understanding, college
and university physics courses could evolve to build on that content and
understanding. For example, suppose that a deeper and more reliable knowl-
edge of Newtonian mechanics could be achieved through advanced study in
high school, as recommended in Chapter 2, with performance on examina-
tions correlating well with established measures of conceptual understand-
ing. Then college courses for graduates of advanced physics programs could
reduce the time spent on mechanics and devote some of the time saved to
topics that are conceptually difficult, such as electromagnetic fields. The net
result would be enhanced student understanding at both levels.
It might also be possible, with some of the time saved, to include more
contemporary physics.32 It is unfortunate that many of our most talented and
advanced physics students spend 3 years surveying essentially the same
material of classical physics (2 secondary years and 1 college year). As dis-
cussed earlier, their motivation and knowledge would be enhanced by some
exposure to physics as it has evolved in the last few decades. This cannot be
done properly in the time available unless some greater success in coordi-
nating secondary and higher-level physics courses can be achieved.
31See Chapter 3 and the discussion of the Introductory University Physics Program evalu-
ations in Coleman, Holcomb, and Rigden (1998).
32The new IB physics syllabus includes particle production and annihilation; fundamental
interactions; and an overview of leptons, quarks, and exchange bosons. The panel applauds
the addition of these contemporary physics topics to the IB program.

PHYSICS
473
Of course, not all students entering college will have studied advanced
physics in high school, and that fact must also be taken into account when
designing college course offerings. How to derive the optimum benefit from
the physics background of incoming students is an issue that colleges will
need to study carefully in the future.
RECOMMENDATIONS
The panel makes the following recommendations for creating a reliable
interface between advanced high school and college physics programs:
• As discussed in Chapter 2, all advanced high school programs should
seek to develop competence in Newtonian mechanics that emphasizes deep
conceptual understanding, even if the coverage of other topics must be
reduced.
• Final assessments must be modified to test for conceptual under-
standing and the ability to apply basic physical principles to situations not
previously encountered.
• Colleges and universities and writers of textbooks should develop
introductory courses and materials that take advantage of this enhanced
understanding of Newtonian mechanics among the rapidly growing popula-
tion of advanced high school program graduates. The amount of duplication
between the high school and college courses could then be reduced, mak-
ing possible a decrease in the excessive breadth of many of the college
courses as well.

474
7
Main Findings and Overall
Recommendations
This chapter summarizes the panel’s main findings and overall recom-
mendations. References to earlier chapters are provided to help the reader
find more comprehensive discussion of these important issues.
1. The most important goals of advanced physics instruction are
independent of the particular topics studied.
Advanced physics instruction should be aimed at generating excitement
and enthusiasm for further study in physics, at achieving deep conceptual
understanding of the subject matter covered, and at instilling in students the
scientific habits of mind that are important for their further education in
science. Learning any particular physics subject matter is of lesser impor-
tance (see Chapter 2).
2. All advanced physics programs should aim to develop deep con-
ceptual understanding of the topics studied.
To achieve the above goals, it is essential that whatever topics are cho-
sen be addressed in depth, with an emphasis on conceptual understanding
rather than on technical problem-solving skills. Students must learn that
physics knowledge is built on general principles and gain the confidence to
apply those principles to unfamiliar situations (see Chapters 2 and 3).
It is critical that advanced physics programs allow enough time for ex-
tended debate, student-designed experimentation, and other activities nec-
essary to develop depth of understanding. There must also be sufficient time
for teachers to diagnose the current state of understanding of their students
and to change their teaching techniques and objectives accordingly. Of course,
it is impossible to assess the understanding of students without requiring
them to explain their reasoning. The panel strongly recommends that expla-
nations of reasoning be required from the first day of an advanced course,

PHYSICS
475
so that providing such explanations quickly becomes automatic for all stu-
dents in whatever they do in the course (see Chapter 4). For these reasons,
very broad curricula, such as 1-year Advanced Placement (AP) Physics B
courses, should either be extended to 2 years (as is done in International
Baccalaureate physics) or eliminated in favor of more compact curricula that
can be covered in depth (see Chapters 2 and 3).
3. All students of advanced physics should study a nationally stan-
dardized one-semester unit in Newtonian mechanics. This unit should
have the coverage of current AP Physics C Mechanics (including rota-
tional dynamics) but should not require formal calculus.
The study of Newtonian mechanics provides an ideal framework for
developing the scientific habits of mind and deep conceptual understanding
that are the primary goals of advanced physics instruction. Since familiarity
with Newtonian mechanics is universally expected of students who have
completed an advanced high school physics program, it is logical to create a
standardized mechanics unit to serve as the foundation of all advanced physics
study. College physics departments could then depend on a thorough knowl-
edge of this unit in developing courses for the further education of ad-
vanced physics students (see Chapters 2 and 6). This new common unit
should contain all the important physics currently found in the AP Physics C
Mechanics curriculum, including rotational dynamics. To permit the study of
the common mechanics unit by all advanced physics students, however,
knowledge of formal calculus should not be required (see Chapter 2).
It is important to understand that the omission of formal calculus would
have no adverse impact on achieving the important goals of advanced phys-
ics instruction. On the contrary, it would permit increased emphasis on con-
ceptual understanding by eliminating the need to spend time studying cal-
culus-intensive problems. For example, students would no longer need to
be able to perform path integrals to find the work done by a force, but they
would need to understand the connection between work and kinetic energy
change. They would also have to be able to find the work done by a force
that varies as a function of position by using the area under the force curve.
We note that this recommendation is in keeping with the recent trend
on AP Physics C examinations to reduce the emphasis on mathematical
complexity. When the concepts of calculus are essential to the development
of the physics, these concepts can be introduced in other ways. For ex-
ample, instantaneous velocity can be introduced as the slope of a tangent
line to the graph of displacement versus time.
Finally, the panel stresses that the examination for the common me-
chanics unit is likely to be more difficult than the present AP Physics C
Mechanics examination. For one thing, research has shown that students

476
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
have more difficulty with the kinds of conceptual questions that would make
up the new examination than with problems that can be solved by math-
ematical techniques. In addition, successful students will be expected to be
thoroughly familiar with the new mechanics unit, and the standards for suc-
cess on the examination will be higher than they are now. The consolidation
of mechanics into a single common unit does not by any means represent a
lowering of present standards, but quite the opposite (see Chapter 2).
4. In a 1-year advanced physics program, students should study
only one major area of physics in addition to Newtonian mechanics.
To keep the size of the curriculum manageable, the panel strongly rec-
ommends that 1-year programs cover only one other major area of physics
beyond Newtonian mechanics. There should be great flexibility in the choice
of the optional topic to be covered in the second semester, including the
possible choice of a nontraditional unit designed to provide advancement
by enrichment. (See Chapter 2.)
5. Meaningful real-world (laboratory) experiences should be in-
cluded in all advanced physics programs. There is ample evidence
that traditional “cookbook” laboratories do not meet this standard.
The panel strongly believes that real-world experiences are an essential
part of advanced physics study. Science is distinguished from other ways of
thinking by its reliance on evidence about the physical world and the impor-
tance of reproducible consistency in judging the truth of conjectures, laws,
and theories. However, these experiences must be meaningful; that is, the
educational benefits derived from the activities must be worth the time and
effort expended. There is ample evidence that traditional cookbook labora-
tories do not meet this standard (see Chapter 2).
6. Teachers of advanced programs must be able to respond to their
ongoing assessment of their students’ understanding (see Chapter 4).
Therefore, curricula that require spending specific amounts of time on
particular subject areas or on certain kinds of activities should be avoided.
7. The scoring of written examinations must emphasize the evalu-
ation of student understanding. A rigid scoring rubric in which points
are awarded for very specific correct responses to small parts of each
question is not appropriate; rather, the reader should evaluate the
student’s response as a whole. A maximum score should be given
only for complete and clear physical reasoning leading to the correct

PHYSICS
477
conclusions. The recent trend toward increased emphasis on con-
ceptual understanding should continue.
Because the final assessments in advanced programs involve high stakes,
students and teachers tend to do whatever they must in order to score well
on those assessments. This fact makes it absolutely imperative that the ex-
aminations measure the depth of understanding that is the fundamental goal
of advanced physics instruction (see Chapter 2).
The assessment of understanding necessitates requiring students to ex-
plain their reasoning and evaluating those explanations. Since there is no
way to anticipate all possible correct and incorrect explanations, it is impos-
sible to perform this evaluation within the confines of a rigid scoring rubric.
Current rigid rubrics must therefore be abandoned in favor of a more flex-
ible approach in which each student’s response is evaluated as a whole. This
is the approach taken in grading essay questions in the humanities or social
sciences, without any apparent problems due to lack of consistency in evalu-
ation. Moreover, one member of the panel participated in an experiment in
which AP physics examinations were graded in this fashion, and the consis-
tency of the evaluation turned out to be at least as good as under the rigid
scoring rubric (see Chapter 2).
8. The panel recommends that sufficient time be allowed for stu-
dents to complete the entire final examination (see Chapter 2). Final
examinations must measure what students know, not how fast they
can recall and apply that knowledge.
9. The standards for success on final assessments should be raised.
The panel believes that if its recommended curriculum changes are imple-
mented, successful students will know the material in the new, more man-
ageable curricula thoroughly. Therefore, the panel recommends high stan-
dards of performance on the new final examinations (see Chapter 2).
10. More well-qualified teachers are desperately needed for ad-
vanced physics programs. A concerted effort should be made through-
out the physics community to contribute to the training of highly
skilled physics teachers. Peer assessment programs should be imple-
mented for certification and continuing assessment of physics teach-
ing skill.
With the continued growth of advanced physics programs across the
nation, there is a severe shortage of qualified teachers for such programs.
The panel endorses a concerted effort by all elements of the physics com-

478
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
munity to train more qualified teachers. It is also imperative that the salaries
and professional status of physics teachers be raised to make them competi-
tive with those of other professionals, so that sufficient talent will be at-
tracted to the physics teaching profession (see Chapter 4).
The panel also recommends that, as is done in other professions (e.g.,
medicine), peer assessment programs be implemented for the certification
of physics teachers and the continuing evaluation of their teaching skills. On
this matter, we endorse the National Board for Professional Teaching Stan-
dards; however, we recommend that peer assessment be discipline specific
rather than for all sciences.
11. The preparation and skill of the teacher are the principal
factors that determine the ultimate success or failure of advanced
physics instruction. Thorough understanding of the subject matter is
a necessary but not sufficient condition for good physics teaching.
Teachers must also be trained in the special pedagogy of physics.
The panel stresses that implementations of advanced physics programs
differ widely from school to school. The way in which a program is imple-
mented by a given teacher is often much more important than the choice of
which program to implement (see Chapter 4).
12. Skilled physics teachers continually diagnose the understand-
ing of their students and change their objectives and strategies as that
diagnosis indicates. It is impossible to assess the understanding of
students without requiring them to explain their reasoning. (See Chap-
ter 4.)
13. Advanced courses should have greater interdisciplinary con-
tent and make increasing use of cyberspace and information technol-
ogy.
Modern developments in both science and society as a whole indicate
that physicists will be increasingly called upon to address problems that
cross the boundaries between traditional disciplines (see Chapter 5). At the
same time, the explosion of information technology provides a vast array of
possibilities for improving advanced physics instruction (see Chapter 5).
Teachers and administrators should be aware of these developments and
help advanced physics programs expand their involvement in both areas
over time.
14. Information technology should be used to create networks
that will enable teachers, college faculty, and other professionals to
share information useful for advanced physics teaching.

PHYSICS
479
The Internet provides a rapid mechanism for exchanging ideas and in-
formation among professionals interested in advanced physics instruction.
The panel encourages the continued expansion of networks of such profes-
sionals. Such networks are a powerful means of encouraging the creation of
a professional community of physics teachers, consistent with the panel’s
recommendations for peer assessment (see recommendation 10) and greater
emphasis on professional development (see Chapters 4 and 5).
15. Fairness must be ensured on future computerized final assess-
ments for advanced physics programs.
The panel is aware that the use of information technology may allow
more efficient administration of nationwide examinations for advanced physics
programs. However, the panel stresses the importance of ensuring that these
more efficient assessments remain fair to all candidates.
16. Given the scarcity of data on the long-term outcomes of phys-
ics education, an effort should be made as soon as possible to follow
the progress of physics students over many years.
The panel believes there are far too few data on the long-term outcomes
of physics education to allow important decisions about the physics educa-
tion of large numbers of students to be made with confidence.

480
References
Chabay, R.W., & Sherwood, B.A. (1999). Electric and magnetic interactions. New
York: Wiley.
Chabay, R. W., & Sherwood, B.A. (2002). Matter and interactions, volume 2: Electric
and Magnetic Interactions. New York: Wiley.
Champagne, A. B., Gunstone, R. F., & Klopfer, L. E. (1985). Instructional conse-
quences of students’ knowledge about physical phenomena. In L.H.T. West and
A.L. Pines (Eds.), Cognitive structure and conceptual change. New York: Academic
Press.
Clement, J. (1982). Student preconceptions in introductory mechanics. American
Journal of Physics, 50(1), 66–71.
Coleman, L. A., Holcomb, D.F., & Rigden, J.S. (1998). The introductory university
physics project 1987–1995: What has it accomplished? American Journal of Phys-
ics, 66, 124–137.
College Entrance Examination Board. (1994a). 1993 AP physics B: Free-response scor-
ing guide with multiple-choice section. New York: Author.
College Entrance Examination Board. (1994b). 1993 AP physics C: Free-response scoring
guide with multiple-choice section. New York: Author.
College Entrance Examination Board. (1994c). College and university guide to the
advanced placement program. New York: Author.
College Entrance Examination Board. (1999a). Advanced placement course descrip-
tion, physics, 2000, 2001. New York: Author.
College Entrance Examination Board. (1999b). Released exams: 1998 AP physics B
and physics C. New York: Author.
College Entrance Examination Board. (2001). Advanced placement course descrip-
tion, physics, 2002, 2003. New York: Author.
diSessa, A.A. (2000). Changing minds: Computers, learning, and literacy. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Edge, R.D. (1987). String and sticky tape experiments. College Park, MD: American
Association of Physics Teachers.
Eisenkraft, A. (1999). Active physics. Armonk, NY: It’s About Time.
Eylon, B.S., & Reif, F. (1984). Effects of knowledge organization on task perfor-
mance. Cognition and Instruction, 1, 5-44.

PHYSICS
481
Hake, R.R. (1998). Interactive-engagement vs. traditional methods: A six-thousand-
student survey of mechanics test data for introductory physics courses. Ameri-
can Journal of Physics, 66 (1), 64–74.
Halliday, D., Resnick, R., & Walker, J. (2000). Fundamentals of physics: Volume 1.
New York: Wiley.
Halloun, I. (1996). Schematic modeling for meaningful learning of physics. Journal
of Research in Science Teaching, 33 (9), 1019–1041.
Halloun, I. (1998). Views about science and physics achievement. The VASS Story. In
E.F. Redish, and J.S. Rigden (Eds.), Proceedings of the international conference
on undergraduate physics education (1996). Washington DC: American Insti-
tute of Physics.
Hammer, D. (1995). Epistemological considerations in teaching introductory physics.
Science Education, 79(4), 393–413.
Hammer, D. (1997). Discovery learning and discovery teaching. Cognition and In-
struction, 15(4), 485–529.
Hestenes, D., Wells, M., & Swackhamer, G. (1992). Force concept inventory. The
Physics Teacher, 30(3), 141–158.
Hewitt, P.G. (1999). Conceptual physics. Menlo Park, CA: Scott Foresman Addison-
Wesley.
Hewson, P.W. (1985). Epistemological commitments in the learning of science: Ex-
amples from dynamics. European Journal of Science Education, 7(2), 163–172.
Hoy, R.R. (1993). A ‘model minority’ speaks out on cultural shyness. Science, 262,
1117–1118.
International Baccalaureate Organisation. (1996). International baccalaureate: Physics.
Geneva, Switzerland: Author.
International Baccalaureate Organisation. (1999a). International baccalaureate:
Physics, higher level, examination papers 1-3. Geneva, Switzerland: Author.
International Baccalaureate Organisation. (1999b). Subject reports—May 1999. Geneva,
Switzerland: Author.
International Baccalaureate Organisation. (2001). IB diploma programme guide: Phys-
ics, 2001. Geneva, Switzerland: Author.
Knight, R.D. (1997). Physics: A contemporary perspective. Reading, MA: Addison-
Wesley.
Kolodny, A. (1991). Colleges must recognize students’ cognitive styles and cultural
backgrounds. Chronicle of Higher Education, 37(21), A44.
Laws, P. (1989). Workshop physics: Replacing lectures with real experience. In E.F.
Redish and J.S. Riley (Eds.), Computers in physics instruction: Proceedings. Read-
ing, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Laws, P.W. (1991). Calculus-based physics without lectures. Physics Today, 44(12),
24–31.
Laws, P.W. (1997). Workshop physics activity guide. New York: Wiley.
Laws, P.W. (1999). New approaches to science and mathematics teaching at liberal
arts colleges. Daedalus, 128(1), 217–240.
Lichten, W. (2000). Whither advanced placement? Education Policy Analysis Archives,
8(29), 1–19.

482
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
MacIsaac, D. (2000). Communities of on-line physics educators. The Physics Teacher,
38(April), 210–213.
Mazur, E. (1997). Peer instruction, A user’s manual. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice
Hall.
McDermott, L.C. (1991). What we teach and what is learned—Closing the gap. Ameri-
can Journal of Physics, 59(4), 301–315.
McDermott, L.C., & Redish, E.F. (1999). Resource letter PER-1: Physics education
research. American Journal of Physics, 67, 755–767.
McDermott, L.C., & Shaffer, P.S. (2002). Tutorials on introductory physics. Upper
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
McDermott, L.C., Shaffer, P.S., & Somers, M.D. (1994). Research as a guide for teach-
ing introductory mechanics: An illustration in the context of the Atwood’s ma-
chine. American Journal of Physics, 62(1), 46–60.
Minstrell, J. (1989). Teaching science for understanding. In L.B. Resnick, and L.E.
Klopfer (Eds.), Toward the thinking curriculum: Current cognitive research (pp.
129–149). Alexandria, VA: American Society for Curriculum Development.
Minstrell, J. (2000). Student thinking and related assessment: Creating a facet-based
learning environment. In N.S. Raju, J.W. Pellegrino, M.W. Bertenthal, K.J. Mitchell,
and L.R. Jones (Eds.), Grading the nation’s report card: Research from the evalu-
ation of NAEP (pp. 44–73). Washington DC: National Academy Press.
Moore, T.A. (1998). Six ideas that shaped physics. Boston: WCB/McGraw-Hill.
Morrison, P., Morrison, P., & Pine, J. (1996). ZAP! Electrical circuits and fields. Sudbury,
MA: Jones & Bartlett.
National Center for Education Statistics. (1998). Pursuing excellence:  A study of U.S.
twelfth-grade mathematics and science achievement in international context
(NCES 98049). Washington, DC: US Department of Education.
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics. (2002). Principles and standards for
school mathematics. Reston, VA: Author.
National Research Council. (1996). National science education standards. National
Committee on Science Education Standards and Assessment. Coordinating Council
for Education. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
National Research Council. (1997a). Improving teacher preparation and credentialing
consistent with the national science education standards: Report of a sympo-
sium. Center for Science, Mathematics, and Engineering Education. Washington,
DC: National Academy Press.
National Research Council. (1997b). Science teaching reconsidered. Committee on
Undergraduate Science Education. Division on Behavioral and Social Sciences
and Education. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
National Research Council. (2000). How people learn: Brain, mind, experience, and
school: Expanded edition. Committee on Developments in the Science of Learn-
ing. J.D. Bransford, A.L. Brown, and R.R. Cocking (Eds.). Committee on Behav-
ioral and Social Sciences and Education. Washington, DC: National Academy
Press.
Neuschatz, M., & McFarling, M. (1999). Maintaining momentum: High school physics
for a new millennium. College Park, MD: American Institute of Physics.

PHYSICS
483
Redish, E.F., Steinberg, R.N., & Saul, J.M. (1998). The distribution and change of
student expectations in introductory physics. In E.F. Redish, and J.S. Rigden
(Eds.), Proceedings of the international conference on undergraduate physics
education (1996). Washington DC: American Institute of Physics.
Reif, F., & Larkin J.H. (1991). Cognition in scientific and everyday domains: Compari-
son and learning implications. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 28, 733–
760.
Roelofs, L.D. (1997). Preparing physics majors for secondary level teaching: The
education concentration in the Haverford College physics program. American
Journal of Physics, 65, 1057–1059.
Roth, W.M., & Lucas, K.B. (1997). From “truth” to “invented reality”: A discourse
analysis of high school physics students’ talk about scientific knowledge. Jour-
nal of Research in Science Teaching, 34(2), 145–179.
Serway, R.A., & Beichner, R.J. (2000). Physics for scientists and engineers. Philadel-
phia: Saunders College.
Shaffer, P.S., & McDermott, L.C. (1992). Research as a guide for curriculum develop-
ment—An example from introductory electricity. Part II: Design of instructional
strategies. American Journal of Physics, 60(11), 1003–1013.
Sherin, B., diSessa, A. & Hammer, D. (1993) . Dynaturtle revisited: Learning physics
through collaborative design of a computer model. Interactive Learning Envi-
ronments, 3(2), 91–118.
Sokoloff, D.R., Laws, P.W., & Thornton, R.K. (1994). Real time physics: Active learn-
ing laboratories, mechanics. Medford, MA: Tufts University.
Sokoloff, D.R., Laws, P.W., & Thornton, R.K. (1997). Real time physics: Active learn-
ing laboratories, electric circuits. Eugene, OR: Department of Physics, Univer-
sity of Oregon.
Taylor, E.F., & Wheeler, J.A. (2001). Spacetime physics: Introduction to special relativ-
ity, 2nd edition. New York: W.H. Freeman.
Thornton, R. &, Sokoloff, D.R. (1990). Learning motion concepts using real-time micro-
computer-based laboratory tools. Amercian Journal of Physics, 58(9), 858–66.
Thornton, R.K., & Sokoloff, D.R. (1998). Assessing student learning of Newton’s
laws: The force and motion conceptual evaluation and the evaluation of active
learning laboratory and lecture curricula. American Journal of Physics, 66(4),
338–352.
van Zee, E.H., & Minstrell, J.A. (1997). Reflective discourse: Developing shared under-
standings in a physics classroom. International Journal of Science Education,
19, 209–228.
Wells, M., Hestenes, D, & Swackhamer, G. (1995). A modeling method for high-
school physics instruction. American Journal of Physics, 63(7), 606–619.
White, B.Y., & Frederiksen, J. R. (1998). Inquiry, modeling, and metacognition: Mak-
ing science accessible to all students. Cognition and Instruction, 16(1), 3–118.
Wilensky, U., & Resnick., M. (1999). Thinking in levels: A dynamic systems perspec-
tive to making sense of the world. Journal of Science Education and Technol-
ogy, 8(1), 3–19.
Wosilait, K., Heron, P.R.L., Shaffer, P.S., & McDermott, L.C. (1999). Addressing stu-
dent difficulties in applying a wave model to the interference, and diffraction of
light. American Journal of Physics, 67(7), S5–S15.

484
Appendix A
Charge to the Content Panels from
the Parent Committee
Charge to the Parent Committee and Content Panels: The charge to
the committee is to consider the effectiveness of, and potential improve-
ments to, programs for advanced study of mathematics and science in Ameri-
can high schools. In response to the charge, the committee will consider the
two most widely recognized programs for advanced study: the Advanced
Placement (AP) and the International Baccalaureate (IB) programs. In addi-
tion, the committee will identify and examine other appropriate curricular
and instructional alternatives to IB and AP. Emphasis will be placed on the
mathematics, physics, chemistry, and biology programs of study.
Charge to Content Panels: The content panels are asked to evaluate
the AP and IB curricular, instructional, and assessment materials for their
specific disciplines.
Below is a list of questions that the content panels will use to examine
the curriculum, laboratory experiences, and student assessments for their
specific subject areas. The content panels will use these questions to issue a
report to the committee about the effectiveness of the AP and IB programs
for educating able high school students in their respective disciplines. In
answering these questions, the content panels should keep in mind the
committee’s charge and study questions.
The panels should focus on the following specific issues in advising the
committee:
I. CURRICULAR AND CONCEPTUAL
FRAMEWORKS FOR LEARNING
Research on cognition suggests that learning and understanding are fa-
cilitated when students: (1) have a strong foundation of background knowl-
edge, (2) are taught and understand facts and ideas in the context of a
conceptual framework, and (3) learn how to organize information to facili-

PHYSICS
485
tate retrieval and application in new contexts (see, e.g., National Research
Council [NRC], 2000).
1. To what degree do the AP and IB programs incorporate current knowl-
edge about cognition and learning in mathematics and science in their cur-
ricula, instructions, and assessments?
2. To what degree is the factual base of information that is provided by
the AP and IB curricula and related laboratory experiences adequate for
advanced high school study in your discipline?
3. Based on your evaluation of the materials that you received, to what
extent do the AP and IB curricula and assessments balance breadth of cov-
erage with in-depth study of important topics in the subject area? In your
opinion, is this balance an appropriate one for advanced high school learn-
ers?
4. Are there key concepts (big ideas) of your discipline around which
factual information and ideas should be organized to promote conceptual
understanding in advanced study courses (e.g., Newton’s laws in physics)?
To what degree are the AP and IB curricula and related laboratory experi-
ences organized around these identified key concepts?
5. To what degree do the AP and IB curricula and related laboratory
experiences provide opportunities for students to apply their knowledge to
a range of problems and in a variety of contexts?
6. To what extent do the AP and IB curricula and related laboratory
experiences encourage students and teachers to make connections among
the various disciplines in science and mathematics?
II. THE ROLE OF ASSESSMENT
Research and experience indicate that assessments of student learning
play a key role in determining what and how teachers teach and what and
how students learn.
1. Based on your evaluation of the IB and AP final assessments and
accompanying scoring guides and rubrics, evaluate to what degree these
assessments measure or emphasize:
a)
students’ mastery of content knowledge;
b)
students’ understanding and application of concepts; and
c)
students’ ability to apply what they have learned to other courses
and in other situations.
2. To what degree do the AP and IB final assessments assess student
mastery of your disciplinary subject at a level that is consistent with expec-
tations for similar courses that are taught at the college level?

486
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
III. TEACHING
Research and experience indicate that learning is facilitated when teach-
ers use a variety of techniques that are purposefully selected to achieve
particular learning goals.
1. How effectively do the AP and IB curricula and assessments encour-
age teachers to use a variety of teaching techniques (e.g., lecture, discus-
sion, laboratory experience and independent investigation)?
2. What preparation is needed to effectively teach advanced mathemat-
ics and science courses such as AP and IB?
IV. EMPHASES
The NRC’s National Science Education Standards and the National Coun-
cil of Teachers of Mathematics’ Standards 2000 propose that the emphases of
science and mathematics education should change in particular ways (see
supplemental materials).
1. To what degree do the AP and IB programs reflect the recommenda-
tions in these documents?
V. PREPARATION FOR FURTHER STUDY
Advanced study at the high school level is often viewed as preparation
for continued study at the college level or as a substitute for introductory-
level college courses.
1. To what extent do the AP and IB curricula, assessments, and related
laboratory experiences in your discipline serve as adequate and appropriate
bases for success in college courses beyond the introductory level?
2. To what degree do the AP and IB programs in your discipline reflect
changes in knowledge or approaches that are emerging (or have recently
occurred) in your discipline?
3. How might coordination between secondary schools and institutions
of higher education be enhanced to optimize student learning and contin-
ued interest in the discipline?

487
S. James Gates, Jr., the John S. Toll Professor of Physics, is the director of
the Center for String and Particle Theory at the University of Maryland at
College Park.  His research focus is in mathematical and theoretical physics.
Dr. Gates served on the National Research Council (NRC) Joint Strike Tech-
nical Review Panel and the Task Group I-Combat Power committee.  He has
taught university-level mathematics and physics for 30 years and has lec-
tured on general education issues, consulted with the Educational Testing
Service, worked on a municipal high school curriculum, and chaired the
Howard University physics department.  The Washington Academy of Science
recognized him as its 1999 College Science Teacher of the Year.  Dr. Gates
received two B.S. degrees and a Ph.D. from the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology.
David Hammer is an associate professor with joint appointments in Physics
and Curriculum & Instruction at the University of Maryland, College Park.
He conducts research in physics education, focusing on students’ beliefs
about knowledge and learning as well as on teachers’ interpretations of the
strengths and weaknesses in student thinking. Dr. Hammer earned his Ph.D.
in Science and Mathematics Education and his MA in Physics from the Uni-
versity of California at Berkeley.
Robert C. Hilborn is the Amanda and Lisa Cross Professor of Physics at
Amherst College, where he teaches introductory and advanced-level phys-
ics.  Dr. Hilborn’s current research focuses on testing the symmetrization
postulate for identical particle systems in quantum mechanics, a study of the
effects of dynamic Stark shifts on laser-excited atoms, and control schemes
for chaotic systems.  Dr. Hilborn is involved in physics education and has
served as president of the American Association of Physics Teachers.  In this
position, he interacted with high school physics teachers and also has worked
Appendix B
Biographical Sketches of
Physics Content Panel Members

488
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
with high school teachers while at Amherst.  He is chair of the newly estab-
lished National Task Force on Undergraduate Physics. Dr. Hilborn earned
his Ph.D. from Harvard University.
Eric Mazur is at Harvard University where he is a Harvard College professor,
Gordon McKay Professor of Applied Physics, and professor of physics.
Dr. Mazur’s research in optical physics includes contributions in light scattering,
spectroscopy, and electronic and structural events in solids. Dr. Mazur also
conducts research in improving science education, becoming well known
for his “peer instruction” method for teaching large lecture classes.  Dr. Mazur
will complete his term on the Advanced Placement test development com-
mittee this spring.  At the NRC, Dr. Mazur has served on the Working Group
on Science Assessment Standards.  Mazur received his Ph.D. in experimental
physics from the University of Leiden in the Netherlands.
Penny Moore taught physics 60-percent time at Piedmont High School in
Piedmont, California for twenty-five years and worked concurrently at the
University of California, Berkeley. During this time she designed, obtained
funding for, and directed three large national science education programs:
The Science for Science Teachers and PRIME Science programs, both funded
initially by the National Science Foundation, and The Journey Inside with
Intel Corporation.  In August 2000, she left a fulltime position in the physics
department at Berkeley to work as director of Science and Math Education
in the College of Mathematical and Physical Sciences at The Ohio State
University in Columbus. At the NRC, Ms..Moore served on the Working Group
on Science Assessment Standards and was a leader in assembling Science
Teaching Reconsidered.
Robert A. Morse is a physics teacher at St. Albans School in Washington,
DC, where he has taught physics and AP physics for 20 years. Dr. Morse has
been recognized for his teaching with the Presidential Award for Excellence
in Science Teaching, the Tandy Technology Scholar Award, the American
Association for Physics Teachers (AAPT) Award for Excellence in Pre-College
Teaching, and was named the American Physical Society Distinguished Physics
Teacher for the District of Columbia for the APS Centennial. Dr. Morse has
been active in the AAPT, where he has developed and presented workshops
on teaching physics.  At the NRC, he served as a panelist for the How People
Learn Conference.  He received his Ph.D. in Science Education from the
University of Maryland at College Park, his M.Ed. from Boston University,
and a BA in Physics from Cornell University.

PHYSICS
489
Robin Spital (committee liaison and chair) is a teacher of Honors and
Advanced Placement Physics at The Bolles School in Jacksonville, Florida.
His career began at Illinois State University in Normal, where he was assistant
professor of physics.  He subsequently worked in the private sector as principal
development engineer for the AAI Corporation in Hunt Valley, Maryland,
and as principal scientist for Pfizer Medical Systems.  Dr. Spital received his
Ph.D. in theoretical high-energy physics from Cornell University.


491
Content Panel Report:
Mathematics


493
1
Introduction
The National Research Council’s Committee on Programs for Advanced
Study of Mathematics and Science in American High Schools (parent com-
mittee) formed the mathematics panel to provide advice on the effectiveness
of and potential improvements to programs for the advanced study of mathe-
matics in U.S. high schools.1 In accordance with its charge (see Appendix A)
the panel focused its work on the Advanced Placement (AP) and Inter-
national Baccalaureate (IB) programs.
A member of the parent committee chaired the panel. This individual
also served as the panel’s liaison to the committee and consolidated the
panel’s findings and recommendations into this report. The five other panel
members represent university and high school mathematics faculty with a
wide range of teaching experiences and a diversity of perspectives on math-
ematics education (for biographical sketches, see Appendix B).
In conducting this study, the panel examined two AP courses—Calculus
AB and Calculus BC—and three of the four mathematics courses offered by
the International Baccalaureate Organisation (IBO)—Mathematical Methods
Standard Level (SL),2 Mathematics Higher Level (HL), and Further Mathematics
SL.3 The panel’s analysis was informed primarily by a range of program
materials, such as published mission statements, course outlines, teacher
guides, sample syllabi, released examinations, and scoring rubrics provided
by the College Board and the IBO; scholarly research related to the teaching
1The mathematics panel is one of four panels convened by the parent committee. Each
panel represented one of the four disciplines that were the focus of the committee’s study:
biology, chemistry, physics, and mathematics. The reports of the other panels and the report of
the full committee are available at www.nap.edu/catalog/10129.html [4/23/02].
2It is the hours of contact time, not necessarily the level of course difficulty, that deter-
mines whether a course is designated as SL or HL.
3The panel did not review Mathematical Studies SL because it is a basic rather than an
advanced course.

494
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
and learning of mathematics; and the combined experience and expertise of
the panel members (College Entrance Examination Board, 1987, 1989, 1992,
1993, 1994, 1995, 1996a, 1996b, 1997a, 1997b, 1998a, 1998b, 1999a, 1999b,
1999c, 1999d, IBO, 1993, 1997, 1998a, 1998b, 1998c, 1998d, 1999a, 1999b,
1999c, 1999d, 1999e, 1999f, 1999g.,1999h, 1999i, 1999j, 1999k,.1999l; 1999m;
Kennedy, 1997). The panel also considered two College Board studies ad-
dressing AP student achievement in college (Morgan and Ramist, 1998;
Willingham and Morris, 1986) and several studies that examined the subse-
quent performance of IB students in college.4 The panel found surprisingly
few other data on AP and IB on which to base its evaluation.5
For example, little is known, except anecdotally, about how either pro-
gram is implemented in U.S. high schools, including the instructional strate-
gies and resources used in individual classrooms, the structure of the syllabi
in different schools, the quantity and quality of the facilities available, the
preparation of teachers who teach the courses, and the ways in which stu-
dents are prepared prior to enrolling in AP calculus or advanced IB math-
ematics courses. Information about the AP and IB assessments is also lim-
ited. The IBO currently conducts no systematic research addressing the va-
lidity,6 reliability,7 or comparability8 of its assessments across administra-
tions. The senior examiners, not psychometricians, make determinations about
the degree to which each administration is a valid and reliable measure of
student achievement. The College Board, on the other hand, has gathered
considerable data to demonstrate the reliability and comparability of student
scores from one administration to the next and from one student to another.
However, neither program has a strong program of validity research, and
4Downloaded from www.rvcschools.org in August 2000.
5Although few data currently exist, the panel notes that both programs have circulated
requests for proposals to conduct research on the ways in which their respective programs are
implemented in schools and classrooms and the effects of these different implementations on
student learning and achievement. No data from any of these studies were available at the time
this report was prepared.
6Validity addresses what a test is measuring and what meaning can be drawn from the test
scores and the actions that follow. It should be clear that what is being validated is not the test
itself, but each inference drawn from the test score for each specific use to which the test results
are put.
7Reliability generally refers to the stability of results. For example, the term denotes the
likelihood that a particular student or group of students would earn the same score if they took
the same test again or took a different form of the same test. Reliability also encompasses the
consistency with which students perform on different questions or sections of a test that mea-
sure the same underlying concept, for example, energy transfer.
8Comparability generally means that the same inferences can be supported accurately by
test scores earned by different students, in different years, on different forms of the test. That is,
a particular score, such as a 4 on an AP examination, represents the same level of achievement
over time and across administrations.

MATHEMATICS
495
neither has gathered data to document that the test items on its examinations
measure the skills and cognitive processes they purport to measure. To fully
analyze or evaluate the AP and IB assessments, it is necessary to know, for
example, that test items intended to measure problem solving do in fact tap
those skills and do not just elicit memorized solutions or procedures.
Further, little evidence is available for evaluating the long-term effects of
the AP and IB programs. For instance, the panel could not find systematic
data on how students who participate in AP and IB fare in college math-
ematics relative to other students. Nor could the panel find studies that
examined the effects on postsecondary mathematics programs of the ever-
increasing numbers of students who are entering college with credit or ad-
vanced standing in mathematics. While the College Board and a few col-
leges that receive IB students have conducted some isolated studies address-
ing how AP or IB students perform in college (see, for example, Morgan and
Ramist, 1998), the inferences that can accurately be drawn from the findings
of these studies are ambiguous (see Chapter 10 of the parent committee’s
report).
Because empirical evidence about the programs’ quality and effective-
ness is lacking, the panel focused its analysis on what the programs say they
do, using available program materials. This report details the panel’s find-
ings about the programs based on its analysis of these materials, its advice to
the committee regarding the major issues under its charge, and the types of
evidence that are needed to enable more complete appraisal of the AP and
IB mathematics programs—evidence that is urgently needed.
Before proceeding to report its findings and recommendations, the panel
wishes to commend the College Board and the IBO for the ways in which
they have responded to changes in the teaching of mathematics: AP by
changing its syllabus and introducing technology; IB by introducing portfo-
lio projects and technology. Both organizations have undertaken these changes
in a balanced, reasoned way, with input from a wide range of communities.
Considering that they are large organizations affecting thousands of stu-
dents, teachers, universities, and colleges, both AP and IB have made signifi-
cant and forward-looking changes remarkably successfully. The panel addi-
tionally commends the College Board for helping to bring together college
faculty and high school teachers in collaborative efforts to improve the teaching
of calculus across the secondary and postsecondary levels. These efforts
have paid off in more coherent syllabi that are better aligned with what is
known about the ways in which students learn mathematics.
While the IBO’s collaborations with IB teachers are an important aspect
of the development of IB programs and assessments, collaborations outside
of the IBO network, for example, with professional disciplinary societies or
colleges and universities, currently are not part of the approach taken to
program development. As the IB program becomes more prominent in the

496
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
United States, the panel encourages the IBO to expand its collaboration
efforts to include more members of the U.S. mathematics community. These
types of collaborative efforts can increase public awareness of the program
and its relationship to the calculus typically taught in U.S. high schools,
colleges, and universities.
The remainder of this report is organized into five chapters. Chapter 2
provides an overview of the AP and IB programs in mathematics. Chapters 3
and 4 present, respectively, the panel’s analyses of curriculum and assess-
ment and of teacher preparation and professional development in the two
programs. The impact of the programs is examined in Chapter 5. Through-
out these four chapters, the panel’s key findings are presented in italic type.
Finally, the panel’s recommendations are given in Chapter 6.

497
2
Overview of the AP and IB
Programs in Mathematics
Although the Advanced Placement (AP) and International Baccalaureate
(IB) programs serve similar populations of highly motivated high school
students, the College Board and the International Baccalaureate Organisation
(IBO) developed their programs for different purposes. These different pur-
poses affect how the individual courses are developed, structured, and imple-
mented; how student learning is assessed; and how assessment results are
used. They also affect how teachers who are assigned to teach AP and IB
courses are prepared and supported by the programs and what types of
school resources must be allocated for the programs.
Detailed information about the history, mission, goals, and growth of
the AP and IB programs is available from the College Board and the IBO
(see the organizations’ Web sites9). This report includes only information
directly relevant to the panel’s analysis, findings, and recommendations. A
more complete discussion of the AP and IB programs can be found in the
parent committee’s report (Chapters 3 and 4, respectively).
THE ADVANCED PLACEMENT PROGRAM
Since its inception in the 1950s, the goal of the AP program has been to
offer interested, motivated, and well-prepared students the opportunity to
tackle college-level material and to earn college credit while they are still in
high school. To this end, AP courses are designed to be equivalent to col-
lege courses in the corresponding subject area. Standardized, nationally ad-
ministered, comprehensive achievement examinations that are offered an-
nually in May provide a vehicle for students to demonstrate mastery of the
9www.collegeboard.com and www.ibo.org.

498
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
college-level material and to earn college credit or advanced placement in
upper-level college courses with qualifying scores.10
The AP mathematics program consists of statistics11 and two levels of
calculus—AB and BC.12 Both AB and BC concentrate on calculus of a func-
tion of a single variable. Consistent with the purpose of the program, AP
courses are designed by a development committee comprised of university
faculty, mathematicians, and master calculus teachers to be equivalent to
many introductory college calculus courses with respect to the range and
depth of topics covered, the kinds of textbooks used, the kinds work done
by students, and the time and effort required of students (College Entrance
Examination Board [CEEB], 1999a). This approach ensures that students have
a smooth transition to college, but also means that any shortcomings in
college calculus are likely to be transferred to advanced high school stu-
dents.
AP courses are designed to represent generic introductory-level college
courses. The determination of the content to include in AP calculus courses
is based on information gathered from responses to an annual survey of
college and university departments that offer general calculus courses in
their institutions. It should be noted that the response rate to the survey is
rather low (30–40 percent), calling into question the consistency of survey
results with actual course syllabi in individual schools and in different types
of institutions.
Each year the College Board publishes the Advanced Placement Pro-
gram Course Description: Calculus, AB and BC (often referred to as the
Acorn Book). This booklet includes a topical outline for the two calculus
courses,13 sample examinations, and information about how previous AP
mathematics examinations have been graded (see, for example, CEEB, 1992,
10The College Board allows colleges and universities to establish their own criteria for
awarding credit or advanced placement. See Chapter 2 of the parent committee’s full report for
additional information on this issue.
11Far more AP students enroll in AP calculus courses and take the related examinations
than is the case for the statistics course, although the number of statistics students has been
growing steadily since the course was first offered in the fall of 1997. To date, the College Board
has identified 22,749 students who have taken both the AP Statistics and the AP calculus exami-
nations; 54 percent took both examinations in the same year, 29 percent took the calculus
examination first, and 17 percent took the statistics examination first (Gloria Dion, personal
communication). Students who took both examinations earned slightly higher calculus grades
than statistics grades.
12The AB curriculum is generally regarded as equivalent to one semester or two quarters
of college calculus, whereas the BC curriculum is considered the equivalent of one year or
three quarters of college calculus.
13The College Board publishes a separate guide for AP Statistics and for each of its other
AP courses.

MATHEMATICS
499
1996b, 1999b). Although the booklet is published annually, changes from
year to year are usually small, and sometimes there are no changes.14
There are no AP calculus curricula in the true sense of the word; there
are only topic outlines. The topic outlines are intended to indicate the scope
of the courses, but they do not necessarily suggest the order in which the
topics are to be taught, nor do they specify any particular pedagogy.15 Teachers
are free to determine the order in which topics are introduced, and they are
also encouraged to enrich their courses with additional topics as appropri-
ate. Thus as implemented, the curricula for AP courses can vary from school
to school in both sequence and emphasis. The resulting curricula are often
more a function of the decisions made by individual teachers than decisions
made by a centralized curriculum development group.
The topical outline for AP Calculus BC includes all of the topics from AP
Calculus AB plus additional topics (see Appendixes C and D, respectively,
for the AB and BC topic outlines for May 2000/May 2001). AB and BC stu-
dents are expected to understand topics common to both courses at the
same conceptual level. Both AB and BC calculus are designed to be taught
over one school year.16 Decisions about which AP calculus course an indi-
vidual student should select are generally based on both the school’s offer-
ings and the individual’s abilities, achievements, and mastery of the prereq-
uisite material.
The International Baccalaureate Diploma Programme
The IB Diploma Programme, created in 1968, was originally designed to
serve a geographically mobile population, primarily children of diplomats,
who relocate frequently but do not want to lose the continuity of their edu-
cational experiences. Thus, the program incorporates elements of several
national systems without being based on any particular one. IB courses do
not reflect the content and structure of college courses but rather what is
believed by the program developers to be the full range of content knowl-
edge and skills that should be mastered by well-prepared students prior to
14The course guide also alerts teachers to upcoming changes so they can prepare to teach
the curriculum when it is implemented.
15A teacher’s guide for AP calculus is available. This guide contains sample syllabi, lesson
plans, and activities that have been used successfully by master AP calculus teachers in their
own classrooms.
16The AB curriculum, although given only a semester of credit in college, is almost always
taught over a full year in high school. The BC curriculum, which receives a year of college
credit, is sometimes spread over more than a year in high school, beginning after one semester
of precalculus.

500
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
study at the university level. Thus the courses are developed not to replicate
college courses but to reflect an international conception of a well-designed
college preparatory program of study among a small group of master teachers
and discipline experts who design the courses using both their expertise and
information gathered systematically from IB teachers in every IB school. A
curriculum review committee with international membership is responsible
for articulating, implementing, and maintaining the vision in each subject
area. The mathematics committee is also responsible for specifying the pre-
sumed knowledge and skills (prerequisites) for each of the four IB math-
ematics courses.
The IB mathematics curriculum is substantially broader than the AP cal-
culus curricula. IB offerings include four mathematics courses: Mathematical
Studies Standard Level (SL), Mathematical Methods SL, Mathematics Higher
Level (HL), and Further Mathematics SL. Each course has been designed to
meet the needs of a particular group of students, and schools and teachers
are encouraged to exercise care in selecting the appropriate course for each
student.17 Courses that are designated as SL require a minimum of 150 hours
of teacher contact time, while those designated as HL require a minimum of
240 hours of teacher contact time. As noted earlier, it is the hours of contact
time, not necessarily the level of course difficulty, that determines whether a
course is designated as SL or HL (IBO, 1993). For example, Further Mathe-
matics SL is the most advanced mathematics course in the IB program. Both
SL and HL courses include a common core of compulsory topics (105 hours
for the SL courses and 195 hours for the HL courses), as well as one or more
optional topics that are selected by individual teachers for their classes (45
hours for both HL and SL courses). Because the IB program has an interna-
tional mission, this flexibility in curriculum enables schools to satisfy higher
education entrance requirements in many countries.
The IB Mathematics HL course is taught over two years and includes as
core material a substantial amount of calculus, roughly equivalent to the AP
Calculus AB course, as well as substantial treatment of probability, algebra
and trigonometry, complex numbers, mathematical induction, vectors, and
matrices. In addition, the HL curriculum has optional units, one of which is
taught in addition to the common core. There are units on abstract algebra,
graphs and trees, statistics, analysis and approximation, and Euclidean ge-
ometry and conic sections. With the analysis and approximation option, the
calculus coverage becomes roughly equivalent to that of AP Calculus BC.
17Mathematical Studies is taken primarily by students who do not expect to pursue math-
ematics or science in college. Students intending to major in science, mathematics, or engineer-
ing usually take Mathematical Methods SL or Mathematics HL, which serve a population compa-
rable to that served by AP Calculus.

MATHEMATICS
501
With the statistics option, the statistics coverage becomes roughly equivalent
to the purely mathematical parts of AP Statistics (note, however, that AP
Statistics devotes substantial attention to the nonmathematical aspects of
statistics).
The IB program guides for the mathematics courses present the com-
mon aims and objectives for all Group 5 (mathematics) courses (see Box 2-
1). The guides also provide a syllabus outline for each course (see Boxes 2-
2 through 2-4). In addition to the syllabus outline, IB teachers are provided
with a detailed syllabus that defines more explicitly what will be covered on
the final examinations. The detailed syllabi include estimated teaching hours
for each topic, but do not recommend a sequence for the presentation of
topics (see Appendix E for an example of a detailed syllabus). IB mathemat-
ics program guides provide general guidance on instruction and offer spe-
cific suggestions regarding instructional strategies. The teaching notes also
include suggestions for linking content to help students see connections,
such as linking the study of the second derivative in the further calculus
option to the study of exponents and logarithms in the core content. Teach-
ers use the guides as the basis for determining the structure of their own
curriculum. Thus as implemented, the curricula for IB courses, like those for
AP courses, can vary from school to school in sequence and emphasis. Little
is known about the nature of these variations and their effects on student
learning and achievement.
Finding: The AP and IB programs are both designed to meet the educa-
tional needs of highly motivated and well-prepared students, but the origins,
goals, purposes, missions, organizations, and structures of the two programs
are very different. These differences contribute to variations in the educa-
tional expectations, opportunities, and experiences of students and teachers
participating in the two programs.
AP AND IB TEST DEVELOPMENT
AP Program
AP calculus examinations are designed by a development committee
comprised of high school teachers and university faculty in consultation
with statisticians and psychometricians who attempt to create examinations
that meet accepted standards for technical quality (American Educational
Research Association/American Psychological Association/National Council
on Measurement in Education, 1999). The development process incorpo-
rates the judgments of both disciplinary and psychometric experts. The AP
calculus examinations are timed, with about 50 percent of the total time
devoted to multiple-choice questions and the rest to free-response problem-

502
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
BOX 2-1 International Baccalaureate Mathematics Common Aims and
Objectives
AIMS
•
appreciate the international dimensions of mathematics and the multiplic-
ity of its cultural and historical perspectives
•
foster enjoyment from engaging in mathematical pursuits and develop an
appreciation of the beauty, power, and usefulness of mathematics
•
develop mathematical knowledge, concepts, and principles
•
employ and refine the powers of abstraction and generalization
•
develop patience and persistence in problem solving
•
have an enhanced awareness of, and utilize the potential of, technological
developments in a variety of mathematical contexts
•
communicate mathematically, both clearly and confidently, in a variety of
contexts
OBJECTIVES
Having followed any one of the programmes in group 5 (mathematics), candi-
dates will be expected to:
•
know and use mathematical concepts and principles
•
read and interpret a given problem in appropriate mathematical terms
•
organize and present information/data in tabular, graphical, and/or diagram-
matic forms
•
know and use appropriate notation and terminology
•
formulate a mathematical argument and communicate it clearly
•
select and use appropriate mathematical techniques
•
understand the significance and reasonableness of results
•
recognize patterns and structures in a variety of situations and draw induc-
tive generalizations
•
demonstrate an understanding of, and competence in, the practical appli-
cations of mathematics
•
use appropriate technological devices as mathematical tools
SOURCE: Adapted from IBO (1997, 1998a).

MATHEMATICS
503
BOX 2-2 Syllabus Outline Mathematical Methods—SL
The mathematical methods SL programme consists of the study of six core topics
and one option.
PART I: Core
105 hours
All topics in the core are compulsory. Candidates are required to study all the
subtopics in each of the six topics in this part of the syllabus as listed in the Syllabus
Details.
1
Number and Algebra
10 hours
2
Functions and Equations
25 hours
3
Circular Functions and Trigonometry
15 hours
4
Vector Geometry
15 hours
5
Statistics and Probability
20 hours
6
Calculus
20 hours
PART II: Options
35 hours
Candidates are required to study all the sub-topics in one of the following options
as listed in the Syllabus Details.
7
Statistical Methods
35 hours
8
Further Calculus
35 hours
9
Further Geometry
35 hours
PORTFOLIO
10 hours
Five assignments, based on different areas of the syllabus, representing the fol-
lowing three activities:
•
Mathematical investigation
•
Extended closed-problem solving
•
Mathematical modeling
SOURCE: Adapted from IBO (1997).

504
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
BOX 2-3 Syllabus Outline Mathematics—HL
The mathematical methods SL programme consists of the study of eight core
topics and one option.
PART I: Core
105 hours
All topics in the core are compulsory. Candidates are required to study all the
subtopics in each of the six topics in this part of the syllabus as listed in the Syllabus
Details.
1
Number and Algebra
20 hours
2
Functions and Equations
25 hours
3
Circular Functions and Trigonometry
25 hours
4
Vector Geometry
25 hours
5
Matrices and Transformations
20 hours
6
Statistics
10 hours
7
Probability
20 hours
8
Calculus
50 hours
PART II: Options
35 hours
Candidates are required to study all the sub-topics in one of the following options
as listed in the Syllabus Details.
9
Statistics
35 hours
10
Sets, Relations and Groups
35 hours
11
Discrete Mathematics
35 hours
12
Analysis and Approximation
35 hours
13
Euclidean Geometry and Conic Sections
35 hours
PORTFOLIO
10 hours
Five assignments, based on different areas of the syllabus, representing the fol-
lowing three activities:
•
mathematical investigation
•
extended closed-problem solving
•
mathematical modeling
SOURCE: Adapted from IBO (1998a).

MATHEMATICS
505
BOX 2-4 Syllabus Outline Further Mathematics—SL
The mathematical methods SL programme consists of the study of six core topics
and one option.
PART I: Core
105 hours
All topics are compulsory. Candidates are required to study all the subtopics in
each of the five topics in this part of the syllabus as listed in the Syllabus Details.
As these five topics are identical to the options in part II of the mathematics HL
syllabus, it will be presumed that candidates will have studied one of these topics
as part of that programme. Consequently, this portion of the further mathematics
SL programme is regarded as having a total teaching time of 140 hours.
1
Statistics
35 hours
2
Sets, Relations, and Groups
35 hours
3
Discrete Mathematics
35 hours
4
Analysis and Approximation
35 hours
5
Euclidean Geometry and Conic Sections
35 hours
PORTFOLIO
10 hours
Three assignments, based on different areas of the syllabus, representing at least
two of the following four activities:
•
mathematical investigation
•
extended closed-problem solving
•
mathematical modeling
•
mathematical research
SOURCE: Adapted from IBO (1997).
solving questions.18 The development committees are responsible for decid-
ing the general content of the examination and the ability level to be tested.
18These percentages do not necessarily reflect the weighting of scores as a final examina-
tion grade is determined.

506
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
Content specifications for AP calculus examinations are determined at
the same time the topic outlines for the courses are developed. Examina-
tions are constructed using the topic percentages from the AP course de-
scriptions as a guideline for the distribution of questions. The development
committee helps write and review test questions, as well as materials (in-
cluding the AP course descriptions) that are distributed to schools. They
work closely with College Board and Educational Testing Service (ETS) con-
tent specialists and psychometricians to ensure that the examination scores
will mean the same thing from year to year and from student to student
(CEEB, 1999a).
For optimal measurement, the development committee endeavors to
design a multiple-choice section such that the average raw score is between
40 and 60 percent of the maximum possible raw score. Questions at varying
levels of difficulty are included. Some previously administered questions are
included to link the current form of the examination to previous forms, thus
maintaining comparability from year to year and examination to examina-
tion. The committees write, select, review, and refine free-response ques-
tions. One important aspect of test development is determining which item
type and format are best for assessing a given topic or skill area. AP devel-
opment committee members work with AP content experts and ETS statisti-
cians in making this determination (CEEB, 1999a). However, the College
Board has not conducted any systematic research to determine whether
particular test items actually measure the cognitive processes they purport to
measure.
IB Program
IB mathematics assessments have two components—external and inter-
nal. The external assessment consists of a written examination that is admin-
istered internationally over a period of two days in May of each year (in
November for split-session schools). The examinations test knowledge of
both the core and optional topics. The internal assessment is a portfolio that
represents the teacher’s formative assessment of students’ practical work
judged against established assessment criteria.19 This component is conducted
by teachers within the school environment and is moderated externally by
the IBO. The Mathematical Methods SL portfolio consists of five assign-
ments, based on different areas of the syllabus, representing the following
three activities: mathematical investigation, extended closed-problem solv-
ing, and mathematical modeling. The Mathematics HL and Further Math-
19The portfolio component is new to mathematics. It was first used in 2000.

MATHEMATICS
507
ematics SL courses add mathematical research to the list of activities from
which students and teachers can draw portfolio activities.
The course guide, which includes a detailed description of the content,
skills, and understanding students are expected to master during the course,
serves as the test blueprint. Amplifications and exclusions are provided for
each topic. They provide more explicit information on specific subtopics
and help define what is and is not required in terms of preparing students
for the examination (see, for example, IBO, 1997, 1998b, 1998c, 1998d).
New questions are written for each external examination. Unlike the
College Board, the IBO does not develop its examinations in consultation
with psychometricians. Rather, it relies on the expertise of its senior examin-
ing team to prepare a different form of the examination that is approxi-
mately of the same level of difficulty as previous examinations. Test items
are not field tested prior to administration, and reliability is not calculated.
Items are not repeated from one administration to another. After each ex-
amination session, a sample of candidate responses is closely scrutinized to
determine whether they are in line with expectations for each question. In
addition, the IBO solicits comments from teachers about the suitability of the
examination papers in achieving the examination’s objectives. Information
gained in this manner is used in the preparation of future examinations. Like
the College Board, the IBO does not conduct systematic research to deter-
mine whether particular test items actually measure the cognitive processes
they are intended to measure.

508
3
Analysis of AP and IB Curricula
and Assessments
To evaluate the appropriateness of the Advanced Placement (AP) calcu-
lus and International Baccalaureate (IB) mathematics programs for advanced
high school students, the panel considered the degree to which the curricula
and assessments of each emphasize four areas listed below. These areas
represent the kind of mathematical learning the panel believes advanced
mathematics students should experience in their high school calculus course:
• Technical skill, including flexibility with symbolic manipulation, graphi-
cal representation, numerical approximation, and function notation
• Conceptual understanding, including, for example, the derivative as
a rate of change
• Theory, including precise definitions, carefully reasoned mathemati-
cal arguments, and mathematical rigor
• Applications and modeling, including situations in which students
must set up the model (for example, choose a formula that represents a real
situation)
CURRICULUM
AP Program
In the panel’s opinion, the topics on the AP syllabi are appropriate and
well connected. A strength of the AP curricula and examinations is their
focus on reasoning that integrates graphical, algebraic, numerical, and model-
ing viewpoints. In its current formulation, AP calculus pays careful attention
to the central concept of function and to connections among the common
ways (numerical, graphical, analytical, and verbal) of representing functions.
There is likewise careful attention to developing the main concepts of differ-
entiation and integration, including several interpretations of and applica-

MATHEMATICS
509
tions for each. However, because AP calculus courses are designed to be
general-purpose courses, the applications to real-world problems and
situations tend to be limited to those that are most manageable, both con-
ceptually and technically. There are relatively few applications requiring
deeper investigation that might prove more memorable and provide better
opportunities for interpretation and modeling.
The panel views the content of the AP courses as sufficient, given the
assumption that the preparatory coursework provides a solid foundation for
calculus. There is considerable anecdotal evidence, however, that students
intending to take calculus are rushed through prerequisite courses without
learning the material well enough. Mathematical sophistication takes time
and should not be confused with knowledge of a catalog of mathematical
facts and techniques. Additionally, because the AP examinations create the
focus for the curriculum, and they do so quite effectively, material not on the
AP assessments tends not to be taught either in calculus or in the prerequi-
site courses.
Further, particularly able AP students could profit from an AP course
enriched by modeling activities and more attention to proof. In this sense,
the panel sees the AP calculus programs as minimal rather than maximal
courses for advanced study. Teachers should be encouraged to challenge
their students with problems that may go beyond the scope of the syllabi,
teaching a course that is more demanding than the tests. Doing so would
result in students having a richer learning experience. For the preparation of
mathematicians, the panel views the slight attention paid to proof by the AP
courses as a deficiency.
IB Program
The panel found that a broad factual base of information is provided by
the IB curricula for Mathematical Methods Standard Level (SL) and Mathematics
Higher Level (HL). The curricula encompass an introduction to elementary
calculus (similar to the AP program’s Calculus AB course) and additional
areas of study selected by the teacher from among available options. However,
the small number of hours suggested for study of each topic (50 hours for
the introduction to calculus for Mathematics HL and 20 hours for Mathematical
Methods SL) leads to the concern that students study each topic only at a
procedural level. As compared with the AP program, the panel views the
calculus portions of the IB curricula as “very traditional.” For example, ques-
tion #6 on the Mathematics HL exam, Paper 1, November 1999, reads:
The area between the graph of y = ex and the x axis from x = 0 to x = k
(k > 0) is rotated through 360° about the x axis. Find, in terms of k and e,
the volume of the solid generated.

510
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
The panel views the branching away from calculus as a positive aspect
of the IB program. Mathematics HL coupled with Further Mathematics SL
requires students to show competence in elementary calculus, as well as an
introductory understanding of probability, matrices and vectors, abstract al-
gebra, graphs and trees, statistics, analysis and approximation, and either
mathematical foundations or mathematical proof. While it would be won-
derful for students to have an understanding of all these topics, the panel is
concerned that the breadth of the curricula may force somewhat superficial
coverage. The panel believes that a more beneficial alternative would be to
help students develop a deeper and richer understanding of one or two of
the mathematical topics and their applications.
The advanced options present teachers with an enormous challenge in
trying to cover advanced material in a highly limited time frame. The ab-
stract algebra option of Mathematics HL provides an example. In this option,
both the extent and depth of the study of the subject are quite limited,
necessarily so in view of the time available and the prior mathematical expe-
rience of the candidates. Therefore, the study of abstract algebra is confined
to basic definitions and a few elementary properties. The focus is formal; no
significant applications of groups are given. The difficult part of learning
about groups is not the formal definitions and elementary properties but
understanding why the ideas are important. The panel believes it is more
useful for students to study deeply topics that are closer to the high school
curriculum, such as the study of solutions of polynomial equations (with
emphasis on 3rd- and 4th-order equations), the use of transformations in
plane geometry, or elementary number theory. Students with these topics in
their background will be better prepared to appreciate later the significance
of group theory.
The IB curricula provide a strong foundation in the key concepts of
college preparatory mathematics. The syllabi and the assessments, however,
do not appear to promote the relationships among the mathematical con-
cepts learned. The syllabus for Further Mathematics SL states: “At this level,
less emphasis should be put on departmentalizing the various topics and
more emphasis should be given to the links between topics. For example,
the knowledge of complex numbers, recurrence relations and Newton’s
method could be brought together in a brief introduction to fractals.” How-
ever, the assessment materials do not support this linkage but are strictly
departmentalized. Waiting until the final year of advanced study to empha-
size the links among topics with the portfolio assessment is too little, too
late.
Finding: The AP curricula are largely sound. The recently revised syllabi
with more emphasis on conceptual understanding have significantly improved

MATHEMATICS
511
the program, although further change in this direction is desirable. The panel
also believes the focus on reasoning should be increased.
Finding: The IB curricula are largely sound. The portfolio requirement,
with its emphasis on applications of mathematics, is likely to introduce a
focus on modeling that will benefit IB students. However, the calculus sec-
tions of the syllabi do not place enough emphasis on conceptual understand-
ing. The panel also has some concern that the breadth of the curricula, al-
though an attractive feature of the program, could lead to superficial learn-
ing.
Finding: AP and IB curricula are designed to prepare students for suc-
cessful performance on end-of-course examinations. The content and struc-
ture of the examinations, therefore, have a profound effect on what is taught
and how it is taught in AP and IB classrooms.
ASSESSMENTS
Research indicates that the problems students solve as part of their classes
have a significant effect on the strength of the background they acquire.
Since the types of problems that are on the end-of-course assessments largely
determine the structure and content of classroom and homework problems,
evaluation of the effectiveness of the programs must include an evaluation
of the problems on the examinations.
AP Program
On the basis of the four areas of emphasis described above, the panel
believes the AP examinations should include questions that emphasize the
following:
• Complex problems that may require significant technical skills
• Problems that probe students’ conceptual understanding and take
into account what research tells us about common misconceptions
• Problems that require mathematical reasoning, clear exposition, and
the ability to write precise mathematical statements
• Problems in which students must construct a mathematical model
from a verbal description
The panel reviewed 5 years of publicly released AP Calculus AB and AP
Calculus BC examinations, related course descriptions, teachers’ guides, and
scoring rubrics (College Entrance Examination Board [CEEB], 1989, 1993,

512
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
1997a, 1998a, 1999b, 1999d). This review focused primarily on the examina-
tions that were administered after 1998, when the revised AP calculus courses
were fully implemented. The following findings with regard to the AP cal-
culus examinations (both AB and BC) emerged from the panel’s review.
Technical Skill
The goals of the AP program explicitly support the development of
strong computational skills, both by hand and using technology. There is a
reasonable balance of symbolic and graphical problems on AP calculus ex-
aminations. However, there are not many numerical problems, and more
would be an improvement. The division of the examinations into two parts—
one that allows the use of a graphing calculator and one that does not—is
useful, ensuring that students acquire skills with both symbols and numeri-
cal approximations.
The need to cover in one 13/4-hour multiple-choice test all of the mate-
rial from two semesters of calculus makes the tests broad with limited depth;
thus, for example, only a modest amount of time is available for solving
each problem. As a result, the chain rule is tested at a superficial level, and
only routine integration-by-parts questions are given. Seldom do Taylor se-
ries questions go beyond the basics, for example, rarely to a composite
series such as the first five terms of sin (x2)ex.
Student achievement on the examinations confirms that the goals for
technical skills are not being met at a high level. The College Board’s analy-
sis of grades earned on the 1998 AB examination indicated that fewer than
15 percent of the students who earned a 3 obtained a score above 23 out of
45 on the multiple-choice questions.20 Most of these multiple-choice questions
tested very basic calculus knowledge. The panel speculates that the under-
lying reason students could not answer these questions was poor algebra
skills rather than a lack of understanding of the necessary calculus. For
example, on the 1998 AB exam, 75 percent of students who earned a grade
of 3 were able to evaluate the integral in question #3, 
dx
x 2
2∫
, but only 38
percent were successful when they had to separate the fraction and then
integrate in question #7, 
x
x
dx
e
2
2
1
−




∫
.
20The College Board provides this type of information to teachers with score reports and
with released examinations (CEEB, 1998a, 1998b). The multiple-choice score is calculated by
giving one point for each correct answer and subtracting 1/4 point for each incorrect item.

MATHEMATICS
513
It also appears that AP students taking the examination had not had
enough practice solving nonstandard problems. For instance, on the 1998
AB exam, 75 percent of the students were able to differentiate the “harder”
implicit function in question #6:
If 
 then when 
x
xy
x
dy
dx
2
10
2
+
=
=
=
,
,
.
However, only 36 percent were able to figure out that the second derivative
of a linear function is zero and then integrate in question #11:
If  is a linear function and 
<
< ,  then 
f
a
x
b
f
x dx
a
b
′′
=
∫
( )
.
Question #3 of the free-response section of the 1998 AB examination
was a problem about motion in which information was given in a graph and
table, rather than the more usual formula. The score on this question (aver-
age 2.9 out of 9) was much lower than the scores on the two multiple-choice
questions in which the position was given by a formula (questions #14 and
#24, with 94 percent and 52 percent correct, respectively). This result sug-
gests that although students had learned how to answer questions like #14
and #24, they had not fully understood the concept. The panel includes
these data to illustrate its contention that some AP students can do very well
on AP calculus examinations without understanding the underlying con-
cepts. Further analysis of this kind is necessary and should be part of a
systematic program of validity research.
Conceptual Understanding
In recent changes to the syllabi for AP calculus, the emphasis on calcu-
lus as a collection of techniques has decreased, and the emphasis on con-
ceptual understanding of fundamental principles has increased. The panel
applauds this change. The current syllabi and examinations acknowledge
the importance of techniques but do not allow them to overwhelm the course.
AP assessment items emphasize the major concepts of calculus (e.g.,
functions, derivative, integral, the Fundamental Theorem). Furthermore, the
items incorporate current perspectives on learning by emphasizing multiple
representations (i.e., the rule of four) and by placing some items in real-
world contexts. However, there are missed opportunities to include ques-
tions that address common student misconceptions identified by educational
research (for example, in understanding the derivative, slope fields, and
functions). In addition, the test does not place enough emphasis on ensur-
ing that students are fluent with the symbolic language.
AP examination problems also sometimes reinforce the idea that math-
ematics is essentially procedural. The questions may be divided into so many
parts that they become exercises in following instructions rather than in

514
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
choosing a strategy to solve a problem. For example, in 1998, the following
problem was given on the AP Calculus BC exam:
A particle moves along the curve defined by the equation y = x3 – 3x.
The x-coordinate of the particle, x(t), satisfies the equation
dx
dt
t
=
+
1
2
1 ,
for t ≥ 0 with initial condition x(0) = –4.
(a) Find x(t) in terms of t.
(b) Find dy
dt  in terms of t.
(c) Find the location and speed of the particle at time t = 4.
Note that parts (a) and (b) of this problem lead the student to the solu-
tion of part (c). Thus, solving this problem successfully involves executing
each step correctly and seeing the connections among them. But suppose
parts (a) and (b) were omitted. The problem would then take on a very
different character: it would test whether a student can find a path to the
solution rather than execute steps. The most talented students—those in BC
Calculus—should have more practice with problems in which they must
design a method or solution.
Theory and Proof
Theoretical questions do not appear explicitly on AP examinations; there
is little emphasis on proof in the AP syllabi. In the last decade, however, the
emphasis on conceptual understanding has increased in the examinations.
For example, in the 1998 syllabi, the movement away from a “laundry list” of
topics encouraged students to think about the key ideas rather than memo-
rize problem types. The panel applauds this change. Indeed, further change
in this direction would be welcome. The panel recommends the inclusion of
one or two items that assess students’ understanding of the definition of the
derivative. By this we mean including problems that assess understanding of
the meaning of the definition of the derivative, not the ability to compute
using the definition.
Applications and Modeling
The AP program does not make a sufficient attempt to connect calculus
with other fields in a realistic way. There is a tendency to use applications of
rather ritualistic and formulaic kinds and of limited difficulty. The test con-

MATHEMATICS
515
centrates on a few prescribed applications (e.g., calculation of volumes) or
gives applications that consist largely of interpretation of symbols or compu-
tations in a new context. Its problems have a “whiff” of application, but they
are often jarringly unreal at a deeper level. For example, question #5 of the
free-response section of the 1995 AB examination states:
. . . [W]ater is draining from a conical tank with height 12 feet and diameter
8 feet into a cylindrical tank that has a base area 400π square feet. The
depth h, in feet, of the water in the conical tank is changing at the rate of
h – 12 feet per minute.
And question #1 on the 1995 BC examination reads:
A particle moves in the xy plane so that its position at any time t, 0 ≤ t ≤ π,
is given by x t
t
t
y t
t
( )
ln(
)
( )
sin
=
−
+
=
2
2
1
3
 and 
.
It is difficult to imagine mechanisms that would make liquid or particles
behave as described in these problems. In their attempt to make mathemat-
ics seem real, items of this sort may in fact contribute to the sense of many
students that mathematics is disconnected from reality.
There is also a paucity of problems requiring substantial background
development or technical facility for their solution. For example, there are
no modeling problems in which students have to construct a function in an
unfamiliar context. Students whose encounter with calculus does not in-
clude substantial applications and difficult problems are not likely to regard
calculus as the immensely useful problem-solving and explanatory tool it in
fact is. The panel notes that the portfolio component of the IB program does
require students to perform mathematical investigations, extended closed-
problem solving, and mathematical modeling.
The panel is concerned that the need to standardize AP has led to a
course with the rough edges smoothed out as much as possible. However, a
real appreciation of the subject may require experiencing those rough spots.
This is the analog of laboratory work for science courses.
In conclusion:
• The AP examinations are closely aligned with the topics included in
the related “Course Description for the AP Calculus Program.”
• Students who do well on the AP examinations can be considered
fluent in the basic operations and key ideas of calculus.
• The AP examinations are light in their expectations of technical skill
(severity of symbolic calculations) and theory (precision in argument).
• The AP examinations do not place enough emphasis on critical think-
ing, communication, and reasoning.

516
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
• The problems on the AP examinations do not appear to be suffi-
ciently difficult to fully assess important skills and conceptual understand-
ing.
• The AP examinations should include questions that ask students to
interpret/explain their results.
• The word problems used on the AP examinations are limited in scope.
The examinations try for a veneer of reality by including problems that
appear to be taken from real-life situations (e.g., water draining and particles
moving), but better applications are needed.
• The types of problems included on the AP examinations are some-
what formulaic and predictable from year to year. This creates a situation
that encourages teachers to teach problem types rather than focusing on the
development of students’ problem-solving skills and mathematical thinking.
Research shows that when teachers know what problem types to expect on
an examination, their students tend to focus on lower-level problem-solving
behaviors.
• It is the consensus of the panel that the AP examinations would be
greatly improved and would encourage better teaching practices if they in-
cluded fewer predictable problems and more challenging and interesting
problems.
Finding: The AP examinations have improved under the current syllabi.
The effort to promote conceptual understanding by asking nonstandard ques-
tions and requiring verbal explanations is excellent. For example, the fact
that there is now a wider variety of applications of integration (and not from
a prescribed list) encourages students to think about the meaning of an inte-
gral. The inclusion of graphing problems involving a parameter focuses at-
tention on the behavior of a family of functions. The variety of representa-
tions of a function—by a graph and a table as well as by a formula—pro-
motes a better understanding of the concept of function. However, the exami-
nation is still predictable enough for many students to do respectably well by
mastering question types rather than concepts. The examination does not
include enough problems that focus on conceptual understanding. More prob-
lems are needed that involve multiple steps, test technical skills in the context
of applied problems, ask for interpretation and explanation of results, in-
clude substantial realistic applications of calculus, and test reasoning or theo-
retical understanding.
The panel acknowledges that including problems such as these on AP
examinations, while providing important information about student learning
and understanding, could increase testing time and add complexity to the
scoring process. A careful analysis of the pros and cons of changing the AP
examinations along the lines suggested above should therefore be conducted.

MATHEMATICS
517
One possible solution to this dilemma might be to use multiple measures of
student achievement that are administered over a period of time to compute
a final AP grade, rather than to maintain exclusive reliance on a single 3-
hour examination for determining what students have learned over 5 years
of mathematics instruction.
IB Program
In conducting its analysis of the IB assessments, the panel reviewed the
May and November 1999 examination papers for Mathematical Methods SL
and Mathematics HL, the Group 5 Mathematics Guide (1993), and the 1998
updated course descriptions for Mathematical Methods SL and Mathematics
HL, all published by the IBO (International Baccalaureate Organisation, 1999a,
1999b, 1999c, 1999d, 1999e, 1999f, 1999g, 1999h, 1999i, 1999j, 1999k). The
panel’s analysis of the IB examinations suggests that considerable concep-
tual understanding is required for students to do well. However, the current
level of emphasis on procedural knowledge does not appear to be appropri-
ate given emerging research on the relative importance of conceptual knowl-
edge. It appears that opportunities are missed throughout the examinations
to connect procedural knowledge with conceptual knowledge. The panel is
concerned that the procedural aspects of the IB examinations could lead to
superficial instruction in the mathematics. The mathematical investigations,
extended closed-problem solving, mathematical modeling, and mathemati-
cal research options for the internal portfolio assignments are a large step in
the right direction to mitigate this problem.
Technical Skill
The overall technical level of the IB examinations is high compared with
typical U.S. high school expectations. Some IB examination questions de-
mand levels of technical accomplishment that the AP Calculus BC examina-
tion does not attempt. For example, the May 1999 examination for Math-
ematics HL, Paper 2, contains the following question 8, part (ii):
(a) Using the trapezium rule and Simpson’s rule with 6 subintervals,
evaluate the integral
g x dx
( )
0
1∫
,
where g(x) is given at seven points by the following table.
x
x0 = 0
x1 = 1⁄6
x2 = 2⁄6
x3 = 3⁄6
x4 = 4⁄6
x5 = 5⁄6
x6 = 1
g(x)
1
0.97260
0.89483
0.77880
0.64118
0.49935
0.36789

518
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
(b) Find the error estimate for Simpson’s rule in terms of g(4)(x).
(c) When |g(4)(x)| ≤ 6, determine the number of subintervals required to
use Simpson’s rule to obtain a value for the above integral, which is correct
to five decimal places.
Items in Further Mathematics SL frequently require a high level of com-
putational skill. Research on learning suggests that procedural fluency also
influences students’ ability to utilize their mathematical knowledge. As a
result, although the panel calls for an increase in conceptual focus, we do
not advocate a decrease in the level of computational skill required.
Unlike the AP examinations, all IB examinations allow the use of calcu-
lators. The calculators must be of a preapproved type, which include graph-
ing calculators, but not those with a computer algebra system. Although the
IB examinations require substantial skill with symbol manipulations, they do
not require much graphical and numerical skill. Few problems are primarily
graphical or numerical. The numerical problems that appear more often
concern numerical algorithms rather than use of numerical data.
The algebraic skills required for success on the IB examinations are
impressive. The examinations often involve the use of parameters, which
increases the difficulty of the resulting algebra. Most computations in the
questions in Part 1 require two steps. For example, on the May 1999 exami-
nation for Mathematics HL, Paper 1, questions #6 and #12 are the following
problems:
6. Find the value of a for which the following system of equations does
not have a unique solution.
4
2
1
2
3
6
2
7
2
x
y
z
x
y
x
y
az
−
+
=
+
= −
−
+
=
12. Given f(x) = x2 + x(2 – k) +k2, find the range of values of k for
which f(x) > 0 for all real values of x.
The calculus included on the IB examinations is basic and focuses pri-
marily on techniques. The functions do not appear to be chosen to simplify
the computations. For example, in question #14 on the May 1999 examina-
tion for Mathematics HL, Paper 1, students were given g t
t
t
( )
ln
=
 and asked
to find the interval where g″(t) > 0. However, the Subject Report coauthored
later by the chief examiner and two deputy chief examiners states, “the
errors resulting from messy answers [for g′(t)] were sad.” (IBO, 1999m). The

MATHEMATICS
519
fact that substitutions for integration and techniques for solving differential
equations were given explicitly to the students greatly—and in the panel’s
opinion, inappropriately—reduced the level of technical calculus skill required.
Problems such as the following appear to be typical:
Using the substitution u
x
=
+
1
2
1, or otherwise, find the integral
x
x
dx
1
2
1
+
∫
.
Conceptual Understanding
Few questions on the IB examinations are focused explicitly on concep-
tual understanding. Many problems could be done procedurally if the teach-
ers had taught this way or if students had done enough practice problems.
However, there is such a broad range of topics on the examinations that it
would be difficult for students to do well without understanding mathemati-
cal concepts.
The IB examinations test conceptual understanding indirectly. Many ques-
tions require a significant level of understanding to be solved in a practical
manner. For example, consider question #16 from the May 1999 Mathemat-
ics HL exam, Paper 1:
Given that (1 + x)5 (1 + ax)6 = 1 + bx + 10x2 + … +a6x11, find the values of
a,b∈Z*.
It is unreasonable for a student to multiply out the two expressions on the
left to solve this problem; in practice, the student needs to understand which
terms of the binomial expansions contribute to the unknown terms on the
right. Problems requiring this level of conceptual understanding are not un-
common.
Very few IB examination problems require interpretation. Some IB ques-
tions also lead the student too much. In such cases, the student often does
not need to decide what to do, as this is specified by the question; the
“question” revolves around whether the student can perform the appropri-
ate procedure accurately. (The integration problem on substitution given
above is of this type.)
Theory and Proof
Few problems on the IB examinations involve anything resembling theory.
Paper 2 of Mathematics or Further Mathematics may include problems on
induction, as well as some problems requiring students to “prove” a simple

520
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
statement (for example, to show that cos x + cos 2x is periodic and even).
However, many of these “proofs” involve only one step or a computation.
Applications and Modeling
The questions on the 1999 IB examinations for Mathematical Methods
SL and Mathematics HL make almost no attempt to connect calculus with the
real world (although the graph theory and statistics questions do feature
quasirealistic settings). However, there is an emphasis on mathematical models
in the portfolio section, which was initiated in 2000.
There were no problems on the 1999 IB examinations for Mathematics
Methods SL and Mathematics HL in which students needed to develop a
mathematical model. The statistical problems on the examinations were stated
in an applied context, but the students were never required to decide what
statistical technique was appropriate for that setting. Some problems had
unrealistic modeling settings; others had settings that were never involved in
the solution. For example, question #20 on the May 1999 examination for
Mathematics HL, Paper 1, reads:
A particle moves along a straight line. When it is a distance s from a fixed
point, where s > 1, the velocity v is given by v = (
)
3
2
2
1
s
s
+
−
. Find the accelera-
tion when s = 2.
In conclusion:
• Including more conceptually focused prompts could strengthen IB
test items. This shift in focus would increase the likelihood that instruction
would assist students in both overcoming common misconceptions and ac-
quiring a deeper understanding of the mathematical ideas.
• Some IB questions are too focused on procedure. For example, al-
most all the integrals to be done by substitution have the substitution given
explicitly. This has the effect of making the substitution problems “plug and
chug.” Instead, students could be asked to (1) decide that the integral should
be done by substitution and (2) be able to select an effective substitution.
• The IB examination could be improved by including more conceptu-
ally focused prompts in items designed to assess students’ techniques for
computing solutions.
• The IB examinations could include prompts that demonstrate the
ability to use computational procedures in solving complex problems.
The panel acknowledges that including problems such as these on IB
examinations, while providing important information about student learning
and understanding, could increase testing time. However, some IB testing

MATHEMATICS
521
time might be recaptured and used more effectively if the IBO eliminated
the easy prompts that are included to make students feel more comfortable
in the testing situation and replaced them with the types of items described
above. A careful analysis of the pros and cons of including more complex
problems on the IB examinations should be conducted before a decision is
made about how to accomplish this task.
Finding: The IB examinations benefit from being more varied than the
AP examinations. However, a few examination questions are at too low a
level as they ask students to perform algorithms specified in the problem. The
examinations should include more problems that focus on conceptual un-
derstanding, and do not include enough problems that test whether students
know which algorithm to apply (e.g., integration by substitution), test techni-
cal skills in the context of applied problems, ask for interpretation and expla-
nation of results, and include substantial realistic applications.
Examination Practices
Beyond their impact on curriculum and pedagogy, AP and IB examina-
tions play a critical role in student learning. Students who do not take the
examination at the end of an AP or IB course are less likely to have a
college-level experience. Virtually all of the students in IB mathematics courses
take the end-of-course examination. Although the panel was unable to ob-
tain precise figures, the director of the North American IBO office estimated
that more than 90 percent of IB students take the examination. In contrast,
College Board data suggest that nearly 40 percent of the students who enroll
in AP calculus courses do not take the exam. It is unclear why this is so.
Some students may decide not to take the examination because they expect
not to do well. Others may not take it for financial reasons or because they
plan to matriculate at a college where the score will not count. Since schools
pay the College Board in June only for the examinations that are taken,
many schools allow students to opt out at the last minute. It also is possible
that because schools are under increased scrutiny for quality and AP exami-
nations may be misused as a measure of quality, weaker students in AP
courses may be discouraged from taking the examinations, thereby eliminat-
ing potentially low scores from the school’s analysis (see Chapter 10 of the
parent committee’s report for further discussion of this issue).
Finding: Students who do not take the examination at the conclusion of
an AP or IB course miss the opportunity to pull the material together for them-
selves. They also have a negative effect on the experience of other students by
making the course appear to be less serious.

522
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
COMPARISON OF AP AND IB SYLLABI AND
EXAMINATIONS
Comparison of the AP and IB syllabi and examinations led the panel to
make the following observations:
• Students who take AP Calculus AB or BC and AP statistics will likely
know more calculus and more statistics but may know less precalculus (par-
ticularly vectors) than a student who completes an IB mathematics program.
• Students who take IB mathematics will likely know more statistics
than those who take AP Calculus AB or BC without AP statistics. The IB
program provides more variety in topics than the AP program and appears
to provide more quality assurance in the areas of algebra and trigonometry.
As yet, however, there are no data on this point.
• Both AP and IB examinations have little emphasis on modeling. How-
ever, the IB examinations reflect even less of an attempt than the AP exami-
nations to connect to the real world.
• The AP calculus examinations are still fairly predictable, even after
the recent revisions to the syllabi. The IB examinations appear to be less
consistent in style and content than the AP examinations, leading the panel
to wonder whether IB questions are required to undergo less psychometric
screening than AP questions. This situation has advantages and disadvan-
tages. There is less predictability in the IB examination in any given year,
and some innovative questions are included, such as question #3 on the
November 1999 examination for Mathematics HL, Paper 2. Others, such as
the question involving g t
t
t
( )
ln
=
, benefit from not having been constructed
primarily so they would be easy to grade. However, some IB problems
suffer from apparently not having had the level of revision typical of AP
questions. (An example is question #8 on the May 1999 Mathematics HL
exam, Paper 1, whose correct answer, 4/5, can be obtained by the most
obvious wrong method—confusing P(A|S), which is given, with P(S|A), which
is the answer.)
Finding: The problems on the AP and IB assessments are too predictable.
This encourages teachers to focus on helping students recognize and solve
particular problem types. A less predictable examination would encourage
instruction focused on the development of students’ critical thinking and prob-
lem-solving abilities.

MATHEMATICS
523
Finding: Both AP and IB examinations lack good applications and con-
nections to the real-world uses of mathematics. The IB examinations are
weaker than the AP examinations in this regard.

524
4
Teacher Preparation and
Professional Development
The College Board publishes teachers’ guides and sponsors professional
development activities for new and experienced teachers; however, it does
not specify in its program materials the instructional strategies to be used by
teachers. The International Baccalaureate (IB) mathematics program guides
provide general guidance on instruction and also offer specific suggestions
about instructional strategies. Teaching notes for each topic in the syllabus
for each mathematics course provide suggestions for teachers while stating
“it is not mandatory that these suggestions be followed” (International Bac-
calaureate Organisation [IBO], 1997, p. 8). The teaching notes also include
suggestions for linking content to help students see connections, such as
linking the study of the second derivative in the Further Calculus option to
the study of exponents and logarithms in the core content (IBO, 1997, p. 23).
Neither program describes the professional qualifications required for
teachers of its courses, nor do they provide guidance to schools and districts
about the level of instructional resources that should be made available to
teachers of advanced mathematics. Such resources include, for example,
technology, class time, time for collaborative planning and reflection on
professional practice, and opportunities for professional development (see
below). The panel notes that this lack of specificity is intentional on the part
of the IBO. Because IB is an international program offered in many coun-
tries with varying resources, the IBO prefers to let schools determine what
resources they can make available in the context of their unique situations.
The IBO believes specifying necessary resources would create an insur-
mountable barrier for schools in poor nations or in poor school districts
wishing to offer IB. As part of the process used to authorize schools to offer

MATHEMATICS
525
IB, the IBO ascertains what resources the schools have and how they will be
used to offer a quality program.21
Both the Adanced Placement (AP) and IB mathematics programs are
expanding rapidly, and there is little reason to expect this growth to taper
off in the near future. A natural consequence of this growth is an increased
demand for well-qualified and well-prepared teachers to staff AP and IB
mathematics classrooms. This increased demand comes at a time when there
is already a shortage of qualified teachers who are prepared to teach advanced
mathematics—a shortage that will be exacerbated by the large number of
retirements expected during the next 10 years and a growing turnover rate
among U.S. mathematics teachers. The teacher shortage is particularly notable
in rural and inner-city schools (National Commission on Mathematics and
Science Teaching for the 21st Century, 2000). Current professional develop-
ment models will be insufficient to ensure adequate numbers of well-prepared
and well-qualified AP and IB teachers.
This panel is united in asserting that professional development for teachers
of mathematics, as for all teachers, must be a planned, collaborative, ongo-
ing, and relevant process. It is not sufficient to offer one-time workshops,
regardless of their length, nor is it prudent to assume that good teachers do
not need ongoing support from professional communities. Burton et al. (2000)
report that many AP teachers feel isolated and unsupported after leaving AP
workshops and returning to their home school districts. AP and IB teachers
need opportunities to experiment with new ideas about teaching and learn-
ing and to receive feedback about their teaching. Of paramount importance
is the need for time to reflect on teaching and learning, both individually
and with colleagues.
We draw support for these observations from the work of Liping Ma, a
mathematics educator, whose 1999 book Knowing and Teaching Elemen-
tary Mathematics: Teachers’ Understanding of Fundamental Mathematics in
China and the United States, sheds light on ways in which professional de-
velopment for U.S. mathematics teachers can be improved. According to Ma,
teachers in China report that their profound understanding of fundamental
mathematics was often developed after becoming teachers. The main factors
that contribute to Chinese teachers’ development of their profound under-
standing of fundamental mathematics include the following:
• Learning from colleagues
• Learning mathematics from their students
21The process of becoming an IB school can take 2 years or more as the IBO evaluates the
ability of both the school and the school district to commit resources to providing the adminis-
trative structure, faculty, and facilities needed to support offering the IB Diploma programme.

526
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
• Learning mathematics by doing problems
• Teaching round-by-round (teaching grades 1–6, or 1–3, 4–5, which
develops an understanding of how mathematical concepts build upon each
other through the grades)
• Studying teaching materials intensively
Other important differences between U.S. and Chinese teachers include the
following:
• Chinese teachers spend more time preparing than teaching a lesson.
• Chinese teachers are organized into “teaching research groups.”
• Chinese teachers learn a great deal of mathematics from their col-
leagues. They are assigned mentors, with whom they have regular conversa-
tions about mathematics.
Teaching materials used by Chinese teachers generally consist of a frame-
work, manuals, and a text. The framework outlines the concepts to be taught,
and the manual provides the mathematics background for the correspond-
ing textbook. The manual contains a section-by-section discussion of each
topic in the textbook, focusing on the following:
• What is the concept connected with the topic?
• What are the important points in teaching the topic?
• What are the difficult points in teaching the topic?
With Ma’s work in mind, the panel encourages the College Board, the
IBO, and individual schools and school districts that offer AP and IB courses
to plan, support, and provide professional development activities for AP and
IB mathematics teachers that focus on increasing teachers’ subject matter
knowledge, knowledge of how students learn mathematics, discipline-spe-
cific pedagogical knowledge, mastery of new topics or new approaches to
the AP or IB syllabi, opportunities to generate and contribute new knowl-
edge to the profession, and access to collegial communities of AP/IB teach-
ers and to opportunities for collaborative work with college faculty.
AP and IB calculus teachers are often the best in their schools, and
many compare favorably with teachers at any level. However, AP and IB
teachers still need ongoing opportunities and incentives for professional
development both to promote their understanding of the underlying math-
ematical content and to provide information about exemplary strategies for
teaching the courses. These support systems might take one or more of the
forms discussed below.
Workshops Prior to Teaching AB/IB. Both AP and IB teachers are
offered optional workshops before beginning to teach an AP or IB course,

MATHEMATICS
527
as well as workshops that cover advanced topics for more experienced teach-
ers.22,23 However, a review of selected workshop materials suggests that
some of these workshops may be as much administrative as mathematical in
nature. The panel’s vision for an effective workshop is a format in which
teachers are provided an opportunity to deepen their understanding of math-
ematics, as well as develop their pedagogical expertise.
Teachers’ Manuals/Background Information. The College Board and
the IBO publish and distribute teachers’ manuals (Kennedy, 1997; IBO, 1998b,
1998c, 1998d). However, the panel does not find these materials to be opti-
mally designed to promote the type of instruction emphasized in this report.
The panel recommends that manuals be produced in collaboration with
high school AP and IB teachers, mathematicians, and mathematics educa-
tion researchers. The documents should be organized around major math-
ematical ideas of the AP and IB mathematics courses. We recommend that
these manuals include sample questions and answers; text on the math-
ematical context in which a mathematical idea is situated; and the theoretical
underpinnings, the common student misconceptions, and the process by
which students acquire understanding. (Note that a new AP Calculus Teach-
ers’ Guide was released in 2000, but the panel did not have the opportunity
to review it.)
Mentoring Support: Colleagues and the Internet. An essential in-
gredient in ongoing teacher development is helping every teacher become
part of a comfortable and reliable support group. Teachers, especially nov-
ice teachers, need a way to have their questions answered. They must feel
comfortable sharing their inexperience with content and pedagogy with col-
leagues who can offer solutions and support. The best support group is
usually departmental colleagues, but teachers of calculus are often the only
22The IB North America Regional Office is responsible for conducting professional devel-
opment activities for IB teachers during summer week-long workshops, 3–5 day sessions dur-
ing the school year, and regional conferences. IB workshops focus on some issues that are not
part of AP workshops, including attention to restructuring of the ninth- and tenth-grade curricu-
lum at IB schools, the nature of the IB student, and the use of international examples and
illustrations in the curriculum. Most mathematics workshops include time spent preparing teachers
to teach an unfamiliar and expanded mathematics curriculum, including working on vectors
and matrices, probability and statistics, and the optional topics (statistics, abstract algebra, and
further geometry).
23Experienced teachers, university faculty, and College Board staff conduct AP workshops.
Currently, the College Board exercises little oversight over these workshops other than to list
them on its Web site. The College Board intends to take a more active role in the development
and implementation of high-quality professional development activities (Commission on the
Future of the Advanced Placement Program, 2001).

528
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
members of their departments who are assigned to teach this subject. Addi-
tionally, new teachers often express trepidation about professing their igno-
rance or inexperience regarding either mathematical content or pedagogical
strategies for fear that doing so may compromise their academic position in
the school or their assignment as an AP or IB teacher. When school col-
leagues cannot provide appropriate support, district or regional professional
groups are an alternative. The College Board, through its regional offices,
and the IBO are uniquely positioned to take a leadership role in helping to
develop and support these professional communities of teachers.
In recent years, teachers have found an alternative on the Internet. The
AP calculus and AP Statistics discussion groups on the Swarthmore College
Web site have been highly successful in supporting beginning teachers. The
online discussions have helped teachers deepen their understanding of the
course content and improve their instructional techniques, particularly with
regard to technology.24
In both discussion groups, more experienced high school teachers offer
new teachers suggestions for instruction, help clarify content issues, and
suggest references and resources to improve instruction. In addition to sec-
ondary teachers helping each other, the discussion groups have regular con-
tributions from university faculty. The AP statistics discussion group is char-
acterized by high-level support offered to high school teachers by leading
statisticians. For example, the last two presidents of the American Statistical
Association regularly offer background information at a fairly deep level to
teachers on the topics in the AP curricula. Their responses to teachers’ ques-
tions reveal an understanding and recognition of both the teachers’ level of
understanding of the content and the difficulties of teaching statistics. Some
panel members note that this level of supportive response is not always true
of the AP calculus discussion group. Some teachers who teach both statistics
and calculus suggest that while they feel very comfortable asking questions
in the statistics group, they hesitate to ask questions in the calculus group.
This is the case in part because university mathematicians who participate in
the discussions sometimes provide abrupt and condescending responses to
questions. It is not uncommon for teachers to feel denigrated by the re-
sponse, which ends their participation in the discussion.
School-Based Support for Teachers of Advanced High School Math-
ematics. Instruction for advanced students can be greatly improved by a
coordinated effort among the staff teaching at all levels at a school. At a
minimum, staff development is needed for precalculus and calculus teach-
24The Swarthmore Web site is The Math Forum, http://forum.swarthmore.edu [4/23/02].
Both the College Board and the IBO also sponsor online discussion groups for mathematics
teachers.

MATHEMATICS
529
ers. To address the development of mathematical stamina and persistence in
students, staff development should include all teachers, from algebra to cal-
culus.
Part of staff development involves providing a stronger foundation in
content knowledge for all teachers. All mathematics teachers need to under-
stand calculus so that students can begin working on its underpinnings in
algebra. More important, however, staff development involves ongoing pro-
fessional contact among colleagues at a school. School districts need to
create working environments in which teachers have time to meet and dis-
cuss, reflect on, and refine instructional practices. School districts should
also create mechanisms for teachers to participate in more structured profes-
sional development during contract hours. Currently, most teachers are
required to participate in these activities, such as AP or IB teacher work-
shops, before or after school or during the summer, as suitable substitute
teachers are not always available or affordable.
The need for more on-site staff development is particularly acute in
schools that offer AP. The AP examinations help focus instruction but be-
cause they are so effective the materials that are not on the tests tend not to
get taught in the prerequisite courses. These courses generally contain both
students who eventually take AP calculus and those who do not. Thus,
accommodations are made in prerequisite courses to ensure that all students
are prepared to some extent for AP calculus. The AP calculus examinations
have therefore become a 3-hour test that measures 5 years of instruction. To
the extent that the test is superficial the previous 5 years of instruction will
also be superficial. Staff development opportunities are needed for the staff
to reclaim some ownership of the instructional output at a school.
Finding: Neither the College Board nor the IBO explicitly articulates in its
published materials what it considers to be excellent teaching in mathemat-
ics.
Finding: The availability of high-quality professional development ac-
tivities and the establishment of support networks for AP and IB mathematics
teachers are crucial to promoting and maintaining excellence in these pro-
grams.
Finding: Adequate preparation of teachers for courses leading to calcu-
lus or other advanced study options is a critical factor in enabling students to
succeed in the advanced courses.
Finding: U.S. teachers have few opportunities to deepen their understand-
ing of mathematics during the school year, and opportunities during the sum-
mer, while useful, tend to be disconnected from everyday teaching.

530
5
Impact of the AP and IB Programs
Enrollment in Advanced Placement (AP) mathematics courses in the
United States far outstrips enrollment in International Baccalaureate (IB)
mathematics courses at all levels (see Table 5-1). Consequently, AP calculus
has had and continues to exert a far greater influence than the IB courses on
the secondary and collegiate mathematics courses offered in the United States.
We therefore focus here on the impact of AP.
AP’S IMPACT ON MATHEMATICS IN GRADES 8–12
For most students, goals such as proficiency in problem solving, proof,
and application may be more important than calculus. But realizing these
goals takes time—time that is not available in a rushed curriculum. As we
focus on the AP program and make suggestions for its improvement, we
also must ask whether those suggestions will improve mathematics for all.
On balance, the effect of AP calculus is probably to improve student achieve-
ment in mathematics. However, this is not the case for all students.
Because calculus requires 4 years of preparation, the AP calculus pro-
gram has repercussions throughout the high school mathematics curriculum
and even into the middle-school curriculum. Thus, the question of impact
may be more important in mathematics than in the sciences. In some schools,
the emphasis on preparing a classroom of students for AP calculus governs
the curriculum for all other students. This impact has both positive and
negative aspects. On the positive side, calculus helps counteract pressures
to make high school mathematics easier. For example, such pressures have
led to efforts by some programs to get more students to continue in math-
ematics by making Algebra II a less challenging course. The need to get
students ready for the AP courses helps counter such pressures.
On the negative side, precalculus courses are condensed in some schools
so that three semesters can be set aside to cover AP calculus (especially if
the school plans to offer AP Calculus BC). This practice may send otherwise

MATHEMATICS
531
strong students to college with an inadequate background in algebra and
trigonometry, which they will need for the study of science and engineering,
as well as further mathematics. In addition, to complete 4 full years of math-
ematics prior to enrolling in AP calculus, students must either take a math-
ematics course over the summer or start algebra in grade 8.25 In the United
States, few students take algebra before the ninth grade.26 Thus, the desire to
have as many students as possible ready to take calculus by their senior year
can lead to condensing the mathematics sequence in a fashion that creates
long-term problems for some students. For example, students may choose
to “double up” and take two mathematics courses in one year—usually ge-
ometry and Algebra II. Other students elect to go to summer school to learn
geometry or Algebra II. Because they are compressed, summer courses of-
ten do not provide a solid background upon which to build higher-level
concepts. High school teachers are aware of the dangers of shortchanging
precalculus but are often powerless to resist the pressure from students and
parents who believe that calculus on students’ transcripts will boost their
chances for admission to college.
The idea that a large proportion of high school students should reach
the level of calculus has led to many schools offering, and a significant
number of students taking, non-AP and non-IB calculus courses—calculus
TABLE 5-1
Comparison of Participation in AP and IB Mathematics Courses Based on
Number of Examinations Administered
AP
AP
IB
IB
IB Further
Calculus
Calculus
AP
Mathematical
Mathematics
Mathematics
AB
BC
Statistics
Methods SL
HL
SL
Number of
Examinations in 2000 137,276
34,142
34,118
4,068
1,112
16
NOTES: SL, Standard Level; HL, Higher Level.
25The panel notes that students taking algebra in grade 8 are sometimes taught by teachers
who are not certified to teach mathematics. This practice can lead to having students in calculus
courses lacking the necessary algebra skills for successful calculus learning. The 1999 Science
and Mathematics Indicators (Council of Chief State School Officers [CCSSO], 1999) reveal that 72
percent of middle-school mathematics teachers were certified in mathematics (up 18 percent
from 1994).
26According to the State Indicators of Science and Mathematics Education (CCSSO, 1999),
only 18 percent of all seventh- and eighth-grade students in the United States were enrolled in
Algebra I while in middle school. Another 25 percent took algebra in grade 9.

532
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
that is not at the college level.27 Many of these students also lack the neces-
sary algebra and precalculus skills for successful calculus learning. Thus,
students in these courses, as well as the less-prepared students in AP calcu-
lus courses, would be better served by strengthening their precalculus back-
ground and starting calculus in college. A solid background in precalculus is
an essential tool for later study in the sciences and quantitative social sci-
ences. The panel sees some merit in developing an AP-level precalculus
course for these students (the panel notes that many colleges give credit for
precalculus courses). Such a course would be more beneficial to these stu-
dents than taking a less demanding calculus course or taking AP without
adequate preparation, as it would help prepare them for the kind of thinking
a good calculus course should require. This would be the ideal course in
which to hold students accountable for remembering their mathematical
knowledge acquired from algebra and applying it to precalculus. It would
encourage the development of students’ ability to solve more difficult prob-
lems. A strong precalculus course would have the effect of reducing the
amount of remediation (currently unacceptably large) that goes on in AP
calculus and allowing the exploration of more difficult problems within that
course.
Finding: The adequacy of the preparation students receive before taking
calculus has an effect on whether they can understand calculus or merely do
calculus. Without understanding, students cannot apply what they know and
do not remember the calculus they have learned.
Finding: Many teachers and schools are under great pressure to com-
press algebra and trigonometry so they can prepare as many students as
possible for calculus. Sometimes students spend too little time mastering the
prerequisite knowledge and skills. The performance of many calculus stu-
dents is undermined by the fact that they do not learn precalculus thoroughly
or learn to solve problems and think mathematically. Thus, the rush to calcu-
lus may curtail their future options to pursue mathematics, science, and en-
gineering. It is important to realize that it is not the structure or curriculum
27In September 1986, the Mathematical Association of America (MAA) and the National
Council of Teachers of Mathematics (NCTM) released a joint statement advocating that calculus
courses taken in high school be at the college level, in other words, at the level of AP or IB. The
statement was published in Calculus for a New Century (Steen, 1988). The MAA/NCTM state-
ment includes the recommendation “that students who enroll in a calculus course in secondary
school should have demonstrated mastery of algebra, geometry, trigonometry, and coordinate
geometry. This means that students should have at least four full years of mathematical prepa-
ration beginning with the first course in algebra.” The panel supports this recommendation. The
full text of the statement is in Appendix F.

MATHEMATICS
533
of the AP calculus courses that causes this problem but the way in which the
program is used.
Finding: There are not enough checks in the system to ensure that stu-
dents have the prerequisite algebra, trigonometry, and precalculus skills nec-
essary for success in calculus and courses beyond.
Finding: The courses that precede calculus are often designed to help
students make a smooth transition to an AP course. The topics and speed of
prerequisite courses are determined by what is needed for AP. Even schools
that do not offer AP calculus usually teach from books and curricula that are
used in other schools to prepare students for this course. Thus, the AP cur-
riculum influences many more courses and many more students than those
who take the AP examinations.
IMPACT OF AP AND IB ON COLLEGE CALCULUS
PROGRAMS
Although the intent of AP courses is to give students a head start on
college-level work, many students take high school calculus and then repeat
calculus in college. This group includes students who score well on the AP
assessment but retake the course in college in the hope of receiving an A,
students who take the AP course but do not take the examination, and
students who take non-AP calculus courses. Although there are no data on
the numbers of students in each category, anecdotally the result is college
calculus classes in which only a few students have not had some calculus
before. Students who have not had any calculus may feel at a disadvantage
in this situation, although the data do not always support their concerns. It is
interesting to note that many students who have had calculus in high school
and repeat the course in college are also at a disadvantage because they do
not devote sufficient attention to their college course, perhaps wrongly be-
lieving that they know calculus more deeply than they actually do.
ACCEPTANCE OF STUDENTS’ AP AND IB TEST
RESULTS BY COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES
Students’ scores on AP calculus examinations are widely accepted by
college and university mathematics departments for placement and/or credit.
The amount of credit and final placement in advanced courses are depen-
dent on which AP examination a student takes (AB or BC), the score that he/
she earns, and the college or university where the student seeks credit or
advanced placement. Research conducted by the College Board and others

534
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
(see for example, University of California at Los Angeles, 2000) supports
accepting scores of 4 or 5 for credit and/or placement. In one study, re-
searchers administered the same calculus problems to AP calculus students
who earned a score of 4 or 5 on the AP examination and students who
completed a college calculus course. This study revealed that AP students
who scored a 4 or 5 on the AP examination performed on these questions as
well as or better than most of their college counterparts who received honor
grades in the comparable college courses (College Entrance Examination
Board [CEEB], 1999a).
The panel agrees with departmental policies that accept scores of 4 or 5
on an AP calculus examination as evidence that students have mastered
knowledge and skills equivalent to those presented in an introductory col-
lege calculus course. Through legislative mandate, however, some publicly
funded colleges are required to award credit or placement for scores of 3,
and the panel is not convinced that such scores reflect sufficient mastery of
the subject to warrant credit or placement. Students who earn a score of 3 or
lower on an AP examination or 5 on an IB examination can present prob-
lems for colleges in terms of placement in introductory courses. The panel
suggests that credit or placement should be awarded to students who earn a
score of 3 on the AP examination on an individual basis and should be
supported by additional evidence beyond examination performance.28
Scores earned on IB mathematics examinations are treated similarly to
scores earned on AP calculus examinations. It should be noted, however,
that the different levels at which IB courses and examinations can be taken
and the variety of optional topics that are included in different classrooms
add further considerations for awarding of credit and/or placement, as it is
more difficult for a university mathematics department to know exactly what
an IB student has learned.
The calculus portion of IB Mathematics HL, including the Approxima-
tion and Analysis option, is generally considered to be at least the equivalent
of AP Calculus BC. The calculus portion of Mathematical Methods SL by
itself is less than a full AP Calculus AB course. However, the majority of
Mathematical Methods SL teachers in the United States teach a full calculus
class that is equivalent to an AB Calculus course, even though this additional
material is not required for the IB examination. Students who earn scores of
6 or 7 are usually regarded as having passed the equivalent of a college-level
course. The exact course for which credit and further placement are awarded
depends on the IB course and examination for which the student submits a
score. Since many fewer students take IB than AP, acceptance of the IB score
28The College Board currently is conducting research on the validity of awarding credit or
placement for a score of 3. The panel did not have access to any data from that study. Its results
should be published within a year.

MATHEMATICS
535
is often based on analogy with AP, rather than on an evaluation of the
particular strengths of the IB course. There is likely to be less topic-by-topic
correspondence between IB courses and college courses than is the case for
AP because of differences in the ways in which the IB and AP courses have
been developed. However, research and experience appear to indicate that
students who have been successful in the IB curriculum are as well prepared
for further mathematics as those who have taken AP.29
Neither advanced placement nor acceleration is a goal of the IB program.
The International Baccalaureate Organisation does not actively encourage
colleges and universities to accept IB examination results for college credit
and/or advanced placement in upper-level mathematics courses. Rather, the
acceptance of these credits resulted through analogy to AP (conference notes,
speech by Paul Campbell, Director of Operations, Internatonal Baccalaureate
North America). Acceptance occurred slowly as parents, teachers, and students,
on an individual basis at first, demonstrated to college registrars and math-
ematics departments that IB courses were equivalent to AP courses in rigor
and content. It was this comparison that led to the acceptance of IB exami-
nation scores. Thus, understanding the use of IB examination scores for
purposes of college credit and placement also requires understanding how
AP gained widespread acceptance.
The College Board has done an admirable job in helping to establish
and maintain communication between college and high school mathematics
faculties so they can stay abreast of each other’s interests and concerns.
Members of the AP test development committee, which is responsible for
the AP calculus program, are drawn from both college and high school
faculty. Every year a group of several hundred college and high school
faculty meet for a week or more in early June to grade the free-response
questions of that year’s AP examination. This provides an excellent opportu-
nity for informal exchanges on mathematics and teaching and allows the
College Board to monitor the reactions of college and high school faculty, as
well as student responses to questions on the examination.30
29We compare the preparation level of good IB students with that of good AP students
because college and university faculty have had much more extensive experience with AP
calculus than with IB mathematics. The panel is not implying that AP is the standard to be met.
30The College Board views its experiences with the revision of the AP calculus program as
a potential model for ways in which to approach the redesign of other AP courses (Breland and
Oltman, 2001). A detailed historical perspective on the communications among the College
Board, mathematicians, teachers, and professional mathematics organizations that led to the
creation of the new AP calculus courses was written by Dan Kennedy of the Baylor School and
can be found on the College Board’s Web site: www.collegeboard.com [4/23/02].

536
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
Finding: Most college and university placement and credit practices that
are based on student performance on AP calculus or IB mathematics exami-
nations are reasonable.
UNINTENDED USES OF AP AND IB ENROLLMENT
FIGURES AND EXAMINATION RESULTS
The media and others sometimes use AP and IB scores inappropriately
as measures of quality for factors that are not related to the intended pur-
poses of the courses or examinations. For example, some members of the
media have proposed using the number of AP and IB courses offered in
schools as a tool to rate and rank the schools against each other, possibly
leading some schools to offer more AP or IB courses than they are able to
support adequately with existing resources. Some schools use the results of
AP or IB examinations to evaluate teachers, the consequence of which may
be to discourage potentially low-scoring students from taking the courses or
the examinations. It is not uncommon for selective colleges to view the
existence of AP or IB courses on an applicant’s transcript as an important
part of their evaluation of the student’s intellectual and academic motiva-
tions. Without any measure of the quality of the student’s achievement in
such courses,31 however, this emphasis on the number of AP or IB courses
on a transcript leads many students to enroll in the courses without a com-
mitment to mastering the material. AP and IB enrollments are increasingly
used as a policy lever, as a method of raising the standards and expectations
for all students. This leads to negative consequences for students for whom
advanced courses in general, and AP and IB mathematics in particular, may
not be appropriate.
Finding: Data on the number of AP and IB courses offered by schools
and the results of the examinations are sometimes used in ways for which
they were not intended, thus creating situations that can be detrimental to
student learning.
31Results of AP examinations taken in the senior year are not available until long after
college acceptances have been sent out.

537
6
Recommendations
PREPARATION OF STUDENTS
1. All calculus taught in high school should be at the college level.
2. All students who enroll in Advanced Placement (AP) calculus
should have had at least 4 years of college preparatory mathematics
prior to AP calculus. The structure of International Baccalaureate (IB)
mathematics courses is different, and this recommendation is not as
applicable to them.
3. Strategies must be developed to ensure that students who en-
roll in calculus have an adequate background in algebra and trigo-
nometry for subsequent work in mathematics and science.
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT
4. The professional development opportunities available to AP and
IB teachers should be improved and expanded.
5. The College Board and the International Baccalaureate Organisa-
tion should ensure that adequate professional development opportu-
nities are available to all AP and IB teachers.
6. Schools that choose to offer AP and IB programs must find ways
to encourage all teachers to take part in professional development,
perhaps by providing time during the school day rather than on nights
and weekends.
7. The College Board should consider developing procedures to
certify AP calculus teachers.
ASSESSMENT
8. The AP and IB examinations should vary more from year to
year. If teachers expect that major ideas will be assessed rather than

538
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
specific problem types, it is likely that instruction will encourage the
development of students’ critical thinking and problem-solving abili-
ties. The AP and IB examinations must strike a balance between judg-
ing students’ conceptual understanding by asking unfamiliar prob-
ing questions and alarming teachers and students with a strange and
unfamiliar test.
9. Both the AP and IB programs should maintain and increase
their focus on conceptual understanding in their assessments.
10. To assess computational and procedural knowledge, students
should be asked questions that demonstrate their ability to use these
procedures in solving more complex problems.
11. All students enrolled in AP and IB courses ordinarily should
take the relevant external examinations as part of the course require-
ments.32
12. AP and IB examinations should contain more emphasis on
realistic applications, including those in which students have to set
up the mathematical model.
32The panel recognizes that policies must be developed to ensure that students without
the financial means to take the tests are not penalized by this requirement. The panel notes that
the College Board is investigating ways to increase the numbers of students who take the AP
examination at the conclusion of an AP course. For more information, see the report of the
Commission on the Future of the Advanced Placement Program, which is available at
www.collegeboard.com [4/23/02].

539
References
American Educational Research Association, American Psychological Association, and
National Council on Measurement in Education. (1999). Standards for educa-
tional and psychological testing. Washington, DC: American Educational Re-
search Association.
Breland, H.M., & Oltman, P.K. (2001). An analysis of Advanced Placement (AP)
examinations in economics and comparative government and politics (College
Board Research Report 2001-4; ETS RR-01-17). New York: College Entrance
Examination Board.
Burton, N.W., Bruschi, B., Kindig, L., & Courtney, R. (2000). Draft interim report of
advanced placement research project—Documentation and evaluation of ad-
vanced placement summer institutes: Advanced placement new teacher needs
study. New York: College Entrance Examination Board.
Campbell, P. (2000). International baccalaureate program. Presentation to the Com-
mittee on Programs for Advanced Study of Mathematics and Science in Ameri-
can High Schools, March 26, Irvine, CA.
College Entrance Examination Board. (1987). Advanced placement course descrip-
tion: Mathematics: Calculus AB, Calculus BC—May 1988 [acorn book]. New
York: Author.
College Entrance Examination Board. (1989). Released exams: The entire 1988 AP
calculus AB examination and key. New York: Author.
College Entrance Examination Board. (1992). Advanced placement course descrip-
tion: Mathematics: Calculus AB, calculus BC—May 1993, May 1994 [acorn book].
New York: Author.
College Entrance Examination Board. (1993). Released exams: 1993 AP calculus AB:
Free-response scoring guide with multiple-choice section. New York: Author.
College Entrance Examination Board. (1994). College and university guide to the
advanced placement program. New York: Author.
College Entrance Examination Board. (1995). AP mathematics: Calculus AB & BC–
Free-response questions 1995. New York: Author.
College Entrance Examination Board. (1996a). AP calculus 1995 free-response ques-
tions. New York: Author.

540
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
College Entrance Examination Board. (1996b). Advanced placement course descrip-
tion: Mathematics: Calculus AB, calculus BC—May 1997 [acorn book]. New
York: Author.
College Entrance Examination Board. (1997a). AP calculus 1996 free-response ques-
tions. New York: Author.
College Entrance Examination Board. (1997b). Advanced placement course descrip-
tion: Calculus: Calculus AB, calculus BC—May 1998, May 1999 [acorn book].
New York: Author.
College Entrance Examination Board. (1998a). Released exams: 1997 AP calculus AB
and calculus BC. New York: Author.
College Entrance Examination Board. (1998b). Released exams: 1997 AP statistics.
New York: Author.
College Entrance Examination Board. (1999a). Advanced placement technical manual
2000. New York: Author.
College Entrance Examination Board. (1999b). Released exams: 1998 AP calculus AB
and calculus BC. New York: Author.
College Entrance Examination Board. (1999c). Advanced placement program course
description: Statistics—May 1999, May 2000 [acorn book]. New York: Author.
College Entrance Examination Board. (1999d). 5-year set of free-response questions,
calculus AB, calculus BC: 1995-1999. New York: Author.
Commission on the Future of the Advanced Placement Program. (2001). Access to
excellence:  A report of the Commission on the Future of the Advanced Placement
Program. New York: College Entrance Examination Board.
Council of Chief State School Officers. (1999). State indicators of science and math-
ematics 1999: State trends and new indicators from the 1997–1998 school year.
Washington, DC: Author
International Baccalaureate Organisation. (1993). Group 5 mathematics guide—For
examination from May 1995 onwards—Edition 1.2. Geneva, Switzerland: Au-
thor.
International Baccalaureate Organisation. (1997). Mathematical methods standard
level. Geneva, Switzerland: Author.
International Baccalaureate Organisation. (1998a). IB mathematics HL diploma
programme guide 1998. Geneva, Switzerland: Author.
International Baccalaureate Organisation. (1998b). Teacher support material: Further
mathematics SL—The portfolio. Geneva, Switzerland: Author.
International Baccalaureate Organisation. (1998c). Teacher support material: Math-
ematics HL—The portfolio. Geneva, Switzerland: Author.
International Baccalaureate Organisation. (1998d). Teacher support material: Math-
ematical methods SL—The portfolio. Geneva, Switzerland: Author.
International Baccalaureate Organisation. (1999a). Further mathematics SL specimen
papers and markschemes (for the programme with first examinations in May
2000)—SPEC/540/S(1-2) and specimen/540/S(1-2)M. Geneva, Switzerland:
Author.
International Baccalaureate Organisation. (1999b). International baccalaureate math-
ematical methods standard level May 1999 exam—M99/520/S(1-2). Geneva,
Switzerland: Author.

MATHEMATICS
541
International Baccalaureate Organisation. (1999c). International baccalaureate math-
ematical methods standard level November 1999 exam—N99/520/S(1-2). Geneva,
Switzerland: Author.
International Baccalaureate Organisation. (1999d). International baccalaureate math-
ematics higher level May 1999 exam—M99/510/H(1-2). Geneva, Switzerland:
Author.
International Baccalaureate Organisation. (1999e). International baccalaureate math-
ematics higher level November 1999 exam—N99/510/H(1-2). Geneva, Switzer-
land: Author.
International Baccalaureate Organisation. (1999f). Markscheme May 1999 mathemati-
cal methods standard level—M99/520/S(1-2)M. Geneva, Switzerland: Author.
International Baccalaureate Organisation. (1999g). Markscheme May 1999 mathematics
higher level—M99/510/H(1-2)M. Geneva, Switzerland: Author.
International Baccalaureate Organisation. (1999h). Markscheme November 1999 math-
ematical methods standard level—N99/520/S(1-2)M. Geneva, Switzerland: Au-
thor.
International Baccalaureate Organisation. (1999i). Markscheme November 1999 math-
ematics higher level—N99/510/H(1-2)M. Geneva, Switzerland: Author.
International Baccalaureate Organisation. (1999j). Mathematical methods SL speci-
men papers and markschemes (for the programme with first examinations in
May 2000 —SPEC/520/S(1-2) and Specimen/520/S(1-2)M. Geneva, Switzerland:
Author.
International Baccalaureate Organisation. (1999k). Mathematics HL specimen papers
and markschemes (for the programme with first examinations in May 2000—
SPEC/510/H(1-2) and Specimen/510/H(1-2)M. Geneva, Switzerland: Author.
International Baccalaureate Organisation. (1999l). Subject reports—May 1999: Math-
ematical methods. Geneva, Switzerland: Author.
International Baccalaureate Organisation. (1999m). Subject reports—May 1999: Math-
ematics higher level. Geneva, Switzerland: Author.
Kennedy, D. (1997). Teacher’s guide: AP calculus. New York: College Entrance Ex-
amination Board.
Ma, L. (1999). Knowing and teaching elementary mathematics: Teachers’ understand-
ing of fundamental mathematics in China and the United States. Mahwah, NJ:
Earlbaum.
Morgan, R., & Ramist, L. (1998). Advanced placement student in college: An investi-
gation of course grades at 21 colleges. Unpublished Statistical Report No. SR-98-
13. Princeton, NJ: Educational Testing Service.
National Commission on Mathematics and Science Teaching for the 21st Century.
(2000). Before it’s too late: A report to the nation from the National Commission
on Mathematics and Science Teaching for the 21st Century. Jessup, MD: Educa-
tion Publications Center.
National Research Council. (2000). How people learn: Brain, mind, experience, and
school: expanded edition. Committee on Developments in the Science of Learn-
ing. J.D. Bransford, A.L. Brown, and R.R. Cocking (Eds.). Committee on Behav-
ioral and Social Sciences and Education. Washington, DC: National Academy
Press.

542
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
Steen, L.A. (Ed.). (1988). Calculus for a new century: A pump, not a filter. Washing-
ton, DC: Mathematical Association of America.
University of California at Los Angeles, Department of Mathematics. (2000). Perfor-
mance of AP and non AP UCLA mathematics students on selected calculus place-
ment problems. Unpublished manuscript. Los Angeles: Author.
Watkins, A.E., Roberts, R.A., Olsen, C.R., & Scheaffer, R. L. (1997). Teacher’s guide:
AP statistics. New York: College Entrance Examination Board.
Willingham, W.W., & Morris, M. (1986). Four years later: A longitudinal study of
advanced placement students in college (College Board Report No. 86-2; ETS RR
No. 85-46). New York: College Entrance Examination Board.

543
Appendix A
Charge to the Content Panels from the
Parent Committee
Charge to the Parent Committee and Content Panels: The charge to
the committee is to consider the effectiveness of, and potential improve-
ments to, programs for advanced study of mathematics and science in Ameri-
can high schools. In response to the charge, the committee will consider the
two most widely recognized programs for advanced study: the Advanced
Placement (AP) and the International Baccalaureate (IB) programs. In addi-
tion, the committee will identify and examine other appropriate curricular
and instructional alternatives to IB and AP. Emphasis will be placed on the
mathematics, physics, chemistry, and biology programs of study.
Charge to Content Panels: The content panels are asked to evaluate
the AP and IB curricular, instructional, and assessment materials for their
specific disciplines.
Below is a list of questions that the content panels will use to examine
the curriculum, laboratory experiences, and student assessments for their
specific subject areas. The content panels will use these questions to issue a
report to the committee about the effectiveness of the AP and IB programs
for educating able high school students in their respective disciplines. In
answering these questions, the content panels should keep in mind the
committee’s charge and study questions.
The panels should focus on the following specific issues in advising the
committee:
I. CURRICULAR AND CONCEPTUAL
FRAMEWORKS FOR LEARNING
Research on cognition suggests that learning and understanding are fa-
cilitated when students: (1) have a strong foundation of background knowl-
edge, (2) are taught and understand facts and ideas in the context of a
conceptual framework, and (3) learn how to organize information to facili-

544
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
tate retrieval and application in new contexts (see, e.g., National Research
Council [NRC], 2000).
1. To what degree do the AP and IB programs incorporate current knowl-
edge about cognition and learning in mathematics and science in their cur-
ricula, instructions, and assessments?
2. To what degree is the factual base of information that is provided by
the AP and IB curricula and related laboratory experiences adequate for
advanced high school study in your discipline?
3. Based on your evaluation of the materials that you received, to what
extent do the AP and IB curricula and assessments balance breadth of cov-
erage with in-depth study of important topics in the subject area? In your
opinion, is this balance an appropriate one for advanced high school learn-
ers?
4. Are there key concepts (big ideas) of your discipline around which
factual information and ideas should be organized to promote conceptual
understanding in advanced study courses (e.g., Newton’s laws in physics)?
To what degree are the AP and IB curricula and related laboratory experi-
ences organized around these identified key concepts?
5. To what degree do the AP and IB curricula and related laboratory
experiences provide opportunities for students to apply their knowledge to
a range of problems and in a variety of contexts?
6. To what extent do the AP and IB curricula and related laboratory
experiences encourage students and teachers to make connections among
the various disciplines in science and mathematics?
II. THE ROLE OF ASSESSMENT
Research and experience indicate that assessments of student learning
play a key role in determining what and how teachers teach and what and
how students learn.
1. Based on your evaluation of the IB and AP final assessments and
accompanying scoring guides and rubrics, evaluate to what degree these
assessments measure or emphasize:
a)
students’ mastery of content knowledge;
b)
students’ understanding and application of concepts; and
c)
students’ ability to apply what they have learned to other courses
and in other situations.
2. To what degree do the AP and IB final assessments assess student
mastery of your disciplinary subject at a level that is consistent with expec-
tations for similar courses that are taught at the college level?

MATHEMATICS
545
III. TEACHING
Research and experience indicate that learning is facilitated when teach-
ers use a variety of techniques that are purposefully selected to achieve
particular learning goals.
1. How effectively do the AP and IB curricula and assessments encour-
age teachers to use a variety of teaching techniques (e.g., lecture, discus-
sion, laboratory experience and independent investigation)?
2. What preparation is needed to effectively teach advanced mathemat-
ics and science courses such as AP and IB?
IV. EMPHASES
The NRC’s National Science Education Standards and the National Coun-
cil of Teachers of Mathematics’ Standards 2000 propose that the emphases of
science and mathematics education should change in particular ways (see
supplemental materials).
1. To what degree do the AP and IB programs reflect the recommenda-
tions in these documents?
V. PREPARATION FOR FURTHER STUDY
Advanced study at the high school level is often viewed as preparation
for continued study at the college level or as a substitute for introductory-
level college courses.
1. To what extent do the AP and IB curricula, assessments, and related
laboratory experiences in your discipline serve as adequate and appropriate
bases for success in college courses beyond the introductory level?
2. To what degree do the AP and IB programs in your discipline reflect
changes in knowledge or approaches that are emerging (or have recently
occurred) in your discipline?
3. How might coordination between secondary schools and institutions
of higher education be enhanced to optimize student learning and contin-
ued interest in the discipline?

546
Appendix B
Biographical Sketches of
Mathematics Content Panel Members
Harold Boger is currently a mathematics specialist for District G in the Los
Angeles Unified School District.  Previously he taught at Crenshaw High School.
In addition to teaching AP calculus and AP statistics, he served as the chairman
of the mathematics department and taught geometry, algebra with transforma-
tions, and the second and third levels of an integrated mathematics program.
Mr. Boger’s thirteen years of outstanding teaching led to his selection as a
visiting lecturer at the University of California at Los Angeles as part of the
prestigious Visiting High School Teacher Program.  He received his B.S. in
Applied Mathematics and M.A.Ed. from the University of California at Los Angeles.
Marilyn P. Carlson is an associate professor in the department of mathematics
at Arizona State University.  Her research area is mathematics education with
primary area of focus on cognitive aspects of knowing and learning major
conceptual strands of first semester calculus. A National Science Foundation
(NSF) CAREER Award is supporting her current development of concept
assessment instruments for precalculus and beginning calculus and curricular
materials for first semester calculus. She has recently been involved in devel-
oping two new Ph.D. programs in research in undergraduate mathematics
education at Arizona State University.  She is the coordinator for the MAA
Special Interest Group, Research in Undergraduate Mathematics Education,
and has been active in various professional organizations, including PME,
PME-NA, National Council of Teachers of Mathematics (NCTM), Mathematical
Association of America (MAA) and Association for Research in Undergraduate
Mathematics Education (ARUME). Dr. Carlson received her Ph.D. in math-
ematics education from the University of Kansas.
Roger E. Howe has been a professor of mathematics at Yale University for
over twenty-five years.  He has been a visiting scholar at numerous universities,
both in the United States and abroad.  Recently, Dr. Howe was a Phi Beta
Kappa visiting scholar.  Dr. Howe is a member of the American Mathematical

MATHEMATICS
547
Society (AMS), MAA, NCTM, the Connecticut Academy of Science and Engi-
neering, the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, and the National Acad-
emy of Sciences (NAS).  He is a former member of the Mathematical Sciences
Education Board (MSEB).  He serves on the board of directors of the Connecticut
Academy for Education in Mathematics, Sciences and Technology, and was
chairman of the AMS Review Group for revision of the NCTM Standards.  He
currently serves as chair of the AMS Committee on Education.  Dr. Howe
received his Ph.D. in mathematics from the University of California at Berkeley.
Daniel J. Teague teaches mathematics at The North Carolina School of
Science and Mathematics in Durham, North Carolina.  His twenty-five years
of teaching at both the secondary and undergraduate levels have been rec-
ognized by awards such as the Tandy Technology Scholar Outstanding Teacher
Award and the Presidential Award for Excellence in Mathematics Teaching.
Dr. Teague’s previous National Research Council (NRC) experience includes
appointments to the MSEB and the U.S. Commission on Mathematics
Instruction.  He received his Ph.D. in Mathematics Education from North
Carolina State University where he completed his doctoral work in inter-
national comparisons of calculus education.
Alan C. Tucker is a professor with the Department of Applied Mathematics
and Statistics at the State University of New York at Stony Brook.  He has
served the department for over 30 years, previously as the department chair
and currently as associate department chair and undergraduate program
director.  Dr. Tucker currently heads the NSF-funded Long Island Consor-
tium for Interconnected Learning, which explores the teaching and learning
of mathematically based subjects through instruction, curricula, technology,
and interdepartmental coordination.  He has previously served the NRC with
appointments to MSEB’s Undergraduate Math Advisory Board and the U.S.
Commission on Mathematics Instruction.  Dr. Tucker received his Ph.D. in
Mathematics from Stanford University.
Deborah Hughes Hallett (committee liaison and chair) is a professor of
mathematics at the University of Arizona; from 1991 to 1998 she was a Pro-
fessor of Practice in the Teaching of Mathematics at Harvard University.  She
was a principal investigator for the NSF–funded Bridge Calculus Consor-
tium.  She has served on committees for the Graduate Record Examination
and the Massachusetts state mathematics framework review process, and on
the Mathematics and Science Teacher Education Program (MASTEP) Advisory
Board, an NSF-funded program to improve teacher training in California.
Dr. Hughes Hallett served on NRC’s Committee on Information Technology
in Undergraduate Education.  A Fulbright Scholar, she received M.A. degrees
from both Harvard University and the University of Cambridge, England.

548
Appendix C
Topical Outline for AP Calculus AB
This outline of topics is intended to indicate the scope of the course, but
it is not necessarily the order in which the topics are to be taught. Teachers
may find that topics are best taught in different orders. (See the Teacher’s
Guide—AP Calculus [Kennedy, 1997] for sample syllabi.) Although the ex-
amination is based on the topics listed in the topical outline, teachers may
wish to enrich their courses with additional topics.
I. Functions, Graphs, and Limits
Analysis of graphs. With the aid of technology, graphs of functions are
often easy to produce. The emphasis is on the interplay between the geo-
metric and analytic information and on the use of calculus both to predict
and to explain the observed local and global behavior of a function.
Limits of functions (including one-sided limits).
• An intuitive understanding of the limiting process.
• Calculating limits using algebra.
• Estimating limits from graphs or tables of data.
Asymptotic and unbounded behavior.
• Understanding asymptotes in terms of graphical behavior.
• Describing asymptotic behavior in terms of limits involving infinity.
• Comparing relative magnitudes of functions and their rates of change.
(For example, contrasting exponential growth, polynomial growth, and loga-
rithmic growth.)
Continuity as a property of functions.
• An intuitive understanding of continuity. (Close values of the domain
lead to close values of the range.)

MATHEMATICS
549
• Understanding continuity in terms of limits.
• Geometric understanding of graphs of continuous functions (Inter-
mediate Value Theorem and Extreme Value Theorem).
II. Derivatives
Concept of the derivative.
• Derivative presented graphically, numerically, and analytically.
• Derivative interpreted as an instantaneous rate of change.
• Derivative defined as the limit of the difference quotient.
• Relationship between differentiability and continuity.
Derivative at a point.
• Slope of a curve at a point. Examples are emphasized, including
points at which there are vertical tangents and points at which there are no
tangents.
• Tangent line to a curve at a point and local linear approximation.
• Instantaneous rate of change as the limit of average rate of change.
• Approximate rate of change from graphs and tables of values.
Derivative as a function.
• Corresponding characteristics of graphs of ƒ and ƒ′.
• Relationship between the increasing and decreasing behavior of ƒ
and the sign of ƒ′.
• The Mean Value Theorem and its geometric consequences.
• Equations involving derivatives. Verbal descriptions are translated into
equations involving derivatives and vice versa.
Second derivatives.
• Corresponding characteristics of the graphs of ƒ, ƒ′, and ƒ″.
• Relationship between the concavity of ƒ and the sign of ƒ″.
• Points of inflection as places where concavity changes.
Applications of derivatives.
• Analysis of curves, including the notions of monotonicity and con-
cavity.
• Optimization, both absolute (global) and relative (local) extrema.
• Modeling rates of change, including related rates problems.
• Use of implicit differentiation to find the derivative of an inverse
function.
• Interpretation of the derivative as a rate of change in varied applied
contexts, including velocity, speed, and acceleration.

550
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
Computation of derivatives.
• Knowledge of derivatives of basic functions, including power, expo-
nential, logarithmic, trigonometric, and inverse trigonometric functions.
• Basic rules for the derivative of sums, products, and quotients of
functions.
• Chain rule and implicit differentiation.
III. Integrals
Interpretations and properties of definite integrals.
• Computation of Riemann sums using left, right, and midpoint evalu-
ation points.
• Definite integral as a limit of Riemann sums over equal subdivisions.
• Definite integral of the rate of change of a quantity over an interval
interpreted as the change of the quantity over the interval:
′
=
−
∫f
x dx
f b
f a
a
b
( )
( )
( )
• Basic properties of definite integrals. (Examples include additivity
and linearity.)
Applications of integrals. Appropriate integrals are used in a variety of
applications to model physical, social, or economic situations. Although only
a sampling of applications can be included in any specific course, students
should be able to adapt their knowledge and techniques to solve other
similar application problems. Whatever applications are chosen, the empha-
sis is on using the integral of a rate of change to give accumulated change or
using the method of setting up an approximating Riemann sum and repre-
senting its limit as a definite integral. To provide a common foundation,
specific applications should include finding the area of a region, the volume
of a solid with known cross sections, the average value of a function, and
the distance traveled by a particle along a line.
Fundamental theorem of calculus.
• Use of the Fundamental Theorem to evaluate definite integrals.
• Use of the Fundamental Theorem to represent a particular antideriva-
tive, and the analytical and graphical analysis of functions so defined.
Techniques of antidifferentiation.
• Antiderivatives following directly from derivatives of basic functions.
• Antiderivatives by substitution of variables (including change of lim-
its for definite integrals).

MATHEMATICS
551
Applications of antidifferentiation.
• Finding specific antiderivatives using initial conditions, including ap-
plications to motion along a line.
• Solving separable differential equations and using them in modeling.
In particular, studying the equation y′ = ky and exponential growth.
Numerical approximations to definite integrals. Use of Riemann and
trapezoidal sums to approximate definite integrals of functions represented
algebraically, goemetrically, and by tables of values.
SOURCE: College Entrance Examination Board (1999, pp. 6–9).

552
Appendix D
Topical Outline for AP Calculus BC
The topic outline for Calculus BC includes all Calculus AB topics. Addi-
tional topics are found in paragraphs that are marked with a plus sign (+) or
an asterisk (*). The additional topics can be taught anywhere in the course
that the instructor wishes. Some topics will naturally fit immediately after
their Calculus AB counterparts. Other topics may fit best after the comple-
tion of the Calculus AB topical outline. (See the Teacher’s Guide —AP Cal-
culus [Kennedy, 1997] for sample syllabi.) Although the examination is based
on the topics listed in the topical outline, teachers may wish to enrich their
courses with additional topics.
I. Functions, Graphs, and Limits
Analysis of graphs. With the aid of technology, graphs of functions are
often easy to produce. The emphasis is on the interplay between the geo-
metric and analytic information and on the use of calculus both to predict
and to explain the observed local and global behavior of a function.
Limits of functions (including one-sided limits).
• An intuitive understanding of the limiting process.
• Calculating limits using algebra.
• Estimating limits from graphs or tables of data.
Asymptotic and unbounded behavior.
• Understanding asymptotes in terms of graphical behavior.
• Describing asymptotic behavior in terms of limits involving infinity.
• Comparing relative magnitudes of functions and their rates of change.
(For example, contrasting exponential growth, polynomial growth, and loga-
rithmic growth.)

MATHEMATICS
553
Continuity as a property of functions.
• An intuitive understanding of continuity. (Close values of the domain
lead to close values of the range.)
• Understanding continuity in terms of limits.
• Geometric understanding of graphs of continuous functions (Inter-
mediate Value Theorem and Extreme Value Theorem).
*Parametric, polar, and vector functions. The analysis of planar curves
includes those given in parametric form, polar form, and vector form.
II. Derivatives
Concept of the derivative.
• Derivative presented geometrically, numerically, and analytically.
• Derivative interpreted as an instantaneous rate of change.
• Derivative defined as the limit of the difference quotient.
• Relationship between differentiability and continuity.
Derivative at a point.
• Slope of a curve at a point. Examples are emphasized, including
points at which there are vertical tangents and points at which there are no
tangents.
• Tangent line to a curve at a point and local linear approximation.
• Instantaneous rate of change as the limit of average rate of change.
• Approximate rate of change from graphs and tables of values.
Derivative as a function.
• Corresponding characteristics of graphs of ƒ and ƒ′.
• Relationship between the increasing and decreasing behavior of ƒ
and the sign of ƒ′.
• The Mean Value Theorem and its geometric consequences.
• Equations involving derivatives. Verbal descriptions are translated into
equations involving derivatives and vice versa.
Second derivatives.
• Corresponding characteristics of the graphs of ƒ, ƒ′, and ƒ″.
• Relationship between the concavity of ƒ and the sign of ƒ″.
• Points of inflection as places where concavity changes.
Applications of derivatives.
• Analysis of curves, including the notions of monotonicity and con-
cavity.

554
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
+ Analysis of planar curves given in parametric form, polar form, and
vector form, including velocity and acceleration vectors.
• Optimization, both absolute (global) and relative (local) extrema.
• Modeling rates of change, including related rates problems.
• Use of implicit differentiation to find the derivative of an inverse
function.
• Interpretation of the derivative as a rate of change in varied applied
contexts, including velocity, speed, and acceleration.
+ Geometric interpretation of differential equations via slope fields and
the relationship between slope fields and derivatives of implicitly defined
functions.
+ Numerical solution of differential equations using Euler’s method.
+ L’Hôpital’s Rule and its use in determining convergence of improper
integrals and series.
Computation of derivatives.
• Knowledge of derivatives of basic functions, including power, expo-
nential, logarithmic, trigonometric, and inverse trigonometric functions.
• Basic rules for the derivative of sums, products, and quotients of
functions.
• Chain rule and implicit differentiation.
+ Derivatives of parametric, polar, and vector functions.
III. Integrals
Interpretations and properties of definite integrals.
• Computation of Riemann sums using left, right, and midpoint evalu-
ation points.
• Definite integral as a limit of Riemann sums over equal subdivisions.
• Definite integral of the rate of change of a quantity over an interval
interpreted as the change of the quantity over the interval:
′
=
−
∫f
x dx
f b
f a
a
b
( )
( )
( )
• Basic properties of definite integrals. (Examples include additivity
and linearity.)
*Applications of integrals. Appropriate integrals are used in a variety of
applications to model physical, social, or economic situations. Although only
a sampling of applications can be included in any specific course, students
should be able to adapt their knowledge and techniques to solve other
similar application problems. Whatever applications are chosen, the empha-
sis is on using the integral of a rate of change to give accumulated change or

MATHEMATICS
555
using the method of setting up an approximating Riemann sum and repre-
senting its limit as a definite integral. To provide a common foundation,
specific applications should include finding the area of a region (including a
region bounded by polar curves), the volume of a solid with known cross
sections, the average value of a function, the distance traveled by a particle
along a line, and the length of a curve (including a curve given in parametric
form).
Fundamental theorem of calculus.
• Use of the Fundamental Theorem to evaluate definite integrals.
• Use of the Fundamental Theorem to represent a particular antideriva-
tive, and the analytical and graphical analysis of functions so defined.
Techniques of antidifferentiation.
• Antiderivatives following directly from derivatives of basic functions.
+ Antiderivatives by substitution of variables (including change of lim-
its for definite integrals), parts, and simple partial fractions (nonrepeating
linear factors only).
+ Improper integrals (as limits of definite integrals).
Applications of antidifferentiation.
• Finding specific antiderivatives using initial conditions, including ap-
plications to motion along a line.
• Solving separable differential equations and using them in modeling.
In particular, studying the equation y ′ = ky and exponential growth.
+ Solving logistic differential equations and using them in modeling.
Numerical approximations to definite integrals. Use of Riemann and
trapezoidal sums to approximate definite integrals of functions represented
algebraically, geometrically, and by tables of values.
*IV. Polynomial Approximations and Series
*Concept of series. A series is defined as a sequence of partial sums, and
convergence is defined in terms of the limit of the sequence of partial sums.
Technology can be used to explore convergence or divergence.
*Series of constants.
+ Motivating examples, including decimal expansion.
+ Geometric series with applications.
+ The harmonic series.
+ Alternating series with error bound.

556
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
+ Terms of series as areas of rectangles and their relationship to im-
proper integrals, including the integral test and its use in testing the conver-
gence of p-series.
+ The ratio test for convergence and divergence.
+ Comparing series to test for convergence or divergence.
*Taylor series.
+ Taylor polynomial approximation with graphical demonstration of
convergence. (For example, viewing graphs of various Taylor polynomials
of the sine function approximating the sine curve.)
+ Maclaurin series and the general Taylor series centered at x = a.
+ Maclaurin series for the functions ex, sin x, cos x, and 1 / (1 – x).
+ Formal manipulation of Taylor series and shortcuts to computing Taylor
series, including substitution, differentiation, antidifferentiation, and the for-
mation of new series from known series.
+ Functions defined by power series.
+ Radius and interval of convergence of power series.
+ Lagrange error bound for Taylor polynomials.
SOURCE: College Entrance Examination Board (1999a, 1999c, pp. 9–14).

557
Appendix E
Syllabus Details, IB Mathematics HL, Core
Calculus Material
SOURCE: International Baccalaureate Organisation (1998a, 1998c).

558
CONTENT PANEL REPORT

MATHEMATICS
559

560
CONTENT PANEL REPORT

561
Appendix F
Text of a Letter Endorsed by the Governing
Boards of the Mathematical Association
of America and the National Council of
Teachers of Mathematics Concerning
Calculus in the Secondary Schools
33
33This letter was extracted from Calculus for a New Century: A Pump, Not a Filter, A
National Colloquium, October 28–29, 1987 (MAA Notes, Number 8, edited by Lynn Arthur Steen
for the Board on Mathematical Sciences and the Mathematical Sciences Education Board of the
National Research Council, Mathematical Association of America, 1988).
TO:
Secondary School Mathematics Teachers
FROM:
The Mathematical Association of America
The National Council of Teachers of Mathematics
DATE:
September, 1986
RE:
Calculus in the Secondary School
Dear Colleague:
A single variable calculus course is now well established in the 12th
grade at many secondary schools, and the number of students enrolling is
increasing substantially each year. In this letter, we would like to discuss two
problems that have emerged.
The first problem concerns the relationship between the calculus course
offered in high school and the succeeding calculus courses in college. The

562
CONTENT PANEL REPORT
Mathematical Association of America (MAA) and the National Council of
Teachers of Mathematics (NCTM) recommend that the calculus course of-
fered in the 12th grade should be treated as a college-level course. The expec-
tation should be that a substantial majority of the students taking the course
will master the material and will not then repeat the subject upon entrance
to college. Too many students now view their 12th grade calculus course as
an introduction to calculus with the expectation of repeating the material in
college. This causes an undesirable attitude on the part of the student both
in secondary school and in college. In secondary school all too often a
student may feel “I don’t have to study this subject too seriously, because I
have already seen most of the ideas.” Such students typically have consider-
able difficulty later on as they proceed further into the subject matter.
MAA and NCTM recommend that all students taking calculus in second-
ary school who are performing satisfactorily in the course should expect to
place out of the comparable college calculus course. Therefore, to verify ap-
propriate placement upon entrance to college, students should either take
one of the Advanced Placement (AP) Calculus Examinations of the College
Board, or take a locally-administered college placement examination in cal-
culus. Satisfactory performance on an AP examination carries with it college
credit at most universities.
The second problem concerns preparation for the calculus course. MAA
and NCTM recommend that students who enroll in a calculus course in sec-
ondary school should have demonstrated mastery of algebra, geometry, trigo-
nometry, and coordinate geometry. This means that students should have at
least four full years of mathematical preparation beginning with the first
course in algebra. The advanced topics in algebra, trigonometry, analytic
geometry, complex numbers, and elementary functions studied in depth
during the fourth year of preparation are critically important for students’
latter courses in mathematics.
It is important to note that at present many well-prepared students take
calculus in the 12th grade, place out of the comparable course in college,
and do well in succeeding college courses. Currently, the two most common
methods for preparing students for a college-level calculus course in the
12th grade are to begin the first algebra course in the 8th grade or to require
students to take second year algebra and geometry concurrently. Students
beginning with algebra in the 9th grade, who take only one mathematics
course each year in secondary school, should not expect to take calculus in
the 12th grade. Instead, they should use the 12th grade to prepare them-
selves fully for calculus as freshmen in college.
We offer these recommendations in an attempt to strengthen the calcu-
lus program in secondary schools. They are not meant to discourage the

MATHEMATICS
563
teaching of college-level calculus in the 12th grade to strongly prepared
students.
LYNN ARTHUR STEEN
President, Mathematical Association of America
JOHN A. DOSSEY
President, National Council of Teachers of Mathematics

