www.allitebooks.com

Learning Adobe Connect 9
Successfully create and host web meetings, virtual 
classes, and webinars with Adobe Connect
Miloš Radovanović
Miloš Vučetić
BIRMINGHAM - MUMBAI
www.allitebooks.com

Learning Adobe Connect 9
Copyright © 2013 Packt Publishing
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, without the prior written 
permission of the publisher, except in the case of brief quotations embedded in 
critical articles or reviews.
Every effort has been made in the preparation of this book to ensure the accuracy 
of the information presented. However, the information contained in this book is 
sold without warranty, either express or implied. Neither the authors, nor Packt 
Publishing and its dealers and distributors will be held liable for any damages 
caused or alleged to be caused directly or indirectly by this book.
Packt Publishing has endeavored to provide trademark information about all of the 
companies and products mentioned in this book by the appropriate use of capitals. 
However, Packt Publishing cannot guarantee the accuracy of this information.
First published: April 2013
Production Reference: 1160413
Published by Packt Publishing Ltd.
Livery Place
35 Livery Street
Birmingham B3 2PB, UK.
ISBN 978-1-84969-416-2
www.packtpub.com
Cover Image by Laura Garton (laurahg123@hotmail.co.uk)
www.allitebooks.com

Credits
Authors
Miloš Radovanović
Miloš Vučetić
Reviewer
Laurent Janolin
Acquisition Editor
Wilson D'souza
Commissioning Editor
Priyanka S
Technical Editors
Kaustubh S. Mayekar
Devdutt Kulkarni
Copy Editors
Laxmi Subramanian
Brandt D'Mello
Alfida Paiva
Project Coordinator
Esha Thakker
Proofreader
Lawrence A. Herman
Indexer
Hemangini Bari
Production Coordinator
Aparna Bhagat
Nitesh Thakur
Cover Work
Aparna Bhagat
www.allitebooks.com

About the Authors
Miloš Radovanović is a software engineer at software powerhouse PSTech 
in Belgrade, Serbia, where he dedicates most of his time to working on projects 
related to the Adobe Connect application. His daily love affair involves passionate 
development of various Adobe Connect components on the backend side, with 
occasional road trips to the frontend. His engineering skills are extended across a 
multitude of exciting world-renowned platforms and technologies including Java, 
MySQL, Eclipse, Ant, Hibernate, Spring, and Flex. He began his life-changing 
journey with the Adobe Connect application as a quality automation engineer where 
he was exposed to all the marvelous application features.
He graduated from the University of Belgrade, with an M.Sc. in Applied 
Mathematics. In addition to being completely dedicated to his work, he loves soccer, 
snowboarding, and the incredible sounds of house music. He lives in Belgrade, 
Serbia, with his beloved wife, Nataša.
I would like to thank my greatest inspiration, Ksenija (my soon to 
be born baby daughter) and my wife, Nataša, who is very proud 
of me for completing this book. She was always there for me with 
unreserved support and encouragement while working on the book. 
 
Additionally, I would like to thank my parents for helping me 
overcome many difficulties and to endure many challenges in life. 
Last but not least, my special thanks goes to my friend and colleague 
Miloš Vučetić, who is the coauthor of this book and my everyday 
partner in the Adobe Connect engineering adventures, and to 
Gabriele Giganti, who helped tremendously with his advice, which 
helped my self-esteem in the moments when I had my doubts about 
completing this book.
www.allitebooks.com

Miloš Vučetić is a software engineer at software development company PSTech in 
Belgrade, Serbia. Miloš connected with the Adobe Connect application for the first 
time as a quality automation engineer, where his passion for in-depth code testing 
introduced him to the magnificent features of this great application. He continued his 
work on the application on the creative side by developing various components for 
Connect, along with a large bundle of third-party tools that integrate perfectly with 
Adobe Connect due to his never-ending quest for perfection and quality. His artistic 
soul continues to expand horizons, as he uses Flex and Java to continue his great 
works of programming and further enhance users' visual and functional experience 
with Connect. In his everyday enterprise adventures, he uses multiple technologies 
and platforms to improve every aspect of his development skills. He graduated from 
the University of Belgrade, with a B.A. in Information Systems and Technologies. He 
lives with his girlfriend, Zorica, in Belgrade, who occasionally lets him play cards 
with his friends.
My deepest gratitude goes to my parents, who supported me 
along my journey on every step of the way. I am very thankful to 
my girlfriend, who tolerated my long nights in front of this text 
and helped me to overcome doubts that I had when inspiration 
was nowhere to be found. Many thanks to my sister, who gave me 
endless support throughout this process. Special thanks for close 
collaboration and great friendship goes to my great friend and 
colleague Miloš Radovanović, along with our colleague Gabriele 
Giganti, who shared his wisdom and good sense of humor when it 
was much needed.
www.allitebooks.com

About the Reviewer
Laurent Janolin is the founder and Associate Director of Live Session.  
Web enthusiast, he loves working on how technology can help professionals to 
develop their competencies, get things done, and improve their business. With Live 
Session's team, Laurent helps companies to successfully deploy more than 1,000 
webinars and virtual training classrooms per year in the banking, pharmaceutical, 
and training industries.
To know more about Live Session, go to http://www.live-session.eu. To get in 
touch with Laurent, send an e-mail to laurent.janolin@live-session.fr.
www.allitebooks.com

www.PacktPub.com
Support files, eBooks, discount offers and more
You might want to visit www.PacktPub.com for support files and downloads related 
to your book. 
Did you know that Packt offers eBook versions of every book published, with PDF 
and ePub files available? You can upgrade to the eBook version at www.PacktPub.
com and as a print book customer, you are entitled to a discount on the eBook copy. 
Get in touch with us at service@packtpub.com for more details.
At www.PacktPub.com, you can also read a collection of free technical articles, sign 
up for a range of free newsletters and receive exclusive discounts and offers on Packt 
books and eBooks.
TM
http://PacktLib.PacktPub.com
Do you need instant solutions to your IT questions? PacktLib is Packt's online  
digital book library. Here, you can access, read and search across Packt's entire 
library of books.
Why Subscribe?
•	
Fully searchable across every book published by Packt
•	
Copy and paste, print and bookmark content
•	
On demand and accessible via web browser
Free Access for Packt account holders
If you have an account with Packt at www.PacktPub.com, you can use this to access 
PacktLib today and view nine entirely free books. Simply use your login credentials 
for immediate access.
www.allitebooks.com

www.allitebooks.com

Table of Contents
Preface	
1
Chapter 1: Starting with Adobe Connect Application	
7
The basics of Connect meetings	
8
Logging to the Connect application	
8
The user interface of the Connect application	
10
The Main Menu area	
11
The Shortcut Menu area	
13
The Main area	
13
Summary	
14
Chapter 2: Creating an Adobe Connect Meeting Room	
15
Meeting room roles	
15
The Meeting Management page	
16
Shared Meeting	
17
User Meetings	
18
My Meetings	
18
Meeting Dashboard	
18
The Enter Meeting Information page	
20
The Meeting Information section	
20
The Select Participants page	
22
Example 1 – granting administrators group participant permission	
23
Example 2 – granting presenter permission to a specific user	
24
The Send Invitations page	
24
The user interface of the Send Invitations page	
25
Summary	
26
Chapter 3: Managing Adobe Connect Meeting Room	
27
The Meeting Information page	
27
The Edit Information page	
29
www.allitebooks.com

Table of Contents
[ ii ]
The Edit Participants page	
30
Example 1 – changing roles	
30
Example 2 – removing a user	
31
Example 3 – adding a specific user	
31
The Meeting Invitations page	
31
The Uploaded Content page	
32
The Meeting Recordings page	
34
The Meeting Reports page	
35
Summary	
36
Chapter 4: Customizing the Viewing Experience	
37
Meeting room templates	
37
Information preserved in a template	
39
Creating a meeting room template	
40
Converting a meeting room into a template	
41
Applying a template to a new meeting	
43
Customizing the login page, central page, and meeting appearance	
43
How to customize the central page	
44
How to customize the login page	
45
How to customize the meeting room look	
46
Summary	
47
Chapter 5: The Content Library	
49
Working with library files and folders	
49
The supported file types in the Content library	
51
Uploading content to the Content library	
52
Viewing content in the Content library	
53
Permission settings in the Content library	
55
Summary	
56
Chapter 6: Meeting Room Overview	
57
Meeting room main menu navigation features	
57
Meeting	
58
Layout	
60
Pods	
61
Audio	
61
Keyboard shortcuts and navigating between pods	
62
Shortcuts for audio and recordings	
63
Shortcuts for attendee management	
63
Shortcuts for dialog boxes	
63

Table of Contents
[ iii ]
Managing attendees through the Attendees pod	
64
Example 1 – changing user roles	
65
Example 2 – removing participants	
66
Example 3 – editing participant names	
66
Example 4 – granting enhanced participant rights	
67
Example 5 – changing meeting attendee status	
67
Using Presenter Only Area	
68
Using Prepare Mode	
69
Summary	
69
Chapter 7: Sharing Presentations	
71
The Share pod	
71
Presentation toolbar options	
74
Navigation through presentations	
76
Summary	
77
Chapter 8: Using a Whiteboard Feature in the Meeting Room	
79
Create and display a whiteboard	
79
Standalone whiteboard	
80
Adding an overlay whiteboard in a share pod	
81
Whiteboard drawing tools	
81
The Shapes tool	
82
The Selection tool	
82
The Pencil tool	
82
The Text tool	
83
The Delete Selected button	
83
The Undo button	
83
The Redo button	
83
Summary	
83
Chapter 9: Using Screen Sharing	
85
Starting screen sharing	
85
Desktop sharing	
86
Changing control of a shared screen	
87
Applications and window sharing	
88
Systray sharing options	
89
Share pod preferences	
90
Summary	
90
Chapter 10: Customizing Pod Display	
91
The Pods menu description	
91
The pod's Preferences dialog	
92
Managing pods	
93
Organize pods	
94
Summary	
95

Table of Contents
[ iv ]
Chapter 11: Customizing and Saving Layouts	
97
Creating layouts	
97
Managing layouts	
99
Changing and managing layouts during a meeting	
100
Specifying layout bar options	
101
Summary	
101
Chapter 12: Recording Adobe Connect Meetings	
103
Recording a meeting	
103
Managing meeting recordings	
104
Deleting recordings	
105
Moving recordings	
105
Enabling recordings for public viewing	
106
Editing recording information	
106
Playing back a recorded meeting	
107
Editing recorded meeting	
108
Creating an offline recording	
109
Summary	
110
Chapter 13: Sharing Files, Polls, and Web Links	
111
The file share pod	
111
Uploading a file	
113
Downloading a file	
113
Removing a file	
114
Renaming a file	
115
The poll pod	
115
Creating a poll	
117
Showing voting results	
118
Editing polls	
118
The web links pod	
118
Adding link	
120
Displaying a web page	
120
Renaming a link or changing a link's URL	
121
Removing a link	
121
Summary	
121
Chapter 14: Managing Text Messages and Questions	
123
Chat pod	
123
Notes pod	
126
Q&A pod	
128
Summary	
131

Table of Contents
[ v ]
Chapter 15: Using Audio and Video	
133
Using audio conferencing	
133
Using integrated adapters	
134
Creating and using an audio profile	
134
Editing or deleting an audio profile	
135
Associating an audio profile with a meeting	
136
Starting an audio conference	
136
Starting meeting audio	
136
Joining an audio conference	
138
Managing audio within meetings	
138
Adjusting audio quality	
140
Using video pods	
143
Sharing a video	
144
Summary	
145
Chapter 16: Using Breakout Rooms	
147
Defining breakout rooms and assigning members	
148
Beginning a breakout session	
150
Communication within breakout session	
150
Ending a breakout session	
152
Sharing breakout room content in the main room	
152
Reopening breakout rooms	
153
Summary	
153
Index	
155


Preface
Modern world organizations require effective collaboration in order to improve 
productivity. Today we live in an era of companies that are spread across different 
continents, while there is an ever-increasing need to effectively share information  
in real time and to discuss a multitude of ideas, no matter where we are.
Conferencing tools enable users to increase their productivity and improve 
communication with their functionalities that include interactive experiences 
supported by multiple features. One of the most advanced conferencing tools and 
the market leader today is Adobe Connect. With its features that include audio 
and video, various sharing capabilities, meeting recordings, advanced users 
management, and file sharing and transferring, it is a great tool that will help you 
organize and present your content in the most efficient manner while capturing 
audience with rich and engaging presentations.
What this book covers
Chapter 1, Starting With Adobe Connect Application, will cover the basics of the  
Adobe Connect 9 application, after which you will be able to navigate through  
the application.
Chapter 2, Creating an Adobe Connect Meeting Room, will teach us how to create 
meeting room in the application, to manage meeting attendees, and to send 
invitations for meetings.
Chapter 3, Managing Adobe Connect Meeting Room, will explain how to edit various 
settings for existing meetings.
Chapter 4, Customizing the Viewing Experience, will provide guidelines on how to 
create meeting room templates and customize the Connect application.
Chapter 5, The Content Library, will discuss how to use the Content library features.

Preface
[ 2 ]
Chapter 6, Meeting Room Overview, will walk us through the meeting room features 
and its functionalities.
Chapter 7, Sharing Presentations, will walk us through the share pod and its  
basic functionalities.
Chapter 8, Using a Whiteboard Feature in the Meeting Room, will walk us through the 
whiteboard features.
Chapter 9, Using Screen Sharing, will walk us through the screen sharing options for 
the share pod. After reading this chapter you will be able to share your desktop, 
applications, and windows.
Chapter 10, Customizing Pod Display, will acquaint us with the pod menu description, 
pod preferences, and how to manage pods.
Chapter 11, Customizing and Saving Layouts, will provide guidelines on how to create 
and manage meeting room layouts.
Chapter 12, Recording Adobe Connect Meetings, will teach us how to record and manage 
meetings.
Chapter 13, Sharing Files, Polls, and Web Links, will provide guidelines on how to use 
File Share Pod, Poll Pod and Web Links Pod.
Chapter 14, Managing Text Messages and Questions, will walk us through the use of the 
Chat Pod, the Notes Pod, and the Q &A Pod.
Chapter 15, Using Audio and Video, will discuss how to use the audio and video 
conferencing features of Adobe Connect.
Chapter 16, Using Breakout Rooms, will explain how to use breakout rooms and  
their features.
Chapter 17, Integrating With Microsoft Outlook and Other Applications, is not present 
in the book but is available as a free download from the following link: http://
www.packtpub.com/sites/default/files/downloads/Integrating_With_
Microsoft_Outlook_and_Other_Applications.pdf. This will guide us on how  
to use the external Connect applications, such as Connect Outlook Add-in and 
Connect Add-in for Microsoft Lync.
Chapter 18, Creating and Managing Adobe Connect Events, is not present in the book but 
is available as a free download from the following link: http://www.packtpub.com/
sites/default/files/downloads/Creating_and_Managing_Adobe_Connect_
Events.pdf. This will explain how to create and manage events.

Preface
[ 3 ]
What you need for this book
You can register for a free Adobe Connect trial account, and in order to successfully 
use a meeting room, you must have an Internet connection, any modern browser 
(for example, Mozilla Firefox, Google Chrome, or Internet Explorer), and an installed 
version of Flash Player. Minimum requirements are Flash 10.1 for Adobe Connect 8 
and 10.3 for Adobe Connect 9.
Who this book is for
This book is for users who would like to start utilizing the Adobe Connect 
application for web meetings, eLearning, and Webinars, and for those who are 
looking to learn Connect and get up to speed with using all the features that will 
help them to enable instant access to their web conferences from any mobile device 
or desktop, to improve collaboration while engaging meeting participants with great 
video experience and rich multimedia features. Readers of this book will be able to 
improve their web conferencing experiences by driving more efficient meetings and 
much better collaboration for all participants.
Conventions
In this book, you will find a number of styles of text that distinguish between 
different kinds of information. Here are some examples of these styles, and an 
explanation of their meaning.
Code words in text are shown as follows: "Depending on Connect settings, it might 
be the case that initially the Shared Meetings folder is only available to those users 
with Admin or Meeting Host role."
New terms and important words are shown in bold. Words that you see on the 
screen, in menus or dialog boxes for example, appear in the text like this: "On  
the right-hand side of the Main Menu bar, there is a Search text field for quick 
search functionality".
Warnings or important notes appear in a box like this.
Tips and tricks appear like this.

Preface
[ 4 ]
Reader feedback
Feedback from our readers is always welcome. Let us know what you think about 
this book—what you liked or may have disliked. Reader feedback is important for us 
to develop titles that you really get the most out of.
To send us general feedback, simply send an e-mail to feedback@packtpub.com, 
and mention the book title via the subject of your message.
If there is a topic that you have expertise in and you are interested in either writing 
or contributing to a book, see our author guide on www.packtpub.com/authors.
Customer support
Now that you are the proud owner of a Packt book, we have a number of things to 
help you to get the most from your purchase.
Errata
Although we have taken every care to ensure the accuracy of our content, mistakes 
do happen. If you find a mistake in one of our books—maybe a mistake in the text or 
the code—we would be grateful if you would report this to us. By doing so, you can 
save other readers from frustration and help us improve subsequent versions of this 
book. If you find any errata, please report them by visiting http://www.packtpub.
com/submit-errata, selecting your book, clicking on the errata submission form link, 
and entering the details of your errata. Once your errata are verified, your submission 
will be accepted and the errata will be uploaded on our website, or added to any list of 
existing errata, under the Errata section of that title. Any existing errata can be viewed 
by selecting your title from http://www.packtpub.com/support.

Preface
[ 5 ]
Piracy
Piracy of copyright material on the Internet is an ongoing problem across all media. 
At Packt, we take the protection of our copyright and licenses very seriously. If you 
come across any illegal copies of our works, in any form, on the Internet, please 
provide us with the location address or website name immediately so that we can 
pursue a remedy.
Please contact us at copyright@packtpub.com with a link to the suspected  
pirated material.
We appreciate your help in protecting our authors, and our ability to bring you 
valuable content.
Questions
You can contact us at questions@packtpub.com if you are having a problem with 
any aspect of the book, and we will do our best to address it.
www.allitebooks.com


Starting with Adobe  
Connect Application
Adobe Connect is a flash-powered platform, and depending upon licensing and 
permissions within your organization, you can create web meetings, e-learning 
courses, and virtual classrooms and webinars. So we can say that Adobe Connect 
encompasses three major components:
•	
Adobe Connect meetings
•	
Adobe Connect trainings
•	
Adobe Connect events
In this chapter, you will learn the following:
•	
Basics of Connect meetings feature
•	
How to log in to the Connect application
•	
Connect home page user interface
In order to help run and manage those features, Content Management and 
Administration features are provided. Also, reporting is another key element of 
Adobe Connect.
The central topic of this book will be the Adobe Connect meeting feature. Of course, 
we will cover most of the Content Management feature, as well as some of Basic 
Event Management features.
In this chapter, you will learn the basics of the Adobe Connect application. After this 
chapter, you will be ready to enter the application and navigate through different 
pages of the Connect.

Starting with Adobe Connect Application
[ 8 ]
The basics of Connect meetings
Adobe Connect Meeting can be best described as an online live conference software 
for multiple users. It is a web-based application that you can use to run an online 
conference meeting. The meeting room interface is combined from various 
components and a number of display containers that are named pods. By using the 
pods functionalities, meeting room provides several features for multiple users who 
play the role of meeting attendees.
Users have the ability to chat, broadcast live video and audio, share files, share 
computer screens, or use other interactive functionalities while using the meeting 
room. You will learn how to use all of those functionalities in the later chapters of 
this book.
In addition to the predefined default layouts, you can customize your own meeting 
room according to your needs. This feature will be explained in detail in Chapter 10, 
Customizing Pod Display.
Every meeting room that is created in the application is assigned its own URL 
address, and it is available until you delete it. You can access your meeting by 
clicking on the assigned URL, and you can use the same URL address to enter 
created meeting rooms several times. In Chapter 2, Creating an Adobe Connect Meeting 
Room and Chapter 3, Managing Adobe Connect Meeting Room, you will learn how to 
create and manage your own meeting rooms.
Based upon your assigned role, you will have different capabilities in a meeting. 
In order to successfully use meeting rooms, you must have an Internet connection, 
any modern browser (for example, Mozilla Firefox, Google Chrome, or Internet 
Explorer), and an installed version of Flash Player. Minimum requirement is Flash 
10.1 for AC8 and 10.3 for AC9.
Logging in to the Connect application
By entering the URL address of your Connect instance, you will be presented with 
the login screen. On this page, you will need to enter your credentials in the form of 
an e-mail address (usually your e-mail address or any other login information your 
administrator provided you with) and password provided to you by your system 
administrator for the specific instance of Adobe Connect. Please see the following 
screenshot for the example of an application login screen. Note that you will be able 
to customize this login page with your own logo. We will see this in the Customizing 
Login Page, Central Page, and Meeting Appearance section of Chapter 4, Customizing the 
Viewing Experience.

Chapter 1
[ 9 ]
In addition to the fields provided for username and password on this page, you will 
find a link for password reset (Forgot your password?). This link can be used in case 
you forgot your password. In the bottom-left corner of the application, you will find 
the Help link that will redirect you to Adobe Connect Help page for detailed help 
of application functionalities. In case you enter incorrect credentials, the application 
will warn you and display an error message, Invalid user name or password. Please 
try again. Refer to the following screenshot:

Starting with Adobe Connect Application
[ 10 ]
In case you have forgotten your password, you can click on the Forgot your 
password? link, which will present you with the confirmation page for changing 
your password. Refer to the following screenshot:
The confirmation page will appear like the following screenshot:
The user interface of the Connect 
application
The user interface of the Home page can be divided into three areas:
•	
The Main Menu area
•	
The Shortcut area
•	
The Main area

Chapter 1
[ 11 ]
These areas are marked in the following screenshot:
The Main Menu area
In the Home page of Main Menu, you will find several tabs that are used to navigate 
through the Adobe Connect application. Users can access each of these tabs based 
on their group membership privileges. There are tabs for the Content Management, 
Meeting Management, Event Management, Training Management, Reports, and 
Administration pages. Each of these pages is used to create, edit, and delete different 
Connect entities (meetings, trainings, contents, and events). Generally, group 
membership is defined by the system administrator.

Starting with Adobe Connect Application
[ 12 ]
If you try to access any tab for which you don't have permissions, the application 
will prompt you with a Not Authorized alert page.
If you are the administrator, either you did not log in as an administrator user, or 
you may want to check the users and groups in the Administration panel to make 
sure you're a member of the right group.
On the right-hand side of the Main Menu bar, there is a Search text field for quick 
search functionality. In addition to quick search, you will find the Search link. Based 
on the search parameters and optional filters, when you click on the Go button, the 
application will take you to the Advance Search page. The search functionality helps 
you to find any Connect entity (meeting, training, content, event, and so on) by using 
advanced criteria. Refer to the following screenshot:
In the upper-right corner, there are three additional links:
•	
My Profile: This link is used to display information about currently logged  
in users
•	
Help: This link will redirect you to the Adobe Online Help page
Please note that this is different from the help you can access from the login 
page; this one is more like a user guide
•	
Logout: This link will log you out from the application

Chapter 1
[ 13 ]
The Shortcut Menu area
In the Shortcut area, marked on the screenshot, in the beginning of this section, 
there are shortcuts that will help you to create meetings, content, or any other 
entity allowed in Connect. Shortcut buttons are enabled for creating entities based 
on the group membership privileges of the user that is currently logged in to the 
application. The screenshot shows an example of a user who is only part of the 
Meeting Host group. Based on his group membership, the application will display 
only shortcuts specific for creating meetings and contents.
The Main area
The Main area menu shown in the next screenshot provides you with information 
about all entities (meetings and trainings) that you are part of. On the left-hand side 
of this area is the list of all meetings in which you are participating.
Here you can view your role in all the listed meetings and the start time of the 
meeting. Next to the meeting name, there is an Open button that is used to quick 
launch the selected meeting.
On the right-hand side of the Main area, you will find detailed information for the 
selected meeting. You can also access a specific meeting by clicking on the URL 
address of the selected meeting.

Starting with Adobe Connect Application
[ 14 ]
By clicking on the My Calendar tab, you will be presented with the calendar view for 
all events that you are participating in as shown in the following screenshot:
Summary
In this chapter, we have gone through some basic information regarding Adobe 
Connect. Now you know how to log in to Connect and how to navigate through 
the user interface of the application. We also talked about the Home page, and 
have described most of the functionalities that this page provides. Now you  
are able to go to the Meeting Creation page using Main Menu or using the 
shortcut button for creating meetings. In the next chapter, we will go through  
the meeting-creation process.

Creating an Adobe  
Connect Meeting Room
This chapter will demonstrate to the user how to successfully create a meeting room 
in the Adobe Connect application. By the end of this chapter, the user will be able to 
create a meeting room, manage meeting attendees, and create and send invitations in 
the Adobe Connect application.
In this chapter, you will learn the following:
•	
Meeting room roles
•	
The Meeting Management page
•	
The Enter Meeting Information page
•	
The Participants Selection page
•	
The Send Invitations page
Meeting room roles
Before we explain how to create a meeting room, we should familiarize ourselves 
with user roles that exist inside the meeting room. Users inside the meeting room  
are divided into four roles:
•	
Host: This is the role with maximum permissions in the meeting room role 
hierarchy. Users assigned with the host role can create meetings, invite 
participants, share content, and create templates and layouts. In addition to 
the listed capabilities, the host can change participants' roles, give enhanced 
rights to participants on certain pods, move other users to breakout rooms, 
start audio conference, stop audio conferences, use prepare mode, use 
presenter mode, and record a meeting.
www.allitebooks.com

Creating an Adobe Connect Meeting Room
[ 16 ]
•	
Presenter: This is the role next to the host in the role hierarchy. Users with 
presenter rights can share their screen, meeting content or content that is 
already loaded inside Content Library, as well as their presentations or image 
files. These users can use presenter and prepare mode as well. On the other 
hand, promoting or devoting other users, moving other users to breakout 
rooms, and creating layouts are some of the options that are not available to 
the presenter role.
•	
Participants: These are registered Connect users who join specific meetings. 
They can watch what are the users with presenter or host privileges sharing, 
use the chat pod, and mute and un-mute speakers on their computers. If 
participants join an audio conference, they will hear the audio broadcast  
as well.
•	
Guest: There is no difference between participants and guest role when users 
already join a meeting. Guests will have exactly the same privileges and 
features available as participants. The main difference is that the guest users 
can join a meeting room only by entering their alias names while they are 
joining the meeting.
Depending on your role, certain icons will be associated with your name in the 
attendees pod.
You don't have to worry because you're not completely familiar with features tied 
to different roles that we mentioned earlier. We will explain them in detail in further 
chapters of this book.
The Meeting Management page
In the previous chapter, we demonstrated how to log in to the Adobe Connect 
application. When you click on the Meetings tab in the main menu navigation bar of 
the application, you will be presented with the Meeting Management page.

Chapter 2
[ 17 ]
On the Meeting Management page, you will find several options that will help you to 
create wanted meetings. When selected, the Meetings tab will display an additional 
navigation bar, where you will be provided with links for the following options:
•	
Shared Meetings
•	
User Meetings
•	
My Meetings
•	
Meeting Dashboard
Shared Meeting
When you click on the Shared Meetings item link, you will be able to see the list of 
all the meetings that are shared with you. Shared meetings are those meetings that 
can be created by registered Connect users. By registered users, we mean users who 
can log in to the Connect application with its assigned login credentials. The shared 
meetings list will display information about your meetings that you created, as well 
as shared meetings that are created by other registered users. In the shared meeting 
list, users will also find the shared templates. Templates are very useful since they 
help to create new meetings with standard layouts (one for training, one for project 
management, one for a specific customer meeting, and so on) without the risk that 
other users will change the layout (Chapter 4, Customizing the Viewing Experience will 
give you more info regarding templates). Refer to the following screenshot:
In the upper section (except already explained), in selected Meeting List, you will 
additionally find two very useful links: Edit Information and Set Permissions. By 
using these links, it is possible to rename the folder, add a detailed description, or 
change the access rights for this folder (for example, you can grant other users the 
ability to see what is in this folder). Depending on the Connect settings, it might be 
the case that initially the Shared Meetings folder is only available to those users 
with Admin or Meeting Host role.

Creating an Adobe Connect Meeting Room
[ 18 ]
User Meetings
By clicking on the User Meetings link, logged in users with administrative privileges 
have the ability to see a list of folders that belong to all users in the Adobe Connect 
application, as shown in the following screenshot:
When an administrator clicks on any of the listed folders, another page is opened. This 
page contains links to all personal meetings previously created by the selected user.
When any of the provided links for meetings are selected, the Meeting Information 
page for the selected meeting will be displayed. The Meeting Information page 
contains the Enter Meeting Room button that enables users to join a preferred 
meeting conference.
Users who do not have administrative privileges cannot access the User  
Meetings page.
If they attempt to access the page, they will be prompted with the message,  
Not Authorized. You do not have permission to access this item.
My Meetings
When you click on the My Meetings link, a new page is opened. This page will 
display all meetings for which you are in the Meeting Host role. You can see the 
detailed meeting information page or enter any of the provided meeting rooms by 
selecting displayed links for these functionalities.
Meeting Dashboard
By selecting the Meeting Dashboard link, users are offered reports that provide 
detailed information about certain Adobe Connect Meeting categories. Generally, 
there are three reports available on this page:
•	
Most Active Meetings Over Last 30 Days
•	
Most Participant Meetings Over Last 30 Days
•	
Most Viewed Recordings over Last 30 Days

Chapter 2
[ 19 ]
When users create meetings, they can be associated with either My Meetings or 
Shared Meetings group. In the bottom part of the Meeting Management page, you 
will find five buttons displayed:
•	
New Meeting
•	
New Folder
•	
Delete
•	
Up One Level
•	
Move
We will describe the Move button functionality in more detail in Chapter 4, 
Customizing the Viewing Experience.
The Delete button is used when users need to delete a particular meeting. In order 
to delete any meeting, the user needs to select specific meetings by clicking on the 
checkbox to the left-hand side of the meeting name. Once when the meeting is 
selected, click on the Delete button to permanently remove the meeting from the 
application, as shown in the following screenshot:
The New Folder button is used to create a new folder inside the meeting list. Users 
can create as many folders as they need in order to organize meetings according to 
their logical needs. For example, you can create two folders with names Private and 
Business, and later on when you learn how to create meetings, you can add them in 
these newly created folders.
The Up One Level button will take the user back to the previous menu item.
Now we can discuss our main topic of interest for this chapter and that is the New 
Meeting button. By clicking on this button, you will start the Meeting Creation 
wizard. Once you start the wizard, the Enter Meeting Information page will open.

Creating an Adobe Connect Meeting Room
[ 20 ]
The Enter Meeting Information page
The Meeting Creation wizard consists of three pages. The first page of the wizard 
is the Enter Meeting Information page. This page consists of two sections; the 
upper section of the page is titled Meeting Information, and the lower section 
is titled Audio Conference Settings. The Audio Conference Settings section is 
optional, and we will skip this part until Chapter 15, where we will write about 
using audio and video in Adobe Connect. At the bottom of the Enter Meeting 
Information page, you will find the Cancel, Previous, Next, and Finish buttons.
The Meeting Information section
In the Meeting Information section, the user should enter details about the meeting 
that is going to be created. Please note that the red asterisk indicates the required 
mandatory fields as shown in the previous screenshot. Two fields that are mandatory 
for meeting creation are Language and Name. Out of those two fields, the English 
language is selected as a default language in the Language drop-down list. The user 
will have to fill out only one mandatory field on this form, so it makes it very easy 
to create a new meeting. To summarize things, in order to create a new meeting at a 
very low level, the user will need to execute the next three operations:
1.	 Hit the New Meeting button.
2.	 Type in the name of the meeting.
3.	 Hit the Finish button at the bottom of the page.

Chapter 2
[ 21 ]
Beside these mandatory fields, the user can include more info while creating a 
meeting. In order to do so, the user will need to fill the following optional data:
•	
Custom URL: As a meeting host, we recommend that you fill out the Custom 
URL text field, so you will be able to track down your meetings easier, 
and it will also be much more easier for your participants to type in your 
meeting URL, if needed. If you do so, the URL for the meeting might look 
like http://meet95934026.adobeconnect.com/CookBook. Otherwise, once 
when you click on the Finish button, the application will autogenerate your 
meeting URL, which will result in a URL similar to http://meet95934026.
adobeconnect.com/r37y6n43npi.
Be careful about how you create a meeting since  the URL is the only field 
that cannot be modified once a meeting is created. You can change the 
date, the description, even the title of the meeting but not the URL. So, for 
example, if you misspell the custom URL field, you'll have to delete it and 
create your meeting again.
•	
Summary: Here, the user can enter comments (limited to 4,000 characters). 
Information entered in this field is sent in the e-mail invitation for the 
meeting.
•	
Start Time: Use this field when you want to specify the start time of  
a meeting. Here, you can define the date, month, year, and exact start  
time of the meeting.
•	
Duration: This field is used in order to enter the planned duration time for  
the meeting by entering values for hours and minutes.
•	
Select Template: You can select a template for the meeting from the  
drop-down list. For the purpose of this chapter, we will pick the Default 
meeting template, since in Chapter 4, Customizing the Viewing Experience,  
we will give you a detailed explanation on templates.
•	
Access: This field offers three radio button options that the user can select:
°°
Only registered users may enter the room (guest access is blocked): 
By selecting this option once when user enters the meeting URL 
in any browser, the login page will appear. The only way to join 
the meeting will be to enter the username and password in the 
appropriate fields on the login page. The meeting host will need to 
accept the incoming users.

Creating an Adobe Connect Meeting Room
[ 22 ]
°°
Only registered users and accepted guests may enter the room: 
In case this option is selected once when login page is displayed, 
the user will have to select an option whether to join a meeting as 
a registered user by entering the username and password or as a 
guest. To join a meeting as a guest, select the Enter as a Guest radio 
button option. The only additional info that needs to be provided is 
the guest user's name that will be displayed in the attendees pod. The 
meeting host will also need to accept the incoming users.
°°
Anyone who has the URL for the meeting can enter the room: This 
option enables users to join a meeting as a guest or registered user, 
but in difference to the previous option, they will automatically join a 
meeting without the need for hosts to accept them.
Important notice here is that all these non-mandatory fields are only designed 
to share info with the participants and to get organized better within Connect. 
However, they have no impact on when one can open a meeting room. For instance, 
setting up the date field on January 7, 2013 will not block the user from opening a 
meeting room on January 8, 2013. Also, the host can change access behavior within 
a meeting room itself. This option can be useful, if, for example, you have originally 
blocked guest access and you need a participant who does not have an account on 
your platform to join a meeting. A detailed explanation on how this can be done 
from within a meeting is explained in Chapter 6, Meeting Room Overview.
In order to access the second page of the Meeting Creation wizard, the user needs to 
click on the Next button. Once you click on the Next button, the Select Participants 
page will be loaded.
The Select Participants page
This page is the second step in creating a meeting with the help of the Meeting 
Creation wizard. Refer to the following screenshot:

Chapter 2
[ 23 ]
On the left-hand side of the window, you will find different users and groups that 
can be added by default as participants in a meeting. If you include a particular 
group, all users registered within that group in the Connect application will be able 
to join the meeting by entering the meeting URL and login credentials. If you decide 
to select a specific user listed in the Available Users and Groups list on the left-hand 
side of the window, you will grant meeting access rights only for the selected user.
Now that you are familiar with the process of including meeting participants, 
you can manage participant roles in the meeting room. We will demonstrate two 
examples that will explain how to include all administrators as meeting participants 
and how to include a specific user as a presenter in a meeting.
Example 1 – granting administrators group 
participant permission
Follow the given steps:
1.	 Click on the Administrators group in the Available Users and Groups table 
on the left-hand side.
2.	 Click on the Add button.
3.	 The Administrators group will now be shown in the Current Participants 
for Cookbook table on the right-hand side of the window. By examining the 
list of participants, you can verify that all members of the Administrators 
group will be granted with participant permission.

Creating an Adobe Connect Meeting Room
[ 24 ]
Example 2 – granting presenter permission to a 
specific user
Follow the given steps:
1.	 Click on any username in the Available Users and Groups table on the  
left-hand side.
2.	 Click on the Add button.
3.	 The user will now be shown in the Current Participants for Cookbook table 
on the right-hand side of the window with participant permission.
4.	 Select the same user in the Current Participants for Cookbook table on the 
right-hand side of the window.
5.	 Click on the Permission button.
6.	 Select the Presenter option from the menu.
7.	 Note that the user in the Current Participants for Cookbook table on the 
right-hand side is now granted with presenter permission.
After explaining how to include different users and manage their roles in your 
meeting, we can proceed with the third and final step for meeting creation by using 
the Meeting Creation wizard.
The Send Invitations page
Features implemented on this page allow you to send e-mail invitations to 
your meeting invitees. On this page, you can find different options that allow 
modifications of your e-mail notification.

Chapter 2
[ 25 ]
The user interface of the Send  
Invitations page
The Send E-Mail Invitations radio button defines whether you want to send 
invitations or not. We will mention here that by default the Do Not Send Invitations 
option is active, so there is no risk that you will send an invitation if you do not want 
to. If you select the Send Invitations option, you have to select recipients from the 
drop-down list next to To: label. The following are the options for the recipients list:
•	
All hosts, Presenters and Participants
•	
Host only
•	
Presenters only
•	
Participants only
By selecting any of the defined groups, the users belonging to these groups will 
receive e-mail invitations. Under the previous radio button, there is a Subject: text 
field. You can enter any text here, which will be used as an e-mail subject when the 
meeting invitation is sent.
Click on the iCal checkbox in case you want to include the Microsoft Outlook calendar 
appointment. In the Message Body comment box section, the application will 
generate detailed meeting information for recipients. The Message Body box contains 
the meeting name, dedicated meeting URL, start time, end time, and customized 
description of the meeting in the summary part of the Message Body box.
By completing this page, we reviewed all of the features that are implemented on 
the Send Invitation page and all of the pages of the Meeting Creation wizard. The 
only thing that is left over now is to click on the Finish button in order to create a 
meeting. After clicking on the Finish button, you will be redirected to the Meeting 
Information page. On this page, you can click on the meeting URL or on the Enter 
Meeting Room button in order to join the meeting. 
www.allitebooks.com

Creating an Adobe Connect Meeting Room
[ 26 ]
By now, your default meeting room will appear as shown in the following screenshot:
Congratulations! You have successfully created and joined your first Adobe Connect 
meeting room.
Summary
In this chapter, we have gone through the description of a Meeting Management 
page, Enter Meeting Information page, and information on how to manage meeting 
participants. Now you will be able to create a meeting room in the Adobe Connect 
application, manage your meeting participants, and send e-mail invitations to them. 
The next chapter will give you a detailed description of the Meeting Information 
page and teach you how to update and edit the meeting info.

Managing Adobe Connect 
Meeting Room
In the previous chapter, you learned how to create and join the Adobe Connect 
meeting. In addition to the information provided in the previous chapters, by the end 
of this chapter, you will master all functionalities on how to edit different settings for 
already existing meetings.
In this chapter we will cover the following topics:
•	
The Meeting information page
•	
The Managing Edit information page
•	
The Managing Edit participants page
•	
The Managing Invitations page
•	
The Managing Uploaded content page
•	
The Managing Reports page
•	
The Managing Recordings page
The Meeting Information page
At the very end of the previous chapter, we mentioned the existence of the Meeting 
Information page. In order to get to this page, you will first need to navigate to the 
Meeting List page by following these steps:
1.	 Log in to the Connect application.
2.	 Click on the Meetings tab in the Home Page main menu.

Managing Adobe Connect Meeting Room
[ 28 ]
When you access the Meetings page, the My Meetings link is opened by default 
and a view is set on the Meeting List tab. You will find the meeting created in the 
previous chapter that is listed on this page as shown in the following screenshot:
By clicking on the Cookbook Meeting option in the Name column (marked with 
a red outline), you will be presented with the Meeting Information page. In the 
section titled Meeting Information, you can examine various pieces of information 
about the selected meeting. On this page, you can review Name, Summary, Start 
Time, Duration, Number of users in room (that are currently present in the meeting 
room), URL, Language (selected), and the Access rights of the meeting.
The two most important fields are marked with a red outline in the previous 
screenshot. The first one is the link to the meeting URL and the second is the Enter 
Meeting Room button. You can join the selected meeting room by clicking on any  
of these two options.
In the upper portion of this page, you will notice the navigation bar with the 
following links:
•	
Meeting Information
•	
Edit Information
•	
Edit Participants

Chapter 3
[ 29 ]
•	
Invitations
•	
Uploaded Content
•	
Recordings
•	
Reports
By selecting any of these links, you will open pages associated with them. Our  
main focus of this chapter will be on the functionalities of these pages. Since we  
have explained the Meeting Information page, we can proceed to the Edit 
Information page.
The Edit Information page
The Edit Information page is very similar to the Enter Meeting Information page. 
We will briefly inform you about the meeting settings, which you can edit on this 
page. These settings are:
•	
Name
•	
Summary
•	
Start time
•	
Duration
•	
Language
•	
Access
•	
Audio conference settings
Any changes made on this page are preserved by clicking on the Save button that 
you will find at very bottom of this page. Changes will not affect participants who 
are already logged in to the room, except changes to the Audio Conference settings. 
Next to the Save button, you will find the Cancel button. Any changes made on the 
Edit Information page, which are not already saved will be reverted by clicking on 
the Cancel button.

Managing Adobe Connect Meeting Room
[ 30 ]
The Edit Participants page
After the Edit Information page, it's time for us to access the next page by clicking 
on the Edit Participants link in the navigation bar. This link will take you to the 
Select Participants page that we've already described in the previous chapter. In 
addition to the already described features, we will introduce you to a couple more 
functionalities that will help you to add participants, change their roles, or remove 
them from the meeting.
Example 1 – changing roles
In this example, we will change the role of the administrators group from participant 
to presenter by using the Search button. This feature is of great help when there are 
a large number of Connect users that are already added as meeting participants. In 
order to do so, you will need to follow the steps listed:
1.	 In the Current Participants For Cookbook Meeting table on the right-hand 
side, click on the Search button located in the lower-left corner of the table. 
When you click on the Search button, a text field for instant search will  
be displayed.
2.	 In the text field, enter the name of the Administrators group or part of the  
group name (the auto-complete function should recognize the name of the 
present group).
3.	 When the group is present in the table, select it.
4.	 Click on the Set User Role button.
5.	 Select new role for this group in the menu. For the purpose of this example, 
we will select the Presenter role.
6.	 By completing this action, you will grant Presenter privileges in the Cookbook 
Meeting table to all the administrators as shown in the following screenshot:
      

Chapter 3
[ 31 ]
Example 2 – removing a user
In this example, we will show you how to remove a specific user from the selected 
meeting. For the purpose of this exercise, we will remove the Administrators  
group from the Participants list. In order to complete this action, please follow  
the given steps:
1.	 Select Administrators in the Current Participants For Cookbook  
Meeting table.
2.	 Click on the Remove button.
3.	 Now, all the members of this group will be excluded from the meeting,  
and Administrators should not be present in the list.
Example 3 – adding a specific user
This example will demonstrate how to add a specific user from any group. For 
example, we will add a user from the Authors group to the Current Participants list.
1.	 In the Available users and Groups table, double-click on the Authors group.
This action will change the user interface of this table and list all the users 
that belong to the Authors group. Please note that table header is now 
changed to \Authors.
2.	 Select a specific user and click on the Add button.
3.	 This will add the selected user from the Authors group to the Current 
Participants For Cookbook Meeting table.
One thing that we would like to mention here is the ability to perform multiple 
selections in both the Available Users and Groups and Current Participants For 
Cookbook Meeting tables. To enable multiple selection functionality, select a 
specific user and group by clicking and selecting Ctrl and Shift on the keyboard at  
the same time. By demonstrating these examples, we reviewed the Edit Participant 
link functionalities.
The Meeting Invitations page
By selecting the Invitations link, you will be redirected to the Invitations page. This 
page will provide you with features that will help you to send invitations to your 
meeting attendees. The Invitations page includes meeting summary, start date, 
duration, and meeting URL. This page is very similar to the Send Invitations page, 
except for the radio button for sending invitations that are not displayed.

Managing Adobe Connect Meeting Room
[ 32 ]
We will present you with two scenarios to manage invitations:
•	
The first one is if you are on the Edit Information page. If the Only 
registered users may enter the room option (guest access is blocked) or the 
Only registered users and accepted guests may enter the room option is 
selected, you can choose to send an invitation among the groups, such as 
All Hosts, Presenters and Participants, Hosts Only, Presenters Only, and 
Participants Only.
•	
The second scenario is if you are on the Edit Information page. If the 
Anyone who has the URL for the meeting can enter the room option is 
selected, then you can perform the following actions on the Invitations page:
i.	
Click on the Send Email button to receive an e-mail with your 
user ID. Later on you can forward this e-mail from any e-mail 
client or from webmail to any contact from your contacts list.
ii.	 Copy the content of the message body and send it to your 
contacts by using any e-mail client.
In addition to selecting the people we want to send notifications to, we can edit 
the e-mail subject and message body on this page. If you would like to attach 
the Outlook calendar event to the e-mail, select the checkbox next to the Attach 
Microsoft Outlook calendar event (iCal) to email message label. Otherwise,  
keep this checkbox unchecked.
The Uploaded Content page
In order to navigate to this page, you can click on the Uploaded Content link in 
the navigation menu. In order to better explain the functionalities on the Uploaded 
Content page, we already set up a meeting room for cookbook meeting and shared 
the content inside the meeting room. We will go into more details and describe how 
this should be done in Chapter 9, Using Screen Sharing. In the table displayed on the 
Uploaded Content page, you can find a list of all content that has been previously 
shared. If you have not opened your meeting room yet, this list will be empty. Refer 
to the following screenshot:

Chapter 3
[ 33 ]
Each type of content listed in this table is described with these parameters:
•	
Name
•	
Type
•	
Date Modified
•	
Size (KB)
•	
Referenced (this determines whether the content is still in use in the  
meeting room)
If you want to edit content settings or review content, click on the desired data 
listed in the content list. When you select content from the list, the Uploaded 
Content Information tab opens. In addition to the functionality for editing content 
information, you will also find the URL for the selected content. By clicking on 
this link, you will see the content of the sample image listed in the example of the 
Meeting Information page.
Let's go back to the Uploaded Content page. In order to return to this page, click  
on the Return To Uploaded Content link. You can also click on the back arrow  
in your browser. In order to remove content from the Uploaded Content table,  
perform the following:
1.	 Click on the checkbox on the left-hand side of content name.
2.	 Click on the Delete button.

Managing Adobe Connect Meeting Room
[ 34 ]
In addition to the Delete button, you will also find the Move to Folder button on 
this page. This button can be used to move selected content to Content Library. 
Depending on the user's permissions in the Content Library folder, the uploaded 
content can be moved to the Shared Content, User Content, or My Content folder. 
In order to move the content, you can follow the given steps:
1.	 Click on the checkbox next to one or more pieces of content you would  
like to move.
2.	 Click on the Move to Folder button; the Folder page will appear.
3.	 Select the My Content folder on this page.
4.	 Click on the Move button.
5.	 After doing so, you will be prompted with the message, The following items 
were moved successfully.
By completing these steps, we have reviewed all the functionalities of the Uploaded 
Content page. Now, we can proceed to the next item.
The Meeting Recordings page
For the time being, we will skip further explanation of the Recordings link in 
the navigation menu since Chapter 12, Recording Adobe Connect Meetings, will be 
dedicated to explaining ways to create and manage meeting recordings.

Chapter 3
[ 35 ]
The Meeting Reports page
In order to get to the Meeting Reports page, you can click on the Meeting Reports 
link in the navigation menu. This page contains reports of the selected meeting. 
These reports are divided into four categories:
•	
By Attendees: This report lets you see the name and e-mail address of any 
meeting participant. Additional information provided by this report is the 
time when users joined or left the meeting. The following screenshot will 
describe the filter creation and report the download process:
•	
By Sessions: These reports show the start and end time of each meeting 
session, together with the number of attendees per session. By clicking on the 
session number, you will see the complete list of meeting participants with 
their names, meeting entry, and exit times.
Both of these reports have a button that will let you download the report 
data. They also contain the Report Filters link that will open the Report 
Filters page. On this page, you can select different settings for a specific 
report. You can customize the date range, add and remove certain groups 
from the report, and select the checkbox to show the data from people you 
manage directly or indirectly.
www.allitebooks.com

Managing Adobe Connect Meeting Room
[ 36 ]
•	
By Questions: This report shows a list of polls by number, session number, 
and question. In the Reports column, the user can choose between View 
answer distribution and View user responses. The first option displays a 
pie chart, where each offered voting option in the poll is shown by a different 
color. The second option displays poll question along with offered answers 
followed by the complete list of users who took part in voting, along with 
their vote results.
•	
Summary: This report type shows the most common meeting information: 
name, URL, most recent session start time, and the highest number of 
participants who joined the meeting room at any given time.
Summary
By now, you should have enough knowledge about managing functionalities  
of Connect meetings, so you should be able to edit already existing meetings  
to satisfy your needs.

Customizing the Viewing 
Experience
At this point, you should be familiar with managing Adobe Connect meeting rooms 
along with all their managing functionalities. We will continue with customizing the 
viewing experience. This chapter will teach you how to create meeting room templates, 
as well as how to customize the Connect application through various recipes.
In this chapter we will show you the following features of Adobe Connect:
•	
Meeting room templates
•	
Description of information preserved in a template
•	
Creating a meeting room template
•	
Converting a meeting room into a template
•	
Applying a template to a new meeting
•	
Customizing the login page, central page, and meeting appearance
Meeting room templates
What is a template for a meeting room? A meeting room template is a meeting 
with predefined settings. Meeting settings that can be predefined are meeting 
configurations, meeting content, and meeting layouts, and the way they are 
presented to the user. As far as meetings are concerned, there is one built-in template 
that exists in Connect as a default meeting template. In addition to the default 
meeting template, there are two additional built-in templates, namely, a template 
for trainings and a template for events. The purpose of a template is to help you to 
quickly create a meeting without a need for additional customized settings each time 
you need to create a meeting.

Customizing the Viewing Experience
[ 38 ]
When creating a new meeting, you have the option to use the default template as 
well as to use customized templates that you previously created. In our first example, 
we will first create a new meeting by using the default meeting template, and in our 
next example, we will create a meeting with our own custom template.
After you have successfully logged in to the Home page, in order to create a new 
meeting, you will need to navigate to the Enter meeting information page. This 
could be done in two ways: you can click on the Meetings tab in the main menu or 
on the Meeting button as shown in the following screenshot:
For the purpose of this chapter, the most important part of the Enter meeting 
information page is the Select Template drop-down list. Here, you can choose 
the desired template from a list of provided templates. For now, the only available 
template is Default Meeting Template, and it will be automatically selected.
On this page, you will be prompted to fill in the meeting information as described 
in the previous chapters. In the Name field, enter Cookbook Meeting as the 
meeting name. We will use this meeting as an example for further explanations of 
functionalities in this chapter. When you click on the Finish button in the lower  
part of the page, your sample meeting room will be created successfully.
Meeting room content, as shown in the following screenshots, will be present when 
we create a meeting from a default template.
Most common configurations when creating a new meeting from default  
templates are:
•	
Only registered users and accepted guests may enter the room in the 
Meeting Information section
•	
Do not include any audio conference with this meeting in the Audio 
Conference Settings section

Chapter 4
[ 39 ]
•	
A meeting room created in this manner will contain three layouts, namely, 
sharing layout, collaboration layout, and discussion layout
°°
Sharing layout is customized so that share options can be  
easily accessed
°°
Discussion layout is optimized for users with a need for frequent use  
of conversation pods, such as chat and note pod
°°
Collaboration layout is created for users who need to annotate some 
information on content and to use a whiteboard during a meeting
Now, when you are familiar with the default template and the template purpose, we 
can continue with the next step, which is the creation of your own template and its 
application on new meetings. Before we go on with template creation, you will learn 
what kind of information is preserved in a template.
Information preserved in a template
A template is simply a duplicate of an original meeting. Some settings in a template 
are saved by default and some aren't.
Settings that are saved in a template are:
•	
Meeting Room background customization
•	
Pods with their name, size and position
•	
Layouts
•	
Notes in the note pod
•	
Polls in the poll pod
•	
Questions and Answers in the Q&A pod
•	
Whiteboard content
•	
Links in the Web Link pod
•	
Message which is displayed to other users when meeting ends

Customizing the Viewing Experience
[ 40 ]
On the other side, settings that are not saved are:
•	
Chat pod messages
•	
Audio settings
•	
Audio setup wizard settings
Now that we have listed the information that is preserved in a template, we will 
continue with the next step.
Creating a meeting room template
In this section, we will show you how to customize meeting room appearance and 
how to use this appearance in a meeting room as a default template while creating 
new meetings. In order to demonstrate this, we will start a new meeting and create a 
new layout, which will be customized for our needs. In order to create a new empty 
layout, please follow the given steps:
1.	 Click on the Layouts link in the meeting room main menu.
2.	 In the Layout menu, click on the Create New Layout… option.
3.	 When the Create a New Layout dialog appears, the Create a new blank 
layout option is selected. All we need to do here is to enter the layout name 
and click on the OK button.
Now it's time to give a new look to our meeting room. We will do this by including 
different kinds of pods in the previously created layout. For this example, we will 
choose web links, notes, and share pod for the new layout look. In order to do this, 
follow the given steps:
1.	 Click on the Pods link in the meeting room main menu.
2.	 In the Pods menu, choose the desired pod. We will select Share, Notes, and 
Web Links pods.
3.	  Depending on the choice of the selected pod in the Pods menu, the submenu 
will contain options such as Share, Notes, or Add New Web Links.

Chapter 4
[ 41 ]
After we complete these steps, the appearance of a meeting room might be like the 
one shown in the following screenshot:
Customized layout
We used the word "might" since the position and size of the pods can be arranged 
simply by resizing them or moving them to a different position with the drag-and-
drop functionality.
Before we close this meeting room, simply add a note in a note pod.
You can close this meeting room for now, because you will need to go back to the 
Connect application. As we mentioned previously, please remember the name of 
the meeting you have created, so you can go back to it. In this chapter, we used 
Cookbook Meeting.
Converting a meeting room into a template
Now that you've created a template for the meeting room appearance, you will learn 
to convert a meeting to a template. In order to do so, you will need to go back to the 
Meetings page in a Connect application as described earlier. You will notice your 
meeting (Cookbook Meeting) in the Meetings List window. Select the meeting 
by clicking on the checkbox next to the meeting name, and then click on the Move 
button, as shown in the following screenshot:

Customizing the Viewing Experience
[ 42 ]
After you click on the button, you will see the Move page.
Move page view
On the left-hand side of the Move page, you can see that your selected meeting is 
shown in the Item(s) to Move section. In our example, only Cookbook Meeting  
is displayed. In order to convert the meeting room into a template, you can follow  
these steps:
1.	 On the right-hand side of the Move page, click on the My Templates tab or 
My Templates folder (marked with red outline in the previous screenshot).
2.	 Click on the Move button (marked with a red outline in the  
previous screenshot).
After completing these steps, you will successfully move the selected meeting into 
the My Templates folder. As a confirmation of the move action, you will see the 
message shown in the following screenshot:
In case you decide to move this meeting into the Shared Templates folder, you 
should know that by doing this, newly created templates will be available to all  
users who can create a meeting.
By completing these steps, conversion of a meeting room into a template is done.

Chapter 4
[ 43 ]
Applying a template to a new meeting
Since you have moved a meeting to the My Templates folder, you should now get 
familiar with how to use newly created templates when creating new meetings. In 
order to do so, you can start creating a meeting creation from the New Meeting button 
shortcut on the Home page. Another way to complete this action is by clicking on 
the Meetings link in the main menu of the Adobe Connect Home page followed by 
clicking on the New Meeting button on the Meeting List page. You will be directed 
to the Enter Meeting Information page. You can select your template from the Select 
Template drop-down list and select the My Templates/Cookbook Meeting option.
After selecting your template, enter a meeting name and click on the Finish button. 
After clicking on the button, the Meeting Information page will load. You can click 
on the Enter Meeting Room button, and you will join a new Connect meeting. The 
meeting room should look exactly like the one shown in the Customized Layout 
and Meeting Room appearance screenshots, and all meeting template information 
should be preserved; you can verify the existence of the note previously added in  
the notes pod in our case.
We are finished with explanation on how to create templates for meeting rooms,  
and in the next part of this chapter we will focus on customizing the Adobe  
Connect application.
Customizing the login page, central page, 
and meeting appearance
Adobe Connect provides features for meeting room customization along with 
features for login page and central page customization. These features are only 
available to users with administrator privileges in the system. We recommend that 
you log in to the Connect application with the administrator role account in order to 
follow instructions for this part of the chapter. In order to get to the Customization 
page, you will need to complete the following steps:
1.	 Click on the Administration tab of the Home page in the main menu.

Customizing the Viewing Experience
[ 44 ]
2.	 Select the Customization tab in the administration submenu.
You will notice that you are on the Customization page now. This page consists of 
three buttons and three tabs. The following is the list of buttons and their functions:
•	
Clear: This button cancels changes
•	
Apply: By clicking on this button, you will confirm the changes that  
you created
•	
Reset to default: Clicking on this button will set your default view to the 
login page
Now, we will list tabs on the Customize page:
•	
Customize Central
•	
Customize Login
•	
Customize Meeting
How to customize the central page
For customization of the Connect Home page, click on the Customize Central tab.
Customize Central tab

Chapter 4
[ 45 ]
The interface customization options that are offered for the Customize Central  
page are:
•	
Background
•	
Top Links Text
•	
Navigation Text
•	
Selection Highlights
•	
Table Header
For any of these options, you can change the color by selecting the desired option 
and then selecting the required color from the color picker next to the option's links. 
You can also choose your page color by entering an HTML color code in the text 
field above color picker (for example, #0000FF). In addition to color changes that 
you can apply, you can also modify the Banner Logo. The Banner Logo image can 
be changed by clicking on the Browse button and by selecting the appropriate image 
file from your computer. Image size for the Banner Logo image should be 360 x 50 
pixels. All changes that are created should be saved by clicking on the Apply button. 
If you reopen the Customize Central page, you should be able to see all the changes 
that you have applied to this page. If the changes are not visible immediately, 
refreshing the browser or clearing the browser cache should help.
How to customize the login page
In order to customize the login page, click on the Customize Login tab.
Customize Login tab
www.allitebooks.com

Customizing the Viewing Experience
[ 46 ]
In the bottom-left corner of this tab, you can choose the changes you would like to 
apply. Changes options that are available are:
•	
Meeting Title
•	
Login Text
•	
Background
In order to change the background color, for example, you will need to select the 
Background option, and then select the preferred color from the color picker next 
to the options links. You can also choose your background color by entering the 
HTML color code in the text field above color picker (for example, #0000FF). After 
you select your choices, you should be able to see changes immediately in the upper 
portion of the tab view.
In addition to these three options, another option for customization that is offered 
is the ability to customize the main logo of the login page. You can change the logo 
image by clicking on the Browse button and selecting any image file from your 
computer. Supported file formats for logo images are .bmp, .jpg, .gif, and .png. 
Image size should be 410 x 310 pixels. Otherwise, the image will be resized to fit 
these dimensions. All changes that are made should be saved by clicking on the 
Apply button. If you reopen the Connect login page, you should be able to see  
all the changes that are applied to this page.
How to customize the meeting room look
In order to change the look of the meeting room, you have to click on the Customize 
Meeting tab.
The Customize Meeting tab will help you to create changes for the following items:
•	
Menu Highlight Color
•	
Focus Border Color
•	
Background Color
•	
Meeting Main Menu Color
•	
Meeting Main Menu Text Color
•	
Pod Bar Color
•	
Pod Bar Text Color

Chapter 4
[ 47 ]
Customize Meeting tab
In the lower-right part of the tab view, you can change the meeting logo. In order to 
do this, you need to click on the Choose File button and select the desired image file 
from your computer. Supported file formats for logo images are .bmp, .jpg, .gif, 
and .png. Image size for the meeting logo should be 50 x 31 pixels. An additional 
option that you can customize is the website URL. You can enter the dedicated URL 
address for a website, which will be opened when you click on the meeting logo 
inside the meeting room. As with the previous examples, you will have to click on 
the Apply button to propagate your changes, and you should be able to see the 
applied changes immediately in the upper section of the tab.
Summary
We have finished the detailed explanation on how to create meeting templates and 
how to customize certain pages of the Connect application. You should now be able 
to create various changes in Connect and the meeting room look according to your 
needs. The next chapter is dedicated to the Content library and how to use it.


The Content Library
Adobe Connect has four types of  libraries: Meetings, Events, Trainings, and 
Contents. We will talk about the basics of Adobe Connect's contents. After this 
chapter, you should have good knowledge about the Content library and how to use 
different features with this library type.
In this chapter, we will deal with the following topics:
•	
Working with library files and folders
•	
Supported file types in the Content library
•	
Uploading content to the Content library
•	
Viewing content in the Content library
•	
Permission settings in the Content library
Working with library files and folders
The Content library contains information about contents that can be easily shared 
inside the meeting room. Depending on your privileges, which are granted to you 
by the system administrator, you can add or review different kinds of contents. To 
navigate to the Content List page, click on the Content tab on the main menu of the 
Connect Home page.

The Content Library
[ 50 ]
When you access the page, the content list will be displayed. You will notice that the 
Content List page is similar to the Meeting List page, which we described in Chapter 
2, Creating an Adobe Connect Meeting Room. Since we already described the Meeting 
List page, we will not go through a detailed description of this page. Here, we will 
show you examples of how to use features available on this page.
Our first example will show you how to create, delete, or add files and folders, and 
how to manage them inside the Content library.
In order to add a folder inside the Content library, you should perform the  
following steps:
1.	 Navigate to the desired content type by clicking on the content links in the 
navigation bar. You can select the Shared Content, User Content, or My 
Content link. 
2.	 Click on the New Folder button to open the New Folder page.
3.	 In the Summary text area, you can add detailed information about  
your folder.
4.	 Enter a name in the Folder name text field since this is a mandatory field, 
and then click on the Save button to create a new folder.
To delete a file or a folder, you will have to do the following:
1.	 Select the desired file or folder by clicking on the checkbox next to it.
2.	 Click on the Delete button so that the Delete page will appear.
3.	 If you want to permanently delete the file or folder, you will have to click  
on the Delete button once again. By clicking on the Cancel button, you  
will cancel the delete process.
To open a folder, click on the folder name; the folders and the files within the 
selected folder will appear now. The selected folder name will be shown in the 
navigation links section.

Chapter 5
[ 51 ]
If you want to move the files or folders, you should follow these steps:
1.	 Click on the checkbox that is on the left-hand side of the desired file or folder.
2.	 Click on the Move button; you will be presented with the Move page.
3.	 On the left-hand side, in the Items to move section, the chosen files or folders 
should be listed.
4.	 Now, navigate to the folder where you want to move these items. In the 
Move to this folder section, you can review the new location for the files.
5.	 Click on the Move button. When you move the selected folder, all the content 
within that folder will be moved along to a new location.
On completing these steps, you will get a sound knowledge of how you can organize 
files and folders inside the Content library according to your needs. Before we go on 
with the creation of specific content, we will show you the supported file types inside 
the Content library.
The supported file types in the Content 
library
In order to add files inside the Content library, they should have one of the  
following extensions:
•	
.pdf
•	
.jpg
•	
.gif
•	
.png
•	
.ppt
•	
.pptx
•	
.swf
•	
.flv
•	
.html
•	
.htm
•	
.mp3
•	
.mp4
•	
.f4v

The Content Library
[ 52 ]
In addition to the listed file formats, you can also upload a ZIP file with specific 
content. The ZIP files that can be uploaded to the Content library can contain the 
following formats:
•	
A ZIP file with .html content
•	
A ZIP file with .swf content
•	
A ZIP file with single .pdf content
If you try to upload a file having an unsupported extension, the Invalid File Format 
message will be displayed. Now we can proceed to our next step and teach you how 
to upload content to the Content library.
Uploading content to the Content library
In order to upload content to the Content library, click on the New Content button. 
When you click on the button, you will be presented with the Enter Content 
Information page. This page is divided into two sections. In the section titled Select 
Content File, click on the Choose File button and navigate to a file that you want to 
upload. Please refer to the following screenshot:
In the lower section titled Enter content Information, you have to fill out three fields, 
namely Title, Custom URL, and Summary. In order to assign a detailed description 
to the content you wish to upload, you can add some text in the Summary field. 
Similar to the custom URL for the meeting, you can add text in the Custom URL text 
field in order to dedicate a specific URL to your content. If you choose not to create a 
custom URL, the system will automatically assign a URL to this content. The Name 
field is the only mandatory field, so you will have to populate it. After you complete 
all the information, click on the Save button as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 5
[ 53 ]
When you click on the Save button, you will submit your file to the Content library. 
Your newly submitted content should now be present in the Content List page.
Viewing content in the Content library
In order to view the content information or review previously added content, you 
need to follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to the Content List page.
2.	 Click on the My content link in the navigation bar.
3.	 Go to the Content Information page by clicking on the content name in the 
Content List page. You can also access it after clicking on the Save button 
while uploading content. In Chapter 3, Managing Adobe Connect Meeting Room 
we explained how to move a sample file to the Content library; now we  
will select this file. After we do so, the Content Information page will be 
loaded. In the links section, you can review the items that are linked to your 
selected content.
4.	 Click on the URL for viewing the link to view the uploaded image.

The Content Library
[ 54 ]
You can note the difference between the navigation bar marked with a red outline 
in the previous screenshot and the one shown in the screenshot that we presented in 
Chapter 3, Managing Adobe Connect Meeting Room. Following are some functionalities 
of the navigation bar links:
•	
Edit Information: Here you can edit some attributes of the content that is 
already uploaded (for example, Name and Summary).
•	
Set Permissions: This functionality enables you to manage permissions for 
selected content for a specific user or user group.
•	
E-mail Link: In this tab view you can add e-mail recipients. By selecting the 
Send button, an e-mail message containing the URL link for viewing content 
will be forwarded to the listed recipients. Note that you may need to log in 
to your Adobe Connect account in order to view the content. By default, the 
link sent is not public. You will see in the next chapter how to make sure that 
your recipients can access the link you sent.
•	
Download Content: When you click on this link, you will be redirected to 
the Download Content page. This page will enable all users that have the 
permission to access selected content to download this content. Users can 
simply click on the content name, and the download page will be displayed.
•	
Upload Content: This provides you with the ability to upload new content. 
The new content that you upload will replace the existing one. In order to  
do this, the user should follow these instructions:
i.	
Click on the Browse button and find the location of the new file 
on your computer.
ii.	 Click on the Save button.
•	
Reports: In this tab view, the user can find different statistics data in the form 
of reports regarding the selected content.

Chapter 5
[ 55 ]
Permission settings in the Content 
library
Administrators and users with appropriate permissions can define which operations 
are allowed for a specific user or a group whose content exists in the Content library. 
To manage permission settings, you should go to the Set Permissions page. This 
page can be accessed in two ways. Depending on how you access this page, you 
can manage permissions for files or folders. In order to change permissions for a 
folder inside the Content library, navigate to the folder's Shared Content option, 
My Content option, and so on of the Content List page. Now click on the Set 
Permissions tab. If, on the other hand, you want to change the permission settings 
for a specific file, this can be achieved by clicking on the Set Permissions tab on the 
Content Information page.
We will show you an example on how to manage the rights for the My content 
folder for the administrators group:
1.	 Navigate to the Content List page.
2.	 Click on the My Content link in the navigation bar.
3.	 Clicking on the Set Permissions tab will open the Set Permissions page.
4.	 Select the administrators group in the Available Users and Groups table 
on the left-hand side and click on the Add button. Administrators are now 
added to the Current Permissions For meetinghost@cookbook.com table on 
the right-hand side. Please note that the permission is set to View by default.
5.	 Click on the Permissions button, and in the Permissions menu choose the 
Manage option.
The following screenshot shows the Set Permissions page that illustrates the 
previous example:
www.allitebooks.com

The Content Library
[ 56 ]
Following are detailed explanations of specific permissions in the Permissions menu:
•	
Manage: Users with this permission can view, edit, move, and delete a 
specific folder or file. These users can also change the permissions for other 
users, create new folders, and view reports.
•	
Publish: Users and groups with this permission can view, publish, or update 
presentations as well as view reports. In order to have these capabilities, 
the users must be members of the Authors group. This permission can be 
granted by an administrator of the Connect application while creating a 
specific user account.
•	
View: Users and groups granted with this permission can view any content 
within the folder or any specific file for which they have permissions set.
•	
Denied: Users with this permission cannot view, edit, manage, or publish 
any file or folder.
In addition to permissions listed previously, you also have the right to allow public 
viewing of some content. This can be done by selecting the Yes radio button next to 
the label Allow public viewing.
Summary
Through this chapter, we introduced you to the Content library. We also went 
through a couple of examples where we explained contents and the ways they can  
be edited or organized into folders. We also demonstrated to you how to grant 
specific privileges to users for desired contents. You should be able to go through  
the Content library and use the functionalities provided by Adobe Connect.

Meeting Room Overview
In the previous chapters we covered functionalities of various pages of Connect. 
We demonstrated how to create a meeting, edit meeting settings, manage invitees, 
manage contents, and create a template from any meeting and use it for future 
meetings. Now, it's time for us to introduce you to the meeting room  
features and functionalities.
In this chapter, you will learn about:
•	
Meeting room main menu navigation features
•	
Keyboard shortcuts and navigation between pods
•	
Managing attendees through the Attendees pod
•	
Using Prepare Mode
•	
Using Presenter Only Area
Meeting room main menu navigation 
features
At this point you should be familiar with creating, editing, and joining a meeting 
room; also, we already explained meeting roles to you. Now it is time to go on with 
further explanations of the meeting room options and functionalities. Depending 
on your role assigned in a particular meeting, you will have different meeting room 
options available for use. In case your assigned meeting role is that of the host, the 
meeting room main menu will look like the following screenshot:

Meeting Room Overview
[ 58 ]
If on the other hand, your assigned meeting role is that of a presenter or participant, 
the main menu for the meeting room will look like this:
You will notice that the participant and presenter roles have restricted access 
to host functionalities. Because of this, we will focus on explanation of all host 
functionalities.
In order to navigate the main menu, the following options are available:
•	
Meeting
•	
Layouts
•	
Pods
•	
Audio
Meeting
Here you will find different options for meeting room management. The following 
screenshot shows all the options that are available under the Meeting menu:
We will describe all the options on this menu:
•	
Manage Meeting Information: Clicking on this option will open the  
Meeting Information page in the Connect application in your default  
browser. As already described in Chapter 3, Managing Adobe Connect  
Meeting Room, you can edit meeting settings on this page.

Chapter 6
[ 59 ]
•	
Manage Access & Entry: This option will present you with different meeting 
room management options:
°°
Invite Participants...: This menu option provides you with features to 
send invitations to future meeting attendees. Here you will find the 
meeting URL, and by clicking on the Compose e-mail button, your 
e-mail client will be invoked, and you will be able to compose e-mail 
for specific participants.
°°
Block Guest Access: This menu option will disable all the users 
that are attempting to access a meeting as guests from entering the 
selected meeting.
°°
Block Incoming Attendees...: This menu option will prevent users 
who are trying to join the meeting from entering the meeting room. 
Users will be prompted with this message, This meeting is currently 
in session. The host has blocked entry for incoming attendees.
°°
Place Participants on Hold: This menu option will place all incoming 
attendees on hold. When participants attempt to join a meeting, they 
will be prompted with this message, This meeting has been placed 
on hold. The host will resume the meeting shortly. Thank you.
°°
Auto-Promote Participants to Presenters: This menu option will 
grant presenter rights to the participants present in a meeting room. 
Additional users who join the selected meeting in the future will 
automatically be granted with presenter rights as well.
•	
Change My Role: This option reveals a submenu, where you can choose to 
demote yourself to the presenter or participant role, or on the other hand, to 
promote yourself to presenter or host.
•	
Preferences...: This option will open the Preferences dialog, where you can 
change different options including Audio, Video, Screen Sharing, Chat Pod, 
Q & A pod, and Attendees Pod.
•	
Audio Setup Wizard: This will offer options for configuring audio setup.
•	
Record Meeting...: When you click on this option, the host will start to  
record the specific meeting. Meeting recordings are saved so that they can  
be reviewed at any time. In Chapter 12, Recording Adobe Connect Meetings,  
we will discuss the ability to record Adobe Connect meetings functionality  
in more detail.

Meeting Room Overview
[ 60 ]
•	
Switch To Prepare Mode: When selected, this option will switch the host 
 to prepare mode; all the changes that he creates while in this mode will  
not be visible to any meeting attendees.
•	
Enable Presenter Only Area: This option allows the host to add the 
Presenter Only Area features to a currently running meeting. This area  
will only be visible to users with the host or presenter role.
•	
End Meeting…: By selecting this option, the host can end a meeting that is 
running currently. When you click on this menu option, the End Meeting 
dialog will appear. This dialog enables you to define a message that will be 
broadcasted to all participants when the meeting is finished.
Layout
This option gives you the ability to change or customize the look of a meeting room 
in order to fit your meeting needs. In order to switch to other layouts, a user can 
choose one of the three options that are offered in the Layouts menu.
The options that are offered actually represent three built-in layouts for Adobe 
Connect, namely, Sharing, Discussion, and Collaboration. If you would like to 
create a new layout, you should select the option Create New Layout…, which is 
also offered in this menu. In addition to the mentioned options, this menu gives 
you an option to manage layouts. In case you don't want to save changes to your 
layout, the Reset Layouts option is available for use in this menu. The last option in 
this menu is the Close Layout Bar option. When you click on this option, you will 
remove the layout bar from the meeting room. We will discuss the Close Layout 
Bar option in depth in Chapter 11, Customizing and Saving Layouts. The following 
screenshot shows the meeting room's Layouts and Pods menus along with all of the 
menu options:

Chapter 6
[ 61 ]
Pods
In this menu item, you will find a list of all the pods that are available, such as:
•	
Share: This pod provides you with functionalities for different sharing 
options. Here you can choose whether you would like to share your desktop, 
a whiteboard, or a certain application.
•	
Notes: In this pod, the user can add the meeting agenda or some other 
information that is considered important for a meeting.
•	
Chat: Using this pod, the user can communicate with other meeting 
participants. By using this pod, you can send messages to selected users via 
private conversation or to all of the users via public conversation.
•	
Files: Here you will find options for sharing files inside a meeting room. In 
this pod, you have an option to upload or download chosen files.
•	
Q & A: This pod contains functionality for questions and answers. In this 
pod, users can overview opened or answered questions.
•	
Poll: By using this pod in a meeting, you can empower meeting participants 
to vote in various polls. You can utilize multiple answers, multiple questions, 
or short-answer polls in this pod.
•	
Web Links: This pod is used for adding web links. Once when you add a 
web link through this pod, the suggested web page becomes easily accessible 
to meeting participants in the form of a link provided in the pod.
•	
Attendees: This pod is usually used by the meeting host. By using this pod, 
the meeting organizer can change participant roles and give additional user 
rights for selected pods.
•	
Video: This pod enables users with specific rights to start video broadcasting 
by using their own webcam.
In addition to the list of pods here, you will find the Manage Pods... and Move  
and Resize Pods options, which are used to manage pods and to move and resize 
pods, respectively.
Audio
For this menu option we will cover a scenario in which audio settings are disabled 
for a meeting. In this case, the menu has only two options: Microphone Rights for 
Participants and Enable Single Speaker Mode. By default, microphone rights are 
only granted to presenters and hosts. By clicking on the Microphone Rights for 
Participants option, the host can change default settings in order to include meeting 
participants in audio conversations. 

Meeting Room Overview
[ 62 ]
When you choose Enable Single Speaker mode, an asterisk will appear next to the 
Connect My Audio icon in the main menu. This means that if some user clicks on the 
Connect My Audio option in order to speak, this option will be disabled for all other 
meeting participants. You will read more about audio menu options when audio is 
enabled in Chapter 15, Using Audio and Video.
The Audio menu
In addition to the already described main menu meeting room options, you will 
certainly notice the options shown in the following screenshot:
In order of appearance, these options are:
•	
Unmute My Speakers
•	
Connect My Audio
•	
Start My Webcam
•	
Set Status
You will find more info regarding these options in later chapters.
Keyboard shortcuts and navigating 
between pods
This topic will teach you how to use keyboard shortcuts for different meeting  
room pods. By using keyboard shortcuts, one can reduce the use of the mouse  
to a minimum. All shortcuts presented here are only available for the Windows 
operating systems. The shortcuts for pods navigation and menus:
•	
Ctrl + Space bar: This shortcut displays the application menu for  
keyboard navigation
•	
Ctrl + F8: This shortcut displays the Pod menu for keyboard navigation

Chapter 6
[ 63 ]
•	
Ctrl + F6: This shortcut moves the focus to the next pod
•	
F2: This shortcut key displays a text field where you can change the title  
of a pod with a focus on it
Shortcuts for audio and recordings
Refer to the following keyboard shortcuts:
•	
Ctrl + M: This shortcut toggles microphone state between on and off
•	
Ctrl + ,: This shortcut is used to start and stop recording
•	
P: This shortcut is used to toggle the recording state between start and stop 
when reviewing recordings
Shortcuts for attendee management
Refer to the following keyboard shortcuts:
•	
Ctrl + /: This shortcut promotes user to presenter
•	
Ctrl + ': This shortcut promotes user to host
•	
Ctrl + ]: This shortcut demotes user to participant
•	
Ctrl + E: This shortcut toggles the Raise Hand status
Shortcuts for dialog boxes
Refer to the following keyboard shortcuts:
•	
Esc: This shortcut key hides, closes, or cancels a dialog box
•	
Enter: This shortcut key executes actions that depend on the dialog box itself
These are the general shortcuts for a meeting room. Beside these general shortcuts, 
each pod has its own shortcuts.

Meeting Room Overview
[ 64 ]
If you want to use the keyboard to navigate among different pods present in a 
meeting room, this can be done by clicking on Ctrl + F6. By using this command,  
you change the focus from one pod to another. Please take your time to notice the  
color of a border around a pod that is in focus. By default, this color is green,  
as you may see in the following screenshot:
If you'd like to change the border color, you can go back to Chapter 4, Customizing the 
Viewing Experience, where we already described how to perform this.
After joining a meeting, by default, focus is set to the Chat pod's message entry text 
field in cases where the Chat pod is present in the meeting.
Managing attendees through the 
Attendees pod
After explaining the meeting room main menu and overall keyboard shortcuts, we 
will demonstrate how to manage attendees in the Attendees pod. The Attendees 
pod is one of the meeting room pods. It's displayed in all of the default layouts that 
you can select. The Attendees pod is generally placed on the right-hand side of the 
meeting room and is shown in the following screenshot:
The Attendees pod

Chapter 6
[ 65 ]
At the very top of this pod, you can find a number of attendees that are present in the 
meeting. In the sample screenshot, this number shows that there are two attendees. 
In the main part of the Attendees pod, every attendee can view who is logged in 
to a meeting as well as the total count of user roles in a meeting. In the screenshot 
provided, you can see that there are currently two users that are logged in. One of 
the users is logged in with the participant role and the other one with a host role. In 
the example provided, there are no presenters present in this meeting.
Adobe Connect users that are logged in to a meeting with their credentials will 
appear in the Attendees pod. Their name will be displayed; it will be the same 
name that was used when they were registered by their system administrator for 
the Adobe Connect application. Users that attend a meeting as guests will have their 
names displayed in the Attendees pod as well. The name that will be displayed for 
guest attendees is the one they entered when they logged in to the meeting.
Users with the host role can execute specific actions inside this pod. To perform 
these actions, there are four buttons available to them. These are: Attendee View, 
Breakout Room View, Status View, and Pod Options. We will describe actions that 
can help hosts to change user roles, remove users from a meeting room, customize 
attendee names, grant additional rights for specific users on selected pods, and 
change user status. The following screenshot will help us to explain these actions:
Example 1 – changing user roles
In order to change a user's role, the host should follow these steps:
1.	 Select the desired meeting attendee in the Attendees pod. For the purpose of 
this example, we will select Meeting Participant.
2.	 Choose a new role for the selected participant by clicking on the Make Host 
or Make Presenter menu options.
3.	 By completing these steps, you have changed the role for the selected 
meeting participant.

Meeting Room Overview
[ 66 ]
Here is another example of executing the same action:
1.	 Select a participant and click on the Pod Options button. The Pod menu 
should be visible now.
2.	 In the Pod menu, select the Change Role menu option.
3.	 In the submenu, click on Host, Presenter, or Participant. By completing these 
steps, you have changed the role for the selected meeting participant.
The easiest way to complete the same action is in just two steps:
1.	 Select the desired attendee in pod.
2.	 Drag the selected attendee to a new role.
Example 2 – removing participants
In order to remove a participant from a meeting, the host should follow these steps:
1.	 Select a participant and click on the Pod Options button. The Pod menu 
should appear.
2.	 Click on the Remove Selected User menu option. After completing these 
steps, the removed user will be prompted with this message: You have 
been asked to leave the room. The removed user will not be present in the 
Attendees pod any more.
Example 3 – editing participant names
In order to edit your own name in the Attendees pod, follow these steps:
1.	 Select your name in the Attendees pod and click on the Pod Options button.
2.	 Click on the Edit My Info… pod menu option. The Meeting Participant's 
Information dialog should be displayed.
3.	 In the Edit Name text field, enter your new name and click on the OK button.
In addition to this action, the meeting host has the ability to change any attendee 
name. To do so, follow these steps:
1.	 Select the desired user in the Attendees pod and click on the Pod  
Options button.
2.	 Click on the Attendee Options pod menu option.
3.	 Now, click on the Edit User Info… submenu option. The Meeting 
Participant's Information dialog will appear.
4.	 In Edit Name text field, enter a new name for the selected participant, and 
click on the OK button.

Chapter 6
[ 67 ]
Example 4 – granting enhanced participant rights
In this example, we will show you how to grant additional rights for specific pods. 
By completing this action, the selected participant will be granted with presenter 
rights for the selected pod without the explicit need to promote the selected 
participant to presenter. In order to complete this, you can follow these steps:
1.	 Select the desired user in the Attendees pod and click on the Pod Options 
button.
2.	 Click on the Attendee Options pod menu option.
3.	 Click on the Enhanced Participant Rights submenu option. The Enhanced 
Participant Rights dialog box should be presented to you.
4.	 Click on the checkbox next to the desired pod name, and then click on the 
OK button.
Example 5 – changing meeting attendee status
This example will show you how to change the status in the Attendees pod. By default, 
the status in the Attendees pod is blank, but participants can change their statuses.
When a user changes status, an appropriate icon will appear next to the attendee's 
name. In order to change the status, follow these instructions:
1.	 Click on the Set Status drop-down list in the meeting room main menu.
2.	 Select the desired status from the status menu as shown in the  
following screenshot:
Available statuses
The statuses are divided into two groups; Raise Hand, Agree, Disagree, and Step 
Away are in the first group, and Speak Louder, Speak Softer, Speed Up, Slow 
Down, Laughter, and Applause statuses are in the second group. The statuses from 
the second group will disappear after 10 seconds. The statuses from the first group 
will remain in the menu until they are removed manually.

Meeting Room Overview
[ 68 ]
Using Presenter Only Area
In order to enable Presenter Only Area, the host needs to follow these steps:
1.	 Click on the Meeting option in the main menu.
2.	 Click on the Enable Presenter Only Area option inside the meeting menu.
After completing this, Presenter Only Area is shown on the right-hand side of 
the meeting room. By default, the Presenter Notes pod will be available inside 
Presenter Only Area (as shown in the following screenshot). This area is only visible 
to hosts and presenters, while it is not visible to participants. It can be used to view 
confidential content among presenters and hosts and to prepare some content before 
sharing it with other meeting participants. Additionally, the host can add any pod to 
Presenter Only Area, and this action will not be seen by the participants. In order to 
disable Presenter Only Area, please follow these steps:
1.	 Click on the Meeting option in the main menu.
2.	 Click on the Disable Presenter Only Area option inside the meeting menu.
When you complete these steps, the Presenter Only area will be removed from the 
meeting room.
Presenter Only Area

Chapter 6
[ 69 ]
Using Prepare Mode
Prepare Mode helps meeting hosts to adjust the visual appearance of non-active 
layouts without affecting the active layout currently seen by attendees. In order to 
open the prepare mode, select Meeting from the main menu and click on the Switch 
to Prepare Mode option. A notification message will show up, informing you that 
you are in Prepare Mode now. Another indicator that you are in Prepare Mode is a 
yellow border around the meeting area. From the Layouts menu or the Layout bar, 
select the layout that you would like to adjust. Afterwards, you can move, hide, or 
show pods as needed.
Prepare Mode with Layout bar
When you are finished adjusting the layout, choose the Meeting option from the 
main menu and click on the End Prepare Mode option in order to close it.
Now that you have selected the layout that you have adjusted in Prepare Mode,  
all changes will be presented to meeting attendees.
Summary
This chapter has taught you how to use different options provided by meeting room 
menus. We also covered Presenter Only Area, Prepare Mode, and the Attendees 
pod, where we saw a couple of examples of how these features might be used. The 
next chapter will give you more info about how you may share presentations within 
Connect meeting rooms.


Sharing Presentations
In this chapter you will get familiar with the Share pod and learn how to use 
some of its basic functionalities. The central topic of this chapter will be sharing of 
presentations, and after reading this chapter, you will be able to share, customize, 
and navigate through presentations within the Share pod.
In this chapter, we will cover the following areas:
•	
The Share pod
•	
Presentation toolbar options
•	
Navigation through presentations
The Share pod
Now that you are familiar with creating meetings, entering meetings, and using the 
meeting room main menu navigation, we will start with meeting room pods and 
their functions.

Sharing Presentations
[ 72 ]
We have discussed meeting room templates in some of the previous chapters, while 
we have also written about three default meeting layouts: Sharing, Discussion, and 
Collaboration layouts. By default, a newly created meeting will be set up with the 
Sharing layout, and the central pod for this layout will be the Share pod.
The Share pod provides you with several different sharing options, such as:
•	
Sharing for various document formats (supported formats are listed in 
Chapter 5, The Content Library)
•	
Sharing your computer screen
•	
Sharing the whiteboard
Our focus in this chapter will be on the document sharing option in order to describe 
presentation sharing by using the Share pod.
There are two ways in which you can start presentation sharing. At the center of the 
Share pod, you will find a quick launch menu with several options for sharing. One 
of them is the Document sharing option. In addition to this option, you will find the 
Pod menu with the same option located in the top-right corner of the Share pod. 

Chapter 7
[ 73 ]
Please see the following screenshot:
Once you select one of these options, you will be presented with the Select 
Document to Share pop-up window as shown the following screenshot:

Sharing Presentations
[ 74 ]
A menu will be displayed on the left-hand side of the pop-up window, and here you 
will find several options listed:
•	
Browse My Computer…: You will find this button in the bottom-left corner. 
By clicking on this button, you can upload documents directly from your 
computer instead of using contents uploaded in the Content library as 
described in Chapter 5, The Content Library.
Please note that loading content directly from the computer takes a little 
longer that loading it from the Content library.
•	
Share History: This option will display a list of previously shared documents 
by using the Share pod. This list will show details such as the document 
name and the type of document that was shared.
•	
Whiteboards: This section contains a list of available Whiteboards pods that 
a user can share by using the Share pod.
•	
Uploaded Files: This option will list all documents that were previously 
uploaded by using the Browse My Computer… button.
•	
My Content: This section provides a list of your documents that were 
uploaded to the Content library.
•	
Shared Content: This section will provide a list of shared documents 
uploaded to the Content library by other users.
For demonstration purposes, in this chapter, we will share a presentation directly from 
the computer. You can also share a presentation by using a document that is already 
uploaded to the Content library (as described in Chapter 5, The Content Library).
Presentation toolbar options
After selecting the PowerPoint file you would like to share, you will see the 
Converting… message with a progress bar shown in the center of the Share  
pod. This progress bar is an indicator of the remaining time that is needed to  
load the presentation.
After successful conversion, you will be presented with the presentation file you 
have selected. In order to illustrate this option, we have created a sample PowerPoint 
file to be used for this chapter.

Chapter 7
[ 75 ]
Once the presentation is loaded, several different buttons will appear in the Share 
pod. All of these options can also be found in the context menu of the Share pod, 
located in the upper-right corner of the Share pod.
The following table will describe functionalities that are invoked by the buttons in 
the list:
Button
Description
The Draw button enables whiteboard functionalities 
for shared presentations.
The Pointer button places a pointer icon on the 
desired area within the presentation.
The Stop Sharing button stops presentation 
sharing.
The Full Screen button opens presentation sharing 
in full screen mode.

Sharing Presentations
[ 76 ]
Button
Description
The navigation arrows allow you to navigate 
through different presentation slides. You can also 
use the keyboard arrow keys for this purpose.
The Show Side Bar button opens a side bar on the 
right-hand side of the presentation.
The Sync button toggles sharing synchronization 
with other attendees on and off.
Navigation through presentations
You can navigate through any presentation by using the navigation arrows that are 
placed in the bottom-left corner of the Share pod. By clicking on the Show Side Bar 
button, you can open a side bar on the right-hand side of the shared presentation. 
This side bar will show some detailed information about the presentation. There are 
three different tabs in the side bar:
•	
The Outline tab will show you a list of all slides in your presentation, with 
information about their names and durations. On this tab, you can navigate 
through slides by selecting an individual slide from the list. This sidebar 
is only visible to hosts and presenters. They can enable this sidebar for all 
attendees by selecting a checkbox next to the Show Side Bar to participants 
checkbox at the bottom of the sidebar.

Chapter 7
[ 77 ]
•	
In the Notes tab, you will find notes for the slide selected on the first side bar 
(if there are any). Notes from the PowerPoint presentation will automatically 
be imported here.
•	
The Search tab will help you to search through the text of a shared 
presentation. You can find content by entering sample text that you would 
like to locate in a presentation.
Please note that, once shared, a presentation remains visible in the Share pod until 
Stop Sharing is hit. The presentation will remain visible even if the meeting room  
is closed.
Summary
In this chapter we demonstrated how to use some of the basic functionalities of the 
Share pod. Also, we explained how to upload a presentation document and how 
to navigate through different slides of a presentation. You are now familiar with 
using the Share pod for successful presentation sharing. In the next chapter, we will 
familiarize you with the functionalities of the whiteboard feature.


Using a Whiteboard Feature 
in the Meeting Room
In this chapter, we will cover most of the functionalities for successful usage of 
the whiteboard pod. After completing this chapter, you will be ready to use a 
whiteboard and all of its drawing tools.
Over the course of this chapter you will learn how to:
•	
Create and display a whiteboard
•	
Use whiteboard drawing tools
Create and display a whiteboard
Whiteboard is a part of the share pod. It provides various drawing features within 
meeting room. It allows hosts or presenters to create text, lines, circles, squares, and 
other freehand drawings in real time during a meeting.
There are two different ways to use the whiteboard:
•	
Using the standalone whiteboard, which creates content on the white 
background
•	
Using a whiteboard as an overlay of a sharing document in the share pod, 
which enables users to add drawings and annotations over documents

Using a Whiteboard feature in the Meeting Room
[ 80 ]
Standalone whiteboard
You can create a standalone whiteboard in two different ways, as follows:
•	
In the share pod, click on Pod Options | Share | Whiteboard
•	
In the share pod, click on Share My Screen | Share Whiteboard
These options are shown in the following screenshots:
After selecting one of these options you will be presented with the whiteboard 
pod. You will notice that the sharing has already started and the title of your share 
pod has been changed to whiteboard. As you can see in the following screenshot, 
toolbar with several options appears in the upper-left corner of the whiteboard. We 
will go through all of these tools in the next topic. Also, some of the buttons that 
we previously described in Chapter 7, Sharing Presentations, appear in the upper-
right corner:
A standalone whiteboard contains multiple pages, for example, a regular flip board. 
You can navigate through these pages by using navigation arrows in the lower-left 
corner. You can also jump to a particular page by entering the page number in the 
text field. This option is available only in the standalone whiteboard.

Chapter 8
[ 81 ]
In order to display an already existing whiteboard, from the main menu select Pods 
| Share and select the name of the whiteboard.
Adding an overlay whiteboard in a share pod
In order to add a whiteboard as an overlay of a shared document, you need to click 
on the Draw button in the share pod.
The share pod provides you with an option to pause screen sharing and annotate by 
using the whiteboard. We will describe this feature in detail in the next chapter.
After you've clicked on the Draw button, a whiteboard turns on with all of its tools 
enabled in the upper-left corner of the pod, as shown in the following screenshot:
In case you've added some drawings, hitting the Draw button again will hide the 
drawings added to a slide. It does not erase them. Thus it is possible to mask a whole 
graph and display it later on the slide. And since Adobe Connect remembers what 
you draw on a presentation (as long as you do not stop sharing), you'll keep your 
drawing forever!
Whiteboard drawing tools
Whiteboard drawing tools are used to create text and drawings on the whiteboard. 
Tools that are available are Shapes, Selection, Pencil, Text, and the Delete Selected, 
Undo, and Redo buttons.

Using a Whiteboard feature in the Meeting Room
[ 82 ]
The Shapes tool
The Shapes tool is used to create different shapes on the whiteboard. By clicking 
on the shapes tool button, the tool will display a list of different shapes. Once you 
select one of the shapes that are available, the customizing appearance tool will be 
enabled on the right-hand side of the toolbar. You can select border and background 
color as well as option for border thickness. You can click on the control points on 
the selected rectangle and drag them to expand the shape. In order to create an even 
width and height for selected shapes you will need to hold down the Shift key while 
dragging the mouse.
The Selection tool
The Selection tool is used to select a desired shape or area on the whiteboard. In 
order to use it, click on a shape to select it. The selection rectangle has eight control 
points for resizing the selected shape and one point that is used for shape rotation. 
Shift and drag a corner control point to maintain the aspect ratio when you resize the 
shape. In order to add text to the shape you need to double-click on it, and a textbox 
will appear. Select and drag a shape to move it around.
The Pencil tool
The Pencil tool is used to create a freeform line. You can customize stroke color 
and stroke weight by using the color picker and the Stroke weight pop-up menu. 
The menu will appear when you select the Pencil tool. Additionally, you can select 
a Highlighter option by holding the pencil tool button. A drop-down menu will 
appear and you will be able to select the Pencil or Highlighter tool (please see the 
following screenshot).

Chapter 8
[ 83 ]
The Text tool
The Text tool allows you to create a floating multiline text field. You can customize 
text fill color, font face, and font size by using the color picker, the Font pop-up 
menu, and the Font size pop-up menu, respectively.
The Delete Selected button
The Delete Selected button is enabled when you select a drawn object by using the 
Selection tool. By clicking on it, you will delete the selected object.
The Undo button
The Undo button deletes current changes on the whiteboard. You can undo the 
actions such as shape drawing, moving a shape, resizing a shape, clearing the 
whiteboard, and changing a shape's property. There is no limit to the number of 
times that you can perform the undo operation in the pod. By using this button it is 
also possible to delete an object individually, whenever it has been created.
The Redo button
The Redo button reverses the undo action on the whiteboard.
Beside these whiteboard drawing tools, you will find one very useful option inside 
the pod option menu. This option is Print. Since a drawing created within Connect 
can't be exported, use this option to print the drawing.
Summary
In this chapter you have learned how to use the whiteboard pod as a standalone 
pod as well as an overlay of a document that is already shared within the share  
pod. Now you can create and customize different shapes and text by using the 
whiteboard features. In the next chapter we will cover screen sharing together  
with all the functionalities of this feature.


Using Screen Sharing
During this chapter, we will cover most of the screen sharing functionalities of share 
pods. After completing this chapter, you will be ready to use various screen sharing 
options available in share pods.
In this chapter, we will cover the following topics:
•	
Starting screen sharing
•	
Desktop sharing
•	
Applications and window sharing
•	
Systray sharing options 
•	
Share pod preferences
Starting screen sharing
In the previous chapter we have described the sharing of documents and 
whiteboards using share pod. Besides these sharing types, share pod allows you 
to share your screen. As before, you can start screen sharing by selecting the Share 
My Screen option from the quick launch menu or from the context menu of a share 
pod. After selecting one of these options you will be presented with the Start Screen 
Sharing dialog box.
Please note that screen sharing is only available while running a meeting using the 
connect add-in. In case you are running a meeting room using only the browser 
application, clicking on Start Screen Sharing will prompt you to install the connect 
add-in and will automatically reload the meeting room using the connect add-in.

Using Screen Sharing
[ 86 ]
In the Start Screen Sharing dialog box, you will find several options, as shown in the 
following screenshot:
As you can see, there are three different options for screen sharing, as follows:
•	
Desktop
•	
Applications
•	
Windows
For each one of these you have additional options, which we will see in the  
next section.
Desktop sharing
Selecting the Desktop sharing option allows you to share the contents of your 
desktop. If you have more than one monitor connected to your computer, a desktop 
icon appears for each monitor. Choose the desktop that you want to share. Note that, 
if needed, you can change the monitor shared once sharing is activated. You will see 
how to do that in the following section.

Chapter 9
[ 87 ]
When you start your screen, the sharing message, Your screen is being shared 
appears and the name of the share pod will change in a way that the name of the 
attendee who is sharing screen will be appended to the name of the share pod. In 
order to make sure your audience see what you are sharing correctly, you can switch 
your pod to full screen and force presenter view.
Please note that screen sharing means that your whole screen will be shrunk in the 
relatively smaller share pod. Thus, if you have a fairly large screen (larger than 
average), reducing its resolution will help your audience see your content properly.
Changing control of a shared screen
While screen sharing, you can pass control of the shared desktop, window, or 
application to another host or presenter.
The instance you start sharing your screen, a Request Control button will appear 
in the share pod of the other hosts and presenters in the meeting. Only users with 
presenter and host rights or users with specific rights granted for the share pod will 
have this button in the upper-right corner of share pod:
If you click on this button, a notification message will appear both for user who is 
sharing and for user who is requesting control, as shown in the following screenshots:
When hosts and presenters request control of the screen, the user who is sharing 
must grant the request. Control cannot be taken without permission.
If for request for control is granted, the Release Control button will appear instead of 
the Request Control button and a notification message will appear, as shown in the 
following screenshots:

Using Screen Sharing
[ 88 ]
Clicking on the Release Control button on the share pod will return control of the 
shared screen to the original host or presenter. Also a notification message will pop 
up, as follows:
Applications and window sharing
The share pod provides you with an option to share just certain applications you 
choose. If you select the Applications option from the Start Screen Sharing dialog 
box, the list of applications running on your computer will be presented to you. 
Selecting one or more of them will share an application and all its related windows 
that are open and running on your computer.
Selecting the Windows sharing option allows you to share one or more windows 
that are open and running on your computer.
The same changing control options apply to application and windows sharing.
When screen sharing starts, the systray icon appears in the taskbar of your  
computer, providing you several different options. In the next section we  
will explain this in detail.

Chapter 9
[ 89 ]
Systray sharing options
On screen sharing start in the taskbar of your computer will appear systray icon of 
connect application, as shown in the following screenshot:
If you click on this icon, a menu with different options will appear. We will now go 
through each one of these. See the following screenshot:
The following are the available options:
•	
Pause and Annotate: If you remember we spoke about this option in 
Chapter 8, Using a Whiteboard Feature in the Meeting Room, where we have 
described using whiteboards. Clicking on this option will open a whiteboard 
as an overlay of a shared screen in a share pod. You will be able to use all 
whiteboard tools in order to focus other attendees' attention to the part of the 
shared screen that you want. You will also notice that in the options of the 
systray icon now you have the Resume Sharing option instead of Pause and 
Annotate. Clicking on this will resume your screen sharing. Note that the 
annotations will be lost, unless you print them out before resuming.
•	
Change Shared Display: If you are in the desktop sharing mode, you will 
find the Change Shared Display option, which allows you to change a 
shared monitor if you have one.
•	
Choose Window to Share...: Also, you can easily switch to the window 
sharing mode by clicking on the Choose Window to Share... option in the 
menu of the systray icon.
•	
Stop Screen Sharing and Stop Control: These shared screen options are also 
available in this menu.

Using Screen Sharing
[ 90 ]
Share pod preferences
In order to optimize screen sharing quality, you will need to open the share pod's 
Preferences dialog box. In the share pod context menu click on the Preferences option.
You will be presented with the Preferences dialog box. In this dialog box you can set 
the Quality and Frame Rate for your screen sharing.
For example, if there are large delays before attendees see changes to a shared screen, 
reduce the Quality setting. Or, if smooth motion is essential for a video you are 
sharing, increase Frame Rate. See the following screenshot:
Summary
During this chapter you have learned how to use screen sharing options. You can 
now successfully share your desktop, applications, and windows using a share 
pod. Also you learned how to use whiteboard features while sharing your screen. 
We have also gone through some basics about setting sharing quality using the 
Preferences dialog box. Now you are ready to use a share pod with all of its 
functionalities, sharing documents, whiteboards, and screens.

Customizing Pod Display
In this chapter, we will go through:
•	
The Pods menu description
•	
The pod's Preferences dialog
•	
Managing pods
In this chapter, you will learn how to adjust your layouts by displaying different pods 
in it. We will talk about context menu of pods and about the pods Preferences dialog.
The Pods menu description
During previous chapters, while we were talking about share pods, we spoke about 
context menu. Every pod in a meeting room (chat, note, web links, poll pod, and 
so on) has its own context menu with different menu options depending on pod 
type. For each pod, the context menu has some specific options, and some common 
options that are placed in the context menu of every pod. In order to open a context 
menu, you need to click on a button placed in the upper-right corner of each pod. We 
can see three different sections in each context menu. See the following screenshot:

Customizing Pod Display
[ 92 ]
The options in the first and third sections are common for context menus of each 
pod. In the first section there are options for hiding, maximizing, and restoring pods. 
In the third section you will find help options, which are linked to the online help, 
and you will also find a preferences option that displays a Preferences dialog box 
where you can set some additional options for each pod.
In the middle section you will find options specific for each pod. We will explain in 
detail these options when we come to chapters for each pod.
The pod's Preferences dialog
By clicking on the Preferences option in the context menu of each pod, the user will 
be presented with the Preference pop-up dialog box. You can also open this dialog 
box by clicking on the Meeting option in the main menu of the meeting room and 
then the Preferences option. See the next screenshot:
Within the left-hand side of this dialog box, you will find nine tabs for adjusting 
additional options of meeting room and meeting room pods. Note that in this dialog 
box there are options such as Video, Screen Share, Attendees Pod, Chat Pod, and Q 
& A Pod. Also, only in context menu of these pods, you will find preferences options 
mentioned before.
Besides pod options there are some general settings for Room Appearance, Room 
Bandwidth, and Audio Settings.

Chapter 10
[ 93 ]
Managing pods
Each of the default layouts has its own pods placed in certain locations within 
meeting room. Hosts can show, hide, add, delete, rearrange, and organize pods. 
More than one instance of a pod (except Attendees Pod and Video) can be displayed 
in a meeting at the same time. From the Pods menu you can add new pods, hide and 
show already existing pods. See the next screenshot:
To show a pod, select it from the Pods menu; note here that a pod will appear in 
Presenter Only Area when it is enabled. For pods that can have multiple instances, 
select the instance name from the submenu. A check mark appears next to the names 
of pods that are currently visible in the meeting. To hide a pod, deselect it in the Pods 
menu, or click on the menu icon in the upper-right corner of the pod and choose Hide.
You can also display a pod at maximum size. When you maximize a pod, it expands 
to fill the whole meeting room (either within the browser window or when the add-
in is used). You can do this by clicking on the Maximize option in the context menu 
of a pod. In order to restore pod size, just click on the Restore option in the context 
menu of a pod.
In the Pods menu of the Main Menu bar, you will found the Add New option 
for each pod type. Clicking on it will automatically add a new pod instance to the 
existing meeting room. Also, in the previous screenshot, you can see that each 
instance of a selected pod type is listed in the Pods menu.
In this menu you will also find the Move and Resize Pods option. By enabling it, you 
will be able to move and resize your pods in the meeting room area. To move a pod, 
drag it by its title bar. To resize a pod, drag any corner or side. Remember that only 
hosts can manage pods. Neither participants nor presenters can do so.

Customizing Pod Display
[ 94 ]
Organize pods
You can see the full list of existing pods in the Manage Pods dialog. In the menu bar, 
follow these steps:
1.	 Select Pods.
2.	 Click on Manage Pods.
You will be presented with the Dialog pop up. See the following screenshot:
Here you can see the list of all pods created in the meeting room. The first 
column contains information about pod type and the second contains the 
name of the pod instance created in the meeting. Using this dialog box you 
can rename or remove selected pods from the list. This dialog box also allows 
you to easily detect which of the pods from the meeting room are currently 
unused by clicking on the Select Unused button. After that, all unused pods 
will be selected. See the following screenshot:

Chapter 10
[ 95 ]
3.	 Now you can delete all of them by clicking on the Delete button. Hitting 
Done will close the window anytime.
Summary
In this chapter we have covered basics for managing meeting room pods. Now 
you can easily adjust meeting room layouts according to your needs. You can add, 
remove, resize, move, hide, and show pods within the meeting room. In next chapter 
we will cover some more features for customizing and managing layouts.


Customizing and Saving 
Layouts
In this chapter you will learn how to create and manage layouts of meeting room. 
This will help you adjust the meeting room's appearance and save changes for future 
meeting sessions. Moreover, the use of layouts will automatically enhance the table 
of content of recordings.
In this chapter, we will go through the following topics:
•	
Creating layouts
•	
Managing layouts
•	
Changing and managing layouts during a meeting
Creating layouts
In order to create a new layout you will use the layout menu presented in the  
main menu of a meeting room or the layout bar placed on the right-hand side  
of a meeting room. Both, the layout menu and layout bar, are visible only to 
attendees with host rights.

Customizing and Saving Layouts
[ 98 ]
To create a blank layout on which you can manually add pods, go to the main  
menu and click on the Layouts tab. In the layout menu select the Create new 
layout… option. Another way is to click on the + button in the lower-right  
corner of the layout bar, as shown in the following screenshots:
After selecting one of these options you will be presented with the Create a New 
Layout dialog box. In this dialog box you are provided with two different options  
for creating a new layout. You can create a blank layout or you can duplicate an 
existing layout. Below these options is the text input field for entering the new layout 
name, as shown in the following screenshot:
Selecting the first option for creating a layout will automatically set the new created 
layout to active, and the meeting room area will be empty, without any pods inside 
it. Selecting the second option will create a new layout based on the layout selected 
in the combo box. Clicking on the OK button will automatically set this layout to 
active and all pods from the layout you have copied will be present at the same 
location and with the same size in the meeting room area.

Chapter 11
[ 99 ]
In the layout menu as well as on the layout bar you can see which layout is currently 
active. In the following screenshots you can see that the newly created layout, which 
we called Test Layout, is now present and active:
Managing layouts
The default layouts are the Sharing, Discussion, and Collaboration layouts. You  
can easily delete, rename, or change the order of layouts.
To rename a layout go to the layouts menu and click on the Manage Layouts option.  
In the Manage Layouts dialog box you will be presented with the options to select 
the layout you want to rename. Click on the Rename button to change the name.
You can also rename the layout by double-clicking on the layout in the layout bar. 
In this dialog box you can also arrange the layout order. Just select the layout and 
click on the up or down buttons to reorder layouts. Please note that you can reorder 
layouts by simply dragging a layout in the layout bar to a desired position. See the 
following screenshots:

Customizing and Saving Layouts
[ 100 ]
Similarly, you can delete layouts using the Delete button. Note that if you delete  
the layout that is currently in use, the default sharing layout will be applied to  
the meeting.
Changing and managing layouts during  
a meeting
The layout menu and the layout bar are visible only to hosts. The default layouts  
are Sharing, Discussion, and Collaboration. Any custom layouts are also listed.  
The layout bar also displays thumbnails for the layouts. When a host chooses a 
different layout, the new layout appears on every attendee's screen. You can switch 
to another layout by clicking on the layout name in the layout menu or selecting 
layout from the layout bar.
Please note that if all the layouts do not fit in the layout bar to scroll 
through the layouts, hover the pointer over the first or the last layout 
previews. You can also use the panning options or the mouse wheel to 
scroll through.
You can also adjust a layout during a meeting without affecting the active layout 
currently seen by other attendees. To do this, select Meeting from the main menu 
and click on the Switch to Prepare Mode option. From the layout menu or the 
layout bar, select the layout that you would like to adjust. Afterwards, you can 
move, hide, or show pods as needed. When you are finished with adjusting the 
layout, choose the Meeting option from the main menu and click on the End 
Prepare Mode option in order to close it. Then, you will be back to the layout you 
quit while activating Prepare Mode. Prepare Mode is described in detail in Chapter 
6, Meeting Room Overview.
Reset layouts to revert to the default layouts. Any modifications to the Sharing, 
Discussion, and Collaboration layouts are reverted, and custom layouts are deleted. 
To do this in the layout menu click on the Reset Layout option. The confirmation 
dialog box will appear. Clicking on Reset will reset default layouts to a default state.
Please note that you cannot reset layouts if a meeting is being recorded.

Chapter 11
[ 101 ]
Specifying layout bar options
Layout bar options let you specify the docking position and auto hide settings. By 
clicking on the button in the upper-left corner of layout bar, you can see available 
options for the layout bar, as shown in the following screenshot:
The following are the available options:
•	
Dock to the left: Enables docking the layout bar to the left-hand side of the 
meeting room window.
•	
Dock to the right: Enables docking the layout bar to the right-hand side edge 
of the meeting room window.
•	
Auto Hide: Enables auto hiding the layout bar. Click on this option to pull 
out the layout bar.
Summary
In this chapter you learned how to create and manage meeting room layouts.  
Now after reading both this and the previous chapters you can easily adjust  
your meeting room appearance and save those settings for future meeting sessions.  
We have also covered most of the functionalities of the layout bar and learned how  
to quickly adjust a meeting room layout using these features.


Recording Adobe  
Connect Meetings
In this chapter we will demonstrate how you can record meeting, manage meeting 
recordings, and review and edit particular meeting recording. By the end of this 
chapter you will have adequate knowledge about applicable recording features for 
meetings included in the Connect application. In this chapter, we will explain to  
you how to:
•	
Record a meeting
•	
Manage recorded meetings
•	
Play back recorded meeting
•	
Edit a recorded meeting
•	
Create an offline recording
Recording a meeting
In order to start recording a meeting, a user must have a host role in a meeting. It is 
important to note that all of the actions, that are performed inside a meeting room 
will be recorded. The only exceptions to this rule are Presenter Only Area, which has 
been already described in Chapter 6, Meeting Room Overview, and breakout rooms, 
which will be described in detail in later chapters of this book. When a meeting is 
played back, recording will contain the exact events that meeting attendees were 
able to see or hear while recording a meeting. Additionally, by reviewing a recording 
you should be able to review meeting attendees and their roles. In order to start 
recording your meeting you should perform the following steps:
1.	 Click on the Meeting option in the meeting room main menu.
2.	 Click on the Record Meeting… option.

Recording Adobe Connect Meetings
[ 104 ]
3.	 The Record Meeting dialog box will pop up.
4.	 In the Name textbox you can enter your recording name and in the  
Summary textbox you have the option to add a more detailed description  
of a specific recording.
5.	 Click on the OK button.
   
After a meeting recording is started, you should be able to see the red dot in the 
meeting room main menu on the far right, as shown in the following screenshot:
This red dot is an indicator that your meeting is being recorded. It is also important 
to mention here that the host can start or stop meeting recording at any given time 
during the meeting. Every meeting recording is associated with a unique URL 
address, which is assigned automatically and will be saved in the recording list  
of meetings in the Recordings tab on the Meeting Information page.
Managing meeting recordings
In order to manage recordings associated with a meeting, you will need to navigate 
to the Meeting Information page for a specific meeting as we already described in 
Chapter 3, Managing Adobe Connect Meeting Room. When you navigate to the Meeting 
Information page, click on the Recordings tab marked with a red outline, as shown 
in the following screenshot. When you complete this action, the Recordings page 
will load.

Chapter 12
[ 105 ]
This page will provide you with functionalities that will enable you to manage or 
edit specific recordings for the meeting. We will teach you how to delete existing 
recording, edit recording information, move a particular recording to a different 
folder, and create recordings that are available for public viewing.
Deleting recordings
To delete an already existing recording, users should perform the following steps:
1.	 Click on the checkbox to the left-hand side of the desired recording name; see 
the preceding screenshot.
2.	 Click on the Delete button.
3.	 You will be redirected to the confirmation page; then click on the Delete 
button again.
4.	 By completing this you will permanently delete the selected  
meeting recording.
Moving recordings
This operation is very similar to any other move operation that is already  
described in this book. In order to move the recording, you will need to  
perform the following steps:
1.	 Click on the checkbox to the left-hand side of any recording that you want to 
move to another location.
2.	 Click on the Move To Folder button.
3.	 You are now on the Move To Folder page.
4.	 In the Move To This Folder section in the right-hand part of this page, 
navigate to the location to which you would like to transfer the chosen 
recording or multiple recordings.
5.	 Click on the Move button.
6.	 You will be prompted with the message – The following items were  
moved successfully.

Recording Adobe Connect Meetings
[ 106 ]
Enabling recordings for public viewing
To enable public viewing of a recording you will need to perform the following steps:
1.	 Click on the checkbox on the left-hand side of the chosen recording name.
2.	 Click on the Make Public button.
3.	 After completing these steps, you should see that the value will be changed 
in the Access column from Private to Public.
The following screenshot outlines the preceding steps:
When the access to a recording is set to Public, anyone who has the recording 
URL address will be able to review it without the need to log in to the Connect 
application. If you switch the access to the meeting recording back to Private by 
clicking on the Make Private button, users will need to log in to Connect before  
they can view the meeting recording.
Editing recording information
In order to edit recording information you should execute the following steps:
1.	 Click on the preferred recording name in the recordings list.
2.	 The Recording Information page will be displayed to you. On this page you 
can review recording data including recording duration, recording name, 
summary, and the recording URL.
3.	 In the recording information bar click on the Edit link.
4.	 Change the recording name, summary, or language and click on the  
Save button.

Chapter 12
[ 107 ]
Playing back a recorded meeting
By now, we've demonstrated that once the meeting is recorded, it can be reviewed 
multiple times until the recording is deleted, as described previously. In order to 
play back an already existing recording navigate to the Recording Information page 
as shown in the preceding screenshot and click on the URL For Viewing link. By 
doing this you will start the recorded meeting. In addition to the actions and events 
recorded in a meeting, users should be able to see a recording navigation bar in the 
bottom part of the window of played back recording. The recording navigation bar 
should look similar to the one shown in the following screenshot:
The recording navigation bar contains the following functional buttons:
•	
Start/Pause button: This button toggles between recording  
play/pause states.
•	
Progress marker: The users can use this functionality to jump to a  
desired position. This can be done by dragging the pointer marker  
on the progress bar.
•	
Elapsed/Total time marker: This displays total recording length and current 
progress marker position.
•	
Volume control button: The users can adjust volume levels by dragging the 
button in order to increase/decrease volume.
Furthermore, there is an additional functionality that enables users to navigate 
throughout recordings. This functionality allows users to navigate to a specific event 
in recordings. Events that are captured in recording include chat messages, layout 
changes, slide changes, and attendee's changes. In order to use this navigation 
option, you will need to click on the little triangle on the left-hand side of the 
window where recording is played back. After clicking on the triangle, you  
should see the Events Index panel, as shown in the following screenshot:

Recording Adobe Connect Meetings
[ 108 ]
In this panel you can navigate to a specific meeting event that was recorded (for 
example, a layout change). In addition, this panel contains the Filter Events pop-up 
menu. By using filters, users can list all recorded events, a specific event, or multiple 
selections of the captured events. The Events Index panel contains the Search 
functionality, so you can perform various event searches inside the recording. By 
describing this panel, we have finished our review of the functionalities associated 
with recording playback. The next step for us is to demonstrate to you how to edit 
meeting recording.
Editing recorded meeting
In this section we will focus on functionalities and ways to edit already existing 
meeting recording. This functionality is very useful in cases where there is plenty of 
silence inside the meeting that has been recorded. In order to eliminate parts with 
usual silence during the recording, users can modify parts of the recording where 
silence is present. We will explain two ways to start recording in the edit mode, as 
follows:
•	
The first method to start recording in the edit mode is by clicking on the Edit 
button in recordings table associated with a specific meeting. The Edit button 
is marked with a red outline in the following screenshot:
•	
The second method to execute the same operation is to click on the Edit 
button on the Recording Information page. You can see a sample of this 
page and how to navigate to it in the Managing meeting recordings section.
After you start recording in the edit mode, instead of seeing the recording navigation 
bar described previously, now you will see the bar with slight changes:
This bar contains an additional four buttons: Cut, Undo, Save, and REVERT TO 
ORIGINAL, and selection markers. In order to edit a meeting recording by using 
this bar, users can perform the following steps:
1.	 Use selection markers to select a certain position in the recording that you 
want to remove from it.
2.	 Click on the Cut button.

Chapter 12
[ 109 ]
3.	 After doing this, in order to permanently save changes, users will need to 
click on the Save button.
4.	 As a form of verification that changes were made successfully, users should 
be able to see changes in the total recording length after the playback restart.
After the changes to the recording are made, the REVERT TO ORIGINAL button 
will be enabled. If for some reason you realize that changes made to a recording 
were incorrect, you can click on the REVERT TO ORIGINAL button. By using 
this button, users can remove the applied changes to the recording and restore the 
original meeting recording no matter how many changes were made. Compared 
to the REVERT TO ORIGINAL button, the Undo button will only revert the last 
change applied to the meeting recording.
Users can edit meeting recording as many times as needed. In the meantime, the 
URL for the recording will always remain the same. Once the changes to a recording 
are made and saved successfully, the View Original column in the recording table 
field will be populated. You can notice the difference by comparing the screenshot on 
the previous page and the following screenshot:
By clicking on the link populated in the View Original column marked with a red 
outline, you have the option to review the original meeting recording. Only the 
original recording and last edited meeting recording are available for playback since 
Connect application will always have only these two versions.
Creating an offline recording
Now that you are familiar with reviewing a recording and editing it in order to 
eliminate parts when there were no actions in a meeting, we will show you how to 
create an offline recording. This feature is very useful in a case where you would like 
to review a recording without Internet access. In order to use this functionality, you 
must have Adobe Connect add-in installed in order to create an offline recording. To 
create an offline recording click on the Make Offline link in the desired recording 
row, as shown in the following screenshot:
 

Recording Adobe Connect Meetings
[ 110 ]
When you create an offline recording for the first time, the Offline Recording dialog 
box will be displayed. If you don't want to see this message anymore, perform the 
following steps:
1.	 Click on the checkbox next to the label, Don't show this message again.
2.	 Click on the Proceed with Offline Recording button.
When you complete this action, you will be able to choose a download location for 
the selected recording. When you browse to the desired location, click on the Save 
button. By completing this action, you downloaded a chosen meeting recording and 
saved it to a selected location as a .flv file. Since you have downloaded this file 
for further review of the recording, you won't need Internet access or access to the 
Adobe Connect application. The only application needed to review the file is any 
available player that supports the FLV file format.
Summary
In this chapter we explained to you one of the essential Connect functionalities, 
meeting recordings. We guided you through the process of creation. During this 
chapter you have also passed different managing functionalities over the meeting 
recording and finally we taught you how to play back and edit recordings. So by 
now you should have a clear picture about built-in recording functionalities and how 
to use them. The next chapter will give you information on how you may use file 
share, web links, and poll pod inside a meeting room.

Sharing Files, Polls, and  
Web Links
After demonstrating recording functionalities in the previous chapter, once again we 
will visit the meeting room for additional guidelines. Just to remind you (in case you 
forgot), pods are visual component containers with defined functionalities. Starting 
from Chapter 8, Using a Whiteboard Feature in the Meeting Room, and continuing 
until Chapter 10, Customizing Pod Display, we described the share pod and its 
functionalities. In this chapter we will continue with the introduction of other pods. 
This chapter will focus on various functionalities of the file share pod, poll pod, and 
web links pod. At the end of this chapter you should have a sound knowledge on 
how to use the mentioned pods. This chapter will teach you how to use:
•	
File share pod
•	
Poll pod
•	
Web links pod
The file share pod
The first pod that we will introduce to you is the file share pod. The primary function 
of this pod is to share files among the meeting participants. The files can be uploaded 
to the file share pod, as well as downloaded from it. The important thing to mention 
in relation to a file share pod is that only hosts and presenters can upload files. In 
order to activate a file share pod, a user needs to follow the following steps:
1.	 Click on the Pods option in the meeting room main menu.
2.	 Then, click on the Files item in the meeting room's Pods menu.

Sharing Files, Polls, and Web Links
[ 112 ]
After doing this, the user should be able to see the file share pod submenu.
This submenu contains two items that are available as options. By clicking on the 
Add New File Share menu item, a user can add an additional file share pod to an 
already running meeting in case there is a need for this. The upper-right corner of 
the next screenshot displays submenu content after the additional file share pod is 
added. After clicking on the Files menu item, you will activate the file share pod and 
it will appear in the meeting room, as shown in the following screenshot:
The file share pod consists of two columns: the first column is titled Name and it 
will display the name of the file; the second column is titled Size. The Size column 
shows the actual size of the shared file to a user. Just as with the functionality of 
the share pod, you can find the Pod Options button in the upper-right corner of 
the pod. When you click on this button, the Pods menu will appear and you will be 
able to choose among several options that are accessible. Now that we have gone 
through these basic functions of the file share pod, we will demonstrate to you how 
to upload, download, remove, and rename the chosen files.

Chapter 13
[ 113 ]
Uploading a file
In order to upload a file located on your computer to the file share pod, a host or 
presenter will need to execute the following steps:
1.	 Click on the Upload File… button in the left-bottom part of the file share  
pod or click on the Pod Options button and select the Upload File …  
menu option.
2.	 The Select Document to Share dialog box will be shown. This functionality 
was described in Chapter 7, Sharing Presentations.
3.	 Click on the Browse My Computer… button.
4.	 Navigate to the desired file that you would like to upload.
5.	 Click on the Open button.
6.	 By completing this, the file is uploaded and it should be visible inside the file 
share pod, as shown in the following screenshot:
In addition to uploading a file from your computer as shown in the previous 
example, there are three additional options available in the the Select Document 
to Share dialog box. These options are: Uploaded Files, Shared Content, and My 
Content. You can read more details about the listed options in Chapter 7, Sharing 
Presentations. Meeting attendees with participant roles can add files inside the 
file share pod as well. In order to do this, they should have enhanced participant 
privileges assigned to this pod. A meeting host has the ability to grant them 
enhanced privileges.
Downloading a file
It is important to note that all meeting attendees have the right to download 
files from the file share pod without restrictions related to their meeting role. To 
download a file from the file share pod, a user should perform the following steps:
1.	 Select the chosen file inside file share pod. You can download several or all 
files using multiple selections (using the Ctrl or Shift keys).
2.	 Click on the Download File(s) button, which will be enabled when any file is 
uploaded. This button is located on the bottom-left part of the file share pod.

Sharing Files, Polls, and Web Links
[ 114 ]
3.	 A new tab will be opened in your default browser, and you will need to 
locate the Click to Download link inside the newly opened page. Depending 
on the computer user settings, the browser tab may appear behind the 
meeting room. Then the user needs to look for it on its computer.
4.	 When you click on this link, you will see the dialog box the shown in the  
following screenshot:
5.	 After you click on the OK button and select the radio button next to the  
Save File option, you will download the file to your default location  
on your computer.
In addition to downloading a single file, Adobe Connect supports downloading 
multiple files that are shared inside the file share pod. In the case where a user wants 
to download all of the shared files, the user can also click on the Pod Options button 
and select the Download All option from the pod options menu.
Removing a file
To remove a chosen file from the file share pod, users with adequate privileges will 
need to follow these steps:
1.	 Select the chosen file inside the file share pod.
2.	 Select the Remove Selected menu option from the pod option menu.
3.	 A confirmation dialog box will be displayed.
4.	 Click on the Remove File(s) button.
When you complete these steps, the selected file is successfully removed from the file 
share pod and it should be removed from the file list.

Chapter 13
[ 115 ]
Renaming a file
This function changes the name of a selected file inside the file share pod, while it 
doesn't rename a file on your filesystem or in the Content library, in cases where that 
file was used for a previous upload. To change a filename inside the pod, you will 
need to perform the following steps:
1.	 Select the desired file inside the file share pod.
2.	 Click on the Rename Selected menu option from the pod option menu.  
The Edit File Name dialog will be shown.
3.	 Enter a new name for the selected file in the text field and click on the  
OK button.
4.	 With this example we finished the review of the file share pod all  
together with its functionalities, and now we can continue to the  
poll pod functionalities.
The poll pod
Another built-in pod type in the Connect application is the poll pod. The poll pod 
is very useful for hosts and presenters when they want to gather feedback from 
meeting attendees. The hosts and presenters have the ability to create different kind 
of polls (for example, multiple questions or multiple answers polls) and to review 
given results. The poll pod is initially visible in a meeting room when the Discussion 
layout or some other custom-made layout is used. In cases where you need to enable 
a poll pod (in addition to previously described ways you can access it) you should 
follow these steps:
1.	 Click on the Pods option in a meeting room main menu.
2.	 Click on the Poll item in a meeting room's Pods menu.

Sharing Files, Polls, and Web Links
[ 116 ]
3.	 Click on the Poll submenu option.
The following screenshot illustrates these steps:
You can see that the option Add New Poll is present in the Poll submenu. This 
suggests that you can have as many polls inside a meeting room as you need. Once 
you click on the Poll submenu option, the poll pod will be added to a currently 
running meeting room. The poll pod should look like this:
Our main point of interest for further feature explanation of this pod will be the 
drop-down menu, which gives a user the option to choose poll type as well as the 
Pod Options button. After you click on the Pod Options button, a pop-up menu 
will appear and you will find different functionalities associated with a poll. We will 
explain and guide you through these functionalities by going through a couple  
of examples.

Chapter 13
[ 117 ]
Creating a poll
Before we create a poll, it is necessary to explain the differences among the three 
basic poll types. If a user creates a multiple questions poll, attendees can vote 
only for one of the offered options. The second case is where user creates multiple 
answers poll. Here, attendees can vote for multiple options that are offered. The third 
and the  
final poll type is the short answer poll. In this poll attendees will need to provide a 
short answer to a presented question. Only presenters and hosts have the ability to 
create polls. In order to create a poll, users with adequate privileges should follow 
these steps:
1.	 In the drop-down menu in the upper-left part of the pod, choose the poll type 
you would like to create. The poll types that are offered are Multiple Choice, 
Multiple Answers, and Short Answer.
2.	 In the Question text field you will need to enter a question (for example, 
What is your favorite color?).
3.	 In cases where you didn't select the Short Answer poll type, you will  
need to enter answers in the text area. Answers should be entered one 
answer per single line (for example: add red, green, and blue). You can 
copy/paste your questions and answers from any notepad.
4.	 Now, the Open button should be enabled and you can click on it.
5.	 By completing this, you have opened your new poll for meeting  
attendees voting.
After a poll is created it can be closed after any period of time. When a poll is closed 
any additional changes to the votes will not be applied to a poll result. In order to 
close the poll for further votes, you will need to click on the Close button.

Sharing Files, Polls, and Web Links
[ 118 ]
Showing voting results
In order to vote any meeting, attendees can click on their preferred option and 
changes in the poll will be applied immediately, as well as it will also be shown in 
the real time to hosts and presenters. In order to change how results are displayed, 
you can follow these steps:
1.	 Click on the Pod Options button in the upper-right corner.
2.	 Select the Result Format menu option.
3.	 Choose among one of the three options offered: Show as %, Show as 
Numbers, and Show Both.
If you would like to show the overall vote results to all meeting attendees including 
participants, you can click on the checkbox Broadcast Results. In order to see how a 
particular meeting attendee voted, you should click on the View Votes button. In the 
first column titled Attendee, you will find the attendee name, and in second column 
titled Answer, you will find submitted poll options for that user.
Editing polls
Once a poll is opened, you can edit it by following these steps:
1.	 Click on the Prepare button in the upper-right corner.
2.	 Add necessary changes to the poll.
3.	 Now, click again on the Open button.
The Poll pod functionalities are now covered. Note that hitting the Prepare button 
will reset the results. Beware of this during your polling sessions!
The web links pod
In cases where there is a need to give access to a specific web page to all meeting 
attendees inside a meeting, you should use the web links pod. Only hosts and 
presenters can copy/paste a URL in the chat pod. With just one click participants can 
open the web page in their default browsers. Initially this pod is not present inside a 
meeting room and, in order to add it, a user should follow these steps that are similar 
to the previous two cases:
1.	 Click on the Pods option in the meeting room main menu.
2.	 Click on the Web Links item in the meeting room's Pods menu.

Chapter 13
[ 119 ]
3.	 Click on the Add New Web Links submenu option.
The previous screenshot illustrates previously described steps. Once this is 
completed, a web links pod should be present in a meeting room and it will be 
available for further usage. The Web links 2 pod looks like the following screenshot:
This pod contains only two buttons: the first one is the Browse To button in the 
lower-left part of the window and second one is the Pod Options button in the 
upper-right part of the window. The commonly used functionalities in this pod  
are Add Link, Remove Link, Rename Link, and Browse To. We will describe  
them individually:

Sharing Files, Polls, and Web Links
[ 120 ]
Adding link
To add a link to a web links pod, a user should complete the following steps:
1.	 Click on the Add Link… menu option from the pod option menu. The Add 
Link dialog will be shown.
2.	 In the URL Path text field you will need to enter a URL address of the 
desired page (for example, www.google.com).
3.	 In the URL Name text field you will need to enter a name that best describes 
the entered web page (for example, Google).
4.	 Click on the OK button to add a link.
5.	 After you go through all of the mentioned steps, this link should be present 
inside the web links pod.
Displaying a web page
Once a web link is added to the web links pod to display the chosen page, the user 
should perform the following steps:
1.	 Select the link in the web links pod.
2.	 Once the link is selected, a URL address should be shown in the text field 
next to the Browse To button.
3.	 Click on the Browse To button.
4.	 This will automatically open your default browser and load your chosen 
page to all meeting attendees.

Chapter 13
[ 121 ]
Renaming a link or changing a link's URL
In the case where a user realizes that there is a need to rename an already added 
link inside the web links pod, the user will need to complete the following steps to 
rename it:
1.	 Select a desired link that you would like to rename.
2.	 Choose the Rename Selected Link… item from the pod options menu.
3.	 This will open the Modify Link dialog, which looks exactly like the 
previously captured Add Link.
4.	 Here, a user can edit the link name or the URL address.
5.	 After clicking on the OK button, all changes will be saved permanently.
Removing a link
When user needs to remove an already added link from the web links pod, these 
steps need to be followed:
1.	 Select the chosen link.
2.	 Select the Remove Selected menu option from the pod options menu.
3.	 By doing this your link will be removed.
At this point we have gone through all of the functionalities of the web links pod, 
and we have completed describing functionalities associated with this pod.
Summary
In this chapter we explained frequently used functionalities such as file sharing, 
web links, and poll pods. You should be able to use these pods in everyday 
communication with confidence. In the next chapter you will learn how to manage 
text messages and questions using Chat, Notes, and Q&A pods.


Managing Text Messages 
and Questions
In this chapter we will continue introducing various meeting room pods to you. 
Throughout this chapter we will cover functionalities of the most common pods used 
in meeting conversations. This group consists of:
•	
Chat pod
•	
Notes pod
•	
Questions and answers pod (also named Q&A)
At the end of this chapter you should be completely confident about using the 
preceding pods.
Chat pod
We will start with chat pod functionality. If you used a default template when 
meeting was created, a chat pod will be initially available inside the meeting room 
and will be placed in the lower-right part of the meeting room. In case that you are 
using a custom-created template and if you are missing a chat pod, you will need to 
perform the following steps:
1.	 Click on the Pods menu in the meeting room main menu.
2.	 Click on the Chat item in the meeting room's Pods menu.
3.	 Click on one of the two offered options. You can click on Chat if you  
want to display a chat pod in the meeting room, or you can click on the  
Add New Chat menu item in order to add additional chat pod to a  
currently running meeting.

Managing Text Messages and Questions
[ 124 ]
Regardless of how a chat pod is enabled, it will look exactly the same as the  
following screenshot:
Chat pod is used for conversation between meeting attendees. By using chat pods, 
attendees can leave a message to a specific user, send a message to all attendees with 
particular roles such as presenters or hosts, and post public message to all meeting 
attendees. In order to create any of the three previously mentioned chat messages 
you should perform the following steps:
1.	 Select the Start Chat With option from the Pod Options menu.
2.	 In the submenu select a desired message recipient among the Hosts, 
Presenters, and Attendees options (for this example, we will select  
the Hosts option).
When you do so, a new tab will be added to the chat pod and will be highlighted,  
as shown in the following screenshot:
After you enter a message text in the text field, click on the Send button, 
 or press 
the Enter key on your keyboard. The message will be sent and should be displayed 
inside the chat pod. In addition to this option you can also find options for text 
customization in the Pod Options menu. These options are as follows:
•	
Text Size: This option allows users to choose different font sizes for the chat 
pod text. Users can choose font size in the range from 8 to 72.

Chapter 14
[ 125 ]
•	
My Chat Color: This option provides users with an ability to change font 
color. The colors that are offered are red, orange, green, brown, purple, 
pink, blue, and black.
•	
Show Timestamps: This option is only available for a meeting host; by 
selecting this option a timestamp with the message time and date will be 
added to the chat pod and will be visible to all meeting attendees.
After sample customization changes are applied, the chat pod text area might look 
like the following screenshot:
Chat pod content is permanent, and it will stay in the chat pod regardless of how 
many times a meeting is closed or reopened until it is removed by a meeting host.
In order to remove chat content from the pod, perform the following steps:
1.	 From the Pod Options menu, select the Clear Chat History option.
2.	 You should be able to see a message in the chat pod – The chat history  
has been cleared.
In case when a host wants to save a chat history before removing content from 
the pod as described previously, the Email Chat History functionality should be 
utilized. This can be done by performing the following steps:
1.	 From the Pod Options menu select the Email Chat History option.
2.	 Once this is done, the host should be able to see a notification message in the 
upper-right part of the screen, as shown in the following screenshot:

Managing Text Messages and Questions
[ 126 ]
By covering these options, we have covered all of the functionalities of the chat 
pod menu. In addition to these functionalities, you will find additional chat pod 
functionalities in the Preferences dialog box under the Chat section. You can  
access the Preferences dialog box by performing the following steps:
1.	 Click on the Meeting main menu option.
2.	 Click on the Preferences menu item.
Here, users with a host role can find a checkbox to enable or disable private chat for 
participants and will find a drop-down menu to choose the time for chat notification 
messages. These messages are used when a user is in the screen share mode or if the 
meeting window is minimized and new messages arrive in the chat pod. In this case 
users will see a notification message similar to the message used in the Email Chat 
History functionality in the lower-right corner of the screen. By describing these 
items we covered all of the functionalities of a chat pod.
Notes pod
In a situation when there is a need to capture various meeting notes, to create 
particular meeting reminder, or to write an agenda to prepare for a meeting, hosts 
can rely on the notes pod. Hosts and presenters have read and write permissions 
over the notes pod while attendees only have read permissions by the default setting. 
Meeting hosts can create and display notes pod. To display or create one, they will 
need to perform the following steps:
1.	 Click on the Pods menu in the meeting room main menu.
2.	 Click on the Notes item in the meeting room's Pods menu.

Chapter 14
[ 127 ]
3.	 Click on the Notes menu item or on the Add New Note menu item.
Hosts have the ability to add as many notes pods as they need. Notes pods can be 
resized and moved to any place inside a meeting room. To move the notes pod click 
on the title bar and drag the pod to your preferred position. In order to resize the 
pod, place your mouse pointer at any corner of the notes pod and drag it to resize  
it to a wanted size.
To add a note inside the notes pod simply click anywhere inside the text area  
and add text. The preceding screenshot shows the notes pod with a sample note 
entered. Once a note is added, it can be edited as well. To edit a note, perform  
the following steps:
1.	 Select the text inside the notes pod that you want to edit.
2.	 From the text toolbar, select the option to change the font color, size, or style.
3.	 Changes should be immediately applied to all meeting attendees.
Hosts, presenters, and participants with additional administrative privileges for 
the notes pod will have the ability to edit already added notes. In case you have 
forgotten how to add enhanced privileges to a participant for any pod, you can 
review the steps, which are described in detail in Chapter 6, Meeting Room Overview. 
Once a note is added to the notes pod, it will remain there until the host deletes it.  
In the meantime, the host can switch between different pod layouts, but if the same 
pod is used, note that is added will be visible in the pod. Also, if the host decides to 
end and restart a meeting, same note will remain visible to meeting attendees.  

Managing Text Messages and Questions
[ 128 ]
In order to avoid this situation, hosts can use different notes pods for different 
layouts. If for some reason hosts would like to save notes before deleting them, the 
Export Note functionality should be used. This functionality is available under the 
Pod Options menu. Users can choose between two options for saving a specific note: 
Email Note …, which will e-mail a note to an entered e-mail recipient or Save as 
Rtf …, which will save the selected note in the .rtf format. .rtf files can easily be 
opened with Microsoft Word or any other word processor software.
Now that we are finished with options that enable users to download pod content, 
we will explain how to delete previously added notes pods. To complete this 
operation users should perform the following steps:
1.	 Click on Pods in the meeting room main menu.
2.	 Click on the Manage Pods menu option.
3.	 The Manage Pods dialog box will be displayed.
4.	 Select the desired notes pod you want to remove.
5.	 Click on the Delete button in the Manage Pods dialog box.
6.	 By executing this, you will permanently remove the desired notes pod.
After examining how you can delete and permanently remove the note pod from a 
meeting room, we have finished describing this pod and will continue by describing 
the questions and answers pod.
Q&A pod
This is the last pod, which we will cover in this chapter. The Q&A pod is very useful 
in situations where participants have the need to raise questions related to presented 
meeting content. In a case where a user doesn't want to interrupt presentation, it 
is useful to display the Q&A pod in a meeting room and to allow participants to 
ask questions by using this feature. Once when a presentation is completed, the 
presenter can review participants' questions in the Q&A pod and start to answer 
individual questions or all of them at once. Once when the presenter provides an 
answer for a question, both question and answer will be shown as a single group to 
all meeting attendees. In order to display Q&A pod inside a meeting you must have 
the host role and perform the following steps:
1.	 Click on the Pods menu in the meeting room main menu.

Chapter 14
[ 129 ]
2.	 Click on the Q&A menu item.
As you can see in the preceding screenshots, this pod has two views. Meeting 
attendees with the participant role will see this pod as shown in the screenshot 
on the right-hand side. As you can see, participants only have the ability to ask 
questions during a presentation. In order to ask a particular question, participants 
should enter text inside the text field and click on the Send Question button. The 
Send Question button is placed on the right-hand side of the text field. Questions 
can also be submitted inside the Q&A pod by pressing the Enter key on your 
keyboard. When submitted, the question will be added to the Q&A pod, and users 
with a host or presenter role will be able to review it. The Q&A pod appearance for 
hosts and presenters is shown in the left-hand screenshot from the preceding two 
screenshots. In addition to the capability to see questions from attendees, users with 
a host or presenter role can use additional options. One of the options available is 
to delegate the question to a specific meeting attendee. To do this, you will need to 
perform the following steps:
1.	 Click on the Assign To drop-down list.
2.	 Select the desired meeting attendee from the drop-down list.
3.	 You should be able to see the message Question assigned to, followed by  
the attendee name, as shown in the following screenshot:

Managing Text Messages and Questions
[ 130 ]
An attendee who needs to provide an answer to the assigned question can choose 
between the following two options when responding:
•	
Send Privately: Use this option when you want to respond to a question only 
to the  person who asked it. It is displayed as 
.
•	
Send To All: Use this option when you want to provide the answer to all of 
meeting attendees. It is displayed as 
.
Once the answer is provided, it will be assigned to the original question, as shown in 
the following screenshot:
The preceding screenshot shows how the answer provided for a specific question 
will be displayed to a participant. The following screenshot shows how a private 
answer will be displayed to a presenter or host:
Inside the Q&A pod, users can find a drop-down list that is used to filter questions 
based on the following listed options:
•	
Show All Questions: By selecting this option, all questions will be displayed
•	
Show Open Questions: By selecting this option, only questions that are not 
answered will remain visible inside the pod
•	
Show Answered Questions: This option displays all the questions that  
are answered
•	
Show My Questions: This option displays all of the questions assigned to  
a specific user

Chapter 14
[ 131 ]
These options are shown in the following screenshot:
In addition to the already described features under the Pod Options menu, you can 
find common features that were previously described and some specific Q&A pod 
features. Specific Q&A features are Remove All Questions and Export Q&A Log. 
The first feature clears all of the questions from the Q&A pod and the second feature 
helps you download pod content as a .rtf file or e-mail pod content. The following 
options are available in the Q&A section of the Preferences dialog box:
•	
Show Submitter Name With Answered Question
•	
Show Presenter Name With Answered Question
You can overview how to access the Preferences dialog box from the Chat pod 
section. These options are enabled or disabled by clicking on the checkbox next  
to their name labels.
By going through these functionalities, we have covered most of the functionalities 
of the questions and answers pod.
Summary
In this chapter you have learned how to use three new pods. You learned how to 
use chat functionalities that the Connect meeting room provides you. Also, you have 
been introduced to taking notes during meetings using notes pod. We have covered 
most of the functionalities that a Q&A pod provides you. Now you are familiarized 
with asking and answering questions during a meeting without interrupting the 
meeting workflow. The next chapter will teach you how to create meetings that 
contain audio conference details and how to use video pod.


Using Audio and Video
Adobe Connect supports several solutions for adding audio and video to 
meetings. Throughout this chapter you will be learning how to start audio and 
video conferences within meeting rooms. We will show you how to make and use 
Universal Voice audio providers and how to use integrated audio adapters without 
Universal Voice. You will also learn how to connect to video telephony streams and 
how to share webcam video.
In this chapter we will go through the following audio and video conferencing 
features:
•	
Using audio conferencing
•	
Creating and using an audio profile
•	
Starting an audio conference
•	
Managing audio within meetings
•	
Adjusting audio quality
•	
Using video pods
In this chapter we will focus on using integrated adapters. In order to go through the 
steps in this chapter, it is necessary to have contracted audio services with one of the 
audio conferencing providers that integrate with Connect (MeetingOne, InterCall, 
Arkadin, and PGi). You will also need to have audio conferencing credentials.
Using audio conferencing
In the meeting room, audio is broadcasted by using voice over Internet protocol 
(VoIP) and the microphones of attendee' computer systems. There are two options 
for integrating audio in the meeting – you can use Universal Voice audio providers 
or integrated audio adapters without Universal Voice.

Using Audio and Video
[ 134 ]
Using integrated adapters
Integrated adapters, which are Adobe Connect extensions written in Java, provide 
communication between Adobe Connect and specific audio conferencing providers. 
Integrated adapters have advanced call capabilities, allowing hosts and presenters 
to control the audio conference from a meeting. Adobe provides several integrated 
telephony adaptors for hosted installations. For example, MeetingOne, PGi, 
and InterCall are integrated telephony adapters. Integrated adapters in licensed 
installations can also be configured for Universal Voice.
Hosts have several options for dialing out to include participants in an audio 
conference call. You can dial out to a registered participant by using the telephone 
number stored in his/her profile or by entering a new telephone number. To include 
an unregistered participant in the audio conference call only, you can enter a new 
name and add his/her number to dial.
Creating and using an audio profile
An audio profile is a collection of audio conference settings that map to an audio 
provider. You can use audio profiles whenever you use an audio provider with a 
Connect meeting. Audio providers are companies that offer audio conferencing 
services that work with the Adobe Connect application.
All audio profiles include the audio provider and a profile name. The remaining 
information includes numbers and access codes that hosts provide for meetings. 
Then, the information requested depends on the provider. For integrated providers, 
the requested information comes from their configuration code.
In order to create a new audio provider, click on the My Profile link in the upper-
right corner of the Adobe Connect web application and then click on the My Audio 
Profiles tab. You will be presented with the list of available audio profiles that were 
created by you. When you click on the New Profile button, the audio profile creation 
page will open, as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 15
[ 135 ]
Meeting hosts, limited administrators, and administrators can create audio profiles.
Select an audio provider and name the profile. The following two fields are present 
for every audio provider:
•	
Provider: This drop-down list has audio providers configured for Universal 
Voice by an account administrator or host. Selecting a provider binds the 
audio profile to the information configured for the provider.
•	
Profile Name: This will contain a unique name that represents something 
meaningful to you, such as the purpose of the audio profile.
The remaining information depends on integrated audio adapter type. For example, 
for the InterCall adapter you will need to enter information in the Conference Code 
and Leader Pin fields. Fill in the remaining information and click on the Save button. 
Saving the profile automatically enables it for future use.
Editing or deleting an audio profile
You can change a profile name, and enable or disable an existing audio profile. You 
cannot change the audio provider and you can specify a provider only when you 
create a profile.

Using Audio and Video
[ 136 ]
In order to change a profile, select a profile and click on the Edit button. Change 
the profile name or status and click on the Save button. In order to delete an audio 
profile, select it and click on the Delete button.
Associating an audio profile with a meeting
The next step is to associate the created audio profile with your meeting. In  
order to complete this action, select the Include this audio conference with this 
meeting option on the meeting creation page in the Audio Conference Settings 
section, and from the drop-down menu select the previously created profile (see  
the following screenshot).
Please note that if you would like to change the audio profile associated with the 
meeting you must restart a meeting in order to apply new conferencing settings.
After you have associated an audio profile with the meeting, you can start an audio 
conference that integrates with Adobe Connect.
Starting an audio conference
In this section we will learn how to enable audio in the meeting. Also you will see 
what the basic steps to start an audio conference are.
Starting meeting audio
By default, the audio option for the meeting is disabled. In order to enable audio for 
the meeting you must perform the following steps:
1.	 From the Audio menu, choose one of the following options:
°°
Microphone Rights for Participants: This option appears if there is 
no audio profile attached to a meeting. Choose this option in order  
to enable an audio conference that uses VoIP.

Chapter 15
[ 137 ]
°°
Start Meeting Audio: This option appears if an audio profile is 
attached to a meeting.
2.	 You must also specify how you would like for attendees to join the meeting’s 
audio conference. You can specify one or more options. The availability of 
the options depend on the meeting’s audio and system configuration (please 
see the following screenshot).
The following are the available options:
°°
Using Computers: Select this option if you would like for attendees 
to join the audio conference by using their computer speakers and 
microphones (VoIP). All users can hear meeting audio using the 
computer’s speakers. To enable participants to speak, check the 
Enable microphone rights for participants checkbox.
°°
Using Phone: Select this option if you would like for attendees to 
join the audio conference over the telephone. Users can dial in to the 
audio conference or receive a call from a meeting. Check the Start 
broadcasting telephony audio checkbox in order to enable attendees 
using computers to interact with attendees on phones.
3.	 After selecting one of the preceding options click on the Start button.  
Once the meeting audio has been started, attendees will need to join  
the audio conference.

Using Audio and Video
[ 138 ]
Joining an audio conference
After a host starts an audio conference, a notification window appears in front of 
all attendees. Afterwards, they can broadcast their voices via their telephones or 
computer microphones.
In order to connect to conference audio, click on the Telephone button, which is 
displayed as 
 in the main menu bar. You will be presented with the Join Audio 
Conference dialog box. This box also appears when people log in to the conference 
once Start Meeting Audio is activated. (please see the following screenshot).
In this dialog box, select the Dial-out [Receive a call from the meeting] option in 
order to receive a call from the meeting on the telephone number you entered, or 
select the Dial-in to the Audio Conference via Phone option in order to place a  
call via telephone by using the number and instructions provided in the textbox.
If a dial-in token is provided, hosts can mute chosen attendees. Without a dial-in 
token, hosts must merge attendees with the related phone number in the  
attendees pod.
Managing audio within meetings
By default, in the meeting room, only hosts and presenters can broadcast audio by 
using their microphones. However, hosts can enable participants to broadcast audio 
by checking the Enable microphone rights for participants checkbox in the Audio 
menu. Hosts can also enable audio for specific participants by selecting one or more 
of the participants in the attendees pod and choose any of the options from the pop-
up menu such as Enable Audio, Make Host, or Make Presenter, as shown in the 
following screenshots:

Chapter 15
[ 139 ]
After selecting one of these options, a microphone icon will appear next to the 
attendee name, as shown in the following screenshot:
By using the same pop-up menu, hosts can later disable audio for selected attendees.
A Connect meeting room also provides you with an option to avoid overlapping 
conversations by selecting the Enable Single Speaker Mode option from the Audio 
menu.
When you select this option, an asterisk will appear next to the microphone button 
 in the main menu bar. When one speaker clicks on the button, it is disabled for 
other users until the current speaker clicks on the button again.
Each attendee can manage their microphones and speakers. In addition to the 
microphone and speaker icons 
 in the meeting room main menu, you 
will find a drop-down menu icon with additional options.

Using Audio and Video
[ 140 ]
There are options to mute your speakers and microphones. You can also adjust 
your microphone and speaker volume by selecting the Adjust Microsoft Volume... 
and Adjust Speaker Volume... options, respectively. When you select this option, a 
volume slider will appear. Attendees can drag a slider to customize the volume, as 
shown in the following screenshots:
During longer meeting breaks, hosts may want to stop broadcasting audio. In order 
to do this, select Stop Audio Broadcast from the Audio menu. To resume audio 
broadcast you will need to select Start Audio Broadcast from the Audio menu. 
Please note that hosts can stop a broadcast for all attendees, but not for a specific 
participant. To stop an audio conference, click on Stop Meeting Audio from the 
Audio menu.
Adjusting audio quality
The Adobe Connect meeting room allows you to quickly optimize settings by using 
Audio Setup Wizard. To complete quick optimization, click on the Audio Setup 
Wizard option in the meeting menu. You will be presented with the Audio Setup 
Wizard dialog box, as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 15
[ 141 ]
Follow the onscreen instructions to optimize the audio quality. If a dialog box appears 
requesting access to your camera and microphone, click on the Allow button.
To set advanced audio options from the meeting menu, select the Preferences option. 
In the displayed Preferences dialog box, click on the Audio tab in the left pane.
Check the Use Enhanced Audio checkbox to automatically cancel echoes, control 
microphone volume, and suppress noise. Uncheck this checkbox if you have 
problems with the audio quality.
For Acoustic Echo Cancellation Mode, three different options are offered, as follows:
•	
Full Duplex: This enables multiple users to speak at once. If echo feedback is 
created, select another option (this option is preferred for most systems).
•	
Half Duplex: This enables only one user to speak at a time. Use this option if 
microphones on your system are unusually sensitive (transmitting unwanted 
background sound) or if you have poor echo cancellation.
•	
Headphones: This optimizes audio settings for use with headphones.  
This option uses the Full Duplex mode, in which multiple users can  
speak at once.

Using Audio and Video
[ 142 ]
In order to enable your microphone volume to adjust automatically in response to 
changes in the voice level, check the Automatic Gain Control checkbox. You can also 
set the audio quality by selecting one of the options available in the Audio Quality 
combo box. Those options are as follows:
•	
Fast: This provides the fastest performance but the lowest audio quality  
(use this option for systems with slower CPUs).
•	
Best: This provides the slowest performance but the best audio quality  
(use this option for systems with fast CPUs).
•	
Custom: This enables you to select options for audio quality settings.  
Use this option if the standard settings do not provide adequate results. 
Selecting this option displays some additional settings, as shown in the 
following screenshot:
For Echo Path, select 128 (default setting) or 256. The higher setting provides greater 
level of suppression for audio feedback. This setting uses more CPU resources and it 
is recommended for systems that don’t use headphones.
Check Noise Suppression to reduce the amount of noise that your microphone can 
pick up. Uncheck this checkbox to make your microphone more sensitive.
Check the Non Linear Processing checkbox (selected by default) to use nonlinear 
processing for audio data. Uncheck this checkbox to use standard processing (and 
fewer CPU resources).
Select Use Speex Codec to take advantage of this VoIP-optimized technology (this 
option requires attendees to install the Adobe Connect add-in). Options range from 
Fast for fastest performance and poorest quality to Best for slowest performance and 
best quality.

Chapter 15
[ 143 ]
Using video pods
By default, in the meeting room only hosts and presenters can broadcast video. 
However, hosts can enable broadcasting by participants to broadcast by selecting 
the Enable Webcam For Participants option in the drop-down menu next to the 
camera icon, which is displayed as 
. Hosts can also enable audio for specific 
participants by selecting one or more participants in the attendees pod and choosing 
any of the options such as Enable Video, Make Host, or Make Presenter from the 
pop-up menu, as shown in the following screenshots:
Hosts, presenters, and participants with enhanced user privileges can simultaneously 
share video from webcams connected to their computers.
If you are a host, presenter, or participant with video rights, you can adjust the 
quality of your webcam video.
To perform this, click on the menu icon in the upper-right corner of the video pod, 
and choose the Preferences option from the context menu of the video pod. You 
will be presented with the Preferences dialog box and the Video tab will be selected 
automatically, as shown in the following screenshot:

Using Audio and Video
[ 144 ]
You can adjust the Video Quality setting to optimize the trade-off between image 
quality and bandwidth usage. For example, if shared screens update slowly, choose a 
lower Video Quality setting.
Sharing a video
In order to start sharing your webcam, click on the Start My Webcam button in the 
main menu bar of the Video pod.
In the Video pod, a preview image appears, so you can adjust your camera position. 
If you want to use a different camera that is connected, you can select it from the 
Video pod menu.
If you want to cancel video sharing, click outside the preview image in the Video 
pod. After clicking on the Start Sharing button your video will start to broadcast to 
all of the participants.
To pause or stop a video, hover the mouse over the Video pod, and click on the 
Pause or Stop icon.
When video is paused, the last image broadcasted from your camera remains static 
in the Video pod until you click on the Play button. When video is stopped, the 
broadcast image disappears entirely. Hosts can pause or stop a video from any 
attendee.

Chapter 15
[ 145 ]
Summary
During this chapter we have covered most of the functionalities for audio and video 
conferencing options that an Adobe Connect meeting room provides. You have 
learned how to create audio providers and how to use integrated audio adapters. 
We have gone through the process of creating audio profiles and associating them 
with the Adobe Connect meeting. During this chapter we have familiarized you with 
starting audio conferences and managing audio and video during meetings.


Using Breakout Rooms
In this chapter we will go through the process of creating and using breakout rooms 
inside meeting. Breakout rooms can be defined as sub-rooms that users can create 
within a meeting room session. Creating breakout rooms allows you to easily split a 
large group of attendees into smaller groups. Breakout rooms can be used in meeting 
sessions that have 200 or more attendees. For a single meeting session you can create 
a maximum of 20 breakout rooms.
For a meeting session that has audio conference running, a host can create a certain 
number of breakout rooms depending on the number supported by the audio 
provider. Also if the number of users in breakout room exceeds the maximum 
supported number, breakout rooms can't be started.
Hosts can also end breakout sessions and return all attendees back to the main room. 
Also, a host is allowed to share breakout room activity with all attendees. You can 
also use the same breakout rooms with previously defined layouts and contents. 
Information about attendees' assignments to a room won't be preserved, so you will 
need to assign them all over again.
This chapter will introduce breakout rooms and their features to the user. It will 
cover the following topics:
•	
Defining breakout rooms and assigning members
•	
Beginning a breakout session
•	
Communication in breakout rooms

Using Breakout Rooms
[ 148 ]
Defining breakout rooms and assigning 
members
Information about breakout rooms is placed within attendees pod of meeting.  
In the attendees pod you will find three tabs for attendees pod view. See the  
following screenshot:
To define breakout rooms and assign members to them, perform the following steps:
1.	 Click on the Breakout Room View button, which is displayed as 
.  
The attendees pod view will change and you will be presented with the 
information on available breakout rooms. Please note that only attendees  
with host rights can view this option in the attendees pod.
2.	 By default three breakout rooms are available in the breakout view. You 
can easily create breakout rooms by clicking on the Create a New Breakout 
button, which is displayed as 
.
3.	 When you have reached the number of breakout rooms that fits your needs, 
you can now begin assigning attendees to selected breakout rooms. There are 
two ways to do this.
°°
You can select an attendee name from the list of attendees and drag it 
to the desired breakout room using your mouse or select the breakout 
room from the pop-up menu. You can also select several attendees 
from the list by using Ctrl + click or Shift + click to select multiple 
attendees. See the following screenshot:

Chapter 16
[ 149 ]
°°
You can also assign attendees to breakout rooms by clicking on 
Evenly Distribute from Main, which is displayed as 
. This option 
will simply assign all attendees to breakout rooms adding them user 
by user to different breakout rooms. Please note that already assigned 
users will stay in the same rooms.
4.	 Hosts can remove breakout rooms by clicking on the X button in the upper-
right corner of the breakout room in the attendees pod. Please note that the 
number of breakout rooms will change in order to ensure continuity. There 
is also an option to remove all breakout rooms by clicking on Remove All 
Rooms... from the Attendees Pod menu. See the following screenshot:
5.	 After you have finished with the creation of breakout rooms and attendees' 
assignments to rooms, you can start your breakout session.

Using Breakout Rooms
[ 150 ]
Beginning a breakout session
In order to start the breakout room session you will need to click on the Start 
Breakouts button. By clicking on this button, a notification message will appear, 
signalizing that you have started the breakout session.
Attendees are placed in the breakout rooms according to assignments done by the 
host. By default all attendees have presenter rights so they can share their voice, 
share content in the share pod, modify whiteboards, and add text to the notes pod. 
All attendees in the breakout rooms can download shared content – even the users 
who entered the meeting as guests. When the host returns users to the main meeting 
room, attendees' roles will be reverted to default ones.
The host can visit each of the active breakout rooms by simply dragging his  
name from the attendee list pod to a desired breakout room. It is very important 
to not display the participants pod in the presenters only area before starting the 
breakout rooms since this area will be hidden in the sub-rooms.
Communication within breakout session
Users can chat within their breakout room using a chat pod. Communication 
between attendees from different breakout rooms is not possible. For hosts there 
is an option to broadcast message to all attendees placed in the different breakout 
rooms. To do this click on the Broadcast Message... option from the Attendees Pod 
menu. You will be presented with the input field where you can type your message, 
as shown in the following screenshots:

Chapter 16
[ 151 ]
After you click on the Send button, attendees in all rooms receive a message, which 
gets displayed at the center of their screens. This can be useful if you have noticed a 
similar question in several breakout rooms. In order to avoid breaking current user 
activities such as chat, file loading, and other user activities within the breakout 
rooms, a few minutes before ending breakout sessions you can send a warning  
message to attendees in breakout rooms. It is also a good practice to return users  
to the main room.
Breakout rooms also provide you with an option to post different polls to  
different rooms. To do this just go to the desired room and open a poll pod  
from the Pods menu.
Attendees in breakout rooms can ask the host whether the host is in their breakout 
room or not at any time. In the Chat Pod menu select the Send a message to host 
option. The host can respond in the chat pod to an attendee alone or can answer to 
everyone.
An attendee can also broadcast a question to all hosts in the meeting by entering the 
message in the Send a message to host text field. After clicking on the Send button, 
all hosts will be presented with the message displayed in the box along with the 
attendee name in it. See the following screenshots:

Using Breakout Rooms
[ 152 ]
Ending a breakout session
Only users with host rights can end a breakout session. Closing breakout rooms will 
return all attendees to the main meeting room. In order to end the breakout session 
click on the End Breakouts button in the breakout view of attendees pod.
Sharing breakout room content in the main 
room
Hosts are also provided with the ability to share the contents of a specific breakout 
room with everyone in the main room even after the breakout session is ended. 
To do this go to the Breakout Pods submenu of the Pods menu, as shown in the 
following screenshot:
Select a breakout room name from which you want to share content. You can now 
select the pod of your choice in order to show it to all attendees. The new pod will 
open with selected content inside it. The contents cannot be changed or edited.

Chapter 16
[ 153 ]
Reopening breakout rooms
In the attendees pod, click on the Breakout Room View button. You can again add 
rooms or change attendees' assignments before you start the breakout session again. 
Now click on the Start Breakouts button in order to start the breakout session again. 
Please note that all rooms' configurations as well as the list of assigned users will 
remain the same.
Summary
In this chapter you have learned how to use the breakout rooms feature of a meeting. 
You can now mange users within different breakout rooms. The next chapter will 
teach you how to use external applications closely tied to Adobe Connect such as 
Adobe Connect Outlook Add-in and Adobe Connect Add-in for Microsoft Lync.


Index
A
Adobe Connect
about  7
audio conferencing  133
components  7
Content library  49
Event library  49
features  7
libraries  49
Meeting library  49
meeting room customization  43
meeting room template  37
Training library  49
Adobe Connect application
Enter Meeting Information page  20
logging in  8-10
Meeting Management page  16, 17
meeting room, creating  15
meeting room roles  15
Participants Selection page  22
Send Invitations page  24
user interface  10
Adobe Connect Meeting
about  8
Edit Information page  29
Edit Participants page  30
Meeting Information page  27
Meeting Invitations page  31
Meeting Recordings page  34
Meeting Reports page  35
Uploaded Content page  32
application and window sharing  88
attendees management
about  64, 65
enhanced participant rights, granting  67
meeting attendee status, changing  67
participant names, editing  66
participants, removing  66
user roles, changing  65, 66
audio
managing, within meetings  138, 140
audio conference
joining  138
meeting audio, starting  136, 137
starting  136
audio conferencing
about  133
audio, enabling in meeting  136
audio, managing within meetings  138
audio profile, creating  134
audio quality, adjusting  140
integrated adapters, using  134
audio menu  61, 62
audio profile
about  134
associating, with meeting  136
creating  134
deleting  136
editing  135
using  135
audio quality
adjusting  140-142
B
breakout rooms
about  147
breakout session, ending  152
breakout session, starting  150
defining  148
members, assigning  148, 149

[ 156 ]
breakout session
breakout room content, sharing in main 
room  152
breakout rooms, reopening  153
communication  150, 151
ending  152
starting  150
C
central page
customizing  44, 45
chat pod
about  123, 124
adding  123
chat history, saving  125
content, removing  125
creating  124
enabling  124
pod options menu  124
preferences  126
Connect application. See  Adobe Connect 
application
content, Content library
uploading  52, 53
viewing  53, 54
Content library
about  49
content, uploading  52
content, viewing  53, 54
files and folders, working with  49-51
permissions settings  55, 56
supported file types  51, 52
Customize Central page
interface customization options  45
D
delete selected button  83
desktop sharing
about  86
screen control, changing  87, 88
E
Edit Information page  29
Edit Participants page
about  30
roles, changing  30
specific user, adding  31
user, removing  31
Enter Meeting Information page
about  20
Meeting Information section  20, 22
F
files and folders, Content library
working with  49-51
file share pod
about  111
activating  111
file, downloading  113, 114
file, removing  114
file, renaming  115
Files menu item, submenu  112
file, uploading  113
New File Share menu item, submenu  112
submenu  112
I
integrated adapters
about  134
using  134
K
keyboard shortcuts, meeting room
for attendee management  63
for audio and recordings  63
for dialog boxes  63, 64
for pods navigation and menus  62
L
layout bar options
specifying  101
layouts, meeting room
creating  97, 98
creating, during meeting  100
layout bar options, specifying  101
managing  99
managing, during meeting  100

[ 157 ]
Layouts menu  60
login page
customizing  45
M
Main area, Connect application UI  13, 14
Main Menu area, Connect application UI  
11, 12
main menu navigation features, meeting 
room overview
about  57, 58
Audio menu  61
Layouts menu  60
Meeting menu  58
Pods menu  61
manage and access entry, Meeting menu
auto-promote participants to presenters  59
block guest access  59
block incoming attendees  59
invite participants  59
place participants on hold  59
meeting
audio, managing  138, 140
offline recording, creating  109, 110
recording  103, 104
Meeting Dashboard link  18, 19
Meeting Information page  27-29
Meeting Information section, Enter Meeting 
Information page
about  20
access field  21
Custom URL field  21
duration field  21
Finish button  20
New Meeting button  20
select template field  21
start time field  21
summary field  21
Meeting Invitations page  31
Meeting Management page
about  16, 17
Meeting Dashboard link  18, 19
My Meetings link  18
Shared Meetings item link  17
User Meetings link  18
Meeting menu
about  58
audio setup wizard  59
change my role  59
enable presenter only area  60
end meeting  60
manage access and entry  59
manage meeting information  58
preferences  59
record meeting  59
switch to prepare mode  60
meeting recordings
deleting  105
enabling, for public viewing  106
info, editing  106
managing  104, 105
moving  105
Meeting Recordings page  34
Meeting Reports page
about  35
by Attendees report  35
By Questions report  36
By Sessions report  35
Summary report  36
meeting room
file share pod  111
layouts, creating  97
layouts, managing  99
poll pod  115
video pod, using  143
web links pod  118
whiteboard  79
meeting room customization
about  43
central page, customizing  44, 45
login page, customizing  45, 46
meeting room look, customizing  46, 47
meeting room look
customizing  46, 47
meeting room overview
about  57
attendees, managing through Attendees 
pod  64
keyboard shortcuts  62
main menu navigation features  57
Prepare Mode  69
Presenter Only Area, enabling  68

[ 158 ]
meeting room roles, Connect application
about  15
guest  16
host  15
participants  16
presenter  16
meeting room template
about  37
applying, to meeting  43
creating  40, 41
meeting, converting to template  41, 42
meeting, creating from  38, 39
settings  39, 40
My Meetings link  18
N
notes pod
about  126
note, adding  127
O
offline recording
creating  109, 110
overlay whiteboard
adding  81
P
Participants Selection page
about  22, 23
administrators group participant permis-
sion  23
presenter permission  24
pencil tool  82
permissions settings, Content library  55, 56
pod display
customizing  91
pods
chat pod  123
managing  93
notes pod  126
organizing  94, 95
preferences dialog  92
Q&A pod  128
pods menu
about  61
attendees  61
chat  61
files  61
notes  61
poll  61
Q & A  61
share  61
video  61
web links  61
pods menu description  91, 92
poll pod
about  115
enabling  115, 116
poll, creating  117
poll, editing  118
voting results, displaying  118
preferences dialog, pods  92
Prepare Mode, meeting room
using  69
presentation toolbar options  74
Presenter Only Area, meeting room
enabling  68
Q
Q&A pod
about  128
displaying, in meeting  128
question, delegating to specific meeting at-
tendee  129, 130
R
recorded meeting
editing  108, 109
playing  107
recording navigation bar
Elapsed/Total time marker  107
Progress marker  107
Start/Pause button  107
Volume control button  107
redo button  83
S
screen sharing
about  85
application and window sharing  88

[ 159 ]
desktop sharing  86
starting  85, 86
systray sharing options  89
selection tool  82
Send Invitations page
about  24
user interface  25
shapes tool  82
Shared Meetings item link  17
Share pod
about  71
navigation arrows  76
options  72
presentation, sharing  72-74
presentations, navigating through  76, 77
presentation toolbar options  74
screen sharing  85
Share pod preferences  90
Shortcut Menu area, Connect application 
UI  13
standalone whiteboard
creating  80
supported file types, Content library  51
systray sharing options
about  89
change shared display  89
choose window to share  89
pause and annotate  89
stop screen sharing and stop control  89
T
text tool  83
U
undo button  83
Uploaded Content page  32-34
user interface, Connect application
about  10
Main area  13, 14
Main Menu area  11, 12
Shortcut Menu area  13
user interface, Send Invitations page  25
User Meetings link  18
V
video pod
about  143
using  143, 144
video, sharing  144
voice over IP (VoIP)  133
W
web links pod
about  118, 119
link, removing  121
link, renaming  121
links, adding  120
link URL, changing  121
web page, displaying  120
whiteboard
about  79
creating  79
drawing tools  81
overlay whiteboard  81
standalone whiteboard  80
using ways  79
whiteboard drawing tools
about  81
delete selected button  83
pencil tool  82
redo button  83
selection tool  82
shapes tool  82
text tool  83
undo button  83
Z
ZIP files, Content library  52


Thank you for buying  
Learning Adobe Connect 9
About Packt Publishing
Packt, pronounced 'packed', published its first book "Mastering phpMyAdmin for Effective 
MySQL Management" in April 2004 and subsequently continued to specialize in publishing 
highly focused books on specific technologies and solutions.
Our books and publications share the experiences of your fellow IT professionals in adapting 
and customizing today's systems, applications, and frameworks. Our solution based books 
give you the knowledge and power to customize the software and technologies you're using 
to get the job done. Packt books are more specific and less general than the IT books you have 
seen in the past. Our unique business model allows us to bring you more focused information, 
giving you more of what you need to know, and less of what you don't.
Packt is a modern, yet unique publishing company, which focuses on producing quality,  
cutting-edge books for communities of developers, administrators, and newbies alike.  
For more information, please visit our website: www.packtpub.com.
Writing for Packt
We welcome all inquiries from people who are interested in authoring. Book proposals 
should be sent to author@packtpub.com. If your book idea is still at an early stage and you 
would like to discuss it first before writing a formal book proposal, contact us; one of our 
commissioning editors will get in touch with you. 
We're not just looking for published authors; if you have strong technical skills but no writing 
experience, our experienced editors can help you develop a writing career, or simply get some 
additional reward for your expertise.

Mastering Adobe Captivate 6
ISBN:  978-1-849692-44-1            Paperback: 476 pages
Create professional SCORM-compliant eLearning 
content with Adobe Captivate
1.	
Step by step tutorial to build three projects 
including a demonstration, a simulation and a 
random SCORM-compliant quiz featuring all 
possible question slides.
2.	
Enhance your projects by adding interactivity, 
animations, sound and more
3.	
Publish your project in a wide variety of 
formats enabling virtually any desktop and 
mobile devices to play your e-learning content
4.	
Deploy your e-Learning content on a SCORM 
or AICC-compliant LMS
Moodle 2.0 E-Learning Course 
Development
ISBN: 978-1-849515-26-9            Paperback: 344 pages
A complete guide to successful learning using 
Moodle
1.	
The new book and ebook edition of the best 
selling introduction to using Moodle for 
teaching and e-learning, updated for Moodle 
2.0
2.	
Straightforward coverage of installing 
and using the Moodle system, suitable for 
newcomers as well as existing Moodle users 
who want to get a few tips
3.	
A unique course-based approach focuses 
your attention on designing well-structured, 
interactive, and successful courses
Please check www.PacktPub.com for information on our titles

Adobe Flash 11 Stage3D 
(Molehill) Game Programming 
Beginner’s Guide
ISBN: 978-1-849691-68-0             Paperback: 412 pages
A step-by-step guide for creating stunning 3D games 
in Flash 11 Stage3D (Molehill) using AS3 and AGAL
1.	
The first book on Adobe's Flash 11 Stage3D, 
previously codenamed Molehill 
2.	
Build hardware-accelerated 3D games with a 
blazingly fast frame rate.
3.	
Full of screenshots and ActionScript 3 source 
code, each chapter builds upon a real-world 
example game project step-by-step.
Adobe Edge Quickstart Guide
ISBN: 978-1-849693-30-1           Paperback: 136 pages
Quickly produce engaging motion and rich 
interactivity with Adobe Edge Preview 4 and above
1.	
Learn to use Adobe’s newest application to 
create engaging motion and rich interactivity
2.	
Familiarize yourself with the Edge interface 
and unleash your creativity through standard 
HTML, CSS, and JavaScript
3.	
Add motion and interactivity to your websites 
using Web standards
4.	
A quickstart guide for creating engaging 
content with Adobe Edge
Please check www.PacktPub.com for information on our titles

