

Lecture Notes:
Gastroenterology and Hepatology


Anton Emmanuel
BSc MD FRCP
Senior Lecturer in Neurogastroenterology 
and Consultant Gastroenterologist
University College Hospital
London, UK
Stephen Inns
MBChB FRACP
Clinical Lecturer in Gastroenterology
Otago School of Medicine, Wellington
and Consultant Gastroenterologist
Hutt Valley Hospital
Wellington, New Zealand
Lecture Notes:
Gastroenterology 
and Hepatology

This edition ﬁ rst published 2011, © 2011 by Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns
Wiley-Blackwell is an imprint of John Wiley & Sons, formed by the merger of Wiley’s global 
Scientiﬁ c, Technical and Medical business with Blackwell Publishing.
Registered ofﬁ ce: John Wiley & Sons Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, 
PO19 8SQ, UK
Editorial ofﬁ ces: 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 2DQ, UK
The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK
111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030-5774, USA
For details of our global editorial ofﬁ ces, for customer services and for information about 
how to apply for permission to reuse the copyright material in this book please see our 
website at www.wiley.com/wiley-blackwell.
The right of the author to be identiﬁ ed as the author of this work has been asserted in 
accordance with the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, 
recording or otherwise, except as permitted by the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 
1988, without the prior permission of the publisher.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as 
trademarks. All brand names and product names used in this book are trade names, service 
marks, trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective owners. The publisher is not 
associated with any product or vendor mentioned in this book. This publication is 
designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in regard to the subject matter 
covered. It is sold on the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering 
professional services. If professional advice or other expert assistance is required, the 
services of a competent professional should be sought.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Emmanuel, Anton.
 Lecture notes. Gastroenterology and hepatology / Anton Emmanuel, Stephen Inns.
   p. ; cm.
 Gastroenterology and hepatology
 Includes index.
 ISBN 978-1-4051-8321-5 (pbk. : alk. paper) 1. Gastroenterology–Outlines, syllabi, etc. 
2. Hepatology–Outlines, syllabi, etc. I. Inns, Stephen. II. Title. III. Title: 
Gastroenterology and hepatology.
 [DNLM: 1. Gastrointestinal Diseases. 2. Liver Diseases. WI 140]
 RC802.E46 2011
 616.3′3–dc22
 
2010047191
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Set in 8.5/11 pt Utopia by Toppan Best-set Premedia Limited
1 2011

Contents
Preface, vii
Part I Clinical Basics
 1 Approach to the patient with abdominal pain, 1
 2 Approach to the patient with liver disease, 11
 3 Approach to the patient with luminal disease, 17
 4 Nutrition, 29
 5 Gastrointestinal infections, 39
 6 Gastrointestinal investigations, 46
Part II Gastrointestinal Emergencies
 7 Acute gastrointestinal bleeding, 52
 8 Acute upper and lower gastrointestinal 
emergencies, 55
 9 Acute liver failure, 61
10 Pancreatobiliary emergencies: 
acute pancreatitis, 67
Part III Regional Gastroenterology
11 Oral cavity, 73
12 Oesophagus, 75
13 Stomach and duodenum, 82
14 Small intestine, 87
15 Small and large bowel disorders, 94
16 Colon, 103
17 Anorectum, 110
18 Pancreatic diseases, 114
19 Biliary diseases, 120
20 Chronic liver disorders, 129
21 Hereditary and congenital liver diseases, 139
22 Viral hepatitides, 157
23 Drug-induced liver injury, 169
24 Vascular liver diseases, 173
25 Autoimmune hepatitis, 182
26 Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease, 184
27 Alcoholic liver disease, 187
28 Liver tumours and lesions, 191
29 Pregnancy-related liver disease, 197
30 Liver transplantation, 200
Part IV Study Aids and Revision
Gastrointestinal history check-list, 207
Abdominal examination routine, 209
Rectal examination routine, 211
Common OSCE cases, 212
Part V Self-Assessment 
Self-assessment case studies: Questions, 213
Self-assessment case studies: Answers, 215
Index, 217


 Preface  
lates the daily absorption of microgram quantities 
of vitamins simultaneously with macronutrients 
in 100 million times that amount. 
 We have tried to combine a didactic approach 
to facts alongside recurrently occurring themes to 
aid memory. For example, we have referred to the 
principles of embryology of the gut to give a 
common sense reminder of how abdominal pain 
is referred and how the blood supply can be 
understood; approached lists of investigations by 
breaking them down to tests which establish the 
condition, the cause or the complications; 
approached aetiological lists by breaking down 
into predisposing, precipitating and perpetuating 
ones. We have eschewed  ‘ introductory chapters ’ 
on anatomy, physiology and biochemistry as these 
are frequently skipped by readers who are often 
studying gastroenterology alongside some other 
subject. Rather, we have included preclinical 
material in the practical context of relevant disease 
areas (ﬂ uid absorption physiology in the section 
on diarrhoea, haemoglobin biochemistry in that 
on jaundice, etc.). Ultimately, we hope the reader 
uses this book as a source of material to help 
understand a fascinating speciality, pass exams in 
it, but above all be able to get as much as possible 
out of each patient seen with a gastrointestinal 
complaint. 
 Anton Emmanuel 
( a.emmanuel@ucl.ac.uk ) 
 Stephen Inns 
( stephen.inns@huttvalleydhb.org.nz ) 
 Science is the father of knowledge, but opinion 
breeds ignorance . 
 (Hippocrates 460 – 357 BC) 
 Specialised knowledge will do a man no harm if 
he also has common sense; but if he lacks this he 
can only be more dangerous to his patients. 
 (Oliver Wendell Holmes 1809 – 1894) 
 The content of any textbook has, by deﬁ nition, 
got to be factual. There are two potential conse-
quences of this. The ﬁ rst, and most important, is 
that medical fact is based upon science, and 
we have based this book on the anatomical, 
physiological and pathological basis of gastroin-
testinal practice. The second potential conse-
quence of a factual focus is that the text can 
become rather dry and list like. To limit this we 
have tried to present the information from a 
clinical perspective  –  as the patients present in 
outpatients or casualty. 
 Gastroenterology is well suited to such an 
approach. It is a fundamentally practical special-
ity, with a strong emphasis on history, examina-
tion and endoscopy. The importance of integrating 
clinical assessment with investigation  – both ana-
tomical and physiological  –  is emphasised by the 
curiously limited range of symptoms despite the 
complexity of the gastrointestinal tract. The gut 
contains about three - quarters of the body ’ s 
immune cells; it produces a wider range of hor-
mones than any single endocrine organ; it has 
almost as many nerves as the spinal cord; it regu-


Lecture Notes: Gastroenterology and Hepatology, 1st edition. 
Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. 
© 2011 Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
 In gastroenterological practice, patients com-
monly present complaining of abdominal pain. 
The clinician ’ s role is to undertake a full history 
and examination, in order to discern the most 
likely diagnosis and to plan safe and cost - effective 
investigation. This chapter describes an approach 
to this process.  
 History  t aking 
 Initially the approach to the patient should use 
 open - ended  questions aimed at eliciting a full 
description of the pain and its associated features. 
Useful questions include: 
   ‘ Can you describe your pain for me in more detail? ’   
 ‘ Please tell me everything you can about the pain 
you have and anything you think might be 
associated with it. ’ 
 ‘ Please tell me more about the pain you 
experience and how it affects you. ’ 
 Only following a full description of the pain by 
the patient should the history taker ask closed 
questions designed to complete the picture. 
 In taking the history it is essential to elucidate 
the presence of warning or  ‘ alarm ’ features (Box 
 1.1 ). These are indicators that increase the likeli-
hood that an organic condition underlies the pain. 
The alarm features guide further investigation.   
 1 
Approach to the  p atient 
with  a bdominal  p ain  
 Historical features that it is important to elicit 
include the following. 
 Onset 
 •  Gradual or sudden? Pain of acute onset may 
result from an acute vascular event, obstruction 
of a viscus or infection. Pain resulting from 
chronic inﬂ ammatory processes and functional 
causes are more likely to be of gradual onset. 
 Frequency and  d uration 
 •  Colicky pain (which progresses and remits in 
a crescendo – decrescendo pattern)? Usually 
related to a viscus (e.g. intestinal renal and 
biliary colic), whereas constant intermittent 
pain may relate to solid organs (Box  1.2 ).  
 •  How long has the pain been a problem? Pain 
that has been present for weeks is unlikely to 
have an acutely threatening illness underlying 
it and pain of very longstanding duration is 
unlikely to be related to malignant pathology. 
 Location:  r adiation or  r eferral 
(Figure  1.1 ) 
 •  Poorly localised? Usually related to a viscus 
(e.g. intestinal, renal and biliary colic). 
 •  Located to epigastrium? Disorders related to 
the liver, pancreas, stomach and proximal 
small bowel (from the embryological foregut).  
 •  Located centrally? Disorders related to the 
small intestine and proximal colon (from the 
embryological midgut). 

2 
Approach to the patient with abdominal pain
progresses to sharp somatic - type pain localised to 
the right lower quadrant. 
 Exacerbating and  r elieving  f eatures 
 Patients should be asked if there are any factors 
that  ‘ bring the pain on or make it worse ’  and con-
versely  ‘ make the pain better ’ . Speciﬁ cally: 
 •  Any dietary features, including particular 
foods or the timing of meals? Patients with 
chronic abdominal pain frequently attempt 
dietary manipulation to treat the pain. Pain 
consistently developing soon after a meal, 
particularly when associated with upper 
abdominal bloating and nausea or vomiting, 
may indicate gastric or small intestinal 
pathology or sensitivity.  
 •  Located to suprapubic area?  Disorders related 
to the colon, renal tract and female 
reproductive organs (from the embryological 
hindgut). 
 Radiation of pain may be useful in localising 
the origin of the pain. For example, renal colic 
commonly radiates from the ﬂ ank to the groin and 
pancreatic pain through to the back. 
 Referred pain  occurs as a result of visceral affer-
ent neurons converging with somatic afferent 
neurons in the spinal cord and sharing second -
 order neurons. The brain then interprets the 
transmitted pain signal to be somatic in nature 
and localises it to the origin of the somatic affer-
ent, distant from the visceral source.  
 Character and  n ature 
 •  Dull, crampy, burning or gnawing? Visceral 
pain: related to internal organs and the visceral 
peritoneum.  
 •  Sharp, pricking?  Somatic pain: originates from 
the abdominal wall or parietal peritoneum 
(Figure  1.1 ). 
 One process can cause both features, the classi-
cal example being appendicitis which starts with 
a poorly localised central abdominal aching vis-
ceral pain; as the appendix becomes more 
inﬂ amed and irritates the parietal peritoneum, it 
 Box 1.1   Alarm features precluding a 
diagnosis of irritible bowel syndrome (IBS). 
 History  
 •  Weight loss  
 •  Older age  
 •  Nocturnal wakening  
 •  Family history of cancer or IBD  
 Examination  
 •  Abnormal examination  
 •  Fever  
 Investigations  
 •  Positive faecal occult blood  
 •  Anaemia  
 •  Leucocytosis  
 •  Elevated ESR or CRP  
 •  Abnormal biochemistry  
 Box 1.2   Characteristic causes of different 
patterns of abdominal pain. 
 Chronic intermittent pain  
 •  Mechanical:  
   Intermittent intestinal obstruction (hernia, 
intussusception, adhesions, volvulus)  
    Gallstones 
    Ampullary stenosis  
 •  Inﬂ ammatory: 
    Inﬂ ammatory bowel disease  
    Endometriosis/endometritis 
    Acute relapsing pancreatitis  
    Familial Mediterranean fever  
 •  Neurological and metabolic: 
    Porphyria 
    Abdominal epilepsy  
    Diabetic radiculopathy  
    Nerve root compression or entrapment  
    Uraemia 
 •  Miscellaneous: 
    Irritable bowel syndrome  
    Non - ulcer dyspepsia  
    Chronic mesenteric ischaemia  
 Chronic constant pain  
 •  Malignancy (primary or metastatic)  
 •  Abscess  
 •  Chronic pancreatitis  
 •  Psychiatric (depression, somatoform disorder)  
 •  Functional abdominal pain  

Approach to the patient with abdominal pain 3
 Any  a ssociated  s ymptoms? 
 The presence of associated symptoms may 
be instrumental in localising the origin of the 
pain. 
 •  Relationship to bowel habit: frequency, 
consistency, urgency, blood, mucus and any 
association of changes in the bowel habit with 
the pain is important. Fluctuation in the pain 
associated with changes in bowel habit is 
indicative of a colonic process and is typical of 
irritable bowel syndrome (IBS).  
 •  Vomiting or upper abdominal distension? 
Suggestive of small bowel obstruction or ileus. 
 •  Haematuria? Indicates renal colic. 
 •  Palpable lump in the area of tenderness? 
Suggests an inﬂ ammatory mass related to 
transmural inﬂ ammation of a viscus, but may 
simply be related to colonic loading of faeces. 
 •  Relief of low abdominal pain by the passage 
of ﬂ atus or stool?  This indicates rectal 
pathology or increased rectal sensitivity.  
 •  The effect of different forms of analgesia or 
antispasmodic used may give clues as to the 
aetiology of the pain.  Simple analgesics such 
as paracetamol may be more effective in 
treating musculoskeletal or solid organ pain, 
whereas antispasmodics such as hyoscine 
butylbromide (Buscopan) or mebeverine may 
be more beneﬁ cial in treating pain related to 
hollow organs.  
 •  Pain associated with twisting or bending? 
More likely related to the abdominal wall than 
intra - abdominal structures. 
 •  Pain severity  may be affected by stress in 
functional disorders, but increasing evidence 
shows that psychological stress also plays a 
role in the mediation of organic disease, such 
as inﬂ ammatory bowel disease (IBD). 
 Figure 1.1   Location of pain in relation to organic pathology. A, Visceral afferent ﬁ rst - order neuron; B, spinal cord 
second - order neuron; C, somatic afferent ﬁ rst - order neuron.  
1
2
3
To Brain
A
B
C
Spinal cord
A – Visceral afferent first order neuron
B – Spinal cord second order neuron
C – Somatic afferent first order neuron
1
1
2
3
2
3

4 
Approach to the patient with abdominal pain
 •  Vital signs, including the temperature , should 
be noted. 
 •  Examination of the hands  may reveal clues 
to intra - abdominal disease. Clubbing may be 
related to chronic liver disease, IBD or other 
extra - abdominal disease with intra - abdominal 
consequences. Pale palmar creases may be 
associated with anaemia. Palmar erythema, 
asterixis, Dupytren ’ s contractures and spider 
naevi on the arms may be seen in chronic 
liver disease.  
 •  Inspection of the face  may reveal conjunctival 
pallor in anaemia, scleral yellow in jaundice, 
periorbital arcus senilis indicating 
hypercholesterolaemia and an increased risk of 
vascular disease or pancreatitis. 
 •  Careful cardiac and respiratory examinations 
may reveal abnormalities associated with 
intra - abdominal disease. For example, 
peripheral vascular disease may indicate a 
patient is at risk for intestinal ischaemia; 
congestive heart failure is associated with 
congestion of the liver, the production of 
ascites and gut oedema; and pain from cardiac 
ischaemia or pleuritis in lower lobe pneumonia 
may refer to the abdomen. 
 •  Examination of the GI system  per se  begins with 
careful inspection of the mouth with the aid of 
 Examination  t echnique 
 The physical examination begins with a careful 
 general inspection . 
 •  Does the patient look unwell?  Obvious weight 
loss or cachexia is an indicator of 
malabsorption or undernourishment.  
 •  Is the patient comfortable? If in acute pain, 
are they adopting a position to ease the pain? 
The patient lying stock still in bed with obvious 
severe pain may well have peritonitis, whereas 
a patient moving about the bed, unable to get 
comfortable, is more likely to have visceral 
pain such as obstruction of a viscus.  
 •  Observation of the skin  may demonstrate 
jaundice, pallor associated with anaemia, 
erythema ab igne (reticular erythematous 
hyperpigmentation caused by repeated skin 
exposure to moderate heat used to relieve 
pain), or speciﬁ c extraintestinal manifestations 
of disease (Table  1.1 ). Leg swelling may be an 
indicator of decreased blood albumin related 
to liver disease or malnutrition.  
 •  Observe the abdomen  for visible abdominal 
distension (caused by either ascites or 
distension of viscus by gas or ﬂ uid). 
 Table 1.1   Extraintestinal manifestations of hepatogastrointestinal diseases. 
 Disease  
  Dermatological  
  Musculoskeletal  
 Inﬂ ammatory bowel disease:  
  
 
 • Crohn ’ s disease  
  Erythema nodosum, pyoderma 
gangrenosum  
 Axial arthritis more common  
 • Ulcerative colitis  
 Erythema nodosum, pyoderma 
gangrenosum  
 Axial and peripheral arthritis 
similar in frequency  
 Enteric infections 
(Shigella, Salmonella, 
Yersinia, Campylobacter )  
 Keratoderma blennorrhagica  
  Reactive arthritis  
 Malabsorption syndromes:  
  
 
 • Coeliac sprue  
 Dermatitis herpetiformis  
  Polyarthralgia  
 Viral hepatitis:  
  
 
 • Hepatitis B  
 Jaundice (hepatitis), livedo 
reticularis, skin 
 ulcers (vasculitis)  
 Prodrome that includes 
arthralgias; 
 mononeuritis multiplex  
 • Hepatitis C  
  Jaundice (hepatitis), palpable 
purpura  
 Can develop positive rheumatoid 
 factor  
 Henoch − Sch ö nlein purpura  
  Palpable purpura over buttocks 
and lower extremities  
 Arthralgias  

Approach to the patient with abdominal pain 5
 Referred pain occurs due to convergence of vis-
ceral afferent and somatic afferent neurons in the 
spinal cord. Examples include right scapula pain 
related to gallbladder pain and left shoulder region 
from a ruptured spleen or pancreatitis. 
 Approach to  d ifferential 
 d iagnosis of  p ain and 
 d irected  i nvestigation 
 Following a careful history and examination, the 
clinician should be able to develop an idea of 
which organ(s) are likely to be involved and what 
the likely pathogenesis might be considering the 
demographics of the patient and the nature of the 
pain. It is important to list the most likely diag-
noses based on these factors ﬁ rst. The differential 
can then be expanded by the application of a sur-
gical sieve (as described in Part IV) to add the less 
likely possibilities. 
 Most patients should have a minimal blood 
panel to rule out warning features and to make 
any obvious diagnoses. These would include FBC; 
urea, creatinine and electrolytes; LFTs; and coeliac 
antibodies, especially if there is any alteration of 
bowel habit. Further testing should be directed at 
each of the most likely diagnoses in the list of dif-
ferential diagnoses. The clinician should attempt 
to choose the range of investigations that will 
most cost - effectively examine for the greatest 
number of likely diagnoses with the greatest sen-
sitivity and speciﬁ city (see clinical example). 
a torch and tongue depressor . The presence of 
numerous or large mouth ulcers or marked 
swelling of the lips may be associated with IBD. 
Angular stomatitis occurs in iron deﬁ ciency. 
Glossitis may develop in association with 
vitamin B 12 deﬁ ciency caused by malabsorption.  
 •  Examination of the thyroid is followed by 
examination of the neck and axilla for 
lymphadenophathy. 
 •  Careful inspection of the abdomen is repeated 
and the abdominal examination is completed 
as described in Part IV, taking great care to 
avoid causing undue additional discomfort . 
The examiner must be careful to ﬁ rst ask if 
there are any tender spots in the abdomen 
before laying on a hand. Special care should be 
taken, starting with very light palpation, asking 
the patient to advise the examiner of any 
discomfort felt and by watching the patient ’ s 
expression at all times. Only if light palpation is 
tolerated in an area of the abdomen should 
deep palpation be undertaken in that area. A 
useful additional sign to elicit when areas of 
localised tenderness are found is Carnett ’ s sign. 
Whilst the examiner palpates over the area of 
tenderness, the patient is asked to raise their 
head from the bed against the resistance 
provided by the examiner ’ s free hand on their 
forehead. If the palpation tenderness continues 
or intensiﬁ es during this manoeuvre, it is likely 
to be related to the abdominal wall rather than 
to intra - abdominal structures. 
 Anatomy and  p hysiology 
of  a bdominal  p ain 
 Pain within the abdomen can be produced in 
two main ways: irritation of the parietal perito-
neum or disturbance of the function and/or struc-
ture of the viscera (Box  1.3 ). The latter is mediated 
by autonomic innervation to the organs, which 
respond primarily to distension and muscular 
contraction. The resulting pain is dull and vague. 
In contrast, chemical, infectious or other irritation 
of the parietal peritoneum results in a more local-
ised, usually sharp or burning pain. The location 
of the pain correlates more closely with the loca-
tion of the pathology and may give important 
clues as to the diagnosis. However, once peritoni-
tis develops, the pain becomes generalised and 
the abdomen typically becomes rigid (guarding).   
 Box 1.3   Character of visceral  versus  
somatic pain. 
 Visceral  
 •  Originates from internal organs and visceral 
peritoneum  
 •  Results from stretching, inﬂ ammation or 
ischaemia  
 •  Described as dull, crampy, burning or gnawing  
 •  Poorly localised  
 Somatic  
 •  Originates from the abdominal wall or parietal 
peritoneum  
 •  Sharper and more localised  

6 
Approach to the patient with abdominal pain
 CLINICAL  E XAMPLE 
 CLINICAL PICTURE Ms AP is a 37 - year - old woman 
who describes 1 year of intermittent right lower 
quadrant abdominal pain. She is caucasian, her 
body mass index is 19   kg/m 2 and she is smokes 
20 cigarettes/day. The pain ﬁ rst came on follow-
ing an illness associated with vomiting and diar-
rhoea. She saw her GP and was given antibiotics 
but stool culture revealed no pathogens. The 
diarrhoea settled spontaneously and she cur-
rently opens her bowels three times a day to 
soft - to - loose stool with no blood or mucous. The 
pain is aching and intermittent but seems to be 
worse during periods of life stress. It often occurs 
about half an hour after meals and is associated 
with abdominal bloating and on occasion nausea, 
but no vomiting. It lasts 30   min to some hours at 
a time. There is no position in which she can get 
comfortable with the pain and she describes 
herself as  “ writhing around ” with the pain. She 
has reduced the size of her meals and avoids 
excess ﬁ bre, which seems to help. No speciﬁ c 
foods contribute to the symptoms. Opening her 
bowels does not relieve the pain. She has trialled 
no medications. She has lost 5  kg in weight in the 
last year. The pain does not wake her at night and 
there is no nocturnal diarrhoea. There has been 
no change in the menstrual cycle and no asso-
ciation of the pain with menses. There has been 
no haematuria and she has never passed stones 
with the urine. She is on no regular medication. 
There is no signiﬁ cant family history. 
 Observation reveals a thin woman with no 
hand or face signs of gastrointesintal disease; in 
particular, no pallor, skin lesions, angular stoma-
titis, mouth ulceration or tongue swelling. The 
abdomen is not distended. There is localised 
tenderness in the right lower quadrant. No mass 
is palpable. Carnett ’ s sign is negative (the ten-
derness disappears when the patient lifts her 
head from the bed). There is no organomegaly. 
Bowel sounds are normal. 
 SYNTHESIS (SEE TABLE  1.2 ) In considering the 
differential diagnosis, one must ﬁ rst consider 
which organ(s) might be involved. The central and 
aching nature of the pain, as well as the fact that 
it causes the patient to writhe around, suggest 
that it is originating in a hollow organ, perhaps 
the small bowel or proximal colon. The localised 
tenderness further localises the pain to the distal 
small bowel or proximal colon. The onset was 
associated with a probable gastroenteritis and 
the bowel habit is mildly disturbed, also suggest-
ing an intestinal cause. The lack of association 
with menses and the absence of other urinary 
symptoms make conditions of the reproductive 
system and renal tract less likely.   
 The most likely diagnoses in this setting are 
IBS and functional GI disease. Use of a surgical 
sieve applied to the distal small bowel and proxi-
mal colon expands the list to include infection, 
neoplasia including benign neoplasia resulting 
in intermittent intussusceptions, and, unlikely in 
a young woman, intestinal ischaemia. Less likely 
causes in other organ systems include biliary 
colic, ovarian pain and renal colic. 
 Initial investigation reveals a microcytic 
anaemia but no abnormality of the renal and liver 
tests and negative coeliac antibodies. Stool 
culture and examination for ova, cysts and 
parasites are negative. Urine dipstick shows no 
blood. Warning features in the form of weight 
loss and anaemia prompt further investigation. 
The investigation of choice to rule out inﬂ amma-
tory disease in the terminal ileum and colon is 
ileocolonoscopy and biopsy. The standard inves-
tigation for the remaining small bowel is CT (or 
MRI) enterography. This will also effectively 
investigate for biliary disease, ovarian disease 
and renal disease. More expensive and invasive 
investigations designed to examine for the less 
likely diagnoses are not utilised in the ﬁ rst 
instance (see Chapter  6 ). 
 At colonoscopy the caecum and terminal 
ileum are seen to be inﬂ amed and ulcerated. 
Biopsies show chronic inﬂ ammation, ulceration 
and granuloma formation suggestive of Crohn ’ s 
disease. CT shows no disease of the ovaries, 
kidneys or biliary tree but does suggest thicken-
ing and inﬂ ammation of the terminal ileum and 
caecum. There is no signiﬁ cant lymphadenopa-
thy. A diagnosis of probable Crohn ’ s disease is 
made and the patient treated accordingly. 

Approach to the patient with abdominal pain 7
 Table 1.2   Approach to differential diagnosis and directed investigation. 
 Likely organ 
involved  
 Likely 
pathology  
 Investigation choices  
  Investigation plan  
 Small bowel and 
colon  
 Inﬂ ammatory 
bowel 
disease  
 Ileocolonoscopy 
 CT enterography 
 US small bowel 
 MRI  
 Stool test 
Ileocolonoscopy 
 CT (or MRI) 
enterography 
 
 Irritable bowel 
syndrome  
 Suggestive symptom 
complex in the absence of 
other diagnoses  
 Infection  
  Stool culture and examination 
for C. difﬁ cile, ova, cysts 
and parasites 
 Speciﬁ c parasitic serology if 
peripheral eosinophilia  
 Neoplasia  
  Ileocolonoscopy and small 
bowel follow - through  
 Ischaemia  
  Angiography  
 Biliary system  
  Biliary stones, 
neoplasia  
 Ultrasound abdomen 
 MRCP 
 ERCP  
 Ovary  
 Ovarian cyst, 
torted ovary  
 Ultrasound pelvis 
 CT pelvis  
 Renal  
 Renal stones  
  Ultrasound abdomen 
 CT urogram  
 US, ultrasound; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; MRCP, magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography; ERCP, endo-
scopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography; CT, computed tomography scan.  
 Acute  a bdominal  p ain 
 The patient presenting with acute abdominal pain 
presents a particular challenge to the clinician. 
Pain production within the abdomen is such 
that a wide range of diagnoses can present in 
an identical manner. However, a thorough history 
and examination still provides the cornerstone 
of assessment. It is essential to have an understand-
ing of the mechanisms of pain generation. Equally, 
it is important to recognise the alarm symptoms 
and initial investigative ﬁ ndings that help to deter-
mine which patients may have a serious underlying 
disease process, and therefore warrant more expe-
ditious evaluation and treatment. 
 History   t aking 
 The assessment of the patient with abdominal 
pain proceeds in the same way whatever the 
severity of the pain; however, in the acute setting, 
assessment and management may need to 
proceed simultaneously and almost invariably 
involve consultation with a surgeon. Much debate 
has centred on the pros and cons of opiate anal-
gesia in patients with severe abdominal pain, as 
this may affect assessment. Current consensus is 
that while judicious use of opiate analgesia may 
affect the examination ﬁ ndings, it does not 
adversely affect the outcome for the patient and is 
preferable to leaving a patient in severe pain. 
 The history (Table  1.3 ) gives vital clues as to the 
diagnosis and should include questions regarding 
the location (Figure  1.2 ), character, onset and 
severity of the pain, any radiation or referral, any 
past history of similar pain, and any associated 
symptoms. 
 Careful exclusion of past or chronic health 
problems that may have progressed to, or be asso-
ciated with, the current condition is important. A 
patient with chronic dyspepsia may now be 

8 
Approach to the patient with abdominal pain
 Table 1.3   Historical features in acute abdominal pain examination. 
 Where is the pain?  
  See Figure  1.2  
 Character of the pain?  
  Acute waves of sharp constricting pain that  ‘ takes the breath away ’ (renal 
or biliary colic) 
 Waves of dull pain with vomiting (intestinal obstruction) 
 Colicky pain that becomes steady (appendicitis, strangulating intestinal 
obstruction, mesenteric ischaemia) 
 Sharp, constant pain, worsened by movement (peritonitis) 
 Tearing pain (dissecting aneurysm) 
 Dull ache (appendicitis, diverticulitis, pyelonephritis)  
 Past similar pain?  
  “ Yes ”  suggests recurrent problems such as ulcer disease, gallstone colic, 
diverticulitis or mittelschmerz  
 Onset?  
  Sudden:  ‘ like a thunderclap ’ (perforated ulcer, renal stone, ruptured 
ectopic pregnancy, torsion of ovary or testis, some ruptured aneurysms) 
 Less sudden: most other causes  
 Severity of the pain?  
  Severe pain (perforated viscus, kidney stone, peritonitis, pancreatitis) 
 Pain out of proportion to physical ﬁ ndings (mesenteric ischaemia)  
 Radiation/referral?  
  Right scapula (gallbladder pain) 
 Left shoulder region (ruptured spleen, pancreatitis) 
 Pubis or vagina (renal pain) 
 Back (ruptured aortic aneurysm)  
 Relieving factors?  
  Antacids (peptic ulcer disease) 
 Lying as quietly as possible (peritonitis)  
 Associated symptoms? 
  Vomiting precedes pain and is followed by diarrhoea (gastroenteritis) 
 Delayed vomiting, absent bowel movement and ﬂ atus (acute intestinal 
obstruction; the delay increases with a lower site of obstruction) 
 Severe vomiting precedes intense epigastric, left chest or shoulder pain 
(emetic perforation of the intra - abdominal oesophagus)  
presenting with perforation of a duodenal ulcer. 
The patient with severe peripheral vascular 
disease, or who has had recent vascular interven-
tion, might have acute mesenteric ischaemia. A 
binge drinker with past episodes of alcohol - related 
pain is at risk for acute pancreatitis, as is the 
patient with known cholelithiasis. Patients with 
past multiple abdominal surgeries are at risk for 
intestinal obstruction. 
 Questioning regarding current and past pre-
scribed, illicit and complementary medicine use is 
necessary. The patient using NSAIDs is at risk of 
peptic ulceration; use of anticoagulants increases 
the risk of haemorrhagic conditions; prednisone 
or immunosuppressants may blunt the inﬂ amma-
tory response to perforation or peritonitis result-
ing in less pain than expected.  
 Examination 
 Initial assessment is aimed at determining the seri-
ousness of the illness. A happy, comfortable -
 appearing patient rarely has a serious problem, 
unlike one who is anxious, pale, sweaty or in 
obvious pain. Vital signs, state of consciousness 
and other signs of peripheral perfusion must be 
evaluated. 
 •  Examination of the non - abdominal organ 
systems is aimed at determining any evidence 
for an extra - abdominal cause for the pain:  
   Abdominal wall tenderness and swelling with 
rectus muscle haematoma . Extremely 
tender, sometimes red and swollen scrotum 
with testicular torsion;  
   Resolving (sometimes completely resolved) 
rash in post - herpetic pain; 
       Ketones on the breath in diabetic ketoacidosis;  
   Pulmonary ﬁ ndings in pneumonia and 
pleuritis. 
 •  Examination of the abdomen focuses on the 
detection of peritonitis, any intra - abdominal 
masses or organomegaly, and localisation of 
the underlying pathology: 
   Distension of the abdomen may be 
associated with intestinal obstruction;  

Approach to the patient with abdominal pain 9
 Figure 1.2   Likely pathologies according to location of acute pain.  
Diffuse abdominal pain
Acute pancreatitis
Diabetic ketoacidosis
Early appendicitis
Gastroenteritis
Intestinal obstruction
Mesenteric ischemia
Peritonitis (any cause)
Sickle cell crisis
Spontaneous peritonitis
Typhoid fever
Appendicitis
Cecal diverticulitis
Meckel’s diverticulitis
Mesenteric adenitis
Right or left lower quadrant pain
Abdominal or psoas abscess
Abdominal wall hematoma
Cystitis
Endometriosis
Incarcerated or strangulated hernia
Inflammatory bowel disease
Left lower quadrant pain
Sigmoid diverticutitis
Left upper quadrant pain
Gastritis
Splenic disorders (abscess,
rupture)
Right or left upper quadrant pain
Acute pancreatitis
Herpes zoster
Lower lobe pneumonia
Myocardial ischemia
Radiculitis
Right upper quadrant pain
Cholecystitis and biliary colic
Congestive hepatomegally
Hepatitis or hepatic abscess
Perforated duodenal ulcer
Retrocecal appendicitis (rarely)
Right lower quadrant pain
Mittelschmerz
Pelvic inflammatory disease
Renal stone
Ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm
Ruptured ectopic pregnancy
Torsion of ovarian cyst or teste
   Bruising at the ﬂ anks (Grey Turner ’ s sign) 
and periumbilically (Cullen ’ s sign) is 
occasionally seen in acute haemorrhagic 
pancreatitis;  
   Absent bowel sounds is indicative of ileus 
and in the presence of severe pain suggests 
peritonitis;  
   High - pitched or over - active bowel sounds 
might indicate intestinal obstruction.    
 •  Palpation  should start with very light 
examination well away from the area of 
greatest pain. Guarding, rigidity and rebound 
indicate peritoneal irritation. Guarding is a 
slow and sustained involuntary contraction of 
the abdominal muscles, rather than the 
ﬂ inching that is observed with sensitive or 
anxious patients. Careful exclusion of hernias 
at the inguinal canals and over surgical scars, 

10 
Approach to the patient with abdominal pain
as well as pelvic and rectal examination, is 
essential. 
 Investigation s 
 Most patients will have a FBC, urea, creatinine and 
electrolytes, and dipstick urinalysis performed, 
although the results from these tests are neither 
sensitive nor speciﬁ c. Serum lipase, however, is 
useful in detecting acute pancreatitis. It is essen-
tial that erect chest and abdomen, and supine 
abdominal X - rays are performed when there is the 
possibility of intestinal perforation or obstruction. 
If the patient cannot sit up, the left lateral position 
may be used. 
 Modern imaging can detect the underlying 
pathology in acute abdominal pain with high sen-
sitivity and speciﬁ city. While ultrasound examina-
tion has the beneﬁ ts of portability and avoidance 
of radiation exposure, it is most useful in detecting 
disease of the gallbladder, and gynaecological and 
obstetric conditions. CT has emerged as the domi-
nant imaging tool for evaluation of the patient 
with severe acute abdomen. This has come about 
with the frequent advent of easy access to helical 
CT within or adjacent to the emergency depart-
ment. The proper execution and interpretation of 
CT in this setting has been shown to reduce the 
need for exploratory laparotomy and hence mor-
bidity, mortality and medical expense. 
 

     Patients with liver disease can present with a wide 
range of complaints, and the clinician must 
remain alert at all times to the possibility of 
hepatic involvement in disease. Increasingly com-
monly, 
asymptomatic 
patients 
will 
present 
because of liver test abnormalities discovered 
incidentally. Once the presence of hepatic dys-
function has been established, the not always 
straightforward task of deﬁ ning the underlying 
pathology is critical to planning appropriate 
management.  
 History  t aking 
 Liver disease can present in a variety of ways: 
 •  Non - speciﬁ c symptoms  include fatigue, 
anorexia, nausea and, occasionally, vomiting;  
 •  Loose, fatty stools (steatorrhoea)  can occur if 
cholestasis interrupts bile ﬂ ow to the small 
intestine;  
 •  Fever (due to liver pyrogens)  may be the ﬁ rst 
feature in viral or alcoholic hepatitis;  
 •  Jaundice  becomes visible when the serum 
bilirubin reaches 34 – 43  μ mol/l (2 – 2.5  mg/dl). 
While jaundice may be related to hepatic 
dysfunction, equally it can be a result of 
bilirubin overproduction. Mild jaundice 
without dark urine suggests unconjugated 
 2 
Approach to the  p atient 
with  l iver  d isease  
hyperbilirubinaemia (most often caused by 
haemolysis or Gilbert ’ s syndrome). 
 The historical features that it is important to 
elicit include the following. 
 Onset and  d uration 
 •  Did the symptoms come on gradually or 
suddenly? How long have the symptoms been 
a problem? Symptoms of acute onset may 
result from an acute vascular event, toxic 
cause, obstruction of the biliary system or 
acute infection. Symptoms resulting from 
chronic inﬂ ammatory processes are more 
likely to be of gradual onset. The development 
of dark urine (bilirubinuria) due to increased 
serum bilirubin, from hepatocellular or 
cholestatic causes, often precedes the onset of 
visible jaundice.  
 •  Identify precipitating events related to the 
onset of the symptoms; direct questions often 
need to be asked regarding exposure to 
common causes (Box  2.1 ), in particular:  
   Any association with pain that might relate 
to biliary obstruction?  
   Any use of medicines  – prescribed, 
complementary or illicit? 
   Any trauma or major stress including 
surgery? 
   Any association with starvation (important in 
Gilbert ’ s syndrome; see Chapter  20 )? 
   Any history of marked weight loss or gain? 
   Any association with vascular events or 
hypotension?  
   Any possible infectious contact or exposure? 
Lecture Notes: Gastroenterology and Hepatology, 1st edition. 
Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. 
© 2011 Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

12 
Approach to the patient with liver disease
 •  Presence of pale stool, bilirubinuria and 
generalised pruritis is indicative of cholestasis. 
If this is associated with fevers and rigors, an 
extrahepatic cause is more likely;  
 •  Central abdominal pain radiating to the back 
might indicate a pancreatic cause for 
obstruction;  
 •  Gradual onset of anorexia and malaise 
commonly occurs in alcoholic liver disease, 
chronic hepatitis and cancer;  
 •  Disturbances of consciousness, personality 
changes, intellectual deterioration and changes 
in speech might indicate hepatic 
encephalopathy. 
 Past  m edical and  f amily  h istory 
 The importance of a thorough past medical history, 
social history, family history and list of medicines, 
including complementary treatments, cannot be 
stressed enough in the evaluation of liver disease. 
 Perpetuating and 
 e xacerbating  f eatures 
 Patients should be asked if there are any factors 
that  ‘ bring on or make the symptoms worse or 
better ’ . Pain of a colicky nature that is exacerbated 
by eating, in particular fatty meals, may indicate a 
biliary cause for jaundice. A relapsing and remitting 
course associated with any toxic or medicinal expo-
sure must be carefully sought. The use of immu-
nosuppressive medications for other conditions 
may improve chronic inﬂ ammatory conditions, 
but conversely may exacerbate infectious causes.  
 Associated  s ymptoms 
 The presence of associated symptoms can help 
localise the origin of symptoms: 
 •  Onset of nausea and vomiting prior to jaundice 
is associated with acute hepatitis or common 
bile duct obstruction by a stone;  
 Box 2.1   Common causes of liver disease. 
 Infectious liver disease  
 •  Hepatitis A  
 •  Hepatitis B  
 •  Hepatitis C  
 •  Hepatitis D  
 •  Hepatitis E  
 •  Epstein – Barr virus  
 Drug - induced hepatitis or cholestasis  
 Vascular disease  
 •  Ischaemic hepatitis  
 •  Portal vein thrombosis  
 •  Budd – Chiari syndrome  
 •  Nodular regenerative hyperplasia  
 •  Veno - occlusive disease of the liver  
 Immune hepatitis  
 •  Autoimmune hepatitis  
 •  Granulomatous hepatitis  
 Deposition diseases  
 •  Wilson ’ s disease  
 •  Haemochromatosis  
 •  Alpha - 1 - antitrypsin deﬁ ciency  
 Alcoholic liver disease  
 Fatty liver  
 •  Non - alcoholic fatty liver disease  
 •  Non - alcoholic steatohepatitis  
 •  Focal fatty liver  
 Tumours and lesions of the liver  
 •  Hepatocellular carcinoma  
 •  Liver secondaries  
 •  Hepatic adenoma  
 •  Focal nodular hyperplasia of the liver  
 •  Hepatic cyst/polycystic liver disease  
 •  Hepatic haemangioma  
 Congenital liver disease  
 •  Congenital hepatic ﬁ brosis  
 •  Gilbert ’ s syndrome  
 •  Dubin – Johnson syndrome  
 •  Crigler – Najjar syndrome  
 Liver disease of pregnancy  
 •  Hyperemesis gravidarum  
 •  Cholestasis of pregnancy  
 •  Acute fatty liver of pregnancy  
 •  HELLP syndrome  
 Cryptogenic cirrhosis  

Approach to the patient with liver disease 13
 •  A complete list of exposure to medicines, 
prescribed and illicit, conventional and 
complementary, must be sought. It must be 
remembered that in drug - induced liver disease 
the temporal association may appear obscure 
as the interval between exposure and 
development of symptomatic disease is 
variable (usually within 5 – 90 days). 
 Mental  s tatus 
 a ssessment 
 It is important to document the mental state 
of all patients with known hepatic dysfunction, 
in particular cirrhosis. The Glasgow Coma 
Scale should be completed (Table  2.1 ) as it 
gives prognostically useful information. In the 
absence of disturbances of consciousness, early 
encephalopathy interferes with visual spatial 
awareness, demonstrated as a constructional 
apraxia, elicited by asking the patient to repro-
duce simple designs, most commonly a ﬁ ve -
 pointed star, or deterioration in the quality of 
handwriting. 
 Examination  t echnique 
 The physical examination begins with a careful 
general inspection  –  the importance of observing 
for the stigmata of chronic liver disease (Table  2.2 ) 
relates to making the diagnosis ( C ondition), and 
identifying aetiology ( C ause) and decompensa-
tion ( C omplications). 
 •  Any history of vascular disease, in particular 
thromboembolic disease, might point to a 
vascular cause for hepatic dysfunction.  
 •  Previous or concomitant autoimmune disease 
increases the possibility of autoimmune 
hepatitis. 
 •  Pregnancy is associated with a particular set of 
hepatic problems.  
 •  Past carcinoma raises the concern of 
metastatic liver disease.  
 •  A history of obesity, in particular in association 
with other features of the metabolic syndrome, 
increases the risk of steatohepatitis.  
 •  Patients should be carefully questioned 
regarding the presence of liver disease in the 
family. Inheritable liver conditions 
uncommonly present in adulthood but 
haemochromatosis and Wilson ’ s disease should 
be considered. Hepatitis viruses, in particular 
hepatitis B, may be contracted congenitally. 
The metabolic syndrome shows a familial 
tendency and increases the risk of fatty liver 
disease. 
 Lifestyle  h istory 
 •  A careful alcohol history, past and present, is 
essential when interviewing the patient with 
liver disease. 
 •  Risk factors for infectious hepatitis also need to 
be carefully questioned in all patients 
(intravenous drug use, transfusion history 
including blood products, and close contacts 
with hepatitis).  
 •  The occupational history may reveal exposure 
to hepatotoxins (employment involving 
alcohol, but also carbon tetrachloride, benzene 
derivatives and toluene). 
 Table 2.1   Glasgow Coma Scale. 
 
  6  
  5  
  4  
  3  
  2  
  1  
 Eyes  
 N/A  
  N/A  
  Opens eyes 
spontaneously  
 Opens eyes in 
response to 
voice  
 Opens eyes in 
response to 
painful stimuli  
 Does not 
open eyes  
 Verbal 
  N/A  
  Oriented, 
converses 
normally  
 Confused, 
disoriented  
 Utters 
inappropriate 
words  
 Incomprehensible 
sounds  
 Makes no 
sounds  
 Motor 
  Obeys 
Commands 
 Localises 
painful 
stimuli  
 Withdraws from 
painful stimuli  
 Abnormal 
ﬂ exion to 
painful stimuli  
 Extension to 
painful stimuli  
 Makes no 
movements 

14 
Approach to the patient with liver disease
repositioning of the patient. Very rarely it is 
possible for intra - abdominal cystic masses to 
cause  ‘ pseudo - ascites ’ ; hence if shifting dullness 
is found, it should be conﬁ rmed bilaterally to 
ensure it is due to ascitic ﬂ uid shift. 
 Approach to 
 i nvestigation and 
 d ifferential  d iagnosis 
 Following a careful history and examination, the 
likely pathological processes relevant to the 
patient should be identiﬁ able. The most likely 
diagnoses should be listed ﬁ rst and this can then 
be expanded by the application of a surgical sieve 
(as described in Part IV). 
 All patients should have routine biochemistry, 
haematology and coagulation tests performed. 
Serial liver enzyme assays give a picture of the 
course of the illness. In  hepatitis  an initial diag-
nostic serological screen should examine for the 
commoner causes. This would commonly include: 
 •  Hepatitis A, B and C serology; 
 •  Autoimmune screen to include antinuclear 
antibodies (ANA), antimitochondrial 
antibodies (AMA), smooth muscle antibodies 
 •  Careful inspection of the abdomen is 
repeated and the abdominal examination is 
completed as described in Part IV. Particular 
care should be taken to deﬁ ne the liver edges 
by percussion, and the position, texture and 
consistency of the lower liver edge by 
palpation. The normal liver span is less than 
12.5   cm. The normal liver edge may be pushed 
down by pulmonary hyperinﬂ ation in 
emphysema or asthma and with a Riedel ’ s 
lobe, which is a tongue - like projection from 
the right lobe ’ s inferior surface. Not all diseased 
livers are enlarged; a small liver is common in 
cirrhosis. Cachexia and an unusually hard or 
lumpy liver more often indicates metastases 
than cirrhosis. A tender liver suggests hepatitis, 
hepatocellular cancer or hepatic abscess, but 
may occur with rapid liver enlargement, e.g. in 
right heart failure (Table  2.3 ).  
 •  Careful examination for the spleen is 
essential . While enlargement of the spleen and 
liver might suggest chronic liver disease with 
portal hypertension, hepatosplenomegaly 
without other signs of chronic liver disease 
may be caused by an inﬁ ltrative disorder (e.g. 
lymphoma, amyloidosis or, in endemic areas, 
schistosomiasis or malaria), although jaundice 
is usually minimal or absent in such disorders.  
 •  Shifting dullness  is elicited by demonstrating 
ﬂ ank dullness to percussion that moves with 
 Table 2.2   Stigmata of chronic liver disease (progressing through the hands, face, abdomen 
and legs). 
 Diagnosis  
  Aetiology  
  Decompensation  
 Palmar erythema  
  Dupuytren ’ s contracture (alcohol)  
  Leuconychia (synthetic function)  
 Clubbing  
  Skin discoloration (haemachromatosis)  
  Multiple bruises (synthetic function)  
 Excoriation  
  Tattoos (viral hepatitis)  
  Asterixis (encephalopathy)  
 Spider naevi (in distribution 
of superior vena cava)  
 Peripheral neuropathy (alcohol)  
  Drowsiness (encephalopathy)  
 Conjunctival pallor (anaemia)  
  Kayser − Fleisher rings (Wilson ’ s)  
  Jaundice (excretory function)  
 Gynaecomastia  
  Parotidomegaly (alcohol)  
  Hyperventilation (encephalopathy 
and acidosis)  
 Female pattern body hair  
  Cerebellar signs: nystagmus, intention 
tremor (alcohol and Wilson ’ s)  
 Ascites (portal hypertension and 
synthetic function)  
 Caput medusa (recanalised 
umbilical vein)  
 Chronic pulmonary disease ( α - 1 -
 antitrypsin deﬁ ciency, cystic ﬁ brosis)  
 Pedal/sacral oedema (synthetic 
function and right heart failure)  
 Distended abdominal veins  
  Obesity (NAFLD)  
  
 Testicular atrophy  
  Diffuse lymphadenopahy 
(lymphoproliferative disease)  
 

Approach to the patient with liver disease 15
 Table 2.3   Differential diagnosis based on features of the liver examination. 
 Diagnosis  
  Characteristics of the liver edge  
 Degree of hepatomegaly  
 Metastases  
  Irregular  
  Mild to massive  
 Fatty inﬁ ltration due to alcoholic liver 
disease, myeloproliferative disease  
 Smooth  
 Right heart failure  
 Smooth 
 Tender if rapid liver enlargement 
 Pulsatile in tricuspid regurgitation  
 Hepatocellular cancer  
  Smooth, tender and occasionally 
pulsatile  
 Haemochromatosis, haematological 
disease (e.g. chronic leukaemia, 
lymphoma), fatty liver, inﬁ ltration 
(e.g. amyloid), granuloma (e.g. 
sarcoid)  
 Smooth  
  Mild to moderate  
 Hepatitis  
  Smooth and tender  
 Mild  
 Biliary obstruction  
  Smooth  
 Hydatid disease, cysts  
 Firm and irregular  
 Hepatic abscess  
  Smooth and tender  
 None to mild  
 Vascular abnormalities  
  May be smooth or irregular, may 
be pulsatile  
 Cirrhosis from any cause  
  Firm and irregular  
 Small liver to mild hepatomegaly  
(SMA) and liver/kidney microsomal antibody 
type 1 in the younger patient;  
 •  Serum immunoglobulin levels are also 
commonly performed: there is some diagnostic 
sensitivity for elevated IgA in alcoholic liver 
disease and IgM in primary biliary cirrhosis;  
 •  As reports of occult coeliac disease as a cause 
of LFT abnormalities are increasing, testing for 
antiendomysial (EMA) or antitissue 
transglutaminase (tTG) may be beneﬁ cial, 
particularly in the patient with GI disturbance;  
 •  Fasting blood sugars and lipids should be 
tested where fatty liver disease is suspected;  
 •  In the young patient the rare genetic causes, 
Wilson ’ s disease (serum caeruloplasmin), 
hereditary haemochromatosis (serum ferritin 
and transferrin saturation) and 
alpha - 1 - antitrypsin deﬁ ciency (AAT 
concentrations), can be screened for. 
 Investigation of the liver architecture and 
hepatic vasculature by ultrasound is generally 
indicated. Due to its low cost and the absence of 
ionising radiation, ultrasound can be considered 
the imaging modality of ﬁ rst choice. However, 
ultrasound may be difﬁ cult in the obese or gaseous 
patient, in those with a high - lying liver completely 
covered by the rib margin and in postoperative 
patients with dressings or painful scars. CT and 
MRI are useful second - line modalities and have 
largely replaced radioisotope scanning. 
 Liver biopsy is not usually required for the 
diagnosis of acute hepatitis. Its use is typically 
reserved for the assessment of chronic liver 
disease in order to inform prognosis and manage-
ment, and following hepatic transplantation. 
Liver biopsy can, however, be useful in conﬁ rming 
deposition diseases of the liver and where a clear 
diagnosis as to the cause of hepatitis has not 
been forthcoming after a complete serological 
work - up. Biopsy of possible malignant tumours 
has to be weighed against the risk of tumour 
seeding (Box  2.2 ). Biopsy may be undertaken 
through percutaneous, transjugular or rarely 
laparoscopic approaches. 
 Assessment of the 
 s everity of  l iver  d isease 
 Where chronic liver disease is conﬁ rmed, some 
assessment of the severity of hepatic dysfunction 

16 
Approach to the patient with liver disease
should be made. The commonest scoring system 
used is the Child – Pugh score (Table  2.4 ). This score 
is calculated using the total bilirubin, serum 
albumin, INR, degree of ascites and grade of hepatic 
encephalopathy. Based on this score patients are 
grouped into three severity levels: A, B and C.   
 These Child – Pugh  ‘ classes ’ are predictive of 
prognosis and useful in determining the required 
 Table 2.4   Child − Pugh scoring system.  
 Measure  
  1 point  
  2 points  
 3 points  
 Bilirubin (total) ( μ mol/l [mg/dl])  
  < 34 [ < 2] 
  34 − 50 [2 − 3]  
  > 50 [ > 3]  
 Serum albumin  
  > 35  
  28 − 35  
  < 28  
 INR  
  < 1.7  
  1.71 − 2.20  
  > 2.20  
 Ascites  
  None  
  Suppressed with medication  
  Refractory  
 Hepatic encephalopathy  
 None  
  Grade I − II (or suppressed 
with medication)  
 Grade III − IV (or refractory)  
 Box 2.2   Indications for liver biopsy. 
 •  Diagnose unexplained liver enzyme 
abnormalities  
 •  Diagnose and assess alcoholic liver disease  
 •  Diagnose and assess non - alcoholic steatosis  
 •  Diagnose and stage chronic hepatitis (viral and 
autoimmune)  
 •  Diagnose storage disorders (iron, copper)  
 •  Diagnose hepatomegaly of unknown cause  
 •  Diagnose unexplained intrahepatic cholestasis  
 •  Monitor use of hepatotoxic drugs (e.g. 
methotrexate)  
 •  Obtain histology of suspicious lesions  
 •  Obtain histology or culture in systemic illnesses  
 •  Following liver transplant: suspected rejection  
 •  Pre - liver transplant to assess donor  
 Table 2.5   Prognosis related to Child − Pugh 
scoring system  . 
 Points  
  Class 
  1 - year 
survival (%)  
 2 - year 
survival (%)  
 5 − 6  
  A  
  100  
  85  
 7 − 9  
  B  
  81  
  57  
 10 − 15  
  C  
  45  
  35  
 Table 2.6   Model for End - Stage Liver Disease 
(MELD) score  . 
 MELD score  
  3 - Month mortality (% 
hospitalised patients)  
 ≤ 9  
  4  
 10 – 19  
  27  
 20 – 29  
  76  
 30 – 39  
  83  
 ≥ 40  
  100  
strength of treatment and the necessity of liver 
transplantation (Table  2.5 ). Another specialised 
pretransplantation 
assessment 
score 
is 
the 
Model for End - Stage Liver Disease (MELD) score 
(Table  2.6 ). 
 
 
 

     This chapter provides both a basis to structure 
revision and a practical approach to patients pre-
senting in gastroenterology wards and clinics. 
Abdominal pain is dealt with in Chapter  1 . The 
other common presenting problem of GI bleeding 
is dealt with in Chapters  7 and  8 . 
 Dysphagia 
 Dysphagia  is deﬁ ned as difﬁ culty in swallowing, 
distinct from  odynophagia , which means pain on 
swallowing. It also needs to be distinguished from 
 globus , which is a functional syndrome of the sen-
sation of a lump in the throat in the absence of an 
organic cause. In taking a history, one needs to 
differentiate one of three general causes  –  oropha-
ryngeal or oesophageal mechanical or oesopha-
geal dysmotility (Table  3.1 ). 
 History 
 See Table  3.1 . 
 Investigation 
 •  Condition and cause : 
   Endoscopy: ﬁ rst - choice investigation, allows 
biopsy and/or dilatation of strictures; may 
be performed after barium swallow to allow 
exclusion of pharyngeal pouch, which could 
 3 
Approach to the  p atient 
with  l uminal  d isease  
be perforated by the unsuspecting 
endoscopist;  
   Barium swallow (irregular 
stricture  =  malignant; smooth 
stricture  =  benign); 
   Chest X - ray (hilar 
lymphadenopathy    =  oesophageal 
malignancy);  
   Videoﬂ uorsocopy (if oropharyngeal cause 
suspected);  
   ENT opinion (if oropharyngeal cause 
suspected);  
   Systemic sclerosis antibodies. 
 •  Complications : FBC (anaemia  =  oesophageal 
malignancy, malnutrition, Plummer – Vinson 
syndrome); 
   LFTs (stage oesophageal malignancy). 
 Causes 
 See Table  3.2 . 
 Management 
 Speciﬁ c management depends on the underlying 
cause (see appropriate sections).    
 Nausea and  v omiting 
 Vomiting  is the violent expulsion of gastric and 
intestinal content induced by contraction of the 
abdominal musculature and diaphragm. It is dis-
tinct from  regurgitation , which is the passive 
passage of gastric content without abdominal 
Lecture Notes: Gastroenterology and Hepatology, 1st edition. 
Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. 
© 2011 Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

18 
Approach to the patient with luminal disease
   If undigested food is present, many hours 
after being eaten, then gastric cause is 
likely. 
 •  Associated features : 
   If isolated, almost always functional; 
   Drug history (see causes below); 
   Neurological symptoms (see causes below). 
 •  Assessment : 
   Signs of dehydration ( complication ); 
   Signs of sepsis ( cause ); 
   Signs of visible peristalsis and hernia 
( cause ); 
   Sucussion splash ( condition ); 
   Dental enamel erosions ( cause  –  GORD or 
bulimia);  
   Neurological signs ( cause ). 
 Investigation 
 Needs to be focused by consideration of causes 
(see below).  
contraction; it may reﬂ ect oesophageal or gastric 
disease.  Nausea  is the perceptual component of 
vomiting. 
 History 
 •  Timing : acute cases (see below) need to be 
distinguished from chronic, as causation is 
quite different: 
   If shortly after meals, suggests a gastric cause; 
   If long after meals, suggests distal intestinal 
cause;  
   If unrelated to meals, suggests non - GI cause; 
   If mostly on waking, suggests CNS cause. 
 •  Amount of vomitus : 
   Large volumes suggest obstruction or gastric 
cause;  
   Small volumes suggest a functional problem. 
 •  Content of vomitus : 
       If bile (bitter brown liquid) present, then 
pylorus is patent, and gastroparesis is unlikely;  
 Table 3.1   Historical features of help in identifying cause of dysphagia  . 
 Clinical features  
  Oropharyngeal  
  Oesophageal 
mechanical cause  
 Oesophageal 
dysmotility cause  
 Initiating swallow  
  Difﬁ cult  
  Unaffected  
  Unaffected  
 Interval to dysphagia 
after swallow  
 Instant  
  Few seconds  
 Few seconds  
 Progression  
  Variable  
  Progressively worsening  
 Intermittent  
 Type of food  
  Liquids  
  Solids  
  Liquids and solids  
 Associated 
symptoms  
 Choking, nasal 
regurgitation, drooling  
 Weight loss, prior 
heartburn  
 Odynophagia  
 Associated signs  
  Cranial nerve signs  
  Cervical lymph nodes, 
anaemia  
 Systemic 
sclerosis?  
 Table 3.2   Causes of dysphagia, classiﬁ ed by frequency of occurrence  . 
 
  Oropharyngeal  
  Oesophageal  
 Common  
  Stroke 
 Candidiasis 
 Globus sensation  
 Benign (peptic) stricture 
 Oesophageal carcinoma 
 Oesophagitis  
 Less common 
  Pharyngeal pouch 
 Motor neurone disease 
 Xerostomia  
 Dysmotility (achalasia    >  spasm   >  systemic 
sclerosis) 
 Webs and rings 
 External pressure (hilar nodes, lung cancer)  
 Rare  
  Oral tumours 
 Severe aphthous ulcers 
 Muscular dystrophy  
 Oesophageal infections 
 Retrosternal goitre 
 Corrosive stricture  

Approach to the patient with luminal disease 19
 Causes 
 The potential list of causes is enormous, but can 
be classiﬁ ed as in Box  3.1 . More than one cause is 
often present. 
 Treatment 
 This should, where possible, be directed at treat-
ing the underlying cause (as per Box  3.1 ). 
Symptomatic relief may be obtained from: 
 •  Centrally - acting antiemetics : 
   Phenothiazines (prochlorperazine, 
haloperidol):  
 –  Antidopamine effect; 
 –  Best for neurological, drug - induced and 
metabolic nausea;  
 –  Side - effects: sedation, orthostatic 
hypotension. 
   5 - HT 3 antagonists (ondansetron): 
 –  Antihistamine effect at chemoreceptor 
trigger zone;  
 –  Best for drug - induced nausea; 
 –  Well - tolerated, but expensive. 
   5 - HT 1 antagonists (diphenhydramine): 
 Box 3.1   Causes of vomiting. 
 Gastrointestinal  
 •  Functional disorders:  
    Functional dyspepsia syndromes  
    IBS 
 •  Obstructive: 
    Achalasia: 
    Gastric outlet obstruction  
 –  Pyloric stenosis  
 –  Gastroparesis 
    Small bowel obstruction  
 •  Organic luminal disease: 
    Peptic ulcers  
    Upper GI cancers  
    Gastroenteritis 
 •  Organic hepato - pancreato - biliary disease: 
    Hepatitis: acute and chronic  
    Pancreatitis: acute and chronic  
    Cholecystitis: acute and chronic  
 Neurological  
 •  Vestibular disorders  
 •  Raised intracranial pressure  
 •  Migraine  
 •  Demyelinating disorders  
 Psychogenic  
 •  Bulimia nervosa    >  anorexia nervosa  
 •  Psychogenic vomiting  
 •  Cyclical vomiting syndrome  
 Alcohol  
 Drugs : almost any, but especially: 
 •  Opiates  
 •  Antibiotics, especially erythromycin  
 •  Chemotherapy agents  
 •  NSAIDs  
 •  Anticonvulsants  
 Metabolic  
 •  Uraemia  
 •  Diabetic ketoacidosis  
 •  Addison ’ s disease  
 Pregnancy  
 –  Antihistamine effect at chemoreceptor 
trigger zone; 
 –  Best for neurological causes of nausea; 
 –  Well tolerated, but limited efﬁ cacy. 
 •  Peripherally - acting antiemetics  : 
   Prokinetic agents (domperidone, 
metoclopramide):  
 –  Best for GI causes of vomiting; 
 –  Side - effects: gynaecomastia, 
extrapyramidal effects. 
   Motilin analogues (erythromycin): 
 –  Especially useful in gastroparesis. 
 •  Centrally - and peripherally - acting agents : 
   Steroids (dexamethasone); 
   Benzodiazepines (lorazepam). 
 Constipation 
 Constipation is deﬁ ned in purely symptomatic 
terms (in contrast to diarrhoea, which is deﬁ ned 
as stool weight  > 200   g). Implicit in this, is the fact 
that constipation is merely a symptom, not a diag-
nosis. Constipation is distinct from the  irritable 

20 
Approach to the patient with luminal disease
bowel syndrome (IBS)  in that abdominal pain is 
not necessarily associated with bowel dysfunc-
tion. It is deﬁ ned as infrequent stools ( < 3 per 
week), passage of hard stools ( > 25% of the time), 
straining to empty the rectum ( > 25% of the time) 
or a sensation of incomplete evacuation ( > 25% of 
the time). 
 Constipation is one of the most common GI 
complaints. It affects about 25% of the population 
at some time, being more common in women and 
the elderly.  
 Table 3.3  Secondary causes of constipation  . 
 Primary pathology  
  Examples  
 Endocrine 
conditions  
 Hypothyroidism *  
 Hyperparathyroidism 
 Diabetes mellitus  *  
 Glucagonoma  
 Neurological 
conditions  
 Multiple sclerosis 
 Autonomic neuropathy 
 Parkinson ’ s disease  *  
 Spinal injury  *  
 Psychogenic 
conditions  
 Affective disorders  *  
 Eating disorders  *  
 Dementia or learning 
difﬁ culty  
 Metabolic  
  Hypercalcaemia 
 Uraemia 
 Hypokalaemia 
 Porphyria 
 Amyloidosis 
 Lead poisoning  
 Colonic  
  Stricture 
 Tumour  *  
 Ischaemia 
 Diverticular disease  *  
 Anal  
  Fissure *  
 Polyp 
 Tumour  
 Physiological  
  Pregnancy  *  
 Old age  *  
 Drugs (all of which 
lead to 
prolongation of 
transit)  
 Opiates 
 Anticholinergics 
 Anticonvulsants 
 Tricyclic antidepressants 
 Antacids (aluminium and 
calcium containing ones) 
 NSAIDs 
 Iron 
 Antihypertensives  
 * , Most common.  
 PHYSIOLOGY OF  G UT  T RANSIT 
 The time taken for food to travel through the 
whole gut (oroanal transit time) varies widely in 
the population, between 20 and 40   h. 80% of this 
time is spent in transit through the colon. There 
are two forms of contractions that occur in the 
colon, the segmental ones that encourage rea-
bsorption of water and the less frequent propa-
gated 
contractions 
that 
propel 
content 
downstream. The latter are complemented by 
the gastrocolic response, which describes the 
increase in segmental activity that occurs after 
eating. Fatty and carbohydrate meals enhance 
the response, which is dependent on vagal func-
tion. This response is a strong stimulus to 
colonic transit and defaecation and explains 
why constipation may result from an inadequate 
dietary habit. 
 Once stool is in the rectum, there needs to be 
co - ordination between the pelvic ﬂ oor, abdomi-
nal musculature and anal sphincters in order to 
allow evacuation of rectal content. 
 Classiﬁ cation 
 Constipation can be classiﬁ ed as primary or sec-
ondary to other disorders, and it is often multifac-
torial. The distinction is important as it will direct 
management. The secondary causes are listed in 
Table  3.3 . 
 Primary causes can be due to constipation with 
a colon of normal diameter or with a dilated colon, 
but this is an clinically important distinction to 
make, and can be assessed on abdominal X - ray or 
barium study. 
 Constipation with a  c olon of 
 n ormal  d iameter 
 Patients who have constipation with a colon of 
normal diameter can be classiﬁ ed into three 
subgroups: 
 •  Normal transit constipation . This is the 
commonest type of constipation. It is 
characterised by a normal rate of stool 
movement through the colon, but the patient 
feels constipated. It is usually secondary to 

Approach to the patient with luminal disease 21
 •  Faecal impaction and faecal soiling? Suggests 
idiopathic megacolon.  
 •  Alarm symptoms needing urgent imaging: 
   Rectal bleeding; 
   Recent onset of symptoms; 
   Weight loss; 
   Family history of colon cancer. 
 •  Comorbid medical history: thyroid disease, 
diabetes or renal impairment? 
 •  Drug history (see Table  3.3 ). 
 •  Dietary history : speciﬁ cally meal frequency 
and ﬁ bre intake. 
 Investigations 
 •  Blood tests : 
   FBC: for anaemia if colon cancer is the cause 
of constipation; 
   U & E: uraemia as a cause of constipation; 
   Thyroid function tests: hypothyroidism as a 
cause of constipation;  
   Calcium: hypercalcaemia as a cause of 
constipation;  
   Glucose: diabetes, constipation is the 
commonest GI manifestation.    
 •  Imaging : 
   Colonic imaging to exclude cancer if there 
are any alarm symptoms, or in patients over 
50 years of age who have a new onset of 
symptoms: colonoscopy  or barium enema 
 or CT colonography (for details, see 
Chapter  6 ); 
   Evacuation proctography (by barium or MRI 
contrast) allows study of anorectal 
morphology and dynamics during 
defaecation. It detects:  
 –  Functional abnormalities such as inco -
 ordination of the pelvic ﬂ oor and anal 
sphincters;  
 –  Structural abnormalities of rectal emptying 
such as intussusception, rectal prolapse 
and rectocoele; 
   Radio - opaque marker study of whole gut 
transit  – a useful measure of the motor 
function of the whole gut. Whole gut transit 
can be measured by performing an 
abdominal X - ray after the ingestion of 
radio - opaque markers; it primarily reﬂ ects 
colonic transit, given that intestinal transit 
time is mostly colonic;  
   Plain abdominal X - ray is  not  a sensitive 
diagnostic test of constipation.    
perceived difﬁ culty with defaecation and hard 
stools. Symptoms may overlap with those of 
constipation - predominant IBS since pain and 
bloating is common.  
 •  Slow transit constipation . Most common in 
young women, with symptoms dating back to 
childhood. Characterised by infrequent bowel 
movements and slow movement of stool 
through the colon. Bloating, abdominal pain and 
an infrequent urge to defaecate are commonly 
associated with this condition. There may be 
underlying neural changes in the colon, though 
these may be secondary to the condition itself.  
 •  Disordered defaecation . Usually due to 
dysfunction of the pelvic ﬂ oor or anal 
sphincters. Patients typically report an inability 
to defaecate despite feeling an urge to do so, 
and need to use digital manipulation per 
vagina or per anum. Most often there is 
inco - ordination of the pelvic ﬂ oor and anal 
sphincters resulting in non - propulsion of stool 
from the rectum; this may have been triggered 
by deliberately suppressing the urge to 
defaecate. Alternatively there may be structural 
abnormalities, such as a rectocoele (a bulging 
of the rectum into the posterior wall of the 
vagina) or rectal intussusception (telescoping 
of the rectum into itself during straining), 
which cause an  ‘ obstruction ’ to defaecation. 
 Constipation with a  d ilated  c olon 
 Severe constipation with gut dilatation is second-
ary to neuromuscular disorders of the colon: 
 •  Hirschsprung ’ s disease (see p. 108); 
 •  Idiopathic megacolon (see p. 108); 
 •  Chronic intestinal pseudo - obstruction (see 
p. 92). 
 History 
 •  Stool frequency and consistency : hard stools 
suggest delayed transit; normal stools suggest 
normal transit; loose stools may relate to 
laxative use.  
 •  Need to strain or digitally extract stool? 
Suggests defaecatory disorder.  
 •  What is the urge frequency?  – Daily suggests 
normal transit; every 2 days or less suggests 
slow transit.  
 •  Any clear precipitants to onset? Abdominal 
or pelvic surgery, childbirth or emotional 
trauma. 

22 
Approach to the patient with luminal disease
 PHYSIOLOGY OF  F LUID  F LUXES IN 
THE  G UT 
 Fluids into lumen  
  Fluids out of lumen  
 Food in  
  2000   ml  Small bowel 
reabsorption  
 5350   ml 
 Saliva  
  250   ml  
  Colonic 
reabsorption  
 2000   ml 
 Gastric 
secretions  
 2000   ml  Stool volume  
  150   ml  
 Small 
intestinal 
secretions  
 3250   ml   
  
 TOTAL  
  7500   ml   TOTAL  
  7500   ml 
 The above illustrates the approximate ﬂ uid 
ﬂ uxes in the gut in a healthy, well nourished 
individual. It illustrates the principle that two -
 thirds of the reabsorption of liquid is accom-
plished during the rapid period of transit 
(approximately 2 – 4   h) through the small bowel. 
This leaves approximately 2   l of material entering 
the caecum each day, which gets progressively 
dehydrated in its passage through the colon 
over approximately 24   h. It is readily appreciable 
therefore that small changes in colonic function 
will alter stool volume: a 10% reduction in 
colonic reabsorption will leave an extra 200   ml 
of liquid in the lumen, and more than double the 
stool volume. 
 The prevalence of chronic diarrhoea ( > 4 weeks 
of symptoms) is approximately 4% in the com-
munity population in the UK. Whilst a compre-
hensive list of causes of diarrhoea is given in Table 
 3.4  (for examination revision purposes), it is easier 
to remember this list by considering the potential 
causes of diarrhoea. Many disorders cause a 
mixture of the three basic mechanisms. 
 Mechanisms of  d iarrhoea 
 Osmotic  d iarrhoea 
 •  Principle : persistence of non - absorbed 
osmotically - active compounds (typically 
carbohydrates or fat) which retain ﬂ uid in the 
lumen exceeding the colonic capacity to 
reabsorb. 
 •  Anorectal physiological tests . These are only 
needed in the minority of patients who do not 
respond to lifestyle advice or brief laxative use: 
   Recto - anal inhibitory reﬂ ex: presence 
excludes Hirschsprung ’ s disease; 
   Ano - rectal sensory testing: to detect whether 
there is loss of rectal sensation (in patients 
with multiple sclerosis, Parkinson ’ s disease, 
etc.). 
 Treatment 
 •  Diet : in general, patients with normal transit 
need to augment dietary ﬁ bre and liquid 
intake. Only if they cannot manage this 
through normal diet should they be prescribed 
ﬁ bre supplements. Patients with slow transit, 
by contrast, need less ﬁ bre in their diet since 
ﬁ bre tends to exacerbate bloating and does not 
help accelerate transit.  
 •  Laxatives : 
   Stimulant laxatives (senna, bisacodyl) are 
best used on an as - required basis, rather 
than regularly, to avoid laxative dependence;  
   Stool softeners (docusate) are primarily used 
as adjuvant agents;  
   Osmotic agents (magnesium salts, lactulose) 
are effective in slow transit and allow dose 
adjustment according to response, but may 
be unpalatable. 
 •  Biofeedback : behavioural therapy with 
biofeedback is an effective alternative to 
laxatives for patients who want to avoid 
long - term dependence on drugs.  
 •  Surgery : whilst rectocoele or pelvic ﬂ oor 
repairs may help some patients with structural 
rectal or pelvic abnormalities, colonic resection 
surgery for constipation has mostly fallen out 
of favour (due to poor long - term results and 
the frequent need for re - operation).  
 •  Psychological therapy : some patients with 
constipation have the symptom as a 
consequence of signiﬁ cant psychological 
distress, and in these situations speciﬁ c 
psychological help can be helpful. 
 Diarrhoea 
 Diarrhoea is strictly deﬁ ned as an increase in stool 
weight above 200   g  –  mostly occurring as a result 
of an increase in stool water content.   

Approach to the patient with luminal disease 23
 Table 3.4   Causes of diarrhoea. 
 Condition  
  Comments  
  Frequency  
 Gastroenteritis  
  Virus 
 Bacterial ( Campylobacter ,  Salmonella)  
 Toxin ( E. coli ,  Shigella ) 
 Parasite ( Giardia)  
 Commonest 
 Common 
 Common 
 Rare  
 Inﬂ ammatory bowel disease  
  
  Common  
 Drug - induced  
  Many, including alcohol, antibiotics, Mg -
 containing antacids, PPIs, NSAIDs  
 Common  
 Colorectal carcinoma  
  Left sided    >  right sided  
  Common  
 Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS)  
 Diarrhoea - predominant IBS may complicate prior 
gastroenteritis in 25% of cases  
 Common  
 Coeliac disease  
  > 50% of patients report diarrhoea  
  Unusual  
 Microscopic colitis  
  Diagnosis depends on right colon histology  
  Unusual  
 Laxative misuse  
  High level of suspicion needed to avoid 
unnecessary investigation  
 Unusual  
 Bacterial overgrowth  
  Usually as comorbidity of another disorder  
  Unusual  
 Uncommon gut disorders  
  Pseudo - membranous colitis 
 Post - gastric or ileal resection or vagotomy 
 Ischaemic colitis 
 Lactose intolerance 
 Bile acid malabsorption 
 Whipple ’ s disease 
 Gastrinoma/VIPoma 
 Carcinoid  
 Unusual 
 Unusual 
 Unusual 
 Unusual 
 Rare 
 Rare 
 Rare 
 Rare  
 Non - intestinal disease  
  Chronic pancreatitis 
 Thyrotoxicosis (may be no other clinical signs) 
 Autonomic neuropathy (diabetes) 
 Addison ’ s disease 
 Beh ç et ’ s disease 
 Hypoparathyroidism  
 Unusual 
 Unusual 
 Rare 
 Rare 
 Rare 
 Rare  
 Inﬁ ltrative gut diseases  
  Amyloidosis 
 Intestinal vasculitis 
 Mastocytosis 
 Hypogammaglobulinaemia  
 Rare 
 Rare 
 Rare 
 Rare  
 •  Characteristic :  ‘ porridgey ’ stool; symptoms 
resolve on fasting. 
 •  Investigation : rarely needed, but physiologically 
gratifying. Identiﬁ es an increased faecal osmotic 
gap: 290  –  2  ×  ([faecal Na  +  ]  +  [faecal K  +  ]); a gap 
 > 125  mOsm/kg is diagnostic. 
 •  Causes : 
   Laxative misuse (lactulose or other osmotic 
laxatives);  
   Lactose intolerance (most commonly as part 
of another intestinal disorder, such as 
Crohn ’ s disease, coeliac disease);  
   Bacterial overgrowth (due to production of 
osmoticaly - active compounds by small bowel 
bacterial colonisation);  
   Steatorrhoea causes (chronic pancreatitis, 
small bowel disease). 
 Secretory  d iarrhoea 
 •  Principle : small bowel secretion abnormally 
stimulated by a peptide (vasoactive intestinal 
peptide [VIP] or gastrin) or a toxin 
( Escherichia. coli enterotoxin,  Vibrio cholera 
toxin). The causative agents act on cyclic 
nucleotide release within enterocytes, 
resulting in ion secretion and water loss into 
the lumen.  
 •  Characteristic :  ‘ watery ’ stool in huge volumes; 
does not settle with fasting.  

24 
Approach to the patient with luminal disease
   Culture (if suspect food poisoning with 
 Salmonella, Shigella, Campylobacter ); 
   Electron microscopy for viruses is rarely if 
ever needed;  
   Faecal calprotectin (a neutrophil - derived 
peptide) is emerging as a potentially useful tool 
to identify IBD or cancers as opposed to IBS.    
 •  Blood tests : 
   Haemoglobin: carcinoma, IBD, coeliac 
disease;  
   MCV elevated in coeliac disease (low folate), 
terminal ileal disease (low B 12 ), Crohn ’ s, 
post - resection, alcohol misuse; 
   MCV reduced in carcinoma, IBD; 
   Serum potassium: classically low in VIPoma, 
but also in any severe diarrhoea (small bowel 
K  +  loss); 
   CRP (preferred to ESR) elevated in carcinoma 
(mild increase), IBD (greater increase) and 
infection (most elevated);  
   TFTs; 
   Coeliac antibodies (see p. 88). 
 •  Endoscopy : 
   Upper GI endoscopy and D2 biopsy: if 
suspect coeliac disease or  Giardia; 
   Flexible sigmoidoscopy: if diarrhoea 
associated with fresh rectal bleeding;  
   Colonoscopy and ileoscopy with biopsies: for 
all patients if stool and blood tests normal; 
intention is to exclude cancer and IBD.    
 •  Radiology : 
   Barium enema: not a good test for diarrhoea 
(poor mucosal deﬁ nition of subtle lesions, no 
opportunity to obtain histology);  
   CT colonography: if patient unsuitable or 
unﬁ t for colonoscopy; 
   Abdominal ultrasound or CT scan: if biliary 
or pancreatic disease suspected;  
   Barium follow - through: to exclude Crohn ’ s 
disease, or intestinal lymphoma. 
 •  Further investigation : 
       If above investigations do not reveal a cause, 
may need to consider admission for 
observation (food and stool chart) and 3 - day 
stool weight estimation. If diarrhoea settles, 
or stool weight  < 200  g/day, treat as IBS or 
functional (laxative misuse); if stool weight 
 > 200  g/day, then further investigation is 
warranted;  
   Stool osmolality and volume after a 48 - h fast 
will identify secretory and osmotic causes of 
diarrhoea;  
 •  Investigation : rarely needed, but stool volumes 
usually  > 500  ml/day, with normal faecal 
osmotic gap ( < 50  mOsm/kg). 
 •  Causes : 
   Toxins ( E. coli, V. cholera, Clostridium ); 
   Tumour (VIPoma, Zollinger – Ellison, bile acid 
malabsorption, villous adenoma). 
 Dysmotility  d iarrhoea 
 •  Principle : accelerated transit leaves less time 
for reabsorption in small and/or large bowel.  
 •  Characteristic : stool consistency varies day to 
day. 
 •  Investigation : none, other than an accurate 
history. 
 •  Causes : 
   IBS; 
   Post GI resection; 
   Drugs (stimulant laxatives). 
 History 
 •  Nature of diarrhoea :  watery,  ‘ porridgey ’ and 
variable consistency stool  – as above; pale, 
fatty stools that are hard to ﬂ ush away suggest 
steatorrhoea (pancreatic or small bowel cause).  
 •  Timing : night - time diarrhoea is organic and 
excludes a diagnosis of IBS; morning diarrhoea 
suggests inﬂ ammatory bowel disease (IBD), 
IBS or alcohol misuse.  
 •  Associated features : 
       Overt blood loss suggests a colonic cause;
Weight loss warrants urgent investigation;  
   Drug and surgical history (as per Box  3.1 ); 
   Systemic illness (diabetes, scleroderma, 
thyroid disease);  
   Family history (colorectal cancer, IBD, 
coeliac disease). 
 Rigid sigmoidoscopy is a useful part of the clini-
cal assessment of the patient with diarrhoea  – 
distal tumours, ulcerative colitis and infectious 
proctitis are readily evident, and biopsies can be 
taken ( Note : microscopic colitis cannot be 
excluded by rectal biopsies alone).  
 Investigation 
 •  Stool microscopy : for  Giardia  (and other 
parasites or ova).  
 •  Other stool tests : 
   Clostridium difﬁ cile  toxin (if recent 
antibiotics);  

Approach to the patient with luminal disease 25
   Laxative screen in suspected patients: this 
will need stool and serology samples;  
   Capsule enteroscopy: pick up for diarrhoea is 
poor if barium follow -  through is normal;  
   Lactose hydrogen breath test will identify 
hypolactasia, but it may be more practical to 
ask the patient to empirically follow a 
lactose - free diet and see how they respond; 
   Se - HCAT bile acid malabsorption test may be 
helpful, but an empirical trial of treatment 
with cholestyramine may be appropriate. 
 Treatment 
 Treatment is usually directed towards supportive 
care (maintaining ﬂ uid balance, treating pyrexia) 
and correcting the underlying cause. Symptomatic 
treatment may be undertaken with: 
 •  Loperamide: acts on  μ - opioid receptors in the 
myenteric plexus of the gut to reduce 
peristalsis and intestinal secretion; it does not 
cross into the CNS or cause dependence;  
 •  Codeine: an opiate with analgesic and 
antidiarrhoeal properties; it can cross into the 
CNS and cause drowsiness and, in large doses, 
respiratory depression;  
 •  Co - phenotrope: a combination drug of a 
synthetic opiate and atropine (anticholinergic) 
 Figure 3.1   Pathophysiology of faecal incontinence. The most common disorders are indicated with an asterisk. 
IBD, inﬂ ammatory bowel disease; IBS, irritable bowel syndrome; MS, multiple sclerosis.  
Patient
Structure
Pathophysiology
Disorders
Faecal incontinence
Rectum
Anus
Structure
Function
Function
Structure
Anorectal unit
Incoordination
1. Obstetric
    sphincter tear*
2. Latrogenic
    sphincter tear*
3. Radiation
    damage*
4. Congenital
    malformations 
Pudenal
neuropathy*
1. Rectal
    inflammation*
    (IBD, radiation)
2. Rectal tumour
    (cancer, polyp)
3. Abnormal
    rectal structure*
    (rectocoele,
    rectal prolapse)
1. Pelvic floor
    incoordination*
    (post-obstetric)
2. Cognitive
    dysfunction
    (interrupting
    pelvic floor
    coordination)
3. Neurological
    dysfunction
    (MS, spinal
    injury)
1. Abnormal
    rectal content*
    (diarrhoea)
2. Abnormal
    rectal
    sensation (IBS,
    neurological
    disease,
    diabetes)
which reduces intestinal secretion and 
contraction; the anticholinergic effects mean it 
is often poorly tolerated. 
 Anal  i ncontinence 
 This refers to involuntary passage of rectal content 
(gas or stool), and it is a source of major 
embarrassment to the sufferer. The symptom 
occurs more commonly with age, and on a weekly 
basis in 2% of community - dwelling over - 70 - year 
olds. 
 Incontinence arises when there is disturbance 
of the: 
 •  Anus; 
 •  Rectum; or 
 •  Co - ordination between anus and rectum. 
 In turn, this could be due to either disorder 
of structure or function of either organ. With 
regard to function, anal incontinence can be 
due to either disturbed motor or sensory 
function. The overall possible pathophysiology 
is summarised in Figure  3.1 , which also outlines 
the possible causes and relates these to the 
pathophysiology. 

26 
Approach to the patient with luminal disease
 Causes 
 See Table  3.5 . 
 History and  i nvestigation 
 Table  3.5  lists the conditions that should be con-
sidered in assessing weight loss. Particular atten-
tion should focus on the psychological and 
environmental factors that may be inﬂ uencing 
nutrient intake, and hence weight. 
 Body mass index (BMI) is used as the measure 
of weight that takes into account height. BMI is 
calculated as weight (in kg) divided by (height) 2 
(in m 2 ). A value between 20 and 25 is normal, but 
sequential measurements showing a progressive 
reduction, even if within this normal range, should 
not be ignored. 
 Table 3.5  Causes of weight loss  . 
 Gastrointestinal 
  Oral disease 
 GI malignancy 
 Small bowel malabsorption 
 Pancreatic disease 
 Liver cirrhosis 
 Inﬂ ammatory bowel disease 
(Crohn ’ s    >  ulcerative colitis) 
 Gut infestations ( Giardia,  small 
intestine bacterial 
overgrowth) 
 Chronic intra - abdominal sepsis  
 Psychosocial  
  Eating disorders 
(anorexia    >  bulimia)  
 
  Affective disorders 
 Alcohol misuse (multifactorial) 
 Chronic pain syndromes 
 Starvation  
 Metabolic  
  Diabetes (type I especially) 
 Hyperthyroidism 
 Addison ’ s disease 
 Hypopituitarism 
 Uraemia 
 Chronic heart failure ( ‘ cardiac 
cachexia ’ )  
 Chronic 
inﬂ ammatory 
diseases  
 Rheumatoid arthritis 
 Connective tissue disorders 
 Chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease  
 Chronic 
infectious 
disease  
 Tuberculosis 
 HIV/AIDS 
 Abscesses  
 Malignancy 
anywhere  
 Especially common sites (lung, 
breast, cervix, prostate, 
lymphoma)  
 History 
 There are two forms of anal incontinence: 
 •  Urge incontinence  occurs when there is 
marked urgency to void the bowel, with 
incontinence occurring before the patient can 
get to a toilet;  
 •  Passive incontinence  is due to leaking of stool 
without perception of any urge. 
 History taking should also address the severity 
of the condition (need to wear pads, frequency of 
episodes, effects on lifestyle).  
 Investigations 
 •  Structure : anal inspection, endo - anal 
ultrasound (rarely pelvic CT or MR);  
 •  Function : digital examination, anorectal 
manometry and sensory testing (rarely EMG). 
 Treatment 
   General :Optimise stool consistency 
(antidiarrhoeal drugs  –  loperamide, codeine);  
   Dietary advice (rationalise dietary ﬁ bre 
intake, avoid excess caffeine, alcohol); 
   Review medications (if possible, discontinue 
any that cause diarrhoea);  
   Anal sphincter exercises. 
 •  Speciﬁ c : 
 •  Sphincter tear: surgical repair (when possible); 
 •  Rectal prolapse or rectocoele: surgical repair; 
 •  Disease causes diarrhoea: speciﬁ c medical 
treatment of each condition;  
 •  Pelvic inco - ordination: biofeedback or sacral 
nerve stimulation (surgical procedure to 
electrically stimulate sacral nerves and hence 
improve sphincter function). 
 Weight  l oss 
 Weight loss is a common cause for presentation to 
gastroenterology services. It should be remem-
bered that there are  ‘ physiological ’ reasons for 
weight loss, according to the simplistic formula:
 
Body weight
Food ingested
Exertion undertaken
=
−
 
 In other words, reduced nutrient intake or excess 
exercise cause weight loss. Importantly, there are 
many non - GI causes of weight loss (Table  3.5 ).   

Approach to the patient with luminal disease 27
 –  Plasma iron is a measure of available iron 
( ↓ in iron deﬁ ciency and anaemia of 
chronic disease)  
 –  Ferritin  – most sensitive measure:  ↓ in 
iron deﬁ ciency (normal or  ↑ in chronic 
disease)  
 –  Transferrin saturation: less speciﬁ c than 
ferritin ( ↓ in iron deﬁ ciency and anaemia 
of chronic disease)  
 –  Total iron - binding capacity: an indirect 
measure of serum transferrin and so is the 
inverse of the transferrin situation ( ↑ in 
iron deﬁ ciency). 
 •  Cause : 
   Endomysial antibodies: not preferred to 
distal duodenal histology;  
   Upper GI endoscopy and distal duodenal 
antibodies;  
   Colonoscopy is preferred to barium enema 
or CT colonography (allows option of taking 
biopsies and treating any bleeding vascular 
lesions);  
   Further investigations: if appropriate 
investigations above are normal, then one 
can consider: 
 –  Meckel ’ s diverticulum in young patients 
   –      Capsule enterosocopy is helpful in some 
refractory patients 
 –  Abdominal ultrasound (renal cell 
carcinoma)  
 –  Mesenteric angiography (coeliac and 
superior mesenteric vessels) is only 
indicated if there is overt bleeding  
 Iron - d eﬁ ciency  a naemia 
 Iron - deﬁ ciency anaemia occurs in up to 5% of 
men and post - menopausal women in the UK. 
It is a common cause of referral to a GI clinic 
for assessment, since the cause is often due 
to GI blood loss or nutrient malabsorption. 
In one - third of patients, the cause is never 
identiﬁ ed. The important diagnoses to exclude 
are 
colorectal 
cancer, 
IBD 
and 
hereditary 
telangiectasia or colonic arteriovenous malforma-
tions. 
Therefore, 
the 
following 
ﬁ ndings 
do not preclude the need to image the whole 
colon: 
 •  Oesophagits; 
 •  Hiatus hernia; 
 •  Non - bleeding peptic ulcer; 
 •  Haemorrhoids; 
 •  NSAID usage. 
 The causes can be broadly thought of as 
being due to either insufﬁ cient iron intake or 
excessive losses (from the gut or gynaecological 
system). 
 Assessment 
 •  Condition : angular stomatitis, glossitis, 
cheilosis, koilonychias.  
 •  Cause : 
   Dietary history; 
   Drug history; 
   History of overt blood loss; 
   Any associated features (diarrhoea, mouth 
ulcers, weight loss);  
   Family history; 
   Abdominal mass. 
 •  Complications : features of anaemia (malaise, 
exertional dyspnoea, heart failure). 
 Investigation  
 •  Condition : 
   Blood tests: 
 –  Hb ( < 13.5  g/dl men;  < 11.5  g/dl women) 
 –  MCV  <  80  ﬂ  
 –  MCH  <  27  pg 
   Blood ﬁ lm: severe iron - deﬁ ciency shows 
dimorphic pattern or Howell – Jolly bodies;  
   Consider Hb electrophoresis if a 
haemoglobinopathy is a possibility;  
   Iron studies: 
 PHYSIOLOGY OF  I RON  M ETABOLISM 
 Normal daily dietary intake of iron is approxi-
mately 15   mg. Gastric acid is essential to release 
iron from food and maintain it in the soluble 
ferrous (Fe 2 +  ) form; this is why achlorhydria may 
cause iron deﬁ ciency. Ferrous iron is then 
absorbed through an active process in the duo-
denum and jejunum. Maximal absorption is 
between 2 and 4   mg/day, being at the upper 
ﬁ gure when iron stores are low or there is 
chronic hypoxia. Absorbed iron can then be 
stored in the enterocytes as ferritin or can be 
bound to the protein transferrin and circulated 
around the body. 

28 
Approach to the patient with luminal disease
 –  Laparotomy and on - table colonoscopy is 
hardly ever needed, being reserved for 
cases of catastrophic bleeding 
complicating iron deﬁ ciency. 
 Management 
 If asymptomatic, give oral iron until Hb is normal-
ised; an increase of 0.5 – 1  g/dl perweek can be 
expected. Treatment is continued for a further 3 
months to replace iron stores, then stopped, and 
the FBC repeated 3 months later. If further iron -
 deﬁ ciency anaemia has recurred, a review of 
investigations is needed. If this too is normal, 
watchful waiting with courses of oral iron as 
required is appropriate. 
 Parenteral iron is only needed if the patient is 
intolerant of, or malabsorbing, oral iron. The risks 
of anaphylaxis with intravenous iron mean that a 
test dose needs to be given. 
 

 Nutritional assessment is directed towards: 
 •  Calorie – protein status; 
 •  Speciﬁ c mineral and vitamin status.     
 Nutritional  p hysiology 
 Glucose is essential to metabolism in the brain 
and renal medulla, and to red cell metabolism. 
Other organs mainly use fatty acids to produce 
energy. For this reason, under normal circum-
stances, regulatory mechanisms maintain and 
control glucose levels in a tight range both around 
the time of eating and between meals. Insulin is 
the main glucose regulatory hormone. On eating, 
glucose is rapidly absorbed into the portal system, 
resulting in insulin secretion from the pancreas 
and a rise in insulin levels. Under the inﬂ uence of 
insulin, the liver extracts a large percentage of that 
glucose and converts it to glycogen. Again under 
the inﬂ uence of insulin, glucose reaching the 
periphery is taken up ﬁ rst into muscle and then 
into adipocytes. 
 Between meals glucose levels in the portal tract 
fall and the resultantdecrease in insulin secretion 
prompts glycogenolysis, gluconeogenesis and 
lipolysis. Glycogenolysis occurs in the liver in 
order to maintain plasma glucose levels. At the 
 4 
Nutrition  
same time, lipolysis is induced and fatty acids are 
released and become the major energy substrate 
for the body. Gluconeogenesis is induced in 
concert with glycogenolysis, converting glycerol, 
amino acids and fatty acids (via the citric acid 
cycle) to glucose. 
 Other hormones act on the regulatory mecha-
nism but their effect is limited compared to 
insulin, except in times of stress. They include glu-
cagons, catecholamines and growth hormone. 
They have an anti - insulin effect, increasing gly-
cogenolysis, gluconeogenesis and release of fatty 
acids and glycerol from adipose tissue, and amino 
acids from muscle. 
 Lipids enter the circulation as chylomicrons. 
These are large droplets of triglyceride emulsiﬁ ed 
by a surface monolayer of phospholipid and 
apolipoproteins. The apolipoproteins are trans-
ferred onto the chylomicrons from high - density 
lipoproteins (HDLs). When chylomicrons reach 
the peripheral capillaries of the heart and adipose 
tissue, lipoprotein lipase on the capillary endothe-
lium binds them, and the triglycerides at the 
core of the chylomicron are rapidly hydrolysed to 
fatty acids that are then taken up and utilised 
by peripheral tissues. HDL recycles the remain-
ing surface phospholipids and apolipoproteins. 
Between meals chylomicrons disappear from 
the circulation and are replaced by very low -
 density lipoproteins (VLDLs), which are secreted 
by the liver. They are bound and metabolised 
by lipoprotein lipase in peripheral capillaries 
also. 
Lecture Notes: Gastroenterology and Hepatology, 1st edition. 
Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. 
© 2011 Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

30 
Nutrition
 Nutritional  s upport 
 Nutritional support simply refers to the provision 
of nutrition above and beyond the normal diet and 
includes food fortiﬁ cation, oral nutritional supple-
mentation (ONS), tube feeding and parenteral 
nutrition (PN) (Figure  4.1  and Box  4.1 ). It aims for 
increased intake of macro - and/or micro - nutrients. 
In certain circumstances a patient may receive one 
or a combination of modalities of support.     
 In 
general, 
the 
following 
principles 
are 
adhered to: 
 •  High catabolic states need high calorie and 
nitrogen intake;  
 •  Enteral feeding is preferred to parenteral 
feeding, and oral feeding is preferred to enteral 
feeding;  
 •  A multidisciplinary team should determine 
nutritional needs and route of supplementation. 
 Five factors need consideration in deciding the 
replacement schedule: 
 •  Calorie (fat and carbohydrate) requirement; 
 •  Nitrogen (protein) balance; 
 •  Minerals and vitamins; 
 •  Fluid and electrolytes; 
 •  Fibre. 
 Calorie  r eplacement 
 Consideration of nutritional support is required 
when there has been  > 10% change in body weight, 
and depends on the speciﬁ c illnesses surrounding 
the weight loss: 
 •  General  =  highly catabolic states  =  50  kcal/
kg/24  h: 
   Intensive care, burns; 
   Chronic sepsis; 
   Following major surgery; 
   Malignancy. 
 •  Gastrointestinal  =  intermediate catabolic 
states  =  40  kcal/kg/24  h: 
   Intestinal ﬁ stula; 
   Short bowel syndrome; 
   Acute pancreatitis; 
   Crohn ’ s disease; 
 •  Prolonged inadequate dietary intake  =  low 
catabolic states    =  30  kcal/kg/24  h: 
   Dysphagia post - cerebrovascular accident 
(CVA); 
   Neurological illness. 
 Evaluation of  n utritional 
 s tatus 
 About 30% of all patients in hospital are under-
nourished. A large number of these patients are 
undernourished when admitted to hospital and in 
the majority of these undernutrition develops 
further while in hospital. Given that nutritional 
status contributes directly to morbidity and 
mortality in the majority of medical conditions, 
accurate and timely assessment of nutritional 
status and identiﬁ cation of patients needing 
nutritional input is essential. This assessment 
takes two forms: 
 •  Nutritional screening, either in the community 
or at hospital admission;  
 •  Nutritional assessment, a more detailed 
assessment, performed by a nutrition expert 
and reserved for those patients identiﬁ ed by 
screening as being at nutritional risk. 
 Nutritional  s creening 
 Nutritional screening should be rapid and simple. 
It is conducted by admitting staff in the hospital, 
or the community healthcare team. All patients 
should be screened on admission to hospital. The 
aim is to stratify patients into nutritional risk 
groups and thus decide which patients should be 
referred on for further nutritional assessment and 
support, which can be managed using a nutrition 
plan as a part of the ordinary ward or home 
routine, and which are not at risk of malnutrition, 
but may need to be rescreened at speciﬁ ed 
intervals. 
 Nutritional  a ssessment 
 The nutritional assessment is more detailed than 
screening and includes a full history, clinical 
examination (Table  4.1 ) and, where appropriate, 
laboratory investigations. An expert clinician, die-
tician or nutrition nurse conducts it. It in turn 
leads to a nutritional support plan. Following 
initial assessment, nutritional and ﬂ uid status 
assessment is a continual process conducted by 
nursing, medical and dietetic staff, gauging the 
patient ’ s ability to manage oral supplements, 
enteral feeding and/or parenteral feeding, with 
appropriate adjustments if requirements are not 
met. 

Nutrition 31
 Table 4.1   Clinical manifestations of speciﬁ c deﬁ ciency states  . 
 Clinical  
  Deﬁ ciency  
  Measurement  
 Anorexia  
  Calories and protein  
 Subjective  
 Weight  
  Calories and protein  
 BMI  < 20   kg/m 2  
 Triceps skinfold thickness 
 Mid - arm muscle circumference  
 Muscle wasting, oedema  
 Protein  
  Albumin  < 35   g/l 
 Transferrin  < 2  g/l  
 Glossitis, cheilitis, stomatitis, koilonychias  
  Iron  
  Serum iron  ↓  
 Serum ferritin  ↓  
 Iron - binding capacity  ↑  
 Weakness, proximal myopathy, tetany, paraesthesiae 
 Chvostek and Trousseau signs  
 Calcium  
  Serum calcium  ↓  
 Weakness, proximal myopathy, tetany, paraesthesiae  
  Magnesium  
  Serum magnesium  ↓  
 Proximal myopathy  
  Phosphate  
  Serum phosphate  ↓  
 Anorexia, diarrhoea, depression, anaemia, rash  
 Zinc  
  Serum zinc  ↓  
 Night blindness, xerophthalmia  
  Vitamin A  
  Dark adaptation time  
 Bone pain, proximal myopathy.  
  Vitamin D  
  Serum calcium  ↓  
 Serum phosphate  ↓  
 Alkaline phosphatase  ↑  
 Bone X - ray, bone biopsy  
 Easy bruising  
  Vitamin K  
  INR  > 1.3  
 Peripheral neuropathy, psychosis, ophthalmoplegia  
  Vitamin B 1  
 Red cell transketolase  
 Stomatitis, anaemia, ataxia, mucosal ﬁ ssures  
 Vitamin B 2  
 Red cell glutathione reductase  
 Diarrhoea, dermatitis, dementia  
  Nicotinamide  
  Urinary metabolites  
 Peripheral neuropathy, sideroblastic anaemia  
  Vitamin B 6  
 Aminotransferase activity  
 Peripheral neuropathy, macrocytic anaemia, 
subacute cord degeneration, vegans  
 Vitamin B 12  
  Serum B 12 ↓  
 Macrocytic anaemia, alcoholics  
 Folate  
  Serum folate  ↓  
 Bleeding, periosteal haemorrhages, poor wound 
healing, gum hypertrophy  
 Vitamin C  
  White cell ascorbic acid  
 Figure 4.1   Range of options for nutritional support.  
Nutritional support
Enteral feeding
Parenteral
nutrition
ONS
Tube
feeding
Food
fortification

32 
Nutrition
 Box 4.1   Methods of delivery of nutritional 
replacement. 
 Oral  
 •  A variety of nutritional supplements are available  
 •  Amount required is judged according to actual 
oral intake  
 Nasogastric feeding  
 •  Appropriate for patients needing up to 4 weeks 
of feeding  
 •  If there is gastric emptying delay, nasojejunal 
tubes may be used  
 Gastrostomy feeding  
 •  Percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) 
tubes used if  > 4 weeks of feeding needed  
 •  Jejunostomy extensions can be placed if there 
is gastric emptying delay or risk of aspiration 
with gastric feeding  
 •  Home PEG feeding with small domestic feeding 
pumps is feasible  
 Parenteral feeding  
 •  Careful balance of nitrogen and electrolytes is 
required  
 •  Tunnelled central venous lines are preferred to 
peripheral lines (due to risk of sepsis and clotting)  
 •  Home parenteral nutrition is needed for some 
patients with intestinal failure  
should be corrected. For ONS and tube feeds the 
vitamin and trace element content is regulated. As 
these recommendations are based on a daily 
intake of 2000   kcal, advice from a dietician should 
be sought about the most appropriate enteral 
feeds and micronutrient supplements to use for 
an individual patient.  
 Fluid and  e lectrolyte  r eplacement 
 Usually between 1.5 and 3.0   l of ﬂ uid are given to 
adults receiving enteral or parenteral nutrition 
(PN). In general 30 – 35   ml/kg body weight/day of 
ﬂ uid is required, with additional requirements for 
those with fever and losses of other body ﬂ uids. 
Electrolyte requirements vary greatly and should 
be tailored to the individual by monitoring serum, 
and in some circumstances urinary electrolytes. In 
general 1 – 1.5  mmol/kg/day of sodium, chloride 
and potassium and 0.3 – 0.7  mmol/kg/day of phos-
phate is appropriate. In standard enteral and 
parenteral regimens, daily intakes of sodium are 
80 – 100  mmol, potassium 60 – 150  mmol and phos-
phate 15 – 40  mmol. Daily weighing, ﬂ uid intake 
charts, serum biochemistry and daily examination 
of the patient (for dehydration, oedema), etc. are 
necessary for monitoring. 
 Fibre  r eplacement 
 Soluble ﬁ bres have a prebiotic effect (i.e. stimulate 
growth of beneﬁ cial biﬁ dobacteria and lactoba-
cilli) and on fermentation provide short - chain 
fatty acids which are essential to the metabolism 
of the cells lining the colon. Less soluble ﬁ bre acts 
as a bulking agent, increasing stool output and 
frequency, and reducing colonic transit time. 
Patients receiving enteral nutrition may beneﬁ t 
from feeds containing a mix of insoluble and 
soluble ﬁ bres, particularly if long - term tube 
feeding is their sole source of nutrition, in order to 
maintain gut integrity, function and ﬂ ora. For 
those receiving PN, it is acknowledged that to 
maintain gut integrity and function, where possi-
ble and appropriate, some feeding into the gut 
should be maintained.   
 Parenteral  n utrition 
 Indications 
 It is clear that in patients with complete, irrevers-
ible intestinal failure, PN support is life saving. 
 Protein  r eplacement 
 In a healthy individual the protein requirement is 
0.12   g nitrogen/kg body weight/day (1   g nitrogen 
per 6.25   g protein on average). Patients with 
protein malnutrition, inﬂ ammatory or infective 
disease and other catabolic conditions (e.g. 
surgery, burns) will have greater requirements. In 
the severely unwell, aiming for a positive nitrogen 
balance is often not possible or advisable, as nitro-
gen losses actually increase with increasing nitro-
gen intake, and high nitrogen intakes lead to 
metabolic burden. Generally, in unwell patients, 
provision of 0.20 (0.17 – 0.25) g nitrogen/kg body 
weight/day should be sufﬁ cient. 
 Mineral,  v itamin and  t race 
 e lement  r eplacement 
 Protein energy malnutrition particularly predis-
poses to deﬁ ciencies of micronutrients and these 

Nutrition 33
In the setting of critical illness, beneﬁ ts have been 
seen with aggressive management of even minimal 
hyperglycaemia with the use of intensive insulin 
therapy. 
 Abnormal LFTs are common but usually relate 
to the underlying disease, sepsis and drugs rather 
than to the PN itself. Steatosis may results from 
over - administration of glucose and lipid, and is 
due to the resultant hyperinsulinaemia, lipogen-
esis and hepatocyte fat deposition. In those receiv-
ing long - term PN there is a risk of cholestasis. The 
exact aetiology of this is unknown but may relate 
to increased lithogenicity of bile with interruption 
of enterohepatic bile acid circulation, reduced 
gallbladder motility and biliary sludge because of 
no oral intake, bacterial overgrowth and nutrient 
deﬁ ciencies, including choline, taurine and carni-
tine. Long - term PN also places the patient at risk 
of metabolic bone disease and micronutrient deﬁ -
ciencies, particularly in the setting of ongoing 
intestinal loss. 
 Enteral  n utrition 
 Oral  n utritional  s upplements 
 The oral route of nutrition should always be pre-
ferred. ONS provides macronutrients and micro-
nutrients, usually in a liquid form. Polymeric 
feeds containing protein, carbohydrate and fat, 
together with electrolytes, minerals, trace ele-
ments and vitamins. These are much more palat-
able than elemental feeds which contain protein 
as amino acids and generally have low fat con-
tents, often providing the fat as medium - chain 
triglycerides. 
 The main indication for ONSs is the presence 
of disease - related malnutrition, which may occur 
in many patient groups, including those with 
cancer, the elderly, surgical patients and others 
with severe acute or chronic diseases. Other 
indications include preoperative preparation of a 
malnourished 
patient, 
inﬂ ammatory 
bowel 
disease, short bowel syndrome, intractable mal-
absorption (which can include patients with 
a range of GI, including pancreatic, and liver dis-
eases), post total gastrectomy, dysphagia, bowel 
ﬁ stulae and dialysis (continuous ambulatory peri-
toneal dialysis, haemodialysis). Provision of ONS 
tends not to suppress food intake substantially 
and so total nutritional intake can be signiﬁ cantly 
improved. 
However, the use of PN in other clinical situations, 
often for short - term use, is more controversial. 
Although meta - analyses have not shown improve-
ments in clinical outcome with PN overall, they 
have shown improvements in complication rates 
among malnourished patients. In general, PN 
should only be considered when partial or com-
plete intestinal failure has occurred and oral nutri-
tion or enteral tube feeding (ETF) is not possible 
or has failed.  
 Administration 
 The GI tract should be utilised as much as possible 
in order to maintain gut hormonesecretion, 
enzyme production, mucosal absorptive capacity 
and resistance to bacterial translocation. When a 
patient is on PN, they should be reassessed regu-
larly with the aim of transferring to oral feeding or 
ETF. 
 Access is via a dedicated feeding line. This can 
be either a peripheral feeding line or central 
venous catheter. Peripheral lines give ease of 
venous access but peripheral veins cannot toler-
ate high infusion rates or high osmolarity solu-
tions, such as lipid - free solutions.  
 Complications 
 Complications can be divided into line - related 
complications and metabolic complications. 
 Line - r elated  c omplications 
 Early line - related complications include local 
haematoma, arterial puncture and pneumotho-
rax. Catheter - related sepsis remains the most 
serious complication of PN. Meticulous line care 
is vital and patients with suspected line sepsis 
should have their PN stopped temporarily and 
blood cultures taken peripherally and from all 
catheter lumens. Generally, lines should be 
removed and replaced after 24   h of appropriate 
antibiotics. However, it is reasonable to attempt 
sterilisation of a long - term tunnelled line. Central 
vein thrombosis is relatively common; however, it 
is usually not clinically evident.  
 Metabolic  c omplications 
 The risk of refeeding syndrome is high and all 
patients who are to receive PN must be carefully 
assessed and managed with this in mind. 
Hyperglycaemia is common and largely due to the 
insulin resistance associated with severe disease. 

34 
Nutrition
 Physiology of  s tarvation 
 During starvation the body utilises liver glycogen 
stores as well as gluconeogenesis to form glucose. 
Gluconeogenesis is glucose synthesis using the 
breakdown products of lipid and protein. During 
this process adipose tissue releases large quanti-
ties of fatty acids and glycerol, and muscle releases 
amino acids. With the depletion of glycogen 
stores, ketone bodies (produced as a by - product 
of gluconeogenesis) and free fatty acids replace 
glucose as a major energy source. The result is 
catabolism of adipose tissue and muscle, with 
resultant loss of lean body mass. 
 With refeeding there is a shift from fat back to 
carbohydrate metabolism. The resultant glucose 
load triggers insulin release, which in turn 
increases cellular uptake of glucose, phosphate, 
potassium, magnesium and water, and promotes 
protein synthesis. It is these nutrient, electrolyte 
and ﬂ uid ﬂ uxes that can produce the refeeding 
syndrome (see below).  
 The  r efeeding  s ydrome 
 The refeeding syndrome can be deﬁ ned as a syn-
drome consisting of metabolic disturbances that 
occur as a result of reinstitution of nutrition to 
patients who are starved or severely malnour-
ished. At - risk patients include those with: 
 •  Kwashiorkor or marasmus, anorexia nervosa, 
or other causes of chronic malnutrition (e.g. 
from carcinoma or in the elderly); 
 •  Chronic alcoholism; 
 •  Prolonged fasting (e.g. hunger strikers); 
 •  Following duodenal switch operation for 
obesity; 
   •      Oncology patients receiving prolonged 
chemotherapy; 
 •  Postoperative patients. 
 Body – ﬂ uid ﬂ uxes can result in cardiac failure, 
dehydration or ﬂ uid overload, hypotension, pre-
renal failure and sudden death. The major meta-
bolic disturbances, their pathological basis and 
treatment are summarised in Table  4.2 . 
 Refeeding syndrome must be considered in any 
patient who is to receive nutrition, be it oral, 
enteral or parenteral, after a period of starvation 
or reduced nutritional intake. Electrolyte disor-
 Enteral  t ube  f eeding 
 ETF should be considered if supplements are 
insufﬁ cient to ensure an adequate intake and 
recovery, or where oral intake is unsafe and con-
traindicated. The conditions in which tube feeding 
should be a part of routine care include: 
 •  Protein - energy malnutrition ( > 10% weight loss) 
with little or no oral intake for 5 days;  
 •  < 50% of the required oral nutrient intake for 
the previous 7 – 10 days; 
   •      Severe dysphagia or swallowing - related 
difﬁ culties, e.g. head injury, strokes, motor 
neurone disease;  
 •  Major, full - thickness burns; 
 •  Massive small bowel resection; 
 •  Low - output enterocutaneous ﬁ stulae. 
 ETF is provided by two main routes in the 
majority of patients: via nasogastric tube (NGT) or 
percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG). 
Generally administration is via a pump and sterile 
administration set, delivering continuous infu-
sions of feed over many hours. Sometimes boluses 
of feed are given with gastric but not jejunal tube 
feeding. 
 As inpatients, on the whole, tend to be fed for 
short periods of time, nasogastric feeding, using a 
ﬁ ne - bore feeding tube (polyurethane) is appropri-
ate, at least initially, in most patients. Tubes 
should be placed by a trained health professional 
and correct positioning should be checked, by 
X - ray initially, to ensure there is no malposition-
ing into the lungs or elsewhere. Some authorities 
recommend checking tube position by aspirating 
stomach contents prior to every feeding episode 
(checking for pH 5 or less using pH indicator 
paper). Secure ﬁ xing of the tube to the nose and 
face is essential. Where ETF will be longer term, 
PEG is the most common route used. For patients 
at increased risk of regurgitation of feed and/or 
pulmonary aspiration, gastric atony or gastropare-
sis, post - pyloric feeding into the duodenum or 
jejunum should be considered. 
 PEG tube insertion is an invasive procedure 
requiring careful patient selection and informed 
consent from the patient and family. Patients 
should have a recent platelet count, haemoglobin 
and coagulation screen available. Where possible, 
antiplatelet drugs and anticoagulants should be 
stopped prior to the procedure. Antibiotics are 
administered prior to the procedure to reduce the 
risk of tube - related infection. 

Nutrition 35
 Table 4.2   Nutrient deﬁ ciencies in refeeding syndrome: their consequences and management. 
 Nutrient/electrolyte 
disturbance  
 Normal physiology  
  Consequences of disturbance  
  Treatment  
   
Hypophosphataemia    Body phosphate 500 – 800   g 
 80% in bony skeleton and 
20% soft tissues and muscle 
 Major intracellular anion 
 Transcellular movement results 
from carbohydrate or lipid 
ingestion and acid – base 
alterations 
 Intake about 1   g/day: 
 • 80% absorbed in the jejunum 
 • Found in protein - rich food 
cereals and nuts 
 Output: 
 • 90% renal 
 • 10% GI loss 
 Important intracellular buffer 
 Structural role as a component 
of phospholipids, 
nucleoproteins and nucleic 
acids 
 Central role in cellular 
metabolic pathways 
including glycolysis and 
oxidative phosphorylation. 
 Essential in 
2,3 - diphosphoglycerate  
 Skeletal muscle weakness and myopathy 
 Cardiomyopathy 
 Seizures, perturbed mental state and 
paresthesia 
 Prolonged hypophosphataemia osteomalacia 
 Rhabdomyolysis 
 Thrombocytopenia, impaired clotting processes 
 Reduced leucocyte phagocytosis and 
chemotaxis 
 Haemolysis 
 Erythrocyte 2,3 - diphosphoglycerate depletion, 
resulting in a leftward shift in haemoglobin –
 oxygen dissociation curve (i.e. haemoglobin 
has a greater afﬁ nity for oxygen)  
 Severe hypophosphataemia rare, most cases are 
clinically insigniﬁ cant 
 Treatment only if plasma phosphate concentration 
 < 0.30   mmol/l or symptomatic 
 Intravenous phosphate replacement with the Vannatta 
regimen: 
 • 9   mmol of monobasic potassium phosphate in 
half - normal saline continuous intravenous infusion over 
12   h 
 • Not with hypercalcaemia (risk of metastatic 
calciﬁ cation) or hyperkalaemia 
 • Plasma phosphate, calcium, magnesium and 
potassium monitored closely 
 • Infusion stopped once plasma phosphate 
 > 0.30   mmol/l  
(continued)

36 
Nutrition
 Nutrient/electrolyte 
disturbance  
 Normal physiology  
  Consequences of disturbance  
  Treatment  
   
Hypomagnesaemia  
  Mandatory for optimal cell 
function 
 Cofactor to many enzymes 
 Found mainly in bone and 
muscle 
 Largely absorbed in the upper 
small intestine 
 70% of dietary magnesium 
eliminated in faeces 
 Major excretory route is 
through the kidneys  
 Hypomagnesaemia, deﬁ ned as  < 0.5   mmol/l or if 
symptomatic 
 Mechanism likely multifactorial: 
 • Intracellular ﬂ ux with carbohydrate feeding 
 • Poor dietary intake 
 • Pre - existing poor magnesium 
 Severe hypomagnesaemia:  
 Can be corrected by oral magnesium but salts poorly 
absorbed and lead to GI upset 
 Intravenous replacement: 
 • Magnesium sulphate (50% solution containing 
2.1   mmol/ml) 
 • 24   mmol of magnesium sulphate over 6   h 
 • Close monitoring of plasma magnesium 
 May facilitate treatment of refractory hypokalaemia 
 Plasma calcium concentration also should be checked  
 • Cardiac arrhythmias 
 • Torsade de pointes 
 • Abdominal 
discomfort 
 • Anorexia  
 • Tremor 
 • Paresthesia 
 • Tetany 
 • Seizures 
 • Irritability 
 • Confusion 
 • Weakness 
 • Ataxia  
   
Thiamine deﬁ ciency 
(vitamin B 1 )  
 Carbohydrate refeeding causes 
increased cellular thiamine 
utilisation  
 Wernicke ’ s encephalopathy: ocular 
disturbance, confusion, ataxia and coma, 
 Korsakov ’ s syndrome: short - term memory loss 
and confabulation  
 50 – 250   mg thiamine should be given at least 30   min 
before refeeding is instigated 
 More thiamine might be necessary until the patient is 
stabilised 
 NB: some preparations associated with anaphylaxis 
 Oral thiamine can be given as 100 - mg tablets once daily  
   
Hypokalaemia  
  Regulated by the kidney distal 
nephron 
 Increased by aldosterone, 
alkalosis 
 Essential for maintaining 
cell - membrane action 
potential  
 Clinical manifestations rare unless severe 
( < 3.0   mmol/l): 
 • Cardiac: arrhythmias, hypotension and 
cardiac arrest 
 • Gastrointestinal: ileus and constipation 
 • Neuromuscular dysfunction: weakness, 
paralysis, paresthesia, confusion, 
rhabdomyolysis and respiratory depression 
 • Potentiation of digitalis toxicity 
 • Glucose intolerance 
 • Metabolic alkalosis 
 • Worsening of hepatic encephalopathy  
 Cautious intravenous potassium administration 
 Ideally, the rate should not exceed 20   mmol/h and 
should not be  > 40   mmol/l in the intravenous infusion 
mixture 
 Close monitoring of plasma potassium is important 
 Electrocardiographic monitoring preferable  
Table 4.2 Nutrient deﬁ ciencies in refeeding syndrome: their consequences and management (continued)

Nutrition 37
include chronic intestinal pseudo - obstruction 
syndrome, refractory sprue, radiation enteritis 
and congenital villous atrophy. 
 Management of Type 2 
 i ntestinal  f ailure 
 Management of the severely ill patient following 
major resections of the bowel, and often resultant 
complications, is of utmost importance to prevent 
further surgical intervention, and reduce the asso-
ciated high morbidity, mortality and risk of pro-
gression to Type 3 IF. Management of these 
patients requires a skilled multidisciplinary team 
combining dieticians, pharmacists, biochemists, 
enterostomal therapists, nurses, microbiologists, 
radiologists, pain specialists, surgeons and physi-
cians. Experts in this area recommend a temporal 
sequence in managing the various facets of intes-
tinal failure in these patients and have coined the 
term  ‘ Sepsis – Nutrition – Anatomy – Plan ’ or  ‘ SNAP ’ 
approach. In this approach attention is ﬁ rst paid 
to managing sepsis, in particular draining intra -
 abdominal collections; then the patient ’ s nutri-
tional status is carefully assessed and rectiﬁ ed; 
following this the intra - abdominal anatomy is 
clearly delineated in order to guide further man-
agement; ﬁ nally, a long - term plan for the restora-
tion of intestinal continuity is instituted, often 
involving medical management of 6 months to a 
year prior to any further attempt at surgical 
intervention. 
 Medical  t herapy 
 Medical therapy of IF consists of providing ade-
quate nutrition of macro - and micro - nutrients, 
sufﬁ cient ﬂ uid, and correcting and preventing 
acid – base disturbances. In some patients this may 
require supplementary enteral nutrition and 
management of electrolyte and ﬂ uid losses: orally 
using salt solutions, or by subcutaneous or intra-
venous administration. A proportion of patients 
will be PN dependent and for them home PN 
(HPN) is often possible, following a period of hos-
pital management and training. 
 HPN is associated with a signiﬁ cant risk of com-
plications, including liver and biliary complica-
tions, 
catheter - related 
infections, 
catheter 
occlusion and metabolic bone disease, including 
osteomalacia and osteopenia. Long - term users 
accrue a 10 – 15% yearly chance of dying from a 
therapy complication. While HPN is clearly 
ders must be corrected and the patient made ﬂ uid 
replete prior to beginning refeeding. At - risk 
patients must be monitored closely, in particular 
their vital functions, ﬂ uid balance and plasma 
electrolytes, including magnesium and phos-
phate. Hypophosphataemia is common not only 
in refeeding syndrome, being present in 2% of 
hospital admissions.  
 Intestinal  f ailure 
 Intestinal failure (IF) results from loss of absorp-
tion due to obstruction, dysmotility, surgical 
resection, congenital defect or disease, and is 
characterised by the inability to maintain protein 
energy, ﬂ uid, electrolyte or micronutrient balance. 
IF can be divided into three types: 
 •  Type 1 : self - limiting intestinal failure as occurs 
following abdominal surgery;  
 •  Type 2 : intestinal failure in severely ill patients 
with major resections of the bowel and septic, 
metabolic and nutritional complications;  
 •  Type 3 : chronic IF requiring long - term 
nutritional support. 
 Short bowel syndrome (SBS)  is IF resulting 
from the loss of small intestinal absorptive capac-
ity for anatomical reasons. The normal length of 
the small intestine ranges from 260 to 800   cm and 
a patient with  < 200   cm of viable bowel is at risk of 
SBS, although methods for measuring residual 
bowel are inaccurate, making assessment of this 
risk difﬁ cult. Dependence on PN may result when 
the small intestine is shorter than 100   cm in the 
absence of an intact and functional colon, or 
60   cm in the presence of a completely functional 
colon. Following shortening, the intestine adapts 
by increasing villous diameter and height, which 
in addition to some slight lengthening of the small 
bowel, increases the absorptive surface. As this 
process evolves over years, especially in children, 
some patients may go from being PN dependent 
to PN independent with time. 
 The vast majority of cases of IF are related to 
acquired SBS and result from surgical resection of 
bowel, related to recurrent Crohn ’ s disease, vas-
cular events such as a mesenteric arterial embo-
lism or venous thrombosis, volvulus, trauma, 
tumour resection or congenital abnormalities in 
children. Functional IF results when malabsorp-
tion occurs despite intact bowel length. Causes 

38 
Nutrition
with the 90% 3 - year survival in at - home, stable, 
PN - treated patients. Hence imminent liver failure 
is currently the most appropriate indication, fol-
lowed by patients failing PN therapy ( < 20% 1 - year 
survival). 
 Post - transplant complications include: 
 •  Postoperative haemorrhage; 
 •  Vascular leaks; 
 •  Obstruction; 
 •  Biliary leaks or obstruction; 
 •  Allograft rejection (frequent and may result in 
graft loss, being most common in the early 
postoperative period);  
 •  Infection is the leading cause of morbidity and 
mortality and is a result of the relatively high 
levels of immunosuppression required and the 
technically difﬁ cult nature of the surgery and 
aftercare;  
 •  Epstein - Barr virus (EBV) and post - transplant 
lymphoproliferative (PTLD) disorder are a 
concern and are more common than in 
solid - organ transplants; 
 •  Graft - versus - host disease (GVHD) is on the 
whole mild and self - limiting. 
 
life - saving when required, it is associated with a 
reduced quality of life compared to patients with 
SBS not requiring HPN, similar to that experi-
enced by patients with chronic renal failure 
treated by dialysis.  
 Surgery and  i ntestinal 
 t ransplantation 
 Non - transplant surgical treatment for IF includes 
approaches that increase nutrient and ﬂ uid 
absorption by either slowing intestinal transit or 
increasing intestinal surface area. Particularly 
important is restoration of intestinal continuity, 
such as reanastomosis of the small intestine with 
the colon, since it can be performed with a rela-
tively low morbidity and mortality, and often with 
a good probability of discontinuation of PN 
therapy because of improved ﬂ uid absorption. 
 Intestinal transplantation is rarely performed 
(fewer than 20 have been performed in the UK), 
the number limited by its risk. Three - year patient 
survival after isolated intestinal transplantation 
is approximately 70%, which is not comparable 

 Oral  i nfections 
 Candidiasis 
 Candida albicans  is a mouth commensal which 
may proliferate in immunocompromised patients 
(newborns, AIDS, diabetes, patients receiving 
cytotoxics) or those taking antibiotics. The diag-
nosis is usually obvious from the appearance of 
small white clumps adherent to the mucosa. 
Dysphagia or painful swallowing raises the possi-
bility of oesophageal involvement. Oral candidia-
sis is treated with nystatin or amphotericin (which 
can also be used prophylactically in at - risk 
patients). Resistant candidiasis, and oesophageal 
involvement, may require ﬂ uconazole. 
 Vincent ’ s  a ngina 
 Borrelia vincenti  may invade the mucosa in immu-
nocompromised patients or those with appalling 
oral hygiene. Deep, sloughing ulcers cause severe 
pain and halitosis; systemic features (fever and 
malaise) are frequent. Local anaesthetic mouth-
washes or oral antibiotics may be needed, depend-
ing on severity.  
 Parotitis 
 Viral (mumps) or bacterial infections (postopera-
tive) of the parotid glands cause parotid swelling 
 5 
Gastrointestinal  i nfections  
and pain. Oral antibiotics may help, but surgical 
drainage is required if there is abscess formation. 
The differential for parotid swelling includes: 
 •  Salivary gland stones; 
 •  Sj ö gren ’ s syndrome; 
 •  Sarcoidosis; 
 •  Tumours (mostly benign adenoma, rarely 
mucoepidermoid tumours or cancers). 
 Oesophageal  i nfections 
 Oesophageal candidiasis is a common observa-
tion at upper GI endoscopy. Less frequent are viral 
infections, of which herpes simplex is the most 
important. The features of these are shown in 
Table  5.1 . 
 Helicobacter  p ylori  
 i nfection 
 Infection with  Helicobacter  is extremely common 
throughout the world, especially in the developing 
world. Whilst usually asymptomatic, it is associ-
ated with certain disorders (Table  5.2 ). 
 H. pylori  infection interacts with host factors 
(age, genetic susceptibility) and environmental 
factors (smoking, drugs) to result in either: 
 •  Antral gastritis (predisposes to duodenal ulcer); 
or 
 •  Pan - gastritis (predisposes to gastric carcinoma). 
 Gastric ulcers are associated with both antral 
and pan - gastritis. 
Lecture Notes: Gastroenterology and Hepatology, 1st edition. 
Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. 
© 2011 Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

40 
Gastrointestinal infections
 Diagnosis 
 This can be through invasive (endoscopic, shaded 
in Table  5.3 ) or non - invasive (breath or blood test, 
unshaded in Table  5.3 ) means. 
 The principle underlying the urea breath test 
and CLO test are that  H. pylori  produces the 
enzyme urease which can cleave urea to ammonia 
and CO 2 . In the breath test,  13 C or  14 C is included 
in a test meal and can be detected by mass spec-
trometer ( 13 C) or radiation count ( 14 C). In the CLO 
test, the biopsies are incubated with urea sub-
strate and a colour pH indicator: ammonia pro-
duction turns the indicator pink.  
 Treatment 
 First - line treatment is 1 week of  ‘ triple therapy ’ , 
namely a proton pump inhibitor (PPI) and two 
antibiotics (of amoxycillin, clarithromycin and 
metronidazole). Second - line treatment involves 
quadruple therapy, including bismuth - containing 
preparations or triple therapy incorporating tetra-
 Table 5.1   Features of oesophageal infections. 
 
  Candida  
  Herpes simplex  
 At - risk groups  
  Immunocompromised, elderly, 
antibiotic use  
 Immunocompromised  
 Spread  
  Downwards from mouth  
  Contagious (other herpes lesions)  
 Symptoms  
  Odynophagia, dysphagia  
  Odynophagia, dysphagia, joint pain  
 Endoscopic appearance  
  Creamy plaques, mucosa normal  
  Mucosal ulceration    ±  vesicles  
 Treatment  
  Fluconazole or amphotericin  
  Aciclovir  
 Prognosis  
  Recurrent, even if correct 
immune system  
 Can be eradicated, especially if 
correct immunocompromise  
 Table 5.2   Disorders associated with 
 Helicobacter pylori  infection. 
 Strong association  
  Uncertain 
association  
 Gastritis (chronic and acute) 
 Peptic ulcer (gastric and 
duodenal) 
 Menetrierer ’ s disease 
 Cancer of the stomach 
 MALT lymphoma  
 NSAID - related ulcer 
 Gastro - oesophageal 
reﬂ ux disease 
 Functional 
dyspepsia  
cycline. However, in most circumstances, treat-
ment failure is due to poor compliance.    
 Acute  g astroenteritis 
 Infection in the GI tract usually results in diar-
rhoea, abdominal pain and occasionally vomiting. 
Since spontaneous resolution usually occurs 
in  <    4 days, investigation for the speciﬁ c organism 
is only required in: 
 •  Elderly patients, especially those in institutions; 
 •  Immunocompromised patients; 
 •  Symptoms  >  5 days; 
 •  Epidemics. 
 Causes 
 See Table  5.4 . 
 History 
 •  History of ingesting suspicious food : 
   Incubation 1 – 6  h:  Bacillus cereus ,  Staphy-
lococcus aureus ; 
   Incubation 8 – 18  h:  Shigella ,  E. coli ,  Campy-
lobacter ,  Clostridium perfringens ; 
   Incubation 12 – 36  h:  Salmonella ,  Clostridium 
botulinum. 
 •  Diarrhoea , all organisms cause diarrhoea, 
bloody in  Shigella , enterotoxic  E. coli , 
 Campylobacter. 
 •  Abdominal pain ,  especi ally in  Campylobacter. 
 •  Vomiting ,  es pecially in  Bacillus cereus and 
 Staphylococcus aureus. 
 •  Systemic features , especially in  Shigella , 
 Campylobacter ,  Yersinia. 

Gastrointestinal infections 41
     
 Serology (IgG)  
  Urea breath test  
  Faecal antigen test  
  Urease (CLO) test  
  Histology  
  Bacterial culture  
 Advantages  
  Speciﬁ c 
 Quick 
 Useful for screening  
 Speciﬁ c and sensitive  
  Speciﬁ c and sensitive 
 Cheap  
 Speciﬁ c 
 Quick 
 Cheap  
 Speciﬁ c and 
sensitive  
 ‘ Gold standard ’  
 Can test antibiotic 
sensitivity  
 Disadvantages  
  No use to test eradication 
(IgG) 
 False negatives in older 
people 
 Need to stop PPIs, antibiotics 
4 weeks  
 Need to stop PPIs, 
antibiotics 4 weeks 
 Requires radiation or 
mass spectrometer 
 Slow  
 Poor acceptability 
 As for serology IgG  
 Insensitive 
 Need to stop PPIs, 
antibiotics 4 
weeks  
 Slow 
 Need to stop PPIs, 
antibiotics 4 
weeks  
 Slow 
 Insensitive 
 Need to stop PPIs, 
antibiotics 4 
weeks  
 Table 5.3   Diagnostic methods to detect  Helicobacter pylori . 
 PPI, proton pump inhibitor. 

42 
Gastrointestinal infections
   Shigella ; 
   Campylobacter. 
 •  Sigmoidoscopy and biopsy only indicated if 
symptoms persist    >  2 weeks. 
 •  Joint X - rays and aspiration if joint is swollen 
and there is fever and leucocytosis.     
 Management 
 •  General supportive treatment : 
   Resuscitation: oral rehydration solution is 
preferred to IV rehydration, if patient is not 
vomiting; 
   Meticulous hand hygiene; 
   Antidiarrhoeals (loperamide) should be 
avoided in most cases, especially in children 
(when fatal paralytic ileus may occur);  
   Antiemetics may be used more liberally; 
   Food poisoning is a notiﬁ able disease. 
 •  Speciﬁ c treatment : 
   Viruses: 
 –  Typically self - limiting within 5 days, but may 
be fatal in elderly and immunocompromised 
 – especially norovirus; 
 –  Epidemics occur in hospitals and 
institutions  –  through uncooked food and 
hand - to - hand transmission; 
   –      Supportive treatment only is needed.    
   Salmonella : 
    –      Antibiotic therapy is avoided, as it 
prolongs gallbladder carriage of the 
organism; 
 –  Ciproﬂ oxacin is the ﬁ rst - choice antibiotic, 
trimethoprim being the alternative; 
 –  Asymptomatic carriers need no speciﬁ c 
management other than advice about 
good hand hygiene. 
   Shigella : 
 –  If antibiotics are needed, ciproﬂ oxacin is 
preferred. 
   E. coli : 
 –  Occurs in outbreaks, usually from infected 
meat;  
 –  Ciproﬂ oxacin is the ﬁ rst - choice antibiotic, 
but increases the risk of developing 
hae molytic uraemic syndrome (due to 
toxin release). 
   Campylobacter : 
 –  If symptoms persist, ciproﬂ oxacin or 
erythromycin may be used. 
   Yersinia : 
 –  Diagnosis requires stool culture or elevated 
antibodies on serology;  
 Potential  c onsequences 
 These occur rarely, but are classical: 
 •  Chronic diarrhoea : 
   Post - infectious IBS (see  p. 100 ); 
   Persistent infection (immunosuppressed, 
 Giardia ); 
   Secondary hypolactasia (especially in 
children, Asian origin). 
 •  Reactive arthritis : 
   May follow  Salmonella  or  Shigella. 
 •  Reiter ’ s syndrome  (asymmetrical polyarthritis, 
conjunctivitis, orogenital mucosal ulceration): 
   May follow  Yersinia  or  Campylobacter. 
 •  Erythema nodosum : 
   May follow  Yersinia  or  Campylobacter. 
 •  Toxic megacolon : 
   Especially with  Clostridium difﬁ cile ,  Yersinia , 
 Campylobacter ,  E. coli ; 
   More often relates to undiagnosed ulcerative 
colitis complicated by infection.    
 •  Asymptomatic carrier state ( Salmonella ). 
 Investigations 
 •  Stool culture and microscopy: for cysts and 
trophozoites. 
 •  Serology for toxins: 
   C. difﬁ cile ; 
   E. coli ; 
 Table 5.4   Infectious causes of acute diarrhoea. 
 Virus  
  Norovirus *  
 Rotavirus  *  
 Bacteria  
 Salmonella  
 Shigella  
 Esherichia coli  
 Campylobacter  
 Yersinia  
 Clostridium perfringens 
 Bacterial toxins 
 E. coli  
 Shigella  
 Clostridium difﬁ cile  
 Staphylococcus aureus 
 Clostridium botulinum  
 Vibrio cholera  
 Bacillus cereus  
 Protozoa  
 Giardia lamblia  
 Cryptosporidium  
 Cyclospora  
 * Commonest causes.

Gastrointestinal infections 43
 –  Immunocompromised may require 
azithromycin. 
   Cyclospora: 
 –  Common cause of chronic diarrhoea in 
returning travellers;  
 –  Responds to a course of co - trimoxazole. 
 Intestinal  t uberculosis 
 Mycobacterium tuberculosis  or  bovis  may cause 
intestinal infection by: 
 •  Ingestion of infected milk; 
 •  Blood - borne spread from the lung; 
 •  Rarely, direct spread from adjacent organs. 
 It affects the immigrant population (sub -
 Saharan Africa, South - East Asia), especially, often 
many years after arriving in the host country. The 
malnourished, immunocompromised and institu-
tionalised are also at particular risk. 
 The differential diagnosis is with Crohn ’ s 
disease and  Yersinia infection. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 •  Ileocaecal disease (commonest): 
   Diarrhoea, abdominal pain, weight loss and 
systemic ill health;  
   Rarely, presentation is with an acute 
abdomen (TB appendicitis, obstruction or 
perforation);  
   An abdominal mass is often present. 
 •  TB adenitis : 
   Mimics appendicitis. 
 •  TB peritonitis : 
   Weight loss, systemic ill health and ascites 
(diagnosis is established by staining and 
culture of paracentesed ascites). 
 Investigations 
 •  Standard TB investigations are often unhelpful: 
two - thirds of patients will have a normal chest 
X - ray, and Mantoux testing is poorly sensitive 
for current infection.  
 •  Tissue diagnosis is required, and also helps 
with determining drug sensitivity:  
   Ascites: exudate with increased lymphocytes, 
supported by Ziehl – Nielsen staining and 
culture of acid - fast bacilli; 
   Peritoneal biopsy, with Abrams ’ needle or at 
laparoscopy. 
 –  Tetracycline for 2 weeks is the ﬁ rst - choice 
antibiotic. 
   C. difﬁ cile : 
 –  This is a Gram - positive anaerobe that is 
found everywhere, with 2% of the 
population being asymptomatic carriers;  
 –  In hospitals the spores are resistant to 
most disinfectants;  
 –  Spectrum of infection occurs, from: 
 Asymptomatic carriage, to 
 Isolated diarrhoea, to 
 Pseudo - membranous colitis (based on 
endoscopic appearance of a grey 
 ‘ membrane ’ overlying colonic mucosa), to 
 Death. 
 –  Risk factors: 
 Antibiotics: high risk  – cephalosporins, 
clindamycin; medium risk  – penicillins, 
co - trimoxazole, macrolides; low - risk 
 – metronidazole, vancomycin, 
metronidazole, ciproﬂ oxacin, 
aminoglycosides;  
 Old age or immunocompromise;  
 Concommitant chemotherapy or proton 
pump inhibitor (PPI). 
 –  Diagnosis:  C. difﬁ cile  toxins A (95%) and B 
(5%);  
 –  Management: 
 Stop causative antibiotic and  avoid 
antidiarrhoeals  
 Careful nursing and hand hygiene 
 Oral metronidazole for 7 – 10 days 
 Oral ( not  IV) vancomycin for 14 – 28 days 
 Role of probiotics and faecal 
bacteriotherapy are under investigation 
for this common hospital condition.    
 –  Prognosis: 30% mortality in hospital 
patients. 
   Listeria monocytogenes : 
 –  Usually ingested in unpasteurised 
products; 
 –  Caution required in immunocompromised 
and pregnant women where there is 
signiﬁ cant mortality and risk to the fetus. 
   Giardia : 
 –  Chronic infection is a signiﬁ cant potential 
problem; 
 –  Course of metronidazole or single - dose 
tinidazole will usually eradicate the 
protozoa. 
   Cryptosporidium : 
    –      Supportive treatment only is needed as it 
is self - limiting; 

44 
Gastrointestinal infections
risk is of rupture into the peritoneum or 
pleural cavity; 
   Diagnosis of liver abscess requires imaging 
(ultrasound or CT) with drainage revealing 
thick brown ( ‘ anchovy sauce ’ ) ﬂ uid. 
 •  Management : metronidazole for 5 days 
followed by paromyocin to eradicate luminal 
parasites. Three sequential clear stool samples 
conﬁ rm eradication. 
 Typhoid and  p aratyphoid 
 •  Mostly in returning travellers, caused by 
 Salmonella typhi or  paratyphi. 
 •  Symptoms are usually systemic and non -
 speciﬁ c (milder in paratyphoid). 
 •  Classic triad is bradycardia,  ‘ rose - spot ’ rash 
and constipation (later diarrhoea).  
 •  Hepatosplenomegaly and a leucopaenia are 
often present.  
 •  Small bowel haemorrhage or perforation 
occurs in 10%; encephalopathy in 5%.  
 •  Diagnosis : usually depends on bone marrow 
culture (blood culture is only positive in the 
early stages, when the diagnosis is usually not 
suspected).  
 •  Management : ciproﬂ oxacin or 
chloramphenicol to eradicate the bacterium, 
and prednisolone for encephalopathy. 
 Parasite  w orm  i nfections 
 •  Roundworm, hookworm, threadworm, 
whipworm and tapeworm are consumed either 
by eating contaminated uncooked meat or 
through the faeco - oral route.  
 •  Infections are usually asymptomatic, but may 
cause low - grade abdominal distension and 
nausea. A low - grade anaemia is common with 
all. Tapeworms are the most likely to give more 
dramatic symptoms (fever, enterocolitis, cyst 
formation in brain or muscle, weight loss). 
There may be pruritus ani or visible worms in 
the faeces.  
 •  Diagnosis is suggested by an eosinophilia, but 
requires faecal examination for conﬁ rmation. 
Sellotape applied to the anal margin will on 
examination reveal threadworm, especially 
common in children.  
 •  Treatment : tapeworm requires niclosamide as 
a stat dose, and the other infections will 
respond to 3 days of mebendazole or 
levamisole. 
 •  Abdominal CT or contrast follow - through often 
reveals features indistinguishable from Crohn ’ s 
disease (small bowel thickening, intra -
 abdominal lymphadenopathy, peritoneal 
reaction). 
 •  Colonoscopy is also indistinguishable from 
Crohn ’ s disease, but does allow for biopsies to 
be taken. 
 Management 
 •  Triple therapy (rifampicin, isonizid and 
pyrazinamide) for 2 months followed 
by dual therapy (rifampicin, isonizid) for 4 
months. 
 •  Ethambutol may be needed if resistance is 
suspected.  
 •  Monitoring response: symptoms, weight, ESR, 
CRP, Hb. 
 •  Monitoring adverse events: liver enzymes. 
 •  Surgery is indicated for: 
   Obstruction; 
   Complications (perforation, haemorrhage); 
   Large abdominal mass (poor antimicrobial 
penetrance). 
 •  TB is a notiﬁ able disease. 
 Miscellaneous  g ut 
 i nfections 
 Amoebiasis 
 •  Mostly in immigrant populations, after 
ingestion of contaminated water or food 
containing  Entamoeba histolytica. 
 •  Classically it occurs in patients receiving a 
course of corticosteroids.  
 •  Usually asymptomatic, but a pancolitis occurs 
in 10% of those infected, and very rarely a fatal 
toxic megacolon may occur.  
 •  Rarely, perianal manifestations and 
ﬁ stulisation may occur, resembling Crohn ’ s 
disease. 
 •  Diagnosis : 
   Entamoeba histolytica  antigen in stool  and 
serum; this is preferred to microscopy of 
warm stool to look for the amoeba. Biopsies 
may show the ﬂ ask - shaped mucosal 
ulceration and trophozoites;  
   One - quarter of patients may develop an 
amoebic liver abscess (especially men); the 

Gastrointestinal infections 45
 Anal  i nfections 
 Anal  w arts 
 Human papilloma virus (HPV) is the commonest 
sexually - transmitted virus, and is highly conta-
gious. The warts are frequently multiple with a 
characteristic cauliﬂ ower appearance, and may 
extend to the dentate line. 
 Treatment is usually with a topical antiviral 
(such as podophyllin, podoﬁ lox or imiquimod). 
Alternatively, destructive local therapies such as 
laser, cryotherapy or electrocoagulation may be 
considered. Surgery is reserved for large clusters 
of lesions or when there is extension into the 
rectum. 
 Chlamydia 
 This is the commonest sexually - transmitted 
disease in the developed world, affecting women 
slightly more often than men. Urethral dis-
charge and dysuria precede a shallow ulcer 
on the penis before the characteristic groin 
lymphadenopathy occurs. In rare late stages, 
inﬂ ammation of the rectum may occur. Diagnosis 
is based on antibody and complement ﬁ xation 
testing, only occasionally needing histology. 
Treatment is with azithromycin, doxicycline or 
co - trimoxazole. 
 Syphilis,  g onorrhoea and 
 h erpes  s implex 
 These sexually - transmitted infections occur most 
frequently in those practising anoreceptive inter-
course. Treatment is along standard lines.   
 Gut  s ymptoms in 
 HIV   i nfection 
 Any part of the GI tract may be affected in patients 
with HIV infection; opportunistic gut infections 
should raise the suspicion of AIDS in these 
patients. Any of the preceding infections may 
occur, but speciﬁ c symptom patterns suggest spe-
ciﬁ c opportunistic infections: 
 •  Oral ulceration : herpes simplex,  Candida , 
 Neisseria gonorrhoea , syphilis. 
 •  Dysphagia : cytomegalovirus (CMV; see below), 
 Candida ; 
 •  Abdominal pain : TB, CMV in the gallbladder 
(intestinal lymphoma, Kaposi ’ s sarcoma); 
 •  Diarrhoea : TB,  Giardia ,  Cryptosporidium , 
 Cyclospora ,  Chlamydia , CMV, herpes simplex; 
 •  Rectal stricture :  –  Chlamydia , 
lymphogranuloma venereum;  
 •  Rectal bleeding : lymphogranuloma venereum, 
syphilis, (anal cancer, Kaposi ’ s sarcoma). 
 Cytomegalovirus 
 CMV can invade the mucosa of any region of the 
gut, causing symptoms (see above). Histology is 
diagnostic, showing  multiple  intranuclear inclu-
sion bodies. CMV infection of the colon can occur 
in any immunocompromised patient, not just 
those with AIDS; speciﬁ cally also in patients 
with a ﬂ are - up of ulcerative colitis who have 
received immunosuppression (prednisolone, aza-
thioprine). Since viraemia is fatal, aggressive treat-
ment may be needed, with intravenous ganciclovir 
or foscarnet. 
  

46 
Gastrointestinal investigations
 Structural  t ests 
 Radiology 
 Plain  X - r ays 
 •  Erect chest X - ray: free air under the 
diaphragm  =  perforation. 
 •  Abdominal X - ray: 
   Dilated bowel loops and ﬂ uid 
level  =  obstruction or ileus; 
   Calciﬁ cation: 
 –  Chronic pancreatitis; 
 –  Gallstones (only 10% radio - opaque). 
 Contrast  s tudies 
 The principle is to provide radio - opaque contrast 
using an insoluble salt (such as barium sulphate) 
or water - soluble medium (gastrografﬁ n); the 
mucosal images can be enhanced by the double -
 contrast technique (with co - inﬂ ation of gas and 
contrast). These are real - time studies, so as well as 
showing mucosal detail, they also give  some infor-
mation about gut motility. 
 Contrast  s wallow 
 •  Indications : 
   Dysphagia (where upper GI endoscopy may 
be dangerous due to pharyngeal pouch);  
 6 
Gastrointestinal 
 i nvestigations  
   Suspected dysmotility (where upper GI 
endoscopy is unhelpful); 
   Size of hiatus hernia (if not quantiﬁ ed at 
upper GI endoscopy);  
   (Other  – heartburn, chest pain). 
 •  Limitations : 
   Upper GI endoscopy shows better mucosal 
detail and allows biopsy;Aspiration risk. 
 Contrast  m eal ( u sually  b arium) 
 •  Indications : 
   Epigastric pain with  ‘ normal ’ upper GI 
endoscopy; possible linitis plastic; 
   Vomiting with  ‘ normal ’ upper GI endoscopy; 
possible gastric outlet obstruction or 
dysmotility; 
   Suspected perforation (water - soluble 
medium);  
   (Anaemia  – superseded by capsule 
endoscopy). 
 •  Limitations : 
   Upper GI endoscopy shows better mucosal 
detail and allows biopsy;  
   Poor at detecting early cancer. 
 Contrast  f ollow - t hrough 
 •  Indications : 
   Crohn ’ s disease: suspected or to quantify 
extent;  
   Diarrhoea or abdominal pain with normal 
endoscopy and histology; 
   Suspected small bowel obstruction. 
 •  Limitations : 
   Ionising radiation exposure; 
   Expertise dependent. 
Lecture Notes: Gastroenterology and Hepatology, 1st edition. 
Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. 
© 2011 Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Gastrointestinal investigations 47
   May  ‘ under - stage ’ tumours; 
   Expertise dependent. 
 MRI  s canning 
 •  Indications : 
   Tumour staging (especially 
oesophagogastric); 
   Crohn ’ s disease (small bowel and perianal); 
   Suspected neuroendocrine tumours; 
   Suspected chronic pancreatitis (secretin -
 stimulated MR); 
   Hepatic tumour staging; 
   MR cholangiopancreatography (MRCP). 
 •  Limitations : 
   Expertise dependent; 
   Claustrophobia for some patients; 
   Time consuming; 
   Not feasible if metal prostheses  in situ. 
 Mesenteric  a ngiography 
 •  Indications :
   GI haemorrhage with normal upper and 
lower GI endoscopy; 
   Recurrent iron deﬁ ciency; 
   Suspected arterio - venous malformation; 
   Suspected mesenteric ischaemia. 
 •  Limitations : 
   Contrast - induced nephropathy; 
   Requires sufﬁ ciently brisk bleeding to 
document source. 
 Endoscopy 
 Video - endoscopy enables passage of ﬂ exible 
instruments into the upper and lower extremes of 
the gut, allowing both direct visualisation of the 
mucosa and biopsy or procedural interventions. 
 Upper  GI   e ndoscopy 
 Performed under sedation with intravenous ben-
zodiazepine, or local anaesthetic throat spray 
only. Should be avoided if perforation is sus-
pected; also caution following recent myocardial 
infarction or if suspected atlantoaxial subluxation 
(e.g. rheumatoid arthritis). 
 •  Indications  – diagnostic : 
   Abdominal pain; 
   Haematemesis or melaena; 
   Dysphagia; 
   Weight loss; 
 Contrast  e nema 
 •  Indications : 
   Altered bowel habit; 
   Suspected diverticulosis where colonoscopy 
may be difﬁ cult or dangerous;  
   Suspected megacolon (where lower GI 
endoscopy can give false negatives); 
   (Anaemia or rectal bleeding). 
 •  Limitations : 
   Uncomfortable for patient; 
   Does not visualise rectal mucosa well 
(especially if patient is unable to retain 
contrast due to incontinence);  
   Ionising radiation exposure; 
   Compared to colonoscopy, poor mucosal 
deﬁ nition, and cannot biopsy lesions and 
same bowel preparation required. 
 Ultrasound 
 •  Indications : 
   Abdominal masses: tumour, abscess, cyst; 
   Organomegaly; 
   Jaundice; 
   Gallstones; 
   Biliary tract dilatation; 
   Ascites; 
   Guided procedures (liver biopsy, cyst 
aspiration, stent insertion).    
 •  Limitations : 
   Low sensitivity for lesions  < 5  mm; 
   Poor views if obstructed (gas) or obese;  
   Expertise dependent; 
   Poor for imaging retroperitoneal structures. 
 CT   s canning 
 Oral contrast helps mucosal deﬁ nition; intrave-
nous contrast shows vascular lesions. 
 •  Indications : 
   Tumour staging (colorectal, gastric, etc.); 
   Crohn ’ s disease; 
   Pancreatic disease; 
   Bile duct stones (better than ultrasound); 
   Hepatic tumour staging; 
   Guided procedures (cyst aspiration, stent 
insertion);  
   CT colonography (non - invasive colonic 
imaging, but requires full bowel prep, and 
may miss lesions  < 1  cm). 
 •  Limitations : 
   Ionising radiation exposure; 

48 
Gastrointestinal investigations
   Argon or laser photocoagulation of vascular 
lesion;  
   Dilatation or stent insertion. 
 •  Complications : 
   Incomplete examination (10%), depending 
on expertise;  
   Perforation (0.5% therapeutic procedures, 
0.1% diagnostic ones);  
   Haemorrhage (half the perforation rate); 
   Cardiorespiratory depression if over - sedated; 
   Infective endocarditis (avoidable with 
prophylactic antibiotics in at - risk patients, 
i.e. those with previous endocarditis or 
prophylactic heart valves). 
 Endoscopic  u ltrasound 
 Performed with specialised endoscopes, bearing a 
revolving ultrasonic probe at the tip of the  ‘ scope. 
 •  Indications : 
   Staging of cancers of oesophagus, rectum 
and pancreas;  
   Drainage of pancreatic pseudocysts; 
   Lymph node biopsy; 
   Assessment of anal sphincters in faecal 
incontinence. 
 Video - c apsule  e nteroscopy 
 Allows visualisation of distal small bowel by a 
swallowed disposable video - capsule. 
 •  Indications : 
   Obscure GI bleeding; 
   Recurrent anaemia. 
 •  Limitations : 
   Caution required if strictures are suspected, 
as the capsule can then obstruct;  
   Expense. 
 Radioisotope  s tudies 
 Meckel ’ s  s can 
 •  Technetium ( 99m Tc) is selectively taken up by 
parietal cells;  
 •  Thus, intravenous infusion of labelled  99m Tc 
allows localisation of ectopic tissue in a 
 Meckel ’ s diverticulum . 
 Labelled  w hite  c ell  s can 
 •  Patient ’ s own leucocytes are extracted and 
radiolabelled before being reintroduced; 
   Iron - deﬁ ciency anaemia (necessitates distal 
duodenal biopsy);  
   Vomiting; 
   Biopsy of upper GI tract following radiology 
procedure; 
   Gastric ulcer follow - up; 
   Balloon enteroscopy: an invasive technique 
allowing visualisation of distal duodenum 
and jejunum in cases of suspected bleeding 
or pain of intestinal origin. 
 •  Indications  – therapeutic : 
   Endoscopic treatment of oesophageal varices; 
   Dilatation of stricture; 
   Insertion of stent to palliate strictures; 
   Placement of PEG tube. 
 •  Complications : 
   Perforation (0.1%); 
   Over - sedation resulting in respiratory 
depression (0.01%);  
   Aspiration pneumonia (avoidable with good 
nursing assistance and aspiration).       
 Flexible  s igmoidoscopy 
 Performed without sedation following enema; 
only the left colon and rectum are examined. 
 •  Indications : 
   Fresh rectal bleeding; 
   Quantify activity in known ulcerative colitis 
patient.    
 •  Complications  of perforation and 
haemorrhage are extremely rare. 
 Colonoscopy 
 Performed after full bowel preparation and with 
conscious sedation; the entire colon (and if pos-
sible the terminal ileum) are examined. 
 •  Indications  – diagnostic : 
   Altered bowel habit (constipation or 
diarrhoea);  
   Rectal bleeding; 
   Iron - deﬁ ciency anaemia; 
   Suspected inﬂ ammatory bowel disease;  
   Follow - up of abnormal barium enema; 
   Colorectal cancer screening; 
   Surveillance: 
 –  Post - colectomy for cancer; 
 –  For adenoma; 
 –  For inﬂ ammatory bowel disease. 
 •  Indications  – therapeutic : 
   Polypectomy; 

Gastrointestinal investigations 49
 •  Host factor  =    brush border lactase levels 
(physiological).  
 •  Physiological metabolites  =  glucose and 
galactose. 
 •  Gas by - products  =  nil: 
   In hypolactasia, the lactose is not digested 
and so enters the colon, where it is 
metabolised by bacteria - releasing 
hydrogen; 
   Positive result is an elevated breath hydrogen 
sooner than 120   min (i.e. when lactose 
substrate has reached the colon). 
 Glucose (or  l actulose)  h ydrogen 
 b reath  t est 
 To diagnose small intestine bacterial overgrowth. 
 •  Substrate  =  glucose (or lactulose). 
 •  Host factor  =    bacteria present in small intestine 
(pathological).  
 •  Physiological metabolite  =  energy. 
 •  Gas by - product  =  hydrogen: 
   In bacterial overgrowth, the ﬂ ora in the small 
intestine digest the glucose - releasing 
hydrogen; 
   Positive result is an elevated breath hydrogen 
sooner than 60   min (i.e. well before substrate 
has reached colonic ﬂ ora). 
 14 C - x ylose  c arbon  d ioxide  b reath  t est 
 To diagnose small intestine bacterial overgrowth. 
 •  Substrate  =  14 C - xylose. 
 •  Host factor  =    bacteria present in small intestine 
(pathological).  
 •  Physiological metabolite  =  energy. 
 •  Gas by - product  =  carbon dioxide: 
   In bacterial overgrowth, the ﬂ ora in the 
small intestine digest the xylose - releasing 
 14 CO 2 ; 
   Positive result is an elevated breath  14 CO 2 
sooner than 60   min (i.e. well before substrate 
has reached colonic ﬂ ora). 
 14 C - t riolein  c arbon  d ioxide  b reath  t est 
 To diagnose fat malabsorption. 
 •  Substrate  =  14 C - triolein (a triglyceride). 
 •  Host factor  =  lipase enzymes (physiological). 
 •  Physiological metabolite  =  oleic acid. 
 •  Gas by - product  =  carbon dioxide: 
   In fat malabsorption, there is less hydrolysis 
of the triolein substrate, hence less oleic acid 
produced, hence less  14 CO 2 ; 
 •  Thus, they migrate to sites of infection or 
inﬂ ammation (Crohn ’ s disease) which can now 
be localised. 
 Labelled  r ed  c ell  s can 
 •  Patient ’ s own erythrocytes are extracted and 
radiolabelled before being reintroduced;  
 •  Thus, they can be seen as they are extravasated 
from the gut. 
 Bile  a cid  a bsorption  t est 
 •  Radiolabelled bile acid substrate is consumed 
orally, and should be absorbed and stored as 
 75 SeHCAT; 
 •  Test allows quantiﬁ cation of the amount that is 
retained after 7 days, with anything  < 5% 
retention being abnormal. 
 Physiological  t ests 
 Gut  h ormone  a nalysis 
 Performed to assess secretory diarrhoea or 
suspected Zollinger – Ellison syndrome. Requires 
cessation of proton pump inhibitor (PPI) for 2 
weeks. Results are of the fasting levels of: 
 •  Gastrin; 
 •  Glucagon; 
   •      Vasoactive intestinal polypeptide (VIP);  
 •  Pancreatic polypeptide; 
 •  Somatostatin; 
 •  Calcitonin. 
 Breath  t ests 
 These depend on the following simple principle:
 
Substrate
Physiological 
 Pathological host
factor
Physiol
+
→
or
ogical metabolite(s)
Gas by-product
+
 
 For each test, the principle is exploited to 
measure a lack or excess of the host factor. The 
methodology for each test is that the substrate is 
given and gas samples are collected regularly for 
120  min. 
 Lactose  h ydrogen  b reath  t est 
 To diagnose hypolactasia ( ‘ lactose intolerance ’ ). 
 •  Substrate  =  lactose. 

50 
Gastrointestinal investigations
 •  Indications : 
   Suspected achalasia: manometry is the 
diagnostic test, showing:  
 –  Absence of peristalsis in body of 
oesophagus (mandatory);  
 –  Non - relaxation of the LOS (often); 
 –  Elevated LOS pressure (occasional); 
 –  Elevated pressures in body of oesophagus 
(occasional).    
   Suspected other oesophageal dysmotility 
(though ambulatory studies may be needed);  
   Prior to proposed antireﬂ ux surgery (to 
exclude dysmotility prior to surgery). 
   Positive result is a reduced breath  14 CO 2 
sooner than 60   min (i.e. well before substrate 
has reached colonic ﬂ ora). 
 14 C - or  13 C - u rea  c arbon  d ioxide 
 b reath  t est 
 To identify the presence of  Helicobacter pylori 
(especially to conﬁ rm eradication in those who 
have been treated but have persistent or recurrent 
symptoms). 
 •  Substrate  =  14 C - or  13 C - urea. 
 •  Host factor  =  Helicobacter pylori (pathological). 
 •  Physiological metabolite  =  ammonium. 
 •  Gas by - product  =  carbon dioxide: 
   In  Helicobacter pylori  infection there is 
increased cleavage of urea by the bacteria 
(which possess the enzyme urease), and 
hence an increase of CO 2 ; 
   Positive result is an elevated breath  14 CO 2 or 
 13 CO 2 at 20  min. 
 Mucosal  i nﬂ ammation  t ests 
 Intestine  p ermeability  s tudies 
 •  Principle : the normal small bowel absorbs 
mono - , not di - , saccharides. Once absorbed 
they are excreted in the urine. An increase 
in permeability allows both mono -  and 
di - saccharides to be absorbed.  
 •  Method : oral lactulose and rhamnose are 
ingested, before accurate urinary measurement 
of the sugars, expressed as a ratio.  
 •  Results : increased permeability in Crohn ’ s 
disease and coeliac disease. 
 Faecal  c alprotectin 
 •  Principle : calprotectin is a peptide expressed 
by colonic neutrophils.  
 •  Method : faecal estimation of concentration of 
calprotectin.  
 •  Results : increased levels in colonic 
inﬂ ammation, infections and cancers. 
 Oesophageal  p hysiology 
 Stationary  m anometry  (Figure  6.1 ) 
 A transnasal catheter is passed into the oesopha-
gus and gives information about: 
 •  Contractions in the body of the oesophagus; 
 •  Function and pressure of the lower 
oesophageal sphincter (LOS).   
 Figure 6.1   Stationary oesophageal manometry trace 
showing normal peristalsis in upper four graphs and 
relaxation of lower oesophageal sphincter in lower four 
graphs. Each horizontal division represents 5   s.  

Gastrointestinal investigations 51
 Ambulatory  m anometry 
 A transnasal catheter is placed in the oesophagus 
for a 24 - h period, measuring contraction patterns 
whilst the patient continues normal activities. 
 •  Indication : Chest pain where coronary artery 
disease has been excluded (to exclude 
oesophageal spasm). 
 Ambulatory  p H  s tudies 
 A transnasal pH catheter is placed in the oesopha-
gus for 24 – 48  h, allowing: 
 •  Quantiﬁ cation of degree of acid exposure;  
 •  Timing of symptom episodes with objective 
episodes of reﬂ ux into the oesophagus.   
 •  Indications : 
   Suspected gastro - oesophageal reﬂ ux where 
endoscopy shows no oesophagitis (to 
conﬁ rm whether there is objective acid 
reﬂ ux); 
   Refractory gastro - oesophageal reﬂ ux (to 
conﬁ rm adequacy of acid suppression);  
   Prior to proposed antireﬂ ux surgery (to 
conﬁ rm pathological degree of acid reﬂ ux). 
 A recent advance has been ambulatory imped-
ance studies which allow quantiﬁ cation not 
only of acid reﬂ ux, but also of non - acid reﬂ ux 
episodes. 
 Gastric  e mptying 
 In suspected gastroparesis, endoscopy and con-
trast studies are often normal (with the exception 
of possibly showing persistence of gastric content 
despite an adequate period of fasting). The rate of 
gastric emptying can be accurately quantiﬁ ed 
using a  radio - isotope - labelled meal , with different 
labels on the solid (technetium) and liquid 
(indium) phase of the test meal. Normal 
emptying is for 50% of the solid phase to be empty 
by 90  min. 
 Whole  g ut  t ransit 
 Oroanal transit time in health is highly variable, 
but approximates to between 20 and 40   h (see 
   p. 20 ), the majority of that time being spent in the 
colon. This rate of transit can be assessed by 
undertaking an abdominal X - ray on day 5 after 
three sets of distinct  radio - opaque markers 
( ‘ shapes study ’ )  have been ingested on days 1, 2 
and 3. Persistence of excessive numbers of any 
one of the sets of markers indicates slow transit, 
and is a valuable test in patients with chronic 
constipation.   
 Anorectal  p hysiology 
 This term refers to a battery of tests undertaken to 
investigate anorectal function in a laboratory 
setting. They are complementary to a focused 
history of bowel function and imaging studies 
(most commonly endo - anal ultrasound or proc-
tography). Measures are obtained of: 
 •  Anal sphincter pressure; 
 •  Rectal sensitivity and compliance; 
 •  Anorectal reﬂ exes. 
 •  Indications : 
   Faecal incontinence; 
   Suspected Hirschsprung ’ s disease (see  p. 108 ); 
   Prior to ileoanal pouch surgery (to conﬁ rm 
sphincter competence). 
 

52 
Acute gastrointestinal bleeding
 Acute  u pper 
 g astrointestinal  b leeding 
 Haematemesis  (vomiting blood) occurs when the 
bleeding source is proximal to the jejunum, and 
 melaena  (tarry stool) usually occurs when blood 
loss is proximal to the caecum. It is a common 
cause of inpatient mortality, but outcome very 
much depends on the expertise available  –  5% in 
the best centres and 20% in others. The aims of 
management are to: 
 •  Resuscitate the patient; 
 •  Arrest the bleeding; 
   •      Prevent or promptly recognise rebleeding.    
 Causes (in  o rder of  o ccurrence) 
 •  Peptic ulcer (duodenal  >  gastric); 
 •  Gastric erosions/gastritis; 
 •  Mallory – Weiss tear; 
 •  Gastro - oesophageal varices ( ∼ 5% of acute 
bleeds, but 80% of mortality);  
 •  Duodenitis; 
 •  Oesophagitis; 
 •  Tumours (gastric  >  oesophageal); 
 •  Gastric antral vascular ectasia (GAVE); 
 •  Dieulafoy lesions; 
 •  Hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia; 
 7 
Acute  g astrointestinal 
 b leeding  
 •  Aorto - enteric ﬁ stula; 
 •  Clotting defect. 
 Management  –  g eneral 
 •  Assess initial Rockall score to predict mortality 
risk (Table  7.1 ). 
 •  Initial resuscitation. 
 •  Intravenous access. 
 •  Give colloid (preferred to crystalloid) if 
hypotensive or tachycardic. 
 •  If Rockall shock score 2, insert central venous 
catheter and urinary catheter and get a surgical 
consultation.  
 •  Keep nil by mouth (until endoscopy). 
 •  Initial investigations : 
   Check bloods for FBC, renal and liver 
function, clotting status;  
   If major blood loss, cross - match blood; if 
not, group and save blood;  
   Arterial blood gases, chest X - ray and ECG if 
cardiorespiratory disease present; 
   Upper GI endoscopy: best performed on a 
daytime list, but emergency procedure 
indicated if there is:  
 –  High likelihood of variceal bleed (history of 
or stigmata of chronic liver disease);  
 –  Rebleeding of a hospital patient; 
 –  Bleeding after endoscopy; 
 –  High chance of acute surgery. 
 •  Endoscopic intervention is preferred to surgery 
for peptic ulcer (thermocoagulation, adrenaline 
injection, vessel clip) and for varices (see    p. 132 ).  
 •  Endoscopy also permits check of  Helicobacter 
pylori status in peptic ulcer patients. 
 •  Assess post - endoscopy Rockall score to predict 
risk (Table  7.2 ). 
Lecture Notes: Gastroenterology and Hepatology, 1st edition. 
Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. 
© 2011 Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Acute gastrointestinal bleeding 53
   Large number of units of blood are being 
required; 
   There is continued bleeding, or rebleeding, 
despite endoscopy;  
   A spurting vessel was seen at endoscopy. 
 Mallory – Weiss  t ears 
 •  Typical feature is that bleeding is not seen in 
the initial vomitus;  
 •  Acid suppression not required ( > 90% heal 
spontaneously);  
 •  Continued bleeding may, rarely, warrant 
endoscopic therapy. 
 Gastric  e rosions 
 •  Usually related to a combination of NSAIDs, 
alcohol and stress;  
 •  Treatment is with a PPI for 2 – 4 weeks; 
 •  Continued bleeding may respond to 
tranexamic acid. 
 Aorto - e nteric  ﬁ stula 
 •  Consider in any patient who has had 
aortic graft surgery and presents with GI blood 
loss;  
 •  Diagnosis is best made by abdominal CT; 
 •  Management requires surgery rather than 
endoscopy. 
 No  s ource of  b leeding  f ound 
 •  Most often due to a common lesion missed at 
upper GI endoscopy, so careful re - examination 
by an expert is warranted, especially if there is 
continued bleeding.  
 •  Rarely, other lesions may be the cause: 
   Dieulafoy lesion that has healed by time of 
endoscopy; 
   Distal duodenal bleeding (NSAID, Zollinger –
 Ellison peptic ulcers); 
   Meckel ’ s diverticulum. 
 Acute  l ower 
 g astrointestinal  b leeding 
 This is distinct from melaena in that blood loss is 
either red – brown or fresh and bright. Causes are 
almost invariably due to a colonic or anal source of 
blood loss; a more useful classiﬁ cation is accord-
ing to frequency of particular lesions occurring. 
 Management  –  s peciﬁ c 
 Oesophageogastric  v arices 
 See  p. 132 . 
 Peptic  u lcers 
 See also  p. 82 . 
   •      Intravenous omeprazole or pantoprazole 
(halves chance of rebleeding).  
 •  There is no role for ranitidine or oral proton 
pump inhibitor (PPI).  
 •  Tranexamic acid (an antiﬁ brinolytic) may help 
reduce bleeding.  
 •  Monitor for rebleeding: 
   Rise in heart rate (most sensitive indicator); 
   Fall in venous pressure or urine output; 
   Overt haematemesis (more sensitive than 
melaena). 
 •  Liaise with surgical team especially if: 
 Table 7.1   Rockall score  – initial. 
 Criterion  
  
  Score 
 Age  
  < 59  
  0  
 
  60 – 79  
  1  
 
  > 80  
  2  
 
  None  
  0  
 
  Pulse, BP    >  100  
  1  
 
  BP   <  100  
 2  
 Comorbidity  
  None  
  0  
 
 Cardiac/lung /
major  
 2  
 
 Renal/liver/cancer  
  3  
 Total  
  
  0 – 7  
 Table 7.2   Rockall score  – post - endoscopy. 
 Criterion  
  
  Score  
 Endoscopic 
diagnosis  
 Normal, Mallory –
 Weiss tear  
 0  
 Any other lesion  
  1  
 Upper Gl cancer  
  2  
 Stigma of recent 
bleed  
 None, black spots  
  0  
 Clot, visible vessel, 
blood in stomach  
 2  
 BP   <  10  
  2  
 Post - endoscopy 
sub total  
 
  0 – 4  
 Total  
  Add initial score  
  0 – 11  

54 
Acute gastrointestinal bleeding
   Flexible sigmoidoscopy if fresh rectal 
bleeding;  
   Upper GI endoscopy is only required if there 
is major circulatory collapse (when the 
source may be a rapidly bleeding upper GI 
lesion causing the presentation). 
 •  Mesenteric angiography is only needed if 
there is continued heavy bleeding (loss of 
 > 1  g  Hb/4  h). 
 •  If there is recurrent bleeding and no source has 
been identiﬁ ed, the following are indicated  in 
sequence : 
 1.  Repeat colonoscopy by an expert;  if nil 
found, go to 2 ; 
 2.  Barium small bowel enema or follow 
through;  if nil found, go to 3 ; 
 3.  Video - capsule enteroscopy;  if nil found, 
consider 4 or 5 ; 
 4.  Meckel ’ s scan;  or 
 5.  Red cell scan. 
 •  In most cases, spontaneous cessation of 
bleeding occurs. However: 
   If blood loss continues from an identiﬁ ed 
source, consideration of surgical resection is 
reasonable; 
   If blood loss continues from an 
unidentiﬁ ed source, laparotomy with 
on - table colonoscopy. 
  
 Causes (in  a pproximate  o rder of 
 f requency) 
 •  Haemorrhoids: these are so common that 
they may occur synchronously with other 
causes;  
 •  Anal ﬁ ssure; 
 •  Colorectal polyps; 
 •  Colorectal cancer; 
 •  Ulcerative colitis  >  Crohn ’ s colitis; 
 •  Rectal prolapse; 
 •  Diverticular disease; 
 •  Angiodysplasia; 
 •  Ischaemic colitis; 
 •  Solitary rectal ulcer syndrome with/without 
rectal prolapse;  
 •  Vasculitis; 
 •  Small intestinal disease (lymphoma, 
diverticula). 
 Management 
 •  Initial resuscitation. 
 •  Initial investigation. 
 •  Check bloods for FBC, renal and liver function, 
clotting status.  
 •  If major blood loss, cross - match blood; if not, 
group and save blood. 
 •  Prompt lower GI endoscopy: 
   Colonoscopy if altered bleeding; 

 Gastrointestinal emergency presentations account 
for a signiﬁ cant proportion of acute presentations 
to the A & E department  –  both to surgeons and 
physicians. The potential presentations are listed 
anatomically in this section. Presentations with 
isolated acute abdominal pain are covered in 
Chapter  3 . 
 Acute  t otal  d ysphagia 
 Sudden complete dysphagia for solids and liquids 
is a medical emergency requiring instant relief of 
obstruction. The commonest cause is bolus food 
impaction on a pre - existing lesion (cancer, benign 
stricture, web). The dangers relate to the risk of 
aspiration pneumonia, and the extreme distress to 
the patient from not being able to swallow even 
their saliva. 
 Management 
 •  Reassurance. 
 •  Rehydration. 
   •      Endoscopic removal of obstruction.  
 •  Endoscopic dilatation of stricture if appropriate; 
if not, an enteral feeding tube should be placed.  
 •  Treat aspiration pneumonia if appropriate. 
 •  Give advice about avoiding dysphagia: 
 8 
Acute  u pper and 
 l ower  g astrointestinal 
 e mergencies  
   Good dentition and careful mastication; 
   Avoid ﬁ brous foods; 
   Plentiful drinks, especially carbonated; 
   Proton pump inhibitor (PPI) if stricture 
present. 
 Oesophageal  r upture 
 Sudden severe chest pain after an obvious provok-
ing cause. In order of frequency, causes are: 
 •  Endoscopy or other instrumentation (usually 
small tears);  
 •  Chest trauma; 
 •  Forceful severe vomiting (usually large tears). 
 The differential includes myocardial infarction, 
dissecting aneurysm, acute pancreatitis, gastroin-
testinal perforation. 
 Investigations 
 Investigations are therefore driven towards con-
ﬁ rming the condition, excluding the differential 
diagnosis (see below in parenthesis), identify-
ing the site of perforation and identifying 
complications: 
 •  ECG and cardiac enzymes (MI); 
 •  Erect chest X - ray (dissecting aneurysm, 
perforated viscus, pneumothorax), 
 •  will also show surgical and mediastinal 
emphysema, and possibly a pleural effusion as 
a complication of the rupture; 
Lecture Notes: Gastroenterology and Hepatology, 1st edition. 
Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. 
© 2011 Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

56 
Acute upper and lower gastrointestinal emergencies 
   Fluid replacement of diarrhoea as per above 
needs to  supplement the minimum 1.5  l of 
liquid that an adult needs per day. 
 Antibiotic  t herapy 
 •  Antimicrobials are not usually indicated since 
acute infections typically last only 1 – 3 days (in 
addition to the risks of antibiotic - related 
diarrhoea and emerging antibiotic resistance).  
 •  Antibiotics are indicated in certain patient 
groups (see  p. 42 ). 
 •  Antibiotics are also indicated in epidemic 
diarrhoea, in order to control spread of 
infection. 
 Antidiarrhoeal  t herapy 
 These agents are best avoided as they may prolong 
carriage of the organism, and as such they are 
absolutely contraindicated in cases of bloody diar-
rhoea (where an enteroinvasive organism may be 
causative). They may trigger intusussception or 
ileus in children. 
 Gut  o bstruction and  i leus 
 History 
 The history of the symptoms preceding intestinal 
obstruction gives invaluable clues as to the loca-
tion and cause (Table  8.1 ). In the patient with a 
past history of laparotomy and sudden onset of 
central abdominal pain and vomiting, adhesional 
obstruction of the small bowel is most likely. 
Patients with obstruction within hernia may give 
a history of a pre - existing hernia: usually inguinal 
or incisional. More chronic progressive presenta-
tions suggest an inﬂ ammatory or malignant cause 
of obstruction.   
 Proximal obstruction is associated with marked 
vomiting and pain, but not usually abdominal dis-
tension. More distal small bowel lesions tend to 
result in more abdominal distension and less 
vomiting. Marked unexplainable weight loss sug-
gests a malignant process or a chronic inﬂ amma-
tory disease such as Crohn ’ s disease. Generally, 
pain caused by small intestinal obstruction is felt 
in the central abdomen. It may be colicky in 
nature, waxing and waning over periods of 
minutes. Severe localised unremitting pain is sug-
gestive of strangulated obstruction. 
 •  CT scan chest and abdomen (dissecting 
aneurysm, perforated viscus);  
 •  Serum amylase (acute pancreatitis  >> 
perforated viscus);  
 •  Gastrografﬁ n swallow: to conﬁ rm location. 
 Management 
 •  Analgesia (potent); 
 •  Intravenous ﬂ uids and keep nil by mouth;  
 •  Urgent surgical opinion. 
 Large  t ears ( b ased on  g astrografﬁ n 
 s wallow) and  s pontaneous  r uptures 
 •  Intravenous antibiotics (metronidazole and 
broad - spectrum agent);  
 •  Early surgical repair;  
 •  Enteral nutrition (via jejunal feeding tube). 
 Small  t ears 
 •  Conservative management (and operate if 
fever or pneumothorax develops);  
 •  If rupture complicates oesophageal 
malignancy, a cuffed oesophageal tube can be 
placed to palliate. 
 Acute  d iarrhoea 
 The presentation and causes of acute diarrhoea 
are detailed on    p. 42 . 
 Management 
 Fluid  r eplacement 
 •  Oral replacement is sufﬁ cient in most cases. 
 •  Isotonic ﬂ uid is required to replace diarrhoeal 
losses (which are isotonic themselves).  
 •  Glucose is required to drive mucosal 
absorption of the ions in this isotonic ﬂ uid. 
 •  This combination of isotonic ﬂ uid and 
glucose is found in oral rehydration solutions 
(ORSs).  
 •  A few ﬁ gures: 
   Adults lose 1  l for every 24  h with moderate 
diarrhoea (6 – 8 stools/day);  
   Typically 200  ml of isotonic ﬂ uid is lost with 
each stool;  
   One sachet of commercial oral rehy 
dration solution provides 200   ml of isotonic 
ﬂ uid; 

Acute upper and lower gastrointestinal emergencies  57
lesions, establish whether there is stool in the 
rectum and to detect left - sided colonic bleeding. 
 Management  –  g eneral 
 •  Initial resuscitation : 
   Intravenous access; 
   Give crystalloid, including potassium; 
   Insert nasogastric suction tube; 
   Keep nil by mouth (until endoscopy). 
 •  Initial investigations : 
   Plain abdominal X - ray: supine and erect; 
look for:  
 –  Gas distribution: valvulae conniventes 
(traverse the full width of the small 
intestine) or haustra (partially traverse the 
width of the colon);  
 –  Fluid levels; 
 –  Luminal dilatation; 
 –  Mucosal oedema. 
   Erect chest X - ray: look for air under the 
diaphragm; 
   Check bloods: 
 Colonic lesions on the left side may be associ-
ated with rectal bleeding or a change in the stool 
calibre. There may be difﬁ culty with evacuation 
but if the lesion allows passage of ﬂ uid stool only, 
there may be pseudo - diarrhoea. Pain from colonic 
obstruction tends to be felt peri - umbilically and in 
the hypogastrium.  
 Examination 
 On general observation the patient may be in 
obvious pain and/or vomiting. The nutritional 
status should be assessed. The abdomen, includ-
ing the inguinal regions, must be carefully exam-
ined for the presence of hernias. Tenderness may 
be generalised and will not necessarily aid locali-
sation of the lesion. Bowel sounds may be high 
pitched where an overactive small bowel attempts 
to push luminal substrate through a narrow 
opening. They may be absent in established 
obstruction. Peritonism occurs where the viscus 
has perforated. Rectal examination must always 
be performed in order to rule out palpable rectal 
 Table 8.1   Causes of gut obstruction. 
 Mechanism  
  Site  
  Examples  
 Mechanical  
  Extrinsic  
  Intestinal hernia  *  
 Adhesions  *  
 Volvulus (sigmoid  >>  caecal  >>  gastric)  
 
  Mural  
  Malignancy (carcinoma  >>  lymphoma    >  carcinoid)  *  
 Diverticular disease 
 Stricturing Crohn ’ s disease 
 NSAID - induced strictures 
 Radiation enterocolitis 
 Intestinal tuberculosis  
 
  Luminal  
  Foreign body 
 Bezoar (food bolus) 
 Intusussception 
 Gallstone ileus  
 Paralytic 
 ( ‘ ileus ’ )  
 Multiple sites  
  Postoperative  *  
 Chronic intestinal pseudo - obstruction 
 Intestinal ischaemia  
 
  Retro - peritoneal  
  Pancreatitis 
 Tumours (sarcoma) 
 Retro - peritoneal ﬁ brosis  
 
  Metabolic  
  Hypokalaemia 
 Diabetic ketoacidosis 
 Acute renal failure  
 * Commonest causes.  

58 
Acute upper and lower gastrointestinal emergencies 
 Table 8.2   Symptoms, investigation and management of gut obstruction according to site of 
obstruction. 
 Site of 
obstruction 
 Common 
causes  
 Typical symptoms  
 Diagnosis  
  Management options  
 Oesophagus  
  Malignancy  
  Progressive difﬁ culty 
swallowing, 
particularly  ‘ hard ’  
foods  
 Upper GI 
endoscopy  
 Dependent on stage and 
grade (see Chapter  28 ) 
 Palliation: 
 •  Endoluminal stent  
 •  Radiotherapy laser 
therapy  
 Curative: 
 •  Surgery  
 •  Radiotherapy  
 Peptic stricture  
  Frequently past history 
of reﬂ ux symptoms 
 Slowly progressive 
dysphagia to solids  
 Upper GI 
endoscopy  
 Endoscopic dilatation 
followed by PPI long 
term  
 Food bolus 
obstruction 
Foreign body  
 Sudden onset of pain 
and dysphagia 
 Unable to swallow 
saliva  
 Plain X - ray if 
foreign body 
 Upper GI 
endoscopy  
 Endoscopic removal 
 Rule out underlying 
lesion in food bolus 
obstruction  
 Stomach  
  Pyloric stenosis 
 (related to 
peptic ulcer 
disease in 
adults)  
 Slowly progressive  
 Upper GI 
endoscopy  
 Surgical pyloroplasty 
 Endoscopic dilatation  
 
  Gastric cancer  
  Progressive 
postprandial 
vomiting and upper 
abdominal bloating 
 Cachexia  
 Upper GI 
endoscopy  
 
 
  Gastroparesis  
  Intermittent nausea 
and vomiting 
 Association with 
diabetes mellitus  
 Scintigraphic meal 
to estimate 
gastric emptying 
half time 
 Upper GI 
endoscopy 
shows no outlet 
obstruction but 
may show large 
gastric residue  
 Careful diabetic control 
 Prokinetics 
 (gastric pacing)  
 Duodenum  
  Pancreatic 
cancer  
 Progressive pain, 
nausea and vomiting 
 Cachexia  
 CT abdomen 
 Upper GI 
endoscopy 
 ERCP  
 Curative: 
 •  Whipple ’ s procedure  
 Palliative: 
 •  Endoluminal stent  
 •  Surgical bypass  
 Jejunum and 
ileum  
 Benign extrinsic 
obstruction 
 •  Adhesions  
 •  Hernia  
 Sudden onset of pain, 
nausea and vomiting 
 Abdominal distension 
depending on site  
 Small bowel 
radiology, 
particularly 
enteroclysis  
 Surgical management  

Acute upper and lower gastrointestinal emergencies  59
 Site of 
obstruction  
 Common 
causes  
 Typical symptoms  
 Diagnosis  
  Management options  
 
  Crohn ’ s 
stricture  
 Diarrhoea 
 Malabsorption 
 Relapsing and 
remitting symptoms  
 Small bowel 
radiology 
 •  Enteroclysis  
 •  MRI  
 •  Ultrasound  
 Colonoscopy and 
ileoscopy 
 Enteroscopy 
 Capsule 
endoscopy (risk 
of capsule 
retention)  
 Medical therapy of 
Crohn ’ s disease 
 Surgical resection or 
stricturoplasty 
 Endoscopic dilatation of 
ileocaecal valve and 
terminal ileal strictures  
 
  Small bowel 
carcinoma 
and 
lymphoma  
 Progressive nausea, 
vomiting and 
bloating  
 Small bowel 
radiology 
 CT abdomen  
 Surgical resection with or 
without chemotherapy  
 
  Meckel ’ s 
diverticulum  
 History of occult GI 
bleeding in some  
 Small bowel 
radiology 
 Meckel ’ s scan  
 Surgical resection  
 Colon and 
rectum  
 Colorectal 
carcinoma  
 Rectal bleeding and 
change in stool form 
with left - sided 
lesions 
 Cachexia  
 Colonoscopy 
 CT colonography 
 Barium enema  
 Surgical excision with 
or without 
chemotherapy 
 Endoluminal stenting or 
ostomy formation for 
palliation  
 
  Benign stricture 
 •  Diverticular  
 •  Crohn ’ s 
disease  
 
  Colonoscopy 
 CT colonography 
 Barium enema  
 Medical therapy of 
Crohn ’ s disease 
 Surgical resection 
 Endoscopic dilatation in 
Crohn ’ s disease  
 
  Extrinsic 
compression 
 •  Uterine 
cancer  
 •  Ovarian 
carcinoma  
 •  Lymphoma  
 
  CT abdomen 
 Colonoscopy 
 Barium enema  
 Surgical or other 
treatment of underlying 
lesion 
 Endoluminal stenting for 
palliation  
 
  Sigmoid 
volvulus  
 Constipation, 
abdominal 
distension  
 Plain X - ray or 
gastrografﬁ n 
enema  
 Flatus tube, endoscopic 
deﬂ ation or surgical 
resection  
 
  Foreign body 
insertion  
 
  Plain X - ray 
 Rigid or ﬂ exible 
sigmoidoscopy  
 Per anal or surgical 
extraction  
Table 8.2 Continued
 ERCP, endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography.  

60 
Acute upper and lower gastrointestinal emergencies 
 Foreign  b odies 
 In the case of swallowed foreign bodies, the prior-
ity is to safeguard the airway. If the object is 
impacted in the pharynx, or is likely to become so 
on attempted removal, then an ENT surgeon 
should be available. Once past the pylorus, spon-
taneous anal passage is the norm, though rarely 
perforation at the ileo - caecal valve may occur. 
Severe pain and fever should raise the concern of 
perforation. 
 Management 
 •  Reassure the patient. 
 •  Perform chest and abdominal X - rays to 
conﬁ rm nature and quantity of ingested item 
(normal X - rays do not exclude the diagnosis):  
   Sharp items and batteries: 
 –  If within the oesophagus or stomach, 
remove at endoscopy (an overtube is 
needed to protect the pharynx on 
extubation);  
 –  If past the pylorus, commence watchful 
waiting.    
   Blunt items and coins: watchful waiting, as 
most will spontaneously pass;  
   Smuggled drug packets: 
 –  Surgical removal is preferred to endoscopic 
(due to risk of rupture);  
 –  Monitor for risks of overdose in case of 
rupture. 
   Rectal foreign bodies: 
 –  Usually need surgical removal at 
examination under anaesthetic;  
 –  Treat the patient with dignity; 
 –  Consider psychiatric referral as 
appropriate. 
  
 –  For FBC: increased white cell count 
suggests strangulation;  
 –  Renal and liver function: hypokalaemia 
and increased urea are found in ileus.    
   Abdominal CT scan: this is the most useful 
examination to determine site and cause of 
obstruction;  
   Arterial blood gases: severe vomiting causes 
metabolic alkalosis. 
   •      If there is strangulation (fever, rebound 
tenderness and increased white count), then 
surgery is required.  
 •  Monitor: 
   Hydration status (venous pressure, signs of 
hydration);  
   Nasogastric aspirate volume; 
   Urine output; 
   Electrolyte status. 
 Management  –  s peciﬁ c (Table  8.2 ) 
 •  Paralytic ileus : 
   Stop provoking drugs (anticholinergics) and 
minimise opiate analgaesia;  
   Give crystalloid, including potassium; 
   Meticulous attention to hydration and serum 
potassium;  
   Consider domperidone, metoclopramide or 
erythromycin (prokinetics);  
   Consider parenteral nutrition if prolonged. 
 •  Intusussception : 
   Diagnosis is often established by ultrasound; 
   Barium or gastrografﬁ n meal may be 
therapeutic in reducing intussusception. 
 •  Meckel ’ s diverticulum : treat surgically if that is 
the cause.  
 •  Volvulus : 
   Sigmoid: deﬂ ating the gut (ﬂ atus tube or 
colonoscopy) is preferable to surgery;  
   Caecal: recurrence is frequent, so surgery is 
advised;  
   Gastric: surgery to reduce the volvulus and 
repair diaphragmatic hiatus that allows the 
gastric volvulus. 

     Acute failure of liver synthetic and metabolic 
function in the presence of encephalopathy and 
the absence of pre - existing liver disease deﬁ nes 
acute liver failure (ALF) and presents the clinician 
with a particular set of diagnostic and manage-
ment problems, often requiring the input of a spe-
cialist liver service. 
 The most common causes of death in ALF are: 
 •  Cerebral oedema; 
 •  Infection; 
 •  Multiorgan failure. 
 The aim of management is to avoid these com-
plications and allow the liver to regenerate. Acute 
liver transplantation remains the only deﬁ nitive 
therapy when supportive care fails. 
 Pathophysiology 
 Systemic  i nﬂ ammatory  r esponse 
 s yndrome and  i nfection 
 ALF is haemodynamically characterised by a 
hyperdynamic circulation with high cardiac 
output and low systemic vascular resistance. The 
pathophysiological mechanisms underlying these 
haemodynamic disturbances are unclear, but 
increased nitric oxide production and cGMP have 
 9 
Acute  l iver  f ailure  
been demonstrated during the later stages of the 
disease. These changes can occur in the absence 
of microbiologically conﬁ rmed infection. 
 More than 80% of ALF patients do develop 
infection, mostly pulmonary. Patients with ALF 
are functionally immunosuppressed (related to 
Kupffer cell and polymorph dysfunction, as well as 
reduction of ﬁ bronectin, opsonins, chemoattract-
ants and components of the complement system). 
Hence, fever and leucocytosis may not occur in 
the face of sepsis. The majority of pathogens are 
Gram - positive organisms, usually staphylococci. 
Fungal infections, occurring in about a third of 
patients, are difﬁ cult to detect and are associated 
with a grim prognosis.  
 Hepatic  e ncephalopathy and 
 r aised  i ntracranial  p ressure 
 Hepatic encephalopathy and raised intracranial 
pressure (ICP) progress hand in hand. Initially 
encephalopathy develops without raised ICP, but 
as it progresses to grade 3 − 4 there is a high risk of 
increased ICP developing (Table  9.1 ). The patho-
genic mechanisms centre on failure of the liver to 
clear mainly nitrogenous waste from the blood-
stream. Worsening encephalopathy is associated 
with worsening prognosis (see Table  9.2 ). 
 Raised ICP can lead to brainstem herniation, 
which is the commonest cause of death. Putative 
mechanisms include: 
 •  Accumulation of osmolytes (such as glutamine) 
in brain cells, and hence uptake of water into 
the cells;  
Lecture Notes: Gastroenterology and Hepatology, 1st edition. 
Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. 
© 2011 Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

62 
Acute liver failure
clearance of activated clotting factors, disturbance 
of its function results in a complex coagulopathy 
characterised by factor deﬁ ciency and intravascu-
lar coagulation. The prothrombin time is widely 
used to assess coagulation and is a useful guide to 
prognosis. 
 Renal,  e lectrolyte and  m etabolic 
 d isturbance 
 Renal impairment is common; 70 – 80% of those 
who have cerebral oedema require some form of 
extracorporeal renal replacement. The aetiology of 
renal dysfunction is a combination of: 
 •  Cerebral blood ﬂ ow changes: initial decrease 
due to loss of the autoregulatory mechanisms 
to maintain perfusion pressure, and then 
later increase due to inappropriate 
vasodilation; 
 •  Disruption of the blood − brain barrier with 
leakage of plasma into the cerebrospinal 
ﬂ uid. 
 Coagulopathy 
 Due to the liver ’ s role in the production of coagu-
lation factors, inhibitors of coagulation and com-
ponents of the ﬁ brinolytic system, as well as the 
 Table 9.1   Grading of hepatic encephalopathy. 
 Grade  
  Level of 
consciousness  
 Personality and 
intellect  
 Neurological signs  
  Electroencephalogram 
abnormalities  
 0  
  Normal  
  Normal  
 None  
  None  
 Subclinical  
  Normal  
  Normal  
 Abnormalities only on 
psychometric testing  
 None  
 1  
  Day/night sleep 
reversal 
 Restlessness  
 Forgetfulness 
 Mild confusion 
 Agitation 
 Irritability  
 Tremor 
 Apraxia 
 Inco - ordination 
 Impaired handwriting  
 Triphasic waves (5   Hz)  
 2  
  Lethargy 
 Slowed 
responses  
 Disorientation to time 
 Loss of inhibition 
 Inappropriate 
behaviour  
 Asterixis 
 Dysarthria 
 Ataxia 
 Hypoactive reﬂ exes  
 Triphasic waves (5   Hz)  
 3  
  Somnolence 
 Confusion  
 Disorientation to place 
 Aggressive behaviour  
 Asterixis 
 Muscular rigidity 
 Babinski signs 
 Hyperactive reﬂ exes  
 Triphasic waves (5   Hz)  
 4  
  Coma  
  None  
 Decerebration  
  Delta/slow wave activity  
 Table 9.2   King ’ s College criteria of poor prognosis in acute liver failure. 
 
  Criterion  
  Paracetamol -  induced ALF  
  Non - paracetamol - induced ALF  
 
  
 Either  pH   <  7.3 or all of  2, 3 and 4 
 Either INR  > 6.5 or 3 of the following 5  
 1 
  INR  
  > 6.5  
  > 3.5  
 2 
  Creatinine  
  > 300   μ mol/l 
 ( > 3.4   mg/dl)  
 > 300   μ mol/l 
 ( > 3.4   mg/dl)  
 3 
  Encephalopathy  
  Grade 3 or 4  
  
 4 
  Patient age  
  
  < 11 or  > 40  
 5 
  Days from jaundice to coma  
  
  > 7 days  
 6 
  Drug toxicity  
  
  present  

Acute liver failure 63
 •  Effects of liver cell failure itself (hepatorenal 
syndrome);  
 •  Acute tubular necrosis (related to sepsis, 
endotoxaemia, bleeding or hypotension).    
 Because paracetamol has a direct effect on the 
renal tubule, renal failure is particularly common 
in the setting of overdose with this agent. Serum 
creatinine is the preferred indicator of renal func-
tion as urea synthesis by the liver will be decreased. 
 Hypokalaemia  develops as a result of renal 
losses and can be compounded iatrogenically 
if 
potassium 
is 
not 
adequately 
replaced. 
 Hypophosphataemia , 
 hypocalcaemia 
and 
 hypomagnesaemia  
also 
commonly 
develop. 
 Hyponatraemia  is usually seen only in the latter 
stages of disease.  Acidosis  commonly develops 
because of: 
 •  Inadequate tissue perfusion causing lactic 
acidosis;  
 •  Respiratory depression or pulmonary 
complications causing respiratory acidosis. 
 Acidosis occurs particularly in paracetamol 
overdose, and is a determinant of prognosis. 
 Hypoglycaemia occurs in 40% of patients and is 
due to failure of gluconeogenesis and raised 
insulin levels because of reduced hepatic uptake. 
Neuroglycopaenia can contribute to reduced 
consciousness. 
 Evaluation 
 History 
 Obtaining an accurate history can be very difﬁ cult 
when faced with an encephalopathic patient. 
Appropriate third - party information must be 
obtained, both to guide diagnostic thinking and to 
decide on the appropriateness of possible liver 
transplantation: 
 •  Onset and duration of the disease; 
 •  Propensity for, or known, pre - existing liver 
disease (focusing on alcohol and drug 
consumption, both prescription and illicit);  
 •  Patient ’ s social context; 
 •  Premorbid function and social support 
networks. 
 The time between onset of the ﬁ rst symptoms 
of illness and hepatic encephalopathy divides the 
illness into hyperacute (within 7 days), acute 
(between 8 and 28 days) and subacute ( > 28 days) 
subgroups. In the hyperacute subgroup, the prog-
nosis is better than for those with acute or suba-
cute disease. 
 The features prior to onset of jaundice are 
non - speciﬁ c, including nausea and malaise. 
Vomiting is common but abdominal pain rare. 
Jaundice  precedes  the onset of hepatic encepha-
lopathy. Coma may then develop rapidly within a 
few days. 
 Rarer pathogens should be sought if there is 
no drug or alcohol history, including plant 
substances, and potential infectious exposures. It 
is important to recall the time delay of 2 − 3 
days between paracetamol overdose and liver 
damage. 
 Worldwide, viral infection, and in the developed 
world, paracetamol overdose and idiosyncratic 
drug reactions, are by far the commonest causes 
(Box  9.1 ). However, the list of possible differential 
diagnoses is long and when an alternative diagno-
sis seems likely, historical features should guide 
investigation. In up to 15% of cases no cause will 
be found. 
 Examination 
 Differentiation of ALF from acute on chronic 
disease is aided by careful observation for the stig-
mata of chronic liver disease, in particular the 
presence of a hard liver, marked splenomegaly 
and spider naevi.  
 Investigations 
 Prognostic  t ests (Table  9.2 ) 
 The ﬁ rst task for the clinician is to select those 
patients with ALF most likely to require transfer to 
a specialist liver unit. Once under the care of a 
transplant unit, criteria have been deﬁ ned that 
allow the selection of candidates appropriate for 
transplantation: 
 •   A  rterial blood gas measurement (especially in 
paracetamol overdose);  
 •   B  ilirubin; 
 •   C  oagulation studies; 
 •  Thrombocytopaenia (secondary to 
  d  isseminated intravascular coagulation). 
 Additional  t ests 
 •  While the transaminases are of little prognostic 
value, a low albumin indicates poor prognosis. 

64 
Acute liver failure
 Box 9.1   Causes of acute liver failure. 
 Viral  
 •  HAV and HBV typically  
 •  HDV, HEV, HSV, CMV, EBV, HVZ, 
paramyxovirus, adenovirus, haemorrhagic fever 
viruses (HCV rarely causes ALF)  
 Drugs and toxins  (these lists are necessarily 
incomplete)  
 •  Dose - dependent: acetaminophen, CCl 4 , yellow 
phosphorus,  Amanita phalloides, Bacillus cereus 
toxin,  sulphonamides, tetracycline, Ecstasy 
(methyldioxymethamphetamine), herbal 
remedies  
 •  Idiosyncratic: halothane, INH, rifampicin, valproic 
acid, NSAIDs, disulphiram  
 Vascular  
 •  Right heart failure  
 •  Budd − Chiari syndrome  
 •  Veno - occlusive disease  
 •  Shock liver (ischaemic hepatitis)  
 •  Heat stroke  
 Metabolic  
 •  Acute fatty liver of pregnancy  
 •  Wilson ’ s disease  
 •  Reye ’ s syndrome  
 •  Galactosaemia  
 •  Hereditary fructose intolerance  
 •  Tyrosinaemia  
 Miscellaneous  
 •  Malignant inﬁ ltration (liver metastases, 
lymphoma)  
 •  Autoimmune hepatitis, sepsis  
 Indeterminate  
 •  Includes primary graft non - function in liver 
transplanted patients  
 HAV, hepatitis A virus; HBV, hepatitis B virus; HCV, hepa-
titis C virus; HDV, hepatitis D virus; HEV, hepatitis E virus; 
HSV, herpes simplex virus; CMV, cytomegalovirus; EBV, 
Epstein − Barr virus; HVZ, herpes varicella zoster virus; 
CCl4, carbon tetrachloride; INH, isoniazid; NSAIDs, non -
 steroidal anti - inﬂ ammatory drugs. 
 •  Paracetamol levels may have decreased by the 
time a patient presents with fulminant hepatic 
failure (FHF), but it is helpful to document this. 
 •  Serum IgM anti - A antibodies diagnose acute 
hepatitis A.  
 •  Hepatitis B surface antigen may have already 
been cleared and hepatitis B surface antibody 
will not yet have appeared, so the hepatitis B 
IgM core antibody is necessary for diagnosis. It 
is very useful to store serum at an early stage, 
as further virological studies might be needed 
later on. In patients found to be positive for 
hepatitis B, serum anti - delta should be 
checked.  
 •  Antihepatitis C virus antibodies should be 
checked, but are unlikely to be positive this 
early in the disease. Diagnosis of acute HCV 
requires PCR for HCV RNA. 
 •  Hepatitis E serology (the virus is prevalent both 
in the UK and in foreign travellers).  
 •  Pregnancy testing must be performed in 
women of childbearing potential.  
 •  In patients with risk factors for thrombo -
 embolism or vasculopathy, assessment of the 
liver vasculature using ultrasound Doppler and 
echocardiography can be helpful.  
 •  Ultrasound of the liver will outline liver 
architecture and show inﬁ ltrating lesions. 
 •  In young patients, rare metabolic and 
autoimmune disease should be considered. 
The diagnosis of Wilson ’ s disease is difﬁ cult as 
serum caeruloplasmin is unreliable; in this 
setting an increased serum - free (unbound) 
copper may be more reliable than any other 
study results. An autoimmune hepatitis screen 
should be sent. 
 Management 
 Management is supportive (in an intensive care 
bed with strict monitoring of vital signs and ﬂ uid 
balance), allowing time for the liver to regenerate. 
This requires careful attention to the complica-
tions of liver failure and aggressive treatment of 
these as they develop. A proton pump inhibitor or 
H 2 antagonist is given to prevent gastroduodenal 
bleeding. Enteral nutrition, or in less severe cases 
oral caloric supplementation, should be given. 
Patients in whom transplant is appropriate should 
be sent to a specialist centre for comprehensive 
assessment. Artiﬁ cial liver support may be avail-
able in some centres. 

Acute liver failure 65
indicated in patients with any clinical suggestion 
of infection. 
 The rationale for the use of prophylactic antibiot-
ics is based on the very high risk of infection in ALF 
and evidence that systemic inﬂ ammatory response 
is important in the pathogenesis of increased ICP 
in ALF. Attempts to reduce infection with prophy-
lactic antibiotics are successful but serious resist-
ance problems emerge in up to 10% of patients. 
 Prophylactic antifungals should be considered 
early because of diagnostic difﬁ culties and the 
high mortality associated with systemic fungal 
sepsis. 
 Circulatory and  r espiratory 
 d ysfunction 
 The circulatory disturbance of ALF is character-
ised by vasodilatation and increased cardiac 
output. Hypotension may respond to volume 
repletion but many patients will require vasopres-
sor therapy directed by invasive haemodynamic 
monitoring. The preferred drug for vasopressor 
support is noradrenaline. 
 Adrenal dysfunction contributes to refractory 
hypotension but supraphysiological doses of 
corticosteroids, while reducing norepinephrine 
requirements, do not improve survival. 
 The main mechanism of lung injury is adult res-
piratory distress syndrome with or without pulmo-
nary sepsis. Sepsis, haemorrhage, pleural effusions, 
atelectasis and intrapulmonary shunts can also 
contribute to respiratory difﬁ culty. Pulmonary 
sepsis should be aggressively sought and treated.  
 Coagulopathy 
 Patients should routinely receive intravenous 
vitamin K. Because the prothrombin time is an 
important prognostic variable, infusion of fresh 
frozen plasma is advocated only for control of 
bleeding or at the time of invasive procedures. 
Thrombocytopaenia, with or without dissemi-
nated intravascular coagulation, correlates much 
more closely with the risk of clinical bleeding than 
INR, and should be monitored closely.  
 Bioartiﬁ cial  l iver  s upport and 
 l iver  t ransplantation 
 A variety of extracorporeal liver - support devices, 
such as haemodialysis, haemoﬁ ltration, charcoal 
haemoperfusion, plasmapheresis and exchange 
 Hepatic  e ncephalopathy and 
 c erebral  o edema 
 Grade 1 − 2  e ncephalopathy 
 •  Sedation should be avoided as this may worsen 
confusion.  
 •  Should not receive a high protein diet, 
although there is debate regarding the beneﬁ t 
of low protein diets.  
 •  Phosphate enemas and lactulose should be 
administered so that the patient has two 
semi - soft bowel motions per day. 
 Grade 3 − 4  e ncephalopathy 
 •  Patients generally require sedation and 
mechanical ventilation (risk of concomitant 
cerebral oedema is high).  
 •  Hyperthermia, hypercapnoea, hypoglycaemia 
and hyperglycaemia must be avoided.  
 •  Speciﬁ c therapies for raised ICP include 
mannitol (mainstay of treatment), barbiturates 
(used less commonly than previously), 
hypothermia (experimental), hypertonic 
normal saline, vasopressors, hepatectomy and 
liver transplantation. 
 Renal,  m etabolic and  e lectrolyte 
 d isturbances 
 •  Hypoglycaemia is treated with 100  ml 50% 
glucose intravenously if the blood sugar falls 
below 3  mmol/l, followed by an infusion of 5% 
or 10% dextrose. The blood glucose should be 
checked at least hourly. Further 50% glucose is 
given if it falls again.  
 •  Iatrogenic hypokalaemia must be carefully 
monitored for and replaced.  
 •  Hypocalcaemia, hyponatraemia, 
hypophosphataemia and hypomagnesaemia 
are common and require adequate replacement.  
 •  Adequate volume repletion and the avoidance 
of nephrotoxins are central to the maintenance 
of renal function. Renal replacement therapy 
should be undertaken early in established 
renal failure. Continuous, rather than 
intermittent, treatment is preferred. 
 Infection 
 Regular culture screens should be carried out, 
including daily sputum and urine culture. Line 
sites must be carefully monitored. Antibiotics are 

66 
Acute liver failure
transfusions, have been advocated and essentially 
serve as toxin ﬁ lters. More recently bio - artiﬁ cial 
livers using cell - based therapies have been devel-
oped. Despite promising case reports and small 
series, no controlled study has shown a long - term 
survival beneﬁ t. These techniques seem to be 
better at  ‘ bridging ’ patients to transplantation 
than at improving transplant - free survival. 
 Liver transplantation (see Chapter  30 ), although 
never subjected to a prospective controlled trial, 
is considered the only proven therapy. Before the 
era of liver transplantation, less than a half of the 
patients with ALF survived. Nowadays, liver trans-
plantation for ALF offers an overall survival of 
65 − 80%. However, the outcome remains worse 
than in those transplanted for chronic liver 
disease. 
 Living donor liver transplantation is now estab-
lished in some centres and is being increasingly 
used due to the scarcity of deceased donor organs. 
Auxiliary liver transplantation, where a partial 
liver graft is transplanted while leaving part of the 
native liver  in situ , has been used for patients in 
whom there is anticipation of recovery of normal 
liver function. Total hepatectomy with portocaval 
shunting is a temporising measure that may be 
employed as a method of stabilising a critical 
patient until a donor liver becomes available.   
 
 
  

 Acute inﬂ ammation of the pancreas can arise 
from a variety of insults, frequently involves 
peripancreatic tissues and at times remote organ 
systems. It is potentially lethal and appears to be 
increasing in incidence. The diagnosis is based 
on characteristic abdominal pain and nausea, 
combined with elevated serum levels of pancre-
atic enzymes. To ensure best management, the 
diagnosis must be considered early, the disease 
severity assessed to guide decision - making 
and 
adequate 
ﬂ uid 
resuscitation 
instituted 
immediately. 
 Epidemiology 
 This is a common emergency condition, with 
incidence rates up to 80 in 100  000 per year. 
There has been an apparent increase in the 
incidence of acute pancreatitis in the past 40 
years. This may be due to improved diagnostic 
capability during this period but may also 
reﬂ ect a true increase due to a greater prevalence 
of risk factors such as increased alcohol 
consumption. 
 The mortality in patients with acute pancreatitis 
is approximately 5%. About half of deaths occur 
within the ﬁ rst 2 weeks of illness, generally attrib-
uted to organ failure.  
 10 
Pancreatobiliary 
emergencies: acute 
pancreatitis  
 Aetiopathogenesis 
 In acute pancreatitis the pathological process 
involves inﬂ ammation, oedema and necrosis of 
pancreatic tissue, as well as inﬂ ammation and 
injury of extrapancreatic organs. Although alcohol 
abuse and gallstone disease cause 70 − 80% of 
acute pancreatitis, a range of other insults can 
lead to the same end result. The exact mecha-
nisms by which these factors initiate acute pan-
creatitis are presently unknown. In the case of 
gallstones or microlithiasis (sludge), it probably 
involves increased ductal pressure. With pro-
longed alcohol intake ( > 100  g/day for  > 3 − 5 years), 
protein plugs may form in small pancreatic duc-
tules. Obstruction by these protein plugs may 
cause premature activation of pancreatic enzymes. 
An alcohol binge in such patients can trigger pan-
creatitis by activating pancreatic enzymes. 
 Pancreatobiliary 
 a natomy and  m echanical 
 c auses 
 Because of the association of the pancreatic 
duct with the bile duct, obstruction can occur 
when biliary material impacts in the common 
segment of the common bile and pancreatic 
duct (Figure  10.1 ). This is more likely to occur 
when biliary sludge and small debris are involved. 
Lecture Notes: Gastroenterology and Hepatology, 1st edition. 
Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. 
© 2011 Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

68 
Pancreatobiliary emergencies
creatic duct and papilla (Figure  10.1 ). A compre-
hensive list of causes is listed in Table  10.1 . 
 Complications 
 Systemic  i nﬂ ammatory  r esponse 
 s yndrome 
 With inﬂ ammation of the pancreas comes activa-
tion of pancreatic enzymes (including trypsin, 
For similar reasons, dysfunction of the sphincter 
of Oddi, with very high sphincter pressures, may 
lead to pancreatitis. One of the complications of 
endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatogra-
phy (ERCP) is acute pancreatitis, occurring at a 
rate of up to 15% following complex ERCP. Other 
types of trauma and pancreatic and periampullary 
tumours can also precipitate pancreatitis. Finally, 
a rare cause of pancreatitis may be pancreas 
divisum where there is failure of the dorsal and 
ventral ducts to fuse in the embryo so that most of 
the pancreatic juice ﬂ ows through the minor pan-
 Figure 10.1   Development and normal anatomy of the pancreas.  
Stomach
Duodenum
Bile duct
Ventral
pancreas
Pancreatic duct
35 days
Dorsal
pancreas
Accessory
pancreatic duct
Accessory pancreatic
duct (Santorini’s)
Principal duct
(Wirsung’s)
Fusion of the ventral
and dorsal pancreas
and union of the ducts
Bile duct
Accessory
pancreatic duct
Pancreatic duct
Papilla of Vater
Second part of
the duodenum
Accessory papilla

Pancreatobiliary emergencies 69
increase in capillary permeability and decrease in 
vascular tone. 
 Other  c omplications 
 The result of acute pancreatitis is effectively a 
chemical burn, as activated enzymes and cytokines 
enter the peritoneal cavity, resulting in capillary 
leakage of pancreatic ﬂ uid. 
 •  Pseudocysts : in about 40% of patients, 
collections of pancreatic ﬂ uid and tissue debris 
form around the pancreas. In half the cases 
these collections resolve spontaneously; in the 
remainder either infection sets in or the 
collections become surrounded by a ﬁ brous 
(not epithelial) - lined capsule and are called 
pseudocysts. These pseudocysts may 
themselves become infected, haemorrhage or 
rupture. 
 •  Metabolic complications of pancreatitis 
include:  
     Hypocalcaemia (a drop in serum 
calcium is usually due to concomitant 
hypoalbuminaemia; however, ionised calcium 
may fall due to intraperitoneal saponiﬁ cation);  
   Hypomagnesaemia; 
   Hyperglycaemia. 
 •  Haematological complications in the form of 
disseminated intravascular coagulopathy may 
occur. 
 •  Infectious complications may complicate 
severe pancreatitis, where there is necrosis and 
haemorrhage of the gland. The necrotic tissue 
may become infected by enteric bacteria after 
5 − 7 days. In addition, pancreatic pseudocysts 
may become infected. 
 History 
 The main symptom of acute pancreatitis is 
 abdominal pain  that is usually epigastric in 
location. It typically increases in severity over a 
few hours before reaching a plateau that may 
last for several days. The pain radiates through 
to the back in about 50% of patients. Sitting 
up and leaning forward may reduce pain, but 
coughing, vigorous movement and deep breath-
ing may accentuate it.  Nausea and vomiting 
are common. Gallstone pancreatitis may be 
more sudden in onset whereas that associated 
with alcoholism may come on more slowly. 
phospholipase A 2  and elastase) within the gland 
itself. These enzymes in turn damage tissue, acti-
vating 
complement 
and 
the 
inﬂ ammatory 
cascade, thus producing cytokines. Inﬂ ammatory 
products that enter the systemic circulation 
produce a systemic inﬂ ammatory response. This 
can result in acute respiratory distress syndrome, 
cardiovascular failure and renal failure. The sys-
temic effects are mainly mediated through an 
 Table 10.1   Causes of acute pancreatitis. 
 Cause  
  Example  
 Drugs  
  α - methyldopa 
 5 - aminosalicylate 
 ACE inhibitors 
 Azathioprine 
 Cimetidine 
 Cytosine arabinoside 
 Dexamethasone 
 Ethinylestradiol 
 Frusemide 
 Isoniazid 
 Mercaptopurine 
 Metronidazole 
 Norethindrone 
 Pentamadine 
 Procainamide 
 Stilbogluconate 
 Sulphamethazole 
 Sulphamethoxazole 
 Sulindac 
 Tetracycline 
 Trimethoprim  
 Infectious  
  Coxsackie B virus, 
cytomegalovirus, mumps  
 Inherited  
  Multiple known gene mutations, 
including a small percentage 
of cystic ﬁ bro sis patients  
 Mechanical/
structural  
 Gallstones, ERCP, trauma, 
pancreatic or periampullary 
cancer, choledochal cyst, 
sphincter of Oddi stenosis, 
pancreas divisum  
 Metabolic  
  Hypertriglyceridaemia, 
hypercalcaemia (including 
hyperparathyroidism)  
 Toxins  
  Alcohol, methanol  
 Other  
  Pregnancy, postrenal 
transplant, ischaemia from 
hypotension or 
atheroembolism, tropical 
pancreatitis  

70 
Pancreatobiliary emergencies
 •  Several clinical ﬁ ndings, including thirst, 
poor urine output, progressive tachycardia, 
tachypnoea, hypoxaemia, agitation, confusion, 
a rising haematocrit level and a lack of 
improvement in symptoms within the ﬁ rst 48  h 
are warning signs of impending severe disease. 
 Investigations 
 The diagnosis of acute pancreatitis is made in 
the presence of typical  clinical features together 
with a high plasma concentration of  pancreatic 
enzymes . Serum amylase analysis is the most 
widely available test. However, concentrations 
decline quickly over 2 − 3 days. In addition, 
hyperamylasaemia is found in several non -
 pancreatic diseases and its speciﬁ city for acute 
pancreatitis is around 88%. Diagnosis should 
therefore not rely on arbitrary limits of values 
three or four times greater than normal. Lipase 
Pain beyond about a week is likely to result 
from the development of local complications. 
 Examination 
 Observation reveals an acutely ill and sweaty 
patient who is tachycardic and tachypnoeic. BP 
may be transiently high or low, with signiﬁ cant 
postural hypotension. Temperature may be 
normal or even subnormal at ﬁ rst but may increase 
to 37.7 − 38.3 ° C within a few hours. Level of con-
sciousness may be reduced. Respiratory examina-
tion may reveal basal crackles consistent with 
atalectasis. 
 Abdominal signs may vary from mild tender-
ness to generalised peritonitis. Blue − grey discol-
ouration of the ﬂ anks, due to exudation of ﬂ uid 
stained by pancreatic necrosis into the subcutane-
ous tissue, is known as Grey − Turner ’ s sign. Similar 
discoloration in the periumbilical area is known as 
Cullen ’ s sign. In about 20% of patients there will 
be upper abdominal distension caused by gastric 
distention or displacement of the stomach by a 
pancreatic inﬂ ammatory mass. Pancreatic duct 
disruption may cause ascites (pancreatic ascites). 
Bowel sounds may be hypoactive. 
 Risk  s tratiﬁ cation 
 In assessing the patient with acute pancreatitis, 
stratiﬁ cation of the severity of an episode is essen-
tial as it guides appropriate allocation of critical 
care beds, ERCP, CT scanning and nutritional 
support. The severity of acute pancreatitis is 
deﬁ ned by the presence or absence of organ 
failure, local complications, or both, and can be 
assessed using speciﬁ c scoring systems. The best 
known of these is the Ranson criteria, completed 
48  h after onset of the episode (Box  10.1 ).   
 Elevated C - reactive protein levels at 24 − 48  h 
after onset are also useful in predicting severity. In 
addition there are markers of severity not included 
in standard scoring systems that should be 
considered: 
 •  Obesity (a BMI of  > 30) is associated with a 2 − 3 
fold increase in the risk of a severe clinical course;  
 •  A haematocrit  >  44% is a clear risk factor for 
pancreatic necrosis, although it is a poor 
predictor of the severity of disease; 
 Box 10.1   Ranson ’ s prognostic signs 
help predict the prognosis of acute 
pancreatitis. 
 Five of Ranson ’ s signs can be documented at 
admission:  
 •  Age  > 55 years  
 •  Serum glucose  > 11.1   mmol/l ( > 200   mg/dl)  
 •  Serum LDH  > 350   IU/l  
 •  AST  > 250   U  
 •  WBC count  > 16   000/ μ l  
 The rest are determined within 48  h of admission:  
 •  Hct decrease  > 10%  
 •  BUN increase  > 1.78   mmol/l ( > 5  mg/dl)  
 •  Serum Ca  < 2   mmol/l ( > 8  mg/dl)  
 •  PaO 2  < 60   mmHg ( < 7.98   kPa)  
 •  Base deﬁ cit  > 4   mmol/l ( > 4  mEq/l))  
 •  Estimated ﬂ uid sequestration  > 6   l  
 Mortality increases with the number of positive 
signs:  
 •  < 3 signs are positive, the mortality rate is  < 5%  
 •  3 − 4 signs positive, the mortality rate is 
15 − 20%  

Pancreatobiliary emergencies 71
may also identify early duct disruption that is 
not seen on CT. 
 Management 
 •  Aggressive ﬂ uid resuscitation is the central 
aspect of management of acute pancreatitis.  
 •  Treatment of pain usually requires opiate 
analgesia and, while morphine is generally 
avoided because of concerns that it might 
exacerbate pancreatitis by increasing sphincter 
of Oddi tone, no deﬁ nitive human study 
supports this. 
 •  Early risk stratiﬁ cation guides allocation to 
critical care and nutritional support. 
 Nutritional  s upport 
 Early enteral nutrition should be the goal for 
all patients with acute pancreatitis. Nutritional 
support is essential for all patients with severe 
disease. Enteral nutrition is superior to parenteral 
in terms of cost, safety and risk of septic complica-
tions. In severe pancreatitis, the nasojejunal 
route of feeding is usually recommended. 
However, a clear beneﬁ t of this over nasogastric 
feeding has not been shown. Serum glucose 
concentrations should be monitored and in the 
critically ill patient should be maintained at or 
below 6.1   mmol/l by the use of intensive insulin 
treatment. 
 Gallstones 
 ERCP and sphincterotomy within 72   h of disease 
onset is indicated for patients with acute severe 
gallstone pancreatitis. In patients with mild gall-
stone pancreatitis, it is important to prevent 
recurrence. A cholecystectomy with intraopera-
tive cholangiography should be undertaken as 
soon after recovery as possible; if the patient is not 
ﬁ t for cholecystectomy, then ERCP and sphincter-
otomy is sufﬁ cient. 
 Other  t reatment  m odalities 
 Antibiotic prophylaxis is effective in preventing 
infection of necrotic pancreatic tissue. However, 
it is also associated with the development of anti-
biotic resistance and is reserved for patients with 
pancreatic necrosis proven on CT. Antibiotics 
has a superior sensitivity and speciﬁ city for acute 
pancreatitis. 
 Following a thorough history and physical 
examination, all patients should have: 
 •  Serum amylase (and if available lipase); 
 •  FBC; 
 •  Electrolytes and renal function; 
 •  Coagulation screening; 
 •  Liver enzymes; 
 •  Serum lactate; 
 •  Calcium, magnesium; 
 •  Glucose; 
 •  Arterial blood gases and pH; 
 •  Biliary ultrasonography. 
 Any abnormalities should be monitored and 
tests repeated within 48   h to allow further risk 
stratiﬁ cation. 
 Follow - up investigations, during the recovery 
phase, should include fasting plasma lipids and 
calcium, as both may be secondarily reduced 
during the acute episode. Convalescent viral 
antibody titres and repeat biliary ultrasonography 
are warranted if the cause is not obvious. Further 
investigations are indicated by the clinical 
situation. 
 For  recurrent idiopathic acute pancreatitis , 
exclusion of the following is essential: 
 •  Pancreatic cancer; 
 •  Microlithiasis; 
 •  Chronic pancreatitis; 
 •  Pancreas divisum. 
 This is undertaken by: 
 •  Ultrasonography: considered the investigation 
of ﬁ rst choice because of its ability to show 
gallstones and dilated bile ducts. Its weakness 
is in detecting stones within the lower and 
common bile duct;  
 •  CT: mainly indicated for the detection and 
staging of the complications of acute severe 
pancreatitis, especially pancreatic necrosis; 
 •  Endoscopic ultrasonography: perhaps the most 
sensitive modality for detecting biliary causes 
and may guide the use of ERCP;  
 •  ERCP: may be needed to detect microlithiasis 
or provide sphincter of Oddi manometry; its 
main role in acute pancreatitis currently is the 
treatment of biliary causes;  
 •  MRI: like CT, can identify gallstones or a 
tumour, as well as local complications. MRI 

72 
Pancreatobiliary emergencies
should be used early when infection is suspected. 
Initial therapy is with agents active against enteric 
organisms. 
 If patients have  > 30% necrosis on CT scanning, 
then further investigation to detect infected 
necrotic tissue is indicated. Positive bacteriology 
from samples gained by ﬁ ne needle aspiration of 
pancreatic or peripancreatic necrotic tissue, or the 
presence of retroperitoneal gas on CT, is an indi-
cation for necrostomy. The standard techniques 
for necrostomy are surgical, however radiological 
and endoscopic techniques have been trialled. 
 
 
  

 The oral cavity is the ﬁ rst portion of the digestive 
system: it receives food, commences digestion by 
mechanically breaking up the solid food into 
smaller particles and then combines these with 
saliva. 
 Oral  u lcers 
 Aphthous ulcers are the commonest causes of oral 
ulceration. These are painful, superﬁ cial breaches 
of the mucosa of the lips, tongue, gums or buccal 
membranes. They are recurrent in up to a third of 
the normal population, but if other systemic fea-
tures are present, then alternative causes need to 
be considered (Box  11.1 ). 
 Usually just antiseptic mouthwashes will sufﬁ ce 
to allow spontaneous healing, but topical sali-
cylates or steroids can induce rapid healing. Rare 
patients with severe, recurrent ulcers need oral 
steroids. 
 Oral  c ancer 
 Squamous cell carcinoma is increasing in inci-
dence, and is aetiologically related to: 
 •  Smoking or tobacco chewing; 
 11 
Oral  c avity  
 •  Alcohol excess; 
 •  Malnutrition; 
 •  Betel nut chewing (in Asian populations). 
 It may present as a lump, or an ulcerated lesion 
or a white patch in the mouth ( ‘ leukoplakia ’ ). 
Cervical lymphadenopathy is usually a sign of late 
presentation. Radical radiotherapy is often under-
taken, and is preferable to surgical resection, 
which often needs extensive dissection.  
 Oral  m anifestations of 
 i nﬂ ammatory  b owel 
 d isease 
 Crohn ’ s  d isease 
 •  0.5% of Crohn ’ s patients show oral features. 
 •  Usually young males, often co - existing with 
anal Crohn ’ s. 
 •  Usually multifocal, ﬁ rm painless lumps (unless 
ulcerated, see Box  11.1 ). 
 •  Diagnosis conﬁ rmed by biopsy. 
 •  Usually self - limiting, may need topical steroid. 
 Ulcerative  c olitis 
 •  Rarer than oral Crohn ’ s. 
 •  Usually male, any age. 
 •  Usually multifocal, shallow, pustular lesions. 
 •  Usually responds to treatment of colonic 
disease. 
 •  Occasionally needs topical steroid or dapsone. 
Lecture Notes: Gastroenterology and Hepatology, 1st edition. 
Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. 
© 2011 Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

74 
Oral cavity
 Hereditary  h aemorrhagic 
 t elangiectasia 
 Four forms of this autosomal dominant disorder 
are described. All are characterised by: 
 •  Mucosal and skin telangiectasia; 
   •      Arteriovenous malformations (AVMs) in the 
internal organs. 
 Gardner  s yndrome 
 An autosomal dominant (chromosome 5) disorder 
of intestinal polyposis (with high rates of develop-
ing into cancer). Head and neck features are 
prominent: 
 •  Unerupted teeth; 
 •  Jaw osteomas; 
 •  Jaw enostoses (growths on internal surface of 
bone cortex);  
 •  Epidermoid cysts on head and neck. 
 Peutz - Jegher ’ s 
 s yndrome 
 An autosomal dominant (chromosome 19) disor-
der of benign hamartomatous intestinal polyps 
and hyperpigmented macules on the lips and oral 
mucosa. Patients are at increased risk of all 
cancers, particularly GI and pancreatic, so once 
diagnosed, screening is mandatory. 
  
 Dental  e namel  e rosion 
 Can arise from GI causes: 
 •  Gastro - oesophageal reﬂ ux disease; 
 •  Chronic alcoholism (recurrent vomiting, 
neglect and malnutrition);  
 •  Recurrent vomiting in bulimia. 
 Box 11.1   Causes of oral ulceration 
 Idiopathic aphthous ulcers  
 GI disease  
 •  Coeliac disease  
 •  Crohn ’ s disease  
 Infection  
 •  Herpes simplex  
 •  Vincent ’ s angina  
 •  Candidiasis  
 Systemic disease  
 •  SLE  
 •  Behcet ’ s disease  
 •  Pemphigus  
 •  Pemphigoid  
 Drugs  
 •  Stevens − Johnson syndrome  
 Neoplasia  
 •  Oral cancers  
 •  Leukaemia  

 Gastro -  o esophageal 
 r eﬂ ux  d isease ( GORD ) 
 Gastro - oesophageal reﬂ ux (GOR) is one of the 
most prevalent symptoms, with 10 − 20% of the 
population in the developed world experiencing 
at least weekly heartburn. Given the high preva-
lence of GOR symptoms, it should only be consid-
ered a disease when frequent symptoms or 
complications occur. 
 Aetiology 
 In health, GOR episodes occur throughout the 
day, especially after meals. However, these do not 
usually cause symptoms due to the following 
antireﬂ ux mechanisms: 
 •  Lower oesophageal sphincter (LOS) pressure: 
the tone produced by the combination of 
smooth circular muscle at the distal 
oesophagus and striated muscle of adjacent 
diaphragm. The LOS resists the pressure 
gradient from abdomen to thorax that 
predisposes towards reﬂ ux. The LOS normally 
relaxes to allow food into the stomach, and 
also does so several times a day to allow 
swallowed air out of the stomach  –  these 
are called  transient LOS relaxations 
(TLOSRs) . 
 •  Angle of Hiss: the oblique angle between the 
cardia and oesophagus, which provides an 
anatomical barrier (Figure  12.1 a). 
 12 
Oesophagus  
 •  Oesophageal clearance: any material reﬂ uxed 
into the oesophagus is normally rapidly 
cleared back into the stomach by oesophageal 
contractions. 
 Impairment of any of these defences may result 
in reﬂ ux symptoms. 
 •  Hiatus hernia herniation of the stomach into 
the thorax. Although present in 30% of over 50 
year olds, it is usually asymptomatic. There are 
two forms: sliding (much commoner) and 
rolling (Figure  12.1 b). A hiatus hernia causes 
reﬂ ux by reducing LOS pressure, increasing 
TLOSRs and straightening out the angle of 
Hiss. A very rare complication of a hiatus 
hernia is development of  gastric volvulus 
when the stomach twists on itself causing 
severe pain and dysphagia; diagnosis is by 
chest X - ray showing a thoracic air bubble, 
and management is by nasogastric tube 
decompression followed by surgical referral  
 •  Gastroparesis  −  any condition that delays 
gastric emptying (pregnancy, binge drinking, 
poorly controlled diabetes) can increase gastric 
volume and hence the pressure gradient 
encouraging reﬂ ux. TLOSRs are also prolonged 
in gastroparesis. This is why eating large, 
calorie - rich meals (especially before lying ﬂ at) 
promotes reﬂ ux. 
 •  Increased intra - abdominal pressure : 
pregnancy, obesity and chronic cough all 
increase the pro - reﬂ ux pressure gradient  – 
hence weight loss may help GOR symptoms.  
 •  Unhealthy lifestyle smoking, eating fat - and 
calorie - rich foods and binge drinking reduce 
LOS pressure and increase TLOSRs. These 
factors, and regular use of NSAIDs, also 
increase gastric acid production, resulting in 
more acid being available to cause reﬂ ux. 
Lecture Notes: Gastroenterology and Hepatology, 1st edition. 
Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. 
© 2011 Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

76 
Oesophagus
is helpful if surgery is being considered or the exact 
diagnosis is unknown.  Note : there is poor correla-
tion between endoscopic change, degree of acid 
reﬂ ux (on pH testing) and burden of symptoms. 
 Clinicopathological  m anifestations 
 •  Oesophagitis : deﬁ ned as endoscopic change 
ranging from minor erythema to frank 
ulceration and stricturing (classiﬁ ed as Los 
Angeles grades A to D, respectively). Anaemia 
from oesophagitis is rare and if present, 
another cause of anaemia should be sought.  
 •  Oesophageal stricture (Box  12.1 ): this typically 
complicates severe and chronic oesophagitis 
and results in narrowing of the distal 
oesophagus following repeated peptic 
ulceration and scarring. It presents as 
dysphagia and requires treatment by 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 •  Heartburn  
 } related to bending,  
 •  Fluid/food 
regurgitation  
 } straining and tight 
clothing;  
 •  Waterbrash ( =  reﬂ ex salivation in response to 
oesophageal acid);  
 •  Nocturnal cough (due to gastric ﬂ uid reﬂ uxing 
to the larynx when lying ﬂ at);  
 •  Chest pain (secondary to acid - related 
oesophageal muscle spasm);  
 •  Dysphagia or odynophagia ( =    painful or difﬁ cult 
swallowing) are  rare in uncomplicated GORD  
 Investigations 
 Indicated in middle - aged or elderly patients with 
alarm symptoms present. Endoscopy is the ﬁ rst -
 line investigation (to exclude other conditions 
causing similar symptoms). 24 - h pH measurement 
 Figure 12.1   (a) Normal distal oesophagus and proximal stomach; (b) Distal oesophagus and proximal stomach 
with hiatus hernia (LOS    =  lower oesophageal sphincter).  
(a)
(b)
Costal diaphragm
Crural diaphragm
Phreno-oesophageal ligament
Angle of Hiss
Weak, short LOS
Loss of diaphramatic
support of LOS
Loss of intra-
abdominal LOS
Stretched,
torn phreno-
oesophageal
ligament
Widened
diaphragmatic
hiatus
Retention
of fluid in
hernia sac

Oesophagus 77
 –  Acid suppressive therapy does not induce 
regression of Barrett ’ s oesophagus; 
 –  Endoscopic ablation through 
photodynamic therapy is effective, but is 
associated with signiﬁ cant local side -
 effects (nausea, dysphagia, chest pain) and 
may result in  ‘ buried islands ’ of Barrett ’ s 
mucosa under the epithelium;  
 –  Antireﬂ ux surgery does not stop 
progression of Barrett ’ s oesophagus; 
   Surveillance frequency depends on the 
severity of dysplasia but the value of this 
surveillance remains controversial;  
   When high - grade dysplasia is observed, 
oesophagectomy may be considered in 
patients ﬁ t enough for such surgery since 
40% will be found to have a cancer present at 
resection. 
 Management 
 Conservative 
 •  Lifestyle modiﬁ cation strategies (weight loss, 
smoking cessation, avoiding fatty meals prior 
to bedtime, elevation of the bed head) are 
usually complied with poorly.  
 •  Antacids provide effective symptom relief for 
40% of patients and may be needed several 
times a day. 
 Medical 
 •  H 2 receptor antagonists  are as effective as 
antacids and need be taken less frequently.  
 •  Proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) achieve 
symptom relief in the overwhelming majority 
of patients, and are especially effective when 
symptoms are severe. Unlike other medical 
agents, they also heal oesophagitic mucosa. 
The newer PPIs are licensed for  ‘ on demand ’  
use to relieve symptoms. Some patients need 
long - term treatment, in which case the lowest 
effective dose should be used. According to 
patient preference  –  and for the rare patient 
who does not respond to PPIs  –  consideration 
of more interventional treatments (see below) 
may be needed. 
 Endoscopic 
 •  Endoscopic fundoplication is an experimental 
technique for patients with signiﬁ cant 
symptoms in the context of a small or no 
hiatus hernia. 
endoscopic dilatation. At this time, biopsies 
may help to exclude malignancy. Following 
dilatation, long - term PPIs are indicated (both 
as secondary prevention and to minimise 
reﬂ ux symptoms after dilatation).  
 •  Barrett ’ s oesophagus : 
   Also known as columnar - lined oesophagus, 
this is an endoscopic or pathological 
diagnosis deﬁ ned as metaplasia of distal 
oesophageal mucosa from squamous to 
columnar epithelium. It is thought to arise as 
an adaptive response to chronic acid 
exposure; 
   Typically asymptomatic; 
   Its importance lies in the fact that it is a 
premalignant condition, with a lifetime risk 
of 10% of developing oesophageal 
adenocarcinoma. This is a cancer that is 
rapidly increasing in incidence. However, it is 
important to remember that the actual rate 
of developing cancer is low, incidence ﬁ gures 
being 1 in 200 patient years. Particularly at 
risk are:  
 –  White males; 
 –  Over 50 year olds; 
 –  The obese; 
 –  Smokers (though not alcohol misusers). 
   Diagnosis is based on mucosal appearances 
and histology; multiple biopsies should be 
taken to look for  intestinal metaplasia (a 
histological precursor of malignancy);  
   There are a range of management options: 
 Box 12.1   Causes of oesophageal stricture 
 (seen at endoscopy or barium swallow) . 
 •  Peptic ulceration secondary to GORD ( majority )  
 •  Achalasia  
 •  Schatzki ring (distal oesophageal ﬁ brotic rings)  
 •  Post - cricoid web (usually distal)  – termed 
Patterson − Kelly or Plummer − Vinson syndrome 
when present with iron - deﬁ ciency anaemia  
 •  Carcinoma of the oesophagus (or gastric cardia)  
 •  Postoperative or post - radiotherapy  
 •  Following corrosive ingestion  
 •  Eosinophilic oesophagitis (young patient)  
 •  Viral oesophagitis (immunocompromised patient)  
 •  Extrinsic compression (lung cancer, enlarged 
lymph nodes, aortic aneurysm)  

78 
Oesophagus
 •  Failure of propagation of peristalsis in the body 
of the oesophagus;  
 •  Progressive dilatation of the body of the 
oesophagus;  
 •  Failure of relaxation of the LOS; 
 •  High pressure LOS. 
 The cause is degeneration of the ganglia in the 
distal oesophagus and LOS (related to disturbed 
nitric oxide synthesis). Destruction of the mye-
nteric plexus, causing a similar clinical syndrome 
is seen with oesophageal cancer and Chagas 
disease. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 •  Dysphagia:  
    Insidious, initially intermittent;  
    For solids, eased by liquids;  
    Worse if swallowing whilst slouched.  
 •  Heartburn (may occur despite increased LOS 
pressure).  
 •  Chest pain.  
 •  Regurgitation  
 } in late stages  
 •  Pulmonary aspiration  
 } of the disease.  
 A rare complication is squamous carcinoma of 
the oesophagus.  
 Investigations 
 •  Oesophageal manometry is diagnostic (Figure 
 12.2 ): 
   Absent peristalsis (always); 
   Poor LOS relaxation (frequent); 
   High LOS pressure (occasional). 
 •  Barium swallow (tapered narrowing of distal 
oesophagus with proximal dilatation and 
aperistalsis).  
 •  Upper GI endoscopy is mandatory (to exclude 
carcinoma  ‘ pseudo - achalasia ’ ). 
 Management 
 Medical 
 •  Drugs which reduce LOS pressure (calcium 
channel antagonists, nitrates) are not usually 
clinically helpful.  
 Endoscopic 
 •  Forced pneumatic dilatation: this beneﬁ ts 80% 
of patients, but may need to be repeated. The 
perforation rate for each procedure is 1 − 2%. 
 Surgical 
 •  Laparoscopic or open fundoplication  is the 
more established  –  and more invasive  –  
method to treat refractory reﬂ ux symptoms. 
It is suitable for patients with large hiatus 
hernias. However, it is not curative ( > 60% of 
patients need to restart PPIs) and it does not 
prevent Barrett ’ s cancers. It may be more 
cost - effective than maintenance PPI use, but 
only after 8 years. Adverse effects are seen in 
up to 15% of patients: 
   Dysphagia; 
   Excess ﬂ atulence; 
   ‘ Gas - bloat ’ syndrome (inability to belch). 
 Caustic  o esophagitis 
 Corrosive  i ngestion 
 Deliberate self - harm through ingestion of bleach 
or battery acid causes acute oropharyngeal and 
oesophageal ulceration, and stricture formation in 
the chronic situation. Management is with analge-
sia, antiemetics and keeping the patient nil by 
mouth. Acutely, oesophageal perforation is the 
major risk, and endoscopy should be avoided. If 
dysphagia develops later on, endoscopic dilata-
tion of any strictures may be performed, but is 
hazardous. 
 Drug - i nduced  o esophagitis 
 NSAIDs, potassium supplements and bisphos-
phonates may cause oesophageal ulceration, 
especially if the tablets get stuck above an 
oesophageal stricture. Liquid or parenteral prepa-
rations should be considered in patients with 
known strictures. 
 Oesophageal  m otility 
 d isorders 
 Achalasia 
 This is a not uncommon oesophageal motility dis-
order that can occur at any age, but most typically 
middle age. 
 Achalasia is characterised by: 

Oesophagus 79
 •  LOS botulinum toxin injection: beneﬁ ts as 
many, but short - lived efﬁ cacy. Both procedures 
are complicated by the development of GORD, 
and so co - prescription of a PPI is needed.     
 Surgical 
 •  Heller ’ s myotomy (performed  ‘ open ’ or 
laparoscopically) is indicated in young patients 
or those requiring multiple dilatations. As with 
endoscopic procedures, reﬂ ux is common, so 
fundoplication is also often undertaken. 
 Diffuse  o esophageal  s pasm 
 This typically presents with angina - like chest pain 
(with or without dysphagia) in middle age. The 
pain is thought to be triggered by smooth muscle 
spasm in response to reﬂ ux. Oesophageal man-
ometry (see Chapter  6 ) and 24 - h pH are required 
for diagnosis. Treatment therefore depends on the 
use of a PPI. Nitrates and calcium channel antago-
nists may also relieve pain. Endoscopic dilatation 
and surgical myotomy are not often effective.  
 ‘ Nutcracker ’  o esophagus 
 Extremely high amplitude contractions can cause 
chest pain and dysphagia. Diagnosis is by man-
ometry. Treatment is with nitrates and calcium 
channel antagonists.  
 Non - s peciﬁ c  m otility  d isorders 
 A variety of manometric abnormalities are observed 
in one - third of patients (especially the elderly) with 
chest pain and dysphagia. These abnormalities 
(e.g. ineffective peristalsis, high pressure LOS, low 
pressure LOS) do not necessarily relate to symp-
toms, and no speciﬁ c treatment is indicated. 
 Systemic sclerosis  (and to a lesser extent other 
connective tissue disorders) can involve the 
oesophagus, resulting in failure of peristalsis, and 
hence dysphagia and heartburn. Long - term treat-
ment is with PPIs to prevent peptic strictures.   
 Oesophageal  t umours 
 Gastrointestinal  s tromal  t umours 
(GISTs) 
 These are rare benign lesions that are usually 
asymptomatic 
and 
observed 
at 
endoscopy 
 Figure 12.2   Stationary oesophageal manometry study 
showing simultaneous contractions in upper four traces 
and non - relaxing high pressure LOS in lower four traces. 

80 
Oesophagus
   Squamous cancers (and to a lesser extent 
adenocarcinomas) may be palliated by 
radiotherapy; 
   Provision of nutritional supplementation. 
 Prognosis 
 Overall 5 - year survival is  < 10%. If the tumour is 
operable, 5 - year survival is 30%. 
 Oesophageal  e ndoscopic 
 a bnormalities 
 Pharyngeal  p ouch 
 See Box  12.2 . Also known as Zenker ’ s diverticu-
lum. The major importance of this condition is 
that it is a potential cause of perforation at endos-
copy; if suspected, the ﬁ rst - line investigation is a 
barium swallow. pouch 
 Eosinophilic  o esophagitis 
 Eosinophilic oesophagitis is a recently described 
condition characterised by eosinophilic inﬁ ltra-
tion of the mucosal layer of the oesophagus. It can 
be due to an allergic trigger and may occur in iso-
lation or as part of a generalized eosinophilic 
gastroenteritis. 
 •  Males are affected twice as often as females. 
 •  Two age peaks at diagnosis: in children and in 
the early 30s.  
 •  Paediatric cases typically present with 
vomiting, and adults with dysphagia. 
 •  Diagnosis is based on the presence of  > 20 
eosinophils/high power ﬁ eld (hpf), since reﬂ ux 
oesophagitis is associated with up to 10 
eosinophils/hpf.  
performed for another reason. No treatment is 
required as long as they do not cause symptoms. 
 Oesophageal  c arcinoma 
 •  Adenocarcinoma : typically lower third of the 
oesophagus (see Barrett ’ s oesophagus above). 
Its incidence is increasing (5 in 100   000 in the 
UK).  
 •  Squamous carcinoma : can occur anywhere 
along oesophagus. Less common than 
adenocarcinoma in the Western world; very 
common in Iran and Far East.  Risk factors : 
smoking, alcohol, betel nut and tobacco 
chewing, achalasia, post - cricoid web, coeliac 
and post corrosive ingestion.  
 •  Small cell cancer : very rare. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 •  Painless, rapidly progressive dysphagia is 
classical.  
 •  Weight loss. 
 •  Chest pain (usually late, suggests local 
invasion).  
 •  Hoarse voice (usually late, suggests local 
invasion).  
 •  Coughing after swallowing, pneumonia or 
pleural effusion suggests oesophagobronchial 
ﬁ stula. 
 •  Acutely : bolus obstruction.  
 •  Examination may be normal until late  – look 
for cervical nodes. 
 Investigations 
 •  Upper GI endoscopy: demonstrates site and 
allows histological sampling.  
 •  Barium swallow: demonstrates length of 
stricture if the tumour could not be intubated 
at endoscopy.  
 •  CT of the thorax and abdomen: for staging. 
   •      Endoscopic ultrasound: best staging modality.     
 Management 
 •  30% have  ‘ operable ’ disease (not spread 
beyond the oesophagus):  
   Oesophagectomy; 
   Preoperative chemotherapy. 
 •  70% have inoperable disease at presentation: 
   Palliation of dysphagia by endoscopic 
stenting or laser;  
   Palliation of pain with potent analgesia; 
 Box 12.2   Features of pharyngeal pouches. 
 •  Patient: elderly, especially males  
 •  Symptoms: dysphagia, night - time cough, 
halitosis, lump in throat or gurgling after eating  
 •  Cause: inco - ordinate swallowing, results in 
herniation through cricopharyngeus  
 •  Diagnosis: barium swallow  
 •  Treatment: surgery (myotomy and pouch 
resection  

Oesophagus 81
 •  Treatment with elemental or elimination diets 
is beneﬁ cial in children.  
 •  Steroid therapy is indicated in diet - refractory 
patients, with systemic steroids more effective 
than topical.  
 •  Rarely, patients presenting with oesophageal 
strictures may need endoscopic dilatation. 
 Oesophageal  r ings and  w ebs 
 These are typically seen at radiology rather than at 
endoscopy. Schatzki ’ s ring is a circumferential 
narrowing in the mid or lower third of the oesopha-
gus, whilst oesophageal webs are not circumfer-
ential and proximal. If iron - deﬁ ciency anaemia is 
associated with an oesophageal web, the condi-
tion is known as Plummer − Vinson syndrome. 
They are usually asymptomatic. They may cause 
intermittent dysphagia to solids over many years, 
in which case dilatation is required.  
 Mallory - Weiss  t ear 
 This is a cause of  haematemesis  (see Chapter  7 ). 
It is caused by recurrent retching or forceful vom-
iting (typically after alcohol binges), resulting in a 
mucosal tear of the oesophogastric junction. The 
characteristic history is that the initial vomitus 
does not contain blood. Most cases settle sponta-
neously. Acid suppression medication and endo-
scopic therapy are only rarely necessary.     
 
  

82 
Stomach and duodenum
 Gastritis 
 Strictly speaking, this is a histological diagnosis, 
and there is poor correlation with endoscopic 
appearances. Classiﬁ cation is according to: 
 •  Type (acute, chronic, special form); 
 •  Site (antrum, body, whole stomach); 
 •  Morphology (inﬂ ammation, atrophy, 
metaplasia,  Helicobacter pylori ); 
 •  Aetiology ( H. pylori , autoimmune, alcohol, 
NSAID, post gastrectomy). 
 Features are summarised in Table  13.1 . 
 Menetrier ’ s  d isease 
 This is a rare condition presenting classically with 
weight loss and diarrhoea (due to protein - losing 
enteropathy). It is aetiologically linked to  H. pylori , 
leading to achlorhydria. Endoscopically there is 
hypertrophy of mucosal folds of the body and 
fundus. 
Histologically, 
mucus - secreting 
cells 
replace parietal cells. Treatment is to eradicate  H. 
pylori , reduce secretion (with proton pump inhib-
itors [PPIs]) and monitor endoscopically due to 
risk of gastric cancer.  
 Peptic  u lcer  d isease 
 Peptic ulcers are caused by an imbalance between 
luminal acid and mucosal defences. Hydrochloric 
 13 
Stomach and  d uodenum  
acid (pH 1) and pepsin are secreted from the 
gastric pits, but do not damage the mucosa in 
health because of a layer of overlying unstirred 
mucus. This mucus layer has bicarbonate secreted 
into it, maintaining a pH of 7. Prostaglandin and 
a good capillary blood ﬂ ow are essential for this 
mucus and bicarbonate secretion, explaining how 
NSAIDs and smoking may predispose to ulcers. 
Peptic ulcers are becoming less frequent in the 
developed world due to widespread  H. pylori 
eradication. 
 Peptic ulcers may occur in the distal oesopha-
gus, stomach, duodenum, near a Meckel ’ s 
diverticulum or any small bowel anastomosis. 
Pathologically, they are distinct from erosions 
in that they penetrate the muscularis mucosae. 
They may be acute or chronic (the latter bearing 
the 
pathological 
hallmark 
of 
submucosal 
ﬁ brosis). 
 Gastric and  d uodenal 
 u lcer 
 The differences between duodenal and gastric 
ulcers are summarised in Table  13.2 . 
 Gastric  u lcer 
 These are usually benign, but gastric adenocarci-
noma may present as an ulcer. 
 Causes 
 •  H. pylori. NSAID use (especially if also  H. pylori 
positive).  
 •  Steroid  and NSAID use. 
 •  Stress (which more often causes gastric 
erosions than ulcers). 
Lecture Notes: Gastroenterology and Hepatology, 1st edition. 
Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. 
© 2011 Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Stomach and duodenum 83
 •  Consider surgery (Bilroth partial gastrectomy) 
if there is:  
   Haemorrhage (seen in 25%); 
   Perforation (in 10%); 
   Failure to heal; 
   Gastric outlet obstruction (with prepyloric 
ulcers). 
 Duodenal  u lcer 
 Causes 
 •  H. pylori (infection of the antrum depletes 
somatostatin production, which results in 
hypergastrinaemia and hence increased acid 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 •  Simple ulcers present as described in Table 13.2. 
 •  Complications such as haematemesis or 
perforation are commoner in the elderly.     
 Management 
 •  Eradication of  H. pylori  (or 50% will recur) and 
4 weeks of PPI (preferred to H 2 receptor 
antagonists).  
 •  Smoking cessation and alcohol moderation 
advice. 
 •  Stop NSAIDs if possible. 
 •  Maintenance PPI is indicated if there is major 
comorbidity or presentation with bleeding.  
 Table 13.1   Features of gastritides. 
 
  Acute gastritis  
  Chronic gastritis  
  Special forms  
 Aetiology  
  NSAIDs 
 Alcohol 
 Other drugs 
 Stress (burns, ITU 
patients) 
 Bile reﬂ ux 
(post - gastrectomy) 
 H. pylori  
 Infections (CMV or 
HSV)  
 •  H. pylori  (commonest by far)  
 •  Autoimmune 
 Infections (CMV, 
TB) 
 Crohn ’ s disease 
 Systemic disease 
(sarcoid, 
GVHD) 
 Granulomatous 
gastritis  
 Presentation 
  
 H. pylori  
 Autoimmune  
 
 
  Asymptomatic usually 
 Rarely dyspepsia, 
anorexia, retching, 
haematemesis  
 Asymptomatic 
usually  
 Asymptomatic usually  
  Asymptomatic 
usually  
 Site  
  Anywhere in stomach  
  Antral usually  
  Body usually  
  Anywhere  – can 
be focal or 
whole stomach  
 Histology  
  Neutrophil inﬁ ltrate  
  Lymphocyte and 
plasma cell 
inﬁ ltrate  
 Diffuse inﬂ ammation, 
atrophy, intestinal 
metaplasia  
 Depends on 
cause  
 Other 
features  
 −  
  Antral predisposes 
to duodenal ulcer, 
 body predisposes 
to gastric ulcer 
( H. pylori ) 
 May cause mucosal 
erosions ( ‘ erosive 
gastritis ’ )  
 Circulating antibodies 
to parietal cells 
 With severe atrophy 
there is 
achlorhydria and 
 loss of intrinsic factor 
leading to 
pernicious anaemia  
 −  
 Cancer risk  
  −  
  Increased risk  
  Increased risk  
  −  
 Treatment  
  Treat cause 
 Antacids 
 Acid suppression 
 Antiemetics  
 H. pylori  eradication  
 Correct anaemia 
 Look for other 
autoimmune 
disease  
 Treat cause  

84 
Stomach and duodenum
 •  Acute presentation (see Chapter  1 ) with severe 
upper abdominal pain, rapidly becoming 
generalised.  
 •  Rigid, silent abdomen. 
 •  Free air under diaphragm on upright chest 
X - ray; if not seen, water - soluble contrast 
examination will show abnormality.  
 •  Resuscitation and surgery (over - sew of defect 
or resection). 
 •  25% mortality. 
 Gastric  o utlet  o bstruction 
 •  May occur with pyloric gastric ulcers, or 
proximal cap duodenal ulcers. 
 •  May also be caused by gastric antral 
carcinoma, adult hypertrophic pyloric stenosis.  
 •  Vomiting of  ‘ old ’ food, abdominal distension. 
 •  Succussion splash, visible gastric peristalsis 
and dehydration. 
 •  Hypokalaemic alkalosis (due to luminal loss of 
K  +  and acid). 
 •  Endoscopic diagnosis after stomach content 
has been aspirated by a nasogastric tube.  
 •  Initial management is  ‘ drip and suck ’  – 
intravenous rehydration and nasogastric 
aspiration.  
 •  Later management is with balloon dilatation 
(if possible) or surgical resection/
gastroenterostomy. 
secretion, which in turn results in gastric 
metaplasia of the duodenum and ulceration).  
 •  NSAID use (especially if also  H. pylori 
positive).  
 •  Smoking. 
 •  Stress (especially with chronic illness  – renal 
failure, cirrhosis). 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 •  Simple ulcers present as described in Table 
13.2.  
 •  Perforation as a complication is commoner 
than with gastric ulcer. 
 Management 
 •  Eradication of  H. pylori   –  routine use of 
PPI is only indicated if there is haemorrhage 
or recurrence of ulcer symptoms after 
eradication. 
 •  Smoking cessation and alcohol moderation 
advice. Stop ulcerogenic drugs (NSAIDs, 
bisphosphonates) if possible. 
 Complications 
 Perforation 
 •  Especially with acute ulcers and NSAID -
 associated ulcers. 
 Table 13.2   Features differentiating gastric and duodenal peptic ulcers. 
 
  
  Gastric  
  Duodenal  
 Pathophysiology 
  Acid secretion  
 
  Normal  
 Increased  
 Epidemiology 
  Age 
  Male:female  
 
  Elderly especially 
 2:1  
 Under 40 year olds 
especially 
 4:1  
 Clinical 
  Epigastric pain 
  Vomiting 
  Other symptoms  
 
  Soon after eating, relieved by 
antacids 
 Not uncommon 
 Loss of appetite and weight common  
 Nocturnal and hunger pain 
 Rare, only with proximal cap 
ulcers 
 No loss of appetite or weight 
 Endoscopy 
  Necessity 
  Biopsy  
 
 Diagnosis  and repeat to check 
healing at 8 − 12 weeks 
 Edge of ulcer to exclude malignancy  
 Diagnosis only 
 Antral biopsy for  H. pylori  
 Treatment 
  Simple ulcer 
  Ulcer presenting 
with GI bleed  
 
 H. pylori  eradication if infection 
present. Add 4 weeks PPI 
 Get surgical opinion  
 H. pylori  eradication only 
 Add 4 weeks PPI  

Stomach and duodenum 85
 Gastric  c arcinoma 
 This is the commonest cause of cancer death 
worldwide (especially in China and Japan), but is 
falling in incidence in the UK. It occurs more often 
in men and those over 50 years old. 
 Causes 
 •  Chronic  H. pylori infection (especially the cagA 
strain) is probably responsible for two - thirds of 
cases. 
 •  Familial: blood group A is associated, and there 
are rare gastric cancer families. 
 •  Genetic (rare polyposis syndromes  – familial 
adenomatous polyposis, Peutz − Jegher ’ s 
syndrome). 
 •  Diet containing  N - nitrosamines (pickled or 
smoked foods), diets low in fruit and vegetables.  
 •  Environmental factors such as smoking and 
alcohol.  
 •  Rarely, organic disorders: Menetrier ’ s disease, 
previous partial gastrectomy. 
 Pathology 
 Adenocarcinoma develops from regions of intes-
tinal metaplasia in the stomach, which themselves 
develop secondary to chronic atrophic gastritis. 
The spectrum of pathology ranges from polypoid 
lesions to diffuse inﬁ ltration ( linitis plastica ). The 
term  early gastric cancer  refers to adenocarcinoma 
conﬁ ned to the mucosa or submucosa. It is diag-
nosed, and can often be cured, endoscopically.  
 Clinical  f eatures 
 •  Epigastric pain (non - speciﬁ c, unrelated to 
meals and relieved by acid suppressants), loss 
of appetite and weight are common.  
 •  Haematemesis is rare and physical signs are 
rare except in late disease. 
 •  A supraclavicular lymph node ( Troisier ’ s sign ) 
and migratory thrombophlebitis ( Trousseau ’ s 
sign ) are rare but classical signs. 
 Investigations 
 •  Condition : endoscopy  – rolled irregular - edged 
ulcers (biopsy the edges)  
 •  Complications  =  staging: FBC and LFTs, chest 
X - ray, abdominal CT and endoscopic 
ultrasound; laparoscopy is often required 
 Zollinger - Ellison 
 s yndrome 
 Rare disorder with the triad of: 
 •  Severe (i.e. multiple or complicated) or 
recurrent peptic ulceration (may be throughout 
upper gut);  
 •  Increased gastric acid secretion; 
 •  Hypergastrinaemia due to secretion from a 
non - beta cell islet pancreatic tumour.    
 Diarrhoea and steatorrhoea often occur (due 
to acid destruction of lipase). 60% of tumours 
are malignant (albeit slow growing), 50% are mul-
tiple and 25% have other endocrine tumours (part 
of a multiple endocrine neoplasia type I). 
 Investigations 
 •  Condition : 
   Gastric acid secretion: grossly elevated at 
baseline with little increment following 
intravenous pentagastrin; 
   Serum gastrin: grossly elevated. 
 •  Cause : locate tumour by endoscopic 
ultrasound or Octreoscan (radiolabelled 
somatostatin receptor scan). 
 Management 
 •  30% resectable (small, single, localisable). 
 •  Lifelong PPI in high doses. 
 •  Octreotide (a somatostatin analogue) may 
help. 
 Gastroparesis 
 This refers to delayed gastric emptying without 
mechanical obstruction. It may occur as a primary 
(idiopathic) condition, but may be secondary to 
autonomic neuropathy (especially secondary 
to diabetes) or gastroduodenal myopathy (sys-
temic sclerosis, amyloidosis). Early satiety, recur-
rent vomiting, abdominal bloating and distension 
are characteristic. Peripherally - acting antiemetics 
(metoclopramide, domperidone) may help, as 
may erythromycin (as a motilin analogue). If mal-
nutrition 
develops, 
jejunostomy 
feeding 
or 
parenteral nutrition is indicated. Rarely, surgical 
enterostomy may be needed.  

86 
Stomach and duodenum
strains. These are histologically distinct, with 
lympho - epithelial lesions and reactive lymphoid 
follicles.  H. pylori  eradication leads to remission 
in 75%. Endoscopic mucosal resection, chemora-
diotherapy and resectional surgery are only rarely 
needed. Long - term follow - up with endoscopy is 
required. 
 Other  g astric  t umours 
 Gastrointestinal  s tromal  t umours 
( GIST s ) 
 These arise from the interstitial cells of Cajal, 
and their origin can be identiﬁ ed immunohisto-
chemically by expression of the  c - kit oncogene, 
which encodes the tyrosine kinase receptor. 
GISTs originate from the muscularis propria 
and submucosa. They are often found coinciden-
tally at endoscopy, but may ulcerate and bleed. 
Tumour size, mitotic rate and presence of the  c - kit 
oncogene predict malignant potential. Resection 
and chemoradiotherapy are traditional treat-
ments. Recently, an antibody directed at the 
tyrosine kinase receptor has been used in malig-
nant GISTs. 
 Gastric  p olyps 
 Hyperplastic or cystic fundal polyps are lesions of 
no clinical signiﬁ cance, whose only signiﬁ cance is 
to be differentiated from early gastric cancer. 
Rarely, adenomatous polyps are found. They 
are premalignant and associated with colonic 
polyps; they need resection and colonoscopic 
examination. 
  
 Management 
 •  Surgery : resection is only possible in a minority 
of cases, and most surgery is palliative.  
 •  Chemotherapy : postoperatively this may 
improve survival, and can also be used 
palliatively. 
 Prognosis 
 Whilst the prognosis for early gastric cancer is 
good (90% 5 - year survival), overall the outlook is 
dismal (10% 5 - year survival). Prognosis would be 
improved by improved public awareness and 
early diagnosis. 
 Gastric  l ymphoma 
 The stomach is the commonest site for non - nodal 
non - Hodgkin ’ s lymphoma. 
 Primary  g astric  l ymphoma 
 This affects mostly males over 50 and relative risk 
is increased in patients with AIDS. These are 
B - cell tumours, most of which are aggressive 
large - cell lymphomas, with a minority being low -
 grade 
mucosal 
associated 
lymphoid 
tissue 
tumours ( ‘ MALT lymphomas ’ ). Clinical and endo-
scopic features are similar to gastric adenocarci-
noma. Diagnosis rests on histology, from deep 
mucosal biopsies or laparoscopy. Endoscopic 
ultrasound and abdominal CT help with staging. 
Early disease is managed surgically, later disease 
by chemoradiotherapy.  
 MALT  l ymphoma 
 This is a B - cell tumour caused by an immune 
response to chronic  H. pylori  infection with cagA 

 Malabsorption 
 Mechanisms 
 •  Structural disorder (pancreas, small bowel, 
biliary tree).  
 •  Mucosal disorder (pancreas, small bowel, 
biliary tree).  
 •  Abnormal luminal digestion (metabolic defect). 
 Metabolic defects are unusual in causing isolated 
defects, whereas most other defects cause com-
bined deﬁ ciencies (macronutrients  –   carbohy-
drate, fat, protein , or micronutrients  –   vitamins, 
minerals ). 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 •  General : 
   Malaise; 
   Anorexia, abdominal bloating; 
   Diarrhoea (especially stool bulk rather than 
frequency  cf  colonic disease);  
   Weight loss (document BMI). 
 •  Speciﬁ c : 
   Steatorrhoea  =  fat malabsorption (more 
severe in pancreatic disease than small 
bowel disease);  
   Oedema, ascites  =  protein malabsorption; 
   Paraesthesiae, tetany  =  Ca 2 +   or  Mg 2 +  
malabsorption;  
   Skin rash  =  Zn 2 +   or  vitamin B malabsorption; 
   Cheilitis, glossitis  =  vitamin B malabsorption; 
 14 
Small  i ntestine  
   Neuropathy, psychological effects  =  vitamin 
B 12 malabsorption; 
   Night blindness  =  vitamin A malabsorption; 
   Bruising  =  vitamin K or  vitamin C 
malabsorption;  
   Bone pain, myopathy, osteoporosis  =  vitamin 
D malabsorption. 
 Investigations 
 Table  14.1  is an  aide memoire  to investigating the 
patient with suspected malabsorption. The inten-
tion is to: 
 •  Establish the condition; 
 •  Identify site of abnormality; 
 •  Identify severity. 
 Intestinal  f ailure 
 Sometimes called  short bowel syndrome , this 
situation occurs when there is insufﬁ cient func-
tioning small intestine to allow normal digestion 
and absorption. Typically, when there is    <  100  cm 
of small bowel, malabsorption will occur (result-
ing in malnutrition and weight loss, as above); 
when the colon is also missing, severe dehydration 
and malabsorption occur. The stomach and intes-
tine produce about 6  l of secretions, so reabsorp-
tion of this ﬂ uid is critical in intestinal failure. 
 Causes 
 •  Extensive surgery. 
 •  Crohn ’ s disease. 
 •  Mesenteric ischaemia. 
 •  Radiation damage. 
 •  Volvulus. 
 •  In children , congenital abnormalities. 
Lecture Notes: Gastroenterology and Hepatology, 1st edition. 
Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. 
© 2011 Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

88 
Small intestine
 Management 
 •  Short - term : 
   Correct malnutrition (total parenteral 
nutrition);  
   Reduce gut secretions (loperamide, codeine 
and PPI). 
 •  Medium - term : 
   Gradual reintroduction of enteral feeding. 
 •  Long - term : 
   Monitor nutrition and ensure adequate 
calorie intake;  
   Monitor hydration status  – especially if 
stoma output    >  1.5  l  – and replace with oral 
rehydration solution;  
   Replace vitamins (B 12 , D) and minerals (Ca 2 +  , 
Mg 2 +  ); 
   Reduce gut secretions (loperamide, codeine 
and PPI; rarely octreotide);  
   Treat small intestinal bacterial overgrowth 
 (see p. 90) ; 
   Cholecystectomy if gallstones develop 
(greater risk due to bile acid depletion  (see 
p. 122) ; 
   Small bowel transplantation (in very rare 
situations). 
 Table 14.1   Potential investigations in patients with malabsorption. (malabsorption factor being 
assessed, if not obvious, given in parentheses). 
 
 Condition  
  Cause  
 Serology  
  Full blood count 
 Folate, B 12 , iron studies 
 INR (vitamin K) 
 Albumin 
 Ca 2 +  , Mg 2 +  
 Coeliac antibodies 
 Amylase is  not a useful test of chronic 
pancreatitis  *  
 HIV antibody  
 Structural  
  
  Duodenal biopsy (see Box  14.1 ) 
 Jejunal aspirate for  Giardia  *  
 Barium follow - through (to identify Crohn ’ s 
disease, diverticula, stricture, tumours) 
 Radiolabelled white cell scan (to identify 
Crohn ’ s) 
 Capsule endoscopy (to identify Crohn ’ s 
disease, lymphangiectasia  *  ) 
 ERCP or MRCP (to identify chronic pancreatitis)  
 Functional 
  Faecal elastase (fat)    −  pancreas 
 Xylose absorption 
(carbohydrate)    −  small bowel  *  
 3. Faecal radioactivity after  131 I - albumin 
(protein)  – small bowel  *  
 Lactose hydrogen breath test  – small bowel 
 Glucose hydrogen breath test  – small bowel 
bacterial overgrowth 
 Schilling test  – to detect small bowel disease  *  
 Basal acid output to identify Zollinger − Ellison  *  
 * Rarely performed test.  
 Coeliac  d isease 
 This is an immune - mediated disorder resulting in 
 small intestinal villous atrophy , which  resolves on 
gluten withdrawal from the diet . 
 Gluten is a family of proteins found in cereals 
(but not rice or oats), and the main toxic antigenic 
component of gluten is  α - gliadin. This protein 
causes a T - cell - mediated inﬂ ammatory response 
of the small bowel. Prevalence in the UK is about 
1:200 (least common in blacks and orientals), with 
a slight female preponderance. Estimates suggest 
that about 50% of cases are  ‘ silent ’ (diagnosed on 
routine testing). 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 •  Infants : 
   Diarrhoea; 
   Malabsorption; 
   Failure to thrive at weaning time. 
 •  Older children : 
   Abdominal pain; 
   Anaemia; 

Small intestine 89
false negative if patient has selective IgA 
deﬁ ciency). These are valuable  screening tests 
and help  monitor treatment response. 
 •  Look for consequences ( complications ): 
   FBC (micro - or macro - cytic anaemia) and 
blood ﬁ lm (features of hyposplenism  =  target 
cells, Howell − Jolly bodies); 
   Haematinincs (low folate, B 12 , iron status); 
   Clotting screen (vitamin K malabsorption); 
   Bone investigation (potentially low Ca 2 +  , 
vitamin D and albumin; osteopaenia on 
DEXA bone scan). 
 •  Supportive factors : rarely needed 
( coincidences ): 
   Liver enzymes (elevated transaminases); 
   Small bowel radiology (altered mucosal 
appearances, clumping of contrast); 
   Intestinal permeability (increased); 
   Faecal fat (increased due to fat 
malabsorption). 
 Management 
 •  Lifelong gluten - free diet (supported by 
dietician): this prevents the ongoing antigen 
provocation of the inﬂ ammatory response. 
 •  Correct deﬁ ciencies (haematinics, vitamins 
and minerals). 
 •  Aggressive management of any bone disease. 
   •      If patient remains refractory:  
   Check compliance with diet; if compliant, 
consider immunosuppression;  
   Consider co - morbidity: giardiasis, lactase 
deﬁ ciency, microscopic colitis  (see p. 99) , IBS 
 (see p. 100) ; 
   Consider complications: small intestinal 
bacterial overgrowth (common;  see p. 90 ), 
small intestine T - cell lymphoma (rare;  see p. 
92 ), ulcerative jejunitis (very rare). 
 Tropical  s prue 
 This extremely rare condition is associated with 
small intestine villous atrophy and is thought to 
be post - infectious. It affects primarily residents of 
(rather than travellers to) tropical countries. 
Diarrhoea and abdominal distension are common, 
and malabsorption may occur, especially if there 
is concomitant bacterial overgrowth. The main 
differential is giardiasis. Treatment is with long -
 term tetracycline and folic acid. 
   Short stature; 
   Delayed puberty. 
 •  Adults : 
   Abdominal bloating; 
   Lethargy; 
   Diarrhoea or constipation; 
   Iron - deﬁ ciency anaemia; 
   Occasionally malabsorption; 
   Rarely oral ulcers and psychiatric disturbance. 
 Coeliac disease is linked to HLA - DQ2, so is often 
associated with other autoimmune diseases 
(most commonly dermatitis herpetiformis [itchy 
blistering rash on extensor surfaces], insulin -
 dependent diabetes, thyroid disease, primary 
biliary cirrhosis [see Chapter  19 ], Sj ö gren ’ s 
syndrome).  
 Investigations 
 •  Conﬁ rm diagnosis ( condition ): 
   Duodenal biopsy  –  gold standard for 
diagnosis   –  villous atrophy (Box  14.1 )  and 
crypt hyperplasia  and intraepithelial 
lymphocytosis (IEL; although seen in as 
many as 2% of routine small bowel biopsies, 
is present in 40% of coeliac patients);  
   IgA antibodies to tissue transglutaminase 
(TTG), endomysial and gliadin antigen ( Note : 
 Box 14.1   Causes of villous atrophy. 
 Common  
 •  Coeliac disease  
 •  Dermatitis herpetiformis  
 •  Giardiasis  
 •  Acute infectious enteritis  
 •  Bacterial overgrowth  
 Rare  
 •  Lymphoma  
 •  AIDS enteropathy  
 •  Tropical sprue  
 •  Hypogammaglobulinaemia  
 •  Radiation enteropathy  
 •  Whipple ’ s disease  
 •  NSAID enteropathy  
 •  Lactose intolerance  
 •  Zollinger − Ellison syndrome  

90 
Small intestine
 •  Replace vitamin B 12 . 
 •  Deﬁ nitive treatment if possible  – surgery for 
structural abnormalities, prokinetics for 
motility disorders. 
 Bile  a cid  m alabsorption 
 A condition characterised by postprandial diar-
rhoea due to: 
 •  Osmotic effect of bile salts in the colon; 
 •  Steatorrhoea. 
 Bile acid malabsorption may be a primary 
abnormality, or if secondary, is most commonly 
due to Crohn ’ s disease, ileal resection and intesti-
nal failure. 
 A positive diagnosis depends on identifying 
reduced retention after administration of Se -
 HCAT (a synthetic radiolabelled bile acid ana-
logue). Treatment is with cholestyramine, a bile 
acid sequestrant. 
 Whipple ’ s  d isease 
 A rare disease characterised by malabsorption  (see 
p. 87) , a seronegative large - joint arthropathy, skin 
pigmentation, ﬁ nger clubbing and fevers. It espe-
cially affects men. 
 Small  i ntestinal  b acterial 
 o vergrowth 
 Colonisation of the small intestine by colonic ﬂ ora 
results in their: 
 •  Deconjugating bile salts (resulting in 
diarrhoea);  
 •  Metabolising vitamin B 12 (resulting in anaemia); 
 •  Metabolising carbohydrate (resulting in calorie 
malnutrition and halitosis).    
 Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth almost 
always occurs secondary to another cause 
(Table  14.2 ). 
 Investigations 
 •  Condition : 
   Jejunal aspirate  – gold standard, but rarely 
required; 
   Hydrogen breath test after ingesting glucose 
or lactulose. 
 •  Cause : small bowel radiology (to identify 
structural or communication abnormalities).  
 •  Complications :  −  low B 12 and normal folate. 
 Management 
 •  Antibiotics directed towards colonic ﬂ ora 
 – may need repeated courses.  
 Table 14.2   Causes of small bowel bacterial overgrowth. 
 Site  
  Mechanism  
  Clinical condition  
 Stomach  
  Reduced gastric acidity  
  Gastric atrophy 
 Partial gastrectomy 
 Long - term PPI usage 
 Old age  
 Small intestine  
  Structural abnormality  
  Small intestine diverticulosis 
 Post Bilroth II surgery ( ‘ blind loop 
syndrome ’ ) 
 Strictures (Crohn ’ s disease)  
 
  Abnormal communication between 
proximal and distal gut  
 Enterocolic ﬁ stula 
 Ileocolonic resection  
 
  Impaired motility  
  Systemic sclerosis 
 Diabetic autonomic neuropathy 
 Chronic intestinal pseudo - obstruction 
 
  Altered immune function  
  Immunodeﬁ ciency syndromes  
 Miscellaneous 
  
  Liver cirrhosis 
 Chronic pancreatitis  

Small intestine 91
 Small  i ntestine  t umours 
 These are rare, accounting for    <  5% of all GI 
tumours. Carcinoid and lymphoma are the two 
most important. 
 Carcinoid  t umours 
 Carcinoid tumours are slow growing, and arise 
from the appendix (45%), small intestine (30%) 
or rectum (20%).  Carcinoid syndrome occurs 
only if the tumour metastasises, occurring in 
2% of cases with tumours    >  2  cm in size. The 
carcinoid syndrome (Box  14.2 ) is caused by sys-
temic release of serotonin, prostaglandins and 
bradykinins. 
 Diagnosis is made by measuring urinary 5 - HIAA 
(a serotonin metabolite), although many tumours 
are detected incidentally at appendicectomy. 
Carcinoid tumours need surgical resection; 
carcinoid treatment implies hepatic metastases 
have occurred. Hepatic resection or arterial 
embolisation reduce metastatic mass of tumour 
and improve symptoms. Octreotide (a synthetic 
 Diagnosis is established by identifying  ‘ foamy ’ 
macrophages which stain positive with periodic 
acid - Schiff (PAS) on jejunal biopsy. Electron 
microscopy may show the pathogenic actinomyc-
ete  Tropheryma whippelii . Treatment is with co -
 trimoxazole or tetracycline for 1 year. One - third of 
patients relapse.  
 Protein -  l osing 
 e nteropathy 
 This is deﬁ ned as gut loss of protein sufﬁ cient to 
reduce serum albumin. Patients therefore present 
with oedema in the absence of proteinuria or signs 
of heart failure,and in the presence of normal 
LFTs. Investigation is towards identifying the con-
dition (faecal  α - antitrypsin) and the potential 
cause (Table  14.3 ). 
 Intestinal  i nfections 
 See Chapter  5 . 
 Table 14.3   Conditions causing protein - losing enteropathy. 
 Mechanism  
  Site  
  Clinical condition  
  Comments  
 Mucosa intact  
  Stomach  
  Menetrier ’ s disease  
  See p. 82  
 
 Small 
intestine  
 Bacterial overgrowth 
 Coeliac disease 
 Eosinophilic 
gastroenteritis  
 See p. 90  
 See p. 88  
 Peripheral blood and mucosal/serosal 
eosinophilia in absence of parasite infection 
 Treat with prednisolone or mast cell stabiliser 
(Na cromoglicate)  
 Mucosal 
ulcerated  
 Stomach  
  Cancer  
  See p. 85  
 Small 
intestine  
 Cancer or 
lymphoma 
 Crohn ’ s disease 
 Radiation enteritis  
  See p. 91  
 See p. 95  
 
 Colon  
  Ulcerative colitis  
  See p. 94  
 Lymphatic 
obstruction  
 Small 
intestine  
 Intestinal 
lymphangiectasia 
 Lymphoma 
 Whipple ’ s disease 
 Constrictive 
pericarditis  
 Primary (congenital) or secondary (lymphatic 
obstruction) 
 Treat with low - fat diet and medium - chain 
triglycerides 
 See p. 90  
 Causes back pressure on lymph vessels  

92 
Small intestine
 globulinaemia. Treatment is with long - term anti-
biotics, with only a minority of patients needing 
chemotherapy. 
 Polyps 
 •  Single polyps : extremely rare, often malignant. 
May be secondaries from melanoma or lung. 
 •  Multiple polyps : commoner. They are either: 
   Nodular lymphoid hyperplasia (in children, 
with hypo -  γ - globulinaemia); 
   Hamartomas (Peutz − Jeghers syndrome, with 
labial pigmentation and intussusception);  
   Adenomatous (Cronkhite − Canada syndrome, 
with alopecia and nail dystrophy). 
 Adenocarcinoma 
 This is exceptionally rare, but may be associated 
with coeliac disease, Crohn ’ s disease, Gardner ’ s 
syndrome or familial adenomatous polyposis. It 
usually presents with obstruction or chronic blood 
loss, and surgical resection is the deﬁ nitive 
treatment. 
 Miscellaneous  i ntestinal 
 d isorders 
 Chronic  i ntestinal 
 p seudo - o bstruction 
 This term refers to a spectrum of rare disorders 
characterised by the signs and symptoms of intes-
tinal obstruction in the absence of true obstruc-
tion. It is caused by pathology of either gut smooth 
muscle ( ‘ visceral myopathy ’ ) or nerves ( ‘ visceral 
neuropathy ’ ) (Table  14.4 ).   
 In the early stages vomiting, abdominal disten-
sion and constipation occur episodically, with no 
symptoms between acute episodes. With disease 
progression, symptoms become more chronic 
and weight loss and malnutrition develop. 
Myopathic forms are commonly associated with 
urinary tract symptoms. The diagnosis requires 
radiological demonstration of a dilated proximal 
small bowel. Laparoscopic full - thickness biopsies 
of the small bowel conﬁ rm both the diagnosis and 
whether it is myopathic or neuropathic in origin. 
 Management comprises symptom relief during 
acute episodes, care being taken to avoid inducing 
opiate dependence. In the long - term parenteral 
somatostatin analogue) may help palliate symp-
toms if debulking is not possible.  
 Lymphoma 
 These are rare tumours, but may complicate: 
 •  Poorly managed coeliac disease (T - cell  >  B - cell 
tumours);  
 •  AIDS and immunodeﬁ ciency states (B - cell  >  T -
 cell tumours). 
 Presentation is most commonly with obstruc-
tive symptoms, though haemorrhage or perfora-
tion may occur. Weight loss is common, but 
malabsorption syndromes are unusual. Abdominal 
CT scanning is usually diagnostic (luminal imaging 
is rarely required), and staging laparotomies are 
often required to decide treatment. Surgical resec-
tion is the treatment of choice, occasionally com-
plemented with chemoradiotherapy.  
 Immunoproliferative  s mall 
 i ntestinal  d isease 
 A rare condition, also known as alpha heavy chain 
disease, this affects especially Mediterranean and 
Arab races. There is proliferation, ranging in sever-
ity from benign proliferation to malignant trans-
formation, 
of 
IgA - producing 
small 
bowel 
immunocytes (in response to chronic bacterial 
antigen stimulation). There is a dense, diffuse 
proximal small bowel inﬁ ltration. Patients present 
typically as young adults with diarrhoea, malab-
sorption, clubbing and weight loss (differential 
diagnosis 
includes 
Crohn ’ s 
and 
Whipple ’ s 
disease). Serum electrophoresis shows  α - heavy 
chains (the F c portion of IgA) and hypo - γ -
 Box 14.2   Clinical features of carcinoid 
syndrome. 
 History  
 •  Flushing (provoked by alcohol and food)  
 •  Diarrhoea  
 •  Wheezing  
 Examination  
 •  Facial telangiectasia  
 •  Hepatomegaly  
 •  Tricuspid and pulmonary valve stenosis  

Small intestine 93
 Lactase  d eﬁ ciency 
 Brush border lactase digests lactose in milk to 
create glucose and galactose. Whereas Caucasians 
are very rarely deﬁ cient of the enzyme, 90% of 
Africans and Asians have hypolactasia. Secondary 
lactase deﬁ ciency may occur following gastroen-
teritides and if undigested lactose enters the 
colon, it becomes a substrate for colonic bacterial 
fermentation, causing an osmotic diarrhoea, ﬂ at-
ulence, abdominal pain and borborygmi after 
eating milk products. Diagnosis is with a lactose 
substrate hydrogen breath test  (see p. 49) , and 
treatment is by minimising (not necessarily abso-
lutely avoiding) milk products. Commercially 
available lactase may be added to the diet. 
 Food  a llergy 
 5% of children (cow ’ s milk and soya especially) 
and 1% of adults (peanuts and shellﬁ sh especially) 
experience immune - mediated reactions to par-
ticular foods. Typically this is a type I hypersensi-
tivity reaction and there is an instantaneous 
reaction on ingestion, which may be unpleasant 
but self - resolving. Rarely, there is a life - threatening 
anaphylaxis. Skin - prick tests and assay of serum 
IgE levels are not helpful in diagnosis, which rests 
on double - blind placebo - controlled food chal-
lenge. Treatment is by appropriate dietary avoid-
ance and anaphylaxis may require constant 
availability of an epinephrine syringe. 
 NSAID - a ssociated  e nteropathy 
 NSAID - induced erosions, ulcers, webs and stric-
tures of the small bowel occur more often than 
NSAID gastropathy. These mucosal changes may 
result in bleeding and protein loss. While many of 
these are mild, the serious events (major haemor-
rhage, perforation, obstruction and sudden death) 
occur as often as that reported for NSAID gastrop-
athy. The diagnosis of NSAID enteropathy has 
been greatly aided by the introduction of capsule 
enteroscopy. 
 
  
nutrition is often required and surgery should be 
avoided. 
 Meckel ’ s  d iverticulum 
 This affects approximately 2% of the population, 
but is symptomatic in only 2% of those individu-
als. It is the commonest congenital gut abnormal-
ity, resulting from failure to close the vitelline 
duct. It is typically 60   cm (2 feet) proximal to 
the ileo - caecal valve and 5   cm (2 inches) long. If 
symptomatic, patients present before age 2, and 
males are twice as likely to be affected. 
Histologically, the mucosa is either gastric or 
pancreatic. 
 The classic symptoms are of painless melaena, 
with intestinal obstruction or intussusception 
being rare. Diagnosis is by a Meckel ’ s scan 
(injecting a radioisotope which is taken up ectopic 
parietal 
cells). 
Surgical 
removal 
is 
rarely 
necessary. 
 Table 14.4   Classiﬁ cation of chronic intestinal 
pseudo - obstruction. Those in bold have 
myopathic causation; others have 
neuropathic causation. 
 Primary  
  Secondary  
 Familial 
visceral 
myopathy  
 Inﬁ ltrative  – sarcoid, amyloid  
 Familial visceral 
neuropathy  
 Myopathic  – mitochondrial 
disorders  
 
  Myenteric plexitis  – inﬂ ammatory  
 
 Myenteric plexitis  –  
paraneoplastic (small cell lung 
cancer)  
 
 CNS  – disorders (Parkinson ’ s, 
autonomic failure)  
 
 Endocrine  – hypothyroidism, 
porphyria  

94 
Small and large bowel disorders 
 Inﬂ ammatory  b owel 
 d iseases ( IBD s ) 
 These are a family of related diseases, which follow 
a relapsing and remitting course. They share the 
pathological hallmark of chronic inﬂ ammation, 
with environmental, genetic and immunological 
factors interacting to cause these diseases. The 
two major members of the family are Crohn ’ s 
disease and ulcerative colitis. 
 Aetiology 
 Genetic  f actors 
 Twin studies have pointed to a  genetic predisposi-
tion  in a subset of IBD patients, speciﬁ cally 
Crohn ’ s disease (concordance  ∼ 50%, compared to 
 ∼ 10% for ulcerative colitis). In particular, the 
 CARD15/NOD2 gene  on chromosome 16 is linked 
to the development of Crohn ’ s disease, probably 
by altering the way bacterial antigens are pre-
sented to the ileal mucosa. The disease is more 
common in Ashkenazi Jews and second - generation 
Asians in developed countries.  
 Environmental  f actors 
 The greatest prevalence of IBD is in developed 
countries, speciﬁ cally where there is improved 
 sanitation . It has been hypothesised that exposure 
to unhygienic conditions in early years can result 
 15 
Small and  l arge 
 b owel  d isorders  
in the development of intestinal immune defence 
mechanisms. S moking  is another important 
factor, and curiously has contrasting effects in 
Crohn ’ s disease and ulcerative colitis: increasing 
the risk of relapse in Crohn ’ s and reducing the risk 
in ulcerative colitis. 
 Immunological  f actors 
 Recent evidence points to the role of the host bac-
terial environment in exerting a protective or 
stimulatory effect on the mucosal inﬂ ammation in 
IBD. This bacterial proﬁ le depends on early life 
factors (breast feeding, sanitation).   
 Epidemiology 
 The incidence of Crohn ’ s disease, which is increas-
ing, is  ∼ 7 in 100  000 in the developed world, with a 
prevalence of  ∼ 70 in 100  000. Unlike Crohn ’ s, the 
incidence of ulcerative colitis is stable in the 
developed world, at  ∼ 12 in 100   000 with a preva-
lence of  ∼ 120 in 100   000. Both diseases show two 
age peaks, one in the third and fourth decades and 
the other in the sixth and seventh.  
 Pathogenesis 
 The gut tissue damage results from the interplay 
of circulating and gut immune cells (lymphocytes 
and neutrophils) and non - immune cells (mast 
cells and ﬁ broblasts). It is clear that dietary anti-
gens and host bacteria play a key initiating role in 
this inﬂ ammatory process. The antigens are taken 
up through breaches in the mucosa and special-
ised antigen - presenting cells (APCs) liberate a 
variety of pro - inﬂ ammatory cytokines, such as 
tumour 
necrosis 
factor -  α 
(TNF - α 
and 
Lecture Notes: Gastroenterology and Hepatology, 1st edition. 
Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. 
© 2011 Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Small and large bowel disorders  95
mately 40% have an  ‘ extensive colitis ’ , which does 
not involve the whole colon but extends proximal 
to the sigmoid. Only the colonic mucosa is 
involved, and the inﬂ ammation is conﬁ ned to 
the mucosa. Histologically, there is inﬂ amma-
tion with  acute and chronic inﬂ ammatory cells 
and  crypt abscesses . Increased dysplasia with 
chronic inﬂ ammation predisposes to colorectal 
carcinoma. 
 About 35% of patients develop extraintestinal 
manifestations of IBD, and some (but not all) of 
these relate to the activity of disease in the gut 
(Table  15.1 ). HLA - B27 positivity predisposes to 
joint manifestations. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Crohn ’ s  d isease 
 Characterised by  abdominal pain  and  diarrhoea , 
but speciﬁ c symptoms depend on the  region  of gut 
involved. 
 •  Ileal Crohn ’ s may cause small bowel 
obstruction and an inﬂ ammatory mass or 
abscess, resulting in abdominal pain 
(commonly post - prandial). This results in 
anorexia and coupled with non - bloody 
diarrhoea, weight loss is common. 
Inﬂ ammation of the small intestine may cause 
malabsorption, resulting in anaemia 
(classically B 12 or folate deﬁ ciency) or 
malnutrition.  
 •  Proximal intestinal Crohn ’ s disease is more 
often associated with vomiting.  
 •  Crohn ’ s colitis presents with bloody 
diarrhoea, loss of mucus and constitutional 
symptoms (malaise and fever). In contrast to 
ulcerative colitis, which has similar symptoms, 
there is typically  ‘ rectal sparing ’ on 
sigmoidoscopy. 
 •  Perianal Crohn ’ s may cause perianal soiling 
of mucus or faeces, and examination 
reveals skin tags, anal ﬁ ssures or ﬁ stulous 
openings. 
 Ulcerative  c olitis 
 Characterised by  bloody  d iarrhoea . Speciﬁ c  s ymp-
toms  d epend on the  extent  and  severity of  c olonic 
 i nvolvement. 
 •  Proctitis and  proctosigmoiditis cause fresh 
rectal bleeding, loss of mucus per rectum and 
interleukin - 12 (IL - 12). These APCs pass on the 
antigen to CD4 + T - lymphocytes (i.e. Th1 and Th2) 
which themselves then differentiate down speciﬁ c 
pathways.  Crohn ’ s disease  is predominantly a 
 Th1 - driven  immune response, characterised ini-
tially by further release of pro - inﬂ ammatory 
cytokines, including TNF - α and interferon - γ . In 
contrast,  ulcerative colitis  is a  Th2 - driven immune 
response, 
with 
increased 
release 
of 
pro -
 inﬂ ammatory cytokines including IL - 5. 
 Whichever immune process is followed, the 
net result is recruitment of further inﬂ ammatory 
cells (through increased adhesion of neutrophils 
to vascular endothelium) and activation of 
non - immune cells (mast cells, ﬁ broblasts). This in 
turn results in tissue damage, and hence further 
ingress of antigen from the lumen into the gut 
mucosa. 
 Finally, in predisposed individuals, this inﬂ am-
matory process can extend beyond the gut, result-
ing in the extraintestinal features of Crohn ’ s 
disease and ulcerative colitis.  
 Distribution of  d isease 
 Although it can be difﬁ cult to differentiate 
Crohn ’ s disease from ulcerative colitis, there are 
important differences in the distribution of the 
diseases. 
 Crohn ’ s  d isease 
 Crohn ’ s disease affects the gut in a  non - continuous 
way, causing characteristic  ‘ skip ’ lesions with 
normal mucosa in - between. Involvement is ileal 
or ileo - colonic (40%), small intestinal (30%), 
purely colonic (20%) and purely perianal (10%). In 
children, proximal gut inﬂ ammation is more 
common. Inﬂ ammation involves the  full thickness 
of the gut wall with deep ulcers, causing a  ‘ cob-
blestone ’ appearance. Ulcers may be so deep as to 
penetrate the bowel wall, causing ﬁ stulae and 
abscesses. The ﬁ stulae may be from the gut to 
adjacent viscera (bladder, vagina, other regions of 
the gut) or through the skin. The histological hall-
mark is of  giant cell granuloma . 
 Ulcerative  c olitis 
 Ulcerative colitis always involves the rectum, and 
may extend in a  conﬂ uent  manner to involve the 
sigmoid colon and rectum (proctosigmoiditis) in 
40%. About 20% have involvement of the entire 
colon (pan - colitis) and the remaining approxi-

96 
Small and large bowel disorders 
 Cancer complicating colitis  may occur with 
both ulcerative colitis and Crohn ’ s disease. Risk is 
related to: 
 •  Extent of disease (especially extensive UC); 
   •      Duration of disease ( > 8 years); 
 •  Comorbidity of primary sclerosing cholangitis 
(PSC);  
 •  Coexistent family history of colorectal cancer. 
 The value of colonoscopic surveillance pro-
grammes looking for dysplasia is debated, but 
should certainly be considered with the latter two 
risks. 
 Small bowel adenocarcinoma is a very rare 
complication of extensive small bowel Crohn ’ s 
disease. 
tenesmus. Constitutional symptoms are absent 
unless  severe inﬂ ammation occurs. 
 •  Extensive or  pancolitis  present with more 
prominent constitutional symptoms, 
abdominal pain and bloody diarrhoea.  Severity 
is indicated by bowel frequency ( > 6 per 24  h), 
degree of blood loss in stools, pulse    >  90  bpm 
and temperature ( > 37.5  °  C). 
 In rare cases, the colon may dilate ( toxic mega-
colon ) with symptoms of a severe colitis, marked 
constitutional symptoms and abdominal disten-
sion. Because of the high risk of perforation, joint 
management between medical and surgical teams 
is essential. This complication can occur with 
Crohn ’ s colitis, but is most frequent in ﬁ rst pres-
entations of ulcerative colitis. 
 Table 15.1   Extraintestinal manifestations of IBD. 
 System  
  Disorder  
  Relationship 
to disease 
activity?  
 Relationship 
with colonic 
involvement? 
 Relationship 
with Crohn ’ s 
disease?  
 Ophthalmology  
  Conjunctivitis  
  +  
 +  
  
 Iritis/uveitis  
  +  
 +  
  
 Episcleritis/scleritis  
  +  
 +  
  
 Oral  
 Aphthous mouth ulcers  
  +  
 
  +  
 Angular stomatitis  
  
 +  
  
 Dermatology  
  Erythema nodosum  
  +  
 +  
  
 Pyoderma gangrenosum  
  +  
 +  
  
 Erythema multiforme  
  +  
 +  
  
 Metastatic Crohn ’ s disease  
  +  
 
  +  
 Musculoskeletal 
  Ankylosing spondylitis  
  
 +  
  
 Sacroiliitis  
  
 +  
  
 Peripheral arthropathy  
  
 +  
  
 Osteoporosis/ osteomalacia  
  
 +  
  +  
 Genitourinary  
  Kidney stones (oxalate)  
  
 
  +  
 Amyloidosis  
  
 
  +  
 Glomerulonephritis  
  
 
  
 Hepatobiliary  
  Gallstones  
  
 
  
 Autoimmune hepatitis  
  
 
  
 Primary sclerosing 
cholangitis (PSC)  
 
 +  
  
 Cholangiocarcinoma  
  
 +  
  
 Fatty liver  
  +  
 
  
 Liver abscess  
  +  
 +  
  
 Cardiovascular  
  Venous thrombosis  
  +  
 
  
 Pleuropericarditis  
  
 
  
 Respiratory  
  Fibrosing alveolitis  
  
 
  
 Pulmonary vasculitis  
  
 
  
 Neurology  
  Neuropathy  
  
 
  
 Myopathy  
  
 
  

Small and large bowel disorders  97
deﬁ ning the extent of disease (especially 
barium follow - through in Crohn ’ s disease). 
Capsule endoscopy is rarely required, 
except in cases where small bowel changes 
may be too subtle for identiﬁ cation by barium 
or CT. 
 •  Radiolabelled white cell scan : a less accurate 
assessor of areas of inﬂ ammation, best suited 
for patients too unwell to undergo endoscopy 
or abdominal CT (see below). 
 Cause 
 •  Stool culture: as infective exacerbations are 
common     
 Complications 
 •  Abdominal X - ray : in toxic megacolon, in 
addition to the colonic dilatation, there may 
also be mucosal oedema ( ‘ thumb - printing ’ ), 
areas of necrosis ( ‘ mucosal islands ’ ) or 
evidence of perforation.  
 •  Abdominal ultrasound : of value if an 
abdominal mass is suspected, and may also 
give information about bowel wall thickness 
(and hence activity).  
 •  Colonoscopy : will identify colorectal cancer 
complicating chronic IBD.  
 •  Abdominopelvic CT or MRI : invaluable 
acutely to identify colonic wall thickness, 
suspected perforation, extraluminal features 
of Crohn ’ s disease. Pelvic MRI is particularly 
helpful for imaging perianal Crohn ’ s 
disease. 
 Management 
 Crohn ’ s  d isease 
 •  Inducing remission : 
   Localised terminal ileal disease: 
 –  Medical ﬁ rst - line: course of oral 
prednisolone ( > 40  mg reducing over 4 − 6 
weeks) or budesonide (a less well 
absorbed steroid, hence causing fewer 
side - effects); 
 –  Medical second - line either Methotrexate 
(intramuscular) at high dose for 12 weeks, 
or Inﬂ iximab infusion  – this is a 
monoclonal antibody targeting TNF -  α that 
can induce rapid healing (beware adverse 
effects of severe infection, anaphylaxis and 
immune reaction);  
 Investigations 
 Investigations are directed towards conﬁ rming 
the condition (i.e. diagnosis, deﬁ ning extent of 
disease and activity of disease), identifying cause 
(infection) and assessing for complications (toxic 
megacolon). 
 Condition 
 The differential diagnosis of small bowel Crohn ’ s 
includes: 
 •  Caecal carcinoma; 
 •  Appendix abscess; 
 •  Intestinal TB or lymphoma; 
 •  Pelvic inﬂ ammatory disease; 
 •  Radiation enteritis. 
 For colitis symptoms, the differential includes: 
 •  Bacterial infections; 
 •  Microscopic colitis; 
 •  Colorectal carcinoma; 
   •      Pseudo - membranous colitis diverticulitis;  
 •  Ischaemic colitis; 
 •  NSAID colitis; 
 •  Radiation enteritis. 
 •  Lab tests : anaemia, iron deﬁ ciency, 
leucocytosis, thrombocytosis, hypokalaemia, 
hypoalbuminaemia, ESR and CRP reﬂ ect 
disease activity. LFTs may be abnormal if PSC 
is present.  Clostridium difﬁ cile  toxin assay will 
exclude pseudo - membranous colitis. 
 •  Endoscopy : sigmoidoscopy will identify an 
inﬂ amed rectum in active ulcerative colitis (but 
may be normal in Crohn ’ s colitis). In active 
disease the mucosa is friable and oedematous, 
and with more severe inﬂ ammation ulceration 
and mucopus are present. With chronic disease 
there is a loss of vascular pattern and a granular 
appearance of the mucosa. The key thing is to 
establish whether there is active mucosal 
disease, as if it is normal, the differential 
diagnosis needs to be considered. Thus, full 
colonoscopy is rarely needed in the acute 
setting; performed in the chronic setting, it 
informs about the extent of colonic ulcerative, 
and indicates whether there is terminal ileal 
Crohn ’ s disease. 
 •  Abdominal X - ray : essential if toxic megacolon 
is suspected (see below). In Crohn ’ s ileitis it 
may show small bowel obstruction.  
 •  Barium studies : these are  not  often required in 
the acute situation, but do have a role in 

98 
Small and large bowel disorders 
 –  An alternative to azathioprine or 6 - MP is 
methotrexate (an immunosupressor with 
anti - inﬂ ammatory activity); beware liver 
and lung ﬁ brosis. 
   Extensive ileal disease: will usually need 
azathioprine or 6 - MP.  
   Colonic disease: same options as for 
maintenance of terminal ileal disease.  
   Perianal disease: if frequent relapses or 
severe inﬂ ammation occur, then consider 
azathioprine or 6 - MP. 
 Ulcerative  c olitis 
 •  Inducing remission : 
   Proctitis or procto - sigmoiditis  – determine 
severity: 
 –  Mild: 5 - ASA or prednisolone 
suppositories;  
 –  Severe: 5 - ASA or prednisolone enemas: 
 If remains refractory: course of oral 
prednisolone 
 If still refractory: consider intravenous 
cyclosporin or inﬂ iximab or surgery 
(Box  15.2 ). 
   Extensive colitis  – determine severity: 
 –  Mild: high - dose oral 5 - ASA; 
   –      Severe: course of oral prednisolone:  
 If remains refractory: consider intravenous 
cyclosporin or inﬂ iximab 
 If still refractory: surgery (Box  15.2 ). 
 •  Maintaining remission : 
   Proctitis or procto - sigmoiditis: 
 –  Mild cases may not need anything, or oral 
5 - ASA; 
   –      Severe cases may need azathioprine or 
6 - MP (for 2 − 4. years) 
   Extensive colitis: 
 –  Mild: oral 5 - ASA; 
 –  Severe: azathioprine or 6 - MP. 
 –  Surgical: limited ileal resection (may be 
preferred by patients as ﬁ rst - line therapy, 
and should be considered in all patients if 
frequent relapses occur; patients will need 
B 12 replacement long - term). 
   Extensive small bowel disease: careful 
parenteral nutrition is often needed: 
 –  First - line: delayed release oral 
5 - aminosalicylate (5 - ASA) (Box  15.1 ); 
 –  Second - line: course of oral prednisolone; 
 –  Third – line: liquid diet and food exclusion 
diet. 
   Colonic disease: 
 –  Proctitis or proctosigmoiditis  – determine 
severity: 
 Mild: 5 - ASA or prednisolone suppositories; 
 Severe: 5 - ASA or prednisolone enemas; if 
refractory  –  course of oral prednisolone.    
 –  Extensive colitis  – determine severity: 
 Mild: high - dose oral 5 - ASA 
  Severe: course of oral prednisolone.      
   Perianal Crohn ’ s disease: 
 –  Fissure: topical gliceryl trinitrate and/or 
5 - ASA or prednisolone suppository;  
 –  Fistula: oral metronidazole or course of 
oral prednisolone; failing that, inﬂ iximab 
infusion or consideration of surgery ; 
 •  − Abscess: surgical drainage.  Maintaining 
remission : 
   Localised terminal ileal disease: 
 –  Nothing may be needed, but if frequent 
relapses occur, consider: − High - dose oral 
5 - ASA, and if frequent relapses occur:  −  
Azathioprine or 6 - mercaptopurine (6 - MP) 
 – modulate the immune system over weeks, 
hence helpful in maintaining remission; 
beware adverse effects of bone marrow 
suppression and pancreatitis. These may be 
predictable in an individual by assay of 
level of the metabolising enzyme (TPMT); 
 Box 15.1   Characteristics of 5 - ASA compounds. As 5 - ASA is easily absorbed from small 
bowel, molecule needs modiﬁ cation to be released at site of inﬂ ammation. 
 Sulphasalazine 
  5 - ASA linked to sulphapyridine (hence adverse effects)  – well absorbed, so good for 
co - existent joint disease  
 Mesalazine  
  Coated and slow - release forms available, released according to luminal pH; used as oral 
and rectal preparations for colonic action  
 Olsalazine  
  Two 5 - ASA molecules released in presence of colonic bacteria  
 Balsalzide  
  5 - ASA molecule especially well released in distal colon  

Small and large bowel disorders  99
about 40% of colonic Crohn ’ s patients. With ulcer-
ative colitis, 90% will run a relapsing − remitting 
course, whilst 10% have chronic active disease, the 
latter being especially likely to undergo surgery. 
Surgery for ulcerative colitis is most common in 
the ﬁ rst 5 years after diagnosis. 
 Microscopic  c olitis 
 This term comprises two histologically distinct 
conditions,  collagenous colitis  and  lymphocytic 
colitis . The incidence is 12 in 100   000, and is more 
common in patients with coeliac disease, autoim-
mune disorders and those taking drugs (particu-
larly PPIs and NSAIDs). In both conditions, the 
endoscopic appearance of the mucosa is normal. 
Histologically, changes are seen more often on 
right than left colon biopsies: collagenous colitis 
is characterised by a thickened subepithelial col-
lagen layer, whilst in lymphocytic colitis there is 
an 
increased 
inﬁ ltrate 
of 
intraepithelial 
lymphocytes. 
 Clinically, the hallmark is watery diarrhoea vari-
ably associated with abdominal pain and weight 
loss. Mild cases respond to loperamide used as 
required. For more severe cases, ﬁ rst choice is 
budesonide. Alternative options include oral 
5 - ASA, metronidazole or prednisolone. 
 Functional 
 g astrointestinal 
 d isorders 
 This is a collective term for the spectrum of disor-
ders labelled as functional heartburn, functional 
dyspepsia and irritable bowel syndrome (IBS). 
These are interrelated conditions involving the 
foregut, midgut and hindgut, respectively. All are 
marked by the complaint of pain associated with 
dysfunction of that region of the gut. They are 
common conditions (the most frequent disorders 
seen by gastroenterologists) with many overlap-
ping symptoms, and up to 20% of the general 
population fulﬁ l diagnostic criteria for these con-
ditions. However, only about 10% present to 
medical services, women more often than men. 
Patients can present at any age, typically during 
childbearing years. Diagnosis is arrived at having 
 Osteoporosis 
 Crohn ’ s disease patients in particular, and the use 
of steroids in all IBD, means patients are predis-
posed to metabolic bone disease. Diagnosis is 
with a DEXA bone scan. Treatment of mild cases 
is with calcium and vitamin D, and of severe cases 
is with bisphosphonates.  
 IBD in  c hildren,  p regnancy and 
 l actation 
 Maintaining nutrition is vital, to ensure normal 
puberty and growth (malnutrition is predisposed 
towards by chronic illness and treatments). For 
 Crohn ’ s disease , polymeric diets are preferred 
to steroids in children and adolescents to 
avoid growth retardation induced by the latter. 
Treatment with steroids, immunosuppression or 
surgery is otherwise similar to that in adults. 
 Pregnancy, labour and lactation are not associ-
ated with any greater risk of relapse. Equally, treat-
ment options need not be altered by pregnancy or 
lactation.  
 Prognosis 
 Advances in medical and surgical treatment since 
the 1950s have resulted in life expectancy of IBD 
patients now being the same as the general popu-
lation. About 90% of ileal Crohn ’ s patients will 
have at least one operation, as opposed to only 
 Box 15.2   Operative options in ulcerative 
colitis. 
 Indications  
 •  Failure of medical therapy (steroid dependence 
or drug side effects)  
 •  Acute severe colitis and toxic megacolon  
 •  Impaired quality of life  
 •  Disease complications (severe haemorrhage, 
pyoderma gangrenosum)  
 •  Colorectal cancer  
 Operations  
 •  Proctocolectomy and ileostomy  
 •  Proctocolectomy and ileoanal pouch (but 20% 
risk of this pouch becoming inﬂ amed)  
 •  Colectomy and ileorectal anastomosis (not 
favoured)  

100 
Small and large bowel disorders 
 •  Irritable bowel syndrome : categorised as 
being either constipation - predominant (c - IBS), 
diarrhoea - predominant (d - IBS) or mixed stool 
pattern (m - IBS). The prevalence of these forms 
is approximately 40%, 20% and 40%, respec-
tively. All forms have cramping abdominal pain 
as the central feature and symptoms do  not 
occur at night. Associated symptoms of rectal 
mucus loss and incomplete evacuation are com-
mon. Treatment centres on making a positive 
diagnosis and offering empathic reassurance:  
   Diet is often of little help and probiotics 
remain unproven; 
   Antispasmodics may help some patients with 
postprandial cramp;  
   Tricyclic antidepressants in low dose are of 
proven efﬁ cacy; 
   Occasional patients need hypnotherapy or 
cognitive behavioural therapy. 
 •  Functional constipation  (see also p. 19) . 
Constipation is a symptom, not a diagnosis. 
The cause needs to be investigated to exclude 
the exhaustive list of possible causes (see Table 
 3.3 ), but  – in contrast to diarrhoea  – in most 
cases a cause is not found, and the ﬁ nal 
diagnosis is of a functional disorder. The 
symptom is deﬁ ned broadly: bowel opening    <  3 
times per week, or need to strain frequently, or 
passage of hard stools, or excessive time spent 
on toileting, or a sensation of incomplete 
voiding. With this loose deﬁ nition, 
approximately 15% of the general Western 
population are said to be affected. Patients can 
be classiﬁ ed as having slow transit 
constipation, a defaecation disorder, or a 
combination of the two. 
   Slow transit constipation: mostly affects 
young women with characteristically 
infrequent urge, infrequent bowel opening 
and abdominal bloating. The colon is not 
dilated, and the diagnosis can be conﬁ rmed 
by a radio - opaque marker transit study. 
Speciﬁ c management is to avoid a high - ﬁ bre 
diet and consider use of an osmotic laxative 
or, as required, stimulant laxative. 
Biofeedback may help toileting behaviour. 
Colectomy is almost never indicated.  
   Defaecation disorder: affects patients of all 
ages and is characterised by straining to 
evacuate the rectum, the need to use digital 
assistance to expel stool and a sensation of 
incomplete voiding. Diagnosis is conﬁ rmed 
by defaecography (barium or MR). 
excluded organic diseases presenting with the 
same symptoms, typically blood tests (including 
testing for coeliac disease,  see p. 19 ), endoscopy or 
radiology. 
 Not only do these patients show overlap 
between gut symptoms, but they also frequently 
report symptoms of functional disorders in other 
parts of the body (chronic fatigue syndrome, func-
tional backache, etc.). 
 Aetiopathogenesis 
 The aetiopathogenesis of these disorders is 
multifactorial: 
 •  Psychological factors  contribute to the 
perception of gut stimuli and also inﬂ uence 
gastric motility. This has been proven in both 
acute stress and in chronic depression and 
anxiety. 
 •  Visceral hypersensitivity and abnormal gut 
motility are physiological phenomena that are 
often interrelated and contribute to causing 
gut symptoms. These visceral changes are in 
turn inﬂ uenced by psychological factors. A 
variety of neurotransmitters have been 
implicated in these alterations of gut sensitivity 
and motility.  
 •  Alterations of mucosal immunology function 
are also thought to contribute. About 25% of 
IBS cases begin after a gut infection, although 
again the risk of subsequently developing IBS 
is related to certain psychological traits. These 
patients with so - called postinfectious IBS have 
altered mast cell and cytokine function. 
 Clinical  s yndromes 
 •  Functional heartburn : deﬁ ned as the presence 
of a retrosternal burning sensation in the 
absence of pathological gastro - oesophageal 
reﬂ ux. Treatment is generally supportive, but a 
subset of patients may respond to intensive 
antireﬂ ux treatment, but antireﬂ ux surgery is 
not generally recommended.  
 •  Functional dyspepsia : comprises two 
distinct subgroups: the postprandial distress 
syndrome (with postprandial fullness and early 
satiety) and the epigastric pain syndrome 
(chronic and less meal - related pain syndrome). 
PPIs are usually ineffective in this setting, 
treatment again being supportive. Cognitive 
behavioural therapy, where available, is 
effective. 

Small and large bowel disorders  101
patient. The pain typically starts 30   min after 
eating and continues for up to 4   h. Anorexia and 
weight loss are the sequelae to this meal - related 
pain. Epigastric bruits are rarely heard. 
 A variety of radiological techniques are available 
to image the intestinal arteries. The gold standard 
is angiography, but less invasive options include 
duplex ultrasound, CT and MR angiography. 
Angioplasty or arterial reconstruction is rarely 
appropriate in these patients who often have 
major atherosclerotic comorbidity. Small frequent 
meals are advised.  
 Ischaemic  c olitis 
 This is a condition which affects arteriopathic 
individuals The typical symptoms are abdominal 
pain (unrelated to meals), rectal bleeding and 
occasionally diarrhoea. A more severe, and rarer, 
fulminant form of the condition may occur, with 
toxic dilatation and a gangrenous colon. 
 Abdominal X - ray may show mucosal oedema 
( ‘ thumb - printing ’ ) at the splenic ﬂ exure, and a 
gentle limited colonoscopy may show erythema-
tous and ulcerated mucosa. Biopsy ﬁ ndings of 
haemosiderin - laden macrophages are diagnostic. 
Management is by resuscitation and early enteral 
nutrition support. The prognosis is usually excel-
lent, although colonic strictures may develop later 
in some patients.   
 Radiation  e nterocolitis 
 Acute  r adiation  e nteritis 
 This affects about 70% of patients in the early 
weeks after ﬁ rst radiotherapy. Symptoms of vom-
iting, 
pain 
and 
diarrhoea 
are 
usually 
self - limiting. 
 Chronic  e nteritis 
 Approximately 
15% 
of 
patients 
undergoing 
abdominal or pelvic radiotherapy sustain damage 
to the gut, the risk depending on cumulative dose 
and site of exposure. Typically symptoms begin 
within 12 months of exposure, but may ﬁ rst 
present 20 years later. The pathology is of an oblit-
erative endarteritis with secondary ﬁ brosis. The 
latter results in ischaemia, and hence ulceration, 
perforation, ﬁ stulisation or stricturing. 
Management is with suppositories or enemas 
and biofeedback to improve defaecatory 
co - ordination. If proctography shows an 
anatomical abnormality, such as rectal 
prolapse or a rectocoele (a protrusion of the 
rectum into the posterior wall of the vagina), 
this may need surgical correction. 
 Ischaemia of the  g ut 
 The vessels supplying the foregut, midgut and 
hindgut are, respectively, the coeliac, superior 
mesenteric and inferior mesenteric. The former is 
the least vulnerable to ischaemia, and the  ‘ water-
shed ’  area between the supply of the latter two 
(namely the splenic ﬂ exure of the colon) is the 
most vulnerable. Causes of gut ischaemia in order 
of frequency of occurrence: 
 •  Arterial thromboembolism  – by far the 
commonest;  
 •  Venous insufﬁ cency (as part of a thrombophilic 
tendency);  
 •  Profound hypotension; 
 •  Vasculitis. 
 Acute  s mall  b owel  i schaemia 
 This is a (rare) medical emergency, characterised 
by severe abdominal pain with minimal physical 
signs. In fact in the early stages, when the bowel is 
most salvageable, the only physical signs are 
abdominal distension and reduced bowel sounds. 
The features of the causative condition may be 
present (generalised atherosclerosis, atrial ﬁ brilla-
tion, vasculitis). Epigastric bruits are diagnostic 
but rare. Rectal bleeding and peritonism are late, 
and often preterminal, features. Lab features are 
of a leucocytosis, raised amylase and metabolic 
acidosis. 
 Management is with aggressive resuscitation, 
analgesia and correction of acidosis. CT or 
mesenteric angiography may show the causative 
occlusion, but should not delay  early laparotomy 
to resect infarcted gut. Mortality is over 80%, and 
long - term parenteral nutrition is often required in 
survivors due to the quantity of gut resected.  
 Chronic  i ntestinal  i schaemia 
 This is a rare condition, characterised by abdomi-
nal pain post - prandially in an arteriopathic 

102 
Small and large bowel disorders 
 A variety of symptom patterns may occur: 
 •  Recto - sigmoid : rectal bleeding, tenesmus, 
rectal pain and loose stools. Sigmoidoscopy 
reveals friable, inﬂ amed mucosa, with 
telangiectatic bleeding. Management of rectal 
bleeding is with argon plasma coagulation of 
involved mucosa. Topical 5 - ASA compounds, 
prednisolone, sucralfate and even 
formaldehyde have all been used. Hyperbaric 
oxygen may be considered in refractory cases. 
Surgery is avoided. 
 •  Faecal incontinence : the internal anal 
sphincter is especially vulnerable to ionising 
radiation, and passive faecal soiling should be 
managed with loperamide and if needed anal 
plugs. 
 •  Diarrhoea may result from bacterial 
overgrowth in blind segments formed by 
strictures or bile salt malabsorption, treated 
respectively by antibiotics or cholestyramine. A 
rarer cause of diarrhoea is small bowel ﬁ stulae 
managed by nutritional support and 
loperamide; surgery is again best avoided.    
 Prevention of damage is the best treatment. 
Optimising dose and radiation dosing regimens is 
critical. Surgical lifting of bowel loops out of the 
ﬁ eld of radiation, with or without use of bioprotec-
tive mesh, is used when heavy localised exposure 
cannot be avoided. 
 
  

 Colorectal  t umours 
 Colonic  p olyps 
 These may be classiﬁ ed histologically as 
neoplastic or non - neoplastic, but cannot be 
distinguished endoscopically with certainty. 
 •  Neoplastic polyps: 
   Adenoma. 
 •  Non - neoplastic polyps: 
   Hamartoma; 
   Metaplastic ( ‘ hyperplastic ’ ); 
   Inﬂ ammatory. 
 Colonic  a denomas 
 All colonic adenocarcinomas originate from 
colonic adenomas, but only a small minority of 
adenomas are premalignant. 30% of people in the 
UK develop an adenoma by age 60 and 3% have a 
lifetime risk of colorectal cancer. The progression 
from adenoma to carcinoma takes on average 10 
years. Adenomas are classiﬁ ed by endoscopic and 
histological (Box  16.1 ) appearance: 
 •  Endoscopic: 
   Pedunculated; 
   Sessile; 
   Flat. 
 •  Histological: 
 16 
Colon  
   Tubular; 
   Villous; 
   Tubulo - villous; 
   Serrated ( ‘ saw - tooth ’ histology). 
 Adenomas are usually asymptomatic, detected 
on surveillance or endoscopy. Occasionally they 
may bleed, and very rarely villous adenomas cause 
a mucous diarrhoea. 
 Colonoscopy and removal of polyps is the gold 
standard (though it is estimated that 25% of polyps 
are missed by an average colonoscopist). Histology 
should determine the histological classiﬁ cation 
and completeness of removal. The need for, and 
timing interval of, future colonoscopy is depend-
ent on the malignant potential of the polyps(s). 
Complications of polypectomy are: 
 •  2% early haemorrhage; 
 •  2% delayed (up to 2 weeks) haemorrhage; 
 •  0.5% perforation; 
 •  30% recurrence of polyp at same site 
(incomplete removal). 
 Inherited  p olyposis  s yndromes 
 Familial  a denomatous  p olyposis ( FAP ) 
 FAP is an uncommon disorder characterised by 
multiple ( > 100) colonic adenomas which invaria-
bly progress to colorectal cancer unless colectomy 
is performed in the second or third decade of life. 
It accounts for 1% of colorectal cancers. The cause 
is a chromosomal (autosomal dominant) disorder 
arising from a mutation in the  APC gene (chromo-
some 5); about 25% of cases are spontaneous new 
mutations with no family history. Gastric and 
duodenal adenomas and carcinomas also occur 
Lecture Notes: Gastroenterology and Hepatology, 1st edition. 
Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. 
© 2011 Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

104 
Colon
 Hamartomas 
 There are speciﬁ c syndromes in which hamar-
tomatous polyps occur. These syndromes are 
often associated with greater risk of non - gut 
cancers (breast, thyroid): 
 •  Peutz − Jeghers syndrome : 
   Multiple small hamartomas in small bowel 
 and colon; 
   Buccal and labial melanin pigmentation; 
Autosomal dominant inheritance; Hamar-
tomas are usually asymptomatic, but may 
rarely bleed or form the focus of 
intussusception.  
   Juvenile polyposis : Large pedunculated 
vascular polyps in small bowel  and colon; 
   Speciﬁ c gene mutations with autosomal 
dominant inheritance;  
   Colorectal cancer risk of  ∼ 40%, gastric cancer 
risk of  ∼ 20%; 
   Treatment is with endoscopic polypectomy if 
there are a few polyps, but with heavy polyp 
density, colectomy is recommended. Family 
screening for the gene mutation should be 
performed. 
 •  Cowden ’ s disease : 
   Gastric, small bowel and cutaneous 
hamartomas;  
   Autosomal dominant inheritance; 
   Multiple congenital abnormalities. 
 •  Cronkhite - Canada syndrome : 
   A non - inherited disorder; 
   Diffuse gastrointestinal hamartomas 
(including gastric);  
   Malabsorption; 
   Alopecia and nail dystrophy. 
 Metaplastic  p olyps 
 Extremely common, usually small ( < 5  mm) polyps 
found in the rectum.  
 Inﬂ ammatory  p olyps 
 Known as  ‘ pseudo - polyps ’ since they represent 
exuberant mucosal regrowth after a severe episode 
of colitis. 
 Colorectal  a denocarcinoma 
 This is the second commonest cancer in the UK, 
with 30   000 cases per year, two - thirds of which 
result in death. The majority (75%) are sporadic, 
with greater frequency.  Gardner ’ s syndrome  is a 
variant associated with osteomas. 
 The cornerstone of management is early diag-
nosis and family screening by colonoscopy from 
teenage years until the age of 40. When polyps are 
detected pan - proctocolectomy is the treatment of 
choice, with formation of an ileoanal pouch or end 
ileostomy. Carcinoma of the ampulla should be 
screened for, and abdominal pain after colectomy 
should raise the concern of intra - abdominal 
desmoid tumours.  
 Hereditary  n on - p olyposis  c olorectal 
 c ancer ( HNPCC ) 
 This autosomal dominant disorder accounts for 
10% of colorectal cancers, and is caused by germ-
line mutations of mismatch repair genes. Primarily 
right - sided colon cancer develops at a mean age 
of 45, without the generalised polyposis of FAP, 
although almost half of patients have meta-
chronous lesions. There is an increased risk of 
other adenocarcinomas (uterus, ovary, stomach 
and small bowel). 
 Management centres on family screening - based 
Amsterdam criteria (Box  16.2 ), undertaken by 
gene testing. Microsatellite instability is a his-
tological feature of HNPCC tumours, and its 
ﬁ nding should trigger consideration of HNPCC. 
Surveillance upper and lower gastrointestinal 
endoscopy is required. 
 Box 16.1   Histological features deﬁ ning 
malignant potential of an adenoma. 
 •  Size (especially    >  2  cm)  
 •  Multiplicity of polyps ( > 5)  
 •  Histological type (villous    >  tubulo - villous    >   
tubular    >  serrated)  
 •  Histological degree of dysplasia  
 Box 16.2   Amsterdam criteria for 
diagnosing HNPCC. 
 •  ≥ One HNPCC - related cancer diagnosed    <  age 
50  
 •  ≥ Two generations with colorectal cancer  
 •  ≥ Three family members with HNPCC - related 
can cers, at least one being a ﬁ rst - degree relative  

Colon 105
   Medical conditions (primary sclerosing 
cho langitis, acromegaly, obesity); 
   Smoking. 
 •  Location : 
   65% rectosigmoid; 
   10% left and transverse colon; 
   25% right colon; 
   (Note 5% are synchronous); 
   Spread occurs early through bowel wall, then 
into lymphatics, and later by portal and 
systemic circulations. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Depend on location of the tumour: 
 •  Rectal bleeding, rectal and left colon tumours 
(remember that presence of haemorrhoids does 
not preclude the possibility of comorbid cancer);  
 •  Altered bowel habit  – especially in distal 
tumours;  
 •  Anorexia, weight loss, abdominal mass and 
anaemia  –  especially caecal cancers;  
 •  Intestinal obstruction or perforation is rare 
 – especially in distal tumours; 
 •  Tenesmus  – in rectal cancers; 
 •  Abdominal pain  – a non - speciﬁ c symptom. 
 Investigations 
 •  Condition : 
   Rigid sigmoidoscopy (will detect 30% of 
tumours);  
   Flexible sigmoidoscopy  – for any patients 
with fresh rectal bleeding.  
   Colonoscopy if: 
 –  Altered bowel habit; 
 –  Polyps seen at ﬂ exible sigmoidoscopy; 
 –  Family history of colorectal cancer; 
 –  Surveillance of IBD or polyps; endoscopic 
examination allows histological specimens 
to be collected. 
   Barium enema: apple - core strictures or 
ulcerated defects may be seen, but sensitivity 
is less than with colonoscopy;  
   CT colonography ( ‘ virtual colonoscopy ’ ): 
more comfortable than colonoscopy; but does 
involve radiation exposure, bowel preparation 
is still needed, histology is not possible and 
resolution is less than with colonoscopy; 
       FBC and iron studies: supportive of diagnosis;  
   Serum carcinoma embryonic antigen (CEA): 
of supportive value, but note false positives 
and negatives are not infrequent.    
10 − 12% occur in relation to the inherited 
polyposis syndromes  (see p. 94) , 10% have some 
other family history and 2% are related to 
inﬂ ammatory bowel disease (IBD). 
 Aetiopathology 
 The adenoma – carcinoma sequence (Figure  16.1 ) 
is widely accepted as the mechanism resulting in 
all but IBD - related colorectal cancers: 
 •  Risk factors : 
   Genetic (as per sequence above); 
   Dietary: 
 –  Exacerbating  – red meat, saturated animal 
fats;  
 –  Protective  – dietary ﬁ bre (cereal and fruit/
vegetable), folic acid. 
   Chronic inﬂ ammation (IBD  [see p. 94] , prior 
ureterosigmoidostomy); 
 Figure 16.1    Adenoma − carcinoma sequence.  APC , 
adenomatous polyposis coli;  DCC , deleted in colon 
cancer (this  DCC gene has the least strong evidence of 
involvement in this sequence).  
Results in
hyperplasia
Cell
proliferation
Loss of
apoptosis
Loss of repair
mechanism
APC gene
Chromosome 5
K-ras gene
Chromosome 12
DC C gene
Chromosome 18
p53  gene
Chromosome 17
Normal
mucosa
Small
adenoma
Intermediate
adenoma
Large
adenoma
Carcinoma

106 
Colon
 Adjuvant  t herapy 
 This may be pre -  or post - operative, by radiother-
apy or chemotherapy. 
 •  Colon cancer : 
   Chemotherapy (5 - ﬂ uoro - uracil or irinotecan) 
for Dukes ’ C or B with T 4 ; 
   Radiotherapy is only used for palliation. 
 •  Rectal cancer : 
   Preoperative radiotherapy or 
chemoradiotherapy is used for Dukes ’ B and 
C cancers to downsize the tumour and 
improve postoperative survival;  
   Postoperative chemotherapy is also widely 
employed.       
 Palliation 
 •  Surgery : 
   To treat obstruction, intractable bleeding or 
pain;  
   Liver resection of metastases. 
 •  Chemotherapy or radiotherapy : 
   Sometimes used for tenesmus, pain. 
 •  Endoscopy : 
   Laser therapy for bleeding; 
   Expandable metal stent insertion for 
obstruction in a non - resectable patient. 
 Prognosis 
 This depends on the cancer stage at presentation: 
5 - year survival for Dukes A is    >  90%, for Dukes B 
is 77%, for Dukes C is 48% and for Dukes D is 6%. 
Survival rates are halved if patients present with 
obstruction.  
 Prevention 
 Intention is to detect and destroy lesions at a pre-
malignant stage: 
 •  Complications staging: 
   LFTs; 
   CT abdomen: for local spread and liver 
metastases;  
   Pelvic MRI: needed for staging of rectal 
cancers. 
 •  Staging :use of Dukes staging and TNM staging 
systems (Tables  16.1 and  16.2 ) 
 Management 
 Decided 
at 
multidisciplinary 
team 
(MDT) 
meetings. 
 Surgery 
 Suitable for Dukes ’  A and B tumours. 
 •  Basic principles : 
   Tumour resection; 
   Direct anastomosis if possible; 
   Clear resection margins; 
   Sampling of lymph nodes. 
 •  Rectal cancers : total mesorectal excision 
reduces recurrence; cancers within 2   cm of the 
anus require abdominoperineal (AP) resection 
and colostomy 
 Table 16.1   Dukes ’  staging for colorectal cancer. 
 Dukes ’  stage  
  Description  
  Prevalence at 
diagnosis (%)  
 5 - year 
survival (%)  
 Dukes ’  A (T 1 − 2 , N 0 , M 0 )  
  Tumour conﬁ ned to bowel wall  
  10  
  95  
 Dukes ’  B (T 3 − 4 , N 0 , M 0 )  
  Tumour extends through bowel wall  
  35  
  75  
 Dukes ’  C (T any , N 1 , M 0 )  
  Tumour through bowel wall and involves 
lymph nodes  
 35  
  35  
 Dukes ’  D (T any , N either , M 1 ) 
  Distant metastases  
  20  
  1  
 Table 16.2   TNM staging for colorectal cancer. 
 Stage  
  Description  
 T  – primary tumour  
  T 0  – no evidence of tumour  
 
  T 1 − 4  – varying depths of 
invasion  
 N   −  lymph nodes  
  N 0   −  no nodes  
 
  N 1  – positive nodes  
 M  – metastases  
  M 0   −  no metastases  
 
  M 1  – metastases  

Colon 107
 Miscellaneous  c olonic 
 d isorders 
 Colonic  d iverticular  d isease 
 Colonic diverticula increase in prevalence with 
age, and are most common in the developed 
world. 50% of over 50 year olds have 
 ‘ diverticulosis ’ , which is asymptomatic 
diverticula. In the Western world, diverticula are 
most prevalent in the sigmoid and left colon, 
whilst in Oriental populations and the rare under 
40 year old who develops them, right - sided 
disease is commoner. Diverticula never occur in 
the rectum. The term  ‘ diverticular disease ’ refers 
to patients having symptomatic diverticula, and 
 ‘ diverticulitis ’ refers to diverticula causing 
complications (bleeding, inﬂ ammation, 
stricturing, perforation). The relationship 
between these terms is shown in Figure  16.2 .   
 •  Faecal occult blood test (FOBT): performed 
every 1 − 2 years after age 60 in the UK, 
increases the proportion of early cancers 
detected and reduces mortality by 16%;  
 •  Flexible sigmoidoscopy: more invasive, reduces 
mortality by 35%;  
 •  Colonoscopy: gold standard, but impractical as 
a screening test;  
 •  Faecal and blood gene mutation testing is not 
yet sensitive enough to be considered at this 
time. 
 Surveillance 
 •  Colonoscopy 6 − 12 months after colon cancer 
resection to detect metachronous lesions.  
 •  CT scan of the abdomen to identify resectable 
liver metastases. 
 Chemoprevention 
 •  Aspirin reduces risk of recurrent adenomas 
after colorectal cancer surgery by 35%; COX - 2 
inhibitors are not indicated.  
 •  Optimising calcium and folic acid intake are 
generally recommended. 
 Figure 16.2   Possible presentations with colonic diverticula. IBS, irritable bowel syndrome.  
Diverticulosis
Symptomatic
(20%)
Asymptomatic
(80%)
Bleeding
(25%)
Diverticulitis
(75%)
Complicated
attack (25%)
Uncomplicated
attack (75%)
Stricture
Perforation
Fistula and
abscess
No further
attacks (33%)
Non specific ‘IBS’
symptoms (33%)
Recurrent attacks
(33%)

108 
Colon
(to bladder or vagina) occurs in 20%; 
mortality following perforation is high;  
   Uncomplicated attacks only need considera-
tion of elective surgical therapy if there is:  
 –  Localised diverticula; 
 –  Frequent recurrence; 
 –  Episodes beginning at a young age (known 
to run a more recurrent course). 
 Megacolon 
 Congenital (Hirschsprung ’ s disease) and acquired 
(idiopathic megacolon and megarectum) forms 
are recognised. 
 Hirschsprung ’ s  d isease 
 Caused by congenital aganglionosis of the colon, 
resulting from defective migration of neuroblasts 
into the embryonic hindgut. It is a rare cause of 
constipation and a family history is present in 35% 
of cases; some hereditary causes are associated 
with a speciﬁ c gene mutation ( RET tyrosine 
kinase). 
 The absence of submucosal ganglia is usually 
localised to the distal rectum, but may be wide-
spread in the hindgut (sigmoid colon). This results 
in defective anorectal reﬂ exes, in particular the 
absence of the internal anal sphincter relaxation 
in response to rectal ﬁ lling ( ‘ rectoanal inhibitory 
reﬂ ex ’ ). This results in constipation, abdominal 
distension and vomiting; most cases present in 
neonatal life, although up to 10% present in ado-
lescents and adults. Diagnosis is established by 
demonstrating the absence of the rectoanal inhib-
itory reﬂ ex on physiological testing ( condition ). In 
addition, barium enema will show the narrowed 
aganglionic segment and dilatation proximal to 
that. The  cause  may be identiﬁ ed through 
surgically - obtained full thickness biopsies of the 
rectum and appropriate immunohistochemistry. 
Treatment involves resection of the localised 
segment.  
 Idiopathic  m egacolon 
and  m egarectum 
 This condition may be localised to the rectum 
or may more extensively involve the colon. 
Constipation with infrequent urge to defaecate is 
common to both megarectum and megacolon, 
but the former is more often associated with faecal 
soiling. Faecal impaction and overﬂ ow inconti-
nence is the main complication. In children, it is 
 Aetiopathogenesis 
 A diet, especially in early life, which is low in unre-
ﬁ ned ﬁ bre is the traditional explanation of diver-
ticulosis and explains the geographical variability 
of the problem, and the changes seen with epide-
miological studies of migrant populations. With 
a low - ﬁ bre diet, the resulting stools are small 
volume and require greater colonic pressure for 
propulsion, explaining the circular muscle hyper-
trophy seen in diverticula. The elevated pressures 
result in mucosal herniation between taenia coli 
muscles of the colon. Faeces may impact in the 
neck of these diverticula, resulting in inﬂ amma-
tion, which may either spontaneously resolve or 
more rarely lead to haemorrhage, perforation, etc.  
 Clinical  s yndromes 
 •  Uncomplicated diverticulosis : symptoms 
of colicky left iliac fossa pain eased by 
defaecation, passage of pellet stools and 
abdominal bloating are typical. The possibility 
of colorectal cancer always requires exclusion 
in view of the prevalence of diverticula. 
Colonoscopy is diagnostic and helps exclude 
other lesions, but carries the small risk of 
perforation. Rigid sigmoidoscopy with 
histology and a barium enema is an alternative 
strategy. Treatment is by increasing dietary ﬂ uid 
and ﬁ bre intake, hence improving stool output 
and preventing further diverticula formation.  
 •  Diverticular bleeding : there is often right - sided 
bleeding, so visible blood loss may not occur. 
Greatest risks are in elderly men and those 
taking NSAIDs or warfarin. Most settle with 
simple observation. Major haemorrhage occurs 
in about one - third of cases, and rebleeding rates 
increase with time and number of prior bleeds. 
Nevertheless, anaemia and altered bowel habit 
should  not  be assumed to be due to diverticula 
until cancer and IBD have been ruled out.  
 •  Diverticulitis : characterised by pain, fever, 
raised white count and inﬂ ammatory markers 
( ‘ left - sided appendicitis ’ ). Colonoscopy is 
contraindicated acutely, but a CT will 
demonstrate any abscess:  
   Mild cases  are managed with oral antibiotics 
(metronidazole and a cephalosporin or 
ciproﬂ oxacin) and analgesia;  
   Severe cases  may need hospitalisation for 
intravenous antibiotics; 
   Complicated attacks  (stricture, perforation, 
ﬁ stula, abscess) require surgery. Fistulation 

Colon 109
toneal autonomic nerves (e.g. secondary to 
abdominal surgery, retroperitoneal tumour inva-
sion, abdominal trauma, diabetic autonomic neu-
ropathy). It may occur secondary to metabolic 
disturbance (e.g. electrolyte disturbance, uraemia, 
respiratory failure). Examination reveals abdomi-
nal distension and increased bowel sounds. The 
 condition  is conﬁ rmed by plain abdominal X - ray 
showing the dilated gut and contrast study will 
exclude a mechanical cause of obstruction. 
 Management depends on reversing the cause if 
possible. The parasympathomimetic neostigmine 
may help to deﬂ ate the colon and ease symptoms. 
If urgent decompression is required (due to the 
risk of perforation with gross colonic distension), 
then a rectally placed ﬂ atus tube or careful 
colonic decompression are preferable to surgical 
caecostomy. 
 Pneumatosis  c ystoides  i ntestinalis 
 A rare condition with multiple gas - ﬁ lled submu-
cosal cysts in the colon (and rarely small bowel). 
It is usually asymptomatic, but diarrhoea, rectal 
bleeding and pain may occur. The cysts may be 
seen on abdominal X - rays or lower GI endoscopy. 
If treatment is required for severe symptoms, 70% 
inspired oxygen for 5 days via a mask and 
rebreather gives long - term beneﬁ t. Elemental 
diets may also help. 
 
 
 
thought to result from disturbed toileting behav-
iour in toddlers, with voluntary avoidance of 
toilets and withholding of stools. The differential 
is with Hirschsprung ’ s disease, from which it is 
distinct due to: 
 •  Absence of a lifelong history; 
 •  Frequent report of faecal soiling (which does 
not occur in Hirschsprung ’ s); Presence of stool 
in the rectum on digital examination.    
 Adult megacolon may be associated with 
dementia or depression, scleroderma, chronic 
opiate use and neurological disorders like multi-
ple sclerosis. Diagnosis is conﬁ rmed by unpre-
pared contrast study demonstrating continuous 
colonic dilatation until a point of abrupt transition 
to proximally normal diameter colon ( Note : by 
contrast, in Hirschsprung ’ s, the colon proximal to 
the narrowing is dilated). Management is by 
titrated use of osmotic laxative with or without 
enemas to empty the rectum. Surgical resection of 
the dilated colon is required only in a minority of 
laxative - refractory patients. The cornerstone is to 
avoid faecal impaction and overﬂ ow. 
 Acute  c olonic  p seudo - o bstruction 
( ‘ Ogilvie ’ s  s yndrome ’ ) 
 Characterised by sudden, painless distension of 
the colon in the absence of mechanical obstruc-
tion. It is often due to disturbance of the retroperi-

110 
Anorectum
 Haemorrhoids 
 These are commonly occurring dilatations of anal 
veins surrounded by tissue.  Internal haemor-
rhoids originate above the dentate line, and com-
prise a venous branch of the internal haemorrhoidal 
plexus surrounded by rectal mucosa.  External 
haemorrhoids arise below the dentate line and 
comprise a branch of the inferior venous plexus 
overlain by anal skin. Over half the population has 
haemorrhoids, being especially common in situa-
tions where there is raised intra - abdominal pres-
sure (chronic constipation, pregnancy, chronic 
cough). 
 Haemorrhoids most commonly present with 
the sensation of a lump at the anus. They are clas-
siﬁ ed as: 
 •  First - degree: internal haemorrhoids move into 
the anal canal;  
 •  Second - degree: haemorrhoids prolapsed out of 
the anus on straining, but spontaneously reduce;  
 •  Third - degree: as second - degree, but need 
manual reduction;  
 •  Fourth - degree: as second - degree, but cannot be 
reduced. 
 The other classical presentation is with rectal 
bleeding, typically in small quantities of fresh 
blood on the toilet tissue. Rarely, haemorrhoids 
may: 
 •  Cause passive faecal or mucus leakage (and 
hence pruritus ani);  
 17 
Anorectum  
 •  Thrombose (causing severe pain). 
 Diagnosis is usually obvious on anal inspection 
and asking the patient to gently strain. If no lump 
is visible, anoscopy may be required. 
 Management  (Table  17.1 ) 
 First - and second - degree haemorrhoids will 
usually respond to non - surgical approaches as an 
outpatient, whereas third - and fourth - degree piles 
usually need haemorrhoidectomy. 
 Anal  ﬁ ssure 
 This is a tear of the skin of the anal canal. It occurs 
most commonly in young adults, affecting men 
and women equally. Typically they occur in the 
posterior midline where anal blood ﬂ ow is lowest 
and the anal skin is least supported. Internal anal 
sphincter spasm also contributes to the develop-
ment of an anal ﬁ ssure. 
 They occur most often in patients with: 
 •  Constipation (by far the commonest cause); 
 •  Crohn ’ s disease; 
 •  Anorectal infection (TB and HIV patients); 
 •  Haematological malignancy. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Fissures present with pain which begins with 
defaecation but then continues afterwards. Blood 
loss is common, but not invariable. The diagnosis 
is evident on inspection, but examination can be 
very uncomfortable for the patient. Typical fea-
tures are: 
 •  Breach in the anal skin; 
Lecture Notes: Gastroenterology and Hepatology, 1st edition. 
Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. 
© 2011 Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Anorectum 111
 •  Prior anal surgery; 
 •  Prior pelvic radiation; 
 •  Prior pelvic trauma. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Typically there is anal discomfort or itching. Loss 
of faecal material and pus are more common than 
bleeding.  
 Investigations 
 Inspection reveals the external opening whilst 
endoscopy rarely identiﬁ es the internal one. MRI 
and endoanal ultrasound are essential to help 
identify the internal sphincter tracks prior to 
surgery. Classiﬁ cation is based on whether: 
 •  Track crosses the sphincters (trans - sphincteric), 
is in - between them (inter - sphincteric) or 
outside them (extrasphincteric); or  
 •  Internal opening is above (high) or below (low) 
puborectalis muscle     
 Management 
 The principles of surgery are to obtain drainage 
of all ﬁ stulae and to lay open or cut out the 
tracks to stop them spreading and causing 
further ﬁ stulae. Rarely, a defunctioning stoma 
may be needed to cover a complex ﬁ stula 
repair. 
 Anal  p ain and  i tch 
 Anal pain can be caused by a number of organic 
conditions: 
 •  ‘ Sentinel ’ pile (actually a skin tag that grows 
near the ﬁ ssure); 
 •  Muscle ﬁ bres of the internal sphincter (with 
severe ﬁ ssuring). 
 Management 
 Treatment options are listed in Table  17.2 .   
 Internal anal sphincterotomy surgery is reserved 
for refractory ﬁ ssures only, due to the risk of faecal 
incontinence. 
 Anal  ﬁ  stula 
 A ﬁ stula is a pathological connection between 
the gut and skin, in this situation, the anal 
canal and perianal skin. They occur more often 
in men and typically in the third and fourth 
decades. 
 At - risk groups : 
 •  Crohn ’ s disease; 
 Table 17.1   Management of haemorrhoids. 
 General  
  Non - surgical  
  Surgical  
 Correct constipation 
(especially with diet 
alteration or bulk 
laxatives)  
 Rubber band ligation 
(complications: pain, bleeding, 
infection)  
 iStapled ’  haemorrhoidectomy  –  
with a mini bowel anastomosis 
device (complications: pain, 
incomplete excision)  
 Avoiding straining  
  Injection sclerotherapy 
(complications: infection, 
ulceration)  
 Open haemorrhoidectomy 
(complications: pain, anal 
stenosis, infection)  
 Local anaesthetic 
suppositories or creams  
 Photocoagulation (complications: 
pain, ulceration)  
 
 Table 17.2   Management of anal ﬁ ssure. 
 First - line  
  Second - line  
  Third - line 
 Correct constipation 
(especially with 
diet alteration or 
bulk laxatives)  
 Topical 
nitroglycerin 
or diltiazem  
 Botox 
injection  
 Avoiding straining  
  
  
 Local anaesthetic 
suppositories or 
creams  
 
  

112 
Anorectum
 •  Syphilis 
   •      People 
participating 
in 
anoreceptive 
intercourse  
 •  Prior perianal Crohn ’ s disease or ﬁ stulae 
 •  Prior pelvic irradiation 
 •  People who have received immunosuppression 
 •  Smokers 
 Investigations 
 Diagnosis often requires examination under 
anaesthesia and biopsy.  
 Management 
 Treatment depends on size of lesion: 
 •  Involving mucosa/submucosa only: wide local 
excision;  
   •      More advanced lesions: abdominoperineal 
resection.    
 Combination chemotherapy and radiotherapy 
may sometimes be added.    
 Rectal  p rolapse 
 This occurs most frequently in women over the 
age of 50 who have had children. Other  at - risk 
groups include: 
 •  Perianal Crohn ’ s disease (see p. 95) ; 
 •  Anal ﬁ ssure; 
 •  Thrombosed haemorrhoids (see p. 110) ; 
 •  Radiation proctitis (see p. 101) ; 
 •  Anorectal abscess (following blockage of an anal 
gland). 
 In addition, there are functional conditions that 
can cause anal discomfort (Table  17.3 ). 
 Anal  c ancers 
 Histologically, a variety of cancers may arise. Most 
patients present in their ﬁ fth or sixth decades. 
Anal carcinoma occurs with the greatest fre-
quency, the rest are rarer: 
 •  Anal carcinoma (of which there are three sub-
types: transitional epithelium, squamous epi-
thelium or keratinised perianal skin);  
 •  Anal adenocarcinoma; 
 •  Basal cell carcinoma; 
 •  Bowen ’ s disease; 
 •  Perianal Paget ’ s disease; 
 •  Malignant melanoma. 
 Particular at - risk groups for  anal carcinoma 
include: 
 •  HIV infection 
 •  HPV (human papilloma virus) infection 
 Table 17.3   Clinical features and management of conditions causing anal pain. 
 
 Proctalgia fugax  
  Levator ani syndrome  
  Pruritus ani  
 Type of pain  
  Episodic, intense  
  Episodic, intense  
  Itch around anus  
 Duration of pain  
  Seconds ( < 20   s)  
  Minutes ( < 30   min)  
  Chronic (worse at night)  
 Epidemiology  
  Males especially, under 40 s  
  Females especially, over 40 s  
  Males especially  
 Associated 
symptoms  
 Faecal urgency, syncope  
  Difﬁ cult evacuation  
  Depend on cause (see 
below)  
 Digital 
examination  
 Normal tone, painless.  
  Sphincter spasm and 
pubo - rectalis tenderness  
 Exclude worms or candida 
 Look for eczema and 
psoriasis  
 Treatment  
  Explanation and 
reassurance 
 Acute treatment with inhaled 
salbutamol or topical GTN 
 Chronic treatment with diet 
or psychotherapy  
 Explanation and reassurance 
 Pelvic ﬂ oor physiotherapy 
and sitz baths  
 Explanation and 
reassurance 
 Avoid scratching and 
over - zealous cleaning 
 Increase diet ﬁ bre and use 
wet - wipes 
 Local anaesthetic cream  

Anorectum 113
 •  Patients who chronically strain; 
 •  Patients with cystic ﬁ brosis (where it can occur 
in childhood);  
 •  Spina biﬁ da; 
 •  Congenital 
mesenchymal 
disorders 
(e.g. 
Marfan ’ s syndrome). 
 In the early stages there is prolapse of the 
mucosa only and in more severe forms the whole 
rectal wall is externalised (and very rarely may be 
life - threateningly incarcerated). Patients usually 
present with the sensation of a mass on wiping. 
They may passively soil stool, but blood loss and 
pain are rare. 
 Examination while straining will reveal the pro-
lapse, and this may need to be done with the 
patient seated on the toilet. 
 Management 
 Mild forms may be managed by biofeedback to 
retrain defaecatory co - ordination. More severe 
prolapse will need surgery, which can be transanal, 
perineal or transabdominal. 
 Solitary  r ectal  u lcer 
 s yndrome 
 Mucosal ischaemia and ulceration resulting from 
repeated straining, anal self - digitation and rectal 
prolapse causes loss of blood and mucus per 
rectum. It typically occurs in young women, and 
there will often be a prior history of constipation 
and psychological distress. The condition is easily 
identiﬁ ed at sigmoidoscopy with single or multi-
ple ulcers, typically on the anterior rectal wall, in 
the distal 10   cm. 
 Management 
 Treatment is initially through biofeedback, to avoid 
straining and digitation. Laxatives may be needed, 
but suppositories and enemas are best not used 
to avoid the cycle of recurrent digitation. Rarely, 
surgical therapy may be needed, especially if heavy 
bleeding occurs or if the problem is recurrent. 
  

114 
Pancreatic diseases
     The pancreas, through the production of pancre-
atic secretions, serves vital  exocrine  digestive func-
tions and acts as the site of production of the 
 endocrine  hormones, insulin and glucagon, con-
trolling glucose homeostasis. Self - digestion by 
exocrine products is prevented by a carefully bal-
anced suppressor system; disruption of that 
system by a variety of causes can result in pancre-
atic inﬂ ammation, called pancreatitis. When 
recurrent, pancreatitis can cause scarring and 
destruction of pancreatic tissue with resultant loss 
of exocrine and/or endocrine functions.  
 Pancreatic  a natomy 
 The pancreas is made up of distinct lobules which 
are connected by loose areolar tissue that also sur-
rounds the entire gland. Each lobule consists of 
connective tissue surrounding alveoli, or pouches, 
that are tubular and almost completely ﬁ lled with 
secretory cells. These then join with the ducts of 
the lobules which drain to the pancreatic duct 
(Figure  18.1 ). The islands of connective tissue 
between the alveoli are termed the islets of 
Langerhan and contain two types of cells, known 
as A and B cells, depending on the pattern of stain-
ing of the secretory granules they contain; they 
produce the endocrine secretions of the pancreas 
involved in glucose homeostasis.   
 The secretory product of the pancreas, the pan-
creatic juice, is carried by the pancreatic duct to 
 18 
Pancreatic diseases  
the duodenum, and there aids digestion, mainly 
by lipolysis of fats. 
 The gland has three parts, the right extremity, 
being broad, is called the  head , and is connected to 
the main portion of the organ, or  body , by a slight 
constriction, the neck; while its left extremity 
gradually tapers to form the  tail . Its length varies 
from 12.5 to 15   cm, and its weight from 60 to 100   g. 
 The pancreatic duct commences in the tail 
where the small duct from the pancreatic lobules 
join. It runs from left to right through the body, 
receiving further ducts along the way. Finally it 
comes into relation with the common bile duct 
and leaves the head of the gland, passing very 
obliquely through the mucous and muscular coats 
of the duodenum, and exiting at the oriﬁ ce of the 
papilla of Vater in the descending duodenum. 
There is often also an additional duct, known as 
the accessory duct, which is given off from the 
pancreatic duct in the neck of the pancreas and 
opens into the duodenum about 2.5   cm above the 
duodenal papilla.  
 Embryology 
 The pancreas develops in two parts. The dorsal 
part arises as a diverticulum from the dorsal side 
of the duodenum just proximal to the hepatic 
diverticulum. This dorsal part forms part of the 
head, the body and tail. The ventral part develops 
from a diverticulum that forms from the bile duct 
and goes on to form the remainder of the head and 
uncinate process. 
 At this stage each part has its own duct. The duct 
of the dorsal part (later known as the accessory 
Lecture Notes: Gastroenterology and Hepatology, 1st edition. 
Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. 
© 2011 Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Pancreatic diseases 115
ogastrium, movement of the stomach draws the 
dorsal mesogastrium down and to the left. The 
right surface of the pancreas becomes applied to 
the posterior abdominal wall, with absorption of 
the peritoneum covering it, resulting in the poste-
rior aspect of the gland in the adult being devoid 
of peritoneum and in contact with the aorta, left 
kidney and its vessels and other retroperitoneal 
structures. 
pancreatic duct) opens independently, while the 
duct of the ventral part opens with the common 
bile duct. At about 6 weeks the two parts fuse and 
form a communication between the two ducts. 
The pancreatic duct continues to increase in 
diameter with development whereas the acces-
sory duct remains small and its opening may even 
be obliterated (Figure  18.2 ). 
 While initially the pancreas lies intraperito-
neally between the two layers of the dorsal mes-
 Figure 18.1   Pancreatic acinar structure.  
Terminal
ductule
Acinar lumen
Apical portion
of acinar cell
Basal portion
 Figure 18.2   Pancreatoduodenal anatomy showing the developing ductal systems.  
Accessory duct
(Santorini’s)
Principal duct
(Wirsung’s)
Fusion of ventral
and dorsal pancreas
and union of ducts

116 
Pancreatic diseases
proteolytic enzymes by secreting them as inactive 
proenzymes, trypsin may be  ‘ autoactivated ’  in the 
acinar cell. Damage by inappropriately activated 
trypsin is prevented by a trypsin inhibitor that can 
inhibit activated trypsin and proteases that can 
cleave trypsin. 
 Activated trypsin is important as the common 
activator of other pancreatic enzymes, including 
more 
trypsinogen, 
chymotrypsinogen, 
proe-
lastase, procarbosypeptidases and prophoshopli-
pase. Trypsin acts to hydrolyse peptide bonds 
within the polypeptide chain of proteins.  
 Nucleotidases 
 Ribonuclease 
and 
deoxyribonuclease 
digest, 
respectively, RNA and DNA.   
 Duct  c ells and  b icarbonate 
 s ecretion 
 Pancreatic enzymes require a neutral pH to func-
tion. This environment is promoted by the secre-
tion of sodium bicarbonate by pancreatic duct 
cells to neutralize the gastric acid which enters the 
duodenum. Pancreatic bicarbonate secretion is 
stimulated by secretin from endocrine cells in the 
duodenal mucosa. The normal pancreas secretes 
about 2 l of pancreatic juice per day, containing 
9 − 18   g of bicarbonate, most of which is reabsorbed 
by the intestine. 
 There are two main mechanisms for the pro-
duction of sodium bicarbonate: 
 •  Pancreatic duct cells use carbonic anhydrase to 
catalyse the conversion of carbon dioxide and 
water (  H O
CO
H CO
H
HCO
2
2
2
3
3
+
→
→
+
−
+
−);  
 •  An Na /HCO
+
−
3  co - transporter located on the 
basolateral membrane of duct cells can 
transport sodium into cells followed by 
transport of  HCO3
− into the duct lumen by a 
 HCO /Cl
3
−
− exchanger. 
 Chronic  p ancreatitis 
 Epidemiology and  a etiology 
 Chronic pancreatitis has a population incidence 
of 3.5 − 10 in 100 000 in industrialised countries. In 
the Western world the major association is with 
alcohol abuse (80% of cases). 
 Much rarer factors include: 
 Physiology 
 Digestive  e nzymes 
 In the acinar cells enzymes are synthesised by the 
ribosomes of the rough endoplasmic reticulum. 
These enzymes are then stored, either in active or 
precursor (pro - enzyme) states within  ‘ zymogen ’ 
granules at the apices of the cell. Cholecystokinin 
(CCK) release in response to a meal results in 
release of these enzymes and pro - enzymes into 
the ductules. 
 The digestive enzymes produced include: 
 •  Amylase for carbohydrates; 
 •  Lipases for fats; 
 •  Proteases for proteins; 
 •  Nucleases for DNA and RNA. 
 Luminal digestion of carbohydrate, protein and 
fat reduces them to smaller molecules, which can 
be absorbed by the intestinal cells, either directly 
or following digestion by enzymes on the brush 
border of these cells. 
 Amylase 
 Amylases hydrolyses polysaccharides in starch 
and glycogen to maltose and other small oligosac-
charides, which can then be cleaved to glucose 
by 
brush 
border 
enzymes 
in 
the 
small 
intestinal mucosa. Salivary glands also produce 
amylase. 
 Lipases 
 The fatty acids of triglycerides in food are hydro-
lysed off by lipase, producing free fatty acids. This 
is aided by the conversion of pro - co - lipase from 
the acinar cells to co - lipase in the small intestine. 
Co - lipase prevents bile salts from inhibiting the 
lipolysis of triglycerides. 
 Prophospholipase A is converted to phospholi-
pase A by trypsin in the small intestine. This then 
hydrolyses fatty acids from lecithin and phos-
phatidyl ethanolamine.  
 Proteases 
 Trypsin is secreted from the acinar cells as 
trypsinogen and activated principally in the upper 
small intestine brush border by an enterokinase. 
While the pancreas protects itself from its own 

Pancreatic diseases 117
patients never have pain and present with 
malabsorption.  
 •  Maldigestion : recurrent inﬂ ammation in 
chronic pancreatitis may result in so much 
glandular destruction that the daily endocrine 
and exocrine requirements of the pancreas 
cannot be met. In the case of exocrine 
insufﬁ ciency, this usually occurs when lipase 
and protease secretions decrease below 10% of 
normal. The resultant malabsorption of 
carbohydrates, proteins and fats often results 
in weight loss and steatorrhoea.  
 •  Diabetes : pancreatic endocrine insufﬁ ciency 
results in glucose intolerance as insulin 
production drops below requirements. 
Polyuria, polydipsia and malaise may occur. 
 Examination 
 Examination is often unremarkable. The presence 
of jaundice should be sought as it might indicate 
associated biliary disease. Infrequently pseudo-
cysts may be palpable as an abdominal mass. 
Nutritional assessment is essential as advanced 
chronic pancreatitis is often associated with 
malnutrition.  
 Investigations 
 Investigations are aimed ﬁ rst at establishing 
the diagnosis (condition) of pancreatitis and the 
underlying cause(s), and second at assessing the 
degree of pancreatic damage (complications). 
 In particular, the presence of cholelithiasis as a 
precipitating cause should be sought and treated, 
and the diagnosis of autoimmune pancreatitis 
should be considered because of the responsive-
ness of this condition to steroid therapy. Finally, 
patients with chronic pancreatitis are at increased 
risk of pancreatic cancer, particularly with increas-
ing age and in smokers, and these groups of 
patient should be considered for surveillance for 
the development of pancreatic lesions. 
 Diagnosis can be difﬁ cult because amylase 
and lipase levels are frequently normal. Diagnosis 
then relies on the detection of structural changes 
and, late in the disease, exocrine and endocrine 
abnormalities. Initial blood tests (taken in 
the convalescent phase, as episodes of acute 
pancreatitis may falsely alter blood chemistry) 
should look for hypertriglyceridaemia and hyper-
calcaemia as well as evidence of biliary obstruc-
tion by measuring bilirubin, ALP and GGT. Late 
 •  Pancreatic duct obstruction (from strictures); 
 •  Metabolic disturbance (hypertriglyceridaemia, 
hypercalcaemia);  
 •  Genetic mutations: 
   Defects in the cystic ﬁ brosis transmembrane 
conductance regulator ( CFTR ) gene cause 
pancreatitis in cystic ﬁ brosis but may also 
play a role in predisposing individuals 
without cystic ﬁ brosis to chronic pancreatitis; 
   In both tropical pancreatitis and pancreatitis 
in children, mutations in a serine protease 
inhibitor gene ( SPINK1 ) have been 
demonstrated in a subgroup of cases: the 
 SPINK 1  gene product normally inhibits up 
to 20% of trypsin activity and may predispose 
to pancreatitis by loss of this mechanism;  
   There is a rare genetic form of chronic 
pancreatitis closely associated with 
mutations in the cationic trypsinogen gene: 
inheritance is autosomal dominant with 
disease penetrance of about 80%.    
 •  Autoimmunity: 
   A steroid responsive form of chronic 
pancreatitis has been more clearly character-
ized and termed autoimmune pancreatitis. 
 At times no cause can be found and idiopathic 
chronic pancreatitis is diagnosed, but the inci-
dence of this continues to decrease with improve-
ments in diagnostic techniques. 
 History 
 In taking a history it is essential that careful atten-
tion is paid to alcohol history. Ancillary history 
from family members may be necessary. Questions 
should also be asked about any family history of 
pancreatitis, personal or family history of autoim-
mune disorders, use of prescription and illicit 
drugs, and travel history. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 The three major clinical features of chronic pan-
creatitis are: 
 •  Pain : often the major and most difﬁ cult to 
manage clinical problem in chronic 
pancreatitis. The pain is usually epigastric and 
may radiate to the back. Because severe pain 
decreases appetite, it can also contribute to 
anorexia. Two categories of pain are described: 
recurrent (type A) pain and continuous (type 
B) pain. It should be noted that 10 − 15% of 

118 
Pancreatic diseases
block, endoscopic procedures and surgical drain-
age and resection.  
 Exocrine  i nsufﬁ ciency 
 Steatorrhoea is deﬁ ned as faecal fat  > 7  g/day. 
However, in practice, faecal fat measurement is 
rarely used and the decision to treat with pancre-
atic enzymes is based on nutritional status and 
subjective reports of steatorrhoea. The aim of 
treatment is to treat the steatorrhoea and correct 
the nutritional consequences of fat malabsorp-
tion, but a signiﬁ cant increase in body weight is 
rarely achieved. Generally a dose of 25000 – 50000   U 
lipase/meal is recommended, but a higher dose or 
combination with a proton pump inhibitor may 
be required. 
 Diabetes 
 Treatment is no different from patients with type 
1 diabetes, but it must be recalled that the coexist-
ing deﬁ ciency of glucagon puts chronic pancrea-
titis patients at increased risk of hypoglycaemia. 
This is particularly true when compliance is poor 
and/or there is continued alcohol consumption or 
autonomic neuropathy. Given that the survival of 
such patients is limited, the aim should be ade-
quate control of glucose and avoidance of hypogly-
caemia. Aggressive glucose management should 
be reserved for patients with good compliance 
and cessation of alcohol.  
 Nutrition 
 There is no speciﬁ c diet known to be beneﬁ cial in 
chronic pancreatitis but abstinence from alcohol 
and the intake of smaller but more frequent meals 
is recommended. Fat restriction is not recomm-
ended and steatorrhoea should instead be treated 
with pancreatic supplements. Fat - soluble vitamin 
deﬁ ciencies occur particularly with ongoing alco-
hol use and should be screened for and treated.     
 Pancreatic  t umours 
 Pancreatic  c arcinoma 
 The majority of pancreatic cancers are adenocar-
cinomas that arise from ductal and acinar cells. 
They are twice as common in men compared to 
women and occur at a mean age of 55 years. Risk 
factors for pancreatic carcinoma include smoking 
and chronic pancreatitis. 
in the disease, endocrine dysfunction should be 
tested for by fasting glucose and glucose tolerance 
testing if indicated. Exocrine function is most 
commonly tested for using faecal elastase, 
reduced 
levels 
indicating 
reduced 
exocrine 
function. 
 Radiological investigation should include ultra-
sound of the abdomen wherever biliary disease 
might be suspected. CT provides the best means 
of assessing the degree of calciﬁ cation of the pan-
creas. MRCP provides information about the pan-
creatic parenchyma and ductal system as well as 
the biliary tree. ERCP is reserved for cases in which 
the above investigations cannot convincingly rule 
out cholelithiasis or where the pattern of radio-
logical change suggests that there may be isolated 
main pancreatic duct stones, the endoscopic 
removal of which might beneﬁ t the patient. 
Finally, obtaining tissue from pancreatic masses is 
increasingly important in differentiating between 
benign and malignant lesions and, as well as open 
surgical and laparoscopic biopsy, endoscopic 
ultrasound and ﬁ ne needle aspiration are increas-
ingly being used.  
 Management 
 Treatment is largely symptomatic and aimed 
at managing pain, and exocrine and endocrine 
insufﬁ ciency, as well as nutritional support. 
The most important factor overall is the absti-
nence from alcohol and smoking in alcoholic 
pancreatitis. Other precipitating factors should 
be sought and corrected, such as anatomical 
abnormalities or metabolic disease. Surgery 
and other interventional procedures are mostly 
reserved 
for 
the 
treatment 
of 
underlying 
anatomical causes or complications of chronic 
pancreatitis. 
 Pain  m anagement 
 Pain compromises quality of life in chronic pan-
creatitis and is of primary concern. Use of analge-
sia should always start with a conventional 
analgesic, including paracetamol, but often 
opiates are required. When prescribing opiates 
the prominent side - effects of CNS depression, 
alterations of GI motility and induction of depend-
ence must be kept in mind. 
 Other strategies of pain relief are used but 
remain unproven, including inhibition of pancre-
atic enzyme secretion using pancreatic enzyme 
therapy and the use of antioxidants, coeliac plexus 

Pancreatic diseases 119
sufﬁ cient dose. Concerns about addiction should 
not prevent this. In difﬁ cult to control pain, 
percutaneous or operative splanchnic (coeliac) 
block may be used. Pruritis is best treated 
by relieving obstruction with palliative surgery 
or endoscoping biliary stenting. Where this is 
not possible, cholestyramine or phenobarbitol 
may be of some beneﬁ t. Pancreatic insufﬁ ciency 
is treated with pancreatic supplements.   
 Cystadenocarcinoma 
 This rare adenomatous tumour results from 
malignant degeneration of a mucous cystade-
noma. Patients present with upper abdominal 
pain and a palpable mass. CT or MRI demonstrate 
a cystic mass that contains debris. The tumour is 
slow growing and slow to metastasise, and prog-
nosis following surgical excision is good.  
 Intraductal  p apillary - m ucinous 
 t umour 
 This rare tumour most commonly occurs in 
women, in the tail of the pancreas. The tumour 
over - secretes mucin, causing pain and recurrent 
bouts of pancreatitis. Disease may range from 
benign to malignant and cannot be differentiated 
without surgical removal. Initial diagnosis is made 
by CT, MRCP or ERCP. ERCP may show the typical 
 ‘ ﬁ sh eye ’ appearance, where the duodenal papilla 
is seen to be gaping with  ‘ shiny ’  mucus bulging 
through the terminal duct. Following surgical 
resection, prognosis is excellent for benign 
disease. Malignant disease has a 5 - year survival of 
50 − 75%. 
 Pancreatic  e ndocrine  t umours 
 These rare tumours arise from the islet and 
gastrin - producing cells of the pancreas. They may 
be non - functioning and present with biliary 
obstruction, bleeding or abdominal masses; or 
functioning (hormone secreting) and present with 
an endocrine syndrome, depending on the 
hormone produced. 
 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 At initial presentation the majority of patients 
have advanced disease: 
 •  Most patients have severe abdominal pain 
often radiating to the back;  
 •  Weight loss is common; 
   •      Obstructive jaundice is a frequent result of 
lesions in the head of the pancreas;  
 •  Cancer in the body and tail may cause splenic 
vein obstruction with resultant splenomegaly, 
gastric and oesophageal varices, and GI 
haemorrhage;  
 •  Glandular destruction by the tumour may lead 
to diabetes and/or pancreatic exocrine 
insufﬁ ciency. 
 Investigations 
 •  Laboratory tests show elevated ALP and 
bilirubin in bile duct obstruction. Ca 19 - 9 is 
not useful in diagnosis but, if positive, may be 
used to monitor response to treatment.  
 •  Helical CT or MRCP are the preferred tests. 
   •      In the case of obstructive jaundice, it is 
reasonable to use ERCP as the initial 
investigation.  
 •  Fine needle aspiration is usually required for 
conﬁ rmation of the diagnosis, using CT or 
endoscopic ultrasound guidance. 
 Management 
 The overall survival rate for pancreatic cancer is 
 < 6%, making it the worst of all the solid organ 
cancers. The only chance for cure is complete 
resection of the tumour. However, only 30% of 
patients with tumours in the head of the pancreas, 
and only 10% of those with cancer in the body and 
tail, can be offered curative resection at presenta-
tion. Adjuvant chemotherapy and radiation 
therapy are commonly used. 
 Given the majority of patients have incurable 
disease, symptomatic management is of the 
utmost importance. Moderate to severe pain 
should be treated with oral opioid analgesics at 

120 
Biliary diseases
 The biliary system is concerned with the transport 
of bile, including timely release and  en route con-
centration, from the liver into the duodenum. 
Disruption of the ﬂ ow of bile has consequences in 
the form of pain, inﬂ ammation, colonisation by 
micro - organisms and infection, as well as in terms 
of loss of essential digestive functions of bile. 
Disruption of bile ﬂ ow most commonly occurs 
because of mechanical blockage caused by biliary 
stones. However, other acquired and congenital 
causes also contribute.  
 Embryology 
 The liver arises as a hollow outgrowth from the 
portion of the gut which goes on to become the 
descending part of the duodenum. This diverticu-
lum gives off two buds of cells which become the 
right and left lobes of the liver. The original diver-
ticulum from the duodenum forms the common 
bile duct, and from this the cystic duct and gall-
bladder arise as a solid outgrowth which later 
acquires a lumen (Figure  19.1 ). 
 Biliary  a natomy 
 The bile ducts arise as tiny passages in the liver 
cells which communicate with the  intercellular 
biliary passages  (bile capillaries or cannaliculi). 
These passages radiate to the circumference of the 
lobule, and open into the interlobular bile ducts, 
accompanying the portal vein and hepatic artery. 
 19 
Biliary  d iseases  
They then join with other ducts to form two main 
trunks, which leave the liver at the porta hepatis 
and join to form the  hepatic duct . 
 The large biliary ducts have an external or 
ﬁ brous and an internal or mucous layer. The 
mucous coat is continuous with the lining mem-
brane of the hepatic ducts and gallbladder, and 
also with that of the duodenum. The mucous mem-
brane is a columnar epithelium, with numerous 
mucous glands. About 4   cm after the union of the 
two main trunks to form the hepatic duct, it is 
joined at an acute angle by the cystic duct, and so 
forms the common bile duct. The hepatic duct is 
accompanied by the hepatic artery and portal vein. 
 The gallbladder is divided into a fundus, body 
and neck, and consists of three coats: an external 
serous coat derived from the peritoneum, a ﬁ bro-
muscular coat which forms the framework of the 
sac and an internal mucus which is elevated into 
minute rugae. Opposite the neck of the gallblad-
der, the mucous membrane projects inward in the 
form of oblique ridges or folds, forming a sort of 
spiral valve. 
 The  cystic duct , which is about 4   cm long, has a 
mucous lining that is thrown into a series of cres-
centic folds, from 5 to 12 in number, similar to 
those found in the neck of the gallbladder. They 
form a continuous spiral valve, which, when the 
duct is distended, results in dilatation of the 
spaces between the fold, so as to give the cystic 
duct a twisted appearance. 
 The  common bile duct , formed by the junction 
of the cystic and hepatic ducts, is about 7.5   cm 
long and  < 7   mm in diameter (this may increase 
with age: approximately 1  mm each decade above 
the age of 50 years). Near its distal end, it lies 
alongside the terminal part of the pancreatic duct. 
The two ducts unite and share an opening at the 
tip of the duodenal papilla. The short tube formed 
Lecture Notes: Gastroenterology and Hepatology, 1st edition. 
Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. 
© 2011 Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Biliary diseases 121
lected in the gallbladder. The gallbladder then 
absorbs up to 90% of the water, concentrating and 
storing bile. Eating results in the release of gut 
hormones and cholinergic stimulation. These ini-
tiate gallbladder contraction and biliary sphincter 
relaxation, promoting the passage of bile from the 
gallbladder into the duodenum. The concentrated 
bile thus released solubilises intestinal fats and 
fat - soluble vitamins, facilitating their absorption. 
During fasting an increase in sphincter tone facili-
tates gallbladder ﬁ lling. 
 The proximal small intestine allows limited 
passive diffusion of bile salts such that 90% of bile 
salts reach the terminal ileum. Here there is active 
absorption of bile salts into the portal venous cir-
culation. Bile salts are thus returned to the liver 
and circulate through this pathway    −  the entero-
hepatic circulation    −  10 − 12 times/day. 
 Biliary  m icrobiology 
 Biliary infection occurs often in association with 
cholelithiasis. It can take acute and chronic forms 
and predominately involves the gallbladder 
by the union of the two ducts is dilated into the 
 ampulla of Vater . 
 Biliary  p hysiology 
 Over a 24 - h period, a normal adult human pro-
duces 400 − 1100   ml of hepatic bile. Bile is com-
posed of: 
 •  Water (the primary component); 
 •  Electrolytes; 
 •  Bile salts, synonymous with bile acids (they 
induce inﬂ ux of water and electrolytes in the 
canaliculi by active transport and passive 
diffusion);  
 •  Bilirubin (from degradation of haem 
compounds from degenerative red blood cells);  
 •  Phospholipids and cholesterol; 
 •  Proteins that regulate GI function; 
 •  Drugs and drug metabolites (including 
potentially toxic compounds). 
 From the cannaliculi bile passes into the inter-
lobular ducts, then the common hepatic duct. 
About 50% of the bile secreted while fasting is col-
 Figure 19.1   Human embryo at 3 - mm length stage, showing developmental structures of the biliary tree.  
Pericardial cavity
Anterior wall of
pericardium
Lower wall of
pericardium
Liver
Bile duct
Vitelline duct
Peritoneal
cavity
Communication
between pericardial
and peritoneal cavities
Vitelline vein
Umbilical vein
Cuverian duct
Atrium
Dorsal mesocardium
Truncus arteriosus

122 
Biliary diseases
types of gallstones are cholesterol stones, black 
pigment stones and brown pigment stones (Table 
 19.1 ). For gallstone formation to occur there must 
be: 
 •  Supersaturation; 
 •  Excess of promotors over inhibitors of 
crystallization; 
 •  A matrix template on which crystallization can 
occur; 
 •  Bile stasis (retention in the gallbladder to allow 
time to grow). 
 The major precipitates are cholesterol, calcium 
bilirubinates and calcium salts of phosphate, car-
bonate and palmitate. 
 The vast majority of gallstones in Western coun-
tries are cholesterol or mixed type. It is interesting 
to note that while pigment gallstones predominate 
in Asian countries, Asians who take up a Western 
diet become more prone to cholesterol stones. 
 Normally, in the gallbladder, bile is concen-
trated by active absorption of water and electro-
lytes. Phospholipids and biliary cholesterol are 
absorbed so that the concentration of cholesterol 
relative to bile salts is actually lower than in 
hepatic bile. Supersaturation with cholesterol 
therefore can occur only if the bile secreted by 
hepatocytes is already supersaturated and/or the 
composition or pH of bile is altered in the extra-
hepatic bile ducts or gallbladder. 
(cholecystitis) or the bile ducts (cholangitis), dis-
cussed separately below. 
 The organisms involved are generally intestinal 
commensals: 
 •  Commonest are Gram negatives (e.g. 
 Escherichia coli ,  Klebsiella ,  Enterobacter ); 
 •  Less common are Gram positives (e.g. 
 Enterococcus  spp.) and mixed anaerobes (e.g. 
 Bacteroides ,  Clostridia ). 
 Cholelithiasis 
 Cholelithiasis, or the presence of gallstones, is 
common. However, the majority of patients 
(60 − 80%) do not develop symptoms associated 
with gallstones. Management centres on popula-
tion measures to reduce rates of gallstone forma-
tion and, in the individual patient, stratiﬁ cation as 
to the risk of symptoms and complications in 
those with asymptomatic, incidentally discovered 
gallstones. Generally patients with symptomatic 
gallstones 
should 
have 
cholecystectomy 
if 
tolerated. 
 Gallstone  f ormation 
 Gallstones are made up of poorly soluble compo-
nents of bile precipitated on a three - dimensional 
matrix of mucins and proteins. The three main 
 Table 19.1   Characteristics of different gallstone types. 
 Characteristic 
  Cholesterol  
  Black pigment  
  Brown pigment  
 Composition  
  Cholesterol with calcium 
bilirubinates  
 Black pigment polymer with 
calcium bilirubinates and 
phosphates  
 Calcium bilirubinates 
with cholesterol and 
calcium palmitate  
 Colour  
  Yellow − white  
  Black to dark brown  
  Yellow to orange  
 Shape and 
texture  
 Hard and shiny, round or 
faceted  
 Shiny or dull, faceted  
  Soft and greasy, ovoid  
 Number  
  Single or multiple  
 Multiple and numerous  
  Single or multiple  
 Location  
  Usually gallbladder  
  Usually gallbladder  
  Usually bile ducts  
 Associations  
  Female gender, multiparity 
 Diabetes 
 Oral contraceptives 
 Obesity or rapid weight loss 
 Family history  
 Haemolysis 
 Cirrhosis 
 Crohn ’ s disease 
 Total parenteral nutrition  
 Structural biliary 
disease (strictures, 
sclerosing 
cholangitis, surgery)  
 Cause  
  Increased cholesterol with 
or without decreased bile 
salt excretion  
 Increased bilirubin and 
calcium excretion into bile 
 Increased bile pH  
 Bacterial infection 
causes hydrolysis of 
bilirubin conjugates  

Biliary diseases 123
 •  Murphy ’ s sign (deep inspiration exacerbates 
the pain during palpation of the right upper 
quadrant (RUQ) and halts inspiration) 
develops with involuntary guarding of right -
 sided abdominal muscles. 
 •  Fever (common): usually low grade. 
 •  In the elderly, fever may not develop, and the 
ﬁ rst or only symptoms may be systemic and 
non - speciﬁ c (e.g. anorexia, vomiting, malaise, 
weakness). 
 Investigations 
 •  Routine tests:   because only 10% of gallstones 
are calciﬁ ed, plain abdominal X - ray is 
infrequently helpful. In addition, given the 
intermittent nature of symptoms, nor are 
routine blood tests, although repeated liver 
tests timed to the onset of pain may give extra 
clues as to the cause of pain.  
 •  Advanced tests:   magnetic resonance 
cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) 
has high speciﬁ city and sensitivity in 
choledocholithiasis, giving it an accuracy 
very similar to ERCP. However, it has 
limitations in the detection of small 
gallstones ( < 4  mm) and gallstones that sit 
close to the ampulla of Vater. Endoscopic 
ultrasonography (EUS) has proven useful in 
detecting very small gallstones ( < 3  mm) 
and may be needed if other studies are 
equivocal. 
 Risk  s tratiﬁ cation of  p atients with 
 a symptomatic  g allstones 
 The average risk of someone with gallstones 
developing symptomatic gallstones is low at 
approximately 2.0% per year, the yearly incidence 
of complications is 0.3% and the risk for gallblad-
der cancer is 0.02%. Hence most patients need 
no therapy. However, the subgroup with high 
risk of symptoms and/or gallbladder cancer, 
will 
generally 
beneﬁ t 
from 
prophylactic 
cholecystectomy. 
 Indications for cholecystectomy : 
 •  Gallbladder polyps which are rapidly growing 
or that are  > 1  cm; 
 •  ‘ Porcelain gallbladder ’ , a radiological sign; 
 •  Solitary stone or total stone burden  > 3  cm; 
 •  Sickle cell anaemia; 
 •  Morbidly obese patients undergoing bariatric 
surgery. 
 When there is supersaturation, if a suitable 
matrix is present, the minerals crystallize on a 
matrix template to form a miniature calculus or 
nidus. The matrix is made up of proteins and glyc-
oproteins. For this nidus to then grow to form a 
gallstone, there needs to be bile stasis due to 
impairment of emptying of the gallbladder or bile 
ﬂ ow in the ducts.  
 Epidemiology and  p ublic 
 h ealth  m easures 
 Risk factors  for cholesterol gallstones include: 
 •  Demographic factors: 
   Family history; 
   Older age; 
   Female gender; 
   Pregnancy and multiparity. 
 •  Abnormal eating behaviours: 
   Obesity; 
   Rapid weight loss; 
   Prolonged fasting. 
 •  Systemic diseases: 
   Diabetes mellitus; 
   Crohn ’ s disease; 
   Spinal cord injury. 
 •  Iatrogenic causes: 
   Somatostatin( - analogue) treatment; 
   Sex hormone treatment; 
   Total parenteral nutrition. 
 Possible  preventative factors include: 
 •  High ﬁ bre diet; 
 •  Low consumption of saturated fatty acids; 
 •  High relative amounts of cis -  versus trans - fatty 
acids;  
 •  Nut consumption; 
 •  Moderate physical activity. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 •  Pain: Typically right hypochondrial or 
epigastric; 
 •  Radiates to the upper back or right shoulder; 
 •  Steady and intense, occurs more than an 
hour after meals (especially fried or fatty 
foods);  
 •  Often associated with an urge to walk (75% of 
patients);  
 •  Each episode lasts 1 − 24  h; 
 •  More likely to be gallstone related when there 
is no associated heartburn and no relief with 
bowel movements. 

124 
Biliary diseases
 However after UDCA, stones recur in about half 
of patients by 5 years, and it is not successful when 
used in patients with highly symptomatic 
gallstones. 
 ERCP and sphincerotomy may be sufﬁ cient 
treatment for patients with gallstones who are not 
suitable for surgery. 
 Acute  c holangitis 
 Aetiology 
 Acute bacterial cholangitis develops when bacte-
rial infection complicates obstruction within the 
biliary tract. Partial obstruction imparts increased 
risk compared to complete obstruction. Infection 
is generally thought to occur through direct 
extension of bacteria from the duodenum. 
Haematogenous spread through the portal venous 
system could be another route. Bacterial colonisa-
tion of the bile duct alone generally does  not result 
in cholangitis. 
 Causes of acute bacterial cholangitis: 
 •  Choledocholithiasis or sludge; 
 •  Biliary strictures; 
 •  Choledochal cysts, choledochocele, Caroli ’ s 
disease;  
 •  Stenosis of the papilla of Vater; 
 •  Parasitic infections; 
 •  Iatrogenic (e.g. post - ERCP). 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 The classical presentation is with Charcot ’ s triad: 
 •  Fever; 
 •  RUQ pain (may be absent in the elderly); 
 •  Jaundice. 
 In severe cases, mental confusion and hypoten-
sion may also be present (Reynold ’ s pentad). In 
these cases, urgent biliary decompression is 
needed.  
 Investigations 
 •  Bloods : all patients should have serum 
biochemistry, FBC and a clotting screen 
performed. In the early stage there may be a 
pronounced and disproportionate increase of 
aminotransferases (ALT, AST). This may cause 
confusion with viral hepatitis, since in the early 
 Primary  p revention of  g allstones 
in  h igh - r isk  g roups 
 High - risk groups can beneﬁ t from modulation of 
therapy to avoid gallstones: 
 •  During weight loss: 
   Limitation of weight loss to a maximum rate 
of 1.5  kg/week; 
   Addition of 10  g of fat to a low - calorie diet; 
   Evidence for NSAIDs is contradictory; 
   Ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA) is efﬁ cacious 
and cost beneﬁ cial. 
   •      Daily intravenous cholecystokinin or amino 
acids during total parenteral nutrition.  
 •  UDCA during somatostatin analogue therapy. 
 Management of  s ymptomatic 
 g allstones 
 Cholecystectomy 
 After symptoms develop, the risk of recurrent 
symptoms decreases with time: 
 •  Within 1 year from the ﬁ rst pain attack about 
50% have a second attack;  
 •  About 30% of patients will have only one pain 
attack;  
 •  After 5 years symptom free, the risk returns to 
that of asymptomatic patients. 
 Symptomatic patients are at higher risk of com-
plications (i.e. acute cholecystitis, acute pancrea-
titis, cholangitis); the risk is about 1 − 2%, as 
compared to 0.1 − 0.2% in asymptomatic patients. 
Open cholecystectomy, previously the treatment 
of choice, is safe and effective with an overall mor-
tality of 0.1 − 0.5%. However, laparoscopic chole-
cystectomy has become the treatment of choice 
because it is associated with shorter convales-
cence, 
decreased 
post - operative 
discomfort, 
improved cosmetic results and no increase in 
morbidity or mortality. In about 5% of cases the 
procedure must be converted to an open one. 
 Non - s urgical  a lternatives 
 Where surgery is declined or surgical risks are 
high, UDCA can sometimes dissolve gallbladder 
stones: 
 •  Treatment given for many months; 
 •  Must be cholesterol stones; 
 •  Stones cannot be too large ( < 1.5  cm); 
 •  Gallbladder should be free of obstruction. 

Biliary diseases 125
previous instrumentation of the bile ducts), 
and results of biliary (if taken) and blood 
cultures. 
 Endoscopic therapy for acute gallstone cholan-
gitis is superior to surgical treatment. Percutaneous 
transhepatic drainage or surgery should be con-
sidered when ERCP is impossible or has failed in 
expert hands. If there is signiﬁ cant coagulation 
disturbances, large and multiple stones or an 
unstable patient, nasobiliary drain placement or 
biliary stents are preferred as initial treatment. 
Stone removal can then be performed at a later 
stage, after recovery from the acute episode. 
Elective cholecystectomy should be performed in 
the majority of cases. 
 Cholecystitis 
 Aetiology 
 Cholecystitis is caused by obstruction of the cystic 
duct usually by a gallstone, leading to distension 
and subsequent chemical or bacterial inﬂ amma-
tion of the gallbladder. 95% of people with 
acute cholecystitis have gallstones ( calculous 
cholecystitis ) and 5% lack gallstones ( acalculous 
cholecystitis ). Positive cultures of the bile or gall-
bladder wall are found in 50 – 75% of cases of acute 
cholecystitis. The cause of acalculous cholecystitis 
is uncertain and may be multifactorial.  
 Epidemiology 
 Of those admitted to hospital for biliary 
tract disease, 20% have acute cholecystitis, and 
the number of cholecystectomies carried out is 
steadily increasing, especially in elderly people. 
Acute calculous cholecystitis is three times 
more common in women up to the age of 50 years 
and about 1.5 times more common in women 
thereafter. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Patients present with unremitting RUQ pain, ano-
rexia, nausea, vomiting and fever. Severe acute 
cholecystitis can lead to necrosis of the gallblad-
der wall, known as  gangrenous cholecystitis . The 
complications of cholecystitis include perforation 
of the gallbladder, pericholecystic abscess and 
ﬁ stula. 
stage bile ducts are often not (yet) dilated on 
ultrasound.  
 •  Transabdominal ultrasound  is the ﬁ rst step in 
detecting bile - duct (as well as associated 
gallbladder) stones. However, the distal bile 
duct may be difﬁ cult to visualise because of 
air - containing intestinal loops in front of it. 
Whilst the speciﬁ city of ultrasound in stone 
detection is almost 100%, the sensitivity in 
detecting bile - duct stones is rather low 
(27 − 49%). The ﬁ nding of bile - duct dilatation is 
invaluable as it indicates the presence of 
post - hepatic obstruction. 
 •  MRCP  is more sensitive than transabdominal 
ultrasound (overall  >  90%) in detecting bile - duct 
stones. However, its sensitivity is lower in cases 
with small stones and/or very dilated bile ducts.  
 •  Endoscopic ultrasonography  allows excellent 
visualisation of the bile duct, including the 
distal part that may be difﬁ cult to see on 
conventional ultrasound. It has a high 
sensitivity to detect bile - duct stones.  
 •  ERCP is considered the gold standard 
investigation. The disadvantages are its 
invasiveness and risk of complications 
(morbidity 3%, mortality 0.2% for diagnostic 
ERCP). A great advantage is the possibility of 
proceeding to therapeutic ERCP with 
papillotomy, stone extraction and/or 
nasobiliary drainage or stenting. 
 Differential  d iagnosis: 
 •  Gallbladder: 
   Acute cholecystitis; 
   Mirizzi ’ s syndrome. 
 •  Intra - abdominal: 
   Acute appendicitis; 
   Perforated duodenal ulcer; 
   Hepatic abscess; 
   Acute hepatitis. 
 Management 
 While 80 − 90% of cholangitis patients respond sat-
isfactorily to initial conservative therapy with 
broad - spectrum antibiotics and adequate intrave-
nous hydration, it is wise to perform ERCP in all 
patients as early as possible: immediately in septic 
patients, otherwise within 24   h. 
 Choice of antibiotics is inﬂ uenced by patient 
characteristics (e.g. antibiotic hypersensitivity, 
renal function, hearing loss, severity of disease, 

126 
Biliary diseases
 Box 19.2   Classiﬁ cation of sphincter 
of Oddi. 
 Type 1  
 •  Biliary pain  
 •  Abnormal liver enzyme levels  
 •  Fixed sphincter of Oddi stenosis on radiograph  
 Type 2  
 •  Biliary pain and transient elevation of enzyme 
level and/or  
 •  Dilated bile duct and/or  
 •  Delay in emptying of bile duct  
 Type 3  
 •  Biliary pain only  
 Box 19.1   Comparing laparoscopic  versus  
open cholecystectomy. 
 •  Reduces hospital stay, duration of surgery and 
intra -  and post - operative complications  
 •  Conversion from laparoscopic to open 
cholecystectomy is necessary in 4 – 27% of 
cases  
 •  Laparoscopic cholecystectomy carries a higher 
incidence of bile duct injury  
 •  Altered gallbladder motility is the most 
commonly accepted abnormality;  
 •  Impairment of gallbladder ﬁ lling; 
 •  Gallbladder hyperalgesia. 
 Functional disorders of adjacent structures, 
classically SOD (Box  19.2 ), have been implicated 
in the pathogenesis of recurrent epigastric or RUQ 
abdominal pain following cholecystectomy. That 
SOD might exist in patients with an intact 
gallbladder has been suggested but remains 
controversial. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 The clinical features of this pain are summarised 
in Box  19.3 . 
 Investigations 
 Gallstone disease and structural abnormalities 
must be excluded before the diagnosis of a func-
tional disorder can be considered. 
 •  Cholecystokinin cholescintigraphy to measure 
the gallbladder ejection fraction (GEF) has 
been advocated as a way to select patients with 
acalculous biliary pain who would beneﬁ t from 
cholecystectomy. 
 •  ERCP with sphincter of Oddi manometry 
(SOM) has been used to identify patients who 
might respond to biliary endoscopic 
sphincterotomy (ES). It must be noted that 
SOD increases the risk for post - ES pancreatitis, 
occurring in as many as 22% of patients.     
 Management 
 The treatment of choice for cholecystitis is open 
or laparoscopic cholecystectomy (Box  19.1 ) under-
taken  early  (within 7 days of onset of symptoms) 
rather than  delayed ( ≥ 6 weeks after onset of symp-
toms) as it reduces the duration of hospital stay.   
 Observation alone has a failure rate after 8 years 
of 30%, but there is no difference in the rate of 
gallstone - related complications (recurrent chole-
cystitis, pancreatitis, intractable pain) or emer-
gency admissions for pain. For this reason those 
with acute cholecystitis who have multiple comor-
bid conditions and relative contraindications 
for cholecystectomy may be treated with antibiot-
ics, a low - fat diet and, in some instances, a chole-
cystostomy tube. If the comorbidity becomes 
better controlled, delayed cholecystectomy is 
appropriate. 
 Acalculous  b iliary  p ain 
 Recurrent biliary - type abdominal pain in patients 
with no evidence of cholelithiasis is a perplexing 
clinical dilemma, and evaluation and treatment of 
these patients is controversial. The frequency of 
biliary - type pain without gallstones in the popula-
tion may be as high as 7% in men and 20% in 
women. Synonyms for the term acalculous biliary 
pain include: gallbladder dysfunction, functional 
gallbladder and sphincter of Oddi dysfunction 
(SOD), gallbladder dyskinesia, biliary dyskinesia, 
chronic acalculous cholecystitis and chronic acal-
culous gallbladder disease. 
 Aetiopathophysiology 
 This remains incompletely understood: 

Biliary diseases 127
 Primary  s clerosing  c holangitis 
 PSC has a male predominance, typically affecting 
young men around age 40 years. There is a strong 
association with inﬂ ammatory bowel disease 
(IBD), especially ulcerative colitis. The estimated 
prevalence is 6 in 100   000. PSC is an idiopathic, 
chronic, progressive liver disease that causes 
inﬂ ammation, ﬁ brosis and strictures in the intra-
hepatic and extrahepatic bile ducts. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 These include jaundice, steatorrhoea, pruritus, 
weight loss and failure of proper absorption of 
calcium and fat - soluble vitamins. However, many 
patients have no symptoms or vague symptoms of 
fatigue and upper abdominal pain. Examination 
may reveal xanthomas of the eyes, neck, chest, 
back and extensor surfaces.  
 Investigations 
 Laboratory 
tests 
show 
elevated 
conjugated 
bilirubin, an ALP that is often more than three 
times the upper limit of normal and an elevated 
GGT. 
 Management 
 This primarily involves symptom management. 
Liver transplantation is the only life - extending 
therapy. Surveillance for cholangiocarcinoma is 
warranted; however, there is no consensus as to 
how this should be conducted. Patients with PSC 
complicating IBD require more frequent colonic 
surveillance than those with IBD alone because of 
an increased risk of colon cancer.   
 Primary  b iliary  c irrhosis 
 PBC is an autoimmune cholestatic liver disease in 
which the epithelial cells lining the intrahepatic 
bile ducts are damaged by the immune system. It 
predominately affects women aged 30 − 65 years 
but can occur in those as young as their late teens. 
The male - to - female ratio is 1 : 10. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 These typically include fatigue, intense pruritus, 
cutaneous hyperpigmentation, xanthelasmas and 
hepatosplenomegaly. The rate of progression is 
slow. PBC is often associated with various autoim-
 Management 
 Given the risks of cholecystectomy and SOM, and 
the lack of clear evidence of beneﬁ t in the majority 
of patients, a conservative approach is advocated. 
Careful evaluation of psychological issues is 
essential, and treatments targeting chronic vis-
ceral pain (such as tricyclic antidepressants) 
should be considered.    
 Structural  b ile  d uct 
 a bnormalities 
 The three major adult manifestations of cholesta-
sis are primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC), primary 
sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) and cholangiocarci-
noma. Drug - related and congenital biliary abnor-
malities are discussed in Chapters  23  and  25 , 
respectively. 
 Box 19.3   Diagnostic criteria for gallbladder 
and sphincter of Oddi disorders. 
 Must include episodes of pain located in the 
epigastrium and/or right upper quadrant and all of 
the following : 
 •  Episodes lasting 30   min or longer  
 •  Recurrent symptoms occurring at different 
intervals (not daily)  
 •  Pain builds up to a steady level  
 •  Pain severe enough to interrupt patient ’ s daily 
activities or lead to an emergency department visit  
 •  Pain not relieved by bowel movements  
 •  Pain not relieved by postural change  
 •  Pain not relieved by antacids  
 •  Exclusion of other structural disease that would 
explain the symptoms  
 Supportive criteria  
 The pain may present with one or more of the 
following: 
 •  Pain associated with nausea and vomiting  
 •  Pain radiates to back and/or right 
infrasubscapular region  
 •  Pain awakens patient from sleep in the middle 
of the night  

128 
Biliary diseases
 •  Intrahepatic (10% of cases); 
 •  Extrahepatic (25% of cases); 
 •  Perihilar bile duct tumours (65% of cases). If 
they involve the bifurcation of the hepatic 
duct, they are known as Klatskin ’ s tumours.    
 The modality most likely to show tumour 
depends on the type of tumour: 
 •  Ultrasonography is the ﬁ rst - line investigation; 
 •  Abdominal CT may demonstrate the tumour if 
the malignancy is nodular and mass - like;  
 •  MRCP demonstrates stricture - causing tumours 
but does not allow distension of the duct and 
may not detect long segments and minimal 
narrowing in diffuse sclerosing tumours; 
 •  ERCP is a more deﬁ nitive investigation that 
can depict the periampullary tumour. 
 Management 
 •  Complete surgical resection is the only 
therapy to afford a chance of cure: 
   < 20% of intrahepatic tumours are resectable, 
and 5 - year survival rate in those undergoing 
resection is 5 − 15%; 
   Resection is more often possible in 
patients with mid - ductal (33%) or distal 
tumours (56%), with a 5 - year survival rate 
of 39%. 
 •  Palliation : 
   ERCP drainage with or without endoluminal 
stenting is preferred;  
   Percutaneous radiological drainage may be 
needed for proximal lesions;  
   Chemotherapy (often as a radiosensitising 
agent, before palliative radiotherapy);  
   Surgical bypass can also be used for 
palliation (but most patients die within a 
year of diagnosis). 
 •  Orthotopic liver transplantation is considered 
for some patients with proximal tumours who 
are not candidates for resection because of the 
extent of tumour spread in the liver. However, 
its use is controversial, primarily because 
cholangiocarcinoma almost invariably recurs 
in the transplanted liver. 
 
 
  
mune diseases, such as scleroderma, thyroiditis 
and Sj ö gren ’ s syndrome. 
 Management 
 UDCA is the ﬁ rst - line treatment early in disease 
and can slow its progression, but is less effective 
later in disease. Liver transplant is the only treat-
ment that prolongs life in PBC.    
 Cholangiocarcinoma 
 Cholangiocarcinoma is a slow - growing malig-
nancy of the bile duct. It is the second most 
common 
primary 
hepatic 
tumour 
(after 
hepatoma). Groups at high - risk include: 
 •  Parasitic diseases of the biliary tract 
( Clonorchis sinensis  or  Opisthorchis viverrini ); 
 •  Congenital choledochal cysts; 
 •  IBD (10 - fold increased risk); 
 •  PSC (10% of cases); 
 •  History of other malignancy (10% of cases); 
 •  Previous surgery for choledochal cyst or biliary 
atresia;  
 •  Alpha - 1 - antitrypsin deﬁ ciency; 
 •  Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease; 
 •  Gallstones (20 − 50% of cases, probably 
coincidental);  
 •  Papillomatosis of the bile ducts; 
 •  Thorotrast exposure; 
 •  Chronic typhoid carrier status. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Intrahepatic tumours may cause abdominal pain, 
palpable masses and weight loss, with progressive 
obstructive jaundice in 90%. Painless jaundice 
occurs in 12%. Advanced disease may be compli-
cated by cholangitis or acute cholecystitis, or 
anaemia (due to chronic blood loss secondary to 
papillary tumours). Physical examination may 
demonstrate hepatomegaly and a palpable mass 
in 18% of patients (the gallbladder may be palpa-
ble with distal tumours).  
 Investigations 
 Tumours, which may be nodular or diffuse, are 
classiﬁ ed as: 

 Chronic liver disease results from hepatocellular 
injury and necrosis, often with a degree of under-
lying ﬁ brosis of the liver. Symptoms may be a 
result of loss of the: 
 •  Detoxifying function of the liver (jaundice, 
hepatic encephalopathy);  
 •  Synthetic function of the liver 
(hypoalbuminaemia, clotting factor 
deﬁ ciencies); 
 •  Portal hypertension (oesophageal and other 
varices, hypersplenism, ascites);  
 •  Complications of the above (GI bleeding, 
spontaneous bacterial peritonitis).     
 Jaundice 
 Jaundice results when the liver ’ s capacity to 
convert and excrete bilirubin as bile is exceeded. 
This can result from: 
 •  Over production of bilirubin; 
 •  Reduction in the eliminatory capacity of the 
liver. 
 Bilirubin is the breakdown product of haem 
(from haemoglobin and other haemoproteins). It 
is bound to albumin in the plasma, but at the 
hepatocyte membrane it dissociates and enters 
the hepatocyte. It is then conjugated, primarily 
with glucuronic acid, and excreted as bile. 
 Thus jaundice can be divided into three main 
mechanisms (Table  20.1 ): 
 •  Prehepatic : increased degradation of haem 
(due to haemolysis) leading to haem 
 20 
Chronic  l iver  d isorders  
concentrations that cannot be cleared by the 
normal conjugative mechanisms, resulting in a 
predominately unconjugated 
hyperbilirubinaemia;  
 •  Hepatic : liver damage and/or inﬂ ammation 
affecting the conjugative and excretory ability 
of the liver so that the normal bilirubin load 
cannot be excreted, resulting in a 
predominately unconjugated, or mixed 
conjugated and unconjugated 
hyperbilirubinaemia;  
 •  Posthepatic : obstruction of the biliary outﬂ ow 
tract at any level, leading to an inability to 
excrete conjugated bilirubin in bile, resulting 
in a conjugated hyperbilirubinaemia. 
 Unconjugated bilirubin is water insoluble and 
thus is not excreted in urine. Conjugated bilirubin 
excreted in bile is converted to urobilinogen in the 
terminal ileum and then reabsorbed as part of the 
enterohepatic circulation before being excreted in 
urine. That which is not reabsorbed is further con-
verted to urobilin, then stercobilin, giving faeces 
its normal colour. Testing for the different by -
 products of haem excretion in the blood and urine 
and observation of the stool give clues as to the 
cause of jaundice. Obstruction of the biliary 
system results in pale stools (decreased stercobi-
lin) and dark urine (increased conjugated bilirubin, 
which is unable to be excreted into bile, but no 
urobilinogen). 
 Portal  h ypertension 
 Raised pressure in the portal venous system is 
generally a result of increased resistance classiﬁ ed 
as occurring within the sinusoids (sinusoidal), 
proximal to the hepatic sinusoids or distal to the 
sinusoids (pre - or post - sinusoidal respectively). 
Lecture Notes: Gastroenterology and Hepatology, 1st edition. 
Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. 
© 2011 Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

130 
Chronic liver disorders
pressure within the portal system. It is often used 
as primary prophylaxis once portal hypertension 
is diagnosed, and should always be considered for 
secondary prophylaxis after an episode of variceal 
bleeding. 
 Ascites 
 Ascites, the presence of ﬂ uid in the peritoneum, 
has two main pathogenic mechanisms, transuda-
tion and exudation. 
 •  Transudates result from sequestration of 
ﬂ uid into the peritoneal space due to 
changes in hydrostatic and oncotic pressures 
across the peritoneum, or due to ﬂ uid 
retention: 
   Hydrostatic: these are the result of portal 
hypertension and resultant increases in the 
pressure in splanchnic vessels;  
   Oncotic: these are the result of lowered 
serum albumin as the synthetic function of 
the liver decreases;  
Another classiﬁ cation system divides the cause 
into hepatic, pre - and post - hepatic. 
 The portal system is formed by the conﬂ uence 
of the splenic and superior mesenteric veins. The 
critical physiological measure is the  ‘ portal pres-
sure gradient ’  (the difference in pressure between 
the portal vein and hepatic veins), and portal 
hypertension is deﬁ ned as this gradient reaching 
12   mmHg or greater. Increased pressure in the 
portal system results in: 
 •  Collateral vessel formation (in particular 
varices);  
   •      Ascites;  
   •      Increased risk of hepatorenal syndrome;  
   •      Hepatic encephalophathy;  
   •      Splenomegaly (enlargement of the spleen) with 
consequent sequestration therein of red blood 
cells, white blood cells and platelets, resulting 
in pancytopenia (hypersplenism).    
 Management 
 First - line treatment is with a non - selective beta -
 blocker (nadolol or propranolol) to reduce the 
 Table 20.1   Classiﬁ cation of jaundice by cause, symptoms and investigation features. 
 Type of 
jaundice  
 Laboratory 
features  
 Clinical 
features  
 Common causes  
 Pre - hepatic 
(haemolytic)  
 Blood: unconjugated 
hyperbilirubinaemia 
 Urine: no bilirubin 
present, 
urobilinogen 
increased  
 Jaundice 
 Normal urine 
 Normal stool  
 Haemolysis 
 Kidney diseases (e.g. haemolytic uraemic 
syndrome) 
 Diseases with increased rate of haemolysis (e.g. 
sickle cell anaemia, glucose - 6 - phosphate 
dehydrogenase deﬁ ciency, malaria)  
 Hepatic  
  Blood: 
hyperbilirubinaemia 
unconjugated or 
mixed conjugated 
and unconjugated 
 Urine: bilirubin 
present, 
urobilinogen may 
be increased but 
variable  
 Jaundice 
 Urine dark 
 Normal stool  
 Commonest: acute hepatitis, alcoholic liver 
disease, drug hepatotoxicity 
 Less common causes: primary biliary cirrhosis, 
Gilbert ’ s syndrome (a genetic disorder of 
bilirubin metabolism present in 5% of the 
population, which can result in mild jaundice), 
metastatic carcinoma  
 Posthepatic 
(obstructive/
cholestatic)  
 Blood: conjugated 
hyperbilirubinaemia 
 Urine: increased 
conjugated 
bilirubin, no urinary 
urobilinogen  
 Jaundice 
Severe 
itching 
 Urine dark 
 Stools pale  
 Extrahepatic biliary disease (most commonly, 
gallstones in the common bile duct and 
cancer in the head of the pancreas; rarer, 
strictures of the common bile duct, biliary 
atresia, ductal carcinoma, pancreatitis and 
pancreatic pseudocysts, liver ﬂ ukes in the 
common bile duct) 
 Intrahepatic cholestasis  

Chronic liver disorders 131
pressure ( transjugular intrahepatic 
portosystemic shunt [TIPS]);  
 •  Surgical shunt placement (now rarely needed). 
 Spontaneous  b acterial 
 p eritonitis 
 Spontaneous bacterial peritonitis (SBP) is, as the 
name suggests, the spontaneous onset of bacterial 
infection of ascitic ﬂ uid in the setting of liver 
disease. Patients with the transudative ascites of 
liver disease with portal hypertension are particu-
larly at risk of bacterial infection in the perito-
neum because of the co - morbid loss of the 
defensive mechanisms present in normal perito-
neal secretions, in particular opsonising proteins. 
Thus, the risk of SBP increases as the protein 
content of the ﬂ uid decreases, the greatest risk 
being in those with an ascitic albumin concentra-
tion  < 1  g/l. 
 The bacteria implicated in SBP are enteric 
organisms. Traditionally, three - quarters of SBP 
infections are caused by aerobic Gram - negative 
organisms (mostly  Escherichia coli ), and one -
 quarter are due to aerobic Gram - positive organ-
isms (especially Streptococcal species). However, 
the percentage of Gram - positive infections may 
be increasing, related to quinolone resistance 
among Gram - positive bacteria. 
 Investigations 
 The  diagnosis  of SBP is by paracentesis and iden-
tiﬁ cation of ascitic neutrophils  > 250/mm 3 . Gram 
stain and culture of ascitic ﬂ uid should also be 
performed. Culture is aided by direct inoculation 
of an aerobic and anaerobic blood culture bottle, 
each with 10   ml of ascitic ﬂ uid, at the time of 
collection.  
 Management 
 Empiric  therapy is with: 
 •  Intravenous third - generation cephalosporins, 
but may be guided by past culture and 
sensitivity results in the setting of recurrent SBP;  
 •  Concomitant administration of intravenous 
albumin.    
 There may be a role for  prophylactic antibiotics 
in patients at high risk: 
   Fluid retention: renal hypoperfusion 
resulting from portal hypertension causes 
release of renin, and hence a secondary 
hyperaldosteronism; this results in salt and 
water retention and contributes to ascites.    
 •  Exudates  result from an inﬂ ammatory or 
neoplastic process at the peritoneal surface, 
causing increased production of peritoneal 
secretions. It is the former that is important in 
hepatic disease, although occasionally 
malignant processes that involve the liver may 
involve the peritoneal surface also.    
 In order to determine whether ascites is related 
to transudation or exudation the serum - to - ascites 
albumin gradient (SAAG) is calculated:
 
SAAG
Serum albumin concentration (g/l)
Ascites albumin con
=
−
centration (g/l)  
 A high gradient ( > 11   g/l) indicates the ascites is 
due to portal hypertension. A low gradient ( < 11  g/l) 
indicates ascites of non - portal hypertensive 
aetiology. 
 Management 
 •  General : 
   Treatment of the underlying liver condition; 
   Improvement of nutritional status in order to 
maximize serum albumin. 
 •  Speciﬁ c : 
   Reduction of hydrostatic pressure in the 
splanchnic vasculature with diuretics, 
particularly spironolactone (an aldosterone 
antagonist);  
   Abdominal paracentesis (removal of ascitic 
ﬂ uid through a drain placed temporarily in 
the peritoneal space) when ascites volumes 
are large. There is an argument for the use of 
intravenous albumin replacement during 
paracentesis in order to reduce the 
haemodynamic consequences of ﬂ uid shifts: 
10  g of albumin is given for each litre of 
ascites removed. 
 Management 
 Intractable ascites is deﬁ ned as ascites not 
responding to aggressive diuretic use. In this 
setting the options are: 
 •  Repeated paracentesis; 
 •  Radiological placement of intrahepatic 
portal - venous shunts to reduce splanchnic 

132 
Chronic liver disorders
 Management 
 Treatment of varices can take two forms: 
 •  Primary prophylaxis, following diagnosis of 
varices but prior to the development of a 
bleeding complication;  
 •  Secondary prophylaxis, instituted after an 
episode of bleeding.    
 Currently the favoured initial treatment for 
primary prophylaxis is with beta - blockers. The risk 
of variceal bleeding relates to the grade of varices 
and the severity of liver disease (Figure  20.1 ). 
 During an episode of variceal bleeding endo-
scopic treatment is required immediately follow-
ing haemodynamic stabilization and airway 
protection: 
 •  Ascitic albumin concentration  < 0.1  g/l; 
 •  Past SBP; 
 •  Patients with ﬂ uid protein  < 15  g/l and either 
Child − Pugh score of at least 9 or impaired 
renal function;  
 •  Cirrhotic patients presenting with bleeding 
oesophageal varices. 
 Oesophageal and 
 g astric  v arices 
 Chronic elevation of the portal pressure results in 
the formation of collateral venous tract formation 
between the portal circulation and the systemic 
venous system. The most troublesome site of col-
lateral formation is around the proximal stomach 
and 
distal 
oesophagus 
(gastro - oesophageal 
varices). These varices result from collateral ﬂ ow 
from the portal system, through the coronary vein 
of the stomach into the azygous vein (Figure  20.1 ). 
They lie submucosally and, with minimal trauma 
and resultant ulceration, can bleed into the GI 
tract. Varices are graded according to their size 
and the presence of overlying mucosal lesion (Box 
 20.1 ). The grade is a predictor of the likelihood of 
future variceal bleeding. 
 Figure 20.1   Primary management of oesophageal varices.  
Diagnosis of cirrhosis
Upper GI endoscopy
No varices
Re-endoscope
3–4 years
Grade I
varices
Re-endoscope
1 year
Grade II or III
varices
Propranolol
80–160 mg/day
Intolerant
Variceal band
ligation
 Box 20.1   Grading for oesophageal varices. 
 Grade 1:   Varices that collapse on inﬂ ation of 
the oesophagus with air  
 Grade 2:   Varices between grades 1 and 3  
 Grade 3:   Varices which are large enough to 
occlude the lumen  

Chronic liver disorders 133
liver; they bypass the liver due to portosystemic 
shunts and produce direct effects on the brain. 
The mechanisms underlying this are thought 
to be multifactorial. Initially it was believed 
that direct toxic effects of ammonia on the 
brain were the main factor. However, more 
recently attention has focused on alterations in 
plasma amino acid composition leading to accu-
mulation of  ‘ false ’ neurotransmitters in the brain 
and increases in neuroinhibitory substances such 
as manganese, monoamines or endogenous 
opiates. 
 Investigations 
 The differential diagnosis of hepatic encephalopa-
thy is wide (Box  20.2 ) and its diagnosis at 
presentation usually requires, in addition to the 
conﬁ rmation and grading of liver failure, exclu-
sion of metabolic disease and toxins (or with-
drawal 
effects) 
and 
head 
CT 
to 
exclude 
intracranial events. Subtle disturbances of cogni-
tion can be detected and followed using bedside 
and more specialised psychometric evaluation 
(Table  20.2 ). 
 •  Modality of ﬁ rst choice is band ligation:  
 •  Second - line modalities are: 
   Sclerotherapy; 
   Splanchnic vasoconstrictors (vasopressin); 
   Sengstaken tube (an apparatus consisting of 
a tube with a balloon on the end which is 
inserted into the oesophagus to tamponade 
the bleeding vessel; Figure  20.2 ). 
 Secondary prophylaxis (Figure  20.3 ) following 
an episode of conﬁ rmed variceal bleeding is: 
 •  Variceal band ligation in the ﬁ rst instance; 
 •  Beta - blockers in combination with banding or 
alone;  
 •  Endoscopic variceal injection of tissue glue or 
thrombin;  
 •  Transluminal intrahepatic porto-systemic 
shunts (TIPPS) and surgical shunts are 
reserved for patients who do not respond to 
banding. 
 Hepatic  e ncephalopathy 
 Hepatic encephalopathy results when toxic 
metabolites cannot be excreted by the diseased 
 Figure 20.2   Sengstaken tube for tamponade of bleeding varices.  
Oesophageal balloon
Oesophageal balloon
Gastric balloon
Gastric aspiration
Gastric balloon

134 
Chronic liver disorders
 •  The mainstay of therapy is the use of non -
 digestable disaccharides such as lactulose 
(given orally through a nasogastric tube or 
through retention enemas). The dose should 
be adjusted to accomplish three or four soft 
bowel movements each day.  
 •  Reduction of protein in the diet may be 
reasonable in the short term but is not a 
long - term consideration. 
 Management 
 Frequently there are factors that precipitate the 
onset of encephalopathy and correction of these 
may reverse, or at least reduce symptoms. These 
factors can be classiﬁ ed as direct neurotoxic pre-
cipitants, promoters of ammonia formation and 
factors altering blood − brain barrier function 
(Table  20.3 ). 
 Figure 20.3   Secondary management of oesophageal varices.  
UGI bleed
? Varices
? Endoscopy available
No
UGI
endoscopy
Glypressin
Somatostatin
Octreotide
Oesophageal
variceal bleed
Gastric
variceal bleed
Gastro-oesophageal
varices
Isolated gastric
varices
Histo-acryl glue
injection or TIPSS
Treat as
oesophageal varices
Recurrent
variceal
bleeding
Eradicated FU
at 3 and 6 months
and then yearly
TIPSS/surgery
Balloon
tamponade
Uncontrolled
Controlled
Banding eradication
programme
Variceal band ligation/
sclerotherapy
Consider referral
for TIPSS/surgery
Yes

Chronic liver disorders 135
perfusion, infection and use of nephrotoxic drugs. 
Hepatorenal syndrome (HRS) refers to acute, 
potentially reversible, oliguric renal failure result-
ing from intense intrarenal vasoconstriction in 
otherwise normal kidneys. It occurs both in 
patients with chronic or acute liver disease. The 
former comprises patients with cirrhosis, ascites 
and liver failure, the latter acute liver failure and 
alcoholic hepatitis. There are associated gross 
alterations in cardiovascular function and overac-
tivity of the sympathetic nervous and renin –
 angiotensin systems, with resultant retention of 
sodium and water and renal vasoconstriction. It 
 •  Traditionally, non - absorbable antibiotics were 
used to detoxify the colon and reduce the 
production of nitrogenous metabolites; 
however, because of toxic effects this is no 
longer commonly employed.  
 •  Occasionally refractory encephalopathy is the 
main indicator for liver transplantation. 
 Hepatorenal  s yndrome 
 Renal dysfunction in chronic liver disease is often 
multifactorial: hypovolaemia, changes in renal 
 Table 20.2   Grading of hepatic encephalopathy. 
 Grade  
 Level of 
consciousness 
 Personality and 
intellect  
 Neurological signs  
  Electroencephalogram 
abnormalities  
 0  
  Normal  
  Normal  
 None  
  None  
 Subclinical  
  Normal  
  Normal  
 Abnormalities only on 
psychometric testing  
 None  
 1  
  Day/night sleep 
reversal 
 Restlessness  
 Forgetfulness 
 Mild confusion 
 Agitation 
 Irritability  
 Tremor 
 Apraxia 
 Inco - ordination 
 Impaired handwriting  
 Triphasic waves (5   Hz)  
 2  
  Lethargy 
 Slowed 
responses  
 Disorientation to time 
 Loss of inhibition 
 Inappropriate 
behaviour  
 Asterixis 
 Dysarthria 
 Ataxia 
 Hypoactive reﬂ exes  
 Triphasic waves (5   Hz)  
 3  
  Somnolence 
 Confusion  
 Disorientation to 
place 
 Aggressive 
behaviour  
 Asterixis 
 Muscular rigidity 
 Babinski signs 
 Hyperactive reﬂ exes  
 Triphasic waves (5   Hz)  
 4  
  Coma  
  None  
 Decerebration  
  Delta/slow wave activity  
 Box 20.2   Differential diagnosis in hepatic 
encephalopathy. 
 Metabolic encephalopathies  
 •  Diabetes (hypoglycaemia, ketoacidosis)  
 •  Hypoxia  
 •  Carbon dioxide narcosis  
 Toxic encephalopathies  
 •  Alcohol (acute alcohol intoxication, delirium 
tremens, Wernicke − Korsakoff syndrome)  
 •  Drugs  
 Intracranial events  
 •  Intracerebral bleeding or infarction  
 •  Tumour  
 •  Infections (abscess, meningitis)  
 Encephalitis  

136 
Chronic liver disorders
 Liver transplantation is the only deﬁ nitive treat-
ment for HRS and remains the treatment of choice. 
It must be noted, however, that morbidity after 
liver transplantation is higher in patients with 
HRS than in those without HRS.    
can be classiﬁ ed into early (Type 1) and late (Type 
2) hepatorenal syndrome (Table  20.4 ). 
 The diagnosis of HRS is one of exclusion (Box 
 20.3 ), and it should not be diagnosed until all 
potentially reversible causes of renal failure have 
been excluded or treated.   
 Management 
 In the ﬁ rst instance treatment is aimed at correct-
ing reversible factors: 
 •  Hypovolaemia; 
 •  Infection; 
 •  Presence of nephrotoxins. 
 Alternative 
initial 
treatment 
is 
obviously 
required in type 1 HRS: 
 •  Vasoconstrictors, usually terlipressin, in 
combination with albumin 
administration;  
 •  TIPSS improve renal function and may 
improve survival in type 1 HRS. This has not 
been shown in type 2 HRS, but TIPSS 
may be used to improve the refractory 
ascites often associated with type 
2 HRS. 
 Table 20.3   Precipitants of encephalopathy in chronic liver disease. 
 
  Example  
  Mechanism  
  Treatment  
 Neurotoxins  
  Sedatives, 
tranquilizers, 
analgesics  
 Direct depressant action on 
brain  
 Avoid sedatives 
 Lactulose  
 Increase in serum 
ammonia  
 Azotemia  
  Urea production in colon 
 Excessive diuresis 
 Prerenal azotemia  
 Lactulose 
 Discontinue diuretics 
 Volume expansion 
with albumin  
 GI bleeding  
  Colonic protein load leads to 
ammonia 
 Production 
 Hypovolaemia  
 Lactulose 
 Blood or plasma 
transfusionVolume 
expansion  
 Excess dietary 
protein  
 Excess nitrogenous substances  
  Lactulose 
 Reduce protein in diet  
 Infection  
  Peripheral ammonia production 
 Tissue catabolism leading to 
ammonia production  
 Treat 
infectionLactulose  
 Constipation  
  Retention of ammonium in colon 
 More efﬁ cient formation of 
ammonia by colonic bacteria  
 Laxatives (e.g. 
lactulose)  
 Disturbance of 
blood − brain barrier  
 Metabolic 
alkalosis  
 Diffusion of ammonia across 
blood − brain barrier  
 Treat underlying 
cause  
 Box 20.3   Diagnostic hepatorenal 
syndrome criteria in cirrhosis. 
 •  Cirrhosis with ascites  
 •  Serum creatinine  > 133   μ mol/l  
 •  No improvement of serum creatinine (decrease 
to a level of 133   μ mol/l) after at least 2 days with 
diuretic withdrawal and volume expansion with 
albumin  
 •  Absence of shock  
 •  No current or recent treatment with nephrotoxic 
drugs  
 •  Absence of parenchymal kidney disease as 
indicated by proteinuria  > 500   mg/day, 
microhaematuria ( > 50 red blood cells per high 
power ﬁ eld) and/or abnormal renal 
ultrasonography  

Chronic liver disorders 137
to age - controlled normal values. If hypoxia is 
demonstrated, more common pulmonary dis-
eases must be screened for and adequately treated 
in the ﬁ rst instance (Figure  20.4 ). 
 The preferred test to demonstrate intrapulmo-
nary vasodilatation and shunting is transthoracic 
microbubble contrast echocardiography. Echocar
diography is performed by injecting agitated 
saline intravenously during normal transthoracic 
echocardiography, 
producing 
microbubbles 
that are visualised by ultrasonography. If an int-
racardiac shunt is present, contrast agent enters 
the left ventricle within three heart beats (early 
shunting). If intrapulmonary shunting character-
istic of HPS is present, the left ventricle opaciﬁ es 
at least three heart beats after the right (delayed 
shunting). 
 In the presence of co - existing cardiac or pulmo-
nary disease, establishing a diagnosis of HPS can 
be difﬁ cult. In the presence of cardiopulmonary 
disease, an estimate of the contribution of 
intrapulmonary shunting due to HPS, and its con-
tribution to hypoxaemia, can be made using the 
macroaggregated albumin scan. In this test, radi-
olabelled aggregates of albumin measuring 
approximately 20  μ m in diameter are infused into 
the venous system. In the presence of signiﬁ cant 
intrapulmonary shunting, a fraction of the macro-
aggregated albumin passes through the lungs and 
into the systemic circulation. Scintigraphy then 
reveals uptake in other organs in addition to the 
lung, allowing the calculation of the shunt 
fraction. 
 Table 20.4   Classiﬁ cation of hepatorenal syndrome (HRS). 
 Early (type 1) HRS  
  Late (type 2) HRS  
 Rapidly progressive: 
 •  Usually associated with acute deterioration of circulatory function  
 •  Characterised by arterial hypotension and activation of endogenous 
vasoconstrictor 
 Steady or slowly progressive 
course  
 Severe renal failure: Doubling of the initial serum creatinine 
concentrations to a level  > 226   μ mol/l in  < 2 weeks  
 Moderate renal failure: Serum 
creatinine 133 − 226   μ mol/l  
 May be associated with impaired cardiac and liver functions as well as 
encephalopathy  
 Typically associated with 
refractory ascites  
 May appear spontaneously, but often develops after a precipitating 
event, particularly SBP  
 Appears spontaneously, but can 
also follow a precipitating event  
 80% mortality at 2 weeks, only 10% survival at 3 months  
  70% survival at 3 months, 40% 
at 1 year  
 Hepatopulmonary 
 s yndrome 
 Pulmonary dysfunction in association with 
chronic liver disease is common, with up to 70% 
of patients complaining of shortness of breath. 
The differential diagnosis ofdyspnoea is extensive 
in this setting and includes all the common causes 
of pulmonary dysfunction in those without liver 
disease. The classical pulmonary condition 
occurring in chronic liver disease is termed hepat-
opulmonary syndrome (HPS). This occurs when 
intrapulmonary vasodilatation impairs arterial 
oxygenation. It has serious consequences in terms 
of increasing mortality in the setting of cirrhosis 
and may inﬂ uence the frequency and severity 
of complications of portal hypertension. HPS 
may 
co - exist 
with 
other 
cardiopulmonary 
abnormalities. 
 Investigations 
 The diagnosis of HPS relies on the demonstration 
of: 
 •  Liver disease or portal hypertension; 
   •      Elevated age - adjusted alveolar − arterial oxygen 
gradient (AaPO 2 );  and 
 •  Evidence of intrapulmonary vasodilatation. 
 Where pulmonary disease is suspected, arterial 
blood gas estimation should be performed and 
the alveolar − arterial oxygen gradient compared 

138 
Chronic liver disorders
 Management 
 There are no effective medical therapies for HPS 
and liver transplantation is the only established 
 Figure 20.4   Diagnosis of hepatopulmonary syndrome (HPS). MAA, macroaggregated albumin scan.  
Liver disease
Portal hypertension
Dysprea
Low pulse aximetry
Delayed
shunting
(>3 heart beats)
Early
shunting
(<3 heart beats)
Intracardiac shunt
No HPS
HPS
Normal
Deviated A–a gradient
Hypoxemia
Low suspicion of intrinsic cardiopulmonary disease
Contrast echocardiogram
Suspect intrinsic
cardiopulmonary
disease
Treat as appropriate
Symptoms persist
Contrast echocardiogram
MAA if delayed shunting
History, exam, CXR, ABG,
other tests as appropriate
(PFT’s, chest CT)
effective therapy. Oxygen supplementation is the 
mainstay of supportive therapy for HPS patients 
with a PaO 2  <  60  mmHg or with exercise - induced 
oxygen desaturation. 
 
 
  

     The exponential growth in genetic and molecular 
techniques over the last decade has led to improved 
understanding of the genetic and molecular mech-
anisms of inherited liver diseases. This has in turn 
led to genetic testing, allowing the diagnosis of 
genetic abnormalities before or soon after the 
onset of clinical disease. A description follows of 
the more common genetic conditions affecting the 
liver, and some of the important congenital condi-
tions that do not appear to have a genetic basis.  
 Hereditary 
 h aemochromatosis 
 Aetiopathogenesis 
 Systemic iron overload is the hallmark of hereditary 
haemochromatosis (HHC). Iron deposits in many 
tissues at sufﬁ cient concentrations can cause clini-
cally relevant damage to the liver, pancreas, heart, 
joints and pituitary. Mutations of the HHC gene 
( HFE ) cause a defect in iron handling that leads 
to iron overload. However, the exact mechanism 
of this remains poorly understood despite descrip-
tion of the underlying genetic defect. 
 HFE  codes for a major histocompatibility 
complex (MHC) class I protein that is expressed 
on many cells, including duodenal crypts. This 
MHC protein interacts with the transferrin recep-
tor to facilitate iron uptake into cells and defects 
in it alter this interaction. 
 21 
Hereditary and  c ongenital 
 l iver  d iseases  
 Haemachromatosis may result from a variety of 
causes other than heredity (Box  21.1 ). 
 Genetics 
 HHC is an autosomal dominant inherited condi-
tion, but genotype – phenotype correlations in 
HHC are highly variable, related to poorly under-
stood genetic factors. However, female sex (and 
thus menstruation), conditions causing iron loss 
and age are implicated. 
 While the molecular mechanism has yet to be 
elucidated, the genetic defect is now well 
described. 80 – 90% of clinically diagnosed HHC 
patients are homozygous for a single G - to - A 
mutation in  HFE which results in a cysteine - to -
 tyrosine substitution at position 282 (C282Y) of 
the gene product. Thus, this mutation accounts 
for the vast majority of disease. A second less 
common mutation (H63D) has been discovered; 
however, its role in causing clinically relevant iron 
overload is not clear as it is present in patients 
and controls at similar frequencies. While homozy-
gotes for H63D do not exhibit signiﬁ cant iron 
overload, compound heterozygotes (i.e. C282Y/
H63D) do have modest increased total body iron 
stores and progress to hepatic ﬁ brosis or cirrhosis 
is rare.  
 Epidemiology 
 HHC is the commonest genetic disease in 
Caucasians with a prevalence of between 1 in 
300 and 1 in 400. The fact that the carrier fre-
quency is as high as 1 in 9 in some populations 
would predict a much higher disease prevalence, 
emphasising the complex genotype – phenotype 
association.  
Lecture Notes: Gastroenterology and Hepatology, 1st edition. 
Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. 
© 2011 Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

140 
Hereditary and congenital liver diseases
   Iron overload results in a variable destructive 
arthropathy. This is not improved by 
venesection and may progress despite 
maintenance of normal iron stores;  
   Pituitary gonadotrophs selectively express the 
transferrin receptor leading to accumulation 
of intracellular ferritin. Hypogonadotropic 
hypogonadism can thus occur early in the 
natural history of the disease. 
 Porphyria cutanea tarda  (PCT) is associated 
with iron overload, and may occur in association 
with haemochromatosis. 
 Patients with iron overload are at increased risk 
of  Yersinia enterocolitica  infection . This organism 
is not commonly pathogenic in the absence of iron 
load because it does not possess a high - afﬁ nity 
iron - chelating system and is not able to obtain suf-
ﬁ cient iron from the internal environment of the 
normal human body. It is speculated that at least 
some of the episodes of acute abdominal pain in 
HHC are related to infection with this organism. 
 Investigations 
 Clinicians should have a high index of suspicion 
for this common genetic condition. 
 •  Blood tests : 
   Transferrin saturation; 
   Serum ferritin concentration (a very sensitive 
test for elevation of total body iron stores);  
   High serum iron; 
   High total iron - binding capacity; 
   However, false negatives may occur in 
menstruating women, ill patients 
(inﬂ ammatory and neoplastic conditions) 
and those with severe liver disease (viral 
hepatitis, non - alcoholic steatohepatitis and 
alcoholic liver disease), as serum ferritin is 
also an acute phase protein.    
 •  Genetic testing : 
   Has replaced liver biopsy as the next test in 
suspected iron overload;  
   Both the C282Y and H63D mutations should 
be tested for  – compound heterozygous states 
may act as a cofactor leading to ﬁ brosis in 
conditions such as porphyria cutanea tarda, 
hepatitis C and steatohepatitis. 
 •  Liver biopsy : 
   Useful in quantifying iron overload; 
   Useful in assessing hepatic ﬁ brosis; 
       To calculate the hepatic iron index by dividing 
the hepatic iron concentration (in  μ mol/g dry 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 These largely relate to iron deposition and depend 
on organ involvement. 
 •  General features : 
   Lethargy; 
   Abdominal pain, episodic, can be severe 
(unclear cause, see below).    
 •  Hepatic features : 
   Hepatomegaly; 
   Hepatic function is often well preserved and 
liver function tests may be normal despite 
high hepatic iron content and ﬁ brosis; 
   Features of chronic liver disease may be 
present in advanced disease.    
 •  Extrahepatic manifestations : 
   Diabetes mellitus occurs in relation to 
deposition of haemosiderin, predominately 
in pancreatic acinar cells, with resultant 
dense ﬁ brosis. This damage occurs at a 
threshold tissue iron concentration similar to 
that of liver ﬁ brosis. Diabetes develops in 
30 – 60% of cases with advanced liver disease; 
   Cardiac manifestations are not uncommon 
and may be the presenting pathology in 
5 – 15% of symptomatic patients. ECG 
abnormalities are seen in about 30% of 
patients. The most common cardiac 
complications are congestive heart failure, 
typically a dilated cardiomyopathy, and 
arrhythmias. If instituted early, phlebotomy 
results in improvement in cardiac 
manifestations;  
 Box 21.1   Causes of  h aemochromatosis. 
 Genetic disorders 
 •  Hereditary haemochromatosis ( HFE , non - HFE  
and juvenile)  
 •  Autosomal dominant haemochromatosis  
 Haematological disorders 
 •  Thalassaemia major  
 •  Sideroblastic anaemia  
 Others 
 •  Increased dietery iron (African iron overload)  
 •  Parenteral iron (e.g. multiple transfusions)  
 •  End - stage alcoholic cirrhosis  
 •  Neonatal haemochromatosis  

Hereditary and congenital liver diseases 141
need to be in smaller amounts and less frequently. 
The iron - chelating agent desferrioxamine can be 
used when there is anaemia from other causes but 
at best removes only 10 – 20   mg of iron/day.  
 Prognosis 
 Prognosis is dependent on the presence of cirrho-
sis or diabetes. In the absence of these, life -
 expectancy is normal provided maintenance 
venesection is adhered to. Liver transplantation 
should be considered where there is end - stage 
liver disease or small HCCs. However, liver trans-
plantation for HHC has been disappointing at 
least in part due to the degree of iron loading in 
these patients, as iron - loaded patients are at risk 
of infection as well as cardiac failure and 
arrhythmia. 
 Wilson ’ s  d isease 
 Aetiopathogenesis 
 Wilson ’ s disease is an autosomal recessive disor-
der caused by a defect in hepatic copper excretion, 
resulting in copper overload and copper deposi-
tion in various organs, including the liver, brain, 
kidneys and cornea, with resultant hepatic, neu-
rological, psychiatric, haematological, renal, eye 
and other abnormalities. 
 In this condition copper is not incorporated into 
its carrier protein, caeruloplasmin, within hepato-
cytes. It is therefore not adequately excreted into 
bile and accumulates in the liver. Eventually it is 
released into blood and deposited in other tissues. 
Liver disease is attributed to oxidative stress 
resulting from the pro - oxidant properties of 
copper. There are high concentrations of copper 
in the hepatocellular mitochondria in hepatic 
copper overload and it may be that mitochondrial 
damage plays a role in the pathogenesis.  
 Genetics and  e pidemiology 
 The prevalence of Wilson ’ s disease is 1 in 30   000 
and the carrier frequency is 1 in 90. The abnormal 
 ATP7B  (conventionally called  WND ) gene is on 
chromosome 13. It encodes an intracellular 
membrane - spanning ATPase transporter with six 
copper - binding sites, which has a role in incorpo-
rating copper into caeruloplasmin. 
weight) by the age of the patients (in years). 
Values  > 1.9 are consistent with HHC. 
 Screening 
 Screening can be considered in three population 
groups: 
 1.  Relatives of a proband with the disease 
(mandatory for all ﬁ rst - degree relatives and 
advisable to extend screening to second -
 degree relatives); 
 2.  People undergoing a health check (probably 
cost - effective); 
 3.  General population. 
 Screening should consist of a history and physi-
cal examination, measurement of transferrin satu-
ration and serum ferritin. Assay for the C282Y 
mutation is undertaken in groups 2 and 3 if the 
transferrin saturation is  > 45% serum ferritin 
(because of the cost of genetic testing). 
 Screening for  h epatocellular  c arcinoma 
 When cirrhosis is present, HHC patients have a 
200 - fold increased risk of hepatocellular carci-
noma (HCC). HCC is the commonest cause of 
death in such patients. Patients who have devel-
oped HCC may present with unexplained weight 
loss, fever, nodular enlargement of the liver, 
variceal haemorrhage, ascites, jaundice and 
abdominal pain. 
 Patients who develop HCC usually have 
advanced hepatic ﬁ brosis and cirrhosis. For this 
reason screening is reserved for patients with cir-
rhosis. Serum alpha - fetoprotein and serial ultra-
sound are used as in other forms of cirrhosis (see 
Chapter  28 ). 
 Management 
 Venesection  is the mainstay of treatment. This 
should occur at weekly intervals until the haemo-
globin concentration falls to 10.5   g/dl and does 
not recover immediately.  Monitoring of serum fer-
ritin  shows a progressive decline during initial 
treatment, the aim being to keep the value within 
the low normal range (50 – 100   pg/l). Maintenance 
venesection is lifelong, approximately four times 
per year, but this needs to be individualised. Iron 
deﬁ ciency must be avoided (ferritin kept  > 20  pg/l). 
 In the presence of cardiac insufﬁ ciency, treat-
ment is still with venesection, as it is the most 
efﬁ cient, safest and cheapest alternative, but may 

142 
Hereditary and congenital liver diseases
symptoms are highly variable. Depression is 
common and neuroses, including phobias and 
compulsive behaviours, are reported. Pure 
psychosis is uncommon. Intellectual 
deterioration may also occur.  
 •  Other manifestations: 
   Fatigue, malaise, arthropathy and rashes; 
   Renal dysfunction; 
   Vitamin D - resistant rickets with severe renal 
dysfunction;  
   Haemolysis related to copper release into the 
bloodstream;  
   Cholelithiasis may occur with repeated 
haemolysis;  
   Pancreatitis; 
   Endocrine: hypoparathyroidism, 
amenorrhoea, testicular dysfunction, 
repeated spontaneous abortion; 
   Kayser – Fleischer rings due to copper 
accumulation in Decemet ’ s membrane in the 
posterior cornea;  
   Sunburst cataracts, in approximately 20% of 
patients;  
   Cardiomyopathy and cardiac arrhythmias 
(rare); 
   Rhabdomyolysis (very rare). 
 Investigations 
 Essential to the diagnosis of this rare condition is 
a high index of suspicion in the appropriate clini-
cal setting. All patients being investigated for sus-
pected autoimmune hepatitis should be tested for 
Wilson ’ s disease because of the similarities in clin-
ical features between the two. 
 Blood  t ests 
 The hallmark of Wilson disease is a low caerulo-
plasmin. This carrier protein binds most of the 
copper in plasma ( >  90%). The normal adult serum 
concentration of caeruloplasmin is 200 – 600  mg/l 
and in most patients with Wilson ’ s disease this is 
greatly reduced (typically  < 50  mg/l). 
 False negatives may occur: 
 •  Difﬁ culties with laboratory assays; 
 •  Hepatic inﬂ ammation (as caeruloplasmin is 
elevated in inﬂ ammatory conditions); 
 •  Pregnancy; 
 •  Exogenous oestrogen. 
 False positives may occur: 
 •  Decompensated cirrhosis of any cause or acute 
liver failure;  
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Wilson ’ s disease is highly variable and may present 
as: 
 •  Acute hepatitis; 
 •  Chronic liver disease; 
 •  Fulminant liver disease; 
 •  Progressive neurological disorder (often 
without clinically evident hepatic dysfunction);  
 •  Psychiatric illness. 
 Patients usually become symptomatic between 
the ages of 6 and 45 years but may be diagnosed 
younger or older. 
 •  Hepatic presentation: liver disease presenta-
tion is more common in children and adoles-
cents. The features are often non - speciﬁ c with 
fatigue, abdominal pain and anorexia:  
   Simple acute hepatitis: a self - limited clinical 
illness indistinguishable from autoimmune 
hepatitis, with:  
 –  Elevated serum aminotransferases; 
 –  Greatly increased serum IgG; 
 –  Detectable non - organ - speciﬁ c autoanti-
bodies, including antinuclear antibody and 
antismooth muscle (antiactin) antibody. 
   Repeated episodes of short - lived jaundice: 
largely asymptomatic, related to haemolysis;  
   Severe established chronic liver disease: typi-
cally, this occurs in late - stage patients with: 
 –  Acute Coombs - negative intravascular 
haemolysis;  
 –  Renal failure; 
 –  Kayser - Fleischer rings on slit - lamp 
examination;  
 –  Greatly elevated urinary copper excretion. 
   These patients do not respond to chelation 
treatment and require urgent liver transplan-
tation. HCC rarely develops in Wilson disease. 
 •  Neurological presentation:  a predominately 
neurological presentation usually occurs in 
older teenagers or adults. There are two 
predominant patterns of involvement: 
   Movement disorders, including tremors, poor 
co - ordination and loss of ﬁ ne motor control; 
   Rigid dystonia with mask - like facies, rigidity 
and gait disturbance;  
   Pseudobulbar involvement is more common 
in older patients and may result in 
dysarthria, drooling, and swallowing 
problems. Seizures may occur.    
 •  Psychiatric presentation:  a purely psychiatric 
presentation occurs in 20% of patients and the 

Hereditary and congenital liver diseases 143
urinary copper excretion every 6 – 12 months; FBC 
and urinalysis should be monitored regularly. 
With effective and early treatment, most patients 
are well and live normally. Some reduction of 
dietary copper is probably also beneﬁ cial. 
 Alpha - 1 -  a ntitrypsin 
 d eﬁ ciency 
 Aetiopathogenesis 
 Alpha - 1 - antitrypsin is a protease inhibitor that 
controls tissue degradation by inhibiting a large 
number of proteases, including trypsin, plasmin, 
thrombin, neutrophil elastase and proteinase 3. It 
is predominately produced in the liver with some 
production in the monocytes and bronchoalveo-
lar macrophages also. Deﬁ ciency of alpha - 1 - anti-
trypsin is one of the commonest hereditary 
disorders in Caucasians. 
 Liver disease in this condition is mediated by 
accumulation of aggregated alpha - 1 - antitrypsin 
within the hepatocyte endoplasmic reticulum, 
visible as periodic acid - Schiff (PAS) - positive inclu-
sion bodies on liver histology. The liver cell injury 
of alpha - 1 - antitrypsin deﬁ ciency is directly related 
to this accumulation, and not to a deﬁ ciency of 
elastase inhibitory capacity. This is evidenced by 
the fact that individuals with a genetic mutation 
that aborts alpha - 1 - antitrypsin production (hence 
no detectable alpha - 1 - antitrypsin in their plasma) 
and lack of the PAS - positive inclusion bodies, do 
not develop liver disease. 
 By contrast lung injury is a result of loss of pro-
tease inhibition; chronic obstructive respiratory 
disease (CORD) due to emphysema is the most 
prevalent clinical disorder associated with alpha -
 1 - antitrypsin deﬁ ciency. Emphysema is due to 
loss of the normal antiproteolytic defences against 
elastase. The resultant degradation of elastic ﬁ bres 
with loss of elastic recoil in the lung and air - ﬂ ow 
obstruction lead to emphysema, markedly exacer-
bated by smoking as the elastase burden is 
increased by recruitment of both neutrophils and 
macrophages. 
 There is an association between small - vessel 
systemic necrotising vasculitis and severe alpha -
 1 - antitrypsin deﬁ ciency. It seems likely that the 
association is due to a loss of the protective effects 
of alpha - 1 - antitrypsin in small - vessel vasculitis 
rather than a direct causative effect. 
 •  Protein - losing enteropathy; 
 •  Nephritic syndrome; 
 •  Malnutrition; 
 •  Heterozygotes for Wilson disease (10% of 
whom have low levels). 
 Other  t ests 
 •  Urinary copper excretion increases (24 - h 
urinary collections are typically  > 100  μ g/24  h). 
   •      Liver biopsy determines hepatic copper 
concentration (a value  > 250  μ g/g dry weight is 
considered diagnostic, values  < 40  μ g/g make 
Wilson ’ s disease unlikely). 
 •  Genetic testing is complex, with almost 300 
mutations in the  ATP7B  gene, and most 
patients are compound heterozygotes. Where 
biochemical ﬁ ndings are equivocal, 
demonstration of two abnormal alleles is 
necessary for diagnosis. Mutational analysis 
can allow presymptomatic diagnosis of the 
siblings of affected individuals, including those 
whose biochemical testing is negative (thus 
permitting early chelation therapy). 
 Management 
 The mainstay of treatment is chelation therapy. 
First - line treatment consists of penicillamine 
which greatly increases urinary excretion of 
copper and induces tissue metallothioneins. Its 
use is limited by common mild side - effects (skin 
rashes, loss of taste, GI upset, diarrhoea, arthral-
gias). Severe side - effects are rarer (proteinuria, 
leucopenia or thrombocytopenia, and rarely 
aplastic anaemia). 30% of patients with Wilson ’ s 
disease develop some side - effect of penicillamine, 
leading to a change of treatment. Deterioration in 
neurological status occurs initially after starting 
penicillamine in up to 50% of patients who present 
with mainly neurological symptoms. Most, but 
not all, recover with continued use. Pyridoxine 
25   mg/day 
is 
given 
in 
conjunction 
with 
penicillamine. 
 Second - line treatment for patients intolerant of 
penicillamine is with Trien (trientine). Side - effects 
are rare apart from occasional gastritis, iron -
 deﬁ ciency (due to chelation of dietary iron) and 
sideroblastic anaemia. Neurological worsening is 
much less common than with penicillamine. 
Finally, zinc can be used as chelation and, apart 
from gastritis, has few adverse effects. 
 With all treatment modalities compliance and 
efﬁ cacy should be checked by measuring 24 - h 

144 
Hereditary and congenital liver diseases
 Genetics 
 Alpha - 1 - antitrypsin is encoded by a single gene 
located on chromosome 14. There are at least 75 
different identiﬁ ed allelic variants and inheritance 
is codominant; thus each parental allele contrib-
utes its own gene product in the individual. Given 
the complexity of the genotypic abnormalities, a 
phenotypic classiﬁ cation system is used which is 
based on the isoelectric properties (on protein 
electrophoresis) of the protease inhibitor (Pi) pro-
duced. Variants that result in faster - moving pro-
teins are identiﬁ ed by letters near the beginning of 
the alphabet, the slowest - moving allele being des-
ignated PiZ. The important genetic variants and 
their clinical consequences are summarised in 
Table  21.1 . 
 Clinical  f eatures  o f liver  d isease 
 Childhood - o nset  l iver  d isease 
 Alpha - 1 - antitrypsin 
deﬁ ciency 
is 
the 
most 
common genetic cause of liver disease in infants 
and children and the most common metabolic 
error for which liver transplantation is indicated. 
The majority (70%) of neonates with homo-
zygous (PiZZ) alpha - 1 - antitrypsin deﬁ ciency have 
abnormal LFTs and a signiﬁ cant minority (10 –
 20%) develop clinically important liver disease. 
They 
present 
with 
the  ‘ neonatal 
hepatitis 
syndrome ’ : 
 Table 21.1   Genetic variants of alpha - 1 - antitrypsin deﬁ ciency. 
 Variant  
  % Normal serum 
alpha - 1 -
 antitrypsin levels  
 Clinical features  
 PiZZ  
  15 – 20%  
  20 – 40% cirrhosis in adulthood 
 Onset of COPD - related dyspnoea aged 30 – 40 in smokers and 10 – 15 years 
later in non - smokers 
 Associated with small - vessel vasculitides  
 PiSZ  
  30 – 40%  
  Probable association with end - stage liver disease in combination with several 
aetiologies (in particular hepatitis C virus and alcohol - related liver disease) 
 Increased risk COPD 
 Associated with small - vessel vasculitides  
 PiMZ  
  50 – 60%  
  Probable association with end - stage liver disease in combination with several 
aetiologies 
 No predisposition to early development of COPD 
 Associated with small - vessel vasculitides  
 PiSS  
  60%  
  Normal  
 PiMM  
  Normal  
  Normal  
 •  Pruritus; 
 •  Hepatomegaly; 
 •  Conjugated hyperbilirubinaemia; 
 •  Increased serum aminotransferase; 
 •  Cholestasis can be marked and the disease can 
be confused with hepatic biliary atresia. 
 Alpha - 1 - antitrypsin states (PiMZ and PiSZ) 
cause partly self - limiting predominantly subclini-
cal liver involvement in 10 – 20% of affected chil-
dren and adolescents. 
 The disease usually resolves spontaneously 
within 6 months, although mild biochemical 
abnormalities persist in a proportion. In a small 
minority ( < 5%), the liver disease does not subside, 
progressing to cirrhosis and liver failure. 
 Adult - o nset  l iver  d isease 
 The phenotypic expression of alpha - 1 - antitrypsin 
deﬁ ciency - related liver disease in adults is varia-
ble. There is a high risk of cirrhosis and HCC in 
adults with severe alpha - 1 - antitrypsin deﬁ ciency 
(PiZZ). Approximately 40% and 15% of alpha - 1 -
 antitrypsin - deﬁ cient adults develop cirrhosis and 
HCC, respectively. Patients may or may not have a 
history of neonatal liver disease. Prognosis is poor 
in patients with cirrhosis, partly due to concomi-
tant emphysema. 
 In adults intermediate deﬁ ciency has been asso-
ciated with chronic liver disease in combination 
with concomitant liver pathology, in particular 
with hepatitis C virus and alcohol - related liver 

Hereditary and congenital liver diseases 145
 •  Puriﬁ ed human alpha - 1 - antitrypsin can be 
given by infusion. Its use is mainly in patients 
with progressive emphysema and vasculitis.  
 •  While the primary pulmonary defect is 
emphysema, there may be a reversible 
obstructive component that responds to 
bronchodilator treatment. 
 •  Orthotopic liver transplantation is curative for 
both liver disease and the alpha - 1 - antitrypsin 
deﬁ ciency state, as the recipient assumes the 
donor ’ s phenotype. It is reserved for advanced 
liver disease in the absence of HCC and where 
preoperative evaluation of lung function is 
satisfactory. With this careful selection, survival 
rates in children are close to 90% at 1 year and 
80% at 5 years. Survival in adults is lower, due 
partly to concomitant emphysema.  
 •  At present, somatic gene therapy is not an 
available alternative. 
 Alagille ’ s  s yndrome 
 Aetiopathogenesis 
 Alagille ’ s syndrome (AS) is an inherited disease 
causing cholestasis in conjunction with cardiovas-
cular, facial, ocular, skeletal and neurodevelop-
mental abnormalities. It is also known as 
arteriohepatic dysplasia. Cholestasis is a result of 
marked paucity of interlobular bile ducts. The 
mechanisms by which these abnormalities come 
about are unknown, but the genetic defect has 
been described.  
 Genetics 
 AS is an autosomal dominant disease, but in up to 
15% of cases it is due to a new mutation. There is a 
large variability in expression of the disease, even 
within affected families. The incidence of AS in 
mixed Caucasian populations is 1 in 100   000 live 
births with no gender differences. The genetic 
defect is a mutation of the  JAG1 gene on chromo-
some 12. It encodes a protein belonging to the 
family of Notch ligands, which are regulatory recep-
tors of the signalling pathway controlling cell fate 
decisions in a number of developmental processes.  
 Clinical  f eatures 
 •  AS characteristically presents as prolonged 
neonatal cholestasis (jaundice, pale stools, 
disease. The mechanism for this may be that the 
concomitant condition promotes retention of the 
abnormal protein in the hepatocyte endoplasmic 
reticulum. 
 Investigations 
 •  Alpha - 1 - antitrypsin deﬁ ciency can be 
diagnosed by a marked reduction or absence of 
the alpha - 1 - globulin band in an agarose gel 
electrophoresis. 
 •  Serum or plasma concentrations can be 
measured but are not accurately indicative of 
the phenotype because of the large variability 
in serum levels.  
 •  Phenotype is usually assessed using isoelectric 
focusing (IEF) to ascertain the isoelectric band 
focusing patterns of the Pi variants. Enzyme -
 linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and DNA - 
based methods can be used, particularly for 
screening large populations. At least the ﬁ rst - 
degree relatives of patients found to have alpha - 
1 - antitrypsin deﬁ ciency should be screened in 
order to detect the 25% of siblings who will be 
homozygotes at an early asymptomatic stage 
(although the only preventive measure likely to 
prolong survival is smoking cessation).     
 Management 
 Monitoring 
 •  All patients diagnosed with alpha - 1 - antitrypsin 
deﬁ ciency should be regularly assessed with 
tests of liver function. If cirrhosis is 
established, screening for HCC may be 
appropriate. 
 •  Monitoring for renal disease and vasculitis in 
both heterozygotes and homozygotes.  
 •  Chest X - ray and pulmonary function 
assessment (especially in smokers). 
 Speciﬁ c 
 Attempts to increase serum levels of alpha - 1 - anti-
trypsin may impact on the progression of pulmo-
nary disease, but will have no beneﬁ cial effect on 
liver disease as the pathogenic abnormality is 
related to intrahepatocytic accumulation of 
abnormal protein rather that reduced Pi activity. 
 •  The androgen danazol and the oestrogen 
antagonist tamoxifen increase synthesis of 
alpha - 1 - antitrypsin slightly but not sufﬁ ciently 
to have a beneﬁ cial effect. 

146 
Hereditary and congenital liver diseases
liver biochemistry and biopsy, cardiovascular 
testing, renal function, slit - lamp eye examination, 
spinal X - rays, serum bile acids, cholesterol and 
triglycerides). 
 A complete genetic evaluation, including family 
pedigree (with examination of family members), 
molecular genetic studies, cytogenetic studies and 
genetic counselling, is required.  
 Management 
 •  Management of the consequences of chronic 
cholestasis is of the utmost importance:  
   Careful provision of adequate calories, 
protein and fat - soluble vitamins (A, D, E and 
K);  
   Management of mineral deﬁ ciencies. 
   •      Severe hyperlipidaemia is associated with early 
atherosclerosis and can be managed to a 
degree with cholestyramine and 
ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA). 
 •  Treatment of pruritus is with antihistamines, 
but if intractable may respond to biliary 
diversion and occasionally liver transplantation. 
 Prognosis 
 The natural history of AS is variable, with a 74% 
10 - year survival. Complex cardiovascular anoma-
lies are the major cause of early mortality, hepatic 
complications the cause of late morbidity and 
mortality. 
 Hereditary 
 h yperbilirubinaemias 
 In an infant or child presenting with jaundice due 
to hyperbilirubinaemia, the differential diagnosis 
is broad. Determination of the concentrations and 
proportions of conjugated and unconjugated 
bilirubin is important (Figure  21.1 ). Once other 
forms of liver disease have been excluded, and 
particularly in the presence of a family history of 
hyperbilirubinaemia, the hereditary hyperbilurib-
inaemias should be considered (Table  21.2 ). 
 While 
conjungated 
hyperbilirubinaemia 
is 
almost always a consequence of underlying liver 
disease, and is harmless in itself, unconjugated 
bilirubin causes neurotoxicity by inhibiting RNA 
and carbohydrate as well as protein synthesis in 
the brain when it is persistently elevated.   
dark urine). In this setting it must be 
differentiated from biliary atresia in particular.  
 •  Presentation in older children is with features of 
chronic liver disease, pruritus and xanthomata. 
 •  It is common for adults to go undiagnosed until 
a related index case is diagnosed, but question-
ing may reveal a history of pruritus as a child. 
 HCC has been reported in AS with and without 
cirrhosis. 
 Extrahepatic  f eatures 
 •  Facial appearance: 
   Triangular face, broad forehead, saddle -
 shaped nose, widely spaced deep set eyes, 
pointed chin. 
 •  Vascular abnormalities (85 – 100%): 
   Commonly peripheral pulmonary stenoses of 
no clinical signiﬁ cance; 
   Occasionally pulmonary vascular hypoplasia 
or severe pulmonary artery stenosis. 
 •  Severe vascular lesions often occur with other 
congenital heart anomalies: 
   Tetralogy of Fallot, truncus arteriosus, septal 
defects, systemic vascular abnormalities, 
narrowing of the abdominal aorta.    
 •  Increased risk of intracranial haemorrhage 
(particularly in young adults): 
   Related to abnormalities in clotting second-
ary to chronic liver disease or structural 
abnormalities in intracranial vessels. 
   •      Other manifestations: 
   Spinal problems: 
 –  Butterﬂ y vertebrae;  – Occult spina biﬁ da. 
   Characteristic eye changes in up to 90%: 
 –  Prominent line in the anterior chamber 
(Schwalbe ’ s line); 
 –  Ocular problems secondary to chronic 
cholestasis. 
   Renal abnormalities; 
   Neurodevelopmental delay; 
   Malnutrition and failure to thrive. 
 Investigations 
 Because of the variability of expression of the 
disease, diagnosis remains phenotypic and is 
based on the occurrence of cholestasis with histo-
logical paucity of interlobular bile ducts, plus two 
of four extrahepatic features (characteristic facies, 
cardiac murmur, vertebral anomalies, posterior 
embryotoxin. 
 Evaluation of all possible manifestations of the 
disease is mandatory (nutritional assessment, 

Hereditary and congenital liver diseases 147
 Autoimmune 
 p olyglandular  s yndromes 
 The autoimmune polyglandular syndromes (APS) 
are autoimmune syndromes with symptoms 
 Figure 21.1   Causes of neonatal jaundice.  
Neonatal jaundice
Unconjugated
Conjugated
Hepatic
• Sepsis
• Cystic fibrosis
• Alpha-1 antitrypsin
   deficiency
Post hepatic
• Biliary atresia
• Bile duct
   obstruction
Physiological
• Breast milk
   jaundice
Pathological
Haemolytic
Non-haemolytic
• Gilbert’s
• Crigler-Najjar
• Sepsis
• Hypothyroidism
• Traumatic
   cephalohaematoma
Intrinsic
• Spherocytosis
• Sickle cell anaemia, G6PD deficiency
• Sepsis
• AV malformation
Extrinsic
• Haemolytic disease of
   the newborn
affecting gland - bearing tissues, and as such the 
gut is often involved (Table  21.3 ). A single gene 
defect is responsible for APS type 1. Diagnosis is 
based on the pattern of glandular disease. APS 
type 1 is associated with a low but recognised inci-
dence of GI disease. 
 PHYSIOLOGY OF  B ILIRUBIN  M ETABOLISM 
 Degradation of haemoglobin, and other haem 
proteins, produces bilirubin. This is tightly but 
reversibly bound to plasma proteins, in particu-
lar albumin. On reaching the hepatocyte mem-
brane, bilirubin dissociates from albumin and 
enters the hepatocyte via a membrane carrier -
 mediated process. In the cell it is bound to glu-
tathione S - transferase, which acts as the 
intracellular store for bilirubin. In the endoplas-
mic reticulum, bilirubin is conjugated by bilirubin 
uridine - diphosphate 
glucuronosyltransferase 
(B - UGT) for efﬁ cient elimination in bile. There are 
two main families of B - UGT, both of which 
derive from a gene complex on chromosome 2. 
The vast majority of bilirubin conjugates are 
excreted in the bile as bilirubin diglucuronide 
(80%) and bilirubin monoglucuronide (15%). 
Unconjugated bilirubin accounts only for 1 – 2% 
of bilirubin excreted into the bile. 

148 
Hereditary and congenital liver diseases
 Table 21.2   Clinical features of the familial hyperbilirubinaemias. 
     
 Aetiology  
  Clinical features  
  Diagnosis  
  Treatment  
   
Familial unconjugated hyperbilirubinaemia syndromes  
 Crigler -
 Najjar I 
 (CNS - I)  
 Autosomal recessive 
 Consanguinity common 
 Several genetic mutations 
identiﬁ ed 
 Deﬁ ciency of both UGTl 
and UGT2 
 Massive bilirubin 
deposition in tissues 
including: 
 •  Kidney 
 •  Endocardium 
 •  Intestinal mucosa  
 •  Brain 
 Severe, chronic unconjugated 
hyperbilirubinaemia: 
 •  Onset after birth  
 •  Bilirubin between 342 and 
599  μ mol/l 
 Lesser degrees of 
hyperbilirubinaemia may not 
develop neurological 
symptoms until second 
decade 
 Cerebellar symptoms may 
predominate  
 No detectable B - UGT1 
activity on assay of 
hepatic tissue 
 Phenobarbital challenge: 
 •  CNS - II decrease bilirubin 
levels by  > 30% 
 •  CNS - I have no response  
 Deﬁ nitive treatments 
 •  OLT curative (survival similar to that of 
OLT for other indications)  
 Alternatives to OLT: 
 •  Auxiliary liver transplantation  
 •  Hepatocyte transplantation  
 •  Gene therapy  
 Temporary treatments: 
 •  Phototherapy 
 •  Exchange transfusion  
 •  (CNS - I does not respond to 
phenobarbital) 
 •  Tin - containing compounds (inhibit haem 
oxygenase, thus decreasing haem 
degradation and bilirubin production)  
 Note : only 1 – 2% functioning hepatocytes 
necessary for bilirubin conjugation  
 Crigler -
 Najjar II 
 (CNS - II)  
 Autosomal recessive 
 Genetics less well deﬁ ned  
 Hyperbilirubinaemia less 
severe: 
 •  Rarely exceeding 
342  μ mol/l 
 •  Increased to  > 342  μ mol/l 
during illness  
 Icterus: 
 •  Present in 50% within the 
ﬁ rst year of life  
 •  Can occur as late as 30 
years 
 •  Non - speciﬁ c neurological 
symptoms as late as 50 
years 
 Activity of B - UGTl reduced 
to  < 10% 
 Bilirubin monoglucuronide in 
bile: 
 •  Collected by small bowel 
intubation 
 •  In CNS - I it is absent  
 •  Not signiﬁ cant enough 
to allow differentiation 
with certainty  
 Adequately treated with phenobarbital 
 Phototherapy may be needed as an adjunct 
 Mechanisms for the action of phenobarbital 
include: 
 •  Induction of binding proteins and 
mobilization of bilirubin  
 •  Enhanced B - UGTl transcription and 
activity 
 •  Atrophic effect on the endoplasmic 
reticulum 

Hereditary and congenital liver diseases 149
     
 Aetiology  
  Clinical features  
  Diagnosis  
  Treatment  
 Gilbert ’ s 
syndrome 
 Reduction in hepatic 
bilirubin clearance to 
approximately one - third 
normal 
 Proposed mechanisms: 
 •  Defective uptake into 
the hepatocyte,  
 •  Intracellular binding  
 •  Conjugation 
 Hereditary basis 
 •  Inherited either as an 
autosomal dominant 
or autosomal 
recessive 
 Likely Gilbert ’ s syndrome 
represents a 
heterogeneous group of 
disorders  
 Mild, chronic unconjugated 
hyperbilirubinaemia: 
 •  Absence of haemolysis  
 •  No hepatic injury  
 Common (prevalence 3 – 12%): 
 •  Most often adolescents 
and young adults  
 •  Males  > females  
 Approx 1/3 asymptomatic 
except for jaundice 
 Non - speciﬁ c symptoms 
 •  Fatigue 
 •  Weakness 
 •  Abdominal discomfort  
 •  Malaise 
 •  All felt to be incidental  
 Degree of hyperbilirubinaemia 
ﬂ uctuates: 
 •  Usually 52   μ mol/l 
 •  May reach levels as high 
as 137   μ mol/l 
 Triggered by 
 •  Physical stress  
 •  Fatigue 
 •  Intercurrent illness  
 •  Alcohol intake  
 Other hepatic and 
haematological diseases 
excluded by history, 
physical examination and 
laboratory studies 
 If no abnormalities develop 
after 12 – 18 months of 
follow - up, diagnosis 
almost certain 
 Provocative testing: 
 •  Caloric deprivation 
(400  kcal/day) for 
48 – 72  h, followed by a 
subsequent rise in 
plasma unconjugated 
bilirubin levels  
 •  Nicotinic acid tolerance 
test 
 Only treatment necessary is reassurance and 
education  
(continued)

150 
Hereditary and congenital liver diseases
     
 Aetiology  
  Clinical features  
  Diagnosis  
  Treatment  
   
Familial conjugated hyperbilirubinaemia syndromes  
 Dubin –
 Johnson 
syndrome 
 Autosomal recessive 
 Worldwide distribution 
 Male  = female 
 Dubin – Johnson 
 syndrome 
 more common than Rotor 
syndrome 
 Mechanism: 
 •  Defective hepatic 
secretion into the bile  
 •  Caused by the 
absence of the  MRP 
(multidrug resistance 
protein) gene  
 Mild, predominantly 
conjugated 
hyperbilirubinaemia: 
 •  34 – 120  μ mol/l, 
 •    
> 50% conjugated.  
 •  Level of bilirubin  
 •  Fluctuates 
 •  Oral contraceptives and 
pregnancy exacerbate 
hyperbilirubinaemia 
 Vague, non - speciﬁ c 
abdominal complaints 
probably incidental 
 Hepatosplenomegaly rarely  
 Cholescintigraphy: 
 •    
99m Tc - HIDA scan  
 •  Intense prolonged 
visualisation of the liver  
 •  Delayed visualisation of 
gallbladder and bile 
ducts 
 Differentiation of 
Dubin – Johnson 
 syndrome 
 from Rotor syndrome 
 and other hepatobiliary 
diseases: 
 •  Urine coproporphyrin 
patterns after d - ALA 
administration 
 •  Bromsulphalein (BSP) 
clearance 
 Oral cholecystography 
(gallbladder visualised in 
Rotor syndrome, but not 
Dubin – Johnson 
syndrome) 
 Benign disorders, without need for treatment  
 Rotor 
syndrome 
 Autosomal recessive 
 Worldwide distribution 
 Male  = Female 
Mechanism: 
 •  Decreased intracellular 
storage of bilirubin  
 •  Excretion of bilirubin is 
moderately decreased  
 Asymptomatic except for 
jaundice  
Table 21.2 Clinical features of the familial hyperbilirubinaemias (continued)
 OLT, Orthotopic liver transplantation; B - UGT1, bilirubin uridine - diphosphate glucuronosyltransferase 1.  

Hereditary and congenital liver diseases 151
 Table 21.3   Clinical features of the autoimmune polyglandular syndromes. 
 
  Aetiology  
  Clinical features and diagnosis  
 Autoimmune 
polyglandular 
syndrome type I 
(APS1) 
 Autoimmune 
polyendocrinopathy -
 candidiasis -
 ectodermal -  
dystrophy (APECED)  
 Autoimmune disease 
 Mendelian inheritance: 
 •  Defects in a single gene  
 •  100% penetrance  
 •  Gene on chromosome 21  
 •  Named autoimmune 
regulator 1 ( AIRE - 1 ) or 
 APECED  gene  
 Lack of HLA dependence 
 Male  = female 
 High prevalence in Iranian 
Jews, Finnish and Sardinian 
people  
 First clinical manifestation typically in ﬁ rst 
decade of life 
 Progressively new disease components may 
manifest even in the ﬁ fth decade 
 Other associated immune disorders are 
frequently found 
 Three groups of disease components: 
 1.   Mucocutaneous candidiasis  
 2.   Autoimmune tissue destruction, 
predominantly of endocrine glands:  
   Hypoparathyroiditis (89%)  
   Adrenocortical insufﬁ ciency 
(70%) 
 3.   Ectodermal dystrophy  
   Dystrophy of the nails  
   Enamel hypoplasia  
   Alopecia 
   Keratopathy 
 Associated GI disease: 
 •  Intestinal malabsorption in about 18% of 
patients 
 •  Autoimmune hepatitis in about 12% of 
patients 
 Diagnosis: two of the following three (however, 
if APS1 in a brother or a sister, one disease 
component is sufﬁ cient): 
 •  Addison disease  
 •  Hypoparathyroidism 
 •  Chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis  
 Autoimmune 
polyglandular 
syndrome type 2  
 Autosomal dominant mode of 
transmission 
 Polygenic 
 Female preponderance 
 Linkage to HLA - DR3 and DR4 
 Far more common than APS1  
 Adult onset of disease 
 Associated autoimmune manifestations: 
 •  Vitiligo 
 •  Gonadal failure  
 •  Alopecia 
 •  Pernicious anaemia  
 Diagnosis: 
 •  Addison disease, autoimmune 
thyroid disease and/or insulin - 
dependent diabetes mellitus (Schmidt ’ s 
syndrome) 
 •  Occurring in a single patient not 
affected by hypoparathyroidism or 
candidiasis 
 Autoimmune 
polyglandular 
syndrome type 3  
 Heterogeneous  
  Autoimmune thyroid disease and the 
presence of at least one second 
autoimmune disorder in the absence of 
Addison disease  

152 
Hereditary and congenital liver diseases
 The  p orphyrias 
 These are rare disorders of haem biosynthesis, 
characterised as either hepatic or erythropoeitic 
(depending on the site of excess porphyrin pro-
duction). They are mostly autosomal dominant 
inherited partial enzyme deﬁ ciencies. The key role 
of environmental factors in causing symptoms 
explains why penetrance is poor: alcohol, iron 
excess, oestrogens and hepatitis C infection are 
the commonest environmental triggers. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 The porphyrias usually present after puberty. Two 
presentations are described (Table  21.4 ): 
 •  Photosensitive  skin features: 
   Pain; 
   Erythema, bullae; 
   Hirsutism and hyperpigmentation. 
 •  Acute relapsing – remitting  neurological features 
(triggered by anticonvulsants, oral 
contraception, alcohol, fasting): 
   Acute abdominal pain; 
   Autonomic symptoms (hypertensive 
headaches, constipation);  
   Peripheral neuropathy; 
   Psychiatric manifestations; 
   Inappropriate ADH secretion. 
 Table 21.4   Clinical features and investigation ﬁ ndings of the porphyrias. 
 Condition  
  Symptoms  
 Blood ﬁ ndings  
  Urine ﬁ ndings  
  Stool ﬁ ndings  
 Plumboporphyria  
  Neurological 
  Protoporphyrin IX  
  ALA, coproporphyrin III  
  
 Acute intermittent 
porphyria (AIP)  
 Neurological 
  
  ALA, porphobilinogen  
  
 Congenital 
erythropoeitic 
porphyria (CEP)  
 Skin  
  Uroporphyrin I  
  Uroporphyrin I  
  Coproporphyrin I  
 Porphyria 
cutanea tarda 
(PCT)  
 Skin  
  
  Uroporphyrin I  
  Isocoproporphyrin  
 Hereditary 
coproporphyria  
 Neurological 
and skin  
 
  ALA, porphobilinogen, 
coproporphyrin III  
 Coproporphyrin III  
 Variegate 
porphyria  
 Neurological 
and skin  
 
  ALA, porphobilinogen, 
coproporphyrin III  
 Protoporphyrin IX  
 Erythropoeitic 
porphyria  
 Skin  
  Protoporphyrin IX  
  
  Protoporphyrin IX  
 ALA, amino laevulonic acid.  
 Investigations 
 Table  21.5  illustrates the blood, urine and stool 
features of the porphyrias. Additionally, the iden-
tiﬁ cation of the genes of the haem biosynthesis 
pathway has allowed genetic screening of family 
members, although there are a large number of 
mutations for each porphyria. 
 Management 
 •  Cutaneous forms : 
   Avoid skin exposure and trauma, use of 
barrier creams;  
   In porphyria cutanea tarda, venesection or 
chloroquine can be helpful.    
 •  Neurological forms : 
   Avoidance of triggers; 
   Intravenous glucose (calories reduce 
abnormal enzyme activity, helping terminate 
attacks);  
   Administration of haem (reduces metabolite 
excretion and accelerates recovery).         
 Glycogen  s torage 
 d iseases 
 The glycogen storage diseases represent a broad 
range of clinical entities brought about by 

Hereditary and congenital liver diseases 153
 Table 21.5   Clinical features of the glycogen storage diseases. 
 
  Clinical features  
  Treatment  
 Type 1 
glycogen 
storage 
disease  
 Impaired glucose - 6 - phosphatase system 
activity: 
 •  Excessive accumulation of glycogen and fat  
 •  inadequate hepatic glucose production via 
glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis  
 Classical presentation: 
 •  Neonatal period with hypoglycaemia and lactic 
acidosis or 3 – 4 months of age with hepatomegaly 
and/or hypoglycaemic seizures  
 •  Doll - like faces with excess adipose tissue in 
cheeks 
 •  Short stature  
 •  Protuberant abdomen  
 •  Kidneys often symmetrically enlarged  
 •  Liver transaminases normal or only slightly 
elevated 
 •  Hypoglycaemia and lacticacidaemia can occur after a 
short fast  
 •  Hyperuricaemia often present  
 •  Intermittent diarrhoea  
 •  Bruising and expistaxis  – prolonged bleeding time 
as a result of impaired platelet aggregation and 
adhesion 
 •  Signiﬁ cant elevation of triglycerides:  
   Cholesterol and phospholipids elevated, but less 
prominently 
   Skin xanthomas  
   Retinal changes associated with hyperlipidaemia  
 Note : some patients do not show all the classical 
symptoms and/or have only relatively mild symptoms. In 
rare cases asymptomatic 
 Liver histology: 
 •  Universal distension of hepatocytes by glycogen and 
fat 
 •  Lipid vacuoles are large and prominent  
 Long - term consequences: 
 •  Growth impaired  
 •  Puberty frequently delayed  
 •  Gout starts around puberty  
 •  Increased risk of pancreatitis  
 •  Hepatic adenomas  
 •  Hepatomas 
 •  Heart failure secondary to pulmonary hypertension 
 •  Osteoporosis 
 •  Renal disease common  
 •  Type Ib glycogen storage:  
   Additional ﬁ ndings of neutropenia and impaired 
neutrophil function  
   Ulceration of oral and intestinal mucosa 
common 
   Inﬂ ammatory bowel disease reported  
 Main aim to prevent 
hypoglycaemia 
 Dietary therapy: 
 •  Nocturnal nasogastric 
infusion of glucose  
 •  Orally administered 
uncooked cornstarch  
 Careful control of glucose during 
illness and perioperatively 
essential 
 Allopurinol to reduce the levels 
of uric acid 
 Liver transplantation: 
 •  Only if other treatments fail 
or 
 •  If there has been malignant 
transformation of an 
adenoma 
 Kidney transplantation in renal 
failure 
 Management of bleeding 
tendency 
 Type Ib: 
 •  Granulocyte and 
granulocyte - macrophage 
colony - stimulating factors to 
correct neutropenia  

154 
Hereditary and congenital liver diseases
 
  Clinical features  
  Treatment  
 Type III 
glycogen 
storage 
disease  
 Deﬁ ciency of glycogen debranching enzyme: 
 •  Impairs release of glucose from glycogen but 
does not affect glucose released from 
gluconeogenesis 
 •  Type IIIa involves both liver and muscle 
(most patients)  
 •  Type IIIb: only the liver is affected  
 Clinical features: 
 •  Hepatomegaly 
 •  Growth retardation  
 •  Hypoglycaemia 
 •  Hyperlipidaemia 
 •  High liver transaminases  
 •  Fasting ketosis  
 •  Liver - related symptoms improve with age and 
disappear after puberty  
 •  Overt liver cirrhosis occurs rarely  
 •  Neuromuscular involvement, slowly progressive 
weakness and distal muscle wasting  
 Liver histology: 
 •  Universal enlargement of hepatocytes by 
glycogen 
 •  Presence of ﬁ brosis (non - progressive in most 
cases) 
 Dietary management is less 
demanding than in type I: 
 •  Symptomatic if 
hypoglycaemia is present:  
   Frequent meals high in 
carbohydrates with 
cornstarch supplements 
or 
   Nocturnal gastric drip 
feedings 
 •  Diet high in protein during 
the daytime plus overnight 
protein enteral infusion may 
be of some beneﬁ t in 
patients with myopathy  
 Type IV 
glycogen 
storage 
disease  
 Branching enzyme deﬁ ciency: 
 •  Accumulation of glycogen with unbranched, long 
outer chains  
 •  Unbranched glycogen is signiﬁ cantly less soluble than 
normal glycogen  
 Clinical features: 
 •  Progressive liver cirrhosis with portal hypertension and 
death often occurs before the age of 5 years (minority 
not progressive)  
 •  Typically presents in the ﬁ rst year of life  
 •  Hepatosplenomegaly 
 •  Failure to thrive  
 •  Hypoglycaemia is rare  
 Histology: 
 •  Diffuse interstitial ﬁ brosis  
 •  Wide ﬁ brous septa  
 •  Abnormally large hepatocytes with stores of coarsely 
clumped material (glycogen and aggregations of 
amylopectin - like material)  
 No speciﬁ c treatment: 
 •  Maintenance of 
normoglycaemia and 
adequate nutrient intake:  
   Improves liver function  
   Improves muscle 
strength 
   May extend the time for 
growth 
 •  Liver transplantation for 
progressive hepatic failure 
may be effective  
Table 21.5 Clinical features of the glycogen storage diseases (continued)

Hereditary and congenital liver diseases 155
 
  Clinical features  
  Treatment  
 Type VI 
glycogen 
storage 
disease  
 Deﬁ ciency in liver phosphorylase or defects in one of the 
four subunits of phosphorylase kinase: 
 •  Heterogeneous group of diseases  
 •  Phenotypes cannot easily be distinguished 
clinically 
 Clinical features: 
 •  Relatively benign  
 •  Usually presenting with hepatomegaly and growth 
retardation in early childhood  
 •  Hypoglycaemia and hyperlipidaemia mild  
 X - linked phosphorylasekinase deﬁ ciency most 
common: 
 •  Classical presentation at age 1 – 5 years:  
   Protuberant abdomen due to hepatomegaly  
   Fasting hyperketosis  
   Mild elevation of cholesterol, triglycerides, AST 
and ALT  
 •  Clinical symptoms tend to disappear gradually with 
age 
 •  Most achieve normal ﬁ nal height  
 Autosomal phosphorylase kinase deﬁ ciencies: 
 •  Early childhood  
 •  Hepatomegaly 
 •  Growth retardation  
 Symptomatic 
 •  High - carbohydrate diet and 
frequent feedings for 
hypoglycaemia 
 •  Most patients require no 
speciﬁ c treatment  
 Prognosis is usually good 
 Adult patients have minimal 
hepatomegaly and normal 
stature  
 Glycogen 
synthase 
deﬁ ciency 
 Different from other glycogen storage diseases: 
 •  Decreased glycogen stores  
 •  Present in early infancy  
   Fasting hypoglycaemia  
   Hyperketonaemia 
   No hepatomegaly or hyperlipidaemia  
 •  Hyperglycaemia and a rise in blood lactate 
concentration may occur after meals (glucose is 
preferentially converted to lactate in the absence of 
glycogen synthesis)  
 Glucagon effect: 
 •  During fasting, administration of glucagon has no 
effect on blood glucose, lactate or alanine 
concentrations 
 After a meal, glucagon causes a rise in glucose and a fall 
in lactate and alanine  
 Symptomatic: 
 •  Frequent feedings to alleviate 
hypoglycaemia 
 •  Protein - containing preferred 
to meals rich in 
carbohydrate: 
   Glycogen synthesis is 
compromised and 
excess glucose is 
converted to lactate  
Table 21.5 Clinical features of the glycogen storage diseases (continued)

156 
Hereditary and congenital liver diseases
disruption of the normal mechanisms of glycog-
enolysis 
and 
gluconeogenesis 
(Table 
 21.5 ). 
Treatment focuses on avoiding hypoglycaemia 
and managing the hepatic and extrahepatic con-
sequences of these diseases.  
 Biliary  a tresia 
 Biliary atresia is a very rare congenital condition 
of unknown cause in which there is obliteration or 
discontinuity of the extrahepatic biliary system. It 
is the most common surgically treatable cause of 
cholestasis encountered during the newborn 
period. The incidence is highest in Asian 
populations. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Biliary atresia is indistinguishable from other 
causes of neonatal jaundice. As well as jaundice, 
patients may exhibit pale stools, dark urine, failure 
to thrive, splenomegaly and hepatomegaly. In any 
neonate with prolonged jaundice that is resistant 
to phototherapy and/or exchange transfusions, a 
search for secondary causes should ensue. 
Kernicterus does not develop as the liver is still 
able to conjugate bilirubin, which is unable to 
cross the blood – brain barrier 
 Biliary atresia is divided into two distinct groups: 
 •  Isolated biliary atresia (postnatal form), which 
accounts for 65 – 90% of cases;  
 •  Associated situs inversus or polysplenia/
asplenia with or without other congenital 
anomalies (fetal/embryonic form), comprising 
10 – 35% of cases. 
 In addition there are three distinct types of 
atresia (Box  21.2 ). 
 Box 21.2   Types of  b iliary  a tresia. 
 •  Type I involves obliteration of the common duct; 
the proximal ducts are patent  
 •  Type II is characterised by atresia of the hepatic 
duct, with cystic structures found in the porta 
hepatis  
 •  Type III ( > 90% of patients) involves atresia of the 
right and left hepatic ducts to the level of the 
porta hepatis  
 Investigations 
 •  Mandatory : 
   Blood tests show marked conjugated 
hyperbilirubinaemia;  
   Ultrasound investigation or other forms of 
imaging can conﬁ rm the diagnosis. 
 •  Further testing : 
   Radioisotope scans of the liver; 
   Liver biopsy. 
 Management 
 If the intrahepatic biliary tree is unaffected, surgi-
cal reconstruction of the extrahepatic biliary tract 
(hepatoportoenterostomy) 
is 
possible 
(Kasai 
procedure). If the atresia is complete, liver 
transplantation is the only option. A third of 
patients will have inadequate bile ﬂ ow following 
the Kasai procedure and will require liver 
transplantation. 
 Postoperative 
breastfeeding 
is 
encouraged 
when possible because breast milk contains both 
lipases and bile salts to aid in lipid hydrolysis and 
micelle formation. Theoretically, breast milk may 
also protect against cholangitis. 
 
 
  

 Hepatitis  A  
 Hepatitis A virus (Table  22.1 ) is highly infectious 
and spread by the faeco - oral route. Development 
of cell - line virus culture techniques has led to the 
development of vaccines. 
 Epidemiology 
 Hepatitis A has a worldwide distribution with 
higher rates occurring in communities with low 
standards of sanitation. Outbreaks in industrial-
ised countries have been seen to occur in daycare 
centres 
and 
in 
association 
with 
sewage -
 contaminated shellﬁ sh, in homosexual men and 
in IV drug abusers. There have been very rare 
reports of transmission by blood transfusion. 
 Pathogenesis 
 The hepatitis A virus (HAV) is very stable, with-
standing substantial heat, drying, low pH and 
detergents. This means it is able to survive in the 
environment (including in foods and drinking 
water) and acid barrier of the stomach, and be 
excreted in the bile, leading to faecal shedding. 
 The mechanisms responsible for hepatocellular 
injury remain poorly characterised but appear to 
be caused by the host ’ s response to infection 
rather than a direct cytopathic effect of the virus. 
The long incubation phase of the virus is related 
to its ability to interfere with normal mechanisms 
for the recognition of viral infection and resultant 
synthesis of interferon (IFN) - β . With the onset of 
 22 
Viral  h epatitides  
hepatocellular 
injury, 
HLA - restricted, 
virus -
 speciﬁ c, cytotoxic, CD8 +  T cells begin to secrete 
IFN - γ , which stimulates the recruitment of addi-
tional, non - speciﬁ c inﬂ ammatory cells, causing 
hepatocellular injury. 
 The secretion of neutralising antibodies occurs 
concurrent with the earliest evidence of serum 
aminotransferase elevation and hepatocellular 
injury. Neutralising antibody is of primary impor-
tance in protection against HAV infection and 
disease. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Following an incubation period of 15 – 50 days 
(average 28 – 30 days), symptomatic individuals 
develop an acute febrile illness with jaundice, 
anorexia, nausea, abdominal discomfort, malaise 
and dark urine. Viral shedding is extensive 
throughout the incubation phase and continues 
for a further 1 – 3 weeks in adults, longer in young 
children. Most infections in infants and preschool 
children are very mild or asymptomatic. Symptoms 
are more common in adults, up to 70% having 
some symptoms, and with the severity tending to 
increase with age. While fulminant hepatitis can 
develop, it is rare. Chronic carrier states do not 
occur and permanent hepatic damage is extremely 
unlikely. However, patients with chronic liver 
disease are at particular risk of exacerbation with 
HAV and should be protected from infection. 
 Investigations 
 Diagnosis relies on the detection of serum anti-
bodies to HAV (Figure  22.1 ). Immunoglobulin M 
(IgM) - speciﬁ c antibody indicates recent infection 
and develops 5 – 10 days after exposure and can 
persist for up to 6 months. Immunoglobulin G 
Lecture Notes: Gastroenterology and Hepatology, 1st edition. 
Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. 
© 2011 Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

158 
Viral hepatitides
of the disease as long as it is given within 2 
weeks of contact with the disease. Protection 
against HAV was ﬁ rst achieved using human 
normal IgG, providing passive immunity to 
the virus;  
   Use of immunoglobulin for vaccination has 
largely been replaced by the use of 
inactivated hepatitis A vaccines. 
   •      While universal and targeted programmes for 
childhood immunisation have been introduced 
in the USA and Australia, in most industrialised 
(IgG) antibody is detectable shortly after the 
appearance of IgM. Virus culture is not used in 
routine diagnosis. 
 Management 
 •  Management of the infected patient is largely 
symptomatic. 
 •  Vaccination is effective both in preventing 
infection and disease:  
   There is an ongoing role for the use of 
immunoglobulin in the control of outbreaks 
 Table 22.1   Hepatitis viruses. 
 
  A  
  B  
  C  
  D  
  E  
 Family  
  Picornavirus  
  Hepadnavirus  
  Flavavirus  
  Deltavirus  
  Calcivirus  
 Size (nm)  
  27  
  42  
  30 – 60  
  40  
  32  
 Genome  
  ssRNA  
  dsDNA  
  ssRNA  
  ssRNA  
  ssRNA  
 Length (kb)  
  7.5  
  3.2  
  9.4  
  1.7  
  7.5  
 Transmission  
  Faeco - oral  
  Parenteral 
 Sexual  
 Parenteral 
 ?Sexual  
 Parenteral 
 Sexual  
 Faeco - oral  
 Chronic 
infection (%)  
 None  
  3 – 7  
  80 – 90  
  2 – 70  
  None  
 Markers of 
infection  
 HAV RNA  
  HBsAg 
 HBeAg  
 HCV RNA  
  HDV RNA  
  HEV PCR  
 Figure 22.1   Natural history of hepatitis A.  
10
8
6
4
2
0
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Weeks
IgM
Anti-HAV
IgG
Anti-HAV
ALT
Fecal HAV
Viremia
Log10 HAV
 ss, Single stranded; ds, double stranded.  

Viral hepatitides 159
 Epidemiology 
 Hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection is one of the 
most common infections worldwide with 400 
million people estimated to be carriers. The mor-
tality rate associated with HCC and other terminal 
complications of HBV infection is approximately 
one million people per year. 
 The  risk factors for HBV infection include: 
 •  Transfusion; 
 •  Needle sharing; 
 •  Sexual transmission; 
 •  Perinatal transmission; 
 •  Men who have sex with men; 
 •  Promiscuous heterosexuals; 
 •  Immunosuppressed patients; 
 •  Patients on haemodialysis; 
 •  Transplantation; 
 •  Healthccare transmission. 
 The prevalence of HBV infection varies widely 
and correlates with risk of infection, age of infec-
tion and mode of transmission (Table  22.2 ).   
 Eight genotypes are recognised (A – H). Each 
genotype: 
 •  Is associated with a particular geographical 
prevalence. 
 •  May also be of clinical importance: 
   Patients with genotype C infection develop 
advanced liver disease more frequently than 
B or D; 
   Rate of HBeAg seroconversion is lower in 
genotype C infection;  
   Genotype C infection is associated with risk 
of HCC. 
countries vaccination is recommended only for 
groups at high risk of infection or in whom 
infection is more likely to cause serious illness. 
These groups include: 
   Patients infected with hepatitis B and C; 
   Travellers to countries with high rates of 
hepatitis A;  
   Certain occupational groups: 
   –      Employees of early childhood services;  
 –  Those involved in the care of the 
intellectually disabled;  
 –  Healthcare workers exposed to faeces; 
 –  Sewerage and other workers exposed to 
faeces;  
 –  Military personnel. 
   Men who have sex with men; 
   Injecting drug users; 
   Recipients of blood products such as factor 
VIII. 
 Special attention should be paid to the group 
chronically infected with other hepatitis viruses 
as superinfection with HAV in this group leads 
to increased morbidity and mortality. All patients 
should 
receive 
hepatitis 
A 
vaccine 
before 
liver decompensation occurs and, if this has not 
occurred prior to consideration for transplanta-
tion, 
as 
early 
as 
possible 
before 
liver 
transplantation. 
 Hepatitis  B  
 This hepatotropic DNA virus can cause chronic 
infection, causing chronic hepatitis, cirrhosis and 
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) (Table  22.1 ). 
 Table 22.2   Epidemiology and modes of transmission of hepatitis  B virus infection. 
 
  High  
  Intermediate  
  Low  
 Carrier rate (%)  
  8  
  2 – 7  
  1  
 Geographical 
distribution  
 Southeast Asia 
 China 
 Paciﬁ c islands 
 Sub - Saharan Africa 
 Alaska (Eskimos)  
 Mediterranean basin 
 Eastern Europe 
 Central Asia 
 Japan 
 Latin and South America 
 Middle East  
 United States and 
Canada 
 Western Europe 
 Australia 
 New Zealand  
 Predominant age 
at infection  
 Perinatal and early 
childhood  
 Early childhood  
  Adult  
 Predominant mode 
of infection  
 Maternal – infant 
 Percutaneous  
 Percutaneous 
 Sexual  
 Sexual 
 Percutaneous  

160 
Viral hepatitides
 2.  Inﬂ ammatory, where the aminotransferases 
become elevated, liver biopsy shows chronic 
hepatitis and viral replication declines;  
 3.  Patients may enter the inactive phase where 
viral replication has stopped, the 
aminotransferases normalise and there is no 
ongoing liver inﬂ ammation. 
 Investigations 
 •  To make a  diagnosis of chronic HBV infection, 
the hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) 
must be positive for 6 months; however, in 
practice the diagnosis is often suspected 
before this. 
 •  Other markers are used to determine  immunity 
and  infectivity : 
   Antibodies to HBsAg (anti - HBs) indicate 
immunity either following vaccination or 
clearance of an acute infection;  
   Positivity for the HBV E - antigen (HBeAg), in 
the presence of HBV - DNA, indicates active 
replication; 
   Level of HBV - DNA correlates with the 
amount of virus in the circulation and has 
prognostic implications; 
   IgM antibodies to the HBV core protein (IgM 
anti - HBc) suggest recent exposure, except 
that patients with reactivation of infection 
may also be IgM anti - HBc positive. 
 Two special situations relating to chronic 
HBV infection are described in Boxes  22.1  
and  22.2 . 
 Pathogenesis 
 The innate immune system does not appear to 
play a role in HBV disease pathogenesis or viral 
clearance. Instead: 
 •  HBV remains undetected in the liver and 
continues to replicate non - cytopathically until 
the adaptive immune response is initiated;  
 •  At the time of onset of hepatocellular damage, 
virus - speciﬁ c CD4 + T helper cells are involved 
in facilitating the induction and maintenance 
of CD8 + cytotoxic T lymphocytes (which have a 
fundamental role in the pathogenesis of liver 
cell injury);  
 •  This pathogen - speciﬁ c response is supported 
by the inﬂ ux of non - virus - speciﬁ c 
inﬂ ammatory cells, including mononuclear 
and polymorphonuclear cells;  
 •  Recent evidence also points to an important role 
for platelets in the modulation of liver damage.    
 Clinical  f eatures 
 The clinical manifestations of HBV vary greatly 
between the acute and chronic phases of the 
disease. In the  acute phase , which occurs in the 6 
months after infection, the majority of patients are 
asymptomatic or demonstrate only mild fatigue. 
In some cases, however, there may be subclinical 
or clinical icterus, or very infrequently fulminant 
hepatitis. 
 In the  chronic phase , the clinical manifestations 
can range from asymptomatic liver test abnor-
malities to chronic hepatitis, cirrhosis and HCC. A 
number of factors determine whether an individ-
ual will clear an acute HBV infection or go on to 
develop chronic hepatitis. 
 •  Age is the most important, with carrier rates of 
 > 90% in patients infected as a newborn but 
 < 5% in those infected as adults;  
 •  Immunological status, with 
immunocompromised patients (HIV, renal 
failure, post - transplant patients) having high 
rates of chronicity;  
 •  Severity of acute disease determines progres-
sion to chronicity: those with less severe acute 
illness mount a less effective immune response 
and so are less likely to clear viral replication.    
 The disease is divided into three phases: 
 1.  Replicative, during which aminotransferases 
are largely normal and there is little liver 
damage;  
 Box 22.1   Predicting  r isk of  c irrhosis and 
 h epatocellular  c arcinoma. 
 Serum HBV DNA level is the strongest predictor of 
progression to cirrhosis and also contributes a 
dose - dependent effect on the risk of HCC. This 
risk is independent of ALT level and HBeAg 
status. Care must be taken in applying these 
results: 
 •  More than one test is needed (as the level of 
HBV ﬂ uctuates greatly)  
 •  In patients with perinatal or early childhood 
infection  
 •  In those with a shorter duration of infection  

Viral hepatitides 161
 Management 
 Prevention 
 Prevention is the cornerstone of management of 
HBV: 
 •  Safe sex; 
 •  Avoidance of sharing of IV drug use; 
 •  Use of gloves; 
 •  Careful cleaning of blood or body ﬂ uid spills; 
 •  Disposal or adequate sterilisation of surgical 
instruments (including tattoo and piercing 
equipment);  
 •  Careful disposal of sharps; 
 •  Use of goggles where there is a risk of infected 
material splashing into the eye  
 •  Immunisation. 
 Immunisation is safe and effective. Many 
countries with a high endemic incidence of 
HBV have a policy of universal childhood 
vaccination. Elsewhere vaccination is recom-
mended for: 
 •  Those exposed to blood or blood products; 
 In chronic HBV infection, loss of the HBeAg is 
usually associated with development of the anti -
 HBe antibody and transition from the phase of high 
HBV replication to an inactive phase of infection. 
However, a variable proportion of patients continues 
to have, or re - develop, high serum HBV - DNA levels. 
This is termed HBeAg - negative chronic HBV 
infection and is a potentially severe and progressive 
form of liver disease. 
 The ﬁ rst discovered causes for this transformation 
were mutations in the precore region of the viral 
DNA, preventing translation of the e antigen by the 
core region. It generally occurs in geographical 
areas where HBV infection is transmitted vertically 
or even horizontally in very early life, and where the 
B and D genotypes of HBV prevail. HBeAg - negative 
chronic HBV infection may also develop with 
precore wild - type HBV strains, and in association 
with mutations in the basic core promoter region of 
the viral DNA. 
 Deﬁ nitive diagnosis requires sequencing of the 
precore region but this technique is conﬁ ned to 
research settings. In practice the diagnosis is made 
by: 
 Box 22.2   HB e A g - n egative  c hronic  h epatitis  B . 
 •  HBsAg positive for at least 6 months  
 •  Negative serum HBeAg and usually positive 
anti - HBe antibody for at least 6 months  
 •  Increased serum ALT  > 2   ×  upper limit of normal 
(ULN) on one occasion or ALT  > 1.5    ×  ULN on 
at least 2 monthly determinations  
 •  Detectable serum HBV DNA  
 •  Exclusion of other causes of liver disease  
 •  Moderate - to - severe necroinﬂ ammation on liver 
histology  
 Common non - HBV causes of liver damage in this 
setting include superinfections with hepatitis D or C 
viruses, alcohol excess, hepatotoxic drugs and rare 
metabolic diseases. 
 In HBeAg - negative chronic HBV infection, 
treatment responses to IFN and lamivudine have 
been disappointing, with frequent relapse at the 
end of treatment and higher rates of lamivudine 
resistance than in the treatment of wild - type virus 
strains.  
 •  Travellers who plan to spend long periods in 
high prevalence areas or with pre - existing 
medical conditions that place them at a higher 
risk of requiring medical procedures abroad 
(including pregnancy);  
 •  Haemophiliacs; 
 •  Prisoners and prison ofﬁ cers. 
 All pregnant women should be screened for 
HBV and, if positive, the baby should receive vac-
cination soon after birth using an accelerated 
schedule. 
 Treatment 
 Current therapies for chronic HBV infection fall 
into two categories: 
 •  IFN - α : 
   Used for a ﬁ nite period with durable 
response in a subset of patients; 
   Disadvantages of administration by injection 
and adverse effects. 
 •  Oral nucleoside and nucleotide analogues (e.g. 
lamivudine): 

162 
Viral hepatitides
failure than HBV alone. Chronic HDV infection is 
associated with more rapidly progressing liver 
damage. 
 Investigations  (Figure  22.2 ) 
 The diagnosis of HDV should be considered in 
all patients diagnosed with HBV. It is particularly 
important 
to 
consider 
superinfection 
in 
patients with HBV undergoing a ﬂ are in disease 
activity. 
 •  HDV produces two proteins, the small and 
large delta antigens (HDAg - S and HDAg - L). 
Even though these antigens are 90% identical 
they have different effects in infection: 
   HDAg - S is produced early and is required for 
viral replication; 
   HDAg - L is produced later and is an inhibitor 
of viral replication but is required for viral 
particle assembly. 
 •  Total anti - HDV antibodies are used to make 
the diagnosis of infection.  
 •  Reverse transcriptase - polymerase chain 
reaction (RT - PCR) is used to measure HDV 
RNA for monitoring chronic infection. 
 HDAg, IgM anti - HD antibodies and IgG anti - HD 
antibodies all disappear within months after 
clearance of viral replication, but persist in chronic 
infection.  
 Management 
 Vaccination against HBV also protects against 
HDV, and there has been a worldwide decrease in 
the incidence of HBV superinfection with the ini-
tiation of HBV vaccination programmes. 
 Antivirals, such as lamivudine, do not reduce 
HDV titres. 
 Treatment of disease is limited to: 
 •  Extensive IFN - α therapy; or 
 •  In severe situations, liver transplantation. 
 Hepatitis  C  
 Hepatitis C virus (HCV) is the most common of the 
chronic blood - borne infections (Table  22.1 ). 
It is estimated that as many as 170 million people 
are infected worldwide. It has six genotypes, 
the relative preponderance of which varies 
globally. 
   Better tolerated but associated with resistance;  
   Expensive given they require administration 
for lengthy periods. 
 In addition, assays, including genotyping, HBV -
 DNA levels, genomic analysis, precore and core 
promoter mutations, and resistance mutations 
can be used to guide therapy. The overriding prin-
ciple of therapy is that early, profound, sustained 
viral suppression improves response rates and 
reduces resistance. 
 Hepatitis  D  
 Hepatitis D virus (HDV) is a subviral agent, 
dependent for its life cycle on HBV (Table  22.1 ). 
Co - infection or superinfection with this agent in 
HBV complicates the course of the disease. 
 Epidemiology 
 It is estimated that 20 million of the more than 400 
million chronic HBV carriers worldwide also have 
chronic HDV. As both HBV and HDV are blood -
 borne, they share the same risk factors and may be 
contracted with the same or separate, exposures. 
When a na ï ve individual receives both viruses, it is 
referred to as  co - infection , whereas  superinfection 
is when a person chronically infected with HBV 
then contracts HDV.  
 Pathogenesis 
 In humans, HDV cannot replicate without the 
presence of HBV as it must make use of the three 
HBV envelope proteins. HBV particle assembly is 
very inefﬁ cient and most of the assembled parti-
cles are empty and do not contain the HBV nucle-
ocapsid structure or genome. HDV assembly 
makes use of this excess production of envelope 
proteins, inserting the HDV genomic RNAs and 
other proteins into these empty particles. 
 Little information exists as to the exact mecha-
nisms by which HDV enhances liver injury in HBV, 
however, it appears HDV replication itself is not 
cytopathic; instead immune mechanisms (both 
humoral and cellular) may be involved in the 
pathogenesis of liver injury.  
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Acute HDV superinfections carry a much greater 
risk of fulminating hepatitis and resultant liver 

Viral hepatitides 163
 Pathogenesis 
 Research into the mechanisms for liver damage in 
HCV infection has been greatly hampered by the 
lack of cell - line and animal models of disease. 
What is clear is: 
 •  Innate immune system, the body ’ s ﬁ rst 
line of defence, is insufﬁ cient to eliminate the 
virus;  
 •  Acquired immune system is also attenuated, 
with T - cell failure, dysfunction and exhaustion; 
 •  Hepatocyte apoptosis (programmed cell 
death) is enhanced, and this correlates with 
liver pathology and may contribute to 
ﬁ brogenesis. 
 Epidemiology 
 The risk factors for this blood - borne infection 
include: 
 •  Blood transfusions (prior to institution of 
screening);  
 •  IV drug use, tattoos, ear or body piercing; 
 •  Sexual promiscuity; 
 •  An HCV - positive partner; 
 •  Incarceration. 
 Co - infection with HIV is common and the rate 
of HCV is high amongst the population with HIV. 
HCV has become one of the most important 
causes of morbidity and mortality in patients with 
HIV in the developed world.  
 Figure 22.2  Serological and clinical course of hepatitis D co - infection (upper panel) and superinfection (lower 
panel).  
Titer
Titer
IgM anti-HDV
ALT elevated
Symptoms
HDV  RNA
HBsAg
HBsAg
Time after exposure
Time after exposure
Total anti HDV
Total anti HDV
IgM anti-HDV
Anti-HBs
Jaundice
Symptoms
ALT
HDV RNA

164 
Viral hepatitides
   Cons: 
 –  Cannot determine ongoing infection; 
   –      May miss patients who have not yet 
developed antibodies or the rare patient 
who does not produce antibodies. 
 •  RNA testing is necessary when antibody tests 
are negative, but the clinical suspicion is high. 
Virus is detectable in serum 1 – 3 weeks after 
infection: 
   Most common modality is PCR; 
   Titre assists in determining the probability of 
response to treatment but not severity or 
likelihood of progression. 
 Management 
 Prevention 
 Prevention of hepatitis C centres around educa-
tion and programmes to eliminate the risk factors 
for HCV infection, in particular avoidance of the 
sharing of IV needles during elicit drug use. 
Because of the variability and high rate of muta-
tion of HCV, as well as difﬁ culties with animal and 
cell - line models of disease, it has not been possi-
ble to develop an effective vaccine.  
 Treatment 
 The primary goal is viral eradication. This is 
deﬁ ned by the sustained virological response 
(SVR), which is the absence of detectable serum 
HCV RNA 6 months following the completion of 
therapy. Combination therapy is usual: 
 •  Pegylated IFN - α , which gives increased and 
sustained duration of activity due to longer 
serum half - lifethan conventional IFN - α ; 
 •  Ribavirin, the nucleoside antimetabolite. 
 Monitoring of serum RNA levels can allow 
rationalisation of treatment. Viral genotype is the 
greatest predictor of treatment response. 
 •  Genotype 1 : SVR is achievable in nearly half of 
patients:  
   Lack of early viral response (EVR: deﬁ ned as 
a minimum 2 - log10 decrease in viral load 
during the ﬁ rst 12 weeks of therapy) is a 
strong predictor of not achieving SVR, 
enabling early treatment discontinuation;  
   However, treatment of the (rarely diagnosed) 
acute infection is warranted, resulting in a 
 > 90% success rate with half the treatment 
time required for chronic infections.    
 •  Genotypes 2 and 3 : SVR is achievable in 80%: 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Acute infection is deﬁ ned as the ﬁ rst 6 months fol-
lowing initial infection: 
 •  Asymptomatic (the vast majority); 
 •  Mild, non - speciﬁ c complaints (fatigue, 
abdominal pain, anorexia, itching, and ﬂ u - like 
symptoms), which lead to a diagnosis only in a 
minority. 
 Chronic infection  is deﬁ ned as  > 6 months of 
documented infection: 
 •  Frequently remains asymptomatic until late in 
the disease when liver ﬁ brosis develops; 
 •  Those symptoms that are experienced are 
non - speciﬁ c and varying;  
 •  Liver function tests are variably elevated and 
ﬂ uctuant. 
 •  Extrahepatic manifestations occur more 
commonly with chronic HCV infection 
than other forms of chronic hepatitis and 
include:  
   Cryoglobulinaemia; 
   Porphyria cutanea tarda; 
   Thyroiditis; 
   Sicca syndrome; 
   Thrombocytopenia; 
   lLchen planus; 
   Diabetes mellitus; 
   B - cell lymphoproliferative disorders; 
   Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis. 
 75% of patients with acute infection go on to 
become chronically infected. The risk of cirrhosis 
is approximately 1% per year, so at 20 years 20% 
will have cirrhosis and in that time 5% will develop 
HCC. 
 Investigations 
 Given the absence of speciﬁ c symptoms, the diag-
nosis of HCV infection needs to be actively con-
sidered by the clinician. The diagnosis is often 
made incidentally with the discovery of elevated 
liver tests and is occasionally diagnosed at screen-
ing, such as occurs with blood donation or contact 
tracing. 
 •  Anti - HCV antibodies: 
   Pros: 
   –      Positive in 80% within 3 months of 
infection,  > 90% within 5 months and  > 97% 
by 6 months;  
 –  Have a strong positive predictive value. 

Viral hepatitides 165
 Viraemia is usually brief, except in the immuno-
suppressed (e.g. after renal transplants), where it 
can be protracted. It appears that HEV can cause 
zoonotic infection and other mammalian hosts 
may constitute important reservoirs for the 
disease in humans.  
 Pathogenesis 
 HEV is the prototype member of the Hepevirus 
genus, family Hepeviridae. The virus was identi-
ﬁ ed for the ﬁ rst time by immunoelectron micro-
graph in the faeces of an infected human. It has a 
spherical and non - enveloped virion, with surface 
spikes as well as cup - like indentations. 
 While an oral route of infection has been clearly 
demonstrated, the site of primary replication has 
not been identiﬁ ed, but is likely to be in the intes-
tinal tract. The virus reaches the liver, presumably 
via the portal vein, and replicates in the cytoplasm 
of hepatocytes. It is able to survive the range of pH 
as it transits through the GI tract. While man is the 
natural host, it seems very likely animals serve as 
a reservoir with several claims of infection in 
domestic sheep and swine. Zoonotic transmission 
of HEV has also been demonstrated from deer to 
humans. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 HEV infections manifests as epidemics of sporadic 
hepatitis in disease - endemic areas following an 
incubation period of 15 – 60 days (mean 40 days). 
As with other viral hepatitides a spectrum of 
symptoms occurs: 
 •  Asymptomatic (probably far more common 
than icteric disease);  
 •  Acute viral febrile illness without any 
characteristic features. When infection is 
symptomatic it produces an acute self - limiting 
hepatitis, which runs a course of a few weeks. 
However, in some patients there may be a 
prolonged cholestatic course. 
 Symptomatic disease can be divided into two 
phases: 
 •  Pre - icteric phase , lasting 1 – 10 days (average 
3 – 4 days) with GI symptoms (epigastric pain, 
nausea and vomiting);  
 •  Icteric phase , beginning abruptly with 
jaundice, dark urine and clay - coloured stools. 
Two - thirds of patients also report arthralgia. 
There is a: 
   Often need lower doses of ribavirin and a 
shorter treatment duration than genotype 1. 
 There are signiﬁ cant adverse effects associated 
with the use of IFN - α and PEG - IFNs, including 
fatigue, ﬂ u - like symptoms, GI disturbances, 
haematological abnormalities, neuropsychiatric 
effects (particularly depression), thyroid dysfunc-
tion and dermatological effects, such as alopecia 
and pruritus. In addition, ribavirin is associated 
with haemolytic anaemia. Because treatment 
success is directly related to adherence to treat-
ment, dose reductions and discontinuations 
should be avoided if possible, hence monitoring 
for, and management of, adverse effects is essen-
tial. Serotonin - reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) are safe 
and effective for IFN - associated depression. 
Anaemia caused by ribavirin can be treated using 
erythropoietin. 
 Hepatitis  E  
 Hepatitis E virus (HEV) is a distinct agent, unre-
lated to HAV, which causes epidemics of largely 
waterborne, enterically transmitted, acute hepati-
tis (Table  22.1 ). 
 Epidemiology 
 The ﬁ rst extensively studied epidemic of HEV 
infection was in Delhi from 1955 to 1956. There 
were  > 29   000 icteric cases, with attack rates of 
1 – 15% and an excess of cases among the 15 – 40 
year olds. Studies of other epidemics in Asia and 
the Indian subcontinent have since shown a high 
susceptibility in children also and a case - fatality 
between 0.2% and 4%. In addition, there is a high 
risk of unexplained fulminant liver failure in preg-
nant women who are infected, especially in the 
third trimester. Intrauterine infection is common 
and associated with substantial prenatal morbid-
ity and mortality. Outbreaks have been especially 
documented in countries of South - East Asia and 
Northern Africa. 
 Transmission : 
 •  Primarily faeco - oral; 
 •  Food - borne HEV infections increasingly 
detected;  
 •  Vertical transmission in HEV - infected pregnant 
women is up to 50%;  
 •  Parenteral transmission seems to be low; 
 •  No evidence for sexual transmission. 

166 
Viral hepatitides
 Management 
 While vaccine development and testing is ongoing 
there is, as yet, no effective vaccine available. HEV 
infection control and prevention strategies aim at 
improving hygiene conditions in endemic areas 
and detecting contaminated sources. Improving 
sanitation and providing clean drinking water and 
proper sewage disposal can reduce infections. 
 Other  v iral  h epatitides 
 A number of other viruses can cause acute, and 
less commonly chronic, hepatitis: 
 •  Epstein – Barr virus (EBV; the commonest); 
 •  Cytomegalovirus (CMV); 
 •  Varicella zoster virus; 
 •  Herpes simplex virus. 
 Epstein – Barr  v irus  h epatitis 
 Epidemiology 
 Almost 95% of the population is seropositive for 
EBV infection by the end of childhood. Most infec-
tions are completely asymptomatic in childhood, 
but symptomatic disease tends to occur in adoles-
cents and adults. It is more common in developed 
   Variable rise in serum bilirubin 
(predominately conjugated);  
   Marked elevation in aminotransferases that 
precedes symptoms by as long as 10 days 
and peaks at the end of the ﬁ rst week (degree 
of transaminase elevation does not correlate 
with disease severity). 
 An uncomplicated infection lasts 12 – 15 days 
with 
complete 
recovery 
within 
1 
month. 
Superinfection in chronic liver disease causes 
severe liver decompensation, a protracted course, 
and high morbidity and mortality. Chronicity of 
infection has not been documented apart from in 
cases with immunodeﬁ ciency. 
 Investigations (Figure  22.3 ) 
 •  HEV RNA in stool can be detected in the 
pre - icteric phase, and then declines, 
disappearing by peak of ALT.  
 •  Anti - HEV IgM in serum identiﬁ ed at onset of 
symptoms, detectable for 2 weeks to 3 months. 
 •  Anti - HEV IgG increases promptly after IgM, per-
sisting for up to several years in 50% of patients. 
 Enzyme immunoassays (EIA) and immuno-
chromatography are the most convenient detec-
tion methods. In residents of, or travellers to, 
endemic areas, testing for HEV infection should be 
included in the ﬁ rst line of diagnostic work - up for 
acute hepatitis.  
 Figure 22.3   Serological and clinical course of hepatitis E virus infection.  
Symptoms
IgG
anti-HEV
IgM
anti-HEV
Virus in stool
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
Time after exposure
Titer
ALT

Viral hepatitides 167
 Clinical  f eatures 
 The term infectious mononucleosis describes the 
triad of: 
 •  Fever; 
 •  Sore throat; 
 •  Adenopathy. 
 in combination with the ﬁ nding of atypical mono-
nuclear cells in the blood, as occurs with EBV 
infection. 
 Non - speciﬁ c abdominal discomfort and nausea 
is seen in up to 15% of patients. Splenomegaly is 
detectable in up to 60%, but hepatomegaly in only 
about 15%.  Rare complications include: 
 •  Splenic rupture; 
countries where the transmission rates during 
childhood are lower.  
 Pathogenesis 
 The exact mechanisms by which EBV causes liver 
damage remain unclear. It seems likely the host ’ s 
immune reaction, rather than cytolytic effects of 
the virus, is responsible. The histology in EBV -
 induced hepatitis includes: 
 •  Swelling and vacuolisation of the hepatocytes 
 •  Periportal inﬁ ltration by lymphocytes and 
monocytes  
 •  Mononuclear inﬁ ltration of the sinusoids  
 •  Bile ducts are often mildly swollen but 
obstruction is rare 
 Box 22.3   Epstein – Barr virus  t ests. 
 To 
diagnose 
infectious 
mononucleosis 
(IM), 
lymphocytes should represent  > 50% of leucocytes, 
20% should be atypical and there should be positive 
serology. There are two types of serological test for 
EBV: 
 •  Heterophil antibody tests  
 •  Tests for antibodies to viral antigens  
 The  heterophil antibody tests , Paul – Bunnel test 
and Monospot test (if done on slides), detect 
antibodies that cause agglutination of the red blood 
cells from another species. False - negative results 
are more common in those under 14 years 
(especially under 5). Positive heterophil antibodies 
are seen during the ﬁ rst month of illness and 
decrease rapidly after week 4, but last  > 6 months 
after onset of infection. 
 Antibodies to several antigen complexes  may be 
measured, including the early antigen, EBV nuclear 
antigen (EBNA) and viral capsid antigen (differentiation 
of IgG and IgM subclasses of this is often used). 
Interpretation of these results can be somewhat 
complex. The antibody proﬁ les seen in each of the 
main clinical situations are: 
 •  Susceptibility to EBV infection : if antibodies to 
the viral capsid antigen are not detected the 
patient is susceptible  
 •  Primary infection :  
    IgM antibody to the viral capsid antigen is 
present and antibody to EBNA is absent, or  
    Elevated IgG antibody to the viral 
capsid antigen and negative antibody 
to EBNA after at least 4 weeks of illness, or  
    Elevated antibody to early antigen  
 •  Past infection : if antibodies to both the viral 
capsid antigen and EBNA are present, then 
past infection (from  > 4 months earlier) is 
indicated. Since 95% of adults have been 
infected with EBV, most will show antibodies to 
EBV from infection years earlier. High or 
elevated antibody levels may be present for 
years and are not diagnostic of recent 
infection  
 •  Reactivation : if antibodies to EBNA are present, 
an elevation of antibodies to early antigen 
suggests reactivation. However, positive 
antibody to the early antigen test does not 
automatically indicate that a patient ’ s current 
medical condition is caused by EBV; healthy 
people with no symptoms can have antibodies 
to the EBV early antigen for years after their 
initial EBV infection. Reactivation often occurs 
subclinically  
 •  Chronic EBV infection : reliable laboratory 
evidence for continued active EBV infection is 
rare in patients who have been ill for  > 4 months. 
When the illness lasts  > 6 months, it should be 
investigated to see if other causes of chronic ill 
health or fatigue are present  

168 
Viral hepatitides
 •  Liver failure due to acute and/or chronic EBV 
infection (especially post - transplantation 
or in association with other 
immunodeﬁ ciency); 
 •  Autoimmune hepatitis and HCC 
(controversially associated in Asian people); 
 •  Lymphoproliferative disorders and lymphoma. 
 Investigations 
 Liver enzyme elevations are seen in 80 – 90% of 
those infected and are largely asymptomatic. 
 •  Transaminases are elevated to two to three 
times the upper limit of normal. If elevations 
of  > 10 times are seen, it is less likely the 
diagnosis is EBV. The liver function 
abnormalities usually occur in the second 
week of illness and resolve within 2 – 6 weeks. 
 •  Alkaline phosphatase is elevated in 60%. 
 •  Bilirubin is elevated in 45% (but jaundice 
occurs in  < 5%) and is self - limited. Jaundice 
may be cholestatic or haemolytic and a FBC 
and peripheral blood ﬁ lm should be performed 
to detect haemolysis. 
 The  diagnosis  of EBV infection revolves around 
recognition of the typical clinical symptoms in 
association with positive EBV IgM antibody, mon-
ospot and/or heterophile antibody tests (see Box 
 22.3 ). False - positive monospot tests occur in HIV, 
endocarditis and acute hepatitis A. Polymerase 
reaction testing is necessary where the suspicion 
is high but serological tests are unremarkable. 
Other 
potential 
viral 
aetiologies 
must 
be 
considered. 
 Management 
 Treatment is supportive and the vast majority of 
cases resolve spontaneously. Steroids and antiviral 
medications have been used in severe disease but 
remain of unproven beneﬁ t. Patients with 
splenomegaly should be advised to avoid abdomi-
nal trauma and patients with elevated transami-
nases should avoid hepatotoxins until liver 
abnormalities resolve. 
 
 
  

     Damage to the liver by medications is not uncom-
mon and is the main reason for cessation of devel-
opment of a drug or regulatory decisions to 
remove drugs from the market. In the majority of 
cases, drug - induced liver injury (DILI) is an unpre-
dictable idiosyncratic reaction. However, there are 
important exceptions that cause DILI by dose -
 dependent mechanisms. Liver injury takes three 
forms: hepatocellular injury, cholestasis and 
mixed. Treatment relies on prompt diagnosis and 
removal of the offending drug. 
 Pathogenesis 
 Hepatocellular injury may result from the drug or 
its metabolites. Whilst most reactions are idiosyn-
cratic, paracetamol and methotrexate are excep-
tions and cause direct hepatocellular toxicity. 
Idiosyncratic reactions may be either metabolic or 
immune mediated, or a combination of the two. 
 Given the variety of cellular mechanisms 
causing DILI, it cannot be viewed as a single 
disease. These mechanisms include: 
 •  Disruption of the cell membrane; 
 •  Production of immune targets by covalent 
binding of the drug to cell proteins;  
 •  Inhibition of cellular pathways of drug 
metabolism;  
 •  Abnormal bile ﬂ ow due to disruption of 
subcellular actin ﬁ laments or interruption of 
transport pumps;  
 •  Programmed cell death (apoptosis) mediated 
by tumour necrosis factor and Fas pathways; 
 23 
Drug -  i nduced  l iver  i njury  
 •  Inhibition of mitochondrial function causing 
accumulation of reactive oxygen species, lipid 
peroxidation, fat accumulation and cell death. 
 Pregnancy, concomitant medications and a 
history of drug reactions all increase susceptibility 
to DILI. The most important susceptibility factor 
is genetic variability. An example of this is differ-
ences in susceptibility related to polymorphisms 
in the  N  - acetyltransferase 2 gene which result in 
so - called fast and slow acetylators, the latter being 
at increased risk of isoniazid toxicity.  
 Clinical  f eatures 
 As DILI commonly simulates other common 
forms of acute and chronic liver disease, it is 
important that it is considered in every patient 
with liver dysfunction. The three commonest clin-
ical scenarios (Table  23.1 ) are: 
 •  Acute hepatitis; 
 •  Cholestasis; 
 •  A mixed condition resembling acute viral 
hepatitis. 
 The rarer forms are: 
 •  Chronic hepatitis; 
 •  Cirrhosis; 
 •  Sinusoidal obstruction syndrome; 
 •  Neoplasia. 
 Clues as to an allergic mechanism (fever, rash, 
peripheral eosinophilia) should not be overlooked. 
The time course may also help identify an allergic 
mechanism: typically there is a short latency 
period (1 month or less) and rapid symptom 
recurrence on rechallenge. In addition there may 
be haematological features including neutropae-
nia, thrombocytopaenia and haemolytic anaemia. 
Lecture Notes: Gastroenterology and Hepatology, 1st edition. 
Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. 
© 2011 Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

170 
Drug-induced liver injury
 •  Hepatocellular injury is deﬁ ned by a rise in 
ALT  >  two - fold that of the upper limit of 
normal (2  ×  ULN) or an ALT/AP ratio  ≥ 5. 
 •  Acute cholestatic injury is deﬁ ned by an 
increase in the ALP  > 2  ×  ULN or an ALT/ALP 
 ≤ 2. Older age is associated with an increased 
likelihood of DILI being expressed as 
cholestatic damage. There are two subtypes:  
   Pure cholestasis (resulting in jaundice, 
itching and an increase in conjugated 
bilirubin, ALP and GGT, with minimal 
alterations in the transaminases; typically 
caused by anabolic or contraceptive 
steroids);  
In rare cases, Steven – Johnson syndrome or toxic 
epidermal necrolysis strongly suggest an immu-
nological mechanism. 
 In the case of hepatocellular injury the clinical 
features are non - speciﬁ c and not always associ-
ated with jaundice. Prognosis is largely dependent 
on the presence of jaundice. and the rule of thumb 
is that the likelihood of mortality or liver trans-
plantation is 10% in the presence of jaundice. 
Variables associated with a poor outcome include 
older age, female gender and AST levels. 
 Because the histological changes of DILI are not 
speciﬁ c, the pattern of hepatotoxicity is deﬁ ned by 
changes in the liver enzymes. 
 Table 23.1   Causes of drug - induced liver injury. 
 
  Hepatocellular 
(elevated ALT)  
 Mixed  
  Cholestatic (elevated 
ALP and bilirubin)  
 Antimicrobials  
  Isoniazid 
 Ketoconazole 
 Pyrazinamide 
 Rifampin 
 Fluconazole 
 Isoniazid 
 Tetracyclines 
 Highly active antiretroviral 
therapy 
 Trovaﬂ oxacin  
 Clindamycin 
 Nitrofurantoin 
 Sulphonamides 
 Trimethoprim -
 sulphamethoxazole  
 Amoxycillin - clavulanic acid 
 Erythromycins 
 Ciproﬂ oxacin 
 Fluconazole 
 Rifampin  
 Psychiatric 
medicines  
 Buproprion 
 Fluoxetine 
 Paroxetine 
 Risperidone 
 Sertraline 
 Trazodone  
 Amitryptilline 
 Trazodone  
 Chlorpromazine 
 Phenothiazines 
 Tricyclic antidepressants 
 Mirtazapine  
 Analgesics  
  Paracetamol 
 NSAIDs  
 
  
 Cardiovascular 
medicines  
 Amiodarone 
 Methyldopa 
 Statins/HMG - CoA 
reductase inhibitors 
 Lisinopril 
 Losartan  
 Captopril 
 Enalapril 
 Verapamil  
 Clopidogrel 
 Irbesartan  
 Others  
  Valproic acid 
 Methotrexate 
 Acarbose 
 Allopurinol 
 Baclofen 
 Herbal medicines (Ma 
Huang, Kava, 
pyrrolizidine alkaloids in 
comfrey, germander 
and chaparral leaf) 
 Omeprazole  
 Azathioprine 
 Carbamazepine 
 Cyproheptadine 
 Flutamide 
 Phenobarbitol 
 Phenytoin  
 Anabolic steroids 
 Oral contraceptives 
 Oestrogens 
 Terbinaﬁ ne  

Drug-induced liver injury 171
injury) on rechallenge with the implicated drug. 
However, intentional rechallenge is contraindi-
cated in hypersensitivity reactions due to the 
risk of a more severe reaction, and in idiosyn-
cratic reactions the amount of drug needed to 
induce a reaction cannot be known. Hence, 
rechallenge cannot be used for purely diagnos-
tic reasons and should only be attempted when 
continuation of the drug is essential. 
 Liver biopsy may be useful: 
 •  Where there is a suspicion of an underlying 
liver disease;  
 •  In the rare cases where there is chronic toxic 
hepatocellular injury;  
 •  If the suspected offending agent needs to be 
continued for therapeutic reasons and hence it 
is important to quantify the degree of liver 
injury generated. 
 In hepatocellular DILI, the histology is variable 
with: 
 •  Necrosis and inﬂ ammation, and often an 
abundance of eosinophils in the inﬂ ammatory 
inﬁ ltrate; 
 •  Acute cholestasis causes hepatocyte cholestasis 
and dilated biliary canaliculi with bile plugs, 
but little or no inﬂ ammation and necrosis; 
 •  Mixed injury often results in a granulomatous 
reaction seen on biopsy. 
 Management 
 Generally there is no effective treatment for DILI 
other than stopping the implicated drug and pro-
viding supportive care. The main exceptions are 
the use of  N - acetylcysteine after paracetamol 
overdose and intravenous carnitine for valproate -
 induced mitochondrial. 
 Paracetamol  o verdose 
 In the UK paracetamol overdose is the commonest 
form of intentional self - harm, with 70   000 cases 
per year, and is the leading cause of acute liver 
failure. Serious or fatal adverse effects in adults 
occur at a dose of around 150   mg/kg. 
 Pathogenesis 
 Paracetamol is inactivated by liver conjugation to 
two metabolites: the glucoronide and the sul-
phate. It is then renally excreted. In overdose 
   Acute cholestatic hepatitis (resulting in 
abdominal pain and fever, and a picture 
similar to acute biliary obstruction; typically 
caused by amoxicillin - clavulanate, macrolide 
antibiotics and phenothiazine neuroleptics, 
amongst many others).    
 •  Mixed DILI is a clinical and biological 
intermediate, predominated by either 
hepatocellular or cholestatic features. It is 
deﬁ ned by an ALT:ALP ratio between 2 and 5. 
 Investigations 
 Due to a lack of speciﬁ c clinical and pathological 
features, the diagnosis of DILI is largely subjective 
and based on the temporal associations between 
the initiation of therapy and onset of symptoms, 
and the rate of improvement after cessation of 
therapy. Alternative diagnoses must be carefully 
excluded. Patients must be carefully questioned 
about the use of prescribed, over - the - counter and 
illicit drugs. 
 The latency period varies with each drug and is 
linked to the mechanism of damage. Intrinsic 
hepatotoxins may cause disease within a few 
hours; allergic reactions may have a latency of 1 – 5 
weeks; and idiosyncratic reactions take between 1 
and 12 weeks to manifest. With some drugs 
(amoxicillin - clavulanate, midecamycin, oxacin 
and trovaﬂ oxacin) there is a delay of 3 or 4 weeks 
between cessation of treatment and presentation. 
The reasons for this are unclear but might repre-
sent a late immune reaction due to retention of 
the drug in the body. 
 When patients are taking a number of medica-
tions, discerning the probable culprit can be very 
difﬁ cult. In the ﬁ rst instance, suspicion should be 
directed at the latest introduced drug and known 
hepatotoxins. The main causative agents in DILI 
are antibiotics, NSAIDs, antiseizure medications 
and herbal preparations. 
 Rapid improvements after withdrawal of the 
offending agent suggest a toxic aetiology: 
 •  A decrease of 50% liver enzymes in the ﬁ rst 8 
days following cessation is said to indicate that 
a hepatotoxic mechanism is  ‘ highly likely ’ . 
   •      Course is  ‘ suggestive ’  of hepatotoxicity if the 
same improvement occurs within 30 days.  
 •  The only way to conﬁ dently conﬁ rm idiosyn-
cratic drug - induced hepatotoxicity is to 
demonstrate at least a doubling of the ALT (in 
hepatocellular toxicity) or ALP (in cholestatic 

172 
Drug-induced liver injury
 Management 
 •  Charcoal: 
   If there has been signiﬁ cant overdose 
(150  mg/kg or 12  g, whichever is the smaller); 
   When ingestion is within 1  h of presentation 
or is unknown. 
 •  Urine output and blood glucose are monitored 
hourly. U & E, LFTs and INR should be checked 
12 hourly.  
 •  4 - h paracetamol level guides therapy. Risk is 
assessed using a nomogram : 
   Patients at high risk (i.e. those at risk of 
enzyme induction or glutathione depletion) 
are assessed using the  ‘ high - risk ’ threshold; 
   N - acetylcysteine (NAC) is given to patients 
(Box  23.1 ): 
 –  With levels above the treatment line; 
 –  Immediately at presentation if the 
overdose is  > 150  mg/kg (or 12  g in an adult) 
 or the overdose is staggered  or the patient 
presents  > 15  h after ingestion. 
 •  When there is signiﬁ cant hepatotoxicity, early 
referral to a specialist unit must be considered 
(see Chapter  9 ). 
 
 
conjugation is inundated and metabolism is by 
an alternative pathway, creating  N - acetyl - p -
 benzoquinone imine (NABQI), which is then inac-
tivated by glutathione. However, glutathione is 
easily run down, preventing inactivation of NABQI 
and resulting in reaction with nucleophilic aspects 
of the cell, causing necrosis of the liver and kidney 
tubules. Increased toxicity occurs with: 
 •  Drug - induced induction of the cytochrome 
P450 system:  
   Rifampicin; 
   Carbamazepine; 
   Phenytoin. 
   •      Low glutathione reserves due to: 
   Genetic variation; 
   HIV positivity; 
   Malnutrition; 
   Ethanol excess; 
   Liver disease. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Patients are generally asymptomatic in the ﬁ rst 
24   h after ingestion or have non - speciﬁ c abdomi-
nal symptoms (such as nausea and vomiting). 
Hepatic necrosis begins after 24   h, resulting in 
right upper quadrant pain, jaundice and elevated 
transaminases. Examination reveals little until 
acute liver failure ensues.  
 Investigations 
 •  Paracetamol level sampled 4  h after ingestion 
(or at presentation if after this time or if 
ingestion was staggered), usually with a 
salicylate level. In the case of staggered 
overdose, the level cannot guide treatment and 
is used only to conﬁ rm ingestion. 
 •  Baseline FBC, U & E, creatinine and LFTs. 
 •  Prothombin time is the best indicator of 
severity of liver failure. 
 •  Blood glucose is measured as hypoglycaemia is 
common.  
 •  Arterial blood gas is analysed as acidosis can 
occur early. 
 Box 23.1   N - a cetylcysteine ( NAC ). 
 •  NAC has beneﬁ cial effects by a number of 
protective mechanisms:  
   Precursor for glutathione  
   Supplying thiols  
   Antioxidants effects  
 •  Its protective effect is greatest within 12   h of 
ingestion  
 •  Allergy occurs in  < 5% of patients: 
   Infusion rate should be slowed if reaction 
occurs 
   Pretreatment with IV hydrocortisone and 
chlorphenamine if known allergy to NAC  
   Methionine is an alternative, but 
absorption is unreliable and it must be 
given early  

     Obstruction of the venous system of the liver 
causes a spectrum of disease ranging from acute 
hepatic failure to passive hepatic congestion. It 
can be divided into three categories: 
 •  Veno - occlusive disease; 
 •  Budd – Chiari syndrome; 
 •  Congestive hepatopathy. 
 In addition, reduction of oxygen delivery to 
hepatocytes (by obstruction of the arterial system 
or systemic hypotension or hypoxia, with/without 
concomitant congestion, can cause profound 
hepatic dysfunction.  
 Embryology 
 The liver arises from a diverticulum on the ventral 
surface gut and gives off two solid buds of cells 
which grow into columns or cylinders, termed the 
hepatic cylinders. These then branch and anasto-
mose to form a close meshwork. This network 
invades the vitelline and umbilical veins, and 
breaks up these vessels into a series of capillary -
 like vessels, termed sinusoids, which ramify in the 
meshes of the cellular network and ultimately 
form the venous capillaries of the liver. 
 Vascular  a natomy 
of the  l iver 
 The vessels of the liver are: the hepatic artery, 
portal vein and hepatic veins. Blood running to 
 24 
Vascular  l iver  d iseases  
the liver travels in the hepatic artery and portal 
vein. These ascend to the porta, between the 
layers of the lesser omentum, in combination with 
the bile duct. The bile duct lies to the right, the 
hepatic artery to the left and the portal vein behind 
and between the other two (Figure  24.1 ). The 
hepatic veins convey the blood away from the liver 
and are formed as the sublobular veins unite to 
form progressively larger conduits. The hepatic 
veins converge to form three large trunks draining 
into the inferior vena cava.   
 The substance of the liver is composed of 
lobules. Each lobule consists of a mass of hepatic 
cells, arranged in irregular radiating columns 
between which are the blood channels (sinu-
soids). These convey the blood from the circum-
ference to the centre of the lobule, ending in the 
intralobular vein, which in turn empties into a 
sublobular vein. The portal vein and hepatic 
artery, after entering the liver at the porta, run 
through the portal canals and repeatedly branch, 
eventually giving interlobular branches, which 
form a plexus outside each lobule. All the blood 
carried to the liver by the portal vein and hepatic 
artery ﬁ nds its way into the interlobular plexus. 
From this plexus, lobular branches enter the 
lobule and end in the network of sinusoids 
between the cells.  
 Budd – Chiari  s yndrome 
 Budd – Chiari syndrome (BCS) is an uncommon 
and potentially life - threatening condition caused 
by the obstruction of hepatic venous outﬂ ow at 
any level from the small hepatic veins to the junc-
tion of the inferior vena cava (IVC) with the right 
atrium. Its presentation is variable depending on 
the degree and rapidity of onset of obstruction. 
Lecture Notes: Gastroenterology and Hepatology, 1st edition. 
Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. 
© 2011 Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

174 
Vascular liver diseases
perfusion and congestion result in hypoxic 
damage to the liver parenchymal cells, releasing 
free radicals. These cause oxidative injury to 
the hepatocytes and the development of centri-
lobular hepatocyte necrosis. Centrilobular ﬁ bro-
sis and nodular regenerative hyperplasia ensue 
and, ultimately, cirrhosis may occur. However, 
if sinusoidal pressure is reduced (by portosys-
temic shunt formation or the development of a 
portal venous collateral system), liver function 
improves. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 BCS demonstrates a wide spectrum of clinical 
features, ranging from asymptomatic disease 
to fulminant liver failure, depending on the 
location, extent and rapidity of onset of the 
obstructive process, and whether there is portal 
vein occlusion. There is commonly ascites, 
hepatomegaly and abdominal pain. The disease 
can be classiﬁ ed into asymptomatic, fulminant, 
acute, subacute or chronic groups. However, 
the correlation between the history, duration 
of occlusion and prognosis is unclear (Table 
 24.1 ). 
 The natural history of BCS is poorly understood 
because most patients receive some form of treat-
ment along the way. The introduction of antico-
agulation and earlier recognition of asymptomatic 
disease has resulted in a decrease in mortality.  
 Epidemiology and  p athophysiology 
 BCS is an uncommon disorder which occurs in 1 
in 100   000 of the general population worldwide. It 
is more common in women, and in the third or 
fourth decade. It has multiple aetiologies: 
 •  Primary: 
 °  Intraluminal thrombosis (commonest cause): 
   –      Primary myeloproliferative disorders 
(especially polycythemia vera  >  essential 
thrombocythemia, myeloﬁ brosis); 
 –  Inherited deﬁ ciencies of protein C, protein 
S and antithrombin III (factor V Leiden 
mutation underlies the majority of 
pregnancy - and oral contraceptive - related 
cases);  
 –  Paroxysmal nocturnal haemoglobinuria. 
 °  Vascular webs. 
 •  Secondary: 
 °  To intraluminal invasion (by parasites or 
malignant tumour);  
 °  To extraluminal compression (by abscess, 
cyst or solid tumour). 
 The pathological features of BCS result from 
the increased sinusoidal pressure that occurs 
with hepatic venous obstruction. This in turn 
results in portal hypertension causing portal per-
fusion to decrease, potentially resulting in portal 
vein thrombosis (PVT; a complication which sub-
stantially worsens prognosis). Reduced venous 
 Figure 24.1   Cross - section of a portal 
canal.  
Bile duct
Hepatic artery
Lymphatic vessel
Portal vein

Vascular liver diseases 175
abdominal pressure rules out a cardiac cause of 
ascites. 
 Investigations 
 Diagnosis requires a high level of suspicion and 
should be considered in anyone presenting with 
ascites, hepatomegaly and right upper quadrant 
(RUQ) pain. Laboratory ﬁ ndings are non - speciﬁ c. 
Ascitic albumin varies at different stages of the 
disease; however, the serum – ascitic ﬂ uid albumin 
gradient is high, usually with a total protein 
 > 25  g/l. 
 Diagnosis is dependent on  imaging . 
 •  Real - time or colour and pulsed Doppler 
ultrasound is the initial investigation of choice, 
with a sensitivity and speciﬁ city of nearly 85%. 
It can demonstrate hepatic vein obstruction or 
abnormal ﬂ ow in large intrahepatic or 
subcapsular venous collaterals.  
 •  Contrast - enhanced CT is less useful for 
visualisation of hepatic veins and the IVC; 
 Differential  d iagnosis 
 BCS 
is 
frequently 
misdiagnosed 
initially. 
Cholecystitis is considered due to the combina-
tion of abdominal pain and ultrasonographically 
visible thickening of the gallbladder wall. It is not 
unusual for these patients to come to cholecystec-
tomy. BCS must be considered in any patient 
at risk of thrombophilia who presents with 
ascites, upper abdominal pain or abnormalities 
on LFTs. 
 IVC compression or thrombosis  causes less 
severe disease, clinically recognisable by the 
development of leg oedema or venous collaterals 
over the trunk and back. It follows a chronic 
course, with repeated acute episodes eventually 
resulting in congestive cirrhosis. IVC obstruction 
is associated with good short - term prognosis but 
there is limited long - term data. 
 Cardiac conditions (tricuspid regurgitation, 
constrictive pericarditis, right atrial myxoma) can 
be ruled out by careful cardiovascular examina-
tion. The absence of a hepatojugular reﬂ ux on 
 Table 24.1   Clinical features and classiﬁ cation of Budd – Chiari syndrome ( BCS ). 
 Clinical 
classiﬁ cation  
 Proportion 
of BCS  
 Presentation  
  Clinical features  
 Asymptomatic 
  5 – 20%  
  Incidental 
discovery of 
abnormal LFTs  
 Absence of symptoms due to large collaterals 
(intrahepatic and portosystemic) or the patency 
of one large hepatic vein  
 Acute  
  20%  
  Symptoms 
develop over a 
few weeks  
 Severe RUQ pain, hepatomegaly, jaundice and 
intractable ascites  
 Fulminant  
  Uncommon 
  Onset of 
encephalopathy 
within 8 weeks 
of symptom 
onset  
 Follows rapid complete occlusion of all major 
hepatic veins 
 Acute - onset encephalopathy, renal failure, 
coagulopathy and marked aminotransferase 
elevations 
 Acute development of oesophagogastric varices, 
tender hepatosplenomegaly  
 Subacute and 
chronic  
 > 60%  
  Onset insidious 
over  > 6 months  
 Subacute: 
 •  Minimal ascites, with hepatosplenomegaly and 
vague RUQ discomfort  
 •  Jaundice absent or mild  
 •  Ascites and hepatic necrosis minimal (because 
hepatic sinusoids have been decompressed by 
a portal and hepatic vein collateral circulation)  
 Chronic: 
 •  Presenting with complications of cirrhosis: 
variceal bleeding, encephalopathy, renal failure, 
coagulopathy, hepatopulmonary syndrome  

176 
Vascular liver diseases
 •  Thrombolytic therapy: 
 °  Indicated in the acute situation where 
angiography suggests fresh thrombus;  
 °  Thrombolytic agent (urokinase or tissue 
plasminogen activator) can be given 
systemically or, preferably, directly into the 
obstructed hepatic vein. 
 •  Percutaneous angioplasty: 
 °  To caval webs or short hepatic vein stenoses; 
 °  Excellent short - term patency, falling to 50% 
by 2 years; 
 °  Can be improved to 90% with use of 
intraluminal stents. 
 •  Transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt 
(TIPS): 
 °  Provides an alternative venous outﬂ ow tract 
to decompress the liver;  
 °  Useful as a bridge to liver transplantation 
and in acute situations, such as variceal 
bleeding and fulminant hepatic failure, 
where 
thrombolysis and angioplasty have been 
unsuccessful;  
 °  May function by allowing time for venous 
collaterals to form, so while long - term 
occlusion occurs in 50%, these patients do 
not generally worsen. 
 •  Portosystemic shunt surgery: 
 °  Creates hepatofugal ﬂ ow in the portal vein;  
 °  Recommended in subacute disease when the 
underlying cause has a favourable long - term 
outcome. 
 Liver  t ransplantation 
 Liver transplantation is the treatment of choice in 
the presence of cirrhosis, fulminant hepatic 
failure or biochemical evidence of advanced liver 
dysfunction. The long - term survival after trans-
plantation in BCS is 50 – 95%. While liver trans-
plantation 
effectively 
cures 
most 
inherited 
thrombophilias, because of the frequent multi-
factorial aetiology of BCS, life - long anticoagula-
tion is needed in most post - transplant patients.   
 Prognosis 
 5 - year survival is 60% in patients with concomi-
tant PVT and 85% in isolated BCS. Prognosis is 
associated with the presence of ascites, encepha-
lopathy, prothrombin time and serum bilirubin 
levels. Histology on liver biopsy is  not  accurate in 
determining prognosis, perhaps because of the 
uneven distribution of hepatic lesions in BCS.    
however, it does allow assessment for 
parenchymal disease, ascites and 
splenomegaly. 
 •  MRI with gadolinium enhancement allows 
excellent visualisation of the hepatic veins and 
IVC but, unlike Doppler, it does not 
demonstrate the direction of hepatic venous 
blood ﬂ ow. It is most useful in cases where 
ultrasound is non - contributory but clinical 
suspicion is high.  
 •  Venography is not essential for the diagnosis of 
BCS, but does give useful information about 
the extent of the thrombosis and the caval 
pressures. It guides decision - making when 
considering surgical treatment of BCS. 
 Pathology  shows variable degrees of parenchy-
mal damage dependent on the location and extent 
of venous congestion. Ischaemic necrosis and 
ﬁ brosis in perivenular areas is characteristic. 
Concomitant PVT results in periportal ﬁ brosis. In 
chronic BCS, collateralisation compensates for 
this and there may be caudate hypertrophic cir-
rhosis with atrophy in the rest of the liver. 
 Management 
 The goals of treatment are to: 
 •  Alleviate obstruction; 
 •  Prevent extension of thrombosis; 
 •  Preserve hepatic function by decreasing 
centrilobular congestion.    
 Medical  m anagement 
 Medical therapy alone can only be considered 
when there is no ongoing hepatic necrosis (as 
indicated by the relative absence of symptoms, 
normal LFTs and easily controlled ascites). These 
patients should be carefully monitored for pro-
gression using serial upper GI endoscopies and 
liver biopsies. The focus is to: 
 •  Control the ascites (low - sodium diet, diuretics 
or paracentesis with IV albumin cover);  
 •  Prevent thrombosis extension (anticoagulation, 
or thrombolysis in the small number of cases 
where it is appropriate);  
 •  Treat complications; 
   •      Investigate and treat underlying cause.     
 Angiographic and  s urgical  m anagement 
 Restoration of hepatic blood ﬂ ow may be achieved 
by the use of: 

Vascular liver diseases 177
 •  Type and dose of the conditioning regimens 
prior to and during HSCT: 
 °  Cyclophosphamide is used in combination 
with busulphan;  
 °  Total body irradiation; 
 °  Carmustine and etoposide. 
 Investigations 
 •  Liver biopsy is the diagnostic gold standard for 
VOD: 
 °  However, patients are frequently 
thrombocytopenic, making biopsy risky even 
when taken by percutaneous, laparoscopic 
or transvenous (transjugular or femoral) 
means;  
 °  Thus the diagnosis is primarily clinical. The 
Seattle and Baltimore clinical criteria are 
commonly applied and correlate well with 
biopsy - proven diagnosis; 
 °  Transvenous biopsy also allows 
measurement of the wedge hepatic venous 
pressures, providing useful additional 
diagnostic information. 
 •  Ultrasound is useful primarily for excluding 
other disorders.  
 •  Plasma plasminogen activator inhibitor - 1 
(PAI - 1) levels have proven 100% sensitive and 
speciﬁ c for VOD diagnosis in the group of 
post - HSCT patients with bilirubin levels 
60  μ mol/l ( > 3  mg/dl). 
 Important differential diagnoses for liver dys-
function post HSCT include: 
 •  Acute graft - versus - host disease (GVHD): 
 °  Tends to occur later and only after intestinal 
and cutaneous manifestations become 
obvious; 
 °  Does not cause hepatomegaly or ascites. 
 •  Sepsis - related cholestasis: 
 °  Does not cause hepatomegaly or ascites. 
 •  Cyclosporin - induced cholestasis. 
 Management 
 Prevention 
 As there is no established effective therapy, pre-
vention of VOD is the priority. This includes modi-
fying the conditioning regimen in patients at 
increased risk of VOD and (possibly) use of urso-
deoxycholic acid as prophylaxis. Heparin infusion 
may be useful but carries an increased risk of 
bleeding. Low - molecular - weight heparin is safer 
 Hepatic  v eno -  o cclusive 
 d isease 
 Epidemiology and  p athophysiology 
 Veno - occlusive disease (VOD) typically occurs 
after haematopoietic stem cell transplantation 
(HSCT), but also after ingestion of pyrrolizidine 
alkaloids. The reported incidence after HSCT 
varies from 5% to 50%, due to differences in chem-
otherapeutic regimens. The reported mortality of 
VOD varies greatly, between 3% and 67% depend-
ing on disease severity.  
 Pathophysiology 
 The histological features of VOD are: 
 •  Loss of sinusoidal endothelial cell (SEC) 
fenestrae; 
 •  Appearance of gaps in the SEC barrier; 
   •      Narrowing of the sublobular and central veins 
due to subendothelial oedema;  
 •  In advanced disease, the sinusoidal and venous 
lumena become obliterated.    
 One of the main hypotheses for the pathogen-
esis of VOD is that depletion of liver glutathione 
reserves diminishes the liver ’ s ability to detoxify 
acrolein (which is an inactive but hepatotoxic 
metabolite of cyclophosphamide). It is unclear if 
coagulation plays a primary role or is a secondary 
event. It is also possible that immunological 
mechanism have a pathogenetic role.  
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Signs and symptoms develop within 3 weeks of 
exposure in the case of HSCT and are primarily 
those of tender hepatomegaly, ﬂ uid retention, 
ascites and jaundice. Liver enzyme changes may 
occur a few days later (hyperbilirubinaemia, 
sometimes in association with increased ALT and 
ALP). 
 In the majority, the ﬁ rst, and often only, 
symptom is RUQ pain. 
 Risk factors for the development of VOD include: 
 •  Advanced age. 
   •      Presence of liver injury prior to HSCT.  
 •  Previous HSCT. 
 •  Clotting cascade mutations (Factor V Leiden 
and prothrombin G20210A)  

178 
Vascular liver diseases
 ‘ Portal cavernoma ’ formation or  ‘ cavernous 
transformation of the portal vein ’  results from the 
development of multiple small vessels in and 
around the recanalising or occluded main portal 
vein, giving a leash of ﬁ ne or markedly enlarged 
serpiginous vessels in place of the portal vein. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 While somewhat arbitrary and often difﬁ cult, it is 
useful to distinguish between acute and chronic 
PVT.  Acute  onset is suggested by the absence of clin-
ical, endoscopic and radiological evidence of portal 
hypertension, typically thrombosis occurring  < 60 
days prior to assessment.  Chronic thrombosis 
presents with the complications of portal hyperten-
sion, including GI bleeding, splenomegaly and 
hypersplenism. Ascites is rare, except in the elderly, 
unless there is comorbid liver disease. While the 
causes of acute and chronic PVT are similar, sepsis 
is a more common cause of chronic thrombosis. 
and easier, and may have a preventive role but 
evidence is lacking.  
 Treatment 
 Once VOD is established, the treatment for most 
patients is simply diuretics and sodium restric-
tion. Repeated paracenteses may be required. 
Hepatotoxic drugs should be avoided and infec-
tions treated promptly. Perhaps the most promis-
ing new development is deﬁ brotide, a polydisperse 
oligonucleotide derived from porcine intestinal 
mucosa with antithrombotic and protective prop-
erties on the microvasculature but minimal haem-
orrhagic risk. Orthotopic liver transplantation is a 
possible last resort but is difﬁ cult and high risk in 
patients undergoing HSCT. 
 Portal  v ein  t hrombosis 
 Epidemiology and 
 p athophysiology 
 The exact frequency of PVT is unknown. It occurs 
most commonly as a complication of cirrhosis, 
particularly in decompensated disease, and in up 
to 35% of cirrhotic patients with hepatocellular car-
cinoma (HCC). The combination of multiple aetio-
logical factors is important in the pathogenesis 
(Box  24.1 ), a cause being identiﬁ able in most cases, 
classiﬁ able as general thrombophilic factors (60% 
of cases) and local factors (in 40%). These include 
systemic factors such as inherited prothrombotic 
disorders, acquired haematological diseases and 
sepsis, in particular  Bacteroides fragilis infection. 
 PVT can be divided into four anatomical 
categories: 
 •  Thrombus conﬁ ned to the portal vein beyond 
conﬂ uence with the superior mesenteric vein 
(SMV); 
 •  Extension into the SMV but patent mesenteric 
vessels; 
 •  Diffuse splanchnic venous involvement with 
large collaterals;  
 •  Splanchnic involvement but extensive ﬁ ne 
collaterals. 
 This system is most useful in determining oper-
ability, but may also be helpful in determining 
prognosis, as thrombus involving the SMV is asso-
ciated with a higher risk of bowel infarction and a 
lower risk of variceal bleeding than isolated PVT. 
 Box 24.1   Causes of  p ortal  v ein 
 t hrombosis. 
 Idiopathic causes  
 Causes secondary to tumour  
 •  Hepatocellular carcinoma  
 •  Cholangiocarcinoma  
 •  Pancreatic carcinoma  
 •  Gastric carcinoma  
 Trauma  
 Intra - abdominal sepsis/inﬂ ammation  
 •  Perinatal omphalitis  
 •  Appendicitis  
 •  Diverticulitis  
 •  Ascending cholangitis  
 •  Intra - abdominal abscess  
 •  Pancreatitis  
 Haematological disorders  
 •  Myeloproliferative disorders  
 •  Clotting disorders (hypercoagulable syndromes)  
 Iatrogenic  
 •  Umbilical vein catheterization  
 •  Oestrogen therapy  
 Severe dehydration  
 Cirrhosis  
 Portal hypertension  

Vascular liver diseases 179
 Where splenomegaly causes hypersplenism, 
splenectomy may be of beneﬁ t. Symptomatic 
bile 
duct 
abnormalities 
are 
best 
treated 
endoscopically. 
 Congestive  h epatopathy 
and  c ardiac  c irrhosis 
 Epidemiology and  p athophysiology 
 While mild degrees of hepatic dysfunction in the 
presence 
of 
congestive 
cardiac 
failure 
are 
common, the development of cardiac cirrhosis is 
rare. When it does occur, the chief causes are: 
 •  Ischaemic heart disease (31%); 
 •  Cardiomyopathy (23%); 
 •  Valvular heart disease (23%); 
 •  Restrictive lung disease (15%); 
 •  Pericardial disease (8%). 
 The classical pathological description is that of 
 ‘ nutmeg liver ’ , with contrasting areas of red 
caused by  sinusoidal congestion  and bleeding in 
the  necrotic  regions surrounding the enlarged 
hepatic veins, and yellow due to the normal or 
 fatty liver  tissue. These macroscopic changes are 
also evident histologically. The degree of cholesta-
sis is variable with occasional bile thrombi in the 
canaliculi. In the presence of chronic heart failure, 
 ﬁ brosis  develops in the perivenular region, leading 
ultimately to bridging ﬁ brosis between central 
veins. Cardiac ﬁ brosis is distinct from primary 
liver cirrhosis in which ﬁ brous bands tend to 
link adjacent portal areas. If the underlying 
cardiac disease is treated successfully, the early 
histological changes resolve, and even ﬁ brosis 
may regress. 
 The pathogenesis of these changes relates to the 
reaction of the hepatic stroma evoked by increased 
venous pressure, hypoxia or hepatocellular necro-
sis. Thrombosis in the hepatic and portal veins is 
also contributory.  
 Clinical  f eatures 
 •  Liver dysfunction in congestive cardiac failure 
is generally mild and asymptomatic, and is 
usually detected incidentally.  
 •  With more severe congestion, mild jaundice, 
RUQ discomfort (due to stretching of the liver 
capsule) and ascites develop.  
 The natural history of PVT is uncertain and 
reported mortality varies from 0 – 76%. Variceal 
bleeding is the presenting problem in approxi-
mately 30% of cases and is the most common 
complication of PVT. Concomitant disease, in 
particular bowel infarction, contributes greatly to 
the prognosis and is a more important cause of 
death than variceal bleeding. 
 Problems in the extrahepatic biliary tree are fre-
quently seen, the mechanisms for which include 
biliary compression by choledochal or periportal 
varices, external compression by portal cavern-
oma formation, pericholedochal ﬁ brosis or ischae-
mic stricturing. In addition, jaundice, cholangitis, 
choledocholithiasis, cholecystitis and haemobilia 
due to rupture of choledochal varices can occur.  
 Investigations 
 •  Initial investigation of choice is colour Doppler 
ultrasound.  
 •  Contrast - enhanced CT scanning is particularly 
useful for demonstrating portosystemic 
collaterals or the development of a cavernoma, 
which suggest well - established PVT. 
 •  Where an underlying local cause is found, 
investigation for other co - factors is not 
required. However, where no local cause is 
found, systemic causes, including 
myeloproliferative disorders and 
prothrombotic conditions, should be sought. 
 Management 
 Treatment aims to either reverse or prevent the 
advancement of thrombosis and to treat the com-
plications. Treatment recommendations are ham-
pered by a lack of randomised controlled studies. 
Variceal bleeding is managed in standard fashion: 
endoscopic therapy and/or medical therapy, 
including non - selective beta - blockers and nitrates. 
 In PVT thrombolysis and/or anticoagulation 
may result in recanalization of the thrombosed 
portal system. Thrombolysis should be consid-
ered in acute PVT and anticoagulation considered 
for chronic thrombosis where there is no evidence 
of cirrhosis. No consensus exists as to the duration 
or degree of anticoagulation and generally a 
similar strategy to deep vein thromboses in the 
lower limb is applied: a ﬁ nite course of treatment 
where a reversible cause is found but long - term 
anticoagulation where the underlying cause is not 
reversible. 

180 
Vascular liver diseases
 •  Viral hepatitis serology. 
 •  Abdominal ultrasound with Doppler studies of 
the liver (the discovery of dilatation of all three 
main hepatic veins on ultrasound mandates 
vigorous investigation for a cardiac cause).  
 •  Liver biopsy may be useful in equivocal cases. 
 •  ECG and echocardiogram. 
 Management 
 Management centres on treatment of the underly-
ing heart disease. Jaundice and ascites usually 
respond well to diuresis. Repeated paracentesis 
may be necessary in the presence of refractory 
ascites. There is no need to regularly replace the 
albumin lost during paracentesis because syn-
thetic function is preserved in congestive hepat-
opathy. It should be noted that liver disease rarely 
contributes to the morbidity or mortality in these 
patients, and serious complications, such as 
variceal bleeding and HCC, rarely develop. 
 Ischaemic/ h ypoxic 
 h epatitis 
 Liver cell injury resulting from subcritical supply of 
oxygen to hepatocytes is traditionally classiﬁ ed as: 
 •  Inadequate blood supply due to reduced 
hepatic arterial ﬂ ow and/or passive venous 
congestion (e.g. heart failure) termed 
ischaemic hepatitis; or  
 •  Hypoxic insult (e.g. respiratory failure), termed 
hypoxic hepatitis. 
 While the pathogenesis is multifactorial, the 
ﬁ nal common pathway is hepatocellular dysfunc-
tion secondary to critically low levels of oxygen for 
metabolic processes, and they will be considered 
together in this section under the term hypoxic 
hepatitis (HH). 
 Epidemiology and  p athophysiology 
 Hypoxic injury to the liver is a reversible subclinical 
condition affecting at least 1% of critically ill patients 
and accounting for  > 50% of dramatic serum 
aminotransferase activity (24 – 48  h following the 
hypoxic insult) identiﬁ ed in hospital admissions. 
 The main aetiologies for HH include: 
 •  Primary heart disease (78%); 
 •  Congestive heart failure (65%); 
 •  Where severe jaundice and elevated 
aminotransferases develop, it is due to acute 
hepatic ischaemia resulting from marked 
reductions in cardiac output.  
 •  Reported cases of fulminant hepatic failure 
have resulted from the combination of both 
hepatic congestion and ischaemia.    
 Symptoms of exertional dyspnoea, orthopnoea 
and angina may help in diagnosis. Examination 
may reveal tender hepatomegaly with a ﬁ rm 
and smooth liver edge. Splenomegaly is uncom-
mon and when it occurs, like ascites, is due to 
increased transmitted central venous pressure. The 
detection of jugular venous distension and hepa-
tojugular reﬂ ux are helpful pointers to an underly-
ing cardiac cause. The liver may be pulsatile, 
particularly in the presence of tricuspid regurgita-
tion. Oesophageal varices may also be present. The 
mortality rate is determined by the severity of the 
underlying cardiac disease and not the liver disease.  
 Investigations 
 The diagnosis is not always obvious and right -
 sided heart failure must be considered in all 
patients with hepatomegaly with or without jaun-
dice. The diagnosis is suggested by the triad of: 
 •  Right heart failure; 
 •  Hepatomegaly; 
 •  Ascites (with high protein content in the 
presence of a high serum to ascites albumin 
gradient, along with refractoriness of ascites to 
diuretic treatment, which contrasts with 
resolution of peripheral oedema with diuretics). 
 Initial investigation includes: 
 •  Liver biochemistry: 
 °  Hyperbilirubinaemia is mostly unconjugated 
and is seen in up to 70% of cases;  
 °  Bilirubin level increases with prolonged and 
repeated bouts of congestive heart failure 
and correlates with the right atrial pressure 
(but not cardiac output);  
 °  Alkaline phosphatase is only mildly elevated 
and aminotransferase elevations are mild 
unless cardiac output is impaired;  
 °  Hepatic synthetic function is usually 
preserved with a normal plasma albumin 
and prothrombin time;  
 °  Improvement in liver biochemistry with 
treatment of cardiac disease supports the 
diagnosis. 

Vascular liver diseases 181
 Risk factors for HH may be present (acute and 
chronic heart failure, respiratory failure, sepsis, 
prolonged hypotension, toxin ingestion and heat 
stroke).  
 Investigations 
 The diagnosis is based on clinical and biochemical 
criteria generally without the need for procedural 
intervention. There is a profound transient serum 
enzyme elevation in conjunction with abnormal 
renal function and abnormalities in PT and APTT 
activity (Figure  24.2 ). There are no biochemical 
differences that distinguish between patients with 
injury caused predominately by hypotension 
 versus 
non - hypotensive, 
non - hypovolaemic 
patients with hypoxic hepatopathy. 
 Management 
 Management is purely supportive and focuses on 
correcting the underlying conditions leading to 
hypotension, and hypoxic and hepatic hypoper-
fusion, including congestion.  
 Prognosis 
 The prognosis depends on that of the underlying 
disease, being largely independent of the liver 
injury. That said, the occurrence of hypoxic hepat-
opathy is a harbinger of a potentially poor prog-
nosis since the mortality rate varies from 25% to 
73%.   
 •  Acute myocardial infarction (17%); 
 •  Chronic respiratory failure (12%); 
 •  Circulatory shock and sepsis (15%) (sepsis 
alone, in the absence of shock, does not cause 
hepatic enzyme elevation)    
 The aetiology of the marked liver enzyme 
rise seen in HH is presumed to be hypoxic injury 
to the hepatocyte mitochondria and endoplasmic 
reticulum, 
especially 
to 
the 
centrilobular 
region. While hypotension/shock is a common 
antecedent to the onset of liver injury, severe 
hypotension/shock  per se  is unnecessary for the 
development of HH, which occurs frequently 
without hypotension due to forward (i.e. ischae-
mia) and backward (i.e. passive congestion) ﬂ ow 
abnormalities, producing hypoxic injury through 
the common pathway of  hypoperfusion , especially 
in the setting of systemic factors resulting in 
increased oxygen consumption or decreased 
oxygen availability. 
 The histological ﬁ ndings include central hepatic 
vein congestion with centrilobular hepatic necro-
sis, fragmentation of liver bulks, polymorphonu-
clear 
cell 
inﬁ ltration, 
abnormal 
hepatocyte 
complexes, pyknosis and disintegration of hepa-
tocyte nuclei. Hyperplasia, inﬂ ammation and 
regeneration, which are characteristic of many 
other forms of hepatitis, are absent.  
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Frequently the liver injury is subclinical, with only 
non - speciﬁ c nausea and vomiting. The liver may 
be tender and enlarged. 
 Figure 24.2   Degree of hepatic 
enzyme elevation over time post 
hypotensive injury.  
4000
3500
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Hours
LDH
AST
ALT
Serum enzyme levels (IU/L)

182 
Autoimmune hepatitis
 A rare autoimmune condition, autoimmune hepa-
titis (AIH) is diagnosed by the presence of a con-
stellation of clinical, laboratory and pathological 
features. The disease usually responds to corticos-
teroid treatment, although relapses on stopping 
therapy are common. The immune biliary condi-
tions primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) and scleros-
ing cholangitis (PSC) are considered in Chapter  19 .  
 Epidemiology and 
 p athophysiology 
 AIH is a condition of unknown cause, which par-
ticularly affects young females of any age. 
However, both sexes and all ethnicities may be 
affected. It is associated with concurrent immune 
disease. It is relatively common for AIH to recur or 
develop  de novo  after liver transplantation and the 
diagnosis must be considered in all transplanted 
patients with allograft dysfunction. 
 While the exact pathogenesis is unknown there 
are identiﬁ ed aetiological triggers, in particular 
drugs (Table  25.1 ). The principal effector cells of 
the autoimmune process in AIH are the CD4 + and 
CD8 +  T lymphocytes. The regulatory CD4 + CD25 + 
T cells are decreased in number and function and 
so fail to modulate CD8 + T - cell proliferation and 
cytokine production, thus facilitating liver injury. 
This activity can be modulated by genetic factors, 
in particular the HLA haplotype. The association 
between AIH and the class II antigens of the major 
histocompatibility complex (MHC) varies between 
 25 
Autoimmune  h epatitis  
ethnic and geographical groups. Corticosteroids 
reconstitute the T - regulatory cell function and 
attenuate the cell - mediated cytotoxic response in 
AIH. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 •  Clinical presentation is often acute, and rarely 
fulminant, and may mimic acute viral or toxic 
hepatitis. 
 •  There are also indolent, asymptomatic forms 
of the disease:  
 °  Commonest complaints are of fatigue, 
amenorrhea and those associated with an 
accompanying rheumatological disorder 
such as arthritis or thyroid disease;  
 °  Physical ﬁ ndings include jaundice (in severe 
disease), spider naevi, palmar erythema and 
hepatosplenomegaly. 
 Concurrent immune diseases may obscure the 
underlying liver disease. The associated immune 
conditions include systemic sclerosis, polymyosi-
tis, neuritis multiplex and polyglandular autoim-
mune syndrome type III.  
 Investigations 
 •  Blood testing : 
 °  Autoantibodies are the hallmark of AIH: 
particularly antinuclear factor and smooth -
 muscle antibodies. The disease is often 
subclassiﬁ ed into type 1 and type 2, the latter 
demonstrating antibodies to liver/kidney 
microsome (anti - LKM 1 hepatitis);  
Lecture Notes: Gastroenterology and Hepatology, 1st edition. 
Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. 
© 2011 Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Autoimmune hepatitis 183
4 − 6 weeks, then tapered to a maintenance level 
(e.g. 5 − 10  mg/day): 
 °  Aim is to keep the liver enzymes within 
normal values;  
 °  This may not prevent ﬁ brosis, but is 
lifesaving in this otherwise fatal condition;  
 °  On stopping corticosteroids many patients 
relapse and treatment failure and drug 
toxicities are all too common. 
 •  Often azathioprine is added for its steroid -
 sparing effect. With this strategy the frequency 
of relapse can be reduced from 93% to 60%. 
 •  Other immunosuppresives, including 
tacrolimus, mycophenolate mofetil and 
rapamycin, have been used empirically as 
frontline and salvage treatments for 
problematic patients. 
 •  In those not responsive to, or who relapse on, 
conventional therapy, liver transplantation is 
highly successful. 
 Prognosis 
 Prognosis is determined by the diseases response 
to corticosteroid. Responsiveness is similar in all 
age groups. Disease onset during pregnancy 
carries a relatively high risk of an adverse outcome 
and high rates of postpartum exacerbation. 
  
 °  Hypergammaglobulinaemia, with 
pronounced elevation of IgG levels is 
invariable. Serum Ig levels can be useful in 
monitoring response to treatment and are 
predictive of future ﬂ ares; 
 °  Reduced serum albumin is common. 
 •  Liver biopsy : essential both for diagnosis and 
assessment of severity, as well as to exclude 
other liver disease. Characteristically this 
shows an interface hepatitis which may coexist 
with cirrhosis. 
 The important differential diagnosis is with 
PBC, which differs from AIH by: 
 •  Immunohistochemistry demonstration of 
nuclear envelope protein, gp210;  
 •  Less marked serum aminotransferase 
elevations, absence of antinuclear antibodies; 
 •  Histological changes of greater bile duct injury 
than interface hepatitis. 
 Management 
 If untreated AIH may progress rapidly to cirrhosis 
within 3 − 5 years. 
 •  Mainstay of treatment is high - dose 
corticosteroids (prednisone 40 − 60  mg/day) for 
 Table 25.1   Drugs implicated in the aetiogenesis of autoimmune hepatitis. 
 First implicated drug 
  DialosePlus ®  (dioctylsodium sulphosuccinate, carboxymethyl 
cellulose, oxyphenisatinacetate) 
 First report of AIH in1971; over 100 cases since then, removed 
from market  
 Type 1 AIH - like liver 
disease  
 Multiple reports: 
 •  Oxyphenisatin  
 •  Nitrofurantoin  
 •  Minocycline  
 •  Alpha - methyldopa  
 •  Clometacine  
 Few reports  – conventional drugs: 
 •  Papaverine  
 •  Diclofenac  
 •  Doxycycline  
 •  Phenprocoumon  
 •  Fenoﬁ brate  
 •  HMG - CoA reductase inhibitors 
(artorvastatin, rosuvastatin, 
simvastatin)  
 •  Rifampin   +  inﬂ iximab  
 •  Pyrazinamide  
 •  Interferon  
 Few reports    −  herbal compounds: 
 •  Dai - saiko - to  
 •  3,4 - methylenedioxy -
 metamphetamine ( ‘ Ecstasy ’ )  
 •  Morindacitrifolia (Nonijuice)  
 Type 2 AIH - like liver 
disease  
 Dihydralazine 
 Tienilic acid 
 Halothane 
 Black cohosh ( Actaea racemosa)  

184 
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease 
 Epidemiology and 
 p athophysiology 
 Non - alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is an 
umbrella term (Figure  26.1 ) encompassing simple 
steatosis (fatty liver) without liver inﬂ ammation, 
non - alchoholic steatohepatitis (NASH), where as 
a result of fatty inﬁ ltration there is inﬂ ammation 
of the liver and the risk of liver damage, and ﬁ bro-
sis and cirrhosis resulting from NASH.   
 NAFLD affects all age groups, including chil-
dren, with an equal sex distribution. Its prevalence 
increases with increasing body weight, affecting 
10 − 15% of normal individuals and up to 80% of the 
obese. NASH follows a similar pattern, affecting 
3% of normal individuals and 20% of the morbidly 
obese (BMI    >  35  kg/m 2 ). 
 Most NAFLD is primary (idiopathic), but it 
can occur in association with rare disorders 
of lipid metabolism and insulin resistance, 
including: 
 •  Abetalipoproteinaemia. 
 •  Lipoatrophic diabetes. 
 •  Mauriac and Weber − Christian syndrome. 
 •  Iatrogenic: 
 °  Parenteral nutrition; 
 °  Acute starvation; 
 °  IV glucose therapy; 
 °  Abdominal surgery; 
 26 
Non - a lcoholic  f atty 
 l iver  d isease  
 °  Drugs (amiodarone, tamoxifen, synthetic 
oestrogens and glucocorticoids). 
 NAFLD is principally associated with the meta-
bolic syndrome and a  ‘ two hit ’  model of pathogen-
esis has been proposed: 
 •  First  ‘ hit ’ consists of excessive triglyceride 
accumulation in the liver:  
 °  Driving factor is insulin resistance; 
 °  This primarily involves the muscles 
and adipose tissue and results in 
hyperinsulinaemia;  
 °  Liver remains insulin sensitive, resulting in 
increased hepatic uptake of free fatty acids 
(FFAs) and increased hepatic triglyceride 
synthesis;  
 °  This results in net hepatic fat accumulation. 
FFAs impair insulin signalling and cause 
further insulin resistance. 
   •      Steatotic liver is then vulnerable to  ‘ second 
hits ’ , resulting in inﬂ ammation and liver 
damage: 
 °  Increased FFA oxidation produces 
hepatotoxic free oxygen radicals which 
contribute to oxidative stress and contributes 
to the  ‘ second hit ’ ; 
 °  Other contributors to the second hit include: 
 –  Pre - existing mitochondrial abnormalities; 
 –  Cytokine production (e.g. tumour necrosis 
factor - α ); 
 –  Defects in peroxisome proliferator 
activating receptors (PPARs, which are 
involved in triggering the effects of 
insulin);  
 –  Resistance to leptin. 
Lecture Notes: Gastroenterology and Hepatology, 1st edition. 
Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. 
© 2011 Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease  185
armpits and neck associated with insulin resist-
ance). The liver usually feels normal, however 
hepatomegaly may occur. 
 Investigations 
 Most commonly NAFLD is an accidental ﬁ nding. 
There is no biochemical or imaging modality cur-
rently that can differentiate simple fatty liver from 
NASH. 
 The hallmark of NAFLD is macrovesicular stea-
tosis in the absence of alcohol excess ( < 40  g of 
ethanol/week). In practice the diagnosis is made 
where there are persistently elevated LFTs, a nega-
tive alcohol history and other causes of fatty liver 
have been excluded. If weight loss results in a 
decrease or normalisation of the liver enzymes, 
the diagnosis of NAFLD is practically assured. 
Given the association with the metabolic syn-
drome, all patients should have fasting sugars and 
lipids measured. 
 The  transaminases  are mild to moderately ele-
vated but can ﬂ uctuate from month to month. 
Typically the ALT is greater than the AST, in con-
trast to alcoholic liver disease where the reverse is 
true. 
 Initial  imaging  is usually with ultrasound which 
frequently shows a hyperechoic liver; however, 
this ﬁ nding is neither sensitive nor speciﬁ c. 
 Liver biopsy  allows diagnosis, differentiation of 
simple steatosis from NASH and some assessment 
of disease severity and possibly prognosis. 
However, there remains no international consen-
sus regarding when liver biopsy should be per-
formed or the histopathological criteria that would 
ﬁ rmly deﬁ ne NASH and differentiate between 
NAFLD entities. A scoring system, the  ‘ NAFLD 
Fibrosis Score ’  has been developed as a way of 
predicting ﬁ brosis (hence potentially avoiding 
need for biopsy in this common condition) and 
stratifying into outcome categories (Box  26.1 ). 
 Prognosis and 
 n atural  h istory 
 Patients with NAFLD have a slightly higher mor-
tality than the general population. The natural 
history has not been clearly deﬁ ned and estimates 
of the risk of NASH progressing to cirrhosis range 
between 8% and 15%. NASH progresses to cirrho-
sis less frequently than alcoholic steatohepatitis 
and has a better long - term survival. Even once 
NASH results in ﬁ brosis, deterioration is not inevi-
table: ﬁ brosis progresses in about a third, remains 
stable in a third and regresses in a third. The clini-
cal and biochemical factors associated with risk of 
progression include: 
 •  Increasing age; 
 •  Obesity; 
 •  Pronounced weight loss (especially if 
previously obese);  
 •  Diabetes mellitus; 
 •  AST/ALT ratio  >  1; 
 •  ALT more than two times normal and raised 
triglycerides. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 The symptoms of NAFLD, when there are any, are 
generally mild and non - speciﬁ c (most commonly 
right upper quadrant abdominal pain). Most 
patients have no symptoms at all and the diagno-
sis is most commonly made incidentally. A 
detailed history of alcohol consumption should be 
obtained. The ﬁ ndings on examination are those 
of the metabolic syndrome: commonly obesity 
(especially abdominal obesity), the complications 
of diabetes, hypertension and acanthosis nigri-
cans (a dark pigmentation of the skin of the 
NAFLD
Simple
steatosis
Steatohepatitis
(NASH)
NASH with
fibrosis
Cirrhosis
 Figure 26.1   Spectrum of non -
 alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD). 

186 
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease 
 Management 
 •  Lifestyle modiﬁ cation is the main therapy. 
Short - term weight loss in combination with 
exercise leads to improvement in liver 
 Box 26.1   Components of the NAFLD 
Fibrosis Score. 
 •  Age  
 •  Hyperglycaemia  
 •  Body mass index  
 •  Platelet count  
 •  Albumin  
 •  AST/ALT ratio  
biochemical tests and to resolution of hepatic 
steatosis. The aim is for moderate weight loss 
as overly rapid weight reduction could 
aggravate steatohepatitis. Multiple weight 
reduction therapies have been investigated but 
bariatric surgery is perhaps the best 
therapeutic modality in the presence of severe 
obesity. 
 •  Elevated cholesterol, triglycerides and blood 
sugar should be corrected.  
 •  In diabetic patients, HbA 1C should be reduced 
to  <  7%. 
 •  Pharmacological therapy is only considered 
when there is no change in the condition after 
lifestyle modiﬁ cation. 
   

 Epidemiology and 
 p athophysiology 
 Alcohol misuse is a major public health problem, 
the World Health Organization estimating that 
140 million people globally suffer from alcohol 
dependence. Alcoholic liver disease (ALD) encom-
passes a spectrum of diseases ranging from fatty 
liver to alcoholic hepatitis to cirrhosis. The main 
risk factor is the quantity and duration of alcohol 
ingestion. In addition, nutritional status and 
genetic and metabolic traits play a role. The main 
genetic factors are polymorphisms in the genes 
responsible for ethanol metabolism, aldehyde and 
alcohol dehydrogenases (ALDHs and ADHs, 
respectively) and cytochromes P450 (CYPs). The 
male - to - female ratio is 11:4. Differences in body 
water composition mean that women are more 
susceptible than men to the harmful effects of 
alcohol. 
 The main pathogenic mechanism for liver 
damage is oxidative stress, arising from: 
 •  Changes in the redox state of the hepatocytes; 
 •  Elevation of hepatocyte Kupffer iron; 
 •  Reactive acetaldehyde derivatives; 
 •  Mitochondrial damage; 
 •  Reduced cellular antioxidants; 
 •  Alterations in intracellular signalling; 
 •  Action of inﬂ ammatory cytokines, adipokines 
and hormones (Figure  27.1 ). 
 27 
Alcoholic  l iver  d isease  
 The pathology of ALD is considered a contin-
uum from fatty liver through alcoholic hepatitis 
on to cirrhosis, although in practice these features 
often overlap: 
 •  Fatty liver is the initial, reversible, effect: 
 °  Consists of the accumulation of cytoplasmic 
macrovesicular triglceride droplets which 
displace the nucleus;  
 °  Less often there are microvesicular 
accumulations, which do not displace the 
nucleus, representing mitochondrial damage. 
 •  Alcoholic hepatitis is the next step: 
 °  Results from the combination of fatty liver 
and inﬂ ammation with necrosis of 
hepatocytes;  
 °  Hepatocytes develop a swollen and granular 
cytoplasm (termed  ‘ balloon degeneration ’ );  
 °  Deposition of ﬁ brillar protein and clumping 
of organelles in the cytoplasm (termed 
 ‘ Mallory ’ , or alcoholic, hyaline bodies). 
 •  Cirrhosis occurs when advanced liver disease 
disrupts the normal liver architecture: 
 °  Collagen ﬁ brosis of the terminal venules 
compromises perfusion and contributes to 
portal hypertension;  
 °  Regeneration is typically limited to the 
production of small nodules (micronodular 
cirrhosis), although, particularly with 
abstinence, macronodular cirrhosis can 
occur; 
 °  Iron accumulation in the hepatocytes occurs 
in up to 10% of patients. 
 Zieve ’ s syndrome  refers to a clinical state 
distinct from the above progression of disease 
(Box  27.1 ). 
Lecture Notes: Gastroenterology and Hepatology, 1st edition. 
Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. 
© 2011 Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

188 
Alcoholic liver disease
 Alcoholic  h epatitis (Box  27.2 ) 
 •  Wide range from mild (limited, non - speciﬁ c 
symptoms) to severe (fulminant).  
 •  Moderate: 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Fatty  l iver 
 •  Generally asymptomatic; 
 •  Occasionally may cause anorexia, nausea and 
right upper quadrant pain (usually follows a 
prolonged, heavy alcoholic binge). 
 Figure 27.1   Pathophysiological consequences of alcohol on the liver.  
Mitochondrial
aldehyde
dehydrogenase
Stellate
cells
Increased liver
metabolism
Decreased
antioxidants
Iron
accumulation
Acetaldehyde
Alcohol
Metabolism
by catalase
Metabolism
by CYP2E
Fibroblasts
Narrowing of
sinusoids
Hypoxia
Leucocyte
recruitment
Cytokine
production
Fatty liver
Increased
fatty acids
Acetate
NADH
Increased redox
potential of liver
Gut endotoxins
NAD
Hyperlipidaemia
Increased
triglycerides
Free radical induced
lipid peroxidative
damage
Liver
damage
 Box 27.2   Features of alcoholic hepatitis. 
 •  Tiredness, non - speciﬁ c ill health  
 •  Hepatomegaly, ascites  
 •  Mild liver enzyme abnormalities  
 •  Severity: encephalopathy  or jaundice and 
elevated INR  
 •  Histology: Mallory ’ s hyaline, balloon 
degeneration, neutrophil inﬁ ltration  
 •  Treatment: prednisolone for moderate − severe 
disease  
 •  Alternative treatment: pentoxifylline, a 
phosphodiesterase inhibitor which is thought to 
work through an anti - TNF mechanism  
 Box 27.1   Features of Zieve ’ s syndrome. 
 Alcohol excess with: 
 •  Alcoholic hepatitis  
 •  Haemolysis  
 •  Jaundice  
 •  Abdominal pain  
 •  Hyperlipidaemia  

Alcoholic liver disease 189
 °  2 − 3 - week prodrome of fatigue, anorexia, 
nausea and weight loss;  
 °  Malnutrition is prominent; 
 °  Mild fever ( < 40 ° C), jaundice and tender 
hepatomegaly. 
 •  Severe: 
 °  Usually follows a period of drinking and 
eating very poorly;  
 °  Gravely ill with fever, marked jaundice, 
ascites and evidence of a hyperdynamic 
circulation (marked palmar erythema is 
common), spider naevi, parotid enlargement 
and gynaecomastia;  
 °  Hypoglycaemia is common and can result in 
coma;  
 °  GI bleeding, usually due to a local gastric 
duodenal lesion, is common. 
 Cirrhosis 
 •  Symptoms are those for any cause of cirrhosis 
(see Chapter  20 ). 
 •  May be additional alcohol - related toxicities: 
 °  Peripheral neuropathy; 
 °  Wernicke ’ s encephalopathy (ataxia, 
ophthalmoplegia, confusion, impaired 
short - term memory); 
 °  Korsakoff ’ s psychosis (amnesia, 
confabulation, apathy);  
 °  Hypogonadism and feminization (in men). 
 Investigations 
 Diagnosis requires suspicion of alcohol as a 
cause of liver disease, remembering that patients 
may not always give an accurate alcohol 
history. CAGE and the alcohol use disorders iden-
tiﬁ cation test (AUDIT) are useful screening 
tools for the presence of an alcohol problem 
(Box  27.3 ). 
 No speciﬁ c test exists for ALD. 
 All  blood tests  suffer from the limitations of 
speciﬁ city: 
 •  Serum gamma - glutamyl transferase (GGT) 
increases due to enzyme induction.  
 •  Red - cell mean corpuscular volume (MCV). 
Macrocytosis is a result of the effects of folate 
deﬁ ciency and alcohol on the bone marrow. 
 •  Serum carbohydrate - deﬁ cient transferrin 
(CDT): relatively more speciﬁ c for ALD than 
the other tests.  
 •  Elevations of the aminotransferases are 
generally moderate ( < 300  IU/l) and do not 
reﬂ ect the degree of liver damage:  
 °  AST exceeds ALT (AST/ALT  >  2); 
 °  Relatively low ALT is due to dietary 
deﬁ ciency      of pyridoxal phosphate 
(vitamin B 6 ). 
   •      Bilirubin and INR: severity of disease is 
related to the bilirubin (indicator of 
secretory function) and INR (synthetic 
function).  
 •  All patients should have screening tests for 
treatable causes of liver disease, especially viral 
disease. 
 Liver biopsy  is useful to conﬁ rm the diagnosis, 
stage the severity of the disease and rule out other 
liver conditions.  
 Management 
 •  Abstinence is the mainstay of treatment. 
 •  General supportive care: 
 °  Nutritious diet; 
 °  Vitamin (particularly B vitamin) 
supplementation, especially in the ﬁ rst few 
days of abstinence;  
 °  Withdrawal from alcohol is treated with 
benzodiazepines. 
 Box 27.3   CAGE questionnaire to identify 
alcohol misuse. 
 This screening test is short and simple to administer. 
Two or more positive answers are correlated with 
alcohol dependence in 90% of cases. CAGE may 
not pick up problems in those who are fearful of 
negative consequences of disclosure (e.g. those 
looking for accommodation, or who are fearful of 
child protection issues) and those with mental health 
problems. 
 C   −  Have you ever thought you should CUT 
DOWN on your drinking?  
 A   −  Have you ever felt ANNOYED by others ’  
criticism of your drinking?  
 G   −  Have you ever felt GUILTY about your 
drinking?  
 E   −  Do you have a morning EYE OPENER?  

190 
Alcoholic liver disease
 •  Corticosteroid use is controversial but may be 
beneﬁ cial for patients with severe alcoholic 
hepatitis complicated by encephalopathy.  
 •  Trials of other drugs (propylthiouracil, 
colchicines) have not shown sustained beneﬁ t. 
 •  Liver transplantation gives 5 - year survival rates 
comparable to those after transplantation for 
non - alcoholic liver disease. However, about 
50% of patients resume drinking after 
transplantation, so most programmes require 6 
months of abstinence and assurance that good 
social networks are in place.    
 Prognosis 
 Once cirrhosis develops patients who abstain 
have a 5 - year survival rate of 60 − 70%, which falls 
to 40% in those who continue to drink. Negative 
prognostic indicators include: 
 •  Low serum albumin; 
 •  Increased INR/PT; 
 •  Low haemoglobin; 
 •  Encephalopathy; 
 •  Persistent jaundice; 
 •  Azotemia. 
 Hepatocellular carcinoma occurs in 10% of 
stable cirrhotics, usually developing after a period 
of abstinence when macronodular cirrhosis is 
present. 
 
  

 Classiﬁ cation of liver lesions revolves around 
whether the lesion is likely to be benign or malig-
nant. The degree of certainty of this will determine 
the need for further imaging or biopsy. Table  28.1  
details each of the main liver lesions.    
 Clinical  f eatures 
 The vast majority of liver lesions are asympto-
matic and are discovered incidentally when 
imaging is performed for another reason. In this 
situation, the history and examination are directed 
at discovering risk factors for, and features of, 
underlying hepatic disease or systemic conditions 
associated with liver lesions. The two clear excep-
tions are when: 
 •  Patient is undergoing surveillance for 
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC);  
 •  Liver mass was discovered because it is 
palpable. 
 These situations obviously incur a different 
range of likely diagnoses and are frequently asso-
ciated with more sinister pathologies.  
 Investigations 
 Serology 
 •  FBC and biochemistry, primarily aimed at 
detecting underlying liver dysfunction or 
associated pathology.  
 28 
Liver  t umours and  l esions  
 •  Raised levels of alpha - fetoprotein (AFP) are 
indicative of HCC in the right clinical setting. 
Other tumour markers, while not speciﬁ c or 
sensitive, may guide diagnostic 
decision - making. 
 Radiology 
 •  Ultrasound remains the initial study of choice: 
 °  Advantages include safety, minimal 
necessary pre - examination preparation and 
relatively low cost.  
 °  Preferred modality for serially imaging of 
lesions to monitor for progression.    
 •  Next modality of investigation, if needed, 
depends on the differential diagnosis based on 
the ultrasound features: CT and MRI most 
commonly. 
 Biopsy 
 After the discovery of a liver lesion, liver biopsy 
might be required to either determine: 
 •  Diagnosis, including the presence or absence 
of malignancy. or 
 •  Presence or absence of underlying liver disease 
and cirrhosis.    
 Biopsy is avoided if HCC or hydatid is strongly 
suspected, to avoid the risk of  ‘ seeding ’  the tumour 
along the biopsy tract. 
 Management 
 The vast majority of benign liver lesions require no 
active treatment. The main exceptions are when a 
large lesion close to the capsule of the liver is 
causing pain or when central lesions cause biliary 
Lecture Notes: Gastroenterology and Hepatology, 1st edition. 
Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. 
© 2011 Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

192 
Liver tumours and lesions
 Table 28.1   Cardinal features of the commonest liver tumours. 
     
     
 Clinical features  
  Radiological 
features  
 Diagnosis  
  Treatment  
  Prognosis  
   
Benign 
liver 
tumours   
   
Hepatocellular 
adenoma  
 Women of childbearing age 
 Associated with oral 
contraceptives 
 Mostly asymptomatic 
 Large lesions may cause 
RUQ discomfort 
 Rarely, peritonitis and shock 
due to rupture and 
intraperitoneal 
haemorrhage  
 Usually involving the 
right lobe 
 Often hypervascular 
but with 
hypovascular 
areas  
 Biopsy usually 
needed for 
conﬁ rmation 
and to rule out 
malignant 
transformation  
 Adenomas due to 
contraceptive use 
often regress if the 
drug is stopped 
 Resection of larger, 
symptomatic 
tumours only  
 Very rarely undergo 
malignant 
transformation  
   
Focal nodular 
hyperplasia  
 Female predominance 
 May resemble macronodular 
cirrhosis 
 Multiple tumours in 20% 
 Not related to the oral 
contraceptive  
 Stellate ﬁ brous 
septae ( ‘ stellate 
scar ’ ) 
 Presence of Kupffer 
cells shows as an 
area of increased 
uptake on 
radionuclear 
scanning 
 MRI: lesions usually 
hypointense to 
liver on T 1 and T 2  
(scar may be 
hyperintense on 
T 2 )  
 Diagnosis usually 
based on 
contrast MRI or 
CT 
 Biopsy may be 
necessary 
 Solid tumours 
have a ﬁ brous 
core and 
include other 
cell types 
(atypical 
hepatocytes, 
Kupffer cells 
and 
inﬂ ammatory 
cells)  
 Treatment is rarely 
needed (especially if 
asymptomatic)  
 Haemorrhage in only 
2 − 3% (most 
common 
complication)  
   
Haemangioma  
  Found in 0.5 − 7% of the 
general population 
 Usually asymptomatic 
 More common in women  
 Ultrasound: 
increased 
echogenicity 
 CT: decreased 
density, enhances 
from periphery  
 Radiological  
  Does not require any 
treatment  
 Rupture is rare, even 
in large tumours 
 No malignant 
potential  

Liver tumours and lesions 193
     
     
 Clinical features  
  Radiological 
features  
 Diagnosis  
  Treatment  
  Prognosis  
   
Hepatic 
cysts  
   
Benign hepatic 
cysts  
 Idiopathic, rarely associated 
with polycystic kidneys, 
usually asymptomatic and 
have no clinical 
signiﬁ cance  
 Isolated cysts are 
commonly 
detected 
incidentally on 
abdominal 
ultrasound or CT  
 Radiological  
  Not necessary  
  Rare congenital 
condition, 
polycystic liver 
commonly 
associated with 
polycystic disease 
of the kidneys 
 True cystic tumours 
rare  
   
Hydatid cysts  
  Tapeworm of the genus 
Echinococcus 
 Endemic areas: 
 Mediterranean, Middle East, 
 South America, 
 Iceland, 
 Australia, 
 New Zealand, 
 Southern Africa  
 Ultrasound may 
demonstrate 
classical daughter 
cysts and 
 ‘ hydatid sand ’  
 CT highly sensitive 
and speciﬁ c  
 Parasite serology 
and radiological 
features 
 Biopsy avoided  
 Surgical treatment of 
larger and 
superﬁ cial cysts 
 Medical treatment: 
albendazole or 
mebendazole 3 − 6 
months 
 Emerging use of 
puncture, 
aspiration, injection, 
and re - aspiration 
technique  
 Morbidity is usually 
secondary to free 
rupture of the 
echinococcal cyst 
(with or without 
anaphylaxis), 
infection of cyst, 
Biliary obstruction, 
cirrhosis  
   
Caroli ’ s disease  
  Rare autosomal recessive 
disease 
 Usually detected in 
childhood or early 
adulthood 
 Associated with medullary 
sponge kidney (renal 
tubular ectasia) in 80%  
 Characterised by 
segmental cystic 
dilation of 
intrahepatic bile 
ducts  
 MRCP or ERCP  
  Treatment for 
complications  
 No associated 
cirrhosis or portal 
hypertension 
 Predisposed to 
calculus formation 
 Prone to recurrent 
cholangitis and 
resultant liver 
abscesses 
 Increased risk of 
cholangiocarcinoma  
(continued)

194 
Liver tumours and lesions
     
     
 Clinical features  
  Radiological 
features  
 Diagnosis  
  Treatment  
  Prognosis  
   
Malignant 
liver 
tumours   
   
Primary liver cancer  
 (HCC)  
 Male predominance 
 Usually cirrhotic 
 Risk greatest in: 
 • Chronic hepatitis B 
(cirrhotic and non - cirrhotic) 
 • Hepatitis C 
 • Haemochromatosis 
 • Cirrhosis from  α - 1 -
 antitrypsin deﬁ ciency 
 Worldwide incidence 1 
million cases per year 
 Risk of HCC in cirrhosis 
1 − 6% per year  
 CT: isodense lesion 
surrounded by a 
low - density 
contrast -
 enhancing ring 
 Associated with 
portal vein 
thrombosis  
 Serum  α  -
 fetoprotein 
levels (AFP) 
are    >  500  μ g/l 
in 70 − 80% of 
cases 
 Biopsy often not 
needed when 
characteristic 
radiology and 
cirrhosis  
 Treatment is 
disappointing 
 Resection often 
complicated by the 
presence of 
underlying cirrhosis, 
multiple lesions and 
micrometastases 
 Liver transplantation 
may be considered 
for multiple lesions 
and cirrhosis  
 Up to 70% of patients 
already have 
metastatic disease 
at the time of 
diagnosis 
 Mean survival from 
time of diagnosis is 
6 − 12 months  
   
Metastatic liver 
cancer  
 Accounts for 95% of all 
hepatic malignancies 
 50% of malignancies in 
cirrhotic liver 
 Majority associated with 
end - stage disease 
 Colonic adenocarcinoma 
commonest cause of 
potentially curable solitary 
metastases  
 CT: lesions generally 
hypovascular and 
hypoattenuating 
when imaged 
during portal 
venous phase 
 Intraoperative 
ultrasound useful 
for detecting liver 
metastases at 
surgery  
 Characteristic 
radiology and 
known primary 
usually sufﬁ cient 
 Biopsy may help 
to determine 
diagnosis and 
treatment if 
primary lesion 
not found  
 Approximately 20% 
colorectal liver 
metastases are 
resectable 
 Neoadjuvant systemic 
chemotherapy may 
increase number 
resectable  
 ‘ Curative ’  resection 
5 - year survival rate 
of 25 − 38% 
 Non - operative therapy 
only provides a 
median survival rate 
of 9 months  
Table 28.1 Cardinal features of the commonest liver tumours (continued)

Liver tumours and lesions 195
     
     
 Clinical features  
  Radiological 
features  
 Diagnosis  
  Treatment  
  Prognosis  
   
Fibrolamellar 
carcinoma  
 Distinct variant of HCC 
 Young adults 
 No association with 
pre - existing cirrhosis, viral 
hepatitis or other known 
risk factors  
 Lobulated 
heterogeneous 
mass with a 
central scar in an 
otherwise normal 
liver  
 Characteristic 
morphology of 
malignant 
hepatocytes 
enmeshed in 
lamellar ﬁ brous 
tissue 
 AFP levels are 
rarely elevated  
 Initial treatment usually 
involves resection of 
the primary tumour 
or liver 
transplantation, with 
 en bloc  resection of 
metastatic 
lymphadenopathy  
 Prognosis is better 
than for HCC 
 Many patients survive 
several years after 
tumour resection 
 Tumour recurrence 
common and 
almost always 
involves the liver  
   
Cholangiocarcinoma    Second most common 
primary liver tumour 
 Male predominance 
 Predisposing: primary 
sclerosing cholangitis, 
choledochal cysts  
 Features helpful in 
differentiating 
from other 
primary tumours: 
 • Homogeneously 
echogenic or 
high attenuation 
 • Presence of 
calciﬁ cation 
 • Invasion of 
portal or 
hepatic veins 
uncommon  
 Histology 
necessary 
 May require 
exploratory 
laparotomy for 
adequate 
biopsy 
 Endoscopic 
ultrasound may 
be useful for 
imaging and 
biopsy  
 Approximately 30% 
are resectable at 
time of diagnosis  
 Overall survival rate 
after resection 
dependent upon 
tumour staging, 
tumour - free surgical 
margins and lymph 
node status  
   
Hepatoblastoma  
  Affects children, almost 
all   <  3 years old  
 Right lobe (75%), 
both lobes or 
multicentric (33%)  
 Increased AFP in 
67 − 90%  
 Surgical resection only 
curative option 
 Control of metastatic 
disease with      
adjuvant 
chemotherapy 
 30% resectable at 
presentation  
 Metastases at 
diagnosis in 10%  
     
     
 Clinical features  
  Radiological 
features  
 Diagnosis  
  Treatment  
  Prognosis  
   
Fibrolamellar 
carcinoma  
 Distinct variant of HCC 
 Young adults 
 No association with 
pre - existing cirrhosis, viral 
hepatitis or other known 
risk factors  
 Lobulated 
heterogeneous 
mass with a 
central scar in an 
otherwise normal 
liver  
 Characteristic 
morphology of 
malignant 
hepatocytes 
enmeshed in 
lamellar ﬁ brous 
tissue 
 AFP levels are 
rarely elevated  
 Initial treatment usually 
involves resection of 
the primary tumour 
or liver 
transplantation, with 
 en bloc  resection of 
metastatic 
lymphadenopathy  
 Prognosis is better 
than for HCC 
 Many patients survive 
several years after 
tumour resection 
 Tumour recurrence 
common and 
almost always 
involves the liver  
   
Cholangiocarcinoma    Second most common 
primary liver tumour 
 Male predominance 
 Predisposing: primary 
sclerosing cholangitis, 
choledochal cysts  
 Features helpful in 
differentiating 
from other 
primary tumours: 
 • Homogeneously 
echogenic or 
high attenuation 
 • Presence of 
calciﬁ cation 
 • Invasion of 
portal or 
hepatic veins 
uncommon  
 Histology 
necessary 
 May require 
exploratory 
laparotomy for 
adequate 
biopsy 
 Endoscopic 
ultrasound may 
be useful for 
imaging and 
biopsy  
 Approximately 30% 
are resectable at 
time of diagnosis  
 Overall survival rate 
after resection 
dependent upon 
tumour staging, 
tumour - free surgical 
margins and lymph 
node status  
   
Hepatoblastoma  
  Affects children, almost 
all   <  3 years old  
 Right lobe (75%), 
both lobes or 
multicentric (33%)  
 Increased AFP in 
67 − 90%  
 Surgical resection only 
curative option 
 Control of metastatic 
disease with      
adjuvant 
chemotherapy 
 30% resectable at 
presentation  
 Metastases at 
diagnosis in 10%  

196 
Liver tumours and lesions
obstruction. Treatment of malignant lesions 
depends on the condition and the underlying liver 
disease. 
 Metastatic  l iver  c ancer 
 Many malignant conditions metastasise to the 
liver as a late feature of terminal disease. Only 
colorectal adenocarcinoma (commonest) and 
neuroendocrine tumours present as solitary 
metastases to the liver and are potentially curable. 
Approximately 20% of patients with colorectal 
liver metastases have disease that is resectable at 
the time of diagnosis. Curative resection gives 
5 - year survival rates of 25 − 38%; non - operative 
therapy only provides a median survival rate of 9 
months. Neoadjuvant systemic chemotherapy 
may increase the proportion of patients with 
resectable disease.  
 Hepatocellular  c arcinoma 
 Treatment of HCC localised to the liver depends 
on the presence or absence of cirrhosis. Survival is 
usually not  >    6 months in patients with a large 
tumour mass and Child C cirrhosis. Patients with 
small HCCs ( < 5   cm diameter) and stable liver 
function have a better prognosis but survival rates 
are still only 21% at 3 years. Surgical resection is 
recommended for patients without cirrhosis or 
with limited segmental or lobar HCC and pre-
served hepatic function. Transplantation is mainly 
recommended when the tumour is small, extrahe-
patic disease is non - existent and hepatic reserve 
is poor. 
  

     Liver disease in pregnancy may take the form of 
problems that occur more frequently in pregnancy 
(e.g. gallstones) or run a more serious course (e.g. 
acute hepatitis E); coincident liver disease which 
may affect management or have implications after 
delivery (e.g. chronic hepatitis B and C); or liver 
diseases speciﬁ c to pregnancy. The latter are the 
most common cause of liver dysfunction in preg-
nancy and it is these that are considered in this 
chapter. 
 In recognising pregnancy - related liver disease 
the clinician must be aware of the normal physi-
ological changes affecting the liver in pregnancy. 
Generally speaking, palmar erythema, spider 
angiomas, low serum albumin levels and high 
serum alkaline phosphatase levels are benign 
changes in the liver during pregnancy. High levels 
of serum liver aminotransferase or bilirubin signal 
a problem.  
 HELLP   s yndrome 
 The HELLP syndrome may be thought of as a 
severe form of pre - eclampsia. Pre - eclampsia itself 
is a condition, occurring after 20 weeks ’  gestation, 
consisting of a triad of hypertension, proteinuria 
and oedema. The lungs and brain are the most 
vulnerable organs in pre - eclampsia. It often 
causes abnormal LFTs (modest elevation of serum 
transaminases and occasionally mild hyperbi-
lirubinaemia), but does not usually seriously affect 
the liver. 
 29 
Pregnancy -  r elated 
 l iver  d isease  
 Clinical  f eatures 
 The HELLP syndrome, in contrast, is associated 
with signiﬁ cant hepatic dysfunction. A syndrome 
of Haemolysis, Elevated Liver enzymes and Low 
Platelets on a background of pre - eclampsia or 
eclampsia deﬁ nes it. The HELLP syndrome com-
plicates 0.1% of pregnancies, and is associated 
with poor maternal and neonatal outcomes. 
Patients may present from 20 weeks ’ gestation but 
the syndrome usually occurs between 27 and 36 
weeks. Presentation is non - speciﬁ c  – abdominal 
pain, nausea and sometimes headache.  
 Investigations 
 •  Nadir platelet count and peak transaminase 
levels are a reﬂ ection of disease severity.  
 •  While the haemoglobin level may be normal 
initially, haemolysis occurs, with the deformed 
red cells of microangiopathy visible on blood 
ﬁ lm, and often a marked decrease in the 
haemoglobin.  
 •  Renal dysfunction is common. 
 •  Clotting must be monitored but remains normal 
except in advanced disease with the onset of 
disseminated intravascular coagulation. 
 Management 
 •  Treatment is by delivery as soon as is practicable, 
balancing maternal health and fetal outcome. In 
uncomplicated disease, once 34 weeks ’  
gestation is reached, this decision is not difﬁ cult. 
However, in complicated disease or early 
gestation the balance is not straightforward.  
 •  Where organ failure occurs, immediate delivery 
is dangerous and must be preceded by transfer 
to intensive care and rapid correction of ﬂ uid 
Lecture Notes: Gastroenterology and Hepatology, 1st edition. 
Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. 
© 2011 Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

198 
Pregnancy-related liver disease 
 •  Polyuria and polydipsia are common, 
sometimes diabetes insipidus.  
 •  Jaundice and encephalopathy only occur late. 
 •  Pancreatitis is frequently associated, but 
because the symptoms are similar to AFLP the 
diagnosis is difﬁ cult. 
 •  There are no speciﬁ c examination features and 
examination is often normal. 
 Investigations 
 The features are of acute impairment of hepatic 
function in late pregnancy. Biopsy is often con-
traindicated in the face of severe disease but when 
performed shows characteristic histological fea-
tures (see above). 
 Typical laboratory ﬁ ndings are: 
 •  Neutrophilia (present in almost all cases), 
platelet count which initially is normal but 
drops with disease progression and normal 
haemoglobin.  
 •  Transaminases are moderately elevated and 
renal dysfunction is common. 
 •  Antithrombin III activity is profoundly and 
consistently decreased.  
 •  Hyperammonaemia, coagulopathy and 
hypoglycaemia are early features that assist in 
differentiating AFLP from HELLP (the main 
differential diagnosis: the presence of polyuria 
and polydipsia, and early absence of anaemia 
are also useful in this regard). 
 •  Radiological imaging is not particularly helpful 
as microvesicular steatosis is not easily detected.     
 Management 
 Early delivery is the mainstay of treatment. The 
safest way of achieving this is emergency caesar-
ean section in combination with ICU manage-
ment of coagulopathy, renal dysfunction, acidosis 
and sepsis. Occasionally, liver transplantation is 
required. Maternal death is uncommon and the 
rate of perinatal death is  < 10%. It should be noted 
that AFLP may recur in subsequent pregnancies.    
 Obstetric  c holestasis 
 Epidemiology and  p athophysiology 
 There has been an apparent increase in the inci-
dence of obstetric cholestasis (OC) or intrahepatic 
imbalance, hypertension, hypoxia, seizures and 
coagulopathy: 
 °  Dexamethasone promotes maturity of the 
fetal lungs and ameliorates HELLP;  
 °  Most serious complications stem not from 
liver disease but the other effects of this 
severe form of pre - eclampsia, although rarely 
subcapsular haematoma and resultant liver 
rupture is fatal;  
 °  While with aggressive management and 
improved disease recognition maternal 
mortality has fallen below 1%, perinatal 
mortality is still 10 − 20%. 
 •  Medical treatment in an attempt to ameliorate 
disease and gain gestational time (plasma 
volume expansion, vasodilatation, low - dose 
Aspirin, corticosteroids) are advocated, but 
have not been subjected to controlled trials. 
 Acute  f atty  l iver of 
 p regnancy 
 Epidemiology and  p athophysiology 
 Acute fatty liver of pregnancy (AFLP) results in 
hepatic failure, and maternal and fetal mortality. 
Originally considered rare, it is now recognised that 
AFLP occurs relatively commonly in a less severe 
form which is associated with better outcomes. 
Incidence is estimated at 1 in 1000 deliveries. There 
are no clear geographical or racial predispositions 
to AFLP. Risk factors for disease include older 
maternal age, primiparity, multiple pregnancies, 
pre - eclampsia, male fetus and previous AFLP. 
 The pathophysiology is one of microvesicular 
fatdeposition. In a minority of cases this can be 
attributed directly to an inherited defect of fatty 
acid oxidation, but the majority of affected 
mothers do not have such a deﬁ ciency and the 
cause of AFLP remains unknown. 
 The characteristic histological features are 
swollen foamy hepatocytes due to microvesicular 
fat. The architecture is not disturbed and neither 
inﬂ ammation nor necrosis is prominent, but 
some cholestasis is common.  
 Clinical  f eatures 
 •  AFLP occurs at 32 − 36 weeks ’ gestation, 
presenting non - speciﬁ cally (nausea, 
abdominal pain).  

Pregnancy-related liver disease  199
 Management 
 The main effect of this disease is not on the mother 
but on the fetus, with increased rates of prematu-
rity, fetal distress and stillbirth. Fetal outcome may 
be inﬂ uenced by peak bile acid levels. 
 Treatment traditionally consists of: 
 •  Ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA) is the treatment 
of choice. It reduces maternal bile acid levels 
and affects pruritis. As yet there is no evidence 
that it affects perinatal mortality; given the 
very low mortality rate of  < 1%, a very large 
number would be required for such a trial.  
 •  Antihistamines and cholestyramine may have a 
slight effect.  
 •  Delivery is recommended at 36 − 38 weeks as 
the risk of stillbirth increases beyond 36 weeks ’  
gestation. Older studies reported perinatal 
mortality as high as 10%; however, with current 
active management this appears now to be 
 < 1%. 
 The features of OC resolve rapidly after delivery, 
usually within a few days. If abnormalities persist, 
the diagnosis should be reconsidered. There is a 
high (50 − 75%) rate of repeat OC in future 
pregnancies. 
 Hyperemesis  g ravidarum 
 Nausea and vomiting are common in early preg-
nancy. In contrast, hyperemesis, deﬁ ned as severe 
intractable vomiting requiring admission, occurs 
in  < 1%. It is commoner in younger, obese, mul-
tiparous women and twin pregnancies. 
 The onset of disease is at 4 – 10 weeks ’  gestation. 
LFTs are deranged by up to 50%, with transami-
nase elevation between 2 and 10 times normal. 
Jaundice is uncommon. Invasive tests are not 
warranted. 
 Most cases settle with rehydration, electrolyte 
replacement and glucose. Symptoms typically 
resolve after 20 weeks ’  gestation. If improvement 
is slow, parenteral hydrocortisone sometimes 
leads to rapid resolution. Maternal and fetal out-
comes are not inﬂ uenced, providing dehydration 
is avoided. 
cholestasis of pregnancy. This is at least in large 
part an artefact of better case ascertainment with 
the increasing investigation of the symptom of 
pruritis in pregnancy. The pathophysiology is of 
pure cholestasis without hepatic inﬂ ammation or 
necrosis. 
 No single cause is responsible for all cases. 
Important factors inﬂ uencing the incidence of the 
disease include: 
 •  Ethnicity (Asians being at greater risk). 
   •      Environment (possible association with low 
selenium levels).  
 •  Hormonal effects, as demonstrated by the 
increased incidence in late pregnancy and 
multiple pregnancies, and precipitation by 
exogenous progestogens.  
 •  Genetic inﬂ uences, with a strong familial 
tendency and the discovery of speciﬁ c gene 
mutations in a minority of cases. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 •  Patients present with generalised pruritis, 
which particularly involves the palms and soles 
and is worst at night. This tends to occur at 
30 − 36 weeks ’  gestation but can start as early as 
the ﬁ rst trimester. 
 •  Jaundice is not common, occurring in  < 10%, 
and when it occurs it indicates more severe 
cholestasis. 
 •  Family history is common (up to 30%). 
 •  Urinary infection often precipitates, or is 
associated with, OC. 
 Investigations 
 •  It must be noted that the laboratory ﬁ ndings of 
OC are not those normally expected with 
cholestasis. The observed elevation of serum 
transaminases (up to 10 times normal)may be 
explained by increased membrane 
permeability. It does not necessarily occur at 
the onset of pruritus and transaminase 
elevation in an otherwise well woman with 
pruritus in pregnancy is virtually diagnostic of 
OC.  
 •  ALP is not useful as it is mildly elevated in late 
pregnancy normally. GGT is raised in only 30% 
of cases.  
 •  Serum bile acids are more sensitive and 
speciﬁ c. Bilirubin may be slightly elevated in 
about 10%.  
 •  Imaging is not usually contributory. 

200 
Liver transplantation
 Indications and 
 c ontraindications 
 Orthotopic liver transplantation (OLT), when 
required, is indicated for most causes of acute or 
chronic liver disease. Cirrhosis accounts for    >  80% 
of transplants performed in adults, hepatitis C and 
alcoholism being the two most common underly-
ing diagnoses. 
 There are very few absolute contraindications to 
OLT: 
 •  Anatomic abnormality precluding transplant; 
 •  Malignancy outside the liver; 
 •  Untreated sepsis; 
 •  Advanced cardiopulmonary disease; 
 •  Active alcohol and drug use. 
 However, conditions previously considered 
contraindications, such as HIV infection and older 
age, are now only relative considerations in many 
centres. 
 Preparation 
 Prior to pretransplant assessment, the patients ’ 
requirements for transplantation need to be cat-
egorised in order to rationalise this limited 
resource. In  fulminant liver failure , the King ’ s 
College Criteria are used to predict outcome and 
the need for OLT (Box  30.1 ). 
 30 
Liver  t ransplantation  
 In patients with  cirrhosis , referral for OLT 
should be considered once an index complication 
has occurred, as such events mark a relative reduc-
tion in survival rates in the cirrhotic patient. These 
complications ( ‘ decompensations ’ of chronic 
disease) include variceal bleeding, onset of ascites 
or hypoalbuminaemia and development of hepa-
torenal syndrome. The aim is to bring a patient to 
transplantation at a point where their expected 
survival is in the realm of 1 − 2 years, but before 
organ failure develops. Calculating the prognosis 
of patients with cirrhosis is currently deﬁ ned 
using both disease - speciﬁ c and generic clinical 
tools. 
 •  Child − Turcotte − Pugh score (see Table  2.4 ) is 
used most frequently to assess prognosis of 
cirrhotic patients, establishing three classes of 
severity (A, B and C). 
 •  Model for End - stage Liver Disease (MELD) 
score is in current use in the USA. It 
incorporates values for serum bilirubin, serum 
creatinine and INR for prothrombin time in a 
log - transformed equation to estimate 
likelihood of 3 - month survival (Table  2.6 ). The 
formula is available at  http://www.mayoclinic.
org/gi - rst/mayomodel5.html 
 •  A Child − Turcotte − Pugh Score of 7, a MELD 
score of 10 or any complication of portal 
hypertension is an appropriate indication for 
transplant evaluation. 
 Referral for pretransplant assessment is then 
made in discussion with the transplant team. 
The pretransplant assessment ensures the patient 
will be able to tolerate the stress of the surgery, 
immunosuppression and highly demanding post -
Lecture Notes: Gastroenterology and Hepatology, 1st edition. 
Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. 
© 2011 Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Liver transplantation 201
 Postoperative  c are 
 Immunosuppression 
 Immunosuppression in OLT has three main 
phases: induction, maintenance and treatment of 
rejection episodes. 
 Induction 
 •  Typically high - dose steroids along with 
introduction of a calcinerin inhibitor, either 
cyclosporin or tacrolimus. 
 •  Common side - effects of the immunosuppres-
sants used are listed in Table  30.1 .  
 •  Mycophenolate mofetil or azathioprine may be 
used as adjuvant agents to allow lower doses of 
the calcineurin inhibitors. 
 Protection of renal function is especially impor-
tant in the early post - transplant period. 
 Acute cellular rejection (ACR)  develops in 
approximately 70% of liver transplant recipients, 
typically 5 − 14 days following transplantation 
(although it may present later). Treatment of ACR 
early in the post - transplant period is with intrave-
nous corticosteroids tapered rapidly over several 
days. ACR not responsive to steroids can be treated 
by the addition of mycophenolate mofetil and 
higher levels of tacrolimus.  
 Maintenance 
 •  In the majority of cases, immunosuppression is 
with a calcineurin inhibitor (ciclosporin or 
tacrolimus) started immediately 
postoperatively with corticosteroids.  
 •  Steroids are slowly reduced and often 
withdrawn within 6 − 12 months of OLT, the 
exception being with autoimmune liver disease. 
 Chronic rejection  occurs late in the post - OLT 
course and is characterised by vanishing bile ducts 
(ductopenia). It may respond to a higher dose of 
tacrolimus, but can lead to the need for 
retransplantation. 
 Early  p ost - t ransplant  c are 
 •  Admission to the intensive care unit 
postoperatively: 
 °  All patients have markedly abnormal 
aminotransferase, bilirubin and INR in the 
initial 48 − 72  h, usually returning to normal 
 Box 30.1   King ’ s College Criteria for acute 
liver failure. 
 Patients with paracetamol toxicity  
 •  pH  < 7.3 or  
 •  PT  > 100  s and serum creatinine level    >  300   μ mol/l 
( > 3.4   mg/dl) if in Grade III or IV encephalopathy  
 Other patients  
 Three of the following variables: 
 •  Age  < 10 years or  > 40 years  
 •  Cause:  
 °  Non - A, non - B hepatitis  
 °  Halothane hepatitis  
 °  Idiosyncratic drug reaction  
 •  Duration of jaundice before encephalopathy  > 7 
days  
 •  PT  > 50   s  
 •  Serum bilirubin  > 300   μ mol/l ( > 17.6   mg/dl)  
 transplant 
care. 
It 
includes 
an 
extensive 
cardiopulmonary and psychosocial evaluation, 
screening for occult infection and neoplasia, as 
well as careful education of the patient and family.   
 The  o peration 
 The operation to transplant a liver consists of 
three phases: 
 1.  Removal of the donor liver; 
 2.  Removal of the recipient ’ s native liver; 
 3.  Grafting of the transplant. 
 •  Two main types of incision are used: the 
 ‘ Mercedes incision ’  which consists of bilateral 
subcostal incisions with a midline extension, 
and the inverted J incision.  
 •  A temporary shunt between the portal system 
and inferior vena cava is formed in order to 
reduce the haemodynamic changes that would 
occur if the hepatic vessels were simply 
clamped during removal of the native liver.  
 •  Liver is then isolated from the arterial and 
biliary systems, and removed 
 •  All dissected vessels are prepared for 
subsequent anastomosis and the donor liver is 
ﬁ nally grafted into the site of the native liver.     

202 
Liver transplantation
 •  Peak onset of action by the calcineurin 
inhibitors is at 1 month, which is when 
post - transplant and opportunistic infections 
can intervene: 
 °  These include cytomegalovirus, herpes 
simplex virus,  Pneumocysitis carinii 
pneumonia and toxoplasmosis. The use of 
prophylactic antimicrobials depends on the 
risk proﬁ le of the individual patient and 
donor in combination;  
 °  Early recurrence of HCV and HBV can occur 
at this time. In the case of HBV, prophylaxis 
with hepatitis B immunoglobulin (with or 
without antiviral treatment) is effective. 
 Long - t erm  c are 
 The long - term care of the liver transplant recipi-
ent increasingly involves the primary and second-
ary care teams. Patients post - OLT are at risk of 
conditions speciﬁ cally related to immunosup-
pression and the underlying liver condition. The 
common complications and their monitoring and 
management are summarised in Table  30.2 . 
 Malignancies after OLT are more frequent than 
in the general population. This relates to high - risk 
behaviour before transplant, speciﬁ cally cigarette 
within a few weeks. This is a result of insults to 
the graft, such as the ischaemia, which occurs 
following harvesting, the preservation in transit 
and the subsequent reperfusion of the graft;  
 °  If the above indices are rising rather than 
falling in the early postoperative phase, 
hepatic artery thrombosis must be excluded 
by Doppler ultrasound. Primary non -
 function of the graft may occur and 
mandates urgent retransplantation. 
 •  After 1 week: 
 °  ACR becomes an important and frequent 
cause of increases in the LFTs. It is conﬁ rmed 
by liver biopsy and treated as described above;  
 °  Nosocomial infectious complications may 
occur. Fungal infections are of particular 
concern and are associated with poor 
prognosis; 
 °  Toxic effects of the calcineurin inhibitors 
(early neurological dysfunction, renal 
impairment and hyperglycaemia) may 
become evident. 
 •  Following discharge, patients remain under 
weekly monitoring for the ﬁ rst month. In this 
phase ACR continues to be a concern, 
prompting urgent liver biopsy if liver 
dysfunction recurs.  
 Table 30.1   Mechanism of action and adverse effects of orthotopic liver transplantation 
immunosuppressive drugs. 
 Drug  
  Tacrolimus  
  Ciclosporin  
 Prednisone  
  Mycophenolate 
mofetil (MMF)  
 Azathioprine  
 Mechanism  
  Calcineurin inhibitors: bind to 
intracellular proteins, inhibiting 
the phosphatase activity of 
calcineurin, resulting in 
inhibition of gene transcription 
for the synthesis of 
lymphokines such as IL - 2  
 Inhibits transcription 
of IL - 1 and IL - 6 
 Blocks antigen 
recognition 
 Causes 
redistribution of 
lymphocytes  
 Inhibitor 
 of inosine 
monophosphate 
dehydrogenase  
 Inhibitor of DNA 
and RNA 
 synthesis  
 Use  
  Most commonly used immunosuppressants in induction 
and maintenance 
 Methylprednisone IV is the mainstay of initial treatment 
of acute cellular reaction (ACR)  
 Used as adjuvant agents in order 
to allow lower doses of the 
calcineurin inhibitors (and hence 
reduce toxicity) 
 MMF used in steroid - resistant ACR  
 Toxicity  
  Nephrotoxicity 
 Tremor 
 Hypertension 
 Headache 
 GI symptoms 
 Alopecia 
 Diabetes  
 Nephrotoxicity 
 Tremor 
 Hypertension 
 Headache 
 Hirsutism 
 Gingival 
hyperplasia  
 Osteoporosis 
 Osteonecrosis 
 Diabetes 
 Hyperlipidaemia 
 Hirsutism 
 Hypertension 
Cushingoid 
habitus  
 Leukopenia 
 Nausea and 
 vomiting 
 Diarrhoea  
 Haematological 
 pancreatitis 
 Cholestatic 
jaundice 
 Hepatitis 
 Interstitial 
pneumonitis  

Liver transplantation 203
 Table 30.2   Pathogenesis and management of postorthotopic liver transplantation (OLT) complications. 
     
 Pathogenesis  
  Monitoring  
  Management  
 Hypertension  
  Calcineurin inhibitors (CNI): 
reversible, dose - dependent 
hypertension due 
to vasoconstriction of afferent 
renal arterioles 
 Corticosteroids: partial 
mineralocorticoid agonism, 
expanding plasma volume  
 Regular medical review, 
including blood pressure 
measurement  
 Lifestyle modiﬁ cations: 
 •  Weight loss  
 •  Sodium restriction  
 •  Smoking cessation  
 •  Exercise  
 •  Abstinence from alcohol  
 Wean - off corticosteroids, or reduce CNI dose 
 Medication if persistent: 
 •  First - line: calcium - channel blockers: amlodipine and 
nifedepine (nicardipine, verapamil and diltiazem, increase 
CNI levels)  
 •  Second - line: clonidine, beta - blockers, ACE inhibitors  
 Renal 
dysfunction  
 Pre - existing in substantial minority 
of cirrhotic patients 
 Glomerular ﬁ ltration rate (GFR) 
drops to 60% of baseline within 
6 weeks of surgery 
 Causes: 
 •  CNIs are major cause  
 •  Underlying kidney disease  
 •  Ischaemic injury  
 •  Diabetes mellitus  
 •  Hypertension  
 •  Other nephrotoxic drugs  
 •  HCV  
 Routine testing of renal 
function at review  
 Treat hypertension and diabetes aggressively 
 Reduce CNI dose (addition of mycofenolate mofetil or sirolimus) 
 Mortality of OLT recipients maintained on dialysis is high and 
renal transplantation should be considered  
(continued)

204 
Liver transplantation
Table 30.2 Pathogenesis and management of postorthotopic liver transplantation (OLT) complications (continued)
     
 Pathogenesis  
  Monitoring  
  Management  
 Post - transplant 
diabetes 
mellitus  
 Affects 10 − 30% of OLT recipients 
in ﬁ rst postoperative year 
 Abates with time as doses of 
corticosteroids and TAC are 
tapered 
 Insulin resistance ﬁ nal common 
pathway 
 Exacerbated by: 
 •  Corticosteroids  
 •  Obesity  
 •  CNIs, (direct toxicity on 
pancreatic beta - cells)  
 •  HCV  
 Screening immediately 
post - transplant and 
regularly thereafter with 
fasting plasma glucose 
 Once diagnosed: 
 •  Regular self - monitoring 
of blood glucose  
 •  Management of 
dyslipidaemia  
 •  Screen annually for 
diabetic complications  
 Steroid and TAC - sparing regimens in diabetes prior to OLT 
 Lifestyle and immunosuppressive regimen modiﬁ cation 
 Majority require treatment with an oral agent 
 Oral combination therapy followed by oral agent and insulin 
instituted in a stepwise fashion if needed  
 Hyperlipidaemia 
  Prevalence 40 − 66% 
 CNIs may cause hyperlipidaemia 
(CYA and, to a lesser extent, 
TAC) 
 SIR contributes to 
hypertriglyceridaemia in 
association with diabetes 
 Risk factors: 
 •  High cholesterol pre - OLT  
 •  Post - OLT renal dysfunction 
 Metabolic syndrome: genetics, diet, 
obesity and diabetes  
 Lipid panel: 
 •  Early after 
transplantation  
 •  After any change in 
immunosuppression  
 Primary target    =  correction of LDL cholesterol 
 Lifestyle changes: (alone rarely result in sufﬁ cient improvement): 
 •  Smoking cessation  
 •  Exercise  
 •  Dietary modiﬁ cation  
 Contributing medications: 
 •  Thiazide diuretics  
 •  Beta - blockers  
 •  Immunosuppressive agents  
 Early post - OLT usually does not require medication and resolves 
with reduction in steroids 
 Medical management if lifestyle management and alteration of 
medications unsuccessful: 
 Isolated hypercholesterolaemia or mixed hyperlipidaemia: 
HMG - CoA reductase inhibitors ( ‘ statins ’ ) treatment of choice 
( Note : metabolism of most statins is decreased by CYA) 
 •  Hypertriglyceridaemia:  
 Less severe cases managed with ﬁ sh oil supplements  
 Refractory cases can be safely treated with a ﬁ brate  
 Consider changing SIR to CYA or TAC  

Liver transplantation 205
SIR, sirolimus; TAC, tacrolimus; CYA, ciclosporin.
     
 Pathogenesis  
  Monitoring  
  Management  
 Bone marrow 
disease 
(BMD)  
 BMD in cirrhotic patients is low: 
 •  Hypogonadism  
 •  Malnutrition  
 •  Physical inactivity  
 BMD declines after OLT: 
 •  Immunosuppressives cause 
increased resorption as well as 
decreased formation of bone  
 •  Bed rest  
 •  Corticosteroids  
 Risk factors: 
 •  Most important is low BMD 
pre - OLT  
 •  Older age,  
 •  Degree of immunosuppression  
 •  Graft dysfunction  
 •  Female sex  
 •  Lower BMI  
 •  Renal dysfunction  
 •  Postmenopausal state  
 Bone densitometry prior to 
OLT if cirrhotic or other 
risk factor for 
osteoporosis 
 Counselling about: 
 •  Adequate vitamin D and 
calcium intake  
 •  Weight - bearing exercise  
 •  Nutritional repletion  
 •  Alcohol use  
 •  Smoking cessation  
 Consider postmenopausal women and men with evidence of 
hypogonadism for hormone replacement therapy 
 Antiresorptive agents, such as bisphosphonates, are the 
treatment of choice when osteoporosis diagnosed or 
long - term steroids predicted  

206 
Liver transplantation
 Table 30.3   Postorthotic liver transplantation (OLT) cancer complications. 
 Cancer type  
  Association with OLT  
  Recommended surveillance  
 Non - melanoma skin cancer  
  20 - fold higher risk than population 
 Most common malignancy in adult OLT 
recipients 
 Squamous cell carcinomas outnumber 
basal cell carcinomas  
 Routine examinations by a 
dermatologist if: 
 •  Sun - damaged skin  
 •  Previous history of skin neoplasms  
 •  Countries with high ultraviolet light 
exposure  
 Colon cancer  
  
  Colonoscopic surveillance for all OLT 
recipients 
 Interval of examination individualised: 
 •  5 - year examinations if no previous 
history of colonic neoplasia  
 •  More frequent examinations for 
higher - risk patients with previous 
polyps  
 •  Ulcerative colitis transplanted for 
primary sclerosing cholangitis: 
yearly surveillance  
 Carcinoma of the 
oropharynx and 
oesophagus  
 
  Consider routine upper endoscopy 
and oropharyngeal examination 
 Any new symptom should prompt 
thorough examination 
 Consider endoscopic surveillance of 
patients with Barrett ’ s oesophagus  
 Lung cancer  
  Particularly increased in alcoholic liver 
disease (probably related to high rate 
of smoking)  
 Consider for screening chest 
imaging, such as with low -
 radiation dose chest CT scanning  
 Post - transplant 
lymphoproliferative disease  
 30 − 50 times risk in general population 
 Usually driven by Epstein − Barr virus  
 
 Recurrence and progression 
of malignant and 
premalignant conditions 
after OLT  
 Varies greatly with tumour type: 
 •  Gynaecological and testicular cancers 
seldom recur after OLT ( < 10%)  
 •  Prostate, colon and lymphomas recur 
in 10 − 20%  
 •  Breast, bladder and skin carcinoma 
recur in 20 − 50%  
 Dependent on individual cancer  
and alcohol abuse, and chronic immunosuppres-
sion, although neither the degree of immunosup-
pression nor the speciﬁ c immunosuppressive 
regimen after OLT has been associated with an 
increased risk of cancer (Table  30.3 ). 
 Strategies to  m aximise 
 d onor  p ool 
 The number of donor livers available each year is 
far fewer than the number of patients listed for 
liver transplant. This results in signiﬁ cant morbid-
ity and mortality in patients listed and awaiting 
transplantation. Novel surgical techniques under 
development to maximise donor organ access 
include split cadaveric liver and living donor 
transplantation. 
 
  

 Dysphagia  
 Duration (months  =  malignancy)  
 Progressive (malignancy or benign stricture) or  intermittent  (other causes)  
 Worse with liquids (functional, dysmotility),  solids  (benign or malignant stricture, 
webs), or  both (dysmotility, neurological cause)  
 Timing in relation to swallow (instant  =    pharyngeal or neuromuscular causes, or few 
seconds later)  
 Nasal aspiration (pharyngeal or neuromuscular causes)  
 Cough (nocturnal  =  dysmotility; instantly after swallowing    =  pharyngeal or 
neuromuscular causes)  
 Weight loss (malignancy  >>  benign stricture, dysmotility)  
 Associated features (e.g. systemic sclerosis, neurological disorders, past history of 
reﬂ ux suggesting benign stricture)  
 Abdominal 
pain  
 Onset (sudden  =  vascular/infection/obstruction; gradual  =  inﬂ ammatory/neoplastic/
functional)  
 Frequency/duration (intermittent  vs . constant)  
 Location, radiation or referral  (visceral poorly localised/somatic well localised, 
radiation and referral pattern may deﬁ ne organ involved)  
 Character and nature (may deﬁ ne organ involved)  
 Exacerbating and relieving features  (association with food    −  timing/type of food, 
relief with passage of ﬂ atus  =    rectal sensitivity, effect of different medicines, stress)  
 Associated symptoms  (bowel habit, vomiting, abdominal distension, haematuria, 
haematochezia, haematemesis, malaena, weight loss, fevers)  
 GI bleed  
 Haematemesis (cause proximal to jejunum)  
 Melaena (cause usually proximal to left colon)  
 Visibly red blood loss (distal colon)  
 On tissue only (anal disease)  
 Associated mucus (IBD, colorectal cancer, villous adenoma, solitary rectal ulcer 
syndrome)  
 Abdominal pain (see above)  
 Signs of chronic liver disease (varices)  
 Signs of circulatory compromise (varices)  
 Fever, sweating (Crohn ’ s disease, intra - abdominal TB, infectious gastroenteritis)  
 Drug history (especially NSAIDs, anticoagulants, alcohol, smoking)  
 Weight loss (malignancy)  
 Gastrointestinal  h istory 
 c heck -  l ist  
Lecture Notes: Gastroenterology and Hepatology, 1st edition. 
Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. 
© 2011 Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

208 
Study aids and revision
 Diarrhoea  
 Watery (secretory small intestinal causes  –  infectious or neoplastic  –  or microscopic 
colitis),  steatorrhoea - like (pancreatic or small intestinal disease) or  other  
 Nocturnal diarrhoea (organic cause) or  daytime only (IBS)  
 Weight loss (malignancy  >  IBD, malabsorption, hyperthyroidism)  
 Relationship to pain (eased by bowel opening    =    diverticular disease, IBD stricture or 
IBS; unrelated    =  ischaemic colitis, drug - induced, hypolactasia)  
 Family history (IBD, coeliac disease, colorectal cancer)  
 Drug history (especially antibiotics, iron, NSAIDs, PPIs)  
 Recent travel (infectious diarrhoea)  
 Past history (surgical, radiation, systemic disease)  
 Incontinence (complication of diarrhoea)  
 Constipation  
 Urge frequency (daily  =  normal transit; less than daily    =  slow transit)  
 Bowel frequency (to conﬁ rm constipation)  
 Stool consistency (to conﬁ rm constipation)  
 Rectal evacuation difﬁ culty (need to strain, incomplete emptying, perineal or anal 
digitation  – all suggest pelvic ﬂ oor dysfunction)  
 Rectal prolapse (a cause and exacerbator of constipation)  
 Diet (encourage more ﬁ bre in normal transit, avoid excess in slow transit)  
 Drug history (especially anticholinergics, iron, opiates; eating behaviour)  
 Past history (eating disorder, abdominal surgery (adhesions), pelvic or anal surgery 
(local pain causing constipation) neurological disorders, hypothyroidism, 
hypercalcaemia)  
 Jaundice  
 Prehepatic (haemolytic; unconjugated hyperbilirubinaemia, normal urine, normal 
stool; reduced serum haptoglobin, features of haemolysis on blood ﬁ lm)  
 Hepatic (unconjugated or mixed hyperbilirubinaemia; dark urine, normal stool; acute 
or chronic liver disease, Gilbert ’ s, neonatal jaundice)  
 Posthepatic  (obstructive/cholestatic; conjugated hyperbilirubinaemia; dark urine, pale 
stool, severe itch; extrahepatic [cholelithiasis, head of pancreas mass]  vs . intrahepatic 
biliary disease [sclerosing cholangitis, primary biliary cirrhosis])  

 1.  Approach the patient ’ s right - hand side and 
introduce yourself  
 2.     Ensure patient is in a good position  –  lying 
comfortably on one pillow, with the abdomen 
exposed  
 3.  General inspection (should take  < 60  s if exam-
iner does not stop you):  
       Look around the bed (drip stands, diet sheets)  
   Survey the patient (scratch marks, gynaeco-
mastia, reduced body hair)  
   Hands: 
 –  Clubbing (Crohn ’ s disease, cirrhosis) 
   –      Dupuytren ’ s contracture (alcoholic liver 
disease)  
 –  Palmar erythema (cirrhosis) 
 –  Leuconychia (cirrhosis, Crohn ’ s disease) 
 –  Liver ﬂ ap (examiner may stop you, but you 
should offer to examine for this)  
  Ask patient to extend elbows and cock 
wrists back towards the face  
 Then ask patient to fan ﬁ ngers out gently 
  You are looking for a bird ’ s wing ﬂ ap at the 
wrist 
   Eyes: 
 –  Anaemia  – expose lower eyelid 
 –  Jaundice  – look at conjunctiva 
   Lips: 
 –  Cyanosis (liver disease) 
 –  Parotid swelling (alcoholic liver disease) 
   –      Pigmentation (Peutz – Jegher ’ s)  
   –      Telangiectasia (hereditary haemorrhagic 
telangiectasia)  
 –  Ulcers (Crohn ’ s disease) 
 Abdominal  e xamination 
 r outine  
   Anterior chest wall: 
 –  Cervical lymphadenopathy (lymphoma, 
gastric cancer Virchow ’ s node) 
 –  Palpate for gynaecomastia 
 4.  Inspect abdomen (should take  < 15  s, if exam-
iner does not stop you): 
   Prominent abdominal vessels 
   Scars (do not forget nephrectomy scars 
posteriorly!)  
       Stoma (an ileostomy is generally in the left 
iliac fossa and smaller than a colostomy 
which is often  –  but not always  –  on the right 
side)  
   Distension: 
 –  Generalised (ascites) 
 –  Localised (upper abdo, periumbilical, 
suprapubic, ﬂ anks, iliac fossae) 
   Pulsation 
 5.  Palpate abdomen: 
   Enquire about areas of pain 
   Assess direction of ﬂ ow (best assessed in 
veins  below umbilicus): 
 –  Cranially in inferior vena cava 
 –  Away from the umbilicus in portal 
hypertension 
   Superﬁ cial palpation in a systematic fashion 
(traditionally in an anticlockwise spiral from 
the 
right 
iliac 
fossa, 
ending 
in 
the 
umbilicus): 
 –  Use pulps  – not tips  – of ﬁ ngers 
   Internal organ palpation: 
 –  Begin at the right iliac fossa again: 
  Liver: work upwards to right upper 
quadrant 
  Spleen: work diagonally to left upper 
quadrant 
 –  Next to left and right ﬂ ank for the kidneys, 
by bimanual palpation: 
Lecture Notes: Gastroenterology and Hepatology, 1st edition. 
Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. 
© 2011 Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

210 
Study Aids and Revision
  Right hand under patient and left hand on 
top for left kidney; left hand under patient 
and right hand on top for right kidney  
  Keep upper hand still and ﬁ rmly pressed 
down, whilst lower hand  ‘ ballotts ’ the 
kidney 
   If any organs are felt: 
 –  Ask patient to take a deep breath in to 
assess for movement with respiration  
 –  Assess edge of the mass  – contour, texture 
 –  Assess if you can  ‘ get above ’ the mass 
(kidney)  
 –  Assess if it is separate to the costal margin 
(kidney) 
       Offer to assess for inguinal lymph nodes and 
hernia oriﬁ ces 
 6.  Percuss abdomen  – the principle of percussion 
is to move from resonant to dull: 
       Percuss down from lower right chest until 
upper border of liver dullness is reached, 
then repeat from lower abdomen upwards  
   Repeat the process for the spleen 
   Shifting dullness: 
 –  First check for stony dullness in ﬂ anks  – if 
absent (rare), there is gross ascites and no 
need to continue; alternatively  
 –  Start percussing in the midline and gradu-
ally move laterally to patient ’ s left until the 
note becomes stony dull; now ask patient 
to roll on to their right (facing you) and 
allow 15   s for the ﬂ uid to settle before per-
cussing back towards the midline and lis-
tening to the note of the dullness that has 
shifted 
 7.  Auscultate abdomen: 
     Offer to listen to: 
 –  Bowel sounds 
 –  Liver venous hum (acute hepatitis) 
 –  Renal artery bruit 
 8.  Complete examination: 
     Offer to: 
 –  Examine external genitalia 
 –  Undertake a rectal examination 
 –  Stool 

 1.     Try to put patient at ease, and explain the 
procedure 
 2.     Place patient in left lateral position (underwear 
off or at knees), with a drape over them  
 3.  Part the buttocks and inspect for:  
   Excoriation 
   External haemorrhoids 
   Anal ﬁ ssure 
   Skin tags 
   Fistulous openings 
   Anal warts 
 Rectal  e xamination 
 r outine  
 4.  Insert a well lubricated ﬁ nger into the anus, 
taking note of: 
       Anal tone at rest and on voluntary squeeze  
   Any rectal mass (polyp, cancer, stool) 
   Prostate size and texture in men 
 5.  Withdraw ﬁ nger and observe the nature of 
material on the glove  
 6.     Clean the anus, and offer the patient tissues 
and privacy to dress 
Lecture Notes: Gastroenterology and Hepatology, 1st edition. 
Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. 
© 2011 Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

 It is essential to look for features of other diseases, to help identify causes. 
 Hepatomegaly  
 Common causes: 
 •  Cirrhosis 
 •  Right heart failure 
 •  Lymphoma 
   •      Myeloproliferative disorder (i.e. polycythaemia rubra vera, chronic myeloid 
leukaemia, myeloﬁ brosis) 
 •  Malignancy (irregular edge to liver) 
 Hepatosplenomegaly   If also anaemic, diagnosis may be: 
 •  Cirrhosis with portal hypertension 
 •  Lymphoma 
 •  Myeloproliferative disorder 
 •  Tropical disorders (malaria, kala - azar) 
 If lymphadenoapthy present, diagnosis may be: 
 •  Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia 
 •  Lymphoma 
 Splenomegaly  
 Massive  – most commonly: 
 •  Myeloproliferative disorder; moderately enlarged  – as above 
 •  Cirrhosis with portal hypertension 
   •      Lymphoma; slightly enlarged  –  as above  
 •  Infections  – infectious mononucleosis, infectious hepatitis, bacterial 
endocarditis 
 Enlarged kidney(s)   
  Bilateral: 
 •  Polycystic kidney disease 
 •  Amyloidosis 
 •  Bilateral hydronephrosis 
 Unilateral 
 •  Hydronephrosis 
 •  Renal carcinoma 
 Isolated ascites   
  Usually with features of chronic liver disease or hepatomegaly, but may be 
isolated. Look for signs of paracentesis and of causes other than liver disease 
(heart failure, intra - abdominal malignancy, operative scars)  
 Chronic liver disease     Have a list of causes and complications of cirrhosis at your ﬁ ngertips  
 Common  OSCE   c ases  
Lecture Notes: Gastroenterology and Hepatology, 1st edition. 
Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. 
© 2011 Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

 1.  An 18 - year - old man with cystic ﬁ brosis has 
had colicky abdominal pain and the passage 
of pale loose stools for many months. He 
presents acutely with a major 
haematemesis. 
 a.  Give two possible causes of his 
diarrhoea.  
 b.  Give two possible causes of his 
abdominal pain.  
 c.  What is the most likely cause of his 
haematemesis? 
 2.  A 35 - year - old asymptomatic new blood 
donor is found to have the following blood 
results:
 Serum bilirubin 
 46  μ mol/l  
 Serum alkaline 
phosphatase  
 110  IU/l 
(normal 
range 
50 − 150)  
 Serum 
aspartate 
transaminase 
 40  IU/l 
(normal 
range 15 − 55) 
 a.  Give two possible causes for this. 
 b.  Can she give blood with these two 
causes? 
 3.  A 23 - year - old man who is HIV positive 
complains of severe retrosternal pain and 
dysphagia, and 2 weeks of bloodless 
diarrhoea. He has had weight loss of 5  kg in 
that time. 
 Self -  a ssessment  c ase 
 s tudies: Questions  
 a.  Give one viral and one non - viral cause of 
the chest pain.  
 b.  Give two causes of diarrhoea. 
 4.  A 66 - year - old retired secretary has been 
taking warfarin for 15 years (for recurrent 
DVTs). She presents with a symptomatic 
anaemia (Hb 0.89   g/l), microcytosis (MCV 
67  ﬂ , normal range 76 − 100  ﬂ ) and 
hypochromia (MCH 20   pg/cell, normal range 
26 − 34   pg/cell). She denied any abdominal 
pain, alteration of bowel habit, overt blood 
or weight loss. Examination revealed 
multiple telangiectasia on the lips and 
hands, but was otherwise entirely normal. 
 a.  What is the likeliest haematological 
explanation for her symptoms and what 
investigations would conﬁ rm this 
diagnosis?  
 b.  What investigations are mandatory to 
ﬁ nd the cause of your answer to (a)? 
 c.  What are the two likeliest possible causes 
of her anaemia that need excluding by 
your answer in (b)? 
 5.  An 83 - year - old woman presented with a 
3 - day history of worsening diarrhoea 
starting 5 days after discharge from hospital 
(she had been admitted for pneumonia). 
Her bowels were opening 10 − 15 times by 
day and night, passing watery stool without 
blood. On examination, she had a 
temperature of 37.8 °  C with a pulse of 96 
beats/min and a blood pressure of 
110/58   mmHg. Her chest was clear, and her 
abdomen was soft but diffusely tender. 
 a.  Give a differential diagnosis of three 
conditions. 
Lecture Notes: Gastroenterology and Hepatology, 1st edition. 
Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. 
© 2011 Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

214 
Self-assessment Case Studies
 a.  What does the ERCP demonstrate? 
 b.  At presentation what was the risk to this 
patient of complications related to her 
cholelithiasis and how does this compare 
to the risk of cholecystectomy?  
 c.  In consenting this patient for 
laparoscopic cholecystectomy, what risks 
should the surgeon have stated and what 
is the expected rate of conversion to 
open cholecystectomy?  
 d.  How should this patient now be treated? 
 Post cholecystectomy she is troubled by 
abdominal pain and has not passed ﬂ atus 
by day 3. Chest X - ray shows a small amount 
of free subdiaphragmatic gas on the right 
side. Abdominal X - ray shows multiple air 
ﬂ uid level in mildly dilated small bowel. CT 
of the abdomen demonstrates the above 
ﬁ ndings and also a focal ﬂ uid collection in 
the gallbladder fossa. ERCP is undertaken 
and the resultant cholangiogram is shown. 
 b.  What tests would conﬁ rm the likeliest 
diagnosis?  
 c.  Following resuscitation, what treatment 
should she be started on? 
 6.  A 59 - year - old woman presents with 
asymptomatic liver test abnormalities\; 
bilirubin 8, ALP 325, ALT 122, GGT 637, AST 
68. Her only medication is 150  mg Aspirin 
daily. There is no history of transfusions, 
tattoos, piercings or intravenous drug use. 
She takes no alcohol. There is no family 
history of liver disease. Her past medical 
history includes open cholecystectomy. 
 Examination reveals no stigmata of 
chronic liver disease and no abdominal 
masses or organomegaly. Serum 
biochemistry, FBC and viral serology are 
negative. However there is 
hypergammaglobulinaemia with an ANA 
titre  >  1:5120. SMA, AMA, LKM1 are negative. 
Liver biopsy shows interface hepatitis with 
abundant plasma cells. Treatment with 
prednisone 40  mg daily is initiated and over 
the subsequent 4 weeks the liver tests return 
to the normal range. 
 a.  What is the likeliest diagnosis? 
 b.  What drug might be used as a steroid -
 sparing agent? 
 c.  What drugs are implicated in the 
aetiology of this condition? 
 7.  A 60 - year - old woman presented with a 
1 - year history of intermittent dysphagia, 
which was gradually worsening. This was 
occurring for both solid and liquid meals, 
and it was taking her longer to manage her 
meals. She was often woken from sleep with 
paroxysms of coughing. She had lost 3  kg in 
weight. She was taking omeprazole for 
long - standing, well - controlled reﬂ ux. 
 a.  What is the likeliest diagnosis, and give a 
differential of two other possibilities?  
 b.  What investigation is required to conﬁ rm 
the diagnosis? 
 8.  A 41 - year - old woman underwent 
laparoscopic cholecystectomy that had to be 
converted to an open procedure because of 
difﬁ culty identifying the cystic duct. A 
percutaneous drain was left in the 
gallbladder fossa. 

 1.  Gastrointestinal sequelae of cystic ﬁ brosis 
 a.  This is steatorrhoea  – the possibilities are 
that it is due to pancreatic insufﬁ ciency 
secondary to chronic pancreatitis (one of 
the sequelae of cystic ﬁ brosis) or small 
bowel bacterial overgrowth (also one of 
the sequelae of cystic ﬁ brosis). 
 b.  The abdominal pain may be secondary 
to chronic pancreatitis or gallstones  –  
both of which are more common in 
cystic ﬁ brosis. In addition, incompletely 
digested food may lead to bolus small 
intestinal obstruction.  
 c.  Oesophageal variceal bleeding  – 
secondary to the cirrhosis that 
complicates cystic ﬁ brosis  – would 
explain the haematemesis. 
 2.  Isolated elevated bilirubin in an 
asymptomatic patient 
 a.  Possible causes are Gilbert ’ s syndrome 
(likeliest) or asymptomatic carriage of 
hepatitis C.  
 b.  Blood donation is acceptable with the 
former, but not the latter. 
 3.  Causes of gastrointestinal infection in an 
HIV - positive patient 
 a.  Herpes simplex, cytomegalovirus, 
candida.  
 Self -  a ssessment  c ase 
 s tudies: Answers  
 b.  Cytomegalovirus, cryptosporidium, 
giardiasis and any cause of bacterial 
gastroenteritis is more common in AIDS 
patients. 
 4.  Microcytic hypochromic anaemia 
 a.  Likeliest cause is iron - deﬁ ciency 
anaemia, conﬁ rmed by serum iron 
studies (serum iron and iron - binding 
capacity). There is no history of chronic 
illness to raise the possibility of the 
 ‘ anaemia of chronic disease ’ . 
 b.  Upper GI endoscopy and colonoscopy. 
 c.  Colorectal cancer (often asymptomatic) 
and hereditary haemorrhagic 
telangiectasia (in view of the cutaneous 
and oral telangiectasia). 
 5.  Diarrhoea after antibiotics 
 a.  The differential includes  Clostridium 
difﬁ cile infection, antibiotic - induced 
diarrhoea, an unrelated coincidental 
condition (colorectal cancer, ulcerative 
colitis, infective gastroenteritis). 
 b.  Stool test for  Clostridium difﬁ cile toxins 
A and B is preferred to a ﬂ exible 
sigmoidoscopy. 
 c.  Start oral metronidazole or vancomycin. 
 6.  Autoimmune hepatitis 
 a.  The diagnostic scoring system for AIH 
includes scores for gender, ALP:AST ratio, 
IgG, ANA, viral markers, drugs, alcohol, 
concurrent immune disease, histological 
features, HLA status and treatment 
response. 
Lecture Notes: Gastroenterology and Hepatology, 1st edition. 
Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. 
© 2011 Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

216 
Self-assessment Case Studies
 b.  Azathioprine is commonly used as a 
steroid - sparing agent in AIH.  
 c.  Oxyphenisatin, nitrofurantoin, 
minocycline, alpha - methyldopa and 
clometacine have been implicated. 
 7.  Intermittent dysphagia with moderate 
weight loss 
 a.  Achalasia is the most likely diagnosis. 
With dysphagia to both liquids and 
solids, over such a long time, the 
possibility of carcinoma of the 
oesophagus and benign oesophageal 
stricture are less likely.  
 b.  The diagnostic investigation of choice is 
oesophageal manometry, not barium 
swallow or upper GI endoscopy (which 
are important to exclude the differential). 
 8.  Iatrogenic biliary leak 
 a.  The ERCP demonstrates leakage of 
contrast from the cystic duct stump. This 
is the cause of the local ﬂ uid collection 
in the gallbladder fossa.  
 b.  The risk of complications in a patient 
with typical colicky pain and gallstones is 
about 1 − 2%, as compared to 0.1 − 0.2% in 
asymptomatic patients. Open 
cholecystectomy is safe and effective 
with an overall mortality of 0.1 − 0.5%. 
 c.  Patients undergoing laparoscopic 
cholecystectomy should be consented 
for the risks of anaesthesia as well as 
speciﬁ c risks of the procedure, including 
bleeding, need for further intervention 
to remove stones outside the gallbladder, 
damage to the bile ducts, infection 
and abscess formation, problems with 
wound healing, the possibility of 
persistent biliary - type pain, and the 
need to convert to open 
cholecystectomy. The frequency of this is 
widely quoted as 5%.  
 d.  This patient should now have 
endoscopic sphincterotomy and/or 
biliary stent placement to ensure 
adequate bile drainage via the ampulla. 
She may then be managed conservatively 
with antibiotics and analgesia. If an 
abscess forms, it will require 
radiologically guided or surgical 
drainage. 

Lecture Notes: Gastroenterology and Hepatology, 1st edition. 
Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. 
© 2011 Anton Emmanuel and Stephen Inns. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
Index
Page numbers in italics indicate tables, boxes or illustrations that are not on the same page as the relevant text.
causing liver disease 170
cholangitis 125
GI infections 42, 43, 44, 45, 56, 213–214, 215
SBP 131–132
anticoagulants 177–178, 179
antidiarrhoeal agents 25, 42, 56
antiemetic agents 19
antispasmodic agents 3
antiviral agents 45
aorto-enteric ﬁ stula 53
aphthous ulcers 73
appendicitis 2
arterial disease see ischaemia 
5-ASA compounds (5-aminosalicylic acid) 98
ascites 14, 130–131, 175, 180, 212
autoimmune hepatitis 14–15, 142, 182–183, 214, 
215–216
autoimmune polyglandular syndromes (APS) 147, 151
azathioprine 202
barium swallow/meal/enema 46–47
Barrett’s oesophagus 77
bicarbonate 116
bile 121
bile acid malabsorption 49, 90
biliary anatomy and embryology 120–121
biliary disorders 120–128
acalculous pain 126–127
atresia 156
cholangiocarcinoma 128, 195
cholecystitis 125–126
cholelithiasis 67, 71, 122–124
infections 121–122, 124–125
PBC 127–128, 183
see also cholestasis 
bilirubin 129, 147
hyperbilirubinaemia 146–147, 148–150, 213, 215
biofeedback 22, 113
biopsy, liver 15, 140, 171, 177, 183, 185, 191
body mass index (BMI) 26
bone marrow disease (BMD) 205
bowel disorders see colonic disorders; small intestinal 
disorders 
breastfeeding 99, 156
breath tests 40, 41, 49–50
Budd–Chiari syndrome (BCS) 173–176
caeruloplasmin 142–143
CAGE questionnaire 189
abdominal examination 209–210
abdominal pain 1–10, 207
in biliary disorders 123, 126–127
in intestinal obstruction 56
ischaemic 101
in pancreatitis 69, 117, 118
acetaminophen (paracetamol) 63, 171–172
achalasia 50, 78–79, 214, 216
acidosis 63
acute abdomen 7–10, 56, 67–72, 101
acute fatty liver of pregnancy (AFLP) 198
acute liver failure (ALF) 61–66, 201
adenocarcinoma 80, 85, 92, 104–107, 118–119
adenoma 103, 192
Alagille’s syndrome 145–146
albumin 91, 131, 137–138
alcoholic liver disease (ALD) 187–190
ALF (acute liver failure) 61–66, 201
allergic reactions 
to drugs 169–170
to food 93
see also coeliac disease 
alpha-1-antitrypsin deﬁ ciency 143–145
amoebiasis 44
Amsterdam criteria (HNPCC diagnosis) 104
amylase 70, 116
anaemia, iron-deﬁ ciency 27–28, 213, 215
anal disorders 
bleeding 53–54
ﬁ ssure 110–111
ﬁ stula 111
haemorrhoids 110, 111
incontinence 25–26, 102
infections 45
pain 111–112
perianal Crohn’s disease 95, 98
tumours 112
analgesia 3, 7, 71, 118, 119
angiography, mesenteric 47
angioplasty, hepatic vein 176
anorectal physiology tests 22, 51
antibiotics 
acute pancreatitis 71–72
ALF 65

218 
Index
calorie replacement 30
calprotectin 50
Campylobacter 42
cancer see tumours 
candidiasis 39, 40
carcinoid tumours 91–92
cardiac cirrhosis 179–180
Carnett’s sign 5
Caroli’s disease 193
catheters, complications of use 33
Charcot’s triad 124
chest pain 55–56, 79
Child–Turcotte–Pugh scores 16, 200
Chlamydia 45
cholangiocarcinoma 128, 195
cholangitis 
acute 124–125
primary sclerosing 127
cholecystectomy 123, 124, 126, 214, 216
cholecystitis 125–126
cholelithiasis 67, 71, 122–124
cholestasis 127–128
drug-induced 170–171
neonatal 145–146, 156
obstetric 198–199
parenteral nutrition and 33
ciclosporin 202
cirrhosis 
alcoholic 187, 189, 190
cardiac 179–180
following HBV infection 160
PBC 127–128, 183
referral for liver transplantation 200
clinical examination see examination techniques 
CLO (urea breath) test 40, 41, 50
Clostridium difﬁ cile 43, 215
coagulopathy 62, 65
codeine 25
coeliac disease 15, 88–89
collagenous colitis 99
colonic disorders 6, 103–109
bleeding 53–54
constipation and 20–21, 100–101
diverticular disease 107–108
IBD 6–7, 94–99
IBS 2, 6, 100
ischaemia 101
megacolon 42, 96, 97, 108–109
microscopic colitis 99
obstruction 57, 59
pneumatosis cystoides intestinalis 109
pseudo-obstruction 109
radiation enterocolitis 101–102
tumours 59, 96, 103–107, 206
colonoscopy 48, 97, 105
congestive hepatopathy 179–180
constipation 19–22, 100–101, 208
contrast studies 46–47
copper metabolism (Wilson’s disease) 64, 141–143
corrosives, ingestion of 78
corticosteroids 183, 202
Cowden’s disease 104
Crigler-Najjar syndromes I and II 148
Crohn’s disease 6–7, 59, 94–95, 97–98, 99
extraintestinal signs 73, 96
Cronkhite-Canada syndrome 104
Cryptosporidium 43
CT (computed tomography) 10, 47
Cullen’s sign 70
Cyclospora 43
cystadenocarcinoma 119
cystic duct 120
cystic ﬁ brosis 117, 213, 215
cysts 
colonic 109
hepatic 193
cytomegalovirus (CMV) 45
defaecation disorder 21, 100–101
deﬁ brotide 178
dental enamel erosion 74
diabetes mellitus 117, 118, 140, 204
diarrhoea 22–25, 102, 208, 213–214, 215
management 25, 42–43, 56
diet and nutrition 29–30
in constipation 22
in Crohn’s disease 99
in diverticular disease 108
intestinal failure 37–38, 87–88
nutritional support 30–37
pain and 2
in pancreatitis 71, 118
diverticular disease 107–108
drug-induced disease 
liver (DILI) 13, 169–172
oesophagus 78
pancreas 69
small bowel 93
Dubin–Johnson syndrome 150
Dukes’ staging (colorectal cancer) 106
duodenal obstruction 58
duodenal ulcers 53, 83–84
dyspepsia, functional 100
dysphagia 17, 55, 207, 214, 216
echocardiography 137
electrolytes 
in ALF/renal failure 63, 65
in refeeding syndrome 35–36
replacement 32
embryology 
biliary 120, 121
hepatic 173
pancreatic 68, 114–115
emergencies 
acute abdominal pain 7–10

Index 219
acute pancreatitis 67–72
gastrointestinal 55–60, 101
encephalopathy, hepatic 13, 61–62, 63, 65, 133–135, 136
endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography 
(ERCP) 68, 71, 118, 125
endoscopy 24, 47–48, 52, 97
Entamoeba histolytica 44
enteral nutrition 32, 33–34, 71
enteritis 
infectious 4, 40–43, 140
radiation 101–102
eosinophilic oesophagitis 80–81
epigastric pain syndrome 100
Epstein–Barr virus (EBV) 166–168
Escherichia coli 42
examination techniques 209–211
for abdominal pain 4–5, 8–10
for liver disease 13–14
facial signs of disease 4, 146
familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) 103–104
fat malabsorption 49–50, 87
fatty liver disease 
AFLP 198
alcoholic 187, 188
non-alcoholic 184–186
ﬁ bre, dietary 22, 32, 108
ﬁ brolamellar carcinoma 195
ﬂ uid balance 22, 32, 56
focal nodular hyperplasia 192
food allergy/intolerance 49, 88–89, 93
foreign bodies, swallowed 60
functional disorders 
biliary 126–127
GI 99–101
fundoplication 77–78
gallbladder 120, 121, 214, 216
cholecystitis 125–126
cholelithiasis 67, 71, 122–124
Gardner syndrome 74, 104
gastric disorders 
functional dyspepsia 100
gastritis 39–40, 50, 82, 83
gastroparesis 51, 58, 75, 85
hiatus hernia 75, 76, 78
Menetrier’s disease 82
obstruction 58, 84
tumours 58, 85–86
ulcers 53, 82–83, 84, 85
gastroenteritis 4, 40–43, 140
gastrointestinal bleeding 81, 108, 207
acute 52–54, 132–133, 179
gastrointestinal emergencies 55–60
gastrointestinal stromal tumours 79–80, 86
gastro-oesophageal reﬂ ux (GOR) 51, 75–78
Giardia 43
Gilbert’s syndrome 149
Glasgow Coma Scale 13
globus 17
glucose hydrogen breath test 49
glucose metabolism 29, 33, 34, 63, 65
gluten intolerance (coeliac disease) 15, 88–89
glycogen storage diseases 152–156
GOR (gastro-oesophageal reﬂ ux) 51, 75–78
Grey-Turner’s sign 70
guarding 10
gut hormones 49
gut transit times 20, 21, 51, 100
haemangioma 192
haematemesis 52–53, 81
haematopoietic stem cell transplantation 177
haemochromatosis 139–141
haemorrhage see gastrointestinal bleeding 
haemorrhoids 110, 111
hamartoma 104
hands, signs of disease 4, 209
HCC (hepatocellular carcinoma) 141, 160, 194, 196
heart failure 179–180
heartburn, functional 100
Helicobacter pylori 39–40, 50, 82, 83, 86
Heller’s myotomy 79
HELLP syndrome 197–198
hepatic artery 173
hepatic duct 120, 156
hepatic encephalopathy 13, 61–62, 63, 65, 133–135, 136
hepatic failure, acute 61–66, 201
hepatic vein 173–180
hepatitis, alcoholic 187, 188–189
hepatitis, autoimmune 14–15, 142, 182–183, 214, 
215–216
hepatitis, ischaemic/hypoxic 180–181
hepatitis, viral 157–168
EBV 166–168
HAV 64, 157–159
HBV 4, 64, 158, 159–162
HCV 4, 64, 158, 162–165
HDV 158, 162
HEV 64, 158, 165–166
hepatoblastoma 195
hepatocellular adenoma 192
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) 141, 160, 194, 196
hepatomegaly 15, 212
hepatopulmonary syndrome 65, 137–138
hepatorenal syndrome 62–63, 65, 135–137
hepatosplenomegaly 14, 212
hepatotoxicity of drugs 13, 169–172
hereditary haemochromatosis 139–141
hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia 74
hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer 104
hernia, strangulated 56
herpes simplex virus 40
hiatus hernia 75, 76, 78
Hirschsprung’s disease 108
history taking 207–208

220 
Index
abdominal pain 1–3, 7–8
liver disease 11–13
HIV/AIDS 45, 163, 213, 215
hydatid cysts 193
hyperbilirubinaemia 
asymptomatic 213, 215
hereditary 146–147, 148–150
see also jaundice 
hyperemesis gravidarum 199
hyperglycaemia 33
hyperlipidaemia 204
hypertension 
portal vein 129–130, 132, 174
posttransplant 203
hypoglycaemia 63, 65
hypokalaemia 36, 63
hypomagnesaemia 36
hypophosphataemia 35
hypotension 65
hypoxic hepatitis 180–181
IBD (inﬂ ammatory bowel disease) 6–7, 59, 73–74, 94–99
IBS (irritable bowel syndrome) 2, 6, 100
ileum 
Crohn’s disease 95, 97–98, 98
obstruction 58–59
ileus 57, 60
imaging 10, 15, 17, 21, 22, 24, 46–49
immunisation 158–159, 161
immunoproliferative small intestinal disease 92
immunosuppression 
autoimmune hepatitis 183
infections associated with 45, 61, 213, 215
liver transplantation 201–202
incontinence, faecal 25–26, 102
infections 
in acute pancreatitis 69, 71–72
in ALF 61, 65
biliary 121–122, 124–125
gastrointestinal 4, 39–45, 56, 140, 213, 215
SBP 131–132
see also hepatitis, viral 
infectious mononucleosis (EBV) 166–168
inﬂ ammatory bowel disease (IBD) 6–7, 59, 73–74, 94–99
insulin 29
interferon-α (IFN-α) 161, 164, 165
intestinal disorders see colonic disorders; small 
intestinal disorders 
intracranial pressure (ICP), raised 61–62, 65
intussusception 60
iron overload (haemochromatosis) 139–141
iron-deﬁ ciency anaemia 27–28, 213, 215
irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) 2, 6, 100
ischaemia 
gut 101
hepatic 179, 180–181
jaundice 11, 129, 130, 208
neonatal 146–147, 148–150
jejunum, obstruction 58–59
juvenile polyposis 104
kidney disorders 
enlargement 212
hepatorenal syndrome 62–63, 65, 135–137
after liver transplantation 203
lactase deﬁ ciency 49, 93
lactation 99, 156
laxatives 22
levator ani syndrome 112
lifestyle 
GOR and 75, 77
liver disease and 13, 186
lipases 116, 118
lipid metabolism 29, 204
Listeria monocytogenes 43
liver anatomy and embryology 173
liver disease 11–16, 212
acute liver failure 61–66, 201
alcoholic 187–190
ascites 14, 130–131, 175, 180, 212
autoimmune 14–15, 142, 182–183, 214, 215–216
drug-induced 13, 169–172
hepatic encephalopathy 13, 61–62, 63, 65, 133–135, 
136
hepatopulmonary syndrome 65, 137–138
hepatorenal syndrome 62–63, 65, 135–137
hereditary 139–156, 193
jaundice 11, 129, 130, 146–147, 148–150, 208
NAFLD 184–186
PBC 127–128, 183
portal hypertension 129–130, 132, 174
pregnancy-related 197–199
SBP 131–132
tumours 141, 160, 191–196
varices 132–133, 134, 179
vascular conditions 173–181
viral hepatitis 4, 64, 157–168
liver transplantation 200–206
assessment for 16, 63, 200–201
as treatment for 66, 128, 136, 145, 156, 176, 190, 200
loperamide 25
lung disorders 
alpha-1-antitrypsin deﬁ ciency 143, 145
cancer 206
in liver disease 65, 137–138
lymphocytic colitis 99
lymphoma 
small intestine 92
stomach 86
macroaggregated albumin scan 137–138
magnesium, low 36
malabsorption syndromes 49–50, 87, 88, 117
intestinal failure 37–38, 87–88
see also iron-deﬁ ciency anaemia 

Index 221
Mallory–Weiss tears 53, 81
malnutrition 30, 34
MALT lymphoma 86
manometry, oesophageal 50–51, 79
Meckel’s diverticulum 48, 59, 93
megacolon 108–109
toxic 42, 96, 97
melaena 52–53
MELD (Model for End-Stage Liver Disease) score 16, 
200
Menetrier’s disease 82
metastatic liver cancer 194, 196
mouth 39, 73–74, 209
MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) 47
mucosal inﬂ ammation tests 50
Murphy’s sign 123
musculoskeletal signs of disease 4
mycophenolate mofetil 202
N-acetylcysteine (NAC) 172
NAFLD Fibrosis Score 186
nasogastric feeding 32, 34
nausea 17–19, 199
neonatal cholestasis 145–146, 156
neonatal hepatitis syndrome 144
neonatal jaundice 146–147, 148–150
neurological disorders 142, 152
see also encephalopathy, hepatic 
non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) 184–186
non-steroidal anti-inﬂ ammatory drugs (NSAIDs) 82, 93
‘nutcracker’ oesophagus 79
‘nutmeg’ liver 179
nutrition see diet and nutrition 
obstetric cholestasis (OC) 198–199
odynophagia 17
oesophageal disorders 18, 75–81
infections 40
Mallory–Weiss tears 53, 81
motility disorders 50–51, 78–79, 214, 216
obstruction 55, 58
oesophagitis 76, 78, 80–81
reﬂ ux (GOR) 51, 75–78
rings/webs 81
rupture 55–56
tumours 77, 79–80, 206
varices 132–133, 134, 179
Ogilvie’s syndrome 109
opiates 7, 25, 71, 119
oral cavity 39, 73–74, 209
oral nutritional supplements (ONS) 33
OSCE cases 212
osteoporosis 99
paediatric disorders 
alpha-1-antitrypsin deﬁ ciency 144
APS I 151
cholestasis 145–146, 156
Crohn’s disease 99
glycogen storage diseases 152–156
hyperbilirubinaemia 146–147, 148–150
liver cancer 195
pain 
abdominal see abdominal pain 
anal 111–112
chest 55–56, 79
palpation of the abdomen 5, 10, 209–210
pancreas 114–119
acute pancreatitis 67–72
anatomy and embryology 68, 114–115
chronic pancreatitis 116–118
haemochromatosis and 140
physiology 116
tumours 58, 85, 118–119
paracentesis 131, 180
paracetamol 63, 171–172
parasitic worms 44–45, 193
paratyphoid 44
parenteral nutrition (PN) 32–33, 32, 37–38
parotitis 39
PBC (primary biliary cirrhosis) 127–128, 183
penicillamine 143
peptic ulcers 53, 82–85
percussion of the abdomen 210
percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) 32, 34
peritonitis 5, 43, 131–132
Peutz-Jegher’s syndrome 74, 104
pharyngeal pouch 79
phosphate, low 35
pneumatosis cystoides intestinalis 109
polyps 
colonic 103–104
gastric 86
intestinal 92
porphyrias 140, 152
portal hypertension 129–130, 132, 174
portal vein anatomy 173
portal vein thrombosis 178–179
postprandial distress syndrome 100
potassium, low 36, 63
prednisone 183, 202
pregnancy 
IBD in 99
liver disease in 197–199
primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) 127–128, 183
primary sclerosing cholangitis 127
proctalgia fugax 112
proctitis 95–96, 98
proteases 116
protein replacement 32
protein-losing enteropathy 91
proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) 77
pruritus ani 112
pseudocysts 69
pseudo-obstruction 
colon 109

222 
Index
small intestine 92–93
psychological therapy 22, 100
pulmonary disorders see lung disorders 
pyloric stenosis 58, 84
radiation enterocolitis 101–102
radioisotope studies 48–49, 51
radiology 17, 21, 24, 46–47, 51, 57
Ranson’s criteria (acute pancreatitis) 70
rectum 
examination of 211
foreign bodies in 60
IBD 95–96, 98
megarectum 108–109
prolapse 112–113
recto-sigmoid radiation enteritis 102
tumours 59, 103–107
ulcers 113
refeeding syndrome 33, 34–37
referred pain 2, 5
regurgitation 17
renal disorders 
enlarged kidneys 212
in liver disease 62–63, 65, 135–137
after liver transplantation 203
Rockall score (GI bleeding) 53
Rotor syndrome 150
Salmonella spp. 42, 44
SBP (spontaneous bacterial peritonitis) 131–132
Sengstaken tubes 133
serological tests 
autoimmune diseases 14–15, 182–183
H. pylori 41
viral hepatitis 64, 157–158, 160, 162, 163, 164, 166, 
167
sexually-transmitted diseases 45
Shigella 42
short bowel syndrome 37, 87–88
sigmoidoscopy 24, 48, 97
skin 
cancer 206
signs of disease 4
small intestinal disorders 6, 87–93
bacterial overgrowth 49, 90
bile acid malabsorption 49, 90
food allergies/intolerances 49, 88–89, 93
IBD 6–7, 94–99
intestinal failure 37–38, 87–88
ischaemia 101
malabsorption 87, 88
Meckel’s diverticulum 48, 59, 93
NSAID-associated 93
obstruction 56, 58–59
protein-losing enteropathy 91
pseudo-obstruction 92–93
radiation enteritis 101–102
tropical sprue 89
tuberculosis 43–44
tumours 91–92, 104
Whipple’s disease 90–91
sphincter of Oddi 68, 126, 127
splenomegaly 14, 179, 212
spontaneous bacterial peritonitis (SBP) 131–132
squamous cell carcinoma 73, 80, 206
starvation 34
steatorrhoea 11, 87, 118
steatosis/steatohepatitis 
AFLP 198
alcoholic 187, 188–189
non-alcoholic 184–186
stomach see entries at gastric; gastro- 
systemic inﬂ ammatory response syndrome 61, 68–69
systemic sclerosis 79
tacrolimus 202
tapeworms 44, 193
teeth, enamel erosion 74
thiamine deﬁ ciency 36
thrombolysis 176, 179
thrombosis 
hepatic vein 174
portal vein 178–179
TNM staging (colorectal cancer) 106
toxic megacolon 42, 96, 97
trace elements 31, 32
transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt 
(TIPS) 131, 136, 176
transplantation 
intestinal 38
liver see liver transplantation 
14C-triolein carbon dioxide breath test 49–50
tropical sprue 89
trypsin 116
tuberculosis, intestinal 43–44
tumours 
anal 112
cholangiocarcinoma 128, 195
colorectal 59, 96, 103–107, 206
complications of liver transplantation 206
gastric 58, 85–86
hepatic 141, 160, 191–196
oesophageal 77, 80, 206
oral 73
pancreatic 58, 85, 118–119
small intestinal 91–92, 104
typhoid 44
ulcerative colitis 94–95, 98–99, 99
clinical features 73, 95–96
ulcers 
oral 73, 74
peptic 53, 82–85
rectal 113
ultrasound 10, 15, 47, 48, 71, 125, 191
urea breath test 40, 41, 50

Index 223
ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA) 124, 128, 199
vaccination 158–159, 161
venesection, in haemochromatosis 141
veno-occlusive disease (VOD), hepatic 177–178
venous liver disease 173–180
video-capsule enteroscopy 48
villous atrophy 89
Vincent’s angina 39
vitamins 31, 32, 36, 87
volvulus 60, 75
vomiting 17–19
haematemesis 52–53, 81
hyperemesis gravidarum 199
warts, anal 45
weight loss 
pathological 26, 30
therapeutic 186
Whipple’s disease 90–91
Wilson’s disease 64, 141–143
worms 44–45, 193
X-rays 17, 21, 24, 46–47, 51, 57
14C-xylose carbon dioxide breath test 49
Yersinia 42–43, 140
Zieve’s syndrome 188
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome 85
[STORMRG]

