

Ophthalmology
Lecture Notes

 We dedicate this book to Chris Chew, 
co - contributor and our esteemed friend and 
colleague, who died in 2004. We valued his 
insightful contributions, and his company is 
missed. 

Ophthalmology
Lecture Notes
Bruce James
MA, DM, FRCS (Ed), FRCOphth
Consultant Ophthalmologist
Department of Ophthalmology
Stoke Mandeville Hospital
Buckinghamshire
Anthony Bron
BSc, FRCS, FRCOphth, FMedSci
Professor Emeritus
Nufﬁ eld Laboratory of Ophthalmology
University of Oxford
Oxford
Eleventh Edition
A John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Publication

This edition ﬁ rst published 2011 © 2011 by Bruce James and Anthony Bron
First published 1960 
Sixth edition 1980
Second edition 1965 
Seventh edition 1986
Third edition 1968 
Eighth edition 1997
Fourth edition 1971 
Ninth edition 2003
Fifth edition 1974 
Tenth edition 2007
Blackwell Publishing was acquired by John Wiley & Sons in February 2007. Blackwell’s 
publishing program has been merged with Wiley’s global Scientiﬁ c, Technical and Medical 
business to form Wiley-Blackwell.
Registered ofﬁ ce: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, 
PO19 8SQ, UK
Editorial ofﬁ ces: 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 2DQ, UK
 
The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK
 
111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030-5774, USA
For details of our global editorial ofﬁ ces, for customer services and for information about how 
to apply for permission to reuse the copyright material in this book please see our website at 
www.wiley.com/wiley-blackwell.
The right of the author to be identiﬁ ed as the author of this work has been asserted in 
accordance with the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, 
recording or otherwise, except as permitted by the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 
1988, without the prior permission of the publisher.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as 
trademarks. All brand names and product names used in this book are trade names, service 
marks, trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective owners. The publisher is not 
associated with any product or vendor mentioned in this book. This publication is designed 
to provide accurate and authoritative information in regard to the subject matter covered. It is 
sold on the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering professional 
services. If professional advice or other expert assistance is required, the services of a 
competent professional should be sought.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
James, Bruce, 1957-
  Lecture notes. Ophthalmology / Bruce James, Anthony Bron. – 11th ed.
   p. ; cm.
 Ophthalmology
 Includes bibliographical references and index.
 ISBN-13: 978-1-4443-3558-3 (pbk. : alk. paper)
 ISBN-10: 1-4443-3558-8 (pbk. : alk. paper)
 1. Ophthalmology–Outlines, syllabi, etc. I. Bron, Anthony J. II. Title. III. Title: 
Ophthalmology.
 [DNLM: 1. Eye Diseases–Handbooks. 2. Eye Diseases–Problems and Exercises. WW 39]
 RE50.T73 2011
 617.7–dc22
 
2011007516
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Set in 8.5/11 pt Utopia by Toppan Best-set Premedia Limited
1 2011

Contents
Preface to eleventh edition, vi
Preface to ﬁ rst edition, viii
Acknowledgements, ix
Abbreviations, x
1 Anatomy, 1
2 History, symptoms and examination, 22
3 Clinical optics, 58
4 The orbit, 66
5 The eyelids, 76
6 The lacrimal system, 88
7 Conjunctiva, cornea and sclera, 97
8 The lens and cataract, 118
9 Uveitis, 130
10 Glaucoma, 146
11 Retina and choroid, 166
12 Retinal vascular disease, 191
13 The pupil and its responses, 209
14 Disorders of the visual pathway, 216
15 Eye movements and their disorders, 232
16 Trauma, 255
17 Tropical ophthalmology: eye diseases in the developing world, 268
18 Services for the visually handicapped, 283
19 Clinical cases, 286
Self-assessment EMQs, 300
Useful references, 307
Answers to EMQs, 311
Appendix: Visual acuity equivalence table, 314
Index, 315
Companion website
This book has an accompanying website that contains all of the images in 
the book in Powerpoint format. It is available at:
www.wiley.com/go/james/ophthalmology

 Preface to 
 e leventh  e dition  
  Welcome to the 11 th  edition of  Ophthalmology Lecture Notes ! As in the past, our 
aim has been to make the diagnosis and management of eye disease a palatable 
process and once again we stress the value of a good history and careful clinical 
examination of the eye. 
 The eye is remarkably accessible. Optical and digital techniques give access 
to the structures of the eye at cellular level. Specular microscopy can image the 
corneal endothelial cells which regulate corneal hydration and transparency; 
digital ﬂ uorescein angiography allows the retinal capillary bed to be explored 
in ischaemic retinal disease; optical coherence tomography allows the layers of 
the retina to be dissected and confocal microscopy provides a three - dimen-
sional view of the optic nerve head. The shape of the cornea can be plotted 
digitally and, outside the globe, orbital structures and the visual pathway can 
be viewed by neuroimaging. 
 Therapeutically, lasers are used to relieve acute, angle closure glaucoma, to 
lower ocular pressure in chronic glaucoma, to open up an opaque lens capsule 
following cataract surgery and to seal retinal holes. Sight - threatening diabetic 
retinopathy can be treated effectively by retinal photocoagulation, to remove 
the angiogenic stimulus to vasoproliferation. More recently it has become pos-
sible to inhibit new vessel formation in diabetic retinopathy, macular degen-
eration and other retinal vascular disorders by intravitreal injections of 
anti - angiogenic drugs. 
 These techniques are matched by technological innovations in microsurgery, 
responsible for dramatic advances in cataract and vitreoretinal surgery. 
Cataracts are now removed by phacoemulsiﬁ cation, using an oscillating ultra-
sonic probe, and optical function is restored by insertion of a lens which 
unfolds within the eye. Vitreoretinal surgery employs inert gases to ﬂ atten the 
detached retina and endoscopic probes which allow manipulations in the vitre-
ous space and the dissection of microscopic membranes from the retinal 
surface. 
 Despite these advances, most ophthalmic diagnoses can still be made from 
a good history and clinical examination of the eye. This book aims to teach 
skills which will be useful to anyone engaged in medical practice. Many sys-
temic disorders have ocular features which are critical in diagnosis. This book 
covers the ophthalmic features of systemic hypertension, diabetes, sarcoidosis, 
endocarditis, demyelinating disease and space - occupying lesions of the brain. 
It also explains how to recognize iritis, distinguish various forms of retinopathy 
and understand the difference between papilloedema and papillitis. 

Preface to eleventh edition  vii
 As in the tenth edition, each chapter provides a set of learning objectives and 
a summary of key points, as well as bullet lists for emphasis. You can test your 
understanding with the multiple choice questions and picture quizzes at the 
end of each chapter. In this edition, we have updated all the chapters and added 
new extended matching questions (EMQs) to bring this small volume up to 
date. 
 Chapter 19 offers classical case histories, which will let you test your diag-
nostic skills. The ﬁ nal section of the book provides a list of further reading and 
the details of attractive websites which offer an expanded view of the speciality. 
Try some of these out. 
 We hope that you will have as much fun reading these Lecture Notes as we 
did putting them together. 
 Bruce James 
 Anthony Bron 

 Preface to  ﬁ  rst  e dition  
  This little guide does not presume to tell the medical student all that he needs 
to know about ophthalmology, for there are many larger books that do. But the 
medical curriculum becomes yearly more congested, while ophthalmology, 
still the  ‘ Cinderella ’  of medicine, is generally left until the last, and only too 
readily goes by default. So it is to these harassed ﬁ nal - year students that the 
book is principally offered, in the sincere hope that they will ﬁ nd it useful; for 
nearly all eye diseases are recognized quite simply by their appearance, and a 
guide to ophthalmology need be little more than a gallery of pictures, linked 
by lecture notes. 
 My second excuse for publishing these lecture notes is a desire I have always 
had to escape from the traditional textbook presentation of ophthalmology as 
a string of small isolated diseases, with long unfamiliar names, and a host of 
eponyms. To the nineteenth - century empiricist, it seemed proper to classify a 
long succession of ocular structures, all of which emerged as isolated brackets 
for yet another sub - catalogue of small and equally isolated diseases. Surely it 
is time now to try and harness these miscellaneous ailments, not in terms of 
their diverse morphology, but in simpler clinical patterns; not as the micro-
scopist lists them, but in the different ways that eye diseases present. For this, 
after all, is how the student will soon be meeting them. 
 I am well aware of the many inadequacies and omissions in this form of 
presentation, but if the belaboured student ﬁ nds these lecture notes at least 
more readable, and therefore more memorable, than the prolix and time - hon-
oured pattern, perhaps I will be justiﬁ ed. 
 Patrick Trevor - Roper 

 Acknowledgements  
  Numerous colleagues have provided valuable advice in their specialist areas, 
for which we are most grateful. The authors wish to thank Tom Meagher and 
Manoj Parulekar for providing additional pictures for the eleventh edition. We 
are particularly grateful to Professor Allen Foster at the London School of 
Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, who kindly provided the illustrations for the 
chapter on tropical ophthalmology. Asha Sharma kindly provided orthoptic 
advice. Thanks are due also to our editors and the staff at Wiley Blackwell for 
their encouragement, efﬁ ciency and patience during the production of this 
edition. We are also grateful to our copy - editor, Joanna Brocklesby, for her 
meticulous reading of the text. 
 Bruce James 
 Anthony Bron 

 Abbreviations  
 AIDS  
  acquired immunodefi ciency syndrome 
 AION  
  anterior ischaemic optic neuropathy 
 AMD  
  age - related macular degeneration 
 ARM 
  age - related maculopathy 
 CMV  
  cytomegalovirus 
 CNS  
  central nervous system 
 CRVO  
  central retinal vein occlusion  
 CSF 
  cerebrospinal fl uid 
 CT 
  computed tomography  
 DCR  
  dacryocystorhinostomy 
 ENT  
  ear, nose and throat  
 ERG 
  electroretinogram 
 ESR 
  erythrocyte sedimentation rate 
 GCA  
  giant cell arteritis 
 GI 
  gastrointestinal 
 GPC  
  giant papillary conjunctivitis 
 HAART   highly active anti - retroviral therapy  
 HIV  
  human immunodefi ciency virus 
 HLA 
  human leucocyte antigen 
 HSV  
  herpes simplex 
 ICG  
  indocyanine green angiography  
 INR 
  international normalized ratio 
 IOL 
  intraocular lens 
 KP 
  keratic precipitate 
 LASEK 
  laser - assisted subepithelial keratomileusis 
 LASIK 
  laser - assisted in situ keratomileusis  
 LGB 
  lateral geniculate body 
 MLF 
  medial longitudinal fasciculus 
 MRA 
  magnetic resonance angiogram 
 MRI 
  magnetic resonance imaging  
 NSAID  
  non - steroidal anti - infl ammatory drug 
 OCT  
  optical coherence tomogram 
 PAS 
  peripheral anterior synechiae  
 PEE  
  punctate epithelial erosions 

Abbreviations xi
 PHMB 
  polyhexamethylene biguanide 
 PMN  
  polymorphonuclear leucocyte 
 PPRF 
  parapontine reticular formation 
 PRK 
  photorefractive keratectomy 
 PS 
  posterior synechiae 
 PVR 
  proliferative vitreoretinopathy 
 RAPD 
  relative afferent pupil defect  
 RPE 
  retinal pigment epithelium 
 TB  
  tuberculosis 
 TNF 
  tumour necrosis factor 
 UV  
  ultraviolet 
 VA 
  visual acuity 
 VEGF  
  vascular endothelial growth factor 
 VKH  
  Vogt – Koyanagi – Harada disease  


 1 
Anatomy  
 
 Learning  o bjective 
 ✓      To learn the anatomy of the eye, the orbit and the 
third, fourth and sixth cranial nerves, to permit an 
understanding of medical conditions affecting these 
structures. 
 Introduction 
 A knowledge of ocular anatomy and function is important to the understanding 
of eye diseases. A brief outline is given below.  
 Gross  a natomy 
 The eye (Figure  1.1 ) comprises:
 •  A tough outer coat which is transparent anteriorly (the  cornea ) and opaque 
posteriorly (the  sclera ). The junction between them is called the  limbus . The 
extraocular muscles attach to the outer sclera while the optic nerve leaves 
the globe posteriorly. 
 •  A rich vascular coat (the  uvea ) forms the  choroid  posteriorly and the  ciliary 
body  and  iris  anteriorly. The choroid lines the retina, to which it is ﬁ rmly 
attached and nourishes its outer two - thirds.  
 •  The ciliary body contains the smooth  ciliary muscle , whose contraction 
allows the lens to take up a more curved shape which permits focusing for 
near objects. The ciliary epithelium secretes  aqueous humour and maintains 
the ocular pressure. The ciliary body provides attachment for the  iris , which 
forms the pupillary diaphragm.  
 •  The  lens  lies behind the iris, supported by the  zonular ﬁ brils , which run from 
the lens equator to the ciliary body. When the eye is focused for distance, 
tension in the zonule maintains a ﬂ attened proﬁ le of the lens. 
Ophthalmology Lecture Notes, Eleventh Edition. Bruce James, Anthony Bron. 
© 2011 Bruce James and Anthony Bron. Published 2011 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

2 
Anatomy
 •  The cornea anteriorly and the iris and central lens posteriorly form the  ante-
rior chamber , whose periphery is the  iridocorneal angle  or  drainage angle . 
The angle is lined by a meshwork of cells and collagen beams called the 
 trabecular meshwork , through which aqueous drains into  Schlemm ’ s canal 
and thence into the venous system via the  aqueous veins . This is the basis of 
aqueous drainage.  
   •      Between the iris, lens and ciliary body lies the  posterior chamber , a narrow 
space distinct from the  vitreous body . Both the anterior and posterior cham-
bers are ﬁ lled with aqueous humour. Between the lens and the retina lies the 
vitreous body, occupying most of the posterior segment of the eye.    
 Anteriorly, the  bulbar conjunctiva  of the globe is reﬂ ected from the sclera 
into the fornices and thence onto the posterior surface of the lids where it forms 
the  tarsal conjunctiva . A connective tissue layer ( Tenon ’ s capsule ) separates the 
conjunctiva from the sclera and is prolonged backwards as a sheath around the 
rectus muscles.  
 The  o rbit 
 The eye lies within the bony orbit, which has the shape of a four - sided pyramid 
(Figure  1.2 ). At its posterior apex is the  optic canal , which transmits the optic 
 Figure 1.1   The basic anatomy of the eye.  
Cornea
Schlemm's canal
Conjunctiva
Tendon of
extraocular
muscle
Iris
Lens
Iridocorneal angle
Posterior
chamber
Sclera
Retina
Anterior chamber
Limbus
Ciliary body
Zonule
Uvea
Ora serrata
Cribriform plate
Optic nerve
Fovea
Choroid
Vitreous

Anatomy 3
nerve to the chiasm, tract and lateral geniculate body. The  superior and inferior 
orbital ﬁ ssures  allow the passage of blood vessels and cranial nerves which 
supply orbital structures. The  lacrimal gland  lies anteriorly in the supe-
rolateral aspect of the orbit. On the anterior medial wall lies the fossa for the 
 lacrimal sac . 
 The  e yelids ( t arsal  p lates) 
 The eyelids (Figure  1.3 ):
 •  offer mechanical protection to the anterior globe; 
 •  spread the tear ﬁ lm over the conjunctiva and cornea with each blink; 
 •  contain the  meibomian oil glands , which provide the lipid component of the 
tear ﬁ lm; 
 •  through closure and blinking prevent drying of the eyes; 
   •      contain the puncta through which the tears ﬂ ow into the lacrimal drainage 
system. 
 They comprise:
 •  an anterior layer of skin; 
 •  the  orbicularis muscle , innervated by the seventh nerve;  
 •  a tough collagenous layer (the  tarsal plate ) which houses the oil glands; 
 •  an epithelial lining, the tarsal conjunctiva, which is reﬂ ected onto the globe 
via the  fornices . 
 Contraction of the peripheral ﬁ bres of the orbicularis muscle results in a 
protective, forced eye closure, while that of the inner, palpebral muscle results 
in the blink. 
 Figure 1.2   The anatomy of the orbit.  
Lesser wing of sphenoid
Superior orbital fissure
Fossa for lacrimal gland
Maxillary process
Ethmoid
Lacrimal bone
and fossa
Orbital plate
of maxilla
Inferior orbital fissure
Zygomatic bone
Optic foramen
Orbital plate of great 
wing of sphenoid
Maxillary process
Frontal bone
Nasal bone
Supraorbital notch

4 
Anatomy
 Figure 1.3   The anatomy of the eyelids.  
Levator muscle and tendon
Müller's
muscle
Skin
Orbicularis
muscle
Tarsal plate
Lash
Meibomian
gland
Tenon's layer
Sclera
Cornea
Upper fornix
Conjunctiva
 The  levator muscle passes forwards to the upper lid and inserts by an apone-
urosis into the tarsal plate. It is innervated by the third nerve. Damage to the 
nerve or weakening of the aponeurosis in old age results in drooping of the 
eyelid ( ptosis ). A ﬂ at,  smooth muscle , innervated by the sympathetic nervous 
system, arises from the deep surface of the levator and inserts into the tarsal 
plate. If the sympathetic supply is damaged, a slight ptosis results ( Horner ’ s 
syndrome ). 
 The meibomian oil glands deliver their oil to the skin of the lid margin, just 
anterior to the  mucocutaneous junction . This oil spreads onto the anterior 
surface of the tear ﬁ lm with each blink, to form a lipid layer which retards 
evaporation. Far medially on the lid margins, two puncta form the initial part 
of the lacrimal drainage system.  
 The  l acrimal  d rainage  s ystem 
 Tears drain into the upper and lower  puncta  and then into the  lacrimal sac 
via the upper and lower  canaliculi  (Figure  1.4 ). They form a common canalicu-
lus before entering the lacrimal sac. The  nasolacrimal duct  passes from the 
sac to the nose. Failure of the distal part of the nasolacrimal duct to fully 
canalize at birth is the usual cause of a watering, sticky eye in an infant. Tear 
drainage is an active process. Each blink helps to pump tears through the 
system. 

Anatomy 5
 Detailed  f unctional  a natomy 
 The  t ear  ﬁ  lm 
 The ocular surface is bathed constantly by the tears, secreted mainly by the 
lacrimal gland but supplemented by conjunctival secretions. They drain away 
via the nasolacrimal system. 
 The epithelial cells of the ocular surface express a  mucin glycocalyx which 
renders the surface wettable. When the eyes are open, the exposed ocular 
surface (the cornea and exposed wedges of bulbar conjunctiva) are covered by 
a tear ﬁ lm, 3    µ m thick. This comprises three layers:
 1   a  mucin gel layer  produced by the conjunctival goblet cells, in contact with 
the ocular surface;  
 2   an  aqueous layer  produced by the lacrimal gland; 
 3   a surface  oil layer produced by the meibomian glands and delivered to the 
lid margins. 
 Functions of the  t ear  ﬁ lm 
 •  It provides a smooth air/tear interface for distortion - free refraction of light 
at the cornea.  
 •  It transmits oxygen to the avascular cornea. 
   •      It removes debris and foreign particles from the ocular surface through the 
ﬂ ow of tears.  
 Figure 1.4   The major components of the lacrimal drainage system.  
Upper canaliculus
Puncta
Lower
canaliculus
Tear sac
Common canaliculus
Nasolacrimal duct
Inferior turbinate
Inferior meatus
Nasal cavity
Nasal mucosa

6 
Anatomy
   •      It has antibacterial properties through the action of lysozyme, lactoferrin, 
defensins and the immunoglobulins, particularly secretory IgA.    
 The tear ﬁ lm is replenished with each blink.    
 The  c ornea 
 The cornea (Figure  1.5 ) is 0.5   mm thick and comprises:
 •  The  epithelium , an anterior non - keratinized squamous layer, thickened 
peripherally at the  limbus  where it is continuous with the conjunctiva. The 
limbus houses the germinative  stem cells  of the corneal epithelium. 
 •  An underlying  stroma  of collagen ﬁ brils, ground substance and ﬁ broblasts. 
The regular packing, small diameter and narrow separation of the collagen 
ﬁ brils account for corneal transparency. This orderly architecture is main-
tained by regulating stromal hydration.  
 •  The  endothelium , a monolayer of non - regenerating cells which actively 
pump ions and water from the stroma, controlling corneal hydration and 
hence transparency. 
 The difference between the regenerative capacity of the epithelium and 
endothelium is important. Damage to the epithelial layer, by an abrasion for 
example, is rapidly repaired by cell spreading and proliferation. Endothelial 
damage, by disease or surgery, is repaired by cell spreading alone, with a loss 
of cell density. A point is reached when loss of its barrier and pumping func-
tions leads to over - hydration (oedema), disruption of the regular packing of its 
stromal collagen and corneal clouding. 
 Figure 1.5   The structure of the cornea and precorneal tear ﬁ lm (schematic, not to 
scale  – the stroma accounts for 95% of the corneal thickness).  
Stroma
Epithelium
Oil layer
Aqueous layer
Tear film
Mucin layer
Bowman's membrane
Endothelium
Descemet's
membrane
Keratocytes

Anatomy 7
 The nutrition of the cornea is supplied almost entirely by the aqueous 
humour, which circulates through the anterior chamber and bathes the poste-
rior surface of the cornea. The aqueous also supplies oxygen to the posterior 
stroma, while the anterior stroma receives its oxygen from the ambient air. The 
oxygen supply to the anterior cornea is reduced but still sufﬁ cient during lid 
closure, but a too - tightly ﬁ tting contact lens may deprive the anterior cornea 
of oxygen and cause corneal, especially epithelial, oedema. 
 Functions of the  c ornea 
 •  It protects the internal ocular structures. 
   •      Together with the lens, it refracts and focuses light onto the retina. The junc-
tion between the ambient air and the curved surface of the cornea, covered 
by its optically smooth tear ﬁ lm, forms a powerful refractive interface. 
 The  s clera 
 •  The sclera is formed from interwoven collagen ﬁ brils of different widths lying 
within a ground substance and maintained by ﬁ broblasts. 
 •  It is of variable thickness, 1  mm around the optic nerve head and 0.3  mm just 
posterior to the muscle insertions.     
 The  c horoid 
 •  The choroid (Figure  1.6 ) is formed of arterioles, venules and a dense, fenes-
trated capillary network.    
   •      It is loosely attached to the sclera.  
   •      It has a remarkably high blood ﬂ ow. 
   •      It nourishes the deep, outer layers of the retina and may have a role in its 
temperature homeostasis.  
   •      Its basement membrane, together with that of the retinal pigment epithelium 
(RPE), forms the acellular Bruch ’ s membrane, which acts as a diffusion barrier 
between the choroid and the retina. 
 Figure 1.6   The relationship between the choroid, RPE and retina.  
Photoreceptor outer segments
Retinal pigment epithelium
Choroid
Bruch's membrane
Choriocapillaris

8 
Anatomy
 The  r etina 
 The retina (Figure  1.7 ) is a highly complex structure derived embryologically 
from the primitive optic cup. Its outermost layer is the retinal pigment epithe-
lium (RPE) while its innermost layer forms the neuroretina, consisting of the 
photoreceptors ( rods  and  cones ), the bipolar nerve layer (and horizontal nerve 
cells) and the  ganglion cell  layer, whose axons give rise to the innermost, nerve 
ﬁ bre layer. These nerve ﬁ bres converge to the optic nerve head, where they 
form the  optic nerve . 
 The  r etinal  p igment  e pithelium ( RPE ): 
 •  is formed from a single layer of cells; 
   •      is loosely attached to the neuroretina except at the periphery ( ora serrata ) 
and around the optic disc;  
 •  forms microvilli which project between and embrace the outer segment discs 
of the rods and cones;  
 •  phagocytoses the redundant external segments of the rods and cones; 
   •      facilitates the passage of nutrients and metabolites between the retina and 
choroid;  
   •      takes part in the regeneration of rhodopsin and cone opsin, the photorecep-
tor visual pigments, and in recycling vitamin A;  
 Figure 1.7   The structure of the retina.  
Vitreous
Inner limiting membrane
Nerve fibre layer
Ganglion cell layer
Inner plexiform layer
Inner nuclear layer
Outer plexiform layer
Receptor nuclear layer
External limiting membrane
Inner and outer segments
of photoreceptors
RPE
Choroid

Anatomy 9
   •      contains melanin granules which absorb light scattered by the sclera thereby 
enhancing image formation on the retina. 
 The  p hotoreceptor  l ayer 
 The photoreceptor layer is responsible for converting light into electrical 
signals. The initial integration of these signals is also performed by the retina.
 •  Cones  (Figure  1.8 ) are responsible for daylight and colour vision and have a 
relatively high threshold to light. Different subgroups of cones are responsive 
to short, medium and long wavelengths (blue, green, red). They are concen-
trated at the fovea, where they provide high resolution and the detailed vision 
required to read. 
 •  Rods  are responsible for night vision. They have a low light threshold and do 
not signal wavelength information (colour). They form the large majority of 
photoreceptors in the remaining retina. 
 The  v itreous 
 •  The vitreous is a clear gel occupying two - thirds of the globe. 
   •      It is 98% water. The remainder is gel - forming hyaluronic acid traversed by a 
ﬁ ne collagen network. There are few cells.  
 Figure 1.8   The structure of the retinal rods and cones (schematic).  
Retinal pigment
epithelium
Outer segment
Inner segment
Outer nuclear
layer
Outer plexiform
layer
Cone
Rod
Nucleus
Outer
fibre
Ellipsoid
Cilium
Discs
External limiting
membrane
Cilium

10 
Anatomy
 •  It is ﬁ rmly attached anteriorly to the peripheral retina,  pars plana  and around 
the optic disc, and less ﬁ rmly to the macula and retinal vessels. 
 •  It has a nutritive and supportive role. 
 Collapse of the vitreous gel (vitreous detachment), which is common in later 
life, puts traction on points of attachment and may occasionally lead to a 
peripheral retinal break or hole, where the vitreous pulls off a ﬂ ap of the under-
lying retina.  
 The  c iliary  b ody 
 The ciliary body (Figure  1.9 ) is subdivided into three parts:
 1  the  ciliary muscle ; 
 2  the ciliary processes ( pars plicata ); 
 3  the  pars plana . 
 The  c iliary  m uscle 
 •  This comprises smooth muscle arranged in a ring overlying the ciliary 
processes. 
 •  It is innervated by the parasympathetic system via the third cranial nerve. 
   •      It is responsible for changes in lens thickness and curvature during  accom-
modation . The  zonular ﬁ bres  supporting the lens are under tension during 
distant viewing, giving the lens a ﬂ attened proﬁ le. Contraction of the muscle 
 relaxes  the zonule and permits the elasticity of the lens to  increase  its curva-
ture and hence its refractive power. 
 The  c iliary  p rocesses ( p ars  p licata) 
 •  There are about 70 radial  ciliary processes arranged in a ring around the pos-
terior chamber. They are responsible for the secretion of aqueous humour.  
 •  Each ciliary process is formed by an epithelium two layers thick (the outer 
 pigmented and the inner  non - pigmented ) with a vascular stroma. 
 •  The stromal capillaries are fenestrated, allowing plasma constituents ready 
access. 
 •  The  tight junctions  between the non - pigmented epithelial cells provide a 
barrier to free diffusion into the posterior chamber. They are essential for the 
active secretion of aqueous by the non - pigmented cells. 
 •  The epithelial cells show marked infolding, which signiﬁ cantly increases 
their surface area for ﬂ uid and solute transport. 
 The  p ars  p lana 
 •  This comprises a relatively avascular stroma covered by an epithelial layer 
two cells thick.  
   •      It is safe to make surgical incisions through the scleral wall here to gain access 
to the vitreous cavity. 

Anatomy 11
 The  i ris 
 •  The iris is attached peripherally to the anterior part of the ciliary body. 
 •  It forms the  pupil  at its centre, the aperture of which can be varied by the 
circular  sphincter  and radial  dilator  muscles to control the amount of light 
entering the eye.  
 •  It has an anterior border layer of ﬁ broblasts and collagen and a cellular 
stroma in which the sphincter muscle is embedded at the pupil margin.  
 Figure 1.9   The anatomy of the ciliary body.  
Pigmented epithelium
Fenestrated capillary
Stroma
Basement membrane
Pigmented epithelium
Tight junction prevents
free diffusion between 
non-pigmented cells
Non-pigmented epithelium
Ciliary muscle
Ciliary epithelium
Non-pigmented epithelium
Basement membrane
Active secretion of aqueous
Stroma with fenestrated
capillaries
Cornea
Trabecular meshwork
Schlemm's canal
Sclera
Iridocorneal angle
Iris
Pars plicata
Pars 
plana
Retina

12 
Anatomy
 •  The sphincter muscle is innervated by the  parasympathetic system. 
   •      The smooth dilator muscle extends from the iris periphery towards the 
sphincter. It is innervated by the  sympathetic system. 
 •  Posteriorly the iris is lined by a pigmented epithelium two layers thick. 
 The  i ridocorneal ( d rainage)  a ngle 
 This lies between the iris, the anterior tip of the ciliary body and the cornea. It 
is the site of aqueous drainage from the eye via the trabecular meshwork 
(Figure  1.10 ). 
 The  t rabecular  m eshwork 
 This overlies Schlemm ’ s canal and is composed of a lattice of collagen beams 
covered by trabecular cells. The spaces between these beams become increas-
ingly small as Schlemm ’ s canal is approached. The outermost zone of the mesh-
work accounts for most of the resistance to aqueous outﬂ ow. Damage here 
raises the resistance and increases intraocular pressure in primary open angle 
glaucoma. Some of the spaces may be blocked and there is a reduction in the 
number of cells covering the trabecular beams (see Chapter  10 ). 
 Fluid passes into Schlemm ’ s canal both through giant vacuoles in its endothe-
lial lining and through intercellular spaces.   
 Figure 1.10   The anatomy of the trabecular meshwork.  
Sclera with
collector channel
Schlemm's canal
Corneo-scleral
meshwork
Uveal meshwork
Anterior chamber
Endothelial 
meshwork

Anatomy 13
 Figure 1.11   The anatomy of the lens.  
Ciliary
body
Epithelium
elu
s
p
a
C
s
u
elc
u
N
s
elu
n
o
Z
Lens fibres
Iris
Equator
Cortex
 The  l ens 
 The lens (Figure  1.11 ) is the second major refractive element of the eye; the 
cornea, with its tear ﬁ lm, is the ﬁ rst.
 •  It grows throughout life. 
 •  It is supported by zonular ﬁ bres running between the ciliary body and the 
lens capsule.  
   •      It comprises an outer collagenous capsule under whose anterior part lies a 
monolayer of epithelial cells. Towards the  equator  the epithelium gives rise 
to the lens ﬁ bres. 
 •  The zonular ﬁ bres transmit changes in the ciliary muscle, allowing the lens 
to change its shape and refractive power.  
 •  The  lens ﬁ bres  make up the bulk of the lens. They are elongated cells arranged 
in layers which arch over the lens equator. Anteriorly and posteriorly they 
meet to form the lens  sutures . With age the deeper ﬁ bres lose their nuclei and 
intracellular organelles.  
 •  The oldest central ﬁ bres represent the fetal lens and form the lens  nucleus ; 
the peripheral ﬁ bres make up the lens  cortex . 
   •      The high refractive index of the lens arises from the high protein content of 
its ﬁ bres. 
 The  o ptic  n erve 
     •      The optic nerve (Figure  1.12 ) is formed by the axons arising from the  retinal 
ganglion cell layer , which form the  nerve ﬁ bre layer of the retina. 

14 
Anatomy
   •      It passes out of the eye through the cribriform plate of the sclera, a sieve - like 
structure. 
 •  In the orbit the optic nerve is surrounded by a sheath formed by the dura, 
arachnoid and pia mater, continuous with that surrounding the brain. It is 
bathed in cerebrospinal ﬂ uid (CSF). 
 The central retinal artery and vein enter the eye in the centre of the optic 
nerve. 
 The extraocular nerve ﬁ bres are myelinated; those within the eye are not. 
 The  o cular  b lood  s upply 
 The eye receives its blood supply from the ophthalmic artery (a branch of the 
internal carotid artery) via the retinal artery, ciliary arteries and muscular arter-
ies (Figure  1.13 ). The conjunctival circulation anastomoses anteriorly with 
branches from the external carotid artery.   
 The anterior optic nerve is supplied by branches from the ciliary arteries. The 
inner retina is supplied by arterioles branching from the central retinal artery. 
These arterioles each supply an area of retina, with little overlap. Obstruction 
results in ischaemia of most of the area supplied by that arteriole. The fovea is 
so thin that it requires no supply from the retinal circulation. It is supplied 
indirectly, as are the outer layers of the retina, by diffusion of oxygen and 
metabolites across the retinal pigment epithelium from the choroid. 
 The endothelial cells of the retinal capillaries are joined by tight junctions so 
that the vessels are impermeable to proteins. This forms an  ‘  inner blood – retinal 
barrier  ’ , with properties similar to that of the blood – brain barrier. The capillar-
ies of the choroid, however, are fenestrated and leaky. The retinal pigment 
 Figure 1.12   The structure of the optic nerve.  
Retina
Central retinal artery and vein
Optic disc
Optic nerve
Retinal pigment epithelium
Choroid
Sclera
Cribriform plate
Dura mater 
Arachnoid mater
Pia mater
Nerve fibres

Anatomy 15
 Figure 1.13   Diagrammatic representation of the ocular blood supply.  
Carotid artery
Ophthalmic artery
Retina
Anterior optic nerve
Choroid
Extraocular
muscles
Iris
Ciliary body
Retinal artery
Posterior
ciliary
arteries
Muscular arteries
Anterior ciliary arteries
epithelial cells are also joined by tight junctions and present an  ‘  external blood –
 retinal barrier  ’  between the leaky choroid and the retina. 
 The breakdown of these barriers causes the retinal signs seen in many vas-
cular diseases.  
 The  t hird,  f ourth and  s ixth  c ranial  n erves 
 The structures supplied by each of these nerves are shown in Table  1.1 . 
 Central  o rigin 
 The nuclei of the third (oculomotor) and fourth (trochlear) cranial nerves lie in 
the midbrain; the sixth nerve (abducens) nuclei lie in the pons. Figure  1.14  
shows some of the important relations of these nuclei and their fascicles.   
 Nuclear and fascicular palsies of these nerves are unusual. If they do occur 
they are associated with other neurological problems. For example if the third 
nerve fascicles are damaged as they pass through the red nucleus the ipsilateral 
third nerve palsy will be accompanied by a contralateral tremor. Furthermore 
a nuclear third nerve lesion results in a contralateral palsy of the superior rectus 
as the ﬁ bres from the subnucleus supplying this muscle cross. 
 Peripheral  c ourse 
 Figure  1.15  shows the intracranial course of the third, fourth and sixth cranial 
nerves. 

16 
Anatomy
 Table 1.1   The muscles and tissues supplied by the third, fourth and sixth 
cranial nerves. 
 Third (oculomotor)  
  Fourth (trochlear)  
  Sixth (abducens)  
 Medial rectus  
  Superior oblique  
  Lateral rectus  
 Inferior rectus  
  
  
 Superior rectus (innervated by the 
contralateral nucleus)  
 
  
 Inferior oblique  
  
  
 Levator palpebrae (both levators are 
innervated by a single midline nucleus)  
 
  
 Preganglionic parasympathetic ﬁ bres run in 
the third nerve end in the ciliary ganglion. 
Here postganglionic ﬁ bres arise and pass 
in the short ciliary nerves to the sphincter 
pupillae and the ciliary muscle  
 
  
 Third  n erve 
 The third nerve leaves the midbrain ventrally between the cerebral peduncles. 
It then passes between the  posterior cerebral  and  superior cerebellar arteries and 
then lateral to the  posterior communicating artery . Aneurysms of this artery 
may cause a third nerve palsy. The nerve enters the cavernous sinus in its lateral 
wall and enters the orbit through the superior orbital ﬁ ssure. 
 Fourth  n erve 
 The nerve decussates and leaves the  dorsal  aspect of the midbrain below the 
inferior colliculus. It ﬁ rst curves around the midbrain before passing like the 
third nerve between the posterior cerebral and superior cerebellar arteries to 
enter the lateral aspect of the cavernous sinus inferior to the third nerve. It 
enters the orbit via the superior orbital ﬁ ssure. 
 Sixth  n erve 
 Fibres leave from the inferior border of the pons. It has a long intracranial 
course passing upwards along the pons to angle anteriorly over the petrous 
bone and into the cavernous sinus where it lies infero - medial to the 
fourth nerve in proximity to the internal carotid artery. It enters the orbit 
through the superior orbital ﬁ ssure. This long course is important because the 
nerve can be involved in numerous intracranial pathologies including base of 
skull fractures, invasion by nasopharyngeal tumours and raised intracranial 
pressure. 

Anatomy 17
 Figure 1.14   Diagrams to show the nuclei and initial course of (a) the third, (b) the 
fourth and (c) the sixth cranial nerves.  
Cerebral aqueduct
Mesencephalic
nucleus of 5th nerve
Medial longitudinal 
fasciculus
Substantia nigra
Third nerve nucleus
Superior colliculus
Red nucleus
3rd cranial nerve
Ventral surface
Dorsal surface
(a)
6th cranial nerve and nucleus
Ventral surface
Dorsal surface
4th ventricle
(c)
Ventral surface
Dorsal surface
4th cranial nerve and nucleus
(b)
Cerebral peduncle
Cerebral aqueduct
Mesencephalic
nucleus of
5th cranial nerve
Medial longitudinal 
fasciculus
Substantia nigra
Inferior colliculus
Cerebral peduncle
Parapontine
reticular formation
Corticospinal tract
Medial longitudinal 
fasciculus
Facial nerve and 
nucleus

18 
Anatomy
 Multiple  c hoice  q uestions 
 1.  The cornea 
 a 
 Has an endothelial layer that regenerates readily. 
 b 
 Comprises three layers. 
 c 
 The endothelium actively pumps water from the stroma. 
 d 
 Is an important refractive component of the eye. 
  e   
  Has a stroma composed of randomly arranged collagen ﬁ brils. 
 2.  The retina 
 a 
 Is ten layers thick. 
 b 
 Has ganglion cells whose axons form the optic nerve.  
 c 
 Has three types of rods responsible for colour vision. 
 d 
 The neuroretina is ﬁ rmly attached to the retinal pigment epithelium. 
 e 
 The RPE delivers vitamin A for rhodopsin production. 
 3.  The lens 
 a 
 Grows throughout life. 
 b 
 Is surrounded by a collagenous capsule. 
 c 
 Cortical and nuclear ﬁ bres are nucleated.  
  d   
  Has a high refractive index owing to its protein content.  
 e 
 Changes in shape with accommodation. 
 Figure 1.15   The intracranial course of the third, fourth and sixth cranial nerves.  
Trochlear (IV) nerve
Trochlear (IV)
nerve
Superior
cerebellar artery
Posterior cerebral 
artery
Trigeminal ganglion
Abducent (VI) nerve
Superior orbital fissure
Anterior clinoid process
Oculomotor (III) nerve
Posterior communicating artery
Optic nerve
Cavernous sinus

Anatomy 19
 4.  The suspensory ligament of the lens (the zonule) 
 a 
 Attaches the lens to the ciliary body. 
 b 
 Is part of the iridocorneal angle. 
 c 
 Is composed of smooth muscle. 
 d 
 Transmits changes in tension to the lens capsule. 
 5.  The posterior chamber 
 a 
 Is another name for the vitreous body. 
 b 
 Lies between the iris, lens and ciliary body. 
 c 
 Contains aqueous humour, secreted by the ciliary processes. 
 d 
 Is in communication with the anterior chamber. 
 6.  The tear ﬁ lm 
 a 
 Is 100  µ m thick. 
 b 
 Is composed of four layers. 
 c 
 The mucin layer is in contact with the cornea. 
 d 
 Is important in the refraction of light entering the eye. 
 e 
 Contains lysozyme and secretory IgA. 
 7.  The iridocorneal angle 
 a 
 Is the site of aqueous production. 
 b 
 Lies between the cornea and the ciliary body. 
  c   
  In primary open angle glaucoma there is a reduction in the number of cells 
covering the trabecular meshwork. 
 d 
 Fluid passes through the trabecular meshwork to Schlemm ’ s canal. 
 8.  The optic nerve 
 a 
 Axons leave the eyeball through the cribriform plate. 
 b 
 Is not bathed in CSF until it enters the cranial cavity. 
 c 
 Anteriorly is supplied by blood from the ciliary arteries. 
 d 
 Axons are not myelinated in its retrobulbar part. 
 e 
 Is formed by the nerve ﬁ bre layer of the retina. 
 9.  The third, fourth and sixth cranial nerves 
 a 
 All originate in the midbrain. 
  b   
  A nuclear third nerve palsy will cause a contralateral palsy of the superior 
rectus. 
  c   
  The fourth nerve supplies the lateral rectus.  
 d 
 The sixth nerve has a long intracranial course. 
  e   
  The third nerve may be affected by aneurysms of the posterior communi-
cating artery. 

20 
Anatomy
 Answers 
 1.  The cornea 
   a   
  False. The human endothelium does not regenerate; dead cells are replaced 
by the spreading of surviving cells.  
 b 
 True. The cornea has epithelial, stromal and endothelial layers. 
  c   
  True. The endothelial cells pump out ions and the water follows osmoti-
cally. Removal of water maintains corneal transparency. 
  d   
  True. The cornea is a more powerful refractive element than the natural 
lens of the eye.  
 e 
 False. The ﬁ ne, equally spaced, stromal collagen ﬁ brils are arranged in 
parallel and packed in an orderly manner. This is a requirement for 
transparency. 
 2.  The retina 
 a 
 True. See Figure  1.7 . 
  b   
  True. The retinal ganglion cell axons form the retinal nerve ﬁ bre layer and 
exit the eye at the optic nerve head.  
  c   
  False. The rods are responsible for night vision and three cone types are 
responsible for daylight and colour vision.  
  d   
  False. The attachment is loose; the neuroretina separates in retinal 
detachment.  
  e   
  True. Vitamin A is delivered by the RPE to the photoreceptors and com-
bined with opsin.    
 3.  The lens 
 a 
 True. It does grow throughout life. 
 b 
 True. This is of great importance in cataract surgery. 
 c 
 False. The older, deep cortical and nuclear ﬁ bres lose their nuclei and other 
organelles. 
 d 
 True The high protein content accounts for its high refractive index. 
 e 
 True. See page 10. 
  4.   The suspensory ligament of the lens (the zonule) 
 a 
 True. Zonular ﬁ bres extend from the pars plicata of the ciliary body to the 
lens equator.  
 b 
 False. The zonule lies behind the iris and iridocorneal angle. 
 c 
 False. The ciliary muscle contains smooth muscle, not the zonule. 
 d 
 True. Contraction of the ciliary muscle relaxes the zonular ﬁ bres allowing 
the lens to increase its curvature and thus its refractive power (this is 
 ‘ accommodation ’ ). 
 5.  The posterior chamber 
 a 
 False. The vitreous body is quite separate. 
 b 
 True. See Figure  1.1 

Anatomy 21
 c 
 True. See page 2. 
  d   
  True. Communication is via the pupil, in the gap between iris and lens at 
the pupil margin. If this gap is narrowed or closed, pressure in the posterior 
chamber pushes the iris forward and may close the angle (acute closed 
angle glaucoma). 
 6.  The tear ﬁ lm 
 a 
 False. The tear ﬁ lm is 3  µ m thick. 
 b 
 False. The tear ﬁ lm is composed of mucin, aqueous and oil layers. 
 c 
 True. The mucin layer is produced by goblet cells. 
 d 
 True. It provides a smooth interface for the refraction of light. 
 e 
 True. These account for the antibacterial properties of the tear ﬁ lm. 
 7.  The iridocorneal angle 
 a 
 False. It is the site of aqueous drainage. 
 b 
 True. See Figure  1.9 . 
 c 
 True. This may reduce aqueous drainage. 
 d 
 True. The process is active. 
 8.  The optic nerve 
   a   
  True. This sieve - like structure provides support for the optic nerve as it 
leaves the eye.  
  b   
  False. In the orbit, within its sheaths, the optic nerve is surrounded by 
subarachnoid CSF in continuity with that in the intracranial cavity.  
 c 
 True. This is a most important blood supply for the anterior optic nerve. 
 d 
 False. They are usually not myelinated  within the eye. 
 e 
 True. It is made up from retinal ganglion cell axons. 
  9.   The third, fourth and sixth cranial nerves 
 a 
 False. The nucleus of the sixth nerve lies in the pons. 
  b   
  True. The superior rectus is innervated by the contralateral nucleus.  
 c 
 False. It supplies the superior oblique. 
  d   
  True. This makes the sixth nerve susceptible to trauma, which may cause 
lateral rectus palsy.  
 e 
 True. It passes lateral to the artery. 

 
 Learning  o bjectives 
 To be able to:
 ✓  Take and understand an ophthalmic history. 
 ✓  Formulate differential diagnoses for the presenting 
symptoms of a red eye, sudden and acute loss of 
vision, ocular pain and diplopia.  
 ✓      Examine the function of the eye (acuity and visual 
ﬁ eld).  
 ✓  Test pupillary reactions. 
 ✓  Examine eye movements. 
 ✓  Examine the structure of the eye. 
 ✓  Understand the use of ﬂ uorescein.  
 ✓  Use the ophthalmoscope. 
 2 
History,  s ymptoms 
and  e xamination  
 Introduction 
 Ophthalmic diagnosis is heavily dependent on a good history and a thorough 
examination. The majority of ophthalmic diagnoses do not require additional 
tests. The sequence of history and examination is described below. It is impera-
tive that hands are washed before and after each examination. If ocular infec-
tion is suspected then it may be necessary to disinfect the slit lamp and other 
Ophthalmology Lecture Notes, Eleventh Edition. Bruce James, Anthony Bron. 
© 2011 Bruce James and Anthony Bron. Published 2011 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

History, symptoms and examination  23
 Speciﬁ c  o phthalmic  h istory 
 The symptoms associated with speciﬁ c eye disease are detailed here to enable 
you to form an overview of the important questions to ask in the ophthalmic 
history. You should revise this section when you have read more about the 
speciﬁ c conditions described. 
 Table 2.1   Key points in the ophthalmic history. 
 Consider the symptoms carefully  
 How long have they been present?  
 Are they continuous or intermittent?  
 What precipitated them?  
 What makes them better or worse?  
 How are they changing?  
 Are there associated symptoms?  
 Is there a history of previous eye, or relevant systemic, disease?  
 Is there a relevant drug history, family history or social history? (alcohol, smoking, exposure 
to chemicals)  
hand - held equipment. Equipment making contact with the eye, e.g. a diagnos-
tic contact lens, is either disposable or routinely disinfected.  
 General  o phthalmic  h istory 
 A good history must include details of:
    •      Ocular symptoms of visual loss or discomfort, with time of onset, eye affected 
and associated non - ocular symptoms (Table  2.1 ). 
   •      Past ocular history (e.g. poor vision in one eye since birth, recurrence of 
previous disease, particularly inﬂ ammatory). 
 •  Past medical history (e.g. of  hypertension , which may be associated with 
some vascular eye diseases such as central retinal vein occlusion,  diabetes , 
which may cause retinopathy, and systemic  inﬂ ammatory  disease such as 
sarcoid, which may also cause ocular inﬂ ammation). 
   •      Drug history, since some drugs such as isoniazid and chloroquine may be 
toxic to the eye.  
   •      Family history (e.g. of ocular diseases known to be inherited, such as retinitis 
pigmentosa, or of disease where family history may be a risk factor, such as 
glaucoma).  
 •  Presence of allergies. 

24 
History, symptoms and examination 
 Red  e ye 
 A red eye is one of the most common presenting complaints in ophthalmology. 
It means redness of the exposed white of the eye, i.e. the exposed conjunctiva 
and underlying sclera. It is associated with infection, inﬂ ammation, trauma 
and acute elevation of intraocular pressure (Table  2.2 ). Determining associated 
symptoms will help establish the diagnosis (Table  2.3 ). 
 Trauma 
 A traumatic cause is usually obvious. Your history should note details of the 
event and whether this was due to blunt injury, a sharp object or a high - speed 
projectile. High - speed metal fragments from hammering may penetrate the 
globe and threaten sight.  The patient may be entirely unaware of any ocular 
injury. 
 •  Subconjunctival haemorrhage  is bright red due to exposure to ambient 
oxygen levels, and obscures the white of the sclera. It may be traumatic or 
spontaneous, or may be associated with systemic hypertension or blood -
 clotting disorders including anticoagulant therapy (the international nor-
malized ratio (INR) may need checking).  
 •  Corneal foreign bodies  and  abrasions  cause extreme pain and epiphora 
(watering). Sensory innervation is nociceptive, and higher than in any other 
part of the body, e.g. it is 400 times greater than in the ﬁ ngertip. Corneal 
injury stimulates reﬂ ex antidromic vasodilatation of limbal episcleral vessels, 
termed a  limbal  or  ciliary ﬂ ush. This characteristic sign is often in the merid-
ian of the lesion, aiding its detection, or it may surround the limbus when 
trauma is associated with iritis. Trauma can also cause conjunctival injection 
(vessel dilation). 
 •  Chemical injury  may be associated with generalized or local conjunctival 
inﬂ ammation, but alkali burns may cause ischaemic whitening, signifying 
severe tissue damage. 
 Table 2.2   Red eye: causes and symptoms. 
 Major causes  
 Trauma 
 Infection 
 Acute glaucoma 
 Other forms of inﬂ ammation  
 Associated symptoms  
 Discharge 
 Pain 
 Photophobia 
 Blurred vision  

History, symptoms and examination  25
 Infection 
 The commonest site of infection is the conjunctiva itself.
 •  Conjunctivitis  is a generalized inﬂ ammation of the conjunctiva associated 
with symptoms of discharge and mild discomfort rather than pain. Any visual 
blur due to discharge is cleared on blinking. Bacterial infections are associ-
ated with a purulent discharge that may stick the lids together. Viral infec-
tions cause a more watery discharge. In severe cases, where the cornea is 
affected, the patient experiences photophobia and blurred vision. Chlamydial 
infections can produce a chronically red eye.  
 •  Malposition of the lids (e.g. entropion) and  lid margin inﬂ ammation (blephar-
itis) may cause secondary inﬂ ammation of the conjunctiva due to recurrent 
irritation. Blepharitis is usually without discharge and may be associated 
with acne rosacea, atopic dermatitis and other skin diseases. The patient 
complains of lid irritation or itching. In some cases, staphylococcal lid margin 
commensals may induce a hypersensitivity (immune complex) reaction in 
the peripheral cornea resulting in a marginal keratitis or ulcer, just central to 
the limbal vascular arcade. This is accompanied by a ciliary injection.  
 Table 2.3   Red eye: differential diagnosis. 
 Deep red, sclera obscured  
 Subconjunctival haemorrhage  
 Diffuse bulbar and tarsal injection  
 Infective conjunctivitis  
 
 Allergic conjunctivitis  
 
 Angle closure glaucoma  
 
 Reaction to topical medication  
 
 Dry eyes  
 
 In association with orbital cellulitis  
 Diffuse/focal bulbar injection  
 Episcleritis  
 
 Scleritis  
 
 Chemical injury  
 
 Endophthalmitis  
 
 Pingueculae  
 
 Pterygia  
 
 Eyelid malposition  
 
 Blepharitis  
 Perilimbal (ciliary) injection  
 Iritis  
 
 Keratitis  
 
 Corneal abrasion  
 
 Corneal ulcer  
 
 Corneal foreign body  

26 
History, symptoms and examination 
 •  Corneal infection  affecting the visual axis is sight - threatening and may be 
associated with localized or general ocular redness. The eye is painful, par-
ticularly in acanthamoeba keratitis, and the vision reduced. There may be a 
mucopurulent discharge. A background history of contact lens use is common 
as an initiating factor.  
 •  Intraocular infection  (endophthalmitis) may occasionally occur within days 
following intraocular surgery. It causes a marked generalized conjunctival 
inﬂ ammation. The eye is painful (unusual after routine intraocular surgery) 
and the vision reduced. A history of recent surgery is the clue. Such a patient 
requires  immediate referral  to an eye unit.  
 •  An  infection of the orbit , orbital cellulitis, presents with swollen and often 
erythematous lids. The conjunctiva may be oedematous ( chemotic ) and red, 
and eye movements are reduced. The eye is proptosed. This is a  medical 
emergency , for vision may be lost rapidly, due to optic nerve damage. 
 Acute  g laucoma 
 The sudden rise in pressure associated with acute angle closure glaucoma, and 
other causes of acute glaucoma, result in a generalized red eye, corneal cloud-
ing, reduced vision and severe pain. It needs urgent treatment.  
 Other  f orms of  i nﬂ ammation 
 A number of other inﬂ ammatory diseases may present with a red eye, of which 
the commonest, mainly seen in primary care, is allergic eye disease.
 •  Seasonal allergic conjunctivitis , or hayfever conjunctivitis, is a common disor-
der, particularly in the spring and summer when exposure to allergens is at its 
height. The conjunctiva is injected and may be chemosed; the eye itches and 
waters and there is accompanying sneezing (due to allergic rhinitis) as part of 
the overall picture of hayfever. Vision is unaffected, but the eye may be photo-
phobic. Vernal keratoconjunctivitis, a chronic form of allergic eye disease, will 
also present as a red, itching, irritable eye and vision may be affected. There 
may be a history of atopy. With both there may be a mucus discharge.  
 •  Dry eyes  may also be associated with mild redness, irritation and  ‘ tiredness ’  
of the eye. In severe cases the vision may be blurred.  
 •  In  episcleritis  the episcleral tissues are inﬂ amed. This may result in focal or 
diffuse inﬂ ammation, and may or may not be painful. There is no discharge, 
and the vision is not reduced.  
 •  In  scleritis , inﬂ ammation of the sclera is associated with the collagen 
vascular diseases. Focal or generalized inﬂ ammation and swelling of the 
sclera is seen through the conjunctiva, which is also swollen. Pain is deep and 
boring.  
   •      Other conjunctival or corneal lesions, for example pterygia and pingueculae, 
may present with focal redness. They are easily visible.  
   •      A red eye may be associated with topical medication, for example the pros-
taglandin analogues used in the treatment of glaucoma. 

History, symptoms and examination  27
 Sudden  v isual  l oss 
 Sudden uniocular loss of vision is caused either by a sudden clouding of the 
ocular media or by a problem with the retina or optic nerve. It is important to 
determine the onset and duration of the visual loss and whether there has been 
any progression or recovery. It is essential to establish whether this is truly a 
 sudden  loss of vision or whether it is a longstanding loss which has been 
revealed when the fellow eye was covered. It is always important to identify any 
associated features, such as visual symptoms or pain (Table  2.4 ), which pre-
ceded visual loss.   
 A general medical history is vital. For example, is the patient diabetic or 
hypertensive? 
 Opacities of the  t ransparent  m edia of the  e ye 
 •  The sudden onset of corneal oedema and clouding in  acute angle closure 
glaucoma  causes blurred vision, accompanied by severe pain and redness of 
the eye. There may be a history of attacks of blurred vision and eye pain or 
headache which then subsided. Such prodromal attacks may be precipitated 
 Table 2.4   Sudden visual loss: causes. 
 Painful  
 
 Angle closure glaucoma  
 
 
 Uveitis  
 
 
 Corneal ulcer/keratitis  
 
 
 Endophthalmitis  
 
 
 Retrobulbar optic neuritis  
 
 
 Orbital cellulitis  
 
 
 Giant cell arteritis  
 Painless  
 Fleeting visual loss  
  Embolic retinal artery occlusion  
 
 
 Migraine  
 
 
 Raised intracranial pressure  
 
 
 Prodromal in giant cell arteritis  
 
 Prolonged visual loss  
  Ischaemic optic neuropathy  
 
 
 Retinal artery occlusion  
 
 
 Retinal vein occlusion  
 
 
 Retinal detachment  
 
 
 Age - related macular degeneration  
 
 
 Other macular disease  
 
 
 Vitreous haemorrhage  
 
 
 Orbital disease affecting the optic nerve  
 
 
 Intracranial disease affecting the visual pathway  

28 
History, symptoms and examination 
in the dark, by pupil dilation, which causes a subacute attack of angle closure 
glaucoma.  
 •  Visual loss may also occur quite quickly with  keratitis  or a  corneal ulcer , again 
with redness, and usually with severe pain.  
 •  A  bleed into the vitreous  is a common cause of sudden, painless visual loss 
and may result from a rupture of abnormal ﬁ ne capillary vessels growing 
from the surface of the retina (proliferative diabetic retinopathy) or be associ-
ated with central retinal vein occlusion or  ‘ wet ’  age - related macular degen-
eration. It may also follow a posterior vitreous detachment, when it is caused 
by a retinal tear and may precede a retinal detachment. 
 •  Anterior uveitis  may cause some blurring of vision when inﬂ ammatory cells 
adhering to the back of the cornea (keratic precipitates), or pupillary syn-
echiae, lie on the visual axis.  
 •  In  posterior uveitis , visual loss may be caused by a vitritis (inﬂ ammation of 
the vitreous). This may be associated with a local retinitis or choroiditis, with 
further visual loss due to retinal damage. The eye will also be slightly painful 
and photophobic.  Endophthalmitis  is an extreme form of posterior uveitis, 
usually due to an intraocular bacterial infection following cataract surgery 
but also following penetrating injury to the globe. It presents with a rapidly 
escalating painful and profound visual loss. The vitreous is opaciﬁ ed by inﬁ l-
trating polymorphonuclear leucocytes (PMNs) and exudative inﬂ ammatory 
products. 
 Retinal  a bnormalities 
 •  Total occlusion  of the central retinal vein or retinal artery results in a sudden 
painless loss of vision involving the whole visual ﬁ eld. A branch occlusion 
causes a partial loss of vision.  
 •  Wet  age - related macular degeneration  can cause a sudden loss or distortion 
of vision. Central vision is lost but peripheral vision is retained. Other acute 
disorders affecting the macula, such as  central serous retinopathy  or a  macular 
hole , may cause sudden central visual loss.  
 •  A  retinal detachment  may be preceded by ﬂ oaters, due either to a small vitre-
ous bleed (see above) or to a vitreous detachment and condensation of the 
vitreous gel. Vitreous detachment also puts traction on the retina, giving rise 
to the key symptom of ﬂ ashing lights. Detachment itself results in a curtain -
 like loss of the visual ﬁ eld, which starts at the top of the visual ﬁ eld in the 
case of an inferior detachment, or at the bottom of the ﬁ eld if the detachment 
is superior.  
 •  Inﬂ ammation of the retina associated with a  posterior uveitis  may cause 
visual loss, particularly if the macula or optic nerve is involved.  
 •  A transient loss of vision, lasting minutes and described as  ‘ a shutter ’ coming 
quickly across the vision, is typical of  amaurosis fugax . It is caused by platelet 
emboli passing through the retinal circulation.  
 •  Occasionally, visual loss is attributable to a  migraine attack  causing vasos-
pasm of the retinal vessels. More commonly migraine presents with fortiﬁ ca-

History, symptoms and examination  29
tion spectra or scintillating scotomata at the start of an attack due to transient 
ischaemia of the visual cortex.     
 Optic  n erve  a bnormalities 
 •  Optic neuritis , due to focal demyelination of the optic nerve, causes loss of 
vision which develops over a few days. With retrobulbar neuritis the optic 
nerve head appears normal and, when the optic sheath is involved, the 
patient complains of pain on eye movement. Anterior optic neuritis is accom-
panied by nerve head swelling, or  papillitis . 
 •  Anterior ischaemic optic neuropathy  (AION) results from an acute decrease 
in blood supply to the optic nerve head. It presents with sudden loss of 
vision. It may be caused by  giant cell arteritis  (GCA), with associated 
symptoms of pain in the temple, jaw claudication, shoulder pain and tired-
ness. There is usually a profound loss of vision in the affected eye. GCA is a 
 medical emergency  requiring urgent treatment with steroids. AION may 
also be seen in patients with vascular disease accompanying ageing, diabetes 
or hypertension. The risk is increased in those with small optic discs 
which accommodate axonal swelling less readily. The loss of visual ﬁ eld is 
painless. Symptoms are often ﬁ rst noticed in the morning, perhaps reﬂ ecting 
the falls in blood pressure and optic nerve head perfusion pressure that 
occur during sleep. Visual loss commonly affects the upper or lower visual 
ﬁ eld. 
   •      Episodes of visual loss lasting only a few seconds are typical of  raised intrac-
ranial pressure . These visual  ‘ obscurations ’  are often worse with a change in 
posture, and occur in the presence of papilloedema. 
   •      The optic nerve may be compressed in orbital cellulitis, resulting in visual 
loss. 
 Visual  l oss  i nvolving  b oth  e yes 
 This usually suggests disease of the visual pathway including the optic nerves 
or visual cortices. Occasionally an ocular cause may be found, for example if 
both eyes are affected by uveitis.   
 Gradual  v isual  l oss 
 Patients may adjust to a gradual loss of vision, so there may be a lengthy 
delay before they seek medical help. This is particularly so in older patients 
with cataract. Also, in chronic glaucoma, because of its slow evolution, the 
patient may be unaware of a considerable degree of visual ﬁ eld loss until it is 
detected by chance or investigated when glaucoma is diagnosed at a routine 
assessment.
    •      Cloudy ocular media, due to the gradual development of corneal oedema, 
cataract or, rarely, vitreous opacity, are possible causes for a gradual, painless 
reduction in vision (Table  2.5 ). 

30 
History, symptoms and examination 
   •      In patients with clear media, retinal abnormalities, particularly those affect-
ing the macula, may be present. Retinal dystrophies often cause a gradual 
reduction in vision. Dry macular degeneration may also result in a slow, 
intermittent decline in central vision, sometimes accompanied by visual 
distortion.  
   •      Compressive optic nerve disease is usually associated with gradual visual 
loss, which may also be caused by intracranial disease such as a pituitary 
tumour. 
 Ocular  p ain 
 The presence of pain can be very useful in deciding the cause of other ocular 
symptoms. It is seldom the only presenting feature of eye disease, and most 
causes have already been discussed. They are summarized in Table  2.6 .    
 Diplopia 
 The onset of diplopia or double vision can be a worrying symptom, both for 
the patient and for the clinician! It is important, as ever, to obtain a full history 
(Table  2.7 ). The answers to these questions will often reveal the diagnosis. The 
ﬁ rst thing to exclude is a monocular diplopia, with a refractive cause such as 
cataract. The most common cause of binocular diplopia is an extraocular 
muscle paresis due to disease of the third, fourth or sixth cranial nerve (Table 
 2.8 ). These are usually painless, constant and acute. Testing the eye movements 
reveals the type of palsy present. Inter -  and supranuclear palsies may also 
present acutely. The nature of the disorder in eye movements usually helps 
locate the site of the lesion. Intermittent double vision is typical of myasthenia, 
where the symptoms are worse as the patient tires.
 •  If thyroid eye disease is suspected (Graves ’ disease), look for the systemic 
features of that condition as well as the characteristic proptosis, restricted 
 Table 2.5   Gradual visual loss: causes. 
 Media cloudy  
 Corneal opacity  
 (opacities in the cornea, lens or vitreous 
appear black against the red reﬂ ex)  
 Cataract 
 Vitreous haemorrhage  
 Media clear  
 
 Retinal disorder  
  Age - related macular degeneration 
 Macular/retinal dystrophy  
 Optic nerve/pathway disorder  
 Optic neuropathy 
 Central nervous disease affecting visual 
pathways (e.g. visual cortex)  

History, symptoms and examination  31
 Table 2.6   Ocular pain: causes. 
 Discomfort  
 Blepharitis  
 
 Dry eye  
 
 Conjunctivitis  
 
 Allergy  
 
 Dysthyroid eye disease  
 Pain on eye movements  
 Optic neuritis  
 Pain around eye  
 Giant cell arteritis  
 
 Migraine  
 
 Orbital cellulitis  
 
 Causes of  ‘ headache ’  
 Severe pain  
 Keratitis  
 
 Corneal abrasion/ulcer/foreign body  
 
 Uveitis  
 
 Angle closure glaucoma  
 
 Endophthalmitis  
 
 Scleritis  
 
 Myositis of extraocular muscles  
 Table 2.7   Establishing the history in a patient with diplopia. 
 Was the onset sudden or gradual?  
 Is there a history of trauma?  
 Is the double vision present all the time?  
 Is it worse when the patient is tired?  
 Are the two images horizontally, vertically or diagonally (a skew deviation) displaced?  
 What are the associated symptoms (abnormalities of the pupils, other neurological 
symptoms)?  
 Are there any clues in the general medical history (diabetes, hypertension, thyroid 
disorders)?  
 Does the diplopia disappear when either eye is covered (to conﬁ rm a binocular cause for 
the diplopia)?  
eye movements and acute inﬂ ammation over the insertion of the extraocular 
muscles. 
 •  Trauma may cause a  neurogenic diplopia  if the cranial nerves are damaged, 
and a  restrictive diplopia , when orbital tissue becomes trapped in an orbital 
fracture of the ﬂ oor or medial wall of the orbit. Once again a good history will 
suggest the most likely diagnosis.  

32 
History, symptoms and examination 
   •      Diplopia may result when a patient fails to control a longstanding squint. 
Here again the symptoms may be intermittent. 
   •      Occasionally diplopia may have a monocular cause, usually corneal opaciﬁ -
cation or cataract. Cataract may cause a ghosting of vision rather than 
diplopia. 
 Examination 
 Both structure and function of the eye are examined. 
 Physiological  t esting of the  e ye 
 Visual  a cuity 
 Adults 
 Visual acuity (VA) tests the visual resolving power of the eye. The standard test 
is the Snellen chart, consisting of rows of letters (known as optotypes) of 
decreasing size (Figure  2.1 a). Each row is numbered with the distance in metres 
at which each letter width subtends 1 minute of arc at the eye. Acuity is recorded 
as the reading distance (e.g. 6 metres) over the row number of the smallest letter 
seen. If this is the 6 metre line, then VA is 6/6; if it is the 60 metre line, then VA 
is 6/60. Snellen acuities are thus recorded as: 6/5, 6/6, 6/9, 6/12, 6/18/ 6/36/ 
6/60. Visual resolution is ten times greater at 6/6 than 6/60. Some countries 
 Table 2.8   Diplopia: causes. 
 Neurogenic  
 III, IV, VI nerve palsies  
 
 Inter - and supranuclear gaze palsies  
 
 Failure to control a longstanding squint  
 
 Associated with ﬁ eld defects (bitemporal hemianopia)  
 Myogenic  
 Thyroid eye disease  
 
 Myasthenia  
 
 Myositis  
 
 Myopathy  
 Orbital  
 Trauma  
 
 Space - occupying lesions  
 
 Caroticocavernous sinus ﬁ stula  
 Monocular  
 Corneal disease  
 
 Cataract  

History, symptoms and examination  33
 Figure 2.1   Methods of 
assessing visual acuity: (a) the 
Snellen chart; (b) a logMAR 
acuity chart; (c) examples of 
Cardiff cards.  
(a)
(b)
(c)

34 
History, symptoms and examination 
(e.g. USA) use a different scale, with the foot as the unit of distance. 20/20 on 
this scale equates to 6/6.   
 Increasingly, the logMAR visual acuity chart is being used, particularly in 
research (Figure  2.1 b). Unlike the Snellen chart which shows uneven jumps in 
size from row to row, the logMAR letter sizes change in smooth, log linear steps. 
The number of letters on each line is equal, so that the lines of letters form a 
distinctive V - shaped pattern on the chart. The chart also allows accurate 
scoring of incompletely seen lines. Scores are recorded as a decimal, 0.00 
equating to 6/6 (see Appendix). 
 Whatever chart is used, vision is tested with spectacles if worn. Viewing  
through a pinhole will correct for moderate refractive error.  
 Children 
 In children, various methods are used to assess visual acuity:
    •      Very young children are observed to see if they can follow objects or pick up 
scattered  ‘ hundreds and thousands ’ cake decorations. 
 •  The Cardiff Acuity Test can be used to assess vision in 1 - to 3 - year - olds. This 
is a  preferential looking test based on the ﬁ nding that children prefer to look 
at complex rather than plain targets. The grey cards present a variety of 
ﬁ gures surrounded by a white band bordered with two black bands; there are 
two pictures, one above the other (Figure  2.1 c). The band widths deﬁ ne the 
acuity at the test distance. As the width of the bands decreases, the picture 
becomes harder to see against the grey background. The gaze of the child 
is observed and the examiner estimates whether the object seen is at the top 
or bottom of the card. When the examiner is unable to identify the position 
of the object from the child ’ s gaze it is assumed that the child cannot see the 
picture and the resolution of the eye is inferred. 
   •      Older children are able to identify or match single pictures and letters on 
charts which they hold in their hands, with those, of varying size, presented 
to them at a distance ( Sheridan – Gardiner test ). 
 Visual  ﬁ elds 
 The visual ﬁ elds map the peripheral extent of the visual world. Each ﬁ eld can 
be represented as a series of contours or  isoptres , representing the ability to 
resolve a target of given size and brightness at a particular location. The ﬁ eld 
is not ﬂ at; towards the centre of ﬁ xation, the eye is able to detect much smaller 
objects than at the periphery. This produces a  ‘  hill of vision ’ in which objects 
which are resolved in ﬁ nest detail are at the peak of the hill (representing the 
 fovea ) and acuity falls towards the periphery (Figure  2.2 ). On the temporal side 
of the ﬁ eld is the blind spot, which corresponds to the position of the optic 
nerve head, where there are no photoreceptors. 
 The visual ﬁ eld may be tested in various ways. 
 Confrontation  t ests 
 In this simple test, the examiner compares their own ﬁ eld with that of the 
patient. One eye of the patient is covered and the examiner sits opposite, 

History, symptoms and examination  35
     
Figure 2.2   The hill of vision: (a) shown diagrammatically; (b) a normal plot of the visual ﬁ eld of the left eye. The different lines (isoptres) 
correspond to different sizes or intensities of the target.  (Adapted with permission from Anderson, D.R. (1982)  Testing the Field of Vision . 
Mosby - Year Book, Inc., St Louis.)  
Fixation
Large high-intensity
light stimulus
Small low-intensity light stimulus
Superior
Inferior
Temporal
Nasal
(a)
(b)

36 
History, symptoms and examination 
closing his eye on the same side. If the patient ’ s left eye is covered the examiner 
closes their own, right eye. The test object, traditionally the head of a large 
white hat pin, is then brought into view from the periphery and moved cen-
trally. The patient is asked to say when they ﬁ rst see the object. Each quadrant 
is tested and the location of the blind spot determined. With practice and more 
effectively using a red target, central  scotomas  can also be identiﬁ ed. (A scotoma 
is a focal area of decreased sensitivity within the ﬁ eld, surrounded by a more 
sensitive area.) 
 A  c rude  t est for  h emianopic or  q uadrantic  d efects 
     •      Sit facing the patient and hold your hands up, palms forwards, one on either side 
of the midline. Ask the patient to cover one eye and look directly at your face. 
Enquire if the two palms appear qualitatively the same. The patient may notice 
that the outer (temporal) palm appears duller. Repeat the test with the fellow 
eye. This can be useful in picking up a bitemporal hemianopia in patients with 
a chiasmal lesion. Such patients may also miss the temporal letters on the 
Snellen chart when their visual acuity is measured.  
 •  Ask the patient to count the number of ﬁ ngers which you show in each quad-
rant of the visual ﬁ eld. 
 A useful way to identify a neurological ﬁ eld defect is to use a red target. The 
red ﬁ eld is the most sensitive to optic nerve lesions. A red - topped pin is used 
to perform a confrontation test, the patient being asked to say when he ﬁ rst 
sees the pin top as red (not when he ﬁ rst sees the pin top). More simply, a red 
object can be held in each quadrant or hemiﬁ eld and the patient asked to 
compare the quality of red in each location. In a hemianopic ﬁ eld defect the 
red would appear duller in the affected ﬁ eld. 
 Perimeters 
 These machines permit more accurate plotting of the visual ﬁ eld. They measure:
 •  The  kinetic  visual ﬁ eld, in which the patient indicates when he ﬁ rst sees a 
light of a speciﬁ c size and brightness brought in from the periphery. This is 
rather like the moving pinhead of the confrontation test. 
 •  The  static  visual ﬁ eld, in which the patient indicates when he ﬁ rst sees a 
stationary light of increasing brightness, presented anywhere in the visual 
ﬁ eld. 
 These techniques are particularly useful in chronic ocular and neurological 
conditions, to monitor changes in the visual ﬁ eld (e.g. in glaucoma or compres-
sive lesions of the visual pathway). 
 Increasingly sophisticated perimeters are being developed using computer 
programs that enable the time it takes to perform an accurate visual ﬁ eld to be 
reduced. These measure the threshold stimuli (the minimum intensity of light 
of a standard - sized source that the subject is able to see 50% of the time) for a 
number of points in the visual ﬁ eld. The intensity of light is recorded in deci-
bels: the higher the number the dimmer the light (Figure  2.3 ).   

History, symptoms and examination  37
 Figure 2.3   Example of a threshold ﬁ eld plot from an automated perimeter. The upper 
left diagram shows the threshold values for each test location. This is pictorially 
represented in the upper right picture. The middle diagrams compare the subject ’ s 
ﬁ eld with that of a normal age - matched population. The lower diagrams indicate how 
likely it is that the value of each location differs from this control population.  
CENTRAL 24–2 THRESHOLD TEST
FIXATION MONITOR: BLINDSPOT
FIXATION TARGET: CENTRAL
FIXATION LOSSES: 0/16
FALSE POS ERRORS: 0%
FALSE NEG ERRORS: 4%
TEST DURATION: 06:05
FOVER: OFF
STIMULUS: III, WHITE 
BACKGROUND: 31.5 RSB
STRATEGY: SITA-STANDARD
24
21
26
<0
32
30
30
29
6
22
24
30
32
33
31
31
–20 
–6   
–6   
–2   
0   
2   
1   
2  
–2   
–8    
–4    
–33  
0    
–1    
0    
0   
–1  
–6   
–8   
–32
2   
2   
2   
–2  
   
–2
–2
0
4
   
–3
0
0
–1
–6   
–3   
–14
–9   
0   
2   
3   
–3  
   
–9   
–17
–12
1   
0   
6  
–14
–15
–1   
0  
–9
0
20
25
16
22
32
33
33
26
19
12
18
31
30
35
13
14
27
28
17
25
30
30
24
21
21
<0
32
33
32
27
25
26
19
18
30
33
25
28
29
28
PUPIL DIAMETER:
VISUAL ACUITY:
RX:    OS    OC  X
DATE: 21-02-2002
TIME: 14:31
AGE: 73
–22 
–8   
–8   
–4   
–2   
0   
–1   
0  
GHT
OUTSIDE NORMAL LIMITS
MD
PSD
EYE CLINIC
STOKE MANDEVILLE HOSPITAL
STOKE MANDEVILLE
BUCKS
< 5%
< 2%
< 1%
< 0.5%
PATTERN
DEVIATION
TOTAL
DEVIATION
–4.29 OB P < 0.5%
9.04 OB P < 0.5%
–4  
–9   
–6   
–35
–2   
–3   
–2   
–2  
–3  
–8   
–10  
–34
0   
1   
0   
–4  
   
–4
–4
–1
2
   
–5
–2
–2
–2
–8   
–5   
–16
–11 
–2   
0   
1   
–4  
   
–11 
–19
–14
–1   
–2   
4  
–16
–16
–3   
–2  
–11
–2  

38 
History, symptoms and examination 
 Perimeters that test different pathways in the visual system have also been 
developed. For example a ﬂ ickering target tests the M - cell pathway, responsible 
for motion detection. These may be important in diseases that may selectively 
affect one pathway, such as glaucoma.   
 Intraocular  p ressure 
 Intraocular pressure is measured by a contact technique, with a Goldmann 
tonometer (Figure  2.4 ). A clear plastic cylinder is pressed against the anaesthe-
tized cornea. The ring of ﬂ attening, viewed through the cylinder, is made visible 
by the presence of ﬂ uorescein in the tear ﬁ lm (see below). A horizontally dis-
posed prism, within the cylinder, splits the ring of contact into two hemicircles. 
The force applied to the cylinder can be varied to alter the amount of corneal 
ﬂ attening and thus the size of the ring. It is adjusted so that the two hemicircles 
just interlock. This is the endpoint of the test and the force applied, converted 
into units of ocular pressure (mmHg), can now be read from the tonometer.   
 Optometrists use a puff of air of varying intensity to produce corneal ﬂ atten-
ing rather than the prism of the Goldmann tonometer. Various other tonome-
ters are also available, including small hand - held electronic devices. 
 The thickness of the cornea has a signiﬁ cant effect on the measurement of 
intraocular pressure, affecting the accuracy of measurement with contact 
tonometers. These tonometers underestimate the pressure where the cornea is 
thin and easier to deform. A thicker cornea requires more force for the same 
deformation, leading to an overestimation of intraocular pressure. Measurement 
of corneal thickness can now readily be performed with small hand - held 
ultrasonic pachymeters, which are used increasingly to make the appropriate 
correction.  
 Pupillary  r eactions 
 The size of the pupils ( miosis , constricted;  mydriasis , dilated) and their response 
to light and accommodation give important information about:
    •      the function of the afferent pathway controlling the pupils (the optic nerve 
and tract) (see Chapter  13 );  
 •  the function of the efferent pathway; 
 •  the action of drugs on the pupil. 
 Examination of the pupils begins with an assessment of the size and sym-
metry of the pupils in a uniform light. If there is asymmetry ( anisocoria ) it must 
be decided whether the smaller or larger pupil is abnormal. A pathologically 
small pupil (after damage to the sympathetic nervous system) will be more 
apparent in dim illumination, since dilation of the normal pupil will be greater. 
A pathologically large pupil (seen in disease of the parasympathetic nervous 
system) will be more apparent in the light since the fellow pupil will be small. 
 While some individuals show pupil asymmetry unassociated with disease, 
remember that inﬂ ammation of the anterior segment ( iritis ), trauma or previ-

History, symptoms and examination  39
 Figure 2.4   (a) Measurement of intraocular pressure with a Goldmann tonometer. 
(b) Two hemicircles are seen by the examiner. The force of contact is increased until 
the inner borders of the hemicircles just touch. This is the endpoint, at which a ﬁ xed 
amount of ﬂ attening of the cornea is achieved.  
The force applied to the prism can be increased 
and decreased by turning the knob. A scale 
converts this force into a measurement of pressure
which can be read directly from the tonometer 
once the endpoint is reached
(a)
(b)
Patient's
eye
Prism
Slit lamp
microscope
Observer
Too low an estimation of ocular pressure
Too high an estimation of ocular pressure
Endpoint
ous ocular surgery may cause structural iris changes which mechanically alter 
pupil shape or result in posterior synechiae (see Chapter  9 ). 
 Where the pupil sizes are equal, in order to test the efferent limb of the pupil 
reﬂ ex, the patient is asked to look at a near object. Normal pupils constrict in 

40 
History, symptoms and examination 
conjunction with accommodation and convergence. This is termed  the near 
reﬂ ex . 
 The next step is to look for a defect in optic nerve function, using the  ‘  swing-
ing ﬂ ashlight test  ’ . This is a sensitive index of an afferent conduction defect. The 
patient is seated in a dimly illuminated room and views a distant object. A torch 
is directed at each eye in turn while the pupils are observed. The light is directed 
at the eye from the side to avoid stimulating the near reﬂ ex. A unilateral defect 
in optic nerve conduction is demonstrated as a relative afferent pupil 
defect (RAPD) (see Figure  2.5  for full description and Chapter  14  for clinical 
importance).  
 Eye  m ovements 
 These are assessed while sitting facing the patient who is asked to look at a 
torch light held directly ahead. In the absence of squint and with the eyes in 
forward gaze (the  ‘ primary position ’ ), the reﬂ ection of light from the corneas 
will be symmetrically disposed. If a squint is present and only one eye is ﬁ xated 
on the light, then the reﬂ ection from the non - ﬁ xating eye is displaced to one 
side. The direction of displacement indicates the nature of the squint (see 
Chapter  15 ). 
 Record the following:
 •  the position of the eyes; 
 •  the range of eye movements; 
 •  the type of eye movements. 
 Figure 2.5   The relative afferent pupil defect (RAPD) or  swinging ﬂ ashlight sign . 
Diagnosis  – left optic neuritis. (a) A light directed at the right eye causes the pupils to 
constrict equally. (b) When the light is moved rapidly to the left eye, both pupils dilate 
because of the lack of afferent drive to the light reﬂ ex from the damaged left nerve. 
This is a left relative afferent pupillary defect.  
Optic
nerve
damage
(a)
Optic
nerve
damage
Left
eye
Left
eye
Right
eye
Right
eye
(b)

History, symptoms and examination  41
 An abnormal direction of one of the eyes in the primary position of gaze 
(looking straight ahead) may suggest a squint. This can be conﬁ rmed by per-
forming a cover test (see Chapter  15 ). 
 The range of eye movements is assessed by asking the subject to follow a 
moving object. Horizontal, vertical and oblique movements are checked from 
the primary position of gaze, asking the patient to report any double vision 
( diplopia ). The presence of oscillating eye movements ( nystagmus ) (see Chapter 
 15 ) is also noted. Movement of the eyes when following an object is recorded. 
Such movements ( pursuit  movements) are usually smooth but may be altered 
in disease. The ability to direct gaze rapidly from one object to another ( sac-
cadic  eye movements) can be tested by asking the patient to look at targets 
(such as the ﬁ nger) held at either side of the head. These movements should 
be fast, smooth and accurate (that is, they should not overshoot or undershoot 
the target). In children, use a toy or other interesting object to assess eye move-
ments while gently steadying the child ’ s head.  
 Eyelids 
 These are usually symmetrical in height. The margin of the lid is applied closely 
to the globe in the healthy eye. If the lid margin is turned away from the globe 
an  ectropion  is present; if the lid margin is turned in and the lashes are rubbing 
against the globe an  entropion  is present. 
 A drooping lid ( ptosis ) may reﬂ ect:
 •  an anatomical disorder (e.g. a congenital or age - related failure of the levator 
tendon to insert properly into the tarsal plate);  
   •      an organic problem (e.g. weakness of the levator muscle in myasthenia gravis 
or impairment of its nerve supply in third nerve palsy).    
 In assessing ptosis, the distance between the upper and lower lids is meas-
ured with the patient looking straight ahead. The excursion of the upper lid 
from extreme downgaze to extreme upgaze is then recorded. In myasthenia, 
repeated up and down movements of the lids will increase the ptosis by fatigu-
ing the levator muscle (see Chapter  5 ).   
 Anatomical  e xamination of the  e ye 
 Lids and  a nterior  s egment 
 Simple examination of the eye and adnexae can reveal a great deal about patho-
logical processes within the eye. 
 Ophthalmologists use a biomicroscope ( slit lamp ) to examine the eye and 
lids. This provides a magniﬁ ed, stereoscopic view. The slit of light permits a 
cross - section of the transparent media of the eye to be viewed. By adjusting 
the angle between this beam and the viewing microscope the light can be 
used to highlight different structures and pathological processes within the 
eye. Each structure is carefully examined, starting with the lids and working 
inwards. 

42 
History, symptoms and examination 
 Examination  w ithout a  s lit  l amp 
 Without a slit lamp the eye can still be meaningfully examined with a suitable 
light such as a pen torch or ophthalmoscope. Comment can be made on:
 •  The conjunctiva: is it injected (inﬂ amed), is there a discharge, what is the 
distribution of redness, is a conjunctival haemorrhage present?  
   •      The cornea: is it clear, is there a bright reﬂ ection of light from the overlying 
tear ﬁ lm? 
   •      The anterior chamber: is it intact (if penetrating injury is suspected), is a 
hypopyon present (see Chapter  9 )?  
 •  The iris and pupil: is the shape of the pupil normal? 
   •      The lens: is there an opacity in the red reﬂ ex observed with the 
ophthalmoscope? 
 Diagnostic  u se of  ﬂ uorescein 
 Fluorescein has the property of absorbing light in the blue wavelength and 
emitting a green ﬂ uorescence. The application of ﬂ uorescein to the eye can 
identify corneal abrasions (where the surface epithelial cells have been lost) 
and leakage of aqueous humour from the eye where the cornea has been pen-
etrated or a wound is unhealed (Figure  2.6 ).   
 To  e xamine an  a brasion 
 •  A weak, highly ﬂ uorescent, solution of the dye is applied to the eye. 
 •  The eye is examined with a blue light. 
 •  The abrasion ﬂ uoresces bright green. 
 To  d etermine  i f  ﬂ uid  i s  l eaking from the  e ye ( e .g.  a fter 
 p enetrating  c orneal  i njury) 
 •  A drop of 2% solution of ﬂ uorescein  –  which is not ﬂ uoresent  – is applied to 
the eye.  
 •  The eye is examined with a blue light. 
   •      The dye, diluted by the leaking aqueous, becomes bright green at its junction 
with the dark, concentrated ﬂ uorescein. 
 Eversion of the  u pper  l id 
 The underside of the upper lid is examined by everting it over a small blunt -
 ended object (e.g. a cotton bud) placed in the lid crease (Figure  2.7 ). This is an 
important technique to master as foreign bodies may often lodge under the 
upper lid, causing considerable pain to the patient.    
 Retina 
 The retina is examined by:
 •  Direct ophthalmoscopy (the conventional ophthalmoscope) (Figure  2.8 ). 
   •      Indirect ophthalmoscopy, which allows the extreme retinal periphery to be 
viewed. The examiner wears a head - mounted binocular microscope with a 

History, symptoms and examination  43
light source. A lens placed between the examiner and the eye of the subject 
is used to produce an inverted image of the retina.  
 •  Special lenses (e.g. 90 dioptre and 3 mirror) are also used at the slit lamp. 
 The latter two techniques are reserved for specialists; the technique that 
must be mastered by the non - specialist is direct ophthalmoscopy. 
 Figure 2.6   (a) A corneal abrasion (the corneal epithelial layer has been damaged); 
(b) ﬂ uorescein uniformly stains the area of damage. (c) A perforated cornea leaking 
aqueous (the leak is protected here with a soft contact lens); (d) the ﬂ uorescein 
ﬂ uoresces as it is diluted by the leaking aqueous.  
(b)
(a)
(d)
(c)
 Figure 2.7   Eversion of the upper lid using a cotton bud placed in the lid crease.  
(b)
(a)

44 
History, symptoms and examination 
 The direct ophthalmoscope provides:
 •  an image of the  red reﬂ ex  –   a red glow in the pupil zone due to light scattered 
from the vascular choroid;  
 •  a magniﬁ ed view of the optic nerve head, macula, retinal blood vessels and 
the retina to the equator.    
 It comprises:
 •  a light source, the size and colour of which can be changed; 
   •      a system of lenses which permits the refractive error of both observer and 
patient to be corrected. 
 Conﬁ dent use of the ophthalmoscope comes with practice. The best results 
are obtained if the pupil is ﬁ rst dilated with  tropicamide , a mydriatic with a 
short duration of action. 
 The patient and examiner must be comfortable; the patient looks straight 
ahead at a distant object. The examiner ’ s right eye is used to examine the 
patient ’ s right eye, and the left eye to examine the left eye. 
 Figure 2.8   The technique of direct ophthalmoscopy. Note that the left eye of the 
observer is used to examine the left eye of the subject. The closer the observer is to 
the patient the larger the ﬁ eld of view.  

History, symptoms and examination  45
 The examiner views the red reﬂ ex through the pupil at a distance of about 
30   cm from the eye. Corneal or lens opacities appear as dark silhouettes against 
the red reﬂ ex, brought into focus by ratcheting down the ophthalmoscope from 
a high to a low hypermetropic (plus) correction. The eye is then approached to 
within a couple of centimetres and the power of the lenses is adjusted in the 
myopic (minus) direction, to achieve focus on the retina. 
 The examiner may ﬁ nd it helpful to place a steadying hand on the subject ’ s 
forehead, which can also be used to hold the upper lid open. The retina should 
now be in view. It is important to try and examine the retina in a logical 
sequence so that nothing is overlooked.
 •  First ﬁ nd the optic disc (Figure  2.9 ). With the eye looking straight ahead, 
approach the eye at an angle of 15 °  temporal to the line of gaze to avoid light 
reﬂ ection from the cornea. Assess the margins of the optic disc (are they 
indistinct  –  as in papilloedema?). Assess the colour of the disc (is it pale  –  as 
in optic atrophy?). Assess the optic cup (see Chapter  10 ).    
   •      Direct the ophthalmoscope slightly temporally and examine the macula. Is 
there a normal foveal reﬂ ex? (In youth the foveal pit appears as a bright pin-
point of light in the centre of the retina.) Are there any abnormal lesions such 
as haemorrhages, exudates or cotton - wool spots? 
   •      Return to the optic disc and follow each major vessel branch of the vascula-
ture out to the periphery. Are the vessels of normal diameter? Do the arteries 
nip the veins where they cross ( A/V nipping   –  in hypertension)? Are there 
any emboli in the arterioles? Also examine the surrounding retina for 
abnormalities. 
 •  Examine the peripheral retina systematically, in a 360 ° sweep. 
 Figure 2.9   A normal left fundus. Note the optic disc with retinal veins and arteries 
passing from it to branch over the retina. The large temporal vessels form the 
 temporal arcades . The macula lies temporal to the disc with the fovea at its centre.  

46 
History, symptoms and examination 
 Direct  o phthalmoscopy 
 •   Use an ophthalmoscope with a good illumination.  
 •   Before examining the patient, set the ophthalmoscope power to a low plus, 
allowing you to focus through from the front to the back of the eye.  
 •   Retinal examination requires that the examiner is close to the subject. An 
inadequate view will result if the examiner is too far away.  
 •   Where the patient is highly short - sighted, you will ﬁ nd it easier to view the 
fundi if the patient ’ s spectacles stay in place.  
 •   Practice, practice, practice.  
   Special  e xamination  t echniques 
 Diagnostic  l enses 
 Ophthalmologists employ special lenses that can be used in conjunction with 
the slit lamp to examine particular ocular structures. 
 A  gonioscopy  lens is a diagnostic contact lens with a built - in mirror that 
permits examination of the iridocorneal angle. A larger lens with three mirrors 
allows the peripheral retina to be seen with the pupil dilated. Both are applied 
to the anaesthetized cornea with a lubricating drop. Other lenses can be used 
to obtain a stereoscopic view of the retina.  
 Retinoscopy 
 The technique of retinoscopy allows the refractive state of the eye to be meas-
ured (i.e. the required strength of a corrective spectacle lens). A streak of light 
from the retinoscope is directed into the eye. The reﬂ ection from the retina is 
observed through the retinoscope. By gently moving the retinoscope from side 
to side the reﬂ ected image is seen to move. The direction in which this image 
moves depends on the refractive error of the eye. By placing trial lenses of  
increasing or decreasing power in front of the eye, the direction in which the 
reﬂ ected image moves is seen to reverse. When this point is reached the refrac-
tive error has been determined. 
 Investigative  t echniques 
 Ultrasound 
 This is used extensively in ophthalmology to provide information about the 
vitreous, retina and posterior coats of the eye (see Figure  11.7 ), particularly 
when they cannot be clearly visualized (if, for example, there is a dense cataract 
or vitreous haemorrhage). Ultrasound is also used to measure the length of the 
eyeball prior to cataract surgery to estimate the power of the artiﬁ cial lens that 
is to be implanted into the eye (see Chapter  8 ).  

History, symptoms and examination  47
 Keratometry 
 The shape of the cornea (the radius of curvature) can be measured from the 
image of a target reﬂ ected from its surface. This is important in contact lens 
assessment (Chapter  3 ), refractive surgery (Chapter  3 ) and in calculating the 
power of an artiﬁ cial lens implant in cataract surgery (Chapter  8 ). The tech-
nique of photo - keratometry allows a very accurate contour map of the cornea 
to be produced (Figure  2.10 ). These techniques can be used to detect aberra-
tions of shape such as a conical cornea ( keratoconus ). 
 Synoptophore 
 This machine permits the assessment of binocular single vision, the ability of 
the two eyes to work together to produce a single image. It can also assess 
the range over which the eyes can move away from ( diverge ) or towards each 
other ( converge ) whilst maintaining a single picture (to measure the range of 
fusion).  
 Exophthalmometer 
 This device measures ocular protrusion ( proptosis ). 
 Figure 2.10   A contour map of the cornea obtained with a photokeratoscope. The 
colours represent areas of different corneal curvature and hence different refractive 
power. 
Dioptres
42.7
42.3
42.1
41.8
41.5
41.2
40.9
40.6
40.3
40.0
39.7
39.5
39.2
39.0
90
0
NAS
15
30
45
60
75
180
TMP
165
150
135
120
105

48 
History, symptoms and examination 
 Electrophysiological  t ests 
 The electrical activity of the retina and visual cortex in response to speciﬁ c 
visual stimuli, for example a ﬂ ashing light, can be used to assess the function-
ing of the retina ( electroretinogram  or  ERG ), RPE ( electro - oculogram ) and the 
visual pathway ( visually evoked response  or  potential ). 
 Radiological  i maging  t echniques 
 Computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans 
have largely replaced skull and orbital radiographs in the imaging of the orbit 
and visual pathway. The newer diagnostic techniques have enhanced the diag-
nosis of orbital disease (e.g. optic nerve sheath meningioma) and visual 
pathway lesions such as pituitary tumours. They have also become the ﬁ rst - line 
investigation in orbital trauma.  
 Fluorescein  a ngiography 
 This technique (Figure  2.11 ) provides detailed information about the retinal 
circulation. Fluorescein dye is injected into the antecubital vein. A  fundus 
camera  is used to take photographs of the retina. A blue light is directed 
into the eye to  ‘ excite ’  the ﬂ uorescein in the retinal circulation. The emitted 
green light is then photographed through a yellow barrier ﬁ lter which absorbs 
any reﬂ ected blue light and allows the ﬂ uorescent image to be seen at high 
contrast. 
 In this way a ﬂ uorescent picture of the retinal circulation is obtained (Figure 
 2.12 ). The dye leaks from abnormal blood vessels (e.g. the new vessels some-
 Figure 2.11   The technique of ﬂ uorescein angiography.  
Fluorescein in the retinal
circulation is 'excited' by
the blue light and emits a
green light
Barrier
filter to
absorb any
reflected
blue light
Exciter filter to 
produce blue light
Photograph of
green light only
produces a picture
of the retinal
circulation
Light source
Camera

History, symptoms and examination  49
times seen in diabetic eye disease). Areas of ischaemia, due to retinal capillary 
closure, fail to demonstrate the normal passage of dye (e.g. in a central retinal 
vein occlusion). The technique is useful both in diagnosis and in planning and 
following treatment. 
 Indocyanin green angiography (ICG) allows the choroidal vasculature to be 
imaged in a similar way.  
 Digital  i maging and  l aser  s canning  t echniques 
 New techniques of retinal imaging, such as confocal microscopy, have been 
developed to improve the quality of retinal and optic disc pictures and to 
permit quantitative assessment of features such as the area of the optic disc 
and optic disc cup (Chapter  10 ) and the size of retinal lesions (Chapter  11 ). 
These will help in the assessment of patients with chronic diseases such as 
glaucoma, diabetes and macular degeneration, where the management 
requires an accurate assessment of any change over time. 
 Figure 2.12   A ﬂ uorescein angiogram. (a) A photograph of the early phase, taken 
shortly after ﬂ uorescein has entered the eye: it can be seen in the choroidal circulation 
as background ﬂ uorescence. (b) In the late phase, some minutes after injection of the 
dye, areas of hyperﬂ uorescence (the dark areas, arrowed) can be seen around the 
macula. There has been leakage from abnormal blood vessels into the extravascular 
tissue space in the macular region (macular oedema).  
(a)
(b)
 
 KEY POINTS 
 •  The eye is part of the body and is often affected in systemic disease. Always seek 
associated features when taking an ophthalmic history.  
 •  A good ophthalmic history can initiate a differential diagnosis and inﬂ uence subsequent 
clinical examination.  

50 
History, symptoms and examination 
   Multiple  c hoice  q uestions 
 1.   Match the description with the most likely diagnosis. A patient presents 
with: 
 a 
 A diffusely red, sticky eye; vision is unaffected. 
 b 
 A red eye most marked at the limbus, with photophobia and blurred vision. 
  c   
  Sudden onset of a local red patch on the sclera, associated with slight 
discomfort but with normal vision. The patient takes warfarin. 
  d   
  A painful red eye and slightly blurred vision. The patient suffers from 
rheumatoid arthritis.  
  e   
  A painful red eye, very blurred vision and discharge. There is a history of 
contact lens wear. 
 i 
 Corneal ulcer. 
 ii 
 Optic neuritis. 
 iii 
 Scleritis. 
 iv 
 Uveitis. 
 v 
 Allergic conjunctivitis. 
 vi 
 Subconjunctival haemorrhage. 
 vii 
 Episcleritis. 
 viii  Bacterial conjunctivitis. 
 ix 
 Corneal abrasion. 
 x 
 Corneal foreign body. 
 2.   Match the description with the most likely diagnosis. A patient presents 
with: 
 a 
 Floaters, ﬂ ashes of light and a curtain - like loss of vision. 
 b 
 Sudden loss of vision in one eye, jaw claudication and shoulder pain. 
 c 
 A painful red eye, loss of vision, nausea.  
 d 
 Loss of vision for seconds on standing from lying down. 
  e   
  Loss of vision over a couple of days associated with pain on eye movement. 
 i 
 Optic neuritis. 
 ii 
 Retinal vein occlusion. 
 iii 
 Retinal artery occlusion. 
 iv 
 Retinal detachment. 
 v 
 Acute glaucoma. 
 vi 
 Vitreous haemorrhage. 
 vii 
 Orbital cellulitis. 
 viii  Raised intracranial pressure. 
 ix 
 Giant cell arteritis. 
 x 
 Endophthalmitis. 

History, symptoms and examination  51
 3.   Match the description with the most likely diagnosis. A patient presents 
with: 
   a   
  A watering eye present since birth, associated with intermittent stickiness 
but no redness of the conjunctiva.  
  b   
  A watering eye in a 6 - month - old child associated with a large cornea. The 
eye is not red.  
  c   
  A watering eye in a 60 - year - old man, associated with a lower lid that 
droops away from the eye.  
 d 
 A sticky, watery, white eye in a 55 - year - old woman. 
  e   
  An acute, watery, red eye associated with photophobia in a 26 - year - old 
man. 
 i 
 Viral conjunctivitis. 
 ii 
 Corneal ulcer. 
 iii 
 Congenital nasolacrimal duct obstruction. 
 iv 
 Acquired nasolacrimal duct obstruction. 
 v 
 Corneal foreign body. 
 vi 
 Congenital glaucoma. 
 vii 
 Migraine. 
 viii  Ectropion. 
 ix 
 Entropion. 
 x 
 Molluscum contagiosum. 
 4.   Match the description with the most likely diagnosis. A patient presents 
with: 
   a   
  Gradual loss of vision over some months, with increasing glare in the sun.  
 b 
 Gradual loss of vision followed by more rapid loss, associated with distor-
tion of central vision.  
  c   
  Gradual loss of vision in the right eye, associated with a relative afferent 
pupillary defect.  
  d   
  Gradual loss of vision in both eyes, with no relative afferent pupillary 
defect or media opacity.  
  e   
  Gradually increasing blurring of vision some months following cataract 
surgery. 
 i 
 Pituitary tumour. 
 ii 
 Cortical infarct. 
 iii 
 Corneal ulcer. 
 iv 
 Cataract. 
 v 
 Age - related macular degeneration. 
 vi 
 Macular oedema. 
 vii 
 Optic nerve compression. 
 viii  Retinal detachment. 
 ix 
 Posterior capsule opaciﬁ cation. 

52 
History, symptoms and examination 
 5.   Name the major sign in each of the photographs (Figure  2.13 ). 
 Figure 2.13   
(b)
(a)
(d)
(c)
(b)
(a)
 Figure 2.14   
 6.   Name the sign or condition in each case (Figure  2.14 ). 

History, symptoms and examination  53
(h)
(g)
(d)
(c)
(f)
(e)
(j)
(i)
Figure 2.14 (Continued)

54 
History, symptoms and examination 
 Figure 2.15   
 Figure 2.16   
 7.   What does this pathological section show (Figure  2.15 )? What is the 
diagnosis? 
 8.   What does this radiograph show (Figure  2.16 )? What is the diagnosis? 
How might the eyes be affected? 
 9.   Physiological testing of the eye 
 a 
 The Snellen chart measures visual acuity, the resolving power of the eye. 
 b 
 The Snellen chart is positioned at 4   m from the patient. 
 c 
 The Cardiff Acuity Test relies on preferential looking. 
 d 
 An isoptre on a visual ﬁ eld chart represents the eye ’ s ability to see a point 
of light of given size and brightness.  
 e 
 Intraocular pressure is measured with a perimeter. 
 10.  Pupils 
 a 
 The term miosis means a constricted pupil. 
 b 
 Anisocoria means that the pupils differ in size. 

History, symptoms and examination  55
 c 
 Damage to oculomotor parasympathetic ﬁ bres causes miosis. 
  d   
  A relative afferent pupillary defect indicates optic nerve disease.  
 e 
 Normal pupils dilate during convergence. 
 11.  Lids 
 a 
 When the lid margin is turned away from the eye, this is ectropion. 
 b 
 When the lid margin is turned into the eye, this is entropion. 
 c 
 A third nerve palsy may cause ptosis. 
  d   
  In myasthenia repeated lid blinking increases any ptosis.      
 12.  Fluorescein 
 a 
 Is excited by green light and emits in the blue wave band. 
 b 
 Will stain a corneal abrasion. 
 c 
 To detect its ﬂ uorescence, the eye must be examined with a blue light. 
 d 
 Can be used to demonstrate a leak of aqueous from the anterior chamber.  
 e 
 Is used to examine the vasculature of the retina. 
 13.  The direct ophthalmoscope 
 a 
 Produces a magniﬁ ed image of the retina. 
 b 
 Contains lenses which increase the magniﬁ cation. 
 c 
 Can be used to examine the red reﬂ ex. 
  d   
  The retina can be seen by holding the instrument at a distance of 30   cm 
from the eye.  
 e 
 The illumination can be altered. 
 14.  Instruments 
 a 
 Keratometry allows the protrusion of the eye to be measured. 
 b 
 The synoptophore measures convergence and divergence. 
 c 
 The exophthalmometer measure corneal shape. 
  d   
  Retinoscopy is used to assess refractive error.        
 Answers 
 1.  Match the description with the diagnosis. 
 a 
 Bacterial conjunctivitis. 
 b 
 Uveitis. 
 c 
 Subconjunctival haemorrhage. 
 d 
 Scleritis. 
 e 
 Corneal ulcer. 
  2.   Match the description with the diagnosis. 
 a 
 Retinal detachment. 
 b 
 Giant cell arteritis. 
 c 
 Acute glaucoma. 
 d 
 Raised intracranial pressure. 
 e 
 Optic neuritis. 

56 
History, symptoms and examination 
  3.   Match the description with the diagnosis. 
 a 
 Congenital nasolacrimal duct obstruction. 
 b 
 Congenital glaucoma. 
 c 
 Ectropion. 
 d 
 Acquired nasolacrimal duct obstruction. 
 e 
 Viral conjunctivitis. 
  4.   Match the description with the diagnosis. 
 a 
 Cataract. 
 b 
 Age - related macular degeneration. 
 c 
 Optic nerve compression. 
 d 
 Pituitary tumour. 
 e 
 Posterior capsule opaciﬁ cation. 
  5.   Name the sign(s) in each of the photographs (Figure    2.13   ). See chapter 
12 for a full description. 
 a 
 Cotton - wool spots, a few haemorrhages and exudates. 
 b 
 Disc new vessels. 
 c 
 Exudates, haemorrhages and cotton - wool spots. 
 d 
 Pre - retinal haemorrhage, laser burns. 
 6.  Name the sign or condition in each case (Figure  2.14 ). 
 a 
 Hyphaema. 
 b 
 Hypopyon. 
 c 
 Follicles. 
 d 
 Keratitic precipitates. 
 e 
 Ectropion. 
 f 
 Cataract. 
 g 
 Posterior synechiae. 
 h 
 Anterior blepharitis. 
 i 
 Meibomian cyst. 
 j 
 Entropion. 
 7.  What does this pathological section show (Figure  2.16 )? 
 The slide shows giant cells seen in giant cell or temporal arteritis. 
 8.  What does this radiograph show (Figure  2.16 )? 
  The radiograph shows hilar lymphadenopathy seen in sarcoidosis; this may 
cause uveitis.  
 9.  Physiological testing of the eye 
 a 
 True. This is the conventional test of visual acuity. 
 b 
 False. The chart is positioned at 6   m unless mirrors are used. 
 c 
 True. See page 34. 

History, symptoms and examination  57
  d   
  True. This allows a map of the visual ﬁ eld to be created, linking the points 
perceived with similar size and brightness; similar to the contour lines of 
a map.  
 e 
 False. A perimeter measures the visual ﬁ eld. A tonometer measures 
intraocular pressure. 
 10.  Pupils 
 a 
 True. Mydriasis refers to a dilated pupil. 
 b 
 True. For causes see Chapter  13 . 
 c 
 False. Blockade of these parasympathetic ﬁ bres results in mydriasis 
because of the continued sympathetic dilator activity.  
 d 
 True. This is an important test of optic nerve function, see page 40. 
 e 
 False. They will constrict. 
 11.  Lids 
 a 
 True. See Chapter  5 . 
 b 
 True. See Chapter  5 . 
 c 
 True. The third nerve carries nerve ﬁ bres to the levator muscle. See 
Chapter  15  for a full description.  
 d 
 True. The muscle fatigues. 
 12.  Fluorescein 
 a 
 False. Fluorescein is excited by blue light and emits in the green. 
  b  
  True. This is a ready way to demonstrate abnormalities of the corneal 
epithelium.  
 c 
 True. The blue light excites the ﬂ uorescein causing it to emit green light. 
  d   
  True.The dye, diluted by the leaking aqueous, becomes bright green at its 
junction with the dark, concentrated solution.  
 e 
 True. This is called ﬂ uorescein angiography. 
 13.  The direct ophthalmoscope 
 a 
 True. The image is magniﬁ ed some 16 times. 
  b   
  False. The lenses allow the refractive error of patient and examiner to be 
corrected.  
 c 
 True. This is an important part of the examination. 
  d   
  False. To see the retina the observer must be close to the eye.  
 e 
 True. The size and colour of the illumination can be altered. 
 14.  Instruments 
 a 
 False. Keratometry involves the measurement of corneal shape. 
 b 
 True. See page 47 for an account of its use. 
 c 
 False. This allows the protrusion of the eye to be measured. 
 d 
 True. See page 46 for a brief account of this. 
 Don ’ t worry if you found some of these questions difﬁ cult at this stage. Revisit 
them when you have read the rest of the book and measure your improved 
knowledge! 

 Learning objectives 
 To understand:
 ✓  The different refractive states of the eye, accommo-
dation and presbyopia.  
 ✓      The means of correcting refractive error in cataract 
surgery. 
 ✓      The correction of vision with contact lenses, specta-
cles and refractive surgery. 
 3 
Clinical optics  
 
 Introduction 
 Light can be deﬁ ned as that part of the electromagnetic spectrum to which the 
retina is sensitive. The visible part of the spectrum lies between the wavebands 
390   nm and 760   nm. For the eye to generate accurate visual information light 
must be correctly focused on the retina. The focus must be adjustable to allow 
equally clear vision of near and distant objects. The cornea, or actually the air/
tear interface, is responsible for two - thirds of the focusing power of the eye, 
and the crystalline lens for one - third. These two refracting elements in the eye 
converge the rays of light because:
    •      The refracting surfaces of the cornea and lens are spherically convex.  
   •      The cornea has a higher refractive index than air; the lens has a higher refrac-
tive index than the aqueous and vitreous humours that surround it. The 
velocity of light is reduced in a dense medium so that light is refracted 
towards the normal. When passing from the air to the cornea, or from the 
aqueous to the lens, the rays therefore converge.     
Ophthalmology Lecture Notes, Eleventh Edition. Bruce James, Anthony Bron. 
© 2011 Bruce James and Anthony Bron. Published 2011 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Clinical optics 59
 Ametropia 
 When parallel rays of light from a distant object are brought to a focus on the 
retina with the eye at rest (i.e. not accommodating) the refractive state of the 
eye is known as  emmetropia  (Figure  3.1 ). Such an individual can see sharply in 
the distance without accommodation.   
 In  ametropia , parallel rays of light are not brought to a focus on the retina 
with the eye at rest. A change in refraction is required to achieve sharp vision. 
 Ametropia may be divided into:
 •  Myopia  (short - sightedness): the optical power of the eye is too high (usually 
due to an elongated globe) and parallel rays of light are brought to a focus in 
front of the retina (Figure  3.2 ).    
 Figure 3.1   The rays of light in an emmetropic eye are focused on the retina.  
Parallel rays from
a distant object
The cornea and crystalline lens
focus the rays onto the retina
Cornea
Lens
Retina
 Figure 3.2   Myopia and hypermetropia.  
Myopic eye
Blurred
image
Blurred
image
Hypermetropic eye
Parallel rays from
a distant object

60 
Clinical optics
 •  Hypermetropia  (long - sightedness): the optical power is too low (usually 
because the eye is too short) and parallel rays of light converge towards a 
point behind the retina (Figure  3.2 ). 
 •  Astigmatism : the optical power of the cornea in different planes is not equal. 
Parallel rays of light passing through these different planes are brought to 
different points of focus.    
 All three types of ametropia can be corrected by spectacle lenses (Figure  3.3 ). 
These diverge the rays in myopia, converge the rays in hypermetropia, and 
correct for the non - spherical shape of the cornea in astigmatism. It should be 
noted that in hypermetropia, accommodative effort will bring distant objects 
into focus by increasing the power of the lens. This will use up the accommoda-
tive reserve for near objects. 
 Accommodation and  p resbyopia 
 As an object of regard is brought nearer to the eye, focus is maintained by an 
increase in the power of the lens of the eye. This is brought about by ciliary 
muscle contraction, which relaxes zonular tension on the lens equator and 
allows the lens to take up a more spherical shape. This is  accommodation 
(Figure  3.4 ). The eyes also converge. 
 The ability to accommodate decreases with age, reaching a critical point at 
about 40 - plus years, when the subject experiences difﬁ culty with near vision 
( presbyopia ). This occurs earlier in hypermetropes than in myopes. The problem 
is overcome with convex reading lenses, which provide the converging power 
no longer supplied by the lens of the eye.  
 Figure 3.3   Correction of ametropia with spectacle lenses.  
Myopic eye
Hypermetropic eye
Converging lens
(Convex lens)
Diverging lens
(Concave lens)

Clinical optics 61
 Optical  c orrection after 
 c ataract  e xtraction 
 The lens provides one - third of the refractive power of the eye, so that after cata-
ract extraction (the removal of an opaque lens) the eye is rendered highly 
hypermetropic, a condition termed  aphakia . This can be corrected by:
 •  the insertion of an intraocular lens at the time of surgery; 
 •  contact lenses; 
 •  aphakic spectacles. 
 Intraocular lenses (IOLs) give the best optical results and are routinely used 
in the developed world and increasingly used in the developing world. These 
are placed at the site of the natural lens and mimic its performance. As they are 
unable to change shape the eye cannot accommodate. An eye with an IOL is 
said to be  pseudophakic . 
 Hinged lenses are available, which can achieve a degree of accommodative 
effect and also multifocal IOLs, which combine a distance and near correction. 
Multifocal lenses may not suit everybody because of optical side effects 
(reduced contrast and glare), so it is important to counsel patients preopera-
tively. Multifocal lenses may allow patients to be independent of spectacles for 
both distance and near vision. 
 Contact lenses are worn at the surface of the cornea and produce slight 
magniﬁ cation of the retinal image (110%); this is not of visual signiﬁ cance. 
Insertion, removal and cleaning can be difﬁ cult for elderly patients or those 
with physical disability (e.g. arthritis). 
 Aphakic spectacles are corrective spectacles which are provided when no IOL 
has been used. They have a number of disadvantages:
 •  They are powerful positive lenses which magnify the retinal image by about 
133%, causing the patient to misjudge distances. They cannot be used to 
correct one eye alone if the other eye is  phakic  (the natural lens is  in situ ) or 
pseudophakic, because of the disparity in image size between the two cor-
rected eyes ( aniseikonia ). This causes symptoms of dizziness and diplopia. 
 Figure 3.4   The effect of accommodation on the lens.  
More globular shape
of lens attained with
accommodation

62 
Clinical optics
   •      Aphakic lenses induce many optical aberrations, including distortion of the 
image due to the thickness of the lens.     
 Contact  l enses 
 These are made either from rigid gas - permeable or from soft hydrophilic mate-
rials. All contact lenses retard the diffusion of oxygen to the cornea but rigid 
gas - permeable lenses are relatively more permeable than soft lenses. Although 
soft lenses are better tolerated physically, gas - permeable lenses have certain 
advantages:
 •  Their greater oxygen - permeability reduces the risk of corneal damage from 
hypoxia.  
 •  Their rigidity allows easier cleaning and offers less risk of infection. 
 •  Their rigidity permits an effective correction of astigmatism. 
   •      Proteinaceous debris is less likely to adhere to the lens and cause an allergic 
conjunctivitis. 
 Daily disposable contact lenses are available which are discarded on the day 
of use. 
 Thin, soft contact lenses without a refractive function may also be used as 
ocular  bandages , e.g. in the treatment of some corneal diseases such as a per-
sistent epithelial defect.  
 Spectacles 
 Spectacles are available to correct most refractive errors. Lenses can be made 
to correct long -  and short - sightedness and astigmatism. They are simple and 
safe to use but may be lost or damaged. Some people ﬁ nd them cosmetically 
unacceptable and prefer to wear contact lenses. The correction of presbyopia 
requires additional lens power to overcome the eye ’ s reduced accommodation 
for near focus. This can be achieved with:
 •  separate pairs of glasses for distance and near vision; 
   •      a pair of bifocal lenses, where the near correction is added to the lower 
segment of the distance lens;  
   •      varifocal lenses, where the power of the lens gradually changes from the 
distance correction (in the upper part) to the near correction (in the lower 
part). This provides sharper middle - distance vision but the lenses may be 
difﬁ cult to manage. 
 People with particular needs, such as musicians, may also need glasses for 
middle distance.  

Clinical optics 63
 Low - vision  a ids 
 Patients with poor vision can be helped by advice on lighting conditions and 
low - vision aids. Clinics specializing in low vision are available in most eye units. 
Devices used include:
 •  magniﬁ ers for near vision (Figure  3.5 );    
 •  telescopes for distance vision; 
 •  closed - circuit television to provide magniﬁ cation and improve contrast; 
 •  large - print books; 
 •  talking clocks and watches; 
 •  a variety of gadgets to help the patient manage household tasks. 
 Refractive  s urgery 
 Although refractive errors are most commonly corrected by spectacles or 
contact lenses, laser surgical correction is gaining popularity. The excimer laser 
is used to precisely ablate a superﬁ cial layer of stromal tissue from the cornea 
to modify its shape and alter its refractive function. Myopia is corrected by 
 Figure 3.5   Some examples of low - vision aids. Most aid near tasks such as reading. 
Two monocular telescopes, to help with distance vision, are shown at the top.  

64 
Clinical optics
ﬂ attening the cornea and hypermetropia by steepening it. In photorefractive 
keratectomy (PRK), the laser is applied to the corneal surface after removing 
the epithelium. The cornea is resurfaced in a few days. In laser - assisted  in situ 
keratomileusis (LASIK), the epithelium is intact. A hinged, partial - thickness 
ﬂ ap of corneal stroma is ﬁ rst created with a rapidly moving automated blade. 
The ﬂ ap is lifted and the laser applied to the stromal bed to alter its contour. 
The ﬂ ap is then restored to its original position. Unlike PRK, LASIK provides a 
near instantaneous improvement in vision with minimal discomfort. Laser -
 assisted subepithelial keratomileusis (LASEK) creates only an epithelial ﬂ ap, 
leaving a thicker stroma. This may be important in those with a thin cornea. 
The LASEK ﬂ ap takes longer to heal than a LASIK ﬂ ap. Serious complications 
during ﬂ ap creation occur rarely. 
 Patients experience discomfort for a few days after PRK although the level 
of pain can be reduced by provision of a bandage contact lens and treatment 
with topical or systemic non - steroidal anti - inﬂ ammatory drugs (NSAIDs). 
Intraocular lenses can also be placed in a phakic eye to correct severe refractive 
error, but this carries all the risks of intraocular surgery and the possibility of 
cataract formation. 
 Multiple choice questions 
 1.  Clinical optics 
 a 
 The visible spectrum extends from 390 to 760  nm. 
  b   
  Emmetropia means that parallel rays of light are brought to a focus on the 
retina when accommodation is relaxed.  
  c   
  In myopia the rays are focused in front of the retina, in hypermetropia they 
are focused behind the retina.  
 d 
 Astigmatism suggests that the cornea is perfectly round. 
 e 
 Presbyopia refers to the loss of accommodation with age. 
 2.  Correction of ametropia 
   a   
  A concave lens causes divergence of parallel rays and is used to correct 
myopia. 
  b   
  A convex lens causes convergence of parallel rays and is used to correct 
hypermetropia.  
 c 
 The natural lens provides 50% of the refractive power of the eye. 
 d 
 Aphakic spectacles magnify the retinal image. 
 e 
 The power of the crystalline lens decreases with accommodation. 
 Answers 
 1.  Clinical optics 
 a 
 True. This is the part of the spectrum to which the retina is sensitive. 
  b   
  True. See page 59 for an explanation and diagram.  

Clinical optics 65
 c 
 True. See Figure  3.2 . 
 d 
 False. It suggests that the shape of the cornea is similar to a rugby ball. 
  e   
  True. The lens is unable to change shape sufﬁ ciently and the ability to 
accommodate is reduced. 
 2.  Correction of ametropia 
 a 
 True. See Figure  3.3 . 
 b 
 True. See Figure  3.3 . 
 c 
 False. It produces about 33% of the refractive power of the eye. 
 d 
 True. This magniﬁ cation effect creates optical problems for patients 
wearing aphakic spectacles.  
 e 
 False. The power of the lens increases with accommodation. 
 

 Learning  o bjective 
 ✓  To understand the symptoms, signs, causes and 
investigation of orbital disease. 
 4 
The  o rbit  
 
 Introduction 
 The orbit provides:
 •  protection to the globe; 
   •      attachments which stabilize ocular movements;  
 •  foramina for the transmission of nerves and vessels. 
 Despite the number of different tissues present in the orbit, the expression 
of diseases due to different pathologies is often similar.  
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Proptosis 
 Proptosis , or  exophthalmos , is a protrusion of the eye caused by a space -
 occupying lesion. It can be measured with an  exophthalmometer . A difference 
of prominence of more than 3   mm between the two eyes is signiﬁ cant. Various 
other features give a clue to the pathological process involved (Figure  4.1 ).
 •  If the eye is displaced directly forwards it suggests a space - occupying lesion 
lying within the extraocular muscle cone (an  intra - conal lesion ). An example 
would be an optic nerve sheath meningioma.    
   •      If the eye is displaced to one side, a lesion outside the muscle cone is likely 
(an  extra - conal lesion ). For example, a tumour of the lacrimal gland displaces 
the globe to the nasal side.  
Ophthalmology Lecture Notes, Eleventh Edition. Bruce James, Anthony Bron. 
© 2011 Bruce James and Anthony Bron. Published 2011 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

The orbit 67
   •      A transient proptosis induced by increasing the cephalic venous pressure (by 
a Valsalva manoeuvre) is a sign of orbital varices. 
   •      The speed of onset of proptosis may also give clues to the aetiology. A slow 
onset suggests a benign tumour whereas rapid onset is seen in inﬂ ammatory 
disorders, malignant tumours and caroticocavernous ﬁ stula. 
 •  The presence of pain may suggest infection (e.g. orbital cellulitis). 
 Enophthalmos 
 Enophthalmos  is a backward displacement of the globe. It is a feature of an 
orbital  ‘ blowout fracture ’ , when blunt injury to the globe and orbit fractures a 
thin orbital wall and displaces orbital contents into an adjacent sinus. It was 
also said to occur in Horner ’ s syndrome, but this is really a pseudo - enophthalmos 
due to narrowing of the palpebral ﬁ ssure (see Chapter  13 ). 
 Figure 4.1   Sites of orbital disease.  
Anteriorly placed 
tumours, e.g. of the 
lacrimal gland
Tumours of the optic
nerve/nerve sheath
Orbital 
apex
masses
Enlargement 
of the muscles
Lesions outside
the muscle cone

68 
The orbit
 Pain 
 Inﬂ ammatory conditions, infective disorders and rapidly progressing tumours 
cause pain. This is not usually present with benign tumours.  
 Eyelid and  c onjunctival  c hanges 
 Conjunctival injection and swelling suggest an inﬂ ammatory or infective 
process. Infection is associated with reduced eye movements, erythema and 
swelling of the lids ( orbital cellulitis ). With more anterior lid inﬂ ammation 
( preseptal cellulitis ), eye movements are full and the globe is not inﬂ amed, thus 
excluding the more serious, orbital cellulitis. 
 Florid engorgement of the conjunctival vessels suggests a  caroticocavernous 
ﬁ stula (see below).  
 Binocular  d iplopia 
 Binocular diplopia occurs when only one of the two eyes is ﬁ xated on a target. 
Thus the image in the second eye does not fall upon the fovea. This can be 
due to:
 •  Direct involvement of the muscles in  myositis  and  dysthyroid eye disease 
(Graves ’  disease). The eye appears to be tethered, so that eye movement is 
restricted in a direction  away  from the ﬁ eld of action of the affected muscle 
(e.g. if the inferior rectus is thickened in thyroid eye disease there will be 
restriction of upgaze).  
 •  Involvement of the nerve supply to the extraocular muscles ( paralytic squint ). 
Here, diplopia occurs during gaze  into  the ﬁ eld of action of the muscle 
(e.g. palsy of the right lateral rectus produces diplopia in right horizontal 
gaze). 
 Visual  a cuity 
 This may be reduced by:
    •      exposure keratopathy from severe proptosis, when the cornea is no longer 
protected by the lids and tear ﬁ lm; 
 •  optic nerve involvement by compression or inﬂ ammation; 
   •      distortion of the macula due to compression of the globe by a posterior, 
space - occupying lesion. 
 Investigation of  o rbital  d isease 
 CT and MRI scans have greatly helped in the diagnosis of orbital disease  –  local-
izing the site of the lesion, demonstrating enlarged intraocular muscles in 
dysthyroid eye disease and myositis, or visualizing fractures to the orbit. 

The orbit 69
Additional systemic tests will be dictated by the differential diagnosis (e.g. tests 
to determine the primary site of a secondary tumour).  
 Differential  d iagnosis of  o rbital  d isease 
 Traumatic orbital disease is discussed in Chapter  16 . 
 Disorders of the  e xtraocular  m uscles 
 Dysthyroid eye disease  and  ocular myositis  present with symptoms and signs of 
orbital disease. They are described in Chapter  15 . 
 In children a rapidly developing proptosis may be caused by a rare  rhab-
domyosarcoma  of the extraocular muscles (see Orbital tumours, below). 
 Infective  d isorders 
 Orbital cellulitis is a serious condition which can cause blindness and may 
spread to cause a brain abscess (Figure  4.2 ). The infection often arises from 
an adjacent ethmoid sinus, reﬂ ecting that the medial wall of the orbit is 
extremely thin. The commonest causative organisms are Staphylococcus and 
Streptococcus. The patient presents with:
 •  a painful, proptosed eye; 
 •  conjunctival injection; 
 •  periorbital inﬂ ammation and swelling;  
 •  reduced eye movements; 
 •  possible visual loss; 
 •  systemic illness and pyrexia. 
 An MRI or CT scan is helpful in diagnosis and in planning treatment. The 
condition usually responds to intravenous broad - spectrum antibiotics, but it 
may be necessary to drain an abscess or decompress the orbit, particularly if 
the optic nerve is compromised. Optic nerve function must be watched closely, 
 Figure 4.2   (a) The clinical appearance of a patient with right orbital cellulitis. (b) A CT 
scan showing a left opaque ethmoid sinus and subperiosteal orbital abscess.  
(b)
(a)

70 
The orbit
checking acuity, monitoring colour vision and testing for a relative afferent 
pupillary defect. Orbital decompression is usually performed with the help of 
an ear, nose and throat (ENT) specialist. 
 A preseptal cellulitis involves lid structures alone (Figure  4.3 ). It presents with 
periorbital inﬂ ammation and swelling but not the other ocular features of 
orbital cellulitis. Eye movement is not impaired.   
 An orbital mucocoele arises from accumulated secretions within any of the 
paranasal sinuses when natural drainage of the sinus is blocked. Surgical exci-
sion may be required.  
 Inﬂ ammatory  d isease 
 The orbit may be involved in various inﬂ ammatory disorders, including sar-
coidosis and orbital pseudotumour, a non - speciﬁ c lymphoﬁ broblastic disor-
der. Diagnosis of such conditions is difﬁ cult. The presence of other systemic 
signs of sarcoidosis may be helpful. If an orbital pseudotumour is suspected it 
may be necessary to biopsy the tissue to differentiate the lesion from a 
lymphoma.  
 Vascular  a bnormalities 
 A ﬁ stula may develop between the internal carotid artery or a dural artery, in 
the cavernous sinus, and the cavernous sinus itself ( caroticocavernous sinus 
ﬁ stula ). As a result, the orbital veins are exposed to a high intravascular pres-
sure, the eye is proptosed and the conjunctival veins are dilated and engorged. 
The patient may complain of a pulsatile tinnitus and a bruit may be heard with 
a stethoscope over the eye, in time with the radial pulse. Extraocular muscle 
engorgement reduces eye movements, and increased pressure in the veins 
draining the eye causes an increased intraocular pressure. Interventional radio-
 Figure 4.3   The appearance of a patient with preseptal cellulitis.  

The orbit 71
logical techniques can be used to close the ﬁ stula by embolizing and thrombos-
ing the affected vascular segment. 
 The orbital veins may become dilated ( orbital varix ), causing intermittent 
proptosis when venous pressure is raised. 
 In infants, a  capillary haemangioma  may present as an extensive lesion of 
the orbit, affecting the skin of the lid (Figure  4.4 ). Swelling of the upper lid may 
cause sufﬁ cient ptosis to cause amblyopia. Fortunately most undergo sponta-
neous resolution in the ﬁ rst 5 years of life. Treatment is indicated if size or 
position obstructs the visual axis and risks the development of amblyopia (see 
Chapter  15 ). Local injections of steroid are usually successful in reducing size 
and recently it has been shown that intralesional or systemic propranolol may 
cause rapid regression of the lesion (Figure  4.5 ).    
 Orbital  t umours 
 The following tumours may produce signs of orbital disease:
 •  lacrimal gland tumours; 
 •  optic nerve gliomas; 
 •  meningiomas; 
 •  lymphomas; 
 •  rhabdomyosarcomas; 
 •  metastasis from other systemic cancers (neuroblastomas in children, the 
breast, lung, prostate or gastrointestinal tract in adults). 
 A CT or MRI scan will help with the diagnosis (Figure  4.6 ). Again systemic 
investigation, for example to determine the site of a primary tumour, may be 
required. 
 Malignant  lacrimal gland tumours  carry a poor prognosis. Benign tumours 
still require complete excision to prevent malignant transformation. Optic 
nerve  gliomas may be associated with  neuroﬁ bromatosis . They are difﬁ cult to 
treat but are often slow - growing and thus may require no intervention. 
 Meningiomas  of the optic nerve are rare, and may also be difﬁ cult to excise. 
 Figure 4.4   The appearance of a capillary haemangioma. 

72 
The orbit
 Figure 4.6   A CT scan showing a left - sided orbital metastasis.  
 Figure 4.5   Before (a) and after (b) treatment of a capillary haemangioma with 
propranolol. 
(a)
(b)
Again, they can be monitored over time and some may beneﬁ t from treatment 
with radiotherapy. Meningiomas arising from the middle cranial fossa may 
spread through the optic canal into the orbit. The treatment of  lymphoma 
requires a full systemic investigation to determine whether the lesion is indica-

The orbit 73
tive of widespread disease or whether it is localized to the orbit. In the former 
case the patient is treated with chemotherapy, in the latter with localized 
radiotherapy. 
 In children the commonest orbital tumour is a  rhabdomyosarcoma , a rapidly 
growing, malignant tumour of striated muscle. Chemotherapy is effective if the 
disease is localized to the orbit.  
 Dermoid  c ysts 
 These congenital lesions are caused by the continued growth of ectodermal 
tissue beneath the surface, which may present in the medial or lateral aspect 
of the superior orbit (Figure  4.7 ). Excision is usually performed for cosmetic 
reasons and to avoid traumatic rupture, which may cause scarring. Some may 
be attached deeply by a stalk, and a CT scan may be necessary before surgery 
to identify this deeper connection. Dermoids may also occur at the limbus.   
 Figure 4.7    A left dermoid cyst.  
 
  PAEDIATRIC OPHTHALMOLOGY 
 •  Treat a child with proptosis as an ophthalmic emergency.  
 •  A capillary haemangioma may cause the pupil to be covered and cause 
amblyopia. 
 
  KEY POINTS 
 •  Suspect orbital cellulitis in a patient with proptosis and periorbital and conjunctival 
inﬂ ammation, particularly when there is severe pain and the patient is systemically 
unwell.  
 •  The commonest cause of bilateral proptosis is dysthyroid disease.  
 •  The commonest cause of unilateral proptosis is also dysthyroid disease.  
 •  Dysthyroid disease may be associated with the serious complications of exposure 
keratopathy and optic nerve compression.  

74 
The orbit
     Multiple  c hoice  q uestions 
 1.  A 56 - year - old female patient presents with a proptosed eye, deviated 
nasally. 
 a 
 An eye displaced to one side of the orbit suggests an extra - conal lesion. 
 b 
 Rapid onset of proptosis might suggest a malignant tumour. 
 c 
 The patient may have dysthyroid eye (Graves ’ ) disease. 
 d 
 The patient may have a rhabdomyosarcoma of the extraocular muscles. 
 e 
 Diplopia is a common presenting feature of orbital disease. 
 2.  A 16 - year - old boy presents with swollen eyelids, a red eye, proptosis, 
severe eye pain and tenderness and a pyrexia. The vision has become very 
blurred and colour vision is reduced. 
 a 
 Orbital cellulitis is the most likely diagnosis. 
 b 
 A relative afferent pupillary defect may be present. 
 c 
 No investigations are necessary. 
 d 
 Urgent orbital decompression is indicated. 
 3.  A 70 - year - old woman with a history of previous head trauma presents 
with sudden onset of a red, proptosed eye. Eye movements are reduced in 
all directions. Vision is intact. Intraocular pressure is increased. The most 
likely diagnosis is: 
 a 
 Dysthyroid eye (Graves ’ ) disease. 
 b 
 A caroticocavernous sinus ﬁ stula. 
 c 
 An orbital varix. 
 d 
 A dermoid cyst. 
 Answers 
 1.  A 56 - year - old female patient presents with a proptosed eye, deviated 
nasally. 
   a   
  True. It is likely that the lesion is outside the muscle cone causing an asym-
metric deviation of the eye.  
  b   
  True. A rapid onset of proptosis is also seen in inﬂ ammatory disorders and 
caroticocavernous sinus ﬁ stula. 
 c 
 True. See Chapter  15 , page 245. 
 d 
 False. This is seen in much younger patients. 
  e   
  True. This may result form direct involvement of the muscle or its nerve 
supply. 
  2.   A 16 - year - old boy presents with swollen eyelids, a red eye, proptosis, 
severe eye pain and tenderness and a pyrexia. The vision has become very 
blurred and colour vision is reduced. 

The orbit 75
 a 
 True. These are the classic symptoms. 
  b   
  True. The reduced acuity and colour vision suggests that the optic nerve is 
compromised, so that a relative afferent pupillary defect is expected.  
  c   
  False. An urgent CT of the orbit should be undertaken to conﬁ rm the diag-
nosis. Blood cultures may also be helpful. 
 d 
 True. Successful decompression may save optic nerve function. 
  3.   A 70 - year - old woman with a history of previous head trauma presents 
with sudden onset of a red, proptosed eye. Eye movements are reduced 
in all directions. Vision is intact. Intraocular pressure is increased. 
 a 
 False. While possible, it is not the most likely diagnosis. 
 b 
 True. These are the classic features, including the history of trauma. 
  c   
  False. A varix causes an intermittent proptosis, worsened by an elevated 
venous pressure, such as may occur with a Valsalva manoeuvre. 
  d   
  False. Dermoid cysts occur in a much younger age group. They do not cause 
proptosis and usually present as a swelling at the medial or lateral aspect 
of the orbit. 
 

 Learning  o bjectives 
 To understand:
 ✓      The symptoms, signs and causes of abnormal eyelid 
position.  
 ✓  The symptoms, signs and treatment of blepharitis. 
 ✓  The causes of lid swellings. 
 5 
The  e yelids  
 
 Introduction 
 The eyelids are important both in providing physical protection to the eyes and 
in ensuring a normal tear ﬁ lm and tear drainage. Diseases of the eyelids can be 
divided into those associated with:
 •  abnormal lid position; 
 •  inﬂ ammation; 
 •  lid lumps; 
 •  abnormalities of the lashes. 
 Abnormalities of  l id  p osition 
 Ptosis 
 This is an abnormally low position of the upper eyelid (Figure  5.1 ). 
Ophthalmology Lecture Notes, Eleventh Edition. Bruce James, Anthony Bron. 
© 2011 Bruce James and Anthony Bron. Published 2011 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

The eyelids 77
 Pathogenesis 
 It may be caused by:
 1  Mechanical factors. 
 a  Large lid lesions pulling the lid down. 
 b  Lid oedema. 
 c  Tethering of the lid by conjunctival scarring. 
  d     Structural abnormalities, including a disinsertion of the aponeurosis of the 
levator muscle, usually in elderly patients.    
 2  Neurological factors. 
   a     Third nerve palsy (see Chapter  15 ).  
  b     Horner ’ s syndrome, due to a sympathetic nerve lesion (see Chapter  13 ).  
 c  Marcus – Gunn jaw - winking syndrome. In this congenital ptosis there is a 
congenital mis - wiring of the nerve supply to the pterygoid muscle of the 
jaw (cranial nerve V) and the levator of the eyelid (cranial nerve III) so that 
the eyelid moves in conjunction with movements of the jaw.    
 3  Myogenic factors. 
 a  Myasthenia gravis (see Chapter  15 ). 
 b  Some forms of muscular dystrophy. 
 c  Chronic external ophthalmoplegia. 
 Symptoms 
 Patients present because:
 •  they object to the cosmetic effect; 
 •  vision may be impaired; 
   •      there are symptoms and signs associated with the underlying cause (e.g. 
asymmetric pupils in Horner ’ s syndrome, diplopia and reduced eye move-
ments in a third nerve palsy). 
 Signs 
 There is a reduction in size of the palpebral aperture. The upper lid margin, 
which usually overlaps the upper limbus by 1 – 2  mm, may partially cover the 
 Figure 5.1   Left ptosis.  

78 
The eyelids
pupil or the eye may be completely closed. The function of the levator muscle 
can be tested by measuring the maximum travel of the upper lid from full 
upgaze to full downgaze (normally 15 – 18   mm). It is common for the eyebrows 
to be elevated in the presence of ptosis, as a compensatory event which offsets 
the ptosis. Pressure on the brow (frontalis muscles) during the test will prevent 
this contribution to lid elevation. Other signs, associated with, for example, 
Horner ’ s syndrome or a third nerve palsy, may be present. 
 Four diagnostic tests may be performed if myasthenia is suspected.
 1     In myasthenia, repeated elevation and depression of the eye results in an 
increased ptosis.  
 2     Manual retraction of the upper lid causes a ptosis or increased ptosis in the 
fellow eye. It is argued that the withdrawal of the stimulus to raise the 
retracted lid reduces the stimulus to elevation bilaterally. 
 3     Ask the patient to look down for 15 seconds and then look up at an elevated 
target. The lid overshoots and then falls slightly after the period of rest 
(Cogan ’ s twitch test). 
 4     Ice (in a rubber glove), applied to the lid for 2 minutes, signiﬁ cantly reduces 
a myasthenic ptosis. 
 Management 
 In the absence of a medically treatable disease such as myasthenia gravis, 
ptosis otherwise requires surgical correction. In very young children this is 
usually deferred, but may be expedited if the visual axis is covered and threat-
ens to induce amblyopia.   
 Entropion 
 This is an inturning of the lid margin and lashes, usually of the lower lid, 
towards the globe (Figure  5.2 ). It may occur if the patient looks downwards or 
 Figure 5.2   Entropion. 

The eyelids 79
be induced by forced lid closure. It is seen most commonly in elderly patients 
where the orbicularis muscle is weakened. It may also be caused by conjunc-
tival scarring, drawing the lid inwards ( cicatricial entropion ). The inturned 
lashes abrade the cornea and cause marked irritation of the eye. The eye 
may be red. Short - term treatment includes the application of lubricants to the 
eye or taping of the lid to turn the lashes away from the globe. The condition 
can be alleviated for a period by the injection of botulinum toxin into the 
palpebral part of the orbicularis muscle of the lower lid, or cured permanently 
by surgery. 
 Ectropion 
 Here there is an eversion of the lid away from the globe (Figure  5.3 ). Usual 
causes include:
 •  age - related orbicularis muscle laxity; 
 •  scarring of the periorbital skin; 
 •  seventh nerve palsy. 
 The malposition of the lids everts the puncta and prevents drainage of the 
tears, leading to epiphora. It also exposes the conjunctiva and lower globe to 
dehydration (see Chapter  6 ). Ectropion causes an irritable eye. Surgical treat-
ment is again an effective treatment.   
 Inﬂ ammations of the  e yelids 
 Blepharitis 
 This is a very common, chronic inﬂ ammation of the lid margins (Figure  5.4 ). 
In  anterior blepharitis inﬂ ammation of the lid margin is concentrated in 
 Figure 5.3   Ectropion. 

80 
The eyelids
the lash line and accompanied by squamous debris around the eyelashes. 
The conjunctiva becomes injected. It is sometimes associated with a 
chronic staphylococcal infection. In severe disease the cornea is affected 
( blepharokeratitis ). Small inﬁ ltrates or ulcers may form in the peripheral cornea 
( marginal keratitis ) due to an immune complex response to staphylococcal 
exotoxins. 
 In  posterior blepharitis  (or  meibomian gland dysfunction ) the meibomian 
glands are usually obstructed by squamous debris. The two forms may occur 
independently. 
 Figure 5.4   Blepharitis. (a) A diagram showing the signs. (b) The clinical appearance 
of the lid margin. Note (1) the scales on the lashes, (2) dilated blood vessels on the lid 
margin and (3) plugging of the meibomian glands.  
Injection of the
lid margin
Collarette formation
around lashes
Meibomian gland
plugging
Cloudy meibomian
gland secretion
Scales
(a)
(b)

The eyelids 81
 Symptoms 
 These include:
 •  tired, itchy, sore eyes, worse in the morning; 
 •  crusting of the lid margins in anterior blepharitis and redness in both. 
 Signs 
 In anterior blepharitis there may be:
    •      redness and scaling of the lid margins; some lash bases may be ulcerated  –  a 
sign of staphylococcal infection;  
   •      debris in the form of a collarette around the eyelashes (cylindrical dan-
druff). This may indicate an infestation of the lash roots by  Demodex 
folliculorum . 
 •  a reduction in the number of eyelashes. 
 In posterior blepharitis there may be:
 •  obstruction and plugging of the meibomian oriﬁ ces; 
 •  thickened, cloudy, expressed meibomian secretions; 
 •  injection of the lid margin and conjunctiva; 
 •  tear ﬁ lm abnormalities and punctate keratitis. 
 Both forms of blepharitis are strongly associated with seborrhoeic dermati-
tis, atopic eczema and acne rosacea. In rosacea there is hyperaemia and tel-
angiectasia of the facial skin and a rhinophyma (a bulbous irregular swelling 
of the nose with hypertrophy of the sebaceous glands).  
 Treatment 
 This is often difﬁ cult and must be long - term for these chronic conditions. 
 For anterior blepharitis, lid toilet with a cotton bud wetted with bicarbonate 
solution or diluted baby shampoo helps to remove squamous debris from the 
lash line. Topical steroids can reduce inﬂ ammation but must be used infre-
quently, to avoid steroid complications. Staphylococcal lid disease may also 
require therapy with topical antibiotics (e.g. fusidic acid gel), and occasionally 
with systemic antibiotics.  Demodex  infestation responds to the application of 
 ‘ tea tree oil ’ . 
 For meibomian gland dysfunction, abnormal secretions can be expressed by 
lid massage after hot bathing through the closed lids. If this treatment fails, 
then there may be a place for topical azithromycin drops. Alternatively, meibo-
mian gland function can be improved by short courses of oral tetracycline. 
Where meibomian gland obstruction is extensive, the absence of an oily layer 
on the tear ﬁ lm can induce an evaporative dry eye, which requires treatment 
with artiﬁ cial tears. 

82 
The eyelids
 Prognosis 
 Although symptoms may be ameliorated by treatment, blepharitis may remain 
a chronic problem. 
 Benign  l id  l umps and  b umps 
 Chalazion 
 This is a common, painless condition in which an obstructed meibomian gland 
causes a granuloma within the tarsal plate (Figure  5.5 ). Symptoms are of an 
unsightly lid swelling which usually resolves within 6 months. If the lesion 
persists it can be incised and the gelatinous contents curetted away.   
 An abscess ( internal hordeolum ) may also form within the meibomian gland 
and, unlike a chalazion, this is painful. It may respond to topical antibiotics but 
usually incision is necessary. 
 A stye ( external hordeolum ) is an exquisitely painful abscess of an eyelash 
follicle. Treatment requires the removal of the associated eyelash and applica-
tion of hot compresses. Most cases are self - limiting, but occasionally systemic 
antibiotics are required.  
 Molluscum  c ontagiosum 
 This umbilicated lesion found on the lid margin is caused by a pox virus (Figure 
 5.6 ). It causes irritation of the eye. The eye is red, and small elevations of lym-
phoid tissue are found on the tarsal conjunctiva ( follicular conjunctivitis ). 
Treatment requires excision of the lid lesion.    
 Figure 5.5   Chalazion. 

The eyelids 83
 Cysts 
 Various cysts may form on the eyelids. Sebaceous cysts are opaque. They rarely 
cause symptoms. They can be excised for cosmetic reasons. A cyst of Moll is a 
small translucent cyst on the lid margin caused by obstruction of a sweat gland. 
A cyst of Zeis is an opaque cyst on the eyelid margin caused by blockage of an 
accessory sebaceous gland. These too can be excised for cosmetic reasons. 
 Squamous  c ell  p apilloma 
 This is a common, frond - like lid lesion with a ﬁ brovascular core and thickened 
squamous epithelium (Figure  5.7 a). It is usually asymptomatic but can be 
excised for cosmetic reasons with cautery to the base. 
 Xanthelasmas 
 These are lipid - containing bilateral lesions which may in youth be associated 
with hypercholesterolaemia (Figure  5.7 b). It is worth checking the blood cho-
lesterol. They are excised for cosmetic reasons.  
 Keratoacanthoma 
 This is a brownish pink, fast - growing lesion with a central crater ﬁ lled with 
keratin (Figure  5.7 c). Treatment is by excision. Careful histology must be per-
formed as some may have the malignant features of a squamous cell carcinoma 
(see below).  
 Naevus ( m ole) 
 These lesions are derived from naevus cells (altered melanocytes) and can be 
pigmented or non - pigmented. No treatment is necessary.   
 Figure 5.6   Molluscum contagiosum.  

84 
The eyelids
 Malignant  t umours 
 Basal  c ell  c arcinoma ( BCC ) 
 This is the most common form of malignant tumour (Figure  5.8 ). Ten per cent 
of cases occur in the eyelids and account for 90% of eyelid malignancies. The 
tumour is:
 •  slow - growing; 
 •  locally invasive; 
 •  non - metastasizing. 
 Patients present with a painless lesion on the eyelid which may be nodular, 
sclerosing or ulcerative (the so - called  rodent ulcer ). Typically, it has a  pale , 
 pearly margin . A high index of suspicion is required. Treatment is by:
 Figure 5.7   (a) A squamous cell papilloma; (b) xanthelasma; (c) keratoacanthoma.  
(a)
(c)
(b)

The eyelids 85
    •      Excision biopsy with a margin of normal tissue surrounding the lesion. For 
large lesions threatening important tissues, excision may be controlled with 
frozen sections and serial sections used to determine the need for additional 
tissue removal (Mohs surgery). This minimizes destruction of normal tissue.  
 •  Cryotherapy. 
 •  Radiotherapy. 
 The prognosis is usually very good, but deep invasion of the tumour can be 
difﬁ cult to treat.  
 Squamous  c ell  c arcinoma 
 This is a less common but more malignant tumour which can metastasize to 
the lymph nodes. It can arise  de novo  or from pre - malignant lesions. It may 
present as a hard nodule or a scaly patch. Treatment is by excisional biopsy 
with a margin of healthy tissue. 
 Ultraviolet (UV) exposure is an important risk factor for both basal cell and 
squamous cell carcinoma. 
 When a squamous cell carcinoma is suspected, it is essential to check for the 
presence of affected cervical lymph nodes.   
 Abnormalities of the  l ashes 
 Trichiasis 
 This is a common condition in which aberrant eyelashes are directed back-
wards towards the globe. It is distinct from entropion. The lashes rub against 
the cornea and cause irritation and abrasion. It may result from any cicatricial 
process. In developing countries, trachoma (see Chapter  17 ) is an important 
cause and trichiasis is an important basis for the associated blindness. 
 Figure 5.8   A basal cell carcinoma.  

86 
The eyelids
Treatment is by epilation of the offending lashes. Recurrence can be treated 
with cryotherapy or electrolysis. Any underlying abnormality of lid position 
needs surgical correction. 
 
  PAEDIATRIC OPHTHALMOLOGY 
 •  A ptosis in a child, if the visual axis is covered, may cause amblyopia.  
 
  KEY POINTS 
 •  Blepharitis is a common cause of sore  ‘ tired ’  irritable eyes.  
 •  A patient with an umbilicated lesion and a sore red eye may have molluscum 
contagiosum.  
 •  Abnormalities of eyelid position can cause corneal disease.  
 •  Always consider the possibility of malignancy in lid lesions.  
     Multiple  c hoice  q uestions 
 1.  A 55 - year - old woman presents with a small ptosis, and miosis on the same 
side. She is a smoker. The likely diagnosis is 
 a 
 Myasthenia gravis. 
 b 
 Marcus – Gunn syndrome. 
 c 
 Horner ’ s syndrome. 
 d 
 Third nerve palsy. 
 e 
 Conjunctival scarring. 
 2.  Blepharitis is associated with 
 a 
 Cloudy meibomian secretions in posterior blepharitis. 
 b 
 Injection of the lid margin. 
 c 
 Marginal keratitis. 
 d 
 An inturned eyelid. 
 e 
 Debris around the base of an eyelash, termed a collarette. 
 3.  A 70 - year - old patient presents with the single lesion shown in Figure  5.9 . 
It is slowly increasing in size. The most likely diagnosis is 
 a 
 Keratoacanthoma. 
 b 
 Basal cell carcinoma. 
 c 
 Squamous cell carcinoma. 
 d 
 Molluscum contagiosum. 
 e 
 Xanthelasma. 

The eyelids 87
 Answers 
 1.  A 55 - year - old woman presents with a small ptosis, and miosis on the 
same side. She is a smoker. 
 a 
 False. This may cause a ptosis but does not cause miosis. 
  b   
  False. The eyelid moves in conjunction with jaw movements, again there is 
no miosis.  
 c 
 True. There is an interruption of the sympathetic supply to the iris dilator 
and to the smooth muscle of the upper lid. In this patient this may be 
caused by a tumour of the lung.  
 d 
 False. There would be a ptosis but the pupil would be  dilated . 
 e 
 False. Once again this would not affect the size of the pupil. 
 2.  Blepharitis is associated with 
 a 
 True. These may block the meibomian glands. 
 b 
 True. The lid margin is injected or inﬂ amed. 
 c 
 True. In anterior blepharitis; due to staphylococcal sensitization. 
 d 
 False. There is no association between blepharitis and entropion. 
 e 
 True. This is a feature of anterior blepharitis. 
 3.  A 70 - year - old patient presents with the single lesion shown in Figure  5.9 . 
It is slowly increasing in size. 
 a 
 False. There is no central crater ﬁ lled with keratin. 
  b   
  True. Slow growth is usual, the shape is typical and the pearly margin is also 
characteristic. 
  c   
  False. The appearance differs and the condition is less common. It can 
however metastasize and must be considered in the differential diagnosis.  
  d   
  False. These lesions are usually umbilicated and may be associated with a 
red eye and tarsal follicles.  
 e 
 False. These lipid - laden lesions, usually bilateral, are not ulcerated. 
 
 Figure 5.9   The clinical appearance of the eye referred to in Question 3.  

 Learning  o bjectives 
 To understand:
 ✓      The symptoms, signs, causes and treatment of dry 
eyes. 
 ✓      The symptoms, signs, causes and treatment of 
watery eyes. 
 6 
The  l acrimal  s ystem  
 
 Introduction 
 Disorders of the lacrimal system are common and may produce chronic symp-
toms with a signiﬁ cant morbidity. The lacrimal glands normally produce about 
1.5  µ l of tears per minute. Some tears are lost by evaporation, while the remain-
der drain via the nasolacrimal system. The tear ﬁ lm is re - formed with each 
blink. 
 Abnormalities are found in:
 •  tear ﬂ ow and evaporation;  
 •  the drainage of tears. 
 Abnormalities in  t ear  ﬂ ow and 
 e vaporation  –  d ry  e ye 
 Dry eye is a condition of the ocular surface due to a deﬁ ciency of tear quantity 
or composition or excessive evaporation, characterized by hyperosmolarity 
Ophthalmology Lecture Notes, Eleventh Edition. Bruce James, Anthony Bron. 
© 2011 Bruce James and Anthony Bron. Published 2011 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

The lacrimal system 89
and leading to ocular surface damage, inﬂ ammation and symptoms of discom-
fort and visual loss. An alternative term is  keratoconjunctivitis sicca ( KCS ). 
 Aqueous - d eﬁ cient  d ry  e ye 
 A deﬁ ciency of lacrimal secretion occurs with age and may be sufﬁ cient to 
cause dry eyes. When dry eyes occur in combination with a dry mouth and 
dryness of other mucous membranes the condition is called primary  Sj ö gren ’ s 
syndrome  (an autoimmune  exocrinopathy ). Other organ systems may be 
affected. When Sj ö gren ’ s syndrome occurs in association with a speciﬁ c autoim-
mune connective tissue disorder the condition is called secondary Sj ö gren ’ s 
syndrome. Rheumatoid arthritis is the commonest of these associated disor-
ders. Diagnosis of Sj ö gren ’ s syndrome is conﬁ rmed by the demonstration of 
reduced lacrimal and salivary function, the presence of raised titres of anti - Rho 
and anti - La antibodies and the demonstration of T - cell inﬁ ltration of biopsied 
minor salivary glands. 
 Symptoms 
 Patients have non - speciﬁ c symptoms of grittiness, burning, photophobia, 
heaviness of the lids and ocular fatigue. Symptoms are worse in the evening 
because the eyes dry progressively during the day. In more severe cases visual 
acuity may be reduced by corneal damage.  
 Signs 
 In mild cases there are few obvious signs. Staining of the eye with ﬂ uorescein 
will show small dots of ﬂ uorescence ( punctate staining ) over the exposed 
corneal and conjunctival surfaces. In severe cases (Figure  6.1 ) tags of abnormal 
mucus may attach to the corneal surface (Figure  6.2 ) ( ﬁ lamentary keratitis ), 
causing pain due to tugging on these ﬁ laments during blinking. 
 Figure 6.1   Fluorescein staining of cornea and conjunctiva in a severe dry eye.  

90 
The lacrimal system
 Treatment 
 Supplementation of the tears with tear substitutes helps to reduce symptoms, 
and a humid environment can be created around the eyes with shielded spec-
tacles. In severe cases it may be necessary to occlude the puncta with plugs, or 
more permanently with surgery, to conserve the tears. Topical anti - inﬂ ammatory 
agents are also in use (e.g. cyclosporin).  
 Prognosis 
 Mild disease usually responds to artiﬁ cial tears and tear conservation. Severe 
disease, such as that in rheumatoid Sj ö gren ’ s, can be very difﬁ cult to treat.   
 Evaporative  d ry  e ye  –  i nadequate  m eibomian 
 o il  d elivery 
 Extensive meibomian gland obstruction may result in a deﬁ cient tear ﬁ lm lipid 
layer and lead to increased water loss from the eyes. This results in tear hyper-
osmolarity in its own right and also may exacerbate an existing aqueous -
 deﬁ cient dry eye. Treatment of the meibomian gland dysfunction (a form of 
posterior blepharitis) is covered in Chapter  5 .  
 Evaporative  d ry  e ye  –  m alposition of the  g lobe or 
 l id  m argins 
 If the lids are not adequately apposed to the eye ( ectropion ), or there is incom-
plete lid closure ( lagophthalmos   –  e.g. in a seventh nerve palsy), or if the eye 
protrudes ( proptosis ) as in dysthyroid eye disease, then the preocular tear ﬁ lm 
will not form adequately and an evaporative form of dry eye will result. It may 
also occur in conditions of infrequent blinking, such as Parkinson ’ s disease. 
 Correction of the lid deformity is required for ectropion. In other instances, 
if the defect is temporary, artiﬁ cial tears and lubricants can be applied. If lid 
 Figure 6.2   Fluorescein staining of ﬁ lamentary keratitis. 

The lacrimal system 91
closure is inadequate, a temporary ptosis can be induced with a local injection 
of botulinum toxin into the levator muscle to effect a short - term paralysis. 
A more permanent result can be obtained by suturing together part of 
the apposed margins of the upper and lower lids (e.g.  lateral tarsorrhaphy ; 
Figure  6.3 ). 
 Cicatricial  c onjunctival  d isorders 
 Loss of goblet cells occurs in most forms of dry eye, but particularly in cicatri-
cial conjunctival disorders such as erythema multiforme (Stevens – Johnson 
syndrome). In this there is an acute episode of inﬂ ammation causing macular 
 ‘ target ’  lesions on the skin and discharging lesions on the eye, mouth and vulva. 
In the eye this causes conjunctival shrinkage with adhesions forming between 
the globe and the conjunctiva ( symblepharon ). There may be both an aqueous, 
meibomian and a mucin deﬁ ciency, and problems due to lid deformity and 
trichiasis. Chemical burns of the eye, particularly by alkalis, and trachoma 
(chronic inﬂ ammation of the conjunctiva caused by chlamydial infection; see 
Chapters  7  and  17 ) may have a similar end result. 
 The symptoms are similar to those seen with an aqueous deﬁ ciency. 
Examination may reveal scarred, abnormal conjunctiva and areas of ﬂ uores-
cein staining on the cornea and conjunctiva. Treatment requires the applica-
tion of artiﬁ cial lubricants. 
 Vitamin A deﬁ ciency ( xerophthalmia ) is a condition causing childhood 
blindness on a worldwide scale. It is associated with generalized malnutrition 
in countries such as India and Pakistan. Goblet cells are lost from the conjunc-
tiva and the ocular surface becomes keratinized ( xerosis ). An aqueous deﬁ -
ciency may also occur. The characteristic corneal melting and perforation 
which occur in this condition ( keratomalacia ) may be prevented by early treat-
ment with vitamin A (see Chapter  17  for a more detailed description).   
 Figure 6.3   A lateral tarsorrhaphy protects a previously exposed cornea.  

92 
The lacrimal system
 Disorders of  t ear  d rainage 
 When tear production exceeds the capacity of the drainage system, excess tears 
overﬂ ow onto the cheeks. It may be caused by:
    •      irritation of the ocular surface, e.g. by a corneal foreign body, infection or 
blepharitis;  
   •      occlusion of any part of the drainage system (when the tearing is termed 
 epiphora ). 
 Obstruction of  t ear  d rainage ( i nfantile) 
 The nasolacrimal system develops as a solid cord which subsequently canalizes 
and is patent just before term. Congenital obstruction of the duct is common. 
The distal end of the nasolacrimal duct may remain imperforate, causing 
a watering eye. If the canaliculi also become partially obstructed, the non -
 draining pool of ﬂ uid in the sac may become infected and accumulate 
within a  mucocoele or cause  dacrocystitis . Diagnostically, the discharge may 
be expressed from the puncta by pressure over the lacrimal sac. The conjunc-
tiva, however,  is not inﬂ amed . Most obstructions resolve spontaneously in 
the ﬁ rst year of life. If epiphora persists beyond this time, patency can 
be achieved by passing a probe via the punctum through the nasolacrimal duct 
to perforate the occluding membrane ( probing ). A general anaesthetic is 
required. 
 Obstruction of  t ear  d rainage ( a dult) 
 The tear drainage system may become blocked at any point, although the 
most common site is the nasolacrimal duct. Causes include infections or 
direct trauma to the nasolacrimal system and, occasionally, topically applied 
drugs. 
 History 
 The patient complains of a watering eye, sometimes associated with stickiness. 
The eye is white. Symptoms may be worse in the wind or in cold weather. There 
may be a history of previous trauma or infection.  
 Signs 
 A stenosed punctum may be apparent on slit lamp examination. Epiphora is 
unusual if one punctum continues to function. Acquired obstruction beyond 
the punctum is diagnosed by syringing the nasolacrimal system with saline, 
using a ﬁ ne cannula inserted into a canaliculus. A patent system is indicated 
when the patient tastes the saline as it reaches the pharynx. If there is an 

The lacrimal system 93
obstruction of the nasolacrimal duct then ﬂ uid will regurgitate from the non -
 cannulated punctum. The exact location of the obstruction can be conﬁ rmed 
by injecting a radio - opaque dye into the nasolacrimal system ( dacrocystogram ). 
X - rays are then used to follow the passage of the dye through the system. A 
more physiological test follows the passage of a drop of technetium isotope, 
applied to the lateral conjunctival sac, through the drainage system using a 
gamma camera ( dacroscintogram ) (Figure  6.4 ). 
 Treatment 
 It is important to exclude other ocular disease that may contribute to watering, 
such as blepharitis. Repair of the occluded nasolacrimal duct requires surgery 
to connect the mucosal surface of the lacrimal sac to the nasal mucosa by 
removing the intervening bone ( dacryocystorhinostomy  or  DCR ; Figure  6.5 ). 
The operation can be performed through an incision on the side of the nose 
but it may also be performed endoscopically through the nasal passages, thus 
avoiding a scar at the root of the nose. 
 Figure 6.4   A dacroscintogram. This picture was taken 25 minutes after instillation of 
the technetium. The dye has passed through to the nasolacrimal duct and the nose 
on the left hand side. On the right it has entered the lacrimal sac but not the 
nasolacrimal duct indicating an obstruction to ﬂ ow here.  

94 
The lacrimal system
 Infections of the  n asolacrimal  s ystem 
 Closed obstruction of the drainage system predisposes to infection of the sac 
( dacryocystitis ; Figure  6.6 ). The organism involved is usually  Staphylococcus or 
Streptococcus . Patients present with a painful swelling on the medial side of the 
orbit, which is the enlarged, infected sac. Treatment is with systemic antibiot-
 Figure 6.5   The principle of a DCR (dacryocystorhinostomy). 
Upper canaliculus
Lower canaliculus
Osteotomy made in bone on side
of nose
Lacrimal sac
New fistula between 
nasal and lacrimal
sac mucosa
Nasal mucosa
Nasolacrimal duct
Blockage
Nasal cavity
 Figure 6.6   Dacryocystitis, unusually, in this case, pointing through the skin.  

The lacrimal system 95
ics. A  mucocoele  results from a collection of mucus in an obstructed sac; it is 
not grossly infected and is often painless. In either case a DCR may be neces-
sary to remove its contents and achieve a patent nasolacrimal system. 
  
 
  PAEDIATRIC OPHTHALMOLOGY 
 •  A watery eye in a newborn child is commonly due to non - patency of the 
nasolacrimal duct. Most spontaneously resolve within the ﬁ rst year of life.  
 
  KEY POINTS 
 •  Dry eyes can cause signiﬁ cant ocular symptoms and signs.  
 •  In an adult a watery eye is due either to excessive lacrimation or dysfunction or 
blockage of the tear drainage system.  
   Multiple  c hoice  q uestions 
 1.  Sj ö gren ’ s syndrome is associated with 
 a 
 Keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS  – dry eye). 
 b 
 Rheumatoid arthritis. 
 c 
 Cardiac failure. 
 d 
 Dryness of the mouth. 
 e 
 Staining of the cornea with ﬂ uorescein. 
    2.   A 60 - year - old man presents with painless watering of the eye, worse when 
outside in the wind. Sometimes there is a sticky discharge. The white of 
the eye is never inﬂ amed. No abnormal masses are palpable, but pressure 
over the lacrimal sac causes a mucopurulent discharge to be expressed 
from the lower punctum. 
 a 
 The most likely diagnosis is an ectropion. 
 b 
 The most likely diagnosis is a blocked nasolacrimal duct. 
  c   
  The site of a nasolacrimal obstruction can be conﬁ rmed with a 
dacrocystogram.  
 d 
 The most likely diagnosis is blepharitis. 
 e 
 The most likely diagnosis is dacrocystitis. 

96 
The lacrimal system
 Answers 
 1.  Sj ö gren ’ s syndrome 
 a 
 True. There is a deﬁ ciency of lacrimal secretion. 
  b   
  True. The association with connective tissue disease is called secondary 
Sj ö gren ’ s syndrome. 
 c 
 False. There are no associated cardiac diseases. 
 d 
 True. Dry eye and dry mouth are key features of Sj ö gren ’ s syndrome. 
 e 
 True. Dry eye damages the corneal (and conjunctival) epithelium. 
  2.   A 60 - year - old man presents with painless watering of the eye, worse 
when outside in the wind. 
   a   
  False. This may cause epiphora, but there would not usually be a discharge, 
nor would there be a mucopurulent discharge expressed from the lower 
punctum.  
 b 
 True. The symptoms and signs are typical of the condition. 
 c 
 True. The radio - opaque dye outlines the nasolacrimal system. 
  d   
  False. Although blepharitis can cause epiphora there would be no mucopu-
rulent discharge expressible from the lower punctum. 
 e 
 False. There is no swelling over the lacrimal sac. 
 

 
 Learning  o bjectives 
 To understand:
 ✓      The symptoms, signs, causes and treatment of con-
junctival disease. 
 ✓      The symptoms, signs, causes and treatment of 
corneal disease. 
 ✓  The difference between episcleritis and scleritis. 
 7 
Conjunctiva,  c ornea 
and  s clera  
 Introduction 
 Disorders of the conjunctiva and cornea are a common cause of symptoms. 
The ocular surface is regularly exposed to the external environment and subject 
to trauma, infection and allergic reactions  –  which account for the majority of 
diseases in these tissues. Degenerative and structural abnormalities account 
for a minority of problems. 
 Symptoms 
 Patients may complain of the following:
 1     Pain and irritation. Conjunctivitis alone is seldom associated with anything 
more than mild discomfort. Pain signiﬁ es something more serious such as 
corneal injury or infection. This symptom helps differentiate conjunctivitis 
from corneal disease.  
Ophthalmology Lecture Notes, Eleventh Edition. Bruce James, Anthony Bron. 
© 2011 Bruce James and Anthony Bron. Published 2011 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

98 
Conjunctiva, cornea and sclera
 2  Redness. In conjunctivitis the entire conjunctival surface including that cov-
ering the tarsal plates is involved. If the redness is localized to the limbus ( a 
ciliary ﬂ ush ) the following should be considered: 
 a  keratitis (an inﬂ ammation of the cornea);  
 b  uveitis (see Chapter 9); 
 c  acute glaucoma (see Chapter10). 
 3  Discharge. Purulent discharge suggests a bacterial conjunctivitis. Viral con-
junctivitis is associated mainly with a more watery discharge.  
 4     Visual loss which is not cleared by blinking. This occurs only when the central 
cornea is affected. Loss of vision is thus an important symptom requiring 
urgent action.  
 5  Patients with corneal disease may also complain of photophobia. 
 Signs 
 The following features may be seen in conjunctival disease:
 •  Papillae. These are raised lesions on the upper tarsal conjunctiva, about 1  mm 
or more in diameter with a central vascular core. They are  a non - speciﬁ c sign 
of chronic inﬂ ammation. They result from inﬂ ammatory inﬁ ltrates within the 
conjunctiva, constrained by the presence of multiple, tiny ﬁ brous septa. 
 Giant papillae  are typical of allergic eye disease and are formed by the coa-
lescence of papillae (see Figure  7.4 ). They are also seen as a reaction to 
contact lens wear.  
 •  Follicles (Figure  7.1 ). These are raised, gelatinous, oval lesions about 1  mm in 
diameter, found usually in the lower tarsal conjunctiva and upper tarsal 
border, and occasionally at the limbus. Each follicle represents a lymphoid 
collection with its own germinal centre. Unlike papillae, the causes of follicles 
are more speciﬁ c (e.g. viral and chlamydial infections) and they are therefore 
a clue to aetiology.    
 •  Dilation of the conjunctival vasculature (termed  injection ). 
 Figure 7.1   The clinical appearance of follicles.  

Conjunctiva, cornea and sclera 99
 •  Subconjunctival haemorrhage, often  bright red  in colour because it is fully 
oxygenated by the ambient air, through the conjunctiva. 
 The features of corneal disease are different, and include the following:
 •  Epithelial and stromal oedema, causing clouding of the cornea. 
 •  Cellular inﬁ ltrate in the stroma causing focal, granular white spots. 
 •  Deposits of cells on the corneal endothelium (termed  keratic precipitates or 
 KPs , neutrophils with ﬁ ne KPs and lymphocytes or macrophages with coarse 
( ‘ mutton fat ’ ) KPs; see Chapter  9 ). 
   •      Chronic keratitis may stimulate new blood vessels superﬁ cially, under the 
epithelium ( pannus ; Figure  7.2 ) or deeper in the stroma. Stromal oedema, 
which causes swelling and separates the collagen lamellae, facilitates vessel 
invasion. 
 •  Punctate epithelial erosions (PEE) are points of superﬁ cial epithelial cell loss 
or dysfunction which may be isolated or scattered, or conﬂ uent. On the 
cornea they are best detected using ﬂ uorescein dye, viewed with a blue light. 
Similar PEE occur on the conjunctiva and are best stained by lissamine green. 
More extensive epithelial loss, due to chemical or physical trauma, is referred 
to as an abrasion. 
 Conjunctiva 
 Inﬂ ammatory  d iseases of the  c onjunctiva 
 Bacterial  c onjunctivitis 
 Patients present with:
 •  redness of the eye; 
 •  discharge; 
 •  ocular irritation. 
 Figure 7.2   Pannus. 

100 
Conjunctiva, cornea and sclera
 The commonest causative organisms are  Staphylococcus ,  Streptococcus , 
 Pneumococcus  and  Haemophilus . The condition is usually self - limiting, 
although a broad - spectrum antibiotic eye drop will hasten resolution. 
Conjunctival swabs for culture are indicated in severe disease or if the condi-
tion fails to resolve.  
 Antibiotics 
 Some of the antibiotics available for topical ophthalmic use. Chloramphenicol is 
an effective broad - spectrum agent; an unproven risk of bone marrow aplasia is a 
moot point.
 •   Azithromycin. 
 •   Ceftazidine. 
 •   Chloramphenicol. 
 •   Ciproﬂ oxacin.  
 •   Fusidic acid.  
 •   Gentamicin. 
 •   Neomycin. 
 •   Tetracycline. 
 •   Oﬂ oxacin. 
 Ophthalmia  n eonatorum 
 Ophthalmia neonatorum, refers to any conjunctivitis that occurs in the ﬁ rst 
28 days of neonatal life and is a notiﬁ able disease requiring urgent treatment. 
Swabs for culture are mandatory. It is also important that the cornea is exam-
ined to exclude any ulceration. 
   The commonest causative agents are:
 •  Bacterial conjunctivitis (usually Gram - positive). 
 •  Neisseria gonorrhoeae . In severe cases this can cause corneal perforation. 
Systemic complications include rhinitis, stomatitis, arthritis, meningitis and 
septicaemia. Due to increasing resistance to penicillin a systemic, third -
 generation cephalosporin (ceftriaxone) is used to treat the condition. The eye 
must be kept clean. Topical bacitracin ointment can also be given but sys-
temic treatment is the most important. Refer parents to a sexually transmit-
ted diseases clinic.  
   •      Herpes simplex, which can cause corneal scarring. Topical antivirals are used 
to treat the condition.  
 •  Chlamydia . This may be responsible for a chronic conjunctivitis and cause 
sight - threatening corneal scarring. Topical tetracycline ointment and sys-
temic erythromycin are used to treat the local and systemic disease respec-
tively. Refer parents to a sexually transmitted diseases clinic. 

Conjunctiva, cornea and sclera 101
 Viral  c onjunctivitis 
 This is distinguished from bacterial conjunctivitis by:
 •  a watery and limited purulent discharge; 
 •  the presence of conjunctival follicles (hence  follicular conjunctivitis ). Pre -
 auricular lymph nodes are also enlarged;  
 •  there may also be lid oedema and excessive lacrimation. 
 The commonest causative agent is adenovirus, and to a much lesser extent 
Coxsackie and picornavirus. Adenovirus conjunctivitis is self - limiting but 
highly contagious and frequently occurs in epidemics. There is a risk of hospital -
 acquired infection, which can arise where there is failure to hand wash and 
disinfect equipment when managing a patient with a red eye and conjunctivi-
tis. Certain adenovirus serotypes also cause a troublesome punctate keratocon-
junctivitis, in which vision is affected, and which may have visual sequelae. 
Adenoviruses can also cause a conjunctivitis associated with the formation of 
a pseudomembrane across the conjunctiva. Patients must be given hygiene 
instruction to minimize the spread of infection in the home (e.g. frequent hand 
washing; using separate towels). Treatment of keratoconjunctivitis is contro-
versial. No effective commercial antiviral is available. Antibacterial therapy is 
not indicated unless there is a secondary bacterial infection The use of topical 
steroids damps down symptoms and causes corneal opacities to resolve, but 
rebound inﬂ ammation is common when the steroid is stopped, and the corneal 
opacities reappear.  
 Chlamydial  i nfections 
 Different serotypes of the obligate intracellular organism  Chlamydia trachoma-
tis are responsible for two forms of ocular infections. 
 Inclusion  k eratoconjunctivitis 
 This is a sexually transmitted disease and may take a chronic course (up to 18 
months) unless adequately treated. Patients present with a mucopurulent 
follicular conjunctivitis and develop a  micropannus (superﬁ cial peripheral 
corneal vascularization and scarring) associated with subepithelial scarring. 
Urethritis or cervicitis is common. Diagnosis is conﬁ rmed by detection of 
chlamydial antigens, using immunoﬂ uorescence, or by identiﬁ cation of 
typical inclusion bodies by Giemsa staining in conjunctival swab or scrape 
specimens. 
 Inclusion conjunctivitis is treated with topical and systemic tetracycline. The 
patient should be referred to a sexually transmitted diseases clinic.  
 Trachoma 
 This is the commonest infective cause of blindness in the world, although it is 
uncommon in developed countries (more details will be found in Chapter  17 ). 
The houseﬂ y acts as a vector, and the disease is encouraged by poor hygiene 

102 
Conjunctiva, cornea and sclera
and overcrowding in a dry, hot climate. The hallmark of the disease is subcon-
junctival ﬁ brosis caused by frequent re - infections associated with the unhy-
gienic conditions. Blindness may occur due to corneal scarring from recurrent 
keratitis and trichiasis (Figure  7.3 ). 
 Trachoma is treated with oral or topical tetracycline or erythromycin. 
Azithromycin, an alternative, requires only a single oral dose. Entropion and 
trichiasis require surgical correction.   
 Allergic  c onjunctivitis 
 This may be divided into acute and chronic forms:
 1     Acute (hayfever, or seasonal allergic conjunctivitis) is an acute IgE - mediated 
reaction to airborne allergens (usually pollens, e.g. ragweed, and mite aller-
gens). Symptoms and signs include: 
 a  itchiness; 
 b  conjunctival injection and swelling (chemosis); 
 c  lacrimation. 
 2     Vernal conjunctivitis (spring catarrh) is also mediated by IgE. It often affects 
male children with a history of atopy. It is usually seasonal but may be 
present all year long and may become a chronic and intractable disease. 
Symptoms and signs include: 
 a  itchiness; 
 b  photophobia; 
 c  lacrimation; 
  d     papillary conjunctivitis on the upper tarsal plate (papillae may coalesce to 
form giant cobblestones; Figure  7.4 ); 
 e  limbal follicles and white spots; 
 f  punctate lesions on the corneal epithelium; 
 g  an opaque, oval plaque which in severe disease replaces an upper zone of 
the corneal epithelium. 
 Initial therapy is with mast cell stabilizers (e.g. sodium cromoglycate, 
nedocromil, lodoxamide) or antihistamines (e.g. levocabastine), or with agents 
combining mast cell stabilizing and antihistamine properties (e.g. olopatidine). 
 Figure 7.3   Trachoma: scarring of (a) the upper lid (everted) and (b) the cornea.  
(b)
(a)

Conjunctiva, cornea and sclera 103
Topical steroids are required in severe cases but long - term use is avoided if 
possible because of the risks of steroid - induced glaucoma or cataract. 
Mucolytics (acetlycysteine) may be required to help dissolve the corneal plaque 
but surgery may be required. 
 Contact lens wearers may develop an allergic reaction to their lenses or to 
lens cleaning materials, leading to a  giant papillary conjunctivitis ( GPC ) with a 
mucoid discharge. Whilst this may respond to topical treatment with mast cell 
stabilizers, it is often necessary to stop lens wear for a period, or even perma-
nently if symptoms recur.   
 Conjunctival  d egenerations 
 Cysts are common in the conjunctiva. They rarely cause symptoms, but if 
necessary can be removed.  Pingueculae and  pterygia  are found on the inter-
palpebral bulbar conjunctiva (Figure  7.5 ). They are thought to result from 
excessive exposure to the reﬂ ected or direct ultraviolet component of sunlight. 
Histologically the collagen structure is altered. Pingueculae are small, elevated 
yellowish paralimbal lesions that never impinge on the cornea. Pterygia are 
 Figure 7.4   The appearance of giant (cobblestone) papillae in vernal conjunctivitis.  
 Figure 7.5   The clinical appearance of (a) a pinguecula; (b) a pterygium.  
(b)
(a)

104 
Conjunctiva, cornea and sclera
wing - shaped and located nasally, with the apex towards the cornea, onto which 
they progressively extend. They may cause irritation and, if extensive, may 
encroach onto the visual axis. They can be excised but may recur.   
 Conjunctival  t umours 
 These are rare. They include:
    •      Squamous cell carcinoma. An irregular raised area of conjunctiva which may 
invade the deeper tissues.  
 •  Malignant melanoma. The differential diagnosis from benign pigmented 
lesions (for example a naevus or melanosis) may be difﬁ cult. Review is neces-
sary to assess whether the lesion is increasing in size. Biopsy, to achieve a 
deﬁ nitive diagnosis, may be required. 
 Cornea 
 Infective  c orneal  l esions 
 Herpes  s implex  k eratitis 
 Type 1 herpes simplex (HSV) is a common and important cause of ocular 
disease. Type 2, which causes genital disease, may occasionally cause keratitis 
and infantile chorioretinitis. Primary infection by HSV1 is usually acquired 
early in life by close contact such as kissing. It may be asymptomatic, but oth-
erwise is accompanied by:
 •  fever; 
 •  vesicular lid lesions; 
 •  follicular conjunctivitis; 
 •  pre - auricular lymphadenopathy. 
 Primary infection may cause a conjunctivitis, with or without punctate kera-
titis. It is followed by resolution and latency of the virus in the trigeminal gan-
glion.  ‘ Recurrent ’  infection involves reactivation of the latent virus, which travels 
centrifugally to nerve terminals in the corneal epithelium to cause an epithelial 
keratitis. There may be no past clinical history. The risk of reactivation is increased 
if the patient is debilitated (e.g. systemic illness, immunosuppression). The 
pathognomonic appearance is of a  dendritic ulcer (Figure  7.6 ). These epithelial 
ulcers may heal without a scar but they may progress to a stromal keratitis, asso-
ciated with an inﬂ ammatory inﬁ ltration and oedema, and ultimately a loss of 
corneal transparency and permanent scarring. This stage of the disease repre-
sents an immunogenic response to the viral antigen. If corneal scarring is severe, 
a corneal graft may be required to restore vision. Uveitis and glaucoma may 
accompany the disease.  Disciform keratitis is another immunogenic reaction to 
herpes antigen in the stroma and presents as disc -  or ring - shaped stromal 
oedema and clouding without ulceration, often associated with iritis.   

Conjunctiva, cornea and sclera 105
 Figure 7.6   A dendritic ulcer seen in herpes simplex infection.  
 Antivirals 
 Some of the topical antiviral agents available for ocular therapy:
 •   Vidarabine. 
 •   Triﬂ uorothymidine.  
 •   Aciclovir. 
 •   Ganciclovir. 
   Dendritic lesions are treated with topical antivirals and typically heal within 2 
weeks. In the UK the standard treatment is with aciclovir. Topical steroids must 
not be given to patients with a dendritic ulcer, since they may exacerbate the 
disease and cause extensive corneal ulceration. In patients with stromal 
involvement (keratitis), steroids are used under ophthalmic supervision and 
with antiviral cover, to suppress the immunogenic response. Patients undergo-
ing corneal graft surgery for past HSV keratitis commonly receive an extended 
course of prophylactic, oral antiviral cover to inhibit recurrence.  
 Herpes  z oster  o phthalmicus ( o phthalmic  s hingles) 
 This is caused by the varicella zoster virus which is responsible for chickenpox 
(Figure  7.7 ). The ophthalmic division of the trigeminal nerve is affected. Unlike 
herpes simplex infection, there is usually a prodromal period with the patient 
systemically unwell. Ocular manifestations are usually preceded by pain and 
the appearance of vesicles in the distribution of the ophthalmic division of the 
trigeminal nerve. Ocular problems are more likely if the  nasociliary branch of 
the nerve is involved (signalled by vesicles at the root of the nose). Signs include:
 •  lid swelling (which may be bilateral); 
 •  keratitis; 

106 
Conjunctiva, cornea and sclera
 •  iritis; 
 •  secondary glaucoma. 
 Reactivation of the disease is often linked to unrelated systemic illness. Oral 
antiviral treatment (e.g. aciclovir, famciclovir) is effective in reducing post -
 infective neuralgia (a severe chronic pain in the area of the rash) if given within 
3 days of the skin vesicles erupting. Ocular disease may require treatment with 
topical steroids and antibacterials to cover secondary infection. 
 The prognosis of herpetic eye disease has improved since antiviral treatment 
became available. Both simplex and zoster cause anaesthesia of the cornea. 
Non - healing indolent ulcers may be seen following simplex infection, and 
these are difﬁ cult to treat.  
 Bacterial  k eratitis 
 Bacteria 
 Some of the bacteria responsible for corneal infection:
 •   Staphylococcus epidermidis. 
 •   Staphylococcus aureus. 
 •   Streptococcus pneumoniae. 
 •   Coliforms. 
 •   Pseudomonas. 
 •   Haemophilus. 
 Figure 7.7   The clinical appearance of herpes zoster ophthalmicus.  

Conjunctiva, cornea and sclera 107
   Pathogenesis 
 A host of bacteria may infect the cornea. Some are found on the lid margin as 
part of the normal ﬂ ora. The conjunctiva and cornea are protected against 
infection by:
 •  blinking; 
 •  washing away of debris by the ﬂ ow of tears; 
 •  entrapment of foreign particles by mucus; 
 •  the antibacterial properties of the tears; 
 •  the barrier function of the corneal epithelium ( Neisseria gonorrhoeae  is the 
only organism that can penetrate the intact epithelium).    
 Predisposing causes of bacterial keratitis include:
 •  keratoconjunctivitis sicca (dry eye); 
 •  a breach in the corneal epithelium (e.g. following surgery or trauma); 
 •  contact lens wear; 
 •  prolonged use of topical steroids. 
 Symptoms and  s igns 
 These include:
    •      pain, usually severe unless the cornea is anaesthetic;  
 •  purulent discharge; 
 •  ciliary injection; 
 •  visual loss (severe if the visual axis is involved); 
   •      hypopyon  – sometimes (a mass of white cells collected in the anterior 
chamber; see Chapter  9 );  
 •  a white corneal opacity which can often be seen with the naked eye (Figure  7.8 ). 
 Treatment 
 Scrapes are taken from the base of the ulcer for Gram staining and culture. The 
patient is then treated with intensive topical antibiotics, often with dual therapy 
 Figure 7.8   Clinical appearance of a bacterial corneal ulcer.  

108 
Conjunctiva, cornea and sclera
using specially formulated, concentrated, combined preparations to cover 
most organisms (e.g. cefuroxime against Gram - positive bacteria and gen-
tamicin for Gram - negative bacteria). The use of ﬂ uoroquinolones (e.g. cipro-
ﬂ oxacin, oﬂ oxacin, available commercially) as a monotherapy is gaining 
popularity. The drops are given hourly, day and night, for the ﬁ rst couple of 
days and are reduced in frequency as clinical improvement occurs. In severe 
or unresponsive disease the cornea may perforate. This can be treated initially 
with tissue adhesives (cyanoacrylate glue) and a subsequent corneal graft. A 
persistent scar may also require a corneal graft to restore vision.   
 Acanthamoeba  k eratitis 
 This freshwater amoeba is responsible for infective keratitis (Figure  7.9 ). The 
infection has become more common with the increasing use of soft contact 
lenses. A painful keratitis with prominent, inﬁ ltrated corneal nerves results. 
The amoeba can be isolated from the cornea (and from the contact lens case) 
with a scrape and cultured on special plates impregnated with  Escherichia coli . 
Topical chlorhexidine, polyhexamethylene biguanide (PHMB) and propami-
dine are used to treat the condition.    
 Fungal  k eratitis 
 This is unusual in the UK but more common in warmer climates such as the 
southern USA. In India it accounts for 30 – 50% of infective keratitis. It should 
be considered in:
 •  lack of response to antibacterial therapy in corneal ulceration; 
   •      cases of trauma with vegetable matter;  
 •  cases associated with the prolonged use of steroids. 
 Figure 7.9   The clinical appearance of acanthamoeba keratitis. Arrows indicate 
neurokeratitis. 

Conjunctiva, cornea and sclera 109
 The corneal opacity appears ﬂ uffy, and satellite lesions may be present. 
Liquid and solid Sabouraud ’ s medium is used to grow the fungi. Incubation 
may need to be prolonged. Treatment requires topical antifungal drops such as 
pimaricin (natamycin) 5%.  
 Interstitial  k eratitis 
 This term is used for any vascular keratitis that affects the corneal stroma 
without epithelial involvement. Classically the most common cause was con-
genital syphilis, leaving a midstromal scar interlaced with the empty ( ‘ ghost ’ ) 
blood vessels. Corneal grafting may be required when the opacity is marked 
and visual acuity reduced.   
 Corneal  d ystrophies 
 These are rare inherited disorders. They affect different layers of the cornea and 
often affect corneal transparency (Figure  7.10 ). They may be divided into:
 •  Anterior dystrophies involving the epithelium. These may present with recur-
rent corneal erosion.    
   •      Stromal dystrophies presenting with visual loss. If very anterior they may 
cause corneal erosion and pain.  
   •      Posterior dystrophies which affect the endothelium and cause gradual loss 
of vision due to corneal oedema. They may also cause pain due to epithelial 
erosion. 
 Disorders of  s hape 
 Keratoconus 
 This is usually a sporadic disorder but may occasionally be inherited. Thinning 
of the centre of the cornea leads to an ectatic, conical corneal shape, with 
 Figure 7.10   Example of a corneal dystrophy (granular dystrophy).  

110 
Conjunctiva, cornea and sclera
marked myopia and an irregular astigmatism. Vision is affected but there is no 
pain. Initially the associated astigmatism can be corrected with glasses and 
then, as the disease progresses, with contact lenses. The contact lens arches 
over the irregularly shaped cornea to provide a new, optically perfect anterior 
surface which restores the optics of the eye. The condition is due to a failure of 
adhesion between the collagen ﬁ brils of the stroma, responsible for its mechan-
ical strength. Thinning is due to an unravelling process. Current treatment is 
directed to cross - linking of the stromal collagen, which is achieved by exposing 
the stroma to UVA radiation in the presence of riboﬂ avin; the generation of free 
radicals results in cross - linking and inhibits progression of the disease. In 
severe cases a corneal graft may be required. 
 Central  c orneal  d egenerations 
 Band  k eratopathy 
 Band keratopathy is the subepithelial deposition of calcium phosphate in the 
exposed part of the cornea where CO 2  loss and the consequent raised pH favour 
its deposition (Figure  7.11 ). It is seen in eyes with chronic uveitis or glaucoma, 
and may cause visual loss or discomfort if epithelial erosions form over the 
band. If symptomatic it can be scraped off surgically, aided by a chelating agent 
such as sodium edetate. The excimer laser can also be effective in treating these 
patients by ablating the affected surface. Band keratopathy can also be a sign 
of systemic hypercalcaemia, as in hyperparathyroidism or renal failure. The 
lesion is then more likely to occupy the 3 o ’ clock and 9 o ’ clock positions of 
the paralimbal cornea. 
 Peripheral  c orneal  d egenerations 
 Corneal  t hinning 
 A rare cause of painful peripheral corneal thinning is  Mooren ’ s ulcer , a condi-
tion of progressive corneal melting with an immune basis which starts near the 
 Figure 7.11   Band keratopathy.  

Conjunctiva, cornea and sclera 111
limbus and spreads relentlessly across the cornea. Corneal melting can also be 
seen in collagen diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis and Wegener ’ s granulo-
matosis. Treatment can be difﬁ cult, and both sets of disorder require systemic 
and topical immunosuppression and antiproteases. Where there is an associ-
ated dry eye it is important to ensure adequate corneal wetting and corneal 
protection (see Chapter  6 ).  
 Lipid  a rcus 
 This is a peripheral white ring - shaped lipid deposit, separated from the limbus 
by a clear interval. It is often seen in normal, elderly people ( arcus senilis ), but 
in younger patients, under 50 years, it may be a sign of hyperlipoproteinaemia. 
It does not affect vision and no treatment is required. 
 Corneal  g rafting 
 Donor corneal tissue can be grafted into a host cornea to restore corneal clarity 
or repair a perforation (Figure  7.12 ). Donor corneas can be stored and are 
banked so that corneal grafts can be performed on routine operating lists. The 
avascular condition of the cornea, and additional processes in the cornea and 
anterior chamber, maintain the host cornea as an immune - privileged site. The 
cornea possess antiangiogenic mechanisms, and mediators in the anterior 
chamber suppress immune responsiveness. There is therefore a high success 
rate for corneal grafting. Tissue can be HLA - typed for grafting of vascularized 
corneas at high risk of immune rejection, although the value of this is still 
uncertain. The patient is treated with steroid eye drops for some time after the 
operation to prevent graft rejection. Complications such as astigmatism can be 
dealt with surgically or by suture adjustment. Increasingly, methods are being 
developed that permit only the damaged part of the cornea to be transplanted, 
for example the endothelial layer when disease of this layer results in corneal 
oedema. 
 Figure 7.12   A corneal graft. Note the interrupted and the continuous sutures at the 
interface between graft and host.  

112 
Conjunctiva, cornea and sclera
 Graft  r ejection 
 Any patient who has had a corneal graft and who complains of redness, pain 
or visual loss must be seen urgently by an eye specialist, as this may indicate 
graft rejection. Examination shows graft oedema, iritis and a line of activated 
T - cells attacking the graft endothelium. Intensive topical steroid application in 
the early stages can restore graft clarity.    
 Sclera 
 Episcleritis 
 This inﬂ ammation of the superﬁ cial layer of the sclera causes mild discomfort. 
It is rarely associated with systemic disease. It is usually self - limiting but, as 
symptoms are tiresome, topical anti - inﬂ ammatory treatment can be given. In 
rare, severe disease, systemic non - steroidal anti - inﬂ ammatory treatment may 
be helpful.  
 Scleritis 
 This is a more severe condition than episcleritis, and may be associated with 
the collagen vascular diseases, most commonly rheumatoid arthritis, but also 
polyarteritis nodosa and systemic lupus erythematosis. It is a cause of intense 
ocular pain. Both inﬂ ammatory areas and ischaemic areas of the sclera may 
occur. Characteristically the affected sclera is swollen (Figure  7.13 ). The follow-
ing may complicate the condition:
 •  scleral thinning ( scleromalacia ), sometimes with perforation; 
 •  keratitis; 
 •  uveitis; 
 Figure 7.13   The appearance of scleritis.  

Conjunctiva, cornea and sclera 113
 
  PAEDIATRIC OPHTHALMOLOGY 
 •  Ophthalmia neonatorum, which refers to any conjunctivitis that occurs in the ﬁ rst 
28 days of neonatal life, is a notiﬁ able disease requiring urgent treatment. 
Swabs for culture are mandatory.  
 
  KEY POINTS 
 •  Avoid the unsupervised use of topical steroids in treating ophthalmic conditions, since 
complications may be serious.  
 •  In contact lens wearers a painful red eye is serious; it may imply an infective keratitis.  
 •  Redness, pain and reduced vision in a patient with corneal graft suggest rejection, 
which is an ophthalmic emergency.  
 •  Good hygiene and hand washing is vital if contact with an adenoviral conjunctivitis is 
suspected to prevent spread.  
 •  cataract formation; 
 •  glaucoma. 
 Treatment may require high doses of systemic steroids, or in severe cases 
cytotoxic therapy and investigation to ﬁ nd any associated systemic disease. 
 Scleritis affecting the posterior part of the globe may cause choroidal effu-
sions, or may simulate a tumour. 
     Multiple choice questions 
 1.  An 11 - year - old child presents with a red watery eye and slightly blurred 
vision. Her sister had similar symptoms a week ago. The appearance of 
the eye is shown in Figure  7.14 . 
 a 
 The most likely diagnosis is uveitis. 
  b   
  The most likely diagnosis is viral conjunctivitis.  
  c   
  The most likely diagnosis is bacterial conjunctivitis.  
  d   
  The child should be treated with steroids.  
  e   
  Papillae are present as elevations on the lid mucosa.      
    2.   A 26 - year - old patient presents with an itchy watery eye. She is photopho-
bic and the vision has become blurred. She has a history of asthma. The 
appearance of the eye is shown in Figure    7.15   . 
 a 
 The most likely diagnosis is uveitis. 
 b 
 The most likely diagnosis is epithelial herpes simplex keratitis. 

114 
Conjunctiva, cornea and sclera
 c 
 The most likely diagnosis is allergic conjunctivitis. 
  d   
  Treatment is with antihistamines, mast cell stabilizers and topical 
steroids. 
 e 
 Treatment is with aciclovir. 
    3.   A 67 - year - old lady presents with pain on the right side of her forehead. 
She has been feeling generally unwell. She has just noticed the appear-
ance of vesicles on the skin. 
 a 
 The most likely diagnosis is herpes simplex. 
 b 
 The most likely diagnosis is herpes zoster. 
 c 
 The most likely diagnosis is acanthamoeba keratitis. 
 d 
 Ocular complications may include keratitis, iritis and secondary glaucoma.  
 e 
 The patient should be prescribed systemic aciclovir in high dosage. 
    4.   A contact lens wearer presents with a red painful eye. There is a purulent 
discharge and vision is decreased. Figure    7.16    shows the appearance of 
the eye. 
 Figure 7.14   The clinical appearance of the eye referred to in Question 1.  
 Figure 7.15   The clinical appearance of the eye referred to in Question 2.  
(b)
(a)

Conjunctiva, cornea and sclera 115
 Figure 7.16   The clinical appearance of the eye referred to in Question 4.  
 a 
 The most likely diagnosis is a bacterial corneal ulcer. 
 b 
 Acanthamoeba keratitis is another possibility in a contact lens wearer. 
 c 
 The most likely diagnosis is a corneal dystrophy. 
 d 
 The patient has band keratopathy. 
  e   
  Treatment with intensive topical antibiotics is necessary.      
 5.  A 24 - year - old lady presents with a red eye. There is no discharge. The 
redness is located in the temporal quadrant of the bulbar conjuctiva. There 
is slight discomfort; the vision is normal. There is no other medical history. 
 a 
 The most likely diagnosis is bacterial conjunctivitis. 
 b 
 The most likely diagnosis is keratoconus. 
 c 
 The most likely diagnosis is episcleritis. 
 d 
 The most likely diagnosis is scleritis. 
 e 
 Treatment is with topical steroids or a non - steroidal anti - inﬂ ammatory agent. 
 6.  Identify the conditions shown in Figure  7.17 . 
(a)
 Figure 7.17   See Question 6.  

116 
Conjunctiva, cornea and sclera
(b)
(c)
Figure 7.17 (Continued)
 Answers 
 1.  An 11 - year - old child presents with a red watery eye and slightly blurred 
vision. 
 a 
 False. While the symptom of redness ﬁ ts, the watering and similar symp-
toms experienced by her sister suggest that an infection is more likely.  
  b   
  True. The symptoms are typical of an adenovirus conjunctivitis, a condition 
which is highly contagious.  
 c 
 False. The discharge would be mucopurulent. 
  d   
  False. While steroids can help the corneal complications of adenovirus 
infection, they are difﬁ cult to wean. Also, you would wish to exclude a 
herpes simplex infection before considering their use.  
 e 
 False. These elevations are called  ‘ follicles ’ and are composed of lymphoid cells. 

Conjunctiva, cornea and sclera 117
 2.  A 26 - year - old patient presents with an itchy watery eye. 
 a 
 False. The inﬂ ammation is not localized at the limbus, papillae are present, 
and there is an opaque corneal plaque on the cornea.  
 b 
 False. The corneal lesion does not resemble a dendritic ulcer. 
  c   
  True. The redness, papillae and corneal lesion are typical of severe vernal 
keratoconjunctivitis. 
 d 
 True. This is a serious condition that may affect the long - term clarity of the 
cornea. Mucolytic drops are also given to remove help dissolve the corneal 
plaque. 
  e   
  False. Aciclovir is an antiviral agent used in the treatment of herpes simplex 
keratitis. 
  3.   A 67 - year - old lady presents with pain on the right side of her forehead. 
 a 
 False. Vesicles would not be a feature of the disease in this age group. 
 b 
 True. This is a classical presentation. 
 c 
 False. The skin is not affected in acanthamoeba keratitis. 
 d 
 True. The effects on the eye can be widespread, see page 105. 
  e   
  True. If this is given in the ﬁ rst 3 days of the disease it can reduce symptoms 
and help prevent severe post - herpetic neuralgia. 
  4.   A contact lens wearer presents with a red painful eye. 
   a   
  True. Contact lens wear is the commonest risk factor in the developed 
world. Other causes are trauma, prolonged steroid use, dry eye and an 
anaesthetic cornea (as seen in herpetic eye disease).  
 b 
 True. The eye is usually very painful. 
  c   
  False. These rarely cause a red painful eye.  
  d   
  False. Band keratopathy is caused by a deposition of calcium salts in the 
superﬁ cial cornea. It may sometimes cause a red painful eye, but the 
appearance differs.  
 e 
 True. This is an ophthalmic emergency. 
 5.  A 24 - year - old lady presents with a red eye. 
   a   
  False. There is no discharge and injection is not usually localized in 
conjunctivitis. 
  b   
  False. Keratoconus is a disorder of corneal shape and occurs in a white eye.  
 c 
 True. The symptoms and signs are very suggestive. 
  d   
  False. The diagnosis is possible but less likely than episcleritis. Scleritis 
causes a deep, boring pain.  
  e   
  True. Simple episcleritis is self - limiting. Nodular episcleritis may be helped 
by topical anti - inﬂ ammatory agents. If there is a lack of response, a sys-
temic NSAID (e.g. ﬂ urbiprofen) may be used. 
 6.  Identify the conditions shown in Figure  7.17 . 
 a 
 Pterygium. 
 b 
 Band keratopathy. 
 c 
 Herpes simplex dendritic ulcer stained with ﬂ uorescein. 
 

 Learning objectives 
 To understand:
 ✓  The symptoms, signs, pathology and causes of 
cataract. 
 ✓  The reasons for undertaking cataract surgery. 
 ✓  The principles of cataract surgery. 
 ✓  The complications of cataract surgery. 
 8 
The  l ens and  c ataract  
 
 Introduction 
 The lens is a biconvex and perfectly transparent organ, held in position behind 
the iris by the suspensory ligament ( zonule ), whose ﬁ bres are composed of the 
protein  ﬁ brillin . The zonule attaches the equator of the lens to the ciliary body. 
Disease may affect structure, shape and position of the lens. 
 Cataract 
 Deﬁ nition and  c auses of  c ataract 
 Cataract is the name given to any light - scattering opacity within the lens wher-
ever it is located. When it lies on the visual axis or is extensive, it gives rise to 
visual loss. Cataract is the commonest cause of treatable blindness in the world. 
The large majority of cataracts occur in older subjects, as a result of cumulative 
exposure to environmental and other inﬂ uences, such as smoking, UV radia-
tion and elevated blood sugar levels. This is referred to as  age - related cataract . 
Ophthalmology Lecture Notes, Eleventh Edition. Bruce James, Anthony Bron. 
© 2011 Bruce James and Anthony Bron. Published 2011 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

The lens and cataract 119
Age of onset is lower in countries with the highest prevalence of cataract, 
reﬂ ecting the inﬂ uence of special cataractogenic factors. A smaller number are 
associated with speciﬁ c ocular or systemic disease and deﬁ ned physicochemi-
cal mechanisms. Some are congenital and may be inherited. 
  
 Symptoms 
 A cataract of sufﬁ cient degree causes:
 •  a painless loss of vision; 
 •  glare; 
 •  in some instances, a change in refraction. 
 In infants, cataract causes  amblyopia  (a failure of visual maturation) by 
depriving the retina of a formed image at a critical stage of visual development. 
Infants with suspected cataract or a family history of congenital cataracts 
should be assessed by an ophthalmologist shortly after birth, as a matter of 
urgency (see Congenital cataract, below).  
 Signs 
 Visual acuity is reduced. In some patients the acuity, measured in a dark room, 
may seem satisfactory, but if the same test is carried out in bright light or sun-
light, the acuity falls, as a result of glare and loss of contrast. Also, small pupils 
in bright light may restrict light entry. 
 A cataract appears black against the red reﬂ ex when the eye is examined with 
a direct ophthalmoscope (see Chapter  2 ). Slit - lamp examination allows the 
cataract to be examined in detail, and the exact site of the opacity in the lens 
can be identiﬁ ed. Age - related cataract is commonly nuclear, cortical or sub-
capsular in location (Figure  8.1 ). Steroid - induced cataract is commonly poste-
rior subcapsular. Other features to suggest an ocular cause for the cataract 
may be found, for example pigment deposition on the lens suggesting 
previous inﬂ ammation, or damage to the iris suggesting previous ocular trauma 
(Figure  8.2 ). 
  
 Ocular  c onditions  a ssociated with  c ataract 
 •   Trauma. 
 •   Uveitis. 
 •   High myopia.  
 •   Topical medication (particularly steroid eye drops).  
 •   Intraocular tumour.  

120 
The lens and cataract
 Figure 8.1   The location of different types of cataract.  
Cortical
Posterior subcapsular
Nuclear
Anterior
Posterior
 Investigation 
 This is required if systemic disease is suspected or if the cataract is congenital 
or appears at an early age.  
 Treatment 
 Although much effort has been directed towards slowing the progression of, or 
preventing cataract, management remains surgical. There is no need to wait 
for the cataract to  ‘ ripen ’  and cause major visual loss. The test is whether or not 
the cataract produces sufﬁ cient visual symptoms to reduce the quality of life. 
Patients may have difﬁ culty in recognizing faces, reading, carrying out their 
occupation or achieving the driving standard. Some patients may be greatly 
troubled by glare. Prior to surgery patients must be informed of any coexisting 
eye disease which may inﬂ uence the outcome of cataract surgery and the visual 
prognosis. 
 Cataract  s urgery 
 The operation (Figure  8.3 ) requires access to the lens substance via an opening 
in the anterior part of the lens capsule, removal of most of the lens ﬁ bres and 
 Systemic  c auses of  c ataract 
 •   Diabetes. 
 •   Other metabolic disorders (including galactosaemia, hypocalcaemia, Fabry 
disease). 
 •   Systemic drugs (particularly steroids, chlorpromazine).  
 •   Infection (congenital rubella).  
 •   Myotonic dystrophy.  
 •   Atopic dermatitis.  
 •   Systemic syndromes (Down ’ s, Lowe ’ s). 
 •   Congenital, including inherited, cataract.  
 •   X - radiation. 

The lens and cataract 121
 Figure 8.2   The clinical appearance of (a) a cortical, (b) a nuclear, (c) a posterior 
subcapsular cataract. The spoke opacities are silhouetted against the red reﬂ ex in (a).  
(a)
(c)
(b)

122 
The lens and cataract
Incision in cornea
Zonule
Iris
Lens
(a)
Phaco
ECCE
(b)
Forceps
Tear in anterior capsule
(capsulorhexis)
Path that tear will follow
Capsulorhexis
 Figure 8.3   Stages in the removal of a cataract and the placement of an intraocular 
lens. (a) An incision is made in the cornea or anterior sclera. A small, stepped 
self - sealing incision is made for phacoemulsiﬁ cation and a wider, limbal incision, for 
extracapsular surgery (ECCE). (b) A circular disc of the anterior capsule is removed. In 
ECCE a ring of small incisions is made with a needle to perforate the capsule, 
allowing the central portion to be removed. In phacoemulsiﬁ cation the capsule is torn 
in a circle leaving a strong smooth edge to the remaining anterior capsule. A cannula 
is then placed under the anterior capsule and ﬂ uid injected to separate the lens 
nucleus from the cortex, allowing the nucleus to be rotated within the capsular bag. 
(c) In ECCE the hard nucleus of the lens is removed through the incision, by 
 expression . Pressure on the eye causes the nucleus to pass out through the incision. 
(d) Alternatively the nucleus can be emulsiﬁ ed  in situ . The phacoemulsiﬁ cation probe, 
introduced through the small corneal or scleral incision, shaves away the nucleus. (e) 
The remaining soft lens matter is aspirated, leaving only the posterior capsule and the 
peripheral part of the anterior capsule. (f) An intraocular lens is implanted into the 
remains of the capsule. To allow implantation through the small phacoemulsiﬁ cation 
wound, the lens must be folded in half or injected through a special introducer into 
the eye. The incision is repaired with ﬁ ne nylon sutures. If phacoemulsiﬁ cation has 
been used the incision in the eye is smaller and a suture is usually not required.  

The lens and cataract 123
(e)
Irrigating cannula
Peripheral cortex
(d) Phacoemulsification
(f)
Phacoemulsification probe
Capsulorhexis
Sculpting of nucleus
Intraocular lens
Nucleus
expressed
through
incision
(c) Extracapsular extraction
Figure 8.3 Continued

124 
The lens and cataract
epithelial cells, and insertion of a plastic lens implant of appropriate optical 
power. The implant is held in place within the  ‘ capsular bag ’ . 
 Surgery is increasingly performed under local rather than general anaesthe-
sia. Local anaesthetic is inﬁ ltrated around the globe and lids or given topically. 
Usually the patient can attend as a day case, without admission to hospital, 
returning home shortly after surgery. 
 The operation can be performed:
 •  By emulsiﬁ cation of the lens, using an ultrasound probe introduced 
through a smaller incision at the limbus ( phacoemulsiﬁ cation or  ‘ phaco  ’ ). 
(Figure  8.3 d). Usually no suture is required.  This is now the preferred method 
in the Western world . 
   •      Alternatively, through an extended incision at the limbus, followed by  ext-
racapsular cataract extraction ( ECCE ) (Figure  8.3 c). Here, after opening the 
capsule, the bulk of the lens substance is expressed from the eye with gentle 
pressure and residual material is aspirated with a cannula. The incision must 
be sutured and the sutures removed postoperatively.    
 The optical power of the  lens implant  is calculated prior to surgery by meas-
uring the length of the eye  ultrasonically  and the curvature of the cornea (and 
thus its optical power) optically ( keratometry ). The power of the lens is gener-
ally calculated to provide good distance acuity without glasses (i.e. emmetropia). 
The choice of implant power is inﬂ uenced by the refraction of the fellow eye 
and whether it too has a cataract which will require surgery. Where surgery on 
the fellow eye is likely to be delayed, it is important that the patient is not left 
with a major difference in the refractive state of the two eyes (aniseikonia), 
since the difference in retinal image size may not be tolerated visually. 
 Postoperatively the patient is given a short course of steroid and antibiotic 
drops. New glasses, if required, can be prescribed after a few weeks, once the 
incision has healed. Visual rehabilitation and the prescription of new glasses is 
much quicker after phacoemulsiﬁ cation. Since the patient cannot accommo-
date, a spectacle correction will be required postoperatively for close work even 
if it is not needed for distance. Multifocal intraocular lenses, which provide 
good distance and near vision without glasses, are now in use, although there 
may be a reduction in contrast sensitivity with these lenses. 
 Surgery may sometimes induce a degree of corneal astigmatism. Where 
sutures were used their postoperative removal may reduce this. This is done 
prior to measuring the patient for new glasses but after the wound has healed 
and steroid drops have been stopped. Excessive corneal curvature can be 
induced in the line of a tight suture. Removal usually solves this problem and 
is easily accomplished in the clinic under local anaesthetic with the patient 
sitting at the slit lamp. Loose sutures must be removed to prevent infection but 
it may be necessary to resuture the incision if healing is imperfect. Sutureless 
phacoemulsiﬁ cation through a smaller incision avoids these complications. 
Furthermore, a modiﬁ ed entry site or relaxing incisions at the periphery of the 
cornea may allow correction of pre - existing astigmatism. Pre - existing corneal 
astigmatism can also be treated with toric intraocular lenses, which incorpo-
rate the astigmatic correction.  

The lens and cataract 125
 Complications of  c ataract  s urgery 
 1     Vitreous loss. If the posterior capsule is damaged during the operation the 
vitreous gel may come forward into the anterior chamber, where it represents 
a risk for glaucoma or may cause retinal traction. The gel requires careful 
aspiration and excision ( vitrectomy ) at the time of surgery and placement of 
the intraocular lens may need to be deferred to a secondary procedure.  
 2     Iris prolapse. The iris may protrude through the surgical incision in the 
immediate postoperative period. It appears as a dark area at the incision site. 
The pupil is distorted. This requires prompt surgical repair.  
 3     Endophthalmitis. A serious but rare infective complication of cataract extrac-
tion (less than 0.3%). Patients present, usually within a few days of surgery, 
with: 
 a  a painful red eye; 
 b  reduced visual acuity; 
 c  a collection of white cells in the anterior chamber (hypopyon). 
 This is an extreme ophthalmic emergency. The patient requires urgent 
sampling of the aqueous and vitreous for microbiological analysis and an 
intravitreal, broad - spectrum, antibiotic injection at the time of sampling 
(e.g. vancomycin and ceftazidime) to provide immediate cover. Further 
injections are dependent on the microbiological report and clinical response. 
In some instances topical and systemic antibiotics are used in addition. 
 4     Cystoid macular oedema. The macula may become oedematous following 
surgery, particularly if surgery was accompanied by vitreous loss or followed 
by inﬂ ammation. It may settle with time but can produce a severe reduction 
in acuity. Inﬂ ammatory prostaglandin release may play a part in this and 
prompt treatment with topical NSAIDs and steroid can alleviate the oedema 
in a proportion of patients. Sometimes it may require treatment with steroids 
injected into or around the eye.  
 5     Retinal detachment. Modern techniques of cataract extraction are associated 
with a low rate of this complication. It is increased if there has been vitreous 
loss. The symptoms, signs and management are described in Chapter  11 . 
 6  Opaciﬁ cation of the posterior capsule (Figure  8.4 ). Normally, the thin capsu-
lar layer, lying behind the implant, is crystal clear. However, in approximately 
20% of patients clarity of the posterior capsule decreases in the months fol-
lowing surgery, when residual epithelial cells migrate across its surface to 
form an opaque scar. Vision becomes blurred and there may be problems 
with glare. A small opening can be made in the capsule with a laser ( neodym-
ium yttrium garnet (ndYAG) laser ) as an outpatient procedure. There is a 
small risk of cystoid macular oedema or retinal detachment following YAG 
capsulotomy. Research aimed at reducing this complication has shown that 
the lens implant material, the shape of the edge of the lens and overlap of 
the intraocular lens by a small rim of anterior capsule are important in pre-
venting posterior capsule opaciﬁ cation.  
 7  If the ﬁ ne nylon sutures are not removed after surgery they may break in the 
following months or years, causing irritation or infection. Symptoms are 
cured by removal. 

126 
The lens and cataract
 Congenital  c ataract 
 The presence of congenital or infantile cataract is a threat to sight, not only 
because of the immediate obstruction to vision but because disturbance of the 
retinal image impairs visual maturation in the infant and leads to amblyopia 
and squint (see Chapter  15 ). If bilateral cataract is present and has a signiﬁ cant 
effect on retinal image formation this will cause amblyopia, squint and an 
oscillation of the eyes ( nystagmus ). Both cataractous lenses require urgent 
surgery and the ﬁ tting of contact lenses to correct the aphakia. The manage-
ment of contact lenses requires considerable input and motivation from the 
parents of the child. 
 The treatment of uniocular congenital cataract remains controversial. 
Unfortunately the results of surgery are disappointing and vision may improve 
little because amblyopia develops despite adequate optical correction with a 
contact lens. To maximize the chances of success, treatment must be per-
formed within the ﬁ rst few weeks of life and be accompanied by a coordinated 
patching routine to the fellow eye to stimulate visual maturation in the ambly-
opic eye and minimize the risk of squint. Increasingly, intraocular lenses are 
being implanted in children over 2 years old. The eye becomes increasingly 
myopic as the child grows, however, making the choice of lens implant power 
difﬁ cult. There is a signiﬁ cant risk of subsequent glaucoma developing in 
patients undergoing surgery for congenital cataract, particularly when this is 
performed prior to 1 year of age.   
 Change in  l ens  s hape 
 Abnormal lens shape is very unusual. The curvature of the anterior part of the 
lens may be increased centrally ( anterior lenticonus ) in Alport ’ s syndrome, a 
recessively inherited condition of deafness and nephropathy. An abnormally 
small lens may be associated with short stature and other skeletal 
abnormalities. 
 Figure 8.4   (a) An opaciﬁ ed posterior capsule. (b) The result of laser capsulotomy.  
(b)
(a)

The lens and cataract 127
 Change in  l ens  p osition ( e ctopia  l entis) 
 Weakness of the zonule causes lens displacement. The lens takes up a more 
rounded form and the eye becomes more myopic. This may be seen in:
 •  trauma; 
   •      inborn errors of metabolism (e.g. homocystinuria, a recessive disorder with 
mental defect and skeletal features  –  the lens is usually displaced 
downwards); 
   •      certain syndromes (e.g. Marfan syndrome, a dominant disorder with skeletal 
and cardiac abnormalities and a risk of dissecting aortic aneurysm  –  the lens 
is usually displaced upwards). There is a defect in the zonular protein due to 
a mutation in the  ﬁ brillin gene. 
 The irregular myopia can be corrected optically, although sometimes an 
aphakic correction may be required if the lens is substantially displaced from 
the visual axis. Surgical removal may be indicated, particularly if the displaced 
lens has caused a secondary glaucoma, but surgery may result in further 
complications. 
 Cataract  – the  w orld  p erspective 
 In the developed world cataract surgery is performed when visual symptoms 
interfere with the quality of life. Worldwide there are in excess of 20 million 
people blind due to dense bilateral cataract (for more detail see Chapter  17 ). 
This represents a huge cause of preventable blindness. Cataract is a major focus 
of the Vision 2020 project, a joint initiative of the World Health Organization 
and the International Association for the Blind. The goal is to remove cataract 
as a cause of blindness by the year 2020. 
  
 
  PAEDIATRIC OPHTHALMOLOGY 
 •  An infant with a family history of congenital cataract or a suspected cataract 
must be seen by an ophthalmologist as a matter of urgency.  
 •  There is a signiﬁ cant risk of glaucoma developing in patients following congenital 
catract surgery at an early age.  
 
  KEY POINTS 
 •  In adult cataract, extraction is indicated if the reduction in vision is interfering with the 
patient ’ s quality of life.  

128 
The lens and cataract
 Multiple choice questions 
 1.  Cataract causes: 
 a 
 A sudden loss of vision. 
 b 
 A gradual loss of vision. 
 c 
 Glare. 
 d 
 Photophobia. 
 e 
 A change in refractive error. 
 2.   Cataract may be caused by or associated with: 
 a 
 Trauma. 
 b 
 Steroids. 
 c 
 Diabetes. 
 d 
 Myotonic dystrophy. 
 e 
 Hypocalcaemia. 
 3.  Complications of cataract surgery include: 
 a 
 Recurrence of the cataract. 
 b 
 Endophthalmitis. 
 c 
 Astigmatism. 
 d 
 Glaucoma. 
 e 
 Cystoid macular oedema. 
 4.   A 60 - year - old lady has just had a cataract operation. Three days later she 
presents to her general practitioner with a painful red eye. The vision, 
which was initially much improved, has become blurred and she is seeing 
lots of ﬂ oaters. 
 a 
 The GP should reassure her that the eye is settling down. 
  b   
  The patient has endophthalmitis and needs to be referred to an eye unit 
immediately. 
 c 
 Treatment of the condition requires steroid drops only. 
 d 
 Treatment of the condition requires intravitreal antibiotics. 
 e 
 This is a rare complication of cataract surgery. 
 Answers 
 1.  Cataract causes: 
 a 
 False. The change in vision is gradual. 
  b   
  True. The patient may not be aware that a change in vision is occurring 
until they notice that particular visual tasks are becoming difﬁ cult. 
  c   
  True. This can be a particularly troubling symptom even in patients with 
good visual acuity.  
 d 
 False. Photophobia is generally caused by inﬂ ammatory conditions affect-
ing the eye.  

The lens and cataract 129
  e   
  True. For example, in nuclear cataract an increase in the density of lens 
proteins at the centre of the lens causes a myopic shift. 
 2.   Cataract may be caused by or associated with: 
 a 
 True. See  page 119 . 
 b 
 True. See  page 119 . 
 c 
 True. See  page 118 . 
 d 
 True. See  page 120 . 
 e 
 True. See  page 120 . 
 3.  Complications of cataract surgery include: 
   a   
  False. Most lens material is removed by surgery, the cataract does not recur 
but the posterior capsule may opacify later. Laser capsulotomy can restore 
vision by creating a hole in the capsule, on the visual axis.  
  b   
  True. This is the most feared complication. Patients with pain, redness of 
the eye and reducing vision following cataract surgery must be seen 
immediately. 
  c   
  True. The incision at the periphery of the cornea can change the shape of 
the cornea inducing astigmatism. This can sometimes be used to advan-
tage however to reduce pre - exisiting astigmatism.  
 d 
 True. Although modern phacoemulsiﬁ cation surgery may actually reduce 
the pressure in the eye in the long term.  
 e 
 True. This accumulation of ﬂ uid at the macula may reduce visual acuity, 
usually temporarily, following cataract surgery.    
 4.   A 60 - year - old lady has just had a cataract operation. 
   a   
  False. The patient has endophthalmitis, a serious eye emergency, and must 
be referred immediately.  
  b   
  True. Immediate and urgent referral is essential to maximize the chance of 
successful treatment.  
 c 
 False. But these may form part of the treatment in conjunction with 
antibiotics. 
 d 
 True. This is the mainstay of treatment. 
  e   
  True. Fortunately this is a rare complication but vigilance is nonetheless 
necessary both in its prevention and early diagnosis. 
 

 Learning  o bjectives 
 To understand:
 ✓  The deﬁ nition of uveitis and the ocular structures 
involved. 
 ✓      The symptoms, signs, causes and treatment of 
uveitis. 
 9 
Uveitis  
 
 Introduction 
 Inﬂ ammation of the uveal tract (the iris, ciliary body and choroid) has many 
causes and is termed  uveitis  (Figure  9.1 ). It is usual for structures adjacent to 
the inﬂ amed uveal tissue to become involved in the inﬂ ammatory process. It 
may be classiﬁ ed anatomically:
 •  Inﬂ ammation of the iris, accompanied by increased vascular permeability, is 
termed  iritis  or  anterior uveitis  (Figure  9.2 ). White cells circulating in the 
aqueous humour of the anterior chamber can be seen with a slit lamp. 
Protein, which also leaks into the anterior chamber from the blood vessels, 
is picked out by its light - scattering properties in the beam of the slit lamp as 
a  ‘ ﬂ are ’ . 
 •  An inﬂ ammation of the ciliary body is termed  cyclitis , of the pars plana is 
 pars planitis  and of the vitreous is  vitritis . As a group these are termed  inter-
mediate uveitis . 
 •  Inﬂ ammation of the posterior uvea is termed  posterior uveitis and 
may involve the choroid ( choroiditis) , the retina ( retinitis)  or both 
( chorioretinitis ). 
 •  A  panuveitis  is present when inﬂ ammatory changes affect the anterior 
chamber, vitreous and retina and/or the choroid. 
Ophthalmology Lecture Notes, Eleventh Edition. Bruce James, Anthony Bron. 
© 2011 Bruce James, Anthony Bron. Published 2011 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Uveitis 131
 Epidemiology 
 The incidence of uveitis is about 15 per 100   000 people. About 75% of these are 
anterior uveitis. 
 About 50% of patients with uveitis have an associated systemic disease. 
 History 
 The patient may complain of:
 •  ocular pain (less frequent with posterior uveitis or choroiditis); 
   •      photophobia;  
   •      blurring of vision;  
   •      redness of the eye.    
 Posterior uveitis may, however, not be painful. 
 The patient must be questioned about other relevant symptoms that may 
help determine whether or not there is an associated systemic disease:
 •  Respiratory symptoms such as shortness of breath, cough, and the nature of 
any sputum produced (associated sarcoidosis or tuberculosis).  
   •      Skin problems. Erythema nodosum (painful raised red lesions on the arms 
and shins) may be present in granulomatous diseases such as sarcoidosis and 
Beh ç et ’ s disease. Patients with Beh ç et ’ s may also have thrombophlebitis, der-
matographia and oral and genital ulceration. Psoriasis (in association with 
arthritis) may be accompanied by uveitis. 
   •      Joint disease. Ankylosing spondylitis with back pain is associated with acute 
anterior uveitis. In children juvenile chronic arthritis may be associated with 
uveitis. Reiter ’ s disease (classically urethritis, conjunctivitis and a seronega-
tive arthritis) may also be associated with anterior uveitis.  
 Figure 9.1   External ocular appearance in a patient with anterior uveitis. Note the 
inﬂ ammatory response at the limbus.  

132 
Uveitis
 Figure 9.2   Signs of anterior uveitis: (a) keratic precipitates on the corneal endothe-
lium; (b) posterior synechiae (adhesions between the lens and iris) give the pupil an 
irregular appearance; (c) a hypopyon, white cells collected to form a ﬂ uid level in the 
inferior anterior chamber.  
(a)
(b)
(c)

Uveitis 133
 •  Bowel disease. Occasionally uveitis may be associated with inﬂ ammatory 
bowel diseases such as ulcerative colitis, Crohn ’ s disease and Whipple ’ s disease.  
   •      Infectious disease. Syphilis with its protean manifestations can cause uveitis 
(particularly posterior choroiditis). Herpetic disease (herpes simplex and 
zoster) may also cause uveitis. Cytomegalovirus (CMV) may cause uveitis, 
particularly in patients with AIDS. Fungal infections and metastatic infec-
tions may also cause uveitis, usually in immunocompromised patients.     
 Signs 
 On examination:
 •  The visual acuity may be reduced. 
 •  The eye will be inﬂ amed, mostly around the limbus ( ciliary injection ). 
 Anterior uveitis 
 •  Inﬂ ammatory cells may be visible clumped together on the endothelium of 
the cornea, particularly inferiorly ( keratitic precipitates or  KPs ). 
   •      Slit - lamp examination will reveal aqueous cells and a ﬂ are due to exuded 
protein. If the inﬂ ammation is severe there may be sufﬁ cient white cells to 
collect as a ﬂ uid level inferiorly ( hypopyon ). 
   •      The vessels on the iris may be dilated.  
   •      The iris may adhere to the lens and bind down the pupil ( posterior synechiae 
or  PS ). Peripheral anterior synechiae (PAS) between the iris and the trabecu-
lar meshwork or cornea may occlude the drainage angle.  
 •  The intraocular pressure may be elevated by PAS or increased aqueous protein. 
 Intermediate and posterior uveitis 
 •  There may be cells in the vitreous. 
 •  There may be retinal or choroidal foci of inﬂ ammation (Figure  9.3 ). 
 •  Macular oedema may be present (see Chapter  11 ). 
 Figure 9.3   Retinitis in a patient with sarcoidosis.  

134 
Uveitis
 Investigations 
 These are aimed at determining a systemic association and are directed in 
part by the type of uveitis present. An anterior uveitis is more likely to be 
associated with ankylosing spondylitis, and human leucocyte antigen 
(HLA) typing may help conﬁ rm the diagnosis. The presence of large KPs 
and possibly nodules on the iris may suggest sarcoidosis: a chest radiograph, 
serum calcium and serum angiotensin - converting enzyme levels would be 
appropriate. In toxoplasmic retinochoroiditis the focus of inﬂ ammation 
often occurs at the margin of an old inﬂ ammatory choroidal scar. A posterior 
uveitis may have an infectious or systemic inﬂ ammatory cause. Some diseases 
such as CMV infections in HIV - positive patients have a characteristic 
appearance, and with an appropriate history may require no further diagnostic 
tests. Associated symptoms may also point towards a systemic disease 
(e.g. fever, diarrhoea, weight loss). Not all cases of anterior uveitis require 
investigation at ﬁ rst presentation unless associated systemic symptoms are 
present. 
 Treatment 
 This is aimed at:
 •  suppressing inﬂ ammation in the eye, and relieving pain in anterior uveitis; 
   •      preventing damage to ocular structures, particularly to the macula and the 
optic nerve, which may lead to permanent visual loss.    
 Steroid therapy is the mainstay of treatment. In anterior uveitis this is deliv-
ered by eye drops. However, topical steroids do not effectively penetrate to the 
posterior segment. Posterior uveitis is therefore treated with systemic steroids, 
or with steroids injected onto the orbital ﬂ oor or into the sub - Tenon ’ s space 
(Figure  9.4 ). 
 In anterior uveitis, dilating the pupil relieves the pain from ciliary spasm and 
prevents the formation of posterior synechiae by separating it from the anterior 
lens capsule. Synechiae otherwise interfere with normal dilation of the pupil. 
Dilation is achieved with mydriatics, e.g. cyclopentolate or atropine drops. 
Atropine has a prolonged action lasting weeks. An attempt to break any syn-
echiae that have formed should be made with initial intensive cyclopentolate 
and phenylephrine drops. A subconjunctival injection of mydriatics may help 
to break resistant synechiae. 
 In posterior uveitis/retinitis visual loss may occur either from destructive 
processes caused by the retinitis itself (e.g. in toxoplasmosis or CMV infection) 
or from ﬂ uid accumulation in the layers of the macula (macular oedema). Apart 
from systemic or injected steroids, speciﬁ c antiviral or antibiotic medication 
may also be required. Some rare but severe forms of uveitis, e.g. that associated 
with Beh ç et ’ s disease, may require treatment with other systemic immunosup-
pressive drugs such as azathioprine or ciclosporin. Long - term treatment may 
be necessary. 

Uveitis 135
 Speciﬁ c  c onditions  a ssociated with 
 u veitis 
 There is a large number of systemic diseases associated with uveitis. A few of 
the more common ones are outlined in Table  9.1 .   
 Ankylosing  s pondylitis 
 This is a seronegative (rheumatoid factor negative) spondyloarthropathy 
causing inﬂ ammation of the tendons, ligaments and joints of the spine. 
Untreated, the condition leads to a disabling, gross rigidity and ﬂ exion deform-
ity of the spine. Genetic factors are involved in the disease. Ninety per cent of 
patients with uveitis have the tissue type HLA B27, although the prevalence of 
the disease in people in general with HLA B27 is only 1%. Approximately 20% 
 Figure 9.4   The principle of a sub - Tenon ’ s injection. A cannula is placed in the 
potential space between the sclera and Tenon ’ s capsule. Injection of steroid 
separates the two layers and the steroid surrounds the eye.  
Conjunctiva
Cannula
Tenon’s capsule

136 
Uveitis
of patients with ankylosing spondylitis will develop acute anterior uveitis. 
Males are affected more frequently than females (3  :  1). 
 History 
 Recurrent anterior uveitis may be the presenting feature of this condition. 
Close enquiry will usually reveal an insidious history of low backache, typi-
cally worse on waking and relieved by exercise. Stiffness at rest is a useful 
symptom which helps differentiate the condition from disease of the 
intervertebral discs. The peripheral joints may be affected in a minority of 
patients. 
 Signs 
 These are typical of an anterior uveitis. 
 Investigation 
 The presence of symptoms and signs in an HLA B27 - positive individual 
is indicative. Sacroiliac spinal MRI may detect early changes in the sacro-
iliac joints and radiographs may reveal the classical features of the disease 
(Figure  9.5 ). 
 Treatment 
 Treatment of the arthropathy is with painkillers, disease modifying drugs, 
NSAIDs, physiotherapy and biologics such as etanercept and adalimumab 
which are directed against the action of tumour necrosis factor alpha (TNF -
 α ). Ocular treatment is as previously outlined. The patient will beneﬁ t from 
a rheumatological opinion and may require intermittent anti - inﬂ ammatory 
treatment and physiotherapy.  
 Table 9.1   Some causes of uveitis (not an exhaustive list). 
 Infectious  
  Non - infectious ocular disease  
 Systemic disease - associated  
 Toxoplasmosis 
 Herpes simplex 
 CMV (AIDS) 
 Tuberculosis 
 Fungal  
 Sympathetic ophthalmitis 
 Fuchs ’  heterochromic cyclitis 
 Angle closure glaucoma 
 Retinal detachment 
 Intraocular tumours 
 Autoimmune reaction to 
advanced cataract. Phakogenic 
 Post - injury or surgery  
 Juvenile chronic arthritis 
 Ankylosing spondylosis 
 Psoriatic arthritis 
 Sarcoidosis 
 Beh ç et ’ s disease 
 Vogt – Koyanagi – Harada 
disease (VKH) 
 Reiter ’ s disease 
 Inﬂ ammatory bowel disease  

Uveitis 137
 Prognosis 
 Patients may experience recurrent attacks. The outlook for vision is good if the 
acute attacks are treated early and vigorously.   
 Reiter ’ s  d isease 
 This condition predominantly affects males, nearly all of whom are HLA B27 -
 positive. It comprises:
 •  urethritis; 
 •  arthritis (typically of the large joints); 
 •  conjunctivitis. 
 Some 40% of patients develop acute anterior uveitis.  
 Juvenile  c hronic  a rthritis 
 A seronegative arthritis (negative for rheumatoid factor) which presents in 
children, either as a systemic disease with fevers and lymphadenopathy, or as 
a pauciarticular or polyarticular arthritis. The pauciarticular form has the 
higher risk of chronic anterior uveitis, particularly if the patient is positive for 
antinuclear antibodies. 
 History 
 The anterior uveitis is chronic and usually asymptomatic. A profound visual 
defect may be discovered by chance if lens or retinal damage caused by chronic 
uveitis has developed slowly. 
 Figure 9.5   MRI appearance of (a) the spine and (b) the fused sacroiliac joints of a 
patient with ankylosing spondylitis.  
(b)
(a)

138 
Uveitis
 Signs 
 The eye is white (unusual for iritis), but other signs of an anterior uveitis are 
present. Because the uveitis is chronic, cataract may occur and patients 
may develop glaucoma, either as a result of the uveitis or as a result of the 
steroid drops used to treat the condition. Macular oedema may also occur. 
Approximately 70% of cases show bilateral involvement.  
 Investigation 
 Rheumatoid factor is negative but patients frequently have a positive antinu-
clear antibody.  
 Treatment 
 Ocular treatment is as previously outlined. Patients may be put on systemic 
treatment for the joint disease. It is important to screen children with 
juvenile arthritis regularly for uveitis, as they are otherwise asymptomatic 
unless potentially blinding complications occur. Glaucoma can be very difﬁ cult 
to treat, and, if medical treatment fails to control pressure, it may require 
surgery. 
 Fuchs ’   h eterochromic  u veitis 
 This is a rare chronic uveitis usually found in young adults. The cause is uncer-
tain, it may be immune mediated and there are no systemic associations. 
 History 
 The patient does not usually present with a typical history of iritis. Blurred 
vision and ﬂ oaters may be the initial complaint. 
 Signs 
 A mild anterior uveitis is present, but without signs of conjunctival inﬂ amma-
tion, and there are no posterior synechiae. There are KPs distributed diffusely 
over the cornea. The iris is heterochromic due to loss of some of the pigment 
epithelial cells. The vitreous may be inﬂ amed and condensations (the cause of 
the ﬂ oaters) may be present. About 70% of patients develop cataract. Glaucoma 
occurs to a lesser extent.  
 Treatment 
 Steroids are not effective in controlling the inﬂ ammation and are thus not 
prescribed. Patients usually respond well to cataract surgery when it is required. 
The glaucoma is treated conventionally.   

Uveitis 139
 Toxoplasmosis 
 History 
 The infection may be congenital or acquired. Most ocular toxoplasmosis was 
thought to be congenital, with the resulting retinochoroiditis being reactivated 
in adult life. However, there is now evidence that it is often acquired during a 
glandular fever - like illness. The patient may complain of hazy vision and ﬂ oat-
ers, and the eye may be red and painful.  
 Signs 
 The retina is the principal structure involved, with secondary inﬂ ammation 
occurring in the choroid ( retinochoroiditis ). An active lesion is often located at 
the posterior pole, appearing as a creamy focus of inﬂ ammatory cells at the 
margin of an old chorioretinal scar (such scars are usually atrophic, with a 
pigmented edge) (Figure  9.6 ). Inﬂ ammatory cells cause a vitreous haze, and the 
anterior chamber may also show evidence of inﬂ ammation. 
 Investigation 
 The clinical appearance is usually diagnostic, but a positive anti - toxoplasma 
antibody test is suggestive. However, a high percentage of the population have 
positive IgG titres due to prior infection.  
 Figure 9.6   The appearance of (a) an inactive toxoplasma retinitis and (b) a reacti-
vated lesion. The active lesion appears pale with indistinct edges; it lies above the 
inactive one.  
(b)
(a)

140 
Uveitis
 Treatment 
 Reactivated lesions will subside, but treatment is required if the macula or optic 
nerve is threatened or if the inﬂ ammatory response is very severe. Systemic 
steroids are administered with antiprotozoal drugs such as clindamycin and 
sulphadiazine, sometimes used in combination. Patients taking clindamycin 
must be warned that if diarrhoea develops they should seek medical help 
immediately as this may indicate the development of pseudomembranous 
colitis, a side effect of the drug.   
 Beh ç et ’ s and Vogt – Koyanagi – Harada  d iseases 
 There are two form of uveitis which are seen infrequently in western countries 
but make an important contribution to the prevalence of uveitis in the Middle 
East, Asia and also in Japan. The prevalence of the disease is these countries is 
in the order of 8 per 10,   000. 
 Beh ç et ’ s  d isease 
 Beh ç et ’ s disease is a condition that causes wide - ranging symptoms including 
mouth ulcers, genital ulcers and a hypopyon anterior uveitis. Additional central 
nervous system (CNS), genito - urinary, gastrointestinal (GI) and skin problems 
and thrombosis   also occur. The disease is due to an arteritis of the small blood 
vessels. The protean nature of the disease may require the support of several 
different specialists. As it is most common in Mediterranean countries, Turkey, 
the Middle East, Japan and south - east Asia it has sometimes been called the 
Silk Route disease, after the ancient trade routes that ran through these areas. 
 Treatment 
 Colchicine tablets are often prescribed for mouth or genital ulcers, and dapsone 
may also be effective. There are also treatments that can be applied locally to 
the ulcers. 
 Immunosuppressives are the usual treatment for moderate to severe Beh ç et ’ s 
syndrome, e.g. azathioprine, and also ciclosporin, tacrolimus and mycopheno-
late. These agents act as steroid - sparing drugs. Anti - TNF drugs may be effec-
tive. Interferon alpha is currently under evaluation. 
 Vogt – Koyanagi – Harada  d isease. 
 Vogt – Koyanagi – Harada disease (VKH) is a multisystem disorder presenting 
with a bilateral panuveitis with exudative retinal detachments and followed by 
neurological and cutaneous manifestations such as baldness and loss of lash 
and skin pigments (poliosis and vitiligo). It is a cell - mediated autoimmune 
disease probably directed against tyrosinase - related proteins, TRP1 and TRP2 
contained in melanocytes. VKH is more common in females than males (2  :  1) 
and affects individuals aged 20 – 50 years, although it has been reported in chil-
dren as young as 4 years. VKH disease occurs most commonly in patients with 

Uveitis 141
a genetic predisposition to the disease, including Asian, Middle Eastern, 
Hispanic, and Native American populations. Several HLA associations have 
been found in patients with VKH disease, including HLA - DR4, HLA - DR53 and 
HLA - DQ4. 
 A prodromal stage, with fever, headache, tinnitus and cerebrospinal ﬂ uid 
(CSF) pleocytosis, is followed after several days by a posterior uveitis leading to 
bilateral serous detachments. There is also a vigorous granulomatous, anterior 
uveitis with mutton fat KP. After several weeks the detachments subside and 
there is both depigmentation of the choroid and hyperpigmentation of the 
retina. Skin changes include vitiligo and poliosis of the lashes, eyebrows and 
hair, with the vitiligo distributed symmetrically over the head, eyelids and trunk.   
 AIDS  and  CMV  r etinitis 
 Ocular disease is a common manifestation of AIDS. Patients develop a variety 
of ocular conditions:
 •  microvascular occlusion causing retinal haemorrhages and cotton - wool 
spots (axonal swelling proximal to infarcted areas of the retinal nerve ﬁ bre 
layer);  
 •  corneal endothelial deposits; 
 •  neoplasms of the eye and orbit; 
 •  neuro - ophthalmic disorders including oculomotor palsies; 
   •      opportunistic infections, of which the most common is CMV retinitis (previ-
ously seen in more than one - third of AIDS patients, but the population at risk 
has decreased signiﬁ cantly since the advent of highly active anti - retroviral 
therapy (HAART) in the treatment of AIDS). It typically occurs in patients 
with a blood CD4 +  cell count of less than 50/ml. Toxoplasmosis, herpes 
simplex and herpes zoster are among other infections that may be seen.    
 History 
 The patient may complain of blurred vision or ﬂ oaters. A diagnosis of HIV 
disease has usually already been made and other AIDS - deﬁ ning features may 
have presented. 
 Signs 
 CMV retinopathy comprises a whitish area of retina, associated with haemor-
rhage, which has been likened in appearance to  ‘ cottage cheese ’  (Figure  9.7 ). 
The lesions may threaten the macula or the optic disc. There is usually an 
associated sparse inﬂ ammation of the vitreous. 
 Treatment 
 Chronic therapy with ganciclovir and/or foscarnet given parenterally is the 
current mainstay of therapy; these drugs may also be given  into  the vitreous 

142 
Uveitis
cavity. Cidoﬁ vir is available for intravenous administration. Ganciclovir and its 
prodrug valganciclovir are available orally. Intraocular depot systems for the 
long - term delivery of anti - CMV agents into the vitreous are under active devel-
opment, and a ganciclovir implant is available.  
 Prognosis 
 Prolonged treatment is required to prevent recurrence. 
 Sympathetic  o phthalmitis 
 This is a devastating complication of ocular injury. A penetrating or surgical 
injury to one eye involving the retina may rarely excite a peculiar form of uveitis 
which involves not only the injured eye but also the fellow eye. This is termed 
sympathetic ophthalmitis. The uveitis may be so severe that in the worst cases 
sight may be lost from both eyes. Fortunately systemic steroids, and particu-
larly ciclosporin, have greatly improved the chances of conserving vision. 
Sympathetic ophthalmitis usually develops within 3 months of the injury or 
last ocular operation but may occur at any time. The cause appears to be an 
immune response against retinal antigens at the time of injury. It can be pre-
vented by enucleation (removal) of the traumatized eye shortly after the injury 
(within a week or so) if the prospects for visual potential in that eye are very 
 Figure 9.7   The retinal appearance in a patient with AIDS and CMV retinitis. Note the 
cotton - wool spot at one o ’ clock. 

Uveitis 143
poor and there is major disorganization. Excision  must precede the onset of 
signs in the fellow eye. 
 Symptoms 
 The patient may complain of pain and decreased vision in the uninjured fellow 
eye. 
 Signs 
 The iris appears swollen, and yellow – white spots may be seen on the retina. 
There is a panuveitis. 
 Treatment 
 High - dose systemic and topical steroids, and also oral ciclosporin, are required 
to reduce the inﬂ ammation and to prevent long - term visual loss. It is vital to 
warn patients with ocular trauma or multiple eye operations to attend an eye 
casualty department if they experience any problems with their normal eye. 
 
  KEY POINTS 
 •  Angle closure glaucoma may cause an anterior uveitis and may present with similar 
symptoms. Look for a dilated pupil and check the intraocular pressure.  
 •  Patients with a retinal detachment may occasionally present with an anterior uveitis. 
The retina should always be examined in patients with uveitis.  
 •  Active treatment of uveitis is required to prevent long - term complications.  
 
  PAEDIATRIC OPHTHALMOLOGY 
 •  Children with juvenile arthritis require regular screening to exclude the presence 
of uveitis, as it is usually asymptomatic.  
 Multiple choice questions 
 1.   Uveitis can be an inﬂ ammation of 
 a 
 The lens. 
 b 
 The iris. 
 c 
 The ciliary body. 
 d 
 The choroid. 
 e 
 The optic nerve. 

144 
Uveitis
 2.  Uveitis 
 a 
 Is always associated with a red eye. 
 b 
 May be complicated by macular oedema. 
 c 
 Posterior synechiae may form between the iris and the lens. 
 d 
 May cause oculomotor palsies. 
 e 
 May be associated with retinitis. 
 3.   A 33 - year - old West Indian patient presents with a red eye, without dis-
charge, and with photophobia and blurred vision. The eye is uncomfort-
able. He has recently become short of breath and developed painful, 
raised, tender red lesions on his shins. 
 a 
 The patient has uveitis. 
 b 
 The patient has ankylosing spondylitis. 
 c 
 The patient probably has sarcoidosis. 
 d 
 Treatment is with steroid eye drops and cycloplegics. 
  e   
  Glaucoma and cataract are possible ocular complications of the condition 
or its treatment. 
 4.  In acquired immunodeﬁ ciency syndrome 
 a 
 Haemorrhages and cotton - wool spots may be seen on the retina. 
  b   
  Opportunistic infection has increased since the development of highly 
active anti - retroviral therapy (HAART).  
  c   
  CMV retinopathy causes focal white spots on the retina associated with 
haemorrhage. 
 d 
 Ganciclovir and foscarnet are used to treat CMV retinitis. 
 e 
 Oculomotor palsies may be seen in AIDS. 
 Answers 
 1.  Uveitis can be an inﬂ ammation of 
 a 
 False. The lens is not inﬂ amed in uveitis. 
 b 
 True. Inﬂ ammation of the iris results in the presence of anterior chamber 
cells. 
 c 
 True. Inﬂ ammation of the ciliary body results in cyclitis. 
 d 
 True. Inﬂ ammation of the choroid is termed choroiditis. 
 e 
 False. The optic nerve is not inﬂ amed in uveitis. 
 2.  Uveitis 
   a   
  False. The eye is usually white in children with uveitis associated with juve-
nile arthritis.  
 b 
 True. Posterior uveitis may be associated with the accumulation of ﬂ uid in 
the macula region of the retina.  

Uveitis 145
  c   
  True. Areas of adhesion between the iris and the lens are a complication of 
anterior uveitis.  
 d 
 False. The condition affects the eye alone. 
 e 
 True. Retinitis refers to inﬂ ammation of the retina. 
  3.   A 33 - year - old West Indian patient presents with a red eye, without dis-
charge, and with photophobia and blurred vision. 
 a 
 True. The signs are classical. 
  b   
  False. Although kyphosis in ankylosing spondylitis may cause shortness of 
breath, this condition is not associated with erythema nodosum. 
  c   
  True. The uveitis, shortness of breath and erythema nodosum are 
suggestive. 
 d 
 True. And his systemic disease also requires investigation and treatment. 
  e   
  True. Both anterior uveitis and prolonged treatment with topical steroids 
may cause cataract or open angle glaucoma. Anterior uveitis may also 
cause closed angle glaucoma.    
 4.  In acquired immunodeﬁ ciency syndrome 
 a 
 True. Haemorrhages and cotton wool spots may be a sign of AIDS. 
 b 
 False. There has been a reduction in opportunistic infection. 
  c   
  True. CMV retinopathy comprises a whitish area of retina associated with 
haemorrhages, likened to cottage cheese. 
  d   
  True. 
Ganciclovir 
and 
foscarnet 
are 
given 
parenterally 
and/or 
intravitreally. 
 e 
 True. Neuro - ophthalmic disorders may be seen. 

 Learning  o bjectives 
 To understand:
 ✓  The nature of glaucoma. 
 ✓  The difference between primary and secondary 
glaucoma; open and closed angle glaucoma.  
 ✓      The different symptoms and signs of open and 
closed angle glaucoma.  
 ✓  The three major forms of glaucoma therapy. 
 10 
Glaucoma  
 
 Introduction 
 The glaucomas are a group of diseases causing damage to the optic nerve ( optic 
neuropathy ) by the effects of raised ocular pressure on the optic nerve head. 
Independent ischaemia of the optic nerve head may also be important. Axon 
loss results in visual ﬁ eld defects and a loss of visual acuity if the central visual 
ﬁ eld is involved. 
 Pathophysiology 
 The intraocular pressure level is determined by a balance between production 
and removal of aqueous humour (Figure  10.1 ). Aqueous is actively secreted into 
Ophthalmology Lecture Notes, Eleventh Edition. Bruce James, Anthony Bron. 
© 2011 Bruce James and Anthony Bron. Published 2011 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Glaucoma 147
the posterior chamber by the ciliary processes, by a combination of active 
transport and ultraﬁ ltration. It then passes through the pupil into the anterior 
chamber and leaves the eye, predominantly, via the trabecular meshwork, 
Schlemm ’ s canal and the episcleral veins to reach the bloodstream ( the conven-
tional pathway ). A small but important proportion of the aqueous (4%) drains 
across the ciliary body into the supra - choroidal space and is absorbed into the 
venous circulation ( the uveoscleral pathway ). 
 Two theories have been advanced to explain how elevated intraocular pres-
sure, acting at the nerve head, damages the optic nerve ﬁ bres:
 1  Raised intraocular pressure causes mechanical damage to the axons. 
 2     Raised intraocular pressure causes ischaemia of the nerve axons by reducing 
blood ﬂ ow at the nerve head. 
 The pathophysiology of glaucoma is probably multifactorial and both mech-
anisms are important.  
 Classiﬁ cation 
 The mechanism by which aqueous drainage is reduced provides a means to 
classify the glaucomas. Classiﬁ cation of the primary glaucomas (Figure  10.2 ) is 
based on whether or not the peripheral iris is:
 •  clear of the trabecular meshwork ( open angle  glaucoma); 
 •  covering the meshwork ( closed angle  glaucoma). 
 Figure 10.1   Diagram of the drainage angle, showing routes taken by aqueous from 
production to absorption.  
Schlemm's canal
Trabecular meshwork
conventional or major pathway
Uveoscleral
outflow
pathway
Ciliary epithelium
(aqueous production)

148 
Glaucoma
 Figure 10.2   Diagram showing the difference between open and closed angle 
glaucoma. Outﬂ ow resistance is increased in each case. In open angle glaucoma the 
obstruction is due to structural changes in the trabecular meshwork. In closed angle 
glaucoma the peripheral iris blocks the meshwork.  
Trabecular meshwork
Trabecular meshwork
(covered by iris)
Open angle
Closed angle
Iris
Iris
 Classiﬁ cation of the  g laucomas 
 1  Primary glaucoma: 
 •  Chronic open angle.  
 •  Acute and chronic closed angle.  
 2  Congenital glaucoma: 
 •  Primary. 
 •  Secondary to maternal rubella infection.  
 •  Secondary to inherited ocular disorders (e.g. aniridia  – absence of the iris).  
 3  Secondary glaucoma (causes): 
 •  Trauma. 
 •  Ocular surgery.  
 •  Associated with other ocular disease (e.g. uveitis).  
 •  Raised episcleral venous pressure.  
 •  Steroid induced.  

Glaucoma 149
   Pathogenesis 
 Primary  o pen  a ngle  g laucoma 
 A special contact lens applied to the cornea (a gonioscopy lens) provides a view 
of the iridocorneal angle with the slit lamp. In open angle glaucoma the trabec-
ular meshwork appears normal on gonioscopy but functionally, it  offers an 
increased resistance to the outﬂ ow of aqueous. This results in an elevated ocular 
pressure. The causes of outﬂ ow obstruction include:
 •  thickening of the trabecular lamellae, which reduces pore size; 
 •  reduction in the number of lining trabecular cells; 
 •  increased extracellular material in the trabecular meshwork spaces. 
 A form of glaucoma also exists in which glaucomatous ﬁ eld loss and cupping 
of the optic disc occurs even though the intraocular pressure is not raised 
( normal tension  or  low tension glaucoma ). It is thought that the optic nerve 
head in these patients is unusually susceptible to the intraocular pressure and/
or has an intrinsically low blood ﬂ ow (Figure  10.3 ). 
 Conversely, intraocular pressure may be raised without evidence of visual 
damage or pathological optic disc cupping ( ocular hypertension ). These sub-
jects may represent the extreme end of the normal range of intraocular pres-
sure; however, a small proportion (about 1% per year) will subsequently develop 
glaucoma.  
 Closed  a ngle  g laucoma 
 This condition occurs in small eyes (i.e. often hypermetropic) which therefore 
have shallow anterior chambers. In the normal eye the point of contact between 
 Figure 10.3   The distribution of intraocular pressure in a normal and glaucomatous 
population. 
Percentage
10
15
20
Intraocular pressure (mmHg)
Skewed distribution in 
non-glaucomatous population
Wide distribution in
glaucomatous population
25
30

150 
Glaucoma
the pupil margin and the lens offers a resistance to aqueous ﬂ ow from 
the posterior into the anterior chamber (relative pupil block); there is a pres-
sure drop between the posterior and anterior chamber. In angle closure 
glaucoma,  sometimes in response to pupil dilation , when the peripheral iris 
may be bunched up in the angle, this resistance is increased and the increased 
pressure gradient bows the iris forward and closes the drainage angle. Aqueous 
can no longer drain through the trabecular meshwork and ocular pressure 
rises, usually abruptly. This peripheral iris contact ultimately leads to adhe-
sions, called  peripheral anterior synechiae  (PAS), which consolidate the 
obstruction. 
 The severely reduced or stagnant circulation of aqueous deprives the whole 
cornea of nutrition and the posterior cornea of its oxygen supply. This causes 
a catastrophic failure of endothelial pumping function and a massive degree of 
corneal oedema and clouding. This is ampliﬁ ed by the raised intraocular pres-
sure and results in a profound fall in vision. 
 However, a full - blown attack of angle closure glaucoma may be preceded by 
subacute episodes of angle closure, associated with transient rises of pressure, 
headaches and the experience of  coloured haloes around bright lights . These 
rainbows are due to presence of mild corneal epithelial oedema which sepa-
rates the regularly arranged basal epithelial cells so that they act as a diffraction 
grating. Any patient presenting with a history of headaches should be asked 
about the presence of  rainbows around lights , which are a key symptom of such 
prodromal attacks.  
 Secondary  g laucoma 
 In secondary glaucoma, the rise of intraocular pressure is usually due to trabec-
ular meshwork obstruction. The trabecular meshwork may be blocked by:
 •  blood ( hyphaema ), following blunt trauma;  
 •  inﬂ ammatory cells ( uveitis ); 
 •  pigment from the iris ( pigment dispersion syndrome ); 
   •      deposition in the trabecular meshwork of material produced by the epithe-
lium of the lens, iris and ciliary body ( pseudoexfoliative glaucoma ); 
 •  drugs increasing the resistance of the meshwork ( steroid - induced 
glaucoma ). 
 Secondary glaucoma may also result from blunt trauma to the eye causing 
damage to the drainage angle ( angle recession ). 
 Angle closure may also account for some cases of secondary glaucoma:
    •      Abnormal iris blood vessels may obstruct the angle and cause the iris to 
adhere to the peripheral cornea, closing the angle ( rubeosis iridis ). This may 
accompany proliferative diabetic retinopathy or central retinal vein occlu-
sion due to the forward diffusion of vasoproliferative factors such as vascular 
endothelial growth factor (VEGF), from the ischaemic retina (Figure  10.4 ; see 
Chapter  12 ). 

Glaucoma 151
   •      A large choroidal melanoma may push the iris forward, approximating it 
to the peripheral cornea and causing an acute attack of angle closure 
glaucoma.  
 •  A cataract may swell, pushing the iris forward and close the drainage angle. 
 •  Uveitis may cause the iris to adhere to the trabecular meshwork. 
 Raised episcleral venous pressure is an unusual cause of glaucoma but may 
be seen in  caroticocavernous sinus ﬁ stula , where a connection between the 
carotid artery or its meningeal branches and the cavernous sinus causes a 
marked elevation in orbital venous pressure. It is also thought to be the 
cause of the raised intraocular pressure in patients with the  Sturge – Weber 
syndrome . 
 Congenital  g laucoma 
 The cause of congenital glaucoma remains uncertain. One view is that the 
iridocorneal angle is developmentally abnormal and covered with a membrane 
which increases the outﬂ ow resistance. 
 Chronic  o pen  a ngle  g laucoma 
 Epidemiology 
 Chronic open angle glaucoma affects 1 in 200 of the population over the age of 
40, affecting males and females equally. The prevalence increases with age to 
nearly 10% in the over - 80 population. There may be a family history although 
the mode of inheritance is often unclear.  
 Figure 10.4   The appearance of the rubeotic iris. Note the irregular pattern of the new 
blood vessels on the surface.  

152 
Glaucoma
 Genetics 
 First - degree relatives of patients with chronic open angle glaucoma have up 
to a 16% chance of developing the disease themselves. Inheritance of the 
condition is complex. Progress has been made with a juvenile form of open 
angle glaucoma (presenting at between 3 and 35 years of age) caused by 
mutations in the myocillin gene (GLC1A), which maps to the long arm of chro-
mosome 1. A different set of mutations in the same gene may be associated 
with some cases of chronic open angle glaucoma and other genes, such as 
optineurin (GLC1E) and WD40 repeat36 (GLC1G), may also play a role. The 
optineurin gene is predominantly associated with normal tension glaucoma 
(see later). It is likely that an interaction between these genes and others yet to 
be identiﬁ ed is required for glaucoma to develop. Other gene candidates are 
being sought.  
 History 
 The symptoms of glaucoma depend on the rate at which the intraocular pres-
sure rises. Chronic open angle glaucoma is associated with a slow rise in pres-
sure and is symptomless until the patient becomes aware of a visual deﬁ cit or 
the diagnosis is made by chance. Many patients are diagnosed when the signs 
of glaucoma are detected by an optometrist.  
 Examination 
 In patients with chronic open angle glaucoma the eyes are white and the 
corneas are clear. Assessment of a glaucoma suspect requires a full slit - lamp 
examination (Figure  10.5 ) and involves:
 •  Measurement of ocular pressure with a tonometer. The mean, normal pres-
sure is 15.5   mmHg. The limits are deﬁ ned as 2 standard deviations above and 
below the mean (11 – 21   mmHg). In chronic open angle glaucoma on presen-
tation, the pressure is typically in the 22 – 40   mmHg range. In angle closure 
glaucoma it rises above 60  mmHg. 
   •      Measurement of the thickness of the cornea with a pachymeter. The meas-
ured value of the intraocular pressure must be adjusted according to the 
corneal thickness (see Chapter  2 ). 
 •  Examination of the iridocorneal angle by gonioscopy, to conﬁ rm that an open 
angle is present.  
   •      Exclusion of other ocular disease that may be a cause of a secondary 
glaucoma.  
   •      Examination of the optic disc and determination of whether it is  pathologi-
cally cupped . Cupping is a normal feature of the optic disc (Figure  10.5 a). The 
disc is assessed by estimating the ratio of the vertical height of the cup to that 
of the disc as a whole (the cup:disc ratio). In the normal eye the cup:disc ratio 
is usually no greater than 0.4. There is, however, a considerable range (0 – 0.8), 
and the size of the cup is related to the size of the disc. It is greater in bigger 

Glaucoma 153
discs and less in smaller discs. In chronic glaucoma, axons leaving the optic 
nerve head die. The central cup expands and the outer rim of nerve ﬁ bres 
( neuroretinal rim ) becomes thinner. The nerve head becomes atrophic. The 
vertical cup:disc ratio becomes greater than 0.4 and the cup deepens. If the 
cup is deep but the cup:disc ratio is lower than 0.4, then chronic glaucoma 
is unlikely, unless the disc is very small. Notching of the rim, implying focal 
axonal loss, may also be a sign of glaucomatous damage. Defects in the nerve 
ﬁ bre layer of the retina may also be apparent and determine the location and 
area of ﬁ eld loss. 
 Much research is being directed towards accurate methods for analysing and 
recording the appearance of the disc. One involves scanning the disc with a 
confocal ophthalmoscope to produce an image of the disc. The neuroretinal 
rim area can be calculated from the image (Figure  10.6 ). Other techniques 
record the thickness of the nerve ﬁ bre layer around the optic disc. These new 
 Figure 10.5   Comparison of (a) a normal optic disc, (b) a glaucomatous optic disc. 
(c) A disc haemorrhage (arrowed) is a feature of patients with normal tension 
glaucoma. (d) A glaucomatous notch (arrowed) in the disc.  
(b)
(a)
(d)
(c)

154 
Glaucoma
technologies may help to detect changes over time, indicating whether pro-
gressive damage to the optic nerve is still occurring despite treatment. 
 Visual ﬁ eld loss in glaucoma is due to the death of optic nerve axons. Field 
testing (perimetry, see Chapter  2 ) is used to establish the presence of islands 
of ﬁ eld loss ( scotomata ) and monitor the progression of optic nerve damage 
(Figure  10.7 ). It is known that a signiﬁ cant proportion of optic nerve ﬁ bres is 
lost before the ﬁ eld loss becomes apparent. This has stimulated the search for 
more sensitive means of assessing visual function with different forms of per-
imetry (a blue target on a yellow background instead of a white target on a 
white background), and testing sensitivity to motion in the peripheral visual 
ﬁ eld. 
 Figure 10.6   A scanning laser ophthalmoscope (Heidelberg) picture of the optic nerve 
head. The thin green circle in (b) outlines the optic nerve head, allowing the machine 
to calculate the area of the cup (red in (a)) and neuroretinal rim in different sectors of 
the disc.  
(b)
(a)
 Symptoms and  s igns of  c hronic  o pen  a ngle  g laucoma 
 •   Symptomless in its early stages.  
 •   A white eye and clear cornea.  
 •   Raised intraocular pressure.  
 •   Visual ﬁ eld defect.  
 •   Cupped optic disc.  

Glaucoma 155
 Figure 10.7   The characteristic pattern of visual ﬁ eld loss in chronic open angle 
glaucoma. (a) An upper arcuate scotoma, reﬂ ecting damage to a cohort of nerve 
ﬁ bres entering the lower pole of the disc (remember  – the optics of the eye determine 
that damage to the lower retina creates an upper ﬁ eld defect). (b) The ﬁ eld loss has 
progressed: a small central island is left (tunnel vision), and sometimes this may be 
associated with sparing of an island of vision in the temporal ﬁ eld.  
30
Small central field
Arcuate scotoma
Blind spot
Small temporal
field
(a)
(b)
30
10
20
10
20
Nasal step
   Treatment 
 Treatment is aimed at reducing intraocular pressure. The level to which the 
pressure must be lowered varies from patient to patient and is that which 
minimizes further glaucomatous visual loss. This requires careful monitoring 
in the outpatient clinic. Three modalities of treatment are available:
 1  medical treatment; 
 2  laser treatment; 
 3  surgical treatment. 
 In the UK guidelines have been published by NICE (National Institute for 
Health and Clinical Excellence www.nice.org.uk/CG85) on the treatment of 
glaucoma with suggested therapeutic regimens. Each form of treatment has its 
complications, and therapy must be aimed at minimizing these whilst maxi-
mizing effectiveness. 
 Medical  t reatment 
 Topical drugs commonly used in the treatment of glaucoma are listed in Table 
 10.1 . In chronic open angle glaucoma the prostaglandin analogues are becom-
ing the ﬁ rst - line treatment. They act by increasing the passage of aqueous 
through the  uveoscleral  pathway. Topical adrenergic beta - blockers may further 
reduce the pressure by suppressing aqueous secretion. Non - selective beta -
 blockers carry the risk of precipitating asthma through their beta - 2 blocking 
action, following systemic absorption, or they may exacerbate an existing heart 

156 
Glaucoma
 Table 10.1   Examples and mode of action of drugs used in the treatment of 
glaucoma. Side effects occur with variable frequency. Systemic effects are due 
to systemic absorption of the drug. 
 Drug  
  Action  
 Side effects  
 Topical agents  
 
 
 Beta - blockers (timolol, 
carteolol, levobunolol, 
metipranolol, 
betaxolol - selective)  
 Decrease secretion  
  Exacerbate asthma and 
chronic airway disease 
 Hypotension, bradycardia, 
heart block  
 Parasympathomimetic 
(pilocarpine)  
 Increase outﬂ ow  
  Visual blurring in the young 
 Darkening of the visual 
world due to pupillary 
constriction 
 Initially, headache due to 
ciliary spasm  
 Sympathomimetic 
(adrenaline, 
dipivefrine)  
 Increase outﬂ ow 
 Decrease secretion  
 Redness of the eye 
 Headache palpitations  
 Alpha - 2 agonists 
(apraclonidine, 
brimonidine)  
 Increase outﬂ ow 
through the 
uveoscleral pathway 
 Decrease secretion  
 Redness of the eye 
 Fatigue, drowsiness  
 Carbonic anhydrase 
inhibitors 
(dorzolamide, 
brinzolamide)  
 Decrease secretion  
  Stinging 
 Unpleasant taste 
 Headache  
 Prostaglandin analogues 
(latanoprost, 
travaprost, 
bimatoprost, 
taﬂ uprost, 
unoprostone)  
 Increase outﬂ ow 
through the 
uveoscleral pathway  
 Increased pigmentation of 
the iris and periocular skin 
 Lengthening and darkening 
of the lashes, conjunctival 
hyperaemia 
 Rarely, macular oedema, 
uveitis  
 Systemic agents  
 
 
 Carbonic anhydrase 
inhibitors 
(acetazolamide)  
 Decrease secretion  
  Tingling in limbs 
 Depression, sleepiness 
 Renal stones 
 Stevens – Johnson syndrome  
block through their beta - 1 action. Beta - 1 selective beta - blockers may have 
fewer systemic side effects, but must still be used with caution in those with 
respiratory disease, particularly asthma, which may be exacerbated even by the 
small residual beta - 2 activity. Pilocarpine may occasionally be used in the treat-
ment of chronic open angle glaucoma. If intraocular pressure remains elevated 
the choice lies between:

Glaucoma 157
 •  adding additional medical treatment; 
 •  laser treatment; 
 •  surgical drainage procedures. 
 Laser  t rabeculoplasty 
 This involves placing a series of laser burns (50    µ m wide) in the trabecular 
meshwork, to improve aqueous outﬂ ow. Whilst effective initially, the intraocu-
lar pressure may slowly increase. In the UK there is an increasing tendency to 
proceed to early drainage surgery.  
 Surgical  t reatment 
 Drainage surgery ( trabeculectomy ) relies on the creation of a ﬁ stula between 
the anterior chamber and the subconjunctival space (Figure  10.8 ). Aqueous 
humour leaves the anterior chamber, via a bleb of conjunctiva, into the sub-
conjunctival space. The operation usually achieves a substantial reduction in 
intraocular pressure. It is performed increasingly early in the treatment of 
glaucoma.   
 Complications of surgery include:
 •  shallowing of the anterior chamber in the immediate postoperative period 
risking damage to the lens and cornea;  
 •  intraocular infection; 
   •      possibly accelerated cataract development;  
 •  failure to reduce intraocular pressure adequately. 
   •      an excessively low pressure (hypotony) which may cause macular oedema.    
 Evidence suggests that some topical medications, particularly those contain-
ing sympathomimetic agents or preservatives, may decrease the success of 
surgery by causing increased postoperative subconjunctival scarring, resulting 
in a non - functional drainage channel. In patients particularly prone to scar-
ring, antimetabolite drugs (5 - ﬂ uorouracil and mitomycin) may be used at the 
time of surgery to prevent subconjunctival ﬁ brosis. 
 Recent research has examined the beneﬁ t of modifying the trabeculectomy 
operation by removing the sclera under the scleral ﬂ ap but not making a ﬁ stula 
into the anterior chamber ( deep sclerostomy ,  viscocanalostomy ). The long - term 
beneﬁ t of the procedure is being assessed.   
 Normal  t ension  g laucoma 
 Normal tension glaucoma, considered to lie at one end of the spectrum of 
chronic open angle glaucoma, can be particularly difﬁ cult to treat, although in 
those with progressive ﬁ eld loss, lowering intraocular pressure may be beneﬁ -
cial. Some patients appear to have non - progressive visual ﬁ eld defects and 
may require no treatment.   

158 
Glaucoma
 Figure 10.8   (a) Diagram showing a section through a trabeculectomy. An incision is 
made in the conjunctiva, which is dissected and reﬂ ected to expose bare sclera. A 
partial - thickness scleral ﬂ ap is then fashioned. Just anterior to the scleral spur a small 
opening (termed a  sclerostomy ) is made into the anterior chamber to create a 
low - resistance channel for aqueous. The iris is excised in the region of the scleros-
tomy ( iridectomy ) to prevent it moving forward and blocking the opening. The 
partial - thickness ﬂ ap is loosely sutured back into place. The conjunctiva is tightly 
sutured. Aqueous can now leak through the sclerostomy, around and through the 
scleral ﬂ ap and underneath the conjunctiva, where it forms a bleb. (b) The appear-
ance of a trabeculectomy bleb.  
The drainage of fluid
under the conjunctiva
forms a bleb
Cornea
Conjunctiva
Partial-thickness
scleral flap
Channel cut from 
base of partial- 
thickness flap
into anterior 
chamber
Sclera
Peripheral
iridectomy
(a)
(b)

Glaucoma 159
 Primary  a ngle  c losure  g laucoma 
 Epidemiology 
 Primary angle closure glaucoma affects 1 in 1000 subjects over 40 years old, 
with females more commonly affected than males. Patients with angle closure 
glaucoma are likely to be long - sighted, because the long - sighted eye is small 
and the structures of the anterior chamber are more crowded.  
 History 
 In acute angle closure glaucoma, there is an abrupt increase in pressure and 
the eye becomes photophobic and very painful due to ischaemic tissue damage. 
There is watering of the eye and loss of vision. The patient may be systemically 
unwell with nausea and referred abdominal pain, symptoms which may take 
them to a general casualty department. 
 Intermittent primary angle closure glaucoma occurs when an acute attack 
spontaneously resolves. The patient may complain of pain, blurring of vision 
and seeing coloured rainbows around lights.  
 Examination 
 On examination visual acuity is reduced, the eye red, the cornea cloudy and 
the pupil oval, ﬁ xed and dilated (Figure  10.9 ). 
 Treatment 
 The acute and dramatic rise in pressure seen in angle closure glaucoma 
must be urgently countered to prevent permanent damage to the vision. 
Acetazolamide is administered intravenously and subsequently orally, together 
 Figure 10.9   The appearance of the eye in angle closure glaucoma. Note the cloudy 
cornea and dilated pupil.  

160 
Glaucoma
with topical pilocarpine and beta - blockers. Pilocarpine constricts the pupil and 
draws the peripheral iris out of the angle; the acetazolamide and beta - blocker 
reduce aqueous secretion and the pressure gradient across the iris. These 
measures often break the attack and lower intraocular pressure. Subsequent 
management requires that a small hole ( iridotomy  or  iridectomy ) be made in 
the peripheral iris to prevent further attacks. This provides an alternative 
pathway for ﬂ uid to ﬂ ow from the posterior to the anterior chamber, bypassing 
the pupil and thus reducing the pressure gradient across the iris. This can be 
done with a YAG laser or surgically. 
 If the pressure has been raised for some days the iris becomes adherent to 
the peripheral cornea ( peripheral anterior synechiae  or  PAS ). The iridocorneal 
angle is damaged, and additional medical or surgical measures may be 
required to lower the ocular pressure. In some patients with cataract, lens 
extraction with implantation of an intraocular lens may help open the irido-
corneal angle. 
 Secondary  g laucoma 
 Secondary glaucomas are much rarer than the primary glaucomas. The symp-
toms and signs depend on the rate at which intraocular pressure rises; most 
are again symptomless. Treatment broadly follows the lines of the primary 
disease. In secondary glaucoma it is important to treat any underlying cause, 
e.g. uveitis, which may be responsible for the glaucoma. 
 In particularly difﬁ cult cases it may be necessary to selectively ablate the 
ciliary processes in order to reduce aqueous production. This is done by appli-
cation of a laser or cryoprobe to the sclera overlying the processes. Endoscopic 
techniques are also under development.  
 Congenital  g laucoma 
 This covers a diverse range of disease. It may present at birth or within the ﬁ rst 
year. Symptoms and signs include:
 •  excessive tearing, photophobia and blepharospasm; 
   •      an increased corneal diameter and enlargement of the globe ( buphthalmos ), 
resulting in progressive myopia; 
 •  a cloudy cornea due to epithelial and stromal oedema; 
 •  splits in Descemet ’ s membrane. 
 Congenital glaucoma is usually treated surgically. An incision is made into 
the trabecular meshwork ( goniotomy ) to increase aqueous drainage, or a direct 
passage between Schlemm ’ s canal and the anterior chamber is created 
( trabeculotomy ). 

Glaucoma 161
 Prognosis of the  g laucomas 
 The goal of treatment in glaucoma is to stop or reduce the rate of visual damage. 
It may be that control of intraocular pressure alone is not the only factor that 
needs to be addressed in the management of glaucoma. The possible role of 
optic nerve ischaemia has been discussed, and there is interest in developing 
neuroprotective drugs. Reducing intraocular pressure is thus currently the 
mainstay of treatment. Some patients will continue to develop visual loss 
despite a large decrease in intraocular pressure. Nonetheless vigorous lowering 
of intraocular pressure, even when it does not prevent continued visual loss, 
appears to signiﬁ cantly reduce the rate of progression. If the diagnosis is made 
late, when there is already signiﬁ cant visual damage, the eye is more likely to 
become blind despite treatment (Figure  10.10 ). 
 If intraocular pressure remains controlled following acute treatment of angle 
closure glaucoma, progressive visual damage is unlikely. The same applies to 
the secondary glaucomas, if treatment of the underlying cause results in a 
reduction of intraocular pressure into the normal range. 
 Figure 10.10   All eyes suffer a gradual loss of neurones with aging but death normally 
precedes a visually signiﬁ cant decline. In glaucoma this loss is speeded up and 
visually signiﬁ cant loss may occur during life (red line). Early diagnosis of the condition 
with lowering of intraocular pressure results in future age - related neuronal loss only 
(green line parallel to the normal eye). Even if there is some continued glaucomatous 
damage the rate is slowed and the patient is unlikely to suffer visual loss during their 
lifetime (interrupted green line). If the diagnosis is made late (purple lines), arresting 
the glaucoma completely may still result in visual loss during the patient ’ s lifetime. 
This emphasizes the need for early diagnosis.  
Good
vision
Early diagnosis, no further glaucomatous damage
Early diagnosis, slower glaucomatous damage
Late diagnosis, no further glaucomatous damage
Late diagnosis, slower glaucomatous damage
70 years
Poor
vision
Untreated
glaucomatous
eye
Normal eye
Age

162 
Glaucoma
     Multiple  c hoice  q uestions 
 1.  Which of the following statements are true? 
 a 
 Aqueous is produced by the ciliary processes. The ﬂ uid circulates through 
the pupil and is drained by the trabecular meshwork.  
 b 
 The uveoscleral pathway accounts for most of the drainage of aqueous. 
 c 
 The major classiﬁ cation of glaucoma depends on the anatomy of the irido-
corneal angle.  
  d   
  One mechanism of angle closure glaucoma is an increased resistance to 
aqueous ﬂ ow through the pupil. This causes the iris to bow forwards and 
block the drainage angle.  
 e 
 Glaucoma is always associated with a raised pressure. 
    2.     A patient is found by his optician to have an arcuate visual ﬁ eld defect, an 
enlarged optic cup and raised intraocular pressure. 
 a 
 The most likely diagnosis is acute glaucoma. 
 b 
 The most likely diagnosis is chronic open angle glaucoma. 
 c 
 Treatment is with intravenous acetazolamide. 
  d   
  Treatment is conﬁ ned to topical therapy.  
 e 
 The corneal diameter will be increased. 
 
  PAEDIATRIC OPHTHALMOLOGY 
 •  Congenital glaucoma may present with an enlarged eye and epiphora.  
 
  KEY POINTS 
 •  Glaucoma is an optic neuropathy caused by an elevation of intraocular pressure.  
 •  Glaucomatous optic neuropathy is distinguished from that due to other causes by an 
enlarged optic cup.  
 •  Primary glaucoma is classiﬁ ed according to whether the trabecular meshwork is 
obstructed by the peripheral iris (angle closure) or not (open angle glaucoma).  
 •  Treatment of glaucoma relies on lowering ocular pressure to reduce or prevent further 
visual damage.  
 •  Ocular pressure can be reduced with topical and systemic medications, laser treatment 
and surgery.  
 •  Beware patients who are acutely ill, with a red eye; they may have acute angle closure 
glaucoma.  

Glaucoma 163
    3.     A patient presents to casualty with a painful red eye and a cloudy cornea. 
The casualty ofﬁ cer suspects he has acute glaucoma. 
 a 
 He should arrange for him to be seen in the eye clinic in a week. 
 b 
 The diagnosis would be further conﬁ rmed by ﬁ nding a dilated pupil. 
  c   
  Treatment is initially with intravenous acetazolamide and pilocarpine eye 
drops. 
 d 
 A laser iridotomy should be performed. 
  e   
  The condition may be caused by a block to the ﬂ ow of aqueous through the 
pupil. 
 4.  Symptoms of congenital glaucoma include 
 a 
 A watering eye. 
 b 
 Increased corneal diameter. 
 c 
 A red eye. 
 d 
 Splits in Descemet ’ s membrane. 
 e 
 Cloudiness of the cornea. 
 5.  Glaucoma surgery (trabeculectomy) 
 a 
 May be complicated by intraocular infection. 
  b   
  Is associated with accelerated cataract development.  
 c 
 Retinal detachment is a common complication of the surgery. 
 d 
 Reverses damage to the optic nerve caused by glaucoma.  
 e 
 Success of surgery may be improved by using antimetabolites topically. 
 6.  Match the side effects of treatment with the drug class 
 a 
 Exacerbation of asthma. 
 b 
 Visual blurring in patients with cataract. 
  c   
  Redness of the eye, increased pigmentation of the periocular skin, darken-
ing of the iris, lengthening of the eyelashes.  
 d 
 Tingling in the ﬁ ngers and around the mouth. 
 i 
 Beta - blockers. 
 ii 
 Prostaglandin analogues. 
 iii  Parasympathomimetic agents. 
 iv 
 Systemic carbonic anhydrase inhibitors. 
 Answers 
 1.  Which of the following statements are true? 
   a   
  True. This is the route that most of the aqueous drains through, a small 
percentage drains via the uveoscleral route.  
  b   
  False. The uveoscleral pathway accounts for only a small proportion of ﬂ ow. 
The conventional pathway across the trabecular meshwork accounts for 
most of the outﬂ ow. 

164 
Glaucoma
 c 
 True. Glaucoma is essentially classiﬁ ed into open and closed angle 
glaucoma.  
  d   
  True. Termed pupil block this is the cause of acute angle closure 
glaucoma.  
  e   
  False. Some patients develop the typical signs of glaucoma (glaucomatous 
ﬁ eld loss and disc cupping) but have an intraocular pressure within the 
normal range. 
  2.     A patient is found by his optician to have an arcuate visual ﬁ eld defect, 
an enlarged optic cup and raised intraocular pressure. 
 a 
 False. This is an acute painful condition. 
 b 
 True. These are the classical signs of chronic open angle glaucoma. 
  c   
  False. Intravenous acetazolamide is used to suppress aqueous secretion 
quickly, in acute glaucoma.  
  d   
  False. Although this is the commonest treatment, laser and surgical treat-
ments are also possible.  
 e 
 False. This is only seen in congenital glaucoma. 
  3.     A patient presents to casualty with a painful red eye and a cloudy cornea. 
The casualty ofﬁ cer suspects he has acute glaucoma. 
 a 
 False. The patient must be referred immediately for treatment. 
  b   
  True. It is likely that the patient has acute closed angle glaucoma, ﬁ nding 
a dilated pupil would help conﬁ rm the diagnosis. 
  c   
  True. The acetazolamide will reduce the pressure and the pilocarpine will 
constrict the pupil helping to relieve the angle closure.  
 d 
 True. This is the deﬁ nitive treatment. 
 e 
 True. This is the proposed mechanism for this type of glaucoma. 
 4.  Symptoms of congenital glaucoma include 
   a   
  True. Although most watering eyes in babies are due to non - patency of the 
nasolacrimal duct (Chapter  6 ) this is also the presentation of congenital 
glaucoma. Children are also photophobic and may have blepharospasm.  
 b 
 True. These children may have  ‘ beautiful ’ big eyes. 
  c   
  False. The eye is usually white.  
  d   
  True. The corneal enlargement is associated with splits in Descemet ’ s 
membrane. 
 e 
 True. This is caused by epithelial and stromal oedema. 
 5.  Glaucoma surgery (trabeculectomy) 
 a 
 True. This is a potential complication of any intraocular surgery. 
  b   
  True. Catarct may develop at an increased rate following trabeculectomy.  
  c   
  False. Choroidal effusion may be seen immediately following trabeculec-
tomy if the pressure is low but retinal detachment is a rare complication.  
  d   
  False. No treatment is known to reverse the damage of glaucoma, but the 
rate of progression can be reduced with treatment. 

Glaucoma 165
  e   
  True. A topical antimetabolite, applied to the sclera and conjunctiva at the 
time of surgery, reduces scarring and allows a functioning drainage bleb 
to form. 
  6.     Match the side effects of treatment with the drug class 
 a 
 Beta - blockers (i). 
 b 
 Parasympathomimetic agents (iii). 
 c 
 Prostaglandin analogues (ii). 
 d 
 Systemic carbonic anhydrase inhibitors (iv).    

 Learning  o bjectives 
 To understand:
 ✓  The symptoms of retinal disease. 
 ✓      The cause and treatment of acquired and inherited 
retinal disease. 
 ✓      The symptoms, signs and complications of posterior 
vitreous detachment. 
 ✓  The symptoms, signs, complications and treatment 
of retinal detachment.  
 ✓      The symptoms, signs and treatment of retinal and 
choroidal tumours. 
 11 
Retina and  c horoid  
 
 Introduction 
 The retina is subject to an enormous range of disease, both inherited and 
acquired. Some are common, with signiﬁ cant socioeconomic importance (e.g. 
age - related macular degeneration), while others are much rarer (for example 
some of the macular dystrophies). The impact on the individual may be pro-
found in either case. Diseases of the macula, particularly if bilateral, result in a 
profound reduction in visual acuity. Despite the variety of diseases, the symp-
toms are relatively stereotyped. These will be described ﬁ rst. In this chapter 
both hereditary and acquired disease of the vitreous, neuroretina, retinal 
pigment epithelium and choroid will be described. In the chapter which follows 
the effects of disorders of the retinal circulation will be explored.  
Ophthalmology Lecture Notes, Eleventh Edition. Bruce James, Anthony Bron. 
© 2011 Bruce James and Anthony Bron. Published 2011 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Retina and choroid 167
 Symptoms of  r etinal  d isease 
 Macular  d ysfunction 
 The central part of the macula (the  fovea ) is responsible for ﬁ ne resolution. 
Disorders of this relatively small part of the retina cause signiﬁ cant visual 
impairment. The patient may complain of:
 •  Blurred central vision. 
 •  Distorted vision ( metamorphopsia ) caused by a disturbance in the arrange-
ment of the photoreceptors such as that which occurs in macular oedema. 
A reduction ( micropsia ) or enlargement ( macropsia ) of object size may 
also occur if the photoreceptors become stretched apart or compressed 
together. 
   •      The patient may notice areas of loss of the central visual ﬁ eld ( scotomata ) if 
part of the photoreceptor layer becomes covered, e.g. by blood, or if the 
photoreceptors are destroyed. 
 Peripheral  r etinal  d ysfunction 
 The patient complains of:
 •  Loss of visual ﬁ eld (usually detected clinically when a signiﬁ cant amount of 
the peripheral retina is damaged). Small areas of damage, e.g. small haemor-
rhages, do not produce clinically detectable defects. The ﬁ eld loss may be 
absolute, for example in a branch retinal artery occlusion, or relative (i.e. 
brighter or larger objects are visible) as in a retinal detachment. 
   •      Some diseases affecting the retina may predominantly affect one type of 
photoreceptor; in retinitis pigmentosa the rods are principally affected so 
that night vision is reduced (night blindness). 
 Acquired  m acular  d isease 
 Acquired disease at the macula may destroy part or all of the thickness of the 
retina (e.g. age - related macular degeneration or a macular hole). In a number 
of conditions this damage is dramatically magniﬁ ed by the growth of new 
vessels from the choroid through Bruch ’ s membrane and the retinal pigment 
epithelium (RPE), causing haemorrhage or exudation of ﬂ uid into the sub -
 retinal space and subsequent scarring of the retina. The neuroretina ceases to 
function if it is detached from the RPE, so these changes cause marked disrup-
tion of macular function even before direct retinal damage occurs. 
 Fluid may also accumulate within the layers of the retina at the macula 
( cystoid macular oedema ) if the normal tight junctions of the retinal capillaries 
that form the  inner blood – retinal barrier  break down. This may occur following 

168 
Retina and choroid
intraocular surgery, such as cataract surgery. The retina and sub - retinal layers 
may also become separated by diffusion of ﬂ uid from the choriocapillaris 
through an abnormal region of the retinal pigment epithelium. This represents 
a breakdown of the  outer blood – retinal barrier  between the choroid and the 
retina, and is termed central serous retinopathy. It may occur unilaterally, as a 
potentially reversible disorder particularly in young men. 
 Age - r elated  m acular  d egeneration 
 Age - related macular degeneration (AMD) is the commonest cause of irrevers-
ible visual loss in the developed world (Figure  11.1 ).   
 Figure 11.1   (a) The pathogenesis of exudative age - related macular degeneration 
(RPE, retinal pigment epithelium). Pictures of: (b) dry AMD: note the discrete scattered 
yellowish sub - retinal dr ü sen; (c) wet AMD: note the small haemorrhage associated 
with the sub - retinal membrane.  
(b)
(c)
(a)
Photoreceptor
layer of retina
RPE
Choroid
Bruch's 
membrane
Abnormal blood vessels
Fluid or blood 
under retina
Fluid or blood 
under RPE
Drusen

Retina and choroid 169
 Pathogenesis 
 The RPE removes and processes the used discs of the photoreceptor outer seg-
ments. Over time, undigested lipid products, such as the age pigment lipofus-
cin, accumulate in the RPE and the excess material is transferred to Bruch ’ s 
membrane, impairing its diffusional properties. Extracellular deposits form 
between the RPE and Bruch ’ s membrane which can be seen with the ophthal-
moscope as discrete, sub - retinal yellow lesions called dr ü sen. Collections of 
these dr ü sen in the macula give rise to the condition termed  age - related macu-
lopathy  or ARM where vision is normal. The neighbouring RPE and photore-
ceptors may also show degenerative changes, producing the dry or non - exudative 
form of AMD. In the less common, exudative or  ‘ wet ’  form, new vessels from 
the choroid, stimulated by angiogenic factors such as vascular endothelial 
growth factor (VEGF), grow through Bruch ’ s membrane and the RPE into the 
sub - retinal space, where they form a  sub - retinal neovascular membrane . 
Subsequent haemorrhage into the sub - retinal space or even through the retina 
into the vitreous is associated with profound visual loss.  
 Symptoms 
 The symptoms are those of macular dysfunction outlined above.  
 Signs 
 The usual foveal reﬂ ex is absent. Yellow, well circumscribed dr ü sen may be 
seen, and there may be areas of hypo -  and hyperpigmentation. In exudative 
AMD sub - retinal, or more occasionally pre - retinal, haemorrhages may be seen. 
The experienced observer may detect elevation of the retina stereoscopically.  
 Investigation 
 Diagnosis is based on the appearance of the retina. In patients with a suspected 
exudative AMD and with vision that is not severely affected, a ﬂ uorescein angi-
ogram is performed to delineate the position of the  sub - retinal neovascular 
membrane . The position of the membrane determines whether or not the 
patient may beneﬁ t from laser treatment.  
 Treatment 
 There is no treatment for non - exudative AMD. Patients with visual loss in one 
eye (visual loss t    <    6/24 from non - exudative or exudative disease) and high risk 
features in the fellow eye or bilateral high risk features but normal vision (large 
or conﬂ uent dr ü sen or signiﬁ cant hypo - and hyperpigmentation) may beneﬁ t 
from high - dose antioxidant vitamins and zinc. Betacarotene is, however, 
avoided in smokers or those who have recently stopped smoking because of 
the increased risk of lung cancer. Smoking itself is associated with an increased 

170 
Retina and choroid
risk of developing haemorrhagic, exudative AMD and patients should be 
encouraged to stop. 
 Vision is maximized with low - vision aids including magniﬁ ers and telescopes 
and closed - circuit television devices (CCTV). The patient must be reassured 
that although central vision has been lost, the disease will not spread to affect 
the peripheral vision. Therefore navigational vision is retained. This is a vital 
message, since many patients fear that they will become totally blind. 
 Patients with exudative AMD, where the ﬂ uorescein angiogram reveals a sub -
 retinal vascular membrane can be treated with drugs inhibiting the action of 
angiogenic factors such as VEGF. These drugs retard angiogenesis and cause 
regression of existing new vessels. Anti - VEGF agents are currently given by 
repeated injections into the vitreous cavity. They reduce visual loss and restore 
the normal anatomical appearance of the macula. In some patients vision may 
improve. This treatment represents a major advance in the therapy of this disease.  
 Other  d egenerative  c onditions  a ssociated with the 
 f ormation of  s ub - r etinal  n eovascular  m embranes 
 •  Degenerative changes and sub - retinal neovascular membranes may also 
occur at the maculae of very myopic patients and can cause loss of central 
vision, particularly in young adulthood.  
 •  Sub - retinal neovascular membranes may also grow through elongated cracks 
in Bruch ’ s membrane called  angioid streaks (Figure  11.2 ). These are seen 
classically in the rare recessive disorder  pseudoxanthoma elasticum , and 
uncommonly in systemic diseases such as Paget ’ s disease and sickle cell 
 Figure 11.2   The clinical appearance of angioid streaks in pseudoxanthoma elasti-
cum. The arrow indicates a streak.  

Retina and choroid 171
disease. Again there may be a profound reduction in central vision. Vision is 
also reduced if the crack itself passes through the fovea.        
 Macular  h oles and  m embranes 
 A well circumscribed hole may form at the centre of the macular region and 
destroy the fovea, resulting in a major loss of acuity (Figure  11.3 ). It results from 
vitreous traction on the thin macular retina. The early stages of hole formation 
may be associated with visual distortion and mild blurring of vision.   
 Unlike peripheral retinal holes, macular holes are not usually associated with 
retinal detachment. Most are idiopathic in origin, but they may be associated 
with blunt trauma. Much interest is being shown in the treatment of macular 
holes with vitreous surgery to relieve the traction on the retina. The degree of 
visual improvement depends on the initial vision, the duration of symptoms 
and the stage (severity) of the macular hole. No other treatment is available. 
 A pre - retinal glial membrane may form over the macular region, whose con-
traction causes  puckering  of the retina and again results in blurred and dis-
torted of vision. These symptoms may be improved by removing the membrane 
with microsurgical vitrectomy techniques.  
 Figure 11.3   (a) The appearance of a macular hole. (b) An optical coherence 
tomogram (OCT) scan of the retina showing a macular hole, compared to (c) a normal 
scan. 
Internal limiting
membrane
Macular hole
Retina
Retinal pigment
epithelium
(c)
(b)
Fovea
(a)

172 
Retina and choroid
 Central  s erous  r etinopathy 
 Here, a localized accumulation of ﬂ uid between the neuro retina and the RPE 
separates the two layers and disturbs the photoreceptor layer. It results from a 
localized breakdown in the normal barrier function of the RPE. It is usually 
unilateral and typically affects young or middle - aged males. Patients complain 
of distortion and blurred vision and visual acuity may fall markedly. Exami-
nation reveals a dome - shaped elevation of the retina (Figure  11.4 ).   
 Treatment is not usually required, as the condition is self - limiting. 
Occasionally, in intractable cases or those where the vision is severely affected, 
the argon laser can be used to seal the point of leakage identiﬁ ed with a ﬂ uo-
rescein angiogram.  
 Macular  o edema 
 This extracellular accumulation of ﬂ uid within the retina is a further cause of 
distorted and blurred vision (Figure  11.5 ). Ophthalmoscopy reveals a loss of the 
normal foveal reﬂ ex and with experience a rather cystic appearance to the 
fovea. If the diagnosis is in doubt a conﬁ rmatory optical coherence tomogram 
(OCT) scan (Figure  11.5 ) or a ﬂ uorescein angiogram can be performed. The 
ﬂ uorescein leaks into the oedematous retina in a characteristic pattern (see 
Chapter  2 ). 
 Macular oedema may be associated with numerous and diverse eye disor-
ders, including:
 •  intraocular surgery; 
 •  uveitis; 
 •  retinal vascular disease (e.g. diabetic retinopathy and retinal vein 
occlusion);  
 •  retinitis pigmentosa. 
 Treatment can be difﬁ cult and is dependent on the associated eye disease. 
Steroids in high doses are helpful in macular oedema caused by uveitis; aceta-
zolamide may be helpful in treating patients with retinitis pigmentosa or fol-
lowing intraocular surgery. 
 Figure 11.4   The pattern of ﬂ uid accumulation in central serous retinopathy.  
Accumulation 
of fluid between 
retina and RPE
Breakdown of RPE
RPE
Choroid
Bruch's 
membrane
Photoreceptor 
layer of retina

Retina and choroid 173
 Prolonged macular oedema can cause the formation of a lamellar macular 
hole. 
 Toxic  m aculopathies 
 The accumulation of some drugs in the RPE can cause macular damage. These 
include the antimalarials chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine, used quite 
widely in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis and other connective - tissue 
disorders, which may cause a toxic maculopathy. Chloroquine is the more toxic. 
Patients on chloroquine require regular visual assessment for maculopathy 
(Figure  11.6 ). The maculopathy is initially only detected by accurate assess-
ment of macular function. At this early stage, discontinuation of the drug 
reverses the maculopathy. Later, a pigmentary target lesion is seen ophthalmo-
scopically, associated with metamorphopsia and an appreciable and irrevers-
ible loss of central vision. Ocular toxicity is unlikely with a dose of less than 
4   mg (chloroquine phosphate) per kg lean body weight per day or a total cumu-
lative dose of less than 300   g. Screening of patients on hydroxychloroquine, at 
the recommended dose, although still advised, is questioned by some.   
 Phenothiazines (thioridazine particularly) used in high doses for prolonged 
periods (to treat psychoses) may cause retinal damage. 
 Tamoxifen, in high doses, may cause a maculopathy. 
 Figure 11.5   (a) The pattern of ﬂ uid accumulation in macular oedema (schematic). 
(b) An optical coherence tomogram (OCT) scan showing cysts of ﬂ uid in the retina of 
a patient with macular oedema, compared to (c) a normal scan.  
Internal limiting
membrane
Fovea
Retina
Retinal pigment
epithelium
(b)
(a)
(c)
Fovea
Retina
RPE
Choroid
Bruch's membrane
Fluid within the retina itself

174 
Retina and choroid
 Vitreous  ﬂ oaters and  p osterior  v itreous 
 d etachment 
 With ageing, the vitreous gel undergoes degenerative changes over the age of 
60 (earlier in myopes), with liquefaction and the formation of fragments of 
condensed vitreous. They cast shadows on the retina, giving rise to the common 
symptom of vitreous  ‘ ﬂ oaters ’ . These take the form of spots or cobwebs which 
obscure vision only slightly and move when the eyes move, reﬂ ecting the ﬂ uid 
nature of the vitreous. Symptoms are most marked on bright days, when the 
small pupil throws a sharper image on the retina. 
 Sometimes, in older patients or myopes, the vitreous gel collapses and sepa-
rates from points of retinal attachment, a condition termed a  posterior vitreous 
detachment (Figure  11.7 ). This gives rise to acute symptoms of:
 •  photopsia (ﬂ ashing lights)  –  due to traction on the peripheral retina by the 
detaching vitreous; 
 •  a shower of ﬂ oaters  –  representing condensations within the collapsed vitre-
ous, or sometimes a vitreous haemorrhage caused when the detaching vitre-
ous ruptures a small blood vessel during the formation of a retinal tear or 
hole. 
 For this reason presentation with recent symptoms of an acute vitreous 
detachment is  an indication for full assessment  of the vitreous and peripheral 
retina with full pupil dilation.  
 Figure 11.6   Bull ’ s - eye appearance in chloroquine maculopathy.  

Retina and choroid 175
 Retinal  d etachment 
 A retinal detachment is an ophthalmic emergency requiring urgent diagnosis 
and treatment. 
 Pathogenesis 
 The potential space between the neuroretina and its pigment epithelium 
corresponds to the cavity of the embryonic optic vesicle. The two tissues are 
loosely attached in the mature eye and may become separated:
 •  If a tear occurs in the retina, allowing liqueﬁ ed vitreous to gain entry to the 
sub - retinal space. This causes a progressive,  rhegmatogenous, retinal detach-
ment which may be partial or total.  
 •  If it is pulled off by contracting ﬁ brous tissue on the retinal surface, e.g. 
in the proliferative retinopathy of diabetes mellitus ( traction retinal 
detachment ). 
 •  When, rarely, ﬂ uid accumulates in the sub - retinal space as a result of an 
exudative process, which may occur with retinal tumours or during toxaemia 
of pregnancy ( exudative retinal detachment ). 
 Tears in the retina are most commonly associated with the onset of a poste-
rior vitreous detachment. As the gel separates from the retina the traction it 
exerts ( vitreous traction ) becomes more localized and thus greater. Occasionally 
it may be sufﬁ cient to tear the retina. An underlying peripheral weakness of the 
retina such as  lattice degeneration  increases the probability of a tear forming 
 Figure 11.7   Ultrasound picture showing a posterior vitreous detachment. Note that 
the vitreous is still attached at the optic disc.  

176 
Retina and choroid
when the vitreous pulls on the retina. Highly myopic people have a signiﬁ cantly 
increased risk of developing retinal detachment.   
 Rhegmatogenous  r etinal  d etachment 
 Epidemiology 
 About 1 in 10   000 of the normal population will suffer a rhegmatogenous retinal 
detachment (Figure  11.8 ). The risk is greater in patients who:
 •  are high myopes; 
   •      have undergone cataract surgery, particularly if this was complicated by vit-
reous loss; 
 •  have experienced a detached retina in the fellow eye; 
 •  have been subjected to recent severe eye trauma. 
 Symptoms 
 Retinal detachment may be preceded by symptoms of a posterior vitreous 
detachment, including ﬂ oaters and ﬂ ashing lights. With the onset of the retinal 
detachment itself the patient notices the progressive development of a ﬁ eld 
defect, often described as a  ‘ shadow ’ or  ‘ curtain ’ . Progression may be rapid 
 Figure 11.8   The formation of a rhegmatogenous retinal detachment. (a) The 
detaching vitreous has torn the retina; the vitreous continues to pull on the retina 
surrounding the break (vitreous traction). (b) Fluid from the vitreous cavity passes 
through the break, detaching the neuroretina from the underlying retinal pigment 
epithelium. 
Retina
Vitreous
Retinal break produced by
localized vitreous traction
on the retina
Fluid has passed through 
the retinal break causing
the retina to detach
)b(
)a(

Retina and choroid 177
when a superior detachment is present. If the macula becomes detached there 
is a marked fall in visual acuity.  
 Signs 
 The detached retina is visible on ophthalmoscopy as a ﬂ oating, diaphanous 
membrane which partly obscures choroidal vascular detail. If there is a marked 
accumulation of ﬂ uid in the sub - retinal space (a  bullous retinal detachment ) 
undulating movements of the retina will be observed as the eye moves. A tear 
in the retina appears reddish pink because of the underlying choroidal vessels. 
There may be associated debris in the vitreous comprising blood ( vitreous 
haemorrhage ) and pigment, or the free - ﬂ oating lid ( operculum ) of a retinal hole 
(Figure  11.9 ). 
 Management 
 There are two major surgical techniques for repairing a retinal detachment 
(Figure  11.10 ):
 1  external ( conventional approach ); 
 2  internal ( vitreoretinal surgery ). 
 The essential principle behind both techniques is to close the causative break 
in the retina and to increase the strength of attachment between the surround-
ing retina and the RPE by inducing inﬂ ammation in the region, either by local 
freezing with a cryoprobe or with a laser. In the external approach the break is 
closed by indenting the sclera with an externally located strip of silicone sponge 
(or plomb). This relieves the vitreous traction on the retinal hole and apposes 
the retinal pigment epithelium to the retina. It may ﬁ rst be necessary to drain 
an extensive accumulation of sub - retinal ﬂ uid by piercing the sclera and 
choroid with a needle ( sclerostomy ). 
 Figure 11.9   The clinical appearance of a retinal detachment. Note the retinal tear. 
The retina has completely detached.  

178 
Retina and choroid
 Figure 11.10   The repair of a retinal detachment. (a) External approach: a silicone 
sponge has been sutured to the globe to indent the sclera over the retinal break 
following drainage of the sub - retinal ﬂ uid and application of cryotherapy. (b) Sagittal 
section of the eye showing the indent formed by the silicone sponge: the retina is 
now reattached and traction on the retinal break by the vitreous is relieved. (c) Internal 
approach: following removal of the vitreous gel and drainage of sub - retinal ﬂ uid an 
inert ﬂ uorocarbon gas has been injected into the vitreous cavity. 
Superior rectus
Conjunctiva
cut at limbus
and retracted
Silicone sponge indenting
the sclera over the
retinal break
(a)
Silicone sponge
Retinal break
supported by
silicone sponge
(b)
(c)
Retinal break
The bubble of gas
in the vitreous
cavity keeps the
retinal break
closed whilst the 
surrounding 
retina adheres to 
the RPE
Vitreous traction
relieved

Retina and choroid 179
 In the internal approach the vitreous is removed with a microsurgical cutter 
introduced into the vitreous cavity through the pars plana. This relieves the 
vitreous traction on the break. Fluid can be drained through the causative 
retinal break itself, and laser or cryotherapy applied to the surrounding retina. 
A temporary internal tamponade is then achieved by injecting an inert  ﬂ uoro-
carbon gas  into the vitreous cavity which is absorbed slowly. This has the effect 
of closing the hole from the inside and preventing further passage of ﬂ uid 
through the break. The patient has to maintain a particular head posture for a 
few days to ensure that the bubble covers the retinal break continuously. Air 
travel must be avoided with the gas in place because, at the reduced barometric 
pressure, gas expansion could cause complications such as glaucoma. 
 Retinal tears unassociated with sub - retinal ﬂ uid are treated prophylactically 
with a laser or cryoprobe to induce inﬂ ammation and increase the adhesion 
between the neuroretina surrounding the tear and the pigment epithelium, 
thus preventing a retinal detachment. It is always important to check the 
peripheral retina in the fellow eye, as tears or an asymptomatic retinal detach-
ment may be present here too.  
 Prognosis 
 If the macula is attached and the surgery successfully reattaches the peripheral 
retina, the outlook for vision is excellent. If the macula is detached for more 
than 24 hours prior to surgery, the previous visual acuity will probably not 
recover completely. Nonetheless a substantial part of the vision may be restored 
over several months. If the retina is not successfully attached and the surgery 
is complicated, then ﬁ brotic changes may occur in the vitreous ( proliferative 
vitreoretinopathy ,  PVR ), which may cause traction on the retina and further 
retinal detachment. A complex vitreoretinal procedure may permit vision to be 
retained, but the outlook for vision is much poorer. 
 Traction  r etinal  d etachment 
 The neuroretina is pulled away from the pigment epithelium by contracting 
ﬁ brous tissue which has grown on the retinal surface. This may be seen in 
 proliferative diabetic retinopathy  or may occur as a result of proliferative vitre-
oretinopathy. Vitreoretinal surgery, requiring excision of the contracting bands, 
is required to repair these detachments. In these cases it may be necessary to 
inject silicone oil into the vitreous cavity, temporarily, to hold the retina ﬂ at. 
 Retinoschisis 
 The retina splits into an inner and outer leaf at the outer plexiform and inner 
nuclear junction. It is usually seen in the lower temporal quadrant of the retina 
and is often bilateral. The appearance is not dissimilar to a retinal detachment. 
Rarely, it may cause a retinal detachment when there are holes in both the inner 
and outer retinal leaves.   

180 
Retina and choroid
 Inherited  r etinal and  p hotoreceptor 
 d ystrophies 
 Retinitis  p igmentosa 
 Retinitis pigmentosa is an inherited disorder of the photoreceptors which has 
several genotypic and phenotypic varieties. It may occur in isolation or in 
association with a number of other systemic diseases, such as Usher ’ s syn-
drome, abetalipoproteinaemia and Laurence – Moon syndrome. 
 Pathogenesis 
 The disease affects both types of photoreceptors, but the rods are particularly 
affected. The inheritance may be:
 •  autosomal recessive (sporadic cases are often in this category); 
   •      autosomal dominant;  
 •  X - linked recessive. 
 Several forms of retinitis pigmentosa have been shown to be due to muta-
tions in the gene for  rhodopsin . 
 Epidemiology 
 The prevalence of this group of diseases is 1 in 4000. 
 Symptoms 
 The age of onset, progression and prognosis are dependent on the mode of 
inheritance. In general the dominant form is of later onset and milder degree, 
while recessive and X - linked recessive forms may present in infancy or child-
hood. Patients notice poor night vision, visual ﬁ elds become increasingly con-
stricted and central vision may ultimately be lost.  
 Signs 
 The three signs of typical retinitis pigmentosa (Figure  11.11 ) are:
 1  peripheral clumps of retinal pigmentation (termed  ‘ bone spicule ’ 
pigmentation);    
 2  attenuation of the retinal arterioles; 
 3  disc pallor  – optic atrophy. 
 Patients may also have cataracts at an early age and may develop macular 
oedema.  

Retina and choroid 181
 Investigation 
 A careful family history will help to determine the mode of inheritance. The 
diagnosis can usually be made clinically. Electrophysiological tests are also 
useful in diagnosis. The electroretinogram (ERG) response may be lost early in 
the disease, where there may be few clinical signs. 
 Recent work on mapping the genetic loci for the condition has opened new 
avenues for genetic counselling and determining disease mechanism. 
 The possibility of associated syndromes should be borne in mind. Usher ’ s 
syndrome, for example, is a recessive disorder characterized by deafness and 
retinitis pigmentosa. Retinitis pigmentosa also occurs in mitochondrial disease.  
 Management 
 Unfortunately nothing can be done to prevent the progression of the disease, 
although there may be possibilities of gene therapy in the future. Associated 
ocular problems can be treated. Cataracts can be removed, and macular 
oedema may respond to treatment with acetazolamide. Low - vision aids may 
be helpful for a period. The possibility of genetic counselling should be dis-
cussed with the patient.  
 Prognosis 
 X - linked recessive and autosomal recessive disease produce the most severe 
visual symptoms. About 50% of all patients with retinitis pigmentosa will have 
an acuity of less than 6/60 by the time they reach 50.   
 Figure 11.11   The clinical appearance of the peripheral retina in retinitis pigmentosa.  

182 
Retina and choroid
 Cone  d ystrophy 
 This is less common than retinitis pigmentosa. It is usually autosomal domi-
nant, but many cases are sporadic. Patients present in the ﬁ rst decade of 
life with poor vision. Examination reveals an abnormal, banded macular 
appearance which has been likened to a bull ’ s - eye target. No treatment is pos-
sible but it is important to provide appropriate help, not only to maximize 
vision but also to help with educational problems. Genetic counselling should 
be offered. 
 Juvenile  m acular  d ystrophies 
 There are a variety of inherited conditions that affect both the RPE and, sec-
ondarily, the photoreceptors. All are rare (e.g. the recessive disorder  Stargardt ’ s 
dystrophy ) and the prognosis for vision is often poor. Once again the social and 
educational needs of the patient need to be assessed and genetic counselling 
offered.  
 Albinism 
 These patients have defective melanin synthesis. There are two types:
 1     Ocular albinism, where the lack of pigmentation is conﬁ ned to the eye. This 
is X - linked and nearly all of the affected individuals are thus male.  
 2     Oculocutaneous albinism, a recessive disorder where the hair is white and 
the skin is pale; a few of these patients can manufacture some melanin. There 
is an autosomal recessive defect in either the enzyme tyrosinase (on chromo-
some 11) or proteins associated with the normal functioning of the enzyme 
(on chromosomes 5, 9 and 15).    
 Clinically the iris is blue and there is marked transillumination so that the 
red reﬂ ex is seen through the iris because of the lack of pigmentation; this also 
allows the lens edge to be viewed in sillhouette, through the iris. The fundus 
appears abnormal, with lack of a normal foveal reﬂ ex, extreme pallor and 
prominent visibility of the choroidal vessels. There is macular dysfunction and 
an abnormal projection of retinal axons to the lateral geniculate bodies. Vision 
is poor from birth and patients often have nystagmus. 
 Some patients will have associated systemic disease (e.g. the Hermansky –
 Pudlak syndrome, where there is an associated haemorrhagic diathesis, caused 
by abnormal platelet function, lung and renal disease). 

Retina and choroid 183
 Retinal  t umours 
 Retinoblastoma 
 This is the commonest malignant tumour of the eye in childhood, with a fre-
quency of 1 per 20   000 births. It may be inherited as an autosomal dominant 
condition, but most cases are sporadic. Retinoblastoma is caused either by 
germinal mutations, which can be passed on to the next generation, or by 
somatic mutations in a single retinal cell, which cannot be genetically transmit-
ted (the majority, some 66% of cases). The retinoblastoma gene is a tumour 
suppressor gene whose product (pRB) plays a key role in the cell cycle as a 
negative regulator of cell proliferation. Mutations remove this anti - proliferative 
action. The disease is initiated in fetal retinal cells exhibiting a  homozygous 
defect  in the retinoblastoma gene. In inherited retinoblastoma one mutation 
is inherited and the other occurs by spontaneous somatic mutation in the retina 
during development. The mutation rate for the gene is thought to be 8    ×   10 −7 , 
but 100  000  000 divisions are needed to form the adult retina  – so the chance of 
a somatic mutation occurring in a subject with only one functioning gene is 
very high. For this reason, inherited retinoblastoma is frequently bilateral. The 
homozygous state is thus achieved by a  ‘  double hit  ’  event and the condition 
behaves as a  pseudodominant disorder . The chance of developing retinoblast-
oma (the penetrance) in a child inheriting the genetic trait is 85%. Thus, 
although it occurs frequently in affected families, there may be some skip gen-
erations. Sporadic retinoblastoma occurs when two spontaneous mutations 
occur by chance in the same primordial retinal cell. Because the chances of this 
occurring are low, this form of retinoblastoma is most commonly unilateral. 
 History and  s ymptoms 
 The child may present (at a mean age of 8 months if inherited and 25 months 
if sporadic) with:
 •  A white pupillary reﬂ ex ( leucocoria ) due light scatter from the pale elevated 
tumour at the posterior pole of the eye (Figure  11.12 ). Sometimes the tumour 
is bilateral on presentation. 
 Figure 11.12   Left leucocoria.  

184 
Retina and choroid
 •  A squint due to reduced vision. 
 •  Occasionally, with advanced tumours, a painful red eye. 
 Most cases present by the age of 2 years. Inherited retinoblastoma is often 
bilateral. When the condition is unilateral on presentation and there is no 
family history, inherited disease is less likely, but not excluded.  
 Signs 
 Dilated fundoscopy shows a whitish - pink mass protruding from the retina into 
the vitreous cavity.  
 Investigations 
 The diagnosis is usually a clinical one. Cerebrospinal ﬂ uid and bone marrow 
must be examined to check for metastatic disease.  
 Treatment 
 Removal (enucleation) of the eye is performed in advanced cases. Radiotherapy 
can be used in less advanced disease, as can local cryotherapy and photoco-
agulation. Cryotherapy involves killing the tumour in a series of freeze - thaw 
cycles using an externally applied cryoprobe. Laser photocoagulation may be 
applied to small tumours. Metastatic disease (either by direct spread through 
the optic nerve or by a haematogenous route) is treated with chemotherapy. 
Regular follow - up and examination of the fellow eye of an affected child is 
required. Genetic counselling should be offered, and children with a parent 
who has had a retinoblastoma should be assessed from infancy, shortly after 
birth. It is possible to detect the mutation by molecular techniques.  
 Prognosis 
 This depends on the extent of the disease at diagnosis. Overall, the mortality 
of the condition is 15%. Unfortunately some 50% of children with the germinal 
mutation will develop a second primary tumour (e.g. an osteosarcoma of the 
femur) or a tumour related to treatment with radiotherapy.   
 Astrocytomas 
 These tumours of the retina and optic nerve (Figure  11.13 ) are seen in patients 
with certain dominantly inherited systemic disorders:
 •  tuberose sclerosis; 
 •  neuroﬁ bromatosis (less commonly). 
 They appear as white mulberry - like lesions, are seldom symptomatic and 
require no treatment. However, their identiﬁ cation may assist in the diagnosis 
of important systemic disease. 

Retina and choroid 185
 Choroidal  l esions,  i ncluding  m elanoma 
 Pigmented fundus lesions include:
 •  areas of old chorioretinitis; 
 •  choroidal naevi; 
 •  congenital hypertrophy of the retinal pigment epithelium (CHRPE); 
   •      the rarest disorder, malignant melanoma, which has serious implications for 
life. 
 CHRPE lesions are darker with better deﬁ ned edges than a choroidal naevi; 
multiple lesions or lesions in both eyes may be associated with familial poly-
posis coli and associated colon cancer and require investigation for this. 
 Uveal melanomas have an incidence of 6 per 1  000  000 per year in white 
adults. It is seen very much more commonly in white than in non - white races. 
It usually presents from middle age onwards (40 – 70 years). Malignant 
melanoma may also be seen in the ciliary body and iris, but by far the greatest 
number (80%) are found in the choroid. 
 Symptoms 
 The presence of a melanoma may be detected as a coincidental ﬁ nding during 
ocular examination (Figure  11.14 ). Advanced cases may present with a visual 
ﬁ eld defect or loss of acuity. If situated in the anterior part of the choroid the 
 Figure 11.13   The clinical appearance of a retinal astrocytoma.  

186 
Retina and choroid
enlarging tumour may cause shallowing of the anterior chamber, resulting in 
secondary angle closure glaucoma. In the UK it is unusual for the tumour to be 
so advanced that it presents with visible destruction of the eye.    
 Signs 
 A raised, usually pigmented, lesion is visible at the back of the eye, which may 
be associated with an area of retinal detachment. The optic nerve may be 
involved. 
 Investigations 
 The patient is investigated for systemic spread, although this is less usual than 
in malignant melanoma of the skin. An ultrasound scan of the eye is useful in 
determining the size of the tumour and can be used both for quantitative 
assessment and to detect tumour growth over time. Fundus photography is 
used in follow - up, the same way.  
 Treatment 
 A number of therapies are available. The treatment used depends on the size 
and location of the tumour. Large tumours that have reduced vision, or that are 
close to the optic nerve, usually require removal of the eye ( enucleation ). 
Smaller tumours can be treated by:
 •  local excision; 
 •  local radiation applied to the lesion by an overlying radioactive plaque; 
 •  proton beam irradiation. 
 Figure 11.14   (a) The clinical appearance of a choroidal melanoma. (b) The appear-
ance of CHRPE.  
(b)
(a)

Retina and choroid 187
 Prognosis 
 This depends very much on the type of tumour (some are more rapidly growing 
than others) and its location (tumours involving the sclera and optic nerve 
carry a poorer prognosis). The existence of metastatic lesions at the time of 
diagnosis carries a poor prognosis. Some tumours are very slow - growing and 
have an excellent prognosis. Others, which extend into the optic nerve or 
through the sclera, are more malignant and result in secondary spread.   
 Metastatic  t umours 
 These account for the greater part of ocular malignant disease. In women the 
commonest site of spread is from the breast; in men the commonest source is 
the lung. Symptoms and signs depend on their location in the eye. They appear 
as a whitish lesion with little elevation, and may be multiple. Treatment is 
usually by external beam radiotherapy.     
 
  PAEDIATRIC OPHTHALMOLOGY 
 •  Children with a white pupil require urgent ophthalmic investigation.  
 •  Children with bilateral sight loss require help with their education and 
development. 
 
  KEY POINTS 
 •  A curtain - like partial loss of vision suggests a retinal detachment and requires urgent 
ophthalmic assessment.  
 •  Distortion of vision is a sign of macular disease.  
 •  Age - related macular degeneration results in loss of acuity but never total loss of vision.  
 Multiple  c hoice  q uestions 
 1.  Match the symptoms with the likely abnormal part of the retina. 
 a 
 Distortion of vision (metamorphopsia). 
 b 
 Loss of superior visual ﬁ eld. 
 c 
 Difﬁ culty seeing at night. 

188 
Retina and choroid
 i 
 The inferior half of the retina. 
 ii 
 The macula. 
 iii  The rods. 
 iv 
 The cones. 
 2.  Age - related macular degeneration 
 a 
 Is the commonest cause of irreversible visual loss in the developed world. 
  b   
  Is associated with disease of the retinal pigment epithelium.  
 c 
 May be associated with the growth of blood vessels beneath the retina. 
  d   
  Is caused by a hole forming at the macula.  
 e 
 Is commonly treated with surgery. 
 3.  Match the pictures (Figure  11.15 ) with the diagnoses. 
 a 
 Age related macular degeneration (AMD). 
 b 
 Macular hole. 
 Figure 11.15   See Question 3.  
(b)
(a)
(c)
(d)

Retina and choroid 189
 c 
 Retinal detachment. 
 d 
 Melanoma. 
 e 
 Retinitis pigmentosa. 
 4.  Macular oedema 
 a 
 Relates to the accumulation of ﬂ uid within the macula. 
 b 
 Causes blurring of vision. 
 c 
 May be seen following intraocular surgery. 
 d 
 Is usually associated with the growth of abnormal vessels in the retina. 
 e 
 Can be treated with steroids. 
    5.     A patient presents with a history of 3 days of ﬂ oaters, ﬂ ashing lights and 
then a dense, curtain - like ﬁ eld loss. 
 a 
 The most likely diagnosis is a retinal vein occlusion. 
  b   
  The most likely diagnosis is a retinal detachment.  
  c   
  The most likely diagnosis is a posterior vitreous detachment.  
  d   
  The patient needs urgent referral to an eye unit.  
 e 
 The vision will settle with no intervention. 
 6.  A 1 - year - old child presents with a squint. The doctor notices that the red 
reﬂ ex appears white. 
 a 
 A white red reﬂ ex is a normal ﬁ nding in a child of this age. 
 b 
 The child may have a retinoblastoma. 
  c   
  The child has albinism.  
  d   
  Urgent referral is required.  
  e   
  The other eye needs to be assessed.        
 Answers 
 1.  Match the symptoms with the likely abnormal part of the retina. 
 a 
 The macula. 
 b 
 The inferior half of the retina. 
 c 
 The rods. 
 2.  Age - related macular degeneration 
   a   
  True. AMD is the commonest cause of irreversible visual loss in the devel-
oped world.  
 b 
 True. This is a disease of the retinal pigment epithelium. 
 c 
 True. This is the cause of  ‘ wet ’ or exudative macular degeneration. 
 d 
 False. This is a separate condition, a macular hole. 
  e   
  False. It is most often untreatable. In some patients with wet macular 
degeneration, intravitreal anti - VEGF treatment, and rarely retinal surgery, 
may prevent visual deterioration. 

190 
Retina and choroid
 3.  Match the pictures (Figure  11.15 ) with the diagnoses. 
 a 
 A retinal detachment. 
 b 
 Age - related macular degeneration (AMD). 
 c 
 Retinitis pigmentosa. 
 d 
 Melanoma. 
 4.  Macular oedema 
 a 
 True. See Figure  11.5 . 
 b 
 True. Visual acuity is affected in macular oedema. 
 c 
 True. It may be seen after cataract and other intraocular surgery. 
 d 
 False. It is the accumulation of ﬂ uid within the retina, there is no associated 
growth of blood vessels as is seen in exudative AMD.  
 e 
 True. Steroids may be given topically but sub - Tenon ’ s injection or intravit-
real injection may be required.    
  5.     A patient presents with a history of 3 days of ﬂ oaters, ﬂ ashing lights and 
then a dense, curtain - like ﬁ eld loss. 
   a   
  False. These are the classical symptoms of a retinal detachment, patients 
with a retinal vein occlusion would not usually have ﬂ ashes and ﬂ oaters. 
 b 
 True. These are indeed the classical symptoms. 
 c 
 False. Although the symptoms of ﬂ ashes and ﬂ oaters suggest a posterior 
vitreous detachment, the ﬁ eld loss indicates that a hole has been torn in 
the retina, causing a retinal detachment.  
 d 
 True. Surgery will be required to reattach the retina. 
  e   
  False. The patient will lose the vision in the eye if urgent treatment is not 
given. 
  6.     A 1 - year - old child presents with a squint. The doctor notices that the red 
reﬂ ex appears white. 
 a 
 False. Leucocoria always requires urgent examination and investigation. 
Retinoblastoma is a life - threatening possibility. 
 b 
 True. This is a presentation of retinoblastoma. 
 c 
 False. The red reﬂ ex would be present.  
  d   
  True. If there is any doubt that a red reﬂ ex is present the child requires 
urgent ophthalmic assessment.  
 e 
 True. Retinoblastoma may be bilateral. 
 

 
 Learning  o bjectives 
 To understand:
 ✓  The features of retinal vascular disease. 
 ✓  The classiﬁ cation and treatment of diabetic 
retinopathy. 
 ✓      The symptoms, signs and complications of retinal 
arterial and venous occlusion. 
 ✓      The causes, features and treatment of retinopathy of 
prematurity. 
 12 
Retinal  v ascular 
 d isease  
 Introduction 
 The eye is an organ in which much of the microcirculation is readily visualized. 
Vascular disease affecting the eye can thus be seen directly. Furthermore the 
eye provides important clues about pathological vascular changes in the rest 
of the body.  
 Signs of  r etinal  v ascular  d isease 
 The signs of retinal vascular disease (Figures  12.1 ,  12.2 ) result from two changes 
to the retinal capillary microcirculation:
 1  vascular leakage; 
 2  vascular occlusion. 
Ophthalmology Lecture Notes, Eleventh Edition. Bruce James, Anthony Bron. 
© 2011 Bruce James and Anthony Bron. Published 2011 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

192 
Retinal vascular disease
 Leakage from the  m icrocirculation 
 This results in:
 •  haemorrhages caused by leakage of blood from damaged vessels; 
 •  oedema of the retina, the result of ﬂ uid leakage from damaged vessels;  
 •  exudates  formed by lipids, lipoprotein and lipid - containing macrophages  –  
these are yellow in colour, with well deﬁ ned margins. 
 Figure 12.1   The building blocks of retinal vascular disease. Capillary leakage and 
occlusion often occur together.  
Retinal vascular disease
Leakage from capillaries
Haemorrhages
Oedema
Occlusion of capillaries
Ischaemia
New
vessels
Irregular
retinal veins
Lipid exudates
Cotton-
wool spots
 Classiﬁ cation of  d iseases  a ffecting the  o cular  c irculation 
 Diabetic retinopathy  
 Central retinal artery occlusion  
 Branch retinal artery occlusion  
 Central retinal vein occlusion  
 Branch retinal vein occlusion  
 Hypertensive retinopathy  
 Retinopathy of prematurity  
 Sickle cell retinopathy  
 Abnormal retinal blood vessels  

Retinal vascular disease 193
   Occlusion of the  m icrocirculation 
 This results in:
 •  Cotton - wool spots  (previously termed  soft exudates ), ﬂ uffy white focal lesions 
with indistinct margins. They occur at the margins of an ischaemic retinal 
infarct due to obstruction of axoplasmic ﬂ ow and build - up of axonal debris 
in the nerve ﬁ bre layer of the retina. Their visibility depends on nerve ﬁ bre 
layer thickness at that site, so they are readily seen close to the optic disc, 
where the nerve ﬁ bre layer is thick, and not in the periphery, where the nerve 
 Figure 12.2   The signs of retinal vascular disease: (a) haemorrhage and exudate; 
(b) cotton - wool spots, note the yellowish nature and distinct margin to the exudates, 
compared to the less distinct and whiter appearance of the cotton - wool spots; 
(c) new vessels, here particularly ﬂ orid and arising at the disc: (d) this ﬂ uorescein 
angiogram demonstrates the occlusion of the retinal capillary circulation (the dark 
areas (arrow)), the bright areas indicate leakage from new vessels.  
(a)
(c)
(b)
(d)

194 
Retinal vascular disease
ﬁ bre layer is thin. They are white in colour because the accumulated axoplas-
mic particles scatter light, whereas the normal nerve ﬁ bre is transparent. 
 •  New vessels . An ischaemic retina releases vasogenic factors (e.g. VEGF) which 
result in the growth of abnormal blood vessels and ﬁ brous tissue onto the 
retinal surface and forwards into the vitreous. These intravitreal vessels are 
much more permeable than normal retinal vessels, so that they leak dye 
during retinal ﬂ uorescein angiography. Their abnormal location predisposes 
them to break and bleed. 
 Diabetic  r etinopathy 
 Diabetes results from a defect in both insulin secretion and action, leading to 
hyperglycaemia. 
 Epidemiology 
 Diabetic eye disease is the commonest reason for blind registration in the UK, 
in the 30 – 65 age group. 
 Type I diabetes (eventual loss of insulin secretion, mostly in young people 
with associated HLA types) has a prevalence in the UK of 2 per 1000 under the 
age of 20. Onset is relatively acute and diabetic retinopathy begins to appear 
about 5 years after onset. 
 Type II diabetes occurs in a heterogeneous group of patients and shows 
familial aggregation. Patients usually retain some insulin secretion but develop 
resistance to the action of insulin. It occurs in an older age group and has a 
prevalence of 5 – 20 per 1000. Because type II diabetes may be present for several 
years prior to diagnosis, retinopathy may be found at presentation. 
 Diabetes is associated with the following ocular events:
 •  retinopathy; 
 •  cataract: a rare  ‘ snowﬂ ake ’  cataract in youth, and a greater frequency and 
earlier onset of age - related cataract;  
   •      glaucoma (e.g. rubeotic glaucoma, but an association with chronic open 
angle glaucoma is disputed);  
   •      extraocular muscle palsy due to microvascular disease of the third, fourth or 
sixth cranial nerves. 
 Pathology 
 Factors thought to be important in the development of diabetic retinopathy 
include:
 •  duration of diabetes: 80% have retinopathy after 20 years of disease; 
 •  poor diabetic control; 
 •  coexisting diseases, particularly hypertension; 
 •  smoking. 

Retinal vascular disease 195
 The development of retinopathy may also be accelerated by pregnancy, and 
patients require careful screening. 
 Retinal damage results from damage to the circulation. Pathological studies 
show:
 •  a decrease in the number of pericytes surrounding the capillary 
endothelium;  
 •  development of microaneurysms on the capillary network, which allow 
plasma to leak out into the retina;  
 •  patchy closure of the capillary net, (capillary non-perfusion), resulting in 
areas of ischaemic retina and the development of arteriovenous shunts. 
 History 
 Diabetic retinopathy should be diagnosed before it is symptomatic. All diabet-
ics should have fundoscopy performed at least yearly. Screening for sight -
 threatening retinopathy (maculopathy and proliferative retinopathy) should 
begin by 5 years after diagnosis in patients with type I disease, and may be from 
the time of presentation in type II disease, since its time of onset is unknown. 
Visual acuity may be reduced gradually by a maculopathy, or suddenly by a 
vitreous haemorrhage.  
 Examination 
 The building blocks of the disease are those of leakage and microvascular 
occlusion, discussed earlier. The classiﬁ cation of retinopathy is shown in 
Table  12.1 . 
 Treatment 
 All diabetic patients should be screened for signs of retinopathy (Figure  12.3 ). 
In the UK a screening programme using digital retinal photographs is being 
used to review patients on a yearly basis.   
 Patients with a maculopathy, preproliferative or proliferative retinopathy or 
worse require referral to an ophthalmologist. Any patient with unexplained 
visual loss should also be referred. The mainstay of treatment for sight -
 threatening diabetic retinopathy is laser therapy. A ﬂ uorescein angiogram may 
be performed in some patients to assess the degree of retinal ischaemia and to 
pinpoint areas of leakage both from microaneurysms and from new vessels. 
 Diabetic  r etinopathy:  c linical  o bservations 
 •     Younger patients are more likely to develop proliferative disease.  
 •   Older patients more commonly develop a maculopathy, but because type II 
disease is more common, it is also an important cause of proliferative disease.  

196 
Retinal vascular disease
 Figure 12.3   The signs of diabetic eye disease. (a) Background diabetic retinopathy. 
(b) Diabetic maculopathy: note the circinate exudate temporal to the macula. 
(c) Preproliferative retinopathy with a venous loop. (d, e) Proliferative retinopathy: new 
vessels have formed on the retina, their presence demonstrated by leakage of 
ﬂ uorescein (hyperﬂ uorescence) on the ﬂ uorescein angiogram; closure of some of 
the retinal capillary network is demonstrated by its failure to ﬁ ll with ﬂ uorescein. 
(f) Advanced diabetic retinopathy: the neovascularization has caused a traction retinal 
detachment. 
 Table 12.1   The classiﬁ cation of diabetic retinopathy (note that diabetic 
maculopathy may coexist with other stages in the classiﬁ cation). 
 Stage  
  Description  
 No retinopathy  
 There are no abnormal signs present on the retina.  Vision normal 
 Background  
  Signs of microvascular leakage (haemorrhage and exudates) 
away from the macula.  Vision normal  
 Maculopathy  
  Exudates and haemorrhages within the macula region, and/or 
evidence of retinal oedema, and/or evidence of retinal 
ischaemia.  Vision is reduced; sight - threatening  
 Preproliferative  
  Evidence of occlusion (cotton - wool spots). The veins become 
irregular and may show loops.  Vision normal  
 Proliferative  
  The occlusive changes have led to the release of a 
vasoproliferative substance from the retina, resulting in the 
growth of new vessels either on the disc (NVD) or elsewhere 
on the retina (NVE).  Vision normal; sight - threatening  
 Advanced  
  The proliferative changes may result in bleeding into the vitreous 
or between the vitreous and the retina. The neuroretina may 
also be pulled from its overlying pigment epithelium by a 
ﬁ brous proliferation associated with the growth of the new 
vessels.  Vision is reduced, often acutely, with vitreous 
haemorrhage; sight - threatening  
  
 Laser treatment of both the maculopathy and new vessels can be performed 
on an outpatient basis.
    •      Diabetic maculopathy is treated by aiming the laser at the points of leakage. 
The exudate is often seen to be in a circinate pattern, with the focus of leakage 
or microaneurysm in the middle. If treatment is effective, the retinal oedema 
and exudate will resorb, although this may take some months.  
   •      Optic disc and retinal new vessels are treated with scattered laser burns to 
the entire retina, leaving an untreated area around the macula and optic 
disc (Figure  12.4 ). The laser treatment eliminates ischaemic retina, thus 
preventing the release of vasoproliferative factors. This results in the 

Retinal vascular disease 197
(a)
(c)
(e)
(b)
(d)
(f)

198 
Retinal vascular disease
regression of the new vessels and prevents the development of advanced 
retinopathy. 
 The development of vitreous haemorrhage which does not clear after a few 
weeks, or ﬁ brous traction on the retina causing detachment from the overlying 
pigment epithelium (traction retinal detachment), may require surgical treat-
ment. A vitrectomy is performed to remove the vitreous gel and blood and to 
repair any of the detached retina.  
 Prognosis 
 Although laser and surgical treatments have greatly improved the prognosis of 
patients with diabetic retinopathy, the disease may still progress and cause 
severe visual loss in some patients. 
 Arterial  o cclusion 
 Pathogenesis 
 Central and branch retinal artery occlusions are usually embolic in origin. 
Three types of emboli are recognized:
 1  ﬁ brin – platelet  emboli, commonly from diseased carotid arteries; 
 2  cholesterol emboli, commonly from diseased carotid arteries (Figure  12.5 ); 
 3  calciﬁ c emboli, from diseased heart valves. 
 Figure 12.4   Typical appearance of retinal laser burns. 

Retinal vascular disease 199
 History 
 The patient complains of a sudden painless loss of all or part of the vision. 
Fibrin – platelet emboli typically cause a ﬂ eeting loss of vision as the emboli pass 
through the retinal circulation ( amaurosis fugax ). This may last for some 
minutes, and then it clears. Cholesterol and calciﬁ c emboli may result in per-
manent obstruction with no recovery in vision (they may also be seen in the 
retinal vessels of asymptomatic individuals). A central retinal artery obstruc-
tion is frequently caused by an embolus, although as it lodges further back in 
the arterial tree behind the optic nerve head it cannot be seen. 
 In young patients, transient loss of vision may be caused by migraine. 
 Signs 
 Occasionally, a series of white platelet emboli can be seen passing rapidly 
through a vessel; more often a bright yellow, reﬂ ective cholesterol embolus is 
noted occluding an arterial branch point. The acutely affected retina is swollen 
and white ( oedematous ), while the fovea is red ( cherry - red spot ) because the 
choroid can be seen through the thin retina of the fovea. After several weeks 
the disc becomes pale ( atrophic ) and the arterioles attenuated. The condition 
may also occasionally be caused by vasculitis, such as giant cell arteritis (see 
Chapter  14 ). 
 Investigation 
 Patients require a careful vascular work - up, since disease in the eye may 
reﬂ ect systemic vascular disease. A search for carotid artery disease should be 
made by assessing the strength of carotid pulsation and listening for bruits. 
Ischaemic heart disease, peripheral claudication and hypertension may also be 
present. 
 Figure 12.5   The clinical appearance of a cholesterol embolus (arrow). They appear to 
sparkle when viewed with a direct ophthalmoscope.  

200 
Retinal vascular disease
 A carotid endarterectomy may be indicated to prevent the possibility of a 
cerebral embolus if a stenosis of the carotid artery greater than 75% is present. 
Doppler ultrasound allows non - invasive imaging of both the carotid and ver-
tebral arteries to detect such a stenosis.  
 Treatment 
 Acute treatment of central and branch artery occlusions is aimed at dilating the 
arteriole to permit the embolus to pass more distally and limit the damage. 
Results are usually disappointing, although a trial is worthwhile if the patient 
is seen within 24 hours of onset of the obstruction. The patient is referred to 
an eye unit, where the following measures may be tried:
 •  lowering the intraocular pressure with intravenous acetazolamide; 
   •      ocular massage;  
   •      paracentesis (a needle is inserted into the anterior chamber to release 
aqueous and lower the intraocular pressure rapidly);  
   •      asking the patient to rebreathe into a paper bag ﬁ rmly applied around the 
mouth and nose to use the vasodilatatory effect of raised carbon dioxide 
levels. 
 Prognosis 
 Full visual recovery occurs with amaurosis fugax, but more prolonged arterial 
occlusion results in severe, unrecoverable visual loss.    
 Venous  o cclusion 
 Pathogenesis 
 Central retinal vein occlusion (CRVO) may result from:
 •  abnormality of the blood itself (the hyperviscosity syndromes and abnor-
malities in coagulation);  
 •  an abnormality of the venous wall (inﬂ ammation); 
 •  an increased ocular pressure. 
 History 
 The patient complains of a sudden partial or complete loss of vision, although 
onset may be less acute than that of arterial occlusion.  
 Signs 
 These contrast markedly with those of arterial occlusion (Figure  12.6 ). There is 
marked haemorrhage and great tortuosity and swelling of the veins. The optic 

Retinal vascular disease 201
disc appears swollen. Branch retinal vein occlusion may originate at the cross-
ing point of an arteriole and a vein where the arteriole has been affected by 
arteriosclerosis associated with hypertension (A/V nipping). 
 Subsequently:
    •      Abnormal new vessels may grow on the retina and optic disc, causing vitre-
ous haemorrhage. This happens if the retina has become ischaemic as a 
result of the vein occlusion (an ischaemic retinal vein occlusion).  
   •      In ischaemic retinal vein occlusion abnormal new vessels may grow on the 
iris, causing rubeotic glaucoma. 
 Investigation 
 Investigation of a CRVO includes vascular and haematological work - up to 
exclude increased blood viscosity. CRVO is also associated with raised ocular 
pressure, diabetes and hypertension and smoking. 
 Treatment 
 Retinal laser treatment is given if the retina is ischaemic, to prevent the devel-
opment of retinal and iris new vessels (see glaucoma, Chapter  10 ). Laser treat-
ment may improve vision in some patients with a branch retinal vein occlusion 
by reducing macular oedema which may also be treated with intravitreal 
steroid therapy. There is also increasing interest in the use of anti - VEGF agents 
in the treatment of retinal vein occlusion and its complications (for example 
rubeotic glaucoma).  
 Figure 12.6   The contrast between: (a) an inferior branch retinal artery occlusion (note 
the white appearance of the affected retina) and (b) a superior branch vein occlusion.  
(b)
(a)

202 
Retinal vascular disease
 Prognosis 
 The vision is usually severely affected in central, and often in branch, vein 
occlusion and usually does not improve. Younger patients may fare better, and 
there may well be some visual improvement.    
 Arteriosclerosis and  h ypertension 
 Arteriosclerosis can be visualized in the eye as an attenuation of the retinal 
arterial vessels (sometimes referred to as  copper  and  silver wiring ) and by the 
presence of  nipping  of the retinal vein where it is crossed by an arteriole. 
Hypertension in addition may cause focal arteriolar narrowing and a break-
down in the blood – retinal barrier, resulting in the signs of vascular leakage 
(haemorrhage and exudate). These are particularly prominent if the hyperten-
sion is of renal origin. If severe, the retina may also demonstrate signs of capil-
lary occlusion (cotton - wool spots). Very high blood pressure may, in addition, 
cause swelling of the optic nerve head as well as these other signs ( malignant 
hypertension ; Figure  12.7 ). The patient may complain of blurring of vision and 
of episodes of temporary visual loss, although severe retinopathy may also be 
asymptomatic. 
 Treatment of the hypertension results in the resolution of the retinal signs 
over some months. A rapid reduction of systemic blood pressure is avoided, 
because it may precipitate vascular occlusion.  
 Figure 12.7   The fundus in malignant hypertension. The disc is swollen, and there are 
retinal haemorrhages and cotton wool spots.  

Retinal vascular disease 203
 Retinopathy of  p rematurity 
 Retinopathy of prematurity is a vascular response of the retina occurring pre-
dominantly in low - birthweight premature infants exposed to oxygen therapy 
in the early weeks of life. It leads to a traction detachment of the retina and 
potentially to bilateral blindness. 
 Pathogenesis 
 There is an initial failure of normal retinal vascularization, followed by a phase 
of aggressive new vessel formation extending forward into the vitreous and 
causing traction detachment. 
 Risk factors associated with retinopathy of prematurity include:
 •  gestation less than 32 weeks; 
 •  birthweight below 1500  g; 
 •  exposure to supplemental oxygen; 
 •  apnoea; 
 •  sepsis; 
 •  duration of ventilation; 
 •  blood transfusion; 
   •      the presence of intraventricular haemorrhage;  
 •  retinal light exposure. 
 The incidence of the condition in infants weighing less than 1500   g is between 
34% and 60%. The risk of occurrence is reduced by regulating the level of 
oxygen exposure.  
 Signs 
 The retinal appearance depends on the severity of the condition, but it includes:
 •  new vessels; 
 •  the development of retinal haemorrhage; 
 •  increased tortuosity and dilation of the retinal vessels. 
 In severe disease blindness can result from:
 •  bleeding into the vitreous; 
 •  retinal detachment. 
 Treatment 
 At - risk infants are screened on a regular basis. The severe complications of the 
condition can be reduced by applying cryotherapy or laser to the avascular 
retina. 
 Retinopathy of  p rematurity 
 Retinopathy of prematurity is a vascular response of the retina occurring pre-
dominantly in low - birthweight premature infants exposed to oxygen therapy 
in the early weeks of life. It leads to a traction detachment of the retina and 
potentially to bilateral blindness. 
 Pathogenesis 
 There is an initial failure of normal retinal vascularization, followed by a phase 
of aggressive new vessel formation extending forward into the vitreous and 
causing traction detachment. 
 Risk factors associated with retinopathy of prematurity include:
 •  gestation less than 32 weeks; 
 •  birthweight below 1500  g; 
 •  exposure to supplemental oxygen; 
 •  apnoea; 
 •  sepsis; 
 •  duration of ventilation; 
 •  blood transfusion; 
   •      the presence of intraventricular haemorrhage;  
 •  retinal light exposure. 
 The incidence of the condition in infants weighing less than 1500   g is between 
34% and 60%. The risk of occurrence is reduced by regulating the level of 
oxygen exposure.  
 Signs 
 The retinal appearance depends on the severity of the condition, but it includes:
 •  new vessels; 
 •  the development of retinal haemorrhage; 
 •  increased tortuosity and dilation of the retinal vessels. 
 In severe disease blindness can result from:
 •  bleeding into the vitreous; 
 •  retinal detachment. 
 Treatment 
 At - risk infants are screened on a regular basis. The severe complications of the 
condition can be reduced by applying cryotherapy or laser to the avascular 
retina. 

204 
Retinal vascular disease
 Sickle  c ell  r etinopathy 
 Patients with sickle cell haemoglobin C disease (SC disease) and sickle cell 
haemoglobin with thalassaemia (SThal) develop a severe form of retinopathy. 
This is unusual in homozygous sickle cell disease (SS), where the retinopathy 
is more conﬁ ned. Signs include:
 •  tortuous veins; 
 •  peripheral haemorrhages; 
 •  capillary non - perfusion; 
 •  pigmented spots on the retina; 
   •      new vessel formation, classically in a  ‘ sea fan ’  pattern, which may occur as a 
result of peripheral retinal artery occlusion.    
 New vessels may cause vitreous haemorrhage and traction retinal detach-
ment. As with diabetes, this may require treatment with laser photocoagulation 
and vitrectomy.  
 Abnormal  r etinal  b lood  v essels 
 Abnormalities of the retinal blood vessels may be seen in rare ocular diseases, 
associated with the development of massive exudate. They may also be an 
indication of systemic disorders, as in the retinal and optic disc angioma asso-
ciated with the familial von Hippel – Lindau syndrome. Here the ocular condi-
tion may be associated with angioma in the brain and spinal cord. Patients and 
their relatives require repeated MRI screening.  
 Abnormalities of the  b lood 
 Clotting abnormalities may be responsible for occlusion of any blood vessel in 
the eye (e.g. a CRVO). Similarly, increased viscosity may also cause vessel occlu-
sion. Leukaemia with a greatly raised white cell count may lead to the develop-
ment of a haemorrhagic retinopathy in which the haemorrhages have white 
centres ( Roth spots ) (Figure  12.8 ). These may also be a feature of bacterial 
endocarditis and autoimmune diseases associated with vasculitis.   
 
  KEY POINT 
 •  Diabetics require regular screening for sight - threatening retinopathy.  

Retinal vascular disease 205
     Multiple  c hoice  q uestions 
    1.   Assign each of these signs of retinal vascular disease to either  leakage  or 
 occlusion. 
 a 
 Haemorrhage. 
 b 
 New vessels. 
 c 
 Cotton - wool spot. 
 d 
 Exudate. 
 e 
 Oedema. 
 2.  A central retinal vein occlusion 
 a 
 Does not usually cause loss of vision. 
 b 
 May be associated with the formation of new vessels. 
 c 
 May be a cause of rubeotic glaucoma. 
 d 
 May be associated with hypertension. 
 e 
 Produces few abnormal signs in the retina. 
 Figure 12.8   White - centred haemorrhages.  
 
  PAEDIATRIC OPHTHALMOLOGY 
 •  Premature infants require screening for retinopathy of prematurity.  

206 
Retinal vascular disease
 3.  Diabetic retinopathy 
 a 
 Is seen in 80% of patients who have had diabetes for 20 years. 
  b   
  Control of systemic hypertension is important in reducing the severity of 
the retinopathy.  
 c 
 The number of pericytes around the capillaries is increased. 
 d 
 Vitreous haemorrhage is associated with the formation of new vessels on 
the retina or optic nerve head.  
 e 
 Circinate patterns of exudates are treated with scattered laser. 
 4.  Match the pictures (Figure  12.9 ) with the diagnoses. 
 i 
 Diabetic retinopathy. 
 ii 
 Sickle cell retinopathy. 
 iii 
 Bacterial endocarditis. 
 Figure 12.9   See Question 4.  
(b)
(a)
(c)

Retinal vascular disease 207
 iv 
 Retinal vein occlusion. 
 v 
 Retinopathy of prematurity. 
 vi 
 Retinal artery occlusion. 
 vii 
 Retinal arteriole embolus. 
 5.  Retinopathy of prematurity 
 a 
 Is caused by a failure of normal retinal vascularization. 
 b 
 Is most commonly seen in babies with a low birthweight. 
 c 
 Is less commonly seen in babies exposed to supplementary oxygen. 
  d   
  New vessels and haemorrhages may be seen in the retina.  
 e 
 Retinal detachment may complicate the condition. 
 Answers 
 1.  Assign each of these signs of retinal vascular disease to either  leakage  or 
 occlusion. 
 a 
 Leakage. 
 b 
 Occlusion. 
 c 
 Occlusion. 
 d 
 Leakage. 
 e 
 Leakage. 
 2.  A central retinal vein occlusion 
 a 
 False. It results usually in a signiﬁ cant loss of vision. 
 b 
 True. This is a serious complication which can lead to vitreous haemor-
rhage and rubeotic glaucoma, see page 150. 
  c   
  True. New blood vessels may develop in the iridocorneal angle causing 
rubeotic glaucoma.  
 d 
 True. This may be a predisposing systemic disease. 
  e   
  False. The retinal veins are swollen and tortuous and there are extensive 
retinal haemorrhages. 
 3.  Diabetic retinopathy 
 a 
 True. See page 194. 
 b 
 True. This is a very important factor in treating diabetic retinopathy. 
 c 
 False. The number is decreased. 
  d   
  True. This is a complication of proliferative diabetic retinopathy when new 
vessels grow on the retina and/or optic disc. 
  e   
  False. The laser is applied to the site of leakage, at the centre of the circinate 
exudate. 
 4.  Match the pictures (Figure  12.9 ) with the diagnoses. 
 a 
 Diabetic retinopathy. Note the haemorrhages, exudates and more periph-
eral cotton - wool spots. 

208 
Retinal vascular disease
 b 
 Retinal vein occlusion. This is a hemi - retinal vein occlusion. 
 c 
 Retinal arteriole embolus. 
 5.  Retinopathy of prematurity 
 a 
 True. There is an initial failure of normal retinal vascularisation followed by 
a phase of aggressive new vessel formation. 
 b 
 True. Low - birthweight is a major risk factor. 
 c 
 False. Supplementary oxygen therapy is a risk factor. 
  d   
  True. New vessels may form and retinal haemorrhages may be seen.  
 e 
 True. Retinal detachment is a serious complication of advanced disease.    

 
 Learning objectives 
 To understand:
 ✓  The neural pathways controlling pupillary size and 
responses. 
 ✓  The causes of pupillary dysfunction. 
 13 
The  p upil and  i ts 
 r esponses  
 Introduction 
 Movements of the pupil are controlled by the parasympathetic and sympa-
thetic nervous systems. The pupils constrict ( miosis ) when the eye is illumi-
nated (parasympathetic activation, sympathetic relaxation) and dilate 
( mydriasis ) in the dark (sympathetic activation, parasympathetic relaxation). 
When the eyes focus on a near object, they converge and the pupils constrict 
(the  near response ). The pupils are normally equal in size but some 20% of 
people may have noticeably unequal pupils ( anisocoria ) with no associated 
disease. 
 The key to diagnosis of pupillary disorders is to:
 •  determine which pupil is abnormal; 
 •  search for associated signs. 
Ophthalmology Lecture Notes, Eleventh Edition. Bruce James, Anthony Bron. 
© 2011 Bruce James and Anthony Bron. Published 2011 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

210 
The pupil and its responses
 Disorders of the pupil may result from:
 •  ocular disease; 
 •  disorders of the controlling neural pathway; 
 •  pharmacological action. 
 The parasympathetic ﬁ bres reach the eye through the third cranial nerve. The 
sympathetic pathway is shown in Figure  13.1 . 
 Ocular  c auses of  p upillary  a bnormality 
 Several diseases of the eye cause pupil irregularity and alter pupil reactions:
    •      anterior uveitis, when posterior synechiae give the pupil an irregular appear-
ance (see Chapter  9 ); 
 •  the sequelae of intraocular surgery; 
   •      blunt trauma to the eye, which may rupture the sphincter muscle, causing 
irregularity or ﬁ xed dilation ( traumatic mydriasis ); 
   •      an acute and severe rise in ocular pressure  –  as in acute glaucoma.     
 Figure 13.1   The pathway of sympathetic pupillary control.  (Adapted with permission 
from Kanski, J. J. (1994)  Clinical Ophthalmology . Butterworth – Heinemann, Oxford.)  
Superior
cervical 
ganglion
Internal
carotid
artery
Ciliospinal centre 
of Budge (C8-T2)
Posterior
hypothalamus
Ophthalmic artery
Long ciliary nerves
Short
ciliary nerves
Ciliary
ganglion (no
sympathetic
synapses)

The pupil and its responses 211
 Neurological  c auses of  a n  a bnormal  p upil 
 Horner ’ s  s yndrome 
 Interruption of the  sympathetic pathway causes:
    •      A small pupil on the affected side due to loss of the dilator function (Figure 
 13.2 ). This is more noticeable in the dark, because the normal pupil of the 
fellow eye dilates more than that of the affected pupil. 
 •  A slight ptosis on the affected side. 
   •      An apparent recession of the globe into the orbit ( enophthalmos ). The 
reduced palpebral aperture size gives an impression of recession. 
   •      Lack of sweating on the affected side, if the  sympathetic pathway is affected 
proximal to the base of the skull.  This catches ﬁ bres travelling with the 
branches of the external carotid, which innervate the skin of the face. 
 Because of its extended course, the sympathetic pathway may be affected by 
a multitude of pathologies. Examples include:
 •  Syringomyelia , an expanding cavity within the spinal cord, sometimes 
extending into the medulla (syringobulbia), which compresses the pathway. 
Typically, it also causes wasting of the hand muscles and loss of sensation. 
 •  Small - cell carcinoma  at the lung apex which catches the cervical sympathetic 
chain. Involvement of the brachial plexus gives rise to  pain and to T1 wasting 
of the small muscles of the hand in Pancoast ’ s syndrome.  
 •  Neck injury, disease or surgery. 
   •      Cavernous sinus disease  –  catching the sympathetic carotid plexus in the 
sinus. 
 Horner ’ s syndrome may also be congenital, in which case the iris colour may 
be altered when compared to the fellow eye ( heterochromia ). 
 Figure 13.2   A right ptosis and miosis in Horner ’ s syndrome.  

212 
The pupil and its responses
 Relative  a fferent  p upillary  d efect ( RAPD ) 
 A lesion of the optic nerve on one side blocks the afferent limb of the pupillary 
light reﬂ ex. The pupils are equal and of normal size, but the pupillary response 
to light directed to the affected side is reduced, while the near reﬂ ex is intact. 
Testing for an RAPD is critical in a patient suspected of having an optic nerve 
lesion, such as optic neuritis (see Chapter  2 ). An RAPD may be seen in very 
severe disease of the retina but not with opacities of the cornea or lens. 
 Light – near  d issociation 
 The key feature is an impaired reaction of the pupils to light, while the near 
response to accommodation is retained. It is seen with Adie ’ s tonic pupil, the 
Argyll Robertson pupil and with peri - aqueductal brainstem lesions such as 
Parinaud ’ s syndrome. Other causes include diabetes and multiple sclerosis. 
There is no condition in which the light reﬂ ex is intact but the near reﬂ ex is 
defective. 
 Adie ’ s  t onic  p upil 
 This is a not uncommon cause of unequal pupil size ( anisocoria ) in young 
adults, but has no serious consequences. Onset is subacute and affects females 
more commonly than males (2   :   1). It is due to a  ciliary ganglionitis  which den-
ervates the parasympathetic supply to the iris and ciliary body. Normally, the 
ciliary body receives about nine times more nerve ﬁ bres than the iris sphincter. 
However, on recovery from the ganglionitis, while the parasympathetic inner-
vation of the iris sphincter is greatly reduced, most of the ﬁ bres which rein-
nervate it are aberrant ﬁ bres which were previously directed to the ciliary body 
and involved in accommodation. As the sphincter is partially denervated its 
muscarinic receptors are supersensitive to cholinergic agonists. 
 The consequence is that the pupil:
 •  is enlarged  – because the sphincter is relatively denervated; 
 •  is poorly reactive to light  – because few of the innervating ﬁ bres were origi-
nally destined for the sphincter. Also, because of the irregular ﬁ bre distribu-
tion, pupil movement in response to light consists of a slow, worm - like 
( vermiform ) contraction, on biomicroscopy. 
 Due to muscarinic supersensitivity of the sphincter, the pupil also:
 •  shows slow, sustained miosis on accommodation; 
   •      constricts to dilute pilocarpine (0.1%), unlike the normal pupil. This is a 
diagnostic test. 
 Because the ciliary body is also partially denervated, the ability to accom-
modate is impaired too and the patient may complain of blurred vision when 

The pupil and its responses 213
looking from distance to near, or  vice versa . Systemically the disorder is associ-
ated with loss of tendon reﬂ exes; there are no other neurological signs. 
 Argyll Robertson  p upil 
 The pupils are bilaterally small and irregular. They do not react to light but 
respond to accommodation. The iris stroma has a typical feathery appearance 
and loses its architectural detail. Classically it is seen in neurosyphilis. It is sug-
gested that a peri - aqueductal lesion on the dorsal aspect of the Edinger 
Westph ä l nucleus involves ﬁ bres associated with the response to light, but 
spares those associated with the near response.  
 Midbrain  p upil 
 Lesions affecting the pretectal nuclear complex in the dorsal region of the 
midbrain can disrupt retinotectal ﬁ bres while preserving the supranuclear 
accommodative pathway. This produces mydriasis and a light – near dissocia-
tion. Causes include demyelination, infarction, enlargement of the third ven-
tricle and space - occupying tumours such as pinealoma, as part of a  dorsal 
midbrain (Parinaud ’ s) syndrome (see Chapter  15 ). 
 Other  c auses of  p upillary  a bnormality 
 In coma, both pupils may become miosed with preservation of the light reﬂ ex 
if a pontine lesion is present, but remember that patients taking pilocarpine 
for glaucoma or receiving morphine also show bilateral miosis. Midbrain 
lesions cause loss of the light reﬂ ex with mid - point pupils. Coma associated 
with a unilateral expanding supratentorial mass, e.g. a haematoma, results in 
pressure on the third nerve and dilation of the pupil. Intrinsic third nerve 
lesions also cause a dilated pupil (see Chapter  15 ). The pupil may also be 
affected by drugs, both topical and systemic (Table  13.1 ) and in some parts of 
the world bilateral mydriasis may be caused by the accidental inoculation of 
plant material into the eye from the Jimson weed ( Datura stramonium ), which 
contains the belladonna alkaloids atropine and scopolamine ( ‘ cornpickers ’ s 
pupil ’ ). Occasionally, patients are encountered who have deliberately instilled 
a mydriatic drop in order to simulate eye disease. 
 
  KEY POINTS 
 •  Take a good history to help exclude an ocular cause for the pupillary changes and to 
see if a medical condition exists which may contribute to the pupillary problem.  
 •  Determine whether it is the small or the large pupil that is abnormal.  
 •  Search for associated signs that may help make a diagnosis.  

214 
The pupil and its responses
   Multiple choice questions 
 1.  Pathological miosis is seen in 
 a 
 Horner ’ s syndrome. 
 b 
 Third nerve palsy. 
 c 
 Argyll Robertson pupil. 
 d 
 Coma. 
 e 
 Systemic and topical atropine treatment. 
 2.  Horner ’ s syndrome may be seen in 
 a 
 Syringomyelia. 
 b 
 Lung neoplasia. 
 c 
 Cavernous sinus disease. 
 d 
 Myasthenia gravis. 
 e 
 Carotid artery dissection. 
 3.  Light – near dissociation 
 a 
 The reaction of the pupils is greater to light than accommodation. 
 b 
 May be seen in diabetes. 
 c 
 Is seen in Horner ’ s syndrome. 
 d 
 Is seen in patients with an Argyll Robertson pupil. 
 e 
 Is seen following administration of tropicamide drops. 
 Table 13.1   Drugs having a pharmacological effect on the pupil. 
 Agent  
  Action  
  Mechanism  
 Topical agents  
 Dilates  
  Muscarinic blockade  
 Cyclopentolate 
 Tropicamide 
 Atropine (long - acting)  
 
  Alpha - adrenergic agonist  
 Phenylephrine 
 Adrenaline 
 Dipivefrine  
 Constricts  
  Muscarinic agonist  
 Pilocarpine  
 Systemic agents  
 Dilates  
  Muscarinic blockade 
 Alpha - adrenergic agonist  
 Atropine 
 Adrenaline  
 Constricts  
  Local action and action on 
central nervous system  
 Morphine  

The pupil and its responses 215
 4.  Match the drop to its action:  dilates  (mydriasis) or  constricts  (miosis). 
 a 
 Cyclopentolate. 
 b 
 Atropine. 
 c 
 Pilocarpine. 
 d 
 Tropicamide. 
 e 
 Phenylephrine. 
 Answers 
 1.  Pathological miosis is seen in 
 a 
 True. The pupil is small in Horner ’ s syndrome; there will also be a small 
ptosis. 
 b 
 False. The pupil is dilated in a third nerve palsy. 
  c   
  True. The pupil is small and irregular in an Argyll Robertson pupil.  
  d   
  True. Both pupils may be miosed but beware of any associated pharmaco-
logical causes of miosis in patients with coma.  
 e 
 False. Atropine causes mydriasis. 
 2.  Horner ’ s syndrome may be seen in 
 a 
 True. See page 211 for a list of causes.  
  b   
  True. An apical lung tumour may catch the cervical sympathetic trunk as 
it leaves the inferior cervical ganglion.  
  c   
  True. The sympathetic pathway may be interrupted here as the nerve 
travels on the internal carotid artery surrounded by the cavernous sinus. 
  d   
  False. This may cause a ptosis but does not affect the pupil.  
 e 
 True. This is a cause of a painful Horner ’ s syndrome. 
 3.  Light – near dissociation 
 a 
 False. It is the other way round: the pupils react poorly to light. 
 b 
 True. It can be seen in diabetes and multiple sclerosis. 
  c   
  False. The pupil is smaller but reacts normally to light and 
accommodation.  
 d 
 True. Argyll Robertson pupils do not react to light. 
 e 
 False. The pupil is dilated and unreactive to both stimuli. 
  4.   Match the drop to its action. 
 a 
 Dilates. 
 b 
 Dilates. 
 c 
 Constricts. 
 d 
 Dilates. 
 e 
 Dilates.    

 
 Learning  o bjectives 
 To understand:
 ✓  The basic anatomy of the visual pathway. 
 ✓  The ﬁ eld defects produced by lesions at different 
points along the visual pathway.  
 ✓  The causes, symptoms and signs associated with a 
swollen optic disc.  
 ✓  The symptoms, signs, treatment and complications 
of giant cell arteritis. 
 14 
Disorders of the  v isual 
 p athway  
 Introduction 
 The innermost layer of the retina consists of the nerve ﬁ bres originating from 
the retinal ganglion cells. These ﬁ bres collect together at the optic nerve head, 
and form the optic nerve (see Chapter  1 ). The subsequent course of the visual 
pathway is shown in Figure  14.1 . Diagnosis and location of disease of the optic 
pathways is greatly aided by study of the differing ﬁ eld defects produced. 
 The  o ptic  n erve 
 The normal optic nerve head has distinct margins, a pinkish rim and, usually, 
a central, pale, cup. The central retinal artery and vein enter the globe slightly 
Ophthalmology Lecture Notes, Eleventh Edition. Bruce James, Anthony Bron. 
© 2011 Bruce James and Anthony Bron. Published 2011 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Disorders of the visual pathway 217
nasally in the optic nerve head, referred to ophthalmoscopically as the optic 
disc. The optic disc may be involved in many disorders but has a limited rep-
ertoire of responses. Ophthalmoscopically it may become swollen, or it may 
become pale. 
 The  s wollen  o ptic  d isc 
 The swollen disc (Figure  14.2 ) is an important and often worrying sign. 
 Papilloedema  is the term given to disc swelling associated with raised 
 Figure 14.1   Anatomy of the optic pathway and the ﬁ eld defects produced by lesions 
at different sites.  
Lateral
geniculate
body
Visual cortex
Optic radiation
Optic
tract
Chiasm
Optic
nerve
Left field
Right field
Temporal
retina
Nasal
retina
Temporal fields
Nasal fields
Uniocular visual loss
Bitemporal hemianopia
Incongruous left hemianopia
Congruous left hemianopia

218 
Disorders of the visual pathway
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)

Disorders of the visual pathway 219
intracranial pressure (ICP), accelerated hypertension and optic disc ischaemia. 
 Papillitis , a condition with a similar fundoscopic appearance, is due to optic 
neuritis (inﬂ ammation) affecting the nerve head. Visual loss always occurs with 
optic neuritis but is uncommon with the papilloedema of hypertension 
and/or raised intracranial pressure; it is, however, a feature of ischaemic 
papilloedema.   
 The differential diagnosis of disc swelling is shown in Table  14.1 . Some 
normal optic nerve heads may appear to be swollen, due a crowding of nerve 
ﬁ bres entering the disc. This is termed  pseudopapilloedema  and occurs 
particularly in small, hypermetropic eyes where the nerve entry site is reduced 
in size. Note also that  myelinated nerve ﬁ bres  occurring on the nerve head may 
be mistaken for optic disc swelling. During development, myelination of the 
optic nerve begins proximally and spreads centrifugally to be completed at the 
lamina cribrosa at term. Occasionally, as a developmental variant, the process 
extends into the peripapillary retinal nerve ﬁ bre layer as a patch of light -
 scattering, myelinated ﬁ bres; the normally unmyelinated retinal nerve ﬁ bre 
layer is partly myelinated, giving it a feathery, white appearance which reﬂ ects 
the organization of the nerve ﬁ bre layer. In myopia it is common to see a pale 
 ‘ myopic crescent ’  of peripapillary atrophy, at the temporal margin of the optic 
disc. In high myopia the optic disc may be surrounded by such an atrophic area 
( peripapillary atrophy ), which may be confused with disc swelling. 
 Papilloedema  d ue to  r aised  i ntracranial  p ressure 
 History 
 The crucial feature of disc swelling due to raised intracranial pressure is that 
there is rarely an associated visual loss, although some patients, with advanced 
papilloedema, may develop ﬂ eeting visual loss lasting seconds when they alter 
posture from lying to standing ( obscurations of vision). 
 Other important clues to the presence of raised intracranial pressure include:
 •  headache, worse on waking and made worse by coughing; 
 •  nausea, retching; 
 •  diplopia (double vision), usually due to a sixth nerve palsy; 
   •      other neurological signs, if the raised pressure is due to a cranial space -
 occupying lesion  –  visual ﬁ eld loss; cranial nerve palsy;  
 •  a history of head trauma suggesting a subdural haemorrhage; 
   •      a history of medications sometimes associated with raised intracranial pres-
sure (e.g. oral contraceptives, tetracyclines). 
 Figure 14.2   (a) A normal disc. (b) A swollen disc secondary to raised intracranial 
pressure. Note the lack of a sharp outline to the disc and the dilated capillaries on the 
disc. (c) The appearance of optic disc dr ü sen; note how the solid yellow lesions 
cause irregularity of the disc margin. (d) Myelination of the nerve ﬁ bres around the 
nerve head may be mistaken for a swollen optic disc. (e) A myopic optic disc. Note 
the extensive peripapillary atrophy.  

220 
Disorders of the visual pathway
 Signs 
     •      The optic disc is swollen, its edges are blurred and the superﬁ cial capillaries 
are dilated and thus abnormally prominent. There is  no spontaneous venous 
pulsation  of the central retinal vein. This has a physiological basis. The central 
retinal vein is exposed to cerebrospinal ﬂ uid (CSF) as it leaves the optic nerve 
to join the veins of the orbit. Normally, venous pressure in the retinal veins 
at the nerve head is just above ocular pressure. Venous pulsation occurs 
because the vein collapses brieﬂ y with each rise in ocular pressure with arte-
 Table 14.1   Causes of a swollen optic disc. 
 Condition  
  Distinguishing features  
 Raised intracranial pressure  
 Vision and ﬁ eld usually normal save for large blind 
spot. Obscurations (short episodes of visual loss 
usually on changing posture). Field may be 
contracted in chronic disease. Colour vision 
normal. No RAPD. No spontaneous venous 
pulsation of the vein at the disc (but some people 
with normal intracranial pressure do not have 
this). Dilated capillaries and haemorrhages on 
disc. Other symptoms and signs of raised 
intracranial pressure  
 Space - occupying lesions of 
the optic nerve head  
 Various solid or inﬁ ltrative lesions at the nerve head, 
e.g. optic disc dr ü sen (calciﬁ ed axonal material), 
gliomas, sarcoidosis and leukaemia, may 
produce disc swelling. These may be associated 
with reduced vision and ﬁ eld defects  
 Papillitis (optic neuritis 
affecting the optic nerve 
head)  
 A swollen optic disc. Exudates around the macula 
may occasionally be seen. Vision is profoundly 
reduced. Colour vision is abnormal. RAPD 
present. A central ﬁ eld defect is present  
 Accelerated (malignant) 
hypertension (see 
Chapter  12 )  
 Reduced vision, haemorrhagic disc swelling. Retinal 
haemorrhages, exudates and cotton - wool spots 
away from the nerve head. Check blood 
pressure!  
 Ischaemic optic neuropathy  
 Sudden visual loss, ﬁ eld defect. Colour vision may 
be normal. RAPD may be present. Spontaneous 
venous pulsation at the optic disc may be 
present. May be sectorial swelling only. 
Haemorrhages on disc and disc margin. 
Cotton - wool spots may be seen around disc, 
particularly if caused by giant cell arteritis  
 Central retinal vein occlusion 
(see Chapter  12 )  
 Sudden marked visual loss, tortuous veins, gross 
retinal haemorrhage  
 Disc swelling must be distinguished from pseudopapilloedema such as optic nerve head 
dr ü sen, myelinated nerve ﬁ bres and the peripapillary atrophy of high myopia.  
 RAPD, relative afferent pupillary defect; see Chapter  2 . 

Disorders of the visual pathway 221
rial inﬂ ow. When the CSF pressure is higher than the ocular pressure, as 
occurs in papilloedema due to raised intracranial pressure, the pressure in 
the veins at the disc rises above the ocular pressure and so spontaneous 
venous pulsation is lost. Absence of spontaneous venous pulsation is seen in 
5 – 20% of those with normal nerve heads, but in this case venous collapse at 
the nerve head can be induced by light pressure on the globe.  
   •      A large blind spot will be found on visual ﬁ eld testing, corresponding to the 
swollen nerve head. In chronic papilloedema the ﬁ eld may become con-
stricted. A ﬁ eld defect may, however, be caused by the space - occupying 
lesion causing the papilloedema.  
 •  Abnormal neurological signs may indicate the site of a space - occupying 
lesion. 
 Investigation 
 CT and MRI scanning will identify any space - occupying lesion or enlargement 
of the ventricles. Following neurological consultation (and normally after a 
scan) a lumbar puncture will enable intracranial pressure to be measured. 
 Treatment is dependent on ﬁ ndings. 
 Idiopathic  i ntracranial  h ypertension  t reatment 
 Intracranial pressure may be elevated and disc swelling present with no evi-
dence of intracranial abnormality and no dilation of the ventricles on the scan. 
This is termed  idiopathic intracranial hypertension  (previously, benign intrac-
ranial hypertension) and usually presents in overweight women in the second 
and third decades. It may also be caused by exposure to certain drugs such as 
the contraceptive pill and tetracyclines. Patients complain of headache and 
may have obscurations of vision and sixth nerve palsies. No other neurological 
problems are present. Although acute permanent visual loss is not a feature of 
papilloedema, if the nerve remains swollen for several weeks there will be a 
progressive contraction of the visual ﬁ eld. It is thus important to reduce intrac-
ranial pressure. This may be achieved:
 •  with medications such as oral acetazolamide; 
   •      through ventriculoperitoneal shunting;  
   •      through optic nerve decompression, where a small hole is made in the sheath 
surrounding the optic nerve to allow the drainage of CSF and reduce the 
pressure of CSF around the anterior optic nerve.    
 Space - occupying lesions (i.e. tumours and haemorrhage) and hydrocepha-
lus require neurosurgical management.   
 Optic  n euritis 
 Inﬂ ammation or demyelination of the optic nerve results in optic neuritis. This 
is termed  papillitis if the optic nerve head is affected and  retrobulbar neuritis 
if the optic nerve is affected more posteriorly with no disc swelling. 

222 
Disorders of the visual pathway
 History 
 There is:
    •      an acute loss of vision that may progress over a few days and then slowly 
improve; 
   •      pain on eye movement in retrobulbar neuritis because rectus contraction 
pulls on the optic nerve sheath;  
   •      a preceding history of viral illness in some cases. Between 40% and 70% of 
patients with optic neuritis will have, or develop, other neurological symp-
toms to suggest a diagnosis of demyelination (multiple sclerosis).     
 Examination 
 This reveals:
 •  reduced visual acuity; 
 •  reduced colour vision; 
   •      a relative afferent pupillary defect (RAPD) due to reduced optic nerve con-
duction (see Chapter  2 ); 
 •  a central scotoma on ﬁ eld testing; 
 •  a normal disc in retrobulbar neuritis; a swollen disc in papillitis. 
 Treatment 
 An MRI scan will help to identify additional  ‘ silent ’ plaques of demyelination, 
but the patient must be suitably counselled before a scan is performed. The 
diagnosis of multiple sclerosis is essentially a clinical one, and the patient may 
not wish to have the presence of other possible plaques conﬁ rmed with a scan. 
There may be a role for steroid treatment to speed up visual recovery. 
 Prognosis 
 Vision slowly recovers over several weeks, although often it is not quite as good 
as before the attack. Repeated episodes may lead to optic atrophy and a decline 
in vision. Very occasionally, in atypical cases, vision may not recover.   
 Ischaemic  o ptic  n europathy 
 Pathogenesis 
 The anterior optic nerve may become ischaemic if the posterior ciliary vessels 
are compromised as a result of degenerative vaso - occlusive or vasculitic disease 
of the arterioles (see Chapter  1 ). This results in an  anterior ischaemic optic 
neuropathy . 
 Symptoms 
 The patient complains of a sudden loss of vision or visual ﬁ eld, often on waking, 
since vascular perfusion of the eye is decreased during sleep. If accompanied 

Disorders of the visual pathway 223
by pain or scalp tenderness, the diagnosis of  giant cell arteritis  must never be 
forgotten. Ischaemic optic neuropathy is the usual cause of blindness in the 
disease. 
 Giant  c ell  a rteritis 
 This is an autoimmune vasculitis occurring in patients generally over the age 
of 60. It affects arteries with an internal elastic lamina, which therefore includes 
the ophthalmic artery. It may present with any combination of:
 •  sudden loss of vision; 
 •  scalp tenderness (e.g. on combing); 
 •  pain on chewing ( jaw claudication ); 
 •  shoulder pain; 
 •  malaise. 
 Signs 
 There is usually (Figure  14.3 ):
 •  a reduction in visual acuity; 
 •  a ﬁ eld defect, typically an absence of the lower or upper half of the visual ﬁ eld 
(altitudinal scotoma);  
   •      a swollen and haemorrhagic disc with normal retina and retinal vessels 
(remember the blood supply to the anterior optic nerve and retina are differ-
ent)  –  in arteritic ischaemic optic neuropathy the disc may be pale;  
 •  a small normal fellow disc with a small cup in non - arteritic disease; 
 •  a tender temporal artery, a sign suggestive of giant cell arteritis. 
 Investigations 
 If giant cell arteritis is present the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and 
 Figure 14.3   (a) The clinical appearance of the optic disc and (b) one form of ﬁ eld 
defect (altitudinal) seen in ischaemic optic neuropathy.  
(b)
(a)

224 
Disorders of the visual pathway
C - reactive protein are usually grossly elevated (e.g. ESR  =  100  mm/h) (although 
1 in 10 patients with giant cell arteritis have a normal ESR). Temporal artery 
biopsy is often helpful, but again may not lead to a diagnosis, particularly if 
only a small specimen is examined, because the disease may skip a length 
of the artery. Giant cell arteritis can also present as a central retinal artery 
occlusion when the vessel is affected secondarily to arteritis of the ophthalmic 
artery. 
 Investigation of the patient with non - arteritic ischaemic optic neuropathy 
includes:
 •  a full blood count to exclude anaemia; 
 •  blood pressure check; 
 •  blood sugar check; 
   •      ESR and C - reactive protein to check for giant cell arteritis.    
 Both hypertension and diabetes may be associated with the condition. It may 
also be seen in patients suffering acute blood loss, e.g. haematemesis, where it 
may occur some days after the acute bleed. Hypotensive episodes may also give 
rise to ischaemic optic neuropathy. Occasionally, clotting disorders or autoim-
mune disease may cause the condition.  
 Treatment 
 If giant cell arteritis is suspected, treatment must not be delayed while the 
diagnosis is conﬁ rmed. High - dose steroids must be given, intravenously 
and orally, and the dose tapered over the ensuing weeks according to both 
symptoms and the response of the ESR or C - reactive protein. The usual precau-
tions must be taken, as with any patient on steroids, to exclude other medical 
conditions that might be unmasked or made worse by the steroids (e.g. tuber-
culosis, diabetes, hypertension and an increased susceptibility to infection). 
Steroids  will not reverse the visual loss  but can prevent the fellow eye being 
affected. 
 There is unfortunately no treatment for non - arteritic ischaemic optic neu-
ropathy other than by the management of underlying conditions. 
 Prognosis 
 The second eye may rapidly become involved in patients with untreated giant 
cell arteritis but this can be prevented by prompt initiation of systemic steroid 
therapy. Steroid therapy may have to be continued on a prolonged basis and 
monitored on the ESR or C - reactive protein result. There is also a signiﬁ cant 
rate of involvement of the second eye in the non - arteritic form (40 – 50%). It is 
unusual for the vision to get progressively worse in non - arteritic ischaemic 
optic neuropathy, and the visual outcome in terms of both visual ﬁ eld and 
acuity is very variable. In both conditions, vision does not recover once it has 
been lost.   

Disorders of the visual pathway 225
 Optic  a trophy 
 A pale optic disc represents a loss of nerve ﬁ bres at the optic nerve head (Figure 
 14.4 , Table  14.2 ). The vision is usually reduced and colour vision affected. On 
examination, the usual vascularity of the disc is lost. Comparison of the two 
eyes is of great help in unilateral cases, as the contrast makes pallor much easier 
to see. A relative afferent pupillary defect will usually be present. 
 The  c hiasm 
 Compressive lesions at the chiasm produce a bitemporal hemianopia as the 
ﬁ bres representing the nasal retina (temporal ﬁ eld) are compressed as they 
cross in the centre of the chiasm. Patients may present with rather vague visual 
symptoms, for example:
 •  Missing objects in the periphery of the visual ﬁ eld. 
   •      When testing vision with a Snellen chart patients may miss the temporal 
letters with each eye.  
 •  The bitemporal ﬁ eld loss may cause difﬁ culty in fusing images, causing the 
patient to complain of diplopia although eye position and movements are 
normal.  
 •  There may be difﬁ culty with tasks requiring stereopsis such as pouring water 
into a cup or threading a needle.    
 The most common lesion is a pituitary tumour (Figure  14.5 ), and the patient 
should be asked whether they have symptoms relating to hormonal distur-
bance. Treatment depends on the type of tumour found; some are amenable 
 Figure 14.4   (a) A pale optic disc compared to (b) a normal optic disc.  
(b)
(a)

226 
Disorders of the visual pathway
to medical therapy but many require surgical excision. A  meningioma and 
 craniopharyngioma  may also cause chiasmal compression. 
 Optic  t ract,  r adiation and  v isual  c ortex 
 Lesions of the optic tract and radiation (usually vascular or neoplastic), produce 
a  homonymous hemianopic ﬁ eld defect , that is, loss conﬁ ned to the right -  or 
left - hand side of the ﬁ eld  in of both eyes  (Figure  14.6 ). This pattern of ﬁ eld loss 
results from the crossing of the ﬁ bres representing the nasal retina in the 
chiasm (Figure  14.6 ). Information from these ﬁ bres is projected to the primary 
visual cortex from the lateral geniculate body (LGB) via the optic tract and 
radiation. If the extent of ﬁ eld loss is similar in both eyes a  congruous  defect is 
 Table 14.2   Causes of a pale optic disc. 
 Cause  
  Distinguishing features  
 Compression of the 
optic nerve  
 History of orbital or chiasmal disease. If sectorial, ﬁ eld loss 
may give a clue to the location of a compressive lesion  
 Ischaemic optic 
neuropathy  
 A history of sudden (unilateral) visual loss in the past  
 Retinal artery 
occlusion  
 The retinal vessels are attenuated  
 Retinal vein occlusion  
 Engorged retinal veins; retinal haemorrhage  
 Glaucoma (see 
Chapter  10 ) 
 Papilloedema and 
chronic elevation of 
ICP  
 The optic disc is pathologically cupped 
 The visual ﬁ elds are contracted  
 Optic neuritis  
  There may be a history of previous loss of vision. Symptoms 
and signs compatible with multiple sclerosis may be present  
 Inherited optic nerve 
disease  
 Dominant and recessive optic neuropathy are associated 
with onset of blindness in the ﬁ rst few years of life. 
Leber ’ s hereditary optic neuropathy results from an 
inheritable mutation of mitochondrial DNA. It typically 
affects males in early adulthood. It is bilateral. There is a 
bilateral central scotoma.  
 Inherited retinal 
disease  
 Retinal disease may result in optic disc pallor. It is, for 
example, a feature of retinitis pigmentosa and rod – cone 
dystrophies  
 Toxic optic 
neuropathy  
 Optic neuropathy may follow chemical toxicity, for example 
heavy metals, toluene from glue - snifﬁ ng and some drugs 
(e.g. isoniazid used in the treatment of tuberculosis). 
Again, information should be sought in the history  
 Tobacco/alcohol/
nutritional vitamin 
amblyopia  
 Optic neuropathy here (where all three factors are often 
involved together) is due to a combination of vitamin 
deﬁ ciency (B 12 ) and cyanide toxicity  

Disorders of the visual pathway 227
said to be present. This usually means that the defect has affected the optic 
radiation or cerebral cortex. Neoplasia more commonly affects the radiation in 
the anterior temporal lobe. The commonest cause of disease in the occipital 
cortex is a cerebrovascular accident. The visual loss is of rapid onset; a slower 
onset is suggestive of a space - occupying lesion.   
 Figure 14.5   (a) The CT appearance of a pituitary tumour (arrow). (b) The bitemporal 
visual ﬁ eld loss produced.  
(b)
(a)
 Figure 14.6   (a) A CT scan showing a left cortical infarct. (b) The complete congruous 
right homonymous hemianopia produced by the infarct.  
(b)
(a)
 
  KEY POINTS 
 •  A bitemporal visual ﬁ eld defect suggests a pituitary lesion.  
 •  There are several causes of a swollen optic disc; it is not just a sign of raised 
intracranial pressure.  
 •  A pale optic disc may result from retinal disease.  

228 
Disorders of the visual pathway
   Multiple  c hoice  q uestions 
 1.  Match the ﬁ eld defect to the possible site of disease. 
 a 
 Unilateral central scotoma. 
 b 
 Congruous left hemianopia. 
 c 
 Bitemporal hemianopia. 
 d 
 Unilateral superior ﬁ eld defect. 
 e 
 Incongruous left hemianopia. 
 i 
 Optic chiasm. 
 ii 
 Visual cortex. 
 iii 
 Optic nerve. 
 iv 
 Optic tract. 
 v 
 Retina. 
 2.  A swollen disc may be caused by 
 a 
 Raised intraocular pressure. 
 b 
 Raised intracranial pressure. 
 c 
 Optic neuritis. 
 d 
 Systemic hypertension. 
 e 
 Central retinal artery occlusion. 
 3.  Match the pictures (Figure  14.7 ) to the most probable diagnosis. 
 i 
 Optic disc dr ü sen. 
 ii 
 Glaucoma. 
 iii 
 Pituitary tumour. 
 iv 
 Ischaemic optic neuropathy. 
 v 
 Retinitis pigmentosa. 
 vi 
 Myelination of the retinal nerve ﬁ bre layer. 
 vii 
 Myopia. 
 viii  Papilloedema. 
 ix 
 Optic neuritis. 
 4.  Optic neuritis 
 a 
 Is associated with a sudden loss of vision that does not progress. 
 b 
 Is painless. 
 c 
 May be part of a systemic neurological disease. 
 d 
 Vision rarely recovers. 
 e 
 Is associated with a reduction in colour vision. 
 5.  Ischaemic optic neuropathy 
 a 
 Presents with an acute loss of vision. 
 b 
 On examination the patient has a swollen disc. 
  c   
  May be associated with scalp tenderness and jaw claudication.  
 d 
 Should always be treated with steroids. 
 e 
 May cause an altitudinal ﬁ eld defect. 

Disorders of the visual pathway 229
 Figure 14.7   See Question 3.  
(c)
(a)
(b) Vision normal
(d) Loss of superior visual ﬁeld
(e)

230 
Disorders of the visual pathway
 6.  Optic atrophy may be seen in 
 a 
 Some retinal diseases. 
 b 
 Compression of the optic nerve. 
 c 
 Diseases of the visual cortex. 
 d 
 Toxic eye disease. 
 e 
 Poor nutrition. 
 Answers 
 1.  Match the ﬁ eld defect to the possible site of disease. 
 a 
 Optic nerve or retina. 
 b 
 Visual cortex. 
 c 
 Optic chiasm. 
 d 
 Retina or optic nerve. 
 e 
 Optic tract. 
  2.   A swollen disc may be caused by 
   a   
  False. A chronic rise in pressure will produce pathological cupping of the 
optic disc.  
 b 
 True. This is a cardinal sign of raised intracranial pressure. 
  c   
  True. This is then called papillitis; but the optic nerve head appears normal 
in retrobulbar neuritis.  
 d 
 True. But only in severe or accelerated hypertension. 
 e 
 False. It is seen in a central retinal vein occlusion and in ischaemic optic 
neuropathy. 
 3.  Match the pictures (Figure  14.7 ) to the most probable diagnosis. 
 a 
 Optic disc dr ü sen. 
 b 
 Papilloedema. 
 c 
 Myopia. 
 d 
 Ischaemic optic neuropathy. 
 e 
 Glaucoma. 
 4.  Optic neuritis 
 a 
 False. The visual loss usually progresses over a couple of days. 
  b   
  False. There may be pain on eye movement in retrobulbar neuritis.  
 c 
 True. It may be due to demyelination and be part of multiple sclerosis. 
 d 
 False. There is usually some degree of recovery. 
 e 
 True. This is a useful test in assessing optic nerve disease. 
 5.  Ischaemic optic neuropathy 
 a 
 True. This may often be noticed by the patient on waking. 
 b 
 True. There may be sectorial swelling of the optic disc. 

Disorders of the visual pathway 231
  c   
  True. The condition may be a feature of giant cell arteritis. It is important 
to think of this in any senior patient, but there are also non - arteritic vas-
cular causes.  
  d   
  False. If it is associated with giant cell arteritis this is the immediate treat-
ment. Non - arteritic disease does not respond to steroids.  
 e 
 True. This is the classical ﬁ eld defect (Figure  14.3 ). 
  6.   Optic atrophy may be seen in 
 a 
 True. It may be seen for example in retinitis pigmentosa. 
  b   
  True. Compression of the optic nerve causes axonal damage.  
  c   
  False. Disc pallor will only be seen in lesions anterior to the lateral genicu-
late body.  
 d 
 True. E.g. tobacco – alcohol or ethambutol toxicity. 
 e 
 True. An example is vitamin B 12 deﬁ ciency. 

 
 Learning objectives 
 To understand:
 ✓      The actions and control of the six muscles moving 
the eye. 
 ✓  The difference between non - paralytic and paralytic 
squint.  
 ✓  What is meant by binocular single vision. 
 ✓      The cause, investigation and treatment of non -
 paralytic squint. 
 ✓  The symptoms, signs and treatment of paralytic 
squint.  
 ✓      The importance of the differential diagnosis of third 
nerve palsy. 
 ✓  Gaze palsy and nystagmus. 
 To be able to:
 ✓  Perform a cover test. 
 15 
Eye movements and 
their disorders  
 Introduction 
 Eye movements may be abnormal because there is:
 •  an abnormal position of the eyes; 
   •      a reduced range of eye movements;  
   •      an abnormality in the character of the eye movements.     
Ophthalmology Lecture Notes, Eleventh Edition. Bruce James, Anthony Bron. 
© 2011 Bruce James and Anthony Bron. Published 2011 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Eye movements and their disorders 233
 Anatomy and  p hysiology 
 Each eye can be  abducted  (away from the nose) or  adducted  (towards the nose) 
or may look up ( elevation ) or down ( depression ). The cardinal positions of gaze 
for assessing a muscle palsy are: gaze right and left, up, down, and gaze up to 
the right and left and down to the right and left. 
 Six extraocular muscles control eye movement. The medial recti bring about 
horizontal adduction of the eyes and the lateral recti cause horizontal abduc-
tion. The superior and inferior recti elevate and depress the eye in  abduction . 
The superior oblique causes depression of the eye in the adducted position and 
the inferior oblique causes elevation in the  adducted  position. The vertical 
muscles each have secondary,  rotatory  actions (intorsion and extorsion). 
 Three cranial nerves supply these muscles (see Chapter  1 ) and their nuclei 
are found in the brainstem, together with pathways linking them with other 
brainstem nuclei (e.g. vestibular) and with gaze centres (horizontal gaze in the 
pons and vertical gaze in the midbrain). These provide  supranuclear pathways 
which coordinate the movements of both eyes. 
 Higher cortical centres control the speed with which the eyes follow a 
moving target ( smooth pursuit ), and the rapid movements required to take up 
a new position of gaze ( saccades ). These centres also inﬂ uence the brainstem 
nuclei. 
 The linkage of the nuclei ensures that the eyes move together in a coordi-
nated fashion (Figure  15.1 ). For example, when looking to the right, the right 
lateral and left medial rectus are equally stimulated and act as  yoke muscles . At 
the same time innervation of the antagonists which move the eyes to the left 
(the left lateral rectus and the right medial rectus) is inhibited.   
 Clinically, eye movement disorders are best described under four headings 
(which are not mutually exclusive):
 1  In a  non - paralytic squint  the movements of both eyes are full (there is  no 
paresis ) but only one eye is directed towards the ﬁ xated target (Figure  15.2 ). 
The angle of deviation is constant and unrelated to the direction of gaze. This 
is also termed a  concomitant squint and is the common squint seen in 
childhood. 
 2  In a  paralytic squint  there is underaction of one or more of the eye muscles 
due to a nerve palsy, extraocular muscle disease or tethering of the globe. 
The size of the squint is dependent on the direction of gaze and thus, for a 
nerve palsy, is greatest in the  ﬁ eld of action  of the affected muscle (i.e. the 
direction in which the muscle would normally take the globe) (Figure  15.3 ). 
This is also termed an  incomitant squint . 
 3  In  gaze palsies  there is a disturbance of the supranuclear coordination of eye 
movements. Pursuit and saccadic eye movements may also be affected if the 
cortical pathways to the nuclei controlling eye movements are interrupted.  
 4     Disorders of the brainstem nuclei or vestibular input may also result in a 
form of oscillating eye movement termed  nystagmus . 

234 
Eye movements and their disorders
 Non - paralytic  s quint 
 Binocular  s ingle  v ision 
 In the absence of a squint ( strabismus ), both eyes are directed towards the same 
object of regard. Their movements are coordinated so that the retinal images 
of an object fall on corresponding points of each retina. These images are fused 
centrally, so that they are interpreted by the brain as a single image. This is 
termed  binocular single vision  (Figure  15.4 ). Because each eye views an object 
from a different angle, the retinal images do not fall precisely on corresponding 
points of each retina. This disparity permits a three - dimensional percept to be 
constructed. This is termed  stereopsis . The development of stereopsis requires 
that eye movements and visual alignment are coordinated over approximately 
the ﬁ rst 5 years of life.   
 Figure 15.1   The connections of the nuclei and higher centres controlling horizontal 
eye movements. Saccade and pursuit pathways shown for right eye only. 
3rd
nucleus
4th
nucleus
Parapontine reticular
formation (PPRF)
3rd
nucleus
RIGHT
LEFT
4th
nucleus
Midbrain
Pons
longitudinal
fasciculus
Medial
Parapontine reticular
formation (PPRF)
PURSUIT
Occipito-mesencephalic pathway
(parieto-occipito-temporal
lobe junction)
SACCADES
Fronto-mesencephalic
pathway
(frontal lobes)
6th
nucleus
6th
nucleus
Vestibular nuclei
Semicircular canal

Eye movements and their disorders 235
 Figure 15.2   Right non - paralytic divergent squint. (a) The right eye is divergent in the 
primary position of gaze (looking straight ahead). (b) When the eyes look to the left 
the angle of deviation between the  visual axis  (a line passing through the point of 
ﬁ xation and the foveola) of the two eyes is unchanged.  
(a)
Straight
ahead
(b)
Left
gaze
Left
Right
 Figure 15.3   Left sixth nerve palsy with paralysis of the left lateral rectus (paralytic 
squint). (a) The eyes are looking to the right, the visual axes are aligned, there is no 
deviation between the visual axes of the two eyes. (b) The eyes look to the left (the 
ﬁ eld of action of the left lateral rectus). The left lateral rectus is paralysed and thus the 
left eye is unable to move past the midline. Now there is a marked angle of deviation 
between the visual axes of the two eyes.  
(a)
Right
gaze
(b)
Left
gaze
Left
Right

236 
Eye movements and their disorders
 Binocular single vision and stereopsis afford certain advantages to the 
individual:
 •  They increase the ﬁ eld of vision.  
   •      They eliminate the blind spot, since the blind spot of one eye falls in the 
seeing ﬁ eld of the other.  
 •  They provide a binocular acuity, which is greater than monocular acuity. 
 •  Stereopsis provides depth perception and estimation of distance. 
 If the visual axes of the two eyes are not aligned, binocular single vision is 
not possible. This results in:
 •  Diplopia  .  An object is seen to be in two different places. 
 •  Visual confusion  .      Two separate and different objects appear to be at the same 
point. 
 In children, a non - alignment of the visual axes of the two eyes (or squint) 
results in suppression of the image in the squinting eye. This means that when 
the vision in the two eyes is tested together only one object is seen and there 
is no diplopia. If this is prolonged and constant during the sensitive period of 
visual development (the ﬁ rst 5 years) it causes a reduced visual acuity in the 
squinting eye ( strabismic amblyopia ). Amblyopia will only develop if the squint 
constantly affects the same eye. Some children alternate the squinting eye and 
do not develop amblyopia, since a focused image always falls on one or other 
retina. However, they do not develop stereopsis.  
 Aetiology of  n on - paralytic  s quint 
 Non - paralytic squint:
 1     May develop in an otherwise normal child with normal eyes. The cause of 
the problem in these patients remains obscure. It is thought to be caused by 
an abnormality in the central coordination of eye movements.  
 2  May be associated with refractive error or ocular disease: 
 Figure 15.4   Elimination of the blind spot and increase in the ﬁ eld of vision that 
binocular single vision affords.  
Field of
right eye
Field of
left eye
Right eye
blind spot
Left eye
blind spot
Field of binocular
single vision
Fixation
point

Eye movements and their disorders 237
   a     A refractive error which prevents the formation of a clear image on the 
retina. This is the most common factor. If the refractive error is dissimilar 
in the two eyes ( anisometropia ) one retinal image will be blurred. 
  b     In a child with an equal degree of long sight (hypermetropia) in both 
eyes a convergent squint may develop because of the  increased accom-
modative effort  required to focus on both distant, and particularly near, 
objects. The link ( synkinesis ) between the accommodative and conver-
gence mechanisms leads to an excessive convergence and ultimately to a 
convergent squint of one eye. Where the squint  only  occurs on attempted 
focusing on near objects (an accommodative squint), amblyopia does not 
develop since binocular visual alignment remains normal for part of the 
time, during distant viewing.  
 c  Opacities in the media of the eye blurring or preventing the formation of 
the retinal image (i.e. corneal opacities or cataract).  
  d     Abnormalities of the retina. Although a correctly formed image is formed, 
inadequate information is transmitted to the visual cortex.      
 History 
 The presence of a squint in a child may be noted by the parents or detected at 
preschool or school screening clinics. It may be intermittent or constant. There 
may be a family history of squint or refractive error. The following should be 
noted:
 •  When the squint is present  – i.e. is it constant? 
 •  How long a squint has been present. 
 •  Past medical, birth and family history of the child. 
 Examination 
 First the patient is observed for features that may simulate a squint. These 
include:
 •  epicanthus  (a crescentic fold of skin on the side of the nose that incompletely 
covers the inner canthus) (Figure  15.5 ); This simulates convergent squint. 
 •  facial asymmetry. 
 Then the alignment of the two eyes is tested, using a pen torch. The corneal 
reﬂ ection of a torch light, held 33   cm in front of the subject, is a guide to eye 
position. If the child is squinting the reﬂ ection will be central in the ﬁ xating eye 
and  deviated in the squinting eye (Figure  15.6 ). 
 A  cover/uncover test  (Figure  15.7 ) is next performed to detect a manifest 
squint (a  tropia ):
 •  The right eye is completely covered for a few seconds whilst holding a detailed 
near target, such as a toy, in front of the child as a ﬁ xation target. The left eye 
is closely observed. If it has been maintaining ﬁ xation it should not move. If 
it moves  outwards  to take up ﬁ xation an  esotropia  or convergent squint is 

238 
Eye movements and their disorders
 Figure 15.6   The appearance of (a) a convergent squint: right eye ﬁ xing; and 
(b) a divergent squint: left eye ﬁ xing. Note the position of the light reﬂ ection in each 
eye. 
(a)
(b)
 Figure 15.5   A child with epicanthic folds, note the light reﬂ ex is central in both eyes. 
The pupils have been dilated for refraction and fundus examination.  
present. If it moves  inwards  to take up ﬁ xation an  exotropia  or divergent 
squint is present. 
    •      The cover is removed from the right eye and then the left eye covered, this 
time closely observing the right. If it moves  outwards  to take up ﬁ xation an 
 esotropia  is present. If it moves  inwards  to take up ﬁ xation an  exotropia is 
present. If there is no movement no squint is present. 
 •  The test is repeated for a distant object sited at 6  m and for a far - distant 
object. It will also reveal a vertical squint.    

Eye movements and their disorders 239
 Figure 15.7   The cover/uncover test. (a) A manifest right convergent squint (right 
esotropia) is present. (b) The right, squinting eye, is occluded. There is no movement 
of the left eye, which maintains ﬁ xation. (c) The left eye is occluded. The squinting 
right eye moves outwards to take up ﬁ xation, and the non - squinting eye moves 
inwards because the movement of the two eyes is linked. (d) The cover is removed 
from the left eye, which moves outwards to take up ﬁ xation; the right eye moves 
inward to resume its squinting position. (If an alternating squint was present (i.e. each 
eye retained the ability to ﬁ xate) the right eye would maintain ﬁ xation and the eyes 
would not move when the cover was removed.)  
(a)
(b)
Occluder
Left eye
Right eye
(c)
(d)
Occluder

240 
Eye movements and their disorders
  
 If no abnormal eye movement is seen an  alternate cover test  is performed. 
This will reveal the presence of a latent squint (a  phoria ), which occurs only 
when the two eyes are not simultaneously stimulated, that is in the absence of 
bifoveal visual stimulation. It is not really an abnormal condition, and can be 
demonstrated in most people who otherwise have normal binocular single 
vision. It represent a tendency of the visual pathways to drift apart which is 
corrected by unconscious effort. If this effort fails, for instance during fatigue, 
then a manifest non - paralytic squint, accompanied by diplopia, may occur. 
The effort of maintaining binocular vision by adjusting for the heterophoria 
may at times itself be a source of symptoms. 
 The alternate cover test is performed as follows:
    •      This time the cover is moved rapidly from one eye to the other a couple of 
times. This dissociates the eyes (i.e. there is no longer bifoveal stimulation), 
causing a squint to become manifest.  
   •      The right eye is now occluded and then uncovered. As the occluder is removed 
any movement in the  right eye is noted. If the eye has moved inwards to take 
up ﬁ xation and resume binocularity, then an  exophoria  (latent divergence) is 
present. If the eye moves outwards to take up ﬁ xation then an  esophoria 
(latent convergence) is present. Exactly the same movements would be seen 
in the left eye if it were covered following dissociation.    
 In an eye clinic the squint can be further assessed with the synoptophore 
(see Chapter  2 ). This instrument, together with special three - dimensional pic-
tures, can also be used to determine whether the eyes are used together and 
whether stereopsis is present. 
 Refractive error is measured following topical administration of cyclopen-
tolate eye drops to paralyse accommodation and dilate the pupil. The eye is 
then examined to exclude opacities of the cornea, lens or vitreous and abnor-
malities of the retina or optic disc.  
 Investigating a squint 
 Summary of the steps taken in investigating a squinting child:
 •   Determination of acuity (see Chapter  2 ). 
 •   Detection of any abnormality in eye movement.  
 •   Detection and measurement of the squint. 
 •   Measurement of stereopsis.  
 •   Determination of any refractive error.  
 •   Careful examination of the eyes, including a dilated fundus view.  

Eye movements and their disorders 241
 Treatment 
 A non - paralytic squint with no associated ocular disease is treated as follows:
 •  Any signiﬁ cant refractive error is ﬁ rst corrected with glasses. 
   •      If amblyopia is present and the vision does not improve with glasses 
the better - seeing eye is patched for limited periods of time to stimulate 
visual development promote an improvement of visual acuity in the ambly-
opic eye.  
 •  Surgical intervention  to realign the eyes may be required for functional 
reasons (to restore or establish binocular single vision) or for cosmetic 
reasons (to improve appearance and prevent a child being singled out at 
school) (Figure  15.8 ). 
 Figure 15.8   The principles of squint surgery. (a) Recession. The conjunctiva has 
been incised to expose the medial rectus muscle. The muscle is then disinserted and 
moved backwards on the globe. (b) Resection. Following exposure of the muscle the 
anterior tendon and muscle are resected, thus shortening them; the muscle is then 
reattached to its original position.  
(a)
(b)
Anterior segment
of muscle resected

242 
Eye movements and their disorders
 The principle of surgery is to realign the eyes by adjusting the position of the 
muscles on the globe or by shortening the muscle. Access to the muscles is 
gained by making a small incision in the conjunctiva.
 •  Moving the muscle insertion backwards on the globe ( recession ) weakens its 
action.  
   •      Removing a segment of the muscle at its insertion ( resection ) strengthens its 
action. 
 Prognosis 
 Glasses and patching can signiﬁ cantly improve vision in the squinting eye. 
Unfortunately realignment, even if performed when the child is very young, is 
rarely associated with the development of stereopsis in the majority of non -
 paralytic squints. The operation is important from the cosmetic viewpoint, 
however, particularly when the child starts school. 
 Paralytic  s quint 
 Isolated  n erve  p alsy 
 Pathogenesis 
 Disease of the third, fourth and sixth nerves and their central connections gives 
rise to a paralytic strabismus (Figure  15.9 ). Each nerve may be affected at any 
point along its course from brainstem nucleus to orbit. Table  15.1 details some 
causes. 
 History and  e xamination 
 The patient complains of diplopia. There may be an abnormal head posture to 
compensate for the inability of the eye to move in a particular direction. 
 A sixth nerve palsy results in failure of abduction of the eye. 
 A fourth nerve palsy results in defective depression of the eye when attempted 
in adduction. It produces the least noticeable eye - movement abnormality. 
Patients may notice vertical double vision with some torsion of the image, 
particularly when going downstairs or reading. 
 A third nerve palsy results in:
 •  failure of adduction, elevation and depression of the eye; 
 •  ptosis; 
 •  in some cases, a dilated pupil due to involvement of the autonomic ﬁ bres. 
 Treatment 
 An isolated nerve palsy is often related to coexistent systemic disease. If a pos-
terior communicating aneurysm is suspected the patient must be sent for 

Eye movements and their disorders 243
 Figure 15.9   (a) Left third nerve palsy: note the dilated pupil and ptosis as well as the 
limitation of eye movement. (b) Left fourth nerve palsy: the defect is maximal when the 
patient tries to look down when the left eye is adducted. (c) Sixth nerve palsy: the left 
eye is unable to abduct.  
Primary position
Left gaze
Right gaze
Upgaze
Downgaze
(a)

244 
Eye movements and their disorders
Right downgaze
Left gaze
(b)
(c)
Figure 15.9 (Continued)
 Table 15.1   The causes of isolated nerve palsies. 
 Orbital disease  
  e.g. neoplasia  
 Vascular disease  
  Diabetes (a  ‘ pupil sparing ’ third nerve palsy, i.e. there is 
ptosis and extraocular muscle palsy but no mydriasis)  
 Hypertension  
 Aneurysm (most commonly a painful third nerve palsy 
from an aneurysm of the posterior communicating artery. 
Mydriasis is usually present)  
 Caroticocavernous sinus ﬁ stula (also causes myogenic 
palsy)  
 Cavernous sinus thrombosis  
 Trauma  
  Most common cause of fourth and sixth nerve palsy  
 Neoplasia  
  Meningioma  
 Acoustic neuroma  
 Glioma  
 Raised intracranial pressure  
 May cause a third or sixth nerve palsy (a false localizing 
sign)  
 Inﬂ ammation  
  Sarcoidosis  
 Vasculitic (i.e. giant cell arteritis)  
 Infection (particularly herpes zoster)  
 Guillain – Barr é  syndrome  

Eye movements and their disorders 245
neurosurgical review and angiography. The most common cause of a palsy is 
microvascular disease of a peripheral cranial nerve, itself associated with dia-
betes or hypertension. Here, nerve function recovers over some months and 
the symptoms abate. 
 Orbital disease (see Chapter  4 ) and disease in the cavernous sinus may also 
be the cause of multiple nerve palsies such as the third, fourth and sixth nerves, 
because they are anatomically close together. A CT or MRI scan will show the 
lesion (e.g. an orbital metastasis). 
 Diplopia can be helped by ﬁ tting  prisms  to the patient ’ s glasses, which realign 
the retinal images. Alternatively the affected eye can be patched. If eye move-
ments fail to improve spontaneously then surgical intervention may be 
required. Such intervention will seldom restore normal full eye movement but 
is aimed at restoring an acceptable ﬁ eld of binocular single vision in the 
primary positions of gaze (i.e. straight ahead and in downgaze), the commonest 
positions in which the eyes are used. 
 Disease of the  e xtraocular  m uscles 
 Dysthyroid  e ye  d isease 
 Pathogenesis 
 Disorders of the thyroid gland can be associated with an inﬁ ltration of the 
extraocular muscles with lymphocytes and the deposition of glycosaminogly-
cans in the tissues, leading to proptosis, exposure of the globes and limitation 
of eye movements. The condition occurs particularly in hyperthyroidism but 
also in hyopothyroidism. An immunological process is suspected but not fully 
determined.  
 Symptoms and  s igns 
 The patient may sometimes complain of:
    •      a red painful eye (associated with exposure caused by proptosis)  –  if the 
redness is limited to part of the eye only it may indicate active inﬂ ammation 
in the adjacent muscle;  
 •  double vision; 
 •  reduced visual acuity (sometimes associated with optic neuropathy). 
 On examination (Figure  15.10 a):
 •  There may be  proptosis  of the eye (the eye protrudes from the orbit, also 
termed  exophthalmos ). 
 •  The conjunctiva may be  chemosed and the eye injected over the muscle insertions.  
 •  The upper lid may be  retracted  so that sclera is visible (due in part to increased 
sympathetic activity stimulating the sympathetically innervated smooth 
muscle of levator). This results in a characteristic stare.  

246 
Eye movements and their disorders
   •      The upper lid may lag behind the movement of the globe on downgaze ( lid 
lag ). 
   •      There may be restricted eye movements or squint (also termed restrictive 
thyroid myopathy, exophthalmic ophthalmoplegia, dysthyroid eye disease or 
Graves ’ disease). 
 The inferior rectus is the most commonly affected muscle. Its movement 
becomes restricted and there is mechanical limitation of the eye in upgaze. 
Involvement of the medial rectus causes mechanical limitation of abduction, 
thereby mimicking a sixth nerve palsy. A CT or MRI scan shows enlargement 
of the rectus muscles (Figure  15.10 b).  
 Investigations 
 These include:
 •  thyroid function tests; 
 •  anti - thyroid antibodies. 
 Complications 
 Dysthyroid eye disease is associated with two serious acute complications:
 1     Excessive exposure of the conjunctiva and cornea with the formation of 
chemosis (oedematous swelling of the conjunctiva), and corneal ulcers due 
to proptosis and failure of the lids to protect the cornea. The condition may 
lead to corneal perforation.  
 2     Compressive optic neuropathy due to compression and ischaemia of the 
optic nerve by the thickened muscles. This leads to ﬁ eld loss and may cause 
blindness. 
 Figure 15.10   Dysthyroid eye disease: (a) clinical appearance; (b) a CT scan 
demonstrating muscle thickening.  
(b)
(a)

Eye movements and their disorders 247
 Treatment 
 Corneal exposure and optic nerve compression require urgent treatment with 
systemic steroids, radiotherapy or surgical orbital decompression. 
 In the long term, treatment may be needed for the eye - movement problems 
and to improve the cosmetic appearance. A period may elapse while the eye 
movements stabilize, during which time prisms can be used to manage the 
diplopia. Once stabilized, if the patient remains symptomatic, surgery on the 
extraocular muscles can be performed to increase the ﬁ eld of binocular single 
vision. If desired, cosmetic surgery to lower the upper lids can be undertaken 
following the squint surgery. This improves the cosmetic appearance and 
achieves better protection of the cornea.   
 Myasthenia  g ravis 
 Pathogenesis 
 Myasthenia gravis is caused by the development of antibodies to the acetylcho-
line receptors of striated muscle. It affects females more than males and, 
although commonest in the 15 – 50 age group, may affect young children and 
older adults. Some 40% of patients may show involvement of the extraocular 
muscles only.  
 Symptoms and  s igns 
 The extraocular muscles fatigue, resulting in a variable diplopia. A variable 
ptosis may also be present. See Chapter  5  for a full account of diagnostic tests.  
 Treatment 
 The diagnosis can be conﬁ rmed by electromyography or by determining 
whether an injection of neostigmine or edrophonium (cholinesterase antago-
nists) temporarily restores normal muscle movement. This test must be per-
formed under close medical supervision with resuscitation equipment and 
atropine to hand because of the possibility of cholinergic side effects such as 
bradycardia and bronchospasm. 
 Patients are treated, in collaboration with a neurologist, with neostigmine or 
pyridostigmine. Systemic steroids and surgical removal of the thymus also have 
a role in treatment.   
 Ocular  m yositis 
 This is an inﬂ ammation of the extraocular muscles associated with pain and 
diplopia, leading to a restriction in the movement of the involved muscle 
(similar to that seen in dysthyroid eye disease). It is not usually associated 
with systemic disease, but thyroid abnormalities should be excluded. The con-
junctiva over the involved muscle is inﬂ amed. CT or MRI scanning shows a 

248 
Eye movements and their disorders
thickening of the muscle. If symptoms are troublesome it responds to a short 
course of steroids.  
 Ocular  m yopathy 
 Ocular myopathy (progressive external ophthalmoplegia) is a rare condition 
where the movement of the eyes is slowly and symmetrically reduced. It is 
caused by a mitochondrial DNA mutation in the muscle. There is an associated 
ptosis. Ultimately, eye movement may be lost completely. 
 Brown ’ s  s yndrome 
 In this condition, elevation of the eye in adduction during contraction of the 
ipsilateral inferior oblique muscle is restricted by the superior oblique muscle 
tendon failing to pass smoothly through its trochlear pulley or a stiff inelastic 
tendon - muscle complex (Brown ’ s syndrome). The exact cause remains 
unknown. The condition may be congenital or result from trauma to the orbit.  
 Duane ’ s  s yndrome 
 This is a  ‘ congenital miswiring ’  or faulty innervation of the medial and lateral 
rectus muscles. Cases of an absent sixth nerve and nucleus are also reported. 
There is neuromuscular activity in the lateral rectus during adduction and 
reduced lateral rectus activity in abduction. This results in limited abduction 
and narrowing of the palpebral aperture on adduction with retraction of the 
eye into the globe (due to simultaneous contraction of medial and lateral rectus 
muscles). The condition may be unilateral or, more rarely, bilateral. Children 
do not usually develop amblyopia, because binocular alignment is normal in 
some positions of gaze. Surgical intervention is often not required.   
 Gaze  p alsies 
 Gaze palsies affect the movement of the two eyes acting in concert. Disordered 
eye movement results from damage to the pathways connecting the cranial 
nerve nuclei together and to the higher centres. The abnormality in eye move-
ment depends on the point at which the pathway is disrupted. Both the extent 
and form of eye movement may be affected. Some of the more common are 
brieﬂ y described below. The ophthalmologist usually investigates and manages 
these patients with the help of a neurologist. 
 Lesions of the  p arapontine  r eticular  f ormation ( PPRF ) 
 Pathogenesis 
 The PPRF controls the horizontal movements of the eyes. Lesions affecting the 
PPRF are usually associated with other brainstem disease. It may be seen in 
patients with:

Eye movements and their disorders 249
 •  vascular disease; 
 •  tumours. 
 Symptoms and  s igns 
 There is:
    •      a failure of horizontal movements of both eyes to the side of the lesion (a 
 horizontal gaze palsy ); 
 •  deviation of the eyes to the contralateral side in acute cases. 
 Internuclear  o phthalmoplegia 
 Pathogenesis 
 It is caused by a lesion of the medial longitudinal fasciculus (MLF) (Figure 
 15.11 ). The MLF connects the sixth nerve nucleus to the third nerve nucleus on 
the opposite side and coordinates their activity in gaze movements.   
 It may become damaged in:
 •  demyelination (e.g. multiple sclerosis  – usually bilateral); 
 •  vascular disease (unilateral). 
 Symptoms and  s igns 
 The patient complains of horizontal diplopia. There is a:
 •  reduction of adduction on the same side as the lesion; 
 •  nystagmus of the contralateral, abducting eye. 
 Figure 15.11   The site of the lesion producing an internuclear ophthalmoplegia.  
3rd
nucleus
4th
nucleus
Parapontine reticular
formation (PPRF)
3rd
nucleus
Right
Left
4th
nucleus
6th
nucleus
Midbrain
Pons
longitudinal
fasciculus
Medial
Lesion
producing an
internuclear
ophthalmoplegia
Parapontine reticular
formation (PPRF)
6th
nucleus

250 
Eye movements and their disorders
 Management 
 Spontaneous recovery is usual although variable in demyelination. An MRI 
scan may be helpful diagnostically, both to locate the causal brainstem lesion 
and, in demyelination, to determine whether other plaques are present.   
 Parinaud ’ s  s yndrome ( d orsal  m idbrain  s yndrome) 
 Pathogenesis 
 In Parinaud ’ s syndrome a lesion in the dorsal midbrain involves the centre for 
vertical gaze. It may be seen in patients with:
 •  demyelination; 
 •  space - occupying lesions such as a  pinealoma  which press on the tectum; 
 •  infarction of the dorsal midbrain; 
 •  an enlarged third ventricle. 
 Symptoms and  s igns 
 The disorder causes:
 •  deﬁ cient elevation of both eyes;  
   •      convergence of the eyes and retraction into the orbit associated with nystag-
mus on attempted elevation;  
 •  light – near dissociation of the pupil (the pupil constricts on accommodation 
but reacts poorly to a light stimulus). 
 Abnormal  o scillations of the  e yes 
 Nystagmus 
 This refers to repeated involuntary to and fro or up and down movements of 
the eyes. Similar movements may occur normally when following a moving 
object (e.g. looking out of a train window) ( optokinetic nystagmus ) or following 
stimulation of the vestibular system. When examined closely they may be seen 
to have a slow phase in one direction and a fast phase in the other ( jerk nystag-
mus ). The nystagmus is described as beating to the side of the fast component. 
In some cases the speed of eye movement may be roughly the same in either 
direction ( pendular nystagmus ). Jerk nystagmus may also be seen at the extreme 
position of gaze ( end - gaze nystagmus ). 
 Acquired  n ystagmus 
 Pathologically, jerk nystagmus may be seen:
    •      in cerebellar disease, when it is worse when gaze is directed towards the side 
of the lesion  –  the fast phase is directed towards the side of the lesion;  
 •  with some drugs (such as barbiturates); 

Eye movements and their disorders 251
   •      in damage to the labyrinth and its central connections, when a ﬁ ne jerk nys-
tagmus results  –  the fast phase of the movement is away from the lesion and 
it is usually present only acutely. 
 An  upbeat nystagmus (fast phase upwards) is commonly associated with 
brainstem disease. It may also be seen in toxic states, e.g. with excess alcohol 
intake. 
 A  downbeat  nystagmus may be seen in patients with a posterior fossa lesion 
near the cervicomedullary junction (e.g. a Chiari malformation, where cerebel-
lar tissue is dragged through the foramen magnum). It may also be seen in 
patients with demyelination, and again may be present in toxic states. 
 Patients with nerve palsies or weakness of the extraocular muscles may 
develop nystagmus when looking in the direction of the affected muscle ( gaze -
 evoked nystagmus ). The fast phase of the movement is in the ﬁ eld of action of 
the weak muscle. 
 Patients with acquired nystagmus complain that the visual environment is 
in continual movement ( oscillopsia ). 
 Congenital  n ystagmus 
 Nystagmus can be congenital in origin.
 •  Sensory  congenital nystagmus. Here the movements may be at similar speeds 
in both directions (pendular nystagmus) or of the jerk variety. It is associated 
with poor vision (e.g. congenital cataract, albinism).  
 •  Motor  congenital nystagmus is a jerk nystagmus developing at birth in chil-
dren with no visual defect.    
 The continuous movement of the eye reduces visual acuity but does not cause 
oscillopsia in congenital nystagmus. The exact degree of disability depends on:
 •  the speed of the nystagmus; 
   •      whether there are short periods of rest between the nystagmoid movements 
when objects can be focused on the fovea;  
 •  whether the nystagmus is reduced by accommodation, as is often the case. 
 Some subjects ﬁ nd a position of the eyes which reduces the nystagmus to a 
minimum (the  null position ), thus maximizing visual acuity. 
  
  
 
  KEY POINTS 
 •  In analysing eye movement problems try to determine whether there is an abnormal 
position of the eyes, a reduction in the range of eye movements, an abnormality in the 
form of eye movements, or a combination of these disorders.  
 •  An abnormality in the range of eye movements may reﬂ ect muscular, orbital, 
infranuclear or supranuclear disease.  
 •  An intracranial aneurysm may present as a painful third nerve palsy involving the pupil.  

252 
Eye movements and their disorders
 Multiple choice questions 
 1.  Match the eye muscle to the nerve. 
 a 
 Lateral rectus. 
 b 
 Superior rectus. 
 c 
 Medial rectus. 
 d 
 Inferior rectus. 
 e 
 Superior oblique. 
 f 
 Inferior oblique. 
 i 
 Third nerve. 
  ii   
  Fourth nerve.  
  iii     Sixth nerve.        
 2.  Which of the following statements are true? 
 a 
 In a non - paralytic strabismus the movement of the eyes is reduced. 
  b   
  In a non - paralytic strabismus the angle of deviation is unrelated to the 
direction of gaze.  
 c 
 In a paralytic strabismus, the eye movement is reduced. 
 d 
 Nystagmus refers to an oscillating movement of the eyes. 
  e   
  In a horizontal gaze palsy the patient is unable to look to one side.      
 3.  Amblyopia 
 a 
 Refers to a developmental reduction in visual acuity. 
  b   
  May be caused by Duane ’ s syndrome.  
  c   
  May be caused by a previously unidentiﬁ ed difference in refractive correc-
tion between the two eyes.  
 d 
 May be caused by a squint. 
 e 
 May be treated by patching the amblyopic eye. 
    4.   Nerve palsies affecting the third, fourth on sixth cranial nerves may be 
seen in 
 a 
 Orbital disease. 
 b 
 Raised intracranial pressure. 
 c 
 Ischaemia of the cerebral cortex. 
 d 
 Systemic inﬂ ammatory disease. 
 e 
 Trauma. 
 
  PAEDIATRIC OPHTHALMOLOGY 
 •  In a child with a squint it is important to exclude intraocular pathology.  

Eye movements and their disorders 253
 5.  Internuclear ophthalmoplegia 
 a 
 Is caused by a lesion of the medial longitudinal fasciculus. 
  b   
  Manifests as a reduced adduction and contralateral nystagmus in the 
abducting eye.  
 c 
 Is manifested by a failure of the eye to elevate in adduction. 
 d 
 May be caused by demyelination. 
 e 
 Requires surgical treatment. 
 Answers 
 1.  Match the eye muscle to the nerve. 
 a 
 Sixth nerve. 
 b 
 Third nerve. 
 c 
 Third nerve. 
 d 
 Third nerve. 
 e 
 Fourth nerve. 
 f 
 Third nerve. 
  2.   Which of the following statements are true? 
   a   
  False. The eye movements are full but only the dominant eye is directed 
towards the ﬁ xation target. 
  b   
  True. The angle of deviation will remain the same no matter which direc-
tion the eyes are looking.  
  c   
  True. Paralytic strabismus is the term used if there is a problem with the 
extraocular muscles, orbital disease or a nerve palsy.  
 d 
 True. See page 250 for a description of nystagmus. 
  e   
  True. Supranuclear coordination is affected. This may be seen in a patient 
with an acute cerebrovascular accident. 
 3.  Amblyopia 
 a 
 True. The loss in visual is caused by a failure of visual development. 
  b   
  False. The eyes are usually aligned in some visual direction or other, so that 
binocular vision develops normally.  
  c   
  True. If the images on the retinas are dissimilar, with one image more 
blurred than the other, the brain suppresses the more blurred image.  
  d   
  True. If the visual axes are not aligned the brain will suppress the image 
from one eye.  
  e   
  False. The non - amblyopic eye is patched, to improve vision in the ambly-
opic eye. 
  4.   Nerve palsies affecting the third, fourth and sixth cranial nerves may be 
seen in 
   a   
  True. Any oculamotor palsy or combination of palsies may be seen in 
orbital disease.  

254 
Eye movements and their disorders
  b   
  True. The sixth cranial nerve may be compressed along its intracranial 
course. 
  c   
  False. This will not affect the cranial nerves.  
 d 
 True. It may be seen in sarcoidosis, for example. 
  e   
  True. This is the most common cause of a fourth or sixth cranial nerve palsy.    
 5.  Internuclear ophthalmoplegia 
 a 
 True. See Figure  15.11 . 
 b 
 True. A full description is given on page 249. 
 c 
 False. This is the description of Brown ’ s syndrome. 
 d 
 True. It is often bilateral in demyelination. 
  e   
  False. Spontaneous resolution is usual in patients with a microvascular 
cause. Recovery is more variable in patients with multiple sclerosis.    

 Learning objectives 
 To be able to:
 ✓  Take a history in a case of eye trauma. 
 To understand:
 ✓      The effects of trauma on the eye and related 
structures. 
 ✓  The management of penetrating eye trauma. 
 ✓  The management of chemical injury to the eye. 
 16 
Trauma  
 
 Introduction 
 Although the eye is well protected by the orbit it may yet be subject to injury 
(Figure  16.1 ). Forms of injury include:
    •      Foreign bodies becoming lodged under the upper lid or on the surface of the 
eye, especially the cornea.    
   •      Blunt trauma from objects small enough not to impact on the orbital rim 
(shuttlecocks, squash balls, champagne corks and knuckles are some of the 
offenders). The sudden alteration of pressure and distortion of the eye may 
cause severe damage.  
   •      Penetrating trauma, where ocular structures are damaged by a foreign body 
which passes through the ocular coat and may be retained in the eye. With 
the introduction of the seat belt laws the incidence of penetrating injury fol-
lowing road trafﬁ c accidents has declined. 
   •      Chemical and radiation injury, where the resultant reaction of the ocular 
tissues causes the damage. 
Ophthalmology Lecture Notes, Eleventh Edition. Bruce James, Anthony Bron. 
© 2011 Bruce James and Anthony Bron. Published 2011 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

256 
Trauma
 History,  s ymptoms and  s igns 
 A careful history is essential.
 •  Use of a hammer and chisel can release a ﬂ ake of metal which will penetrate 
the globe, leaving only  a tell - tale subconjunctival haemorrhage  to indicate 
penetration of the sclera and suggest a retained foreign body. Pain may be 
minor and heat, generated by the high velocity, sterilizes the fragment so that 
infection does not occur. Undetected, such a retained foreign body may have 
devastating effects on the eye.  
   •      A wire under tension, or a rose thorn, may penetrate the cornea brieﬂ y, 
sometimes creating a barely visible track.  
   •      A blunt injury to the eye may also result in damage to the orbit ( blow - out 
fracture ). 
   •      It is vitally important to determine the nature of any chemical that may have 
been in contact with the eye. Strong alkalis and acids penetrate the anterior 
tissues of the eye and may rapidly cause irreversible damage.    
 The patient ’ s symptoms will relate to the degree and type of trauma suffered. 
Pain, lacrimation and blurring of vision are common features of trauma, but 
mild symptoms may disguise a potentially blinding intraocular foreign body. 
 Figure 16.1   The extent of possible traumatic damage to the eye.  
Vitreous
haemorrhage
Damage to the angle
Corneal laceration
Corneal abrasion
Corneal foreign body
Dialysis of the retina
Dialysis of the iris
Traumatic mydriasis
Traumatic uveitis
Hyphaema
Cataract
Zonular damage
Commotio
retinae
Macular
hole
Scleral
rupture
Choroidal
rupture
Traumatic
optic
neuropathy

Trauma 257
As in all history taking, it is essential to enquire about previous ocular and 
medical events.  
 Examination 
 Without a  s lit  l amp 
 The examination will depend on the type of injury. In all cases it is important 
that visual acuity is recorded in the injured and  uninjured  eye for medico - legal 
reasons, among others. Where a penetrating injury is suspected and pressure 
to the globe must be avoided, it may only be possible to measure vision approx-
imately in the injured eye; the patient may be able to detect light shone through 
the closed lid and even the direction of the source. The skin around the orbit 
and eyelids should be carefully examined for a penetrating wound. 
 Orbital  i njury 
 Damage to the orbit itself (a  blow - out fracture ; Figure  16.2 ) is suspected if the 
following signs are present:
 Figure 16.2   A blow - out fracture.  
Prolapse into
the orbital floor
fracture
Upgaze and
downgaze
limited by
tethered muscle

258 
Trauma
  
 The  c onjunctiva and  s clera 
 These must be examined for the presence of any lacerations. If the history is 
appropriate a subconjunctival haemorrhage should be considered to be the 
possible site of a scleral perforation (Figure  16.3 ). The fundus should be exam-
ined with full mydriasis to exclude a retained intraocular foreign body.   
 Retained, iron - containing foreign bodies may have an insidious and particu-
larly devastating effect on the eye ( siderosis oculi ). A tiny, high - velocity metal 
fragment, penetrating the ocular coats and retained in the peripheral vitreous 
cavity can, with time, lead to a progressive, pigmentary degeneration of the 
retina. A discolouration of the iris ( heterochromia) , a ﬁ xed mydriasis and cata-
ract can be a late clues to the diagnosis. Failure to detect and remove such a 
foreign body at the time of injury results in irreversible blindness. The mecha-
nism of damage is by the diffusion of ferrous ions throughout the globe and 
the generation of free radicals, via the Fenton reaction, in affected tissues. 
    •      Emphysema (air in the skin which crackles when pressed) derived from a 
fractured sinus. 
 •  A patch of paraesthesia below the orbital rim suggesting infraorbital nerve 
damage. The infraorbital nerve is commonly injured in orbital blow - out 
injury involving the ﬂ oor of the orbit.  
   •      Limitation of eye movements, particularly on upgaze and downgaze, due to 
trapping of the inferior rectus muscle by connective tissue septa caught in 
the fracture site in the inferior orbital ﬂ oor, the wall most commonly 
fractured. 
 •  Subsequently the eye may become recessed into the orbit ( enophthalmos ). 
   •      If the lid margin is cut at the medial canthus it is important to determine if 
either of the lacrimal canaliculi is severed. This will cause epiphora if 
untreated. 
 Further examination of a traumatized eye will require the instillation of a 
local anaesthetic to facilitate lid opening (lidocaine, amethocaine). If a pene-
trating eye injury is suspected it is important that no pressure is applied to the 
globe, to avoid expression of its contents. 
 Symptoms and signs of a penetrating eye injury 
 •   History of high - velocity object hitting the eye.  
 •   Dark tissue in the cornea or sclera (iris plugging of a penetrating wound).  
 •   Distortion of the pupil.  
 •   Unusually deep anterior chamber.  
 •   Cataract. 
 •   Vitreous haemorrhage.  

Trauma 259
 Figure 16.3   A subconjunctival haemorrhage.  
 Figure 16.4   (a) An everted lid showing ischaemia of the upper tarsal conjunctiva 
following an alkali burn; (b) a hazy cornea following an alkali burn.  
(b)
(a)
 Events of this kind emphasize the need to wear protective goggles when 
using metal hammers or hammering on metal. 
 If a chemical injury has occurred, the conjunctiva may appear white and 
ischaemic (Figure  16.4 ). If such changes are extensive, involving the greater part 
of the limbal circumference, corneal healing will be grossly impaired because 
of damage to the epithelial stem cells of the cornea, which are located at the 
limbus. There will be additional complications such as uveitis, secondary glau-
coma and cataract. 
 The  c ornea 
 This is examined for loss of the epithelial layer (abrasion), for lacerations and for 
foreign bodies (Figure  16.5 ). The instillation of ﬂ uorescein will identify the extent 
of an abrasion and use of concentrated ﬂ uorescein, will identify a leak of aqueous 
through a penetrating wound (see Chapter  2 ). If the globe appears intact and a 

260 
Trauma
subtarsal foreign body is suspected (signalled by ﬁ ne, staining, vertical, linear 
corneal abrasions) the upper lid must be everted, to expose the underside of the 
lid (see Figure  2.7 ). This allows any foreign body to be identiﬁ ed and removed.  
 Electromagnetic radiation may injure the conjunctiva and the cornea. 
Unprotected exposure to ultraviolet radiation from an arc lamp ( arc eye ) or 
sunlamp, or reﬂ ected from snow, is the commonest cause of this severely 
painful condition. Typically, severe ocular pain onsets acutely, 6 hours after 
exposure to the radiation, and the cornea shows diffuse epithelial oedema and 
punctate erosions. These resolve within 24 – 48 hours.  
 The  a nterior  c hamber 
 Blunt trauma may cause haemorrhage into the anterior chamber, where it col-
lects with a ﬂ uid level, visible as a  hyphaema . This is caused by rupture of the 
root of the iris blood vessels, or the iris may be torn away from its insertion into 
the ciliary body ( iris dialysis ) to produce a D - shaped pupil. Hyphaema may also 
be seen with a penetrating eye injury and the shape of the pupil may be dis-
torted if the peripheral iris has plugged a penetrating corneal wound (Figure 
 16.6 ). The pupil may also show a ﬁ xed dilatation as a result of blunt trauma 
( traumatic mydriasis ). 
 The  l ens 
 Dislocation of the lens following blunt trauma may be suggested by a ﬂ uttering 
of the iris diaphragm on eye movement ( iridodonesis ). Lens clarity should be 
assessed with the slit lamp and against the red reﬂ ex after pupil dilatation. 
Cataracts develop abruptly with direct penetrating trauma (Figure  16.7 ). Blunt 
trauma also causes a posterior subcapsular cataract within hours of injury, 
which may be transient.    
 Figure 16.5   A corneal foreign body.  (With permission from Sue Ford, Western Eye 
Hospital.) 

Trauma 261
 The  f undus 
 The fundus should be inspected with a direct ophthalmoscope after full 
mydriasis. If no systemic neurological complications accompany the injury 
and ocular penetration is not suspected, the pupil can be dilated. Areas of 
retinal haemorrhage may be seen and typical patches of white, retinal oedema 
( commotio retinae ). A  retinal dialysis  (a separation of the peripheral retina from 
its junction with the pars plana of the ciliary body) and a macular hole (see 
Chapter  11 ) may also result from blunt trauma. The choroid may also become 
torn, causing a subretinal haemorrhage which later leads to subretinal scarring. 
Peripheral retinal changes can only be excluded with indirect ophthalmoscopy 
or slit - lamp microscopy. If there is no red reﬂ ex and no fundus details are 
visible, this suggests a vitreous haemorrhage. 
 Figure 16.6   (a) A hyphaema; (b) penetrating eye injury (note the eyelashes in the 
anterior chamber and the distorted iris).  
(b)
(a)
 Figure 16.7   The lens in this patient has become disrupted and cataractous following 
penetrating trauma.  

262 
Trauma
 The optic disc may be pale from a traumatic optic neuropathy caused by 
avulsion of the blood vessels supplying the optic nerve. Although this is uncom-
mon, it leads to a profound loss of vision and no treatment is available.   
 With a  s lit  l amp 
 The slit lamp allows a more detailed examination to be performed, which may 
reveal:
    •      a shallow anterior chamber compared to the fellow eye, suggesting an ante-
rior penetrating injury with aqueous loss;  
   •      a microscopic hyphaema, where red cells are present, circulating in the ante-
rior chamber, but have not yet settled to form a level;  
 •  the presence of white cells in the anterior chamber ( traumatic uveitis ); 
 •  recession  of the iridocorneal angle seen with a gonioscopic contact lens (the 
ciliary muscle apex is disinserted from the scleral spur and moves posteri-
orly)  –  this may be seen with blunt trauma and results in raised intraocular 
pressure, sometimes after a delay of months or years; 
 •  raised intraocular pressure measured by applanation tonometry  – this may 
accompany a hyphaema, lens dislocation or, as noted, damage to the 
chamber angle. 
 Treatment 
 Lacerations to the  s kin and  l ids 
 These require careful apposition and suturing, particularly if the lid margin is 
involved, to retain the lid contour. If one of the lacrimal canaliculi is damaged 
an attempt can be made to repair it, but if repair is unsuccessful, usually the 
remaining tear duct is capable of draining all the tears. If both canaliculi are 
involved, an attempt at repair should always be made.  
 Corneal  a brasions 
 This is an extremely painful condition which normally heals rapidly. It should 
be treated with antibiotic ointment, with or without an eye pad. Dilatation of 
the pupil with cyclopentolate 1% can help to relieve the pain caused by spasm 
of the ciliary muscle. 
 In some cases, when such an injury is caused by ﬂ exible objects such as 
ﬁ ngernails, twigs or the edge of a newspaper, a minority of patients experience 
recurrent episodes of pain, particularly in the early hours of the morning or on 
waking. This condition is termed  recurrent corneal erosion  and is due to a defec-
tive adhesion of the resurfacing epithelium to Bowman ’ s layer at the site of 
injury. Prophylaxis against further recurrent corneal erosions is attempted, 
using a lubricating ointment at night for several weeks after an initial attack, 
but more permanent results are achieved by inducing a subepithelial scar at 

Trauma 263
the site of the original injury to reinforce the attachment of the basal epithelial 
layer to Bowman ’ s layer. This can be induced by laser treatment or by applying 
a series of micropunctures with a needlepoint to the affected zone. 
 UV injury to the cornea responds quickly to topical steroids. 
 Corneal  f oreign  b odies 
 Corneal foreign bodies should be removed with a needle under topical anaes-
thesia (Figure  16.8 ). Where the foreign body contains iron, a rust ring may 
remain which can be removed with a small, rotating burr. Subtarsal objects can 
often be swept away with a cotton - wool bud from the everted lid. The patient 
is then treated as for an abrasion. If there is any suggestion that a foreign body 
may have penetrated the globe the eye must be carefully examined with dila-
tion of the pupil to allow a good view of the lens and retina. A radiograph of 
the orbits, with the eyes looking up and then down, or a CT scan, may also be 
indicated if an intraocular foreign body is suspected. Microsurgical techniques 
can be used to remove foreign bodies from the eye under direct view.    
 Corneal and  s cleral  p enetrating  t rauma 
 Once identiﬁ ed, no further examination of the globe should be performed but 
a shield should be gently placed over the eye and the patient referred for urgent 
ophthalmic treatment. These serious injuries, often with grave implications for 
sight, require careful microsurgical suturing to restore the integrity of the globe. 
Once the eye has settled from this primary repair additional operations are 
often required later, to:
 •  remove a foreign body; 
 •  remove a cataract; 
 •  replace a corneal opacity with a corneal graft; 
 •  repair a detached retina or remove the vitreous gel to prevent detachment. 
 Figure 16.8   Removal of a superﬁ cial ocular foreign body at the slit lamp.  

264 
Trauma
 Occasionally, in the longer term, the fellow eye may develop sympathetic 
ophthalmitis (see Chapter  9 ). 
 Uveitis 
 This responds to the usual treatment with steroids and dilating drops. It may 
be accompanied by elevated intraocular pressure requiring additional medical 
treatment. 
 Hyphaema 
 This usually settles with rest, but a rebleed may occur in the ﬁ rst 5 – 6 days after 
injury. Children usually require admission to hospital for a few days, while 
adults can be treated at home, provided they can rest and no complications 
develop. Steroid eye drops are given for a short time, together with dilation of 
the pupil. Steroids reduce the risk of rebleeds. The commonest complication is 
a raised ocular pressure, particularly if there is a secondary bleed, which tends 
to be more severe than the ﬁ rst. It is for this reason that rest is important. Raised 
pressure is due to the accumulation of empty, red cell  ‘ ghosts ’  in the trabecular 
meshwork or to damage to the drainage angle itself (e.g. angle recession). It 
usually responds to medical treatment, but occasionally surgical intervention 
is required. When the hyphaema has settled it is important that the eye is care-
fully checked for other complications of blunt trauma. Hyphaema clears more 
slowly after trauma in patients with sickle cell disease because the hypoxic and 
acidic environment within the anterior chamber precipitates sickling, and sick-
ling retards red cell removal via the trabecular meshwork.  
 Retinal  d amage 
 In  commotio retinae  the affected zone of retina opaciﬁ es and obscures the 
underlying choroidal detail. It usually resolves, but requires careful observation 
since retinal holes may develop in affected areas and may lead to subsequent 
retinal detachment. 
 Retinal dialysis  requires surgical intervention to repair any detached retina. 
 A  vitreous haemorrhage  may absorb over several weeks, or may require 
removal by vitrectomy. An ultrasound scan is useful in detecting associated 
retinal detachments.  
 Chemical  i njury 
 The most important part of the treatment is to irrigate the eye immediately 
with copious quantities of clean water at the time of the accident. This must 
be repeated when ophthalmic care is available, when it is also important to 
irrigate under the upper and lower lid to remove solid particles, e.g. lime. The 
nature of the chemical can then be ascertained by history and measuring tear 
pH with litmus paper. Administration of steroid and dilating drops may be 
required. Vitamin C, given both orally and topically, may improve healing. 
Systemic and topical anticollagenases may be needed (e.g. tetracyclines). 

Trauma 265
 Extensive damage to the limbus may prevent resurfacing of the cornea with 
epithelium. A prolonged epithelial defect may lead to a corneal  ‘ melt ’  (keratoly-
sis). This is treated later, by limbal  stem cell transplantation , for instance from 
the normal, fellow eye or from a donor source, or with an overlay of  amniotic 
membrane  which protects and maintains the underlying tissue and promotes 
resurfacing. It is also possible to resurface the cornea by transplanting expanded 
sheets of corneal limbal or even oral mucosal cells, grown in culture  
 Orbital  b low - out  f racture 
 If a blow - out fracture is suspected, a CT scan will delineate the bony and soft -
 tissue injury. If this is not possible then plain orbital radiographs are per-
formed. Treatment may be delayed until the periorbital swelling has settled. At 
this later stage the degree of enophthalmos and the limitation of eye movement 
can be measured. If the enophthalmos is cosmetically unacceptable or eye 
movements are signiﬁ cantly limited, then surgical repair of the orbital fracture 
is indicated. Although some surgeons advocate an early intervention to obtain 
the best results, many patients will require no surgery at all.   
 Prognosis 
 The eye heals well following minor trauma and there are rarely long - term 
sequelae save for the occurrence of the  recurrent corneal erosion syndrome. 
Penetrating ocular trauma, however, is often associated with severe visual 
damage and may require extensive surgery. Long - term retention of iron foreign 
bodies may destroy retinal function by the generation of free radicals. Similarly, 
chemical injuries to the eyes can result in severe long - term visual impairment 
and ocular discomfort. Blunt trauma can cause untreatable visual loss if a 
retinal hole develops at the fovea. Vision will also be impaired if the choroid at 
the macula is damaged. In the longer term, secondary glaucoma can develop 
in an eye several years after the initial insult if the trabecular meshwork has 
been damaged. Severe orbital trauma may also cause both cosmetic and ocu-
lomotor problems. 
  
 
  KEY POINTS 
 •  Take an accurate history.  
 •  Foreign bodies can often be found under the upper lid.  
 •  Persistent pain in an intact eye suggests a subtarsal foreign body.  
 •  Irrigate chemical injuries immediately with clean water.  
 •  Suspect a perforating eye injury if the pupil is not round, a cataract has developed 
rapidly or a vitreous haemorrhage is present.  

266 
Trauma
 Multiple choice questions 
 1.  Orbital injury may produce the following signs 
 a 
 Periorbital emphysema. 
 b 
 Limitation of eye movements. 
 c 
 Exophthalmos in the longer term. 
 d 
 A patch of anaesthesia below the orbital rim. 
 e 
 Hyphaema. 
 2.  A subconjunctival haemorrhage 
 a 
 Is never associated with serious eye disease. 
 b 
 May cause blood to pass into the cornea.  
 c 
 Is usually associated with a reduced vision. 
 d 
 May be associated with some discomfort of the eye. 
 e 
 Usually settles in a couple of weeks. 
 3.  Chemical eye injuries 
 a 
 Acids cause more severe damage than alkalis. 
 b 
 Initial treatment requires copious irrigation of the eye with litres of water. 
 c 
 May be associated with a melt of the cornea. 
  d   
  A white eye is a sign that the eye has not been severely affected.  
 e 
 May be treated with oral and topical vitamin C and tetracyclines. 
 4.  A hyphaema 
 a 
 Is a ﬂ uid collection of white cells in the anterior chamber. 
 b 
 May be associated with a low intraocular pressure. 
 c 
 Is treated with restriction of activity. 
 d 
 If it recurs within a short time may result in more severe problems. 
 e 
 Is treated with steroid drops. 
 Answers 
 1.  Orbital injury may produce the following signs 
   a   
  True. The skin appears to crackle when touch due to the presence of air 
within it.  
 b 
 True. There may be swelling of the orbital contents, or the muscle or orbital 
tissue may become tethered in the orbital fracture.  
 c 
 False. The eye is usually recessed into the orbit (enophthalmos). 
 d 
 True. This occurs with an orbital blow - out affecting the ﬂ oor of the orbit, 
which damages the infraorbital nerve.  
  e   
  True. It is always important to look at the eye closely in patients with an 
orbital fracture. 

Trauma 267
 2.  A subconjunctival haemorrhage 
 a 
 False. In traumatic disease it may overlie a penetrating wound. 
  b   
  False. The conjunctiva is inserted at the limbus, blood cannot pass into the 
cornea.  
 c 
 False. If vision is reduced another cause must be found. 
 d 
 True. It may cause slight elevation of the conjunctiva. 
 e 
 True. It settles spontaneously, treatment is usually not required. 
 3.  Chemical eye injuries 
 a 
 False. Alkalis diffuse more rapidly and so cause the worst injuries. 
 b 
 True. The area under the eyelids must also be inspected and irrigated. 
 c 
 True. Keratolysis is particularly seen with alkali injuries. 
  d   
  False. This may indicate a severe ischaemic injury by an alkali.  
  e 
  True. Vitamin C may improve healing, tetracyclines function as 
anticollagenases. 
 4.  A hyphaema 
 a 
 False. This is a hypopyon. A hyphaema is a collection of red cells. 
  b   
  False. It may be associated with a raised intraocular pressure, due to an 
obstruction of the trabecular meshwork.  
 c 
 True. This may help to prevent a further bleed. 
  d   
  True. A rebleed may result in more signiﬁ cant complications, for example 
high intraocular pressure.  
 e 
 True. These will help to reduce any associated inﬂ ammation and reduce 
the incidence of rebleeds. 
 

 Learning  o bjectives 
 To understand:
 ✓      The severity of the problems associated with oph-
thalmic disease in developing countries.  
 ✓  How these problems are being addressed. 
 ✓  The clinical presentation and treatment of the major 
diseases, including trachoma, onchocerciasis and 
xerophthalmia. 
 17 
Tropical  o phthalmology: 
 e ye  d iseases in the 
 d eveloping  w orld  
 
 Introduction 
 In the year 2000, 45 million of the world population were estimated to be blind, 
with a visual acuity of less than 3/60 or a visual ﬁ eld less than 10 degrees around 
ﬁ xation. Sixty per cent had treatable cataract or refractive error and 15% had 
preventable diseases such as trachoma, onchocerciasis and vitamin A deﬁ -
ciency. A further 25% had diabetic eye disease, glaucoma and age - related 
macular degeneration. Thus, while this ﬁ gure grows by some 1 to 2 million each 
year, 75% of world blindness is treatable or preventable. Ninety per cent of the 
blind live in the poorest parts of the developing world. 
  
  Ophthalmology Lecture Notes, Eleventh Edition. Bruce James, Anthony Bron. 
© 2011 Bruce James and Anthony Bron. Published 2011 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Tropical ophthalmology: eye diseases in the developing world 269
 There are estimated to be 1.5 million blind children in the world. Half a 
million children become blind each year. In developing countries where 
vitamin A deﬁ ciency is prevalent, 50% die within 2 years of becoming blind. 
Half of all blindness in children is avoidable or treatable. 
 In 1999, to combat worldwide blindness, the International Agency for the 
Prevention of Blindness and the World Health Organization launched  Vision 
2020  –  the Right to Sight . The aim of the programme is to eliminate world blind-
ness by 2020. Many of the diseases responsible for world blindness have been 
discussed earlier in this book. This chapter focuses on those diseases that are 
the major causes of preventable blindness, and on some of the methods for 
delivering care in the developing world. 
 Providing  e ye  c are in the 
 d eveloping  w orld 
 With so much treatable and preventable eye disease, the greatest problems 
surrounding eye care in the developing world are:
 •  dealing with environmental factors that predispose to disease; 
 •  the cost of providing care; 
 Causes of  c hildhood  b lindness 
 •   Vitamin A deﬁ ciency.  
 •   Trachoma. 
 •   Congenital cataract.  
 •   Ophthalmia neonatorum.  
 •   Congenital glaucoma.  
 •   Congenital malformations.  
 •   Measles. 
 •   Retinopathy of prematurity.  
 •   Other infections (corneal and ocular, e.g. toxoplasmosis).  
 Reasons for  d ifferences in the  s everity of  o phthalmic  d isease in 
the  d eveloped and  d eveloping  w orld 
 •   Aetiological exposure and patient susceptibility are greater.  
 •   Access to medical care is less.  
 •   Preventive programmes (such as measles immunization) are not advanced.  
 •   Facilities and trained personnel are limited.  

270 
Tropical ophthalmology: eye diseases in the developing world
 •  delivering eye care to remote and widely spread populations; 
 •  delivering a high - quality service that is assessed and constantly improved; 
   •      sustaining the programme.     
 Cataract 
 Cataract is the commonest cause of treatable blindness, responsible for 17 
million blind people worldwide (Figure  17.1 ). The surgical methods available 
for treatment have been described in Chapter  8 . In the developing world ext-
racapsular cataract extraction remains the surgery of choice, as it is cheaper 
than phacoemulsiﬁ cation and less dependent on high - tech equipment. The 
results of surgery are excellent, and the challenge is to make it available. The 
cost of the operation, and availability of trained staff, particularly in rural com-
munities, are major problems that have to be overcome. Various models have 
been developed.   
 In India, where cataract blindness remains a signiﬁ cant problem, the Aravind 
Eye Care system has created a highly efﬁ cient, high - volume, low - cost, self -
 ﬁ nancing system for performing cataract surgery. The system uses income 
from relatively rich patients, receiving private surgery, to pay for the poor, who 
receive free surgery. Patients are screened in eye camps, and those in need of 
surgery or other treatment are referred to hospital. 
 At the Kikuyu Hospital in Kenya cataract operations are performed both by 
ophthalmologists and by technicians trained in surgery. The hospital also has 
a training programme, which is vital if the service is to be sustainable. Again, 
outreach clinics are used to screen patients, and those requiring surgery are 
transported to hospital. Seventy - ﬁ ve per cent of the cost of this service comes 
from fees; donations have helped develop the service. 
 Figure 17.1   The appearance of a brown, nuclear cataract.  

Tropical ophthalmology: eye diseases in the developing world 271
 As with all health programmes, it is important ﬁ rst to understand the epide-
miology of the problem so that appropriate resources can be determined. There 
has been increasing emphasis on training local healthcare workers to run pro-
grammes, with outside aid providing equipment, consumables and training 
rather than direct surgical input. Additionally, assessment of the outcome of 
surgery is emphasized, to maximize the quality of care provided and match that 
in the developed world.  
 Tropical  d iseases 
 Trachoma 
 Trachoma causes blindness by corneal scarring and is due to infection by 
 Chlamydia trachomatis . It was ﬁ rst described in Egypt in the sixteenth century. 
Active trachoma has not been seen in Europe since the early twentieth century 
but was present in America until the 1960s. Trachoma is endemic in 48 coun-
tries in Latin America, Africa, the Middle East, Asia and Australasia. It affects 
more than 84 million people worldwide and 8 million are irreversibly visually 
impaired. Ten per cent of the world population are at risk, mostly in dry, hot 
parts of the developing world (Figure  17.2 ). It is responsible for 3% of world 
blindness. Some 6 million were blind from trachoma in 1990, falling to 2 million 
in 2003. In some developing communities some 60% of children are affected 
by active disease. It is endemic in rural communities, in areas of water shortage, 
where living conditions are crowded and sanitation and hygiene are poor. 
 Figure 17.2   The worldwide distribution of trachoma.  
Widespread active trachoma
Pockets of active trachoma

272 
Tropical ophthalmology: eye diseases in the developing world
 Transmission is by the transfer of the elementary bodies of the bacteria, from 
one person to another, usually from the nasal and ocular secretions of an 
infected child. This may involve eye to eye transmission with the ﬁ ngers, the 
sharing of towels, handkerchiefs and bedclothes, coughing and sneezing. In 
addition, eye - seeking ﬂ ies (e.g.  Musca sorbens ) act as important vectors, carry-
ing the infective particles from eye or nose, to other individuals. The ﬁ rst infec-
tion does not cause serious disease. 
 Initially, follicles (collections of lymphocytes) appear in the superior tarsal 
conjunctiva (Figure  17.3 ), followed by papillae. Then the limbal cornea is 
invaded by superﬁ cial vessels ( pannu s) with the development of peripheral 
scarring (Figure  17.4 ). Repeated episodes of infection with  C. trachomatis lead 
to extensive upper tarsal conjunctival scarring, lid deformity and trichiasis, 
which together exacerbate the corneal changes. Continued re - infection leads 
to chronic corneal scarring and blindness. This results from:
 •  Dry eye. Conjunctival scarring blocks lacrimal and meibomian gland duct 
oriﬁ ces, leading to reduced tear production and excessive evaporative water 
loss (Figure  17.5 ). 
 •  Reduced lubrication through tear deﬁ ciency and loss of goblet cell mucin. 
   •      Corneal trauma, due to cicatricial entropion (in - turning of the lid margins by 
tarsal scarring; Figure  17.6 ) and trichiasis, where aberrant lashes abrade the 
 Figure 17.3   Follicles on the upper tarsus of a patient with trachoma.  
 Figure 17.4   Peripheral corneal scarring in trachoma.  

Tropical ophthalmology: eye diseases in the developing world 273
cornea. This also predisposes to secondary bacterial and fungal corneal 
infection and scarring. 
 Public - health intervention has led to the development of the SAFE strategy, 
which involves:
 •  S urgery, for those with entropion, everting the lid to move the lashes away 
from the globe.  
 •  A ntibiotic therapy. A single dose of oral azithromycin is effective in treating 
infected individuals, but the disease must be eradicated from all individuals 
in a community to prevent re - infection, and treatment must be repeated 
yearly. This is expensive, and the disease will recur unless changes are made 
to the environment in which the organism prospers. This is much harder to 
achieve. 
 •  F ace washing, which reduces transmission of the disease. The ﬂ ies are less 
likely to be attracted to the child and the child is less likely to spread 
 Chlamydia  by direct contact.  
 •  E nvironmental change. A clean environment reduces the ﬂ y population. 
Improving the water supply and sanitation, with bore holes and pit latrines, 
is important in this respect. 
 Figure 17.5   Scarring of the tarsal conjunctiva in trachoma.  
 Figure 17.6   Upper lid entropion and corneal scarring in trachoma.  

274 
Tropical ophthalmology: eye diseases in the developing world
 Onchocerciasis ( r iver  b lindness) 
 Onchocerca volvulus , a ﬁ larial nematode, is responsible for this disease, which 
is found principally in Africa and South America (Figure  17.7 ). One hundred 
million people are at risk from the disease, some two million visually impaired 
and 9   00   000 blind in 1995. This fell to 400   000 blind in 2002. Microﬁ lariae in the 
skin are ingested when the female blackﬂ y (e.g.  Simulium damnosum ) bites a 
human for a blood meal. The microﬁ lariae develop into infective larvae in the 
ﬂ y, pass to its mouth and are then transmitted to a human with the next bite. 
Following moulting, the larvae develop into adult worms in the body. They are 
found in subcutaneous skin nodules (onchocercomata) and diagnosis may be 
made from skin - snip biopsies. Alternatively, antibodies may be detected in the 
blood and PCR techniques have also been used to detect ﬁ larial DNA in skin 
scrapings. The adult female worm is 30 – 80   cm long and the male 3 – 5   cm long, 
and in the human body they have a lifespan of 9 – 14 years. A female worm may 
produce 1600 microﬁ lariae a day and generate a body load of 150 million. These 
migrate in the dermis and its lymphatics and die after a couple of years if they 
do not pass into a blackﬂ y. 
 The microﬁ lariae, entering the eye directly from the conjunctiva or the 
bloodstream, are responsible for ocular disease. The living organisms inhibit 
the host ’ s protective immune response. Clinically, microﬁ lariae are visible in 
the cornea, anterior chamber, vitreous and retina. Living, mobile, microﬁ lariae 
may be seen in the anterior chamber on biomicroscopy. In the cornea a char-
acteristic ﬂ uffy, punctate stromal keratitis occurs as an early sign of eye disease, 
 Figure 17.7   The worldwide distribution of onchocerciasis.  

Tropical ophthalmology: eye diseases in the developing world 275
each opacity representing the reaction around a dead microﬁ larium. With 
increased load this advances to cause complete opaciﬁ cation (sclerosing kera-
titis) and consequent blindness (Figure  17.8 ). Uveitis may be associated with 
anterior and posterior synechiae (Figure  17.9 ), cataract and secondary glau-
coma. Diffuse involvement of the retina and choroid (choroidoretinitis) is a 
common cause of blindness (Figure  17.10 ), as is optic neuritis, leading to optic 
atrophy. 
 Figure 17.8   Sclerosing keratitis in onchocerciasis.  
 Figure 17.9   Uveitis with synechiae formed between iris and lens in 
onchocerciasis. 

276 
Tropical ophthalmology: eye diseases in the developing world
 Treatment relies on:
 •  public - health intervention; 
 •  antibiotic therapy. 
 Water courses provide the breeding grounds for the blackﬂ y, which is why 
those whose work or daily life takes them to the banks of rivers are most at risk 
of infection. Hence the name, river blindness. Control programmes are aimed 
at the blackﬂ y vector, by spraying its habitat with larvicides. The onchocerciasis 
control programme has been successful in the endemic West African region. A 
low density of human population (principally farming and ﬁ shing communi-
ties) in affected areas increases the likelihood of multiple blackﬂ y bites. 
Protective clothing reduces the possibility of bites but may not always be prac-
tical. Vector control programmes are a long - term proposition because the 
female worm lives for 9 – 14 years, producing ongoing microﬁ larial inﬁ ltration 
of the skin. 
 Ivermectin is a ﬁ laricide which has revolutionized the treatment of onchocer-
ciasis. It is safe and effective in killing microﬁ lariae, and reactions, if they occur, 
are mild and diminish with repeated dosing. It also reduces the number of adult 
worms present and their reproductive capability. It is given once a year, often 
on a community basis. Reduction in the number of microﬁ lariae reduces the 
infectious potential of the blackﬂ y and complements vector control pro-
grammes. Over 24 million people are treated each year as a result of a donation 
of the drug by the manufacturer, Merck, and collaborations with national and 
international health organizations. The African programme for onchocerciasis 
control (APOC) has developed a system whereby the local community is 
responsible for the delivery of ivernectin treatment.  
 Figure 17.10   The appearance of retinal disease in onchocerciasis.  

Tropical ophthalmology: eye diseases in the developing world 277
 Figure 17.11   The worldwide distribution of vitamin A deﬁ ciency.  
Clinical
Severe: subclinical
Moderate: subclinical
Mild: sporadic or high-risk
No data: problem likely
 Vitamin  A  d eﬁ ciency ( x erophthalmia) 
 Vitamin A is an essential vitamin, required for cell maturation and division and 
the maintenance and protection of mucosal surfaces. Dietary carotenoids from 
dark, leafy green vegetables, carrots, red palm oil, mangos and papayas etc. are 
absorbed and broken down to release vitamin A (roughly 12 molecules of   -
 carotene for every molecule of vitamin A). Pre - formed vitamin A is available in 
breast milk, liver, ﬁ sh oils, eggs and dairy products. Vitamin A is stored chieﬂ y 
in the liver. Animal sources of the vitamin are often not available in the devel-
oping world and environmental factors are crucial to a good diet. Social factors 
are also important, since poor water supply may lead to chronic diarrhoea and 
malabsorption, which exacerbates any deﬁ ciency. Lack of vitamin A increases 
susceptibility to these diseases. Deﬁ ciency in vitamin A, when associated with 
protein malnutrition and febrile illnesses such as measles, gives rise to severe 
disease. 
 Vitamin A deﬁ ciency causes blinding ocular disease (xerophthalmia) and an 
increased morbidity and mortality, particularly in growing, preschool children 
over the age of 1 year, but also in pregnant women, whose nutritional require-
ment is increased during gestation and breastfeeding. About 140 million chil-
dren suffer from vitamin A deﬁ ciency and some 5 – 10 million develop 
xerophthalmia each year, with loss of sight in half a million. The peak incidence 
occurs between 3 and 5 years of age. There is a widespread distribution of clini-
cal and subclinical disease, with much of the clinical disease seen in Africa 
(Figure  17.11 ). 

278 
Tropical ophthalmology: eye diseases in the developing world
 The features of xerophthalmia occur in the following sequence with increas-
ing vitamin A deﬁ ciency:
    •      Night blindness: often the earliest symptom  –  due to the lack of visual 
pigment.  
 •  Conjunctival xerosis: keratinization, thickening and non - wetting of the con-
junctiva, frequently with Bitot ’ s spots (Figure  17.12 ) (foamy triangular surface 
plaques containing keratinized cells and saprophytic bacteria).    
   •      Corneal xerosis: punctate or diffuse drying of the cornea (Figure  17.13 ), 
usually with stromal oedema. This is due to goblet cell loss and a reduced 
expression of mucins at the surface of the eye and also to reduced tear pro-
duction. Untreated it may progress to:    
 •  Corneal ulceration or focal melting (keratomalacia; Figure  17.14 ). This occurs 
more in severe disease and leads to perforation, loss of the eye and  phthisis 
bulbi . 
 Night blindness, conjunctival and corneal xerosis are usually completely 
reversed by vitamin A therapy, and even corneal ulceration may be checked, to 
leave residual scarring. 
 Figure 17.12   The appearance of a Bitot ’ s spot.  
 Figure 17.13   Xerosis of the cornea in vitamin A deﬁ ciency.  

Tropical ophthalmology: eye diseases in the developing world 279
 Treatment with vitamin A supplementation, fortiﬁ cation of food or increas-
ing the natural dietary intake is very cost - effective. A protein - rich diet is also 
advised, if possible. Delivery of supplements is often combined with immuni-
zation programmes. Education about breastfeeding, diet and food availability 
and preparation is also important. Care should be taken in women of child-
bearing age, as vitamin A in large doses may have teratogenic effects. For this 
reason, maternal supplements are recommended in the immediate postpar-
tum period, when they may replenish maternal liver stores and ensure a supply 
of the vitamin in the breast milk.  
 Measles 
 This is an important cause of corneal scarring and childhood blindness and its 
severity is exacerbated by vitamin A deﬁ ciency. During infection with measles 
vitamin A stores are signiﬁ cantly depleted, which can result in severe corneal 
disease (Figure  17.15 ). Vitamin A deﬁ ciency also increases mortality from this 
disease. Associated exposure keratopathy, herpes simplex keratitis and other 
secondary infections may also cause corneal opaciﬁ cation, which may be com-
pounded by treatment with local remedies which traumatize the eye, or cause 
infection or chemical burns. 
 Immunization programmes help to reduce infection rates and blindness 
from measles.  
 Figure 17.14   Severe corneal disease with ulceration in vitamin A deﬁ ciency.  

280 
Tropical ophthalmology: eye diseases in the developing world
 Corneal  u lceration 
 With so many involved in agricultural labour in the developing world, micro-
bial keratitis, initiated by minor eye trauma, is not unusual. In northern cli-
mates, where agricultural injuries are less frequent, fungal infections are rare. 
But in tropical zones fungal keratitis may account for over 80% of infected 
cases. It is estimated that 1.5 million new cases of unilateral visual impairment 
due to corneal ulceration occur each year. Treatment can be expensive and is 
often delayed in the developing world. Some topical anti - fungal agents are 
highly toxic and may leave their own sequelae and corneal grafting for central 
scarring is seldom available. Antibiotic treatment of minor eye trauma has, 
however, an important role in preventing progression to a bacterial keratitis. 
 HIV  and  AIDS 
 Treatment available in the developed world, which has reduced the severity of 
ocular disease associated with opportunistic infection such as CMV (see 
Chapter  9 ), is becoming available to much of the developing world. Other sys-
temic manifestations of the disease may however occur before the CD4 +  
T - lymphocyte count is sufﬁ ciently low for ocular disease to become apparent. 
The spectrum of ocular disease is also different in developing countries. CMV 
retinitis is more unusual, herpes zoster more common. 
 Ophthalmia  n eonatorum 
 Infection of a child ’ s eye occurring during birth may lead to blindness within 
the ﬁ rst month of life (see Chapter  7 ). The infant presents with conjunctivitis 
and discharge. Although a number of bacteria may be responsible for infection 
the two most important are:
 •  Neisseria gonorrhoeae ; 
 •  Chlamydia trachomatis . 
 Gonorrhoeal keratitis may progress rapidly to corneal perforation and endo-
phthalmitis. Chlamydial infection is the commonest cause and the associated 
 Figure 17.15   Bilateral severe corneal scarring in measles.  

Tropical ophthalmology: eye diseases in the developing world 281
keratitis, if untreated, may progress to corneal scarring. It can also be associ-
ated with a pneumonitis. Because of the systemic implications of these eye 
infections, both are treated with systemic and topical antibiotics. 
 Topical instillation of povidone – iodine eye drops into the eyes of neonates, 
at the time of delivery, is a simple and cost - effective means to prevent either 
disease. 
  
 
  KEY POINTS 
 •  There were 45 million blind people in the world in the year 2000.  
 •  Seventy - ﬁ ve per cent of this blindness is preventable or treatable.  
 •  Ninety per cent of the world ’ s blind population live in the poorest parts of the 
developing world.  
 •  The WHO  Vision 2020  is a worldwide programme set up to eliminate world blindness.  
 •  Preventable forms of treatable blindness include cataract, trachoma, onchocerciasis 
and vitamin A deﬁ ciency.  
 •  Treatment relies as much on education and environmental changes as on drug 
therapy.  
 Multiple  c hoice  q uestions 
 1.  In the developing world 
 a 
 60% of blindness is treatable. 
 b 
 10% of blindness is treatable. 
 c 
 15% is preventable. 
 d 
 30% is preventable. 
 2.  Trachoma 
 a 
 Affects more than 84 million people. 
 b 
 In some developing communities 60% of children have active disease.  
 c 
 Corneal scarring may result from cicatricial entropion. 
 d 
 Is treated with ivermectin. 
 e 
 Follicles are present on the upper tarsus in early disease. 
 3.  Onchocerciasis 
 a 
 Is caused by a bacterium. 
 b 
 One hundred million people are at risk from the disease. 
 c 
 Is transmitted by the blackﬂ y. 
 d 
 Does not affect the cornea. 
 e 
 Eye disease is caused by microﬁ lariae. 

282 
Tropical ophthalmology: eye diseases in the developing world
 4.  Vitamin A deﬁ ciency (xerophthalmia) 
 a 
 Affects 140 million children. 
 b 
 The peak incidence for xerophthalmia is at age 10 – 15 years. 
 c 
 Does not affect night vision. 
 d 
 Bitot ’ s spots are a speciﬁ c sign. 
  e   
  The severity of the disease is increased with concurrent measles 
infection. 
 Answers 
 1.  In the developing world 
 a 
 True. See page 268. 
 b 
 False. See page 268. 
 c 
 True. See page 268. 
 d 
 False. See page 268. 
 2.  Trachoma 
 a 
 True. See page 271. 
 b 
 True. See page 271. 
 c 
 True. The lid margin is turned in by tarsal scarring. 
  d   
  False. Trachoma is treated with a single dose of azithromycin. This needs 
to be repeated yearly to prevent re - infection.  
  e   
  True. These are collections of lymphocytes preceding papillae formation 
and corneal vascularization and peripheral scarring.    
 3.  Onchocerciasis 
 a 
 False. Onchocerciasis is caused by a ﬁ larial nematode. 
 b 
 True. See page 274. 
 c 
 True. Microﬁ lariae in the skin are ingested when the female blackﬂ y bites 
a human for a blood meal.  
  d   
  False. It may result in a sclerosing keratitis with complete opaciﬁ cation of 
the cornea.  
 e 
 True. They enter the eye from the conjunctiva or bloodstream. 
 4.  Vitamin A deﬁ ciency (xerophthalmia) 
 a 
 True. See page 277. 
 b 
 False. The peak incidence is at 3 – 5 years. 
 c 
 False. This is an early sign of the disease.  
  d   
  True. Bitot ’ s spots are foamy triangular surface plaques containing kerati-
nized cells and saprophytic bacteria.  
 e 
 True. There may be increased corneal scarring as Vitamin A stores are sig-
niﬁ cantly depleted during measles infection. 
 

 Learning  o bjectives 
 To understand:
 ✓  The social help available to blind people. 
 ✓  The reasons for registering a patient in the UK. 
 18 
Services for the  v isually 
 h andicapped  
 
 Introduction 
 Sight impairment has been variously deﬁ ned. In the UK it is deﬁ ned as a vision 
of less than 6/18 to 6/60 and severe sight impairment, as a vision worse than 
6/60. Legally it is said to be  ‘ so blind as to be unable to perform any work for 
which sight is essential ’ . This deﬁ nition is none too helpful and each case must 
be assessed on its individual merits. The effects of reduced vision are inﬂ u-
enced by:
    •      the speed and age at which it occurred (sudden visual loss is harder to adjust 
to than a gradual loss, younger people may be able to adapt better to poor 
vision than older people);  
 •  whether central or peripheral vision is affected; 
 •  the type of ﬁ eld defect that is present  –  homonymous hemianopia presents 
special difﬁ culties in reading and navigation; 
 •  the existence of other disabilities (e.g. deafness). 
 Help and advice are available in the UK both from local government (social 
services) and from voluntary organizations such as the Royal National Institute 
Ophthalmology Lecture Notes, Eleventh Edition. Bruce James, Anthony Bron. 
© 2011 Bruce James and Anthony Bron. Published 2011 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

284 
Services for the visually handicapped
of Blind People (RNIB). There are also numerous local groups that offer 
support. Help is aimed at enabling the visually impaired person to lead an 
independent life.  
 Blind  r egistration 
 In the UK, patients with poor vision who meet certain requirements can be 
registered as sight impaired or severely sight impaired depending on the level 
of visual deﬁ cit. Registration does not necessarily mean that the person can see 
nothing at all but helps to coordinate the services available. Not all patients 
wish to be registered, however, because of an assumed stigma, and it is impor-
tant to discuss the subject fully with the patient. Despite the beneﬁ ts that may 
follow registration, some patients regard it as an end to a ﬁ ght against failing 
sight rather than a new beginning, managing the problem with all available 
help. It is important not to dismiss the wishes of these patients when trying to 
maximize their ability to manage their reduced vision. It is worth pointing out 
to the patient that, aside from the beneﬁ ts that may affect them personally, 
registration contributes to the creation of national statistics about the preva-
lence of sight - threatening diseases and therefore can focus the attention of 
research and funding bodies on the need for research in speciﬁ c areas. 
 Registration is performed by an ophthalmologist. The beneﬁ ts of registration, 
some only available to patients registered severely sight impaired, include:
 •  Financial help (e.g. tax allowances, a TV licence concession, additional 
income support, a disability living allowance, an attendance allowance).  
   •      Help from the social services (e.g. a specialist assessment leading to an adap-
tation of living accommodation).  
 •  Exemption from directory enquiry fees. 
   •      Public transport travel concessions, railcards, disabled parking schemes for 
carers. 
 •  Help with access to work. 
 Patients with impaired sight, whether registered or not, may also beneﬁ t 
from the  ‘ talking book and newspaper ’  schemes, which provide extensive 
recorded material. Further information is available from the RNIB website 
( www.rnib.org.uk ). 
 Services for  c hildren with  i mpaired  s ight 
 Children with impaired sight may require additional help with education, or 
may be educated in special schools for the visually handicapped. The local 
education authority has to make a  statement  of the educational needs of the 
child. Special visual aids, including voice - activated computers and closed -
 circuit television, may help. 

Services for the visually handicapped 285
 In addition, children may be eligible for the disability living allowance, which 
may enable parents to claim additional beneﬁ ts. 
 Additional  h elp 
 As well as low - vision aids (see Chapter  3 ), various devices are available, ranging 
from telephones with large number buttons and guides that help with placing 
a signature on a cheque, to devices that indicate when a cup is ﬁ lled. Closed 
circuit television systems are also available to transfer text at high magniﬁ ca-
tion to a screen. Additionally, for some patients, training in the use of a cane 
or provision of a guide dog may aid mobility. Some patients may also beneﬁ t 
from learning Braille. 
  
  
 
  KEY POINTS 
 •  Assist the patient to maximize their residual vision.  
 •  Ensure that they are aware of support services and of the beneﬁ ts of partial sight or 
blind registeration.  
 
  PAEDIATRIC OPHTHALMOLOGY 
 •  Make the appropriate arrangements for the education of a poorly sighted child.  

 Introduction 
 These case histories are designed to test your understanding of the symptoms, 
signs and management of ophthalmic disease that have been discussed in this 
book. Answers are given after each case and include references to chapters 
where additional information may be found.  
 Clinical  c ases 
 Case 1 
 A 70 - year - old woman presents to the eye casualty department with sudden loss 
of vision in her right eye. She has noted increasing headache and her scalp is 
tender when she combs her hair. She complains of pain in the jaw when she 
eats, and tires easily. There is no ophthalmic history but she suffers from peptic 
ulceration. She takes no regular medications. There is no family history of 
medical problems. 
 Examination reveals a visual acuity of counting ﬁ ngers in the affected eye. A 
relative afferent pupillary defect is present (see Chapter  2 ). The optic disc 
appears slightly swollen (Figure  19.1 ). The left eye is normal.   
 Questions 
 •  What is the likely diagnosis? 
 •  What is the immediate treatment? 
 •  How would you conﬁ rm the diagnosis?  
 •  What other precautions would you take? 
 19 
Clinical  c ases  
Ophthalmology Lecture Notes, Eleventh Edition. Bruce James, Anthony Bron. 
© 2011 Bruce James and Anthony Bron. Published 2011 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Clinical cases 287
 Answers 
 The patient almost certainly has giant cell arteritis causing ischaemic optic 
neuropathy (see Chapter  14 ). Intravenous and oral steroids must be given 
 immediately  before any other diagnostic step is taken, for there is a risk of 
arteritis and blindness in the fellow eye. 
 An ESR, C - reactive protein and temporal artery biopsy will help to conﬁ rm 
the diagnosis. 
 As the patient is being treated with steroids it is important to obtain a chest 
radiograph to exclude tuberculosis (TB) (steroids may promote miliary TB if 
pulmonary TB is present). Blood pressure and blood glucose must be moni-
tored. The patient should be warned of the other complications of steroid 
therapy, including immunosuppressive effects. Treatment to prevent oste-
oporosis is required. A positive history of gastric ulceration demands prophy-
lactic treatment with a proton pump inhibitor.   
 Case 2 
 A 40 - year - old man presents with sudden onset of a drooping left eyelid. When 
he lifts the lid with his ﬁ nger he notices that he has double vision. He has 
a severe headache. He is otherwise ﬁ t and well with no past ophthalmic 
history. He is on no regular medication. There is no family history of medical 
problems. 
 Examination reveals normal visual acuity in both eyes. A left ptosis is present. 
The left pupil is dilated. The left eye is abducted in the primary position of gaze. 
Testing eye movements reveals reduced adduction, elevation and depression 
of the left eye. The remainder of the eye examination is normal. 
 Figure 19.1   The appearance of the optic disc in case 1.  

288 
Clinical cases
 Questions 
 •  What nerve palsy is present? 
 •  What is the most likely cause? 
 •  What is the management? 
 Answers 
 The man has a third nerve palsy (see Chapter  15 ). An aneurysm from the pos-
terior communicating artery pressing on the third nerve must be the initial 
diagnosis in a  painful  third nerve palsy. The patient requires urgent neurosurgi-
cal investigation with a magnetic resonance angiogram (MRA) and possibly 
angiography. Urgent treatment may be required. It is also important to check 
blood pressure and blood glucose. Diabetics may develop a painful third nerve 
palsy, but the pupil is not always affected (a  ‘ pupil - sparing third nerve palsy ’ ).   
 Case 3 
 A 55 - year - old man presents to his GP with a 5 - day history of the sudden onset 
of ﬂ oaters in the left eye. These were accompanied by small ﬂ ashes of light. He 
has treated hypertension but no other medical problems. 
 The GP examines the eye and ﬁ nds a normal visual acuity. Dilated fundos-
copy reveals no abnormality. 
 Questions 
 •  What should the GP advise? 
 •  What is the diagnosis? 
 •  What are the associated risks? 
 Answers 
 As the symptoms are acute the GP should arrange for an urgent ophthalmic 
assessment. The man has a posterior vitreous detachment. With careful oph-
thalmoscopy it will be possible to identify vitreous opacities in keeping with 
this diagnosis. The ﬂ ashing lights are caused by traction of the detached vitre-
ous gel on the retina. A specialized examination of the peripheral retina is 
needed. A tear may occur in the retina, which in turn may lead to a retinal 
detachment. Laser applied around the tear while it is ﬂ at can prevent retinal 
detachment (see Chapter  11 ). 
 Case 4 
 A 75 - year - old woman attends the main casualty department with nausea and 
vomiting. She says that her right eye is painful and red. Vision is reduced. She 
is longsighted and wears glasses for near and distance vision. She is generally 
ﬁ t. There is no family history of medical problems. 

Clinical cases 289
 On examination the casualty ofﬁ cer ﬁ nds the vision to be reduced to count-
ing ﬁ ngers in the right eye. The eye is red, the cornea appears cloudy and 
oedematous, and the pupil is oval and dilated on the affected side. No view of 
the fundus is obtained. 
 Questions 
 •  What is the diagnosis? 
 •  How might it be conﬁ rmed? 
 •  What is the treatment? 
 Answers 
 The lady is longsighted and has acute angle closure glaucoma (see Chapter  10 ). 
Tonometry would reveal an intraocular pressure of about 65   mm Hg (see 
Chapter  2 ). If possible through the cloudy cornea, gonioscopy would conﬁ rm 
the presence of a closed angle and a narrow angle in the fellow eye (see Chapter 
 10 ). This can also be seen using high resolution ultrasound or confocal micro-
scopy. The pressure must be lowered with intravenous acetazolamide and 
topical hypotensive drops, including pilocarpine, to produce miosis. A periph-
eral iridotomy is then performed, usually with a YAG laser, in both eyes, to 
prevent further attacks. 
 Case 5 
 A 28 - year - old man presents to his optician with a painful, red right eye. The 
vision has become increasingly blurred over the last 2 days. He wears 
soft contact lenses, and contact lens tolerance has decreased in the preceding 
days. 
 The optician notes that the vision is reduced to 6/60 in the right eye, the 
conjunctiva is inﬂ amed, and there is a central opacity on the cornea. A small 
hypopyon (see Chapter  9 ) is present (Figure  19.2 ). 
 Figure 19.2   The appearance of the eye in case 5.  

290 
Clinical cases
 Questions 
 •  What is the likely diagnosis? 
 •  What should the optician do? 
 Answers 
 The man has a bacterial corneal ulcer secondary to contact lens wear. He 
requires immediate referral to an ophthalmic casualty unit. The ulcer will be 
scraped for culture and the contact lens and any lens containers cultured. 
Intensive, topical, broad - spectrum antibiotics are administered as an inpatient 
pending the result of the microbiological investigation (see Chapter  7 ).   
 Case 6 
 A mother attends her GP ’ s surgery with her baby, now 8 months old. He has 
had a persistently watery eye since birth. Intermittently there is a yellow dis-
charge surrounding the eye. The white of the eye has never been red. The baby 
is otherwise healthy. 
 Examination reveals a white, quiet, normal eye. Slight pressure over the lac-
rimal sac produces a yellowish discharge from the normal puncta. 
 Questions 
 •  What is the diagnosis? 
   •      What advice would you give the mother?     
 Answers 
 It is likely that the child has nasolacrimal obstruction due to an imperforate 
nasolacrimal duct. The mother should be reassured that this often resolves 
spontaneously. The lids should be kept clean and the region overlying the lac-
rimal sac massaged gently on a daily basis. Antibiotics are generally not effec-
tive. If the symptoms persist after the child ’ s ﬁ rst birthday the child can be 
referred to an ophthalmologist for syringing and probing of the nasolacrimal 
duct (see Chapter  6 ). 
 Case 7 
 A 14 - year - old complains of intermittent redness and soreness of the right eye. 
He has noticed a small lump on the upper lid. The vision is unaffected. 
 Examination reveals a small, raised, umbilicated lesion on the skin of the 
upper lid, associated with a follicular conjunctivitis below (Figure  19.3 ).    
 Questions 
 •  What is the likely diagnosis? 
 •  What is the treatment? 

Clinical cases 291
 Answers 
 It is likely that the lid lesion is a molluscum contagiosum. It is treated by exci-
sion (see Chapter  5 ). 
 Case 8 
 A 35 - year - old man presents to his GP with erythematous, swollen right upper 
and lower eyelids, worsening over the previous 2 days. He is unable to open 
them. He feels unwell and has a temperature. 
 Examination reveals marked lid swelling, a tender globe and, on manual 
opening of the lids, a proptosis with chemotic injected conjunctiva. Eye move-
ments are limited in all directions. Visual acuity and colour vision are normal, 
and there is no relative afferent pupillary defect (see Chapter  2 ). The optic disc 
and retina also appear normal. 
 Questions 
 •  What is the diagnosis? 
 •  What is the management? 
 Answers 
 The man has orbital cellulitis (see Chapter  4 ). Blood cultures and a high nasal 
swab should be performed, together with an orbital CT scan, to conﬁ rm the 
diagnosis and delineate any abscess. He requires admission to hospital for 
intravenous antibiotics and close monitoring of his vision, colour vision and 
pupillary reﬂ exes, as he is at risk of severe optic nerve damage. The ENT sur-
geons should be informed, as they may be required to drain an abscess. The 
normal acuity and colour vision suggest that the optic nerve is not compro-
mised at present, but should these signs worsen, urgent surgical drainage will 
be required. 
 Figure 19.3   The appearance of the lid in case 7.  

292 
Clinical cases
 Case 9 
 While working in the laboratory a colleague inadvertently sprays his eyes with 
an alkali solution. 
 Questions 
 •  What is the immediate treatment? 
 •  What should you do next? 
 Answers 
 The eyes must be washed out with copious quantities (litres) of water imme-
diately. Acids and particularly alkalis are very toxic to the eye. Failure to treat 
immediately may result in permanent, severe ocular damage (see Chapter  16 ). 
The patient should then be taken to an eye emergency clinic.   
 Case 10 
 A 27 - year - old man presents with a 2 - day history of a painful red right eye; the 
vision is slightly blurred and he dislikes bright lights. He is otherwise ﬁ t and 
well, but complains of some backache. He wears no glasses. 
 Questions 
 •  What is the likely diagnosis? 
 •  What would you expect to ﬁ nd on examination of the eye? 
 •  What treatment would you give? 
 •  What is the eye condition likely to be associated with? 
 Answers 
 The patient has iritis (see Chapter  9 ). Examination would reveal a reduction 
in visual acuity, redness of the eye that is worse at the limbus, cells in the ante-
rior chamber and possibly on the cornea (keratic precipitate) or a collection 
at the bottom of the anterior chamber (hypopyon). The iris may be stuck to 
the lens (posterior synechiae). There may be inﬂ ammation of the vitreous 
and retina. The patient is treated with steroid eye drops to reduce the inﬂ am-
mation and dilating drops to prevent the formation of posterior synechiae. 
The history of backache suggests that the patient may have ankylosing 
spondylitis. 
 Case 11 
 A 68 - year - old lady presents with a mildly painful red eye and some blurring of 
vision. One year previously she had a corneal graft. She is on no medications 
and is otherwise well. 

Clinical cases 293
 Questions 
 •  What is the possible diagnosis? 
   •      What treatment should the patient be given?     
 Answers 
 There may be a number of causes of this lady ’ s red eye. A diagnosis of graft 
rejection must be considered ﬁ rst of all. The patient must be referred to an eye 
department as an emergency. If a graft rejection is conﬁ rmed, she will need 
intensive treatment with topical steroids to save the graft (see Chapter  7 ). 
 Case 12 
 A 68 - year - old hypertensive man noted a ﬂ eeting loss of vision in one eye lasting 
for about a minute. He described it as a curtain coming down over the vision. 
Recovery was complete. There was no pain. 
 Examination reveals no abnormality. 
 Questions 
 •  What is the diagnosis? 
 •  What treatment would you advise? 
 Answers 
 The patient has had an episode of  amaurosis fugax , most likely caused by the 
passage of a ﬁ brin - platelet embolus through the retinal circulation. The patient 
requires treatment with antiplatelet drugs and a cardiovascular work - up. The 
most likely abnormality is a plaque on the carotid artery, which may require 
surgery (see Chapter  12 ). 
 Case 13 
 A 60 - year - old lady presented to her GP with gradual loss of vision over some 
months. She noticed that the problem was particularly bad in bright sunshine. 
The eye was not painful or red. She was otherwise well. 
 Questions 
 •  What is the probable diagnosis? 
 •  How can the diagnosis be conﬁ rmed? 
 •  What treatment may be advised? 
 Answers 
 It is likely that the lady has a cataract. These can be readily seen with a slit lamp, 
but are also well visualized with the direct ophthalmoscope in the red reﬂ ex 

294 
Clinical cases
 Figure 19.4   A posterior subcapsular cataract, seen in the red reﬂ ex by direct 
ophthalmoscopy in case 13.  
(Figure  19.4 ). The advantages and possible complications of cataract surgery 
should be discussed with her once the diagnosis has been conﬁ rmed (see 
Chapter  8 ). 
 Case 14 
 An 80 - year - old lady who has already lost the vision in one eye develops distor-
tion and reduction of vision over a few days in her good eye. 
 Examination reveals an acuity of 6/12, an early cataract and an abnormality 
at the macula (Figure  19.5 ). 
 Questions 
 •  What is the likely diagnosis? 
 •  What treatment may be helpful? 
 Answers 
 The rapid onset suggests that the cataract has little to do with the new visual 
disturbance. It is most likely due to age - related macular degeneration (AMD) 
(see Chapter  11 ). In some patients, with wet AMD, where a ﬁ brovascular mem-
brane grows beneath the macula that can be shown on a ﬂ uorescein angi-
ogram, anti - VEGF injections injections into the vitreous may be helpful in 
preventing further progression and in some cases improving vision. 

Clinical cases 295
 Case 15 
 A 30 - year - old builder was using a hammer to hit a steel chisel. He felt some-
thing hit his eye and the vision became blurred. He is ﬁ t and well and there is 
no history of medical problems. 
 On examination by his GP the vision was reduced to 6/12. A ﬂ uorescein stain-
ing lesion was seen on the cornea but this appeared Seidel - negative. A small 
hyphaema was seen in the anterior chamber, and in the red reﬂ ex observed 
with a direct ophthalmoscope a well delineated lens opacity was seen. The 
retina appeared normal. 
 Questions 
 •  What is the cause of the reduced acuity? 
 •  What is the likely origin of the lens opacity? 
 •  What is the possible management of the patient? 
 Answers 
 It is likely that a piece of steel travelling at high velocity has penetrated the 
cornea, traversed the iris (resulting in the hyphaema) and passed into or 
through the lens (causing the opacity). The relatively good acuity suggests that 
there has been no damage to the macula. The patient needs to be seen urgently 
in an eye unit. The corneal wound, if self - sealing, will probably not require 
suturing. The exact location of the foreign body has to be determined. Although 
 Figure 19.5   The appearance of the macula in case 14.  

296 
Clinical cases
it is unlikely to cause an infection (heat generated by the impact of the hammer 
on the metal may effectively sterilize the fragment) it may cause retinal toxicity 
if it has entered the vitreous cavity or retina. If it is enclosed in the lens 
(Figure  19.6 ) there is less chance of retinal toxicity developing but the patient 
is at high risk of developing a subsequent cataract that may require an opera-
tion. A foreign body that impacts on the retina or the vitreous body requires a 
vitrectomy to remove it, with careful examination of the retina for tears (see 
Chapter  16 ). 
 Case 16 
 A 2 - year - old child was thought to have a squint by her parents. The ﬁ nding was 
conﬁ rmed by her GP and she was referred to hospital. 
 Question 
 •  What examination must be conducted in hospital? 
 Answer 
 Having taken a full history, an orthoptist will measure the visual acuity of the 
child, examine the range of eye movements, determine the presence type of 
 Figure 19.6   The intralenticular foreign body seen in case 15.  

Clinical cases 297
squint with a cover test, trying to assess the degree of binocular vision present. 
The child will have a refraction performed and glasses prescribed if there is a 
signiﬁ cant refractive error or a difference in the strength of the lens needed 
between the two eyes (anisometropia). An ophthalmologist will examine the 
eye to check that there is no ocular or neurological condition that may account 
for the squint (see Chapter  15 ) and can discuss any future need for surgery.   
 Case 17 
 A 26 - year - old lady presents with a 3 - day history of blurring of vision in the right 
eye. This has become progressively worse. She also has pain caused by moving 
the eye. She has previously had an episode of weakness in the right arm 2 years 
ago, but this settled without treatment. She is otherwise ﬁ t and well. 
 On examination the vision was 6/60, with no improvement on looking 
through a pinhole. A central scotoma was present on confrontation. The eye 
was white and quiet with no abnormality noted save for a right relative afferent 
pupillary defect (see Chapter  2 ). 
 Questions 
 •  What is the diagnosis? 
 •  How could this be conﬁ rmed? 
 •  What are the management options? 
 •  What is the prognosis? 
 Answers 
 The patient has the typical symptoms and signs of optic neuritis (see Chapter 
 14 ). The diagnosis can be supported by an MRI scan to look for additional 
plaques of demyelination and a visual evoked potential to examine the func-
tioning of the optic nerve. A neurologist may also suggest performing a lumbar 
puncture, particularly if there is any doubt about the diagnosis. With the pos-
sibility of a previous neurological episode it is likely that the patient has mul-
tiple sclerosis. It is of great importance that appropriate counselling is given. 
Steroid treatment may speed up the recovery of vision and the prognosis for 
recovery of vision over a few months is good. 
 Case 18 
 A 79 - year - old man presents with a lesion on his right lower lid (Figure  19.7 ). It 
has been there for some months and has gradually grown bigger. It is ulcerated 
and the ulcer shows a pearly margin.   
 Questions 
 •  What is the lesion? 
 •  How should it be treated? 

298 
Clinical cases
 Answers 
 This is a basal cell carcinoma. It requires local excision. There is no problem 
with metastatic spread but local extension could cause severe problems as the 
tumour grows and inﬁ ltrates surrounding structures (see Chapter  5 ). 
 Case 19 
 A 60 - year - old man presents with tired sore eyes. He has noted that the eyelids 
may crust in the morning. Sometimes the white of the eye is red. The vision is 
unaffected. He is otherwise ﬁ t and well. 
 Questions 
 •  What is the probable diagnosis? 
 •  What signs would you look for? 
 •  How can this condition be treated? 
 Answers 
 The patient has blepharitis (see Chapter  5 ). Scaling of the lid margins and at 
the base of the lashes, together with inﬂ ammation of the lid margins and plug-
ging of the meibomian glands, may be present (Figure  19.8 ). Lid cleaning, along 
with the use of local antibiotic ointment and possibly topical steroids (super-
vised by an ophthalmologist), will improve, if not alleviate, the symptoms. Heat 
and lid massage can restore oil ﬂ ow. Courses of systemic tetracycline may be 
beneﬁ cial in more advanced cases and are in any case used in the treatment of 
acne rosacea which may be an associated condition.     
 Figure 19.7   The appearance of the lid in case 18.  

Clinical cases 299
 Case 20 
 A 30 - year - old man developed an acute red eye ﬁ rst on the right and then in the 
left eye, associated with a watery discharge. Vision is unaffected but the eye 
irritates. He is otherwise ﬁ t and well. 
 Questions 
 •  What is the diagnosis? 
 •  What conﬁ rmatory signs would you look for on examination? 
 •  What precautions would you take following your examination? 
 Answers 
 The patient has viral conjunctivitis  – probably adenovirus  – (see Chapter  7 ). 
Examination for a preauricular lymph node and conjunctival follicles on the 
lower tarsus would conﬁ rm the diagnosis. This form of conjunctivitis is highly 
contagious; it is important to ensure that hands and equipment are thoroughly 
cleaned following the examination, and that the importance of good hygiene 
is emphasized to the patient. 
 
 Figure 19.8   Plugging and capping of the meibomian glands in case 19.  

 1.  Differential diagnosis: red eye
 a 
 Iritis 
 b 
 Viral conjunctivitis 
 c 
 Endophthalmitis 
 d 
 Bacterial conjunctivitis 
 e 
 Subconjunctival haemorrhage 
 f 
 Acute glaucoma 
 g 
 Corneal ulcer 
 h 
 Chronic open angle glaucoma 
 For each of the following scenarios what is the single most likely diagnosis?
 1.     A 78 - year - old hypermetropic lady presents to the main casualty unit one 
evening with severe ocular pain of sudden onset, a red eye, dilated pupil 
and reduced vision.  
 2.     A 58 - year - old man develops a sudden bright red patch on the white of the 
eye, vision is not affected, the eye is slightly sore. 
 3.     A 45 - year - old man develops pain in the eyes which have become more red 
and the vision slightly blurred. He has a watery discharge. There is no past 
ocular or medical history.  
 4.     A 23 - year - old myopic man develops an acute, painful red eye. He notices 
that the vision is becoming blurred. He is a contact lens wearer but has no 
other eye history.  
 5.     A 56 - year - old lady presents with photophobia, redness of the eye and 
blurred vision. She has no previous eye history. She has been diagnosed 
with sarcoidosis and is currently on systemic prednisolone. There is a 
family history of glaucoma. 
 2.  Differential diagnosis: sudden loss of vision
 a 
 Central retinal vein occlusion 
 b 
 Central retinal artery occlusion 
 c 
 Acute glaucoma 
 d 
 Endophthalmitis 
 e 
 Giant cell arteritis 
 Self - a ssessment 
 EMQ s  
 
Ophthalmology Lecture Notes, Eleventh Edition. Bruce James, Anthony Bron. 
© 2011 Bruce James and Anthony Bron. Published 2011 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Self-assessment EMQs 301
 f 
 Macular degeneration 
 g 
 Diabetic retinopathy 
 h 
 Optic neuritis 
 i 
 Orbital cellulitis 
 j 
 Raised intracranial pressure 
 k 
 Amaurosis fugax 
 l 
 Retinal detachment 
 For each of the following scenarios what is the single most likely diagnosis?
 1.     A 23 - year - old female presents with loss of vision in the right eye over 3 days; 
she also complains that the right eye is painful when she moves it. She is 
otherwise ﬁ t and well, with no past ocular or medical history. Examination 
reveals an acuity of counting ﬁ ngers in the right eye, 6/6 in the left. The eye 
is white, the pupils equal and reactive to light, but a right relative afferent 
pupillary defect is present. Examination of the fundus is normal. 
 2.     A 24 - year - old overweight female has recently developed a headache and 
notices that she sees double when looking to the left. Yesterday she sud-
denly lost her vision for a few seconds when she rose from a chair. She is 
otherwise ﬁ t and well. She takes the contraceptive pill. Examination reveals 
normal visual acuity and colour vision. There is reduced abduction of the 
left eye. The eyes are quiet, intraocular pressure normal. The optic discs 
appear swollen. Neurological examination is normal.  
 3.     A 76 - year - old lady is driving her car when she notices a sudden curtain 
coming over the left eye. The vision is lost for about 15 minutes and then 
the curtain lifts. She has a history of systemic hypertension and has recently 
been diagnosed with diabetes. There is no other medical history. On exami-
nation you can ﬁ nd no abnormality.  
 4.     A 72 - year - old man with a previous diagnosis of glaucoma presents with a 
sudden loss of vision in the right eye. There is no pain. He is hypertensive. 
There is a family history of macular degeneration. Examination reveals a 
visual acuity of counting ﬁ ngers in the right eye, 6/6 in the left. The eye is 
white, intraocular pressure is not raised. The pupils are equal and no rela-
tive afferent pupillary defect is present. Dilated fundoscopy reveals a 
swollen optic disc and multiple haemorrhages scattered over the retina. 
The retinal veins appear dilated and tortuous.  
 5.     An 80 - year - old lady presents with sudden loss of vision in the right eye. She 
complains of severe pain over the right side of her head, which is painful 
to touch. There is no past ocular history. She has not been able to eat 
recently as her jaw has been painful when she tries to chew; an appoint-
ment with the dentist has been arranged. She also feels tired and has 
developed a pain in her shoulders. On examination the vision in the right 
eye is perception of light, left eye 6/6. The eyes are white, intraocular pres-
sure is normal. A right relative afferent pupillary defect is present. Dilated 
fundoscopy reveals a slightly swollen optic disc with some pale white 
lesions between the disc and the macula.      

302 
Self-assessment EMQs
 3.  Complications: ophthalmic surgery
 a 
 Endophthalmitis 
 b 
 Cystoid macular oedema 
 c 
 Astigmatism 
 d 
 Posterior capsule rupture 
 e 
 Iris prolapse 
 f 
 Retinal detachment 
 g 
 Posterior capsule opaciﬁ cation 
 h 
 Corneal graft rejection 
 For each of the following scenarios what is the single most likely diagnosis?
 1.     A 67 - year - old man had cataract surgery 2 days previously. The eye has 
become increasingly red and painful and the vision more blurred.  
 2.     An 80 - year - old lady had cataract surgery 2 years ago. Recently she has 
noticed that the vision in the operated eye has become a little blurred. The 
eye is not painful and she notices no distortion of vision. 
 3.     A 50 - year - old myopic male had a cataract operation 3 months previously 
in his right eye. He suddenly noted several ﬂ oaters in this eye a week ago. 
These were accompanied by some ﬂ ashing lights. Yesterday he noted a 
defect in his visual ﬁ eld which is getting worse. 
 4.  A 46 - year - old female with a history of iritis had a cataract operation. The 
vision initially improved but a week later was blurred once again. There 
was no pain and the eye was not red.  
 5.     A 36 - year - old man had a corneal graft 6 months ago. Recently the vision 
has become blurred and the eye red. 
 4.  Treatment: pharmacological treatment
 a 
 Ganciclovir 
 b 
 Prostaglandin analogue 
 c 
 Artiﬁ cial tears 
 d 
 Acetazolamide 
 e 
 Anti - VEGF agent 
 f 
 Tetracycline 
 g 
 Azithromycin 
 h 
 Pilocarpine 
 i 
 Chloramphenicol 
 j 
 Methylprednisolone 
 Choose the most appropriate single therapy in the following situations.
 1.     A 76 - year - old man has been referred by his optician with a visual ﬁ eld 
defect, raised intraocular pressure and cupping of the optic disc. You 
conﬁ rm the ﬁ ndings and start treatment.  
 2.     A 82 - year - old lady comes to casualty with a very painful right eye and loss 
of vision. Visual acuity is only hand movements in the affected eye. The 

Self-assessment EMQs 303
cornea is cloudy and the pupil is dilated. It will take her at least an hour to 
see an ophthalmologist at another hospital.  
 3.     A 78 - year - old lady notices a sudden reduction in vision in the right eye and 
distortion when looking at a straight line. A ﬂ uorescein angiogram suggests 
that there are abnormal leaking blood vessels below the macula.  
 4.     A 56 - year - old man has been troubled with sore red eyes for some time. He 
has been diagnosed as suffering from acne rosacea. On examination he has 
been found to have the signs of blepharitis. This has not responded to 
conservative treatment with lid toilet. 
 5.     A 25 - year - old male with known AIDS presents with reduced vision and 
ﬂ oaters. Examination of his right retina shows white and haemorrhagic 
lesions. 
 5.  Differential diagnosis: pupil
 a 
 Horner ’ s syndrome 
 b 
 Adie ’ s pupil 
 c 
 Argyll Robertson pupil 
 d 
 Application of atropine drops 
 e 
 Application of pilocarpine drops 
 f 
 Third nerve palsy 
 g 
 Relative afferent pupillary defect 
  h   
  Application of cyclopentolate drops  
  i   
  Application of tropicamide drops  
  j   
  Physiological anisocoria    
 Choose the most appropriate single diagnosis in the following abnormalities 
affecting the pupils.
 1.  A 25 - year - old female comes into the surgery concerned that in a recent 
group photograph it was pointed out to her that the right pupil looked 
bigger than the left. She had no visual problems and no diplopia. On exami-
nation her eye movements were full, no ptosis was present and the differ-
ence in pupil size was conﬁ rmed. The right pupil constricted poorly to 
light.  
 2.     A 67 - year - old man who had smoked all his life noted that his left pupil was 
smaller than his right and his left lid drooped slightly. On examination the 
ﬁ ndings were conﬁ rmed and both pupils reacted normally to light. The 
difference in pupil size was more pronounced in the dark.  
 3.  An 80 - year - old man with a diagnosis of glaucoma for which he had been 
on the same treatment for many years attended his optician. He was noted 
to have bilaterally small pupils which did not appear to react to light. 
 4.     A 45 - year - old man attended his GP with a frontal headache and reduced 
vision in his left eye. The GP conﬁ rmed that the vision was reduced and 
noted that although the pupils were equal, when a light was moved from 
the right to the left eye both pupils appeared to dilate. The optic nerve on 
the left appeared pale, that on the right was normal.  

304 
Self-assessment EMQs
 5.     A child suspected of having a squint had been taken to the eye hospital one 
afternoon. The following morning his mother phoned the GP saying that 
his pupils were dilated. 
 6.  Differential diagnosis: ﬁ eld defect
 a 
 Central scotoma 
 b 
 Bitemporal hemianopia 
 c 
 Incongruous left hemianopia 
 d 
 Congruous left hemianopia 
 e 
 Arcuate ﬁ eld defect 
 f 
 Altitudinal ﬁ eld defect 
 g 
 Enlarged blind spot 
 h 
 Constricted visual ﬁ eld 
 Choose the most appropriate single ﬁ eld defect in the following situations.
 1.     A 77 - year - old man with hypertension and diabetes notices that he is unable 
to see on the left hand side. An MRI scan conﬁ rms a right cortical infarct. 
 2.     A 63 - year - old lady with hypertension notices that she has blurred vision in 
the right eye on waking one morning. The ophthalmologist records a 
reduced visual acuity, right afferent pupillary defect and a swollen optic 
disc surrounded by haemorrhages.  
 3.     A 12 - year - old boy notices that his vision is becoming increasingly poor at 
night. His ophthalmologist notices that his visual acuity is normal but there 
is pigmentation on the peripheral retina, the disc looks pale and the retinal 
vessels attenuated. 
 4.     A 50 - year - old man presents to his GP saying that he feels his peripheral 
vision is reduced and he often spilled the water when making a cup of tea. 
The GP notes that although his acuity was normal he missed the temporal 
letters on the Snellen chart with each eye.  
 5.     A 62 - year - old lady was found by her optometrist to have a raised intraocu-
lar pressure in the right eye. He noted that the optic disc appeared cupped 
on the right compared to the left. The eye otherwise appeared normal.      
 7.  Differential diagnosis: eye movements
 a 
 Convergent squint 
 b 
 Divergent squint 
 c 
 Third nerve palsy 
 d 
 Fourth nerve plasy 
 e 
 Sixth nerve palsy 
 f 
 Internuclear ophthalmoplegia 
 g 
 Myasthenia gravis 
 h 
 Duane ’ s syndrome 
 i 
 Brown ’ s syndrome 
 j 
 Parinaud ’ s syndrome 
 k 
 Dysthyroid eye disease 

Self-assessment EMQs 305
 Choose the most appropriate single diagnosis in the following situations.
 1.     A 47 - year - old lady had recently noticed that her heart seems to be racing. 
She was unable to sleep, increasingly anxious and perspired a lot. Her 
appetite had increased but her weight reduced. She also noticed that her 
eyes had become red and that she was troubled with diplopia. 
 2.     A 72 - year - old hypertensive male reported the sudden onset of horizontal 
diplopia. This was worse on looking to the left but not present on looking 
to the right. On examination he had a reduction on left abduction.  
 3.     A mother took her 2 - year - old son to the GP. She was concerned that the left 
eye was looking in. The GP conﬁ rmed the ﬁ nding and noted that the eyes 
seemed to have a normal range of movement.  
 4.     A boy aged 15 years presented to the ophthalmologist because of headache. 
He had no other visual symptoms. On examination his visual acuity was 
normal, he was found to have reduced upgaze in both eyes and light – near 
dissociation was present.  
 5.     A 23 - year - old man suffered a head injury when he fell off his motorbike. 
He reported diplopia on looking to the right and on looking straight ahead.  
 6.     A 43 - year - old woman complained of double vision. Objects appeared side 
by side and the problem appeared worse as the day progressed. Examined 
in the morning her eye movements appeared full. During the course of 
the examination it became apparent that an increasing ptosis affected the 
right eye. 
 8.  Examination: ocular examination
 a 
 Perimeter 
 b 
 Direct ophthalmoscopy 
 c 
 Tonometer 
 d 
 Cardiff acuity test 
 e 
 Slit lamp 
 f 
 Retinoscopy 
 g 
 Keratometry 
 h 
 Synoptophore 
 i 
 Fluorescein angiography 
 Name the most appropriate instrument to examine the eye.
 1.  To measure the visual ﬁ eld. 
 2.  To examine the anterior segment of the eye. 
 3.  To measure the intraocular pressure. 
 4.     To examine the circulation of the retinal vessels and detect leakage of blood 
and its components from these vessels.  
 5.  To measure the shape of the cornea. 
 9.  Differential diagnosis: gradual loss of vision
 a 
 Cataract 
 b 
 Macular degeneration 

306 
Self-assessment EMQs
 c 
 Optic neuropathy 
 d 
 Posterior capsule opaciﬁ cation 
 e 
 Keratoconus 
 f 
 Vitreous haemorrhage 
 g 
 Diabetic maculopathy 
 h 
 Chronic open angle glaucoma 
 What is the most likely diagnosis in the following situations?
 1.  A 73 - year - old patient reports to her GP that she is having increased difﬁ -
culty reading road signs and experiences glare in bright lights.  
 2.  A 56 - year - old man presents to an ophthalmologist complaining that he has 
gradually lost vision in the right eye. The vision is 6/18 on the right, 6/6 on 
the left. Colour vision is reduced on the right. A relative afferent pupillary 
defect is present and the right optic disc appears pale.  
 3.     A 20 - year - old man is referred to the ophthalmologist by the optometrist 
because he can no longer ﬁ t him with contact lenses. On examination the 
centre of the cornea is thinned.  
 4.  A 56 - year - old patient with diabetes complains of ﬂ oaters and a reduced 
visual acuity over a few weeks.  
 5.     An 86 - year - old patient with a previous cataract operation notes increased 
distortion of vision and a gradual reduction in central visual acuity. 

 Textbooks 
  Listed below are some sources that will provide more detailed information 
about the subjects covered in this book.  
 Clinical  o phthalmology 
   American Academy of Ophthalmology . Basic and Clinical Science Course 
(BCSC), 2010 – 2011. (Reviews of ophthalmic subspecialty subjects.)  
 Easty ,  D. L.  &  Sparrow ,  J. M. (eds) ( 1999 )  Oxford Textbook of Ophthalmology . 
 Oxford University Press . (Large comprehensive textbook from Britain.)  
 Ehler ,  J. P. ,  Shah ,  C. P.  &  Fenton  G. L. (eds) ( 2008 )  The Wills Eye Manual . Fith 
edition.  Lippincott ,  Williams  & Wilkins . (Concise details on the management 
of ophthalmic disease.)  
 Kanski ,  J. J. ,  Bowling  B . ( 2011 )  Clinical Ophthalmology .  Seventh edition . 
 Elsevier . (Concise illustrated description of ophthalmic disease.) 
 Kanski ,  J. J. ( 2008 )  Clinical Ophthalmology: a Test Yourself Atlas .  Third edition . 
 Butterworth - Heinemann Elsevier . (Test your knowledge with this compan-
ion volume.)  
 Rowe ,  F. J. ( 2004 )  Clinical Orthoptics .  Second edition .  Blackwell Science . 
(Outlines the examination and diagnosis of eye movement disorders.) 
 Spalton ,  D. J. ,  Hitchings ,  R. A.  &  Hunter ,  P. A. ( 2005 )  Atlas of Clinical 
Ophthalmology .  Third edition .  Mosby . (Illustrated account of ophthalmic 
disease.) 
 Yanoff ,  M. ,  Duker ,  J. S.  &  Augsburger ,  J. J. (eds) ( 2003 )  Ophthalmology .  Second 
edition .  Mosby . (Also available on CD - ROM.) (Large comprehensive textbook 
from America.) 
 Basic  s cience 
 Bron ,  A. J. ,  Tripathi ,  R. C.  &  Tripathi ,  B. J. ( 1997 )  Wolff ’ s Anatomy of the Eye and 
Orbit .  Eighth edition .  Chapman  & Hall . 
 Elkington ,  A. R. ( 1999 )  Clinical Optics .  Third edition .  Blackwell Science . 
 Forrester ,  J. V.  et al . ( 2001 )  The Eye: Basic Sciences in Practice .  Second edition . 
 Saunders . 
 Useful  r eferences  
Ophthalmology Lecture Notes, Eleventh Edition. Bruce James, Anthony Bron. 
© 2011 Bruce James and Anthony Bron. Published 2011 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

308 
Useful references 
 Snell ,  R. S.  &  Lemp ,  M. A. ( 1998 )  Clinical Anatomy of the Eye .  Second edition . 
 Blackwell Science . 
 Review  j ournals 
 Eye News 
  Published by Pinpoint Ltd. Provides short practical review articles and informa-
tion about new developments in ophthalmology.  
 Survey of Ophthalmology 
 Published by Elsevier Science. Bi - monthly. Provides in - depth well - referenced 
review articles on particular topics in ophthalmology. 
 Progress in Retinal and Eye Research 
 Published by Elsevier Science. Bi - monthly. Provides in - depth well - referenced 
review articles on basic science topics in ophthalmology. 
 Ophthalmic  j ournals 
  For detailed research articles there are numerous ophthalmic publications; 
most of the subspecialty ﬁ elds in ophthalmology have their own journal. 
Among the leaders in clinical ophthalmology are:
 American Journal of Ophthalmology  
 Archives of Ophthalmology 
 British Journal of Ophthalmology 
 Eye 
 Experimental Eye Research  
 Graefe ’ s Archive for Clinical and Experimental Ophthalmology  
 Ophthalmology 
 Investigative Ophthalmology and Visual Science (IOVS) 
 Websites 
  American Academy of Ophthalmology ( www.aao.org ). This site (subscription 
required) contains updates on every aspect of ophthalmology. Includes a link 
to Eyewiki (free) which provides information on a wide range of ophthalmo-
logical subjects.  
  Digital Journal of Ophthalmology ( www.djo.harvard.edu ). Includes clinical 
case presentations and quizzes from the large American ophthalmic 
hospitals. 
  Examination techniques:  www.mrcophth.com . Useful videos on examination 
techniques. Information and past questions for the Duke - Elder undergradu-
ate examination. Information on the UK postgraduate examinations. 

Useful references  309
Information about training hospitals in the UK, the addresses of the surgical 
colleges, a link to the BMJ ophthalmology job pages and a discussion board 
for those in training.  
  Eye News ( www.eyenews.uk.com ). The website requires registration for 
complete access but some articles are available without this. The Eye 
Directory lists companies involved in the manufacture of ophthalmic 
equipment and medicines. Some of these sites also contain clinical 
information.  
 Eye Pathologist ( www.eyepathologist.com ). A web - based interactive program 
developed to provide self - directed learning on the anatomy and pathology 
of the eye.  
  International Council of Ophthalmology ( www.icoph.org ). Includes a compre-
hensive list of ophthalmic journals with links to their websites under the 
resources tab. Information about educational meetings. Information about 
eye diseases for patients linking to other websites. A link to the free Atlas of 
Ophthalmology. 
 International 
Glaucoma 
Association 
( www.glaucoma - association.com ). 
Provides patient - orientated information about glaucoma. 
 London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine ( www.lshtm.ac.uk ). A website 
for those wishing to ﬁ nd out more about tropical ophthalmology. 
  Macular Disease Society ( www.maculardisease.org ). The website provides 
patient - orientated information about macular disease. 
 Moorﬁ elds Eye Hospital ( www.moorﬁ elds.nhs.uk ). Describes the facilities of 
the hospital, courses available, and has information sheets for patients on 
common eye diseases.  
 Optic Disc org ( www.optic - disc.org ). This site is speciﬁ cally aimed at features 
of the optic disc, including an atlas and tutorials on examination.  
  Optometry Today. The journal of the Association of Optometrists ( www.optom-
etry.co.uk ). Aimed at optometrists it requires a log in to access most resources 
but there are some training videos available on free access.  
 Orbis 
website 
( www.cybersight.org ) 
includes 
videos 
of 
ophthalmic 
procedures. 
  Oxford Eye Hospital ( www.eyecasualty.co.uk ). This provides details on common 
ocular emergencies, and patient information sheets on common eye 
problems. 
  Retinal Screening ( www.retinalscreening.nhs.uk ). Information on the UK 
national screening programme for diabetic retinopathy.  
  RootAtlas ( www.rootatlas.com ). An American site with videos on ophthalmic 
conditions, examination and treatment.  
  Royal College of Ophthalmologists ( www.rcophth.ac.uk ). Includes details of the 
college ’ s publications and information about ophthalmic disease for patients.  
  Royal National Institute of the Blind (  www.rnib.org.uk ). Produces a range of 
fact sheets for patients.  
 Sarawak Eyecare ( www.sarawakeyecare.com ). A useful atlas of ophthalmology.  
  Vision 2020 ( www.v2020.org ). This site describes the activities of the pro-
gramme to eliminate preventable world blindness by 2020. 

310 
Useful references 
 Organizations  p roducing  p atient 
 i nformation  l iterature 
 See some of the websites mentioned above, in addition:  
  The Royal National Institute of Blind People, 105 Judd Street, London WC1H 
9NE, UK. Produces a variety of leaﬂ ets on common ocular conditions from 
the patient ’ s perspective. It is also a most valuable source of information and 
practical help for visually impaired people.  
  The Royal College of Ophthalmologists, 17 Cornwall Terrace, London NW1 
4QW, UK. 
  American Academy of Ophthalmology, PO Box 7424, San Francisco, CA 94120 -
 7424, USA. Produces a range of booklets and guidelines on ophthalmic 
topics. 

 1.1  f    The most likely cause in this age group is acute angle closure glaucoma, 
conﬁ rmed by ﬁ nding a dilated pupil and raised intraocular pressure. 
 1.2  e    A subconjunctival haemorrhage can occur spontaneously or following 
trauma. It is unusual for it to have any serious associations. Patients on 
anticoagulants should have an INR checked. 
 1.3  b    This is the most likely diagnosis; a patient with bacterial conjunctivitis 
has a sticky discharge, patients with iritis have no discharge. 
 1.4  g  Contact lens wearers are more likely to develop corneal ulcers. 
 1.5  a    The symptoms suggest iritis and this is associated with sarcoidosis. 
The steroids may increase the pressure in some people but this is unlikely 
to cause a symptomatic acute glaucoma. 
 2.1  h    The reduced vision occurring over a short time and pain on eye move-
ments are typical. The relative afferent papillary defect points to an optic 
nerve problem. Acutely the fundus is normal, later optic nerve pallor may 
develop. 
 2.2  j    Loss of vision for a few seconds when standing from sitting is a classical 
sign of raised intracranial pressure. Typically the vision is normal and 
colour vision full unless the papilloedema is very longstanding. Patients 
with raised intracranial pressure may also have a sixth nerve palsy regard-
less of the cause of the raised pressure. The fact that she is on the contra-
ceptive pill and is overweight point to a diagnosis of benign intracranial 
hypertension (idiopathic intracranial hypertension). A full neurological 
examination, MRI scan and lumbar puncture would be needed to conﬁ rm 
the diagnosis and exclude other causes. 
 2.3  k    This is a typical history of amaurosis fugax associated with the passage 
of a ﬁ brin - platelet embolus. The patient will require a full vascular work -
 up including imaging of the carotid arteries to see if an endarterectomy 
is indicated. Asprin may also be prescribed to prevent further emboli. 
 2.4  a    The retinal appearance leads to the diagnosis. There may be an affer-
ent papillary defect if there is marked retinal ischaemia. 
 2.5  e    The history points to the diagnosis of giant cell (temporal) arteritis. The 
examination suggests optic nerve disease (relative afferent papillary 
defect) and the signs at the optic disc suggest an ischaemic optic neuropa-
thy with cotton - wool spots, the cause of the white lesions at the disc. The 
 Answers to  EMQ s  
 
Ophthalmology Lecture Notes, Eleventh Edition. Bruce James, Anthony Bron. 
© 2011 Bruce James and Anthony Bron. Published 2011 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

312 
Answers to EMQs
signs may be less dramatic than the ischaemic optic neuropathy associ-
ated with hypertension. 
 3.1  a    The symptoms point to a diagnosis of endophthalmitis. Examination 
would show a reduced vision, inﬂ ammation and possibly a hypopyon in 
the anterior chamber and inﬂ ammation of the vitreous (vitritis). This is 
an acute ocular emergency requiring prompt treatment. 
 3.2  g    The slow onset of the problem and time interlude make this the most 
likely diagnosis. It can be treated with a laser to make a small hole in the 
posterior capsule. 
 3.3  f    The prodromal symptoms suggest that the vitreous jelly has detached 
from the retina producing a retinal tear. This has led to a retinal detach-
ment with an associated loss of visual ﬁ eld. 
 3.4  b    Patients with iritis are more likely to get cystoid macular oedema fol-
lowing cataract surgery but it can happen in any patient and may explain 
why the vision has not improved as much as expected. 
 3.5  h    In any patient with a red eye following corneal graft surgery suspect 
corneal graft rejection if they subsequently develop a red eye and altered 
vision. 
 4.1  b    The prostaglandin analogues are increasingly the ﬁ rst - line treatment 
in patients with glaucoma. 
 4.2  d    This lady has acute angle closure glaucoma. The initial treatment is 
with intravenous acetazolamide, to reduce the pressure in the eye. Also,  g  
 –  Pilocarpine eye drops are subsequently given to constrict the pupil. They 
may not be effective when the pressure in the eye is very high and the iris 
ischaemic. 
 4.3  e    This lady has wet AMD and may beneﬁ t from intravitreal anti - VEGF 
injections. 
 4.4  f  This patient has signiﬁ cant blepharitis and may beneﬁ t from tetracy-
cline given for 2 – 3 months. 
 4.5  a    It is likely that this patient has CMV retinitis and may beneﬁ t from 
systemic and intravitreal ganciclovir. 
 5.1  b    The poorly reacting pupil is the key to the diagnosis; on a slit - lamp 
examination vermiform movements would be observed. Absent reﬂ exes 
would help to conﬁ rm the diagnosis. 
 5.2  a  The sign ’ s suggest Horner ’ s syndrome. The history of smoking make 
the investigation for associated chest neoplasia important. 
 5.3  e    It is likely that he is taking pilocarpine to treat his glaucoma. This is an 
unusual drop to prescribe to treat the condition today but was a mainstay 
of treatment in the past. 
 5.4  g    This is a relative afferent pupillary defect. The pallor of the optic disc 
conﬁ rms the likelyhood of optic nerve disease. 
 5.5  h    Cyclopentolate drops are applied to dilate the pupil and allow an 
examination of the fundus to exclude any associated eye disease. 
Cyclopentolate also prevents the child accommodating permitting an 

Answers to EMQs 313
accurate refraction to be performed. Anisometropia can be associated 
with amblyopia and squint (see Chapter  15 , Non - paralytic squint). The 
effect of the drops may last for some hours. 
 6.1  d    A posteriorly placed visual pathway lesion causes a congruous 
defect (similar defect in both eyes), those affecting the optic tract are 
incongruous. 
 6.2  f    It is likely that this lady has a non - arteritic ischaemic optic neuropathy; 
this is the classical but not the only ﬁ eld defect seen in this condition. 
 6.3  h    It is likely that this patient has retinitis pigmentosa. The signs are 
typical and a contraction of the visual ﬁ eld results. 
 6.4  b    The symptoms suggest the possibility of a bitemporal hemianopia and 
the patient ’ s performance on the Snellen chart helps to conﬁ rm the pres-
ence of this type of ﬁ eld defect arising from a chiasmal lesion. 
 6.5  e  An arcuate ﬁ eld defect is typical of glaucoma. 
 7.1  k    The symptoms suggest thyrotoxicosis and that the associated dysthy-
roid eye disease is also present. 
 7.2  e  This is a left sixth nerve palsy with the lateral rectus muscle affected. 
 7.3  a    The presence of a convergent squint requires referral to an eye hospital 
for further investigation to exclude a refractive error or ocular disease. 
 7.4  j  The ﬁ ndings suggest Parinaud ’ s syndrome associated with diseases in 
the pineal region of the brain (dorsal midbrain syndrome). See Chapter 
 15 . 
 7.5  e    Here the cause of the sixth nerve palsy is the trauma, it can also be a 
sign of raised intracranial pressure however. 
 8.1  a  A perimeter is used to measure the visual ﬁ eld. 
 8.2  e  A slit lamp allows a magniﬁ ed 3 - D view of the eye. 
 8.3  c  A tonometer measures the pressure in the eye. See Chapter  2 . 
 8.4  i    Fluorescein angiography allows the circulation of the retina to be 
examined. See Chapter  2 . 
 8.5  g  A keratometer measures the curvature of the cornea. See Chapter  2 . 
 9.1  a  A cataract is the most likely cause of the reduced acuity and glare. 
 9.2  c  The signs point towards optic nerve disease. 
 9.3  e    Keratoconus causes a progressive astigmatism. This can often be 
treated with glasses or contact lenses but in more extreme cases may 
require a corneal graft. 
 9.4  f  The ﬂ oaters suggest that there has been a bleed into the vitreous from 
new vessels associated with proliferative diabetic retinopathy. 
 9.5  b    The distortion of vision suggests a macula problem. The more gradual 
reduction in acuity suggests a  ‘ dry ’ macular degeneration is present. 

 United States notation (feet)  
  Metres  
  Expressed as a decimal  
 20/200  
 6/60  
 1.0  
 20/160  
 6/48  
 0.9  
 20/125  
 6/37  
 0.8  
 20/100  
 6/30  
 0.7  
 20/80  
 6/24  
 0.6  
 20/60  
 6/18  
 0.5  
 20/50  
 6/15  
 0.4  
 20/40  
 6/12  
 0.3  
 20/30  
  6/9  
  0.2  
 20/25  
  6/7  
  0.1  
 20/20  
  6/6  
  0.0  
 20/16  
  6/5  
  0.1  
 20/12.5  
  6/3.8  
  0.2  
 20/10  
  6/3  
  0.3  
 Appendix: Visual  a cuity 
 e quivalence  t able  
Ophthalmology Lecture Notes, Eleventh Edition. Bruce James, Anthony Bron. 
© 2011 Bruce James and Anthony Bron. Published 2011 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
 The  f ollowing  a bbreviations  a re  a lso  u sed 
 CF  
 Count ﬁ ngers. The ability to count ﬁ ngers at a speciﬁ ed distance.  
 HM  
  Hand movements. The ability to see a hand moving in front of the face.  
 LP  
  Light perception. The ability to differentiate light from dark.  
 NLP   No light perception. Unable to detect light.  

Ophthalmology Lecture Notes, Eleventh Edition. Bruce James, Anthony Bron. 
© 2011 Bruce James and Anthony Bron. Published 2011 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
abduction 233, 242, 243, 246
abetalipoproteinaemia 180
abnormal retinal blood vessels 192, 204
abnormalities of the blood 204
acanthamoeba keratitis 108, 108
accommodation 10, 60, 61, 212–13, 237, 
251
acetazolamide 156, 159–60, 172, 181, 200, 
221
acetylcysteine 103
aciclovir 105
acne rosacea 81
acoustic neuroma 244
acute closed angle glaucoma 27–8, 148, 
151, 162
clinical case 288–9
acute glaucoma 26, 98
adalimumab 136
adduction 233, 242, 243, 248, 249
adenovirus 101
Adie’s tonic pupil 212–13
adnexae 41
adrenaline 156, 214
adrenergic beta-blockers 155
advanced diabetic retinopathy 196–7, 
197
afferent pathway 38
African Programme for Onchocerciasis 
Control (APOC) 276
age 29, 79, 174, 180, 185, 202, 221
arcus senilis 111
cataract 118–19
diabetic retinopathy 194, 195
services 283
glaucoma 151, 159, 161
age-related macular degeneration (AMD) 
28, 166–7, 168, 168–70, 187
clinical case 294
world statistics 268
Index
age-related maculopathy (ARM) 169
albinism 182
alcohol 226
alkalis 256, 259, 292
allergies 23, 26, 97, 98, 102–3
alpha-2 agonists 156
Alport’s syndrome 126
alternate cover test 240
alternating squint 236, 239
altitudinal scotoma 223, 223
amaurosis fugax 28, 199, 200, 293
amblyopia 86, 226, 248
capillary haemangioma 71, 73
cataract 119, 126
non-paralytic squint 236, 237, 241
amethocaine 258
ametropia 59, 59–60, 60
amniotic membrane 265
anatomy 1–21
questions and answers 18–21
aneurysm 16, 242, 244, 251
angiography 48, 48–9, 49, 245
angioid streaks 170, 170, 171
angle closure glaucoma 136, 143
angle recession 150
aniridia 148
aniseikonia 61, 124
anisocoria 38, 209, 212
anisometropia 237
ankylosing spondylitis 131, 134, 135–6, 
136–7, 137
anterior blepharitis 79–80, 81
anterior chamber 2, 2, 12, 42, 274
trauma 258, 260, 261, 262
anterior ischaemic optic neuropathy 
(AION) 29, 222
anterior lenticonus 126
anterior optic neuritis 29
anterior segment 41–2
Page numbers in italics indicate ﬁ gures or tables

316 
Index
anterior uveitis 28, 130–1, 132, 133–4, 
136–8, 143, 210
antibiotics 94, 125, 262, 280
abscess 82
blepharitis 81
conjunctivitis 100
keratitis 107–8
onchocerciasis 276
ophthalmia neonatorum 281
orbital cellulitis 69
trachoma 273
anticoagulants 24
anticollagenases 264
antihistamines 102
antiprotozoals 140
anti-thyroid antibodies 246
antivirals 100, 101, 105, 106
aphakia 61, 126, 127
apraclonidine 156
aqueous humour 1–2, 7, 10, 11, 58
glaucoma 146–7, 148, 149–50, 155, 157, 
160
leakage 42, 43
aqueous layer of tear ﬁ lm 5, 6
aqueous veins 2
arachnoid matter 14, 14
Aravind Eye Care, India 270
arc eye 260
arcus senilis 111
Argyll Robertson pupil 212, 213
arteriosclerosis 202
artery/vein (AV) nipping 45, 201, 
202
artiﬁ cial tears 81, 90, 91
asthma 155–6, 156
astigmatism 60, 110, 111, 124
astrocytomas 184, 185
atrophic optic disc 199
atopic dermatitis 120
atopic eczema 81
atropine 134, 213, 214, 240, 247
azathioprine, 134, 140
azithromycin 81, 102, 273
bacitracin 100
bacterial keratitis 106–8, 280
band keratopathy 110, 110
barbiturates 250
basal cell carcinoma (BCC) 84–5, 85, 
297–8
Behçet’s disease 131, 134, 136, 140
beta-blockers 155–6, 156, 160
betacarotene 169
betaxolol-selective beta-blockers 156
bimatoprost 156
binocular diplopia 68
binocular single vision 232, 245, 247
non-paralytic squint 234, 236, 236, 
240–1
biomicroscope 41
bitemporal hemianopia 36
Bitot’s spots 278, 278
blackﬂ y 274–6
bleed into the vitreous 28
blepharitis 25, 76, 79–80, 80, 81–2, 86
anterior 79–80, 81
clinical case 298
posterior 80, 81, 90
watery eye 93
blepharokeratitis 80
blind services 283–5
blind spot 34, 36, 236, 236
swollen optic disc 220, 221
blindness causes in children 269
blindness world statistics 268, 281
blood clotting disorders 24
blood–retinal barrier 167–8
blood sugar 118
blow-out fracture 256, 257, 257–8, 265
bone spicule pigmentation 180
botulinum toxin 79, 91
Bowman’s layer 6, 262–3
brain abscess 69
brainstem nuclei 233–4, 242
branch retinal artery occlusion 192, 
201
branch retinal vein occlusion 192, 201, 
201–2
brimonidine 156
brinzolamide 156
Brown’s syndrome 248
Bruch’s membrane 7, 7, 167, 169, 170–1, 
172, 173
bulbar conjunctiva 2
bullous retinal detachment 177
buphthalmos 160
calciﬁ c emboli 198, 199
canaliculi 4, 5, 259, 262
capillary haemangioma 71, 71–2, 73

Index 317
capsulorhexis 122–3
capsulotomy 125, 126
carbon dioxide 200
carbonic anhydrase inhibitors 156
Cardiff cards and acuity test 33, 34
caroticocavernous sinus ﬁ stula 67, 68, 
70–1, 151, 244
carotid endarterectomy 199
carteolol 156
cataract 29, 61–2, 118–27
age 118–19
causes 118–19, 120
children 119, 120, 126, 127, 269
clinical case 293–4
complications 125
congenital 119–20, 126, 127, 269
developing world 270, 270–1, 281
diabetes 194
diplopia 30, 32
examination 46, 47
glaucoma 126, 127, 151, 157
location 119, 120–1
non-paralytic squint 237
onchocerciasis 274
penetrating injury 258, 260, 261, 263, 
265
questions and answers 128–9
retinal detachment 176
retinitis pigmentosa 180, 181
scleritis 113
steroid-induced 103, 119–20
surgery 120, 122–3, 124, 125, 270
trauma 119, 256, 258, 259
uveitis 119, 136, 138
world statistics 127, 268, 270
cavernous sinus disease 211
cavernous sinus thrombosis 244, 245
ceftazidine 100
ceftriaxone 100
central retinal artery occlusion 28, 192, 
199
central retinal vein occlusion (CRVO) 23, 
28, 192, 200–2, 204
glaucoma 150
swollen optic disc 220
central retinal vein pressure 220–1
central serous retinopathy 28, 168, 172, 
172
cephalosporin 100
cerebrospinal ﬂ uid (CSF) 14, 220
cerebrovascular accident 227, 227
chalazion 82, 82
chemical injury 24, 255, 256, 259, 259, 
264–5
chemosis 245, 246
chemotherapy 73
cherry-red spot 199
chiasm 225–6
children 34, 69, 152, 187, 284–5
capillary haemangioma 71, 71
cataract 119, 120, 126, 127, 269
causes of blindness 269
cone dystrophy 182
congenital glaucoma 148, 151, 160, 162
Duane’s syndrome 248
eye movements 41, 236, 252
juvenile chronic arthritis 136, 137–8
juvenile macular dystrophies 182
myasthenia gravis 247
nystagmus 251
ophthalmia neonatorum 100, 113, 280
proptosis 73
ptosis 86
retinal tumours 183–4
retinitis pigmentosa 180
retinopathy of prematurity 191, 192, 
203, 205
rhabdomyosarcoma 73
squint 236, 241, 242, 252
tear draining obstruction 92, 95
trachoma 271–2
trauma 264
uveitis 131, 136, 137, 140, 143
vitamin A deﬁ ciency 277
VKH disease 140
chlamydia 25, 91, 100, 101, 280–1
trachoma 101–2, 271–3
Chlamydia trachomatis 101, 271–3, 280–1
chloramphenicol 100
chlorhexidine 108
chloroquine 23, 173, 174
chlorpromazine 120
cholesterol emboli 198, 199, 199
cholinesterase antagonists 247
choriocapillaris 7, 168
chorioretinitis 104, 130, 185
choroid 1, 2, 7, 7–8, 14, 166–9, 275
blood supply 14, 15
macular oedema 173
rupture 256, 261, 265

318 
Index
tumours and lesions 166, 185–6, 186, 
187
uveitis 130, 133, 134
choroidal effusions 113
choroidal melanoma 151
choroiditis 28, 130, 131, 133
choroidoretinitis 275
chronic external ophthalmoplegia 77
chronic glaucoma 29
chronic closed angle glaucoma 148
chronic open angle glaucoma 148, 151–7, 
158
diabetes 194
examination 152–4
cicatricial entropion 79, 272
ciclosporin 134, 140, 142, 143
cidoﬁ vir 142
ciliary arteries 14, 15
ciliary body 1–2, 2, 10, 11, 130
glaucoma 147, 150
ciliary epithelium 10, 11, 147
ciliary ﬂ ush 24, 98
ciliary ganglionitis 212
ciliary injection 133
ciliary muscle 1, 2, 10, 11, 13
ciliary processes (pars plicata) 10, 11
ciproﬂ oxacin 100
clindamycin 140
clinical optics 58–65
questions and answers 64–5
closed angle glaucoma 146–8, 148, 
149–50, 152
acute 27–8, 148, 151, 162
chronic 148
Cogan’s twitch test 78
colchicine 140
coliforms 106
colour vision 9, 220, 222
coma 213
commotio retinae 256, 261, 264
compressive optic neuropathy 245, 
246–7
computer tomography (CT) scans 48, 
221, 227, 247–8
dysthyroid eye disease 246, 246
orbit 68–9, 69, 71, 72, 73
paralytic squint 245
trauma 263, 265
concomitant squint 233
cone dystrophy 182
cone opsin 8
cones 8–9, 9
confocal microscopy 49
confrontation tests 34, 36
congenital cataract 119–20, 126, 127, 269
congenital glaucoma 126, 127, 148, 151, 
160, 162, 269
congenital hypertrophy of the retinal 
pigment epithelium (CHRPE) 185, 
186
congenital malformations 269
congenital nystagmus 251
congenital rubella 120
conjunctiva 2, 4, 42, 68, 79, 97–104
blepharitis 80, 81
chemosis 246
degenerations 103–4
dry eye 89, 89, 91
dysthyroid eye disease 246
inﬂ ammatory disease 98, 99–103
ocular myositis 247
questions and answers 113–17
trachoma 272, 273
trauma 258–9, 259, 260
tumours 104
conjunctival xerosis 278
conjunctivitis 25, 97–8
allergic 26, 102–3
bacterial 98, 99–100
follicular 101
giant papillary 103, 103
HSV 104
ophthalmia neonatorum 280
Reiter’s disease 137
vernal 102, 103
viral 98, 101, 113, 299
contact lenses 47, 61, 62, 98, 103, 
110
congenital cataract 126
diagnostic 43, 46
glaucoma 149
keratitis 107, 108, 113
convergence 237, 240, 250
convergent squint 237–8, 238–9
copper wiring 202
cornea 1–2, 2, 6, 6–7, 58, 97–9, 104–12
abrasions 99, 256, 259–60, 262–3
astigmatism 60
blepharokeratitis 80
chemicals 259, 259, 264–5
ciliary body 11
clinical cases 289–90, 295–6

Index 319
conjunctivitis 100–1
degenerations 110–11
disorders of shape 109–10
dry eye 89, 89, 91
dystrophies 109
dysthyroid eye disease 246–7
eyelids 3, 4, 80, 86
examination 38, 42, 43, 47
foreign bodies 24, 255, 256, 259, 260, 
263
glaucoma 150–2, 154, 159, 159, 160
grafting 104–5, 108, 109–10, 111, 
111–12, 113
infection 26, 97, 104–9
infective lesions 104–9
intraocular pressure 38
laceration 256, 256, 259
marginal keratitis 80
measles 279, 280
onchocerciasis 274
opacities 27, 30, 45, 107, 109, 212, 263, 
275
ophthalmia neonatorum 280
penetration 263–4, 295–6
perforation 42, 43, 108
questions and answers 113–17
red eye 24
surgery 63–4, 122
thinning 110–11
trachoma 102, 271–2, 272–3, 273
trauma 258, 259–60, 260
ulceration 28, 105, 107, 108, 246, 278, 
279, 280, 289–90
vitamin A deﬁ ciency 277–8, 278, 
279
xerosis 278, 278
see also keratitis
corneo-scleral meshwork 12
cornpickers’ pupil 213
cotton-wool spots 192–3, 193–4, 196, 202, 
220
cover test 41, 232, 237, 239, 240
Coxsackie 101
cranial nerves 15–16, 16–18
see also fourth cranial nerve; sixth 
cranial nerve; third cranial nerve
craniopharyngioma 226
C-reactive protein 224
cribriform plate 2, 14, 14
Crohn’s disease 133
cryoprobe 160, 177, 179, 184
cryotherapy 85, 86, 184, 203
cyanide 226
cyanoacrylate glue 108
cyclitis 130
cyclopentolate 134, 214, 240, 262
cyst of Moll 83
cystoid macular oedema 125, 167
cysts 73, 83
cytomegalovirus (CMV) 133, 134, 136, 
280
retinitis 141–2, 142, 280
cytotoxic therapy 113
dacrocystitis 92, 94, 94
dacroscintogram 93, 93
dacryocystorhinostomy (DCR) 93, 94, 
95
dapsone 140
Datura stramonium 213
defensins 6
Demodex folliculorum 81
demyelination 249–50, 251
dendritic ulcer 104, 105, 105
depression 233, 242
dermatographia 131
dermoid cysts 73, 73
Descemet’s membrane 6, 160
diabetes 23, 49, 194–6, 196–7, 198, 204, 
212
cataract 120
ischaemic optic neuropathy 224
paralytic squint 244, 245
retinal detachment 175, 179
retinal venous occlusion 201
sudden visual loss 27–8, 29
world statistics 268
diabetic retinopathy 172, 191, 192, 194–6, 
196–7, 198
classiﬁ cation 196
proliferative 28, 150, 175, 179, 195, 
196–7
diagnostic contact lenses 43, 46
digital imaging 49
dilator muscles 11–12
dipivefrine 156, 214
diplopia 30–2, 41, 68, 236, 247, 249
causes 32
dysthyroid eye disease 245, 247
paralytic squint 242, 245
raised intracranial pressure 219
direct ophthalmoscope 119

320 
Index
discharge 98, 99, 101, 107
disciform keratitis 104
disinfection of equipment 22–3
divergence 238, 240
divergent squint 238, 238
dorsal midbrain syndrome 213, 250
dorzolamide 156
double vision see diplopia
downbeat nystagmus 251
Down’s syndrome 120
drainage angle 2, 12–13
drú1sen 168, 169, 218–19, 220
dry macular degeneration 30, 168, 169
dry eyes 26, 88–9, 89–90, 90–1, 95, 111, 
272
aqueous deﬁ cient 89, 89–90, 91
evaporative 90–1
keratoconjunctivitis sicca 89, 107
Duane’s syndrome 248
dura mater 14, 14
dysthyroid eye disease 30, 68–9, 73, 90, 
245, 246, 246–7
ectopia lentis 127
ectropion 41, 79, 79, 90
Edinger Westphäl nucleus 213
edrophonium 247
efferent pathway 38
electroretinogram (ERG) 48
electromagnetic radiation 260
electromyography 247
electo-oculogram 48
electrophysiological tests 48
elevation 233, 242, 250
emmetropia 50, 59
emphysema 258
end-gaze nystagmus 250
endophthalmitis 26, 28, 125
endothelial meshwork 12
endothelium 6, 6
enophthamos 67, 211, 258, 265
entropion 25, 41, 78, 78–9, 85, 102
trachoma 272, 273
enucleation 184, 186
epicanthus 237, 238
epiphora 79, 92, 162, 258
episcleral venous pressure 147, 148, 151
episcleritis 26, 97, 112
epithelial keratitis 104
epithelium 6, 6
equator of lens 13, 13
erythema 68
erythema multiforme 91
erythema nodosum 131
erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 
223–4
erythromycin 100, 102
esophoria 240
esotropia 237–8, 239
etanercept 136
ethmoid 3
examination 22–3, 32–41
anatomical 41–6
glaucoma 38, 49, 152–4, 159
investigative 46–9
non-paralytic squint 237–8
paralytic squint 242
questions and answers 51–7
trauma 257–62
exocrinopathy 89
exophoria 240
exophthalmic ophthalmoplegia 
246
exophthalmometer 47, 66
exophthalmos 66, 245
exotropia 238
exposure keratopathy 68, 73, 279
external blood-retinal barrier 15
external hordeolum 82
external limiting membrane 8
extorsion 233
extracapsular cataract extraction (ECCE) 
122–3, 124, 270
extra-conal lesion 66, 67
extraocular muscle 2, 233, 245–8
exudates 192, 192, 193, 202
exudative retinal detachment 175
eye movement 30–1, 68, 70, 232–54
abnormal oscillations 250–1
blow-out fracture 257, 258, 265
children 41, 236, 252
examination 40–1
extraocular muscle disease 245–8
internuclear ophthalmoplegia 
249–50
lesions of PPRF 248–9
non-paralytic squint 234–42
paralytic squint 242–5
Parinaud’s syndrome 250
questions and answers 252–4

Index 321
eyelashes 4, 76, 82, 85–6
blepharitis 80, 80, 81
entropion 78, 78–9
eyelids 3–4, 4, 76–87, 246
abnormalities of lashes 76, 85–6
abnormalities of position 25, 76–9, 86
benign lumps 76, 82–4, 290–1
dry eye 90–1
dysthyroid eye disease 245–7
eversion of upper lid 42, 43
examination 41–2
inﬂ ammation 25, 76, 79–82
lacerations 262
orbit 68, 69–70, 71
questions and answers 86–7
tumours 76, 82–4, 84, 85–6
Fabry disease 120
facial asymmetry 237
Fenton reaction 258
ﬁ brillin 118, 127
ﬁ brin-platelet emboli 198, 199
ﬁ lamentary keratitis 89, 90
ﬂ are 130, 133
ﬂ ickering target test 38
ﬂ oaters 28, 138, 139, 174, 176
ﬂ uorescein 42, 43, 169–70, 172, 193
angiography 48, 48–9, 49
diabetic retinopathy 195, 196–7
dry eye 89, 89
trauma 259
ﬂ uorocarbon gas 178, 179
ﬂ uoroquindones 108
5-ﬂ uorouracil 157
follicles 98, 98, 272, 272
follicular conjunctivitis 83, 101
foramina 66
foreign bodies
cornea 24, 255, 256, 259, 260, 263
trauma 255–6, 256, 258–60, 260, 263, 
263, 265
fornices 3, 4
fortiﬁ cation spectra 28–9
fourth cranial nerve 15, 16, 16–18, 30, 
194
paralytic squint 242, 243, 244, 245
fovea 2, 14, 34, 167, 169, 199
examination 34, 45, 45
macular holes 171, 171
macular oedema 172, 173
Fuchs’ heterochromic cyclitis 136, 138
fundoscopy 184, 195
fundus 45, 46, 48, 186
trauma 258, 261–2
fungal infection 133, 136
keratitis 108–9, 273, 280
fusidic acid 100
galactosaemia 120
ganciclovir 105, 141–2
ganglion cell later of retina 8, 8, 13
gaze-evoked nystagmus 251
gaze palsies 232, 233, 248
gender 159, 172, 182, 187, 212, 221, 247
gentamicin 100
giant cell arteritis (GCA) 29, 199, 220, 
223–4
clinical case 286–7
giant (cobblestone) papillae 99, 103, 103
giant papillary conjunctivitis (GPC) 103, 
103
glasses (spectacles) 62, 124, 241–2, 245
ametropia 59, 59–60, 60
cataract extraction 61–2
presbyopia 60
glaucoma 23, 24, 26–9, 138, 146–65
acute 26, 98
acute closed angle 27–8, 148, 151, 162, 
288–9
angle closure 136, 143
band keratopathy 110
cataract 126, 127, 151, 157
chronic 29
chronic closed angle 148
chronic open angle 148, 151–7, 158
classiﬁ cation 147–8
closed angle 146–8, 148, 149–50, 152
congenital 126, 127, 148, 151, 160, 162, 
269
diabetes 194
drugs 156
examination 38, 49, 152–4, 159
keratitis 104
lens displacement 127
low tension 149
normal tension 149, 152, 153, 157
pale optic disc 226
pathogenesis 149–51
prognosis 161
pupils 210, 213

322 
Index
questions and answers 162–5
rubeotic 194, 201
scleritis 113
shingles 106
steroid-induced 103, 138, 148, 150
world statistics 268
see also open-angle glaucoma; primary 
glaucoma; secondary glaucoma
glioma 71, 244
Goldmann tonometer 38, 39
gonioscopy 46, 149, 152, 262
goniotomy 160
gonorrhoeal keratitis 280
gradual vision loss 29–30
causes 30
Graves’ disease 30, 68
great wing of sphenoid 3
Guillain-Barré syndrome 244
Haemophilus 100, 106
Haemophilus inﬂ uenzae 69
haemorrhage
optic disc 153
retinal vascular disease 192, 192–3, 
202
white-centred 204, 205
hayfever 26, 102
Hermansky–Pudlak syndrome 182
herpes simplex 100, 136, 141
keratitis 104–5, 105, 279
herpes zoster 141, 244, 280
herpes zoster ophthalmicus (ophthalmic 
shingles) 105–6, 106
heterochromia 211, 258
hill of vision 34, 35
history 22, 23–32, 49
AIDS retinitis 141
chronic open angle glaucoma 151, 152
diabetic retinopathy 195
key points 23
non-paralytic squint 237
optic neuritis 222
pale optic disc 226
papilloedema 219
paralytic squint 242
primary angle closure glaucoma 159
pupils 213
questions and answers 50–6
retinal arterial occlusion 199
retinitis pigmentosa 181
retinoblastoma 183–4
speciﬁ c 23–32
tear drainage 92
trauma 255, 256–7, 258, 264–5
uveitis 131, 133, 134, 136–8
HIV and AIDS 280, 141–2, 142
uveitis 133, 134, 136
homocystinuria 127
homonymous hemianopia 226, 227, 283
homozygous defect 183
horizontal gaze palsy 249
Horner’s syndrome 4, 67, 77, 78, 211, 211
human leucocyte antigen (HLA) typing 
134
hyaluronic acid 9
hydrocephalus 221
hydroxychloroquine 173
hyphaema 150, 256, 260, 261, 262, 264
hypercalcaemia 110
hypercholesterolaemia 83
hyperﬂ uorescence 196–7
hyperglycaemia 194
hyperlipoproteinaemia 111
hypermetropia 59–60, 60, 61, 64, 237
hyperosmolarity 88, 90
hyperparathyroidism 110
hypertension 23, 27, 29, 149, 202, 202, 
221, 224
diabetic retinopathy 194
malignant 202, 202, 219, 220
paralytic squint 244, 245
red eye 24
retinal arterial occlusion 199
retinal venous occlusion 201
retinopathy 192, 202, 202
swollen optic disc 219, 220
hyperthyroidism 245
hypocalcaemia 120
hypopyon 107, 125, 132, 133
hypothyroidism 245
immunoglobulins 6
inclusion keratoconjunctivitis 101
incomitant squint 233
indocyanin green angiography (ICG) 49
infantile chorioretinitis 104
infection 25–6, 269, 279, 280
conjunctiva 97, 99–103
cornea 26, 97, 104–9, 289–90
nasolacrimal system 94–5

Index 323
onchocerciasis 274–6
orbit 26, 68, 69–70
paralytic squint 244
red eye 24, 24, 25–6
trachoma 271–3
inferior meatus 5
inferior orbital ﬁ ssure 3, 3
inferior recti 233, 246
inferior turbinate 5
inﬂ ammation 23, 26
conjunctiva 98, 99–103
eyelids 76, 79–82
ocular myositis 247
orbit 67, 68–9, 70, 73
paralytic squint 244
red eye 24, 24, 25, 26
sclera 112–13
uveitis 130–43
inﬂ ammatory bowel disease 133, 136
inﬂ ammatory prostaglandin release 125
infraorbital nerve 258
inherited disorders 166
astrocytomas 184
juvenile macular dystrophies 182
retinitis pigmentosa 180–1
retinoblastoma 183–4
injection 98, 107
inner blood–retinal barrier 14
inner limiting membrane of retina 8
inner nuclear layer of retina 8
inner and outer segments of 
photoreceptors 8
inner plexiform layer of retina 8
interferon alpha 140
intermediate uveitis 130
internal hordeolum 82
International Agency for the Prevention 
of Blindness 269
international normalized ratio (INR) 
24
internuclear ophthalmoplegia 249, 
249–50
interstitial keratitis 109
intorsion 233
intra-conal lesion 66
intraocular lenses (IOLs) 61
intraocular pressure 200, 201, 210, 262, 
264
acute elevation 24
examination 38, 39
glaucoma 146–7, 149, 149–52, 154–7, 
159–61, 161, 162
iridectomy 158, 160
iridocorneal angle 2, 2, 11, 12–13
glaucoma 149–51, 152, 160
trauma 256, 262, 264
iridodonesis 260
iridotomy 160
iris 1–2, 2, 11, 11–12, 42
dialysis 256, 260
glaucoma 147, 148, 150–1, 160
prolapse 125
trauma 256, 260, 261
uveitis 130, 133, 134
iris sphincter 210, 212
iritis 24, 38, 104, 106, 130, 138
clinical case 292
iron 258, 263, 265
irregular retinal veins 192, 203
irritation 98, 99
ischaemia 192, 195, 201
ischaemic optic neuropathy 219, 222–4, 
225
anterior 29, 222
pale optic disc 223, 225–6, 227
swollen optic disc 220
isoniazid 23, 226
isoptres 34, 35
ivermectin 276
jerk nystagmus 250–1
Jimson weed 213
juvenile arthritis 131, 136, 137–8, 
143
juvenile macular dystrophies 182
keratic precipitates (KPs) 28, 99
uveitis 133, 134, 138
keratinisation 278
keratitis 28, 98–9, 102, 104–5, 105, 112, 
280
acanthamoeba 108, 108
bacterial 106–8, 280
disciform 104
epithelial 104
fungal 108–9, 273, 280
herpes simplex 104–5, 105, 279
interstitial 109
measles 279
onchocerciasis 274–5, 275

324 
Index
ophthalmia neonatorum 280–1
punctuate 81
sclerosing 275
shingles 105
stromal 104
viral 104–6, 113
keratoacanthoma 83, 84
keratoconjunctivitis 101, 104
keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS) 89, 
107
keratoconus 47, 109–10
keratocytes 6, 6
keratolysis 265
keratomalacia 91, 278, 279
keratometry 47, 47, 124
Kikuyu Hospital, Kenya 270
kinetic visual ﬁ eld 36
lacrimal bone and fossa 3, 3
lacrimal canaliculi 259, 262
lacrimal drainage system 3, 4, 5, 92–4
lacrimal gland 3, 3, 66, 67, 71
lacrimal sac 3, 4, 5, 92, 93, 93–4
lacrimal system 88–96
questions and answers 95–6
lactoferrin 6
lagophthalmos 90
laser-assisted in situ keratomileusis 
(LASIK) 64
laser-assisted subepithelial 
keratomileusis (LASEK) 64
lasers 110, 169, 172, 201, 203, 204, 263
diabetic retinopathy 195, 196, 198
glaucoma 157, 158, 160, 162
ndYAG 125
retinal detachment 177, 179
retinoblastoma 184
scanning techniques 49
trabeculoplasty 157, 158
YAG 160
latanoprost 156
lateral tarsorrhaphy 91, 91
lateral recti 233, 235, 248
lattice degeneration 175
Laurence–Moon syndrome 180
Leber’s hereditary optic neuropathy 
226
lens 1–2, 2, 10, 13, 13, 58
cataract 118–27
change in position 127
change in shape 126
correction after cataract extraction 
61–2
examination 42
glaucoma 150
questions and answers 128–9
trauma 127, 260, 261, 262
lesser wing of sphenoid 3
leucocoria 183, 183
leukaemia 204
levator muscle 4, 4, 41, 78
levobunolol 156
lid lag 246
lidocaine 258
light–near dissociation 212–13
limbal ﬂ ush 24
limbus 1, 2, 6, 131, 133
lipid arcus 111
lipofuscin 169
logMAR acuity chart 33, 34
low tension glaucoma 149
low-vision aids 63, 63
Lowe’s syndrome 120
lymphomas 71, 72–3
lysozyme 6
macropsia 167
macula 45, 45, 166, 167, 187
acquired disease 167–70
age-related degeneration (AMD) 166–7, 
168, 168–70, 187, 268
degeneration 49
diabetes 195, 196, 196–7
hole 28, 167, 171, 171, 256, 261, 265
juvenile dystrophies 182
oedema 172, 173, 180–1, 181, 201
retinal detachment 177, 179
toxic maculopathies 173
uveitis 134, 140
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 48, 
221, 222, 245, 246
abnormal retinal blood vessels 204
ankylosing spondylitis 136, 137
internuclear ophthalmoplegia 250
ocular myositis 247–8
orbit 68, 69, 71
malignant melanoma 104
Marcus –Gunn jaw-winking syndrome 77
Marfan syndrome 127
marginal keratitis 80
mast cell stabilizers 103
maxillary process 3

Index 325
M-cell pathway 38
measles 269, 277, 279, 280
medial canthus 258
medial longitudinal fasciculus (MLF) 
249, 249
medial recti 233, 241, 246, 248
meibomian gland 3, 4, 5, 82, 90
blepharitis 80, 80, 81
melanoma 104, 185, 186, 186–7
meningiomas 71, 72, 226, 244
optic nerve sheath 66, 67, 71
Merck 276
metamorphopsia 167, 173
metipranolol 156
microﬁ lariae 274–6
micropannus 101
micropsia 167
midbrain pupil 213
migraine 28–9, 199
miosis 209, 211, 212, 213
mitomycin 157
Mohs surgery 85
molluscum contagiosum 82, 83, 86, 
290–1
monocular diplopia 30, 32, 32
Mooren’s ulcer 110–11
morphine 213, 214
mucin gel layer of tear ﬁ lm 5, 6
mucin glycocalyx 5
mucocoele 70, 92, 94–5
mucocutaneous junction 4
mucolytics 103
Mü1ller’s muscle 4
multiple sclerosis 212, 222, 249
muscular arteries 14, 15
muscular dystrophy 77
myasthenia 30, 41
myasthenia gravis 77, 78, 247
mycophenolate 140
mydriasis (pupil dilation) 209, 213, 244
glaucoma 150, 159, 159, 160
paralytic squint 2442, 243
trauma 210, 256, 258, 260, 261
mydriatics 134
myogenic diplopia 32
myopia 59, 59–60, 60, 110, 127, 170
cataract 119, 126
ﬂ oaters 174
refractive surgery 63–4
retinal detachment 176
swollen optic disc 218–19, 219, 220
myositis 68, 69, 247–8
myotonic dystrophy 120
naevi 83, 185
nasal bone 3
nasal cavity 5
nasolacrimal system 4, 5, 5, 92–4, 290
navigational vision 170
near response (reﬂ ex) 40, 209
Neisseria gonorrhoeae 100, 107, 280
neodymium yttrium garnet (ndYAG) laser 
125
neomycin 100
neoplasia 244
neostigmine 247
nerve ﬁ bre layer of retina 8, 13
nerve palsy 79, 232, 233, 235, 242, 243–4, 
245
clinical case 287–8
ptosis 77, 78
neuroﬁ bromatosis 71, 184
neurogenic diplopia 31, 32
neurokeratitis 108
neuroretina 8, 166, 167
detachment 175, 176, 179
rim 153, 154
neurosyphilis 213
new vessels 192–3, 194, 196, 196–7, 198
retinopathy of prematurity 203
sickle cell retinopathy 204
venous occlusion 201
night vision 9, 167, 180, 278
non-paralytic squint 232, 233, 234–42
non-pigmented layer of ciliary processes 
10, 11
non-steroidal anti-inﬂ ammatory drugs 
(NSAIDs) 64, 112, 125, 136
normal tension glaucoma 149, 152, 153, 
157
nystagmus 41, 126, 182, 232, 233, 
250–1
internuclear ophthalmoplegia 249
Parinaud’s syndrome 250
obicularis muscle 79
obscurations of vision 219, 220, 221
ocular albinism 182
ocular blood supply 14–15, 15
ocular massage 200
ocular myopathy 248
ocular myositis 247–8

326 
Index
ocular pain 30, 31, 68
oculocutaneous albinism 182
oedema
cystoids macular 125, 167
macular 172, 173, 180–1, 201
retinal 196, 199
retinal vascular disease 192, 192
oﬂ oxacin 100
oil layer of tear ﬁ lm 5, 6
Onchocerca volvulus 274
onchocerciasis (river blindness) 268, 
274–6, 281
open-angle glaucoma 146–8, 148
chronic 148, 151–7, 158
primary 149, 162
treatment 155–7, 158
operculum 177
ophthalmia neonatorum 100, 113, 269, 
280–1
ophthalmic artery 14, 15
ophthalmitis 264
ophthalmoscopy 42–3, 44, 44–6, 217, 261
macula 169, 172, 173
retinal arterial occlusion 199
retinal detachment 177
optic atrophy 222, 225
optic canal 2–3
optic disc 45, 45, 49, 218–19, 225, 262
atrophic 199
cupping 152, 153, 153–4, 154
diabetic retinopathy 196
glaucoma 152, 153, 153–4, 154, 162
glaucomatous notch 153, 153
haemorrhage 153
ischaemia 219, 223, 223
pale 223, 225–6, 227
retinal arterial occlusion 199
retinal venous occlusion 200–1
swollen 217, 218–19, 219–20, 220, 222, 
227
optic foramen 3
optic neuritis 29, 40, 219, 220, 221–2, 226
clinical case 297
onchocerciasis 275
RAPD 212
optic neuropathy 146, 256, 262
optic nerve 2, 8, 13–14, 14, 18, 30, 71
abnormalities 29
astrocytomas 184
atrophy 225
compression 68, 73, 245, 246–7
decompression 221
demyelination 221–2
drú1ssen 218–19, 220
glaucoma 146–7, 149, 153–4, 154–5, 
155, 161–2
glioma 71
melanoma 186
meningioma 71
myelination 218–19, 219, 220
orbital cellulitis 69–70
pale optic disc 226
RAPD 212
sheath meningioma 66, 67, 71
swollen optic disc 219, 220
uveitis 134, 140
visual acuity 68
visual pathway 216–17, 217
optical coherence tomogram (OCT) 171, 
172, 173
optineurin gene 152
optokinetic nystagmus 250
ora serrata 2, 8
oral contraceptives 219, 221
orbicularis muscle 3, 4
orbit 2–3, 3, 26, 66–75
blow-out fracture 256, 257, 257–8, 265
paralytic squint 244, 245
questions and answers 74–5
tumours 66–7, 67, 68, 69, 71–2, 72, 73
orbital apex masses 67
orbital cellulitis 29, 68, 69, 69–70, 73, 291
orbital diplopia 32
orbital mucocoele 70
orbital varices 67, 71
oscillopsia 251
outer plexiform layer of retina 8
oxygen 203
pachymeter 152
Paget’s disease 170
pain 30, 31, 68
palpebral ﬁ ssure 67
palpebral muscle 3
Pancoast’s syndrome 211
pannus 99, 99, 272
panuveitis 130, 140, 143
papillae 98, 103, 272
papillitis 29, 219, 220, 221, 222
papilloedema 217, 218–19, 219–21

Index 327
paracentesis 200
paraesthesia 258
paralytic squint 68, 232, 233, 235, 242, 
243–4, 245
parapontine reticular formation (PPRF) 
234, 248–9
parasympathetic nervous system 12, 209, 
210
parasympathomimetic drugs 156
paresis 30
Parinaud’s syndrome 212, 213, 250
Parkinson’s disease 90
pars plana 10, 11, 130
pars plicata 10, 11
patching 241, 242, 245
pen torch 42
pendular nystagmus 250, 251
penicillin 100
perimeters 36, 37, 38
peripapillary atrophy 219, 220
peripheral anterior synechiae (PAS) 133, 
150, 160
phacoemulsiﬁ cation 122–3, 124, 270
phakogenic 136
phenothiazines 173
phenylephrine 134, 214
phoria 240
photocoagulation 184
photophobia 24, 25, 89, 98, 102, 131
glaucoma 159, 160
photopsia 174
photoreceptors 7–8, 8–9, 167, 169, 180, 
182
central serous retinopathy 172, 172
photorefractive keratectomy (PRK) 64
phthisis bulbi 278
pia mater 14, 14
picornavirus 101
pigment dispersion syndrome 150
pigmented layer of ciliary processes 10, 
11
pilocarpine 156, 156, 160, 212, 213, 
214
pimaricin 109
pinealoma 250
pinguecular 26, 103, 103
Pneumococcus 100
pneumonitis 281
poliosis 140–1
polyarteris nodosa 112
polyhexamethylene biguanide (PHMB) 
108
polymorphonuclear leucocytes (PMNs) 
28
polyposis coli 185
posterior capsule 125, 126
posterior cerebral artery 16, 18
posterior chamber 2, 2
posterior communicating artery 16, 18
posterior synechiae (PS) 39, 132, 133, 
134, 138
posterior uveitis 28, 130, 131, 134
posterior vitreous detachment 28, 166, 
174, 175, 175–6
clinical case 288
povidone–iodine eye drops 281
preferential looking test 34
pregnancy 195, 277
preproliferative retinopathy 195, 196–7
presbyopia 60
preseptal cellulitis 68, 70, 70
primary glaucoma 146–8, 160, 162
closed angle 159, 159–60, 161–2
open angle 149
prisms 245, 247
probing lacrimal system 92
progressive external ophthalmoplegia 
248
proliferative diabetic retinopathy 28, 150, 
175, 179, 195, 196–7
proliferative vitreoretinopathy (PVR) 179
propamidine 108
propranolol 71, 72
proptosis 47, 66–7, 68, 70, 71, 73, 90
dysthyroid eye disease 245–6, 246
prostaglandin analogues 26, 155, 156
proton beam irradiation 186
psoriasis 131
psoriatic arthritis 136
pseudo-enophthalmos 67
pseudoexfoliative glaucoma 150
pseudomonas 106
pseudopapilloedema 219, 220
pseudophakia 61
pseudoxanthoma elasticum 170, 170
pterygia 26, 103, 103–4
ptosis 4, 41, 71, 76, 77, 77–8, 91
Horner’s syndrome 211, 211
ocular myopathy 248
paralytic squint 242, 243, 244

328 
Index
puncta 3, 4, 5, 92–3
punctate epithelial erosions (PEE) 99
punctate keratitis 81
punctate keratoconjunctivitis 101, 104
punctate staining 89
pupils 11, 38–40, 42, 209–15
contraction (miosis) 209, 211, 212, 213
questions and answers 214–15
trauma 210, 258, 260, 265
see also mydriasis (pupil dilation)
pupillary synechiae 28
pursuit movement 41, 233–4
pyridostigmine 247
quadrantic defects 36
race 185
radiation 186, 226–7, 255, 260
radiotherapy 85, 184, 186, 187, 247
orbit tumours 72, 73
raised intracranial pressure 29, 217, 
218–19, 219–21, 227, 244
recurrent corneal erosion 262, 265
receptor nuclear layer of retina 8
recession 241, 242, 262, 264
red eye 24–6, 98–9, 113, 125, 131
causes and symptoms 24
clinical case 292–3
differential diagnosis 25
glaucoma 159, 162
red reﬂ ex 44–5, 182, 260, 261
cataract 119, 121
refractive error 236–7, 240, 241, 268
refractive surgery 47, 63–4
Reiter’s disease 131, 136, 137
relative afferent pupil defect (RAPD) 40, 
40, 212, 220, 222
renal failure 110
resection 241, 242
restrictive diplopia 31
restrictive thyroid myopathy 246
retina 2, 2, 7, 8, 8–9, 23, 58, 166–74
abnormalities 28–9, 237, 240
albinism 182
AMD 168–70
ametropia 59
central serous retinopathy 172, 172
ciliary body 11
dialysis 256, 261, 264
disease 226, 227
examination 42–6, 48–9
glaucoma 153, 155
inﬂ ammation 130, 133
inherited dystrophies 180–2
juvenile macular dystrophies 182
macular oedema 172, 173
oedema 196, 199
onchocerciasis 274, 275, 276
optic nerve 13–14, 14
peripheral dysfunction 167
retinoschisis 179
sickle cell disease 192, 204
tears 28, 175, 176–7, 177, 179
trauma 258, 261, 264
tumours 166, 175, 183–5
see also retinal detachment
retinal artery 14, 14–15
occlusion 167, 191–2, 198, 199, 199–200, 
226
retinal detachment 28, 166, 167, 171, 
175–9, 187
cataract surgery 125
diabetes 198
traction 175, 179, 196–7, 198, 203, 204
trauma 176, 264
uveitis 136, 140, 143
retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) 7, 7–8, 
8–9, 9, 14, 166
acquired macular disease 167–8, 168, 
169
blood supply 14
central serous retinopathy 172, 172
congenital hypertrophy (CHRPE) 185, 
186
examination 48
juvenile macular dystrophies 182
macular hole 171
macular oedema 173
retinal detachment 175, 176, 177, 178, 
179
toxic maculopathies 173
retinal vascular disease 191–208
questions and answers 205–8
retinal vein 14, 14
occlusion 172, 191, 192, 201, 226
retinitis 28, 130, 133, 134
retinitis pigmentosa 23, 167, 226
macular oedema 172, 180–1, 181
retinoblastoma 183–4
retinopathy of prematurity 191, 192, 203, 
205, 269
retinoschisis 179

Index 329
retinoscopy 46
retrobulbar neuritis 29, 221, 222
rhabdomyosarcomas 69, 71, 73
rhegmatogenous retinal detachment 175, 
176, 176–9
rheumatoid arthritis 89, 111, 112, 173
rhodopsin 8, 180
riboﬂ avin 110
rodent ulcer 84
rod–cone dystrophies 226
rods 8–9, 9, 167, 180
Roth spots 204, 205
Royal National Institute of the Blind 
(RNIB) 283–4
rubella 148
rubeosis iridis 150, 151
rubeotic glaucoma 194, 201
saccades 233–4
saccadic eye movements 41
SAFE strategy 273
salivary glands 89
sarcoid 23
sarcoidosis 131, 133, 134, 136, 244
scanning laser ophthalmoscope 
(Heidelberg) 154
Schlemm’s canal 2, 2, 11, 12, 12–13
glaucoma 147, 147, 160
scintillating scotomata 29
sclera 1–2, 2, 4, 7, 11–12, 112–13
optic nerve 14, 14
questions and answers 113–17
trauma 256, 256, 258–9, 163–4
scleritis 26, 97, 112, 112
scleromalacia 112
sclerostomy 157, 158, 177
scopolamine 213
scotomata 36, 154, 155, 167, 222
seasonal allergic conjunctivitis (hayfever) 
26, 102
sebaceous cysts 83
seborrhoeic dermatitis 81
secondary glaucoma 146, 148, 150–1, 
160, 161, 186
onchocerciasis 274
trauma 259, 265
secretory IgA 6
services 283–5
seventh cranial nerve palsy 79
Sheridan–Gardiner test 34
shingles 105–6, 106, 133
sickle cell disease 170–1, 264
retinopathy 192, 204
siderosis oculi 258
silver wiring 202
sixth cranial nerve 15, 16, 16–18, 30, 221, 
249
diabetes 194
Duane’s syndrome 248
palsy 235
paralytic squint 242, 243, 244, 245
Sjö1gren’s syndrome 89, 90
slit lamps 41, 119, 124, 130, 133
glaucoma 149, 152, 153
trauma 260, 262, 262, 263
small cell carcinoma 211
smoking 118, 169–70, 194, 201, 
226
Snellen charts 32, 33, 34, 36, 225
sodium edetate 110
soft exudates (cotton-wool spots) 192–3, 
193–4, 196, 202, 220
spectacles see glasses (spectacles)
sphincter of iris 11–12
squamous cell carcinoma 85, 104
squamous cell papilloma 83, 84
squint 32, 40–1, 126, 184, 246, 252
alternating 236, 239
children 236, 241, 242, 252, 296–7
clinical case 296–7
concomitant 233
convergent 237–8, 238–9
divergent 238, 238
incomitant 233
vertical 238
see also non-paralytic squint; paralytic 
squint
staphylococcal infection 80, 81, 94, 100, 
106
Staphylococcus 94, 100
Staphylococcus aureus 106
Staphylococcus epidermidis 
106
Stargardt’s dystrophy 182
static visual ﬁ eld 36
stem cells 6
transplantation 265
stereopsis 234, 236, 240, 242
steroids 29, 113, 125
allergic conjunctivitis 103
bacterial keratitis 107
blepharitis 81

330 
Index
capillary haemangioma 71
causing cataracts 103, 119–20
causing glaucoma 103, 138, 148, 150
corneal grafting 111
dendritic ulcer 105
dysthyroid eye disease 247
fungal keratitis 108
ischaemic optic neuropathy 224
keratoconjunctivitis 101
macular oedema 172
myasthenia gravis 247
ocular myositis 248
optic neuritis 222
retinal venous occlusion 201
scleritis 113
trauma 263, 264
uveitis 134, 135, 138–9, 142–3, 264
Stevens–Johnson syndrome 91
strabismus 234, 236, 242
Streptococcus 100
Streptococcus pneumonia 106
stroma 6, 6–7
fenestrated capillaries 10, 11
stromal keratitis 104
Sturge–Weber syndrome 151
styes 82
subconjunctival haemorrhage 24, 99, 
256, 258, 259
sub-retinal neovascular membrane 169, 
170
sub-Tenon’s injection 134, 135
sudden visual loss 27–9
causes 27
sulphadiazine 140
superior cerebellar artery 16
superior orbital ﬁ ssure 3, 3, 18
superior recti 233
supranuclear pathways 233,
supraorbital notch 3
surgery 241, 241–2, 245, 247, 273
cataract 120, 122–3, 124, 125, 270
swinging ﬂ ashlight test 40, 40
symblepharon 91
sympathetic ophthalmitis 136, 142–3
sympathetic nervous system 12, 209, 210, 
210, 211
sympathomimetic drugs 156, 157
synechiae 28, 275, 275
peripheral anterior (PAS) 133, 150, 160
posterior (PS) 39, 132, 133, 134, 138
synkinesis 237
synoptophore 47, 240
syphilis 109, 133
syringomyelia 211
systemic lupus erythematosis 112
tacrolimus 140
taﬂ uprost 156
tamoxifen 173
tarsal conjunctiva 2, 3
tarsal plates 3–4, 4
see also eyelids
tea tree oil 81
tears and tear ﬁ lm 3, 5–6, 6, 81, 88–96, 
272
drainage 88, 92–4
evaporation 90–1
technetium 93, 93
temporal arcades 45
Tenon’s capsule 2, 4, 134, 135
tetracyclines 81, 100–2, 219, 221, 264
thioridazine 173
third cranial nerve 15, 16, 16, 17–18, 30
aneurysm 251
diabetes 194
internuclear ophthalmoplegia 249
palsy 77, 78, 232, 287–8
paralytic squint 242, 243, 244, 245
pupils 210, 213
three-mirror lens 43, 46
threshold stimuli 36, 37
thrombophlebitis 131
thyroid function test 246
tight junctions of ciliary processes 10, 
11
timolol 156
toluene 226
tonometer 152
toxaemia of pregnancy 175
toxic optic neuropathy 226
toxoplasmic retinochoroiditis uveitis 134, 
139, 139
toxoplasmosis 134, 136, 139–40, 141
trabecular meshwork 2, 11, 12, 12–13, 
133
glaucoma 147, 147–8, 149–51, 157, 158, 
160, 162
trauma 264, 265
trabulectomy 157, 158
trabeculoplasty 157

Index 331
trabeculotomy 160
trachoma 101–2, 102, 268, 271–2, 272–3, 
273
children 269
trichiasis 85
world statistics 271, 271, 281
traction retinal detachment 175, 179, 
203, 204
diabetes 196–7, 198
trauma 31, 38, 255–67, 280
Brown’s syndrome 248
cataract 119, 256, 258, 259
chemical 255, 264–5
glaucoma 148, 150
lens 127, 260, 261, 262
orbit 67
paralytic squint 244
penetrating 255, 257, 258, 259–2, 
263–5
pupils 38, 210, 258, 260, 265
questions and answers 266–7
raised intracranial pressure 219
red eye 24, 24
retinal detachment 176, 264
uveitis 136, 142, 256, 259, 262, 264
traumatic mydriasis 210
travaprost 156
trichiasis 85–6, 91, 102, 272–3
triﬂ uorothymidine 105
trigeminal nerve 105
tropia 237–8
tropical diseases 268–82
questions and answers 281–2
tropicamide 44, 214
tuberculosis 131, 136
tuberose sclerosis 184
tumours and lesions 187, 213
cataract 28
chiasm 217, 225–6
choroidal 166, 185–6, 186, 187
conjunctiva 104
eyelids 76, 82–4, 84, 85–6
orbit 66–7, 67, 68–9, 71–2, 72, 73
pituitary 227, 227
retinal 166, 175, 183–5
swollen optic disc 220, 221
uveitis 136
visual pathway 217, 218–19, 226–7, 
227
tunnel vision 155
ulcerative colitis 133
ultrasound 24, 46, 175, 186, 199, 264
ultraviolet (UV) radiation 85, 103, 118, 
260, 263
unoprostone 156
upbeat nystagmus 251
upper fornix 4
Usher’s syndrome 180, 181
uvea 1, 2
uveal meshwork 12
uveitis 28, 29, 98, 130, 131–2
anterior 28, 130–1, 132, 133–4, 136–8, 
143, 210
associated conditions 135–42
band keratopathy 110
cataract 119, 136, 138
epidemiology 131–5
glaucoma 148, 150, 151, 160
herpes simplex keratitis 104
history 131, 133, 134, 136–8
intermediate 130
investigations 134
macula 134, 140
macular oedema 172
onchocerciasis 275, 275
posterior 28, 130, 131, 134
questions and answers 143–5
scleritis 112
sympathetic ophthalmitis 142–3
toxoplasmic retinochoroiditis 134, 139, 
139
trauma 136, 142, 256, 259, 262, 264
treatment 134–5
uveoscleral (outﬂ ow) pathway 147, 147, 
155
valganciclovir 142
valsalva manoeuvre 67
varicella zoster virus 105
vascular disease 191–208, 244, 249
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) 
150, 194, 201
AMD 169, 170
vascular leakage 191, 192, 192–3
diabetic retinopathy 195, 196, 196, 198
vascular occlusion 191, 192–3, 193–4, 195
vasculitis 199
venous loops 196–7
ventriculoperitoneal shunting 221
vernal keratoconjunctivitis 26

332 
Index
vertical squint 238
vestibular nuclei 233–4
vidarabine 105
viral conjunctivitis 98, 101, 113, 299
viral keratitis 104–6, 113
Vision 2020 – the Right to Sight 269, 281
viscocanalostomy 157
visual acuity 32–4, 68, 222, 257, 268
AMD 187
binocular single vision 236
cataract 119, 125
choroidal lesions 185
dysthyroid eye disease 245
equivalence table 314
glaucoma 146
macular holes 171
non-paralytic squint 236, 240, 241
nystagmus 251
retina 166–7
retinal detachment 177, 179
retinitis pigmentosa 181
uveitis 133
visual confusion 236
visual cortex 226–7
visual ﬁ eld 34–8, 167
binocular single vision 236, 236
chiasm 225
choroidal lesions 185
examination 34, 35, 36
glaucoma 146, 153, 154, 155, 157
ischaemic optic neuropathy 222, 223
optic tract lesions 226, 227
paralytic squint 233, 235
pathway disorders 216, 217
retinal detachment 176
retinitis pigmentosa 180
swollen optic disc 220, 221
world statistics 268
visual loss 23, 173, 199–200, 202, 283
AMD 168–71, 187
band keratopathy 110
cataract 118, 119, 120
cornea 98, 109
diabetic retinopathy 195, 198
glaucoma 155, 159, 161, 161
gradual 29–30, 30
ischaemic optic neuropathy 222–4
keratitis 107
migraine 199
retinal detachment 187
sudden 27, 27–9
swollen optic disc 219, 220, 221
uveitis 134
visual pathway disorders 216–17, 217
questions and answers 228–31
visually evoked potential 48
visually evoked response 48
vitamin A 8, 91, 268, 269, 277–9, 281
vitamin B12 226
vitamin C 264
vitamins 169
vitiligo 140–1
vitrectomy 125, 171, 198, 204, 264
vitreoretinal surgery 177, 178, 179
vitreous 2, 2, 9–10, 58, 130, 133, 166
bleed into 28
detachment 10, 28, 166, 174, 175, 175–6
ﬂ oaters 174
loss during surgery 125
onchocerciasis 274
retinal detachment 175–6, 176, 177, 178
traction 175, 176, 177, 178, 179
vitreous haemorrhage 28, 177, 201, 256, 
261, 264–5
diabetes 196, 198
penetrating injury 258
retinopathy of prematurity 203
sickle cell retinopathy 204
vitritis 28, 130
Vogt–Koyanagi–Harada (VKH) disease 
136, 140–1
von Hippel–Lindau syndrome 204
watery eye 92–5
Wegener’s granulomatosis 111
wet age-related macular degeneration 28
Whipple’s disease 133
World Health Organization 269, 281
xanthelasmas 83, 84
xerophthalmia 91, 268, 277–9
xerosis 91
X-radiation 93, 120
YAG laser 160
yoke muscles 233
zinc 169
zonule 1, 2, 10, 13, 13, 118, 122
lens displacement 127
trauma 256
zygomatic bone 3
uploaded by [stormrg]

