

Lecture Notes:
General Surgery

Companion website
The book is supported by a website containing a free bank of interactive questions and answers. 
These can be found at:
www.testgeneralsurgery.com
The website includes:
• Interactive Multiple-Choice Questions for each chapter
• Interactive Short Answer Questions for each chapter

Lecture Notes:
General Surgery
Harold Ellis
CBE DM MCh FRCS
Emeritus Professor of Surgery, Guy’s Hospital, London
Sir Roy Calne
MS FRCS FRS
Emeritus Professor of Surgery, Addenbrooke’s Hospital, Cambridge
Christopher Watson
MD BChir FRCS
Reader in Surgery and Honorary Consultant, Addenbrooke’s Hospital, 
Cambridge
Twelfth Edition
A John Wiley & Sons, Ltd., Publication

This edition ﬁ rst published 2011© 1965, 1968, 1970, 1972, 1977, 1983, 1987, 1993, 1998, 2002, 2006, 2011 © 2011 Harold Ellis, 
Sir Roy Y. Calne, Christopher J. E. Watson
Blackwell Publishing was acquired by John Wiley & Sons in February 2007. Blackwell’s publishing program has been merged 
with Wiley’s global Scientiﬁ c, Technical and Medical business to form Wiley-Blackwell.
Registered ofﬁ ce: John Wiley & Sons Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK
Editorial ofﬁ ces: 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 2DQ, UK
 
The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK
 
111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030-5774, USA
For details of our global editorial ofﬁ ces, for customer services and for information about how to apply for permission to 
reuse the copyright material in this book please see our website at www.wiley.com/wiley-blackwell
The right of the author to be identiﬁ ed as the author of this work has been asserted in accordance with the UK Copyright, 
Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form 
or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, except as permitted by the UK Copyright, 
Designs and Patents Act 1988, without the prior permission of the publisher.
First published 1965 
Fifth edition 1977 
Ninth edition 1998
Revised edition 1966 Sixth edition 1983 
Reprinted 1999, 2000
Second edition 1968 
Reprinted 1984, 1985, 1986 Tenth edition 2002
Third edition 1970 
Seventh edition 1987 
Reprinted 2003, 2004, 2005
Fourth edition 1972 
Reprinted 1989 (twice) 
Eleventh edition 2006
Reprinted 1974 
Eighth edition 1993 
Twelfth Edition 2010
Revised reprint 1976 Reprinted 1994, 1996
Greek edition 1968
Portuguese edition 1979
Indonesian edition 1990
Turkish edition 2005
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print may not be available in 
electronic books.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. All brand names and 
product names used in this book are trade names, service marks, trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective 
owners. The publisher is not associated with any product or vendor mentioned in this book. This publication is designed to 
provide accurate and authoritative information in regard to the subject matter covered. It is sold on the understanding that 
the publisher is not engaged in rendering professional services. If professional advice or other expert assistance is required, 
the services of a competent professional should be sought.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Ellis, Harold, 1926–
  Lecture notes. General surgery / Harold Ellis, Sir Roy Calne, Christopher Watson. – 12th ed.
    p. ; cm.
  General surgery
  Includes bibliographical references and index.
  ISBN 978-1-4443-3440-1 (pbk. : alk. paper)
 1. Surgery. I. Calne, Roy Yorke. II. Watson, Christopher J. E. (Christopher John Edward) III. Title. IV. Title: General 
surgery.
  [DNLM: 1. Surgical Procedures, Operative. WO 100]
  RD31.E4 2011
  617–dc22
 
2010036446
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Set in 8.5/11pt Utopia by Toppan Best-set Premedia Limited
01 2011

Contents
Introduction, vii
Acknowledgements, ix
Abbreviations, xi
 1 Surgical strategy, 1
 2 Fluid and electrolyte management, 5
 3 Preoperative assessment, 10
 4 Postoperative complications, 15
 5 Acute infections, 26
 6 Shock, 31
 7 Tumours, 36
 8 Burns, 41
 9 The skin and its adnexae, 47
10 The chest and lungs, 60
11 The heart and thoracic aorta, 69
12 Arterial disease, 80
13 Venous disorders of the lower limb, 98
14 The brain and meninges, 105
15 Head injury, 114
16 The spine, 126
17 Peripheral nerve injuries, 137
18 The oral cavity, 143
19 The salivary glands, 153
20 The oesophagus, 158
21 The stomach and duodenum, 167
22 Mechanical intestinal obstruction, 183
23 The small intestine, 194
24 Acute appendicitis, 199
25 The colon, 204
26 The rectum and anal canal, 218
27 Peritonitis, 230
28 Paralytic ileus, 236
29 Hernia, 239
30 The liver, 250
31 The gallbladder and bile ducts, 266
32 The pancreas, 276
33 The spleen, 289
34 The lymph nodes and lymphatics, 292
35 The breast, 295
36 The neck, 308
37 The thyroid, 311
38 The parathyroids, 323
39 The thymus, 328
40 The suprarenal glands, 330
41 The kidney and ureter, 335
42 The bladder, 353
43 The prostate, 358
44 The male urethra, 367
45 The penis, 370
46 The testis and scrotum, 374
47 Transplantation surgery, 384
Index, 391
Companion website
The book is supported by a website containing a free bank of interactive questions and answers. 
These can be found at:
www.testgeneralsurgery.com
The website includes:
• Interactive Multiple-Choice Questions for each chapter
• Interactive Short Answer Questions for each chapter


 Introduction  
  The ideal medical student at the end of the clinical 
course will have written his or her own textbook 
 –  a digest of the lectures and tutorials assiduously 
attended and of the textbooks meticulously read. 
Unfortunately, few students are perfect, and most 
approach the qualifying examinations depressed 
by the thought of the thousands of pages of excel-
lent and exhaustive textbooks wherein lies the 
wisdom required of them by the examiners. 
 We believe that there is a serious need in these 
days of widening knowledge and expanding syl-
labus for a book that will set out brieﬂ y the impor-
tant facts in general surgery that are classiﬁ ed, 
analysed and as far as possible rationalized for the 
revision student. These lecture notes represent 
our own ﬁ nal - year teaching; they are in no way a 
substitute for the standard textbooks but are our 
attempts to draw together in some sort of logical 
way the fundamentals of general surgery. 
 Because this book is written at student level, 
principles of treatment only are presented, not 
details of surgical technique. 
 The need after only 4 years for a new, 12th, 
edition reﬂ ects the rapid changes which are taking 
place in surgical practice. We are conﬁ dent that 
our constant updating will ensure that this volume 
will continue to serve the requirements of our 
medical students. We advise you to read this book 
in conjunction with  Clinical Cases Uncovered  –  
Surgery , which provides illustrated case studies, 
MCQs, EMQs and SAQs, cases that correspond to 
the chapters in this volume. 
 H.E. 
 R.Y.C. 
 C.J.E.W. 


 Acknowledgements  
  We are grateful to our colleagues  –  registrars, 
housemen and students  – who have read and 
criticized this text during its production, and 
to many readers and reviewers for their con-
structive criticisms. In particular, we are indebted 
to Simon Dwerryhouse (Chapters  20  and  21 ); 
Justin Davies (Chapters  22 ,  23  and  25 ); Gordon 
Wishart (Chapters  35 ,  37 and  38 ); Neville 
Jamieson (Chapters  30 – 33 and  40 ); Kathryn Nash 
(Chapters  21 and  30 ); and Andrew Doble (Chapters 
 41 – 46 ). 
 Finally, we would like to acknowledge the con-
tinued help given by the staff at Wiley Blackwell, 
in particular to Jane Fallows, who has created 
some new diagrams and brought colour to others, 
Rebecca Huxley, who oversaw the production, and 
Lindsey Williams, who has meticulously steered 
this edition from text to ﬁ nished product.
. 


 Abbreviations  
 ABPI 
  ankle brachial pressure index 
 ACE  
  angiotensin - converting enzyme 
 ACTH  
  adrenocorticotrophic hormone 
 ADH  
  antidiuretic hormone 
 AFP 
  α - fetoprotein 
 AIDS  
  acquired immune deﬁ ciency syndrome 
 ALP 
  alkaline phosphatase 
 ALT 
  alanine transaminase 
 APACHE  
  Acute Physiology And Chronic Health 
Evaluation 
 APUD  
  amine precursor uptake and 
decarboxylation 
 ASA 
  American Society of Anesthesiologists 
 AST 
  aspartate transaminase 
 ATN 
  acute tubular necrosis 
 BCG  
  bacille Calmette – Gu é rin 
 CABG  
  coronary artery bypass graft 
 CEA  
  carcinoembryonic antigen 
 CNS  
  central nervous system 
 CRP  
  C - reactive protein 
 CSF 
  cerebrospinal ﬂ uid 
 CT 
  computed tomography 
 DCIS  
  ductal carcinoma  in situ 
 DIC  
  disseminated intravascular coagulopathy 
 DMSA  
  dimercaptosuccinic acid 
 DOPA  
  dihydroxyphenyl alanine 
 DTC  
  differentiated thyroid cancer 
 DTPA  
  diethylene triamine pentaacetic acid 
 ECG  
  electrocardiograph 
 EMG  
  electromyography 
 ER 
  oestrogen receptor 
 ERCP  
  endoscopic retrograde 
cholangiopancreatography 
 ESBL 
  extended spectrum beta - lactamase 
 ESR 
  erythrocyte sedimentation rate 
 ESWL  
  extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy 
 EUS  
  endoscopic ultrasound 
 FAP 
  familial adenomatous polyposis 
 FEV 1 
  forced expiratory volume in 1 second 
 GCS  
  Glasgow coma scale 
 GFR 
  glomerular ﬁ ltration rate 
 GGT 
  gamma glutamyl transferase 
 GLA 
  gamma linolenic acid 
 GTN  
  glyceryl trinitrate 
 HAART 
  highly active anti - retroviral treatment 
 HbA1c  
  glycosylated haemoglobin 
 HCC  
  hepatocellular carcinoma 
 HER2 
  human epidermal growth factor 
receptor 2 
 HHT  
  hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia 
 HHV  
  human herpes virus 
 HIV  
  human immunodeﬁ ciency virus 
 HLA 
  human leucocyte antigen 
 HPOA 
  hypertrophic pulmonary osteoarthropathy 
 HPV 
  human papilloma virus 
 HRT 
  hormone replacement therapy 
 HTIG 
  human tetanus immunoglobulin 
 ICP 
  intracranial pressure 
 ICSI 
  intracytoplasmic sperm injection 
 IFN - γ 
  interferon  γ 
 IPMN 
  intraductal papillary mucinous tumour 
 IVC  
  inferior vena cava 
 IVF  
  in vitro  fertilization 
 IVU 
  intravenous urogram 
 JVP 
  jugular venous pressure 
 KSHV  
  Kaposi sarcoma herpes virus 
 ‘ KUB ’ 
  kidneys, ureters and bladder 
 LAD 
  left anterior descending artery 
 LCIS 
  lobular carcinoma  in situ 
 LHRH  
  luteinizing hormone - releasing hormone 
 MAG3  
  m ercapto - a cetyl tri g lycine 
 MCN  
  mucinous cystic neoplasm 
 MEN  
  multiple endocrine neoplasia 
 MHC  
  major histocompatibility complex 
 MIBG 
  meta - iodobenzylguanidine 
 MIBI 
  methoxyisobutylisonitrile 
 MR 
  magnetic resonance 
 MRCP 
  magnetic resonance 
cholangiopancreatography 
 MRSA  
  meticillin - resistant  Staphylococcus aureus 
 NAFLD 
  non - alcoholic fatty liver disease 
 NPI 
  Nottingham Prognostic Index 
 NSAIDs 
  non - steroidal anti - inﬂ ammatory drugs 
 NSGCT 
  non - seminomatous germ cell tumour 
 NST 
  ‘ no special type ’ 
 OCP 
  oral contraceptive pill 
 OPG  
  orthopantomogram 
 PET 
  positron emission tomography 
 PNET  
  primitive neuroectodermal tumour 
 POSSUM   Physiological and Operative Severity Score 
for the enUmeration of Mortality and 
morbidity 
 PSA  
  prostate - speciﬁ c antigen 
 PTA  
  percutaneous transluminal angioplasty 
 PTC 
  percutaneous transhepatic 
cholangiography 
 PTCA 
  percutaneous transluminal coronary 
angioplasty 

xii 
Abbreviations
 PTFE 
  polytetraﬂ uoroethylene 
 PTH 
  parathormone 
 SGOT 
  serum glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase 
(synonymous with AST) 
 SGPT 
  serum glutamic pyruvic transaminase 
(synonymous with ALT) 
 SIADH  
  syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic 
hormone 
 SLE 
  systemic lupus erythematosus 
 SLN 
  sentinel lymph node 
 T3 
  tri - iodothyronine 
 T4 
  tetra - iodothyronine, thyroxine 
 TACE  
  transarterial chemoembolization 
 TCC  
  transitional cell carcinoma 
 TED  
  thromboembolism deterrent 
 TIA 
  transient ischaemic attack 
 TIPS 
  transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic 
shunt 
 TNF  
  tumour necrosis factor 
 TOE 
  transoesophageal echocardiography 
 TPA  
  tissue plasminogen activator 
 TPN 
  total parenteral nutrition 
 TSH 
  thyroid - stimulating hormone 
 TUR 
  transurethral resection 
 UW  
  University of Wisconsin 
 VAC  
  vacuum - assisted closure 
 VATS 
  video - assisted thoracoscopic surgery 
 VIP 
  vasoactive intestinal polypeptide 
 VRE  
  vancomycin - resistant  Enterococcus 
 β - HCG  
  β - human chorionic gonadotrophin  

 1 
Surgical  s trategy  
 
 Learning objectives 
 ✓  To understand the principles of taking a clear history, 
performing an appropriate examination, presenting the 
ﬁ ndings and formulating a management plan for surgical 
diagnosis. 
 ✓  To understand the common nomenclature used in surgery. 
to become a good clinician. Remember that the 
patient will be apprehensive and often will be in 
pain and discomfort. Attending to these is the ﬁ rst 
task of a good doctor. 
 The  h istory 
 The history should be an accurate reﬂ ection of 
what the patient said, not your interpretation 
of it. Ask open questions such as  ‘ When were 
you last well? ’ and  ‘ What happened next? ’ , rather 
than closed questions such as  ‘ Do you have 
chest pain? ’ . If you have a positive ﬁ nding, do not 
leave the subject until you know everything 
there is to know about it. For example,  ‘ When 
did it start? ’ ;  ‘ What makes it better and what 
makes it worse? ’ ;  ‘ Where did it start and where 
did it go? ’ ;  ‘ Did it come and go or was it constant? ’ . 
If the symptom is one characterized by bleeding, 
ask about what sort of blood, when, how much, 
were there clots, was it mixed in with food/
faeces, was it associated with pain? Remember 
that most patients come to see a surgeon because 
of pain or bleeding (Table  1.1 ). You need to be 
able to ﬁ nd out as much as you can about these 
presentations. 
 Keep in mind that the patient has no knowledge 
of anatomy. He might say  ‘ my stomach hurts ’ , but 
this may be due to lower chest or periumbilical 
pain  –  ask him to point to the site of the pain. Bear 
in mind that he may be pointing to a site of 
referred pain, and similarly do not accept  ‘ back 
pain ’  without clarifying where in the back  –  the 
    Students on the surgical team, in dealing with 
their patients, should recognize the following 
steps in their patients ’  management. 
 1  History taking . Listen carefully to the patient ’ s 
story. 
 2  Examination of the patient . 
 3  Writing notes . 
 4  Constructing a differential diagnosis . Ask the 
question  ‘ What diagnosis would best explain 
this clinical picture? ’ 
 5  Special investigations . Which laboratory and 
imaging tests are required to conﬁ rm or refute 
the clinical diagnosis?  
 6  Management . Decide on the management of 
the patient. Remember that this will include 
reassurance, relief of pain and, as far as 
possible, allaying the patient ’ s anxiety. 
 History and  e xamination 
 The importance of developing clinical skills 
cannot be overemphasized. Excessive reliance on 
special investigations and extensive modern 
imaging (some of which may be quite painful and 
carry with them their own risks and complica-
tions) is to turn your back on the skills necessary 
Lecture Notes: General Surgery, 12th edition. © Harold Ellis, 
Sir Roy Y. Calne and Christopher J. E. Watson. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

2 
Surgical strategy
tures of the cloaca such as the bladder, uterus 
and fallopian tubes (Figure  1.1 ). Testicular pain 
may also be periumbilical, reﬂ ecting the intra -
 abdominal origin of these organs before their 
descent into the scrotum  –  never be fooled by the 
child with testicular torsion who complains of 
pain in the centre of his abdomen.    
 The  e xamination 
 Remember the classical quartet in this order: 
 1  inspection; 
 2  palpation; 
 3  percussion; 
 4  auscultation. 
sacrum, or lumbar, thoracic or cervical spine, or 
possibly loin or subscapular regions. When refer-
ring to the shoulder tip, clarify whether the patient 
means the acromion; when referring to the shoul-
der blade, clarify whether this is the angle of the 
scapula. Such sites of pain may suggest referred 
pain from the diaphragm and gallbladder, 
respectively. 
 It is often useful to consider the viscera in terms 
of their embryology. Thus, epigastric pain is gen-
erally from foregut structures such as stomach, 
duodenum, liver, gallbladder, spleen and pan-
creas; periumbilical pain is midgut pain from 
small bowel and ascending colon, and includes 
the appendix; suprapubic pain is hindgut pain, 
originating in the colon, rectum and other struc-
 Table 1.1   Example of important facts to determine in patients with pain and rectal bleeding 
 Pain  
 Rectal bleeding  
 Exact site  
  Estimation of amount (often inaccurate)  
 Radiation  
  Timing of bleeding  
 Length of history  
  Colour  – bright red, dark red, black  
 Periodicity  
  Accompanying symptoms  – pain, vomiting (haematemesis)  
 Nature  – constant/colicky  
  Associated shock  – faintness, etc.  
 Severity  
  Blood mixed in stool, lying on surface, on paper, in toilet pan  
 Relieving and aggravating factors  
  
 Accompanying features (e.g. jaundice, vomiting, 
haematuria)  
 
 Figure 1.1   Location of referred pain 
for the abdominal organs.  
T8,9
Liver
Gallbladder
Spleen
Stomach
Duodenum
Pancreas
Heart and
aorta
Large bowel
Bladder
Prostate (    )
Uterus and
adnexa (    )
Small bowel
Appendix
Caecum
Ascending
colon to
mid-
transverse
Testis
Renal
tract
T10
T11
T12
L1

Surgical strategy 3
inﬂ ammatory disease but the next person 
might interpret it as a prolapsed intervertebral 
disc. Use the correct surgical terminology 
(Table  1.2 ). 
 Illustrate your examination unambiguously 
with drawings  –  use anatomical reference points 
and measure the diameter of lumps accurately. 
When drawing abdominal ﬁ ndings use a hexago-
nal representation (Figure  1.2 ). A continuous line 
implies an edge; shading can represent an area of 
tenderness or the site where pain is experienced. 
If you can feel all around a lump, draw a line to 
indicate this; if you can feel only the upper margin, 
show only this. Annotate the drawings with your 
ﬁ ndings (Figure  1.2 ). At the end of your notes, 
write a single paragraph summary, and make a 
diagnosis, or write down a differential diagnosis. 
Outline a management plan and state what inves-
tigations should be done, indicating which you 
have already arranged. Sign your notes and print 
your name, position and the time and date legibly 
underneath. 
 Case  p resentation 
 The purpose of presenting a case is to convey to 
your colleagues the salient clinical features, diag-
nosis or differential diagnosis, management and 
investigations of your patient. The presentation 
 Learn the art of careful inspection, and keep 
your hands off the patient until you have done so. 
Inspect the patient generally, as to how he lies and 
how he breathes. Is he tachypnoeic because of a 
chest infection or in response to a metabolic 
acidosis? Look at the patient ’ s hands and feel 
his pulse. 
 Only after careful inspection, proceed to palpa-
tion. If you are examining the abdomen, ask the 
patient to cough. This is a surrogate test of rebound 
tenderness and indicates where the site of inﬂ am-
mation is within the peritoneal cavity. Remember 
to examine the  ‘ normal ’ side ﬁ rst, the side that is 
not symptomatic, be it abdomen, hand, leg or 
breast. Look at the patient while you palpate. If 
there is a lump, decide which anatomical plane it 
lies in. Is it in the skin, in the subcutaneous tissue, 
in the muscle layer or, in the case of the abdomen, 
in the underlying cavity? Is the lump pulsatile, 
expansile or mobile?   
 Writing  y our  n otes 
 Always write up your ﬁ ndings completely and 
accurately. Start by recording the date and the 
time of the interview. Write all the negative as 
well as positive ﬁ ndings. Avoid abbreviations 
since they may mean different things to different 
people; for instance, PID  –  you may mean pelvic 
 Figure 1.2   Example of how to record 
abdominal examination ﬁ ndings.  
Previous perforated
duodenal ulcer repair
Kidney
transplant
Bowel sounds normal
PR: No tenderness, no mass
 
Normal coloured stool
Irregular
enlarged
liver edge
Tender ++

4 
Surgical strategy
should not be merely a reading of the case notes, 
but should be succinct and to the point, contain-
ing important positive and negative ﬁ ndings. Do 
not use words such as  ‘ basically ’ ,  ‘ essentially ’ or 
 ‘ unremarkable ’ , which are padding and meaning-
less. Avoid saying that things are  ‘ just ’  palpable  –  
 Table 1.2   Common preﬁ xes and sufﬁ xes used in surgery 
 Preﬁ x  
 Related organ/structure  
 angio -  
  blood vessels  
 arthro -  
  a joint  
 cardio -  
  heart  
 coelio -  
  peritoneal cavity  
 cholecysto -  
  gallbladder  
 colo -  and colon -  
  colon  
 colpo -  
  vagina  
 cysto -  
  urinary bladder  
 gastro -  
  stomach  
 hepato -  
  liver  
 hystero -  
  uterus  
 laparo -  
  peritoneal cavity  
 mammo - and masto -  
  breast  
 nephro -  
  kidney  
 oophoro -  
  ovary  
 orchid -  
  testicle  
 rhino -  
  nose  
 thoraco -  
  chest  
 Sufﬁ x  
 Procedure  
 - centesis 
  surgical puncture, often accompanied by drainage, e.g. thoracocentesis  
 - desis  
  fusion, e.g. arthrodesis  
 - ectomy  
  surgical removal, e.g. colectomy  
 - oscopy  
  visual examination, usually through an endoscope, e.g. laparoscopy  
 - ostomy  
  creating a new opening (mouth) on the surface, e.g. colostomy  
 - otomy  
  surgical incision, e.g. laparotomy  
 - pexy  
  surgical ﬁ xation, e.g. orchidopexy  
 - plasty  
  to mould or reshape, e.g. angioplasty; also to replace with prosthesis, e.g. arthoplasty  
 - rrhapy  
  surgically repair or reinforce, e.g. herniorrhaphy  
either you can feel it or you cannot. Make up 
your mind. At the end of a good presentation, the 
listener should have an excellent word picture of 
the patient and his/her problems, what needs 
to be watched and what plans you have for 
management. 
 
  

 2 
Fluid and  e lectrolyte 
 m anagement  
 
 Learning objective 
 ✓  To understand the distribution and composition of body ﬂ uids, 
and how these may change following surgery. 
tion. Only 2% of the total body potassium is in the 
extracellular ﬂ uid. There is also a difference in 
protein concentration within the extracellular 
compartment, with the interstitial ﬂ uid having 
a very low concentration compared with the 
high protein concentration of the intravascular 
compartment. 
 Knowledge of ﬂ uid compartments and their 
composition becomes very important when con-
sidering ﬂ uid replacement. In order to ﬁ ll the 
intravascular compartment rapidly, a plasma sub-
stitute or blood is the ﬂ uid of choice. Such ﬂ uids, 
with high colloid osmotic potential, remain within 
the intravascular space, in contrast to a saline 
solution, which rapidly distributes over the entire 
extravascular compartment, which is four times as 
large as the intravascular compartment. Thus, of 
the original 1   L of saline, only 250   mL would 
remain in the intravascular compartment. Five 
per cent dextrose, which is water with a small 
amount of dextrose added to render it isotonic, 
will redistribute across both intracellular and 
extracellular spaces.  
 Fluid and  e lectrolyte 
 l osses 
 In order to calculate daily ﬂ uid and electrolyte 
requirements, the daily losses should be meas-
ured or estimated. Fluid is lost from four routes: 
the kidney, the gastrointestinal tract, the skin and 
 The management of a patient ’ s ﬂ uid status is vital 
to a successful outcome in surgery. This requires 
preoperative assessment, with resuscitation if 
required, and postoperative replacement of 
normal and abnormal losses until the patient can 
resume a normal diet. This chapter will review the 
normal state and the mechanisms that maintain 
homeostasis, and will then discuss the aberrations 
and their management.  
 Body  ﬂ uid  c ompartments 
(Figure  2.1 ) 
 In the  ‘ average ’  person, water contributes 60% to 
the total body weight: 42   L for a 70   kg man. Forty 
per cent of the body weight is intracellular ﬂ uid, 
while the remaining 20% is extracellular. This 
extracellular ﬂ uid can be subdivided into intravas-
cular (5%) and extravascular, or interstitial (15%). 
Fluid may cross from compartment to compart-
ment by osmosis, which depends on a solute gra-
dient, and ﬁ ltration, which is the result of a 
hydrostatic pressure gradient.   
 The electrolyte composition of each compart-
ment differs. Intracellular ﬂ uid has a low sodium 
and a high potassium concentration. In contrast, 
extracellular ﬂ uid (intravascular and interstitial) 
has a high sodium and low potassium concentra-
Lecture Notes: General Surgery, 12th edition. © Harold Ellis, 
Sir Roy Y. Calne and Christopher J. E. Watson. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

6 
Fluid and electrolyte management
the respiratory tract. Losses from the last two 
routes are termed insensible losses.  
 Normal  ﬂ uid  l osses 
(Table  2.1 ) 
 The  k idney 
 In the absence of intrinsic renal disease, ﬂ uid 
losses from the kidney are regulated by aldoster-
one and antidiuretic hormone (ADH). These two 
hormone systems regulate the circulating volume 
 Figure 2.1   Distribution of ﬂ uid and electrolytes within the body.  
Intracellular
fluid
20% body 
weight
40% body 
weight
Distribution of body water
Distribution of principal cations
Extracellular 
fluid
Interstitial fluid
15% body weight
Intravascular fluid
5% body weight
Mg2+
Ca2+
Ca2+
K+
Na+
Mg+
Na+
K+
For a 75 kg man, 45 kg (45 litres) 
is water, of which 30 litres is
intracellular fluid, 12 litres is 
interstitial fluid and 3 litres 
is intravascular fluid (plasma)
 Table 2.1   Normal daily ﬂ uid losses 
 Fluid loss   Volume (mL)   Na  +  (mmol)   K  +  (mmol)  
 Urine  
  2000  
  80 – 130  
  60  
 Faeces  
 300  
  
  
 Insensible  
  400  
  
  
 Total  
 2700  
  
  
and its osmolarity, and are thus crucial to home-
ostasis. Aldosterone responds to a fall in glomeru-
lar perfusion by salt retention. ADH responds to 

Fluid and electrolyte management 7
occur if predominantly acid or alkaline ﬂ uid is 
lost, as occurs with pyloric stenosis and with a 
pancreatic ﬁ stula, respectively. 
 Large occult losses occur in paralytic ileus and 
intestinal obstruction. Several litres of ﬂ uid may 
be sequestered in the gut, contributing to the 
hypovolaemia. Resolution of an ileus is marked by 
absorption of the ﬂ uid and the resultant hypervol-
aemia produces a diuresis.  
 Insensible  l osses 
 Hyperventilation, as may happen with pain or 
chest infection, increases respiratory losses. Losses 
from the skin are increased by pyrexia and sweat-
ing, with up to 1   L of sweat per hour in extreme 
cases. Sweat contains a large amount of salt. 
 Effects of  s urgery 
 ADH is released in response to surgery, conserving 
water. Hypovolaemia will cause aldosterone 
secretion and salt retention by the kidney. 
Potassium is released by damaged tissues, and the 
potassium level may be further increased by blood 
transfusion, each unit containing in excess of 
20   mmol/L. If renal perfusion is poor, and urine 
output sparse, this potassium will not be excreted 
and instead accumulates, the resultant hyperka-
laemia causing life - threatening arrhythmias. This 
is the basis of the recommendation that supple-
mentary potassium may not be necessary in the 
ﬁ rst 48 hours following surgery or trauma. 
 Prescribing  ﬂ uids for 
the  s urgical  p atient 
 The majority of patients require ﬂ uid replacement 
for only a brief period postoperatively until they 
resume a normal diet. Some require resuscitation 
preoperatively, and others require replacement 
of speciﬁ c losses such as those from a ﬁ stula. 
In severely ill patients, and those with impaired 
gastrointestinal function, long - term nutritional 
support is necessary. 
 Replacement of  n ormal  l osses 
 Table  2.1  shows the normal daily ﬂ uid losses. 
Replacement of this lost ﬂ uid in a typical adult is 
the increased solute concentration by retaining 
water in the renal tubules. Normal urinary losses 
are around 1500 – 2000  mL/day. The kidneys 
control water and electrolyte balance closely, and 
can function in spite of extensive renal disease, 
and abuse from doctors prescribing intravenous 
ﬂ uids. However, damaged kidneys leave the 
patient exquisitely vulnerable to inappropriate 
water and electrolyte administration.    
 The  g astrointestinal  t ract 
 The stomach, liver and pancreas secrete a large 
volume (see Table  2.3 ) of electrolyte - rich ﬂ uid into 
the gut. After digestion and absorption, the waste 
material enters the colon, where the remaining 
water is reabsorbed. Approximately 300   mL is lost 
into the faeces each day.    
 Insensible  l osses 
 Inspired air is humidiﬁ ed in its passage to the 
alveoli, and much of this water is lost with expira-
tion. Fluid is also lost from the skin, and the total 
of these insensible losses is around 700   mL/day. 
This may be balanced by insensible production of 
ﬂ uid, with around 300  mL of  ‘ metabolic ’ water 
being produced endogenously. 
 Abnormal  ﬂ uid  l osses 
 The  k idney 
 Most of the water ﬁ ltered by the glomeruli is rea-
bsorbed in the renal tubules so impaired tubular 
function will result in increased water loss. 
Resolving acute tubular necrosis (Chapter  41 , 
 p. 349   ), diabetes insipidus and head injury may 
result in loss of several litres of dilute urine. In 
contrast, production of ADH by tumours (the syn-
drome of inappropriate ADH, or SIADH) causes 
water retention and haemodilution.  
 The  g astrointestinal  t ract 
 Loss of water by the gastrointestinal tract is 
increased in diarrhoea and in the presence of an 
ileostomy, where colonic water reabsorption is 
absent. 
 Vomiting, nasogastric aspiration and ﬁ stulous 
losses result in loss of electrolyte - rich ﬂ uid. 
Disturbance of the acid – base balance may also 

8 
Fluid and electrolyte management
daily requirements. The composition of these 
special losses varies (Table  2.3 ) but, as a rough 
guide, replacement with an equal volume of 
normal saline should sufﬁ ce. Extra potassium 
supplements may be required when losses are 
high, such as in diarrhoea. Biochemical analysis of 
the electrolyte content of ﬁ stula drainage may be 
useful.  
 Resuscitation 
 Estimation of the ﬂ uid deﬁ cit in patients is impor-
tant in order to enable accurate replacement. 
Thirst, dry mucous membranes, loss of skin turgor, 
tachycardia and postural hypotension, together 
with a low jugular venous pressure, suggest a loss 
of between 5% and 15% of total body water. Fluid 
losses of under 5% body water are difﬁ cult to 
detect clinically; over 15%, there is marked circu-
latory collapse. 
 As an example, consider a 70   kg man presenting 
with a perforated peptic ulcer. On examination he 
is noted to have dry mucous membranes, a tachy-
cardia and slight postural fall in arterial blood 
pressure. If the loss is estimated at 10% of the total 
body water, itself 60% of body weight, the volume 
deﬁ cit is 10%    ×  60% of 70  kg, or 10% of 42  L  =  4.2  L. 
achieved by the administration of 3   L of ﬂ uid, 
which may comprise 1  L of normal saline 
(150   mmol NaCl) together with 2   L of water (as 5% 
dextrose) (Table  2.2 ). Potassium may be added to 
each 1   L bag (20   mmol/L). Alternatively, com-
pound sodium lactate (Hartmann ’ s solution) has 
been advocated as the more effective ﬂ uid replace-
ment in the postoperative period since it is similar 
in composition to plasma (Table  2.2 ). Adjustments 
to this regimen should be based on regular clinical 
examination, measurement of losses (e.g. urine 
output), daily weights (to assess ﬂ uid changes) 
and regular blood samples for electrolyte determi-
nation. For example, if the patient is anuric, 1   L/
day of hypertonic dextrose without potassium 
may sufﬁ ce, which has the added advantage of 
reducing catabolism with the breakdown of 
protein and accumulation of urea.    
 Replacement of  s pecial  l osses 
 Special losses include nasogastric aspirates, losses 
from ﬁ stulae, diarrhoea and stomas and covert 
losses such as occur with an ileus. Loss of plasma 
in burns is considered elsewhere (Chapter  8 ). All 
ﬂ uid losses should be measured carefully when 
possible, and this volume added to the normal 
 Table 2.2   Electrolyte content of intravenous ﬂ uids 
 Intravenous infusion  
 Na  +  (mmol/L)  
 Cl  −  (mmol/L)  
 K  +  (mmol/L)  
 HCO 3  −  (mmol/L)  
 Ca 2 +  (mmol/L)  
 Normal saline (0.9% 
saline)  
 150  
  150  
  –  
  –  
  –  
 4% dextrose/ 0.18% 
saline  
 30  
  30  
  –  
  –  
  –  
 Hartmann ’ s 
(compound sodium 
lactate)  
 131  
  111  
  5  
  29  
  2  
 Normal plasma values  
  134 – 144  
  95 – 105  
  3.4 – 5.0  
  22 – 30  
  2.2 – 2.6  
 Table 2.3   Daily volume and composition of gastrointestinal ﬂ uids 
 Fluid  
 Volume (mL)  
 Na  +  (mmol/L)  
 K  +  (mmol/L)  
 Cl  −  (mmol/L)  
 H  +  /HCO 3  −  (mmol/L)  
 Gastric  
  2500  
  30 – 80  
  5 – 20  
  100 – 150  
  H  +  
  40 – 60  
 Bile  
  500  
  130  
  10  
  100  
  HCO 3  −  
  30 – 50  
 Pancreatic  
 1000  
  130  
  10  
  75  
  HCO 3  −  
  70 – 110  
 Small bowel  
  5000  
  130  
  10  
  90 – 130  
  HCO 3  −  
  20 – 40  

Fluid and electrolyte management 9
 Parenteral  f eeding 
 For patients with intestinal ﬁ stulae, prolonged 
ileus or malabsorption, nutrition cannot be sup-
plemented through the gastrointestinal tract, and 
therefore parenteral feeding is necessary. This is 
usually administered via a catheter in a central 
vein because of the high osmolarity of the solu-
tions used; there is a high risk of phlebitis in 
smaller veins with lower blood ﬂ ow. However, 
peripheral parenteral nutrition with less hyperos-
molar solutions can be used for short - term 
feeding. The principle is to provide the patient 
with protein in the form of amino acids, carbohy-
drate in the form of glucose, and fat emulsions 
such as Intralipid. Energy is derived from the car-
bohydrate and fat (30 – 50% fat), which must be 
given when amino acids are given, usually in a 
ratio of 1000   kJ/g protein nitrogen. Trace ele-
ments, such as zinc, magnesium and copper, as 
well as vitamins such as vitamin B 12 and ascorbic 
acid, and the lipid - soluble vitamins A, D, E and K, 
are usually added to the ﬂ uid, which is infused 
as a 2.5   L volume over 24 hours. Daily weights as 
well as biochemical estimations of electrolytes 
and albumin are useful guides to continued 
requirements. 
 The ability of a patient to beneﬁ t from intrave-
nous feeding depends on the general state of 
metabolism and residual liver function. Nutritional 
support should be continued in the postoperative 
period until gastrointestinal function returns and 
the patient is restored to positive nitrogen balance 
from the perioperative catabolic state. Restoration 
of a positive nitrogen balance is often apparent to 
the nurses and doctors as a sudden occurrence, 
when the patient starts smiling and asks for food. 
Occasionally, in chronic malnutrition with intes-
tinal ﬁ stulae or in patients who have lost most of 
the small bowel, parenteral feeding may be neces-
sary on a long - term basis. 
 Complications of total parenteral nutrition 
(TPN) include sepsis, thrombosis, hyponatraemia, 
hyperglycaemia and liver damage. To minimize 
sepsis, the central venous catheter is tunnelled 
with a subcutaneous Dacron cuff at the exit site to 
reduce the risk of line infection. Thrombosis may 
occur on any indwelling venous catheter, and, in 
patients requiring long - term TPN, this is a major 
cause of morbidity. Hyperglycaemia is common, 
particularly following pancreatitis, and may 
necessitate infusion of insulin. 
 
 
 
As this loss is largely isotonic (gastric juices and 
the peritoneal inﬂ ammatory response), infusion 
of a balanced crystalloid solution (e.g. Hartmann ’ s 
solution) is appropriate. A general rule of thumb 
is to replace half of the estimated loss quickly, and 
then reassess before replacement of the rest. The 
best guide to the success of resuscitation is the 
resumption of normal urine output; therefore, 
hourly urine output should be measured. Central 
venous pressure monitoring will help in the 
adjustment of the rate of infusion.   
 Nutrition 
 Many patients undergoing elective and emer-
gency surgery are reasonably well nourished and 
do not require special supplementation pre -  or 
postoperatively. Recovery from surgery is usually 
swift, and the patient resumes a normal diet 
before he/she has become seriously malnour-
ished. There are, however, certain categories of 
patients in whom nutrition prior to surgery is 
poor, and this may be a critical factor in determin-
ing the outcome of an operation by lowering their 
resistance to infection and impairing wound 
healing. Such patients include those with chronic 
intestinal ﬁ stulae, malabsorption, chronic liver 
disease, neoplasia and starvation, and those 
who have undergone chemo -  and radiotherapy. 
Wherever possible in such patients, nutritional 
support should be instituted before surgery, as 
postoperative recovery will be much quicker. 
 Enteral  f eeding 
 If the gastrointestinal tract is functioning satisfac-
torily, oral intake can be supplemented by a basic 
diet introduced through a ﬁ ne nasogastric tube 
directly into the stomach. The constituents of the 
diet are designed to be readily absorbable protein, 
fat and carbohydrate. Such a diet can provide 
8400  kJ with 70  g protein in a volume of 2  L. The 
commonest complication is diarrhoea, which is 
usually self - limiting. 
 If a prolonged postoperative recovery is antici-
pated, or a large preoperative nutritional deﬁ cit 
needs to be corrected, consideration should be 
given to insertion of a feeding jejunostomy at the 
time of surgery. This has the advantage of avoiding 
a nasogastric tube.  

 3 
Preoperative  a ssessment  
 
 Learning objectives 
 ✓  To be aware of the principles of preoperative assessment.  
 ✓  To be able to identify and manage likely complicating factors 
prior to surgery. 
tify factors that may be a problem during or 
following surgery. Some problems may be readily 
identiﬁ able and treated in advance; for example, 
a history of vomiting or intestinal obstruction 
would indicate that ﬂ uid volume replacement is 
necessary, and this can be done swiftly prior to 
surgery. A long history of a condition that is sched-
uled for elective surgical treatment may afford 
time in which the patient ’ s comorbid conditions 
can be improved before surgery. 
 Past  m edical  h istory 
  •   Diabetes  – whether controlled by insulin, oral 
hypoglycaemics or diet. Severe diabetes may 
be complicated by gastroparesis with a risk of 
aspiration on induction of anaesthesia.  
  •   Respiratory disease  – what is the nature of the 
chest problem, and is the breathing as good as 
it can be or is the patient in the middle of an 
acute exacerbation?  
  •   Cardiac disease  – has the patient had a recent 
myocardial infarct, or does he/she have mild 
stable angina? What is his exercise tolerance?  
  •   Rheumatoid arthritis  – may be associated with 
an unstable cervical spine so a cervical spine 
X - ray is indicated. 
  •   Rheumatic fever or valve disease or presence of 
a prosthesis  – necessitating prophylactic 
antibiotics. 
  •   Sickle cell disease  – a haemoglobin 
electrophoresis should be checked in all 
patients of African – Caribbean descent. 
Homozygotes are prone to sickle crises under 
general anaesthetic, and postoperatively if they 
become hypoxic. 
    The preoperative assessment involves an overall 
analysis of the patient ’ s condition and prepara-
tion of the patient for the proposed procedure. 
This involves taking a careful history, conﬁ rming 
that the indication for surgery still exists (e.g. that 
the enlarged lymph node that was to be removed 
for biopsy has not spontaneously regressed), and 
that the patient is as ﬁ t as possible for the proce-
dure. Do not accept someone else ’ s diagnosis  –  it 
might be wrong. In particular, verify the proposed 
side of surgery and mark the side; write the opera-
tion name next to the arrow. 
 Fitness for a procedure needs to be balanced 
against urgency  – there is no point contemplating 
a referral to a diabetologist for better diabetic 
control for someone with a ruptured aortic aneu-
rysm in need of urgent repair. The assessment 
process can be considered in terms of factors spe-
ciﬁ c to the patient and to the operation.  
 Patient  a ssessment 
 In assessing a patient ’ s ﬁ tness for surgery, it is 
worth going through the clerking process with this 
in mind. 
 History of  p resenting  c omplaint 
 An emergency presentation may warrant an emer-
gency procedure, so the assessment aims to iden-
Lecture Notes: General Surgery, 12th edition. © Harold Ellis, 
Sir Roy Y. Calne and Christopher J. E. Watson. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Preoperative assessment 11
appropriate precautions taken; such patients 
are a high risk for transmission of hepatitis B, 
hepatitis C and human immunodeﬁ ciency 
virus (HIV). 
 Drugs 
 Most drugs should be continued on admission. In 
particular, drugs acting on the cardiovascular 
system should usually be continued and given on 
the day of surgery. The following are examples 
of drugs that should give cause for concern 
and prompt discussion with the surgeon and 
anaesthetist: 
  •   Warfarin  – when possible it should be 
stopped before surgery. If continued 
anticoagulation is required, then convert to a 
heparin infusion. 
  •   Aspirin and clopidogrel cause increased 
bleeding and should also be stopped whenever 
possible at least 10 days before surgery.  
  •   Oral contraceptive pill is associated with an 
increased risk of deep vein thrombosis and 
pulmonary embolism; it should be stopped at 
least 6 weeks preoperatively. The patient 
should be counselled on appropriate 
alternative contraception since an early 
pregnancy might be damaged by teratogenic 
effects of some of the drugs used in the 
perioperative period. 
  •   Steroids  – patients who are steroid dependent 
will need extra glucocorticoid in the form of 
hydrocortisone injections to tide them over the 
perioperative stress. 
  •   Immunosuppression  – patients are more prone 
to postoperative infection.  
  •   Diuretics  – both thiazide and loop diuretics 
cause hypokalaemia. It is important to 
measure the serum potassium in such patients 
and restore it to the normal range prior to 
surgery. 
  •   Monoamine oxidase inhibitors are not widely 
used nowadays, but do have important 
side - effects such as hypotension when 
combined with general anaesthesia. 
 Allergies 
 It is important to determine clearly the nature of 
any allergy before condemning a potentially 
useful drug to the list of allergies. For example, 
diarrhoea following erythromycin usually reﬂ ects 
its action on the motilin receptor rather than a 
 Past  s urgical  h istory 
  •   Nature of previous operations   –  what has been 
done before? What is the current anatomy? 
What problems were encountered last time? 
Ensure a copy of the previous operation note is 
available. 
  •   Complications of previous surgery , e.g. deep 
vein thrombosis, MRSA wound infection or 
wound dehiscence. 
 Past  a naesthetic  h istory 
  •   Difﬁ cult intubation   –  usually recorded in the 
previous anaesthetic note, but the patient may 
also have been warned of previous problems.  
  •   Aspiration during anaesthesia  – may suggest 
delayed gastric emptying (e.g. owing to 
diabetes), suggesting that a prolonged fast and 
airway protection (cricoid pressure) are 
indicated prior to induction.  
  •   Scoline apnoea  – deﬁ ciency of 
pseudocholinesterase resulting in sustained 
paralysis following the  ‘ short - acting ’ muscle 
relaxant suxamethonium (Scoline). It is usually 
inherited (autosomal dominant) and so there 
may be a family history.  
  •   Malignant hyperpyrexia  – a rapid excessive rise 
in temperature following exposure to 
anaesthetic drugs due to an uncontrolled 
increase in skeletal muscle oxidative 
metabolism and associated with muscular 
contractions and rigidity, sometimes 
progressing to rhabdomyolysis; it carries a high 
mortality (at least 10%). Most of the cases are 
due to a mutation in the ryanodine receptor 
on the sarcoplasmic reticulum, and 
susceptibility is inherited in an autosomal 
dominant pattern, so a family history should 
be sought. 
 ‘ Social ’  h abits 
  •   Smoking   –  ideally patients should stop 
smoking before any general anaesthetic to 
improve their respiratory function and reduce 
their thrombogenic potential.  
  •   Alcohol  – a history suggestive of dependency 
should be sought, and management of the 
perioperative period instituted using 
chlordiazepoxide to avoid acute alcohol 
withdrawal syndrome.  
  •   Substance abuse   –  in particular a history of 
intravenous drug usage should be sought and 

12 
Preoperative assessment
 Cardiac  d isease 
 Angina is not a contraindication to general anaes-
thesia provided it is stable. An indication of the 
severity of angina can be gauged by the frequency 
with which the patient uses glyceryl trinitrate 
preparations for acute attacks. High usage is an 
indication to refer to a cardiologist for improved 
management. Similarly if the patient has a good 
exercise tolerance, regularly walking his or her 
dogs half a mile, for example, it suggests that the 
cardiac disease is not limiting. 
 Coronary  a rtery  b ypass  g raft 
( CABG )  s urgery 
 Patients who have had successful CABG surgery 
should have better cardiac function than they had 
prior to surgery; the same applies following 
balloon angioplasty and stenting. If CABG surgery 
was done some time previously, ascertain whether 
the patient ’ s symptoms have changed, particularly 
whether there was any recurrence of angina or 
breathlessness, suggesting that the graft(s) may 
have thrombosed or the disease progressed. 
 Routine electrocardiogram (ECG) may detect 
abnormalities at rest. To rule out signiﬁ cant 
cardiac disease, consider stressing the heart, such 
as with an exercise ECG, stress - echocardiogram or 
radionuclide myocardial perfusion scan. Local 
anaesthesia should be considered in all patients 
with a history of cardiac or respiratory disease.   
 Other  p roblems 
 Bleeding  d isorders or 
 a nticoagulation 
 Patients should be managed in close collaboration 
with the haematology department. Patients with 
haemophilia A or B should be given the speciﬁ c 
clotting factor replacement. Patients on warfarin 
should be converted to heparin preoperatively. 
When patients are anticoagulated on account 
of previous thromboembolic disease, additional 
prophylaxis should be given, including measures 
such as thromboembolism deterrent (TED) stock-
ings, intermittent compression boots while on the 
operating table and early mobilization (when pos-
sible with local anaesthesia to facilitate this). Rapid 
reversal of warfarin may be achieved with clotting 
factor replacement (human prothrombin complex, 
e.g. Beriplex) or pooled fresh frozen plasma. 
true allergy, but a skin rash does suggest an allergy 
such that its use should be avoided. In particular, 
consider allergies to the following: 
  •   anaesthetic agents ; 
  •   antimicrobial drugs ; 
  •   skin preparation substances , e.g. iodine;  
  •   wound dressings , e.g. Elastoplast. 
 Management of  p re -
 e xisting  m edical 
 c onditions 
 Diabetes 
 Patients with diet - controlled diabetes require 
no special preoperative treatment. Patients on 
oral hypoglycaemics or on subcutaneous insulin 
should stop therapy the night before, and be com-
menced on a glucose and insulin infusion. In par-
ticular, long - acting insulin preparations should 
be avoided the night before surgery in order to 
prevent unexpected intraoperative hypoglycae-
mia. Patients with diabetes should be placed ﬁ rst 
on the operating list.  
 Respiratory  d isease 
 Asthma 
 The degree of respiratory compromise can be 
readily assessed with a peak ﬂ ow meter. In 
addition, patients will know whether their chest 
is as good as it can be, or whether they are 
currently having an exacerbation. Some patients 
with allergic asthma have poor peak ﬂ ows in 
summer owing to pollen allergies, but have no 
problems in winter months. Elective surgery 
should be planned to avoid the summer in such 
patients. 
 Obstructive  p ulmonary  d isease 
 This is often more of a problem, since there is less 
reversibility and, even at the patient ’ s best, respi-
ratory reserve might be poor. Consider whether 
the patient will require postoperative ventilation 
on an intensive care unit, or whether epidural 
analgesia would be sensible to avoid opiates early 
postoperatively. 

Preoperative assessment 13
with severe angina might be a candidate for 
removal of a sebaceous cyst under a local anaes-
thetic but not for a complex incisional hernia 
repair under a general anaesthetic. When the 
surgery will correct the comorbidity, different cri-
teria apply; thus, the same patient with angina 
would be a candidate for a general anaesthetic if 
it was given to enable myocardial revasculariza-
tion with aortocoronary bypass grafts.  
 Urgency of the  s urgery 
 When patients present with life - threatening con-
ditions, the risk – beneﬁ t balance often changes in 
favour of surgical intervention even if there is sig-
niﬁ cant risk attached, but the alternative is prob-
able death; a good example is a patient presenting 
with a ruptured aortic aneurysm, in whom death 
is often an immediate alternative to urgent 
surgery, and there is little time for preoperative 
preparation. 
 Objective  o perative  r isk 
 a ssessment 
 The American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) 
has produced a grading scheme to estimate 
comorbidity (Table  3.1 ). Half of all elective surgery 
will be in patients of grade 1, i.e. normal ﬁ t 
individuals with a minimal risk of death. As the 
patient ’ s grade increases, reﬂ ecting increased 
comorbidity, the postoperative morbidity and 
mortality increases. Alternative predictive scoring 
schemes exist, both in general and tailored for 
speciﬁ c operations. The Acute Physiology And 
Chronic Health Evaluation (APACHE) score looks 
at different physiological variables (e.g. tempera-
ture, blood pressure, heart rate, respiratory rate) 
to derive a measure of how ill someone is. It is 
of most use in an ITU setting, and is less useful 
as a preoperative risk estimation tool. In contrast, 
the Physiological and Operative Severity Score 
for the enUmeration of Mortality and morbidity 
(POSSUM) was developed as a predictive scoring 
system for surgical mortality and combines infor-
mation regarding the patient ’ s physiological status 
and the operative procedure (Table  3.2 ). A subse-
quent reﬁ nement resulted in P - POSSUM, which 
is now widely used as an audit tool to compare 
estimated mortality with actual mortality. 
  
 Obstructive  j aundice 
 Patients with obstructive jaundice often have a 
prolonged prothrombin time and require vitamin 
K and either human prothrombin complex (e.g. 
Beriplex) or fresh frozen plasma prior to surgery 
to correct the abnormality. They are also more 
prone to infection and poor wound healing. 
Intraoperatively, it is important to maintain a 
diuresis with judicious ﬂ uid replacement and 
diuretics (such as mannitol) to prevent acute renal 
failure (hepatorenal syndrome) to which these 
patients are susceptible. In the presence of liver 
impairment, metabolism of some commonly used 
drugs may be reduced.  
 Chronic  r enal  f ailure 
 Chronic renal failure carries many additional peri-
operative problems. Electrolyte disturbances, par-
ticularly hyperkalaemia, are common and, in the 
absence of adequate renal function, ﬂ uid balance 
is difﬁ cult to achieve. Uraemia impairs platelet 
function, but the effect can be reversed using 
desmopressin (DDAVP). Clearance of narcotics 
is poor and postoperative narcosis should be 
reversed by the opiate antagonist naloxone, which 
should be given as a bolus and must be followed 
by an extended infusion, since the half - life of 
naloxone is much shorter than that of opiate anal-
gesia. Venous access should be carefully chosen 
since such patients may have, or may require, 
arteriovenous dialysis ﬁ stulas. In patients with 
chronic renal failure, avoid using the arm with a 
ﬁ stula  in situ , and avoid using either cephalic vein. 
Similarly, central lines should be placed in the 
internal jugular veins rather than the subclavian 
veins, since a resultant subclavian vein stenosis 
could prevent satisfactory ﬁ stula function. 
 Operative  f actors  i nﬂ uencing 
 p reoperative  m anagement 
 Nature of the  s urgery 
 Some operations require special preparation of 
the patient, such as bowel preparation prior to 
colonic surgery or preoperative localization of an 
impalpable mammographic abnormality prior to 
breast surgery. Different degrees of ﬁ tness are 
acceptable for different procedures. So, a patient 

14 
Preoperative assessment
 Table 3.1   The ASA grading system 
 ASA grade  
 Deﬁ nition  
 Typical mortality (%)  
 I  
  Normal healthy person, no comorbidity  
  < 0.1  
 II  
  Mild systemic disease that does not limit activity  
  0.3  
 III  
  Severe systemic disease that limits activity, but is not incapacitating  
  2 – 4  
 IV  
  Incapacitating systemic disease which is constantly life - threatening  
  20 – 40  
 V  
  Not expected to survive 24 hours, with or without surgery  
  > 50  
 Table 3.2   Factors involved in the estimation of risk using P - POSSUM 
 Physiological parameters  
 Operative parameters  
 Age  
  Operation severity, e.g. minor, moderate, major  
 Cardiac disease, e.g. heart failure, angina, cardiomyopathy  
  Number of procedures  
 Respiratory disease, e.g. degree of exertional dyspnoea  
  Operative blood loss  
 ECG, e.g. presence of arrhythmia  
  Peritoneal soiling  
 Systolic blood pressure  
  Presence of malignancy  
 Heart rate  
  Urgency, e.g. elective, urgent, emergency  
 Leucocyte count  
  
 Haemoglobin concentration  
  
 Urea concentration  
  
 Sodium concentration  
  
 Potassium concentration  
  
 Glasgow coma score  
  

 4 
Postoperative 
 c omplications  
 
 Learning objectives 
 ✓  To know the common postoperative complications. 
 ✓  In particular, to be aware of measures to limit the occurrence of 
complications, including the principles of antimicrobial 
prophylaxis and commonly encountered resistant 
micro - organisms. 
  −   Postoperative  – factors introduced after 
the patient ’ s return to the ward. 
 A useful table of postoperative complications 
following abdominal surgery is presented in Table 
 4.1 . This scheme can be modiﬁ ed for operations 
concerning any other system. 
 Wound  i nfection 
 The incidence of wound infection after surgical 
operations is related to the type of operation. 
The common classiﬁ cation of risk groups is as 
follows: 
 1  Clean (e.g. hernia repair)  – an uninfected 
operative wound without inﬂ ammation and 
where no viscera are opened. Infection rate is 
1% or less.  
 2  Clean contaminated  – where a viscus is open 
but with little or no spillage. Infection rate is 
less than 10%.  
 3  Contaminated  – where there is obvious 
spillage or obvious inﬂ ammatory disease, e.g. 
a gangrenous appendix. Infection rate is 
15 – 20%. 
 4  Dirty or infected  – where there is gross 
contamination (e.g. a gunshot wound with 
 Classiﬁ cation 
 Any operation carries with it the risk of complica-
tions. These can be classiﬁ ed according to the 
following: 
 1  Local or general complication. 
  •   Local  – involving the operation site itself. 
  •   General   –  affecting any of the other systems 
of the body, e.g. respiratory, urological or 
cardiovascular complications. 
 2  Time of occurrence postoperatively. 
  •   Immediate   –  within the ﬁ rst 24 hours.  
  •   Early  –  within the ﬁ rst 30 days.  
  •   Late  – any subsequent period, often long 
after the patient has left hospital. 
 In addition, when considering the factors 
contributing to any postoperative 
complication the following classiﬁ cation 
should be used:  
  −   Preoperative   –  factors already existing 
before the operation is carried out.  
  −   Operative   –  factors that come into play 
during the operation itself.  
Lecture Notes: General Surgery, 12th edition. © Harold Ellis, 
Sir Roy Y. Calne and Christopher J. E. Watson. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

16 
Postoperative complications
 2  General factors  – nasal carriage of 
staphylococci; concurrent skin infection, e.g. a 
crop of boils; malnutrition, e.g. gastric 
carcinoma; immunosuppression. 
 Operative  f actors 
 These are lapses in theatre technique, e.g. failure 
of adequate sterilization of instruments, the sur-
geon ’ s hands or dressings. There may be nasal or 
skin carriers of staphylococci among the nursing 
and surgical staff. Wound infections are especially 
common when the alimentary, biliary or urinary 
tract is opened during surgery, allowing bacterial 
contamination to occur. Wounds placed in poorly 
vascularized tissue, such as an amputation stump, 
are also prone to infection, in particular gas gan-
grene from anaerobic clostridial contamination, 
since necrotic tissue is a good medium for bacte-
rial growth. 
devitalized tissue), or in the presence of frank 
pus or gross soiling (e.g. a perforated large 
bowel). Anticipated infection rate up to 40%. 
 In 
pre - antibiotic 
days, 
the 
haemolytic 
 Streptococcus  was feared most, but now, as this is 
still usually penicillin sensitive, the principal 
causes of wound infection are the penicillin -
 resistant  Staphylococcus aureus , together with 
 Streptococcus faecalis ,  Pseudomonas , coliform 
bacilli and other bowel bacteria including 
 Bacteroides . With continued use of antibiotics, 
more resistant strains of the organisms are appear-
ing, such as the meticillin - resistant  Staphylococcus 
aureus  (MRSA) and the vancomycin - resistant 
 Enterococcus (VRE). 
 Preoperative  f actors 
 1  Local factors  – pre - existing infection, e.g. a 
perforated appendix or an infected compound 
fracture. 
 Table 4.1   Postoperative complications following abdominal surgery  
 
Time
Local
General
0–24 
hours
Reactionary haemorrhage
Asphyxia
Obstructed airway
Inhaled vomit
Anatomical injury, e.g. ligation 
of ureter during pelvic surgery
2nd day to 
3 weeks
Paralytic ileus
Pulmonary
Collapse
Bronchopneumonia
Embolus
Infection
Wound
Peritonitis
Pelvic
Subphrenic
Urinary
Retention
No production 
(acute tubular 
necrosis)
Secondary haemorrhage
Deep venous thrombosis
Dehiscence
Wound
Anastomosis
Enterocolitis
Obstruction due to ﬁbrinous 
adhesions
Bed sores
Late
Obstruction due to ﬁbrous 
adhesions
After extensive 
resections or 
gastrectomy
Anaemia
Vitamin deﬁciency
Steatorrhoea and/
or diarrhoea
Dumping syndrome
Osteoporosis
Incisional hernia
Persistent wound sinus
Recurrence of original lesion 
(e.g. malignancy)
 

Postoperative complications 17
the emergence of resistant strains of bacteria, 
and side - effects such as diarrhoea and skin 
rashes. 
 Principles of  a ntimicrobial 
 p rophylaxis 
 1  Antimicrobial selection in order to target the 
bacterial ﬂ ora likely to be encountered. 
 2  Treatment before contamination occurs, in 
order to achieve adequate antimicrobial 
concentration in the blood at the time of 
exposure to infection. 
 Speciﬁ c  e xamples 
  •   Valvular heart disease . In patients with valvular 
heart disease, commonly rheumatic mitral 
valve disease, prophylaxis is given against 
haematogenous bacterial colonization of the 
valve resulting in infective endocarditis.  
  •   Implantation or presence of a foreign body . 
Where a foreign body such as a prosthetic 
heart valve or prosthetic joint is implanted, 
antimicrobials are used to prevent infection of 
the prosthesis at the time of surgery. The 
commonest infecting agent is  S. aureus , 
therefore the antimicrobial spectrum should 
cover this organism. The likely presence of 
MRSA should inform the choice of 
antimicrobial. Haematogenous spread of an 
organism during other procedures should also 
be borne in mind, occurring in a similar 
manner to infective endocarditis.  
  •   Vascular surgery . Used especially where 
prosthetic material is used and where 
ischaemia exists.  
  •   Amputation of an ischaemic limb . Here the 
risk of gas gangrene is high, particularly 
following above - knee amputations where 
contamination by perineal and faecal 
organisms may occur: penicillin is the 
antibiotic of choice.  
  •   Penetrating wounds and compound fractures . 
Penicillin prophylaxis against clostridial 
infections (metronidazole if penicillin allergic).  
  •   Organ transplant surgery . Prophylaxis should 
be given against wound infection, but also 
against opportunist viral, fungal and protozoan 
infections occurring as a consequence of 
immunosuppression.  
  •   Where there is a high risk of bacterial 
contamination . In operations such as those 
 Postoperative  f actors 
 1  Cross - infection  from elsewhere on the patient ’ s 
body or from other infected cases in the ward 
during dressing changes or wound inspection.  
 2  New infection  due to contamination of the 
wound from the nose or hands of the surgical 
or nursing staff. 
 The use of basic infection control and hygiene 
discipline cannot be overstated. Healthcare pro-
fessionals, be they nurses, doctors, ward clerks or 
cleaners, have a duty to care for their patients. 
This includes avoidance of cross - contamination 
or infection by basic hand washing before touch-
ing any patient or whenever entering their bed 
space, and isolation of any patient infected with a 
contagious or dangerous organism such as MRSA, 
VRE, extended spectrum beta - lactamases (ESBL) 
(see  p. 18 ) or  Clostridium difﬁ cile (see  p. 18 ). 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 The onset of wound infection is usually a few days 
after operation; this may be delayed still further, 
even up to weeks, if antimicrobial chemotherapy 
has been employed. The patient complains of 
pain and swelling in the wound and of the general 
effects of infection (malaise, anorexia, vomiting) 
and runs a swinging pyrexia. The wound is red, 
swollen, hot and tender. Removal of sutures or 
probing of the wound releases the contained pus.  
 Treatment 
 Prophylaxis comprises scrupulous theatre and 
dressing technique, the isolation of infected cases 
and the elimination of carriers with colds or septic 
lesions among the medical and nursing staff. 
 Established infection is treated by drainage; 
antibiotics are given if there is, in addition, a 
spreading cellulitis. Open wounds may beneﬁ t 
from use of a negative pressure wound therapy 
device (vacuum - assisted closure (VAC) system), 
although direct application onto an open abdomen 
runs the risk of creating an enteric ﬁ stula. 
 Antimicrobial  p rophylaxis 
 Prophylactic antimicrobial chemotherapy ( ‘ pro-
phylactic antibiotics ’ ) was, in the early days of 
its use, believed to herald the end of wound 
infections. Unfortunately, the widespread and 
prolonged use of antimicrobials resulted in 

18 
Postoperative complications
 Treatment 
 Fluid and electrolyte replacement is essential. 
Broad - spectrum antibiotics are stopped when 
possible, and oral metronidazole is prescribed. 
Oral vancomycin, which is not absorbed from the 
gut, rapidly eliminates  C. difﬁ cile  but is avoided as 
ﬁ rst - line therapy to prevent the occurrence of 
vancomycin - resistant enterococci. 
 C. difﬁ cile  is highly contagious; so in order to 
prevent further spread on the ward, scrupulous 
hand hygiene should be practised and the patient 
placed in isolation. Spores of  C. difﬁ cile  are quite 
hardy and persist in the environment, resulting in 
relapse and reinfection unless cleaning practices 
are thorough. 
 The best prophylaxis against  C. difﬁ cile 
infection is the judicious use of antibiotics, 
avoiding broad - spectrum antibiotics wherever 
possible. 
 Meticillin -  r esistant 
 Staphylococcus  a ureus  
( MRSA ) 
 Pathology 
 Most community - acquired species of  S. aureus 
are sensitive to ﬂ ucloxacillin and meticillin (previ-
ously called methicillin); increasingly in hospital, 
the organism is resistant to these and other anti-
biotics, including cephalosporins and gentamicin. 
 S. aureus  has a record of developing resistance to 
antibiotics; for example, most species, whether 
acquired in hospital or in the community, already 
possess a beta - lactamase that confers resistance 
to penicillin. MRSA strains have been increasing 
in incidence and most remain sensitive to vanco-
mycin, although MRSA species with reduced or 
no sensitivity to vancomycin (vancomycin -
 intermediate  S. aureus  (VISA) and vancomycin -
 resistant  S. aureus (VRSA)) are now commonly 
encountered.  
 Clinical  f eatures 
 MRSA is spread by contact, and scrupulous 
hand hygiene is a cheap and effective way to 
reduce infection. Once colonized, it is difﬁ cult 
to clear the organism from patients, particularly 
that involve opening the biliary or alimentary 
tract (especially the large bowel), prophylactic 
systemic broad - spectrum antimicrobials are 
indicated. In colonic surgery, cover against 
anaerobic organisms is particularly important 
and is afforded by metronidazole. Systemic 
anti - candidal therapy with ﬂ uconazole may 
also be indicated. 
 Antibiotic -  a ssociated 
 e nterocolitis:  Clostridium 
 d ifﬁ cile  
 Broad - spectrum antibiotics disrupt the normal 
commensal organisms in the gut, selecting out 
resistant forms, such as the toxin - producing 
strains of  C. difﬁ cile . The patient experiences 
severe watery diarrhoea due to extensive enter-
ocolitis, and the bowel shows mucosal inﬂ am-
mation with pseudomembrane formation  –  
pseudomembranous colitis. 
 When ﬁ rst described, there was a strong asso-
ciation with preceding lincomycin or clindamycin 
therapy; today, cephalosporins and co - amoxiclav 
are the commonest culprits, reﬂ ecting their wide-
spread use in clinical practice. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Antibiotic - associated enterocolitis usually occurs 
in patients who have received broad - spectrum 
antibiotics. The condition is particularly likely 
to occur after large - bowel surgery. Mild cases 
present simply with watery diarrhoea. Severe 
cases have a cholera - like picture with a sudden 
onset of profuse, watery diarrhoea with excess 
mucus, abdominal distension and shock due to 
the profound ﬂ uid loss. Occasionally,  C. difﬁ cile 
infection may present with a toxic dilatation of 
the colon. 
 Sigmoidoscopy reveals a red, friable mucosa 
with whitish yellow plaques, which may coalesce 
to form a pseudomembrane. Diagnosis is made by 
identiﬁ cation of the  C. difﬁ cile  toxins (A and B) in 
the stool. 
 Recently, a new strain of  C. difﬁ cile , known as 
type 027, has been detected in the UK, having ﬁ rst 
been identiﬁ ed in North America. Type 027 pro-
duces more toxins and is associated with increased 
mortality and more relapses.  

Postoperative complications 19
 lactam ring of beta - lactam antibiotics including 
second - and third - generation cephalosporins 
(e.g. cefotaxime) and carbapenems (e.g. mero-
penem). Most ESBL - producing bacteria are also 
exceptionally resistant to non - beta - lactam antibi-
otics such as quinolones and aminoglycosides, 
the resistance for which is carried and spread 
to other bacteria by plasmids. As with other resist-
ant organisms, they are commonly found in 
patients treated with prolonged courses of broad -
 spectrum antibiotics. 
 Vancomycin -  r esistant 
 e nterococci ( VRE ) 
 Enterococci constitute a signiﬁ cant portion of 
the normal gut ﬂ ora. The emergence of resistance 
of enterococci to vancomycin is an inevitable 
consequence of the increased usage of vancom-
ycin for prophylaxis and treatment of MRSA, 
as well as the use of similar drugs in animal 
foodstuffs to enhance growth. First identiﬁ ed in 
1986, VRE is now commonly isolated in patients 
who have had prolonged admissions with expo-
sure to antibiotics, such as those on intensive 
care units, transplant units and haematology 
wards. 
 At present there are few antibiotics capable of 
treating VRE, and treatment is best delayed until 
microbiological sensitivities are known. As with 
MRSA and ESBL, VRE is best contained by appro-
priate infection - control measures, such as hand 
washing and isolation.  
 Pulmonary  c ollapse 
and  i nfection 
 Some degree of pulmonary collapse occurs after 
almost every abdominal or transthoracic proce-
dure. Mucus is retained in the bronchial tree, 
blocking the smaller bronchi; the alveolar air is 
then absorbed, with collapse of the supplied lung 
segments (usually the basal lobes). The collapsed 
lung continues to be perfused and acts as a shunt, 
which reduces oxygenation. The lung segment 
may become secondarily infected by inhaled or 
aspirated organisms, and, rarely, abscess forma-
tion may occur. 
if they have a urinary catheter, intravenous 
cannula or open wound. Typically, the organism 
causes a local infection in the same way that 
non - MRSA species do. It is commonly found in 
sick patients, particularly those on intensive 
care units who have been on broad - spectrum 
antibiotics and who are already severely debili-
tated. MRSA is the cause of 40% of all staphylococ-
cal bacteraemias in the UK, and it is associated 
with one - ﬁ fth of all deaths involving hospital -
 acquired infection. 
 One of the reasons for the prevalence of MRSA 
is the failure of healthcare professionals to follow 
good infection control practice, such as hand 
washing. Increased nursing workload has also 
been shown to correlate with increased infection. 
Screening of patients and staff for MRSA carriage, 
with decolonization or isolation of carriers, does 
reduce infection rates. Such simple practices 
reduce not only the incidence of MRSA but also 
infections by other bacteria.  
 Treatment 
 Hand hygiene to prevent transmission between 
patients and intravenous vancomycin to treat 
those patients with the infection are the principles 
of management. Infected patients should be 
isolated, particularly when the organism is in 
the nose or lungs with the potential for droplet 
spread. 
 Colonization of a patient with MRSA is not an 
indication for treatment, although current or pre-
vious history of colonization would alter the 
choice of antibacterial prophylaxis for surgical 
procedures to include cover against MRSA. 
Attempts to eradicate MRSA are worthwhile in 
patients due to undergo procedures involving 
implantation of prosthetic material, such as hip 
replacements and hernia repairs.   
 Extended  s pectrum 
 b eta - l actamases ( ESBL ) 
 While MRSA is one of the most prevalent 
antibiotic - resistant bacteria, still others exist. 
One such class of bacteria are the Gram - negative 
bacteria such as  Klebsiella  and  Escherichia coli 
that produce an extended spectrum beta -
 lactamase, an enzyme that hydrolyses the beta -

20 
Postoperative complications
 Treatment 
  •   Preoperatively , breathing exercises are given, 
smoking is forbidden and antibiotics 
prescribed if any chronic respiratory infection 
is present. Surgery should be postponed when 
possible until all pre - existing chest infection 
has resolved.  
  •   Postoperatively , the patient is encouraged to 
cough, and breathing exercises are instituted, 
usually under the supervision of a 
physiotherapist. Small repeated doses of 
opiates diminish the pain of coughing but are 
insufﬁ cient to dull the cough reﬂ ex. Epidural 
anaesthesia and intercostal nerve blocks may 
help reduce the inhibitory pain of an 
abdominal or thoracic incision, without 
affecting the respiratory drive. Antibiotics are 
prescribed only if the sputum is infected; their 
selection is based on the sensitivity of the 
cultured organisms. 
 Deep  v ein  t hrombosis in 
the  l ower  l imb 
 In the operative and postoperative periods, the 
patient has an increased predisposition to venous 
thrombosis in the veins of the calf muscles, the 
main deep venous channels of the leg and pelvic 
veins. This predisposition has three main compo-
nents (Virchow ’ s triad): 
 1  Increased thrombotic tendency . Following 
blood loss and platelet consumption 
intraoperatively, more platelets are produced, 
numbers peaking around day 10. The new 
platelets have an increased tendency to 
aggregate. Fibrinogen levels also increase, 
predisposing to clot formation. 
 2  Changes in blood ﬂ ow . Increased stagnation 
within the veins occurs as a result of 
immobilization on the operating table and 
postoperatively in bed, and with depression of 
respiration. 
 3  Damage to the vein wall prompts thrombus 
formation on the damaged endothelium. The 
damage may be due to an inﬂ ammatory 
process in the pelvis, or may be produced by 
pressure of the mattress against the calf or 
direct damage at operation (particularly the 
pelvic veins during pelvic procedures) or by 
disease (e.g. pelvic sepsis). 
 Aetiology 
 Preoperative  f actors 
  •   Pre - existing acute or chronic pulmonary 
infection increases the amount of bronchial 
secretion and adds the extra factor of 
pathogenic bacteria.  
  •   Smokers are at particular risk, with increased 
secretions and ineffective cilia.  
  •   Chronic pulmonary disease , e.g. emphysema. 
  •   Chest wall disease , e.g. ankylosing spondylitis, 
which makes coughing difﬁ cult. 
 Operative  f actors 
  •   Anaesthetic drugs  increase mucus secretion 
and depress the action of the bronchial cilia.  
  •   Atropine in addition increases the viscosity of 
the mucus. 
 Postoperative  f actors 
  •   Pain . The pain of the thoracic or abdominal 
incision, which inhibits expectoration of the 
accumulated bronchial secretions, is the most 
important cause of mucus retention. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Pulmonary collapse occurs within the ﬁ rst post-
operative 48 hours. The patient is dyspnoeic with 
a rapid pulse and elevated temperature. There 
may be cyanosis. The patient attempts to cough, 
but this is painful and, unless encouraged, he or 
she may fail to expectorate. The sputum is at ﬁ rst 
frothy and clear, but later may become purulent, 
diagnostic of secondary infection. 
 Examination reveals that the patient is dis-
tressed, with a typical painful  ‘ fruity cough ’ . 
This results from the sound of the bronchial 
secretions rattling within the chest and a good 
clinician should be able to make the diagnosis 
while still several yards away from the patient. The 
chest movements are diminished, particularly on 
the affected side; there is basal dullness and air 
entry is depressed with the addition of coarse 
crackles. 
 Pulse oximetry indicates a reduced saturation, 
and chest X - ray may reveal an opacity of the 
involved segment (usually basal or mid - zone), 
together with mediastinal shift to the affected 
side. 

Postoperative complications 21
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Deep vein thrombosis can be  ‘ silent ’ , but typically 
symptoms and signs occur during the second 
postoperative week, although they may come 
earlier or later. Studies using radioiodine - labelled 
ﬁ brinogen, which is deposited as ﬁ brin in the 
developing thrombus and which can be detected 
by scanning the leg, suggest that the thrombotic 
process usually commences during, or soon after, 
the operation. Earlier thrombosis may occur when 
a patient has already been immobile in hospital 
for some time preoperatively. 
 The patient complains of pain in the calf, and 
on examination there is tenderness of the calf and 
swelling of the foot, often with oedema, raised skin 
temperature and dilatation of the superﬁ cial veins 
of the leg. This is accompanied by a mild pyrexia. 
If the pelvic veins or the femoral vein are affected, 
there is massive swelling of the whole lower limb. 
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   Duplex scanning . The course of the iliac and 
femoral veins can be scanned and ﬁ lling 
 Platelets deposit on the damaged endothelium, 
the vein is occluded by thrombus and a propa-
gated ﬁ brin clot then develops, which may detach 
and embolize to the lung (a pulmonary embolus, 
see below; Figure  4.1 ). 
 This complication is particularly likely to occur 
in elderly patients, the obese, those with malig-
nant disease, patients who have a history of pre-
vious deep vein thrombosis, those undergoing 
abdominal, pelvic and particularly hip surgery and 
women who are taking oestrogen - containing oral 
contraceptives and hormone replacement tablets. 
Thrombosis is commonly observed in the deep 
veins during lower limb amputation for ischae-
mia, the thrombus resulting from the low ﬂ ow and 
immobilization. In addition, some patients may 
be predisposed to thrombosis because of reduced 
levels of the endogenous anticoagulants protein C, 
protein S and antithrombin III, or because they 
carry the Leiden mutation of coagulation factor V 
or the prothrombin 20210 mutation. 1 
 Figure 4.1   (a – d) Progression of deep 
vein thrombosis. PE, pulmonary 
embolus.  
Vein wall damage    
Blood
flow
Platelet aggregation 
on damaged vein wall, 
thrombus forms    
Clot propagates and 
occludes vein: enhanced 
by turbulent or slow
blood flow, raised 
fibrinogen and sticky 
platelets; impaired by 
heparin    
Clot breaks off 
as embolus:
a PE    
(a)    
(b)    
(c)    
(d)    
  1   Factor V Leiden is a G to A substitution at nucleotide 1691 of the 
factor V gene; the thrombophilic factor II (prothrombin) mutation 
is G to A at nucleotide 20210.  

22 
Postoperative complications
should be checked to avoid inadvertent 
over - anticoagulation. 
 Treatment 
 In the established case, anticoagulant therapy 
with an intravenous heparin infusion or subcuta-
neous low molecular weight heparin is com-
menced to prevent further propagation of the clot, 
and to increase ﬁ brinolysis. Once anticoagulated, 
the patient can be mobilized with the lower limbs 
supported in elastic stockings to prevent oedema, 
and initial parenteral anticoagulation can be 
replaced by oral anticoagulation with warfarin. 
 The decision to anticoagulate a patient is par-
ticularly difﬁ cult if thrombosis occurs in the 
immediate postoperative period, as anticoagula-
tion carries a serious risk of haemorrhage at the 
operation site. In this setting, a heparin infusion is 
usually used since the infusion can be immedi-
ately discontinued, and its effects reversed with 
protamine, if bleeding occurs. 
 If pulmonary embolism occurs in spite of anti-
coagulation, or when anticoagulation is contrain-
dicated, percutaneous insertion of an umbrella - like 
ﬁ lter into the inferior vena cava may be indicated 
to prevent recurrent episodes of pulmonary 
embolization. Emboli get caught up in the 
umbrella rather than in the pulmonary arteries.   
 Pulmonary  e mbolus 
 This occurs when a clot from a vein, usually origi-
nating in a femoral vein or a pelvic vein (and occa-
sionally in the calf muscles), detaches and travels 
to the heart to becomes lodged in the pulmonary 
arterial tree. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 The clinical features of pulmonary embolus may 
vary from dyspnoea or mild pleuritic chest pain to 
sudden death due to an occlusion of the pulmo-
nary artery trunk. Minor symptoms include 
pleuritic chest pain, dyspnoea and haemoptysis. 
Severe dyspnoea may occur with cyanosis and 
shock, and larger emboli may prompt acute right 
heart failure and death. 
 The dyspnoea may be sudden in onset, or pro-
gressive as further showers of emboli dislodge. 
The chest pain is pleuritic, and, when basal lung 
segments are affected, diaphragmatic irritation 
defects due to thrombi detected. In skilled 
hands, duplex scanning can detect thrombi in 
all the major veins at and above the knee, but 
is less reliable below this. It has the advantage 
that it is simple and non - invasive.  
  •   Venography . This is the deﬁ nitive investigation 
but can be neither repeated frequently nor 
employed for routine screening.  
  •   125 I - labelled ﬁ brinogen . A highly sensitive 
test that enables the legs to be scanned at 
daily intervals. It demonstrates the presence 
of a deep vein thrombus in approximately 
one - third of all postoperative patients, with 
a particularly high incidence in the high - 
risk groups listed above. Only half of the 
thrombi picked up on scanning can be 
detected on careful clinical examination. 
Owing to scatter from the radioactive iodine 
excreted in the urine and held in the bladder, 
the test is unreliable in the pelvic and thigh 
region and is signiﬁ cant only from the knee 
downwards. 
 Management 
 Prophylaxis 
  •   Treat avoidable risk factors . Elective surgery on 
anyone with a treatable risk factor should be 
avoided. For example, elective surgery on a 
patient taking the contraceptive pill should be 
delayed for 6 weeks (one normal cycle) after 
stopping the pill.  
  •   Active mobilization . Stimulation of blood ﬂ ow 
by encouraging early mobilization reduces the 
risks. 
  •   Intermittent calf compression  using inﬂ atable 
cushions wrapped around the lower legs may 
be used intraoperatively to reduce the 
incidence of thrombosis.  
  •   Thromboembolic deterrent (TED) stockings 
(graded compression stockings) and elevation 
of the legs to increase venous return are simple 
and effective.  
  •   Subcutaneous low molecular weight heparin 
injections , such as enoxaparin, should be 
started preoperatively and continued while the 
patient remains at risk. Controlled trials have 
shown a reduction in the incidence of venous 
clot formation, with a less certain reduction in 
pulmonary embolism in the treated groups. 
These drugs are eliminated by the kidneys and, 
in the presence of renal failure, factor Xa levels 

Postoperative complications 23
radiolabelled inert gas such as krypton - 81m 
is inhaled and its distribution throughout 
the lung compared with the distribution 
of intravenously injected technetium - 
99m - labelled human albumin particles. 
The albumin particles are trapped in the 
lung capillaries and their distribution 
reﬂ ects lung perfusion. In a pulmonary 
embolus, the perfusion scan will show 
uneven circulation through the lungs, 
with multiple perfusion defects, but a 
simultaneous ventilation scan is normal in the 
absence of pre - existing pulmonary disease 
(mismatch).  
  •   Computed tomographic pulmonary 
angiography (CTPA) is the deﬁ nitive 
diagnostic test used when V/Q scan is 
unreliable, such as when pulmonary disease is 
present. 
 It is important to appreciate that pulmonary 
embolus may occur without any preceding 
warning signs of thrombosis in the leg. Indeed, 
once there are obvious clinical features of deep 
vein thrombosis, detachment of an organized and 
adherent clot from this limb is rather unlikely, 
especially if anticoagulant therapy has been com-
menced so that fresh clot formation is inhibited. 
The great majority of fatal pulmonary emboli are 
unheralded.  
 Treatment 
 When the person is in pain, opiate analgesia is 
given, oxygen is administered and heparin is com-
menced if the patient is not already on anticoagu-
lants. Lysis of a massive embolus may be effected 
with an intravenous infusion of streptokinase, 
especially if delivered via a pulmonary catheter 
at the time of pulmonary angiography. Recent 
surgery is a relative contraindication to throm-
bolysis. In the critically ill patient, pulmonary 
embolectomy carried out with cardiopulmonary 
bypass may be successful. 
 Burst  a bdomen 
 Aetiology 
 Dehiscence of the abdominal wound may result 
from a number of factors, preoperative, operative 
and postoperative. 
may occur and result in shoulder - tip pain. In 
elderly patients, confusion due to hypoxia may be 
the presenting symptom. Pulmonary emboli clas-
sically occur around the 10th postoperative day. 
They often occur while straining at stool, as the 
increased intra - abdominal pressure dislodges a 
pelvic venous thrombus.  
 Examination 
 On examination, the patient is tachypnoeic, often 
with a spike of fever. There is a tachycardia and a 
raised jugular venous pressure (JVP) reﬂ ecting the 
pulmonary hypertension. There may be tender-
ness in the calves at the site of a deep vein throm-
bosis, but this is not common. Cyanosis may be 
present if the embolus is large, and a pleural rub 
may be audible in small and peripherally located 
emboli. 
 If the patient survives the embolus, complete 
clearing of the clot occurs quite rapidly. Infarction 
of the lung is uncommon because the lungs 
themselves are perfused via the bronchial 
arteries. It may occur in those patients with 
cardiac failure in whom there is pre - existing pul-
monary congestion. 
 Diagnosis of an embolus is often difﬁ cult. The 
main differential diagnosis of a major embolus is 
a myocardial infarction, while small emboli may 
be confused with a chest infection.  
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   Chest X - ray  in the early stages is often normal, 
although within a few hours patchy shadowing 
of the affected segment takes place.  
  •   Electrocardiogram (ECG)  may help in 
differentiating pulmonary embolus from 
myocardial infarction. In the case of an 
embolus, there may be rhythm changes (atrial 
ﬁ brillation, heart block) or features of right 
heart strain (ST segment depression in leads 
V1 to V3, III and aVF, with right axis deviation), 
as the heart pumps against the obstructed 
pulmonary arterial tree. The characteristic 
 ‘ S1 – Q3 – T3 ’  pattern (S wave in lead I, with a Q 
wave and an inverted T wave in lead III) is 
seldom present.  
  •   Arterial blood gases  may conﬁ rm the hypoxia. 
Hypocapnia (low CO 2 ) may also be present 
secondary to tachypnoea.  
  •   Ventilation – perfusion scintigraphy (V/Q scan). 
This is a radionuclide technique in which a 

24 
Postoperative complications
The wound usually heals rapidly, but there is a 
high incidence of subsequent incisional hernia.   
 Postoperative  ﬁ stula 
 Deﬁ nition 
 A ﬁ stula is deﬁ ned as an abnormal connection 
between two epithelial surfaces.  
 Aetiology 
 The development of a ﬁ stula involving the alimen-
tary canal or its biliary or pancreatic adnexae fol-
lowing abdominal surgery is a serious complication. 
A ﬁ stula may be consequent upon general or local 
factors. 
 General  f actors 
 The patient ’ s general condition may be poor due 
to uraemia, anaemia, jaundice, protein deﬁ ciency 
or cachexia from malignant disease.  
 Local  f actors 
  •   Poor surgical technique . 
  •   Poor blood supply at the anastomotic line, 
particularly in operations on the oesophagus 
and rectum. 
  •   Sepsis incurred before or during the operation 
leading to suture line breakdown. (Sepsis is 
inevitable once leakage has occurred.)  
  •   Presence of distal obstruction . A biliary ﬁ stula is 
likely to occur if stones are left behind in the 
common bile duct after cholecystectomy.  
  •   Local malignant or chronic inﬂ ammatory 
disease , e.g. Crohn ’ s disease. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Diagnosis is usually all too obvious, with the 
escape of bowel contents or bile through the 
wound or drainage site. If there is any doubt, 
methylene blue given by mouth will appear in the 
efﬂ uent of an alimentary ﬁ stula, and the ﬂ uid can 
be tested for bile to diagnose a biliary leak, or cre-
atinine for a urinary tract leak, while the ﬂ uid from 
a pancreatic leak is rich in amylase. An injection 
of radio - opaque ﬂ uid will outline the ﬁ stulous 
tract and provide valuable information about its 
size and whether or not distal obstruction exists. 
 Preoperative 
 Uraemia, 
cachexia 
with 
protein 
deﬁ ciency, 
vitamin C deﬁ ciency, jaundice, obesity and ster-
oids all impair wound healing.  
 Operative 
 Poor technique in closing the abdominal wound 
or the use of suture material of low tensile strength, 
which ruptures postoperatively. Badly tied knots 
may come undone and sutures too near the edge 
of the incision may cut through the tissues like a 
wire through cheese, especially if these tissues are 
weakened by infection.  
 Postoperative 
 Cough or abdominal distension, which puts a 
strain on the suture line; infection or haematoma 
of the wound, which weakens it.   
 Clinical  f eatures 
 The abdomen usually dehisces on about the 10th 
day. There may be a warning of this if pink ﬂ uid 
discharges through the abdominal incision. This 
represents the serous effusion (which is always 
present during the ﬁ rst week or two within the 
abdominal cavity after operation), which is tinged 
with blood and which seeps through the breaking 
down wound. If this  ‘ pink ﬂ uid sign ’  is ignored, the 
patient ﬁ nds a loop of intestine or the omentum 
protruding through the wound, usually after a 
cough or strain  –  a most alarming ﬁ nding for both 
the patient and staff. 
 Sometimes, the deep layer of the abdominal 
incision gives way but the skin sutures hold; such 
cases result in a massive incisional hernia.  
 Treatment 
 The patient with a burst abdomen is usually in 
mortal fear. The patient should be reassured and 
the reassurance supplemented by an injection 
of morphine combined with an antiemetic. The 
abdominal contents should be covered with sterile 
towels soaked in saline and the patient prepared 
for operation. The abdominal wound should 
be resutured under a general anaesthetic using 
strong nylon stitches passed through all the layers 
of the abdominal wall including the skin. The 
prognosis after this procedure is good unless 
the patient succumbs to the underlying disease. 

Postoperative complications 25
 The enzyme - rich ﬂ uid of the upper alimentary 
tract and of a pancreatic ﬁ stula produces rapid 
excoriation of the surrounding skin. This is much 
less marked in a faecal ﬁ stula, as the contents 
of the colon are relatively poor in proteolytic 
enzymes. The patient is toxic and passes into a 
severe catabolic state compounded by infection 
and starvation due to loss of intestinal ﬂ uid. Rapid 
wasting occurs from ﬂ uid loss and protein 
depletion.  
 Treatment 
 The early management has three aims: 
 1  To protect the skin around the ﬁ stula from 
ulceration . The edges of the wound are 
covered by Stomahesive (which adheres even 
to moist surfaces), or aluminium paint or 
silicone barrier cream. It may be possible to 
collect the efﬂ uent by means of a colostomy 
appliance and thus reduce skin soiling. If the 
mouth of the ﬁ stula is large, continuous 
suction may be necessary.  
 2  To replace the loss of ﬂ uid, electrolytes, 
nutrients and vitamins . In a high alimentary 
ﬁ stula, this will require intravenous feeding via 
a central line (total parenteral nutrition). 
Calories are given in the form of glucose and 
fat emulsion and protein depletion is 
countered by amino acids. Vitamins and 
electrolytes are also required. Such prolonged 
intravenous feeding must be carefully 
monitored by serial biochemical studies. If the 
ﬁ stula is low in the alimentary tract, an 
elemental diet can be given by mouth. This is 
rapidly absorbed in the upper intestine and is 
thus not lost through the ﬁ stula. 
 3  To reduce sepsis . This is achieved by judicious 
drainage of pus collections and by antibiotic 
therapy. 
 On this conservative regimen, a side - ﬁ stula 
without distal obstruction may well heal sponta-
neously. However, if the ﬁ stula is large or com-
plete, or if there is a distal obstruction or if the 
ﬁ stula is malignant in origin or at the site of an 
inﬂ ammatory disease such as Crohn ’ s disease, 
subsequent surgery is required to close the leak 
and deal with the cause. This can only be success-
ful if carried out at the stage when the patient ’ s 
condition has improved and when a positive 
nitrogen balance has been achieved.   
 Postoperative  p yrexia 
 There are many causes of a pyrexia following 
surgery, and diagnosis requires a methodical 
approach. A mild pyrexia is a common postopera-
tive feature immediately following surgery and is 
a normal response to tissue injury. The following 
procedure is valuable in elucidating the cause of 
such a fever. 
 1  Inspect the wound : superﬁ cial wound infection 
or haematoma. 
 2  Inspect venous cannula sites : thrombophlebitis 
is common when a cannula has remained  in 
situ for a few days, or when irritant infusions 
have passed through it. 
 3  Examine the chest clinically and if necessary 
order a chest X - ray and ultrasound: exclude 
pulmonary collapse, infection, infarction and 
subphrenic abscess. 
 4  Examine the legs : deep vein thrombosis.  
 5  Rectal examination : pelvic abscess. 
 6  Urine culture : urinary infection. 
 7  Stool culture : for  C. difﬁ cile toxin to exclude 
enterocolitis. 
 8  Finally, consider the possibility of  drug 
sensitivity . 
 
 
  

 5 
Acute  i nfections  
 
 Learning objectives 
 ✓  To know the common surgical infections and their management. 
 ✓  To be particularly cognizant of tetanus and gas gangrene, 
including prophylaxis and treatment. 
phangitis and lymphadenitis, and there may be an 
associated septicaemia. 
 Treatment 
 Immobilization, elevation and antibiotics. If a 
local abscess forms, this must be drained.   
 Abscess 
 An abscess is a localized collection of pus, usually, 
but not invariably, produced by pyogenic organ-
isms. Occasionally, a sterile abscess results from 
the injection of irritants into soft tissues (e.g. 
thiopentone). 
 An abscess commences as a hard, red, painful 
swelling, which then softens and becomes ﬂ uctu-
ant. If not drained, it may discharge spontane-
ously onto the surface or into an adjacent viscus 
or body cavity. There are the associated features 
of bacterial infection, namely a swinging fever, 
malaise, anorexia and sweating with a polymorph 
leucocytosis. 
 Treatment 
 An established abscess in any situation requires 
drainage. Antimicrobial agents cannot diffuse 
in sufﬁ cient quantity to sterilize an abscess 
    There is an important general principle in treating 
acute infection anywhere in the body; antibiotics 
are invaluable when the infection is spreading 
through the tissues (e.g. cellulitis, peritonitis, 
pneumonia), but drainage is essential when 
abscess formation has occurred. 
 Diabetics are very prone to infection; in any 
infection, test the blood or urine for sugar.  
 Cellulitis 
 Cellulitis is a spreading inﬂ ammation of connec-
tive tissues. It is generally subcutaneous, but the 
term may also be applied to pelvic, perinephric, 
pharyngeal and other connective tissue infec-
tions. The common causative agent is the  β -
 haemolytic  Streptococcus . The invasiveness of this 
organism is due to the production of hyaluroni-
dase and streptokinase, which dissolve the inter-
cellular matrix and the ﬁ brin inﬂ ammatory barrier 
respectively. 
 Characteristically, the skin is dark red with local 
oedema and heat; it blanches on pressure. There 
may be vesicles and, in severe cases, cutaneous 
gangrene. Cellulitis is often accompanied by lym-
Lecture Notes: General Surgery, 12th edition. © Harold Ellis, 
Sir Roy Y. Calne and Christopher J. E. Watson. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Acute infections 27
 Treatment 
 When pus is visible, the boil should be incised. 
Recurrent crops of boils should be treated by 
improving the general hygiene of the patient, and 
by the use of ultraviolet light and hexachloroph-
ene baths, but systemic antibiotic therapy is 
seldom indicated.   
 Carbuncle 
 A carbuncle is an area of subcutaneous necrosis 
that discharges onto the surface through multiple 
sinuses. It is usually staphylococcal in origin. The 
subcutaneous tissues become honeycombed by 
small abscesses separated by ﬁ brous strands. The 
condition is often associated with general debility, 
and diabetes, in particular, must be considered. 
 Treatment 
 Surgery is rarely indicated initially. Antibiotic 
therapy is given and the carbuncle merely pro-
tected with sterile dressings. Occasionally, a 
large sloughing area eventually requires excision 
and a skin graft. Diabetes, if present, must be 
controlled. 
 Speciﬁ c  i nfections 
 Tetanus 
 Tetanus is now a rare disease in the Western 
world, thanks to a comprehensive immunization 
policy. In the developing world, it remains preva-
lent with a mortality of up to 60%. 
 Pathology 
 Tetanus is caused by  Clostridium tetani , an anaer-
obic, exotoxin - secreting, Gram - positive bacillus. 
It is characterized by formation of a terminal 
spore ( ‘ drumstick ’ ), and is a normal inhabitant of 
soil and faeces. The bacillus remains at the site of 
inoculation and produces a powerful exotoxin, 
tetanospasmin. Tetanospasmin principally affects 
inhibitory 
neurones 
that 
secrete 
gamma -
 aminobutyric acid (GABA) and glycine. By block-
ing the inhibitory effects of these neurones, there 
is unopposed excitatory activity from motor and 
completely. Pus left undrained continues to act as 
a source of toxaemia and becomes surrounded by 
dense, ﬁ brous tissue. 
 The technique of abscess drainage depends on 
the site. The classical method, which is applicable 
to a superﬁ cial abscess, is to wait until there is 
ﬂ uctuation and to insert the tip of a scalpel blade 
at this point. The track is widened by means of 
sinus forceps, which can be inserted without fear 
of damaging adjacent structures. If there is room, 
the surgeon ’ s ﬁ nger can be used to explore the 
abscess cavity and break down undrained loculi. 
Drainage is then maintained until the abscess 
cavity heals  –  from below outwards  –  since other-
wise the superﬁ cial layers can close over, with 
recurrence of the abscess. The cavity is therefore 
kept open by means of a gauze wick, a corrugated 
drain or a tube; the drain is gradually withdrawn 
until complete healing is achieved. 
 Deep 
abscesses 
can 
be 
localized 
and 
drained percutaneously using ultrasound or CT 
guidance. 
 Boil 
 A boil (furuncle) is an abscess, usually due to the 
pyogenic  Staphylococcus , which involves a follicle 
and its associated glands. It is therefore not found 
on the hairless palm or sole, but is usually encoun-
tered where the skin is hairy, injured by friction or 
is dirty and macerated by sweat; thus, it occurs 
particularly on the neck, axilla and the perianal 
region. Occasionally, a furuncle may be the 
primary source of a staphylococcal septicaemia 
and may be responsible for osteomyelitis, perine-
phric abscess or empyema, particularly in debili-
tated patients. A boil on the face may be 
complicated by a pyelophlebitis spreading along 
the facial veins resulting in thrombosis of the cav-
ernous sinus. 
 Differential  d iagnosis 
  •   Hidradenitis suppuritiva . Multiple infected foci 
in the axillae or groins due to infection of the 
apocrine sweat glands of these regions are 
usually misdiagnosed as boils. They do not 
respond to antimicrobial therapy and can only 
be treated effectively by excision of the 
affected skin; if this is extensive, the defect 
may require grafting. 

28 
Acute infections
  •   Strychnine poisoning : ﬂ accidity occurs between 
convulsions, whereas in tetanus the spasm 
persists. 
  •   Meningitis : neck stiffness. 
  •   Epilepsy . 
  •   Hysteria . 
 Treatment 
 Prophylaxis 
 Active  i mmunization 
 This comprises two initial injections of tetanus 
toxoid (formalin - treated exotoxin) at an interval of 
6 weeks. Booster doses are given at intervals of 10 
years, or at the time of any injury. Toxoid should 
be given to any population at risk of injury, partic-
ularly the elderly in whom cover may have lapsed.  
 Wound  t oilet 
 The risk of tetanus can be reduced almost to zero 
if penetrating and contaminated wounds are ade-
quately excised to remove all dead tissue and a 
course of prophylactic penicillin (or erythromycin 
for penicillin - sensitive patients) is given. Antibiotic 
therapy is no substitute for thorough wound 
debridement.  
 Passive  i mmunization 
 This is done to neutralize the toxin. Patients who 
have previously received toxoid should be given a 
booster dose. If toxoid has not been given in the 
past, human tetanus immunoglobulin (HTIG), 
prepared from fully immunized subjects, should 
be given if the wound is heavily contaminated or 
is a puncture wound, and more than 6 hours have 
elapsed before treatment is received. HTIG is 
insufﬁ cient to confer long - term immunity, and a 
course of toxoid should also be given.   
 Curative  t reatment 
 Control of  c onvulsions 
 The patient is nursed in isolation, quiet and dark-
ness, and is heavily sedated. In severe cases, phar-
macological paralysis with tracheostomy and 
intermittent positive - pressure mechanical venti-
lation is required and this may have to be contin-
ued for several weeks. It is terminated when the 
spasms and rigidity are absent during a trial period 
without muscle relaxants.  
 Control of the  l ocal  i nfection 
 Excision and drainage of any wound is carried out 
under a general anaesthetic. High - dose penicillin 
autonomic neurones. Motor effects include 
increase in muscle tone, with rigidity and reﬂ ex 
spasms; autonomic effects include sympathetic 
overactivity with tachycardia, increased cardiac 
output and reduced vascular tone. 
 Tetanus follows the implantation of spores into 
a deep, devitalized wound where anaerobic condi-
tions occur. Infection is related less to the severity 
of the wound than to its nature; thus, an extensive 
injury that has received early and adequate wound 
toilet is far less risky than a contaminated punc-
ture wound that has been neglected.  
 Clinical  f eatures 
 The incubation time is 24 hours to 24 days, the 
initial injury often being trivial and forgotten. 
Muscle spasm ﬁ rst develops at the site of inocula-
tion and then involves the facial muscles and the 
muscles of the neck and spine. As a rule, it is the 
trismus of the facial spasm (producing the typical 
 ‘ risus sardonicus ’ ) that is the ﬁ rst reliable indica-
tion of developing tetanus. This may be so severe 
that it becomes impossible for the patient to open 
his or her mouth ( ‘ lock - jaw ’ ). The period of spasm 
is followed, except in mild cases, by violent and 
extremely painful convulsions, which occur within 
24 – 72 hours of the onset of symptoms and may be 
precipitated by some trivial stimulus, such as a 
sudden noise. The convulsions, like the muscle 
spasm, affect the muscles of the neck, face and 
trunk. Characteristically, the muscles remain in 
spasm between the convulsions. The temperature 
is a little elevated but the pulse is rapid and weak. 
 In favourable cases, the convulsions, if present 
at all, become less frequent and then cease and 
the tonic spasm gradually lessens. It may, however, 
be some weeks before muscle tone returns to 
normal and the risus sardonicus disappears. In 
fatal cases, paroxysms become more severe and 
frequent; death occurs from asphyxia due to 
involvement of the respiratory muscles or from 
exhaustion, inhalation of vomit or pneumonia. 
 Poor prognostic features are a short incubation 
period from the time of injury to the onset of spasm 
(under 5 days) and the occurrence of convulsions 
within 48 hours of the onset of muscle spasm.  
 Differential  d iagnosis 
  •   Hypocalcaemic tetany : characteristically affects 
the limbs, producing carpopedal spasm (see 
 p. 324 ) 

Acute infections 29
packed with gauze. Delayed primary suture can 
then safely be performed after 5 – 6 days, by which 
time the wound is usually healthy and granulat-
ing. The dangers of primary closure of contami-
nated wounds has been learned and forgotten 
after every war and catastrophe since 1914!  
 Antimicrobial  t herapy 
 Penicillin is given in all heavily contaminated 
wounds and to patients undergoing amputation 
of an ischaemic leg. 
 Curative  t reatment 
 In the established case, all involved tissue must be 
excised. Involvement of all muscle groups in a 
limb is an indication for amputation, which in the 
lower limb may mean a disarticulation at the hip. 
High - dose penicillin is given, and other suppor-
tive measures as required. Hyperbaric oxygen 
therapy, to eliminate the anaerobic environment, 
has been used with varying degrees of success. 
The value of antiserum against gas gangrene, as 
either a prophylactic or curative measure, is not 
proven. 
 Synergistic  g angrene 
 Pathology 
 Synergistic gangrene, also known as progressive 
bacterial gangrene and Meleney ’ s gangrene 1 , is 
caused by the synergistic action of two or 
more organisms, commonly aerobic haemolytic 
 Staphylococcus  and microaerophilic non - haemo-
lytic  Streptococcus . It is more common in patients 
with diabetes and is often related to recent trauma 
or infection. Where it affects the scrotum and peri-
neum, it has been termed Fournier ’ s gangrene. 2 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 There may be no precipitating factor, but most 
follow infections or recent surgery (previously 
termed progressive postoperative gangrene). 
Around the wound an area of cellulitis appears, 
which spreads rapidly. The area is exquisitely 
tender, and, as gangrene evolves, it liberates an 
offensive odour. The patient becomes profoundly 
septic and unwell.  
(or erythromycin if the patient is penicillin sensi-
tive) is administered.  
 Nutrition 
 Feed the patient by ﬁ ne - bore nasogastric tube to 
maintain the general condition and electrolyte 
balance. 
 Gas  g angrene 
 Pathology 
 Gas gangrene results from infection by  Clostridium 
perfringens ( welchii ) and other  Clostridium 
species. The organism, a Gram - positive, anaero-
bic spore - forming bacillus such as  Clostridium 
tetani , also produces powerful exotoxins. The 
toxins have various activities, including phosphol-
ipase, collagenase, proteinase and hyaluronidase, 
which facilitate aggressive local spread of infec-
tion along tissue planes, with liberation of CO 2 , 
H 2 S and NH 3  by protein destruction. The organ-
isms are found in soil and in faeces. 
 Gas gangrene is a typical infection of deep pen-
etrating wounds, particularly of war, but some-
times involvement of the abdominal wall or cavity 
may follow operations upon the alimentary 
system. Occasionally, gas gangrene complicates 
amputation of an ischaemic lower limb, or follows 
abortion or puerperal infection.  
 Clinical  f eatures 
 The incubation period is about 24 hours. Severe 
sudden onset of pain is characteristic, together 
with severe toxaemia with tachycardia, shock and 
vomiting. The temperature is ﬁ rst elevated and 
then becomes subnormal. The affected tissues 
are swollen, and crepitus is palpable due to gas. 
The skin becomes gangrenous and the infection 
spreads along the muscle planes, producing at 
ﬁ rst dark red swollen muscle and then frank 
gangrene. 
 Treatment 
 Prophylaxis 
 Debridement 
 Adequate excision of wounds removes both the 
organisms and the dead tissues which are essen-
tial for their anaerobic growth. Seriously contused 
wounds (such as those produced by a gunshot) or 
contaminated wounds are left open and lightly 
  1   Frank L. Meleney (1889 – 1963), Professor of Clinical Surgery, 
Columbia University, OH, USA. 
  2  Jean Alfred Fournier (1832 – 1914),  ‘ Professeur des maladies 
cutan é es et syphilitiques ’ , H ô pital St. Louis, Paris, France. 

30 
Acute infections
pruritic papule that develops into a vesicle 
1 – 2  cm in diameter. The vesicle ruptures, 
undergoes necrosis and enlarges to form a 
black eschar with surrounding oedema. 
Associated features include lymphangitis and 
regional lymphadenopathy as well as general 
manifestations of sepsis.  
  •   Gastrointestinal anthrax . Manifests as nausea, 
vomiting, fever and abdominal pain, with 
bloody diarrhoea and features suggestive of an 
acute abdomen. Symptoms ﬁ rst appear 2 – 5 
days after ingestion of contaminated food. 
Haemorrhagic mesenteric adenitis and ascites 
are late features, and mortality is around 50%. 
 Prophylaxis and treatment of anthrax is with 
ciproﬂ oxacillin. 
 Botulism 
 Botulism is caused by an exotoxin of  Clostridium 
botulinum , botulism is associated with ingestion 
of contaminated food, originally described with 
contaminated sausages ( ‘ botulus ’ is Latin for 
sausage). The botulinum toxin is a heat - labile 
toxin (hence destroyed by cooking) that pene-
trates cholinergic neurones and prevents neuro-
transmitter release, thus inhibiting muscular 
contraction. While botulism is itself a condition 
more familiar to infectious disease units, the toxin 
is becoming increasingly used in surgery for con-
ditions as diverse as ﬁ ssure  in ano , achalasia, 
facial wrinkles and hyperhidrosis (excess sweat-
ing, especially of the palms). As an aerosol, the 
toxin has been considered for biological warfare. 
 
 
 Treatment 
 High - dose, broad - spectrum antibiotics should be 
commenced immediately, but the mainstay of 
treatment is a radical debridement of all the 
affected area. Following the initial debridement, 
the wound should be inspected twice daily at least 
for evidence of spread, and further debridement 
performed until all the affected area is cleared.   
 Surgical  i nfections and 
 b ioterrorism 
 Recent events have focused attention on the 
potential for bioterrorism, in particular with 
anthrax. Its inclusion here reﬂ ects manifestations 
that might present to the surgeon. 
 Anthrax 
 Anthrax is caused by  Bacillus anthracis , a Gram -
 positive aerobic spore - forming bacillus that lives 
in the soil. It may manifest in one of three ways: 
 1  cutaneous anthrax   –  infection through a break 
in the skin;  
 2  gastrointestinal anthrax   –  spore entry through 
the gut mucosa;  
 3  inhalational anthrax   –  inhalation of spores 
causing pulmonary disease. 
 It is an occupational disease of people working 
with wool ( ‘ wool sorter ’ s disease ’ ) and the hides 
from infected animals. 
  •   Cutaneous anthrax . This is the commonest 
manifestation and presents as a painless, 

 6 
Shock  
 
 Learning  o bjective 
  ✓   To understand what shock is, what causes it, and how it is best 
managed according to the cause. 
increase in stroke volume, the heart acting as a 
permissive pump (Starling ’ s law: 1 the output 
depends on the degree of stretch of the heart 
muscle at the end of diastole). Volume regulation 
is achieved by the kidney, in particular by the 
regulation 
of 
sodium 
loss 
by 
the 
renin –
 angiotensin – aldosterone system (Chapter  11 , 
p. 77 and antidiuretic hormone (ADH) produced 
by the posterior pituitary; in addition, a fall in cir-
culating volume prompts the sensation of thirst, 
stimulating increased ﬂ uid intake. 
 Abnormal  r egulation of 
 t issue  p erfusion 
 Inadequate tissue perfusion (shock) may result 
from factors related to the pump (the heart) and 
factors relating to the systemic circulation. The 
causes of shock may be classiﬁ ed accordingly, as 
follows: 
 1  Cardiogenic shock.  A primary failure of cardiac 
output in which the heart is unable to 
maintain adequate stroke volume in spite of 
satisfactory ﬁ lling. Compensation involves an 
increase in heart rate and systemic vascular 
resistance, manifested clinically by a 
tachycardia, sweating (due to sympathetic 
nervous system outﬂ ow), pallor and coldness 
(due to cutaneous vasoconstriction). Causes 
include the following:  
    Shock is characterized by inadequate perfusion of 
vital organs, principally the heart and brain.  
 Aetiology 
 Tissue perfusion requires an adequate blood pres-
sure, which is dependent upon the systemic vas-
cular resistance and cardiac output; the cardiac 
output is a function of the heart rate and the stroke 
volume. These may be expressed in mathematical 
terms:
 CO
HR
SV
=
×
 
 BP
CO
SVR
=
×
 
where CO is cardiac output, SV is stroke volume, 
HR is heart rate, BP is arterial blood pressure and 
SVR is systemic vascular resistance.  
 Normal  r egulation of 
 t issue  p erfusion 
 The autonomic nervous system is able to alter 
heart rate and peripheral vascular resistance in 
response to changes in blood pressure detected by 
the carotid sinus and aortic arch baroreceptors; 
changes in systemic vascular resistance may alter 
venous return by changing the amount of ﬂ uid 
circulating in the cutaneous and splanchnic 
vascular beds. Venous return determines stroke 
volume; increasing venous return causes an 
Lecture Notes: General Surgery, 12th edition. © Harold Ellis, 
Sir Roy Y. Calne and Christopher J. E. Watson. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
  1   Ernest Henry Starling (1866 – 1927), Professor of Physiology, 
University College, London, UK. Described capillary ﬂ ow dynam-
ics and discovered secretin (with Bayliss). 

32 
Shock
clinical picture. Consider a patient, with 
hypertension and taking a  β - blocker such as 
atenolol. For that patient, a systolic blood 
pressure of 110  mmHg may be very low, and 
the atenolol prevents a compensatory 
tachycardia in response. 
 Special  c auses of  s hock 
 Adrenocortical  f ailure 
 Loss of the hormones produced by the cortex 
of the suprarenal gland may follow bilateral sup-
rarenal haemorrhage, adrenalectomy, Addison ’ s 
disease 2  or lack of corticosteroid replacement 
in patients who have been on long - term 
glucocorticoids. 
 Failure of aldosterone secretion results in 
volume depletion and glucocorticoid deﬁ ciency, 
which impairs autonomic responses. The ability 
to respond to minor stress is severely compro-
mised and may provoke an Addisonian crisis char-
acterized by bradycardia and postural hypotension, 
which is responsive to corticosteroid replace-
ment. Adrenocortical failure should be considered 
and a bolus of hydrocortisone given in all patients 
with unexplained hypotension.  
 Sympathetic  i nterruption 
 This reduces the effective blood volume by wide-
spread vasodilatation. It follows transection of the 
spinal cord (spinal shock), but may also occur 
after a high spinal anaesthetic.  
 The  v asovagal  s yndrome ( f aint) 
 The vasovagal syndrome is produced by severe 
pain or emotional disturbance. It is the result 
of reﬂ ex vasodilatation together with cardiac 
slowing owing to vagal activity. Hypotension 
is caused by a fall in cardiac output due to 
both bradycardia and reduced venous return; 
the latter the result of peripheral vasodilatation. 
Clinically, it is recognized by the presence of 
a bradycardia and responds to the simple 
measure of laying the patient ﬂ at with elevation of 
the legs.  
 a  massive myocardial infarction; 
 b  pulmonary embolism; 
 c  acute ventriculoseptal defect following 
myocardial infarction affecting the septum; 
 d  mitral or aortic valve rupture; 
 e  acute cardiac tamponade. 
 2  Fluid loss.     Reduction in circulating volume 
results in a reduction in stroke volume and 
cardiac output. Blood pressure is initially 
maintained as in cardiogenic shock, with 
increased sympathetic activity raising the 
peripheral vascular resistance leading to the 
clinical picture of a cold, clammy patient with a 
tachycardia. As volume losses increase, the 
blood pressure falls. In severe cases, the patient 
is confused or semiconscious. Causes include: 
 a  haemorrhage, revealed or internal (e.g. 
ruptured aneurysm; bleeding into the bowel 
or around a closed fracture);  
 b  burns, with massive loss of plasma and 
electrolytes;  
 c  severe diarrhoea or vomiting, with ﬂ uid and 
electrolyte loss, particularly in colitis or 
pyloric stenosis;  
 d  bowel obstruction, in which large amounts 
of ﬂ uid are sequestered into the gut, in 
addition to the losses due to vomiting;  
 e  peritonitis, with large ﬂ uid losses into the 
abdomen as a consequence of infection or 
chemical irritation;  
 f  gastrointestinal ﬁ stulae with ﬂ uid and 
electrolyte loss;  
 g  urinary losses, e.g. the osmotic diuresis of 
diabetic ketoacidosis, or polyuria in 
resolving acute tubular necrosis (Chapter  41 , 
p. 349). 
 3  Reduction in systemic vascular 
resistance.   Reduction in systemic vascular 
resistance increases the size of the systemic 
vascular bed, producing a relative 
hypovolaemia, reduced diastolic ﬁ lling, 
reduced stroke volume and thus a fall in blood 
pressure. Unlike the previous two causes, 
vasodilatation occurs as part of the 
pathogenesis, so the patient appears warm 
( ‘ hot shock ’ ), not cold and peripherally shut 
down. The heart compensates with an increase 
in output. The principal causes are: 
 a  anaphylaxis; 
 b  sepsis; 
 c  spinal shock. 
 4  Confounding factors.    Pre - existing medical 
conditions and medications may confuse the 
  2  Thomas Addison (1793 – 1860), Physician, Guy ’ s Hospital, London, 
UK. His original specimens may still be seen in the Gordon 
Museum at Guy ’ s Hospital. 

Shock 33
 Principles in the 
 m anagement of  p atients 
in  s hock 
 Immediate  m easures 
 The immediate treatment of patients in shock 
varies according to cause. Two causes merit 
mention for immediate treatment: bleeding and 
anaphylaxis. 
 Bleeding 
 Direct pressure should be applied to a bleeding 
wound. Immediate surgical exploration is indi-
cated where continued bleeding is likely, such as 
in peptic ulcer haemorrhage, ruptured spleen, 
ruptured aortic aneurysm or ruptured ectopic 
pregnancy. In these cases, resuscitation cannot 
overcome the losses until the rate of blood loss is 
curtailed.  
 Anaphylaxis 
 In surgical practice, this may arise as an allergic 
reaction to an antibiotic or radiological contrast 
medium. In addition to hypotension (due to 
vasodilatation), bronchospasm and laryngeal 
oedema may be present and warrant immediate 
therapy. 
The 
immediate 
treatment 
for 
anaphy laxis is the administration of adrenaline 
(epinephrine; 0.5   mL of 1:1000 concentration) 
intramuscularly or subcutaneously, repeated 
every 10 – 30 minutes as required. Subsequently, 
hydrocortisone and antihistamine agents may be 
given (e.g. chlorphenamine). 
 For milder reactions, aliquots of 1   mL of 1:10   000 
adrenaline are given and titrated to effect.  
 Monitoring and  s ubsequent 
 m anagement 
 The severely shocked patient should be admitted 
to an intensive care ward where continuous 
supervision by specially trained nursing staff is 
available. As well as careful clinical surveillance, 
the following need to be monitored: 
  •   Core temperature, pulse, respiration rate and 
blood pressure.  
  •   Hourly urine output (via a urinary catheter). 
  •   Central venous pressure. 
 Septic  s hock 
 Shock may be produced as the result of severe 
infection from either Gram - positive or, more 
commonly, Gram - negative organisms. The latter 
are seen particularly after colonic, biliary and 
urological surgery, and with infected severe 
burns. The principal effect of endotoxins is 
to cause vasodilatation of the peripheral circula-
tion together with increased capillary permeabil-
ity. The effects are partly direct and partly due to 
activation 
of 
normal 
tissue 
inﬂ ammatory 
responses such as the complement system and 
release of cytokines such as tumour necrosis 
factor (TNF). 
 Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) 
results from activation of the clotting cascade and 
may lead to blockage of the arterial microcircula-
tion by microemboli. Fibrin and platelets are con-
sumed excessively, with resultant spontaneous 
haemorrhages into the skin, the gastrointestinal 
tract, the lungs, mouth and nose.   
 Sequelae of  s hock 
 A continued low blood pressure produces a series 
of irreversible changes, so that the patient may die 
in spite of treatment. The lack of oxygen affects all 
the vital organs. 
  •   Cerebral hypoperfusion  results in confusion or 
coma.  
  •   Renal hypoperfusion  results in reduced 
glomerular ﬁ ltration, with oliguria or anuria. 
As renal ischaemia progresses, tubular necrosis 
may occur, and profound ischaemia may lead 
to cortical necrosis (Chapter  41 ). 
  •   The heart  may fail owing to inadequate 
coronary perfusion.  
  •   Pulmonary capillaries  may reﬂ ect the changes 
in the systemic circulation with transudation 
of ﬂ uid resulting in pulmonary oedema, 
hampering oxygen transfer and causing further 
arterial hypoxaemia and thus tissue hypoxia. 
Pulmonary capillary function may also be 
impaired following multiple blood transfusions 
and contusions resulting from chest trauma, a 
condition known as acute lung injury 
(previously termed  ‘ shock lung ’ ). 
  •   DIC , precipitated by sepsis, may be further 
aggravated by hypothermia unless active 
re - warming is undertaken. 

34 
Shock
calculation of the systemic and pulmonary vascu-
lar resistances. 
 When the balloon is inﬂ ated, no ﬂ ow comes 
past the tip. The catheter is wedged and the pres-
sure that is recorded, referred to as the wedge 
pressure, is an approximation of the left atrial 
pressure. 
 Fluid  m anagement 
 See Chapter  2 . 
 Prevention of 
 h ypothermia 
 Patients may cool down because of neglect, infu-
sion of cold ﬂ uids, particularly unwarmed blood, 
and extracorporeal circulations such as haemodi-
alysis or haemoﬁ ltration circuits. Allowing a 
patient to cool down to subnormal temperatures 
(35 ° C and below) impairs the coagulation cas-
cades and platelet aggregation, and promotes 
ﬁ brinolysis, possibly resulting in DIC. To prevent 
this, all infusions should be prewarmed, and the 
patient actively re - warmed using warm air 
blankets. 
 Pharmacological  a gents 
 The shocked patient may require signiﬁ cant phar-
macological support. The principal drugs used are 
catecholamines or their derivatives, in addition to 
drugs to treat speciﬁ c causes such as antimicro-
bial therapy for septicaemia. Patients in cardio-
genic shock beneﬁ t from positive inotropic agents, 
whereas patients with low systemic vascular 
resistance due to sepsis require agents to increase 
vascular resistance. The drugs used in this context 
are sympathomimetics, with differing degrees of  α 
(peripheral vasoconstriction),  β 1  (inotropic and 
chronotropic) and  β 2  (peripheral vasodilatation) 
effects. Examples of such drugs include the 
following.  
 Dopamine 
 Dopamine has three separate actions according to 
dose: 
  •   Pulse oximetry. Oxygen is administered to 
ensure adequate oxygenation. Mechanical 
ventilation may be required. 
  •   Electrocardiogram (ECG). 
  •   Serum electrolytes, haemoglobin and white 
blood cell count.  
  •   Arterial blood gases ( P o 2 ,  P co 2 , [H  +  ]). 
  •   The cardiac output, and left atrial and 
pulmonary arterial pressures using a Swan –
 Ganz catheter (see below). 
 The frequency of these measurements depends 
on the patient ’ s condition and response to treat-
ment. It is particularly important that doctors 
remember that, in this environment of recording 
machinery and scientiﬁ c nursing, the patient 
remains a human being, who deserves to be 
treated with dignity and tenderness. If the patient 
is conscious, he or she may well be terriﬁ ed, in 
pain and acutely aware of all that is going on. 
Proper explanations and appropriate analgesia 
must be provided.   
 Swan – Ganz  c atheter  3  
 The Swan – Ganz catheter is a multiple lumen cath-
eter that is passed via a central vein (internal 
jugular or subclavian) into the right atrium. At this 
stage, a small balloon on the end of the catheter is 
inﬂ ated. The inﬂ ated balloon then  ‘ ﬂ oats ’ with the 
blood, returning to the heart across the tricuspid 
and pulmonary valves into the pulmonary artery. 
Once there, the catheter is advanced until it 
wedges itself in a small branch of the pulmonary 
arterial tree. The balloon is then deﬂ ated. During 
insertion, the position of the catheter can be 
monitored by the changing pressure waveform 
recorded by a transducer connected to the lumen. 
The catheter also has a temperature probe near its 
tip, which facilitates the measurement of cardiac 
output as well as core temperature. 
 Cardiac output is calculated by the Fick 4 princi-
ple after injecting a bolus of cold saline through 
the catheter and monitoring the change in tem-
perature. Importantly, the catheter also allows 
  3   Harold J. C. Swan (1922 – 2005), Cardiologist, Cedars of Lebanon 
Hospital, Los Angles, CA, USA. William Ganz (1919 – 2009), 
Professor of Medicine, UCLA, and Senior Research Scientist, 
Cedars of Lebanon Hospital, Los Angeles, CA, USA.  
  4   Adolf Eugen Fick (1829 – 1901), born in Germany, Professor of 
Physiology, Zurich, Switzerland.  

Shock 35
increasing cardiac output. It is used principally in 
cardiogenic shock.  
 Noradrenaline ( n orepinephrine) 
 Noradrenaline has predominantly  α  effects, but 
with modest  β  activity. It is used to increase sys-
temic vascular resistance through its vasocon-
strictor  α effects. 
 Adrenaline ( e pinephrine) 
 Adrenaline has strong  α  and  β  actions, and may be 
used to increase peripheral resistance while also 
increasing cardiac output. The powerful vasocon-
strictor actions of both adrenaline and noradrena-
line may result in ischaemia and infarction of 
peripheral tissues, most commonly ﬁ ngers, toes 
and the tips of the nose and ears.   
 
 
 1  At  low doses (2  μ g/kg/min) dopaminergic 
actions dominate, causing increased renal 
perfusion. This is the commonest indication 
for the use of dopamine.  
 2  At  moderate doses (5  μ g/kg/min),  β 1 effects 
predominate with positive inotropic activity 
(increasing myocardial contractility and rate).  
 3  At  higher doses (over 5  μ g/kg/min),  α effects 
predominate with vasoconstriction. 
 Dopexamine 
 Dopexamine has predominantly  β 2 actions, 
increasing myocardial contractility; it also acts on 
peripheral dopamine receptors, increasing renal 
perfusion.  
 Dobutamine 
 Dobutamine has predominantly  β 1 actions, 
increasing myocardial contractility and rate, thus 

 7 
Tumours  
 
 Learning  o bjectives 
  ✓   To know the pathology and clinical features of tumours, as well as 
the ways in which a tumour might present, the histological 
features which inﬂ uence prognosis, and the principles of tumour 
staging.  
  ✓   To know the  treatment options, including the principles of 
cytotoxic chemotherapy and the broad classes of agents available. 
  •   Sex distribution. 
  •   Geographical distribution (where relevant). 
  •   Predisposing factors. 
  •   Macroscopic appearances. 
  •   Microscopic appearances. 
  •   Pathways of spread of the tumour. 
  •   Prognosis. 
 Clinical  f eatures and 
 d iagnosis 
 A malignant tumour may manifest itself in any or 
all of four ways. 
 1  The effects of the  primary tumour itself. 
 2  The effects produced by  secondary deposits . 
 3  The general effects of  malignant disease . 
 4  Paraneoplastic syndromes . These are remote 
effects caused by hormone or other tumour -
 cell products, which are most common in 
carcinoma of the lung, particularly small cell 
tumours. For example, production of ectopic 
adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH) may 
present like Cushing ’ s syndrome, and 
production of ectopic parathormone (PTH) 
may present with hypercalcaemia and its 
symptoms. 
 The only common exceptions to this scheme 
are primary tumours of the central nervous 
    New growths are so common and widespread that 
their consideration must at least pass through 
the mind in most clinical situations. It therefore 
behoves the student, both for examinations and, 
still more importantly, for his or her future prac-
tice of medicine, to have a standard scheme with 
which to tabulate the pathology, diagnosis, treat-
ment and prognosis of neoplastic disease.  
 Pathology 
 When considering the tumours affecting any 
organ, this simple classiﬁ cation should be used: 
 1  Benign. 
 2  Malignant: 
 a  primary; 
 b  secondary. 
 It is surprising how often failure to remember 
this basic scheme leads one to omit such an ele-
mentary fact that common tumours of brain and 
bone are secondary deposits. 
 For each particular tumour, the following head-
ings should be used: 
  •   Incidence. 
  •   Age distribution. 
Lecture Notes: General Surgery, 12th edition. © Harold Ellis, 
Sir Roy Y. Calne and Christopher J. E. Watson. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Tumours 37
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   The primary tumour : chest X - ray, computed 
tomography (CT), bronchoscopy, cytology of 
sputum and needle biopsy.  
  •   Secondary deposits : isotope bone scan, bone 
X - ray and ultrasound of liver.  
  •   General manifestations of malignancy : a blood 
count may reveal anaemia. The erythrocyte 
sedimentation rate (ESR) may be raised.  
  •   Paraneoplastic hormone production : hormone 
assay. 
 This simple scheme applied to any of the prin-
cipal malignant tumours will enable the student 
to present a very full clinical picture of the disease 
with little mental effort.  
 Tumour  m arkers 
 These are blood chemicals (often fetal proteins) 
produced by the malignant cells. Some tumours 
have a characteristic marker associated with them, 
such as  α - fetoprotein (AFP) in hepatoma and 
teratoma and prostate - speciﬁ c antigen (PSA) in 
carcinoma of the prostate (Table  7.1 ). Tumour 
markers may indicate malignant change in a 
benign condition, and are useful in postoperative 
monitoring. If a marker was raised before treat-
ment, it should fall when the disease is controlled, 
but will rise again if recurrence occurs. Some 
tumours produce excess amounts of the appropri-
ate hormone, such as medullary carcinoma of the 
thyroid and calcitonin, in which case hormone 
assay may be used to detect tumour activity.    
 Treatment 
 The treatment of malignant disease should be 
considered under two headings: 
 1  Curative : an attempt is made to ablate the 
disease completely.  
 2  Palliative : although the disease is incurable or 
has recurred after treatment, measures can still 
be taken to ease the symptoms of the patient.    
 In this section, we shall summarize the possible 
lines of treatment for malignant disease in general; 
system (CNS), which seldom produce secondary 
deposits. 
 Diagnosis is always made by history, clinical 
examination 
and, 
where 
necessary, 
special 
investigations. 
 Let us now, as an example, apply this scheme to 
carcinoma of the lung  – the commonest lethal 
cancer in the UK, accounting for 22% of all deaths 
from cancer; bowel (10%), breast (8%) and pros-
tate (7%) follow lung cancer in this deadly league 
table. 
 History 
  •   The primary tumour  may present with cough, 
haemoptysis, dyspnoea and pneumonia 
(sometimes recurrent pneumonia due to 
partial bronchial obstruction).  
  •   Secondary deposits  in bone may produce 
pathological fracture or bone pains; cerebral 
metastases may produce headaches or 
drowsiness; liver deposits may result in 
jaundice. 
  •   General effects of malignant disease : the patient 
may present with malaise, lassitude or loss of 
weight. 
  •   Paraneoplastic syndromes , such as  
  −   ectopic hormone production (e.g. PTH, 
ACTH); 
  −   myasthenia - like syndrome (Eaton – Lambert 
syndrome 1 ); 
  −   hypertrophic pulmonary osteoarthropathy 
(HPOA) and ﬁ nger clubbing. 
 Examination 
  •   The primary tumour  may produce signs in the 
chest.  
  •   Secondary deposits  may produce cervical 
lymph node enlargement, hepatomegaly or 
obvious bony deposits.  
  •   The general effects of malignancy  may be 
suggested by pallor or weight loss.     
  1   Lealdes M. Eaton (1905 – 1958), Professor of Neurology at the 
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. Edward Lambert (1915 – 2003), 
Professor of Physiology and Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, 
MN, USA.  

38 
Tumours
carcinoma of the rectum may be excised to 
prevent pain, bleeding and mucus discharge, 
although secondary deposits may already be 
present in the liver. Irremovable obstructing 
growths in the bowel may be stented or 
bypassed. Inoperable obstructing tumours of 
the oesophagus or cardia of the stomach may 
also be stented so that dysphagia can be 
relieved. The bile duct may be stented 
endoscopically via the duodenal papilla for the 
relief of jaundice and pruritus in patients with 
inoperable carcinomas of the head of 
pancreas. Surgery may also be used for pain 
relief by interrupting nerve pathways, e.g. 
cordotomy in which the contralateral 
spinothalamic tract within the spinal cord is 
divided.  
 2  Radiotherapy.   Palliative treatment may be 
given to localized secondary deposits in bone, 
irremovable breast tumours and inoperable 
in subsequent chapters, the management of spe-
ciﬁ c tumours will be considered in more detail. 
 Curative  t reatment 
 1  Surgery (e.g. carcinoma of the lung or colon). 
 2  Radiotherapy  alone (e.g. tumours of the mouth 
and pharynx).  
 3  Cytotoxic chemotherapy  when the tumour is 
particularly sensitive to particular agents, such 
as teratoma of the testis to platinum 
compounds. 
 4  A combination of treatment modalities 
including surgery and/or radiotherapy and/or 
cytotoxic chemotherapy. 
 Palliative  t reatment 
 1  Surgery.  The palliative excision of a primary 
lesion may be indicated, although secondary 
deposits may be present. For example, a 
 Table 7.1   Tumour markers 
 Marker  
 Nature of marker  
 Malignant disease associated 
with rise in marker  
 Benign disease associated 
with rise in marker  
 α - Fetoprotein 
(AFP)  
 Protein secreted by 
fetal liver  
 Hepatocellular carcinoma and 
testicular teratoma  
 Viral hepatitis (e.g. hepatitis 
C) and cirrhosis; pregnancy 
esp. if spinal cord abnormality  
 β - Human chorionic 
gonadotrophin 
( β - HCG)  
 Protein normally 
produced by placenta  
 Testicular teratoma and chorion 
carcinoma  
 Pregnancy  
 Ca 15.3  
  Oncofetal antigen  
  Breast carcinoma  
  Hepatitis, cirrhosis, 
autoimmune diseases, benign 
lung disease  
 Ca 27.29  
  Glycoprotein mucin 1 
(MUC1) on epithelial 
cells  
 Breast carcinoma  
  Benign breast disease, 
ovarian cysts, and liver and 
kidney disease  
 Ca 19.9  
  Intracellular adhesion 
molecule related to 
Lewis blood group  
 Hepatocellular and 
cholangiocarcinoma. Also other 
colorectal and ovarian 
carcinoma  
 Pancreatitis, cholestasis, 
cholangitis, cirrhosis  
 Ca 125  
  Glycoprotein on 
coelomic epithelium 
during fetal 
development  
 Ovarian carcinoma  
  Pregnancy, ovarian cysts, 
pelvic inﬂ ammation, ascites, 
cirrhosis, hepatitis, 
pancreatitis  
 Carcinoembryonic 
antigen (CEA)  
 Oncofetal protein 
(protein secreted by 
fetal gut)  
 Advanced colorectal, breast and 
lung carcinomas  
 Peptic ulcer, inﬂ ammatory 
bowel disease, pancreatitis  
 Prostate - speciﬁ c 
antigen (PSA)  
 Glycoprotein produced 
by epithelium of 
prostatic duct  
 Prostatic carcinoma  
  Prostatitis, benign prostatic 
hypertrophy and prostatic 
trauma  

Tumours 39
 3  anatomical situation; 
 4  general condition of the patient. 
 The  e xtent of  s pread ( s taging) 
 The extent of the tumour (its staging) on clinical 
examination, at operation and on studying the 
excised surgical specimen, is of great prognostic 
importance. Obviously, the clinical ﬁ ndings of 
palpable distant secondaries or gross ﬁ xation of 
the primary tumour are serious. Similarly, the 
local invasiveness of the tumour at operation and 
evidence of distant spread are of great signiﬁ -
cance. Finally, histological study may reveal 
involvement of the nodes which had not been 
detected clinically, or microscopic extension of 
the growth to the edges of the resected specimen 
with consequent worsening of the outlook for the 
patient. 
 The TNM classiﬁ cation is an international 
system for tumour staging. Tumours are staged by 
scoring them according to the following: 
  •   T umour characteristics  – size and degree of 
invasion.  
  •   N ode involvement  –  regional nodes and distant 
nodes. 
  •   M etastases  – presence or absence. 
 An example of TNM staging as it relates to 
breast cancer is illustrated on in Chapter  35 , 
p. 304. Some tumours have additional classiﬁ ca-
tions which are more familiar to the clinician. 
Examples are Breslow ’ s staging of local invasion of 
malignant melanoma (Chapter  9 , p. 55) and 
Dukes ’  staging of rectal carcinoma (Chapter  26 , 
p. 228). 
 Microscopic  a ppearance 
( h istological  d ifferentiation) 
 As a general principle, the prognosis of a tumour 
is related to its degree of histological differentia-
tion (its grading) on the spectrum between well 
differentiated and anaplastic. 
 The spread of the tumour and its histological 
differentiation should be considered in conjunc-
tion with each other. A small tumour with no 
apparent spread at the time of operation may still 
have a poor prognosis if it is highly anaplastic, 
whereas an extensive tumour is not incompatible 
with long survival of the patient after operation if 
the microscopic examination reveals a high degree 
of differentiation. 
lymph node deposits, for example. It is 
particularly indicated for localized irremovable 
disease. 
 3  Hormone therapy.     Applicable in carcinoma of 
the breast and prostate.  
 4  Cytotoxic chemotherapy.     A wide range of drugs 
have anticancer action, but this action is not 
speciﬁ c; all the drugs damage normal dividing 
cells, especially those of the bone marrow, the 
gut, the skin and the gonads. They may be 
classiﬁ ed into the following:  
 a  alkylating agents (e.g. cyclophosphamide, 
chlorambucil, busulphan);  
 b  antimetabolites (e.g. ﬂ uorouracil, 
methotrexate, gemcitabine);  
 c  plant alkaloids (e.g. vincristine, vinblastine); 
 d  cytotoxic antibiotics (e.g. bleomycin, 
doxorubicin); 
 e  platinum compounds (e.g. cisplatin, 
carboplatin);  
 f  epipodophyllotoxins (e.g. etoposide); 
 g  monoclonal antibodies (e.g. cetuximab, 
trastuzumab); 
 h  taxanes (e.g. paclitaxel, docetaxel); 
 i  protein kinase inhibitors (e.g. imatinib, 
erlotinib);  
 j  others (e.g. procarbazine). 
 Multiple drugs are frequently used 
(combination chemotherapy) when their 
modes of action and toxicity proﬁ les are 
different. 
 A balance must be made between the 
chances of regression of the tumour in 
relatively ﬁ t patients with tumours likely to 
be sensitive (e.g. breast, ovary, testis) and 
the toxic effects of the drug regimen.  
 5  Drugs.  These are administered for pain relief 
(non - steroidal analgesics, opiates), hypnotics, 
tranquillizers and anti - emetics (e.g. 
chlorpromazine).  
 6  Nerve blocks,     with phenol or alcohol for relief 
of pain.  
 7  Maintenance of morale.    This is often 
impossible, but might be improved by a 
cheerful and kindly attitude of medical and 
nursing staff. 
 Prognosis 
 The prognosis of any tumour depends on four 
main features: 
 1  extent of spread; 
 2  microscopic appearance; 

40 
Tumours
 Population  s creening 
 Examples of population screening include breast 
cancer screening by mammography, which is 
restricted to older women (over 50 years) and 
cervical cancer screening for women over 25 
years. In cervical cancer, for example, a distinct 
progression exists from dysplasia through carci-
noma  in situ  to invasive cancer. This progression 
may take 10 years. Hence, screening the popula-
tion every 3 – 5 years by cervical smear cytology is 
cost - effective. 
 Screening for  h igh - r isk 
 i ndividuals 
 A number of cancer syndromes exist in which 
there is an inherited predisposition (e.g. familial 
adenomatous polyposis (FAP)) or a familial risk 
(e.g. breast and ovarian cancer). 
 Inherited  c ancer  s yndromes 
 Like FAP, most inherited cancers are autosomal 
and dominantly inherited. In at - risk families, early 
identiﬁ cation may be possible through either 
genetic mapping of the cancer or early recognition 
of a component of the syndrome. In FAP, early 
colonoscopy may identify villous adenomas 
(polyps) while they are still dysplastic and before 
they become malignant, at which stage prophy-
lactic colectomy is indicated. Alternatively, identi-
ﬁ cation of the gene (located on chromosome 
5q21) will also signify carriage.  
 Familial  c lustering 
 Many of the familial cancers are now being associ-
ated with mutations of speciﬁ c genes. Incomplete 
expression of the gene may account for the spo-
radic incidence of the tumour. For breast cancer, 
two genes have been identiﬁ ed,  BRCA1 (chromo-
some 17q21) and  BRCA2  (chromosome 13q12). 
Mutations of either gene confer an 80% risk of 
breast cancer by the age of 70 years, together with 
an increased risk of ovarian cancer. Screening 
tests based on the detection of these genes differ 
from the other screening tests mentioned above, 
as they identify a tendency to malignancy and not 
premalignant change or early curable malignancy. 
There is no consensus at present as to the best 
management of such patients. 
 
 
 
 Anatomical  s ituation 
 The site of the tumour may preclude its 
adequate removal and thus seriously affect the 
prognosis. For example, a tumour at the lower 
end of the oesophagus may be easily removable 
whereas an exactly similar tumour situated 
behind the arch of the aorta may be technically 
inoperable; a brain tumour located in the frontal 
lobe may be resected whereas a similar tumour 
in the brain stem will be a desperate surgical 
proposition. 
 General  c ondition of the  p atient 
 A patient apparently curable from the point of 
view of the local condition may be inoperable 
because of poor general health. For example, gross 
congestive cardiac failure may convert what is 
technically an operable carcinoma of the rectum 
into a hopeless anaesthetic risk.  
 Screening 
 Screening is the process of testing individuals for 
a speciﬁ c condition. It is commonly performed for 
tumours, but may be used in other contexts such 
as abdominal aortic aneurysm and hypertension. 
Effective screening for a given condition using a 
particular test has several prerequisites: 
  •   The condition, if untreated, is sufﬁ ciently 
serious to warrant its prevention.  
  •   The natural history of the condition should be 
understood.  
  •   The condition has a recognizable early stage. 
  •   Effective treatment is available. 
  •   Treatment at an early stage could improve the 
prognosis, and is of more beneﬁ t than 
treatment started later in the disease.  
  •   The screening test is simple, reliable and 
acceptable to the patient.  
  •   The screening test should have minimal 
false - positive and false - negative outcomes (i.e. 
it should be both sensitive and speciﬁ c). 
Incorrect diagnosis can have serious 
consequences. 
 In reality, cost - effective screening requires 
restricting the testing to those groups at highest 
risk of a condition. This may involve large - scale 
population screening or screening of families 
where a genetic predisposition exists.  

 8 
Burns  
 
 Learning  o bjective 
  ✓   To know the different types of burn, how to determine the 
severity of a burn according to depth and extent, and the 
principles of burn management. 
complete healing takes place within a few 
days. 
 2  Superﬁ cial partial thickness : burn extends 
down through the epidermis to involve the 
germinal layer, but the dermal appendages 
such as sweat glands and hair follicles remain 
largely preserved. There is intense blistering 
followed by the formation of a slough. This 
separates after about 10 days, leaving healthy, 
newly formed, pink epithelium beneath.  
 3  Deep partial thickness : burn extends to the 
germinal layer and destroys a signiﬁ cant 
proportion of hair follicles, sebaceous glands 
and dermis. Healing is much slower and is 
associated with signiﬁ cant scarring. 
 Full thickness burns completely destroy the 
skin. There may be initial blistering, but this is 
soon replaced by a coagulum or slough; more 
often, this is present from the onset in an intense 
deep burn. Unlike the more superﬁ cial burns, this 
slough separates only slowly over 3 – 4 weeks, 
leaving an underlying surface of granulation 
tissue. Very small deep burns may heal from an 
ingrowth of epithelium from adjacent healthy 
skin; more extensive burns, unless grafted, heal by 
dense scar tissue with consequent contracture 
and deformity.  
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Pain 
 This is due to the stimulation of numerous nerve 
endings in the damaged skin. It is more severe in 
 Causes 
  •   Thermal burn : the commonest cause of a burn, 
due either to direct contact with a hot object 
or ﬂ ames or to hot vapour such as steam 
(scald).  
  •   Electrical burn : severity depends on strength of 
current and duration of contact.  
  •   Chemical burn : such as from caustic material. 
The chemical may penetrate deep into the skin 
and be difﬁ cult to remove. 
  •   Radiation burn : due to exposure to radiation, 
as in the local erythema that may follow 
superﬁ cial radiotherapy. 
 Classiﬁ cation 
 Burns may be classiﬁ ed into partial thickness and 
full thickness, depending on whether or not the 
germinal epithelial layer of the skin is intact or 
destroyed (Figure  8.1 ; Table  8.1 ). 
 Partial thickness burns  vary in appearance and 
severity: 
 1  Erythema : a superﬁ cial burn with erythema 
due to capillary dilatation and with or without 
areas of blistering produced by exudation of 
plasma beneath coagulated epidermis. The 
underlying germinal layer is intact, and 
Lecture Notes: General Surgery, 12th edition. © Harold Ellis, 
Sir Roy Y. Calne and Christopher J. E. Watson. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

42 
Burns
 Figure 8.1   A partial - thickness burn (a) leaves part or the whole of the germinal epithelium intact; complete healing 
takes place (b). A full - thickness burn (c) destroys the germinal layer and, unless very small, can heal only by dense 
scar tissue (d).  
Zone of keratinization
Germinal zone
Dermis
Scar tissue
(a)   Partial thickness burn
(b)   Healed partial thickness burn
(c)   Full-thickness burn
(d)   Healed full-thickness burn

Burns 43
occurs as in any severe injury. Peptic ulceration 
(Curling ’ s ulcers 1 ) may occur as a reaction to the 
stress. 
 Toxaemia 
 This is a combination of factors, which include 
biochemical disturbances, plasma loss and 
infection. It has also been postulated that the 
burnt tissues may produce a toxin. Toxaemia is 
less often seen now that burns are treated 
adequately. 
 Treatment 
 1  Immediate ﬁ rst - aid treatment.  The immediate 
treatment of any burn is to stop the process 
straight away. This is done by removing the 
patient from the source of the burn, removing 
overlying clothing, which may contain the 
heat, and applying cold running water to cool 
the area and prevent continued damage. 
 If the burn area is over 15% (10% if a child) 
admission and intravenous resuscitation is 
warranted. Less extensive burns can be 
managed by oral replacement.  
 2  Subsequent treatment.   Thereafter, the 
principles of the treatment of burns are as 
follows:  
 a  management of the local condition  – 
prevent infection and promote healing; 
 b  general treatment  – mitigate the systemic 
effects of burns listed above;  
 c  reconstruction and rehabilitation. 
 Local  t reatment 
  •   Partial thickness burns are managed with 
simple non - adherent dressings such as 
parafﬁ n - impregnated gauze under several 
layers of absorbent gauze; dressings are 
changed every 2 – 3 days. When infection is 
suspected, or the patient presents late, a 
topical antibiotic such as silver sulfadiazine 
cream (Flamazine) may be applied to the burn. 
When the hands are involved, the burn may be 
covered by sulfadiazine cream and placed in a 
sealed polythene bag. Full thickness burns, 
superﬁ cial burns and, indeed, deep burns may be 
relatively painless owing to extensive destruction 
of nerve endings.  
 Plasma  l oss 
 Loss of the epidermis, together with the intense 
exudation of plasma through the damaged capil-
laries, which is especially marked in the ﬁ rst 24 
hours after burning, results in an enormous loss of 
plasma. By the time a coagulum has formed 
(about 48 hours), this plasma loss ceases. The 
amount of this loss is proportional to the area of 
the burn and not its depth.  
 Hypovolaemic  s hock 
 Shock is a direct result of plasma loss. The intra-
vascular volume is rapidly depleted as plasma is 
lost from the surface of the burn.  
 Anaemia 
 This results partly from destruction of red cells 
within involved skin capillaries and partly from 
toxic inhibition of the bone marrow if infection of 
the burnt area occurs.  
 Airway 
 Smoke inhalation or thermal injury of the respira-
tory tract may rapidly result in respiratory obstruc-
tion from pharyngeal or laryngeal oedema and is 
a common cause of death.  
 Stress  r eaction 
 The adrenocortical response of sodium and water 
retention, potassium loss and protein catabolism 
 Table 8.1   Burn comparison 
 
 Partial thickness  
 Full thickness  
 Depth  
  Superﬁ cial  
  Deep  
 Underlying 
germinal layer  
 Intact  
  Destroyed  
 Sensation  
  Present  
  Absent  
 Healing  
  Complete  
  Scarring and 
contracture  
 Blistering  
  Prominent, 
followed by slough  
 Slight, slough 
dominates  
  1   Thomas Blizzard Curling (1811 – 1888), Surgeon to the London 
Hospital; also wrote the ﬁ rst accurate description of cretinism in 
adults (myxoedema) in 1850.  

44 
Burns
 
 Percentage surface area  
 Head and neck  
 9  
 Each arm  
 9  
 Each leg  
 2  ×  9  =  18  
 Front of the trunk  
 2  ×  9  =  18  
 Back of the trunk  
 2  ×  9  =  18  
 Perineum  
 1  
 As a rough rule, the patient ’ s hand is 
approximately 1% of the body surface area. 
 An alternative is the Lund and Browder 
chart (Figure  8.3 ), which takes account of the 
differing surface areas of the body with age. 
For example, an infant ’ s head has a 
proportionately greater surface area than an 
adult ’ s. This chart tends to be more accurate 
than the  ‘ rule of nines ’ . 
and some deep partial thickness burns, require 
total excision of the burn wound; smaller 
defects may be closed primarily whereas larger 
defects require application of split thickness 
skin grafts to hasten re - epithelialization of the 
defect. Any residual necrotic tissue will be a 
focus of infection.  
  •   Circumferential full thickness burns affecting 
the chest or limb contract and may restrict 
breathing and impair blood ﬂ ow to the limbs. 
Such contractions must be incised acutely to 
save the limb (escharotomy). 
  •   Inhalational burns  are indicated by burnt skin 
and soot around the face, particularly the 
mouth and nostrils. Burns to the airway 
produce oedema, particularly laryngeal 
oedema, which may necessitate intubation or 
tracheostomy. Evidence of hypoxia and 
pulmonary oedema should be treated by 
ventilation with humidiﬁ ed oxygen; antibiotics 
are given. The presence of 
carboxyhaemoglobin in the blood is further 
evidence suggesting inhalational burns.  
  •   Priority areas for skin grafting . Skin grafting is 
carried out immediately if the eyelids are 
involved in order to prevent ectropion with the 
risk of corneal ulceration. The face, hands and 
the joint ﬂ exures are next in priority for skin 
grafting procedures, as scarring at these sites 
will obviously produce considerable deformity 
and disability. 
 General  t reatment 
 Pain 
 Relieve pain with intravenous opiates (e.g. 
morphine).  
 Hypovolaemic  s hock 
 Rapid ﬂ uid loss occurs, the rate of loss being 
quickest in the ﬁ rst 12 hours. Aggressive replace-
ment of this ﬂ uid as soon as possible is essential. 
There are two underlying principles in this 
replacement: ﬁ rst, the correct amount of ﬂ uid 
should be replaced, and, second, the correct type 
of ﬂ uid is important. 
 1  Amount of ﬂ uid replacement.    This depends 
upon the total area burnt. As a guide, the  ‘ rule 
of nines ’  is helpful and readily calculated. The 
body is divided into zones of percentage of 
surface area as follows (Figure  8.2 ): 
 Figure 8.2   The  ‘ rule of nines ’  – a useful guide to the 
estimation of the area of a burned surface. (Note also 
that a patient ’ s hand represents 1% of the body 
surface area.)  
Head 
and neck
= 9%
Each
arm 
= 9%
Front
of trunk
= (9×2) %
Back of
trunk
= (9×2) %
Perineum 
= 1%
Each leg
= (9×2) %

Burns 45
in the next 16 hours. This does not include the 
daily maintenance ﬂ uid requirement (3 litres 
in an adult). 
 During the resuscitation phase, careful 
clinical assessment of the patient should 
include monitoring hourly urinary output, 
pulse, blood pressure, central venous pressure 
and core temperature, together with regular 
haematocrit estimations. Fluid replacement 
may need to be adjusted according to these 
observations. 
 2  Type of ﬂ uid used for replacement.   Ringer ’ s 
lactate (Hartmann ’ s solution) is the 
crystalloid of choice for the ﬁ rst 24 hours. 
This has been shown to cause less 
pulmonary oedema than colloid in the ﬁ rst 
 The rate of ﬂ uid replacement must take 
into account that most ﬂ uid is lost in the 
ﬁ rst few hours after the burn, before a 
coagulum forms. The Parkland formula is 
now the most accepted way of estimating the 
volume of ﬂ uid to be given in the ﬁ rst 24 
hours. Half the volume should be given in 
the ﬁ rst 8 hours; the remainder over the next 
16 hours. 
 
Fluid replacement (mL) in first 
 hours
 mL
weight (kg)
24
4
=
×
× % burn area
 
 For example, a 70   kg patient with a 40% burn 
would, using this formula, require a ﬁ gure of 
4  ×  70  ×  40  =  11  200  mL. Half of this (5600  mL) 
is given in the ﬁ rst 8 hours and the other half 
 Figure 8.3   The Lund and Browder 
chart allows more accurate estimation 
of burn surface area and is particularly 
useful in children. The extent of the 
burn is marked on the chart. The 
areas of burns on the head, thighs 
and lower legs (A, B and C on the 
chart) are calculated and multiplied by 
the age factor in the table.  
A
1
13
B
B
Lund and Browder chart
Ignore simple erythema
C
C
2
2
A
1
1
13
B
B
Region 
%
Head
Neck
Ant.trunk
Post.trunk
Right arm
Left arm
Buttocks
Genitalia
Right leg
Left leg
Total burn
Deep
Superficial
Area 
 Age 0 
1 
5 
10 
15 
Adult
A = 1/2 of head 
 9.5 
8.5 
6.5 
5.5 
4.5 
3.5
B = 1/2 of one thigh 2.75 
3.25 
4.0 
4.5 
4.5 
4.75
C = 1/2 of one leg 
 2.5 
2.5 
2.75 
3.25 
3.25 
3.5
Relative percentage of body surface area affected by growth surface
C
C
2
2
13/4 13/4
13/4
11/2
11/2
11/2
11/2
11/2
11/2
11/2
11/2
21/2 21/2
13/4

46 
Burns
 Complications 
 Local 
  •   Wound sepsis, usually with  Streptococcus 
pyogenes or  Pseudomonas aeruginosa . 
  •   Scarring (full thickness). 
  •   Wound contractures. 
 General 
  •   Sepsis, particularly chest infection in 
inhalational injury, urinary tract infection 
resulting from catheterization and septicaemia 
directly from wound invasion.  
  •   Acute peptic ulceration (Curling ’ s ulcer). 
  •   Seizures in children, owing to electrolyte 
imbalance. 
  •   Renal failure resulting from the initial 
hypovolaemia due to plasma loss, precipitation 
of haemoglobin or myoglobin, or nephrotoxic 
antimicrobial agents.  
  •   Psychological disturbance. 
 Prognosis 
 Prognosis depends on the extent and depth of the 
burns, and whether or not infection occurs. Young 
infants and the elderly carry a higher mortality 
than young adults. No matter which methods of 
treatment are used, few patients survive more 
than a 70% body area full thickness burn. As a very 
rough guide, if the patient ’ s age  +  percentage 
body area of full thickness burn exceeds 100, the 
chances of survival are low.  
 
 
 
 
24 hours. At the end of 24 hours, colloid 
infusion such as albumen or fresh frozen 
plasma is begun, and free water in the form of 
5% dextrose is given. If the burns are of full 
thickness, blood could be used as the colloid 
ﬂ uid replacement in order to replace the 
extensive red cell destruction that occurs 
within the affected area. 
 Antimicrobial  c hemotherapy 
 Topical agents are used in preference to systemic 
prophylactic antimicrobial therapy. Secondary 
infection of the burns may also require local appli-
cation of antibiotics, and silver sulfadiazine is the 
commonest used. Invasive infection does require 
systemic administration of broad - spectrum anti-
microbial treatment covering streptococcal and 
staphylococcal infection (including meticillin -
 resistant species, e.g. vancomycin) as well as 
 Pseudomonas  
(e.g. 
gentamicin); 
prophylaxis 
against fungal infection (e.g. ﬂ uconazole) may 
also be appropriate in cases of extensive burns. 
When necrotic tissue is present, antibiotics will 
not eliminate infection, and there is the risk that 
resistant organisms will eventually proliferate. 
The best protection against infection is to excise 
the eschar and obtain skin cover.  
 Nutrition 
 The patient ’ s nutrition should be maintained, 
especially when burns are extensive. If enteral 
nutrition is not possible, parenteral feeding should 
be instituted early (within 24 hours of the injury). 
Patients rapidly become catabolic, and adequate 
calorie and protein replacement are necessary to 
avoid a negative nitrogen balance. 

 9 
The  s kin and  i ts  a dnexae  
 
 Learning  o bjective 
  ✓   To know the range of lesions that may present in the skin, and in 
particular the different cancers of the skin, their presentation and 
management. 
 Treatment 
 The uninfected sebaceous cyst should be removed 
to prevent possible complications. A small ellipti-
cal skin incision is made around the punctum of 
the cyst under local anaesthetic; the capsule is 
identiﬁ ed and the cyst removed intact. Failure 
to remove the cyst in its entirety may lead to 
recurrence. 
 If the cyst is acutely inﬂ amed, incision and 
drainage will be required, followed later by exci-
sion of the capsule wall.   
 Dermoid  c yst 
 There are two types of dermoid cyst: implantation 
dermoid and sequestration dermoid. 
 Implantation  d ermoid 
 This is a painless, subcutaneous, cystic swelling 
commonly found on the pulps of the ﬁ ngers, 
attached neither to the skin nor to the deeper 
structures. It usually follows a puncture injury 
(e.g. from a rose thorn) with consequent implan-
tation of epithelial cells into the subcutaneous 
tissues. The cyst typically contains a white, greasy 
material, which results from degeneration of the 
desquamated cells. An old healed scar over the 
cyst may help conﬁ rm the diagnosis. 
 Sequestration  d ermoid 
 This is a subcutaneous cystic swelling resulting 
from an embryological rest of epithelial cells along 
 Sebaceous  c yst 
 A sebaceous cyst (epidermoid cyst or wen) is 
a retention cyst produced by obstruction to 
the mouth of a sebaceous gland. Therefore, 
sebaceous cysts may occur wherever sebaceous 
glands exist and are not found on the gland - 
free palms and soles. They are especially common 
on the scalp, face, scrotum and vulva and on 
the lobe of the ear. The cyst is ﬂ uctuant and 
cannot be moved separately from the overlying 
skin. There may be a typical central punctum and 
the contents are cheesy with an unpleasant smell. 
The lining membrane consists of squamous 
epithelium. 
 Complications 
  •   Infection. 
  •   Ulceration, which may then resemble a 
fungating carcinoma ( ‘ Cock ’ s peculiar 
tumour ’ 1 ). 
  •   Calciﬁ cation, producing a hard subcutaneous 
tumour misnamed a  ‘ benign calcifying 
epithelioma ’ . 
  •   Keratin horn formation. 
  •   Malignant change, which is very rare. 
Lecture Notes: General Surgery, 12th edition. © Harold Ellis, 
Sir Roy Y. Calne and Christopher J. E. Watson. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
  1   Edward Cock (1805 – 1892), Surgeon, Guy ’ s Hospital, London, UK.  

48 
The skin and its adnexae
 Keratoacanthoma 
( m olluscum  s ebaceum) 
 This is a lesion that occurs in elderly patients, 
most commonly men, in sun - exposed areas such 
as the face and nose (75%), although it may occur 
on any skin surface. It appears as a rapidly growing 
nodule, which may reach 3   cm or more in diame-
ter in a few weeks, with a characteristic central 
crater ﬁ lled by a keratin plug. It closely resembles 
a squamous carcinoma or rodent ulcer in appear-
ance, and it is only the history of very rapid growth 
that helps differentiate it from the latter. 
 Histologically, it consists of a central crater ﬁ lled 
with keratin surrounded by hypertrophied squa-
mous stratiﬁ ed epithelium. There is no invasion of 
the surrounding tissues. 
 If left untreated, the lesion disappears over a 
period of 4 – 5 months, leaving a faint white scar. It 
appears to be of hair follicle origin, and may be 
associated with a minor injury. 
 Treatment 
 It is safest to remove the lesion to establish histo-
logical proof of the diagnosis.   
 Ganglion 
 A ganglion presents as a cystic, subcutaneous 
swelling that transilluminates brilliantly. It most 
commonly occurs around the wrist and the 
dorsum of the foot (joint capsule origin), or along 
the ﬂ exor aspect of the ﬁ ngers and on the peroneal 
tendons (tendon sheath origin). Although ganglia 
are among the commonest of surgical lumps, their 
origin is uncertain. They may represent a benign 
myxoma of joint capsule or tendon sheath, a 
hamartoma or a myxomatous degeneration due to 
trauma. They are thin - walled cysts with a synovial 
lining, and contain clear colourless material with 
the consistency of KY Jelly. 
 Treatment 
 The patient may complain of discomfort or of the 
cosmetic appearance; if so, the cyst should be 
excised under a general anaesthetic using a blood-
less ﬁ eld produced by a tourniquet. The old -
a line of fusion. The common sites are over the 
external angular process of the frontal bone (the 
external angular dermoid at the upper outer 
margin of the orbit), the root of the nose (internal 
angular dermoid) and in the midline. When in 
relation to the skull, the underlying bone is usually 
hollowed out around it. The possibility of com-
munication with an intracranial dermoid or the 
meninges should be excluded by skull radiogra-
phy or computed tomography (CT) scan prior to 
excision. 
 Verruca  v ulgaris ( w art) 
 This is a well - localized horny projection that is 
common on the ﬁ ngers, hands, feet and knees, 
particularly of children and young adults. Crops 
of warts may occur on the genitalia and perianal 
region, in many cases spread by sexual contact. 
Warts are often multiple and are due to a 
number of different strains of human papilloma 
virus. 
 Microscopically, there is a local hyperplasia of 
the prickle cell layer of the skin (acanthosis) with 
marked surface corniﬁ cation. 
 Treatment 
 Untreated, warts usually vanish spontaneously 
within 2 years, hence the apparent efﬁ cacy of 
folklore  ‘ wart cures ’ . Often, reassurance that 
these lesions will disappear is all that is required, 
but if treatment is demanded they can be 
burnt down by the application of a silver 
nitrate stick or podophyllin, frozen with liquid 
nitrogen, or curetted under local or general 
anaesthesia.  
 Plantar  w arts 
 Otherwise known as verrucas, these occur on 
the weight - bearing areas of the foot. Pressure 
forces 
the 
wart 
into 
the 
deeper 
tissues, 
producing intense local pain on walking. They 
may occur in epidemics in schools and other 
such places, where the hygiene of the communal 
bath or changing room is not of a high standard. 
They should be treated by podophyllin or 
curettage. 

The skin and its adnexae 49
Recurrence is diminished by keeping the 
surrounding skin free from hair by rubbing 
with ﬁ ne sandpaper, shaving or the use of 
depilatory creams. 
 The  n ails 
 The nails are the site of some common and impor-
tant surgical conditions. 
 Paronychia 
 Paronychia denotes infection of the nail fold, 
usually of the ﬁ nger, but it may complicate an 
ingrowing toenail (see below). 
 Diagnosis of acute paronychia is obvious; the 
nail fold is red, swollen and tender, and pus may 
be visible beneath the skin. 
 Treatment 
 If seen before pus has formed, at the cellulitic 
stage, infection may be aborted by a course of ﬂ u-
cloxacillin or other appropriate anti - staphylococcal 
antibiotic together with immobilization by a splint 
to the ﬁ nger and elevation of the arm in a sling. If 
pus is present, drainage is performed through an 
incision carried proximally through the nail fold, 
combined with removal of the base of the nail if 
pus has tracked beneath it. 
 Chronic paronychia is seen in those whose 
occupation requires constant soaking of the hands 
in water, but it may also occur as a result of fungal 
infection ( Candida ) of the nails and where the 
peripheral circulation is deﬁ cient, e.g. Raynaud ’ s 
phenomenon (Chapter  12 , p. 94). 
 Ingrowing  t oenail 
 This is nearly always conﬁ ned to the hallux and is 
usually due to a combination of tight shoes (par-
ticularly  ‘ trainers ’ ) and the habit of paring the nail 
downwards into the nail fold, rather than trans-
versely; the sharp edge of the nail then grows into 
the side of the nail bed, producing ulceration and 
infection. 
 Treatment 
 If seen before infection has occurred, advice is 
given on correct cutting of the nails; nylon socks 
 fashioned treatment of hitting the ganglion with 
the family bible ruptures the cyst, but recurrence 
usually occurs after some time. Unfortunately, 
recurrence is also common after surgical excision.   
 Pilonidal  s inus 
 The majority of pilonidal sinuses occur in the skin 
of the natal cleft. They may be solitary or appear 
as a row in the midline. Frequently, tufts of hair 
are found lying free within the sinus (Latin  pilus , 
hair;  nidus , nest). 
 Usually, young adults are affected, males more 
than females, and more often dark - haired indi-
viduals; the sinuses are rarely seen in children and 
do not present until adolescence. They are an 
occupational disease of barbers, in whom sinuses 
occur in the clefts between the ﬁ ngers. They are 
occasionally found in the axilla, at the umbilicus, 
in the perineum and on the sole of the foot as well 
as on amputation stumps. 
 Aetiology 
 The occurrence of pilonidal sinuses remote from 
the natal cleft, and the occurrence of such sinuses 
on the hands and feet of people working with 
cattle, where the contained hair is clearly of 
animal origin, supports the hypothesis that these 
sinuses occur by implantation of hair into the skin; 
these set up a foreign - body reaction and produce 
a chronic infected sinus. It may be that, in some 
cases, post - anal pits act as traps for loose hairs, 
thus combining both the congenital and acquired 
theories of origin. The hair enters the skin follicles 
from its distal end and works its way in due to 
tapered lateral hair extensions angled proximally, 
rather as a grass seed migrates up one ’ s sleeve. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 The pilonidal sinus is asymptomatic until it 
becomes infected; there is then a typical history of 
recurrent abscesses, which either require drain-
age or discharge spontaneously.  
 Treatment 
 1  Acute abscess.     This is drained in the usual way. 
 2  Quiescent sinus.     The track is excised or simply 
laid open and allowed to heal by granulation. 

50 
The skin and its adnexae
It appears as a reddish - brown area under the nail, 
which is tender on pressure. The exostosis may 
ulcerate through the overlying nail, producing an 
infected granulating mass. The diagnosis is con-
ﬁ rmed by X - ray of the toe, and treatment is to 
remove the nail and excise the underlying 
exostosis. 
 Subungual  m elanoma 
 The nail bed is a common site for malignant 
melanoma (see p. 52). There is a long history of 
slow growth and often a misleading history of 
trauma. The lesion should be conﬁ rmed by exci-
sion biopsy followed by amputation of the digit. If 
the regional lymph nodes are involved, block dis-
section is performed.  
 Glomus  t umour 
 The nail beds of the ﬁ ngers and toes are a common 
site of this extremely painful lesion, which is a 
benign tumour arising in a subcutaneous glomus 
body (highly innervated arteriovenous anastomo-
ses in dermis responsible for temperature regula-
tion). It is considered on p. 57.    
 Tumours of the  s kin and 
 s ubcutaneous  t issues 
 Classiﬁ cation 
 1  Epidermal. 
 a  Benign: papilloma, senile keratosis, 
seborrhoeic keratosis.  
 b  Malignant: Bowen ’ s disease, squamous cell 
carcinoma, basal cell carcinoma, secondary 
deposits (e.g. from carcinoma of breast and 
lung, leukaemia, Hodgkin ’ s disease). 
 2  Benign and malignant melanomas. 
 3  Tumours of sebaceous and sweat glands. 
 4  Dermal tumours from blood vessels, 
lymphatics, nerves, ﬁ brous tissue or fat. 
 Epidermal  t umours 
 Papilloma 
 This is a common, benign, pedunculated tumour, 
often pigmented with melanin. Microscopically, it 
comprises a keratinized papillary tumour of squa-
mous epithelium.  
and trainers are vetoed. A pledget of cotton wool 
tucked daily into the side of the nail bed, after pre-
liminary soaking of the feet in hot water to soften 
the nails, enables the nail to grow up out of the fold. 
 If an acute paronychia is present, drainage will 
be required by means of removal of the side of the 
nail or avulsion of the whole nail. For recurrent 
cases when the infection has settled, the affected 
side may be excised together with the nail root 
(wedge excision), or the entire nail may be obliter-
ated completely by excision of the nail root 
(Zadik ’ s operation 2 ) or by treating the nail bed 
with liqueﬁ ed phenol, or a combination of the two 
techniques. 
 Onychogryphosis 
 The nail is coiled like a  ‘ ram ’ s horn ’ . It may affect 
any of the toes, although the hallux is the com-
monest site. It may follow trauma to the nail bed 
and is usually found in elderly subjects. 
 Treatment 
 Relatively mild examples can be kept under 
control by trimming the nail with bone - cutting 
forceps. Merely avulsing the nail is invariably fol-
lowed by recurrence, and the only adequate treat-
ment is excision of the nail root.   
 Lesions of the  n ail  b ed 
 It is convenient to list a number of relatively 
common conditions that affect the nail bed. 
 Subungual  h aematoma 
 As a result of crush injury to the terminal phalanx, 
with or without fracture of the underlying bone, a 
tense, painful haematoma may develop beneath 
the nail. Relief is afforded by evacuating the clot 
through a hole made either by a dental drill or by 
a red - hot needle; both procedures are painless. 
Occasionally, a small haematoma may develop 
after a trivial or forgotten injury and clinically may 
closely simulate a subungual melanoma.  
 Subungual  e xostosis 
 This is nearly always conﬁ ned to the hallux and is 
especially found in adolescents and young adults. 
  2   Frank Raphael Zadik (1914 – 1995), Orthopaedic Surgeon, Leigh 
and Wigan, UK. 

The skin and its adnexae 51
 Squamous  c ell  c arcinoma 
( e pithelioma) 
 Occurs usually in the elderly male, especially in 
skin areas exposed to sunshine, e.g. the face and 
backs of the hands. Like solar keratoses, it is rela-
tively common in white subjects who live in the 
tropics. 
 Predisposing  f actors 
 These include the following: 
  •   solar keratosis; 
  •   Bowen ’ s disease; 
  •   exposure to sunshine or ultraviolet irradiation; 
  •   exposure to ionizing irradiation; 
  •   infection with human papilloma virus types 6, 
11, 16 and 18;  
  •   carcinogens, e.g. pitch, tar, soot, mineral oils; 
  •   chronic ulceration, particularly in burns scars 
(Marjolin ’ s ulcer  – see below); 
  •   immunosuppressive drugs. 
 Pathology 
 Macroscopically, it presents as a typical carcino-
matous ulcer with indurated, raised everted 
edges and a central scab. Microscopically, there 
are solid columns of epithelial cells growing 
into the dermis with epithelial pearls of central 
keratin surrounded by prickle cells. Occasionally, 
anaplastic tumours are seen in which these pearls 
are absent. 
 Spread occurs by local inﬁ ltration and then by 
lymphatics. Blood spread occurs only in very 
advanced cases.  
 Treatment 
 Treatment consists of either wide excision or radi-
otherapy, depending on the site of the lesion. If 
the regional lymph nodes are involved, block dis-
section is indicated.   
 Marjolin ’ s  u lcer  4  
 The name applied to malignant change in a scar, 
ulcer or sinus, e.g. a chronic venous ulcer, an 
unhealed burn or the sinus of chronic osteomyeli-
tis. It has the following characteristics: 
  •   slow growth , because the lesion is relatively 
avascular; 
 Seborrhoeic  k eratosis ( b asal  c ell 
 p apilloma) 
 This is a common tumour occurring after the 
age of 40 years. It appears as a yellowish or 
brown raised lesion on the face, arms or trunk 
and is often multiple. It often appears greasy, 
and its surface is characterized by a network of 
crypts. 
 Microscopically, there is hyperkeratosis, prolif-
eration of the basal cell layer and melanin 
pigmentation. 
 The lesion is quite benign, but differential diag-
nosis from a melanoma can only be made with 
certainty by excising the lump and submitting it to 
histological examination.  
 Solar ( a ctinic)  k eratosis 
 This is a small, hard, brown, scaly tumour on sun -
 exposed areas of skin (e.g. the forehead, ears and 
backs of hands) of the elderly. Keratoses are more 
common in individuals with fair skin, and after 
prolonged exposure to ultraviolet light. 
 Microscopically, 
hyperkeratosis 
is 
present, 
often with atypical dividing cells in the prickle cell 
layer. 
 The lesions may be treated with liquid nitrogen 
cryotherapy or curettage; large areas may require 
topical 
chemotherapy 
(e.g. 
5 - ﬂ uorouracil). 
Imiquimod has also been used, and acts as an 
immune 
modiﬁ er, 
stimulating 
an 
immune 
response with resolution of the lesions. 
 The importance of this lesion is that it may 
undergo change into a squamous cell carcinoma.  
 Bowen ’ s  d isease  3 
 This appears as a very slowly growing, red, scaly 
plaque, and represents  ‘ squamous carcinoma  in 
situ  ’ . It may be mistaken for a psoriatic plaque. 
Human papilloma virus (HPV) DNA (particularly 
HPV16, but also HPV2) has been found in some 
lesions. 
 Microscopically, atypical keratinocytes with 
vacuolization, mitoses and multinucleated giant 
cells are prominent in the epidermis but the basal 
layer is intact. 
 Treatment is excision; if left untreated, eventu-
ally a squamous cell carcinoma will supervene.  
  3  John Templeton Bowen (1857 – 1941), Dermatologist, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.  
  4  Jean Nicholas Marjolin (1780 – 1850), Surgeon, H ô pital Sainte -
 Eug é nie, Paris, France. 

52 
The skin and its adnexae
 Melanoma 
 Aetiology 
 Melanomas develop from melanocytes, which 
are situated in the basal layer of the epidermis 
and which originate from the neuroectoderm of 
the embryonic neural crest. Some melanocytes 
contain no visible pigment, but all are character-
ized by a positive dihydroxyphenyl alanine (DOPA) 
reaction  –  they can all convert DOPA into melanin. 
While most melanomas arise in the skin, they may 
also occur at other sites to which neural crest cells 
migrate, in particular the pigmented choroid layer 
of the eye.  
 Classiﬁ cation 
 Melanomas may be classiﬁ ed into the following: 
  •   intradermal melanoma or naevus (the 
common mole);  
  •   junctional melanoma or naevus; 
  •   compound melanoma or naevus; 
  •   juvenile melanoma; 
  •   malignant melanoma. 
 Nearly everyone possesses one or more moles; 
some have hundreds, although they may not 
become apparent until after puberty. Those moles 
that are entirely within the dermis remain benign, 
but a small percentage of the junctional naevi, so 
called because they are seen in the basal layer of 
the epidermis at its junction with the dermis, may 
undergo malignant change (Figure  9.1 ). 
 Intradermal  m elanoma or  n aevus 
 This is the commonest variety of mole. The naevus 
may be light or dark in colour and may be ﬂ at or 
raised, hairy or hairless. A hairy mole is nearly 
always intradermal. They may be found in any 
place in the body except the palm of the hand, the 
sole of the foot or the scrotal skin. 
 Histologically, there is a nest of melanocytes 
situated entirely within the dermis where the cells 
form non - encapsulated masses. They never 
undergo malignant change, and need no treat-
ment unless the diagnosis is uncertain.  
 Junctional  m elanoma or  n aevus 
 The junctional naevus is pigmented to a variable 
  •   painless , because the scar tissue does not 
contain cutaneous nerve ﬁ bres; 
  •   lymphatic spread is late , because the scar 
tissue produces lymphatic obliteration. 
 Once the tumour reaches the normal tissues 
beyond the diseased area, rapid growth, pain and 
lymphatic involvement take place.  
 Basal  c ell  c arcinoma ( r odent  u lcer) 
 This is the most common form of skin cancer 
in white people. It occurs usually in elderly 
subjects, in males twice as commonly as in 
females. Ninety per cent are found on the face 
above a line joining the angle of the mouth to 
the external auditory meatus, particularly around 
the eye, the nasolabial folds and the hair line of 
the scalp. The tumour may, however, arise on any 
part of the skin, including the anal margin. 
Predisposing factors are exposure to sunlight or 
irradiation. 
 Pathology 
 Macroscopically, the tumour has raised, rolled, 
but not everted edges. It consists of pearly nodules 
over which ﬁ ne blood vessels can be seen to 
course (telangiectasia). Starting as a small nodule, 
the tumour very slowly grows over the years with 
central ulceration and scabbing. 
 Microscopically, solid sheets of uniform, darkly 
staining cells arising from the basal layer of the 
skin are seen. Prickle cells and epithelial pearls are 
both absent. 
 Spread is by inﬁ ltration with slow but steady 
destruction of surrounding tissues; in advanced 
cases, the underlying skull may be eroded or the 
face, nose and eye may be destroyed, hence the 
name  ‘ rodent ’ . Lymphatic and blood spread occur 
with extreme rarity.  
 Treatment 
 Treatment is by excision, where this can be done 
with an adequate margin and without cosmetic 
deformity. It is also indicated in late cases where 
the tumour has recurred after irradiation or has 
invaded the underlying bone or cartilage. In the 
majority of cases, however, superﬁ cial radiother-
apy gives excellent results. Where the tumour 
occurs on or near the eyelid, the conjunctiva must 
be protected by means of a lead shield during irra-
diation therapy. 

The skin and its adnexae 53
 Compound  m elanoma or  n aevus 
 Clinically, this is indistinguishable from the intra-
dermal naevus, but histologically it has junctional 
elements that make it potentially malignant.  
 Juvenile  m elanoma 
 Melanomas before puberty are relatively unusual, 
and may present as a dark nodule. Microscopically, 
they may be indistinguishable from malignant 
melanoma; yet fortunately and surprisingly, these 
shade from light brown to almost black. It is nearly 
always ﬂ at, smooth and hairless. It may occur any-
where on the body and, unlike the intradermal 
naevus, may be found on the palm of the hand, 
sole of the foot and the genitalia. 
 Histologically, naevus cells are seen in the basal 
layers of the epidermis from which the cells may 
spread to the surface. 
 Only a small percentage of junctional naevi 
undergo malignant change, but it is from this 
group that the vast majority of malignant melano-
mas arise.  
 Figure 9.1   (a) The normal skin contains melanocytes (shown as cells) and melanin pigment shown as dots. The 
pigment increases in sunburn and freckles. (b) A benign intradermal naevus; the melanocytes are clumped together 
in the dermis to form a localized benign tumour. (c) A junctional naevus with melanocytes clumping together in the 
basal layer of the epidermis. These are usually benign but may occasionally give rise to an invasive malignant 
melanoma (d).  
(a)   Normal
(b)   Intradermal melanoma
(c)   Junctional melanoma
(d)   Malignant melanoma

54 
The skin and its adnexae
that also occurs in dark - skinned races. The 
subungual melanoma is a variant of acral 
melanoma (see p. 50).  
  •   Mucosal melanoma.   Malignant melanoma 
may be found on the mucous membranes of 
the nose, mouth, anus and intestine. 
  •   Choroid melanoma.    Melanomas may arise 
from melanocytes in the pigment layer of the 
retina. These are renowned for presenting 
many years after enucleation with hepatic 
metastases; hence, the aphorism  ‘ beware the 
patient with the large liver and the glass eye ’ .  
  •   Amelanotic melanoma.   Paradoxically, 
melanomas are not always pigmented, but 
they remain DOPA positive. 
 Signs of  m alignant  c hange in 
a  m elanoma 
  •   Increase or irregularity in size. 
  •   Increase or irregularity in pigmentation. 
  •   Bleeding or ulceration. 
  •      Spread of pigment from the edge of the naevus.  
  •   Itching or pain. 
  •   Formation of daughter or satellite nodules. 
  •   Lymph node or distant spread. 
 Pathology 
 Microscopically, pleomorphic cells are seen, 
which spread through the layers of the epidermis 
and which are usually pigmented (occasionally 
the cells are amelanotic).  
 Spread 
 As well as local growth and ulceration, malignant 
melanomas seed by lymphatic permeation, which 
produces cutaneous nodules by progressive proxi-
mal spread, and by lymphatic emboli to the 
regional lymph nodes. There is also widespread 
dissemination by the bloodstream to any and 
every organ in the body. Free melanin in the blood 
may produce generalized skin pigmentation and 
melanuria in late cases.  
 Staging 
 The prognosis of malignant melanoma depends 
upon its degree of invasion, which is measured by 
the depth of invasion. The depth may be meas-
ured either by reference to the normal skin layers 
(Clark ’ s levels) or, more simply and accurately, 
according to its measured depth (Breslow depth 6 ). 
usually pursue a completely benign course. 
Melanomas in children should therefore always 
be dealt with by conservative surgery in spite of 
their frightening histological appearance.  
 Malignant  m elanoma 
 Malignant melanomas arise in pre - existing naevi, 
either junctional naevi or compound naevi where 
there is a junctional component. They occur in 
white people on light - exposed areas, hence the 
higher incidence on the legs of females. It is rarely 
found in the pigmented skin of dark - skinned 
races, tending to be found in the non - pigmented 
skin on the sole of the foot or, less commonly, the 
palm. A premalignant form, the lentigo maligna, 
also exists. 
 Presentations 
 The two main presentations of malignant 
melanoma are the superﬁ cial spreading type, and 
the nodular type. 
  •   Superﬁ cial spreading melanoma.    The 
commonest presentation of malignant 
melanoma is of a previously dormant naevus 
starting to spread superﬁ cially. The surface has 
patches of deep pigmentation.  
  •   Nodular melanoma.     The naevus is nodular 
and deeply pigmented and may bleed or 
ulcerate. Such a nodule may occur on a 
pigmented background such as the lentigo 
maligna. It tends to invade deeply rather than 
spread superﬁ cially, and carries a poorer 
prognosis with earlier lymphatic involvement.    
 In addition to the common types of malignant 
melanoma above, less common forms include the 
following: 
  •   Lentigo maligna.     This is a brown pigmented 
patch with an irregular outline and is usually 
found on the cheeks of elderly women, often 
called a Hutchinson ’ s freckle. 5  The pale patch 
appears over several years; malignant change 
is indicated by deeper pigmentation or nodule 
formation.  
  •   Acral melanoma.     These are so called because 
they occur at the extremities, commonly on 
the palms and soles of the feet. It is this type 
  5   Sir Jonathan Hutchinson (1828 – 1913), Surgeon, The London 
Hospital, London, UK. Described numerous conditions and was 
ﬁ rst to perform a successful operation for reduction of an intus-
susception in a child.  
  6   Alexander Breslow (1928 – 1980), Pathologist, George Washington 
University Hospital, Washington, DC, USA. 

The skin and its adnexae 55
 Prognosis 
 Prognosis depends on a large number of factors. 
  •   Breslow depth of the primary lesion, measured 
vertically from the top of the granular layer to 
the deepest point of tumour invasion. This is 
the most important prognostic factor. 
Prognosis is good when this depth is less than 
1.5  mm. The deeper the lesion, the greater the 
risk of lymph node metastasis and the worse 
the 5 year survival (Table  9.1 ).  
  •   Type of lesion . A superﬁ cial spreading 
melanoma has a better prognosis than a 
penetrating and ulcerating lesion.  
  •   The anatomical site . Tumours on the trunk and 
scalp have a poor prognosis.  
  •   Lymph node metastases . They indicate poor 
prognosis, more so if there are cutaneous 
deposits. The presence of sentinel node 
involvement, or satellite lesions, reduces 5 year 
survival to under 30%. 
 Tumours of  s weat  g lands and 
 s ebaceous  g lands 
 Benign and malignant tumours of these glandular 
adnexae of the skin are rare. 
 Sebaceous  a denomas 
 These are more in the nature of a hyperplasia of 
the glands than true tumours. They occur as pink 
or yellow papules on the nose, cheek and fore-
head. Microscopically, they are merely over-
growths of sebaceous glands. 
 Sebaceous  c arcinoma 
 Found rarely on the face and scalp in elderly sub-
jects, it is an uncommon but aggressive cancer. 
Carcinomatous change may rarely occur in seba-
ceous cysts.  
Because of its simplicity, Breslow ’ s method is now 
routinely adopted.  
 Treatment of  p igmented  l esions 
 The following is a general guide to the manage-
ment of pigmented lesions of the skin. 
 Prophylactic  r emoval 
 Any pigmented tumour on the hand, sole or geni-
talia, or any that, in other situations, are subjected 
to trauma should be excised; these are the com-
monest among the small percentage of naevi to 
undergo malignant change. In addition, pig-
mented lesions should be removed for cosmetic 
reasons or if the patient is acutely anxious about 
their presence  –  this is a particularly common 
phenomenon among doctors, nurses and medical 
students. Such lesions are sent for careful histo-
logical examination and should always be removed 
in their entirety.  
 Suspicious  n aevi 
 If the pigmented lesion shows any of the features 
already listed that suggest that malignant change 
has taken place, the naevus is ﬁ rst removed for 
urgent histological examination (frozen section). 
If malignant melanoma is conﬁ rmed, a wide local 
excision of the area is performed, with a margin of 
clearance proportional to the depth of invasion 
(Breslow depth). Traditionally this was translated 
into a centimetre margin for every millimetre of 
invasion; primary skin grafting may be required.  
 Sentinel  l ymph  n odes 
 The sentinel node, the primary lymphatic drain-
age of the tumour, is identiﬁ ed and excised for 
histological examination. Identiﬁ cation of the 
sentinel node is by injection of vital blue dye 
around the primary melanoma, combined with 
preoperative lymphoscintigraphy to map the 
lymphatic drainage. If the sentinel node is 
involved, the regional nodes are excised by block 
dissection.  
 Adjuvant  t herapy 
 Malignant melanoma deposits often show regres-
sion when the primary lesion is excised, implying 
an immunological component. Immunotherapy 
with high dose interferon -  α 2b may be effective at 
prolonging survival. Interleukin 2 administration 
has also had some success. 
 Melanomas are generally radioresistant. Results 
of chemotherapy, including high - dose isolated 
perfusion of a limb with cytotoxic chemothera-
peutic agents, have been disappointing.   
 Table 9.1   Five year survival according to 
Breslow depth 
 Depth  
 5 year survival  
 < 0.75   mm  
  > 95%  
 0.75 – 1.5   mm  
 90%  
 1.5 – 4.0   mm  
 70%  
 > 4.0   mm  
  < 50%  

56 
The skin and its adnexae
to the cutaneous branches of the trigeminal 
nerve and may be associated with angiomas of 
the cerebral pia – arachnoid, which may 
manifest themselves by focal epileptic attacks 
(the Sturge – Weber syndrome 7 ). 
  •   Campbell de Morgan spots 8 are found on the 
trunk of middle - aged and elderly subjects. 
They are bright red aggregates of dilated 
capillaries, which can be emptied by pressing 
on them with the tip of a pencil. They are of no 
signiﬁ cance. 
  •   Spider naevus is another example of a capillary 
haemangioma. Isolated  ‘ spiders ’ are present in 
normal people, but they are more common 
during pregnancy and in chronic liver 
disease. They comprise a central arteriole 
from which radiate capillaries. Pressure on 
the central arteriole with a pinhead causes 
the lesion to disappear while pressure is 
maintained. 
 Treatment 
 Most strawberry naevi disappear spontaneously, 
but diathermy coagulation, application of CO 2 
snow or excision and grafting may be required. 
The port - wine stain may respond to cutaneous 
laser therapy, but the simplest treatment remains 
camouﬂ age with cosmetics. 
 Cavernous  h aemangioma 
 These are made up of large blood spaces lined 
with endothelium. They occur on the skin and lip 
and, quite commonly, as multiple nodules in the 
liver. They are usually present at birth, and grow 
to keep pace with normal body growth. 
 The lesions are blue, may be raised and may 
partly empty on pressure. They may inﬁ ltrate the 
underlying tissues and may be associated with 
unsightly overlying cutaneous thickening. 
 Treatment 
 This is often difﬁ cult. The condition may be dis-
guised by the use of cosmetics, or thrombosis can 
be encouraged by injection of sclerosing agents. 
Very unsightly small lesions may be excised and 
skin grafted. 
 Sweat  g land  a denomas or 
 c arcinomas 
 These may occur on the face and scalp and in 
the apocrine sweat glands of the axilla, vulva 
and scrotum. They are composed of columns or 
cylinders of clear cells and the descriptive term 
 ‘ cylindroma ’  is applied to these tumours for 
this reason. On the scalp, they may form masses 
of large nodules ( ‘ turban tumour ’ ), but tumours 
of similar appearance may also be of basal cell 
origin. 
 Blood  v essel  t umours 
 Tumours of blood vessels usually lie in the dermis, 
although the underlying muscles and soft tissues 
may be involved. The abdominal viscera, central 
nervous system and bone may also be the sites of 
these lesions. The terminology of blood vessel 
tumours is confusing and is bedevilled with pic-
turesque descriptive terms. Most benign blood 
vessel  ‘ tumours ’ are indeed congenital malforma-
tions or hamartomas. 
 Classiﬁ cation 
  •   Capillary haemangioma. 
  •   Cavernous haemangioma. 
  •   Sclerosing angioma (ﬁ brous histiocytoma). 
  •   Glomus tumour. 
  •   Haemangiosarcoma. 
  •   Kaposi ’ s sarcoma. 
 Capillary  h aemangioma 
 A variety of types of congenital capillary malfor-
mation may be found in the skin, usually at birth. 
  •   A salmon pink patch  is a common blemish on 
the head or neck of a newborn child and 
rapidly disappears spontaneously.  
  •   A  strawberry naevus  is bright red and raised, 
and usually disappears during the ﬁ rst few 
years of life, although there may at ﬁ rst be a 
rapid alarming enlargement, even with 
ulceration, before involution occurs.  
  •   A  port - wine stain , ﬂ ush with the skin, usually 
on the face, lips and buccal mucosa, produces 
an extensive area of dark red, blue or purple 
discolouration. It is present from birth and 
shows no tendency to regress with age. 
 Note that port - wine stain of the face may 
have a segmental distribution corresponding 
  7  William Allen Sturge (1850 – 1919), Physician, Royal Free Hospital, 
London, UK. Frederick Parkes Weber (1863 – 1962), Physician, 
London, UK, with a life - long interest in rare diseases. 
  8   Campbell de Morgan (1811 – 1876), Surgeon, Middlesex Hospital, 
London, UK.  

The skin and its adnexae 57
limbs. The nodules spread centrally along the 
limb, may ulcerate and can metastasize to the liver 
and lungs. In the aggressive form, which occurs in 
the immunosuppressed, visceral involvement 
occurs with bowel perforation, haemorrhage or 
intussusception. 
 Histologically, there are two components: blood 
vessels and ﬁ broblasts. The latter show the malig-
nant features, thus distinguishing this tumour 
from a haemangiosarcoma. Treatment involves 
control of HIV infection with highly active anti -
 retroviral treatment (HAART) or reduction of 
immunosuppression in transplant recipients, 
together with local radiotherapy or cytotoxic 
drugs. 
 Telangiectasia 
 Telangiectases, although not truly tumours, are 
conveniently mentioned in this section. They are 
dilatations of normal capillaries and are seen in a 
number of circumstances, e.g. on the weather -
 beaten faces of country people and on the legs of 
young women, who may complain of their cos-
metic appearance. 
 Hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT; 
Osler – Weber – Rendu syndrome 11 ) is an inherited 
autosomal dominant disease characterized by 
tiny capillary angiomas of the skin, lips and 
mucous membranes; they may give rise to 
repeated nose bleeds and gastrointestinal haem-
orrhage. The genetic abnormality is a mutation 
of either endoglin (HHT type 1) or activin 
receptor - like kinase (HHT type 2) genes. Typically, 
the telangiectases are visible around the mouth 
and in the fauces, and present with nose 
bleeds. Occult arteriovenous malformations are 
common.  
 Lymph  v essel  t umours 
 Lymphangiomas are congenital in origin and 
similar to haemangiomas; they are lined by 
endothelium but contain lymph. They are rela-
tively uncommon, but occur mainly on the lips, 
tongue and cheek, resulting in macrocheilia or 
macroglossia.  
 Sclerosing  a ngioma ( ﬁ  brous 
 h istiocytoma) 
 This is a pigmented tumour of the skin that may 
easily be confused with a malignant melanoma 
with which it has a close macroscopic resem-
blance. Palpation, however, reveals a typically 
hard consistency due to the dense ﬁ brous stroma. 
It is probably produced as a result of ﬁ brosis of a 
capillary haemangioma. The pigment is due to 
iron and not to melanin; this is easily shown with 
speciﬁ c histological staining.  
 Glomus  t umour 
 Glomus bodies are found in the subcutaneous 
tissues of the limbs, particularly the ﬁ ngers, the 
toes and their nail beds. They are convoluted arte-
riovenous anastomoses with a cellular wall com-
prising a thick layer of cuboidal  ‘ glomus ’  cells, 
which are modiﬁ ed plain muscles; between these 
cells are abundant nerve ﬁ bres. These structures 
are perhaps concerned with cutaneous heat regu-
lation. Glomus tumours are blue or reddish, small, 
raised lesions, which occur in young adults at the 
common sites of glomus bodies. Their character-
istic is exquisite tenderness, which makes the 
slightest touch agonizing. 
 Treatment 
 Treatment is excision of the lesion, which is 
rewarded by the heartfelt gratitude of the patient.   
 Kaposi ’ s  s arcoma 9 
 This tumour has a multicentric origin. It used to 
be most common in the elderly in central Europe, 
particularly Ashkenazi Jews; 10  now it is a common 
tumour in patients with acquired immune deﬁ -
ciency syndrome (AIDS), and also occurs more 
commonly in immunosuppressed organ trans-
plant recipients. DNA extracted from Kaposi ’ s 
sarcoma tissue has been found to contain human 
herpes virus type 8 (HHV8), now known as Kaposi 
sarcoma herpes virus (KSHV), indicating a signiﬁ -
cant aetiological role for this virus. It presents as a 
number of bluish red or dark blue nodules scat-
tered over the extremities of one or more of the 
  9  Moriz Kaposi (1837 – 1902), Professor of Dermatology, Vienna, 
Austria. 
  10   Ashkenazi Jews: contrast Sephardic and Oriental Jews. Migrated 
to Germany, Poland and Russia. 
  11   Sir William Osler (1849 – 1919), Professor of Medicine, succes-
sively at McGill University, Montreal, Canada; Johns Hopkins 
University, Baltimore, MD, USA; and the University of Oxford, 
Oxford, UK. Frederick Parkes Weber (1863 – 1962), Physician, 
London, UK. Henri Rendu (1844 – 1902), Physician, H ô pital 
Necker, Paris, France. 

58 
The skin and its adnexae
bromatosis are recognized, and all are autosomal 
dominant. von Recklinghausen ’ s disease is type 1 
neuroﬁ bromatosis 14  and results from a mutation 
in the neuroﬁ bromin gene. The cutaneous lesions 
are soft and often pedunculated. They are usually 
painless, although pressure may produce pain 
along the line of the nerve, particularly when 
larger nerve trunks are involved. The tumour is 
mobile from side to side but not longitudinally, in 
the line of the nerve to which is it attached. There 
may be associated caf é - au - lait patches of pigmen-
tation. In some cases, there are disﬁ guring masses 
of neuroﬁ bromatous tissue over which the thick-
ened skin hangs in ugly folds. The  ‘ elephant man ’  
of the London Hospital was a gross example of the 
disease. 
 Treatment 
 Where the neuroﬁ bromas are solitary or few in 
number, removal can be performed, either by 
enucleation, if the nerve ﬁ bres are pushed to one 
side, or by resection with suture of the divided 
nerve. Incomplete removal must not be per-
formed, as sarcomatous change may follow. 
Where the whole body is covered by these lesions, 
some cosmetic improvement can be effected by 
excising the more noticeable lesions from the face 
and hands. 
 Neuroﬁ brosarcomas  are uncommon. They may 
arise  de novo  or as malignant change in a neuroﬁ -
broma. Clinical features are pain, rapid growth 
and peripheral anaesthesia or paralysis. Treatment 
is wide excision.   
 Fatty  t umours 
 Lipoma 
 Lipomas are the commonest of benign tumours. 
They usually occur in adults, and the sex distribu-
tion is equal, although females are more likely to 
present to the surgeon for cosmetic removal of 
these lesions. Lipomas may arise in any connec-
tive tissue but especially in the subcutaneous fat, 
particularly around the shoulder and over the 
trunk. They do not occur in the palm, sole of the 
foot or the scalp, because in these areas the fat is 
 Cystic  h ygroma 
 A form of lymphangioma, the aetiology of cystic 
hygromas is thought to relate to a combination of 
a failure of lymphatics to connect to the venous 
system, abnormal growth of embryonal lymphat-
ics and sequestered lymphatic rests. Most occur in 
the neck, usually the left side, and were thought to 
be related to the embryonic precursor of the 
jugular part of the thoracic duct. They consist of a 
multilocular cystic mass, which is often present at 
birth or noticed in early infancy. Characteristically, 
they are supremely transilluminable. They may 
respond to injection of sclerosant agents such as 
alcohol or doxycycline. Surgical treatment consists 
of excision, but this is a difﬁ cult procedure as the 
cysts ramify throughout the structures of the neck.  
 Nerve  t umours 
 Tumours of the peripheral nerves arise from the 
neurilemmal sheath of Schwann; 12 hence, the 
terms neurilemmoma, neuroﬁ broma or schwan-
noma. They push the ﬁ bres of the nerve to one 
side or actually grow within the substance of the 
nerve. The tumours may be solitary or multiple 
and may involve any peripheral nerve in the body. 
Of the cranial nerves, the eighth is most com-
monly involved, often as a solitary tumour (the 
acoustic neuroma; see Chapter  14 ). Tumours may 
arise within the spinal canal, particularly from the 
dorsal nerve roots, resulting in an extramedullary, 
intrathecal, slow - growing spinal tumour (see 
Chapter  16 ). Part of this tumour may protrude 
through the intervertebral foramen, producing a 
dumb - bell tumour, which projects into either the 
thoracic cavity or the abdominal cavity. 
 In the skin and subcutaneous tissues, there is a 
wide range of presentations from a solitary tumour 
arising from a peripheral nerve to uncountable 
numbers involving the whole of the body ( von 
Recklinghausen ’ s disease ; 13 his name is also applied 
to the osteitis ﬁ brosa cystica of hyperparathy-
roidism  – see Chapter  38 ). 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 The tumours may appear in childhood and there 
is often a family history. Three types of neuroﬁ -
  12   Theodor Schwann (1810 – 1882), Professor of Anatomy, Louvain 
and then Li è ge, Belgium.  
  13   Friederich Daniel von Recklinghausen (1833 – 1910), Professor of 
Pathology, successively at K ö nigsberg, Germany; W ü rzburg, 
Germany; and Strasbourg, France. 
  14  Type II neuroﬁ bromatosis (mutation in neuroﬁ bromin 2 gene) 
is characterized by eighth nerve tumours, meningiomas and 
schwannomas of the dorsal roots of the spinal cord; type III neu-
roﬁ bromatosis has features of both type I and type II, with caf é  -
 au - lait spots, cutaneous lesions and intracranial neuroﬁ bromas 
and meningiomas.  

The skin and its adnexae 59
contained within dense ﬁ brous septa. Occasionally, 
lipomas appear in large numbers subcutaneously 
and are tender (adiposis dolorosa or Dercum ’ s 
disease 15 ) and it is sometimes quite difﬁ cult to dif-
ferentiate them from neuroﬁ bromas. Elsewhere it 
is useful to remember that  ‘ lipomas occur beneath 
everything ’ ; thus, in addition to being subcutane-
ous, they may be subfascial, subperiosteal, sub-
peritoneal, submucosal and subpleural. 
 The diagnosis is rarely in doubt with this soft, 
lobulated, ﬂ uctuant tumour. The ﬂ uctuation is 
interesting; it is often said to be due to the fat 
being liquid at body temperature, but anyone 
observing an operation will notice that fat within 
the body certainly does not ﬂ ow out in liquid form 
over the surgeon ’ s boots when the skin is incised. 
The ﬂ uctuation can be explained by the histologi-
cal structure of the lipoma, which consists of 
aggregates of typical fat cells; each cell itself forms 
a microscopic cyst. This is very much like the ﬂ uc-
tuation that can be elicited in a colloid goitre 
made up of thyroid vesicles distended with colloid 
material. 
 Treatment 
 Treatment consists of excision if the lipoma is cos-
metically troublesome. 
 Liposarcoma 
 A rare tumour, which probably arises as an 
unusual event in a pre - existing benign lipoma. 
The retroperitoneal site is commonest, but it may 
also occur around the thigh region and should be 
suspected if the tumour is very large, ﬁ rmer than 
usual, vascular or rapidly growing. 
 Treatment 
 Treatment comprises wide excision if this is 
possible. 
 
 
 
 
  15   Francis Xavier Dercum (1856 – 1931), Professor of Clinical 
Neurology, Jefferson Medical College, Philadelphia, PA, USA. 

 10 
The  c hest and  l ungs  
 
 Learning  o bjectives 
  ✓   To have a knowledge of the types of chest injury and their 
management.  
  ✓   To have a knowledge of lung cancer and its management; this is 
particularly important as it is the commonest cancer cause of 
death in the UK. 
 Fractures of the  r ibs 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 The commonest injury to the chest is fracture of 
the ribs by a direct blow. The most commonly 
affected ribs are the seventh, eighth and ninth, in 
which the fracture usually occurs in the region of 
the midaxillary line. The patient complains of pain 
in the chest overlying the fracture and this pain is 
intensiﬁ ed by springing the ribs with gentle but 
sharp pressure on the sternum.  
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   Chest X - ray may conﬁ rm rib fractures, and 
will identify underlying lung damage or 
haemorrhage that might not have been 
suspected from the trivial nature of the 
patient ’ s symptoms. A chest X - ray may not 
always demonstrate a fracture; if the patient 
has clinical signs of fractured ribs, he or she 
should be treated for this condition in spite 
of a negative X - ray. A repeat X - ray at 2 weeks 
may show fracture callus and conﬁ rm the 
diagnosis. 
  •   Bone scans  are more sensitive at detecting 
fractures, especially pathological fractures, 
when they may also reveal metastatic tumour 
deposits elsewhere in the skeleton, or be 
suggestive of metabolic bone disease. 
 Injury to the  c hest 
 Ventilation of the lungs depends on a patent main 
airway and pulmonary alveoli, the rigid bony skel-
eton of the thorax and the integrity of the nerves 
and muscles that control the movements of the 
ribs and diaphragm. Traumatic disruption of the 
chest wall is likely to be lethal unless treatment is 
instituted rapidly. Dangerous complications of 
chest injury are: 
  •   paradoxical respiration; 
  •   pneumothorax; 
  •   penetration of the lung; 
  •   haemothorax; 
  •   cardiac tamponade due to laceration of the 
heart; 
  •   large - vessel damage. 
 Serious harm can also result from blunt (crush) 
injuries that do not penetrate the chest; thus, 
a main bronchus or the aorta may be ruptured, 
the lung contused and papillary muscles of 
the heart or the coronary arteries may be 
damaged.  
Lecture Notes: General Surgery, 12th edition. © Harold Ellis, 
Sir Roy Y. Calne and Christopher J. E. Watson. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

The chest and lungs 61
 Figure 10.1   Flail chest. On inspiration, the detached segment of the chest wall is sucked inwards, producing 
paradoxical movement, and inhaled air shunts back and forth between lungs.  
Flail
segment
sucked in
Air shunted
from one lung
to the other
on inspiration
Air movement 
within lungs
Inspiration
Expiration
 Complications 
 Flail  c hest  (Figure    10.1 )  
 Crush injuries of the chest, in which the whole 
sternum is loosened by fractured ribs on either 
side or several ribs are fractured in two places, 
result in the condition of ﬂ ail chest. On inspira-
tion, the ﬂ ail part of the chest wall becomes 
indrawn by the negative intrathoracic pressure, as 
it is no longer in structural continuity with the 
bony thoracic cage. Similarly, in expiration the ﬂ ail 
part of the chest is pushed out while the rest of the 
bony cage becomes contracted. This is termed 
 paradoxical movement . The patient becomes 
grossly hypoxic due to failure of adequate expan-
sion of the affected side and also because of shunt-
ing of deoxygenated air from the lung on the side 
of the fracture into the opposite side. The pendu-
lum movements of the mediastinum also produce 
cardiovascular embarrassment so that the patient 
becomes rapidly and progressively shocked.  
 Pneumothorax 
 If a bony spicule penetrates the lung, air escapes 
into the pleural cavity and will result in a 
pneumothorax. 
 A  tension pneumothorax (Figure  10.2 ) results 
if the pleural tear is valvular, allowing air to 
be sucked into the pleural cavity at each 
inspiration but preventing air returning to the 
bronchi on expiration. A tension pneumothorax 
produces 
rapidly 
increasing 
dyspnoea; 
the 
trachea and the apex beat are displaced away 
from the side of the pneumothorax; and, on 
the left side, cardiac dullness may be absent. The 
chest on the affected side gives a tympanitic 
percussion note with bulging of the intercostal 
spaces. 
 Subcutaneous  e mphysema 
( s urgical  e mphysema) 
 When a fractured rib tears the overlying soft tissue 
and allows air from the pneumothorax to enter the 
subcutaneous tissues, subcutaneous emphysema 
will result. The skin over the trunk, neck and 
sometimes face gives a peculiar crackling feel to 
the examining ﬁ ngers ( crepitation ) and, in severe 
cases, the face and neck may become grossly 
swollen. The alternative name, surgical emphy-
sema, is misleading as it is rarely caused by 
surgeons. 

62 
The chest and lungs
area of the skin that has been subjected to com-
pression at the time of injury (e.g. from a tight 
collar, braces or spectacles) is protected and these 
areas remain mapped out on the body as strips of 
normal skin, giving a characteristic appearance to 
the patient. 
 Other  v isceral  i njury 
 It is important to remember that penetrating 
wounds of the chest may also injure the underly-
ing diaphragm and thence the abdominal viscera. 
Thus, it is not uncommon for a knife or bullet 
wound of the left chest to penetrate the spleen or, 
on the right side, to damage the liver  –  incorrect 
placement of a chest drain may do the same.  
 Treatment 
 The priorities in the management of chest injuries 
are as follows: 
  •   Airway control.     This may involve the passage 
of an endotracheal tube, particularly where a 
head injury coexists with chest trauma. 
Aspiration of vomit is prevented by passing a 
nasogastric tube to empty the stomach.  
  •   Breathing.  Ensure the patient is breathing and 
maintaining adequate oxygenation. A 
saturation monitor should be employed and 
 Sucking  w ound of the  c hest 
 A pneumothorax will also result from a penetrat-
ing wound of the chest wall produced, for example, 
by a knife stab or gunshot wound. The lips of the 
wound may also have a valvular effect so that air 
is sucked into the cavity at each inspiration, but 
cannot escape on expiration, thus resulting in 
another variety of tension pneumothorax, which 
has been vividly named a sucking wound of the 
chest.  
 Haemothorax 
 A haemothorax often accompanies a chest injury 
and may be associated with a pneumothorax ( hae-
mopneumothorax ). The bleeding is usually from 
an intercostal artery in the lacerated chest wall or 
from underlying contused lung, but on occasions 
may result from injury to the heart or great vessels. 
Retropleural bleeding may compress the thoracic 
viscera without breaching the pleural cavity.  
 Traumatic  a sphyxia 
 With severe crush injuries of the chest, the sudden 
sharp rise in venous pressure produces extensive 
bruising and petechial haemorrhages over the 
head, neck and trunk. There are often subcon-
junctival haemorrhages and nasal bleeding. Any 
 Figure 10.2   Tension pneumothorax 
produced by a valvular tear in the 
lung. Air is sucked into the pleural 
cavity on inspiration and cannot 
escape on expiration.  
Apex beat displaced medially
Hyper-resonant
percussion
note over
pneumothorax;
no breath sounds
Trachea
deviated
away
Air sucked
into pleural
cavity on
inspiration

The chest and lungs 63
  •   Strapping of the chest wall inhibits thoracic 
movement and encourages pulmonary 
collapse; it should be avoided. 
 Flail  c hest 
  •   Support the ﬂ ail segment in an emergency by 
means of a ﬁ rm pad held by strapping. This 
stops the paradoxical movement and air 
shunting.  
  •   Endotracheal intubation and  positive - pressure 
ventilation on admission to hospital will stop 
the paradoxical movement, as the chest wall 
now moves as a single functional unit. The 
treatment is continued for about 10 days until 
ﬁ xation of the chest wall occurs. In cases of 
gross instability, wire ﬁ xation of the chest wall 
may be necessary.  
  •   Tracheostomy may be indicated for prolonged 
periods of intubation. 
 Pneumothorax 
 A traumatic pneumothorax requires insertion 
of a chest drain, in contrast to a spontaneous 
pneumothorax, which may resolve without 
intervention. 
intubation and ventilation considered when 
the oxygen saturation is below 80% or  P co 2 
above 7.3  kPa (55  mmHg). 
  •   Sucking wounds.     These should be closed. In 
an emergency, a dressing pad should be 
applied over the hole and secured in place.  
  •   Lung expansion.    This should be achieved by 
insertion of an intercostal drain with 
underwater drainage.  
  •   Stop bleeding.     A haemothorax should be 
drained, and large haemothoraces may require 
multiple drains, all placed on underwater seals 
as for a pneumothorax (Figure  10.3 ). 
Continued bleeding is an indication for an 
exploratory thoracotomy. 
 Simple  r ib  f racture 
  •   Pain relief may be achieved by analgesics, 
particularly non - steroidal anti - inﬂ ammatory 
drugs (NSAIDs), by the injection of local 
anaesthetic in the paravertebral region to 
block the intercostal nerves or by a thoracic 
epidural block, which can be maintained by 
means of an infusion into an indwelling plastic 
catheter. 
  •   Vigorous physiotherapy  is administered to 
encourage deep breathing.  
 Figure 10.3   Underwater seal chest 
drain in the treatment of a 
pneumothorax. Air escapes from the 
pleural cavity on expiration but cannot 
be sucked back through the water 
seal on inspiration (as shown here). 
The water bottle is placed below the 
level of the chest to ensure ﬂ uid does 
not reﬂ ux into the thoracic cavity.  
Underwater seal
below level
of chest
Underwater 
seal 
prevents
air being
sucked in

64 
The chest and lungs
  •   Inhalation pneumonitis, e.g. inhaled vomit or 
pus. 
  •   Inhaled foreign body, e.g. at dental extraction. 
  •   Infected cyst. 
  •   Infected pulmonary infarct. 
  •   Blood borne, secondary to staphylococcal 
septicaemia.  
  •   Secondary to pulmonary infection, e.g. 
pneumonia, bronchiectasis or tuberculosis, 
especially in immunocompromised patients. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 The history may suggest the primary cause. There 
is usually acute fever and toxaemia, although the 
disease may sometimes run a more chronic 
course. If the abscess ruptures into the bronchus 
there is a foul productive cough. 
 Complications 
  •   Empyema. 
  •   Metastatic cerebral abscess (a feared 
complication of all pulmonary sepsis). 
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   Chest X - ray shows a solid opacity or a ﬂ uid 
level if the abscess communicates with the 
bronchus. 
  •   Bronchoscopy may demonstrate the primary 
cause if this is a foreign body or carcinoma.  
  •   Computed tomography (CT) will accurately 
locate the abscess and conﬁ rm the diagnosis. 
Percutaneous CT - guided drainage may be 
possible and effective. 
 Treatment 
 The underlying cause may itself require treat-
ment. The mainstay of therapy for lung abscess is 
postural drainage combined with antibiotics. 
Surgical excision is required only for the small per-
centage who fail to respond to this therapy, when 
some underlying cause needs to be treated, or 
when, in a late case, there is a complicating 
empyema that requires drainage. 
 Empyema 
 An empyema (pyothorax) is a collection of pus in 
the pleural cavity. 
 Tension  p neumothorax 
 Urgent emergency treatment is required by insert-
ing an  intercostal tube drain . 
 A  chest drain  is inserted into the pleural cavity 
via an intercostal space, the ﬁ fth space being pre-
ferred. After cutting through the overlying skin in 
the midaxillary line, the remaining insertion is 
done by blunt dissection into the pleural cavity, at 
which point the drain is inserted and connected 
to an underwater seal. When the pressure in the 
pleural space is increased on expiration, the air 
escapes through the water but air cannot enter the 
chest at inspiration as this is prevented by the 
water seal. This essential safety valve has been a 
most important step in the development of safe 
thoracic surgery (Figure  10.3 ). 
 A  bronchopleural ﬁ stula , due to rupture of a 
bronchus into the pleural space, should be sus-
pected if the pneumothorax persists. It may 
require a thoracotomy to repair.  
 Penetrating  w ounds of the  c hest 
 Immediate application of a dressing is required in 
order to prevent suction of air into the pleural 
space. Minor cases require only wound toilet with 
an underwater intercostal drain to allow escape of 
any accumulated blood or air in the pleural space. 
Large wounds demand formal exploration with 
excision or repair of damaged lung tissue, repair 
of any diaphragmatic tear and exclusion of injury 
to underlying abdominal viscera.  
 Cardiac  t amponade 
 This may follow open or closed injuries to the 
chest or upper abdomen. It is characterized by a 
rise in venous pressure and a fall in arterial pres-
sure. The heart sounds are distant and the cardiac 
shadow enlarged on chest X - ray. Treatment is 
emergency surgical exploration; the pericardium 
is opened, the blood is evacuated and the cardiac 
laceration sutured.   
 Lung  a bscess 
 Aetiology 
  •   Bronchial obstruction secondary to carcinoma 
of the lung.  

The chest and lungs 65
chronic cases, the ﬁ brous wall of the empyema 
cavity may require excision (decortication).    
 Lung  t umours 
 Classiﬁ cation 
 Benign 
  •   Adenoma. 
  •   Carcinoid (occasionally malignant). 
  •   Hamartoma. 
  •   Haemangioma (rare). 
 Malignant 
 1  Primary 
 a  squamous cell carcinoma; 
 b  adenocarcinoma; 
 c  small - cell carcinoma; 
 d  large - cell carcinoma; 
 e  carcinoid. 
 2  Secondary 
 a  carcinoma (especially breast, kidney); 
 b  sarcoma (especially bone); 
 c  melanoma. 
 Adenoma 
 Pathology 
 Adenomas account for about 4% of lung primary 
tumours. Two - thirds of the patients are female, 
and the average age is 40 years. 
 The tumour arises from the mucosa usually 
of the main bronchus as a cherry - red swelling, 
which ulcerates and bleeds (hence the common 
presenting symptom of haemoptysis). The growth 
may eventually block the bronchus with resulting 
pulmonary collapse and infection. Although 
slow growing, it cannot be considered benign, as 
inﬁ ltration and metastases may eventually take 
place. 
 Occasionally, serotonin (5 - hydroxytryptamine) 
is secreted, producing attacks of ﬂ ushing and 
dyspnoea (carcinoid syndrome; see Chapter  23 , 
p. 197). 
 Treatment 
 Removal 
by 
local 
resection, 
lobectomy 
or 
pneumonectomy. 
 Aetiology 
  •   Underlying lung disease: pneumonia, 
bronchiectasis or carcinoma of the lung; 
tuberculous empyema is now uncommon.  
  •   Penetrating wounds of the chest wall or 
infection following a transthoracic operation.  
  •   Perforation of the oesophagus. 
  •   Transdiaphragmatic infection from a 
subphrenic abscess.  
  •   Haematogenous. 
 Complications 
  •   Rupture into a bronchus (bronchopleural 
ﬁ stula). 
  •   Discharge through the chest wall (empyema 
necessitans).  
  •   Cerebral abscess. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 There is usually a history of the underlying cause. 
The patient is febrile, toxic and may be anaemic. 
There are signs of ﬂ uid in the chest on the affected 
side. In chronic cases, ﬁ nger clubbing may be 
present. 
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   Full blood count will reveal a leucocytosis.  
  •   Chest X - ray  demonstrates an effusion and 
there may be evidence of the underlying lung 
disease. 
  •   Bronchoscopy  is useful in determining the 
primary pathology.  
  •   Aspiration  of the chest conﬁ rms the diagnosis 
and identiﬁ es the responsible bacteria. 
The infecting organisms are usually 
 Pneumococcus ,  Streptococcus or 
 Staphylococcus . 
 Treatment 
 An acute empyema may respond to repeated aspi-
rations together with antibiotic therapy, based on 
the sensitivity of the responsible organism and 
given both systemically and into the pleural cavity. 
If the condition fails to respond to this treatment, 
drainage by means of excision of a rib overlying 
the empyema becomes necessary. An intercostal 
tube is inserted and progress followed by repeated 
sinograms to ensure adequate drainage and ulti-
mate obliteration of the empyema cavity. In more 

66 
The chest and lungs
rhage or abscess formation. The lung segments 
distal to the occlusion may show collapse, bron-
chiectasis or abscess formation.  
 Microscopic  a ppearance 
  •   Squamous cell carcinoma (40%) . Mostly poorly 
differentiated and arising in an area of 
squamous metaplasia of bronchial epithelium. 
Following successful resection, new primaries 
are common (10%), reﬂ ecting the  ‘ ﬁ eld 
change ’ . 
  •   Adenocarcinoma (30%) . Very rapidly growing 
tumour often found in the periphery of the 
lung, associated with a large ﬁ brotic 
(desmoplastic) reaction. This type of lung 
primary often occurs in non - smokers. 
  •   Large - cell carcinoma (10%) . Large cells 
containing abundant cytoplasm and without 
evidence of squamous or glandular 
differentiation.  
  •   Small - cell carcinoma (20%) (also known as 
oat - cell carcinoma). This has neuroendocrine 
properties and produces peptides giving rise to 
paraneoplastic syndromes (Chapter  7 , p. 37). 
The tumour comprises small cells with little 
cytoplasm. It has a poor prognosis, has 
generally spread by the time of diagnosis and 
is best treated by chemotherapy. 
 Spread 
  •   Local : to pleura, left recurrent laryngeal nerve, 
phrenic nerve, pericardium, oesophagus 
(broncho - oesophageal ﬁ stula), sympathetic 
chain (Horner ’ s syndrome 1 ) and brachial 
plexus (Pancoast ’ s tumour 2 ). 
  •   Lymphatic : to mediastinal and cervical nodes. 
Compression of the superior vena cava by 
massive mediastinal node involvement 
produces gross oedema and cyanosis of the 
face and upper limbs (superior vena cava 
syndrome).  
  •   Blood : to bone, brain, liver and suprarenals. 
  •   Transcoelomic : pleural seedlings and effusion. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Carcinoma of the lung may present with the fol-
lowing features: 
 Carcinoma 
 This is the second commonest cancer affecting 
men (after prostate) and accounts for 17% of all 
new male cancers; it is responsible for some 40  000 
deaths per year in the UK, with an age - standardized 
incidence for men of around 61 per 100   000 per 
year, and 37 per 100   000 for women. In women, it 
accounts for 11% of all new cancers, and is the 
third commonest cancer in women after breast 
(31%) and colorectal cancer (12%). 
 Aetiology 
 In the UK, the main aetiological factor is the 
smoking of cigarettes. Passive smoking, air 
pollution with diesel, petrol and other volatile 
hydrocarbon fumes, asbestos exposure and 
exposure to radioactive gases such as radon in 
uranium mines are also predisposing factors. 
The incidence is higher in urban than in rural 
populations. 
 Carcinoma of the lung has an extremely poor 
prognosis, and the gravity of this condition should 
be impressed on all patients who are inveterate 
smokers. The decision whether or not to continue 
smoking depends on the patient, but there is no 
doubt that the doctor ’ s advice should be against it. 
There is an increased incidence of carcinoma 
of the lung even in patients who smoke only a 
few cigarettes a day, and this danger is greatly 
increased in patients smoking more than 20 ciga-
rettes a day for a number of years.  
 Pathology 
 There used to be a considerable predominance of 
men over women in this disease (6:1 in the 1950s), 
but the ratio is decreasing as women tend to 
smoke more and men less. In 1975 the age -
 standardized incidence of lung cancer in men was 
113 per 100   000, falling to 59 in 2007; in women, it 
has risen from 23 to 38 per 100   000 over the same 
period. 
 Macroscopic  a ppearance 
 About half the tumours arise in the main bronchi 
(particularly squamous carcinoma), and 75% are 
visible at bronchoscopy. The growth may arise 
peripherally (particularly adenocarcinoma) and 
some appear to be multifocal. 
 The bronchial wall is narrowed and ulcerated. 
Surrounding lung tissue is invaded by a pale mass 
of tumour, which may undergo necrosis, haemor-
  1  Johann Horner (1831 – 1886), Professor of Ophthalmology, Zurich, 
Switzerland. 
  2   Henry Pancoast (1875 – 1939), Professor of Radiology, University 
of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. 

The chest and lungs 67
nerve. In addition to imaging the chest, a CT 
scan should also image the liver and 
suprarenal glands for evidence of secondary 
spread. 
  •   Cytology of the sputum may identify malignant 
cells, a particularly sensitive test in proximal 
exuberant bronchial growths. 
  •   Bronchoscopy and biopsy . Bronchoscopy may 
reveal an ulcerating or exuberant growth, and 
involved lymph nodes may widen the carina. 
Brushings and washings may be taken for 
cytology in addition to biopsy of a visible 
tumour. 
  •   Fine - needle aspiration cytology  of a peripherally 
placed lesion under X - ray guidance. 
  •   Mediastinoscopy , performed through a small 
suprasternal incision, may be indicated to 
remove lymph nodes from the region of the 
carina for histological examination to aid in 
staging. Video - assisted thoracoscopic surgery 
(VATS) may also be helpful. 
  •   Pulmonary function tests to determine lung 
reserve and hence capacity to withstand 
surgery. Chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease is common in this patient group. 
Patients with a forced expiratory volume in 1 
second (FEV 1 )  > 2.5 litres can usually tolerate 
  •   Local features , namely cough, dyspnoea, 
haemoptysis or lung infection. Chest pain 
suggests spread to pleural surface.  
  •   Secondaries , which are especially likely to 
occur in the brain, suprarenal, liver and bones; 
thus, the patient may present with evidence of 
a space - occupying lesion within the skull, 
pathological fracture, jaundice and 
hepatomegaly, or adrenocortical failure.  
  •   Paraneoplastic syndromes  due to the remote 
effects of a hormone or cell product produced 
by the tumour. Small - cell carcinomas often 
produce adrenocorticotrophic hormone 
(ACTH), while squamous carcinomas may 
produce parathormone (PTH) and present 
with hypercalcaemia.  
  •   The general effects of neoplasm : loss of weight, 
anaemia, cachexia and endocrine 
disturbances. Patients may also present with 
bizarre neuropathies and myopathies.    
 Unfortunately, by the time carcinoma of the 
lung is diagnosed, most cases are incurable. About 
half the patients will be found to have inoperable 
growths when they have had no symptoms at all, 
with a lesion discovered on routine chest X - ray. 
Certainly, any middle - aged or elderly person pre-
senting with a respiratory infection that has con-
tinued for more than 2 weeks should have a chest 
X - ray, and, if the symptoms persist and nothing 
shows on the chest X - ray, he or she should undergo 
bronchoscopy. 
 Cancer of the lung is likely to lead to pulmonary 
infection and the patients often develop clubbing 
of the ﬁ ngers, which are usually nicotine stained. 
 On examination, special attention should be 
paid to evidence of stridor or hoarseness of the 
voice due to recurrent laryngeal nerve involve-
ment by the cancer. The heart may be invaded, 
resulting in atrial ﬁ brillation or cardiac failure. 
There may be enlarged lymph nodes, especially at 
the root of the neck, and signs in the chest of con-
solidation, ﬂ uid or collapse.  
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   Chest X - ray  and  thoracic CT scan  may show an 
opacity in the lung and enlargement of the 
hilar lymph nodes. The differential diagnosis 
of a mediastinal mass on radiological 
examination of the chest is listed in Box  10.1 . 
There may be paralysis of one side of the 
diaphragm due to involvement of the phrenic 
 Box 10.1   Abnormal shadow in the 
mediastinum 
  •    Retrosternal thyroid  
  •    Aneurysm of the thoracic aorta  
  •    Thymic tumour and cysts  
  •    Carcinoma of the lung with a mediastinal mass  
  •    Heart enlargement: cardiac failure; valve 
incompetence; pericardial effusion; left – right 
shunts; cardiomyopathies  
  •    Enlarged lymph nodes: sarcoid; Hodgkin ’ s 
disease; non - Hodgkin ’ s lymphoma; leukaemia; 
secondary deposits  
  •    Oesophageal enlargement: tumour; hiatus hernia; 
mega - oesophagus in achalasia of the cardia  
  •    Paravertebral abscess, particularly due to 
tuberculosis 
  •    Scoliosis 
  •    Dumb - bell tumour of neuroﬁ broma  
  •    Dermoid cyst or teratoma  

68 
The chest and lungs
vena caval obstruction. It may also give some relief 
from the irritating cough and dyspnoea resulting 
from early bronchial obstruction. 
 Cytotoxic  c hemotherapy 
 Cyclical cytotoxic therapy combined with radio-
therapy is the treatment of choice for small - 
cell tumours; there is increasing evidence that 
this approach with cisplatin - based regimens, 
together with agents such as gemcitabine and 
paclitaxel for advanced disease, is also helpful 
in the treatment of unresectable non - small - cell 
cancers. 
 Secondary  t umours 
 The lung is second only to the liver as the site of 
metastases, which may be from carcinoma (espe-
cially breast, kidney), sarcoma (especially bone) 
or melanoma. Spread may be as a result of 
either vascular deposits or retrograde lymphatic 
permeation from involved mediastinal nodes  –  
lymphangitis carcinomatosa. 
 Pulmonary metastases are so common that it 
should be routine practice to image the chest by 
plain X - ray or CT scan in every case of malignant 
disease to aid staging the primary.  
 
 
 
 
pneumonectomy; those with an FEV 1  > 1.1 
litres can usually tolerate lobectomy. 
 Treatment 
 Surgery 
 Overall, 80% of patients with non - small - cell lung 
cancer die within 1 year of diagnosis. The possi-
bility of curative surgery is assessed by biopsy 
of all suspicious nodes to exclude spread, as 
well as radiological imaging and bronchoscopy. 
Removal of a lobe, or of the whole lung, is per-
formed when there is a possibility of cure, i.e. 
small tumours with no spread; in these highly 
selected cases, the 5 year survival rate of this 
disease is of the order of 40 – 60%. Increasingly 
resection is performed by video - assisted thoracos-
copy rather than thoracotomy. 
 Sometimes, with a technically resectable early 
tumour, the patient ’ s general respiratory reserve 
is so limited by years of tobacco abuse as to make 
resection impossible.  
 Radiotherapy 
 Radiotherapy may give useful palliation for inop-
erable cases. Although it may not prolong life, it 
may stop distressing haemoptysis, relieve the pain 
from bone secondaries and produce dramatic 
improvement in a patient with acute superior 

 11 
The  h eart and 
 t horacic  a orta  
 
 Learning objectives 
 ✓  To know the principal surgical conditions of the heart and 
thoracic aorta, and how they are treated.  
 ✓  To know the surgically remediable causes of hypertension. 
over the pumping and oxygenation of the blood. 
Generally, a combination of hypothermia and car-
diopulmonary bypass is used. 
 Technique (Figure  11.1 ) 
 After full heparinization, cannulae are inserted 
into the venae cavae via the right atrium to siphon 
off the venous return from the systemic circula-
tion. The blood is then pumped through an oxy-
genator and a heat exchanger before returning 
to the systemic circulation via a cannula in the 
ascending aorta or femoral artery. This form of 
bypass will perfuse the whole body with oxygen-
ated blood at an adequate pressure while divert-
ing it from the heart and lungs. The heart may now 
be stopped and cooled by infusion via the coro-
nary arteries of cold  ‘ cardioplegic ’  solution con-
taining potassium to produce rapid cardiac arrest 
in diastole. If the aorta is cross - clamped, the heart 
may be opened in a bloodless ﬁ eld with access to 
all chambers. 
 Complications 
  •   Emboli . Air entrapped during formation of the 
bypass circuit or entering during bypass, or 
thrombus forming in the bypass circuit, may 
embolize into the cerebral and peripheral 
circulation with catastrophic results.  
  •   Haemorrhage  postoperatively may result in 
cardiac tamponade. Passage through the 
 Cardiopulmonary  b ypass 
 Background 
 Prior to the development of cardiopulmonary 
bypass, surgery on the heart was limited to proce-
dures that could be performed rapidly on a beating 
heart, such as mitral valvotomy to relieve mitral 
stenosis, where a ﬁ nger is passed blindly through 
the left atrial appendage and through the stenotic 
mitral valve. If the circulation is temporarily 
stopped at normal body temperature, organs 
suffer ischaemic damage owing to lack of oxygen, 
the extent varying according to the metabolic 
demand of the organ. The brain is the most sensi-
tive tissue in this respect and is liable to irrevers-
ible changes after 3 minutes of ischaemia. The 
spinal cord is next, followed by heart muscle, 
which will tolerate between 3 and 6 minutes of 
ischaemia at normal temperature. The tolerance 
to ischaemia can be increased slightly by lowering 
the metabolic rate by hypothermia; at 28 ° C, up to 
10 minutes of circulatory arrest can be tolerated. 
 Following the development of cardiopulmonary 
bypass, it is now possible to stop the heart for pro-
longed periods while a machine is used to take 
Lecture Notes: General Surgery, 12th edition. © Harold Ellis, 
Sir Roy Y. Calne and Christopher J. E. Watson. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

70 
The heart and thoracic aorta 
 Prosthetic  v alves 
 Many examples exist, such as the St Jude bileaﬂ et 
valve, where the valve comprises two semicircular 
tilting leaﬂ ets. Prosthetic valves may become 
obstructed by thrombus owing to turbulent ﬂ ow 
across the valve leaﬂ ets; recipients should there-
fore be anticoagulated indeﬁ nitely. Prosthetic 
valves have a risk of catastrophic failure such as 
when tilting discs dislodge or fracture.  
 Allograft and  x enograft  v alves 
 These are taken from fresh human cadaver hearts 
or from pig hearts. The valve is suspended on a 
prosthetic ring to allow it to be sewn in place; once 
implanted, the recipient does not require antico-
agulation. The lifetime of such valves is generally 
shorter than prosthetic valves, but the avoidance 
of anticoagulation makes them the preferred 
choice in the elderly.  
bypass circuit activates the clotting cascade 
and consumes platelets, thus increasing the 
risk of haemorrhage.  
  •   Hypothermic injury and ischaemia  may result 
in pancreatitis and contribute to the 
occurrence of peptic ulceration and 
mesenteric ischaemia. 
 Valvular  d isease 
 Valve  r epair and  r eplacement 
 With the advent of cardiopulmonary bypass, it 
has become possible to remove diseased valves 
and replace them with artiﬁ cial ones  –  prosthetic, 
human or xenograft. In mitral valve regurgitation, 
if the valve is not heavily distorted or calciﬁ ed, 
repair may be undertaken in preference to 
replacement. 
 Figure 11.1   Cardiopulmonary bypass.  
Aortic cannula
     sutured in
Cannula in inferior and
superior  venae cavae 
secured by external tape
Oxygenator
Heat exchanger to control 
body temperature
Gas in
Gas out
Water in
Water out
Oxygenated 'arterial' blood
Deoxygenated venous blood
Pump

The heart and thoracic aorta  71
 Mitral  s tenosis 
 Rheumatic fever  occasionally followed throat 
infection 
with 
the 
group 
A 
 β - haemolytic 
 Streptococcus . Antigens on this organism cross -
 react with various body tissues, with manifesta-
tions that included serial involvement of large 
joints (hence the name), the basal ganglia 
(Sydenham ’ s chorea 1 ) and, most importantly, the 
heart muscle and valves. Rheumatic fever has now 
become much less common in Western nations, 
perhaps because of decreased virulence of the 
organism and the widespread use of antibiotics in 
throat infections, but is still seen commonly in 
developing countries. 
 Pathology 
 Pathological changes consist of fusion of the valve 
commissures with shortening of the chordae 
tendinae. As the mitral valve opening narrows, 
blood ﬂ ow across the valve is impaired and the left 
atrium, particularly the atrial appendage, dilates 
and, with the dilatation, atrial ﬁ brillation follows. 
Thrombus may form in the atrial appendage. In 
time, the valve narrows critically and prevents 
adequate ventricular ﬁ lling, resulting in exertional 
dyspnoea.  
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Patients usually present between the 20th and 
40th year, women more commonly than men. 
The usual presenting feature is increasing 
dyspnoea due to progressive cardiac failure. 
There may be nocturnal dyspnoea and episodes 
of pulmonary oedema with recurrent lung 
infections. 
 On examination, the patient may have the 
typical malar ﬂ ush. There is a mid - diastolic 
murmur in the mitral area and the opening snap 
of the mitral valve may be audible and palpable as 
a tapping apex beat. Atrial ﬁ brillation is common 
and this is accompanied by the disappearance of 
the presystolic murmur as effective atrial contrac-
tion ceases.  
 Complications of  v alve 
 r eplacement 
  •   Valve thrombosis and embolus formation , 
especially if not on anticoagulation.  
  •   Mechanical failure with embolus of valve 
fragments, outﬂ ow obstruction or massive 
valve incompetence.  
  •   Anticoagulation  with the risks of haemorrhage 
due to over - anticoagulation. 
  •   Paraprosthetic leaks , where blood leaks 
between the artiﬁ cial valve ring and the 
outﬂ ow tract. 
  •   Infection of valve , a situation akin to infective 
endocarditis of a native valve. 
 Aortic  s tenosis 
 Stenosis of the aortic valve may be congenital or 
acquired. The acquired variety may be due to 
rheumatic heart disease, but in older patients it is 
more commonly due to calciﬁ cation of congeni-
tally bicuspid valves  –  1% of the population have 
only two aortic valve leaﬂ ets owing to fusion of 
two adjacent valve cusps. Unfortunately, no 
matter what the cause, the aortic valve, when 
stenosed, is usually grossly distorted and calciﬁ ed 
and unsuitable for valve repair; replacement is the 
treatment of choice. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 The three presenting symptoms of aortic stenosis 
are angina, dyspnoea due to cardiac failure 
and 
syncope 
(occasionally 
sudden 
death). 
Examination reveals a slow rising pulse, a low 
blood pressure and left ventricular hypertrophy, 
as shown on electrocardiogram (ECG) and 
echocardiogram. Chest X - ray may show valve 
calciﬁ cation and post - stenotic dilatation of the 
aorta. Once the gradient across the valve exceeds 
50   mmHg, or the patient is symptomatic, surgery 
is advised.  
 Treatment 
 Valve replacement on cardiopulmonary bypass. 
Coincidental coronary artery disease may be 
treated at the same time. Percutaneous aortic 
valve replacement, via the femoral artery, is cur-
rently being evaluated for the unﬁ t elderly patient.   
  1   Thomas Sydenham (1624 – 1689). After serving under Cromwell in 
the Civil War, he became a distinguished London physician. 

72 
The heart and thoracic aorta 
It is important for accurate anatomical 
diagnosis, and may be combined with 
endoluminal therapy. 
 Treatment 
  •   Angioplasty . Isolated stenoses in proximal 
vessels are most appropriate for percutaneous 
transluminal coronary angioplasty (PTCA), 
often combined with endoluminal stenting to 
prolong patency. 
  •   Surgical revascularization . For total occlusions 
or stenoses in multiple vessels, the procedure 
of choice is surgery. This involves joining an 
internal mammary (internal thoracic) artery to 
the diseased coronary artery distal to the 
blockage. For multiple grafts, autogenous 
reversed saphenous vein or radial artery can 
also be used as aortocoronary bypass conduits 
(Figure  11.2 ). 
 As with all arterial surgery for atherosclerosis, 
there is a tendency for recurrent disease with 
the passage of time. This may require repeat 
surgery, or may be amenable to endoluminal 
procedures. In young patients crippled by 
angina in whom direct bypass surgery is impos-
sible or in those with gross myocardial disease, 
cardiac transplantation may be indicated to give 
relief of symptoms and to enable a return to 
normal life. 
 Surgery for the  c omplications of 
 m yocardial  i nfarction 
 1  Acute ventriculoseptal defect . When the 
infarcted ventricular muscle is part of the 
septum and undergoes necrosis, septal rupture 
may occur. This occurs 1 – 2 weeks after 
myocardial infarction in 0.5% of patients and 
requires urgent repair, which may be achieved 
surgically or via an endovascular approach. 
Mortality is high. 
 2  Ventricular aneurysm . If the infarcted 
ventricular wall is apical, it may necrose 
and rupture, leading to rapid death by 
tamponade. Alternatively, it may heal with 
ﬁ brosis, and subsequently a ventricular 
aneurysm may form. This may require excision 
if paradoxical movement or thrombus become 
symptomatic. 
 Complications 
  •   Right heart failure. 
  •   Peripheral arterial embolism (particularly in 
atrial ﬁ brillation). 
  •   Infective endocarditis  – likely wherever there is 
a valve abnormality. 
 Treatment 
 In the absence of mitral regurgitation, evidence of 
valve calciﬁ cation or a history of emboli, an open 
valvotomy is performed to split the fused commis-
sures. If this is unsuccessful, or in the presence of 
calciﬁ ed and distorted valves or regurgitation, 
valve replacement is performed. 
 Ischaemic  h eart  d isease 
 Severe angina, due to myocardial ischaemia, 
may be alleviated by increasing the arterial supply 
to the muscle. Two treatment options exist: endo-
luminal intervention with balloon angioplasty and 
stenting, or surgical revascularization. 
 Aetiology 
 The risk factors for coronary artery disease are 
those for atheroma in general (see Box 12.2). In 
particular, raised serum cholesterol, hypertension 
and cigarette smoking each double the risk of 
coronary artery disease. The presence of all three 
increases the risk eightfold.  
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   Exercise ECG  shows whether there is 
myocardial ischaemia on exercise.  
  •   Myocardial perfusion imaging . In patients 
unﬁ t for treadmill exercise, myocardial stress 
can be induced pharmacologically using 
dobutamine or adenosine while imaging with 
magnetic resonance or 
methoxyisobutylisonitrile (MIBI).  
  •   Stress echocardiography is an alternative to 
myocardial perfusion imaging. The contraction 
of different segments of the heart wall is 
studied before and during pharmacologically 
induced stress.  
  •   Coronary arteriography  is performed on 
patients with ischaemic responses to exercise. 

The heart and thoracic aorta  73
infancy. A duct with moderate ﬂ ow tends to 
present later with exertional dyspnoea. Most com-
monly, the patient is asymptomatic and the con-
dition is diagnosed on ﬁ nding the characteristic 
machinery - like continuous murmur with systolic 
accentuation best heard over the second left space 
anteriorly. In infants, the bruit may be purely 
systolic. 
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   Chest X - ray will usually show left ventricular 
hypertrophy and increased pulmonary arterial 
markings. 
  •   Echocardiography and angiography will 
demonstrate the persistent ductus and indeed 
the cardiac catheter can often be manipulated 
through the ductus into the aorta.     
 Treatment 
 Operative ligation and division of a persistent 
ductus should be undertaken on diagnosis, and 
before irreversible pulmonary hypertension or 
cardiac 
failure 
has 
occurred. 
Percutaneous 
 Thoracic  a ortic  d isease 
 Persistent  d uctus  a rteriosus 
(Figure  11.3 ) 
 Pathology 
 If the channel between the aorta and pulmonary 
artery fails to close at the time of birth, blood will 
be shunted from the systemic circulation with its 
higher pressure into the pulmonary circulation, 
resulting in pulmonary hypertension. In time, pul-
monary vascular resistance increases and exceeds 
peripheral resistance, at which time the shunt 
reverses, deoxygenated blood from the pulmonary 
artery passes into the systemic circulation and the 
patient becomes cyanosed. It carries a risk of 
development of infective endarteritis. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 In neonates with a large duct, shunting may 
progress rapidly and cardiac failure may occur in 
 Figure 11.2   A saphenous vein graft 
from the aorta to the right coronary 
artery and a direct left internal 
mammary (thoracic) artery graft to the 
anterior interventricular coronary artery 
(also known as the left anterior 
descending (the  ‘ LAD ’ ) artery).  
Pulmonary artery
Left
internal
thoracic
artery
Anterior interventricular
coronary artery
Ascending aorta
Obstruction
Saphenous
vein graft
Right 
coronary 
artery

74 
The heart and thoracic aorta 
intermittent claudication. The danger of coarcta-
tion is due to the effects of hypertension proximal 
to the coarctation. This is often severe and is 
likely to result in cerebral haemorrhage or left 
ventricular failure. The mechanism of the 
hypertension is probably due to the relatively 
poor blood supply to the kidneys, which results 
in release of renin and renal hypertension (see 
Figure  11.5 ). 
 Patients also run the risk of developing infective 
endarteritis at the stenosis, and the lesion may 
also be the origin of an aortic dissection.  
 Clinical  f eatures 
 The diagnosis is considered in any child or young 
adult with hypertension. In addition to the hyper-
tension, the most characteristic physical sign is 
absent, diminished or delayed femoral pulsations 
in relation to the radial pulse, and is conﬁ rmed by 
a large difference in the blood pressure between 
the arm and leg. A systolic murmur is sometimes 
present posterior in the left chest, and large col-
lateral blood vessels may be seen or felt in the 
subcutaneous tissues of the chest wall.  
endovascular insertion of an occlusive device into 
the ductus may achieve a cure without surgery.   
 Coarctation of the  a orta 
 Pathology 
 This is a congenital narrowing of the aorta which, 
in the majority of cases, occurs in the descending 
aorta just distal to the origin of the left subclavian 
artery close to the obliterated ductus arteriosus. 
Indeed, the pathogenesis of coarctation formation 
may be related to the presence of abnormal ductus 
tissue. Coarctation can rarely occur in other sites 
up and down the aorta. The stenosis is usually 
extreme, only a pinpoint lumen remaining. There 
is often a coexistent cardiac anomaly. 
 Blood reaches the distal aorta via collateral 
connections between branches of the subclavian, 
scapular and intercostal arteries, and by the 
anastomosis between the internal thoracic and 
inferior epigastric arteries. Although the blood 
supply to the lower part of the body is diminished, 
patients with coarctation seldom have peripheral 
gangrene, although occasionally they complain of 
 Figure 11.3   (a) A persistent ductus arteriosus  – note its close relationship to the left recurrent laryngeal nerve. 
(b) Coarctation of the aorta.  (Reproduced from Ellis H, Mahadevan V. (2010)  Clinical Anatomy , 12th edn. Oxford: 
Wiley - Blackwell.)  
Left recurrent 
laryngeal nerve
Left vagus
nerve
Brachiocephalic trunk
Left carotid artery
Left subclavian
artery
Persistent ductus arteriosus
Pulmonary
artery
Aorta
Coarctation of aorta
(a)
(b)

The heart and thoracic aorta  75
to stretch the left recurrent laryngeal nerve leading 
to hoarseness and may obstruct the left lower lobe 
bronchus, producing an area of collapse. 
 Aneurysms of the descending thoracic aorta 
may produce pain in the back, erosion of 
vertebrae or may press on the oesophagus, pro-
ducing dysphagia and even rupture into it. Not 
surprisingly, this is the most lethal cause of 
haematemesis. 
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   Chest X - ray may show the extent of the 
aneurysm due to calciﬁ cation in its walls. 
  •   Computed tomography (CT) and magnetic 
resonance (MR) imaging are useful in 
demonstrating the size and extent of the 
aneurysm and its relation to the major vessels 
of the neck.  
  •   Aortography may be dangerous and often does 
not help in establishing the diagnosis, as the 
lumen of the aneurysm is narrowed by 
thrombus. 
  •   Echocardiography is important to diagnose 
aortic incompetence caused by aneurysmal 
dilatation of the valve ring. 
 Treatment 
 Aneurysms of the ascending aorta and arch 
require total cardiopulmonary bypass for ade-
quate surgical treatment, which consists of partial 
excision of the aneurysm and insertion of a pros-
thetic graft with appropriate junction limbs to the 
main aortic branches. Aneurysms of the descend-
ing thoracic aorta require a left heart bypass for 
their surgical treatment, which is similar in prin-
ciple to those of the arch. More recently, endovas-
cular stenting of thoracic aneurysms has proved 
to be a promising alternative.  
 Complications 
  •   Spinal ischaemia is due to loss of ﬂ ow in the 
great radicular artery (of Adamkiewicz 3 ), which 
arises from the aorta near T10 and supplies the 
lower part of the spinal cord. This results in 
paraplegia. 
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   Chest X - ray will show left ventricular 
hypertrophy, and often the ribs are notched by 
the large intercostal collateral blood vessels 
bypassing the stenotic area.  
  •   Echocardiography  in an infant to exclude 
coexisting cardiac anomalies.  
  •   Angiography  will conﬁ rm the diagnosis. 
 Treatment 
 This is desirable before complications arise and 
consists of excision of the stenotic segment and 
either end - to - end anastomosis of the proximal 
and distal aorta or, if the gap to bridge is too great, 
an arterial graft interposed between the two aortic 
ends. Balloon angioplasty is an alternative 
treatment. 
 Thoracic  a ortic  a neurysms 
 Aneurysms can occur in any place in the body (see 
Chapter  12 ) but the aorta is particularly liable to 
be affected. Aneurysms of the arch of the aorta 
were once commonly syphilitic but now are 
mainly due to Marfan ’ s syndrome, 2  medial degen-
eration or atherosclerosis. Aneurysms of the 
descending thoracic aorta may be traumatic, 
syphilitic or atherosclerotic. With the exception of 
aneurysms with a very narrow neck, those involv-
ing the thoracic aorta require some form of vascu-
lar bypass in order to treat them surgically. 
 A thoracoabdominal aneurysm is an aneurysm 
extending across the diaphragm and involving 
the coeliac, superior mesenteric and renal artery 
origins. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Aneurysms of the ascending aorta may present 
with chest pain, aortic regurgitation, obstruction 
of the superior vena cava, obstruction of the right 
main bronchus and eventually a pulsating mass 
in the front of the chest, which may even 
ulcerate through the chest wall, resulting in 
exsanguination. 
 Aneurysms of the arch of the aorta may com-
press the trachea or ulcerate into it; they are liable 
  2   Antonine Marfan (1858 – 1942), Professor of Paediatrics, H ô pital 
des Enfants Malades, Paris, France. Marfan ’ s syndrome is due to 
a mutation in the ﬁ brillin - 1 gene on chromosome 15, and mani-
fests with cardiovascular, skeletal and ocular abnormalities. 
  3   Albert Adamkiewicz (1850 – 1921), Professor of Pathology, Cracow, 
Poland. 

76 
The heart and thoracic aorta 
 Classiﬁ cation 
 Aortic dissection has been classiﬁ ed into type A 
and type B (Stanford classiﬁ cation 4 ). 
  •   Type A dissection affects the ascending aorta 
and arch and occurs in two - thirds of cases.  
  •   Type B dissection has an initial tear distal to the 
origin of the left subclavian artery and only the 
descending aorta is affected. It occurs in 
one - third of cases. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 The patient usually presents with a sudden severe 
pain in the chest, which may radiate to the arms, 
neck or abdomen, or with a tearing interscapular 
pain. In addition, there may be signs of shock, 
either from cardiac tamponade or from external 
rupture of the aneurysm. Patients with aortic dis-
section are often initially diagnosed as suffering 
from coronary thrombosis, and an ECG may not 
help differentiate between the two conditions. 
Indeed, if the coronary sinus is involved, coronary 
occlusion may have occurred. In type A dissec-
tions, the aortic valve may become incompetent 
as the root dilates. 
 As the dissection in the wall of the aorta 
progresses, the origins of the main arterial 
branches may become blocked, producing pro-
gression of symptoms and the disappearance and 
reappearance of peripheral pulses. If the renal 
vessels are involved, there may be haematuria or 
anuria. One or both femoral pulses may disappear 
with leg ischaemia. Mesenteric ischaemia is 
usually diagnosed late. 
 Neurological abnormalities may also occur, 
ranging from hemiparesis, as a result of occlusion 
of the carotid and subclavian artery origins, to 
paraesthesia, as a result of peripheral nerve 
ischaemia; Horner ’ s syndrome 5 (see Chapter  17 , 
p. 142 ) may occur owing to interruption of the 
cervical sympathetic chain, and hoarseness 
may 
complicate 
recurrent 
laryngeal 
nerve 
involvement.  
 Aortic  d issection (Figure  11.4 ) 
 Pathology 
 An aortic dissection (dissecting aneurysm) con-
sists of a tear in the wall of the aorta, usually in the 
region of its arch, which allows blood to dissect 
along a plane of cleavage in the media. The false 
passage thus formed may rupture internally into 
the true lumen, thus decompressing itself and 
resulting in an aorta with a double lumen. Such a 
patient may survive. More commonly, the aneu-
rysm ruptures externally into the pericardium, 
producing cardiac tamponade, or into the 
mediastinum or abdominal cavity with fatal 
haemorrhage. 
 Aetiology 
 Cystic medial degeneration weakens the wall of 
the aorta and enables the splitting to occur. It is 
usually found in atherosclerotic, hypertensive 
subjects. 
 Figure 11.4   Classiﬁ cation of aortic dissection.  
Type A
Type B
False
lumen
Intimal
tear
  4   Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA. The 
Stanford classiﬁ cation was described in 1970 by Norman 
Shumway and colleagues in the Division of Cardiovascular 
Surgery. 
  5  Johann Horner (1831 – 1886), Professor of Ophthalmology, Zurich, 
Switzerland. 

The heart and thoracic aorta  77
 Primary  h ypertension 
 Primary hypertension is a disease of middle - aged 
and elderly patients, which tends to run in fami-
lies. It is a very common condition and may be 
compatible with few symptoms and a long life. 
There is an increase in the peripheral resistance 
due to arteriolar thickening or spasm, but, as arte-
riolar thickening is a consequence of hyperten-
sion, the argument as to which is the primary 
factor has not been resolved in this disease. 
 The kidney may be an important contributor 
to the hypertension when its blood supply is 
impaired owing to arteriolar narrowing. There is a 
vicious circle of arteriolar spasm, arteriolar thick-
ening, renal ischaemia and further hypertension, 
which leads to a progressive increase in the sever-
ity of this condition.  
 Secondary  h ypertension 
 This may be due to the following factors: 
 1  Renal disease. 
 2  Coarctation of the aorta (p. 74) . 
 3  Endocrine causes: 
 a  phaeochromocytoma (Chapter  40 , p. 333 ); 
 b  Cushing ’ s syndrome (Chapter  40 , p. 331 ); 
 c  Conn ’ s syndrome (Chapter  40 , p. 332 ). 
 4  Raised intracranial pressure (Chapter  15 , p. 117 ). 
 5  Toxaemia of pregnancy. 
 Renovascular  h ypertension 
 Mechanism of  r enal  h ypertension 
(Figure  11.5 ) 
 Ever since the experiments of Goldblatt, 6  it has 
been known that impairment of blood perfusion 
to the kidneys can result in hypertension which, 
if the renal perfusion remains impaired, may 
become permanent, owing to the vicious circle 
that has already been mentioned. The mechanism 
of renal hypertension appears to be the release of 
the hormone renin from the juxtaglomerular cells 
in the renal cortex. Renin acts on the serum 
protein angiotensinogen to give rise to a physio-
logically inactive decapeptide, angiotensin I. 
Angiotensin I is then converted to the octapeptide 
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   Chest X - ray  shows widening of the 
mediastinum in two - thirds of patients and a 
small left pleural effusion.  
  •   Contrast - enhanced CT  shows a ﬂ ap across the 
aortic lumen with distal aneurysmal change.  
  •   Echocardiography  may also demonstrate a ﬂ ap 
and aortic regurgitation.  Transoesophageal 
echocardiography (TOE)  is probably the 
investigation of choice. 
 Treatment 
 Once the diagnosis is made, treatment depends 
largely upon the type of dissection. 
 Type A dissections  should be managed surgically 
because of the risk that the dissection may extend 
back across the aortic root resulting in tampon-
ade, and to correct aortic incompetence where 
present. The surgery aims to interpose a pros-
thetic tube graft at the aortic root to prevent 
further dissection (and tamponade), and carries a 
high mortality. 
 Type B dissections  are usually treated conserva-
tively, and hypotensive drugs are used, reducing 
systolic pressure to 100 – 120  mmHg to prevent 
further extension of the dissection. The dissected 
portion may then thrombose. Any organ, limb or 
mesenteric ischaemia resulting from the dissec-
tion is treated by revascularization. An aneurysm 
resulting from a chronic dissection may require 
treatment if it enlarges or produces pressure 
symptoms. In cases where there is evidence of 
impending aortic rupture or non - perfusion of a 
visceral artery, endovascular placement of a 
covered stent (a stent – graft) is appropriate. The 
stent is placed to cover the proximal entry into the 
false lumen, and to re - establish blood ﬂ ow through 
the collapsed true lumen. 
 Hypertension 
 This section summarizes raised blood pressure in 
its surgical aspects. 
 Classiﬁ cation 
  •   Primary (cause unknown). 
  •   Secondary (causes at least partially 
understood). 
  6   Harry 
Goldblatt 
(1891 – 1977), 
Professor 
of 
Experimental 
Pathology, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, 
USA.  

78 
The heart and thoracic aorta 
 ACE inhibitors, such as captopril, are effective at 
reducing blood pressure in patients with renal 
disease. However, when renal insufﬁ ciency is due 
to renal artery stenosis, their use will exacerbate 
the impaired perfusion and result in deterioration 
in renal function. 
 Unilateral  r enal  d iseases 
 p roducing  h ypertension 
 These are of particular surgical importance, as 
they may sometimes be amenable to curative 
treatment either by nephrectomy or by recon-
structive procedures on the kidney or on its blood 
supply. 
angiotensin II by the action of angiotensin -
 converting enzyme (ACE). Angiotensin II is a 
potent vasoconstrictor and causes an increase in 
peripheral resistance (and thus hypertension) and 
acts on the suprarenal cortex to release aldoster-
one (which causes sodium retention). The features 
of hypertension are thus set in motion. This renin 
mechanism is protective as far as the kidney is 
concerned and is one method by which the kidney 
maintains its circulation. How important renin is 
in the maintenance of normal blood pressure has 
not been established. All forms of renal parenchy-
mal disease are likely to produce hypertension. 
Especially common are chronic glomerulonephri-
tis and chronic pyelonephritis. 
 Figure 11.5   Mechanism of renal hypertension.  
Asp
Arg
Val
Tyr
Ile
His
Phe
Pro
His
Leu
Asp
Arg
Val
Tyr
Ile
His
Phe
Pro
Proteases
Reduced
blood
flow
Renin
from 
juxtaglomerular cells
Angiotensinogen
Circulating protein
Angiotensin I
Deactivated
Angiotensin-converting
enzyme
Angiotensin II
Angiotensin III 
Vasoconstriction
Hypertension

The heart and thoracic aorta  79
  •   Diethylene - triamine - penta - acetic acid (DTPA) 
radionuclide scan will show renal blood ﬂ ow 
difference, especially if the patient has been 
given an ACE inhibitor such as captopril to 
exaggerate the condition. 
 Treatment 
  •   Angioplasty . In suitable cases, a localized 
stenosis can be dilated by a balloon 
angioplasty. This is particularly successful in 
ﬁ bromuscular dysplasia. 
  •   Renal artery bypass . If the stenosis is fairly 
proximal and the distal vessels relatively 
healthy, it may be possible to remove the 
stenotic portion of the artery or bypass it, e.g. 
on the left side by joining the splenic artery to 
the renal artery distal to the blockage.  
  •   Autotransplantation of the kidney may be 
performed after excising the stenosed portion 
of the artery.  
  •   Unilateral nephrectomy is appropriate when 
the small intrarenal branches of the renal 
artery are also diseased. 
 Other lesions of the renal arteries, for instance 
aneurysm and congenital bands, may also result 
in hypertension, which can be cured by unilateral 
nephrectomy or direct arterial surgery. 
 It should be noted that, since the introduction 
of effective antihypertensive drugs (in particular 
ACE inhibitors), enthusiasm for surgery in 
unilateral renal disease has waned, apart from 
patients in whom the kidney ’ s function is grossly 
impaired. 
 Other unilateral renal diseases can cause hyper-
tension, including hydronephrosis, tuberculosis 
of the kidneys or tumours of the kidney; nephrec-
tomy is indicated in these conditions. 
 
 
 
 Unilateral  p yelonephritis 
 Rarely, pyelonephritis may affect one kidney only, 
especially if this kidney has been the site of previ-
ous trauma or of congenital malformation, if the 
ureter on that side has been blocked or if there is 
unilateral hydronephrosis. If the condition is diag-
nosed early, before the hypertension has reached 
the chronic established stage and before hyper-
tensive changes have taken place in the opposite 
kidney, removal of the affected kidney may result 
in a return to normal blood pressure. Presence of 
a functioning contralateral kidney should be con-
ﬁ rmed ﬁ rst. 
 Renal  a rtery  s tenosis 
 This is a fairly common cause of secondary hyper-
tension. It occurs in two age groups: the elderly 
(70%), in whom the cause of the narrowing is 
atherosclerosis, and young people, especially 
women, in whom the cause appears to be the 
thickening of the intima and media by hyperplasia 
of 
collagen 
and 
muscle 
 –  
ﬁ bromuscular 
dysplasia.  
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   Arteriography  should be performed in young 
patients, in whom ﬁ bromuscular dysplasia 
characteristically shows up as a string of beads 
in the distal part of the renal artery and is 
bilateral. 
  •   Duplex scanning  may permit diagnosis of a 
signiﬁ cant stenosis. 
  •   Renin estimation  should be performed by 
selective renal vein catheterization. Renin 
concentration is at least 1.5 times higher on 
the affected side.  

 12 
Arterial  d isease  
 
 Learning objectives 
  ✓   To know the types of arterial trauma and their management. 
  ✓   To know the causes of arterial aneurysms, their manifestation and 
treatment. 
  ✓   To have knowledge of occlusive arterial disease (including 
thromboembolic disease), its risk factors, manifestations and 
treatment options. 
and the intimal layer tears, while the 
surrounding adventitia remains intact. The 
intima then buckles and causes a localized 
stenosis, which may or may not result in 
thrombosis or dissection.  
  •   Full thickness tear . All layers of the artery are 
divided, and this may be partial or complete. 
Partial tears bleed copiously, while complete 
division of the artery often results in 
contraction and spasm of the divided vessel 
with surprisingly little blood loss. 
 Consequences of  i njury 
  •   Haemorrhage . This may be concealed or overt. 
  •   Thrombosis . Immediate or delayed. 
  •   Arteriovenous ﬁ stula formation . 
  •   False (pseudo - ) aneurysm formation (see p. 81) . 
  •   Arterial dissection . 
  •   Compartment syndrome . Ischaemic muscle 
swells and if the muscle is contained by a 
ﬁ brous fascial compartment, such as in the 
forearm or in the lower leg, the swelling further 
exacerbates the ischaemia by an increased 
compartment pressure. Volkmann ’ s 1 ischaemic 
contracture (Chapter  17 , p. 141 ) is a result of 
compartment syndrome. 
 Arterial  t rauma 
 Traumatic arterial injuries are due to either closed 
(blunt) trauma or open (penetrating) trauma. 
 Closed  i njuries 
 The artery is injured by extraneous compression 
such as a crush injury, fractures of adjacent bones 
with displacement of the artery (e.g. supracondy-
lar fracture of the humerus in children) or joint 
dislocation. Iatrogenic causes include a tight 
plaster of Paris cast in which no allowance has 
been made for post - traumatic oedema.  
 Penetrating  i njuries 
 Penetrating arterial injuries may result from 
gunshot wounds, stabbing, penetration by bone 
spicules in fractures or iatrogenic injury.  
 Types of  a rterial  i njury 
  •   Mural contusion  with secondary spasm.  
  •   Intimal tear . This injury is usually a result of 
distraction, in which the artery is stretched 
Lecture Notes: General Surgery, 12th edition. © Harold Ellis, 
Sir Roy Y. Calne and Christopher J. E. Watson. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
  1   Richard von Volkmann (1830 – 1889), Professor of Surgery, Halle, 
Germany. 

Arterial disease 81
 Clinical  f eatures 
 The features of arterial injury may be those of 
acute ischaemia, haemorrhage or often both. 
Acute ischaemia is characterized by: 
  •   pain (in the limb supplied, starting distally and 
progressing proximally);  
  •   pallor; 
  •   pulselessness; 
  •   paraesthesiae; 
  •   paralysis; 
  •   coldness. 
 Haemorrhage may be overt (bright red blood) or 
concealed (e.g. closed limb fractures). Symptoms 
are those of rapidly developing hypovolaemic 
shock (cold, clamminess, tachycardia, hypoten-
sion, loss of consciousness, oliguria progressing to 
anuria).  
 Treatment 
 Closed  i njuries 
  •   Treat causative factors.     If the cause of 
ischaemia is a tight plaster cast, remove or 
split the cast. If it is due to a supracondylar 
humeral fracture, the peripheral pulses should 
return when the fracture is reduced; if the 
radial pulse does not return rapidly, surgical 
exploration is indicated.  
  •   Angiography.  An angiogram will reveal 
whether ischaemia is due to spasm, intimal 
tear or arterial disruption. It may be performed 
in a radiology suite or intraoperatively. Partial 
tears in large vessels may be amenable to 
intravascular stenting.  
  •   Operative exploration.     If a limb fails to 
reperfuse after a fracture or dislocation is 
reduced, and angiography is unhelpful or 
shows a tear or block, exploration is 
mandatory. Either the affected vessel is 
repaired directly or a segment of saphenous 
vein interposed to replace the injured area. 
  •   Fasciotomy.   Muscle ischaemia leads to 
swelling and compartment syndrome. The 
fascial compartments should be opened by 
splitting the deep fascia widely to relieve 
compartment pressure. 
 Open  i njuries 
  •   Direct compression.    Primary measures to 
staunch haemorrhage should include direct 
pressure. The use of a proximal tourniquet 
usually exacerbates blood loss, as it seldom 
generates sufﬁ cient pressure to occlude 
arterial ﬂ ow, but does block venous return, 
which results in increased blood loss.  
  •   Resuscitation.  Replace blood loss. 
  •   Exploration.   Small vessels that are part of a 
large collateral supply may be sacriﬁ ced and 
ligated above the site of injury. Partial tears 
may be directly sutured or closed with a vein 
patch; complete division often requires 
interposition of reversed saphenous vein. The 
use of prosthetic material after trauma is 
avoided if possible owing to the risk of 
contamination and graft infection. 
 Aneurysm 
 An aneurysm is an abnormal permanent dilata-
tion of an artery or part of an artery or the 
heart. Morphologically, it may be fusiform or 
saccular. The term aneurysm is also used to 
describe any condition in which there is a sac 
communicating with an arterial lumen, in which 
case the aneurysms are false or pseudo - 
aneurysms. These false aneurysms may also 
involve arteriovenous ﬁ stulae (arteriovenous 
aneurysms) or arterial dissections (also known as 
dissecting aneurysms). 
 Aneurysm  t ypes (Figure  12.1 ) 
 Saccular  a neurysms 
 A dilated portion of the artery joins the main 
lumen by a narrow neck. Mycotic aneurysms are 
often of this sort, in which infection causes a local 
weakness of the wall, which gives way to aneurys-
mal dilatation. 
 Fusiform  a neurysm 
 A generalized dilatation of the artery exists, and 
this is the commonest type of aneurysm to affect 
the abdominal aorta.  
 False ( p seudo - )  a neurysm 
 Blood leaks out of an artery and is contained by 
the surrounding connective tissue lined with 
thrombus. The resultant blood collection commu-
nicates with the artery so it is pulsatile and 

82 
Arterial disease
expansile. It will either thrombose spontaneously 
or enlarge and rupture.  
 Arteriovenous  a neurysm 
 A communication between adjacent artery and 
vein; this is a false aneurysm intervening between 
artery and vein. 
 Aneurysm  c omplicating  a rterial 
 d issection 
 Blood forces a passage through a break in the 
intima of a vessel, creating a separate  ‘ false ’  
channel between the external layers of the arterial 
wall. This false channel may then either rupture 
back into the lumen, or rupture out of the adven-
titia externally. Over the arterial segment where 
ﬂ ow is extraluminal, vessels taking their origin 
from the true lumen will be deprived of blood (see 
aortic dissection, Chapter  11 , p. 76 ). 
 Aetiology 
 Congenital 
 The small berry (or saccular) aneurysms that 
occur intracranially on the circle of Willis 2 (see 
p. 110)  are thought to result from congenital 
weakness of the cerebral arteries. Arteriovenous 
aneurysms and ﬁ stulae in the limbs may also be 
congenital.  
 Degenerative 
 Atheromatous degeneration of the vessel wall is 
the commonest cause of a true aneurysm.  
 Traumatic 
 Penetration or weakening of the arterial wall by a 
penetrating wound such as a bullet or knife, or 
iatrogenic injury during catheterization for angi-
ography and angioplasty, may result in a true 
aneurysm or false aneurysm, possibly with an 
associated arteriovenous ﬁ stula. 
 Infection 
 Mycotic aneurysms, previously seen in the tho-
racic aorta of patients with tertiary syphilis, are 
now more commonly seen in the abdominal aorta 
or femoral artery as a consequence of salmonel-
losis, or resulting from mycotic emboli in patients 
with infective endocarditis. Patients with immu-
nodeﬁ ciency, whether as a result of immunosup-
pression for organ transplantation or as a result of 
human immunodeﬁ ciency virus (HIV) infection, 
are prone to mycotic aneurysms from unusual 
bacteria or fungi. 
 Figure 12.1   (a – d) Types of aneurysms.  
True
(a)    
(b)
False
Dissecting
Saccular
Fusiform
Arteriovenous
(c)
(d)
  2   Thomas Willis (1621 – 1675), Physician and Anatomist, ﬁ rst in 
Oxford then in London, UK.  

Arterial disease 83
 Inﬂ ammatory 
 This is a subtype of atherosclerotic and mycotic 
aneurysms in which there is an immune response 
to components in the aneurysm wall resulting in 
a dense inﬂ ammatory response with a rind of 
inﬂ ammatory tissue surrounding the lumen. In 
non - infective cases, this may subside with corti-
costeroid treatment. It is also associated with ret-
roperitoneal ﬁ brosis and ureteric obstr uction. The 
erythrocyte sedimentation rate is raised.   
 Clinical  f eatures of  t rue 
 a neurysms 
 The clinical features of an aneurysm depend on its 
location, and it may present with symptoms far 
distant from the aneurysm itself. Abdominal aortic 
aneurysms may present with back pain but they 
are frequently asymptomatic and picked up inci-
dentally during the course of investigation for 
some other condition. The patient may feel a sen-
sation of abdominal bloating or may have noticed 
the pulsatile swelling, or may present with distal 
emboli from the sac contents. When the periph-
eral arteries are involved, it is more common to 
ﬁ nd a complaint of a pulsatile mass or distal 
ischaemia. On examination there is a dilatation 
along the course of the artery. The aneurysm itself 
is both pulsatile and expansile. In smaller periph-
eral aneurysms, direct compression may empty 
the sac or diminish its size, and pressure on the 
artery proximal to the aneurysm may reduce its 
pulsation. If the feeding vessel has a narrow 
oriﬁ ce, there may be a thrill and bruit, and if there 
is an arteriovenous communication, a machinery 
murmur is audible.  
 Differential  d iagnosis 
  •   A dilated, tortuous, atheromatous artery; 
commonly seen in the carotid and brachial 
arteries of elderly subjects.  
  •   A mass overlying or displacing the artery 
superﬁ cially. In the abdomen, for example, the 
palpable mass of a carcinoma of the pancreas 
may have a transmitted pulsation from the 
underlying aorta but will not be expansile, 
distinguishing it from an aneurysm. 
 Complications 
  •   Rupture.   The likelihood of rupture increases 
as the diameter of the artery increases relative 
to its normal size.  
  •   Thrombosis.  Thrombus lines the wall of the 
aneurysm, and may dislodge or extend to 
completely occlude the artery. This results in 
acute impairment of the distal circulation.  
  •   Embolism.  Lining thrombus may detach and 
embolize to distal circulation, either as small 
emboli resulting in digital ischaemia or as a 
large mass of thrombus threatening the entire 
limb. 
  •   Pressure.  Adjacent structures may be eroded 
or displaced. Hence backache and sciatica are 
common in patients with large abdominal 
aortic aneurysms, and occlusion of the 
femoral vein is common with large femoral 
aneurysms. 
  •   Infection.  An aneurysm may become infected 
or arise secondary to infection and consequent 
weakening of the arterial wall. 
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   Abdominal X - ray . This may show calciﬁ cation 
in the wall of the aneurysm. A lateral ﬁ lm is 
particularly helpful in demonstrating aortic 
aneurysm calciﬁ cation. 
  •   Computed tomography (CT), magnetic 
resonance (MR) and ultrasound scanning may 
delineate the size and extent of an aneurysm, 
its relationship to other structures and provide 
evidence of leakage.  
  •   Angiography underestimates the size and 
extent of a true aneurysm, as it images the 
lumen, which is usually narrowed by 
thrombus. In addition, it may be dangerous, as 
the guidewire or cannula may perforate the 
aneurysm wall. It is useful in false aneurysms 
to identify the connection between the artery 
and the sac. 
 Treatment 
 The treatment of an arterial aneurysm depends 
on its nature (true or false), location, size and 
symptoms. Abdominal aortic aneurysms should 
be resected or stented when they become 
symptomatic or reach a size at which the risk of 
rupture outweighs the likely operative mortality 
for the individual. Aneurysms of other large 
vessels, such as the femoral and popliteal arteries, 
may be replaced with a prosthetic graft or saphen-
ous vein, whereas a small peripheral aneurysm 
can usually be excised without endangering 
the distal circulation, assuming an adequate col-
lateral circulation. False aneurysms and mycotic 

84 
Arterial disease
aneurysms are more prone to rupture and require 
urgent attention. 
 Abdominal  a ortic 
 a neurysm 
 Dilatation of the abdominal aorta is a common 
ﬁ nding in older males, and in those with a positive 
family history. Around 10% will have a coinciden-
tal popliteal aneurysm. Small aneurysms (less 
than 4  cm) are generally benign and grow slowly 
(1 – 2   mm per annum). As they enlarge, the growth 
rate increases, and the risk of symptoms increases. 
The most feared complication is rupture. This has 
an incidence of around 5% per annum once the 
aneurysm reaches 6   cm in anteroposterior diam-
eter. With operative mortality at or below 5%, 
resection of the aneurysm is advised at 5.5 – 6  cm 
as prophylaxis against rupture. 
 Management 
 Patients with small asymptomatic aortic aneu-
rysms are followed up by regular ultrasound 
scans to monitor the rate of growth. Once the 
threshold diameter is reached, or if the aneurysm 
becomes symptomatic, elective surgical resection 
is advised. Preoperative assessment includes eval-
uating the patient ’ s operative risk by screening for 
coincident cardiac disease (by resting and exercise 
ECG or echocardiography) and for carotid arterial 
disease. This information may affect the decision 
to operate. 
 Operative  m anagement 
 Surgery involves replacement of the aneurysmal 
aorta with an artiﬁ cial graft, usually made of 
Dacron. Increasingly aortic aneurysms are treated 
electively by endovascular stent – graft placement. 
The prosthetic graft is introduced via a femoral 
artery and positioned across the aneurysm. It is 
secured in the normal diameter aorta above and 
below the aneurysm with self - expanding stents. 
The aneurysm sac is thus excluded from aortic 
blood ﬂ ow and any residual blood in the sac 
thromboses. When there is not a sufﬁ cient length 
or normal diameter aorta below the aneurysm 
either a bifurcated graft is deployed with compo-
nents via both femorals or a unilateral aortoiliac 
graft is deployed and a subsequent femorofemoral 
bypass graft is performed. This minimally invasive 
approach is ideal for patients who are otherwise 
unﬁ t for surgery, such as the elderly or those with 
other signiﬁ cant comorbidity such as obstructive 
pulmonary disease. 
 Complications of  s urgery 
  •   Renal failure.  The renal arterial ostia are often 
compressed when the aorta is clamped, thus 
rendering the kidneys ischaemic for the 
duration of cross - clamping. The left renal vein 
may be ligated as it passes across the front of 
the aorta to enter the inferior vena cava and 
divided as part of the operative procedure. 
Hypotension pre -  or postoperatively may 
exacerbate the renal injury.  
  •   Distal embolization.   Thrombus from the sac 
may disperse distally and block the small 
vessels in the foot and lower leg causing acute 
ischaemia, in this context called  ‘ trash foot ’ . 
  •   Myocardial infarction.   Coronary artery disease 
is common in the population who develop 
aortic aneurysms. Cross - clamping the aorta 
during surgery dramatically increases the 
peripheral resistance against which the heart 
must work, and this extra stress, coupled with 
the metabolic stress that occurs when the legs 
are reperfused, may precipitate a myocardial 
infarct.  
  •   Graft infection.   This occurs in about 1% of 
cases and may lead to an aortoenteric ﬁ stula. 
 Ruptured  a bdominal 
 a ortic  a neurysm 
 A patient with a ruptured aneurysm usually 
presents with severe back pain, frequently with 
radiation to the groin, and the diagnosis is often 
confused with renal colic, although renal colic is 
less likely in the elderly population (60 years and 
over) than a ruptured aneurysm. Occasionally, 
only groin or iliac fossa pain may be the present-
ing symptom. Sometimes, the pain is conﬁ ned to 
the epigastrium, leading to the mistaken diagnosis 
of myocardial infarction. 
 Fifty per cent of patients die from the initial 
rupture and never reach hospital. Those who do 
reach hospital are usually profoundly shocked 
(cold, clammy, tachycardic, hypotensive) with 
generalized abdominal tenderness. A pulsatile 

Arterial disease 85
mass is an indication for immediate laparotomy. 
In most patients reaching hospital, the rupture 
is contained by the retroperitoneum, helped by 
the hypotension following rupture. Injudicious 
ﬂ uid replacement to restore normal blood pres-
sure prior to surgery may lead to further bleeding 
and breaching of the retroperitoneum, resulting 
in 
haemoperitoneum 
and 
exsanguination. 
Occasionally, the aortic aneurysm may rupture 
into the inferior vena cava (aortocaval ﬁ stula, 
diagnosed by a machinery murmur and pulsatile 
veins) or into the duodenum (aortoduodenal 
ﬁ stula, diagnosis suggested by coexistence of an 
aneurysm and brisk haematemesis or melaena).  
 Acute  a ortic  e xpansion 
 The aneurysm may expand acutely and result in 
the typical pain of rupture but without the haemo-
dynamic consequences of a bleed. Indeed, some 
patients are paradoxically hypertensive during this 
phase. At laparotomy, the aneurysm sac is found 
to be oedematous or a local rupture is found. 
 Special  i nvestigations 
 Investigation of a patient with a suspected rupture 
should be performed only if there is reasonable 
doubt about the diagnosis, as delay may be fatal. 
Investigation should answer two questions: 
 1  Does the patient have an aneurysm?    Often an 
aneurysm is difﬁ cult to feel because of 
hypotension and a large retroperitoneal 
haematoma masking the sac. A plain X - ray will 
frequently show calciﬁ cation in the wall of an 
aneurysm, especially in an aortic aneurysm. A 
dorsal decubitus ﬁ lm is particularly valuable, 
showing the calciﬁ ed sac displacing the bowel 
anteriorly. 
 2  Is the aneurysm bleeding?     A patient known to 
have an aneurysm presents with abdominal 
pain and is normotensive. In this context, a CT 
is useful to identify a leak, but no modality will 
distinguish an uncomplicated aneurysm from 
one that has acutely expanded and that may 
imminently rupture. 
 Treatment 
 Urgent surgery is indicated in anyone with a high 
suspicion of a ruptured abdominal aortic aneu-
rysm. Prior investigations are indicated only when 
doubt exists. Even with prompt surgery there is a 
signiﬁ cant mortality rate, together with morbidity, 
including acute renal failure, myocardial infarc-
tion and distal embolization.   
 Popliteal  a neurysm 
 Popliteal aneurysms are the most common 
peripheral aneurysms, and historically were the 
ﬁ rst to be diagnosed and treated surgically. They 
are usually associated with other aneurysms, and 
are frequently bilateral. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Popliteal aneurysms are generally asymptomatic. 
When they do present, it is either in association 
with distal embolization of sac contents leading to 
claudication or digital infarction, acute occlusion 
or rupture (uncommon). Examination conﬁ rms a 
prominent pulsation in the popliteal fossa, often 
extending proximally. Distal pulses should be 
sought for evidence of embolization.  
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   Duplex ultrasonography.   Delineates the extent 
and size of the aneurysm.  
  •   Angiography.  To examine the arterial tree 
distal to the aneurysm.     
 Treatment 
 Symptomatic aneurysms should be treated by 
femoral to distal popliteal bypass, with ligation 
of the feeding vessels. Aneurysms containing 
clot 
should 
be 
repaired 
electively. 
Distal 
emboli may be treated by embolectomy and 
direct intra - arterial thrombolysis at the time of 
surgery. 
 Assessing the  p atient 
with  a rterial  d isease 
 Diseases of the arteries may result in impaired 
blood supply to the limbs. It is important to 
remember when assessing a particular patient 
that arterial disease is rarely localized to the 
peripheries; 
involvement 
of 
other 
organs, 

86 
Arterial disease
 Box 12.1   Acute limb ischaemia 
  •    Pain 
  •    Pallor 
  •    Pulselessness 
  •    Paraesthesiae 
  •    Paralysis 
  •    Perishingly cold  
particularly the heart, central nervous system 
(CNS) and abdominal viscera, must be kept in 
mind. 
 The vascular diseases to be considered are the 
following: 
  •   atherosclerosis; 
  •   diabetic microangiopathy; 
  •   thromboembolism; 
  •   Raynaud ’ s phenomenon; 
  •   Buerger ’ s disease; 
  •   ergot poisoning  – usually iatrogenic from 
migraine therapies;  
  •   arterial injury due to trauma  (see p. 80) ;  
  •   cold or chemical injury. 
 By far the commonest of these is atherosclero-
sis, which may often be complicated by coexisting 
diabetes. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Accurate pathological and anatomical diagnosis 
can often be made by careful history taking and 
clinical examination. 
 History 
 The time - course of the symptoms is important, 
ranging from the insidious progression of inter-
mittent claudication of the calves over a period of 
months or years to the acute onset of ischaemia 
following an embolus. Sudden onset of pain in the 
leg suggestive of an embolus should prompt the 
student to seek a likely source such as atrial ﬁ bril-
lation, recent myocardial infarction or aortic 
aneurysm. Acute deterioration in a patient with 
claudication is suggestive of thrombosis on the 
background of atherosclerotic occlusive disease. A 
history of cold, painful hands since childhood, 
especially in the female, will be suggestive of 
Raynaud ’ s disease, and coexistence of connective 
tissue disorders, such as systemic lupus erythema-
tosus (SLE) or systemic sclerosis (scleroderma), 
favours Raynaud ’ s phenomenon. The change in 
colour (pale and deathly white, then blue and 
ﬁ nally a dusky red) precipitated by cold immer-
sion is typical. 
 Symptoms of atherosclerosis occurring in a 
young person, especially a heavy smoking male, is 
typical of Buerger ’ s disease. 
 Ergot poisoning is occasionally seen in patients 
with migraine who are consuming large doses of 
ergotamine. 
 It is important to determine the degree of hand-
icap produced by the symptoms, for the selection 
of patients for reconstructive surgery will depend 
on this. Similarly, if a patient has angina pectoris 
as well as intermittent claudication, there may be 
more handicap from the angina than from the 
claudication, and more beneﬁ t from coronary 
revascularization (Chapter  11 , p. 72 ). 
 Atherosclerosis is a generalized disease, and the 
cerebral circulation is often affected in addition to 
the circulation in the legs. Thus, a history of inter-
mittent loss of consciousness, blindness and 
hemiparesis is of importance and may indicate 
coexisting carotid artery disease.  
 Examination 
 Careful clinical examination will usually provide a 
very clear indication of the severity and nature of 
the ischaemic disease. It is important that atten-
tion should be directed to other systems of the 
body, especially the heart, and blood pressure (is 
the poor circulation due to a poor cardiac output?). 
  •   Heart rhythm.   The presence of atrial 
ﬁ brillation or other cardiac arrhythmias should 
be noted, particularly if there is a history of 
acute limb ischaemia (Box  12.1 ) or stroke. The 
heart should be examined with particular 
attention to the apex beat (ventricular 
aneurysm) and auscultated for evidence of 
valvular disease (e.g. mitral stenosis). 
  •   Inspection of limbs.   Attention is then directed 
to the legs. Inspection may reveal marked skin 
pallor, an absence of hairs, ulcers (usually 
lateral malleolus and often in the interdigital 
clefts) and gangrene, all being evidence of 
impaired circulation. Fixed staining (purpuric 
areas not blanching on pressure) in the context 
of an acutely ischaemic limb is a sign of 
irrever sible tissue injury. A tense, tender calf 
with impaired dorsiﬂ exion in acute ischaemia 

Arterial disease 87
signiﬁ es compartment compression and 
requires urgent fasciotomy in addition to 
revascularization. 
  •   Venous guttering.    The veins of the foot and leg 
in a patient with diminished arterial supply are 
often very inconspicuous compared with 
normal veins. Indeed, the veins may be so 
empty that they appear as shallow grooves or 
gutters, especially in the elevated limb.  
  •   Buerger ’ s test. 3  Buerger ’ s test involves raising 
the legs to 45 °  above the horizontal and 
keeping them there for a couple of minutes. A 
poor arterial supply is shown by rapid pallor. 
The legs are then allowed to hang dependent 
over the examination couch. The feet reperfuse 
with a dusky crimson colour in contrast to a 
normally perfused foot, which has no colour 
change. In severe cases, the foot may remain 
pale and some time may pass before the 
reactive hyperaemia appears. 
  •   Capillary return.     The speed of return of 
capillary circulation after the blanching 
produced by pressure on the nails is a very 
useful gauge of the peripheral circulation.  
  •   Skin temperature.     In addition to the pulses, 
skin temperature can be readily assessed by 
palpation, which is especially sensitive when 
the dorsum of the hand is used. A difference 
between the temperatures of one part of the 
leg and another or between the two legs can be 
ascertained when it is as small as 1 ° C. A clearly 
marked change of temperature may reveal the 
site of blockage of a main artery.  
  •   Peripheral pulses.    The peripheral pulses 
throughout the body should be examined. 
Whereas normal pulsation can be appreciated 
easily, palpation of weak pulsation requires 
practice, care and, above all, time. The 
presence of a weak pulse that is deﬁ nitely 
palpated is of considerable signiﬁ cance 
diagnostically and can be important 
prognostically, as even a weak pulse means the 
vessel is patent. 
 Careful recording of the peripheral pulses 
will often clearly delineate a blockage in the 
arterial system. For instance, the presence of a 
good femoral pulse and absence of pulses 
distal to the femoral suggests a superﬁ cial 
femoral arterial block. Ischaemia of the digits 
in the presence of all pulses including the 
radial and ulnar pulses is a typical ﬁ nding in 
Raynaud ’ s phenomenon. 
  •   Aortic pulsation.   The abdomen should be 
examined for any evidence of abnormal aortic 
pulsation; the popliteal and femoral arteries 
are also often aneurysmal and should be 
examined with this in mind. If distal pulses are 
absent, then it is possible that no aortic 
pulsation will be felt owing to thrombosis of 
the terminal aorta.  
  •   Auscultation of vessels.     In all areas where pulses 
are felt, auscultation should be performed. 
Partial blockage of arteries very often causes 
bruits, which are usually systolic in timing. 
They may even be felt as thrills. Arteriovenous 
communications will produce continuous 
bruits with systolic accentuation (machinery 
murmur) and pulsating dilated veins.  
  •   Ankle brachial pressure index (ABPI).   The ABPI 
should be measured in each leg as part of the 
routine examination. A Doppler 4 probe is held 
over the brachial artery and a blood pressure 
cuff inﬂ ated to occlude the blood ﬂ ow. As the 
blood pressure cuff is deﬂ ated, a Doppler 
signal reappears and a systolic pressure can be 
recorded. Similar pressure readings are taken 
from the dorsalis pedis and posterior tibial 
arteries with a cuff just above the ankle. The 
ABPI is the ratio of pressure at the foot pulse to 
that at the brachial artery. Values less than 0.5 
indicate signiﬁ cant ( ‘ critical ’ ) ischaemia. 
Heavily calciﬁ ed vessels, as are common in 
patients with diabetes, may be incompressible 
and give false high readings. 
  •   Exercise test.   If it is difﬁ cult to obtain a clear 
history of the exact severity of intermittent 
claudication, the patient should be taken for a 
walk with the doctor, who observes the time 
and nature of the onset of symptoms. 
Measurement of the ABPI before and after 
exercise may show a signiﬁ cant fall from 
normal after exercise, indicating a critical 
stenosis in the proximal vessels. 
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   Urine test for sugar and blood glucose to 
exclude diabetes, a common accompaniment 
of peripheral artery disease. If necessary, a 
fasting blood glucose estimation or 
  3   Leo Buerger (1879 – 1943), born in Vienna; Urologist, Mount Sinai 
Hospital, New York, NY, USA.  
  4   Christian Doppler (1803 – 1853), Professor of Physics, University 
of Vienna, Austria. 

88 
Arterial disease
glycosylated haemoglobin (HbA1c) may be 
necessary. 
  •   Haemoglobin estimation  to exclude anaemia or 
polycythaemia. Anaemia may sometimes 
precipitate angina or claudication.  
  •   Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and 
 C - reactive protein (CRP) 5  are raised in 
inﬂ ammatory and mycotic aneurysms.  
  •   Serum cholesterol  is often raised in 
atherosclerosis, and is treatable.  
  •   Electrocardiogram (ECG)  to exclude associated 
coronary disease.  
  •   Echocardiogram  to conﬁ rm valvular lesions, 
mural thrombus on an akinetic ventricular 
wall, ventricular aneurysm and atrial myxoma.  
  •   Chest X - ray . Bronchial carcinoma is a common 
ﬁ nding in end - stage vascular disease, both 
being caused by smoking. Chest X - ray also 
allows assessment of the cardiac silhouette.  
  •   Doppler ultrasound . The Doppler ultrasonic 
probe can be used to generate a waveform of 
the arterial pulse in the peripheral vessels in 
addition to allowing the measurement of 
pressure and derivation of the ABPI. The 
waveform is biphasic in normal elastic arteries, 
but becomes monophasic in hardened arteries.  
  •   Duplex ultrasonography . Combining Doppler 
ultrasound with real time produces duplex 
scanning, which is a sensitive method of 
imaging blood vessels. By measuring ﬂ ow 
patterns, it can quantify the degree of stenosis 
of a vessel because the blood velocity increases 
as it crosses a stenosis in order to maintain the 
same ﬂ ow rate. Summation of scans produces 
a result similar to angiography, but non -
 invasively. It is particularly useful in assessing 
carotid artery disease.  
  •   Arteriography  is used to determine the site and 
extent of a blockage, and is performed if 
reconstructive surgery or angioplasty is 
contemplated to identify the severity and 
distribution of disease, whether atheromatous 
plaques, stenoses or complete blocks as well as 
demonstrating run - off (Figure  12.2 ). 
  •   Angioplasty . At the time of arteriography, a 
stenosed segment of artery may be dilated 
using a specially designed balloon catheter. 
This percutaneous transluminal angioplasty 
(PTA) is now commonly undertaken for 
coronary as well as peripheral arteries. It may 
be combined with endoluminal stenting to 
maintain the patency of the dilated segment.  
  •   CT and ultrasound scanning . These are useful 
in determining the presence and extent of 
aneurysmal disease, and their relation to other 
structures. 
 Principles of  t reatment 
 There are two treatment principles underlying the 
management of patients with vascular disease; 
both come under the adage of  primum non nocere 
(ﬁ rst do no harm). 
 1  Treat handicap not disability.   Treatment must 
be tailored to the patient. If a patient 
claudicates at 500   m (the disability) but seldom 
needs to walk that distance, there is no 
handicap with this disability and therefore the 
patient needs no treatment. However, if the 
patient is young and work requires him or her 
to walk 500   m (e.g. on a post round) then the 
patient is handicapped by the disability and 
merits treatment. 
 There are usually two treatment options: 
conservative management and surgery. 
Recon structive surgery can produce dramatic 
results but at a risk.  
 2  Prophylactic surgery is appropriate only when 
the risk of the event outweighs the risk of the 
procedure.  For example, surgical repair of an 
aortic aneurysm is advised when the risk of 
rupture (which is usually fatal) outweighs the 
operative mortality. If the patient is a poor 
operative risk then the threshold for surgery 
increases. 
 Atherosclerotic  a rterial 
 d isease 
 Arterial disease may be divided into occlusive 
disease and aneurysmal disease  (see p. 81) , the 
commonest cause of both being atherosclerosis. 
Both manifestations may coexist; hence, patients 
with an abdominal aortic aneurysm frequently 
also have coronary artery disease. 
 Aetiology 
 Many factors have been shown to contribute to 
the genesis of atherosclerosis. While there is a 
  5   A marker of inﬂ ammation, C - reactive protein was so named 
because it reacts with the C polysaccharide in the wall of 
 Pneumococcus . It is not related to protein C or C - peptide.  

Arterial disease 89
familial tendency to the disease, the most common 
aetiological factors are smoking, hyperlipidaemia 
and hypercholesterolaemia, hypertension and 
diabetes (Box  12.2 ). It is a disease that predomi-
nantly affects men, although, with increasing age, 
women become more susceptible. 
 Smoking 
 There are three components of the serious effects 
of smoking in atherosclerotic disease. 
 1  Nicotine, which induces vasospasm. 
 2  Carbon monoxide, present in inhaled smoke, 
which is taken up by haemoglobin to form 
carboxyhaemoglobin, which dissociates slowly 
and is, therefore, unavailable for oxygen 
carrying, resulting in relative tissue hypoxia.  
 3  Increased platelet stickiness, with increased 
risk of thrombus formation. 
 Hyperlipidaemia 
 Raised cholesterol and raised triglycerides are 
both implicated in vascular disease and choles-
terol - lowering agents have been shown to reduce 
the risk of death from coronary artery disease in 
patients with hypercholesterolaemia.  
 Box 12.2   Risk factors for atherosclerotic 
disease 
  •    Smoking 
  •    Hyperlipidaemia 
  •    Hypertension 
  •    Diabetes mellitus  
  •    Male sex  
  •    Increasing age  
  •    Family history  
 Figure 12.2   Tracings of arteriograms. 
(a) An example of a good  ‘ run - off ’  
from the occluded superﬁ cial femoral 
artery, with a patent popliteal artery; 
this is suitable for reconstructive 
surgery. (b) The main arterial tree is 
obliterated and reconstruction cannot 
be carried out.  
Superficial
femoral
artery
Deep
femoral
artery
Tortuous
dilated
collateral
channel
Popliteal
artery
(a)
(b)

90 
Arterial disease
 Diabetes 
 Diabetic patients are prone to higher incidence 
of atherosclerosis, and also are at risk of diabetic 
microangiopathy, resulting in poor tissue per-
fusion, ulceration and gangrene, owing to both 
tissue perfusion and the neuropathy that accom-
panies diabetes. Two clinical manifestations of 
diabetic arterial disease should be distinguished: 
 1  The young diabetic patient with peripheral 
gangrene but with good pulses in the limb. 
Control of infection with the appropriate 
antibiotic and improved diabetic control, 
together with local debridement of the 
gangrenous tissue, usually results in limb 
salvage. 
 2  The elderly patient with atherosclerosis (as 
shown by absent peripheral pulses) who is 
also diabetic. Here, the diabetes makes the 
prognosis of the disease much worse. 
 Atherosclerotic  o cclusive 
 a rterial  d isease 
 Occlusive disease results in ischaemia of the end -
 organ or tissue that is supplied. In the peripheral 
arteries, the three cardinal features are exercise -
 induced pain ( intermittent claudication ), which 
may progress, as the disease progresses, to  pain at 
rest  and  gangrene . The progression is not neces-
sarily a smooth one in the early stage, with 
deterioration in claudication distance, followed 
by some improvement as collateral circulation 
develops, before further deterioration due to 
thrombosis. 
 Parallels to peripheral artery occlusive disease 
are present in the other circulatory systems.  
 Coronary  o cclusive 
 d isease 
 Angina pectoris is the coronary circulation ’ s 
equivalent of intermittent claudication, with pain 
on exertion as oxygen demand exceeds supply, 
and rest pain being analogous to unstable angina 
with resultant infarction if the coronary circula-
tion is not revascularized by either thrombolysis 
or bypass surgery.  
 Mesenteric  o cclusive 
 d isease 
 Mesenteric angina occurs when the blood supply 
to the gut is impaired and follows the ingestion of 
food. Patients present with pain after meals, a 
history of marked weight loss and fear of eating 
because of pain. Acute occlusion results in bowel 
infarction.  
 Cerebral  o cclusive 
 d isease 
 In the cerebral circulation, progressive occlusive 
disease manifests as dementia, while small emboli 
causing occlusion of small vessels may appear as 
transient ischaemic attacks, complete occlusion 
resulting in cerebral infarction in the absence of a 
collateral circulation.  
 Intermittent  c laudication 
 Intermittent claudication manifests as a gripping, 
tight, cramp - like pain in the calf on exercise, and 
usually affects one leg in advance of the other. The 
pain disappears on resting. Pain that is present on 
standing and that requires the patient to sit down 
before it is relieved is more typical of cauda equina 
compression (spinal claudication) (Chapter  16 , 
p. 133 ). 
 The pathology lies in one of the main arteries 
supplying the leg. Calf claudication is usually 
due to a lesion in the thigh, whereas buttock 
claudication is due to a reduced blood ﬂ ow 
down the internal iliac arteries, owing to a lesion 
either there or higher up in the common iliac 
artery or the aorta. Bilateral buttock claudication 
is associated with impotence, as both internal iliac 
arteries are compromised (Leriche ’ s syndrome; 6 
absent femoral pulses, intermittent claudication 
of the buttock muscles, pale cold legs and 
impotence). 
  6  Ren é Leriche (1879 – 1955), Professor of Surgery, successively at 
Lyon, Strasbourg and Paris, France. 

Arterial disease 91
 Management (Box  12.3 ) 
 Conservative  t reatment 
 If patients stop smoking and continue exercise, 
or better still are enrolled into a programme of 
supervised exercise, over one - third of patients will 
extend their claudication distance owing to the 
development of collateral vessels that bypass the 
blockage. Only one - third will deteriorate. In addi-
tion to cessation of smoking, the other risk factors 
for the development of arterial disease should 
be treated, so diabetes should be sought and 
treated aggressively and hyperlipidaemia if 
present should be treated.   
 The work performed by the legs is greater if the 
patient is overweight, so strict dieting may well 
improve exercise tolerance. If the claudication is 
limited to the calf, raising the heels of the shoes 
2   cm will relieve the work performed by the calf 
muscles, and therefore allow the patient to walk a 
greater distance. Careful chiropody is important. 
Gangrene can commence from a minor trauma 
such as faulty nail or corn cutting and may result 
in limb loss.  
 Interventional  t reatment 
 If claudication is a signiﬁ cant handicap to 
the patient, the possibility of reconstructive 
surgery or angiographic intervention should be 
considered. 
 Special  i nvestigations 
 The special investigations detailed above should 
be 
arranged, 
including 
the 
following 
in 
particular. 
  •   Arteriography , either with an intra - arterial 
cannula or by MR scan. This should include 
the aorta and iliac, femoral, popliteal and 
distal arteries on the affected side. In 
particular, this should look for short (less than 
10  cm) occlusions or signiﬁ cant (greater than 
70%) stenoses, which would be amenable to 
angioplasty. 
  •   Duplex sonography . Duplex scanning is now 
replacing angiography in many centres. It 
takes longer to perform and is more subjective 
but can give better information as to the 
signiﬁ cance of stenoses and has the beneﬁ t of 
being non - invasive. 
 Treatment  c hoices (Box  12.3 ) 
  •   Angioplasty.  Angioplasty involves inﬂ ating a 
balloon within the vessel to stretch and 
fracture the stenosis or blockage, and allow 
more blood to pass through. This is most 
successful with concentric stenoses or blocks 
in the iliac system and is less successful with 
long blocks over 10   cm, particularly in the 
distal femoral and popliteal arteries. An 
endovascular stent may be used to maintain 
patency. Angioplasty carries the risk of distal 
embolization and vessel perforation.  
  •   Thrombolysis.  When there has been an acute 
deterioration in claudication distance because 
of thrombosis occurring on a background of 
pre - existing disease, thrombolysis may be 
appropriate. A ﬁ brinolytic enzyme such as 
streptokinase or tissue plasminogen activator 
(TPA) is infused into the clot, which it 
dissolves. Complete dissolution of thrombus 
takes time, so the technique is not 
appropriate when limb viability is acutely 
threatened.  
  •   Bypass surgery.  Bypass surgery should not 
be undertaken for minimal symptoms and is 
now generally reserved for limiting 
claudication or rest pain. Complications 
include intimal dissection, distal embolization 
and graft thrombosis, which worsen the initial 
situation. 
 Box 12.3   Treatment of claudication 
 Conservative 
  •    Stop smoking  
  •    Exercise to increase the collateral circulation  
  •    Learn to live within a claudication distance, 
involving a change in lifestyle and perhaps 
employment 
  •    Weight loss  – less effort for the muscles  
  •    Raising the heel of the shoe  – less effort for the 
calf muscles  
  •    Foot care to prevent minor trauma that may lead 
to gangrene  
  •    Treat coexisting conditions such as diabetes, 
hypertension and hyperlipidaemia  
 Interventional 
  •    Angioplasty 
  •    Endoluminal stenting  
  •    Bypass surgery, but only if severely handicapped  

92 
Arterial disease
 Critical  i schaemia 
 Critical ischaemia may be deﬁ ned as rest pain, 
ulceration or gangrene associated with absent 
pedal pulses. An ABPI of less than 0.5 also signiﬁ es 
critical ischaemia  (see p. 87) .   
 Rest  p ain 
 Rest pain occurs when the blood supply to the 
leg is insufﬁ cient. Initially, the pain occurs at 
night after the foot has been horizontal for a 
few hours in bed. The patient gains relief by 
sleeping with the leg hanging out of bed. As 
the disease progresses, the pain becomes 
continuous. 
 Gangrene 
 The presence of gangrene indicates a severe 
degree of vascular impairment. Typically, it 
occurs in the toes or at pressure areas on the 
foot, particularly the heel, over the malleoli 
or on the plantar aspect of the ball of the 
hallux. Gangrene results from infection of 
ischaemic tissues. Minimal trauma, such as a 
nick of the skin while cutting the toenails or an 
abrasion from a tight shoe, enables ingress of 
bacteria into the infarcted tissues; the combina-
tion of these two factors results in clinical 
gangrene. 
 Investigation 
 Critical ischaemia needs investigating with great 
urgency to relieve the patient ’ s pain and to prevent 
irreversible damage leading to limb loss. The 
investigations are the same as those used to evalu-
ate claudication.  
 Treatment 
 Non - o perative  t reatment 
  •   Arteriography and angioplasty.    Arteriography 
should be performed with a view to 
angioplasty or stenting when possible, and to 
identify surgically reconstructable disease.  
  •   Lumbar sympathectomy.    Palliation may be 
achieved by lumbar sympathectomy, which 
increases the blood supply to the skin, and 
which can be performed percutaneously. The 
small increase in blood supply may be 
sufﬁ cient to allow an ulcer to heal but will not 
generally improve rest pain. 
 Operative  t reatment 
  •   Reconstructive surgery. Successful surgical 
reconstruction demands four things: 
 1  Inﬂ ow.    A good arterial supply up to the area 
of blockage is necessary to ensure that enough 
blood can be carried distally via the conduit 
to the ischaemic area.  
 2  Outﬂ ow (run - off).  There should be good 
vessels below the area of disease onto which 
a conduit can be anastomosed. If there is 
nowhere for the blood to go, the conduit 
will occlude.  
 3  The conduit.     A graft of saphenous vein, 
reversed or used  in situ with valve 
destruction, or an inert prosthetic material 
such as polytetraﬂ uoroethylene (PTFE), may 
be used for the conduit to take blood from 
the proximal to the distal segment of the 
artery beyond the blockage. In grafts that 
start and ﬁ nish above the knee, there is little 
to choose between PTFE and vein in terms 
of long - term patency, but a graft that 
crosses the knee is much more likely to 
remain patent if it is saphenous vein rather 
than PTFE. Infection is less likely with 
autologous vein.  
 4  The patient.    Critical ischaemia is often the 
ﬁ rst sign of the end - stage vascular disease, 
which inevitably results in death. Surgery for 
critical ischaemia has a high mortality 
reﬂ ecting this general deterioration. 
  •   Amputation.  Pain that is not controlled by 
sympathectomy or reconstructive surgery, and 
gangrene that is associated with life -
 threatening infection are indications for 
amputation of the limb or part of the limb. The 
general principle is to achieve a viable stump 
that heals primarily, and a secondary goal is to 
make the stump as distal as possible. 
 Carotid  a rtery  d isease 
(Figure  12.3 ) 
 Atheroma usually affects the bifurcation of the 
carotid artery into the internal and external carotid 
arteries. Atheromatous plaques may ulcerate 
and thrombus form on their surface. If this throm-
bus breaks off, it forms an embolus comprising 

Arterial disease 93
platelet clumps or atheromatous debris. This may 
impact in the ipsilateral retinal artery, producing 
ipsilateral blindness, or the cerebral arteries of the 
ipsilateral hemisphere, producing contralateral 
paralysis. Alternatively, the atheroma may so 
narrow the artery that blood ﬂ ow is critically 
limited or totally occluded, producing similar 
symptoms. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
  •   Amaurosis fugax.    The patient commonly 
complains of a loss of vision like a curtain 
coming down across his or her visual ﬁ eld. The 
blindness is unilateral, ipsilateral to the 
diseased carotid, and usually lasts a few 
minutes. 
  •   Cerebrovascular accidents (stroke).    Emboli in 
the carotid territory of the cerebral circulation 
of the ipsilateral hemisphere will result in 
symptoms affecting the contralateral side of 
the body, commonly loss of use of the arm. If 
the dominant hemisphere is involved, speech 
may be affected.  
  •   Transient ischaemic attack (TIA).    By deﬁ nition, 
these mimic strokes, but last less than 24 hours.  
  •   Cerebral hypoperfusion.  Bilateral severe 
stenoses may result in critical ischaemia in the 
brain such that cerebral or physical exertion 
may result in relative hypoperfusion and 
confusion or TIA. 
 Examination may reveal a bruit over the affected 
side (although very tight stenoses are often silent) 
and evidence of vascular disease elsewhere. 
During an attack, unilateral weakness affecting 
the arm or leg, dysphasia, and retinal emboli and 
infarction may be noted.  
Ipsilateral
hemisphere
Internal
carotid
artery
stenosed
External
carotid 
artery
Common
carotid
artery
Diseased
intima
removed
Ipsilateral
       eye
Contralateral
    eye
Patch
Emboli
 Figure 12.3   Symptoms and treatment of carotid artery stenosis.  

94 
Arterial disease
 Differential  d iagnosis 
 Other causes of focal neurological deﬁ cits include 
hypoglycaemia, focal epilepsy, migraine, intracer-
ebral neoplasm and emboli secondary to cardiac 
arrhythmias and valve disease.  
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   Duplex ultrasonography . This gives a non -
 invasive assessment of the degree of stenosis 
and is useful to screen for the disease.  
  •   Angiography  allows accurate assessment of the 
degree of stenosis, but carries the risk of 
dislodging thrombus and precipitating an 
embolic stroke.  
  •   MR angiography can also give good images of 
the carotid vessels and allows good 
visualization of the vertebral system to assess 
the complete cerebral perfusion. It is less 
accurate in the measurement of the degree of 
stenosis. 
  •   MR/CT of the brain  is indicated if any doubt 
over symptoms exists, since intracranial 
tumours may mimic carotid artery disease, 
and may coexist.  
  •   Cerebral reactivity . If cerebral perfusion is 
marginal, with bilateral stenoses or an 
occlusion on one side and stenosis on the other, 
the haemodynamic response to stress can be 
gauged by measuring the change in cerebral 
blood ﬂ ow using intracranial duplex scanning 
while the patient breathes CO 2 , which causes 
vasodilatation, so intracranial blood ﬂ ow 
should increase. If there is a critical stenosis 
affecting the carotid artery, and the collateral 
cerebral circulation provided by the circle of 
Willis is not intact or sufﬁ cient, there will be no 
reactive increase in perfusion.  
  •   ECG/echocardiography . This may be necessary 
to exclude a cardiac cause of cerebral 
symptoms. 
 Treatment 
 Patients who have had a recent TIA, amaurosis 
fugax or stroke with full recovery in the presence 
of an internal carotid stenosis of 70% or more 
are at high risk of a subsequent stroke in the 
months following. These patients beneﬁ t from 
endarterectomy to remove the diseased intima 
and re - establish normal carotid ﬂ ow. All patients 
should be started on aspirin upon diagnosis, 
and this should be continued indeﬁ nitely as 
prophylaxis against further events. Patients with 
asymptomatic stenoses may also beneﬁ t from 
surgery, but here the risk/beneﬁ t ratio is not as 
favourable. 
 Carotid endarterectomy  is performed as prophy-
laxis against future stroke. The diseased intima is 
removed, and peroperatively a shunt may be used 
to keep blood ﬂ owing to the brain. Increasingly 
carotid angioplasty is being performed in place of 
surgery. 
 Complications of  c arotid 
 e ndarterectomy 
  •   Death and disabling stroke.   Up to 5% of 
patients will suffer a stroke, some of whom will 
die as a consequence.  
  •   Haemorrhage.  Bleeding is common, as the 
patients are on aspirin therapy. Occasionally, 
postoperative haemorrhage requires 
re - exploration. 
  •   Hypoglossal neuropraxia.  The hypoglossal 
nerve crosses the upper part of the incision 
and may be damaged during surgery, resulting 
in a hypoglossal palsy, manifested by 
protrusion of the tongue to the ipsilateral side. 
  •   Reperfusion syndrome.  The sudden increase in 
blood ﬂ ow to the brain may result in cerebral 
oedema and ﬁ tting or haemorrhage. Good 
postoperative blood pressure control is 
therefore vital.  
  •   Restenosis.   The vessel may restenose at the 
site of the arteriotomy. To overcome this, a 
patch is usually used, made from saphenous 
vein or prosthetic material such as PTFE or 
Dacron. 
 Raynaud ’ s  p henomenon 7 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 The syndrome occurs as a result of intermittent 
spasm of the small arteries and arterioles of the 
hands (and feet). Spasm is usually precipitated 
by cold exposure. During the spasm, the hands 
go white. As the vasospasm resolves, the pallor 
changes to cyanosis and then crimson red as 
reperfusion and hyperaemia occurs, the process 
commonly taking 30 – 45 minutes. 
  7  Maurice Raynaud (1834 – 1881), Physician, Paris, France. 

Arterial disease 95
 Aetiology 
 This may be primary Raynaud ’ s disease, almost 
invariably in women, or Raynaud ’ s phenomenon, 
secondary to some other lesion, particularly con-
nective tissue disorders such as scleroderma and 
polyarteritis nodosa, the other symptoms of which 
it may precede by several years. It may occur in 
patients with cryoglobulinaemia or it can result 
from work with vibrating tools. It is important to 
exclude other causes of cold, cyanosed hands, for 
instance pressure on the subclavian artery from a 
cervical rib (sometimes complicated by multiple 
emboli arising from the damaged artery wall at the 
site of rib pressure), or blockage of a main artery 
in the upper limb due to atherosclerosis or 
Buerger ’ s disease. 
 Treatment 
 Conservative 
 The management should initially be conservative. 
Patients should be exhorted to keep their hands 
and feet warm, to wear gloves and fur - lined boots 
in the winter, and to make sure that the house, 
especially the bed, is warm at night. They should 
also avoid immersion of the limbs in cold water. 
Treatment with vasodilator drugs is usually tried 
but the results are often disappointing. Smoking 
must be stopped.  
 Surgery 
 Sympathectomy almost invariably produces a 
dramatic improvement in the symptoms, but 
unfortunately may not be long - lasting in the 
upper limbs. Rarely, Raynaud ’ s phenomenon or 
disease leads to actual necrosis of tissues and gan-
grene of the digits. If this occurs, local amputation 
may be necessary, but, as the circulation of the 
proximal part of the hand is usually satisfactory, 
major amputations are seldom required. 
 Buerger ’ s  d isease 
 Buerger ’ s disease (thromboangiitis obliterans) is a 
rather poorly deﬁ ned entity, usually affecting men 
(90%), the salient features of which are similar to 
atherosclerosis but the age incidence is much 
younger and the association with heavy smoking 
is almost invariable. Peripheral vessels tend to be 
affected earlier in Buerger ’ s disease and the veins 
may be inﬂ amed together with the arteries. It is 
more an inﬂ ammatory condition than atheroscle-
rotic, although the symptoms of distal claudica-
tion and ischaemic ulceration of the toes are 
similar. It tends to affect the hands and ﬁ ngers 
more commonly than atheroma. 
 Embolism (Figure  12.4 ) 
 An embolus is abnormal undissolved material 
carried in the bloodstream from one part of the 
vascular system to impact in a distant part. While 
the embolus may comprise air, fat or tumour 
(including atrial myxoma), it is most commonly 
thrombus that becomes dislodged from its source, 
usually the heart or the major vessels.   
 Emboli tend to lodge at the bifurcation of 
vessels; their danger will depend upon the ana-
tomical situation. Blockage of arteries of the CNS, 
retina and small intestine will produce dramatic 
effects. Emboli in the renal arteries will produce 
haematuria and pain in the loin. Emboli in the 
splenic artery will produce pain under the left 
costal margin. Large emboli straddling the aortic 
bifurcation (a saddle embolus) may cause bilateral 
signs. 
 The late results of embolism in limb vessels are 
similar to those of atherosclerosis and may, in fact, 
be associated with or caused by this condition. 
However, acute embolism is a surgical emergency 
and prompt adequate treatment may produce a 
complete recovery. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 The  l imb 
 With an acute blockage of the principal artery to a 
limb, the history is usually one of sudden pain in 
the limb, which soon becomes white and cold. 
Sensation may disappear and the muscles may 
become rapidly paralysed. As time progresses, the 
limb becomes anaesthetic and ﬁ xed muscular 
contractures develop. On examination, the site of 
the block will usually be considerably proximal to 
the site at which pain is experienced. It is fairly 
common for the level of occlusion to move distally 
in the course of the ﬁ rst few hours, owing to the 
embolus being dislodged or fragmented. In time, 
skin staining appears, which does not blanch on 

96 
Arterial disease
pressure (ﬁ xed staining); this is a sign of irrevers-
ible tissue damage.  
 The  u nderlying  c ause 
 The history and physical signs may reveal a cause 
for the embolus (Box  12.4 ). 
  •   Atrial ﬁ brillation  is by far the most common 
cause of arterial emboli. The atrial ﬁ brillation 
may be due to rheumatic heart disease or 
myocardial ischaemia.  
  •   A mural thrombus , typically following a 
myocardial infarction, may also dislodge and 
embolize. This typically occurs around 10 days 
after infarct.  
 Figure 12.4   Source of peripheral 
emboli. DVT, deep vein thrombosis.  
Atrial fibrillation
or enlarged left
atrium with
thrombus
Aortic aneurysm
Atrial septal
defect with
paradoxical
embolus 
from DVT
Aortic valve
disease with
vegetation
Mural infarct
or left ventricular
aneurysm with
thrombus
Mitral valve disease
with vegetation
  •   Aortic dissection is an uncommon differential 
diagnosis, when ischaemia may progress down 
the body, often with spontaneous recovery 
corresponding to the intimal ﬂ ap dissecting 
away from the true lumen (Chapter  11  , p. 76 ).    
  •   Paradoxical emboli are also uncommon. In 
patients with a patent foramen ovale, or other 
septal defect, a clot originating in the veins 
may pass up towards the chest. In addition to 
impacting in the pulmonary arterial tree, the 
clot may pass across the septal defect and 
lodge in the arterial system. This is particularly 
likely after a pulmonary embolus, as the 
resultant raised pulmonary artery pressure 
results in increased shunting across a septal 
defect if present.  
  •   An  atrial myxoma is rare, but may present with 
distal embolization of adherent clot or tumour 
fragments. 
 Treatment 
 1  Assessment.  The limb is exposed to room 
temperature and observed for signs of 
impairment to the circulation. If the block 
seems to be resolving, with the appearance of 
pulses that had previously been absent, the 
collateral circulation may produce adequate 
distal arterial blood supply and surgery may 
not be required; thrombolysis may be an 
appropriate alternative. If the distal limb has 
apparently no blood supply and there are 
 Box 12.4   Potential sources of emboli 
  •   Left atrium:   atrial ﬁ brillation and mitral stenosis, 
atrial myxoma  
  •    Heart valves:   infective endocarditis  
  •   Left ventricular wall:   mural thrombus after 
myocardial infarction or from ventricular 
aneurysm 
  •   Aorta:   from aneurysm or atheroma  
  •   Interventricular septum:    rare paradoxical 
embolus via a septal defect, originating in the 
systemic veins  

Arterial disease 97
neurological changes, urgent surgery is 
indicated. Absent femoral, popliteal or aortic 
pulsations are indications that operation will 
probably prove necessary. 
 The likelihood of surgical removal of an 
embolus successfully restoring viability to a 
limb is inversely proportional to the time since 
the onset of the arterial occlusion; after 24 
hours have elapsed, successful 
revascularization of the limb becomes 
unlikely. Fixed staining of the skin is a sign 
that it is too late.  
 2  Heparinization.   As soon as the diagnosis is 
made, the patient should be systemically 
heparinized, so as to prevent propagation of 
clot from the site of blockage.  
 3  Surgical embolectomy.    The approach to the 
involved vessel will depend on physical 
ﬁ ndings indicating the level of the block. The 
operative treatment is relatively simple: the 
vessel is exposed, opened and the clot 
removed. A special balloon catheter (designed 
by Thomas Fogarty 8  when he was a medical 
student) is passed into the vessel with the 
balloon collapsed. The balloon is then inﬂ ated 
and pulled back, the clot being expelled by the 
balloon via the arteriotomy. Poor results will 
be due to propagation of clot beyond the 
embolus, particularly down the branches of 
the popliteal artery, and local thrombolysis 
may be required. Emboli in the upper limb 
vessels usually produce less disability than 
those in the lower limb, as a collateral 
circulation in the upper limb is better. Surgery 
is therefore indicated less often.  
 4  Thrombolysis.  When there is no obvious cause 
for an embolus, a spontaneous thrombosis  in 
situ must be considered. This is more likely if 
the patient has a previous history of occlusive 
symptoms such as claudication. In this case, 
collaterals have already developed and the 
limb remains viable. Thrombolysis may restore 
patency, followed by angioplasty to treat the 
underlying disease. Occasionally,  in situ 
thrombosis may be a manifestation of 
malignancy. 
 It is most important that, after the successful 
outcome of an embolectomy, the cause of the 
embolism be treated if this is possible.   
 Cold  i njury 
 Frostbite may result from prolonged exposure 
to cold and results from a combination of 
ice crystal formation in the tissues, capillary 
sludging and thrombosis within small vessels of 
the exposed extremities. Treatment comprises 
gentle warming, anticoagulation with heparin to 
prevent further thrombosis, and antibiotics to 
inhibit infection of necrotic tissues. Local ampu-
tation to remove necrotic digits is performed 
once clear demarcation develops. Raynaud ’ s 
phenomenon may be experienced as a late 
complication.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  8   Thomas Fogarty (b. 1934), Surgeon, Portland, OR, USA.  

 13 
Venous  d isorders of 
the  l ower  l imb  
 
 Learning objective 
 ✓  To know the causes and treatment of varicose veins and deep 
venous insufﬁ ciency of the lower limb. 
foot to the saphenofemoral junction in the groin, 
and the small (short) saphenous vein, which 
drains the lateral aspect of the lower limb into the 
popliteal vein behind the knee. The superﬁ cial 
system lies outside the deep fascia, and drains the 
skin and superﬁ cial tissues. 
 Perforating  v eins 
 Besides the saphenofemoral and saphenopop-
liteal junctions, there are additional communica-
tions between superﬁ cial and deep veins with 
valves allowing blood in the superﬁ cial system to 
pass into the deep system, and preventing blood 
ﬂ owing out from deep to superﬁ cial. These are 
called perforating veins, or perforators. Typically, 
there is one mid - thigh (called the hunterian per-
forator on account of its relationship to Hunter ’ s 
canal 1 ), and several running up the medial and 
lateral aspect of the tibia just above the ankle.  
 The  c alf  p ump 
 All the major leg veins have valves that prevent 
blood ﬂ owing away from the heart. As the calf 
muscles contract, the deep veins within them 
are squeezed and emptied, the blood passing 
upwards, directed towards the heart by the 
non - return valves. As the muscles relax, blood 
ﬂ ows in from the superﬁ cial system via perfora-
tors as well as from more distal segments of the 
 Anatomy of the  v enous 
 d rainage of the  l ower 
 l imb 
 In order to understand the various manifestations 
of venous disease in the lower leg, it is essential to 
understand the functional anatomy of the venous 
system. There are two venous systems taking 
blood from the skin and muscles of the lower limb 
back to the trunk: the deep system and the super-
ﬁ cial system (Figure  13.1 ). 
 The  d eep  v enous  s ystem 
 This comprises a network of veins which accom-
pany the main arteries of the lower limb, lying 
deep to the deep fascia that envelops the muscular 
compartments of the leg. Smaller tributaries drain 
into the popliteal vein behind the knee, which 
then ascends as the femoral vein to the inguinal 
ligament, where it becomes the external iliac vein. 
From there, blood passes up the common iliac 
vein, via the inferior vena cava, to the right atrium.  
 The  s uperﬁ cial  v enous  s ystem 
 This comprises the medially placed great (long) 
saphenous vein, draining from the dorsum of the 
Lecture Notes: General Surgery, 12th edition. © Harold Ellis, 
Sir Roy Y. Calne and Christopher J. E. Watson. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
  1   John Hunter (1728 – 1793), Surgeon, St George ’ s Hospital, London, 
UK.  

Venous disorders of the lower limb  99
insufﬁ ciency), share the same underlying pathol-
ogy: valvular incompetence resulting in a distur-
bance of the normal ﬂ ow of blood (Figure  13.2 ). 
This haemodynamic disturbance is due either to a 
physical obstruction, such as a thrombosis, or to 
a functional obstruction leading to high pressure 
as occurs when valves are incompetent or, rarely, 
when an arteriovenous ﬁ stula exists. When valves 
are incompetent, there is a greater resistance to 
return ﬂ ow (the functional obstruction). One 
incompetent valve will put extra pressure on the 
next and will tend to make this incompetent; so, 
once defects have arisen, there is a tendency for 
the condition to get worse as further valves are 
involved. 
 There are no valves in the vena cava, and none 
in the common iliac veins. The ﬁ rst valve usually 
occurs in the external iliac vein. Congenital 
absence of this, or destruction following disease, 
imposes increased pressure on the next in line, 
commonly the one guarding the saphenofemoral 
junction. The pressure on this valve is then equiv-
alent to a column of blood from the saphenofemo-
ral junction to the right atrium. This absence of 
valves and the tendency to develop varicose veins 
is the unfortunate legacy from the days before 
humans adopted the upright posture.  
 Varicose  v eins 
 Deﬁ nition 
 Varicose veins are abnormally dilated and length-
ened superﬁ cial veins. They should be distin-
guished from prominent normal veins, which 
are most obvious over the muscular calves of 
an athlete, and venous ﬂ are, the clusters of 
small, dilated venules that occur subcutaneously 
as a result of hormonal change, pregnancy or 
trauma. 
 Classiﬁ cation 
 Primary or  i diopathic 
 The great majority of cases are idiopathic. This 
probably represents a primary valve defect 
and may be familial. Women are affected twice 
as commonly as men. Symptoms are often 
accentuated by pregnancy, partly as a result of 
pressure of the enlarged uterus on the iliac veins 
and partly as a result of relaxation of smooth 
vein, only to be forced upwards again by the next 
contraction of the calf muscles, which are thus 
acting as a pump.   
 Pathology of  v enous 
 d isease 
 Venous disorders, whether in the superﬁ cial veins 
(e.g. varicose veins) or in the deep veins (venous 
 Figure 13.1   The superﬁ cial and deep veins of the leg. 
Note the two superﬁ cial systems  – the great saphenous 
and small saphenous  – each of which communicates 
with the deep veins by piercing the deep fascia.  
Valve at sapheno-
femoral junction
Great
saphenous
vein
Deep
fascia
Mid-thigh
perforator
Femoral vein
Small
saphenous
vein
Ankle
perforators
Lateral
malleolus

100 
Venous disorders of the lower limb 
suggestive of thrombosis such as swelling and 
pain postoperatively, during pregnancy, or after 
a long period of immobilization. If the deep 
veins are still blocked, the varicose veins that are 
visible may represent the sole venous drainage of 
the leg. A history of any complications arising 
from the veins (e.g. thrombophlebitis) should be 
sought. 
 Examination 
 A patient with varicose veins must be examined 
while standing. Examination of the legs should 
include inspection of the medial gaiter area 
for evidence of deep venous insufﬁ ciency 
(haemosiderosis, eczema, lipodermatosclerosis  –  
see later). Overlying port - wine stains or similar 
pigmentation may suggest underlying arteriov-
enous 
malformation, 
especially 
in 
young 
patients. Auscultation over such areas may be 
diagnostic. 
 A  saphena varix , a prominent dilatation of the 
vein (varicosity) at the saphenofemoral junction, 
may be present. It gives a characteristic thrill to 
the examining ﬁ ngers when the patient coughs, 
quite different from a femoral hernia. It disap-
pears when the patient lies ﬂ at. 
 The  tap test  involves placing the ﬁ ngers of one 
hand over the saphenofemoral (or saphenopop-
liteal) junction and, with the patient standing, 
tapping over distally placed varicosities. In the 
absence of valves, there will be a continuous 
column of blood and a transmitted thrill will be 
palpated proximally. 
muscle under the inﬂ uence of hormones such as 
progesterone. 
 Secondary 
  •   Previous deep vein thrombosis . Occluded veins 
may subsequently recanalize but their valves 
are rendered incompetent.  
  •   Raised venous pressure  due to compression 
(e.g. by a pelvic tumour including a pregnant 
uterus), congenital venous malformation 
(e.g. Klippel – Trenaunay syndrome 2 ), 
arteriovenous ﬁ stula (congenital or acquired 
following trauma) or severe tricuspid 
incompetence. The last two cause pulsating 
varicosities. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 History 
 Varicose veins are prominent and unsightly, and 
patients may seek treatment on account of the 
unpleasant appearance. Other symptoms are of 
tiredness, aching or throbbing in the legs and 
swelling of the ankles, particularly after long 
periods of standing. Other points to note are a 
history of deep vein thrombosis, or a history 
 Figure 13.2   Normal veins and 
incompetent varicose veins. Note that 
the vein dilates under pressure and 
the valve becomes incompetent.  
Competent
Increased
pressure
Valvular
incompetence
Incompetent
  2  Maurice Klippel (1858 – 1942), French Neurologist, Salp ê tri è re 
Hospital, Paris, France. Paul Trenaunay (b. 1875), French 
Neurologist. The syndrome involves multiple congenital venous 
malformations producing varicose veins together with hypertro-
phy of bones and soft tissues and extensive cutaneous haeman-
giomas, usually affecting the lower limbs.  

Venous disorders of the lower limb  101
 Sclerotherapy 
 Superﬁ cial varicosities that are cosmetically unde-
sirable may be obliterated by injection of a small 
volume of sclerosant with the vein emptied. The 
vein is kept compressed with ﬁ rm pressure band-
aging for a period of 2 weeks to enable ﬁ brosis to 
take place. This outpatient treatment is used for 
small -  or moderate - sized varices below the knee. 
Recurrences can be treated by further injections. 
Complications include bruising, phlebitis with 
unsightly skin staining, ulceration and deep vein 
thrombosis. 
 Surgical  t reatment 
 Varicose vein surgery is one of the most com-
monly performed elective surgical procedures in 
the UK. More recently, the indications for the pro-
cedure have come under fresh scrutiny on account 
of their cosmetic nature, the need for the great 
saphenous vein as a conduit for future arterial 
surgery, such as coronary artery bypass, and the 
cost. 
 Indications for varicose vein surgery include the 
following: 
  •   haemorrhage occurring from a varicosity; 
  •   varicosities being grossly dilated or otherwise 
symptomatic;  
  •   skin changes , typically in the medial gaiter 
area, which may suggest coincident deep 
venous insufﬁ ciency; 
  •   incompetent perforator veins , which should be 
identiﬁ ed preoperatively and ligated by a 
conventional open technique or subfascial 
ligation performed via an endoscope, 
assuming the deep system is patent.    
 Surgery involves disconnecting the great saphe-
nous vein from the femoral vein; the terminal 
branches of the great saphenous vein are indi-
vidually ligated and divided. This may be com-
bined with stripping of the great saphenous vein 
from groin to knee. If there are other incompetent 
communications (perforators), these need to be 
individually ligated or avulsed. Small varicose 
venules can be avulsed via a small skin incision. 
 Recurrence of varicose veins  after operation is 
due either to a failure in the original diagnosis (e.g. 
underlying deep vein incompetence or arteriov-
enous ﬁ stula) or to a defect in operative technique, 
particularly a failure to divide and excise all the 
groin tributaries of the saphenous vein. If this 
 Trendelenburg ’ s test 3  detects reﬂ ux from deep 
into superﬁ cial veins, and when carefully per-
formed can identify the site of the incompetent 
connections. The patient lies ﬂ at and the leg is 
elevated to empty the superﬁ cial veins. A tourni-
quet is placed around the upper thigh and the 
patient stands up. If saphenofemoral junction 
incompetence is the cause of the superﬁ cial 
venous reﬂ ux, this high thigh tourniquet will 
control it and the varicose veins will remain 
empty. If this high tourniquet does not control the 
varices, the tourniquet test can be repeated with 
progressively lower placement of the tourniquet 
until the varicosities are controlled, and the level 
of the incompetent connection between deep and 
superﬁ cial veins identiﬁ ed. 
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   A  hand - held Doppler probe  is useful to 
diagnose reﬂ ux at saphenofemoral and 
saphenopopliteal junctions. Identifying 
perforating veins is more difﬁ cult, and the 
device is not as sensitive as duplex scanning or 
venography; it is superior to clinical 
examination.  
  •   Duplex scanning can accurately map the veins 
in the leg and diagnose both valvular and 
perforator incompetence, as well as occlusion 
of large veins. Like the hand - held Doppler 
probe, it allows accurate preoperative 
localization of perforating veins.  
  •   Venography involves placing a tourniquet 
around the ankle to occlude superﬁ cial veins 
and injecting contrast medium into the 
dorsum of the foot such that it will pass 
through the deep system up the leg. Its 
progress is followed on sequential X - rays. 
Reﬂ ux through perforating veins and deep vein 
occlusion are readily detected. 
 Treatment 
 Graded  c ompression  s tockings 
 Indicated for minor varicosities, and for the 
elderly, the pregnant and the unﬁ t. The stocking 
is elasticated and specially ﬁ tted to ensure that it 
delivers graduated compression along its length, 
such that at the ankle the elastic compression of 
the lower leg is much higher than that at the thigh.  
  3  Friedrich Trendelenburg (1844 – 1924), Professor of Surgery, suc-
cessively at Rostock, Bonn and Leipzig, Germany.  

102 
Venous disorders of the lower limb 
 Deep  v enous 
 i nsufﬁ ciency 
 Varicose veins appear when superﬁ cial veins are 
dilated by blood entering via incompetent perfo-
rating veins or incompetent superﬁ cial valves. 
Deep venous insufﬁ ciency (also known as chronic 
venous insufﬁ ciency, post - thrombotic limb and 
postphlebitic limb) is the term given to the situa-
tion in which the valves of the deep venous system 
are incompetent. In the normal patient, there is a 
pressure in the veins at the ankle of around 
100  cmH 2 O, equivalent to the height of the column 
of blood from the right atrium to the ankle. Upon 
walking, this pressure drops to around 20   cmH 2 O 
as the calf pump drives the blood upwards. In the 
presence of incompetent valves, blood is no longer 
pumped back efﬁ ciently, and the venous pressure 
remains at the high resting state. This raised 
hydrostatic pressure causes an increase in ﬂ uid 
transudation across the capillaries following 
Starling ’ s forces. 4 
 Aetiology 
 Primary 
  •   Congenital syndromes where valves are 
absent.     
 Secondary 
  •   Venous hypertension. Deep vein thrombosis is 
the major cause of deep venous insufﬁ ciency, 
where the previous thrombosis has recanalized 
but left the valves incompetent.  
  •   Arteriovenous ﬁ stula. 
 Features of  v enous  h ypertension 
in the  l eg 
  •   Swelling , particularly of the lower leg, is due to 
transudation of ﬂ uid across capillaries causing 
oedema, which takes on a brawny character 
with time.  
  •   Superﬁ cial varicose veins , caused by perforator 
incompetence secondary to the raised venous 
pressure. 
error is made, these tributaries will dilate and form 
new varices. Recurrence may also be due to the 
development of further varices  de novo , despite an 
adequate operation. 
 Endovenous laser treatment  is replacing con-
ventional surgery and sclerotherapy. Laser ﬁ bre is 
passed along the vein under ultrasound guidance. 
When in position the laser is ﬁ red and produces 
heat within the vein which ablates the endothe-
lium, causing the vein to thrombose. The ﬁ bre is 
gradually withdrawn until all of the vein has been 
treated. A compression bandage or stockings are 
applied for 2 weeks. 
 Complications of 
 v aricose  v eins 
 Haemorrhage 
 This is usually due to minor trauma to a dilated 
vein. The bleeding is profuse owing to the high 
pressure within the incompetent vein. The treat-
ment is very simple; the patient is laid recumbent 
with the leg elevated, and a pressure bandage is 
applied. Subsequent to the emergency, the vari-
cose veins should be treated by operation.  
 Phlebitis 
 This may occur spontaneously or may be second-
ary to trauma to the leg or the sclerosing ﬂ uid used 
in the injection treatment of varicose veins. The 
varicose vein becomes extremely tender and hard 
and the overlying skin may be inﬂ amed. The 
patient may have a constitutional disturbance 
with pyrexia and malaise. Secondary bacterial 
infection 
may 
occasionally 
complicate 
the 
thrombosis. 
 Treatment 
 Bed rest with the foot of the bed elevated and a 
pressure bandage on the leg, which compresses 
the superﬁ cial veins and increases the speed of 
ﬂ ow of blood in the deep veins. If infection is 
present, antibiotics may be necessary, but this is 
unusual. In severe cases, systemic anticoagulation 
may alleviate pain and prevent spread of the 
condition. Non - steroidal anti - inﬂ ammatory drugs 
may give relief of symptoms but they can cause 
peptic ulceration. 
  4   Sir Ernest Starling (1866 – 1927), Professor of Physiology, University 
College, London, UK. 

Venous disorders of the lower limb  103
venous thrombosis, suggested by painful swelling 
of the leg after an operation, childbirth or immo-
bilization in bed for any reason. 
 Why the ulcer occurs around the malleoli and 
not in the foot itself is not fully explained. It is 
probable that in this area the subcutaneous tissue 
is less well supported than in the foot. The pres-
sure of the column of blood and the consequent 
oedema and pericapillary ﬁ brin cuffs result in 
ischaemia and very poor nutrition to this area so 
that the skin may break down either spontane-
ously or more commonly after minor trauma. 
 Venous ulcers either have an edge which is 
ragged or, where the ulcer is healing, the 
margins will be shelving with a faint blue rim of 
advancing epithelium. Previous scarring appears 
as a white rim around the ulcer, known as atrophie 
blanche. Rarely, a squamous carcinoma can 
develop in the edge of a long - standing ulcer 
(Marjolin ’ s ulcer 5 ). 
 Treatment 
 If the patient is conﬁ ned to bed with the foot of 
the bed elevated, so that the high venous pressure 
is abolished, venous ulcers will heal fairly quickly, 
provided they are kept clean by careful toilet. 
Antibiotics should be administrated only in the 
unusual circumstances of the ulcer being grossly 
infected with a surrounding cellulitis. The antibi-
otics used will depend on the sensitivity of the 
bacteria cultured from the ulcer. Topical antibi-
otic therapy should be avoided; the incidence of 
sensitivity reaction is high. 
 Unfortunately, this simple treatment is often 
not a practical one. The patients are mostly elderly, 
and prolonged recumbency is obviously of some 
danger in these cases. Younger patients, from the 
economic point of view, do not wish to spend 
several weeks in hospital, in bed. 
 In such cases, healing can be obtained either by 
tight elastic bandaging of the leg or by using pro-
prietary paste bandages over which elastoplast is 
applied. This ﬁ rm pressure empties the dilated 
superﬁ cial veins and enables the calf muscle 
pump to act more efﬁ ciently. Oxygenated blood is 
therefore able to reach the previously ischaemic 
tissues. A split - skin graft may be useful in indolent 
cases, but grafting must only supplement the 
other treatment modalities. 
  •   Pigmentation of skin , particularly the medial 
gaiter area (just above the medial malleolus). 
The pigment, which appears brown in colour, 
is haemosiderin and is the breakdown product 
of haemoglobin in transuded red blood 
corpuscles. 
  •   Eczema , particularly over the pigmented area, 
causing pruritus. When the patient succumbs 
to the temptation to scratch this skin, it is 
further damaged and predisposed to ulcer 
formation.  
  •   Lipodermatosclerosis . The soft subcutaneous 
tissue is replaced by thick ﬁ brous tissue, a 
consequence of inﬂ ammation and ﬁ brin 
exudation. In time, this forms a hard 
enveloping layer around the lower leg through 
which the veins pass, forming prominent 
gutters when the leg is elevated. The 
appearance of the lower leg has been likened 
to an inverted champagne bottle, with the 
narrow ankle below and soft oedematous limb 
above. 
  •   Ulceration  occurs as a consequence of the 
poor skin nutrition. Repeated excoriations due 
to the irritation of the eczema and the 
impaired nutrition of the ﬁ brotic subcutaneous 
tissue lead to epithelial damage and ulceration. 
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   Venography  to detect perforators that may be 
treated, and identify occlusions that may 
explain the aetiology of the condition.  
  •   Duplex sonography , in the hands of an 
experienced operator, will demonstrate deep 
venous reﬂ ux as well as detecting occlusions. 
 Treatment 
 There is no successful way to repair or replace the 
valves of the deep veins. If there is incompetence 
in the superﬁ cial veins they may be removed, and 
incompetent perforators ligated.   
 Venous  u lceration 
 As described above, ulceration due to venous 
hypertension is generally due to incompetence of 
the deep veins, although superﬁ cial vein incom-
petence may be present. All patients with such an 
ulcer (also called varicose or gravitational ulcers) 
should be questioned for any previous history of 
  5  Jean Nicholas Marjolin (1780 – 1850), Surgeon, H ô pital Sainte -
 Eug è nie, Paris, France. 

104 
Venous disorders of the lower limb 
 Once the ulcer has healed, the patient is 
ﬁ tted with a ﬁ rm elastic graduated compression 
stocking or advised to continue with the elastic 
bandage. Incompetent perforating veins are 
ligated. Unless the incompetent veins are treated 
thus, either by support or by operation, recur-
rence is inevitable. 
 Venous ulcers account for approximately 90% of 
all ulcers of the legs, but other, rarer, causes should 
always be considered (Box  13.1 ). Venous ulcers 
may be complicated by a poor arterial supply, so 
the ankle brachial pressure index should be 
checked (Chapter  12 , p. 87 ). 
 Deep  v ein  t hrombosis 
 Spontaneous deep vein thrombosis generally 
presents to, and is managed by, general physi-
cians. To surgeons, it is usually a postoperative 
complication, which is where it is discussed in full 
(Chapter  4 , p. 15 ). 
 
 
 
 
 Box 13.1   Differential diagnosis of leg ulcers 
  •    Venous ulcer complicating venous insufﬁ ciency 
  •    Ischaemic ulcer , due to impaired arterial blood 
supply; the peripheral pulses must always be 
examined and ankle brachial pressure indexes 
checked 
  •    Neuropathic ulcer : particularly common in 
diabetics where they are often compounded by 
ischaemia due to diabetic microangiopathy  
  •    Malignant ulcer : a squamous carcinoma, often 
arising in a pre - existing chronic ulcer, or an 
ulcerated malignant melanoma  
  •    Ulcer complicating systemic disease , e.g. 
acholuric jaundice, ulcerative colitis and 
rheumatoid arthritis  
  •    Arteriovenous ﬁ stula - associated ulcer 
  •    Repetitive self - inﬂ icted injury 
  •    Gummatous ulcer of syphilis : usually affects the 
upper one - third of the leg  

 14 
The  b rain and  m eninges  
 
 Learning objective 
 ✓  To know the manifestations and causes of raised intracranial 
pressure, with particular reference to intracranial tumours and 
pituitary adenomas. 
impeding the circulation or absorption of cerebro-
spinal 
ﬂ uid 
(CSF) 
causing 
hydrocephalus  
(see p. 112) . For example, a tumour in the poste-
rior fossa may present rapidly with severe symp-
toms of raised intracranial pressure secondary to 
hydrocephalus. 
 A slowly progressive rise in intracranial pressure 
may lead to the following presenting features: 
  •   Headache : may be severe, often present when 
the patient wakes and is aggravated by 
straining or coughing.  
  •   Vomiting : often without preceding nausea. 
  •   Papilloedema : which may be accompanied by 
blurring of vision and may progress to 
permanent blindness.  
  •   Depressed conscious level . 
  •   Neck stiffness : particularly if the lesion is in the 
posterior fossa.  
  •   Diplopia, ataxia . 
  •   Enlargement of the head ; in children before the 
sutures have fused. 
 A rapid rise in intracranial pressure results in a 
clinical picture of intense headache with rapid 
progression into coma. 
 Localizing  s igns 
 Having diagnosed the presence of raised intracra-
nial pressure, an attempt must be made to localize 
the lesion on the basis of the clinical ﬁ ndings, 
although in some cases this is not possible. There 
may be upper motor neurone weakness, indicating 
a lesion of the pyramidal pathway; there may be 
cranial nerve signs, e.g. a bitemporal hemianopia 
indicating pressure on the optic chiasma. A lesion 
 Space - o ccupying 
 i ntracranial  l esions 
 Space - occupying lesions within the skull may be 
caused by the following: 
 1  Haemorrhage: 
 a  extradural; 
 b  subdural  – acute or chronic (Chapter  15 , 
p. 123 ); 
 c  intracerebral. 
 2  Tumour. 
 3  Hydrocephalus. 
 4  Brain swelling (oedema), e.g. head injury, 
encephalitis. 
 5  Cerebral abscess. 
 Other causes are rare and include hydatid cyst, 
tuberculoma and gumma. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 A space - occupying lesion manifests itself by the 
general features of raised intracranial pressure 
and by localizing signs. 
 Raised  i ntracranial  p ressure 
 A space - occupying lesion within the skull pro-
duces raised intracranial pressure not only by its 
actual volume within the closed box of the cranium 
but also by provoking oedema, and sometimes by 
Lecture Notes: General Surgery, 12th edition. © Harold Ellis, 
Sir Roy Y. Calne and Christopher J. E. Watson. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

106 
The brain and meninges
tary tumour. In children, widening of the coronal 
sutures and increased convolutional markings 
may be seen (the  ‘ beaten brass ’ appearance). 
 Intracranial  t umours 
 Intracranial tumours can be divided into intrinsic 
tumours of the brain, arising usually from the 
supporting (glial) cells, and extracerebral tumours, 
which originate from the numerous structures sur-
rounding the brain. In addition, 15% of patients 
with cerebral tumours presenting to neurosurgical 
units have tumours that are metastatic from distant 
sites, but many patients dying of widespread 
metastases have cerebral deposits and do not 
come under specialist care. The overall incidence 
of central nervous system (CNS) tumours is around 
5 per 100 000 population. The only identiﬁ ed pre-
disposing factor is previous cranial irradiation. 
 Intracranial tumours cause generalized and 
focal symptoms. Generalized symptoms reﬂ ect 
a progressive increase in intracranial pressure 
and include headache (particularly in the early 
morning), nausea and vomiting. Mental state 
changes and hemiparesis may also occur. Focal 
symptoms depend on the tumour location within 
the brain. Cerebellar tumours therefore lead to 
ataxia; occipital lobe tumours result in visual ﬁ eld 
disturbance; and tumours in the posterior aspect 
of the frontal lobe affecting the motor cortex will 
result in weakness. Seizures are common and may 
be focal; post - ictal neurological impairment may 
help localization. Investigation is outlined above. 
 Classiﬁ cation 
 Common tumours include the following. 
 Intracerebral 
  •   Gliomas (45%), including astrocytoma, 
oligodendroglioma, ependymoma, 
medulloblastoma.  
  •   Lymphoma. 
  •   Pineal gland tumour. 
  •   Metastases (15%). 
 Extracerebral 
  •   Meningioma (15%). 
  •   Neuroma, e.g. acoustic neuroma (5%). 
  •   Pituitary tumours (5%), including pituitary 
adenomas and craniopharyngioma. 
of the post - central cortex may produce loss of ﬁ ne 
discrimination and of stereognosis. Cerebellar 
lesions may produce coarse ataxia, muscular 
hypotonia, incoordination and often nystagmus. A 
focal ﬁ t may provide valuable localizing data. 
Motor aphasia (the patient knows what he or she 
wishes to say but cannot do so) suggests a lesion in 
Broca ’ s area 1  on the dominant side of the lower 
frontal cortex of the cerebrum. Pupillary dilatation 
is a late sign, and is caused by the uncus of the tem-
poral lobe being displaced through the tentorial 
hiatus where it compresses the oculomotor nerve.   
 Special  i nvestigations 
 The following investigations are required in the 
study of a suspected space - occupying lesion: 
  •   Computed tomography (CT) , with intravenous 
contrast enhancement, is a non - invasive and 
extremely accurate investigation for all cerebral 
tumours and other space - occupying lesions.  
  •   Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging gives superb 
anatomical localization of intracerebral 
space - occupying lesions. 
  •   Positron emission tomography (PET) further 
complements MR.  
  •   Chest X - ray  should always be performed if 
tumour is suspected to exclude a symptomless 
primary bronchogenic carcinoma; in the case 
of a cerebral abscess, it may reveal the source 
of infection.  
  •   Burr - hole biopsy  may be appropriate to 
establish a tissue diagnosis.  
  •   Skull X - ray  has been largely superseded in the 
diagnosis of space - occupying lesions by 
cross - sectional imaging (CT and MR). Ten per 
cent of tumours show calciﬁ cation, most 
commonly craniopharyngiomas and 
oligodendrogliomas. It is occasionally found in 
astrocytomas, meningiomas and vascular 
malformations. 
 The pineal gland may be calciﬁ ed (30% of 30 
year olds, 70% of 70 year olds). Close inspection of 
the skull X - ray may show a shift of the pineal to 
one side, indicating a space - occupying lesion on 
the other. 
 The sella turcica should be examined; decalciﬁ -
cation is evidence of raised intracranial pressure, 
and expansion of the sella with erosion of the 
clinoid processes suggests the presence of a pitui-
  1   Pierre Broca (1826 – 1880), Professor of Clinical Surgery, Paris, 
France. 

The brain and meninges 107
 Treatment 
 Gross surgical removal may prolong survival and 
improve neurological deﬁ cit. This may be fol-
lowed by radiotherapy to the tumour site. Small 
tumours less than 3   cm may be suitable for 
stereotactic radiosurgery (the Gamma Knife). 
Chemotherapy may confer additional beneﬁ t for 
certain tumours, such as oligodendrogliomas.   
 Cerebral  l ymphoma 
 Primary cerebral lymphoma is uncommon but is 
increasing in incidence. It occurs in two settings: 
immunosuppressed patients, whether through 
disease (e.g. AIDS) or for organ transplantation, 
have a markedly increased risk of cerebral lym-
phoma; in non - immunosuppressed patients, the 
incidence peaks in the sixth and seventh decade, 
and is often multifocal. Diagnosis is by stereotac-
tic biopsy and the treatment is chemotherapy.  
 Meningioma 
 Meningiomas arise from arachnoid cells in the 
dura mater, to which they are almost invariably 
attached, and typically are found in middle -
 aged patients. Special sites are one or both sides 
of the superior sagittal sinus, the lesser wing of the 
sphenoid, the olfactory groove, the parasellar 
region and within the spinal canal. The majority 
are slow growing and do not invade the brain 
tissue but involve it only by expansion and pres-
sure, so they may become buried in the brain. The 
tumour may, however, invade the skull, producing 
a hyperostosis, which may occasionally be enor-
mous. Most are benign, 5% atypical and 2% frankly 
malignant. 
 Treatment 
 Most meningiomas are surgically removable. 
 Acoustic  n euroma 
 Neuromas are benign tumours that arise from the 
Schwann 2  cells of a cranial nerve. The great major-
ity arise from the eighth cranial nerve at the inter-
nal auditory meatus (acoustic neuroma). They are 
usually found in adult patients between the ages 
of 30 and 60 years and are occasionally associated 
 Gliomas 
 Gliomas arise from the glial supporting cells 
and 
are 
usually 
supratentorial. 
They 
are 
classiﬁ ed according to the principal cell com-
ponent. The four important subgroups are as 
follows. 
 Astrocytomas (80%) 
 These are graded according to their mitotic activ-
ity, nuclear pleomorphism endothelial prolifera-
tion and necrosis. Grade 1 (pilocytic astrocytoma) 
and grade 2 (diffuse astrocytoma) are less aggres-
sive and are often cystic and slow growing, 
although they may change over the years into less 
differentiated and more invasive tumours. Grade 
3 (anaplastic astrocytoma) and grade 4 (glioblas-
toma multiforme) gliomas are more aggressive; 
about half of all astrocytomas are the highly ana-
plastic glioblastoma multiforme, the median sur-
vival with which is 3 months. Often, a glioma may 
have cells of different grades of differentiation in 
different areas of the tumour. It is interesting that 
the glioblastoma tends to occur in the adult and 
in the cerebrum, whereas the well - differentiated 
cystic glioma (juvenile pilocytic astrocytoma) 
occurs frequently in children and usually arises in 
the cerebellum.  
 Medulloblastomas (10%) 
 These are rapidly growing small - cell tumours gen-
erally affecting the cerebellum in children, usually 
boys. They may block the fourth ventricle, produc-
ing an obstructive hydrocephalus, and may spread 
via the CSF to seed over the surface of the spinal 
cord. The cells appear to be embryonal in origin 
with elements of ependymomas and medulloblas-
toma in varying proportions, and are now more 
commonly called primitive neuroectodermal 
tumours (PNETs).  
 Ependymomas (5%) 
 These arise from the lining cells of the ventricles, 
the central canal of the spinal cord or the choroid 
plexus. They usually occur in children and young 
adults. 
 Oligodendrogliomas (5%) 
 Most are relatively slow growing and are usually 
found in the cerebrum in adults.  
  2   Theodore Schwann (1810 – 1882), German physiologist; one of the 
ﬁ rst to establish the cellular nature of all tissues. 

108 
The brain and meninges
adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH) and 
follicle - stimulating hormone (FSH). The 
posterior pituitary hormones are rarely 
affected.  
 3  Hormone excess: hormone - secreting 
adenomas may present with symptoms from 
the hormone, for example Cushing ’ s disease 3 
from ACTH excess. 
 They are named according to their staining on 
light microscopy. 
 Chromophobe  a denoma (80%) 
 This is the commonest pituitary tumour, which, as 
it enlarges, compresses the optic chiasm, produc-
ing a bitemporal hemianopia. Half are non -
 secretory tumours, which gradually destroy the 
normally 
functioning 
pituitary, 
producing 
hypopituitarism with secondary hypogonadism, 
hypothyroidism and hypoadrenalism. In child-
hood there is arrest of growth together with 
infantilism. Half produce prolactin, which causes 
infertility, amenorrhoea and galactorrhoea (dis-
charge of milk from the nipple) in females. These 
tumours rarely extend to involve the hypothala-
mus, producing diabetes insipidus and obesity. 
 Eosinophil ( a cidophil)  a denoma 
(15%) 
 These are slow - growing tumours, which secrete 
growth hormone. If they occur before puberty, 
which is unusual, they induce gigantism. After 
puberty, acromegaly results. 
 Basophil  a denoma (5%) 
 These are small tumours that produce no pressure 
effects and may be associated with Cushing ’ s syn-
drome (adrenocorticotrophic hormone produc-
tion, Chapter  40 , p. 331 ). 
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging 
demonstrates the pituitary fossa, 
encroachment on the optic chiasm superiorly 
and laterally into the cavernous sinus.  
  •   Visual ﬁ eld mapping looking for evidence of 
bitemporal hemianopia. 
with neuroﬁ bromatosis type II, when they may be 
bilateral. 
 Neuroﬁ bromatosis has three forms (Chapter  9  , 
p. 58 ). Type II is characterized by neuroﬁ bromas 
on cranial nerves, mental retardation and a ten-
dency to form gliomas and meningiomas. 
 As the acoustic tumour slowly enlarges, it 
stretches the adjacent cranial nerves, VII and V 
anteriorly and IX, X and XII over its lower surface. 
It also presses on the cerebellum and the brain 
stem, producing the  ‘ cerebellopontine angle syn-
drome ’ with the following features: 
  •   unilateral nerve deafness often associated with 
tinnitus and giddiness (VIII) is the ﬁ rst 
symptom;  
  •   facial numbness and weakness of the 
masticatory muscles (V);  
  •   dysphagia, hoarseness and dysarthria (IX, X 
and XII);  
  •   cerebellar hemisphere signs and, later, 
pyramidal tract involvement; 
  •   eventually features of raised intracranial 
pressure;  
  •   facial weakness with unilateral taste loss (VII) 
is very uncommon ( < 5%). 
 Treatment 
 Acoustic neuromas can be removed completely 
but with some risk to the facial nerve. Alternatively, 
stereotactic radiosurgery is now being used to 
treat some smaller tumours.   
 Pituitary  t umours 
 Pituitary tumours have three special features. 
 1  Local mass effects: 
 a  Visual ﬁ eld disturbance (bitemporal 
hemianopia) due to compression of the 
optic chiasm.  
 b  Headache , due to expansion of the pituitary 
fossa with dural stretching, erosion into the 
paranasal air sinus, and/or haemorrhage 
within the tumour (pituitary apoplexy). 
 2  Hormone deﬁ ci ency  (hypopituitarism): as the 
tumour grows, it compresses the normal 
pituitary around the tumour, resulting in 
reduced production of anterior pituitary 
hormones. Deﬁ ciency tends to ﬁ rst suppress 
luteinizing and growth hormone production, 
followed in sequence by loss of thyroid -
 stimulating hormone (TSH), 
  3   Harvey Cushing (1869 – 1939), Professor of Surgery, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. He was one of the founders of 
neurosurgery. 

The brain and meninges 109
 1  Penetrating wound of the skull usually with a 
staphylococcal secondary infection. Such 
wounds usually cause extradural abscesses.  
 2  Direct spread  – the cause in 75% of cases 
 a  an infected middle ear or mastoid; initially 
causes a subdural abscess that subsequently 
spreads to either the temporal lobe or the 
cerebellum;  
 b  an infected frontal or ethmoid sinus, 
spreading to the frontal lobe. 
 3  Blood - borne spread . A septic embolus, 
especially from a focus of infection in a lung 
such as bronchiectasis or lung abscess, or 
occasionally from the systemic circulation in 
the presence of congenital cyanotic heart 
disease in which there is a right - to - left shunt. 
Such abscesses commonly occur in the middle 
cerebral artery territory. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 The clinical features are those of the following: 
  •   the underlying cause (e.g. chronic mastoiditis); 
  •   evidence of the development of an 
intracerebral space - occupying lesion (raised 
intracranial pressure);  
  •   localizing features (e.g. epilepsy or a focal 
neurological defect);  
  •   toxaemia, fever, meningism and a leucocytosis, 
particularly if there is rapidly spreading 
cerebral infection. Often, the abscess is walled 
off by a relatively thick capsule so that the 
general manifestations of infection (fever and 
toxaemia) are not evident. 
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   Skull X - ray may show evidence of frontal sinus 
or mastoid infection.  
  •   Chest X - ray may show a primary focus in the 
lung.  
  •   CT and MR imaging provide accurate 
diagnosis and localization of the abscess, 
typically appearing as a ring - enhancing lesion 
with extensive oedema; sinus views may reveal 
the source. 
 Treatment 
 In the ﬁ rst instance, the abscess is aspirated 
through a burr hole by means of a brain needle. 
Antibiotics are instilled into the abscess cavity and 
resolution is followed by serial CT scans. The 
  •   Hormone assessment , with basal assays of each 
pituitary hormone and change in hormone 
concentrations after stress created by insulin -
 induced hypoglycaemia. 
 Treatment 
 Pituitary tumours which are producing pressure 
symptoms on the optic chiasm are treated by int-
racapsular removal through a trans - sphenoidal 
(or occasionally transcranial) route. Prolactin -
 secreting 
tumours 
(prolactinomas) 
usually 
respond to treatment with a dopamine agonist 
(e.g. cabergoline) to suppress prolactin secretion 
and reduce tumour size.  
 Craniopharyngioma 
 Craniopharyngioma (suprasellar cyst, or cyst of 
Rathke ’ s pouch 4 ) is a benign but locally invasive 
tumour, usually cystic, which arises in the remnant 
of the craniopharyngeal duct (the precursor of the 
anterior pituitary). It presents in childhood or 
early adult life and lies above and/or within the 
sella turcica. 
 The tumour produces hypopituitarism, raised 
intracranial pressure and optic chiasmal involve-
ment. Craniopharyngiomas may be very difﬁ cult 
to remove completely because of their close rela-
tionship to the hypothalamus, so treatment often 
involves subtotal removal with postoperative 
radiotherapy. 
 Secondary  t umours 
 These account for about 15% of intracranial 
tumours seen on a neurosurgical unit but are 
more common on the general wards. Common 
primary tumours are lung, breast, kidney and 
melanoma, the last occasionally presenting with 
intracranial haemorrhage. 
 Intracranial  a bscess 
 Aetiology 
 Intracranial abscesses may be intracerebral, sub-
dural or extradural. There are three common 
causes for them: 
  4   Martin Heinrich Rathke (1793 – 1860), Professor of Anatomy, 
Konigsberg, Germany. Gave an early description of the pituitary 
gland in 1838.  

110 
The brain and meninges
artery, internal carotid artery and middle cerebral 
artery (Figure  14.1 ). The internal carotid artery 
aneurysms occur at its terminal bifurcation, origin 
of the posterior communicating artery and occa-
sionally in the cavernous sinus or at the origin of 
the ophthalmic artery. Fifteen per cent occur on 
the basilar or vertebral arteries. About 20% are 
multiple. Men and women are equally affected, 
and they may be familial. They are associated with 
hypertension and cigarette smoking, and also 
occasionally with polycystic kidney disease, coarc-
tation of the aorta and collagen disorders such as 
the Ehlers – Danlos syndrome. 6  They are rarely due 
to arteriosclerosis, trauma or infection (mycotic 
aneurysms). 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 These can be divided into two groups. 
 1  Subarachnoid haemorrhage:   bleeding into the 
CSF from a ruptured intracranial aneurysm is 
the commonest cause of spontaneous 
subarachnoid haemorrhage. Between 6% and 
8% of all strokes are due to subarachnoid 
haemorrhage. Rupture most commonly occurs 
at times of stress or exercise, and presents with 
the following: 
 a  severe headache of sudden onset ( ‘ as if I 
was hit across the back of my head ’ );  
 b  vomiting; 
aspirations may require to be repeated and high -
 dose systemic antibiotics are given, depending on 
the bacteriology report on the pus. Occasionally, 
the abscess fails to respond to aspiration and its 
capsule must be excised. 
 Epilepsy develops in one - third of patients 
and anticonvulsant therapy is therefore given 
prophylactically. 
 Intracranial  v ascular 
 l esions 
 Intracranial vascular lesions may present as either 
subarachnoid or intracerebral haemorrhage, or a 
combination of the two. There are two primary 
lesions: an aneurysm of a cerebral artery or an 
arteriovenous malformation. 
 Intracranial  a neurysms 
 Pathology 
 Intracranial (berry) aneurysms are primary aneu-
rysms of the cerebral arteries. They are saccular, 
generally arise near the bifurcation of an artery 
and are probably due to aplasia or hypoplasia of 
the tunica media. Eighty - ﬁ ve per cent occur in the 
anterior half of the circle of Willis, 5  with equal dis-
tribution between the anterior communicating 
 Figure 14.1   The common sites of 
intracranial aneurysms.  
Anterior communicating
artery (30–40%)
Olfactory
nerve
Optic
nerve
Internal carotid artery
(30–40%)
Middle cerebral artery 
(20%)
Posterior communicating 
artery (5%)
Posterior cerebral artery
(5%)
Basilar artery
(5%)
Vertebral artery
  5   Thomas Willis (1621 – 1675), Physician and Anatomist, ﬁ rst in 
Oxford then in London, UK.  
  6   Edvard Lauritz Ehlers (1863 – 1937), Professor of Clinical 
Dermatology, Copenhagen, Denmark. Henri - Alexandre Danlos 
(1844 – 1912), Dermatologist, Paris, France. 

The brain and meninges 111
coils to thrombose the aneurysm are increasingly 
used, and are preferred to surgical clipping in 
patients with posterior circulation aneurysms 
(because of the difﬁ cult surgical approach) and 
those with signiﬁ cant comorbidity. Clipping is 
also associated with a low incidence of recanal-
ization and hence rebleeding. The results of clip-
ping are good in 80% of patients, with a 2 – 8% 
mortality. 
 About 15% of the angiograms are negative and 
probably indicate that thrombosis has taken place 
in a microaneurysm. Such patients are treated 
conservatively and the prognosis is good. 
 Arteriovenous  m alformations 
 Developmental 
vascular 
malformations 
may 
occur in any part of the CNS, particularly over the 
surface of the cerebral hemispheres in the distri-
bution of the middle cerebral artery. They com-
prise a tangle of abnormal vessels, ranging from 
telangiectasia to cavernous and venous malfor-
mations often with arteriovenous ﬁ stulae. 
 They may produce focal epilepsy, headaches or 
slowly progressive paralysis, and 50% present with 
subarachnoid or intracerebral bleeding. The sub-
arachnoid haemorrhage is less catastrophic than 
in rupture of an aneurysm, but accounts for about 
10% of all cases of spontaneous subarachnoid 
bleeding. Half of the cases have a bruit, which may 
be heard over the eye, the skull vault or the carotid 
arteries in the neck. Exact diagnosis and localiza-
tion is made by cerebral angiography. 
 The haemorrhage rate is around 4% per year. 
Accessible malformations in non - eloquent parts 
of the brain (i.e. those not involved in speech pro-
duction) might be treated by surgery, although 
stereotactic radiosurgery (known as the Gamma 
Knife) is now employed for the majority of 
patients, inducing endarteritis obliterans in the 
nidus of the lesion. Stereotactic radiosurgery 
involves focusing multiple beams of low - dose 
gamma radiation such that only the lesion receives 
a signiﬁ cant radiation dose. Both surgery and 
stereotactic radiosurgery may be facilitated by 
prior embolization. 
 Sturge – Weber syndrome 8  is an association 
between a port - wine stain localized to one or 
more segments of the cutaneous distribution 
of the trigeminal nerve with a corresponding 
 c  photophobia; 
 d  irritability; 
 e  neck stiffness and a positive Kernig ’ s sign 7 
(ﬂ exion of the hip with extension of the leg 
causes pain when meningeal irritation 
present); 
 f  impairment of consciousness; 
 g  focal neurological signs or generalized 
seizures. 
 Prior to the haemorrhage, there is often a 
history of severe headache within the 
previous 2 weeks, an event that might be 
due to a small bleed. Aneurysm rupture may 
also cause intracerebral or subdural 
bleeding with neurological signs depending 
on the site of the haematoma. Most cases 
occur after the age of 40 years, when 
increasing atheromatous degenerative 
changes in the arteries and hypertension are 
probably precipitating factors. The clinical 
diagnosis is conﬁ rmed by CT or, if CT is 
negative, lumbar puncture will reveal 
xanthochromia  – yellow - stained CSF. 
 2  Pressure symptoms due to the aneurysm:    
especially third - nerve palsy from an aneurysm 
of the posterior communicating artery. 
 Haemorrhage from a ruptured aneurysm is 
serious and one - quarter of patients die without 
recovering consciousness. Further deterioration 
results from the intense spasm that follows several 
days after the haemorrhage, and from further 
bleeding. About 50% will bleed again within 6 
weeks of the initial haemorrhage and the mortality 
of such bleeds is high.  
 Treatment 
 If the patient is in coma or has signiﬁ cant neuro-
logical deﬁ cit, but does not have hydrocephalus or 
a signiﬁ cant intracerebral bleed, conservative 
management is adopted. This involves ﬂ at bed 
rest, adequate ﬂ uid replacement and analgesia, 
and nimodipine to reduce the risk of development 
of delayed cerebral ischaemia from vasospasm. 
 If the patient recovers from the initial bleed, cer-
ebral angiography is performed to locate the site 
of the aneurysm. If the aneurysm is demonstrated, 
treatment comprises craniotomy with the direct 
application of a clip across the base of the aneu-
rysm. Endovascular approaches using platinum 
  7   Vladimir Kernig (1840 – 1917), German Physician and Neurologist, 
St Petersburg, Russia.  
  8  William Allen Sturge (1850 – 1919), Physician, Royal Free Hospital, 
London, UK. Frederick Parkes Weber (1863 – 1962), Physician, 
London, UK, with a life - long interest in rare diseases. 

112 
The brain and meninges
 Non - c ommunicating or 
 o bstructive  h ydrocephalus 
 CSF cannot escape from within the brain to the 
basal cisterns. This may be due to congenital nar-
rowing of the aqueduct of Sylvius 11  or the Arnold –
 Chiari malformation, 12  which is a congenital 
downward protrusion of the cerebellum into the 
foramen magnum (with consequent occlusion of 
the foramina of the fourth ventricle) frequently 
associated with spina biﬁ da. It may also be 
acquired as a result of cerebral abscess or tumour, 
either within or adjacent to a ventricle.  
 Communicating  h ydrocephalus 
 CSF can escape from within the brain but absorp-
tion via the villi is prevented as a result of the 
obliteration of subarachnoid channels. It may be 
congenital as a result of failure of development of 
the arachnoid villi, or it may be secondary to men-
ingitis or bleeding into the subarachnoid space 
(head injury, aneurysm rupture, arteriovenous 
malformation).  
extensive venous angioma (which may cause 
contralateral focal ﬁ ts). 
 Hydrocephalus 
 The  c irculation of CSF 
 CSF is produced by the choroid plexuses of the 
lateral, third and fourth ventricles (Figure  14.2 ). It 
escapes from the fourth ventricle through the 
median foramen of Magendie 9  and the lateral 
foramina of Luschka 10  into the cerebral subarach-
noid space. About 80% of the ﬂ uid is reabsorbed 
via the cranial arachnoid villi. The remaining 20% 
of the CSF is absorbed by the spinal arachnoid villi 
or escapes along the nerve sheaths into the 
lymphatics. 
 Obstruction along the CSF pathway produces a 
rise in pressure and dilatation within the system 
proximal to the block. Hydrocephalus may 
be classiﬁ ed according to whether the block 
occurs within the ventricular system or outside 
it. 
 Figure 14.2   The ventricular system.  (Reproduced from Ellis H, Mahadevan V. (2010)  Clinical Anatomy , 12th edn. 
Oxford: Wiley - Blackwell.)  
Interventricular foramen
Posterior horn
Aqueduct
Inferior horn
4th ventricle
3rd ventricle
Anterior horn
Body of lateral ventricle
  9  Fran ç ois Magendie (1783 – 1855), Physician, H ô tel Dieu, Paris, 
France. 
  10   Hubert von Lushka (1820 – 75), Professor of Anatomy, Tubingen, 
Germany. 
  11  Fran ç ois Sylvius (1614 – 1672), Professor of Medicine, Leiden, The 
Netherlands. 
  12  Julius Arnold (1835 – 1915), Professor of Pathology, Heidelberg, 
Germany. Hans Chiari (1851 – 1916), Viennese Pathologist, succes-
sively Professor at Strasbourg, France, and Prague, Czech 
Republic. 

The brain and meninges 113
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Clinically, hydrocephalus may be divided into two 
important groups. The ﬁ rst is the acquired variety, 
which presents with features of raised intracranial 
pressure described on p. 105. The second com-
prises patients with congenital hydrocephalus, 
who show the characteristic picture of enlarge-
ment of the skull (comparison should be made 
with the size of an infant ’ s skull of the same age 
obtained from standard charts) over which the 
scalp is stretched with dilated cutaneous veins. 
The fontanelles are enlarged and tense and fail to 
close at the normal times. Typical of this condition 
is the downward displacement of the eyes ( ‘ sun 
setting ’ ) and there may be an associated squint 
and nystagmus. Papilloedema is not present in 
these cases. There may be late epilepsy, and 
mental impairment may be considerable when 
there is extensive thinning of the cerebral cortex. 
There may be associated congenital deformities, 
especially spina biﬁ da. 
 In some infants with congenital hydrocephalus, 
natural arrest occurs, presumably as a result of 
recanalization of the subarachnoid spaces. In the 
remainder, there is steady progression with inevi-
table mental deterioration and high mortality 
unless adequate treatment is instituted.  
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   CT scan conﬁ rms ventricular enlargement.  
  •   Cranial ultrasound through the fontanelle is 
useful in the child. 
 Treatment 
 The goal of treatment is to divert the CSF around 
the blockage by means of a shunt. For non -
 communicating 
(obstructive) 
hydrocephalus, 
direct removal of the occluding mass lesion is 
desirable. 
 Decompression of the hydrocephalus can be 
achieved by diverting CSF into the peritoneum 
(ventriculoperitoneal shunt) or right atrium via 
the internal jugular vein (ventriculoatrial shunt). 
The shunts comprise silicone catheters with a 
regulator valve mechanism in the middle to permit 
CSF ﬂ ow at a certain ventricular pressure without 
overdrainage of the CSF. 
 In non - communicating (obstructive) hydro-
cephalus, an artiﬁ cial outlet may be created 
through the ﬂ oor of the third ventricle into the 
basal cisterns (endoscopic third ventriculostomy).   
 
 
 

 15 
Head  i njury  
 
 Learning objectives 
  ✓   To know the common causes of coma. 
  ✓   To be able to recognize the severity of a head injury and 
understand the principles of management. 
brain may be lacerated. However, if the injury 
occurred when the head was stationary, in the 
absence of acceleration and deceleration, con-
sciousness may not be lost and neither the patient 
nor the doctor may appreciate the true extent of 
the injury. 
 Skull  i njuries 
 Injuries to the skull are a result of crushing or 
some other severe force. The skull fractures 
along its weakest plane, which varies according 
to the position of the injuring force. Typically, 
this is a linear fracture of the skull vault, but 
may extend into the skull base. A simple crush 
injury to a stationary head may leave the 
scalp intact and not disturb consciousness in the 
absence of acceleration and deceleration forces, 
although the subsequent skull X - ray may show 
extensive fractures. 
 A skull fracture is most important as an indica-
tor of the force of the injury, and the risk of intrac-
ranial haemorrhage . There are several other 
facets of a skull fracture that are important to note 
(Box  15.2 ). 
 Fractures  i nvolving  p aranasal  a ir 
 s inuses:  c erebrospinal  ﬂ uid 
 r hinorrhoea 
 Fractures extending through any of the paranasal 
air sinuses (frontal, ethmoid or sphenoid) com-
municate with the outside and are therefore 
compound (open) fractures, as the overlying 
dura is usually breached. This external communi-
cation may manifest as a runny nose, the clear 
    Head injury is a major cause of death in children 
and young adults. Many survivors of head 
injury are catastrophically disabled. Recognizing 
a severe head injury and administering prompt 
and appropriate care is important for all medical 
practitioners who, if not receiving patients 
with such injuries under their care, may never-
theless be bystanders witnessing such an injury. 
If presented with a patient in  ‘ coma ’ (Box  15.1 ) 
other causes of unresponsiveness should be 
considered. 
 Head injuries are generally classiﬁ ed as closed 
(concussional) or open (penetrating).  
 Types of  i njury 
 Injuries are usefully classiﬁ ed according to the 
structures involved (scalp, skull and underlying 
brain) together with the mechanism of the injury, 
be it penetrating or blunt, and whether an 
acceleration/deceleration and/or a rotational 
brain injury occurred. In reality, isolated injuries 
are uncommon, and patients more typically expe-
rience blunt injury fracturing the skull in which 
acceleration/deceleration of the brain also occurs. 
 Scalp  i njuries 
 Most scalp injuries are simple penetrating inju-
ries, which are readily managed by debridement 
and suture. When the skull is also penetrated, the 
Lecture Notes: General Surgery, 12th edition. © Harold Ellis, 
Sir Roy Y. Calne and Christopher J. E. Watson. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Head injury 115
 Fractures of the  p etrous  t emporal 
 b one: CSF  o torrhoea or  r hinorrhoea 
 Fractures through the petrous temporal bone may 
result in CSF otorrhoea, as CSF passes through 
into the external auditory meatus either directly or 
via the mastoid air cells or middle ear in the pres-
ence of a ruptured tympanic membrane. If the 
tympanic membrane is intact, CSF rhinorrhoea 
occurs via the eustachian tube. Involvement of the 
inner ear will result in deafness. Spontaneous 
resolution of the leak is usual. 
 Fractures  t hrough the  t emporal 
 b one:  m iddle  m eningeal  v essels 
 A fracture through the temporal bone may disrupt 
the middle meningeal artery and/or vein as they 
traverse the bone, and result in an extradural 
haemorrhage, which may not manifest immedi-
ately (see p. 122) . 
cerebrospinal ﬂ uid (CSF) being rich in glucose and 
low in mucin content (and positive for tau protein), 
compared with the normal nasal secretion, which 
contains no sugar and is rich in mucin. Such a 
connection may also be indicated by intracranial 
air (aerocele) or ﬂ uid in one of the sinuses on a 
computed tomography (CT) scan or skull X - ray. 
Anosmia may occur if the fracture crosses the 
cribriform plate. Such patients are at risk of men-
ingitis. Some CSF leaks heal spontaneously, par-
ticularly those involving the temporal bone, but a 
persistent leak will require craniotomy and dural 
repair. 
 Box 15.1   Causes of coma 
 The casualty ofﬁ cer is often called upon to make a 
diagnosis of a patient in coma. The following are the 
common causes to be considered, the ﬁ rst three 
groups accounting for the great majority of cases. 
  •    Central nervous system  
 –  trauma 
 –   disease (e.g. cerebrovascular accident (the 
commonest), epilepsy, subarachnoid 
haemorrhage, cerebral tumour, abscess, 
meningitis) 
  •    Drugs/toxins 
 –   alcohol 
 –   carbon monoxide  
 –   barbiturates, aspirin, opiates, etc.  
  •    Diabetes 
 –   hyperglycaemia 
 –   hypoglycaemia 
  •    Uraemia 
  •    Hepatic failure  
  •    Hypertensive encephalopathy  
  •    Profound toxaemia  
  •    Hysteria 
 It is usually easy enough to determine that uncon-
sciousness is due to trauma, but it is important to 
remember that a drunk or epileptic person, for 
example, may have struck his or her head in falling 
so that the condition is complicated by a head injury.  
 Box 15.2   Physical signs of skull fractures 
 Anterior  f ossa 
  •    Nasal bleeding  
  •    Orbital haematoma (see text)  
  •    Cerebrospinal ﬂ uid rhinorrhoea  
  •    Cranial nerve injuries, nerves I – VI 
 Middle  f ossa 
  •    Orbital haematoma  
  •    Bleeding from the ear  
  •    Cerebrospinal ﬂ uid otorrhoea (rare)  
  •    Cranial nerve injuries, nerves VII and VIII  
 Posterior  f ossa 
  •    Bruising over the suboccipital region, which 
develops after a day or two (Battle ’ s sign 1 ) 
  •    Cranial nerve injuries  – nerves IX, X and XI (rare)  
  1  William Henry Battle (1855 – 1936), Surgeon, St Thomas ’ s Hospital, 
London, UK. 

116 
Head injury
result of the brain being relatively mobile within 
the skull and it being violently forced into sudden 
acceleration and deceleration. These result in 
both diffuse and local effects. 
 Secondary brain injuries  occur after the 
initial event and are the result of hypoxia, 
hypercapnia, hypotension (ischaemia), intracra-
nial haemorrhage or meningitis. These are the 
main causes of in - hospital mortality after head 
injury. 
 Diffuse  b rain  i njury 
 Diffuse neuronal injury occurs as a result of shear-
ing movements, the worst being rotational shear-
ing, as occurs when a blow is delivered off centre. 
The result is axon damage and rupture of the small 
vessels, particularly serious in the brain stem. A 
severe rotational shearing force may be transmit-
ted down along the axis of the brain, and such 
forces shearing through the brain stem are usually 
fatal.  
 Localized  b rain  i njury 
 Local brain damage occurs as the brain impacts 
against the skull.  
 Coup and  c ontre - c oup 
(Figure  15.1 ) 
 The direct impact of the brain on the skull at the 
site of injury and the contre - coup injury as it 
rebounds against the opposite wall of the skull 
result in oedema and bruising at the sites of 
impact. Common sites of impaction are the frontal 
lobes in the anterior fossa and temporal lobes 
within the middle fossa, with contre - coup to the 
occipital lobes. 
 Laceration within the  s kull 
 The brain may impinge on sharp bony edges 
within the skull, such as the sphenoid ridge, and 
sustain a laceration. 
 Cerebral  p erfusion 
 Understanding the mechanisms underlying the 
regulation of cerebral perfusion, and how these 
may be affected in trauma, is important in the 
management of head injury victims. The main 
regulatory factors are described below. 
 Depressed  f ractures 
 A localized blow drives a fragment of bone below 
the level of the surrounding skull vault. Such frac-
tures are often compound, as the overlying scalp 
is torn. The depressed bone may be left if it is not 
deeply depressed (less than the skull thickness) 
and not otherwise troublesome. Indications for 
elevation include the debridement of a contami-
nated wound, depression greater than the bone 
thickness, associated intracranial haematoma or 
epileptic focus. 
 Orbital  h aematoma 
 Fractures of the anterior and middle cranial fossae 
are very frequently associated with orbital hae-
matoma; blood tracks forward into the orbital 
tissues, into the eyelids and behind the conjunc-
tiva. It may be difﬁ cult to differentiate this from a 
 ‘ black eye ’ , which is a superﬁ cial haematoma of 
the eyelid and surrounding soft tissues produced 
by direct injury. 
 An orbital haematoma is suggested by the fol-
lowing features: 
  •   a subconjunctival haemorrhage , the posterior 
limit of which cannot be seen;  
  •   absence of grazing of the surrounding skin ; 
  •   conﬁ ned to the margin of the orbit  (owing to its 
fascial attachments), whereas a black eye 
frequently extends onto the surrounding cheek;  
  •   mild exophthalmos and a degree of 
ophthalmoplegia ; 
  •   bilateral haematoma . 
 There may also be some confusion in making 
a diagnosis between a subconjunctival and 
conjunctival haemorrhage. The subconjunctival 
haemorrhage extends from the orbit, forwards 
and deep to the conjunctiva; there is therefore no 
posterior limit to the haemorrhage. A conjunctival 
haemorrhage results from a direct blow on the eye 
and produces a small haematoma clearly delim-
ited on the conjunctiva itself.   
 Brain  i njuries 
 Brain injury can be divided into primary and 
secondary. 
 Primary brain injuries  are the direct result of 
trauma, and may have several components which, 
apart from direct penetrating injuries, are the 

Head injury 117
bradycardia  –  the Cushing reﬂ ex. 2  Hence, hypo-
tension in head injury victims is seldom due to the 
head injury.  
 Cerebrovascular  r esistance 
 The cerebral arterioles can compensate for altera-
tions in systemic blood pressure by altering 
vascular tone. The arterioles are sensitive to the 
presence of vasoactive mediators, the most impor-
tant being pH, and its proxy,  P co 2 . An increase 
in arterial  P co 2  (hypercapnia) causes cerebral 
vasodilatation. If a reduction in cerebral blood 
volume is required therapeutically, e.g. in the 
treatment of post - traumatic cerebral oedema, 
elective hyperventilation with its resultant hypoc-
apnia is often performed. 
 Conversely, hypercapnia in the presence of 
oedema may further raise intracranial pressure 
and result in exacerbation of the brain injury, 
one of the causative factors in secondary brain 
injury. 
 Systemic  a rterial  p ressure 
 Cerebral perfusion is normally autoregulated by 
the vasoactive cerebral arterioles to maintain 
constant cerebral blood ﬂ ow over a wide range of 
systemic blood pressures. If systemic arterial pres-
sure falls, cerebral vasodilatation occurs to com-
pensate; a further fall may exceed the arterioles ’  
ability to compensate, and cerebral ischaemia 
occurs. 
 Intracranial  p ressure 
 Since the skull is a closed compartment, a rise in 
intracranial pressure (ICP) will reduce the cerebral 
perfusion pressure.
 Cerebral perfusion pressure
BP
ICP
=
−
 
 where BP is blood pressure. The ﬂ ow of blood to 
the brain is autoregulated until the perfusion 
pressure is around 40   mmHg. A rise in ICP coupled 
with hypotension in trauma victims with head 
injuries reduces cerebral blood ﬂ ow, and the 
resultant ischaemia affecting the cardiorespira-
tory centres in the ﬂ oor of the fourth ventricle 
leads to reﬂ ex increase in systemic pressure and 
 Figure 15.1   Coup and contre - coup injuries  – mechanism.  
Blow
Direct 'coup' injury
'Contre-coup'
injury from brain
hitting opposite
part of skull
  2   Harvey Cushing (1869 – 1939), Professor of Surgery, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. He was one of the founders of 
neurosurgery. 

118 
Head injury
should be obtained from relatives and friends. 
Was the patient drunk at the time? Is the 
patient diabetic and so could the coma be 
hypoglycaemic? Does the patient have a glass 
eye or is he or she on treatment for chronic 
glaucoma to account for the absence of 
pupillary responses? 
 Examination 
 Your examination should reassess the patient ’ s 
conscious level to decide whether the condition 
has worsened or improved, and look for associ-
ated injuries, in particular major occult injuries 
such as a tension pneumothorax or fractured 
spine. In patients with major injuries, the priori-
ties for examination are usually quoted in terms of 
the ABC of resuscitation, to which may be added 
an additional C. 
  •   Airway . Is the airway clear without obstruction 
such as vomitus or blood? If the patient is not 
maintaining the airway, intubation with an 
endotracheal tube should be performed. 
Occasionally, this may not be possible and a 
tracheostomy may be required. 
  •   Breathing . Is the patient breathing 
spontaneously, or should ventilation be 
instituted? Controlled hyperventilation may be 
desirable to reduce intracranial pressure 
(Chapter  14  , p. 106 ). An arterial blood sample 
for estimation of oxygen carriage should be 
taken as soon as convenient, and the patient 
should be monitored by pulse oximeter to 
ensure adequate haemoglobin saturation. 
  •   Circulation . The patient ’ s pulse and blood 
pressure should be taken and monitored. 
Raised intracranial pressure results in 
bradycardia and hypertension (Cushing reﬂ ex , 
see p. 117 ). Hypotension is rarely due to head 
injury and an alternative cause should be 
sought (a ruptured spleen, a haemothorax or a 
fractured pelvis for example). Occasionally, 
extensive scalp bleeding may result in 
hypotension, as may a head injury in a child.  
  •   Cervical spine . Every patient who sustains a 
head injury should be considered to have a 
cervical spine injury as well until proved 
otherwise by good quality radiography or CT 
scan. The neck should therefore be 
immobilized in a hard collar. 
 Following the initial ABC, a full central nervous 
system (CNS) examination should be performed 
 Management of the 
 p atient with a  h ead  i njury 
 The management of a patient with a head injury 
can be divided into the following: 
  •   initial assessment; 
  •   immediate management; 
  •   delayed management. 
 In practice, the initial assessment and immedi-
ate management frequently overlap according to 
clinical priorities. 
 Initial  a ssessment 
 The initial assessment is an active process and 
not just a period of history taking. However, the 
history is most important, in particular the account 
of a witness, as most victims of major head injuries 
are unable to give an accurate history. 
 History 
 Important points to note in the history are as 
follows. 
  •   The mechanism of the injury . This may enable 
some prediction as to the likely injuries, both 
visible and within the cranium. The nature of 
the injurious force and its direction relative to 
the recipient are important.  
  •   The immediate condition of the injured person . 
What was the patient like immediately after 
the injury? In particular, note the level of 
consciousness in terms of an accepted scale 
such as the Glasgow coma scale  (see p. 119) , as 
well as other vital signs (pulse, respiration, 
blood pressure), the size and reaction of the 
pupils and recorded limb movements (was the 
patient moving his or her arms and legs after 
the accident?).  
  •   Any change in the condition of the injured 
person . As well as establishing the patient ’ s 
condition when ﬁ rst seen after the injury, it is 
also important to establish whether the 
condition has changed at all. For example, if 
the patient was talking and moving all limbs 
and is now comatose, it suggests that an 
intracranial mass lesion such as an intracranial 
haemorrhage is developing.  
  •   The prior condition of the injured person . As 
much history about the injured as possible 

Head injury 119
avoided; they may be of value to a psychiatrist but 
not to a surgeon. Instead, the conscious level is 
charted according to the patient ’ s motor, verbal 
and eye - opening responses to stimuli; these are 
very much the reactions of a patient recovering 
from deep anaesthesia. The most commonly used 
scale is the Glasgow coma scale (GCS) (Box  15.3 ), 
in which the responses within each group are 
allotted a score, the normal being 15. A mild head 
injury may score 13 – 15, a severe injury 8 or less. 
 Special  i nvestigations 
 With respect to head injury, there are three imme-
diate investigations that may be indicated. 
 1  Skull X - ray used to be the initial investigation 
but has been replaced owing to the ready 
availability of CT. It may have a role in 
children as part of a skeletal survey in 
suspected non - accidental injury. 
 2  CT scan should be performed on all patients 
with signiﬁ cant head injuries (Box  15.4 ) as 
indicated by impaired conscious level (GCS 
 < 15), history of penetrating injury or suspected 
fracture, signs of a basal skull fracture (e.g. 
CSF rhinorrhoea or otorrhoea, bilateral orbital 
haematoma (Battle ’ s sign)), post - traumatic 
seizure, focal neurological deﬁ cit or recurrent 
( > 1) vomiting or amnesia for more than 30 
minutes prior to impact. Other indications 
as well as complete examination of the chest, 
abdomen and limbs. Particular attention should 
be paid to the parts that are usually forgotten, 
including examining the back for evidence of 
trauma and integrity of the spine, and a rectal 
examination with particular attention to anal tone 
(or its absence in spinal injury) and the position of 
the prostate in the male (a ruptured urethra results 
in a displaced prostate).  
 The  c onscious  l evel: the Glasgow 
 c oma  s cale 
 Vague terms such as comatose, semicomatose, 
unconscious, stuporose and so on should be 
 Box 15.3   The Glasgow coma scale ( GCS ) 
 Eye  o pening 
 4  Spontaneously 
 3   To speech/command  
 2   To pain  
 1   None 
 Best  v erbal  r esponse 
 5   Orientated  – knows who he or she is and where 
he or she is  
 4   Confused conversation  – disorientated; gives 
confused answers to questions  
 3   Inappropriate words  – random words; no 
conversation 
 2   Incomprehensible sounds  
 1   None 
 Best  m otor  r esponse 
 6   Obeys commands  
 5   Localizes pain  
 4   Flexes to pain  – ﬂ exion withdrawal of limb to 
painful stimulus  
 3   Abnormal (decorticate) ﬂ exion  – upper limb 
adducts, ﬂ exes and internally rotates so that it 
lies across chest; lower limbs extend (Figure 
 15.2 ) 
 2   Extends to pain (decerebrate)  – painful stimulus 
causes extension of all limbs  
 1   None 
 When assessing the GCS, it is very important that 
an adequate stimulus is applied.  
 Box 15.4   Indications for  CT scan 
  •    Impaired conscious level, GCS  < 13 on initial 
assessment or GCS  < 15 at 2 hours after the 
injury 
  •    Suspected open or depressed skull fracture or 
suspected penetrating injury  
  •    Basal fracture of skull (possibly indicated by 
cerebrospinal ﬂ uid rhinorrhoea or otorrhoea, 
periorbital haematoma (Battle ’ s sign))  
  •    Focal neurological signs, ﬁ ts or any other 
neurological symptoms  
  •    Deteriorating conscious level  
  •    More than one episode of vomiting 
  •    Amnesia for 30 minutes before impact 
  •    Coagulopathy/anticoagulation in patients with a 
history of signiﬁ cant trauma or impaired 
consciousness 

120 
Head injury
gery is indicated (see below). Transfer should only 
occur after initial resuscitation and stabilization of 
the patient.   
 The immediate management of complicated 
cases will include correcting any problems identi-
ﬁ ed in the initial assessment, such as draining 
a pneumothorax, instituting ventilation if the 
patient is unable to maintain the airway or to 
breathe, and performing a laparotomy and/or 
orthopaedic procedures when appropriate. 
 Following the initial brain injury, further dete-
rioration may be due to the following factors: 
  •   increasing cerebral oedema as the brain swells 
consequent upon the damage it sustained;  
  •   intracranial haemorrhage  – extradural, 
subdural or intracerebral;  
  •   hypoxia, due to impaired ventilation or 
ischaemia;  
  •   infection, secondary to compound fractures 
including fractures involving the paranasal 
sinuses or petrous temporal bone;  
  •   hydrocephalus, either communicating or 
non - communicating. 
include a history of loss of consciousness or 
amnesia and a history of signiﬁ cant trauma, 
coagulopathy (e.g. patient on anticoagulation), 
or age over 65 years. The resulting images may 
then be viewed locally or transmitted to a 
regional neurosurgical centre for specialist 
opinion.  
 3  Cervical spine X - ray  is necessary in all 
unconscious patients following head injury, 
unless included in the CT scan. Other 
indications include neck pain and/or 
tenderness with a history of possible neck 
trauma, or where exclusion of neck trauma is 
necessary prior to intubation for other surgery. 
 Immediate  m anagement 
 Admission to hospital (Box  15.5 ), CT scanning 
(Box  15.3 ) and neurosurgical referral should all be 
considered. Consultation with a neurosurgeon is 
indicated for persistent coma (GCS  ≤ 8), persistent 
unexplained confusion lasting more than 4 hours, 
deterioration in GCS and progressive focal neuro-
logical signs as well as those in whom neurosur-
 Figure 15.2   Decerebrate and decorticate postures.  
Arms adducted,
flexed and
internally 
rotated to lie
across chest
Legs extended
Ankles plantar 
flexed
Arms extended
and internally
rotated
Legs extended
Ankles plantar
flexed as in
decorticate
Decorticate
Decerebrate

Head injury 121
that side becomes compressed by descent of the 
uncus over the edge of the tentorium cerebelli. 
Paralysis of the third nerve (which transmits para-
sympathetic pupilloconstrictor ﬁ bres) results in 
dilatation of the corresponding pupil (owing to 
the intact unopposed sympathetic supply) and 
failure of the pupil to respond to light. An impor-
tant sign of cerebral compression is, therefore, 
dilatation and loss of light reaction of the pupil on 
the affected side, although, occasionally, pupillary 
dilatation will be a false localizing sign and will be 
on the side opposite the mass lesion. Because the 
optic nerve pathway is intact, a light shone into 
this unreacting pupil produces constriction in the 
opposite pupil (consensual reaction to light). As 
compression continues, the contralateral third 
nerve becomes compressed, and the opposite 
pupil in turn dilates and becomes ﬁ xed to light. 
Bilateral ﬁ xed dilated pupils in a patient with head 
injury indicates very great cerebral compression 
from 
which 
the 
patient 
rarely 
recovers. 
Occasionally, local trauma to the nerves from 
extensive skull - base fractures may produce the 
same ﬁ ndings. 
 Pulse,  r espiration and  b lood 
 p ressure 
 With increasing intracranial pressure, the pulse 
slows and the blood pressure rises (Cushing reﬂ ex , 
see p. 117 ), the respirations become stertorious 
and eventually Cheyne – Stokes 3 in nature. 
 Nursing  c are of the  u nconscious 
 p atient 
 The  a irway 
 The most important single factor in the care of the 
deeply unconscious patient, whatever the cause, 
who has lost the cough reﬂ ex is the maintenance 
of the airway. The patient is transported and 
nursed in the recovery position, i.e. on one side 
with the body tilted head downwards, which allows 
the tongue to fall forward and bronchial secretions 
or vomit to drain from the mouth rather than be 
inhaled. Suction may be required to remove exces-
sive secretions or vomit from the pharynx. 
 An endotracheal tube may be necessary if the 
airway is not satisfactory and, if after some days it 
 Delayed  m anagement 
 With respect to the head injury, there follows a 
period of observation, with attention paid to the 
following: 
  •   conscious level  – according to the Glasgow 
coma scale;  
  •   pupil size and responses  –  dilatation of a pupil, 
loss of response to light or asymmetry are late 
signs of increasing intracranial pressure;  
  •   vital signs  – pulse, blood pressure, 
temperature, oxygen saturation;  
  •   intracranial pressure monitoring  – done with a 
catheter placed within the ventricles, which 
will help direct treatment and facilitate 
drainage of ICF to lower pressure.    
 Pupil  s ize and  r esponses 
 If a cerebral hemisphere is pressed upon by an 
enlarging blood clot, the third cranial nerve on 
 Box 15.5   Indications for admission 
following a head injury 
  •    Persisting confusion or impaired conscious level 
(GCS  < 15), in spite of imaging results  
  •    Skull fracture or other signiﬁ cant abnormality on 
imaging 
  •    Neurological symptoms or signs, including 
headache and ﬁ ts and cerebrospinal ﬂ uid leaks  
  •    Difﬁ culty in assessing the patient, particularly 
children, those under the inﬂ uence of alcohol or 
recreational drugs, those with other injuries or in 
shock, and those with pre - existing neurological 
condition, e.g. Parkinson ’ s disease  
  •    Complicating medical condition other than head 
injury, such as anticoagulant therapy  
  •    Lack of responsible adult to supervise the 
patient, or other adverse social conditions  
 Notes 
  •    Patients who are discharged home should be 
given written instructions about the possible 
complications and what action should be taken.  
  •    Post - traumatic amnesia with full recovery is not 
considered an indication for admission.  
  •    No patient presenting with a head injury should 
be allowed home until their GCS is normal (15).  
  3  John Cheyne (1777 – 1836), an Edinburgh - trained physician who 
migrated to Ireland. William Stokes (1804 – 1878), Physician, Meath 
Hospital, Dublin, Ireland. 

122 
Head injury
 Delayed 
  •   Repair of a dural tear with CSF rhinorrhoea. 
  •   Late repair of skull defects. 
  •   Late plastic surgery for deforming facial 
injuries. 
 Traumatic  i ntracranial 
 b leeding 
 Classiﬁ cation 
 Haemorrhage within the skull following injury 
may be classiﬁ ed as follows. 
 1  Extradural. 
 2  Subdural: 
 a  acute; 
 b  chronic. 
 3  Subarachnoid. 
 4  Intracerebral. 
 5  Intraventricular. 
 Extradural  h aemorrhage 
 This is sometimes wrongly named  ‘ middle menin-
geal haemorrhage ’ . It may indeed arise from a 
tear of the middle meningeal artery, but an extra-
dural collection of blood may also develop from 
a laceration of one of the other meningeal 
vessels, from the torn sagittal sinus or as a result 
of oozing from the diplo ë , bone and stripped dura 
mater on each side of any associated fracture 
(Figure  15.3 a). 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 The classic story is of a relatively minor head 
injury producing temporary concussion, recovery 
( ‘ the lucid period ’ ) then, some hours later, the 
development of headache and progressively 
deeper coma due to cerebral compression by the 
extradural clot. This picture may give rise to the 
tragedies of the drunk who is put into the cells for 
the night and is found dead in the morning, or the 
cricketer who goes home to bed after being mildly 
concussed by a cricket ball and perishes during 
the evening. It is important to note that this classic 
picture is not as common as is thought. Often, 
there is no lucid period; the patient progressively 
passes into deeper coma from the time of the 
initial injury. 
is still difﬁ cult to maintain an adequate airway, 
tracheostomy may be required.  
 Restlessness 
 Opiates, particularly morphine, are generally con-
traindicated, as they will depress respiration and 
disguise the level of consciousness and will also 
produce constricted pupils, which may mask a 
valuable physical sign. Paracetamol, barbiturates 
or codeine preparations may be necessary but, 
often, all that is required is to protect the patient 
from self - injury by judicious restraint and padding. 
 A cause of restlessness may be a distended 
bladder; often, if the retention is relieved, the 
patient will then calm down.  
 Feeding 
 Many patients with head injury died in the past 
owing to dehydration and starvation. Orogastric 
feeding is instituted if the patient remains unable 
to swallow. A nasogastric tube is contraindicated 
in patients with craniofacial injuries because of 
the danger of intracranial penetration.  
 Skin  c are 
 A deeply unconscious patient is liable to bed 
sores. Careful nursing care and the use of an inter-
mittently inﬂ atable mattress are required for their 
prevention. 
 Sphincters 
 The unconscious patient may be incontinent, and 
the resultant excoriation of the skin makes the 
patient still more liable to pressure sores. The use 
of Paul ’ s tubing 4  on the penis or of an indwelling 
catheter in female patients will help in the nursing 
care. Retention of urine may require catheter 
relief. 
 Indications for  s urgery in 
 h ead  i njuries 
 Early 
  •   The excision and suture of scalp lacerations. 
  •   Surgical toilet of a compound fracture.  
  •   Cerebral decompression and evacuation of the 
haematoma for intracranial bleeding. 
  4  Frank Thomas Paul (1851 – 1941), Surgeon, Liverpool Royal 
Inﬁ rmary, Liverpool, UK. 

Head injury 123
turned over the clot. Alternatively, a burr - hole is 
made over the suspected site of the clot, the 
opening enlarged with nibbling forceps and the 
clot evacuated. The major bleeding point on 
the dura is controlled either with diathermy or 
silver clips or by under - running. Bleeding from the 
bone edges is plugged by means of bone wax.   
 Subdural  h aematoma (Figure  15.3 b) 
 Acute 
 This results from bleeding into the subdural space 
from lacerated brain or torn vessels. It is usually 
part of a severe head injury. The patient is fre-
quently in deep coma from the moment of injury 
but the condition deteriorates still further. 
 Treatment 
 Release of the subdural clot through a craniotomy 
may give some improvement in the neurological 
state, but the outcome may be poor because of the 
severity of the underlying brain trauma. 
 Chronic  s ubdural  h aematoma 
or  h ygroma 
 This follows a trivial (often forgotten) injury, 
usually in an elderly patient, sustained weeks or 
months before. There is a small tear in a cerebral 
vein as it traverses the subdural space. Whenever 
the patient coughs, strains or bends over, a little 
 The physical signs are those of rapidly increas-
ing intracranial pressure, which have already been 
discussed (Chapter  14 , p. 105 ). 
 In addition, there are certain localizing signs 
that may help the surgeon decide on which side to 
explore the skull. These are as follows: 
  •   The pupils : a good neurosurgical aphorism is 
 ‘ explore the side of the dilated pupil ’   (see p. 
121) . In 10% of patients, the dilated pupil will 
be a false localizing sign.  
  •   Hemiparesis or hemiplegia  (common) or focal 
ﬁ ts (uncommon) usually indicate contralateral 
compression.  
  •   A boggy  scalp haematoma  usually overlies the 
extradural clot. 
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   CT scan is diagnostic and allows accurate 
localization of the position and size of the clot.  
  •   Skull X - ray may be entirely normal. However, 
the clot tends to be on the side of the fracture, 
if one is visible. A calciﬁ ed pineal gland may be 
seen to be pushed over from the midline in a 
good anteroposterior ﬁ lm. 
 Treatment 
 An extradural haemorrhage is one of the few surgi-
cal emergencies where minutes really can matter. 
If a neurosurgeon is available, a bone ﬂ ap will be 
 Figure 15.3   (a) Extradural haematoma and (b) acute subdural haematoma. The latter is usually associated with a 
severe brain injury.  
Skull
Dura
Extradural haematoma
Subdural haematoma
Laceration of brain
(a)
(b)

124 
Head injury
 Intraventricular  h aemorrhage 
 Haemorrhage into a ventricle may occur from 
tearing of the choroid plexus at the time of injury 
or rupture of an intracerebral clot into the ventri-
cle. It occurs particularly in childhood and is 
usually part of an overwhelming head injury.    
 Other  c omplications 
 Meningitis 
 Infection of the meninges may complicate a frac-
ture of the skull that is compound, either directly 
to the exterior or via a dural tear into the nasal or 
aural cavities (see p. 114) . 
 Conﬁ rmation of the diagnosis of meningitis is 
the only positive indication for performing a 
lumbar puncture on a patient with a head injury. 
 Treatment 
 The treatment of established meningitis is antibi-
otic therapy. Infection via the nasal route is prob-
ably due to  Pneumococcus ; here, penicillin should 
be the ﬁ rst drug of choice. For infection compli-
cating a compound fracture, or in patients with 
long inpatient stays or previous antibiotic expo-
sure,  Staphylococcus aureus or Gram - negative 
bacilli may be responsible and a broad - spectrum 
antibiotic which can cross the blood – brain barrier 
is indicated. The antibiotic may have to be changed 
when the sensitivity of the organism obtained on 
lumbar puncture becomes known.   
 Hyperpyrexia 
 The temperature of a patient with severe brain -
 stem injury may soar to 40 ° C (105 ° F) or more as a 
result of injury to the heat - regulating centre. This 
is a serious complication and must be treated vig-
orously by means of cooling blankets. 
 Late  c omplications 
 Post - c oncussional  s yndrome 
 Neurosis following a head injury is not uncom-
mon. Unless reassured and rapidly rehabilitated, 
the patient who has had concussion is easily led to 
believe that the brain has been damaged and that 
he or she will never be ﬁ t to lead a normal life again.  
blood extravasates. The resulting haematoma 
becomes encapsulated; as the clot breaks down, 
smaller molecules are formed with a rise in 
the osmotic pressure within the haematoma. 
Consequent absorption of tissue ﬂ uid produces 
gradual enlargement of the local collection, which 
may comprise liquid blood, clot or clear yellow 
ﬂ uid (hygroma). 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Clinical features are those of a developing intrac-
ranial mass lesion. There is mental deterioration, 
headaches, vomiting and drowsiness, which 
progresses to coma. Moderate papilloedema is 
seen in about half the cases. The condition is 
indeed often confused with an intracerebral 
tumour but contrast - enhanced CT scanning will 
demonstrate the outline of the clot.  
 Treatment 
 Treatment comprises the evacuation of the clot or 
ﬂ uid collection through burr - holes. 
 Subarachnoid  h aemorrhage 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Blood in the CSF after head injury is incidental to 
most severe head injuries and gives the clinical 
picture of meningeal irritability with headache, 
neck stiffness and a positive Kernig ’ s sign. 5 There 
may be a mild pyrexia.  
 Treatment 
 Analgesics and bed rest are required until the 
severe headache has subsided; rapid rehabilita-
tion follows. 
 Intracerebral  h aemorrhage 
 Scattered small haemorrhages throughout the 
brain substance are a common post - mortem 
ﬁ nding in severe head injuries and may be dem-
onstrated at CT scanning in extensive cerebral 
injury. At other times, a clot may develop within 
the brain substance, often in the frontal or tempo-
ral lobes. If it is exerting a mass effect and the 
intracranial pressure is high, the haematoma is 
evacuated and the injured lobe may have to be 
removed. 
  5   Vladimir Kernig (1840 – 1917), Neurologist, St Petersburg, Russia. 
He described neck stiffness in meningitis, which at the time was 
commonly tuberculous in origin.  

Head injury 125
 Amnesia 
 Some idea of the severity of the injury is given by 
the period of amnesia, both the retrograde 
amnesia up to the time of the accident and 
the post - traumatic amnesia following injury. 
Interestingly, the retrograde amnesia is always 
considerably shorter than the post - traumatic 
amnesia. If the period of amnesia amounts to a 
few minutes or hours, the ultimate prognosis is 
good; amnesia of several days or even weeks indi-
cates a severe injury and poor prognosis for return 
of full mental function.  
 Epilepsy 
 Persistent epilepsy may complicate penetrating 
compound wounds with resultant cortical scar-
ring. In such cases, anticonvulsant therapy, e.g. 
phenytoin, is given for at least 6 months following 
injury. Established post - traumatic epilepsy is 
treated medically by means of anticonvulsants. 
Occasionally, success may follow excision of a cor-
tical scar. 
 Brain  d eath 
 The medical and nursing care of patients with 
severe brain damage due to trauma, haemorrhage 
or intracranial tumour is now so good that the 
doctors and nurses are often faced with the sad 
case of a patient whose brain is completely and 
irreversibly destroyed, but whose heart and circu-
lation are intact, provided the lungs are mechani-
cally ventilated. This state of affairs may persist for 
some weeks with severe distress to the patient ’ s 
relatives and to the ward staff. 
 The diagnosis of brain death depends on the 
demonstration of permanent and irreversible 
destruction of brain - stem function. The tests must 
be performed by two people with experience in 
the diagnosis of brain - stem death.  All brain - stem 
reﬂ exes should be absent . The following should 
ﬁ rst be excluded before tests for brain - stem death 
can be performed: 
  •   hypothermia; 
  •   intoxication; 
  •   sedative drugs; 
  •   neuromuscular blocking drugs; 
  •   severe electrolyte and acid – base abnormalities. 
 In addition, there must be a clearly identiﬁ ed 
cause of death, which is usually obvious in the 
presence of head injury but may be less clear in 
other circumstances. The speciﬁ c features of 
brain - stem death are as follows: 
  •   The patient is in a coma and on a ventilator. 
  •   The pupils are dilated and do not respond to 
direct or consensual light.  
  •   There is no corneal reﬂ ex. 
  •   Vestibulo - ocular (doll ’ s eye) reﬂ exes are 
absent, such that when the head is passively 
turned, the eyes remained ﬁ xed relative to the 
head.  
  •   Caloric reﬂ exes are absent. These are tested by 
slow injection of 20  mL of ice - cold water into 
each external auditory meatus in turn, clear 
access to the tympanic membrane having been 
established by direct inspection. If no eye 
movement occurs during or after the test, it is 
considered positive.  
  •   No motor responses within the cranial nerve 
distribution can be elicited by adequate 
stimulation of any somatic area.  
  •   There is no gag reﬂ ex response to bronchial 
stimulation by a suction catheter passed down 
the trachea.  
  •   No respiratory movements occur when the 
patient is disconnected from the mechanical 
ventilator for long enough to ensure that the 
arterial  P co 2  rises above the threshold for 
stimulating respiration, i.e. the  P co 2 must be 
above 6.65  kPa (50  mmHg). 
 If this situation persists over a period of obser-
vation and is conﬁ rmed by a second practitioner, 
death can be certiﬁ ed. The period of observation 
depends upon the age of the patient (child or 
adult) and the cause of the coma. 
 The decision to stop mechanical ventilation 
rests on the above factors. Once this decision has 
been made, the possibility of the patient becom-
ing an organ donor for transplantation should be 
considered. This should be discussed fully and 
sympathetically with available relatives so that 
their informed consent is obtained for the removal 
of organs. 
 
 
 
 

 16 
The  s pine  
 
 Learning  o bjectives 
  ✓   To know the types of spinal injury, their clinical signs and how to 
manage them.  
  ✓   To know the degenerative diseases of the spine, how they 
manifest and how they are managed.     
declined. The incidence of open spina biﬁ da 
(meningocele, myelomeningocele and myelocele) 
is 1 in 1000 births. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 These defects are particularly common in the 
lumbosacral area, although any part of the spine 
may be involved. There may be an associated 
overlying lipoma, tuft of hair or skin dimple, which 
may be an important clue to the astute clinician 
of the underlying defect. When nervous tissue is 
involved, there may be paraparesis, paraplegia, 
sensory disturbances in the limbs and loss of 
sphincter control. 
 Hydrocephalus nearly always coexists with the 
myelomeningocele owing to the  Arnold – Chiari 
malformation , 1  in which the cerebellar tonsils 
descend below the foramen magnum with conse-
quent obstruction of the CSF pathway. 
 As with any other congenital deformity, there 
may be multiple developmental anomalies, e.g. 
congenital dislocation of the hip, talipes equino-
varus, cleft lip or palate, cardiac lesions or super-
numerary digits. 
 Spina biﬁ da occulta  is usually an incidental 
ﬁ nding noted on X - ray. When overlying skin 
changes (dimple, hair tuft, lipoma, sinus) are 
present, the cord beneath may be tethered to the 
skin by a ﬁ brous band, and, as the child grows, 
 Spina  b iﬁ da 
 The neural tube develops by an infolding of 
the neural ectoderm to become the spinal cord. 
The surrounding meninges and vertebral column 
derive from mesodermal tissue. Failure of 
em bryonic fusion may result in the following 
anomalies: 
  •   Spina biﬁ da occulta : failure of the vertebral 
arch fusion only; meninges and nervous tissue 
normal. It occurs in 10% of the population.  
  •   Meningocele : a cystic protrusion of the 
meninges through a posterior vertebral defect 
without nervous tissue involvement.  
  •   Myelomeningocele : neural tissue (the cord or 
spinal roots) protrudes into, and may be 
adherent to, the meningeal sac.  
  •   Myelocele (rachischisis) : failure of fusion of 
the neural tube; an open spinal plate 
occupies the defect as a red, granular area 
weeping cerebrospinal ﬂ uid (CSF) from its 
centre. 
 Antenatal screening (presence of high levels of 
 α  - fetoprotein in the amniotic ﬂ uid and ultra-
sound) enables a high degree of accuracy in intra-
uterine diagnosis of neural tube defects, and gives 
the opportunity for termination of the pregnancy. 
The number of infants born with severe spinal 
abnormalities 
has, 
in 
consequence, 
greatly 
Lecture Notes: General Surgery, 12th edition. © Harold Ellis, 
Sir Roy Y. Calne and Christopher J. E. Watson. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
  1  Julius Arnold (1835 – 1915), Professor of Pathology, Heidelberg, 
Germany. Hans Chiari (1851 – 1916), Viennese Pathologist, succes-
sively Professor at Strasbourg, France, and Prague, Czech 
Republic. 

The spine 127
this, the concept of the three - column spine is 
useful (Figure  16.1 ). 
 The three columns are made up as follows. 
  •   The anterior column comprises the anterior 
longitudinal ligament, the anterior annulus 
ﬁ brosus and the anterior part of the vertebral 
body. 
  •   The middle column comprises the posterior 
longitudinal ligament, the posterior annulus 
ﬁ brosus and the posterior part of the vertebral 
body and the facet joints.  
  •   The posterior column comprises the posterior 
arch and the intervening ligament complex, 
itself comprising supraspinous ligaments, 
interspinous ligaments and ligamentum 
ﬂ avum. 
 Disruption of two or all of these columns results 
in spinal instability. Disruption of a single column, 
such as in a wedge fracture affecting the anterior 
half of the vertebral body, is a stable injury without 
risk of further displacement or further neurologi-
cal damage.  
 Types of  f racture 
 Most fractures are caused by a sudden hyperex-
tension or hyperﬂ exion, often combined with 
compression or distraction. The results of such 
forces may be considered in terms of ﬁ ve distinct 
levels in the spine. 
 1  Upper cervical spine (C1, C2).   In the upper 
cervical spine, ﬂ exion/extension injuries may 
result in fracture of the dens (odontoid 
process) at its base, atlantoaxial dislocation or 
fracture of the atlas or axis (hangman ’ s 
fracture). The spinal canal is wide in the upper 
cervical region and immediate spinal cord 
damage may be minor, although, in more 
severe injuries, fatal damage to the cord may 
occur. 
 2  Lower cervical spine (C3 – C7). 
 a  Hyperﬂ exion injuries may result in anterior 
dislocation of facet joints, with consequent 
narrowing of the spinal canal and 
neurological injury. A corresponding step 
may be seen on a lateral cervical spine 
X - ray. Either one or both facet joints may be 
involved. Because of the much closer ﬁ t of 
the cervical cord within the vertebral canal 
compared with the wider lumbar region, the 
incidence of cord damage in these injuries is 
extremely high, with resultant tetraplegia or 
weakness in the legs may occur with sensory loss, 
pes cavus or difﬁ culty with bladder and bowel 
sphincters  –  ‘ the tethered cord syndrome ’ . 
 Treatment 
 Dietary supplementation with folic acid before 
pregnancy and in the ﬁ rst trimester reduces the 
occurrence of neural tube defects. In the USA, 
folic acid has been added to grain in an effort to 
ensure that adequate dietary supplementation is 
achieved. 
 Minor degrees of spina biﬁ da are left alone 
unless there is a risk of tethering or infection. Skin -
 covered lesions require only cosmetic surgery. All 
cases with an exposed neural plate should be 
repaired within a few hours of birth to prevent 
meningitis. Associated hydrocephalus should be 
drained within the next 2 weeks provided there 
is no ascending meningitis. Surgery to improve 
bladder function and to correct orthopaedic limb 
problems arising as a result of spasticity or paraly-
sis is often required as the child grows.   
 Spinal  i njuries 
 Spinal injuries have two components  –  the bony 
injury and the neurological injury  –  both of which 
must be considered in all patients with spinal 
trauma. 
 The  b ony  i njury 
 The bony injury may comprise either a fracture or 
a dislocation or a combination of both (fracture 
dislocation). The most important consideration is 
the stability of the fracture. A stable fracture is one 
that is unlikely to undergo further displacement or 
neurological damage; an unstable fracture may 
undergo further displacement with the risk of 
further neurological damage. 
 Assessing  s tability 
 The assessment of stability is fundamental to the 
initial management of the patient. It depends 
upon the integrity of the structures that make up 
the normal spinal column, namely the vertebrae, 
intervertebral discs and ligaments. While it is rela-
tively easy to determine stability in upper cervical 
fractures, it is less easy in lower fractures such as 
those in the thoracolumbar region. To overcome 

128 
The spine
 Figure 16.1   The three - column spine 
concept.  
Interspinous
ligament
Annulus
fibrosus
Anterior
longitudinal
ligament
Posterior
longitudinal
ligament
Supraspinous
ligament
1
2
3
paraplegia. If the facet joints do not lock, 
there may be spontaneous reduction and 
little to see on a lateral X - ray, although 
complete transection of the cord may have 
occurred.  
 b  Hyperextension  may result in rupture of the 
anterior longitudinal ligament and disc with 
backward displacement of the vertebral 
body to narrow the spinal canal and 
impinge on the cord, before springing back.  
 c  Compression, combined with ﬂ exion , may 
result in a wedge - shaped fracture of the 
vertebral body. Severe compression injuries 
may result in a comminuted fracture with 
fragments encroaching on the spinal canal. 
 3  Thoracic.   The thoracic spine is relatively 
stable owing to the splinting afforded by the 
rib cage and sternum. Pathological fractures, 
commonly a result of osteoporosis or 
secondary tumour, are more common in this 
region. 
 4  Thoracolumbar.  The thoracolumbar junction 
is relatively unsupported, and liable to injuries 
caused by ﬂ exion, rotation and compression. 
Such injuries may follow a fall from a height 
landing on the feet or the buttocks, or forward 
ﬂ exion of the spine in a decelerating car crash, 
or a heavy weight falling on the shoulders. 
 5  Lumbar. 
 a  Compression injuries may cause wedge -
 shaped fractures where the body of the 
vertebra collapses.  
 b  Burst fractures with comminution of the 
vertebral body and hence disruption of 
anterior and middle columns may occur 
following axial compression and result in an 
unstable fracture, often with cord or cauda 
equina damage if bone fragments encroach 
into the canal. Such fractures are often 
associated with crushing of the 
intervertebral disc. 
 In practice, the commonest fractures are those 
in the cervical and thoracolumbar regions.  
 Clinical  f eatures 
 There is the typical history of injury followed by 
localized pain, bruising, tenderness and often a 
kyphus. Careful neurological examination is 
imperative (Box  16.1 ). 

The spine 129
 Box 16.1   Examining neurological injury 
 The examination of nerve injuries requires testing for sensation, power and reﬂ exes. The components of sensa-
tion include light touch, vibration and joint position sense (dorsal columns), and temperature and pain (spinotha-
lamic tract). Abnormalities should be noted in relation to both dermatome and, in the case of peripheral nerve 
injuries, innervation. 
 Motor responses should be examined in relation to spinal level or peripheral nerve according to injury. 
 Movement  
  Muscle responsible  
  Innervation 
 Arm abduction  
  Deltoid  
  C5,6  
 Elbow ﬂ exion  
  Biceps  
  C5,6  
 Wrist extension  
  Forearm extensors  
  C6,7  
 Elbow extension  
  Triceps  
  C7,8  
 Finger abduction  
  Intrinsic muscles of hand  
  C8,T1  
 Hip ﬂ exion  
  Iliopsoas  
  L2,3  
 Knee extension  
  Quadriceps femoris  
  L2,3,4  
 Foot dorsiﬂ exion  
  Tibialis anterior, extensor hallucis longus, extensor digitorum longus  
 L4,5  
 Knee ﬂ exion  
  Hamstrings  
  L5,S1  
 Hallux extension  
  Extensor hallucis longus  
  L5,S1  
 Foot plantar ﬂ exion  
  Gastrocnemius, soleus, tibialis posterior, ﬂ exor hallucis longus, 
ﬂ exor digitorum longus  
 S1,2  
 Anal tone  
  Anal sphincter  
  S2,3,4  
 Motor responses should be graded according to the Medical Research Council (MRC) scale: 
 0   Total paralysis  
 1   Flicker of movement  
 2   Active movement with gravity eliminated  
 3   Normal movement against gravity but not against additional resistance  
 4   Movement against both gravity and resistance, but still overcome  
 5   Normal power  
 The reﬂ exes are innervated as follows: 
 Biceps jerk  
  C5,6 
 Triceps jerk  
  C7,8 
 Knee jerk  
  L3,4  
 Ankle jerk  
  S1,2 
  •   Plantar reﬂ ex.    Extension is abnormal and indicates an upper motor neurone lesion.  
 Two other reﬂ exes are useful in the assessment of patients with spinal cord injuries, the presence of which sug-
gests an incomplete cord lesion: 
  •   Bulbocavernosus reﬂ ex.   Contraction of the anal sphincter in response to pinching of the penile shaft.  
  •    Anal reﬂ ex.    Contraction of the anus in response to stroking of the perianal skin.  

130 
The spine
 Cord  t ransection 
 Loss of function owing to anatomical division of 
the cord is irrecoverable, as the axons within the 
cord have no power of regeneration. There is an 
initial period of spinal shock with complete ﬂ accid 
paralysis below the line of cord section, loss of 
tendon reﬂ exes, atonicity of the bladder (which 
becomes distended), faecal retention and pria-
pism. This phase generally lasts for a few days. The 
cord below the line of transection then recovers 
reﬂ ex function so that the paralysis becomes 
spastic with muscle spasms, the plantar responses 
become extensor, and bladder and bowel begin to 
empty by reﬂ ex (Box  16.2 ). 
 Cauda  e quina  i njury 
 This may complicate fractures below the level of 
termination of the spinal cord at the lower border 
of the ﬁ rst lumbar vertebra. There is saddle anaes-
thesia (over the buttocks, anus and perineum), 
 It is obligatory to examine every person with a 
head injury for suspected spinal fracture, as this is 
easily overlooked in the unconscious patient. 
Unskilled handling of such a case may produce an 
irreparable spinal injury.  
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   Spine X - ray . The exact type of fracture is 
usually shown. Lateral ﬁ lms are the most 
important. Cervical spine ﬁ lms should show all 
seven cervical vertebra and T1. Additional 
views, such as a swimmer ’ s view (a front - crawl 
position) or an oblique view to visualize the 
lower cervical spine, and an open - mouth view 
to show the dens, may be necessary.  
  •   Computed tomography (CT)  to conﬁ rm a 
fracture and demonstrate the extent of 
comminution.  
  •   Magnetic resonance (MR)  imaging to assess 
injury to the spinal cord or intervertebral disc.      
 The  n eurological  i njury 
 Mechanism of  c ord  i njury 
 Cord  c ompression 
 The cord may be compressed by bone, interverte-
bral disc or haematoma. This is particularly 
common when a previous abnormality exists, 
such as congenital spinal stenosis or cervical 
spondylosis. Facet joint dislocation, in which 
the cord is trapped in the narrow canal at the 
level of the dislocation, is another common 
example. 
 Direct  i njury 
 Open injuries, or shards of fractured bone may 
penetrate the neural canal and lacerate the cord.  
 Ischaemia 
 A vascular insult to the spinal vessels may result in 
cord damage, and may be delayed and exacer-
bated by cord oedema and haematoma.   
 Types of  n eurological  i njury 
 Spinal  c oncussion 
 Nervous continuity is not lost, paraplegia is only 
partial and recovery commences within a few 
hours. Full return of function can be anticipated. 
 Box 16.2   Components of neurological 
injury 
 The neurological injury following spinal cord damage 
can be divided into three components:  
 Sensory  l oss 
  •    Somatic and visceral sensations are lost below 
the level of section. Hyperaesthesia may be 
present at the level of section  
 Motor  l oss 
  •    Spinal cord injuries result in an upper motor 
neurone spastic paralysis with hyperreﬂ exia. 
Cauda equina injuries, being injuries of nerve 
roots, produce a lower motor neurone paralysis 
characterized by reduced tone and areﬂ exia  
 Autonomic  l oss 
  •    Loss of sympathetic outﬂ ow injuries below T5 
results in hypotension as a result of loss of 
vasomotor tone. Thermoregulation, which also 
depends on vasomotor activity, is also impaired. 
Sphincter control is also autonomic. With injuries 
above the level of the sacral outﬂ ow the spinal 
reﬂ ex arc triggering micturition remains intact so 
the bladder empties automatically. Injuries below 
this level interrupt the reﬂ ex and an atonic 
bladder results  

The spine 131
spinal cord and nerve - root injury. For example, a 
fracture dislocation at the T12/L1 junction will 
divide the cord at the ﬁ rst sacral segment but clini-
cal examination may reveal paralysis being due to 
damage to the spinal roots as they pass the site 
of the fracture dislocation (Figure  16.2 ). In this 
instance, the roots may recover with return of 
knee and hip movement, although the sacral 
paralysis will be permanent. 
 Brown - S é quard  s yndrome  2  
 A penetrating injury of the spinal cord, which 
is unilateral and results in spastic paralysis on 
the affected side (involvement of the ipsilateral 
pyramidal tract), loss of position and vibration 
sense also on the affected side (posterior column 
involvement) and loss of pain and temperature 
sensation on the opposite side to the lesion 
(involvement of the spinothalamic tract). Such an 
injury is often partial, and rarely occurs after a 
closed injury. 
 Treatment of  s pinal  i njuries 
 The treatment of spinal injuries depends whether 
or not there has been neurological injury, and also 
upon the stability of the fracture. 
 Immediate  m anagement 
 Spinal injury should be suspected in anyone 
following severe trauma or who is unconscious 
following trauma. In addition, any patient with 
sensory or motor symptoms following minor 
trauma should be treated as possessing a spinal 
injury until proved otherwise. Before such a 
patient is moved, the neck should be immobilized 
in a hard collar and the patient log rolled or 
 ‘ scooped ’ onto a stretcher for transfer. 
 Airway management is the immediate consid-
eration. The principles are the same as those fol-
lowing head injury. In addition, following spinal 
cord injury, loss of sympathetic tone may lead to 
vasodilatation and hypotension, on top of any 
blood loss which may result from trauma, and so 
replacing circulating volume is important to 
prevent ischaemia.  
weakness of the lower leg muscles, absent ankle 
reﬂ exes and urinary retention. The cauda equina 
are the roots of peripheral nerves and therefore 
possess the power of regeneration provided con-
tinuity of the nerve trunk is not lost. However, 
recovery is rarely complete if compression occurs 
for more than a few hours.  
 Combined  c ord and  c auda  e quina  i njury 
 As many spinal injuries take place at the thoraco-
lumbar junction, there is usually a combination of 
 Figure 16.2   The relationship of the spinal cord and 
nerve roots to the vertebrae. Because of the disparity 
between the two, a fracture dislocation at the 
dorsolumbar junction, shown here by the dotted line, 
will miss the lumbar cord but may transect the sacral 
segments of the cord together with injury to the lumbar 
nerve roots.  
Vertebrae
Nerve roots
T8
T9
T10
T11
T12
L1
L2
L3
L4
L5
  2  Charles Edward Brown - S é quard (1817 – 1894), born in Mauritius, 
trained in Paris, France. Neurologist at The National Hospital for 
Nervous Diseases, Queen ’ s Square, London, UK, and later 
Professor of Medicine at Harvard, Boston, MA, USA, and then the 
Coll è ge de France in Paris, France. 

132 
The spine
continued for 6 weeks. Plaster casts or beds are 
avoided, as pressure sores are almost 
inevitable. Once the fracture has become 
stable, the patient can progress to the 
rehabilitation stage of treatment. The surgical 
approach, more often used on the continent 
and in the USA, consists of open reduction and 
internal rod ﬁ xation of the unstable fracture. 
  •   Care of the skin . Pressure sores may develop 
with extraordinary rapidity in the ﬁ rst weeks 
because of the combination of anaesthesia and 
immobilization. Two - hourly turning, aided by 
use of the circo - electric bed or a Stryker frame, 
and meticulous skin care are required.  
  •   The bladder . In the initial phase of complete 
bladder paralysis, acute urinary retention is 
common and continuous catheter drainage by 
means of a ﬁ ne Silastic urethral or suprapubic 
catheter is instituted. With recovery from 
spinal shock, the patient may develop an 
automatic (reﬂ ex) bladder so that stroking the 
side of the thigh or abdominal compression 
may evoke reﬂ ex bladder emptying. 
  •   The bowels . Acute spinal injury results in 
paralytic ileus. Following recovery of motility, 
constipation is common and is best managed 
by regular enemas. Faecal impaction must be 
watched for and treated by digital evacuation.  
  •   Peptic ulceration prophylaxis . Prophylaxis with 
antacids, H 2 - receptor antagonists, proton 
pump inhibitors or sucralfate should be 
initiated since acute peptic ulceration is 
common in the early days following spinal 
cord injury. 
  •   Pulmonary embolism prophylaxis . Patients 
with paralysis of the legs following spinal cord 
injury are at risk of venous thrombosis and 
pulmonary emboli. Prophylaxis with 
subcutaneous low - molecular - weight heparin 
should be instituted and continued until 
normal mobility is restored.  
  •   Rehabilitation . Active development of muscles 
with an intact or partial innervation by expert 
physiotherapy can restore mobility in 80% of 
paraplegic patients. However, these patients 
require callipers and crutches so that they can 
swing their paralysed legs by the use of 
abdominal, ﬂ ank and shoulder muscles. Of 
these, latissimus dorsi is the most important. 
At the same time, vocational training can be 
commenced and a large percentage of these 
unfortunate patients can be restored to useful 
activity. 
 Treatment with  n o 
 n eurological  i njury 
 Stable fractures of the spine are treated by bed rest 
for 2 – 3 weeks, to allow the associated soft - tissue 
injury to subside, followed by early exercise and 
active mobilization. There is no need to reduce the 
fracture by hyperextension and prolonged ﬁ xa-
tion; often this results in permanent residual pain. 
 Unstable fractures require immobilization in 
order to secure bony stability and thus to protect 
the cord from later damage. Gross instability in the 
presence of an incomplete neurological injury is 
an indication for urgent operative stabilization. 
 Unstable cervical fractures  are immobilized by 
traction using tongs applied to the skull for 6 
weeks, or are ﬁ xed by open reduction and plating. 
This is followed by a cervical collar for a further 
month. Traction may also be used to try to reduce 
facet joint dislocation, although open reduction 
may be necessary. 
 Unstable thoracolumbar fractures  may be 
treated by operative reduction and internal 
ﬁ xation. 
 Treatment with  p araplegia or 
 t etraplegia 
 The patient is transported in a neutral position (so 
that ﬂ exion and extension are not possible), to a 
spinal or neurosurgical centre, the spine being 
supported by suitably arranged pillows and the 
patient being moved frequently from side to side 
to prevent bed sore formation. The distended 
bladder is best left alone until catheterization can 
be carried out under full aseptic precautions to 
prevent infection. High - dose methyl prednisolone 
given as early as possible and continued for 24 
hours has been shown to improve recovery of 
motor function. 
 The following are the main principles of 
treatment. 
  •   The management of the fracture . Two 
techniques of management may be employed. 
The conservative approach, favoured in most 
centres in the UK, comprises nursing the 
patient on a circo - electric bed or a Stryker 
frame. 3 This allows regular turning of the 
paraplegic (thus avoiding pressure sores), 
while keeping the fracture immobilized. This is 
  3   Homer Stryker (1894 – 1980), Orthopaedic Surgeon, Stryker 
Corporation, Kalamazoo, MI, USA.  

The spine 133
ﬁ brosus. It is probable that most ruptures are initi-
ated by trauma, which may be severe but which is 
more often mild or repetitive. It is probably for this 
reason that the great majority of prolapsing discs 
occur in the active adult male. 
 By far the commonest sites are between the L4 
and L5 vertebrae, and between L5 and the sacrum. 
Cervical disc protrusion most commonly occurs 
between C5 and C6 or between C6 and C7. The 
cervical lesion is often associated with degenera-
tive changes in the spine and is therefore usually 
found more than the lumbar disc prolapse in older 
patients. 
 Lumbar  d isc  h erniation 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 There is often lumbar pain early in the history, 
with exacerbations as a result of straining or heavy 
lifting. The majority of patients complain of sci-
atica, their pain being usually unilateral and radi-
ating from the buttock along the back of the thigh 
and knee and then down the lateral side of the leg 
to the foot. This pain is aggravated by coughing, 
sneezing or straining (which raise the intrathecal 
pressure) or by straight leg raising (which stretches 
the sciatic nerve). Sometimes there is the com-
plaint of weakness of ankle dorsiﬂ exion (L5) or 
plantar ﬂ exion (S1). There may be paraesthesiae 
or numbness in the foot. A central prolapse of the 
lumbar disc is more devastating, producing bilat-
eral sciatic pain, sphincter disturbance and com-
plete or incomplete cauda equina compression. 
 Examination reveals ﬂ attening of the normal 
lumbar lordosis, scoliosis and limited spinal 
ﬂ exion. The erector spinae muscles are in spasm 
and straight leg raising is limited and painful. 
There may be weakness of plantar -  or dorsiﬂ exion 
of the ankle and there may be disuse muscle 
wasting of the leg on the affected side. Sensory loss 
on the medial side of the dorsum of the foot and 
the great toe (L5 innervation) suggest an L4/L5 
disc lesion. Sensory loss on the lateral side of the 
foot (S1 innervation) may occur in L5/S1 disc 
lesions. The ankle jerk may be diminished in the 
latter cases.  
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   X - rays of the spine  may or may not reveal 
narrowing of the affected disc space on the 
lateral view. 
 Degenerative  s pinal 
 d isorders 
 Degenerative spinal disorders may arise from 
degenerative changes in the vertebral body, the 
intervertebral joints or the intervertebral discs. 
The resulting symptoms may arise from a combi-
nation of effects, so apophyseal joint degeneration 
may result in local back pain (lumbago), together 
with a radiculopathy attributable to encroach-
ment of osteophyte into the intervertebral 
foramen. 
 Neurological  s equelae of  s pinal 
 d egeneration 
  •   Local pain  arises from osteoarthritis of the 
intervertebral joints. Backache (lumbago) in 
the lumbar spine, neck ache in the cervical 
spine. 
  •   Radiculopathy , causing lower motor neurone 
symptoms, arises from compression and 
irritation of the nerve roots as they exit the 
intervertebral foramen. This may be due to 
disc or osteophyte encroachment into the 
intervertebral canal, and is compounded by 
loss of intervertebral joint space. 
  •   Myelopathy  causes upper motor neurone 
symptoms, results from compression of the 
spinal cord within the canal, arises from 
prolapse of an intervertebral disc or 
osteophyte encroachment into the spinal canal 
and is exacerbated in the presence of a 
congenital narrowing of the spinal canal.  
  •   Claudication of the cauda equina  may arise as 
a result of lumbar canal stenosis. Symptoms 
are similar to those resulting from peripheral 
vascular disease with cramp - like calf pains, but 
are often associated with paraesthesiae, are 
worse when standing erect or walking 
downhill, may be bilateral and are relieved by 
sitting rather than standing. Contrast 
claudication from vascular disease, which is 
usually unilateral, worsens walking uphill and 
is relieved on standing. 
 Prolapsed  i ntervertebral  d isc 
 Disc herniation comprises a protrusion of the 
nucleus pulposus posteriorly, or more commonly 
posterolaterally, through a defect in the annulus 

134 
The spine
Treatment is usually conservative, although 
surgery with decompression and fusion may be 
required. 
 Cervical  s pondylosis 
 Cervical 
spondylosis 
refers 
to 
degenerative 
changes that occur in the neck, with a similar 
pathological process to that in the lumbar spine. 
In the cervical spine, coexistent myelopathy and 
radiculopathy is more common. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Local cervical pain is usually overshadowed by a 
more severe pain radiating into the arm and 
accompanied by numbness and tingling in the 
ﬁ ngers. Patients with myelopathy also complain 
of leg stiffness and difﬁ culty in walking. Sensory 
changes may be present in the legs or arms, and 
bladder sphincter control may be disturbed. 
Examination of the arms reveals a lower motor 
neurone weakness with wasting and decreased 
tendon reﬂ exes. Sensation is reduced with a 
nerve - root distribution. Examination of the legs 
may reveal an upper motor neurone pattern with 
a spastic paraplegia, increased tone, leg weakness, 
brisk reﬂ exes and extensor plantars. 
 Differential  d iagnosis 
 There is an extensive differential diagnosis, which 
includes spinal tumour, multiple sclerosis and 
motor neurone disease. When the radiculopathy 
alone is present with unilateral or bilateral arm 
pain, the differential diagnosis includes cervical 
rib, carpal tunnel syndrome and angina pectoris. 
 Treatment 
 Radiculopathy usually settles with conservative 
treatment. A severe episode may require a period 
of neck traction; otherwise, the neck is supported 
in a plastic collar. Operative removal of the pro-
lapsed cervical disc has the same indications as 
lumbar disc protrusions. 
 Extradural  s pinal  a bscess 
 An abscess in the extradural spinal compartment 
usually represents a metastatic infection as part of 
  •   CT or MR scans are the investigations of choice 
and usually demonstrate the disc protrusion.  
  •   C - reactive protein (CRP)  is normal, and is 
helpful in the differential diagnosis of tumour 
or abscess. 
 Differential  d iagnosis 
 This includes the other common spinal lesions: 
sacroiliac strain, osteoarthritis, spondylolisthesis, 
spinal tumours and tuberculosis. One should 
consider, particularly in the elderly patient, an 
intrapelvic tumour, e.g. of the prostate or rectum, 
involving the sacral plexus; never omit a rectal 
examination in any patient with sciatica, both to 
detect rectal and prostatic tumours and to assess 
anal tone. Intermittent claudication is readily dif-
ferentiated by careful history and examination. An 
abdominal aortic aneurysm may cause low back 
pain, and upon rupture may cause sciatica.  
 Treatment 
 Severe acute pain is treated with analgesia and 
rest on a ﬁ rm bed; as soon as the patient can get 
up, gentle mobilization and physiotherapy should 
be instituted. Operative removal of the prolapsed 
disc is indicated if conservative measures fail, if 
repeated attacks occur, if there are severe neuro-
logical disturbances and particularly if a large 
central protrusion is diagnosed. If bladder sphinc-
ter disturbance occurs, surgical decompression 
must be performed urgently.   
 Spinal  s tenosis 
 Narrowing of the spinal canal may be congenital, 
but more commonly follows degeneration of the 
spine with osteophyte formation. It generally 
extends over several segments, and occurs pre-
dominantly in the lumbar spine. 
 The clinical features have been likened to inter-
mittent claudication (Chapter  12 , p. 90), but in 
spinal claudication the patient presents with pain, 
numbness and weakness in the legs brought on by 
standing or walking, and, in contrast to vascular 
claudication, it is not relieved by standing still but 
by sitting down or otherwise ﬂ exing the spine. 
Neurological examination of the legs is most 
revealing after the patient has been walking for a 
few minutes. 
 The diagnosis is conﬁ rmed by MR (or CT) scan 
of the spine, which shows evidence of bony and 
soft - tissue encroachment into the spinal canal. 

The spine 135
  •   The extradural tumours are usually fast 
growing and malignant; they therefore give a 
picture of rapidly progressive cord 
compression leading to paraplegia, although 
symptoms of root irritation (see below) may 
also be present.  
  •   The intradural extramedullary tumours are 
usually slow growing and benign. Initially, 
there is irritation of the involved nerve roots; 
pain occurs in the localized area of nerve 
distribution, which is often aggravated by 
recumbency and by factors such as coughing, 
sneezing or straining, which raise the CSF 
pressure. There may be hyperalgesia in the 
affected cutaneous segment. Motor symptoms 
due to anterior root pressure are not a feature 
if only one nerve segment is involved, as most 
major muscle groups are innervated from 
several segments; however, if more than one 
segment is affected, there may be localized 
ﬂ accid paralysis. 
 As the tumour increases in size, cord 
compression takes place. There may be 
features of the  Brown - S é quard syndrome (see 
p. 131). Further compression results in 
complete paraplegia of the spastic type with 
increased tendon jerks and extensor plantar 
response, together with overﬂ ow retention of 
urine and severe constipation. 
 Cauda equina tumours produce a lower 
motor neurone lesion: ﬂ accid paralysis with 
diminished reﬂ exes and paralysis of the anal 
and bladder sphincters with incontinence.  
  •   The intramedullary tumours may be 
accompanied by pain, but much more 
frequently give a picture very similar to that of 
syringomyelia. Progressive destruction of the 
cord produces bilateral motor weakness below 
the lesion and, as the crossed spinothalamic 
tracts are the ﬁ rst to be involved, there may be 
dissociation of sensory loss below the lesion, 
with abolition of pain and temperature but 
with persistence of vibration and position 
sense until later on in the progress of the 
disease. 
 Differential  d iagnosis 
 Spinal tumours are relatively uncommon and are 
great impersonators of other diseases; indeed, a 
correct diagnosis made  ab initio  is something of a 
rarity. The root pain, if it occurs in the thoracic 
or abdominal segments, is often mistaken for 
a  Staphylococcus aureus  septicaemia. Occasionally, 
it is secondary to an osteomyelitis of the spine. 
Diagnosis can be difﬁ cult owing to an insidious 
presentation. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Clinical features are local pain and tenderness, 
fever, malaise and anorexia, and a rapidly progres-
sive paraplegia. The white blood cell count is 
raised and the C - reactive protein is elevated. 
 Treatment 
 Urgent treatment is required with drainage of the 
abscess via a laminectomy, and antibiotic therapy 
is commenced. Provided surgery is performed in 
the initial stages, the paraplegia recovers but delay 
carries with it the risk of permanent cord damage.   
 Spinal  t umours 
 Spinal tumours are conveniently classiﬁ ed, from 
both the pathological and clinical points of view, 
into those which occur outside the spinal theca 
(extradural), those which occur within the theca 
but outside the cord itself (intradural extramedul-
lary) and those occurring within the cord 
(intramedullary). 
 The tumours most commonly encountered are 
the following. 
 1  Extradural. 
 a  Secondary deposits in the spine  –  by far the 
commonest.  
 b  Primary vertebral bony tumours (e.g. 
osteoclastoma, myeloma).  
 c  Lymphomas (Hodgkin ’ s disease, non -
 Hodgkin ’ s lymphoma). 
 2  Intradural extramedullary. 
 a  Meningioma. 
 b  Neuroﬁ broma. 
 3  Intramedullary (rare). 
 a  Glioma. 
 b  Ependymoma. 
 c  Others, such as haemangioma. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 The three groups of spinal tumours listed above 
each tend to have a fairly distinctive clinical 
picture. 

136 
The spine
above the normal 0.4  pg/L and may indeed be 
grossly elevated with yellow (xanthochromic) 
ﬂ uid, which may actually clot in the container. 
Queckenstedt ’ s test 4 may show either no rise 
or else a very slow rise and fall of the CSF 
pressure on jugular compression, indicating a 
complete or partial block within the spinal 
canal.  
  •   A radiculogram , in which radio - opaque 
water - soluble contrast medium is injected into 
the theca, will conﬁ rm the presence of a 
space - occupying lesion and localize its 
position accurately. 
 Treatment 
 A laminectomy (or vertebral body excision and 
bone grafting) is required to conﬁ rm the patho-
logical nature of the tumour and also to decom-
press the cord. Wherever possible, the tumour is 
completely excised; this is usually conﬁ ned to the 
benign meningiomas and neuroﬁ broma, in which 
case complete recovery can be anticipated. In the 
malignant tumours, radiotherapy is usually the 
only practical treatment and the prognosis is poor.   
 
 
 
 
intrathoracic or intra - abdominal disease; if the 
pains radiate to the leg, they may be at ﬁ rst diag-
nosed as a prolapsed disc or intermittent claudi-
cation. The intramedullary lesions closely simulate 
syringomyelia and it may be difﬁ cult at ﬁ rst to dif-
ferentiate them from disseminated sclerosis or 
other intraspinal lesions.  
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   MR has become the deﬁ nitive investigation 
and gives almost anatomically perfect imaging 
of spinal tumours.  
  •   X - rays of the spine  may show obvious bony 
deposits within the vertebral bodies. In other 
cases, pressure erosion from the enlarging 
tumour may scallop the posterior aspect of the 
vertebral body, erode one or more vertebral 
pedicles or enlarge the intervertebral foramen. 
Occasionally, calciﬁ cation is seen within a 
meningioma.  
  •   Lumbar puncture . Cytological examination of 
the CSF, together with its protein content and 
CSF pressure measurement, may be useful. 
The protein in the CSF is nearly always raised 
  4   Hans Heinrich Queckenstedt (1876 – 1918), Physician, Leipzig, 
Germany. He described his test while serving in the German 
Army; he was killed accidentally 2 days before the Armistice. 

 17 
Peripheral  n erve  i njuries  
 
 Learning  o bjectives 
  ✓   To know the different types of nerve injury and their prognosis.  
  ✓   To be able to recognize the patterns of neurological deﬁ cit that 
occur with injury to all the main nerves in the upper and lower 
limbs. 
the injury. As the sheath is intact, the correct 
axon will grow into its original nerve ending. 
The rate of regeneration is approximately 
1  mm/day; therefore, the time to recovery 
depends upon the distance between the injury 
and end organ.  
 3  Neurotmesis.  This is actual physical disruption 
of the peripheral nerve. Regeneration will take 
place provided the two nerve ends are not too 
far apart, but functional recovery will never be 
complete. 
 Following the complete disruption of neurot-
mesis, the distal part of the severed nerve under-
goes Wallerian degeneration. The medullary 
sheath is depleted of myelin and the axon cylin-
ders vanish; the empty endoneural sheaths remain 
as tubules composed of proliferating neurilemmal 
cells. The proximal end of the nerve degenerates 
up to the ﬁ rst uninjured node of Ranvier. New axis 
cylinders proliferate from this point and grow into 
the empty neurilemmal tubules. However, there is 
no selection of tubules for the appropriate axon; 
the distal growth is governed solely by the position 
of the nerve ﬁ bres. Thus, with most mixed nerves, 
there is likely to be considerable wastage owing to 
regenerating ﬁ bres growing into endings which 
will be functionless, i.e. motor nerve ﬁ bres growing 
into sensory nerve endings, and vice versa. Even 
when a motor nerve grows into a motor nerve 
ending, it may not supply the original muscle and 
the patient will have to relearn the affected 
movement. 
    Although there is no regeneration of divided tracts 
in the central nervous system (CNS), injured 
peripheral nerve ﬁ bres may recover to a varying 
extent, depending on the severity of the trauma.  
 Classiﬁ cation 
 Nerve injuries are commonly the result of lacera-
tion, stretching (traction) or compression (crush) 
injuries. There are three types of injury: 
 1  Neurapraxia.  Damage to the nerve ﬁ bres 
without loss of continuity of the axis cylinder; 
this is analogous to concussion in the CNS. 
The conduction along the ﬁ bre is interrupted 
for only a short period of time. Recovery 
usually commences within a few days and is 
complete in 6 – 8 weeks. 
 2  Axonotmesis.   This is injury to the axon and 
myelin sheath without disruption of the 
continuity of its perineural sheath. The axon 
distal to the lesion degenerates (Wallerian 
degeneration 1 ) and regrowth of the axon 
occurs from the node of Ranvier 2  proximal to 
Lecture Notes: General Surgery, 12th edition. © Harold Ellis, 
Sir Roy Y. Calne and Christopher J. E. Watson. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
  1  Augustus Waller (1816 – 1870), a General Practitioner in London, 
UK, for 10 years before working as a Physiologist in Bonn, 
Germany, Paris, France, and Birmingham, UK. 
  2   Louis Ranvier (1835 – 1922), Professor of Histology, Paris, France. 

138 
Peripheral nerve injuries
tioned of 1  mm/day. Eventual recovery will seldom 
be full.  
 Nerve  g rafts 
 When important nerves are divided, sometimes 
useful function can be obtained by grafting sec-
tions of non - essential nerves such as the sural 
nerve to act as conduits for axon regrowth. 
 Tendon  t ransfers 
 If restoration of nerve function cannot be achieved 
after injury, tendon transfers may allow the patient 
to perform movements that would otherwise be 
impossible. Thus, wrist drop after a radial nerve 
lesion may be treated by transposing some of the 
ﬂ exor tendons into the extensor group. 
 It is beyond the scope of this book to discuss 
lesions of all the individual nerves, but a few 
important peripheral nerve injuries will be 
mentioned.   
 Brachial  p lexus  i njuries 
 Upper  t runk  l esions 
(Erb ’ s  p aralysis 3 ) 
 These are the result of damage to the upper trunk 
when the head is forced away from the shoulder, 
a common injury in motor cyclists. It may also 
occur as an obstetric injury. C5 and C6 are 
damaged and there is paralysis of the biceps, bra-
chialis, brachioradialis, supinator, supraspinatus, 
infraspinatus and deltoid. The limb will assume 
the  ‘ waiter ’ s tip ’ position, being internally rotated 
with the forearm pronated (owing to the loss of the 
powerful supinating action of biceps). The arm 
hangs vertically (deltoid paralysis) and the elbow 
cannot be ﬂ exed (biceps and brachialis). There 
will be an area of impaired sensation over the 
outer side of the upper arm.  
 T1  i njury (Klumpke ’ s  p aralysis 4 ) 
 This may occur with a cervical rib or dislocation 
or forcible abduction of the shoulder. The small 
 Because a peripheral nerve contains a large 
number of individual ﬁ bres, it is quite possible 
in a nerve injury for some ﬁ bres to suffer 
from 
neurapraxia, 
others 
axonotmesis 
and 
others 
neurotmesis. 
However, 
a 
distinction 
between the ﬁ rst two and the last may be quite 
clear in that, if the nerve is found to be severed 
at surgical exploration, neurotmesis must have 
occurred. 
 Partial nerve injury may occur as the result 
of pressure or friction, for instance from a 
crutch, a tightly applied plaster cast or a tourni-
quet, as well as from closed injuries or open 
wounds. 
 Special  i nvestigation 
 Electromyography (EMG)  plays an important part 
in the diagnosis and assessment of nerve injuries. 
Serial studies are useful in demonstrating the 
amount and rate of regeneration. EMG is also 
useful in the diagnosis of nerve compression 
syndromes. 
 Treatment 
 Neurapraxia and  a xonotmesis 
 Those joints whose muscles have been paralysed 
are splinted in the position of function to avoid 
contractures. They are put through passive move-
ments several times a day so that, when recovery 
of the nerve lesion occurs, the joints will be fully 
mobile. 
 Neurotmesis 
 Operative repair using an operating microscope is 
usually required. If a section of the nerve has been 
lost such that approximation is not possible, the 
nerve is freed proximally, or even moved from 
its original position to a new anatomical plane 
where more length will be available. For example, 
the ulnar nerve can be transposed from the poste-
rior to the anterior aspect of the elbow joint to 
allow compensation for a distal loss of nerve 
substance. 
 After nerve suture, recovery cannot be expected 
to take place until the time for regeneration 
has been allowed for, at the rate already men-
  3   Wilhelm Erb (1840 – 1921), Professor of Neurology, Heidelberg, 
Germany. 
  4  Auguste Dejerine - Klumpke (1859 – 1927), Neurologist, Paris, 
France; her husband, J. J. Dejerine, was also a distinguished 
neurologist. 

Peripheral nerve injuries 139
wrist. In high lesions, the pronators of the 
forearm and ﬂ exors of the wrist and ﬁ ngers will be 
involved, with the exception of the ﬂ exor carpi 
ulnaris and the medial half of the ﬂ exor digitorum 
profundus, which are supplied by the ulnar nerve 
and which produce ulnar deviation of the wrist. 
When the patient clasps the two hands together, 
the index ﬁ nger on the affected side remains 
extended  – the  ‘ pointing sign ’ of a high median 
nerve injury. Whether the injury is in the forearm 
or wrist, there will be paralysis of the small muscles 
of the thumb so that the thenar eminence is 
wasted. The patient is unable to abduct the thumb, 
i.e. lift it at right angles to the plane of the hand. 
The sensory loss with a median nerve lesion is 
serious. There is anaesthesia over the palmar 
aspects of the thumb and the radial two and a half 
ﬁ ngers, and the loss extends onto the dorsum of 
the distal phalanges of these digits. This sensory 
defect makes it difﬁ cult to perform ﬁ ne and deli-
cate tasks.  
 Median  n erve 
 c ompression at the  w rist 
( c arpal  t unnel  s yndrome) 
 The median nerve is compressed as it passes 
through the carpal tunnel formed by the ﬂ exor 
retinaculum stretching from the hook of the 
hamate and pisiform medially to the trapezium 
muscles of the hand are wasted and there is loss 
of sensation on the inner side of the forearm. 
There may also be Horner ’ s syndrome owing to 
associated damage of sympathetic ﬁ bres passing 
to the inferior cervical ganglion (see p. 142).   
 Radial  n erve  i njuries 
(Figure  17.1 a) 
 Usually, the radial nerve is injured by a fracture of 
the humerus involving the spiral groove where the 
nerve is closely applied to the posterior aspect of 
the mid - shaft of the bone. The nerve supply to the 
triceps comes off the radial nerve before it enters 
the spiral groove, and the lesions distal to that 
point will not affect extension of the elbow. 
However, there will be wrist drop because of 
paralysis of the wrist extensors and also loss of 
sensation over a small area on the dorsum of the 
hand at the base of the thumb and index ﬁ nger. 
This surprisingly small sensory loss is due to con-
siderable overlap from the median and ulnar 
nerves. 
 Median  n erve  i njuries 
(Figure  17.1 b) 
 This nerve may be damaged in fractures around 
the elbow joint or laceration of the forearm or 
 Figure 17.1   (a) Radial nerve injury: 
wrist drop, together with anaesthesia 
of a small area of the dorsal aspect of 
the hand at the base of the thumb 
and index ﬁ nger. (b) Median nerve 
injury: thenar eminence paralysis with 
anaesthesia of the palmar aspect of 
the radial three and a half digits and 
corresponding palm.  
(a)
(b)

140 
Peripheral nerve injuries
nens and ﬂ exor pollicis brevis) and the two radial 
lumbricals, all of which are supplied by the median 
nerve. The affected intrinsic muscles are the 
adductor pollicis, the muscles of the hypothenar 
eminence, the ulnar two lumbricals and the inter-
ossei, which are the abductors and adductors of 
the ﬁ ngers and which also extend the interphalan-
geal joints. In the forearm, the ulnar nerve sup-
plies ﬂ exor carpi ulnaris and the medial half of 
ﬂ exor digitorum profundus. 
 Damage to the ulnar nerve produces the typical 
deformity of clawed hand or  main en griffe . The 
clawed appearance results from the unopposed 
action of the long ﬂ exors and extensors of the 
ﬁ ngers. The ﬂ exor profundus and sublimis, 
inserted into the bases of the distal and middle 
phalanges respectively, ﬂ ex the interphalangeal 
joints, while the long extensors, inserted into the 
bases of the proximal phalanges, extend the meta-
carpophalangeal joints. 
 If the nerve is injured at the elbow, ﬂ exor 
digitorum profundus to the fourth and ﬁ fth 
ﬁ nger is paralysed so that the clawing of these 
ﬁ ngers, rather anomalously, is less intense than 
in injuries at the wrist. Paralysis of ﬂ exor carpi 
ulnaris produces a tendency to radial deviation at 
the wrist. In late cases, wasting of the intrinsic 
muscles is readily evident on inspecting the 
dorsum of the hand and the web space between 
the thumb and index ﬁ nger. Sensory loss occurs 
over the dorsal and palmar aspects of the ulnar 
one and a half digits and the ulnar border of 
the hand on both palmar and dorsal aspects. If 
the ulnar nerve is divided at the level of the wrist, 
the sensory loss is conﬁ ned to the palmar surface, 
as the dorsal branch of the ulnar nerve, supplying 
the dorsal aspects of the ulnar one and a half 
ﬁ ngers, is given off 5   cm above the wrist and thus 
escapes injury. 
 Division of the ulnar nerve leaves a surprisingly 
efﬁ cient hand. The long ﬂ exors enable a good 
grip to be taken; the thumb, apart from the loss 
of adductor pollicis, is intact, and the important 
sensation over the palm of the hand is largely 
maintained. Indeed, it may be difﬁ cult to be 
certain clinically that the nerve is injured. A reli-
able test is loss of the ability to abduct and adduct 
the ﬁ ngers with the hand laid ﬂ at, palm down-
wards, on a table. This eliminates the trick move-
ments of adduction and abduction of the ﬁ ngers 
occurring as part of their ﬂ exion and extension, 
respectively. 
and scaphoid laterally. This results in wasting of 
the thenar eminence, diminished sensation and 
most often unpleasant pain (characteristically 
at night), paraesthesia (numbness and tingling) 
in the thumb and radial two ﬁ ngers and some-
times paraesthesia extending up into the arm. 
The reason for this last symptom is not clear. 
Women are affected four times more commonly 
than men, and there is an association with preg-
nancy, rheumatoid arthritis, myxoedema and 
acromegaly. Wrist fractures also predispose to the 
syndrome. 
 EMG conﬁ rms the diagnosis. Treatment con-
sists of dividing the ﬂ exor retinaculum at the wrist 
deep to which the median nerve is compressed, 
although conservative management using a wrist 
splint may also be effective.  
 Ulnar  n erve  i njuries 
(Figure  17.2 ) 
 Like the median, this nerve is also injured by frac-
tures around the elbow joint and by lacerations of 
the forearm and, particularly, the wrist.   
 The ulnar nerve supplies all the intrinsic muscles 
of the hand apart from the three muscles of the 
thenar eminence (abductor pollicis brevis, oppo-
 Figure 17.2   Ulnar nerve injury:  main en griffe  with 
anaesthesia of the ulnar one and a half digits and ulnar 
border of the hand on both palmar and dorsal aspects.  

Peripheral nerve injuries 141
 Mallet  ﬁ  nger 
 This follows trauma (common in cricketers) with 
ﬂ exion deformity of the distal interphalangeal 
joint due to avulsion of the extensor tendon inser-
tion to the base of the distal phalanx.  
 Trauma 
 Scar formation following burns, injury or surgery 
to the ﬁ ngers or the palm may produce gross 
ﬂ exion deformities wherever a scar crosses a joint 
line. 
 Sciatic  n erve  i njuries 
 This nerve may be wounded in penetrating 
injuries or torn in posterior dislocation of the 
hip associated with fracture of the posterior lip 
of the acetabulum, to which the nerve is closely 
related. Injury is followed by paralysis of the 
hamstrings and all the muscles of the leg and 
foot; there is loss of all movement below the 
knee joint with foot drop deformity. Sensory loss 
is complete below the knee, except for an area 
extending along the medial side of the leg over 
the medial malleolus to the base of the hallux, 
which is innervated by the saphenous branch of 
the femoral nerve, the longest cutaneous nerve in 
the body.  
 Common  p eroneal  n erve 
 i njuries 
 The common peroneal nerve is in a particularly 
vulnerable position as it winds around the neck of 
the ﬁ bula. It may be injured at this site by direct 
trauma or compression, such as the pressure of a 
tight plaster cast, or in severe adduction injuries 
to the knee. Damage is followed by foot drop (due 
to paralysis of the ankle and foot extensors) and 
inversion of the foot (due to paralysis of the pero-
neal muscles with unopposed action of the foot 
ﬂ exors and invertors). There is anaesthesia over 
the anterior surface of the leg and foot. The medial 
side of the foot, innervated by the saphenous 
branch of the femoral nerve, and the lateral side 
of the foot, supplied by the sural branch of the 
tibial nerve, both escape.  
 Differential  d iagnosis of 
 ﬂ exion  d eformities of 
the  ﬁ ngers 
 Ulnar  n erve  l esion 
 This has been described above; there is hyperex-
tension of the metacarpophalangeal joints and 
clawing of the hand, with sensory loss along the 
ulnar border of the hand and ulnar one and a half 
ﬁ ngers. 
 Dupuytren ’ s  c ontracture 5 
 This is a common condition in the elderly, usually 
male, subject in whom there is ﬁ brosis of the 
palmar aponeurosis. This produces a ﬂ exion 
deformity of the ﬁ ngers at the metacarpophalan-
geal and proximal interphalangeal joints, usually 
starting at the ring ﬁ nger and spreading to the 
little ﬁ nger and sometimes the middle ﬁ nger. 
As the aponeurosis extends distally only to the 
base of the middle phalanx, the distal interphal-
angeal joint escapes. The contracture is often 
bilateral and may occasionally affect the plantar 
fascia also.  
 Volkmann ’ s  c ontracture 6  d ue 
to  i schaemic  ﬁ  brosis of  ﬂ  exors 
of the  ﬁ  ngers ( s ee Chapter  12 , 
 p . 141) 
 The ﬁ ngers will be curled up in the hand with 
metacarpophalangeal and interphalangeal joint 
ﬂ exion. This deformity can to some extent be 
relieved by ﬂ exion of the wrist when the shortened 
tendons are no longer so taut and the ﬁ ngers can 
be partially extended.  
 Congenital  c ontracture 
 This usually affects the little ﬁ nger and produces 
very little, if any, disability. The proximal inter-
phalangeal joint is typically affected, the condi-
tion is usually bilateral and, of course, it dates 
from birth.  
  5  Baron Guillaume Dupuytren (1777 – 1835), Surgeon, H ô tel Dieu, 
Paris, France.  
  6  Richard von Volkmann (1830 – 1889), Professor of Surgery, Halle, 
Germany. 

142 
Peripheral nerve injuries
syndrome (Figure  17.3 ), in which there are the fol-
lowing characteristics: 
  •   Meiosis:  paralysis of the dilator pupillae, 
resulting in constriction of the pupil. 
  •   Ptosis:  paralysis of the sympathetic muscle 
ﬁ bres transmitted via the oculomotor nerve to 
the levator palpebrae superioris results in 
drooping of the upper eyelid. 
  •   Anhidrosis:  loss of sweating on the affected 
side of the face and neck.  
  •   Enophthalmos:  the eye appears sunken within 
the orbit, an illusion due to the ptosis. 
 Horner ’ s syndrome may follow operations on, 
or injuries to, the neck in which the cervical sym-
pathetic trunk is damaged, malignant invasion 
from lymph nodes or adjacent tumour or 
spinal cord lesions at the T1 segment (e.g. 
syringomyelia).  
 
 
 
 Lateral  c utaneous 
 n erve of the  t high 
 c ompression:  m eralgia 
 p araesthetica 
 The lateral cutaneous nerve of the thigh may be 
trapped as it emerges beneath the inguinal liga-
ment, a ﬁ nger ’ s breadth medial to the anterior 
superior iliac spine. It commonly occurs in over-
weight middle - aged men and in athletes undergo-
ing physical training. Symptoms comprise painful 
paraesthesiae over the anterolateral aspect of the 
thigh, worse on standing and relieved on sitting 
(hip ﬂ exion). Sensation in the distribution of the 
nerve is diminished. 
 Cervical  s ympathetic 
 n erve  i njuries: Horner ’ s 
 s yndrome  7  
 If the T1 contribution to the cervical sympathetic 
chain is damaged, the result is known as Horner ’ s 
 Figure 17.3   Horner ’ s syndrome.  
Ptosis: drooping upper 
eyelid
Enophthalmos: apparent,
not real
Meiosis: small pupil
Dry skin and
flushing on side of
lesion (sudomotor
and vasoconstrictor 
denervation)
Ipsilateral hand often
also involved
  7  Johann Horner (1831 – 1886), Professor of Ophthalmology, Zurich, 
Switzerland. 

 18 
The  o ral  c avity  
 
 Learning  o bjectives 
  ✓   To know the common congenital and acquired lesions occurring 
around the lips and in the oral cavity. 
  ✓   To know the common features of oropharyngeal carcinomas. 
the coated tongue with foetor oris of acute 
appendicitis and the typical response of the 
hypochondriac to the command  ‘ show me 
your tongue ’ , upon which the patient opens 
his or her mouth to an extraordinary degree 
and enables the nethermost recesses of the 
oral cavity to become exposed. 
 The  l ips 
 Cleft  l ip and  p alate 
 These developmental abnormalities are very 
common. Cleft lip occurs in 1 in every 750 live 
births, cleft palate in 1 in every 2000, with half the 
cases of cleft lip being associated with cleft palate. 
It is important here, as in all congenital anomalies, 
to make a careful search for other developmental 
defects  –  10% of patients with clefts have some 
other malformation. 
 Embryology 
 These deformities can only be understood if the 
embryological development of the face and palate 
is revised (Figure  18.1 ). 
 Around the primitive mouth or stomodaeum 
the following develop: 
  •   The frontonasal process , which projects 
downwards from the cranium. Two olfactory 
pits develop in this process, and then rupture 
into the pharynx to form the nostrils. The 
frontonasal process forms the nose, the nasal 
    It is a useful exercise (and a favourite examination 
topic) to consider what can be learned by examin-
ing a speciﬁ c anatomical site, such as the ﬁ ngers, 
nails or eyes, in making a clinical diagnosis. The 
mouth and tongue can be conveniently used to 
illustrate how best to deal with this subject, which 
can be considered under three headings: 
 1  Information about local disease.    Tumours of 
the mouth and tongue and congenital 
anomalies are obviously diagnosed by local 
examination.  
 2  Local manifestations of diseases elsewhere.    The 
smooth tongue of pernicious anaemia, the 
ulcerated fauces of agranulocytosis or of 
severe glandular fever, the hemiatrophy of the 
tongue in hypoglossal nerve palsy, the 
pigmentation of Addison ’ s disease, 1 the 
pigmented spots of the Peutz – Jeghers 
syndrome 2  and the gingivitis, swollen bleeding 
gums and loosened teeth of vitamin C 
deﬁ ciency are examples of intrabuccal signs of 
more widespread diseases.  
 3  Information given about the general condition 
and habits of the patient.     The dry tongue of 
dehydration, the brown dry tongue of uraemia, 
Lecture Notes: General Surgery, 12th edition. © Harold Ellis, 
Sir Roy Y. Calne and Christopher J. E. Watson. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
  1  Thomas Addison (1773 – 1860), Physician, Guy ’ s Hospital, London, 
UK. 
  2  Johannes Peutz (1886 – 1957), Physician, The Hague, The 
Netherlands. Harold Jeghers (1940 – 1990), Professor of Medicine, 
Georgetown University School of Medicine, Washington, DC, and 
Tufts University Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. 

144 
The oral cavity
 Cleft  l ip (Figure  18.2 ) 
 This condition was once termed hare lip, but only 
rarely is the cleft a median one like the upper lip 
of a hare, although this may occur as a failure of 
development of the philtrum from the frontonasal 
process. Much more commonly, the cleft is on one 
side of the philtrum as a result of failure of fusion 
of the maxillary and frontonasal process. In 15% 
of cases, the cleft is bilateral. The cleft may be a 
small defect in the lip or may extend into the 
septum, the nostril, the philtrum of the upper 
lip and the premaxilla; this is the V - shaped 
anterior portion of the upper jaw, which 
usually bears the four incisor teeth.  
  •   The maxillary processes  on either side, which 
fuse with the frontonasal process to become 
the cheeks, the upper lip (exclusive of the 
philtrum), the upper jaw and the palate apart 
from the premaxilla.  
  •   The mandibular processes , which meet in the 
midline to form the lower jaw.     
 Figure 18.1   The ventral aspect of a 
fetal head showing the three 
processes  – frontonasal, maxillary and 
mandibular  – from which the face, 
nose and jaw are derived.  
Forebain
Medial nasal fold
Eye
Lateral nasal fold
Frontonasal fold
Maxillary process
Mandibular process
Stomodaeum
Olfactory
pit
 Figure 18.2   Types of cleft lip.  
Unilateral cleft lip
Bilateral cleft lip
Facial cleft
Cleft lower lip

The oral cavity 145
 Principles of  m anagement 
 The details of surgical repair belong to the realms 
of the specialist plastic surgeon, but the principles 
underlying management are of importance to the 
paediatrician and the general practitioner. 
 Cleft lip alone presents no feeding or nursing 
problems. Repair is required at an early stage so 
that normal moulding of the bones of the face may 
occur during growth. Early repair within a few 
days of birth is now preferred to the previous prac-
tice of waiting 3 – 6 months. 
 Cleft palate interferes with the normal suckling 
mechanism. The infant is fed either by using a 
spoon or by dripping milk into the mouth from a 
bottle provided with a large hole in the teat. The 
defect is repaired at between 6 months and 1 year 
in order to allow normal speech to develop. If 
delayed beyond this time, the child will develop 
bad speech, which will require considerable reha-
bilitation to restore to normal. 
 Where both defects coexist, the lip is repaired 
early (before 10 weeks) and the palate then oper-
ated upon at a second stage at the age of about 6 
months. 
nostril, split the alveolus or even extend along the 
side of the nose as far as the orbit as a very rare 
anomaly. Associated with the deformity is an 
invariable ﬂ attening and widening of the nostril 
on the same side.   
 Cleft of the lower lip occurs very rarely but may 
be associated with a cleft of the tongue and of the 
mandible. 
 Cleft  p alate 
 A failure of fusion of the segments of the palate. 
The following stages may occur (Figure  18.3 ): 
  •   Biﬁ d uvula , which is of no clinical importance. 
  •   Partial cleft , which may involve the soft palate 
alone or the posterior part of the hard palate 
also. 
  •   Complete cleft , which may be unilateral, 
running the full length of the maxilla and then 
alongside one face of the premaxilla, or 
bilateral, in which the palate is cleft with an 
anterior V which separates the premaxilla 
completely. The premaxilla ﬂ oats forward to 
produce a hideous deformity. 
 Figure 18.3   Types of cleft palate.  
Partial clefts of palate
Unilateral complete 
cleft palate
Bilateral complete
cleft palate
Premaxilla
Vomer

146 
The oral cavity
 Ulcers in the  m outh 
 Traumatic 
 Usually occurs as a result of a sharp edge of a tooth 
or a denture, and usually present on the tongue. 
Healing rapidly takes place when the cause is 
removed. Nowadays, the ulcer produced on the 
under - aspect of the tongue as this is rubbed 
against the lower incisor teeth in whooping cough 
is rarely seen. 
 Aphthous  u lcer 
 Recurrent, small, round, white, painful ulcers, 
which may occur singly or in crops anywhere in 
the mouth but particularly on the edge of the 
tongue. The ulcers have a sloughy base and a rim 
of erythema surrounding them. The cause is 
unknown. They are particularly common around 
puberty and occasionally they are associated with 
inﬂ ammatory bowel disease. The ulcer will usually 
heal rapidly if a hydrocortisone tablet is held 
against it.  
 Herpes  s implex 
 Can be extensive in the oropharynx, nose, 
oesophagus and larynx in patients on immuno-
suppressive drugs or infected with human immu-
nodeﬁ ciency virus (HIV). 
 Carcinoma 
 Carcinoma (see p. 148) and lymphoma may cause 
intraoral ulceration. 
 Syphilitic  u lcers 
 Now rarely seen, ulcers were features of the ﬁ rst, 
second and third stages of syphilis: a chancre in 
the ﬁ rst, a  ‘ snail - track ’  ulcer in the second and a 
midline punched - out gumma in the third. In addi-
tion, tertiary syphilis may produce leucoplakia or 
diffuse ﬁ brosis of the tongue. All these conditions 
are extremely rare now that early syphilis is efﬁ -
ciently treated.  
 Other  c auses of  u lceration 
 Rarer causes of oral ulcers include neutropenia 
 Lesions on the  l ip 
 Angular  s tomatitis 
 Superﬁ cial ulceration at the corners of the mouth. 
Causes range from iron - deﬁ ciency anaemia to 
habitual licking in children.  
 Retention  c yst 
 A mucous retention cyst represents an obstructed 
mucous gland. It appears as a blue, domed, trans-
lucent swelling of the buccal aspect of the lower 
lip. 
 Herpes  s implex ( c old  s ores) 
 Painful ulceration, which starts as a crop of 
vesicles near the vermilion border and develops 
into a crusting ulcer before resolving. The cause 
is a herpes simplex virus (usually type 1), which 
remains latent in the nerve ganglion and 
recurs when triggered by viral infection (hence 
 ‘ cold sores ’ ), trauma, sunburn or endogenous 
factors such as menstruation. Recurrence starts 
with a pricking sensation, followed by lip 
swelling and the appearance of a cluster of 
vesicles, which break down to produce painful 
ulcers. Early topical treatment with aciclovir or 
famciclovir may curtail the infection and reduce 
symptoms. 
 Carcinoma 
 Ulcerating squamous carcinomas are indurated 
and have characteristic raised edges. Evidence of 
regional lymph node involvement should be 
sought (see p. 149). 
 Less common lesions include Peutz – Jeghers cir-
cumoral pigmentation, which is associated with 
intestinal hamartomatous polyps, and telangiecta-
sia typical of hereditary haemorrhagic telangiecta-
sia (Osler – Rendu – Weber syndrome 3 ), which is 
associated with intestinal telangiectasia and 
bleeding. 
  3   Sir William Osler (1849 – 1919), Professor of Medicine, succes-
sively at McGill University, Montreal, Canada; Johns Hopkins 
University, Baltimore, MD, USA; and the University of Oxford, 
Oxford, UK. Henri Rendu (1844 – 1902), Physician, Necker Hospital, 
Paris, France. Frederick Parkes Weber (1863 – 1962), a London 
physician with an interest in rare disorders.  

The oral cavity 147
found on the inside of the lips and inner aspects 
of the cheek. They are blue in appearance and 
contain glairy mucoid ﬂ uid. Their nuisance value 
is that they tend to be chewed upon by the patient. 
 Ranula 
 A large mucous extravasation cyst on one or the 
other side of the ﬂ oor of the mouth arising from a 
sublingual salivary gland. Often, the submandibu-
lar duct can be seen passing over the cyst. The word 
ranula means a small frog and the lesion is so called 
because it resembles a frog ’ s belly. Small cysts may 
be excised; larger cysts are marsupialized. 
 Midline  d ermoid 
 This occupies the ﬂ oor of the mouth and may 
project below the chin. It represents a congenital 
seeding of ectoderm during the process of fusion 
of the two mandibular processes. Similar inclu-
sion dermoid cysts occur at the outer and inner 
margins of the orbit (external and internal angular 
dermoids). Treatment is excision. 
 Epulis 
 Epulis is a non - speciﬁ c term applied to a localized 
swelling of the gum. This may be: 
  •   Fibrous:  a nodule of dense ﬁ brous tissue 
covered by epithelium, which arises from the 
submucosa of the gum.  
  •   Giant cell:   with the histological appearance of 
an osteoclastoma. 
  •   Granulomatous:  peculiarly likely to occur in 
pregnancy and probably arises as a result of 
minor trauma followed by chronic infection.  
  •   Denture granuloma:   originates from the 
persistent irritation of an ill - ﬁ tting denture. 
  •   Dental abscess:   while not a true epulis, it 
initially presents as an acute inﬂ ammatory 
swelling of the mucosa adjacent to the 
diseased tooth. 
 Malignant  d isease of the 
 m outh and  p harynx 
 General  f eatures 
 In broad principles, the pathology, diagnosis and 
treatment of malignant disease of the lips, tongue, 
and agranulocytosis, Beh ç et ’ s syndrome, 4 Reiter ’ s 
syndrome, 5 
Wegener ’ s 
granulomatosis 6 
and 
tuberculosis. Some drugs, such as sirolimus 
and 
everolimus, 
may 
also 
cause 
mucosal 
ulceration. 
 Other  l esions  w ithin 
the  m outh 
 Leucoplakia 
 Leucoplakia refers to thickened white patches of 
mucosa. In contrast to  Candida  infection, the 
lesions cannot be rubbed off. This condition may 
occur anywhere within the mouth, particularly on 
the tongue. Other sites are the larynx, the anus 
and the vulva. The affected area may show cracks 
or ﬁ ssures. 
 Microscopically, there is hyperplasia of the 
squamous epithelium with hyperkeratosis. It is 
usually found in middle - aged or elderly subjects. 
Its aetiology may result from chronic irritation, 
or may relate to smoking, syphilis, sepsis, spices, 
sore tooth and spirits  –  the list of S ’ s  –  but it 
must be confessed that often no cause at all can 
be found. 
 The importance of the condition is that it is 
often premalignant. Malignant change especially 
occurs within the ﬁ ssures and should be sus-
pected if there is local thickening, pain or bleeding 
or areas of erythema. 
 Treatment 
 Remove any underlying irritant cause. Any area 
suspicious of malignancy should be biopsied. 
Superﬁ cial areas of leucoplakia are usually satis-
factorily treated by excision, with skin grafting if 
the area is large.   
 Mucous  r etention  c ysts 
 These result from leakage of mucus due to minor 
trauma of the mucous glands and are better 
termed extravasation cysts. They are commonly 
  4  Hulusi Beh ç et (1889 – 1948), Professor of Dermatology, Istanbul, 
Turkey. 
  5  Friederich Wegener (1907 – 1990), German Pathologist. 
  6   Hans C. J. Reiter (1881 – 1969), German Bacteriologist, who 
described the syndrome in a fellow ofﬁ cer while serving as a 
doctor in the Great War.  

148 
The oral cavity
 Microscopic  a ppearance 
 Microscopically, by far the commonest tumours 
are keratinizing squamous cell carcinomas. In 
addition, two other types may be seen, particu-
larly in the posterior third of the tongue, the tonsil 
and the nasopharynx. These are as follows: 
 1  transitional cell carcinoma , made up of 
undifferentiated epithelial cells, which 
simulate the transitional carcinomas of the 
urinary tract; 
 2  lymphoepithelioma , comprising sheets of 
rather anaplastic epithelial cells pervaded with 
a diffuse lymphocytic inﬁ ltration. 
 It is probable that these variations are merely 
examples of undifferentiated squamous cell 
tumours. Tumours may also arise in the minor 
salivary glands, which are abundantly distributed 
over the mucous membrane of the mouth. 
 Spread 
 They occur by local inﬁ ltration, which often 
transgresses nearby anatomical boundaries. Thus, 
a carcinoma of the tongue may invade the ﬂ oor 
of the mouth, the gum and the fauces. Cervical 
lymph node involvement is common and is 
often the presenting feature. Thirty per cent of 
patients have cervical node involvement at the 
time of diagnosis. Distant blood - borne spread 
(e.g. to the lung and liver) is late and relatively 
uncommon.  
 Causes of  d eath 
 Tumours of the mouth and pharynx are particu-
larly horrible in their late stages. The patient 
becomes cachectic because of difﬁ culty in swal-
lowing and anorexic as a result of the infected, 
foul - smelling, fungating ulcer within the mouth. 
As a result of this sepsis, inhalation bronchopneu-
monia is a common cause of death. Fatal haemor-
rhage may occur, either from the primary 
ulcerating growth or from invasion of tumour 
from cervical lymph nodes into the internal 
jugular vein or carotid artery.   
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   Endoscopy and examination under anaesthetic 
to look at the larynx and exclude second 
primaries, or diagnose the primary in patients 
presenting with cervical lymphadenopathy. 
ﬂ oor of the mouth, gums, inner aspects of the 
cheek, hard and soft palate, tonsils, fauces and 
pharynx can be considered as one. Speciﬁ c fea-
tures of each site are given in the next section. 
Common hiding places for oral tumours include 
the base of the tongue, sulci lateral to the base of 
the tongue, tonsillar fossa (is one tonsil bigger 
than the other?) and nasopharynx.  
 Pathology 
 Sex  d istribution 
 For the most part, oral tumours are more common 
in men than in women. However, tumours of the 
hard palate and posterior one - third of the tongue 
have an equal sex distribution and post - 
cricoid tumours affect women more often than 
men.  
 Predisposing  f actors 
 These can be divided into three groups: 
 1  Chronic irritation:     the common causes begin 
with S: smoking, syphilis, sepsis, spices, sore 
tooth and spirits. Certainly mouth cancer is 
seen particularly among old men of poor 
social class with gross dental caries and heavy 
smoking habits. Especially at risk is the heavy 
smoker who is also a heavy drinker. In India, 
betel nut chewing is associated with a high 
incidence of mouth cancer.  
 2  Leucoplakia:  a deﬁ nite precancerous 
condition (see p. 147).  
 3  Iron deﬁ ciency:    the Plummer – Vinson 7 
syndrome with smooth tongue, cracks at the 
angles of the mouth (cheilosis), koilonychia, 
dysphagia and an iron - deﬁ ciency anaemia is 
often present in oral and pharyngeal cancer in 
women. 
 Macroscopic  a ppearance 
 Macroscopically, malignant tumours of the mouth 
present as one of three types: 
 1  a nodule; 
 2  an ulcer or ﬁ ssure which feels hard to the 
palpating ﬁ nger; 
 3  a warty or papilliferous growth. 
  7   Henry Plummer (1874 – 1937) and Porter Paisley Vinson (1890 –
 1959), Physicians, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.  

The oral cavity 149
 If the lymph nodes are enlarged but mobile and 
obviously operable, block dissection is performed 
providing the primary tumour is controllable; 
clearly there is little point in carrying out a radical 
block dissection of the neck in the presence of a 
hopelessly inoperable malignant mass within the 
mouth. 
 If the lymph nodes are enlarged but are ﬁ xed 
and clinically irremovable, palliative irradiation is 
given and may be combined with cytotoxic 
chemotherapy. 
 Prognosis 
 The prognosis becomes increasingly worse the 
further backwards into the mouth the tumour 
occurs; the outlook is best in tumours of the 
lip, then of the anterior two - thirds of the tongue, 
but it is usually grave in tumours of the pharynx 
and tonsil. As with tumours elsewhere, the 
prognosis also depends on the degree of 
differentiation of the tumour on histological 
examination and on the extent of spread, parti-
cularly whether or not the lymph nodes are 
involved.  
 Speciﬁ c  f eatures 
 The local pathological and clinical features at 
speciﬁ c sites can now be considered. In every 
case, the management of the tumour and the 
regional lymph nodes are as described in the 
above scheme. 
 Carcinoma of the  l ip 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 This disease commonly affects men (90%), nearly 
always elderly, and those exposed to a weather -
 beaten outdoor life associated with sunlight expo-
sure. The lower lip is by far the commonest site, 
accounting for 93% of the tumours. Five per cent 
occur on the upper lip and 2% at the angle of the 
mouth  –  these last have a particularly bad progno-
sis. The lesion appears as a ﬁ ssure, as a typical 
malignant ulcer or as a warty papilliferous tumour. 
The majority are slow growing, and spread to the 
regional lymph nodes is comparatively late: ﬁ rst to 
the submental, then the submandibular and 
ﬁ nally the internal jugular chain of nodes. Distant 
metastasis is rare.  
  •   Orthopantomogram (OPG)  may demonstrate 
bone invasion in tumours arising close to the 
mandible. 
  •   Chest X - ray  to exclude the rare pulmonary 
secondary spread.  
  •   Computed tomography (CT)  may demonstrate 
local disease including bone invasion and 
involvement of the maxillary sinus, and may 
demonstrate cervical nodal involvement. 
  •   Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging  has a slightly 
better resolution than CT. 
 Principles of  t reatment 
 The diagnosis is ﬁ rst conﬁ rmed by biopsy. The 
search for predisposing factors includes syphilis 
serology and haemoglobin estimation. In every 
case, treatment must be considered with respect 
to (1) the primary tumour and (2) the regional 
lymph nodes.  
 Management of the  p rimary 
 t umour 
 The treatment of choice is radiotherapy. When the 
tumour is readily accessible, e.g. the lip, the ante-
rior part of the tongue and the buccal mucosa, 
this is conveniently carried out by implantation 
of 
radioactive 
needles. 
More 
posteriorly 
placed tumours are treated by external beam 
radiotherapy. 
 With conventional radiotherapy, invasion of the 
mandible or maxilla by the tumour was a con-
traindication to treatment because bone necrosis 
almost invariably took place. In such circum-
stances, only radical surgery could be offered. 
Fortunately, modern external beam radiotherapy 
only infrequently causes radionecrosis so that jaw 
involvement is no longer a bar to treatment. 
 Irradiation is abandoned under two circum-
stances: ﬁ rst, if the tumour proves to be radiore-
sistant, and, second, if recurrence takes place 
subsequent to satisfactory regression. In these cir-
cumstances, it may be necessary to consider 
radical surgical excision, e.g. a hemiglossectomy 
or mandibulectomy and block dissection of the 
cervical nodes in continuity.  
 Management of the  r egional 
 l ymph  n odes 
 If the lymph nodes are not enlarged, the patient is 
kept under close regular observation. 

150 
The oral cavity
lus, speech and swallowing become difﬁ cult 
because of ﬁ xation of the tongue (ankyloglossia). 
Palpation is especially valuable. Malignant ulcers 
in the mouth, as in the rectum, feel hard with sur-
rounding induration. 
 Lymphatic spread occurs to the submental, sub-
mandibular and deep cervical nodes. Unless the 
primary tumour is situated far laterally on the 
margin of the tongue, this lymphatic spread may 
be bilateral. 
 Posterior third tumours  of the tongue are rapidly 
growing and are of the lymphoepitheliomatous 
type with early spread bilaterally to the cervical 
nodes. 
 Any nodule or chronic ulcer of the tongue must 
be regarded with great suspicion of malignant 
disease, particularly if there is any predisposing 
factor such as leucoplakia.  
 Differential  d iagnosis 
 This is to be made from the other ulcers of the 
tongue discussed on p. 146, from the compara-
tively rare benign tumours of the tongue (papil-
loma, haemangioma, lymphangioma and ﬁ broma) 
and from the still rarer lingual thyroid which 
occurs as a midline nodule. More commonly, the 
nervous patient may suddenly notice a circumval-
late papilla on the tongue viewed in the mirror, 
and may present to the surgeon having decided it 
is a cancer of the tongue. 
 Carcinoma of the  s oft 
 p alate and  f auces 
 These tumours usually resemble those of the pos-
terior third of the tongue in their behaviour.  
 Carcinoma of the  h ard 
 p alate 
 Tumours in this region are usually warty, spread 
over the palate and later invade the bone. 
Differential diagnosis must be made from second-
ary involvement of the palate from an antral 
tumour and from mixed salivary tumours, which 
arise from the small accessory salivary glands 
scattered over the hard palate. 
 Differential  d iagnosis 
 The differential diagnosis of carcinoma of the 
lip conveniently sums up the other swellings 
that may be found in this situation. They are as 
follows: 
  •   simple papilliferous wart, which may itself be 
premalignant; 
  •   keratoacanthoma (molluscum sebaceum; see 
Chapter  9 , p. 48); 
  •   haemangioma; 
  •   lymphangioma; 
  •   herpes simplex; 
  •   mucous cyst  – this is probably the 
commonest swelling to be found upon the 
lip (see p. 147);  
  •   chancre  – the lip is the commonest 
extragenital site for a chancre. Usually, the 
upper lip is affected; it is accompanied by 
considerable local oedema and exuberant 
enlargement of the regional lymph 
nodes. 
 Carcinoma of the  t ongue 
 Carcinoma of the tongue occurs more commonly 
in men than in women, affecting older men who 
drink and smoke excessively. The tumours are 
conveniently divided into those of the anterior 
two - thirds and those of the posterior one - third of 
the tongue. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 The tumour itself tends to occur on the lateral 
border of the tongue, and rarely affects the 
dorsum. 
 Anterior tumours  commence as a nodule, ﬁ ssure 
or ulcer, although occasionally a widely inﬁ ltrat-
ing type of tumour is seen. At ﬁ rst the lesion is 
painless but becomes painful as it invades and 
becomes grossly septic. The pain often radiates to 
the ear, being referred from the lingual branch of 
the trigeminal nerve, supplying the tongue, along 
its auriculotemporal branch. Ulceration is accom-
panied by bleeding. The typical picture of late 
disease is an old man sitting in the outpatient 
department spitting blood into his handkerchief, 
with a plug of cotton wool in his ear. As the tumour 
extends onto the ﬂ oor of the mouth and the alveo-

The oral cavity 151
ache. Tumours at this site are notoriously difﬁ cult 
to locate even on careful inspection and palpation 
under anaesthesia. One - third present ﬁ rst as a 
cervical node mass.  
 Carcinoma of the  o ro -  
and  l aryngopharynx 
 Carcinomas at these sites present ﬁ rst with 
discomfort in the throat, excessive salivation 
and expectoration of blood - stained mucus, 
which then becomes foetid. Later, there may be 
alteration of the voice progressing to hoarseness 
and then dysphagia. Often, however, these 
tumours present with enlarged cervical lymph 
nodes. 
 The hypopharyngeal tumours (post - cricoid car-
cinoma) are almost always conﬁ ned to women, 
many of whom present features of the Plummer –
 Vinson syndrome (see Chapter  20 , p. 162). 
Diagnosis is conﬁ rmed by oesophagoscopic 
examination and biopsy.  
 Tumours of the  j aw 
 Tumours of the jaw are of extremely wide 
pathological variety because they may arise 
from the bone of the jaw itself, from the tissues 
over the surface of the jaw or, in the case of the 
maxilla, from the mucosa lining the maxillary 
antrum. 
 Tumours of the  b one 
 These may originate from any of the histological 
structures forming the bone, e.g. osteoma or 
osteogenic sarcoma from the bone itself, chon-
droma and chondrosarcoma from the cartilage, 
osteoclastoma from the osteoclasts, myeloma 
from the marrow cells, haemangioma from the 
blood vessels and ﬁ brosarcoma from the perios-
teum. In addition to this, the jaw is the occasional 
site for secondary deposits, the common sources 
of which are lung, breast, prostate, thyroid and 
kidney. 
 Carcinoma of the  ﬂ oor 
of the  m outh,  a lveolus 
and  c heek 
 Here the tumour is commonly an ulcerating car-
cinoma, which often involves more than one of 
these structures; thus, an ulcer is often found 
wedged in the ﬂ oor of the mouth extending 
upwards onto the gum and backwards to involve 
the root of the tongue. There is early spread to the 
regional nodes. 
 In addition, adenomas or adenocarcinomas 
occasionally arise in the mucous and salivary 
accessory glands of this region.  
 Carcinoma of the  t onsil 
 About 85% of the tumours of the tonsil are squa-
mous carcinomas, about 10% are lymphomas 
arising from the lymphoid tissue of the tonsil and 
5% are lymphoepitheliomas, which show rapid 
lymph node spread.  
 Carcinoma of the 
 n asopharynx 
 As elsewhere, the predominant tumour is a squa-
mous carcinoma. In addition, a rapidly growing 
lymphoepithelioma occurs in younger subjects 
and for some unexplained reason is particularly 
common among the Chinese, with a high inci-
dence of raised antibody titres to the Epstein –
 Barr virus; 8  indeed, in this race, it is second in 
frequency only to uterine cancer. Rarely, a ﬁ brosa-
rcoma of the nasopharynx arises from the perios-
teum of the basiocciput. 
 These tumours may present with nasal obstruc-
tion and bleeding, eustachian tube blockage with 
deafness, involvement of one or more of the 
cranial nerves and severe deeply situated head-
  8   Michael Anthony Epstein (b. 1921), Professor of Pathology, 
University of Bristol, Bristol, UK. Yvonne Barr (b. 1932), Epstein ’ s 
assistant, Middlesex Hospital, London, UK.  

152 
The oral cavity
 Medial  e xtension 
 Blockage of the ostium of the maxillary antrum 
with consequent infection of the sinus, or with 
nasal obstruction and epistaxis.  
 Lateral  e xtension 
 Swelling of the face, which often has an inﬂ amma-
tory appearance and may well be mistaken for an 
acute infection.  
 Upward  e xtension 
 Orbital invasion with proptosis, diplopia and 
lacrimation due to blockage of the tear duct. 
Anaesthesia of the cheek may result from invasion 
of the maxillary branch of the trigeminal nerve.  
 Inferior  e xtension 
 Bulging and ulceration into the palate. Metastases 
to the upper jugular lymph nodes occur at a rela-
tively late stage. 
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   Skull X - rays  usually reveal decalciﬁ cation and 
erosion of the maxilla. There may be 
opaciﬁ cation of the normally translucent 
maxillary antrum. 
  •   CT and MR imaging are valuable in indicating 
the exact spread of the tumours. 
 Treatment 
  •   Benign tumours are treated by local excision; 
in the case of the lower jaw, this may require 
bone graft to the resected portion of the 
mandible. 
  •   Malignant tumours of the mandible and of the 
maxillary antrum are treated initially by 
radiotherapy, followed by hemi -
 mandibulectomy or maxillectomy. 
 
 
 
 Ameloblastoma 
( a damantinoma) 
 This is an interesting benign tumour, which is 
derived from the epithelial cells of the enamel 
organ. Its histological appearance resembles these 
cells arranged in clumps within a ﬁ brous stroma. 
Gradual destruction of the jaw takes place but the 
tumour metastasizes only rarely. It is multilocular, 
and usually involves the lower jaw towards its 
angle. Any age may be affected, but the majority 
present in the second and third decades with 
equal sex distribution.  
 Surface  t umours 
 Carcinoma, mixed salivary tumour or rarely 
melanoma of the palate, gum, cheek or ﬂ oor of the 
mouth may invade the underlying bone.  
 Antral  t umours 
 Probably the commonest tumour of the upper 
jaw is the squamous carcinoma arising from 
the 
mucous 
membrane 
of 
the 
maxillary 
antrum. 
 The antral carcinoma occurs in middle - aged 
and elderly subjects with equal sex distribution. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Symptoms and signs are late in manifesting them-
selves; indeed, the tumour must burst through the 
bony walls of the antrum before it becomes 
obvious. Presentation then depends on the direc-
tion of growth of the tumour and can be deduced 
by the application of some knowledge of the 
anatomy of the region. 

 19 
The  s alivary  g lands  
 
 Learning  o bjective 
  ✓   To know the common inﬂ ammatory and malignant conditions of 
the salivary glands and their treatment. 
 Inﬂ ammation 
 Aetiology 
  •   Calculus , usually affecting the submandibular 
gland (see below).  
  •   Mumps , usually affects the parotid, rarely the 
submandibular gland.  
  •   Acute bacterial infection usually occurs 
postoperatively and involves the parotid.  
  •   Chronic recurrent sialadenitis , usually occurs 
in the parotid.  
  •   Mikulicz ’ s syndrome : involving all the salivary 
and the lacrimal glands. 
 Mumps 
 A viral infection (incubation period 17 – 21 days), 
which is common in children and affects the 
parotid glands; it is usually bilateral. Rarely the 
submandibular or sublingual glands may be 
involved. Most children are now immunized 
against mumps before starting school. 
 Mumps may present to the surgeon in the fol-
lowing ways: 
  •   Acute parotitis:  usual in childhood but may 
occasionally occur as a painful parotid swelling 
in an adult (Boxes  19.1 and  19.2 ). 
  •   Mumps orchitis:   usually presents in 
adolescents or young adults, and rare before 
puberty. Pain and swelling in the testicle occur 
7 – 10 days after the onset of the parotitis and 
may lead to testicular atrophy. If bilateral 
orchitis occurs, there may be sterility or 
    The salivary glands comprise three paired glands 
 –  the parotid, submandibular and sublingual  –  
together with tiny accessory salivary glands scat-
tered over the walls of the buccal cavity. The 
parotid gland secretes a serous saliva, in contrast 
to the mucus product of the sublingual glands. 
The submandibular saliva is seromucus, and rep-
resents 75% of the total saliva produced. The 
parotid and submandibular glands drain into the 
mouth via long ducts, the parotid (Stensen ’ s 1 ) 
duct opening adjacent to the second upper molar 
tooth, while the submandibular (Wharton ’ s 2 ) duct 
opens on the ﬂ oor of the mouth through a papilla 
at the base of the frenulum of the tongue. Their 
oriﬁ ces are easily visible in your own mouth and 
saliva will be seen to ﬂ ow if you press on the 
glands themselves. The sublingual gland ’ s mucus 
secretion drains by a series of very short ducts into 
the ﬂ oor of the mouth. 
 The two principal surgical conditions of the sali-
vary glands are inﬂ ammation, with or without cal-
culus, and neoplasm. The nature of the glandular 
cells determines the saliva ’ s composition, explain-
ing the different incidence of these conditions in 
each of the salivary glands.  
Lecture Notes: General Surgery, 12th edition. © Harold Ellis, 
Sir Roy Y. Calne and Christopher J. E. Watson. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
  1   Niels Stensen (1638 – 1686), Professor of Anatomy, University of 
Copenhagen, Denmark. Gave up his Chair in 1669 to become a 
Bishop. 
  2  Thomas Wharton (1614 – 1673), Physician, St Thomas ’ s Hospital, 
London, UK.  

154 
The salivary glands
Aetiological factors include dental sepsis, dehy-
dration, prolonged presence of a nasogastric tube 
and poor oral hygiene. This complication may also 
occur in any severe debilitating illness and in 
uraemia. The infection is usually streptococcal 
( Streptococcus viridans  or  S. pneumoniae ) and 
occasionally staphylococcal. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Clinically, there is swelling and intense pain in one 
or both parotid glands, which are hard, enlarged 
and tender, often with associated trismus (mas-
seter spasm). There may be a purulent discharge 
from the duct. Abscess formation occasionally 
occurs. 
 Treatment 
 Prophylaxis is important. Adequate hydration 
with elimination of the above aetiological factors 
has rendered this complication rare nowadays. In 
the established case, the patient must be kept fully 
hydrated and the ﬂ ow of saliva encouraged by 
sucking sweets or chewing gum. Parenteral anti-
biotic therapy is commenced. Occasionally, surgi-
cal drainage is required. 
 Chronic  r ecurrent 
 p arotid  s ialadenitis 
 Repeated episodes of pain and swelling in one or 
both parotids is not uncommon and is caused by 
a combination of obstruction and infection of the 
gland. There may be an associated dilatation of 
the duct system and alveoli of the gland, termed 
sialectasia (which resembles bronchiectasis in the 
lung), associated with a stricture of the duct or a 
stone. These changes are best demonstrated by 
performing a  sialogram . 
 Treatment 
 An associated stricture is treated by dilatation or 
surgical enlargement, and if stones are present 
these must be removed. Massage of the gland 
several times a day, and the use of sialogogues 
(such as  ‘ acid drops ’ ) encourage drainage. 
Occasionally, in severe and refractory cases, exci-
sion of the gland with preservation of the facial 
nerve is required.   
eunuchoidism. Very rarely the orchitis occurs 
without prodromal parotitis.  
  •   Pancreatitis, mastitis, thyroiditis or o ö phoritis 
are also rarely caused by mumps. 
 Acute  b acterial  p arotitis 
 Ascending infection of the parotid gland via its 
duct may occur after major surgical procedures. 
 Box 19.1   Parotid swelling: differential 
diagnosis 
 A swelling in the parotid region may be one of the 
following: 
 Swelling of the  p arotid  g land  i tself 
  •    Parotitis 
  •    Pleomorphic adenoma  
  •    Adenolymphoma 
  •    Carcinoma 
 Swelling in  o ther  a natomical  s tructures in 
the  v icinity 
  •    Sebaceous cyst  
  •    Lipoma 
  •    Enlarged pre - auricular or parotid lymph nodes  
  •    Neuroma of facial nerve  
  •    Ameloblastoma (adamantinoma) and other 
tumours of the mandible  
 Box 19.2   Parotid swelling: examination 
 The following should always be performed, in addi-
tion to examination of the gland itself: 
  •    Inspection of the parotid duct: redness, oedema 
of the duct or exudation of pus indicate parotitis  
  •    Testing the integrity of the facial nerve: it is 
invariably intact in benign swelling, but may be 
paralysed in malignant disease  
  •    Inspection and palpation of the fauces: a parotid 
tumour may plunge into the pharynx  
  •    Palpation of the regional lymph nodes: they may 
be involved with secondary deposits from a 
parotid carcinoma  

The salivary glands 155
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   X - rays invariably conﬁ rm the presence of the 
stone. 
  •   A  Sialogram , in which contrast material is 
injected into the duct, may be necessary if no 
stone is visible. This may reveal stenosis of the 
ostium of the duct, which mimics the 
symptoms of a stone, or sialectasis. 
 Treatment 
 If the stone lies within the submandibular duct, 
it can be removed from within the mouth, with 
the duct being marsupialized at the site of 
extraction. If one or more stones are impacted in 
the gland substance, excision of the whole gland 
is required. 
 Salivary  t umours 
 Classiﬁ cation 
 Benign 
  •   Pleomorphic adenoma (mixed salivary 
tumour).  
  •   Adenolymphoma. 
 Malignant 
  •   Primary:  carcinoma. 
  •   Secondary:  direct invasion from skin or from 
secondarily involved lymph nodes. 
 Pleomorphic  a denoma 
 Ninety per cent occur in the parotid, although 
occasionally they are found in the submandibular, 
sublingual or accessory salivary glands. Ninety 
per cent present before the age of 50 years, 
although any age may be affected. Sex distribution 
is equal.  
 Pathology 
 Macroscopic  a ppearance 
 The tumour is lobulated and lies within a false 
capsule of compressed salivary tissue. The cut 
surface is glistening and translucent; the consist-
ency is crumbly.  
 Mikulicz ’ s  s yndrome  3  
 Mikulicz ’ s syndrome is characterized by enlarge-
ment of the salivary and lacrimal glands, and is 
associated with dry eyes, leading to conjunctivok-
eratitis, and dry mouth (xerostomia). It may occur 
in the following conditions: 
  •   sarcoid (commonest); 
  •   lymphoma, particularly non - Hodgkin ’ s 
lymphoma;  
  •   tuberculosis; 
  •   Sj ö gren ’ s syndrome 4 , principally affecting 
middle - aged women and associated with 
connective tissue disorders such as 
rheumatoid arthritis and systemic lupus 
erythematosus. 
 Calculi 
 Stone formation is common in the submandibular 
gland and its duct, rare in the parotid and unknown 
in the sublingual. The different composition of the 
saliva from each gland probably explains this dif-
ference. Stasis of the more viscid secretion of the 
submandibular gland in its long duct, changes in 
composition of the saliva, trauma to the duct, 
infection, stricture and several metabolic diseases 
such as hyperparathyroidism may predispose to 
stone formation. The stones themselves consist of 
calcium phosphate and calcium carbonate, and 
are therefore radio - opaque. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 There is painful swelling of the affected gland, 
aggravated by food (classically by sucking a lemon) 
and there may be an unpleasant taste in the mouth 
due to the purulent discharge. On examination, 
the obstructed gland is enlarged and tender. The 
submandibular duct, visible in the ﬂ oor of the 
mouth, is red and swollen and the calculus may 
be visible or palpable on bimanual examination 
of the duct. Gentle pressure on the gland may 
produce a purulent exudate from the oriﬁ ce of the 
duct.  
  3  Jan Mikulicz - Radecki (1850 – 1905), Professor of Surgery succes-
sively at Cracow, Konigsberg and Breslau, Poland. One of the ﬁ rst 
surgeons to use rubber gloves and to wear a face mask. 
  4  Henrik Sj ö gren (1899 – 1986), Ophthalmologist, Gothenburg, 
Sweden. 

156 
The salivary glands
 Prognosis 
 Providing the tumour is completely excised, the 
prognosis is excellent but inadequate surgery is 
followed by a recurrence in a high percentage of 
cases. 
 Adenolymphoma 
 Adenolymphoma (Warthin ’ s tumour 5 ) accounts 
for about 10% of parotid tumours, and is very rare 
elsewhere. Adenolymphomas usually occur in 
men over the age of 50 years, and are occasionally 
bilateral. 
 Macroscopically, the tumour is soft and cystic. 
Microscopically, it consists of columnar cells 
forming papillary fringes, which project into cystic 
spaces and which are supported by a lymphoid 
stroma. These tumours probably arise from the 
salivary duct epithelium, the lymphoid tissue orig-
inating from the lymphoid aggregates that are 
present in the normal parotid gland. Presence of 
the lymphoid tissue may lead to confusion with 
lymphoproliferative disorders. Prognosis is excel-
lent after local removal.  
 Carcinoma 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Again this usually affects the parotid. Sex distribu-
tion is equal, and the patients are usually over the 
age of 50 years. The tumour is hard and inﬁ ltrat-
ing. Clinically, the diagnosis is based on rapid 
growth, pain and involvement of the facial nerve 
and regional lymph nodes. Eventually, surround-
ing tissues are inﬁ ltrated and the overlying skin 
becomes ulcerated. 
 Microscopically, most tumours are adenocarci-
nomas, rapidly progressive with a high incidence 
of metastasis to regional lymph nodes. A small 
proportion represent malignant change in slow -
 growing pleomorphic adenomas. 
 Treatment 
 When the tumour lies in the parotid, radical 
 Microscopic  a ppearance 
 The tumours vary across a spectrum from a typical 
adenoma to a frank carcinoma. The majority show 
glandular acini within a blue - staining stroma, 
which gives the appearance of a cartilage but 
which is, in fact, mucus. The appearance of epi-
thelial cells and  ‘ cartilage ’  gave rise to the older 
concept of a  ‘ mixed tumour ’ . 
 Surgical  c onsiderations 
 If treated by enucleation, at least 25% of the 
tumours recur, because: 
  •   the capsule surrounding the tumour is a false 
one, which itself is incomplete and may 
contain tumour cells;  
  •   serial sections show that the tumour often has 
 ‘ amoeboid ’  processes, which may be left 
behind; and  
  •   implantation of tumour cells may occur into 
the wound. 
 Although slow growing, these tumours cannot 
be considered benign because of the lack of 
encapsulation, the occasional wide inﬁ ltration of 
surrounding tissues and the tendency to recur. 
Moreover, the less differentiated tumours, which 
are extremely difﬁ cult to distinguish from frank 
carcinoma, may metastasize to the regional lymph 
nodes and distantly via the bloodstream.  
 Clinical  f eatures 
 The patient presents with a slow - growing swelling 
anywhere within the parotid gland, but usually 
in the lower pole and in the region of the angle 
of the jaw. The lump is well deﬁ ned, usually 
ﬁ rm or hard but sometimes cystic in consistency. 
It is usually placed in the superﬁ cial part of 
the gland but may occasionally be in its deep 
prolongation and indeed may project into the 
pharynx. The facial nerve is never involved, except 
by frankly malignant tumours. Its integrity should 
be conﬁ rmed. 
 Treatment 
 Wide excision of the tumour and the surrounding 
parotid tissue, with careful preservation of the 
ﬁ bres of the facial nerve (superﬁ cial parotidec-
tomy). Where the tumour involves one of the other 
salivary glands, complete excision of the gland is 
performed.  
  5   Aldred Scott Warthin (1866 – 1931), Professor of Pathology, 
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. 

The salivary glands 157
parotidectomy is performed with sacriﬁ ce of 
the facial nerve. This is combined if necessary 
with block dissection of the regional lymph nodes 
if these are involved, and is followed by radio-
therapy. When the tumour arises in the other 
sites of salivary tissue, wide local excision is 
performed, again with block dissection if this is 
indicated by the presence of enlarged but mobile 
lymph nodes. 
 The prognosis is not good for this tumour, par-
ticularly when the submandibular gland is the site 
of origin. 
 
  

 20 
The  o esophagus  
 
 Learning  o bjectives 
  ✓   To know the common causes of dysphagia. 
  ✓   To know the presentation and management of oesophageal 
carcinoma. 
 Outside the  w all 
  •   Pressure of enlarged lymph nodes (secondary 
cancer or lymphoma).  
  •   Thoracic aortic aneurysm. 
  •   Bronchial carcinoma. 
  •   Retrosternal goitre. 
 General  c auses 
  •   Myasthenia gravis. 
  •   Bulbar palsy. 
  •   Bulbar poliomyelitis. 
  •   Diphtheria. 
  •   Hysteria. 
 Investigation 
 History 
 The subjective site of obstruction is not always 
exact; the patient often merely points vaguely to 
behind the sternum. The diagnosis may be given 
by a history of swallowed caustic in the past. A 
previous story of reﬂ ux oesophagitis suggests 
peptic stricture. Patients with achalasia tend to be 
young and the history is often long, usually 
without loss of weight. 
 Malignant stricture has a short history, occurs 
usually in elderly people and is associated with 
severe weight loss. 
 Examination 
 Often this is negative, but search is made for clini-
cal evidence of Plummer – Vinson syndrome (a 
smooth tongue, anaemia and koilonychia, see 
 Dysphagia 
 Dysphagia is difﬁ culty in swallowing. The causes 
may be local or general. The local causes of 
obstruction of any tube in the body can be subdi-
vided into those in the lumen, those in the wall 
and those outside the wall. 
 Local  c auses 
 In the  l umen 
  •   Foreign body. 
 In the  w all 
  •   Congenital atresia. 
  •   Inﬂ ammatory stricture, secondary to reﬂ ux 
oesophagitis. 
  •   Caustic stricture. 
  •   Achalasia. 
  •   Plummer – Vinson syndrome with oesophageal 
web. 
  •   Pharyngeal pouch. 
  •   Schatzki ring. 1 
  •   Tumour of oesophagus or cardia. 
  •   Systemic sclerosis (scleroderma). 
Lecture Notes: General Surgery, 12th edition. © Harold Ellis, 
Sir Roy Y. Calne and Christopher J. E. Watson. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
  1   Richard Schatzki (1901 – 1992), Radiologist, Boston, MA, USA. 
Described a circumferential ring of mucosal tissue in the distal 
oesophagus. 

The oesophagus 159
  •   Barium swallow , with cine - radiography, may 
demonstrate the characteristic appearances 
of a cervical web, extrinsic compression 
and the dilated oesophagus of achalasia 
(Figure  20.1 ). 
 The investigations are complementary and both 
may be indicated.  
 Swallowed  f oreign  b odies 
 Foreign bodies are swallowed either accidentally, 
usually by children, or deliberately by mentally 
disturbed people, prison inmates and circus 
p. 164), secondary nodes from a carcinoma of the 
oesophagus which may be felt in the neck and 
supraclavicular fossae, and the upper abdomen is 
carefully palpated, as a carcinoma of the cardia is 
a common cause of dysphagia in elderly patients 
and indeed is more common in this country than 
carcinoma of the oesophagus. 
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   Fibreoptic oesophagoscopy  enables biopsies to 
be taken to conﬁ rm malignancy, and permits 
therapeutic dilatation or intubation if 
indicated.  
 Figure 20.1   (a – e) Barium swallow 
appearances of common causes of 
dysphagia.  
(a)
(b)
Pharyngeal
pouch
Achalasia
(c)   Carcinoma
(d)   Caustic 
        stricture
(e)   Extrinsic 
       compression 
       from bronchial
       carcinoma

160 
The oesophagus
 Perforations of the 
 o esophagus 
 Classiﬁ cation 
 From  w ithin 
  •   Swallowed foreign body  – may occur anywhere 
in the oesophagus.  
  •   Rupture at oesophagoscopy  – usually at the 
level of cricopharyngeus or above a stricture.  
  •   Rupture during dilatation or biopsy  – usually 
at the lower end of the oesophagus and 
especially likely in the presence of oesophageal 
disease (carcinoma or stricture).  
  •   Rupture during oesophageal echocardiography 
 – again usually at the lower end, often in 
the presence of a hitherto unknown 
stricture. 
 From  w ithout 
  •   Perforating wounds (rare). 
 Spontaneous 
  •   Lower thoracic oesophagus (Boerhaave ’ s 
syndrome 3 ). 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 After instrumentation , perforation is suspected 
if the patient complains of pain in the neck, 
chest 
or 
upper 
abdomen, 
together 
with 
dysphagia and pyrexia. Diagnosis is certain if sub-
cutaneous emphysema is felt in the supraclavicu-
lar area. 
 Spontaneous rupture  of the oesophagus occurs 
rarely and is associated with vomiting after a large 
meal (Boerhaave ’ s syndrome). There is severe 
pain in the chest, the dorsal region of the spine or 
the upper abdomen (acute mediastinitis). The 
patient is collapsed and cyanosed. The abdomen 
may be rigid and often a false diagnosis of perfo-
rated peptic ulcer or myocardial infarction is 
made. Surgical emphysema (subcutaneous crepi-
tation) is usually palpable in the neck owing to gas 
escaping into the mediastinum.  
sideshow performers. A recent phenomenon is 
the  ‘ body - packer ’ , a smuggler who swallows 
condoms packed with cocaine or heroin. These 
may present with bowel obstruction, or may 
rupture producing coma or death from absorption 
of the drug. 
 Obstruction of the oropharynx and tracheal 
opening by a large portion of meat can rapidly 
become fatal. A sharp blow just below the xiphoid, 
Heimlich ’ s manoeuvre, 2  causing a sudden rise in 
intra - abdominal pressure, may dislodge the plug 
and save the patient ’ s life. 
 Unless they are sharp or irregular, amazingly 
large foreign bodies will pass into the stomach. If 
a smooth object such as a bolus of food impacts 
in the oesophagus, one must suspect the presence 
of a stricture. Occasionally a carcinoma of the 
oesophagus presents as an acute dysphagia when 
a morsel of food lodges above it. Absolute dys-
phagia, with failure to swallow even saliva, is then 
characteristic. 
 The presenting feature is painful dysphagia. The 
danger depends on the nature of the foreign body. 
Perforation may occur with resultant mediastini-
tis; rarely, perforation of the aorta occurs with fatal 
haematemesis. The diagnosis may be conﬁ rmed 
by a plain X - ray if the foreign body is radio -
 opaque; otherwise, it may be shown up on a 
barium swallow.  
 Treatment 
 Oesophagoscopic removal is indicated when 
the foreign body is stuck in the oesophagus. 
Occasionally, oesophagotomy is required. The 
great majority of foreign bodies, once they have 
passed into the stomach, proceed uneventfully 
along the alimentary canal and are passed per 
rectum. Occasionally, a sharp foreign body pene-
trates the wall of the bowel (there is a particular 
tendency for it to lodge in, and pierce, a Meckel ’ s 
diverticulum; see Chapter  23 , p. 194). 
 The treatment of a foreign body that has passed 
the cardia is initially conservative. The patient is 
watched and serial X - rays taken to observe the 
object ’ s progress if it is radio - opaque. Operation 
is performed if a sharp object fails to progress or 
if abdominal pain or tenderness develop. 
 If the foreign body is potentially toxic when 
ingested, emetics or laxatives may be indicated.   
  2   Henry J. Heimlich (b. 1920), Thoracic Surgeon, Xavier University, 
Cincinnati, OH, USA.  
  3   Hermann Boerhaave (1668 – 1738), Physician, Leiden, The 
Netherlands. Diagnosed spontaneous rupture of the oesophagus 
at post - mortem on the Grand Admiral of the Dutch Fleet. 

The oesophagus 161
 Achalasia of the  c ardia 
 This is a neuromuscular failure of relaxation at the 
lower end of the oesophagus with progressive 
dilatation, tortuosity, incoordination of peristalsis 
and often hypertrophy of the oesophagus above. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Achalasia may occur at any age but particularly in 
the third decade. The ratio of women to men is 3:2. 
It is indistinguishable from Chagas ’  disease, 4 
which occurs in South America secondary to 
 Trypanosoma 
cruzi  
infection. 
The 
parasite 
destroys the intermuscular ganglion cells of the 
oesophagus. 
 There is progressive dysphagia over months to 
years, sometimes associated with a spasm - like 
chest pain. Regurgitation of ﬂ uids from the dilated 
oesophageal sac may be followed by an aspiration 
pneumonia. 
Occasionally, 
malignant 
change 
occurs in the dilated oesophagus.  
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   Chest X - ray  may reveal the dilated oesophagus 
as a mediastinal mass, with an air – ﬂ uid level, 
and pneumonitis from aspiration of 
oesophageal contents. (Note that there are 
three other  ‘ pseudotumours ’ : scoliosis, 
tuberculous paravertebral abscess and thoracic 
aortic aneurysm, all of which may simulate a 
mediastinal tumour on a chest X - ray  –  Chapter 
 10 , p. 67.) 
  •   Barium swallow shows gross dilatation and 
tortuosity of the oesophagus leading to an 
unrelaxing narrowed segment at the lower end 
(said to resemble a bird ’ s beak) (Figure  20.1 ).  
  •   Oesophagoscopy demonstrates an enormous 
sac of oesophagus containing a pond of 
stagnant food and ﬂ uid. 
  •   Oesophageal manometry conﬁ rms increased 
lower oesophageal sphincter pressure. 
 Treatment 
 Satisfactory results are obtained by Heller ’ s opera-
tion, 5  which is a cardiomyotomy dividing the 
muscle of the lower end of the oesophagus and the 
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   Chest X - ray  shows gas in the neck and 
mediastinum and there may be ﬂ uid and gas 
in the pleural cavity.  
  •   Thoracoabdominal computed tomography 
(CT) , combined with oral gastrografﬁ n (a 
water - soluble contrast ﬂ uid), will conﬁ rm the 
perforation and deﬁ ne its position. 
 Treatment 
 Cervical perforation  is managed conservatively 
with parenteral antibiotics, nil by mouth and 
intravenous drip. Abscess formation in the supe-
rior mediastinum requires drainage via a supra-
clavicular incision. 
 Thoracic rupture  is treated by immediate suture 
(or resection if a carcinoma is instrumentally per-
forated). The prognosis from spontaneous rupture 
is inversely related to the time to surgery, and after 
12 hours is very poor.   
 Caustic  s tricture of 
the  o esophagus 
 This follows accidental or suicidal ingestion 
of strong acids or alkalis (particularly caustic 
soda 
and 
ammonia). 
It 
often 
occurs 
in 
children. 
 In the acute phase, there are associated burns 
of the mouth and pharynx. The mid -  and lower 
oesophagus are usually affected, as these are the 
sites of temporary hold - up of the caustic material 
where the oesophagus is crossed by the aortic arch 
and at the cardiac sphincter. 
 Treatment 
 In the acute phase treatment aims to neutralize 
the cause, so alkali ingestion with vinegar and 
acid with bicarbonate of soda. The damaged 
oesophagus is rested by instituting feeding via a 
gastrostomy, nil being given by mouth. Systemic 
steroids are given to reduce scar formation. If 
a stricture develops, gentle dilatation with 
bougies is commenced after 3 or 4 weeks. An 
established, impassable stricture is treated by a 
bypass operation, a loop of colon or small bowel 
being brought up on its vascular pedicle between 
the stomach below and the upper oesophagus 
above. 
  4   Carlos Chagas (1879 – 1934), Professor of Tropical Medicine, Rio 
de Janeiro, Brazil. 
  5  Ernst Heller (1877 – 1964), Surgeon, Leipzig, Germany. 

162 
The oesophagus
 Pharyngeal  p ouch 
 This is a mucosal protrusion between the two 
parts of the inferior pharyngeal constrictor  –  the 
thyropharyngeus and cricopharyngeus (Figure 
 20.2 ). The weak area between these portions of the 
muscle is situated posteriorly (Killian ’ s dehis-
cence 7 ). The pouch is believed to originate above 
the cricopharyngeus muscle which is in spasm; it 
develops ﬁ rst posteriorly but cannot then expand 
in this direction and protrudes to one or the other 
side, usually the left. As the pouch enlarges, it dis-
places the oesophagus laterally. It is an example of 
a pulsion diverticulum, forming as a result of 
increased intraluminal pressure. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 It occurs more often in men and usually in the 
elderly. There is dysphagia, regurgitation of the 
food that has collected in the pouch, and often a 
palpable swelling in the neck, which gurgles. Food 
retained in the pouch leads to a foetor, and late 
regurgitation may lead to aspiration pneumonia 
and lung abscess. Diagnosis is conﬁ rmed by a 
barium swallow. 
 Treatment 
 Traditional surgery involved a cervical incision 
with excision of the pouch combined with a 
posterior myotomy of the cricopharyngeus. 
Alternatively, the pouch can be treated by division 
of the wall between pouch and oesophagus using 
an endoscopic stapling device (endoscopic diver-
ticulotomy), leaving the pouch  in situ and 
avoiding the risk of ﬁ stula formation and leaks 
associated with the open operation.  
 Other  o esophageal  d iverticula 
 Other oesophageal diverticula are very rare. 
  •   Traction diverticula may occur in association 
with ﬁ xation to tuberculous nodes or to pleural 
adhesions. 
  •   Pulsion diverticula may be associated with 
cardiospasm and occur at the lower end of the 
oesophagus. 
upper stomach down to the mucosa in a similar 
manner to Ramstedt ’ s operation (see Chapter  21 , 
p. 168) for congenital pyloric hypertrophy. This 
procedure is best performed laparoscopically, 
thus reducing morbidity. 
 The same effect may be achieved by forcible 
dilatation of the oesophagogastric junction by 
means of an endoscopic balloon that is inﬂ ated 
under ﬂ uoroscopic (X - ray) control. Although this 
avoids open operation, it is accompanied by the 
risk of rupture of the oesophagus. A newer alterna-
tive involves endoscopic injection of botulinum 
toxin (Botox) to paralyse the lower oesophageal 
sphincter, a treatment that gives relief in many 
patients and which may last for a year.   
 Plummer – Vinson 
 s yndrome  6  
 A syndrome actually described by Paterson and 
Kelly before Plummer and Vinson, and which 
sometimes rejoices in all four names, comprising 
dysphagia and iron - deﬁ ciency anaemia (with its 
associated smooth tongue and koilonychia  –  
spoon - shaped nails) usually in middle - aged or 
elderly women. 
 The dysphagia is associated with hyperkeratini-
zation of the oesophagus and often with the 
formation of a web in the upper part of the 
oesophagus. The condition is premalignant and is 
associated with the development of a carcinoma 
in the cricopharyngeal region. 
 Treatment 
 The dysphagia responds to treatment with iron, 
although the web may require dilatation through 
an oesophagoscope. 
 Oesophageal  d iverticula 
 The only common diverticulum of the gullet is the 
pharyngeal pouch.  
  6   Henry Strong Plummer (1874 – 1937), Physician, Mayo Clinic, 
Rochester, MN, USA. Porter Paisley Vinson (1890 – 1959), Physician, 
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. Donald Ross Paterson (1863 –
 1939), ENT Surgeon, Royal Inﬁ rmary, Cardiff, UK. Adam Brown -
 Kelly (1865 – 1914), ENT Surgeon, Victoria Inﬁ rmary, Glasgow, UK.  
  7   Gustav Killian (1860 – 1921), Professor of Otorhinolaryngology, 
Freiburg and Berlin, Germany. 

The oesophagus 163
  •   physiological muscle sphincter at the lower 
end of the oesophagus;  
  •   valve - like effect of the obliquity of the 
oesophagogastric angle;  
  •   pinch - cock effect on the lower oesophagus of 
the diaphragmatic sling when the diaphragm 
contracts in full inspiration;  
  •   plug - like action of the mucosal folds at the 
cardia. 
 The diaphragm is an important but not essen-
tial part of the cardiac sphincter mechanism, as 
sliding hiatus hernias are not necessarily accom-
panied by regurgitation. Similarly, free regurgita-
tion occurs in some subjects with a normal 
oesophageal hiatus, presumably because of 
some defect in the function of the physiological 
sphincter. 
 Reﬂ ux oesophagitis may also occur in associa-
tion with the following: 
  •   repeated vomiting, especially in the presence 
of a duodenal ulcer with high acid content of 
gastric juice;  
  •   long - standing nasogastric intubation; 
  •   resections of the cardia with gastro -
 oesophageal anastomosis; 
  •   Congenital diverticula  are occasionally found. 
These are usually X - ray ﬁ ndings only, although 
they may occasionally produce dysphagia. 
 Reﬂ ux  o esophagitis 
 This is produced by the reﬂ ux of peptic juice 
through the incompetent cardiac sphincter into 
the lower oesophagus, resulting in ulceration 
and inﬂ ammation and eventually in stricture 
formation. 
The 
exact 
mechanism 
of 
the 
cardio - oesophageal sphincter is not understood; 
it is sufﬁ cient to prevent regurgitation into the 
oesophagus when standing on one ’ s head or in 
forced inspiration, when there is a pressure differ-
ence of some 80   mmHg between the intragastric 
and intraoesophageal pressure, yet it can relax 
readily to allow vomiting or belching to occur. The 
mechanism is probably a complex affair compris-
ing the following: 
  •   positive intra - abdominal pressure acting on 
the lower (intra - abdominal) oesophagus, 
maintaining a high - pressure zone at the 
cardia;  
 Figure 20.2   A pharyngeal pouch 
emerging between the two 
components of the inferior constrictor 
muscle.  
Pharyngeal pouch
Thyropharyngeus
Thyroid cartilage
Cricopharyngeus
Cricoid cartilage

164 
The oesophagus
tion will provide good palliation, with repeat dila-
tation every year or so. Anti - reﬂ ux surgery to 
repair the hernia in younger patients combined 
with preoperative dilatation may also give good 
long - term palliation. In the advanced case, where 
frequent dilatation is required or is unsuccessful, 
resection of the stricture may be necessary. 
 Tumours of the 
 o esophagus 
 Classiﬁ cation 
 Benign 
  •   Leiomyoma. 
 Malignant 
  •   Primary: 
 –  carcinoma; 
 –  leiomyosarcoma. 
  •   Secondary: direct invasion from lung or 
stomach. 
 Carcinoma 
 Post - cricoid 
carcinoma 
usually 
occurs 
in 
women and is associated with the Plummer –
 Vinson syndrome (see p. 162). The remaining 
oesophageal growths occur more often in men, 
usually elderly men. The commonest site has 
changed in recent years, with distal tumours 
becoming more common than tumours of the 
mid - third, with upper oesophageal tumours being 
least common. 
 Risk factors for oesophageal carcinoma include 
tobacco and alcohol, with squamous carcinoma 
also being linked to achalasia and coeliac disease; 
adenocarcinoma 
may 
occur 
in 
association 
with Barrett ’ s oesophagus as a consequence of 
metaplastic change at the gastro - oesophageal 
junction. 
 Carcinoma of the oesophagus is a relatively 
common tumour in the UK (12 per 100   000 inci-
dence), but is 20 times more common in China, 
and twice as common in France. The incidence is 
rising in the Western world. The overall prognosis 
is less than 10% survival at 3 years. 
  •   the presence of ectopic acid - secreting gastric 
mucosa within the oesophagus ( ‘ Barrett ’ s 
oesophagus ’ , see p. 166). 
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   Fibreoptic oesophagoscopy  demonstrates the 
presence of oesophagitis, and facilitates biopsy 
to exclude carcinoma, or the presence of 
gastric - type epithelium. 
  •   24 hour oesophageal pH studies : a probe in the 
oesophagus will demonstrate reﬂ ux of gastric 
acid and its temporal relation to pain.  
  •   Barium swallow : this will demonstrate the 
outline of a hernia and the presence of any 
associated stricture. Tilting the patient head 
down will demonstrate reﬂ ux, but does not 
necessarily conﬁ rm that the pain is due to 
reﬂ ux. 
 Differential  d iagnosis 
 The pain of oesophagitis may be confused with 
cholecystitis, peptic ulcer or angina pectoris; 
indeed, these conditions often coexist. 
 The obstructive symptoms of an associated 
stricture must be differentiated from carcinoma of 
the oesophagus or of the cardia.  
 Treatment 
 Medical treatment  comprises weight loss, stop-
ping 
smoking 
and 
dietary 
manipulation. 
Regurgitation is discouraged by avoiding stooping 
or lying and by sleeping propped up in bed. 
Alginate antacids (e.g. Gaviscon) taken after meals 
neutralize the acidity as well as line the gullet. 
H 2  - receptor antagonist drugs (e.g. cimetidine or 
ranitidine) and proton pump inhibitors (e.g. ome-
prazole) provide more complete reduction in 
gastric acidity. Prokinetic drugs to increase gastric 
emptying, such as metoclopramide, may also be 
useful. Many patients with mild symptoms obtain 
considerable relief from such regimens. 
 Laparoscopic repair  of the hernia is undertaken 
when medical treatment fails. This may be sup-
plemented by fundoplication in which the fundus 
of the stomach is sutured around the lower 
oesophagus in an inkwell fashion in order to 
produce an anti - reﬂ ux valve. 
 In the presence of  stricture , surgical treatment 
is indicated. In a mild case, continuous acid 
reduction treatment with a proton pump inhibitor 
(e.g. omeprazole) and endoscopic balloon dilata-

The oesophagus 165
  •   Endoscopic ultrasound enables assessment of 
the tumour ’ s depth of invasion and detection 
of local and lymphatic spread; it also facilitates 
ﬁ ne needle aspiration of lymph nodes to 
facilitate preoperative staging.  
  •   Positron emission tomography (PET) , in 
conjunction with CT, may also be used to 
screen for metastatic disease and stage the 
tumour. 
  •   Laparoscopy may be indicated to exclude 
peritoneal metastases prior to resection. 
 Differential  d iagnosis 
 Other causes of dysphagia (p. 158). 
 Treatment 
 The two treatment aims are to cure the cancer 
when possible, and to palliate the dysphagia. The 
treatment options are curative resection and pal-
liative intubation or laser. 
 Curative  r esection 
 When cure is possible, resection is undertaken fol-
lowing a course of chemotherapy. The growth is 
removed and the defect is usually bridged by 
mobilizing the stomach up into the chest, with 
anastomosis to residual oesophagus or to the 
pharynx in the neck. Even with successful resec-
tion, survival is poor.  
 Palliation 
  •   Intubation with a stent may relieve dysphagia 
if the tumour is inoperable.  
  •   Endoscopic laser therapy may vaporize 
the growth and restore the lumen. 
Repeated courses may be necessary, but 
disease progression rapidly overtakes the 
patient.  
  •   Radiotherapy , either external beam or 
intraluminal, is useful for squamous 
tumours. 
  •   Chemotherapy , particularly with a 
platinum - based regimen, has shown 
increasing promise when combined with 
radiotherapy. 
 The average expectation of life is in the region 
of 3 months with a maximum survival of about 1 
year, but at least the patient is spared the misery 
of total dysphagia. 
 Pathology 
 The tumour commences as a nodule, which then 
develops into an ulcer, a papilliferous mass or an 
annular constriction. 
 Microscopically, the majority are now adeno-
carcinomas arising at the lower end of the 
oesophagus, either in gastric metaplasia (Barrett ’ s 
oesophagus) or as a result of an invasion of the 
oesophagus from a tumour developing at the 
cardiac end of the stomach. Tumours of the upper 
two - thirds are usually squamous carcinomas. 
 Spread 
  •   Local:  into the mediastinal structures  –  the 
trachea, aorta, mediastinal pleura and lung. 
  •   Lymphatic:  to para - oesophageal, 
tracheobronchial, supraclavicular and 
subdiaphragmatic nodes.  
  •   Bloodstream:  to liver and lungs (relatively 
late). 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Carcinoma of the oesophagus may present 
because of the following: 
  •   local symptoms  – dysphagia; 
  •   secondary deposits   –  enlarged neck nodes, 
occasionally jaundice and/or hepatomegaly;  
  •   general manifestations of malignant disease 
 – loss of weight, anorexia, anaemia.    
 Dysphagia in an elderly male with a short history 
is almost invariably due to carcinoma of the 
oesophagus or the upper end of the stomach. 
Progression is from dysphagia for solids to dys-
phagia for liquids. Hoarseness and a bovine cough 
suggest invasion of the left recurrent laryngeal 
nerve by an upper oesophageal tumour. 
 Special  i nvestigations 
 The purpose of these investigations is to conﬁ rm 
the diagnosis and to assess extent (stage) of 
disease. 
  •   Oesophagoscopy  enables the tumour to be 
inspected and a biopsy taken. This may be 
combined with endoluminal ultrasound to 
evaluate local invasion.  
  •   CT of the thorax and abdomen to assess the 
primary growth, local invasion and secondary 
spread to the liver and lymph nodes.  

166 
The oesophagus
 Barrett ’ s  o esophagus 8  
and  a denocarcinoma 
 This is an increasingly common condition with 
an estimated prevalence of about 2% of adults 
in the UK. The normal oesophagus is lined by 
stratiﬁ ed squamous epithelium. In patients with 
long - standing reﬂ ux of duodenogastric contents, 
the lower oesophageal epithelium undergoes 
metaplasia to an intestinal - type columnar epithe-
lium. Continued inﬂ ammation may lead to dys-
plasia and subsequently to malignant change. 
Carcinomas in such cases are adenocarcinomas, 
and most occur in the lower third of the oesopha-
gus or at the gastro - oesophageal junction. They 
are commonest in male smokers, with a long 
history (over 10 years) of Barrett ’ s metaplasia and 
frequent symptoms (more than three times a 
week) of gastro - oesphageal reﬂ ux. 
 As metaplasia to a Barrett - type oesophagus is 
premalignant, such patients should undergo 
regular endoscopic surveillance, with biopsies to 
look for dysplasia. Severe dysplasia (carcinoma  in 
situ ) is an indication for endoscopic treatment or 
resection. 
 
 
 
  8  Norman Barrett (1903 – 79), Thoracic Surgeon, St Thomas ’ s 
Hospital, London, UK.  

 21 
The  s tomach and 
 d uodenum  
 
 Learning  o bjectives 
  ✓   To have knowledge of pyloric stenosis, in particular the 
characteristic biochemical changes.  
  ✓   To know about peptic ulceration and its aetiology and how 
treatment has changed with recognition of  Helicobacter pylori . 
  ✓   To know about gastric carcinoma and its management. 
 The presenting symptom is projectile vomiting. 
The vomit does not contain bile and the child 
takes food avidly immediately after vomiting, i.e. 
it is always hungry. There is failure to gain weight 
and, as a result of dehydration, the baby is consti-
pated (the stools resembling the faecal pellets of a 
rabbit). 
 The infant may be dehydrated and visible peri-
stalsis of the dilated stomach may be seen in the 
epigastrium. Ninety - ﬁ ve per cent of infants have a 
palpable pyloric tumour, which is felt as a ﬁ rm 
 ‘ bobbin ’  in the right upper abdomen, especially 
after vomiting a feed.  
 Differential  d iagnosis 
  •   Enteritis:  diarrhoea accompanies this. 
  •   Neonatal intestinal obstruction from duodenal 
atresia, volvulus neonatorum or intestinal 
atresia: symptoms commence within a day or 
two of birth and the vomit contains bile.  
  •   Intracranial birth injury . 
  •   Overfeeding:   here there are no other features 
to suggest pyloric stenosis apart from vomiting.     
 Special  i nvestigations 
 If the clinical features are characteristic and a 
pyloric mass is palpable, no further investigations 
are necessary. 
 Congenital  h ypertrophic 
 p yloric  s tenosis 
 Aetiology 
 The aetiology of the pyloric muscle  ‘ tumour ’  in 
pyloric obstruction in infants is unknown. It may 
result from an abnormality of the ganglion cells of 
the myenteric plexus; failure of the pyloric sphinc-
ter to relax may then produce an intense 
work hypertrophy of the adjacent circular pyloric 
muscle. 
 It is a familial condition; 80% of cases occur in 
male infants; 50% are ﬁ rst - born; and the condition 
often occurs in siblings.  
 Clinical  f eatures 
 The child usually presents at 3 – 4 weeks old, 
although symptoms may be present, rarely, at or 
soon after birth. It is extremely uncommon for a 
previously healthy infant to develop this condition 
after 12 weeks old. 
Lecture Notes: General Surgery, 12th edition. © Harold Ellis, 
Sir Roy Y. Calne and Christopher J. E. Watson. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

168 
The stomach and duodenum
 Surgical  t reatment 
 Ramstedt ’ s  p yloromyotomy  1  
 A longitudinal incision is made through the hyper-
trophied muscle of the pylorus down to mucosa 
and the cut edges are separated (Figure  21.1 ). This 
is now commonly performed laparoscopically. 
The infant is given glucose water 3 hours after the 
operation and this is followed by 3 hourly milk 
feeds, which are steadily increased in amount. 
 Results are excellent and the mortality is 
extremely low. 
 Duodenal  a tresia 
 Duodenal atresia may be partial or complete, and 
principally affects the second part of the duode-
num near the ampulla of Vater. An annular pan-
creas may be present (Chapter  32 , p. 276). 
  •   Ultrasound scan  demonstrates the thickened 
pylorus and large stomach.  
  •   Abdominal X - ray reveals a dilated stomach 
with minimal gas in the bowel, in contrast 
to dilated coils of bowel in intestinal 
obstruction.  
  •   Barium meal reveals the pyloric obstruction 
with characteristic shouldering of the pyloric 
antrum due to the impression made on it by 
the hypertrophied pyloric muscle. However, 
this investigation is rarely called for. 
 Treatment 
 This is anomalous in that the more seriously ill 
the child, the less urgent is the operation. With 
prolonged vomiting, the infant becomes dehy-
drated with a hypochloraemic metabolic alkalosis. 
In such cases, a day or two must be spent in 
gastric lavage and ﬂ uid replacement (saline with 
added potassium chloride), by either the subcuta-
neous or intravenous route. The otherwise healthy 
child can be submitted to operation soon after 
admission.  
 Figure 21.1   Ramstedt ’ s pyloromyotomy. The thickened muscle at the pylorus is split down to the mucosa. 
(a and b) The pathology and the operative procedure in transverse section.  
Split
Thickened 
pyloric 
muscle
Mucosa pouts 
out through
myotomy
Incision through thickened
pylorus down to mucosa
(a)
(b)
  1  Conrad Ramstedt (1867 – 1963), Surgeon, Munster, Germany. 

The stomach and duodenum 169
the stoma of a gastrojejunal anastomosis or adja-
cent to a Meckel ’ s diverticulum 2  when ectopic 
parietal cells are present.  
 Aetiology 
 Historical  b ackground 
 The vast majority of peptic ulcers are caused by 
infection with  Helicobacter pylori . Until the publi-
cation of the link between this organism and 
ulcers in 1983, the majority of peptic ulcers were 
thought to be due to overactivity of the gastric 
parietal cells. The stimuli to parietal cell function 
are neural (via the vagus nerve) and humoral 
(gastrin and histamine). Earlier treatments were 
therefore directed at reducing acid secretion by 
surgical denervation of the stomach (vagotomy) 
or removal of the parietal cells (partial gastrec-
tomy). More recently, pharmacological control 
has been possible with histamine H 2 - receptor 
antagonists (e.g. cimetidine and ranitidine), and 
proton pump inhibitors (e.g. omeprazole). With 
hindsight, we now realize that none of these treat-
ments dealt with the most important cause of the 
peptic ulceration,  H. pylori . 
 Helicobacter  p ylori 
 H. 
pylori  
(previously 
called 
 Campylobacter 
pyloridis ) is a spiral - shaped, Gram - negative, 
motile rod that is able to penetrate the viscid 
mucus layer lining the stomach. Its potent urease 
activity splits any urea in the vicinity, producing 
ammonia and thus neutralizing the pH in the local 
milieu surrounding the organism. Many  H. pylori 
strains also produce cytotoxins that possess pro-
tease and phospholipase activity, allowing them 
to attack and damage mucosal membranes. This 
direct damage, together with the resultant inﬂ am-
mation, impairs the gastric mucosal barrier and 
allows further damage by gastric acid. Non -
 cytotoxin - producing strains explain asympto-
matic carriage of the organism. 
 Evidence identifying  H. pylori  as a causative 
agent in peptic ulceration includes the following 
observations: 
  •   Ingestion of  H. pylori results in chronic 
gastritis (as demonstrated Barry Marshall, who 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Antenatally, the diagnosis is suggested by the 
presence of polyhydramnios and ultrasound 
appearances. Vomiting occurs from birth and the 
stomach may be visibly distended. As the common 
bile duct usually enters above the obstruction, the 
vomit usually contains bile. 
 There 
is 
a 
strong 
association 
between 
duodenal atresia and Down syndrome, with 
30% of neonates with duodenal atresia having 
trisomy 21.  
 Differential  d iagnosis 
  •   Oesophageal atresia:    there is choking rather 
than vomiting.  
  •   Pyloric stenosis:    bile is absent from the vomit, 
there is a palpable pyloric tumour and onset is 
later. 
  •   Congenital intestinal obstruction:    there is 
abdominal distension and X - rays show 
multiple distended loops of bowel with ﬂ uid 
levels (Chapter  22 , p. 185). 
 Plain X - ray of the abdomen is diagnostic and 
shows distension of the stomach and proximal 
duodenum with absence of gas throughout the 
rest of the bowel (the  ‘ double bubble ’  sign).  
 Treatment 
 Duodenojejunostomy or gastrojejunostomy is 
performed 
after 
rehydration 
and 
gastric 
aspiration. 
 Peptic  u lcer 
 Pathology 
 The pathogenesis of peptic ulcer involves a distur-
bance in the balance between the secretion of acid 
and pepsin by the stomach on the one hand and 
the mucosal barrier (a thick layer of mucus) on the 
other. The normal stomach mucosa is adapted to 
contain the acid produced by the parietal (oxyntic) 
cells. Where the mucosal defence is compromised, 
or non - existent, the acid causes mucosal ulcera-
tion. Ulcers also occur where acid attacks mucosa 
not specialized to deal with it. Hence, typical sites 
for peptic ulcers are the oesophagus (peptic 
oesophagitis), stomach, ﬁ rst part of duodenum, at 
  2   Johann Frederick Meckel (1781 – 1833), Professor of Anatomy and 
Surgery, Halle, Germany. His grandfather and father were both 
Professor of Anatomy. 

170 
The stomach and duodenum
acute stress, a major operation, head injury 
(Cushing ’ s ulcer 5 ) or severe burns (Curling ’ s 
ulcer 6 ). It may present with sudden pain, haemor-
rhage or perforation. A proportion of acute ulcers 
probably go on to become chronic. 
 The  c hronic  p eptic  u lcer 
 At least 80% of peptic ulcers occur in the duode-
num. Duodenal ulcers may occur at any age, but 
especially in the thirties to forties; about 80% 
occur in men. Women are relatively immune to 
duodenal ulceration before menopause and espe-
cially during pregnancy. 
 Gastric ulcers occur predominantly in men, but 
the sex preponderance is less marked  –  about 3:1 
for men to women. Any age may be affected, but 
especially the forties to ﬁ fties (i.e. a decade later 
than the peak for duodenal ulceration). 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Physical signs in the uncomplicated case are 
absent or conﬁ ned to epigastric tenderness. 
Clinical diagnosis depends on the careful history. 
 The pain is typically epigastric, occurs in attacks 
that last for days or weeks and is interspersed with 
periods of relief. Pain that radiates into the back 
suggests a posterior penetrating ulcer. Peptic 
ulcer pain may come on immediately after a meal 
but more typically commences about 2 hours 
after, so that the patient says it precedes a meal 
( ‘ hunger pain ’ ). Characteristically, it wakes the 
patient in the early morning, so much so that the 
patient may adopt the habit of taking a glass of 
milk or an alkali preparation to bed. However, it is 
a myth to say that one can differentiate between a 
gastric and a duodenal ulcer merely on the time 
relationship of the pain. The pain is aggravated by 
spicy foods and relieved by milk and alkalis, 
although the relief is lost in deep and penetrating 
ulcers. There may be associated heartburn, nausea 
and vomiting. The patient may lose weight 
because of the pain produced by food but often 
may gain weight because of the high intake of 
milk.  
with Robin Warren 3 identiﬁ ed the relationship 
between infection with the organism and 
peptic ulceration, and proved it by inoculating 
himself). 
  •   Animal inoculation with  H. pylori mimics 
human gastritis.  
  •   Antimicrobial treatment which eradicates 
 H. pylori also eliminates gastritis.  
  •   H. pylori can be identiﬁ ed in almost all 
patients with duodenal ulcers, and most 
patients with gastric ulcers. 
 Zollinger – Ellison  s yndrome  4  
 This is a syndrome in which a non - insulin - secret-
ing islet cell tumour of the pancreas produces a 
potent gastrin - like hormone (Chapter  32 , p. 284). 
It is an uncommon cause of peptic ulceration. In 
this syndrome, the ulcers are often multiple, and 
ulceration may be more widespread within the 
small bowel.  
 Other  f actors in the  a etiology of 
 p eptic  u lceration 
 A number of other factors decrease the effective-
ness of the mucosal defences against gastric 
juice. 
In 
particular, 
non - steroidal 
anti - 
inﬂ am matory drugs (NSAIDs) inhibit the produc-
tion of protective prostaglandins in the mucosa. 
Steroids also predispose to ulceration, as do 
smoking and stress, which are thought to have an 
effect on both acid secretion and mucosal 
defences. 
 The  a cute  p eptic  u lcer 
 This may be single or multiple (multiple erosions), 
may occur without apparent cause or may be 
associated with ingestion of alcohol or NSAIDs 
(aspirin is a common culprit), steroid therapy, 
  3  Barry Marshall (b. 1951), Gastroenterologist, Royal Perth Hospital, 
Australia. J. Robin Warren (b. 1937), Pathologist, Royal Perth 
Hospital, Australia. Won Nobel Prize for their observation in 2005. 
Spiral - shaped organisms were identiﬁ ed in stomach biopsies in 
1875, and their relation to gastritis suggested in 1899 by Walery 
Jaworski, a Polish physician; the observation was largely over-
looked until the work of Marshall and Warren in 1982.  
  4   Robert Milton Zollinger (1903 – 1992), Professor of Surgery, Ohio 
State University, Columbus, OH, USA. Edwin Homer Ellison 
(1918 – 1970), Associate Professor at the same institution.  
  5   Harvey Cushing (1869 – 1939), Professor of Surgery, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. 
  6   Thomas Blizzard Curling (1811 – 88), Surgeon, The London 
Hospital, London, UK. 

The stomach and duodenum 171
  •   H. pylori  eradication . A 2 week course of 
antimicrobial therapy combined with acid 
reduction therapy will eradicate  H. pylori . Acid 
reduction is usually afforded by a proton 
pump inhibitor (e.g. omeprazole, lanzoprazole) 
and the antimicrobial therapy is based on 
either clarithromycin or amoxicillin, together 
with metronidazole. The combination of two 
antibiotics is recommended because of the 
high incidence of antibiotic resistance. Such 
protocols will eradicate  H. pylori in over 90% 
of patients. 
  •   Acid reduction . Acid reduction with a proton 
pump inhibitor such as omeprazole (or less 
commonly a H 2 receptor blocker such as 
ranitidine) alone results in the majority of 
ulcers healing within 1 – 2 months; the ulcers 
will recur if  H. pylori has not been eradicated. 
 Violent gastric acid stimulants such as alcohol 
should be avoided. Rest, sedation, avoidance of 
smoking and dealing with underlying anxiety 
states are helpful. Aspirin and other NSAIDs 
should be avoided wherever possible.  
 Principles of  s urgical  t reatment 
 Surgical treatment is now reserved for those 
patients in whom complications of ulceration 
occur. In the emergency situation, minimal 
surgery is practised with the conﬁ dence that 
medical cure of the underlying disease may be 
effected. The commonest indications for emer-
gency surgery are bleeding or perforation (see 
below). 
  •   Gastric ulcers are treated by removing the ulcer 
together with the gastrin - secreting zone of the 
antrum. Traditionally, this was done by the 
Billroth I gastrectomy 7 (Figure  21.2 ), but is now 
more commonly achieved by an antrectomy 
combined with a Roux - en - Y 
gastroenterostomy, the latter to limit bile 
reﬂ ux. 
  •   Duodenal ulcers will heal providing the high 
acid production of the stomach is abolished. 
This can be effected by removing the bulk of 
the acid - secreting area of the stomach (the 
body and the lesser curve), and re - establishing 
gastric drainage via a Roux - en - Y 
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   Fibreoptic endoscopy:    enables the oesophagus, 
stomach and duodenum to be examined. The 
ulcer can be identiﬁ ed and, particularly in the 
case of a gastric lesion, biopsy material 
obtained to enable differentiation between a 
benign and malignant ulcer.  
  •   H. pylori  detection . 
 –  Endoscopic biopsy . Histological examination 
will conﬁ rm the presence of the organism 
and identify mucosal damage. A urease test, 
in which a biopsy sample is placed in a 
solution of urea together with a pH 
indicator, is highly speciﬁ c and sensitive for 
the organism.  H. pylori  splits urea, releasing 
ammonia, which changes the pH of the 
solution.  
 –  13 C - labelled urea breath test . The patient 
ingests a solution containing  13 C - labelled 
urea (non - radioactive). The urease from the 
organism cleaves the urea load and 
bicarbonate (HCO 3  −  ) is released into the 
blood and expired as  13 CO 2 . Measurement of 
labelled CO 2  in breath samples taken before 
and after ingestion of the urea solution 
conﬁ rms the diagnosis, and serial tests can 
be used to conﬁ rm eradication of the 
organism. 
 –  Serological testing . Infection with  H. pylori 
results in generation of antibodies, which 
may be detected. Antibody titre falls slowly 
after eradication. 
  •   Barium meals  are seldom performed nowadays 
to diagnose ulcers.  
  •   Faecal occult blood examination  is often 
positive in the presence of an ulcer.     
 Treatment 
 Treatment of a peptic ulcer is medical in the ﬁ rst 
instance; surgery is indicated when complications 
supervene. The complications are chronicity, per-
foration, stenosis, haemorrhage and, in the case of 
gastric ulcer, malignant change. They are consid-
ered in detail later in this chapter. 
 Principles of  m edical  t reatment 
 The main principles of treatment are to eradicate 
 H. pylori  and to reduce and neutralize (using 
alkalis and milk) acid secretion. Failure to eradi-
cate  H. pylori  by giving antacid therapy alone 
results in high relapse rates. 
  7   Theodor Billroth (1829 – 94), Professor of Surgery, Vienna, Austria. 
He performed the ﬁ rst successful gastrectomy for cancer at the 
pyloric end of the stomach in 1881. 

172 
The stomach and duodenum
 Figure 21.2   The principal operations 
once commonly performed for peptic 
ulcer. Surgery is still indicated in the 
presence of haemorrhage from an 
ulcer, and usually comprises a partial 
gastrectomy with drainage into a 
Roux - en - Y loop of jejunum. The more 
traditional procedures are also shown 
here: for a gastric ulcer a Billroth I 
gastrectomy with gastroduodenal 
anastomosis was performed; for a 
duodenal ulcer, a simple longitudinal 
duodenotomy, closed as a 
pyloroplasty, with under - running of the 
bleeding vessel was performed, 
combined with acid suppression with 
a proton pump inhibitor (instead of the 
traditional vagotomy); a P ó lya 
gastrectomy with under - running of the 
vessel was an alternative. Eradication 
of  Helicobacter pylori  should be 
undertaken when necessary. For 
gastric cancer, a gastrectomy with 
Roux - en - Y drainage is now preferred.  
Gastric ulcer
Billroth I gastrectomy
Duodenal ulcer
Gastric or 
duodenal ulcer
Duodenotomy and pyloroplasty
Pólya gastrectomy
Roux-en-Y
gastro-
enterostomy
Entero-
enterostomy

The stomach and duodenum 173
of the acid - secreting area of the stomach or, 
rarely, because of the Zollinger – Ellison 
syndrome (Chapter  32 , p. 284). A stomal 
ulcer, like any other peptic ulcer, may 
perforate, stenose, invade surrounding 
structures or bleed. It is treated by either 
vagotomy or higher gastric resection. 
  •   Postvagotomy syndromes.   The following 
sequelae may occur after truncal vagotomy: 
 –  Steatorrhoea and diarrhoea.   Frequently 
transient or episodic, they may be severe 
and persistent in about 2% of patients. The 
incidence is reduced in patients subjected to 
highly selective vagotomy without drainage.  
 –  Stomal ulceration may occur if vagotomy is 
incomplete. 
 Complications of  p eptic 
 u lceration 
 Peptic ulcer at any site may undergo the following 
complications: 
  •   perforation either into the peritoneal cavity or 
into adjacent structures, e.g. the pancreas, liver 
or colon; 
  •   stenosis ; 
  •   haemorrhage ; 
  •   chronicity due to formation of ﬁ brous tissue in 
the ulcer base;  
  •   malignant change which does not occur in 
duodenal ulcers but may rarely take place in a 
gastric ulcer; a long history does not 
necessarily mean that the ulcer was not 
malignant  de novo . Both gastric ulcer and 
gastric carcinoma are common conditions and 
there may merely be a chance association 
between the two. It would seem that about 1% 
of all gastric carcinomas arise in a gastric ulcer.      
 Perforated  p eptic  u lcer 
 Pathology 
 Perforation of a peptic ulcer is a relatively common 
and important emergency. The incidence of per-
foration fell steadily from the 1950s (i.e. before the 
introduction of the H 2 - receptor antagonists), but 
has been relatively constant for the past 10 years. 
Male preponderance, once very high, is now about 
2:1. Until recently, perforation occurred particu-
larly in young adults, but now the shift is towards 
gastroenterostomy . The traditional procedures 
involved a partial (P ó lya 8 ) gastrectomy with 
closure of the duodenum and a 
gastrojejunostomy, or division of the vagus 
nerves. As total vagotomy interferes with the 
mechanism of gastric emptying, this operation 
must be accompanied by a drainage 
procedure, either gastrojejunostomy or 
pyloroplasty. If the branches of the vagus that 
supply the pyloric sphincter (the nerves of 
Latarjet 9 ) are left intact, the remaining vagal 
ﬁ bres can be divided without the necessity of 
gastric drainage (highly selective vagotomy), 
but nevertheless the goal of reduction in 
the vagal phase of acid secretion is 
achieved. 
  •   Postgastrectomy syndromes . Even though about 
85% of patients are well following P ó lya partial 
gastrectomy for peptic ulcer, a large number of 
unpleasant sequelae may occur. These may be 
classiﬁ ed into the following:  
 –  Small stomach syndrome:    a feeling of 
fullness after a moderate - sized meal. 
 –  Bilious vomiting  due to emptying of the 
afferent loop of a P ó lya gastrectomy into the 
stomach remnant.  
 –  Anaemia  due usually to iron deﬁ ciency (HCl 
is required for adequate iron absorption) or, 
occasionally, vitamin B12 deﬁ ciency owing 
to loss of intrinsic factor with extensive 
gastric resection.  
 –  Dumping:   comprises attacks of fainting, 
vertigo and sweating after food, rather like a 
hypoglycaemic attack. This is probably an 
osmotic effect due to gastric contents of 
high osmolarity passing rapidly into the 
jejunum, absorbing ﬂ uid into the gut lumen 
and producing a temporary reduction in 
circulating blood volume.  
 –  Steatorrhoea.   In the presence of a long 
afferent loop, food passing into the jejunum 
traverses the bowel without mixing 
adequately with pancreatic and biliary 
secretions. Calcium deﬁ ciency and 
osteomalacia may occur.  
 –  Stomal ulceration  complicates about 2% of 
gastrectomies for duodenal ulcer; it is 
extremely rare after resection for gastric 
ulcer. It may be due to inadequate removal 
  8  Eugen Alexander P ó lya (1876 – 1944), Surgeon, St. Stephen ’ s 
Hospital, Budapest, Hungary.  
  9   Andr é  Latarjet (1876 – 1947), Professor of Anatomy, Lyon, France. 

174 
The stomach and duodenum
  •   acute pancreatitis; 
  •   myocardial infarction. 
 Treatment 
 A nasogastric tube is passed to empty the stomach 
and diminish further leakage. It is an essential 
preanaesthetic measure. Opiate analgesia is given 
to relieve pain and an intravenous ﬂ uid resuscita-
tion is started. Antibiotics are given to contend 
with the peritoneal infection, and an intravenous 
H 2  - blocker or proton pump inhibitor commenced. 
Most surgeons are in favour of immediate opera-
tive repair of the perforation. 
 Surgery  involves suturing an omental plug to 
seal the perforation, together with lavage of the 
peritoneal cavity. In addition, a gastric ulcer is 
biopsied at all four quadrants to exclude malig-
nancy. An obviously malignant gastric ulcer is 
removed by partial gastrectomy (see p. 182). 
Deﬁ nitive ulcer treatment at the time of emer-
gency surgery is now uncommon, and medical 
control of acid secretion together with  H. pylori 
eradication is undertaken postoperatively. A 
deﬁ nitive procedure may be indicated when 
medical therapy has failed.  
 Prognosis 
 The mortality for perforated peptic ulcer lies 
between 5% and 10%. Most deaths are in patients 
incorrectly diagnosed, with consequent delay in 
correct treatment, or in those who are too ill for 
operation. The subjects who die are typically 
either over the age of 70 years or reach hospital 12 
hours or more from the time of perforation. 
 The 
late 
prognosis 
following 
perforation 
depends on whether or not the ulcer is chronic, 
and whether a treatable cause, such  as H. pylori or 
NSAIDs, is present. Some patients may come to 
further surgery. 
 Pyloric  s tenosis 
 This is an inaccurate term when applied to duo-
denal ulceration, as the obstruction is in the ﬁ rst 
part of the duodenum. 
 Pathology 
 At ﬁ rst, ﬁ brotic scarring is compensated by dilata-
tion and hypertrophy of the stomach muscle. 
the older age groups, especially in patients who 
are on either steroids or NSAIDs (aspirin, indomet-
acin, etc.). 
 Gastric carcinomas may occasionally present 
with perforation.  
 Clinical  f eatures 
 A previous history of peptic ulceration is obtained 
in about half the cases, although this may be for-
gotten by the patient in agony. Typically, the pain 
is of sudden onset and of extreme severity; indeed, 
the patient can often recall the exact moment of 
the onset of the pain. Subphrenic irritation may be 
indicated by referred pain to one or both shoul-
ders, usually the right. The pain is aggravated 
by movement and the patient lies rigidly still. 
There is nausea, but only occasionally vomiting. 
Sometimes, there is accompanying haematemesis 
or melaena. 
 Examination  reveals a patient in severe pain, 
cold and sweating with rapid, shallow respira-
tions. In the early stages (hours), there may be 
no clinical evidence of true shock: the pulse is 
steady and the blood pressure normal; the tem-
perature is either normal or a little depressed. The 
abdomen is rigid and silent, although in some 
instances an occasional bowel sound may be 
heard. Liver dullness is diminished in about half 
the cases owing to escape of gas into the perito-
neal cavity. Rectal examination may reveal pelvic 
tenderness. 
 In the delayed case, after 12 hours or more, the 
features of generalized peritonitis with paralytic 
ileus become manifest; the abdomen is distended, 
effortless vomiting occurs and the patient is 
extremely toxic and in oligaemic shock.  
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   Chest X - ray , with the patient erect, shows free 
gas below the diaphragm in over 70% of cases.  
  •   Computed tomography (CT) is more sensitive 
in the detection of free intraperitoneal gas, and 
can exclude common differential diagnoses 
such as pancreatitis when doubt exists. 
 Differential  d iagnosis 
 The four conditions with which perforated ulcer is 
most commonly confused are the following: 
  •   perforated appendicitis; 
  •   acute cholecystitis; 

The stomach and duodenum 175
in diminished volume and increased concentra-
tion of urine, the chloride content of which is 
ﬁ rst diminished and then disappears and the 
pH of which is alkaline. If vomiting continues, a 
large sodium deﬁ cit becomes manifest. This 
loss of sodium is partly accounted for by loss in 
the vomitus but it is mainly the result of urinary 
excretion consequent upon the bicarbonate lost in 
the urine as sodium bicarbonate. As the body ’ s 
sodium reserves become depleted, hydrogen and 
potassium ions are substituted for sodium as the 
cations that are excreted with the bicarbonate. 
This results in the paradox that the patient with 
advanced alkalosis now excretes an acid urine. 
The blood urea rises, partly because of dehydra-
tion and partly because of renal impairment sec-
ondary to the electrolyte disturbances. Eventually, 
the patient may develop tetany as a result of a 
shift of the ionized, weakly alkaline calcium phos-
phate to its unionized state, in attempted 
compensation for the alkalosis. The concentration 
of calcium ions in the plasma therefore falls, 
although the total calcium concentration is not 
affected. 
 The metabolic disturbances may be summa-
rized as follows: 
  •   The patient is dehydrated and the haematocrit 
level is raised.  
  •   The urine is scanty, concentrated, initially 
alkaline, but later acid; the chloride content of 
the urine is reduced or absent.  
  •   Serum chloride, sodium and potassium are 
lowered and the plasma bicarbonate and urea 
are raised. 
 Differential  d iagnosis 
  •   Carcinoma of the pylorus. 
 Other causes of pyloric obstruction are unusual 
in the adult: 
  •   scarring associated with a benign gastric ulcer 
near the pylorus;  
  •   carcinoma of the head of the pancreas 
inﬁ ltrating the duodenum and pylorus; 
  •   chronic pancreatitis; 
  •   invasion of the pylorus by malignant nodes. 
 The differential diagnosis from a pyloric carci-
noma cannot always be established until endos-
copy and biopsy, or even laparotomy, but a 
reasonable attempt can be made on the following 
points: 
Eventually, failure of compensation occurs, much 
like the failure of a hypertrophied ventricle of the 
heart with valvular stenosis.  
 Clinical  f eatures 
 During the phase of compensation, there is 
nothing in the history to suggest stenosis. Once 
failure occurs, there is characteristic profuse vom-
iting, which is free from bile. The vomitus may 
contain food eaten 1 – 2 days previously and appear 
and smell faeculent. Because of copious vomiting, 
there is associated loss of weight, constipation 
(because of dehydration) and weakness because 
of electrolyte disturbance. 
 On examination, the patient may appear dehy-
drated and wasted. The progressive dilatation and 
hypertrophy of the stomach can be summed up as 
 ‘ the stomach you can hear, the stomach you can 
hear and see, and the stomach you can hear, see 
and feel ’ . At ﬁ rst, a gastric splash ( succussion 
splash ) can be elicited by shaking the patient ’ s 
abdomen several hours after a meal. As the 
stomach enlarges, visible peristalsis can also be 
seen, passing from left to right across the upper 
abdomen. Finally, the grossly dilated, hypertro-
phied stomach, full of stale food and ﬂ uid, can 
actually be palpated. 
 Gastric aspiration yields a morning resting 
juice of over 100   mL. In advanced cases, it may 
amount to several litres of foul - smelling gastric 
contents. 
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   Gastroscopy  following decompression of the 
stomach with a nasogastric tube will identify 
the cause in most cases.  
  •   CT scan will provide further anatomical 
information about the diagnosis and its 
aetiology. 
  •   Arterial blood gases and electrolyte estimation 
may show a hypochloraemic alkalosis, with 
hypokalaemia and uraemia (see below). 
 Biochemical  d isturbances 
 Pyloric obstruction with copious vomiting results 
in not only dehydration from ﬂ uid loss but also 
alkalosis due to loss of hydrogen ions from the 
stomach. The alkalotic tendency is compensated 
by the renal excretion of sodium bicarbonate, 
which may keep the blood pH within normal 
limits. During this phase, the dehydration results 

176 
The stomach and duodenum
cardia and a systolic blood pressure below 
100   mmHg. It should be remembered that patients 
on beta - blockers tend not to become tachycardic, 
and if the patient is known to have hypertension 
a systolic pressure well above 100   mmHg does not 
rule out shock. 
 The presence of shock is an indication for 
immediate ﬂ uid replacement with normal saline 
or compound sodium lactate solution; at the 
same time, blood should be taken for cross -
 matching. Additional evidence of signiﬁ cant 
bleeding is a marked difference between lying and 
standing blood pressure (postural hypotension) 
and a low central venous pressure. Every patient 
presenting with gastrointestinal haemorrhage 
should have blood taken for grouping and cross - 
matching. 
 Direct inspection of the amount of blood 
vomited and melaena passed will generally under-
estimate losses; however, it may help to distin-
guish old from recent bleeding. The haemoglobin 
estimation on admission is of only limited value, 
as it may be more than 24 hours before haemodi-
lution will reduce the haemoglobin level from its 
normal value. 
 Once resuscitation is under way, a further 
history should be taken to establish the possible 
aetiology of the bleeding.  
 Aetiology 
 In considering the aetiology of the bleeding 
both general and local causes should be borne in 
mind. 
 Local causes  of bleeding are best considered 
anatomically, as follows. 
 1  Oesophagus: 
 a  reﬂ ux oesophagitis (associated with hiatus 
hernia);  
 b  oesophageal varices (associated with portal 
hypertension, Chapter  30 , p. 259); 
 c  peptic ulcer; 
 d  tumours (benign and malignant). 
 2  Stomach: 
 a  gastric ulcer; 
 b  acute erosions (small ulcers  < 5  mm; 
associated with aspirin, other NSAIDs and 
corticosteroids);  
 c  gastritis (generalized inﬂ ammation, 
appearing as red dots through the 
endoscope);  
 d  Mallory – Weiss syndrome (see below); 
  •   Length of history:    a history of several years of 
characteristic peptic ulcer pain is in favour of 
benign ulcer. Cancer usually has a history of 
only months and indeed may be painless.  
  •   Gross dilatation of the stomach favours a 
benign lesion, as it may take several years for 
this to develop.  
  •   The presence of a mass  at the pylorus indicates 
malignant disease, although, rarely, a palpable 
inﬂ ammatory mass in association with a large 
duodenal ulcer can be detected. 
 Treatment 
 The treatment of established pyloric obstruction 
is invariably surgical. Before operation, dehydra-
tion and electrolyte depletion are corrected by 
intravenous replacement of saline together with 
potassium. Daily gastric lavage is performed to 
remove the debris from the stomach. In addition, 
this often restores function to the stomach and 
allows ﬂ uid absorption to take place by mouth. 
Vitamin C is given, as the patient with a chronic 
duodenal ulcer is often deﬁ cient in ascorbic 
acid. This may be a direct effect of  H. pylori or 
it may be the result of a diet low in fruit and 
vegetables. 
 Surgical correction is carried out after a few 
days of preoperative preparation. Surgery usually 
involves an antrectomy with a Roux - en - Y 
gastroenterostomy. 
 Gastrointestinal 
 h aemorrhage 
 Management 
 The management of patients presenting with hae-
matemesis and/or melaena is threefold: 
 1  assessment and resuscitation of the patient; 
 2  diagnosis of the source of the bleeding;  
 3  treatment and control of the source of 
bleeding. 
 Assessment of the  p atient 
 An initial appraisal of the patient ’ s airway and 
breathing are undertaken; oxygen is administered 
when necessary. Indicators of severe blood loss 
are the features of shock, namely pallor, cold, 
clammy and peripherally shut down, with a tachy-

The stomach and duodenum 177
bleeds are found to be due to recent ingestion 
of aspirin, clopidogrel, anticoagulants, steroids, 
NSAIDs etc. A story of alcoholism or previous viral 
hepatitis may suggest cirrhosis, and an alcoholic 
binge may also have precipitated an acute gastric 
erosion or gastritis. Repeated violent vomits after 
a large meal or alcohol followed by a bright red 
haematemesis is typical of the Mallory – Weiss syn-
drome, 11  in which a mucosal tear at the gastro -
 oesophageal 
junction 
may 
result 
in 
brisk 
haemorrhage. 
 Clinical  e xamination 
 This is usually negative apart from the clinical fea-
tures that enable assessment of blood loss. It is 
important to note the following: 
  •   purpura , suggesting a bleeding tendency; 
  •   features of cirrhosis  (enlargement of the liver 
and spleen, the presence of spider naevi, 
jaundice and liver palms) suggesting 
oesophageal varices;  
  •   circumoral telangiectasia suggesting hereditary 
haemorrhagic telangiectasia. 
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   Haemoglobin estimation.   Useful as a baseline, 
it will not reﬂ ect acute blood loss until the 
circulating volume is restored. Until then, the 
haemoglobin concentration is unchanged.  
  •   Serum urea.  This is usually raised following 
upper gastrointestinal bleeding, so it is helpful 
in distinguishing upper from lower 
gastrointestinal bleeding.  
  •   Coagulation screen and platelet count.    An early 
assessment of any underlying bleeding 
tendency is essential, and should stimulate 
treatment if abnormal. 
  •   Liver function tests may identify an underlying 
liver disease. 
  •   Upper gastrointestinal ﬁ breoptic endoscopy , 
viewing the oesophagus, stomach and 
duodenum, is the most valuable investigation, 
and should be carried out as an emergency as 
soon as the patient has been resuscitated and 
stabilized. It will usually identify the exact site 
of the bleeding in upper gastrointestinal 
haemorrhage. 
 e  vascular malformation, (e.g. Dieulafoy 10 
lesion);  
 f  tumours (benign and malignant). 
 3  Duodenum: 
 a  duodenitis; 
 b  duodenal ulcer; 
 c  erosion of the duodenum by a pancreatic 
tumour; 
 d  aortoduodenal ﬁ stula, in patients with 
previous aortic graft. 
 4  Small intestine: 
 a  tumours; 
 b  Meckel ’ s diverticulum; 
 c  angiodysplasia; 
 d  aortoenteric ﬁ stula. 
 5  Large bowel: 
 a  tumours (benign and malignant, commonly 
adenocarcinomas);  
 b  diverticulitis; 
 c  angiodysplasia; 
 d  colitis (ulcerative colitis, ischaemic colitis 
and infective colitis).      
 General causes  of bleeding include haemophilia, 
leukaemia, anticoagulant therapy and thrombo-
cytopenia. While it is accepted that general bleed-
ing diatheses do not cause bleeding by themselves, 
they alter the course of bleeding from a local 
lesion. 
 Hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia  is an 
inherited condition characterized by numerous 
mucosal arteriovenous malformations, any of 
which may cause bleeding; the common presenta-
tion is, however, with nose bleeds. 
 About 55% of patients in the UK with upper gas-
trointestinal bleeding of an acute form have a 
peptic ulcer or erosion of the stomach or duode-
num. About 5% of patients have oesophageal 
varices, and the remainder are accounted for by 
the other causes listed above. 
 Diagnosis is made on history, examination and 
special investigations.  
 History 
 There may be a typical story of peptic ulceration 
(see p. 170) with epigastric pain and often a history 
of a previous positive endoscopy. It is important 
to take a history of drug habits, as many obscure 
  10   George Kenneth Mallory (1900 – 1986), Professor of Pathology, 
Boston University, Boston, MA, USA. Soma Weiss (1898 – 1942), 
Professor of Medicine, Harvard University, Boston, MA, USA. 
  11  Santiago Ram ó ny Cajal (1852 – 1934), Histologist and Professor, 
successively in Valencia, Barcelona and Madrid, Spain. Awarded 
the Nobel Prize in 1906 with Golgi for studies of the neurone.  

178 
The stomach and duodenum
 2  A careful watch is kept on the patient ’ s general 
condition, pulse and blood pressure, and urine 
output.  
 3  Shock, if present, is treated with ﬂ uid 
replacement including blood transfusion. A 
central venous catheter is placed after the 
initial resuscitation to measure central venous 
pressure and assist in ﬂ uid replacement; a 
urinary catheter is passed to monitor urine 
output.  
 4  Intravenous proton pump inhibitor therapy 
may be considered to reduce acid secretion.  
 5  Treatment of  H. pylori should be commenced 
only once infection is proven in patients with 
duodenal or gastric ulcers.  
 6  As soon as active bleeding ceases, patients can 
commence oral ﬂ uids and light diet. Oral 
anti - ulcer therapy is commenced as soon as 
possible, and the patient is transferred to a 
semisolid diet. 
 Indications for  s urgery 
 The mortality of gastrointestinal haemorrhage is 
in the region of 10%. This is almost conﬁ ned to 
patients over the age of 45 years, especially the 
elderly, who continue to bleed, or in whom bleed-
ing recurs, while in hospital on the above regimen. 
 1  Clinical features suggesting poor prognosis: 
 a  age over 60 years; 
 b  chronic history; 
 c  relapse on full medical treatment; 
 d  serious coexisting medical conditions; 
 e  continued melaena or haematemesis; 
 f  more than four units of blood transfusion 
required during resuscitation. 
 2  Endoscopic features suggesting poor 
prognosis: 
 a  active bleeding; 
 b  visible vessel in the ulcer base; 
 c  clot adherent to the ulcer; 
 d  blood in the stomach but the source not 
identiﬁ able. 
 In most cases therapeutic endoscopy will be 
able to control the haemorrhage, although it may 
require more than one treatment. Indications for 
surgery are: 
 1  continued bleeding in spite of adequate 
endoscopic treatment;  
 2  torrential bleeding preventing adequate views 
of the bleeding lesion;  
 Most actively bleeding peptic ulcers can be 
treated endoscopically by injection of adrenaline 
(epinephrine) into and around the vessels in the 
ulcer bed; dual modality treatment is superior to 
injection alone, and other modalities include 
coagulation with a heater probe or placement of a 
clip directly onto the bleeding vessel. Bleeding 
oesophageal varices can be treated by band 
ligation. 
 If upper gastrointestinal endoscopy fails to 
detect a source for the blood loss, the following 
may be considered: 
  •   Colonoscopy  is performed to identify colonic 
sources of bleeding, particularly the presence 
of angiodysplasia in the right colon.  
  •   Technetium scan , in a child or young adult, will 
identify the presence of ectopic gastric mucosa 
in a Meckel ’ s diverticulum. Gastric mucosa 
takes up technetium, which is then detected 
by scintigraphy.  
  •   Selective visceral angiography  using a catheter 
inserted via the femoral artery into the 
mesenteric arteries may localize the source of 
haemorrhage in an obscure case, but usually 
only in the presence of signiﬁ cant active 
bleeding.  
  •   Red cell scintigraphy  using radiolabelled red 
cells to identify the site of bleeding. More 
sensitive than angiography but poorer at 
localization of the bleeding source.  
  •   Capsule endoscopy , which uses a small 
capsule containing a camera that takes 
pictures as it traverses the gastrointestinal 
tract; this is not useful in acute haemorrhage. 
Its role is in identifying lesions in the small 
bowel that are not accessible by ﬁ breoptic 
endoscope. 
  •   Laparotomy and on - table enteroscopy is 
required rarely when bleeding continues and 
upper and lower gastrointestinal endoscopy 
are unproductive. An enterotomy is made at 
laparotomy through which an endoscope is 
passed and guided throughout the entire small 
bowel, seeking an obscure cause of bleeding 
such as an arteriovenous malformation. 
 Treatment 
 In the ﬁ rst instance this is on medical lines. 
 1  The patient is reassured, and reassurance is 
supplemented with morphine if the patient is 
in pain.  

The stomach and duodenum 179
 Malignant 
 1  Primary : 
 a  adenocarcinoma; 
 b  gastrointestinal stromal tumour; 
 c  lymphoma; 
 d  Hodgkin ’ s disease. 
 2  Secondary : invasion from adjacent tumours 
(pancreas or colon). 
 Gastrointestinal  s tromal 
 t umours 
 Pathology 
 These 
are 
uncommon 
tumours, 
previously 
thought to arise from the muscular layer or from 
nerve cells in the gut wall; in fact, they are now 
believed to arise from the interstitial cells of Cajal 12 
(ICCs), the pacemaker cells of the gastrointestinal 
tract. ICCs are part of the autonomic nervous 
system, and when the tumour has the appearance 
of neural tissue it is often called a gastrointestinal 
autonomic nervous tumour (GANT). Other 
tumours may have an appearance more like 
smooth muscle cells; hence, they were previously 
thought to be leiomyomas. Gastrointestinal 
stromal tumours (GISTs) may be malignant or 
benign, and, although they may occur anywhere 
in the gastrointestinal tract, they are most common 
in the stomach, but not infrequent in the rest of 
the small intestine. They appear as small tumours 
within the muscular wall, or larger tumours 
growing out from the bowel wall. Large tumours 
may outstrip their blood supply and become 
partly cystic; sometimes, the cyst communicates 
with the bowel lumen. GISTs typically present 
with either intestinal bleeding or obstruction; 
some are found during investigation of non -
 speciﬁ c abdominal pain. 
 Aetiology 
 The aetiology of GISTs is unclear, but they are 
associated with type 1 neuroﬁ bromatosis in some 
cases. Typically, patients are over 40 and there is 
no sex difference in incidence. The pathogenesis 
is a spontaneous mutation in the  c - kit gene, which 
 3  rebleeding that cannot be treated 
endoscopically. 
 At operation, the source of bleeding is found 
and controlled. For a chronic gastric ulcer, this 
usually takes the form of a simple ulcer excision or 
partial gastrectomy; for duodenal ulceration, 
pyloroplasty and undersewing of the gastroduo-
denal artery at the base of the ulcer. In other cases, 
it may be possible to undersew an acute erosion 
or bleeding ulcer, particularly in the desperately ill 
patient who is unﬁ t for gastrectomy. 
 In most cases, preoperative endoscopy will 
identify the cause of the haemorrhage. If blood is 
present in the stomach but the source of haemor-
rhage is not immediately obvious, the stomach is 
opened by a gastrotomy, the blood clot evacuated 
and the bleeding point sought by direct inspection 
of the gastric and duodenal mucosa. 
 In patients unﬁ t for laparotomy, angiographic 
embolization of the bleeding vessel, such as the 
gastroduodenal artery for a duodenal ulcer, may 
be effective. 
 In patients who are treated medically and who 
settle down, careful assessment is made in the 
convalescent period. If the presence of a chronic 
duodenal or gastric ulcer is established, in the 
absence of  H. pylori , surgery may be advised as an 
elective procedure; once a chronic ulcer has bled, 
subsequent haemorrhages are likely to occur.  H. 
pylori  eradication therapy should be attempted 
ﬁ rst when it is found. However, it is now rare for 
surgery to be required.  
 The  m anagement of 
 h aemorrhage from 
 o esophageal  v arices 
 This is considered in Chapter  30 , p. 261.   
 Tumours of the  s tomach 
 Classiﬁ cation 
 Benign 
 1  Epithelial  – adenoma: 
 a  single; 
 b  multiple (gastric polyposis). 
 2  Connective tissue : gastrointestinal stromal 
tumour. 
 3  Vascular : haemangioma. 
  12   Rudolf Ludwig Karl Virchow (1821 – 1902), Professor of Pathology 
in W ü rzburg and later Berlin, Germany. 

180 
The stomach and duodenum
 Carcinoma 
 Pathology 
 This is a common (incidence 10 per 100   000 in the 
UK) and important tumour, although its incidence 
is falling, in both Europe and the USA. It is the ﬁ fth 
most common cancer killer in the UK, preceded 
only by lung, colorectal, breast and prostate 
cancer. Distribution is worldwide, although it is 
particularly frequent in some races, especially the 
Japanese. Any age may be involved, but it espe-
cially affects the 50 – 70 year age group.  
 Risk  f actors 
 The risk factors for stomach cancer can be classi-
ﬁ ed into three groups. 
 1  Predisposing conditions. 
 a  Pernicious anaemia and atrophic gastritis, 
conditions where achlorhydria is present.  
 b  Previous gastric resection (two - to threefold 
increased incidence).  
 c     Chronic peptic ulcer, believed to give rise to 
1% of gastric cancer cases. 
 2  Environmental factors. 
 a  H. pylori  infection. Seropositive patients 
(indicating past or present infection) have a 
six - to ninefold risk of gastric cancer. 
However, fewer than 1% of those infected 
with  H. pylori  will go on to develop gastric 
cancer. 
 b  Low socioeconomic status. 
 c  Smoking. 
 d  Nationality. Gastric cancer is much more 
common in Japan, although recent work 
suggests much of this excess is related to  H. 
pylori . The incidence declines in Japanese 
immigrants to America. 
 3  Genetic factors. 
 a  Blood group A. 
 b  Hereditary non - polyposis colon cancer 
syndrome (HNPCC, Chapter  25 , p. 211), 
associated with an increased incidence of 
gastric as well as colon cancer. 
 Macroscopic  p athology 
 One - third diffusely involve the stomach; one -
 quarter arise in the pyloric region; and the remain-
der are distributed fairly evenly throughout the 
rest of the organ. 
codes for a transmembrane receptor ( c - kit /
CD117) for a growth factor called stem cell factor. 
The  c - kit  mutation results in a continuous signal 
for cell growth which is mediated via a tyrosine 
kinase in the intracellular domain of the molecule. 
Some GISTs arise from mutations in platelet -
 derived growth factor receptor  α (PDGFA); 
occasional 
cases 
demonstrate 
an 
inherited 
predisposition. 
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   Endoscopy  usually detects the tumour, which 
appears as a submucosal polyp and which 
often has an ulcerated surface.  
  •   CT may also identify the presence of a tumour. 
  •   Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS)  can be used to 
conﬁ rm the nature of the polyp and 
demonstrates clearly the origin of the polyp 
from the muscular layer of the stomach wall. 
  •   Positron emission tomography (PET)  is used 
both for detection and for staging of the 
tumours. 
 Once a tumour is found, diagnosis is by biopsy. 
Owing to the polyp ’ s submucosal origin, mucosal 
biopsies are frequently non - diagnostic and conﬁ r-
mation of the diagnosis relies on EUS appearances 
with or without EUS - guided biopsy. Percutaneous 
biopsies are undertaken in the presence of metas-
tases, but not undertaken otherwise to avoid the 
risk of seeding tumour cells along the biopsy track. 
The presence of c - kit protein (CD117) on the cell 
surface is almost diagnostic. Most small GISTs 
( < 5   cm) have a low mitotic rate and behave 
like benign tumours; larger GISTs ( > 5  cm) have a 
more malignant phenotype and require adjuvant 
chemotherapy. 
 Treatment 
  •   Surgical.  Wide excision  is the treatment of 
choice. 
  •   Chemotherapy.  Molecular targeted 
chemotherapy with imatinib mesilate (Glivec), 
an inhibitor of the  c - kit tyrosine kinase, is very 
effective. It can be either given prior to surgery 
to shrink a large tumour in order to make it 
operable or given postoperatively to treat 
metastases or when complete resection was 
not possible. This is an example of the new 
generation of chemotherapy relying on unique 
molecular features of the tumour to target and 
control. 

The stomach and duodenum 181
  •   Transcoelomic spread.  May produce peritoneal 
seedlings, ascites and bilateral Krukenberg 15 
tumours owing to implantation in both 
ovaries. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Symptoms may be produced by the local effects of 
the tumour, by secondary deposits or by the 
general features of malignant disease. 
 Local  s ymptoms 
 These are epigastric pain and discomfort, pain 
radiating into the back (suggesting pancreatic 
involvement), vomiting, especially with a pyloric 
or antral tumour producing pyloric obstruction 
(see p. 174) and dysphagia in tumours of the 
cardia. The patient may also report a feeling of 
fullness 
after 
eating 
little 
(early 
satiety). 
Occasionally, carcinoma of the stomach may 
present with perforation or haemorrhage (melaena 
and/or haematemesis).  
 Symptoms from  s econdaries 
 The patient may ﬁ rst report with jaundice owing 
to liver involvement or abdominal distension with 
ascites. 
 General  f eatures 
 Anorexia (an extremely common presenting 
symptom), loss of weight and anaemia. 
 Examination may reveal features corresponding 
to these three headings. Local examination may 
reveal a mass in the upper abdomen. A search for 
secondaries may show enlargement of the liver 
with or without jaundice, ascites, enlarged, hard 
left supraclavicular nodes, or a palpable mass on 
pelvic examination due to secondary deposits in 
the pouch of Douglas. There may be obvious signs 
of loss of weight or anaemia.  
 Paraneoplastic  s yndromes 
 Haemolytic anaemia, membranous glomerulone-
phritis and chronic disseminated intravascular 
 There are four macroscopic appearances: 
 1  a  malignant ulcer with raised, everted edges;  
 2  a  polypoid tumour  proliferating into the 
stomach lumen;  
 3  a  colloid tumour : a massive, gelatinous 
growth; 
 4  the  leather - bottle stomach (linitis plastica) 
caused by submucous inﬁ ltration of 
tumour with marked ﬁ brous reaction. This 
produces a small, thickened, contracted 
stomach without, or with only superﬁ cial, 
ulceration; hence, occult bleeding is rare in 
this group. 
 Microscopic  a ppearances 
 These tumours are all adenocarcinomas with 
varying degrees of differentiation. The leather -
 bottle stomach consists of anaplastic cells 
arranged in clumps with surrounding ﬁ brosis. 
 Malignant change in a benign ulcer is suggested 
when a chronic ulcer, with characteristic com-
plete destruction of the whole muscle coat and its 
replacement by ﬁ brous tissue and chronic inﬂ am-
matory cells, has a carcinoma developing in its 
edge. 
 Spread 
  •   Local.  Spread is often well beyond the 
naked - eye limits of the tumour, and the 
oesophagus or the ﬁ rst part of the 
duodenum may be inﬁ ltrated. Adjacent 
organs (pancreas, abdominal wall, liver, 
transverse mesocolon and transverse colon) 
may be directly invaded. A gastrocolic ﬁ stula 
may develop.  
  •   Lymphatic.   Lymph nodes along the lesser and 
greater curves are commonly involved. Lymph 
drainage from the cardiac end of the stomach 
may invade the mediastinal nodes and thence 
the supraclavicular nodes of Virchow 13  on the 
left side (Troisier ’ s sign 14 ). At the pyloric end, 
involvement of the subpyloric and hepatic 
nodes may occur.  
  •   Bloodstream.  Dissemination occurs via 
the portal vein to the liver and thence 
occasionally to the lungs and the skeletal 
system.  
  13  Charles  É mile Troisier (1844 – 1919), Professor of Pathology, Paris. 
  14  Friedrich Krukenberg (1871 – 1946), Pathologist, Halle, Germany.  
  15  Armand Trousseau (1801 – 1867), Physician, H ô pital St. Antoine 
and H ô pital Dieu, Paris, France. Noted this sign in himself as 
conﬁ rmation of his own gastric cancer. Also described carpopedal 
spasm in hypocalcaemic tetany. 

182 
The stomach and duodenum
 The principal differential diagnosis of gastric 
carcinoma is a benign gastric ulcer. If in doubt, 
resection should be advised, but it may be difﬁ -
cult, even at operation, to decide between the two, 
and a perioperative frozen section microscopic 
examination 
is 
then 
useful 
in 
planning 
treatment. 
 Treatment 
  •   Curative : partial or total gastrectomy, with 
extensive lymph node clearance, depending on 
the extent of the tumour. Patients undergoing 
gastrectomy now commonly receive 
chemotherapy before and after surgery  
  •   Palliative : palliative gastrectomy may be 
carried out even in the presence of small 
secondary deposits elsewhere. A 
gastroenterostomy may be performed for an 
irremovable obstructive lesion of the pylorus. 
However, more commonly, stenting of the 
pylorus is performed for gastric outﬂ ow 
obstruction in unresectable disease. Stenting is 
also used for carcinoma of the cardiac end that 
is unresectable and producing dysphagia. 
Irradiation and cytotoxic drugs are of limited 
value. 
 Prognosis 
 This depends on the extent of spread and degree 
of differentiation of the tumour. Microscopic 
spread is much further than apparent at opera-
tion, and lymph node spread has a poor progno-
sis. Early gastric carcinomas conﬁ ned to the 
stomach wall (stage 1) have a 72% 5 year survival 
with resection. Perigastric lymph node involve-
ment (stage 2) reduces survival to 32%, whereas 
more distant nodal involvement more than 3   cm 
away from the tumour (stage 3) has a survival 
rate of only 10% at 5 years. The presence of 
metastases (stage 4) is associated with death 
before 5 years. 
 
 
 
coagulation leading to vascular thrombosis 
(Trousseau ’ s sign 16 ) are occasionally seen.   
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   Gastroscopy  enables direct inspection and 
multiple biopsies of any lesion. The detection 
rate is related to the number of biopsies taken. 
  •   CT may show nodal and metastatic spread, 
information that may inﬂ uence attempts at 
curative gastric resection. 
  •   EUS enables assessment of lymph node spread 
and local tumour inﬁ ltration into pancreas, 
crura and liver. 
  •   Staging laparoscopy  allows assessment of the 
primary tumour, including its mobility and 
invasion into adjacent organs, and 
examination of the peritoneal cavity to exclude 
small metastases (peritoneal or liver) that are 
not detectable by CT scanning. If ascites is 
found, this can be sampled for cytology. The 
presence of even small metastases means the 
patient has incurable disease. 
 It is important to note that considerable pain 
relief and  ‘ healing ’  may occur when a gastric car-
cinoma is treated with acid suppression (H 2 -
 antagonists or proton pump inhibitors), owing to 
diminution in the adjacent oedema, and may lead 
to a false diagnosis of benign ulcer.  
 Differential  d iagnosis 
 There are ﬁ ve common diseases that give a very 
similar clinical picture, of a patient with slight 
lemon - yellow tinge, anaemia and loss of weight: 
 1  carcinoma of the stomach; 
 2  carcinoma of the caecum; 
 3  carcinoma of the pancreas; 
 4  pernicious anaemia; 
 5  uraemia. 
 They form an important quintet, and should 
always be considered together. 
  16   Paul Georges Dieulafoy (1839 - 1911), Physician, Paris. The lesion 
is a submucosal artery running abnormally close to the mucosa, 
typically occurring in the gastric fundus near the oesophagogas-
tric junction and a cause of recurrent bleeding.  

 22 
Mechanical  i ntestinal 
 o bstruction  
 
 Learning  o bjective 
  ✓   To know the causes of obstruction in all age groups. In particular, 
the reader should recognize the four common clinical features, 
the key points of clinical examination and the management 
principles. 
becomes complete, e.g. when a narrowed lumen 
becomes totally occluded by inspissated bowel 
contents. 
This 
is 
termed 
acute - on - chronic 
obstruction.  
 Site 
 The site of the obstruction is classiﬁ ed into high or 
low, which is roughly synonymous with small or 
large bowel obstruction. 
 Nature 
 The nature of the obstruction is divided into 
simple or strangulated. 
  •   Simple obstruction occurs when the bowel is 
occluded without damage to its blood supply.  
  •   Strangulating obstruction is when the blood 
supply of the involved segment of intestine is 
cut off (as may occur, for example, in 
strangulated hernia, volvulus, intussusception 
or when a loop of intestine is occluded by a 
band). Gangrene of the strangulated bowel is 
inevitable if left untreated. 
 Aetiology 
 Whenever one considers obstruction of a tube 
anywhere in the body, the causes should be clas-
siﬁ ed into the following: 
  •   causes in the lumen; 
  •   causes in the wall; 
 Mechanical  o bstruction 
 Classiﬁ cation 
 Intestinal obstruction (Box  22.1 ) is a restriction to 
the normal passage of intestinal contents. It may 
be divided into two main groups: paralytic and 
mechanical. Paralytic obstruction (paralytic or 
adynamic ileus) is discussed in Chapter  28 . 
 Mechanical intestinal obstruction is further 
classiﬁ ed according to the following: 
  •   speed of onset : acute, chronic, acute on 
chronic;  
  •   site : high or low;  
  •   nature : simple versus strangulating; 
  •   aetiology . 
 Speed of  o nset 
 The speed of onset determines whether the 
obstruction is acute, chronic or acute on chronic. 
In acute obstruction, the onset is rapid and the 
symptoms severe. In chronic obstruction, the 
symptoms are insidious and slowly progressive 
(as, for example, in most cases of carcinoma of the 
large bowel). A chronic obstruction may develop 
acute symptoms as the obstruction suddenly 
Lecture Notes: General Surgery, 12th edition. © Harold Ellis, 
Sir Roy Y. Calne and Christopher J. E. Watson. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

184 
Mechanical intestinal obstruction
  •   The elderly:   strangulated hernia, carcinoma of 
the colon, colonic diverticulitis, impacted 
faeces. 
 A strangulated hernia is an important cause of 
intestinal obstruction from infancy to old age. The 
hernial oriﬁ ces must therefore be carefully exam-
ined in every case.  
 Pathology 
 When the bowel is obstructed by a simple occlu-
sion, the intestine distal to the obstruction rapidly 
empties and becomes collapsed. The bowel above 
the obstruction becomes dilated, partly with gas 
(most of which is swallowed air) and partly with 
ﬂ uid poured out by the intestinal wall together 
with the gastric, biliary and pancreatic secretions. 
There is increased peristalsis in an attempt to 
overcome the obstruction, which results in intes-
tinal colic. As the bowel distends, the blood supply 
to the tensely distended intestinal wall becomes 
impaired and, in extreme cases, there may be 
mucosal ulceration and eventually perforation. 
Perforation may also occur from the pressure of a 
band or the edge of the hernia neck on the bowel 
wall, producing local ischaemic necrosis, or from 
pressure from within the gut lumen, e.g. by a 
faecal mass (stercoral ulceration). 
 In strangulating obstruction, the integrity of the 
mucosal barrier is lost as ischaemia progresses, so 
bacteria and their toxins can no longer be con-
tained within the lumen. Transudation of organ-
isms into the peritoneal cavity rapidly takes place, 
with secondary peritonitis. Unrelieved strangula-
tion is followed by gangrene of the ischaemic 
bowel with perforation. 
 The lethal effects of intestinal obstruction result 
from ﬂ uid and electrolyte depletion owing to the 
copious vomiting and loss into the bowel lumen, 
protein loss into the gut and toxaemia due to 
migration of toxins and intestinal bacteria into the 
peritoneal cavity, either through the intact but 
ischaemic bowel wall or through a perforation.  
 Clinical  f eatures 
 The four cardinal symptoms of intestinal obstruc-
tion are the following: 
 1  colicky abdominal pain; 
 2  distension; 
 3  absolute constipation; 
 4  vomiting. 
  •   causes outside the wall. 
 This can be applied to intestinal obstruction. 
  •   In the lumen : faecal impaction, gallstone 
 ‘ ileus ’ , food bolus, parasites (e.g. ascaris worms 
in small bowel), intussusception.  
  •   In the wall : congenital atresia, Crohn ’ s disease, 
tumours, diverticulitis of the colon.  
  •   Outside the wall : strangulated hernia (external 
or internal), volvulus and obstruction due to 
adhesions or bands. 
 It is also useful to think of the common intesti-
nal obstructions that may occur in each age group. 
  •   Neonatal:   congenital atresia and stenosis (e.g. 
duodenal atresia), imperforate anus, volvulus 
neonatorum, Hirschsprung ’ s disease and 
meconium ileus.  
  •   Infants:  intussusception, Hirschsprung ’ s 
disease, strangulated hernia and obstruction 
due to Meckel ’ s diverticulum. 
  •   Young adults and middle age:    strangulated 
hernia, adhesions and bands, Crohn ’ s disease. 
 Box 22.1   Intestinal obstruction 
 There are three important points to remember about 
intestinal obstruction. 
 1   It is diagnosed by the presence of:  
 a  colicky abdominal pain  
 b   distension 
 c   absolute constipation  
 d   vomiting 
 2   Examination should always include a search for 
hernias and scars  
 3   Is it either simple or strangulating? Features 
suggesting strangulation are: 
 a   change in character of pain from colicky to 
continuous 
 b   tachycardia 
 c   pyrexia 
 d   peritonism 
 e   bowel sounds absent or reduced  
 f   leucocytosis 
 g   raised C - reactive protein (CRP)  

Mechanical intestinal obstruction 185
 Clinical  e xamination 
 The patient may be obviously dehydrated if vom-
iting has been copious. He or she is in pain and 
may be rolling about with colic. The pulse is 
usually elevated, but the temperature is frequently 
normal. A raised temperature and a tachycardia 
suggest strangulation. The abdomen is distended 
and visible peristalsis may be present. Visible peri-
stalsis itself is not diagnostic of intestinal obstruc-
tion, as it may be seen in the normal subject if the 
abdominal wall is very thin. 
 During inspection it is important to look care-
fully for two features: (1) the presence of a stran-
gulated external hernia, which may require a 
careful search in the case of a small strangulated 
femoral hernia in a very obese and distended 
patient, and (2) the presence of an abdominal 
scar. Intestinal obstruction in the presence of this 
evidence of a previous operation immediately 
suggests adhesions or a band as the cause. 
 Palpation reveals generalized abdominal ten-
derness. A mass may be present (e.g. in intussus-
ception or carcinoma of the bowel). 
 Bowel sounds are usually accentuated and tin-
kling. Rectal examination must, of course, never 
be omitted. It may reveal an obstructing mass in 
the pouch of Douglas, the apex of an intussuscep-
tion or faecal impaction.  
 Simple  o bstruction  v ersus 
 s trangulating  o bstruction 
 Clinically, it is extremely difﬁ cult to distinguish 
with any certainty between simple obstruction 
and strangulation. The distinction is important, as 
strangulating obstruction with ensuing peritonitis 
has a mortality of up to 15%. Features suggesting 
strangulation include the following: 
  •   toxic appearance, with a rapid pulse and some 
elevation of temperature;  
  •   colicky pain, becoming continuous as 
peritonitis develops;  
  •      tenderness and abdominal rigidity more marked;  
  •   bowel sounds becoming reduced or absent, 
reﬂ ecting peritonism; 
  •   raised white cell count, mostly neutrophils, 
which is usual with infarcted bowel. 
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   Abdominal X - rays (erect and supine) are 
valuable in diagnosis of intestinal obstruction 
 It is important to note that not all of these four 
features need necessarily be present in a case of 
intestinal obstruction. The sequence of onset of 
symptoms will help localize the obstruction to the 
upper or lower intestine. 
 Pain 
 This is usually the ﬁ rst symptom of intestinal 
obstruction and is colicky in nature. In small 
bowel obstruction, it is periumbilical; in distal 
colonic obstruction, it may be more suprapubic in 
location. In postoperative obstruction, the colic 
may be disguised by the general discomfort of the 
operation and by opiates that the patient may be 
receiving. 
 Distension 
 This is particularly marked in chronic large bowel 
obstruction and also in volvulus of the sigmoid 
colon. In a high intestinal obstruction, there may 
only be a short segment of bowel proximal to the 
obstruction, and distension will not then be 
marked.  
 Absolute  c onstipation 
 Absolute constipation is the failure to pass either 
ﬂ atus or faeces. Although it is a usual feature of 
acute obstruction, a partial or chronic obstruction 
may be accompanied by the passage of small 
amounts of ﬂ atus. Absolute constipation is an 
early feature of large bowel obstruction, but a late 
feature of small bowel obstruction as, even when 
the obstruction is complete, the patient may pass 
one or two normal stools as the lower bowel 
empties after the onset of the obstruction.  
 Vomiting 
 This usually occurs early in high obstruction, but 
is often late or even entirely absent in chronic or 
in low (large bowel) obstruction. In the late stages 
of intestinal obstruction, the vomiting becomes 
faeculent but not faecal. The faeculent vomiting is 
due to bacterial decomposition of the stagnant 
contents of the obstructed small intestine and of 
the altered blood that may transude into the bowel 
lumen. True vomiting of faeces only occurs in 
patients with gastrocolic ﬁ stula (e.g. because of a 
carcinoma of the stomach, carcinoma of the colon 
or ulceration of a stomal ulcer into the colon), or 
in coprophagists. 

186 
Mechanical intestinal obstruction
and to lessen the risk of inhalation of gastric 
contents during induction of anaesthesia.  
 2  Intravenous ﬂ uid replacement . The large 
amount of ﬂ uid sequestered into the gut, 
together with losses due to vomiting, means 
that a lot of ﬂ uid may be required. Hartmann ’ s 
solution or normal saline are given, with 
potassium if this is low and renal function 
satisfactory. If the patient is shocked plasma 
expanders may be required.  
 3  Antibiotic therapy is commenced if intestinal 
strangulation is likely (or is found at 
operation). 
 Operative  t reatment 
 The affected bowel is carefully inspected to deter-
mine its viability, either at the site of the obstruc-
tion (e.g. where a band or the margins of a hernial 
oriﬁ ce has pressed against the bowel) or the whole 
segment of bowel involved in a closed loop 
obstruction. Non - viability is determined by four 
signs: 
 1  loss of peristalsis; 
 2  loss of normal sheen; 
 3  colour (greenish or black bowel is non - viable; 
purple bowel may still recover);  
 4  loss of arterial pulsation in the supplying 
mesentery. 
 Doubtful bowel may recover after relief of the 
obstruction. It should be reassessed after it has 
been left for a few minutes wrapped up in a warm 
wet pack. If extensive areas of bowel are of doubt-
ful viability, it may be worthwhile planning a 
second - look laparotomy in 48 hours to reassess 
the necessity for an extensive bowel resection. 
 The general principle is that small bowel in 
intestinal obstruction can be resected and primary 
anastomosis performed with safety because of its 
excellent blood supply. Large bowel obstruction is 
treated by resection of the obstructing lesion, with 
a primary ileocolic anastomosis in the case of 
obstructing lesions proximal to the splenic ﬂ exure. 
Left - sided lesions are managed by excision of the 
affected segment and exteriorizing the two ends of 
colon as a temporary colostomy and mucous 
ﬁ stula (Chapter  25 , p. 216). If the distal end will not 
reach the surface it is closed (Hartmann ’ s proce-
dure 1 ). This difference in management of colonic 
and in attempting to localize the site of the 
obstruction. A loop or loops of distended 
bowel are usually seen, together with ﬂ uid 
levels on an erect ﬁ lm. 
  •   Small bowel obstruction  is suggested by a 
ladder pattern of dilated loops, their central 
position and by striations that pass completely 
across the width of the distended loop 
produced by the circular mucosal folds.  
  •   Distended large bowel  tends to lie peripherally 
and to show the haustrations of the taenia coli, 
which do not extend across the whole width of 
the bowel. A small percentage, perhaps 5%, of 
intestinal obstructions show no abnormality 
on plain X - rays. This is because the bowel is 
completely distended with ﬂ uid in a closed 
loop and without the ﬂ uid levels produced by 
coexistent gas.  
  •   Computed tomography (CT) , combined with 
oral water - soluble contrast (e.g. Gastrograﬁ n), 
is particularly useful; it can localize the site of 
obstruction, detect obstructing lesions and 
colonic tumours, and may diagnose unusual 
hernias (e.g. obturator hernias).  
  •   Water - soluble contrast study . An emergency 
contrast enema may detect a suspected large 
bowel obstruction due to carcinoma or 
diverticular disease. Unlike a normal barium 
enema, no pre - examination laxative is given 
because of the risk of exacerbating the 
obstruction, and causing perforation if a closed 
loop exists. 
 Treatment 
 Although the treatment of speciﬁ c causes of intes-
tinal obstruction is considered under the appro-
priate headings, certain general principles can be 
enunciated here. 
 Chronic large bowel obstruction, slowly pro-
gressive and incomplete, can be investigated at 
some leisure (including sigmoidoscopy, colonos-
copy and barium enema) and treated electively. 
 Acute obstruction, of sudden onset, complete 
and with risk of strangulation, is invariably an 
urgent problem requiring emergency surgical 
intervention. 
 Preoperative  p reparation in 
 a cute  o bstruction 
 This comprises the following: 
 1  Gastric aspiration  by means of nasogastric 
suction. This helps to decompress the bowel 
  1  Henri Hartmann (1860 – 1952), Professor of Surgery, H ô tel Dieu, 
Paris, France. 

Mechanical intestinal obstruction 187
not rapidly relieved. Diagnosis is made on X - ray 
showing characteristic dilatation of the caecum. 
Other examples of closed loop obstruction include 
volvulus (gastric, caecal, sigmoid) and stomal 
obstruction of the afferent loop following P ó lya 2 
partial gastrectomy.  
 Adhesive  o bstruction 
 Intra - abdominal adhesions are an almost invari-
able consequence of abdominal or pelvic surgery. 
In most cases these are symptomless, but a small 
number of patients develop small bowel obstruc-
tion as a consequence. This may occur at any time 
from the immediate postoperative period to many 
years later. Because abdominal surgery is now so 
common, adhesions account for about three -
 quarters of all cases of small bowel obstruction. 
(Large bowel obstruction from this cause is 
extremely rare.) Treatment is initially conserva-
tive, with nasogastric suction and intravenous 
ﬂ uid replacement. However, clinical features of 
strangulation, peritonitis or failure to respond to 
the conservative regimen are indications for 
urgent laparotomy. 
 Volvulus 
 Deﬁ nition 
 A twisting of a loop of bowel around its mesenteric 
axis, which results in a combination of obstruction 
together with occlusion of the main vessels at the 
base of the involved mesentery. 
 Most commonly, it affects the sigmoid colon, 
caecum and small intestine, but volvulus of the 
gallbladder and stomach may also occur.  
 Aetiology 
 Precipitating factors include the following: 
  •   an abnormally mobile loop of intestine, e.g. 
congenital failure of rotation of the small 
intestine, or a particularly long sigmoid loop; 
  •   an abnormally loaded loop  – as in the pelvic 
colon of chronic constipation;  
obstruction reﬂ ects the intraluminal bacterial 
ﬂ ora and poorer blood supply of the large bowel; 
a colonic primary anastomosis is very liable to leak 
in the presence of obstruction. Where a primary 
colo - colonic anastomosis is performed, the proxi-
mal bowel is ﬁ rst lavaged via a catheter passed 
through the appendix stump, ﬂ ushing efﬂ uent 
along the colon and out via a large - bore tube in 
the proximal end of the colon; a defunctioning 
loop ileostomy may be performed at the same 
time to minimize the complications of an anasto-
motic leak, should one occur.  
 Conservative  t reatment 
 Conservative treatment of obstruction by means 
of intravenous ﬂ uid and nasogastric aspiration 
( ‘ drip and suck ’ ) is indicated only under the fol-
lowing conditions. 
  •   When distinction from postoperative paralytic 
ileus is uncertain (Chapter  28 , p. 236) and when 
a period of careful observation is indicated.  
  •   When the obstruction is one of repeated 
episodes due to massive intra - abdominal 
adhesions, rendering surgery hazardous, and 
when, once again, a short period of 
observation with conservative treatment is 
indicated. An increase in distension, 
aggravation of pain, an increase in abdominal 
tenderness or a rising pulse are indications to 
abandon conservative treatment and to 
re - explore the abdomen. 
  •   When chronic obstruction of the large bowel 
has occurred. Here, it is reasonable to attempt 
to remove the obturating faeces by enema, 
prepare the bowel and carry out a subsequent 
elective operation. 
 Closed  l oop  o bstruction 
 This is a speciﬁ c form of mechanical obstruction. 
It is characterized by increasing distension of a 
loop of bowel due to a combination of complete 
obstruction distally and a valve - like mechanism 
proximally allowing the bowel to ﬁ ll, but prevent-
ing reﬂ ux back. It is most commonly seen with a 
left - sided colonic obstruction, in the presence of 
a competent ileocaecal valve. The caecum, the 
most distensible part of the large bowel, blows up 
like a balloon, and perforation of the caecum, with 
faecal peritonitis, may occur if the obstruction is 
  2  Eugen Alexander P ó lya (1876 – 1944), Surgeon, St. Stephen ’ s 
Hospital, Budapest, Hungary. 

188 
Mechanical intestinal obstruction
 Caecal  v olvulus 
 Caecal volvulus is usually associated with a con-
genital malrotation where, in contrast to the 
incomplete rotation which causes volvulus neona-
torum (see p. 190), the caecum and proximal 
ascending colon rotate beyond the right iliac fossa 
(RIF) during development so that, instead of being 
ﬁ xed in the RIF, it has a persistent mesentery. 
 Clinically, there is an acute onset of pain in 
the RIF with rapid abdominal distension. X - ray 
of 
the 
abdomen 
shows 
a 
grossly 
dilated 
caecum, which is often ectopically placed and is 
frequently located in the left upper quadrant of 
the abdomen. 
 Treatment 
 At laparotomy, the volvulus is untwisted. Right 
hemicolectomy is necessary if the caecum is inf-
arcted, and it is also the most reliable way to 
prevent recurrence. 
 Small  i ntestine  v olvulus in  a dults 
 This may occur when a loop of the small intestine 
is ﬁ xed at its apex by adhesions or by a ﬁ brous 
remnant of the vitellointestinal duct (often associ-
ated with a Meckel ’ s diverticulum). Occasionally, 
the apex of the volvulus bears a tumour. In Africa, 
primary volvulus of the small bowel is relatively 
common, and may be due to the loading of a loop 
of gut with large quantities of vegetable foodstuffs. 
The clinical picture is one of acute intestinal 
obstruction. 
 Treatment 
 Early operation with simple untwisting and treat-
ment of the underlying cause. If gangrene is 
present, resection must be carried out. 
 Volvulus  n eonatorum 
 This is considered on p. 190. 
 Mesenteric  v ascular 
 o cclusions 
 Embolism or thrombosis of the mesenteric vessels 
constitutes a special variety of intestinal obstruc-
tion without occlusion of the bowel. 
  •   a loop ﬁ xed at its apex by adhesions, around 
which it rotates;  
  •   a loop of bowel with a narrow mesenteric 
attachment. 
 Sigmoid  v olvulus 
 This occurs usually in elderly, constipated 
patients. It is four times more common in men 
than in women. It is relatively rare in the UK 
(about 2% of intestinal obstructions) but is 
much more common in Russia, Scandinavia 
and central Africa. The loop of sigmoid colon 
usually twists anticlockwise, from one - half to 
three turns. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 There is a sudden onset of colicky pain with 
characteristic gross and rapid dilatation of the 
sigmoid loop. 
 A plain X - ray of the abdomen shows an enor-
mously dilated oval gas shadow on the left side, 
which may be looped on itself to give the typical 
 ‘ bent inner - tube ’ sign. If left untreated, the 
strangulated bowel undergoes gangrene, resulting 
in death from peritonitis. The caecum is usually 
visible and dilated in the right lower quadrant, 
distinguishing 
it 
radiologically 
from 
caecal 
volvulus. 
 Treatment 
 A long, soft rectal tube is passed through a 
sigmoidoscope and advanced into the sigmoid 
colon. This often untwists an early volvulus and is 
accompanied by the passage of vast amounts of 
ﬂ atus and liquid faeces. If this method fails, the 
volvulus is untwisted at laparotomy and the bowel 
is decompressed via a rectal tube threaded 
upwards from the anus. If gangrene has occurred, 
the affected segment is excised and the two open 
ends are brought out as a double - barrelled 
colostomy, which is later closed (Paul – Mikulicz 
procedure 3 ). 
 Recurrent sigmoid volvulus is an indication 
for elective resection of the redundant sigmoid 
loop. 
  3  Frank Thomas Paul (1851 – 1941), Surgeon, Liverpool Royal 
Inﬁ rmary, Liverpool, UK. Johann von Mikulicz - Radecki (1850 –
 1905), Professor of Surgery, successively at Cracow, Konigsberg 
and Breslau, Poland.  

Mechanical intestinal obstruction 189
the block develops slowly. One or even two of 
the three main arteries (coeliac, superior and 
inferior mesenteric) may be occluded without 
symptoms. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 There may be some pre - existing factor such as a 
heart lesion or liver disease. The classical triad is 
acute colicky abdominal pain, rectal bleeding and 
shock (due to associated blood loss) in an elderly 
patient who has atrial ﬁ brillation. 
 The abdomen is generally tender, and a vague, 
tender mass may be felt, which is the infarcted 
bowel. However, the condition is impossible to 
diagnose unless the clinician has a high index of 
suspicion.  
 Treatment 
 The shock is treated by blood transfusion. 
Occasionally, successes have been reported from 
embolectomy in very early cases before frank gan-
grene has occurred. Resection of the gangrenous 
bowel is carried out, but this is obviously impos-
sible when the whole superior mesenteric supply 
(small intestine and right side of the colon) is 
affected, usually a fatal situation. Revascularization 
using a saphenous vein conduit to take blood from 
an iliac artery to the superior mesenteric artery 
may be possible. Resection of the deﬁ nitely inf-
arcted bowel is performed, and the bowel of 
dubious viability is left and inspected at subse-
quent laparotomy the following day. 
 Young patients who have undergone extensive 
resection of the small bowel can be managed by 
long - term total parenteral nutrition, with intesti-
nal transplantation as an alternative in selected 
cases. 
 Neonatal  i ntestinal 
 o bstruction 
 Classiﬁ cation 
  •   Intestinal atresia. 
  •   Volvulus neonatorum. 
  •   Meconium ileus. 
  •   Necrotizing enterocolitis. 
  •   Hirschsprung ’ s disease. 
  •   Anorectal atresias. 
 Aetiology 
 Mesenteric  e mbolus 
 This may arise from the left atrium in atrial ﬁ bril-
lation, a mural thrombus secondary to myocardial 
infarction, a vegetation on a heart valve or an 
atheromatous plaque on the aorta. Occasionally, 
it may be a paradoxical embolus originating in the 
deep leg veins and crossing the septum of the 
heart through a patent foramen ovale (Figure  12.4  
p. 96). 
 Mesenteric  a rterial  t hrombosis 
 This is usually thrombosis secondary to atheroma. 
Arterial occlusion may also be secondary to an 
aortic dissection (Chapter  11 , p. 76). 
 Mesenteric  v enous  t hrombosis 
 This is associated with portal hypertension, or 
may follow splenectomy for thrombocytopenic 
purpura, pressure of a tumour on the superior 
mesenteric vessels or septic thrombophlebitis 
(e.g. 
secondary 
to 
Crohn ’ s 
disease). 
Both 
mesenteric arterial and venous thrombosis are 
well documented in previously healthy young 
women on oral contraceptives, and are also asso-
ciated with thrombophilias such as antithrombin 
III deﬁ ciency. 
 Non - o cclusive  i nfarction of 
the  i ntestine 
 This may occur in patients with grossly dimin-
ished cardiac output and mesenteric blood ﬂ ow 
consequent upon myocardial infarction or con-
gestive cardiac failure.   
 Pathology 
 Mesenteric vascular occlusion results in infarction 
of the affected bowel with bleeding into the gut 
wall, lumen and peritoneal cavity; gangrene and 
subsequent perforation of the ischaemic bowel 
occurs. Impaired arterial blood ﬂ ow to the gut 
without infarction may produce the symptoms of 
 ‘ intestinal angina ’  in which severe abdominal 
pain follows meals; indeed, fear of eating and thus 
inducing pain produces rapid loss of weight. 
There may be an associated steatorrhoea. Minor 
degrees of occlusion may be overcome by devel-
opment of a collateral circulation, particularly if 

190 
Mechanical intestinal obstruction
the bronchial tree. Because of the loss of intestinal 
mucus and a blockage of pancreatic ducts with 
loss of enzymatic digestion, the lower ileum of the 
fetus becomes blocked with inspissated, viscous 
meconium. Perforation of the bowel may occur in 
intrauterine life (meconium peritonitis). 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 The infant presents with acute obstruction in the 
ﬁ rst days of life, with gross abdominal distension 
and vomiting. The loop of ileum impacted with 
meconium may be palpable. X - ray of the abdomen 
shows, in addition to distended coils of bowel, 
the typical mottled  ‘ ground glass ’ appearance of 
meconium.  
 Treatment 
 It may be possible to clear the meconium by instil-
lation of Gastrograﬁ n per rectum under X - ray 
control. This material is radio - opaque and hyper-
osmolar (drawing ﬂ uid into the bowel lumen) and 
contains an emulsifying agent (Tween), which 
facilitates evacuation of the meconium. If this 
fails, or if the bowel has perforated, surgery is indi-
cated. This comprises enterotomy and removal of 
the inspissated meconium by lavage. Occasionally, 
the impacted segment of ileum may show areas of 
gangrene and require resection. Postoperatively, 
the infant is given pancreatic enzyme supple-
ments by mouth. 
 The long - term prognosis is dictated by the 
extent to which the chest is affected since, owing 
to the lack of mucus secretion of the bronchi, 
recurrent chest infection is almost inevitable. 
 Necrotizing  e nterocolitis 
 This is a condition seen in premature infants and 
is due to mesenteric ischaemia, which permits 
bacterial invasion of the mucosa. Terminal ileum, 
caecum and distal colon are commonly affected. 
The condition probably represents the culmina-
tion of a number of disorders, such as hypoxia, 
hypotension and hyperviscosity, which reduce 
distal perfusion, together with sepsis and the pres-
ence of an umbilical artery cannula. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 The infant shows signs of generalized sepsis with 
vomiting and listlessness. The abdomen is dis-
tended and tense. Blood and mucus are passed 
 Continuous vomiting in the newborn suggests 
intracranial injury, infection or obstruction. Bile 
vomiting in the neonate indicates, almost without 
exception, intestinal obstruction. 
 In addition to vomiting, there may be con-
stipation, abdominal distension and visible 
peristalsis. 
 Plain X - ray of the abdomen shows distended 
loops of intestine with ﬂ uid levels. 
 Intestinal  a tresia 
 This may be a septum, complete or partial, or a 
complete gap, which may be associated with a 
corresponding defect in the mesentery. Multiple 
segments may be involved. 
 Treatment 
 Resection of the stricture and anastomosis. The 
operation is difﬁ cult and the mortality is high. 
 Volvulus  n eonatorum 
 This is due to a congenital malrotation of the 
bowel. The caecum remains high and the midgut 
mesentery is narrow, and drags across the duode-
num, which may thus also be obstructed. Because 
of the narrow attachment of mesentery, it readily 
undergoes volvulus. Untreated, the whole of the 
midgut becomes gangrenous. 
 Treatment 
 Laparotomy is performed as soon as possible. The 
operative procedure comprises untwisting the 
volvulus, and widening the narrow mesenteric 
attachment to the retroperitoneum. Adhesions 
between caecum and duodenum (Ladd ’ s bands 4 ) 
are divided, and the caecum and ascending colon 
are placed on the left side or in the midline. An 
appendicectomy is performed if practical, as the 
unusual position of the appendix may cause diag-
nostic difﬁ culty in the future.   
 Meconium  i leus 
 Eighty per cent of infants with meconium ileus 
have cystic ﬁ brosis (mucoviscidosis), which is a 
generalized defect of mucus secretion of the intes-
tine, pancreas (ﬁ brocystic pancreatic disease) and 
  4   William Edwards Ladd (1880 – 1967), Professor of Paediatric 
Surgery, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.  

Mechanical intestinal obstruction 191
fruitlessly, to resection of the dilated, normally 
innervated portion of the colon. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 In the most severe cases, obstructive symptoms 
commence in the ﬁ rst few days of life with 
failure to pass meconium; death results if 
untreated. Less marked examples present with 
extraordinarily stubborn constipation in infancy 
and these children survive into adult life with 
gross abdominal distension and stunted growth. 
Many untreated infants develop severe, life -
 threatening enterocolitis within the ﬁ rst 3 months 
of life. 
 Rectal examination reveals a narrow, empty 
rectum above which faecal impaction may be felt; 
this examination is usually followed by a gush of 
ﬂ atus and faeces. 
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   Abdominal X - ray shows dilated gas - ﬁ lled loops 
of bowel throughout the abdomen except in 
the pelvis.  
  •   Barium enema demonstrates the characteristic 
narrow rectal segment, above which the colon 
is dilated and full of faeces.  
  •   Rectal wall biopsy , deep enough to include the 
submucosa, shows complete absence of 
ganglion cells. In difﬁ cult cases, a longitudinal 
full - thickness biopsy is required. 
 Differential  d iagnosis 
 The differential diagnosis is acquired megacolon, 
a condition of severe constipation commencing 
usually at the age of 1 – 2 years, often in a child with 
mental retardation. Rectal examination in these 
cases is typical, impacted faeces being present 
right up to the anal verge. Biopsy of the rectal wall 
shows normal ganglion cells. This condition is 
relieved by regular enemas and aperients. 
 Treatment 
 If the child is obstructed in the neonatal period, 
colostomy is performed. Elective surgery is carried 
out when the infant is 6 – 9 months old, or until at 
least 3 months have elapsed after a colostomy has 
been established. The aganglionic segment is 
resected and an abdominoperineal pull - through 
anastomosis performed between normal colon 
and the anal canal. 
per rectum in over half the cases. The affected 
bowel may perforate or the condition resolve with 
stricture formation. 
 X - rays of the abdomen show distended loops of 
intestine, and gas bubbles may be seen in the 
bowel wall. Pneumoperitoneum signiﬁ es intesti-
nal perforation.  
 Treatment 
 Initially, this is medical. The infant is resuscitated 
and commenced on total parenteral nutrition 
and broad - spectrum antibiotics. Indications for 
surgery are failure to respond, profuse intestinal 
haemorrhage and evidence of perforation or 
obstruction due to stricture formation. It com-
prises resection of the frankly gangrenous or per-
forated segment or segments of intestine with 
primary anastomosis when possible to avoid 
ileostomies, which are difﬁ cult to manage in 
neonates. Mortality remains around 20%.   
 Hirschsprung ’ s  d isease 5  
 This may present as acute obstruction in the 
neonate, with an incidence of 1 in 5000. Eighty per 
cent of the patients are male. 
 Pathology 
 This condition, also termed congenital or agangli-
onic megacolon, is produced by faulty develop-
ment of the parasympathetic innervation of the 
distal bowel. There is an absence of ganglion cells 
in the submucosal plexus of Auerbach 6 and 
intermyenteric plexus of Meissner 7  affecting the 
rectum, which sometimes extends into the lower 
colon and, rarely, affects the whole of the large 
bowel. The involved segment is spastic, causing a 
functional obstruction with gross proximal disten-
sion of the colon. Recent work suggests it is associ-
ated with a mutation in the  RET proto - oncogene, 
probably interacting with another mutant gene, 
affecting the migration of neural crest cells in the 
embryo to the gut, where they normally become 
ganglia. 
 Until the true nature of the disease was deter-
mined, surgical treatment was directed, quite 
  5   Harald Hirschsprung (1830 – 1916), Professor of Paediatrics, 
Queen Louisa Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark.  
  6  Leopold Auerbach (1828 – 1897), Neuropathologist, Breslau, 
Poland. 
  7   Georg Meissner (1829 – 1905), Professor of Physiology, G ö ttingen, 
Germany. 

192 
Mechanical intestinal obstruction
 Intussusception 
 Deﬁ nition 
 An intussusception is the prolapse of one portion 
of the intestine into the lumen of the immediately 
adjoining bowel. The prolapsing or invaginating 
bowel is called the intussusceptum. 
 Terminology 
 Different portions of the intestine may form the 
apex of the intussusception. The common forms, 
in order of frequency, are the following: 
  •   ileocolic:  an ileoileal intussusception extends 
through the ileocaecal valve into the colon; 
this is the commonest sort (75%);  
  •   ileocaecal:  the ileocaecal valve is the apex of 
the intussusception;  
  •   ileoileal:  the ileum is invaginated into the 
adjacent ileum;  
  •   colocolic:  the colon invaginates into 
an adjacent colon (usually because 
of a protruding tumour of the bowel 
wall). 
 Aetiology 
 Ninety - ﬁ ve per cent occur in infants or young 
children, in whom there is usually no obvious 
cause. The mesenteric lymph nodes in these 
patients are invariably enlarged. It is postulated 
that the lymphoid tissue in Peyer ’ s patches 8  in the 
bowel wall undergoes hyperplasia because of an 
adenovirus; the swollen lymphoid tissue pro-
trudes into the lumen of the bowel and acts as 
a  ‘ foreign body ’ , which is then propelled by 
peristalsis distally along the gut, dragging the 
bowel behind. 
 In adults and in some children, a polyp, carci-
noma, intestinal lymphoma or an inverted 
Meckel ’ s diverticulum may form the apex of the 
intussusception. 
 The intussusceptum has its blood supply cut off 
by direct pressure of the outer layer and by stretch-
ing of its supplying mesentery so that, if untreated, 
gangrene will occur.  
 It is important at operation to ensure by frozen 
section histological examination that ganglion 
cells are present in the remaining colon.   
 Anorectal  a tresias 
 Anorectal atresias are a spectrum of abnormalities 
from imperforate anus to complete absence of 
anus and rectum. They result from failure of 
breakdown of the septum between the hindgut 
and the invaginating ectoderm of the procto-
daeum. Fifty per cent are associated with ﬁ stula: 
in the female into the vagina; in the male into 
the bladder or urethra. Twenty - ﬁ ve per cent 
are 
associated 
with 
congenital 
anomalies 
elsewhere. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 The anus may be entirely absent or represented by 
a dimple or a blind canal. Diagnosis may be sus-
pected on pre - natal ultrasound. Traditionally the 
extent of the defect is judged by X - raying the child, 
held upside down, with a metal marker such as a 
small coin at the site of the anus: the distance 
between the gas bubble in the distal colon and the 
marker can then be measured. 
 Imperforate anus is associated with vertebral 
and other congenital defects; any child with the 
diagnosis should have an ultrasound or magnetic 
resonance imaging of the spine.  
 Treatment 
  •   If the septum is thin (less than 1   cm), it is 
divided with suture of the edges of the defect 
to the skin.  
  •   If there is an extensive gap between the blind 
end and the anal verge, a colostomy is 
fashioned with a later attempt at a pull -
 through operation at about 2 years of age. 
Some surgeons perform an immediate 
pull - through procedure in the neonate.  
  •   If a vaginal ﬁ stula is present, operation is not 
urgent, as the bowel decompresses through 
the vagina. Elective surgery is performed when 
the girl is older.  
  •   If a rectourethral or vesical ﬁ stula is present 
(meconium escaping in the urine) the ﬁ stula 
must be closed urgently, with either colostomy 
or reconstruction of the anus, in order to 
prevent ascending infection of the urinary 
tract. 
  8  Johann Peyer (1653 – 1712), Anatomist, Schaffhausen, Switzerland. 

Mechanical intestinal obstruction 193
 Treatment in the  i nfant 
 Non - o perative 
 Barium is run in per rectum, and X - ray conﬁ rma-
tion of the diagnosis is established. If the intus-
susception is recent, it may be completely reduced 
hydrostatically by the pressure of the column of 
barium and this is conﬁ rmed radiologically. 
 Operative 
 The intussusception is reduced at laparotomy by 
squeezing its apex backwards out of the contain-
ing bowel. In late cases, reduction may be impos-
sible or the bowel may be gangrenous so that 
resection may be necessary. 
 Mortality is very low in the ﬁ rst 24 hours but is 
very high in the irreducible or gangrenous cases. 
An intussusception may recur in a small percent-
age of children. 
 
 
 
 Clinical  f eatures in  i nfants 
 Intussusception usually occurs in previously 
healthy children commonly aged between 3 and 
12 months. Boys are affected twice as often as 
girls. 
 The history is of paroxysms of abdominal colic 
typiﬁ ed by screaming and pallor. There is vomit-
ing and usually the passage of blood and/or slime 
per rectum, giving the appearance of redcurrant 
jelly. On examination, the child is pale and 
anxious, and a typical attack of screaming may be 
observed. Palpation of the abdomen, after seda-
tion if necessary, reveals a sausage - shaped tumour 
anywhere except in the RIF. Occasionally, the 
tumour cannot be felt because it is hidden under 
the costal margin. Rectal examination nearly 
always reveals  ‘ redcurrant jelly ’ on the examining 
ﬁ nger and, rarely, the tip of the intussusception 
can be felt. 
 If neglected, after 24 hours the abdomen 
becomes distended, faeculent vomiting occurs 
and the child becomes intensely toxic, owing to 
gangrene of the intussusception and associated 
peritonitis. 

 23 
The  s mall  i ntestine  
 
 Learning  o bjectives 
  ✓   To know the varying presentations of a Meckel ’ s diverticulum.  
  ✓   To have knowledge of Crohn ’ s disease of the small intestine, 
in particular its varying presentations and 
treatment. 
melaena at about the age of 10 years. Rarely, 
the peptic ulcer perforates or gives rise to 
postcibal pain. The diverticulum may also 
contain ectopic pancreatic tissue.  
  •   Patent vitellointestinal duct , presenting as an 
umbilical ﬁ stula that discharges intestinal 
contents. 
  •   Raspberry tumour at the umbilicus due to a 
persistent umbilical extremity of the duct.  
  •   Vitellointestinal band stretching from the tip of 
the diverticulum to the umbilicus, which may 
snare a loop of intestine to produce 
obstruction or act as the apex of a small bowel 
volvulus. 
 Special  i nvestigations 
 Most 
diverticula 
are 
incidental 
ﬁ ndings. 
However, the following investigations may be 
indicated. 
  •   Technetium scan.  Radiolabelled technetium 
( 99m Tc) is taken up by gastric mucosa, and 
scintigraphy will outline the stomach and, in 
addition, the Meckel ’ s diverticulum, usually 
near the right iliac fossa (RIF).  
  •   Barium follow - through or small bowel enema 
may show the diverticulum arising from the 
antimesenteric border.  
  •   Computed tomography (CT) scan may 
demonstrate the diverticulum. 
 Treatment 
involves 
resection 
of 
the 
diverticulum. 
 Meckel ’ s  d iverticulum 
 Meckel ’ s diverticulum 1  is the remnant of the vitel-
lointestinal duct of the embryo. It lies on the 
antimesenteric border of the ileum and, as an 
approximation, occurs in 2% of the population, 
arises 60   cm (2 feet) from the caecum, and aver-
ages 5   cm (2 inches) in length. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 It may present in numerous ways: 
  •   A symptomless ﬁ nding  at operation or autopsy. 
  •   Acute inﬂ ammation , clinically identical to 
acute appendicitis.  
  •   Perforation by a foreign body , presenting as 
peritonitis. 
  •   Intussusception  (ileoileal), often gangrenous by 
the time the patient comes to operation.  
  •   Peptic ulceration  due to contained heterotopic 
gastric epithelium, which bears HCl - secreting 
parietal cells. This particularly occurs in 
children and characteristically is the cause of 
Lecture Notes: General Surgery, 12th edition. © Harold Ellis, 
Sir Roy Y. Calne and Christopher J. E. Watson. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
  1   Johann Frederick Meckel (1781 – 1833), Professor of Anatomy and 
Surgery, Halle, Germany. His grandfather and father were both 
Professor of Anatomy.  

The small intestine 195
oedema result in a  ‘ cobblestone ’ appearance of 
the mucous membrane. The wall of the intestine 
is greatly thickened, as is the adjacent mesentery, 
and the regional lymph nodes are enlarged. 
Mesenteric fat advances over the serosal surface 
in affected segments. There may be skip areas of 
normal intestine between involved segments. 
Fistulae may occur into adjacent viscera. 
 Microscopic  a ppearance 
 There is ﬁ brosis, lymphoedema and a chronic 
inﬂ ammatory inﬁ ltrate through the whole thick-
ness of the bowel with non - caseating foci of epi-
thelioid and giant cells. Ulceration is present, with 
characteristic ﬁ ssuring ulcers extending deep 
through the mucosa. These may extend through 
the bowel wall to form abscesses, or ﬁ stulae into 
adjacent viscera. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Crohn ’ s disease occurs at any age, but is particu-
larly common in young adults with a peak age of 
onset between 20 and 40 years of age. There is no 
sex difference. The typical clinical picture is a 
young adult with abdominal pain and diarrhoea, 
often with a palpable mass in the RIF. However, 
Crohn ’ s disease may manifest clinically in several 
ways. 
  •   Acute Crohn ’ s disease.  Crohn ’ s disease may 
present like appendicitis with acute abdominal 
pain, usually in the RIF, and vomiting. Rarely, 
there is perforation of the bowel or acute 
haemorrhage. Unlike appendicitis, the history 
is usually of several days or weeks, and 
investigation may reveal anaemia, or other 
features of Crohn ’ s disease may be present.  
  •   Intestinal obstruction.   Following inﬂ ammatory 
exacerbations, ﬁ brosis of the intestinal wall 
occurs, leaving stenotic segments which result 
in intestinal obstruction. Obstruction may also 
follow an intraperitoneal abscess. 
  •   Fistula formation.   Fistulae may develop, 
penetrating adjacent loops of gut or the 
bladder, or they may be perianal. External 
faecal ﬁ stulae may follow operative 
intervention. 
  •   Malabsorption.  Extensive involvement of the 
bowel produces malabsorption with 
steatorrhoea and multiple vitamin deﬁ ciencies. 
It is exacerbated when bowel resections have 
already occurred.  
 Crohn ’ s  d isease 
 Crohn ’ s disease 2  is a non - speciﬁ c inﬂ ammatory 
disease of the alimentary canal, with diseased seg-
ments sandwiched between normal segments (i.e. 
it is discontinuous). Crohn ﬁ rst described its 
occurrence in the ileum and termed it  ‘ regional 
ileitis ’ . However, this description is inaccurate, 
as the disease may affect any part of the alimen-
tary tract from the mouth to the anus. Crohn ’ s 
disease may affect the large bowel alone (Chapter 
 25 , p. 210). 
 Aetiology 
 The aetiology of Crohn ’ s disease has environmen-
tal (cigarette smoking; urban living) and genetic 
(20% of patients have an affected relative) compo-
nents. Recent work has pointed to a genetic 
mutation in the  NOD  gene family. These genes 
are involved in the innate immune response to 
bacterial antigens within the gut. This observation 
explains the success of dietary manipulation, 
such as the elemental diet (see p. 196). The pres-
ence of granulomas on histology has suggested 
infection by a mycobacterium species, possibly 
 Mycobacterium 
avium  
ssp. 
 paratuberculosis . 
However, the success of immunosuppression in 
the control of Crohn ’ s disease suggests an autoim-
mune rather than an infectious cause. 
 Acute ileitis can also be caused by the bacterium 
 Yersinia enterocolitica . 
 Pathology 
 Distribution 
 The small bowel is affected in two - thirds of cases, 
with the lower ileum being the commonest site, 
although the disease may affect any part of the 
alimentary canal from the buccal mucosa to the 
anal verge. One - third of patients with ileal disease 
also have rectal or colonic manifestations.  
 Macroscopic  a ppearance 
 In the acute stage, the bowel is bright red and 
swollen; mucosal ulceration and intervening 
  2   Burrill Bernard Crohn (1884 – 1983), Gastroenterologist, Mount 
Sinai Hospital, New York, NY, USA. The disease was ﬁ rst described 
by Morgagni (1682 – 1771). 

196 
The small intestine
interruption of the enterohepatic bile - salt 
circulation.  
  •   Primary sclerosing cholangitis, sacroiliitis, 
pyoderma gangrenosum and uveitis also occur, 
but are more common when the colon is also 
involved. 
 Treatment 
 Treatment is primarily medical, although surgery 
is appropriate in the management of compl-
ications and chronic disease. Surgery is avoided 
when possible because of the malabsorption 
that may follow extensive resections of the 
bowel or the production of blind loops of 
intestine. 
 Medical  m anagement 
 Initial management is conservative. Nutritional 
support may be required, and an elemental diet 
may be useful. Acute episodes are treated with 
steroids and immunosuppressants such as aza-
thioprine; parenteral nutrition may be required. 
Inﬂ iximab, a monoclonal antibody to tumour 
necrosis factor (TNF - α ), has been shown to be 
effective treatment for acute exacerbations and 
ﬁ stulating disease. 
 Mild 
symptoms 
are 
treated 
with 
5 -
 aminosalicylate drugs such as sulfasalazine and 
mesalazine, and steroids may be required. 
Metronidazole may also help. 
 Surgical  m anagement 
 If found at laparotomy in the acute stage, the con-
dition should be left undisturbed since in a high 
proportion the acute phase may subside com-
pletely without further episodes. 
 In the chronic stage of the disease, surgery is 
indicated for severe or recurrent obstructive 
symptoms, and for the treatment of ﬁ stulae into 
the bladder or skin. Recognizing that the disease 
is recurrent and that further resections may be 
required, surgery should be as conservative as 
possible. Either resection of the affected segment 
or a strictureplasty is performed. 
 Prognosis 
 Recurrence of the disease after resection occurs 
in some 50% of cases within 10 years, and 
repeated operations may be required over the 
years. 
  •   Diarrhoea.   Diarrhoea may be due to 
inﬂ ammation and mucosal ulceration, colonic 
or rectal involvement, bacterial overgrowth in 
obstructed segments and malabsorption 
secondary to either disease or short bowel 
following previous surgery. Mucosal ulceration 
causes diarrhoea, with positive occult blood 
and anaemia.  
  •   Perianal disease.     Ten per cent of patients with 
small bowel Crohn ’ s disease also have perianal 
disease, ranging from ﬁ ssures to ﬁ stulae 
(Chapter  26 , p. 224). 
 Special  i nvestigations 
 Crohn ’ s disease is associated with anaemia, posi-
tive occult blood and occasionally steatorrhoea. 
Serum albumin is low, and inﬂ ammatory markers 
such as C - reactive protein and the acute phase 
proteins are helpful indices of disease activity. 
Additional investigations include the following: 
  •   Small bowel enema , or enteroclysis, in which 
contrast is instilled into the duodenum via a 
nasogastric tube and followed ﬂ uoroscopically 
as it passes through the bowel, may 
demonstrate ﬁ stulae or strictures (the string 
sign of Kantor 3 ) in the affected segment, 
usually the terminal ileum, and ulcerated 
small bowel may show a  ‘ cobblestone ’ 
appearance. 
  •   CT or magnetic resonance enteroclysis  may also 
demonstrate extraluminal disease  
  •   Technetium - labelled leucocyte scan  is a 
sensitive way to show the extent of disease 
activity. Leucocytes are taken up in the 
inﬂ amed segments, and also localize to 
abscesses. 
 Complications  o utside 
the  g astrointestinal  t ract 
 In addition to those already mentioned, the fol-
lowing are associated with the disease. 
  •   Renal calculi:     usually oxalate stones secondary 
to hyperoxaluria, which occurs as a 
consequence of steatorrhoea.  
  •   Biliary calculi  are more common in patients 
with ileal Crohn ’ s disease, and in whom the 
ileum has been resected. This is due to the 
  3   John Leonard Kantor (1890 – 1947), Radiologist, Presbyterian 
Hospital, New York, NY, USA.  

The small intestine 197
group of neuroendocrine tumours called gastro-
enteropancreatic tumours; the other tumours in 
this group are pancreatic endocrine tumours such 
as gastrinomas and insulinomas. In 10% of cases, 
there is an association with the multiple endo-
crine neoplasia type 1 (MEN - 1) syndrome (Chapter 
 38 , p. 324). Carcinoid tumours are most com-
monly found in the appendix, but may be found 
anywhere in the alimentary canal and occasion-
ally in the lung (10%). They commonly secrete 
5 - hydroxytryptamine (5 - HT, also called serot-
onin), in addition to other hormones, but are 
rarely symptomatic until they have metastasized 
to the liver and are thus able to secrete their 
hormone directly into the systemic circulation, 
since 
the 
liver 
normally 
inactivates 
these 
hormones. 
 Pathology 
 Macroscopic  a ppearance 
 The tumour appears as a yellowish submucosal 
nodule. The overlying mucous membrane is at 
ﬁ rst intact but later ulcerates. Extension to the 
serosa leads to ﬁ brosis and obstruction. Usually, 
the tumour encircles the bowel at the time of diag-
nosis, and has inﬁ ltrated the mesenteric lymph 
nodes. 
 Microscopic  a ppearance 
 The tumour is made up of Kultschitzky cells, 5 
which take up silver stains and arise in the crypts 
of the intestinal mucosa. 
 The tumour is very slow growing, and usually 
presents after the fourth decade. Up to one -
 quarter are multiple. Carcinoids of the appendix 
are relatively benign but 4% eventually metasta-
size. They may present early as appendicitis by 
obstructing the appendix lumen. Those arising in 
the ileum and large bowel spread to the regional 
lymph nodes and the liver.   
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Carcinoid tumours present with features related 
to the primary tumour or metastatic spread, or 
with the carcinoid syndrome because of its endo-
crine products: 
 Tumours of the  s mall 
 i ntestine 
 One of the many mysteries of tumour formation is 
the rarity of growths from beyond the pylorus to 
the ileocaecal valve. 
 Classiﬁ cation 
 Benign 
  •   Adenoma. 
  •   Gastrointestinal stromal tumour (see Chapter 
 21 , p. 179). 
  •   Lipoma. 
  •   Hamartoma (e.g. Peutz – Jeghers syndrome, 4 
associated with circumoral pigmentation and 
multiple intestinal polyps). 
 Malignant 
 1  Primary : 
 a  adenocarcinoma; 
 b  lymphoma; 
 c  carcinoid; 
 d  gastrointestinal stromal tumour (see 
Chapter  21 , p. 179). 
 2  Secondary invasion  (e.g. from stomach, colon 
or bladder, or from a lymphoma).      
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Tumours of the small intestine may present with 
the following: 
  •   intestinal bleeding; 
  •   obstruction; 
  •   intussusception; 
  •   volvulus. 
 Carcinoid  s yndrome 
 Carcinoid tumours are APUD (amine precursor 
uptake and decarboxylation) tumours, and share 
this property with cells of neural crest origin with 
which they were once confused. They belong to a 
  4  Johannes Peutz (1886 – 1957), Physician, The Hague, The 
Netherlands. Harold Jeghers (1940 – 1990), Professor of Medicine, 
Georgetown University School of Medicine, Washington, DC, and 
Tufts University Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. 
  5  Nicolai Kultschitzky (1865 – 1925), Professor of Histology, Kharkov, 
Russia. After the Russian Revolution he became Lecturer in 
Anatomy at University College, London, UK. 

198 
The small intestine
  •   CT or ultrasound of the  liver to seek 
metastases. The primary tumour is often 
elusive, but CT may show mesenteric 
inﬁ ltration. 
  •   Radiolabelled octreotide scintigraphy is a useful 
test for screening for tumour and for detection 
of metastases; the octreotide binds to 
somatostatin receptors which are often 
expressed on the tumour. 
 Treatment 
 Resection of the tumour in early cases. Local 
deposits in the liver are also occasionally resecta-
ble. Palliation of more extensive deposits can 
be achieved by embolizing the hepatic arterial 
supply via a catheter passed through the femoral 
artery. Cytotoxic therapy may induce worthwhile 
remission. 
 Symptoms may be controlled with octreotide, a 
somatostatin analogue that inhibits 5 - HT release. 
Targeted radiotherapy, using radiolabelled octre-
otide, may have a place in treatment. Even if wide-
spread deposits are present, the tumour is slow 
growing and the patient may survive for many 
years. 
 
 
  •   ﬂ ushing (90%) with attacks of cyanosis and a 
chronic red - faced appearance, often 
precipitated by stress or ingestion of food or 
alcohol;  
  •   diarrhoea (70%), often profuse, with noisy 
borborygmi;  
  •   bronchospasm (15%); 
  •   abdominal pain (40%) owing to mesenteric 
ﬁ brosis resulting in partial obstruction.    
 Abnormalities in the heart (pulmonary and 
tricuspid 
stenosis) 
are 
late 
manifestations; 
lung carcinoids also cause stenosis of the left 
heart valves (mitral and aortic). Hepatomegaly 
and a palpable abdominal mass produced by 
the tumour and its secondaries may also be 
present. 
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   5 - Hydroxyindole acetic acid (5 - HIAA) urinary 
concentration . 5 - HT is broken down to 5 - HIAA, 
which is excreted in the urine. A 24 hour urine 
collection contains raised levels of 5 - HIAA.  
  •   Chromogranin A serum concentration  is raised 
in patients with neuroendocrine tumours such 
as carcinoids.  

 24 
Acute  a ppendicitis  
 
 Learning  o bjective 
  ✓   To know about the presentation and treatment 
of appendicitis, and the range of diagnoses that it can 
mimic. 
Once these are thrombosed, gangrene is inevita-
ble and is followed by perforation. 
 There is no strict time relationship for this chain 
of events. An appendix may perforate in under 12 
hours, but conversely it is not rare to see an acutely 
inﬂ amed but not perforated appendix after 3 or 4 
days. 
 The effects of appendicular obstruction depend 
on the content of the appendix lumen. If bacteria 
are present, acute inﬂ ammation occurs; if, as 
sometimes happens, the appendix is empty, then 
a  mucocele  of the appendix results, owing to con-
tinued secretion of mucus from the goblet cells in 
the mucosal wall. 
 Appendicitis can occur in the non - obstructed 
appendix. Here, there may be a direct infection 
of the lymphoid follicles from the appendix 
lumen, or in some cases the infection may be 
haematogenous (e.g. the rare streptococcal 
appendicitis). 
The 
non - obstructed 
acutely 
inﬂ amed appendix is more likely to resolve than 
the obstructed form. 
 Pathological  c ourse 
 The acutely inﬂ amed appendix may resolve, but 
if so a further attack is likely. It is not uncommon 
for a patient with acute appendicitis to confess 
to one or more previous milder episodes of 
pain, the  ‘ grumbling appendix ’ . More often, the 
inﬂ amed appendix undergoes gangrene and 
then perforates, either with general peritonitis 
or, more fortunately, with a localized appendix 
abscess. These possibilities are summarized in 
Figure  24.1 . 
    This is the most common abdominal emergency 
and is estimated to affect one - sixth of the British 
population. It is, however, prevalent only in people 
on a Western diet.  
 Pathology 
 Acute appendicitis usually occurs when the 
appendix is obstructed by a faecolith or foreign 
body in the lumen, by a ﬁ brous stricture in its wall 
from previous inﬂ ammation or by enlargement of 
lymphoid follicles in its wall secondary to inﬂ am-
mation of its mucosa; rarely, it is associated with 
an obstructing carcinoid tumour near its base. 
Occasionally, acute appendicitis occurs proximal 
to an obstructing lesion (usually carcinoma) in the 
caecum or ascending colon. As the appendix of 
the infant is wide mouthed and well drained, and 
as the lumen of the appendix is almost obliterated 
in old age, appendicitis at the two extremes of life 
is relatively rare. However, when it does occur in 
these age groups it is poorly tolerated, and often 
diagnosed late. 
 The obstructed appendix acts as a closed loop; 
bacteria proliferate in the lumen and invade the 
appendix wall, which is damaged by pressure 
necrosis. The vascular supply to the appendix is 
made up of end - arteries, which are branches of 
the appendicular branch of the ileocolic artery. 
Lecture Notes: General Surgery, 12th edition. © Harold Ellis, 
Sir Roy Y. Calne and Christopher J. E. Watson. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

200 
Acute appendicitis
diagnostic sequence as colicky central 
abdominal pain, followed by vomiting, 
followed by movement of the pain to the RIF.  
  •   Anorexia is almost invariable. 
  •   Constipation is usual, but diarrhoea may occur 
(particularly when the ileum is irritated by the 
inﬂ amed appendix). 
 There may be a history of previous milder 
attacks of similar pain. 
 With perforation of the appendix, there may be 
temporary remission or even cessation of pain as 
tension in the distended organ is relieved; this is 
followed by more severe and more generalized 
pain with profuse vomiting as general peritonitis 
develops. 
 Examination 
  •   Pyrexia (around 37.5 ° C) and tachycardia are 
usual. 
  •   The patient is ﬂ ushed, may appear toxic and is 
obviously in pain. 
  •   Movement exacerbates the pain. 
  •   The tongue is usually coated, and a fetor oris is 
present. 
  •   The abdomen shows localized tenderness in 
the region of the inﬂ amed appendix. There is 
usually guarding of the abdominal muscles 
over this site with release tenderness. 
Coughing mimics the release test for rebound 
tenderness. 
  •   Rectal examination reveals tenderness when 
the appendix is in the pelvic position or when 
there is pus in the rectovesical or Douglas 
pouch. 2 
  •   In late cases with generalized peritonitis, the 
abdomen becomes diffusely tender and rigid, 
bowel sounds are absent and the patient is 
obviously very ill. Later still, the abdomen is 
distended and tympanitic, and the patient 
exhibits the hippocratic facies of advanced 
peritonitis. 
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   Leucocyte count:    a mild polymorph 
leucocytosis is the rule.  
  •   Computed tomography (CT) is increasingly 
being used to evaluate atypical presentations 
of appendicitis and its complications.  
 Clinical  f eatures 
 History 
 The vast majority of patients with acute appendi-
citis present with marked localized pain and ten-
derness in the right iliac fossa (RIF). 
  •   Pain   –  typically, the pain commences as a 
central periumbilical colic, which shifts after 
approximately 6 hours to the RIF or, more 
accurately, to the site of the inﬂ amed appendix 
as the adjacent peritoneum becomes inﬂ amed. 
The appendix is a long tube (7 – 10  cm long), 
tethered proximally to the caecum near the 
ileocaecal junction; distally the tip may lie 
anywhere from behind the caecum 
(retrocaecal), adjacent to the ileum or down in 
the pelvis lying against the rectum or bladder. 
Thus, if the appendix is in the pelvic position, 
the pain may become suprapubic, with urinary 
frequency as the bladder is irritated; if it is in 
the high retrocaecal position, the symptoms 
may become localized in the right loin with 
less tenderness on abdominal palpation. 
Rarely, the tip of the inﬂ amed appendix 
extends over to the left iliac fossa and pain 
may localize there. The colicky central 
abdominal pain is visceral in origin; the shift of 
pain is due to later involvement of the sensitive 
parietal peritoneum by the inﬂ ammatory 
process. Typically, the pain is aggravated by 
movement and the patient prefers to lie still 
with the hips and knees ﬂ exed. 
  •   Nausea and vomiting  usually occur following 
the onset of pain. Murphy 1  described the 
 Figure 24.1   The pathological course of appendicitis.  
Acute
appendicitis
Resolution
Perforation
Localized
Generalized
  1   John Benjamin Murphy (1857 – 1916), Professor of Surgery, North 
Western University, Chicago, IL, USA. 
  2   James Douglas (1675 – 1742), Obstetrician and Anatomist, 
London, UK.  

Acute appendicitis 201
sigmoid colon is sufﬁ ciently mobile, or if there 
is inﬂ ammation of a solitary caecal 
diverticulum. The age group differs from the 
usually younger patient with appendicitis. 
 The  u rogenital  t ract 
  •   Ureteric colic and acute pyelonephritis.   The 
urine must be tested for blood and pus cells in 
every case of acute abdominal pain. The 
patient with ureteric colic is usually restless 
and moving about, with pain radiating from 
loin to groin. Remember, however, that an 
inﬂ amed appendix adherent to the ureter or 
bladder may produce dysuria and microscopic 
haematuria or pyuria; if reasonable doubt 
exists, it is safer to perform a diagnostic 
laparoscopy to visually assess the appendix. 
  •   Testicular torsion may occasionally present 
with periumbilical pain and vomiting. It is 
mandatory to examine the testes of all boys 
with abdominal pain, to exclude both torsion 
and maldescent (Chapter  46 , p. 379). 
 The  c hest 
 Basal pneumonia and pleurisy may give referred 
abdominal pain, which may be surprisingly 
difﬁ cult to differentiate, especially in children. 
Auscultation may reveal a rub, and chest X - ray 
may demonstrate pneumonia.  
 Gynaecological  e mergencies 
 The commonest gynaecological pitfalls are acute 
salpingitis, ectopic pregnancy and ruptured cyst 
of the corpus luteum. A ruptured or torted ovarian 
cyst presents with sudden severe RIF pain radiat-
ing to the loin, and the patient with salpingitis has 
a more diffuse bilateral lower abdominal pain and 
a vaginal discharge. Ultrasound helps to visualize 
the distended fallopian tube in salpingitis and 
ectopic pregnancy. A pregnancy test (serum  β -
 HCG) may help conﬁ rm the presence of an ectopic 
pregnancy. In women of childbearing age, laparo-
scopic pelvic examination may be helpful in 
resolving the differential diagnosis, and appendi-
cectomy may be performed at the same time.  
 The  c entral  n ervous  s ystem 
 The pain preceding the eruption of herpes zoster 
affecting the 11th and 12th dorsal segments, the 
irritation of these posterior nerve roots in spinal 
  •   Ultrasound of the RIF , in experienced hands, 
may be diagnostic. 
 In general, the investigations are directed at 
excluding the differential diagnoses, as well as 
conﬁ rming appendicitis. 
 Differential  d iagnosis 
 The differential diagnosis of appendicitis includes 
most of the causes of acute abdominal pain. They 
should be considered systematically under the fol-
lowing headings. 
  •   other intra - abdominal causes of acute pain; 
  •   the urogenital tract; 
  •   the chest; 
  •   gynaecological emergencies in female patients; 
  •   the central nervous system. 
 Intra - a bdominal  d isease 
 The following commonly simulate appendicitis. 
  •   Non - speciﬁ c mesenteric adenitis , particularly in 
young children, following upper respiratory 
tract infection. This may coexist with 
appendicitis, so the diagnosis is best 
conﬁ rmed at the time of appendicectomy. 
  •   Meckel ’ s divertic ulitis, often indistinguishable 
from appendicitis; the presence of an inﬂ amed 
Meckel ’ s diverticulum (see Chapter  23 , p. 194) 
should always be excluded if the appendix is 
normal at exploration.  
  •   Acute Crohn ’ s ileitis  (see Chapter  23 , p. 195), 
affects young adults, usually with a long 
history of recurrent pain.  
  •   Acute intestinal obstruction , with colicky pain 
and vomiting, but noisy bowel sounds and 
distended bowel on X - ray. 
  •   Gastroenteritis , with diarrhoea and vomiting 
but more diffuse and less severe tenderness. 
Vomiting usually precedes any colic.  
  •   Perforated peptic ulcer , normally a sudden 
onset; RIF pain may occur as ﬂ uid tracks down 
the right paracolic gutter.  
  •   Acute cholecystitis , in which the initial colicky 
pain is foregut pain, experienced in the 
epigastrium. A distended, inﬂ amed gallbladder 
may descend to the RIF.  
  •   Pancreatitis , a central pain with central and 
sometimes RIF tenderness, diagnosed by a 
raised serum amylase concentration.  
  •   Acute colonic diverticulitis , usually affecting 
the left colon but may give RIF pain if the 

202 
Acute appendicitis
circumstances, the area of the appendix requires 
adequate drainage and subsequent  ‘ interval 
appendicectomy ’ in about 3 months. 
 The  a ppendix  m ass 
(Box  24.1 ) 
 Not uncommonly, the patient will present with a 
history of 4 or 5 days of abdominal pain and with 
a localized mass in the RIF. The rest of the 
abdomen is soft, bowel sounds are present and 
the patient obviously has no evidence of general 
peritonitis. In these circumstances, the inﬂ amed 
appendix is walled off by adhesions to the 
omentum and adjacent viscera, with or without 
the presence of a local abscess. Immediate surgery 
in such circumstances is difﬁ cult and dangerous, 
with a risk of damage to adjacent bowel loops. 
disease (invasive tumour or tuberculosis) and the 
lightning pains of tabes dorsalis all occasionally 
mimic appendicitis. 
 Nothing can be so easy, nor anything so difﬁ -
cult, as the diagnosis of acute appendicitis. The 
tyro may smile indulgently at the long list of 
differential diagnoses given in the textbooks 
but, as year follows year, he or she will experience 
the chagrin of making most, if not all, of these 
errors. 
 Treatment 
 The treatment of acute appendicitis is appendi-
cectomy; nowadays, usually performed at laparos-
copy to enable formal conﬁ rmation of the 
diagnosis particularly in women. Immediate 
appendicectomy is not indicated in the following 
circumstances: 
  •   The patient is moribund with advanced 
peritonitis. In this case the patient should be 
aggressively resuscitated with intravenous 
ﬂ uids, antibiotics and analgesia; inotropes may 
also be required.  
  •   The attack has already resolved; in such a case, 
appendicectomy can be advised as an elective 
procedure, but there is no immediate 
emergency. 
  •   An appendix mass has formed without 
evidence of general peritonitis (see below).  
  •   When circumstances make operation difﬁ cult 
or impossible, e.g. at sea. Here reliance must 
be placed on a conservative regimen and the 
hope that resolution or local abscess will form, 
rather than on one ’ s surgical skill with a razor 
blade and a bent spoon. 
 Antibiotic prophylaxis is given preoperatively. 
When at operation peritonitis is discovered, anti-
biotic therapy is continued; metronidazole and 
gentamicin, or a cephalosporin, are effective for 
both the anaerobic and aerobic bowel organisms, 
but this regimen may need to be supplemented or 
changed when the bacteriological sensitivities of 
the cultured pus become available after 24 – 48 
hours. After appendicectomy, a drain is inserted 
when there is severe inﬂ ammation of the appen-
dix bed, when a local abscess is present or when 
closure of the appendix stump is not perfectly 
sound. Very occasionally, the inﬂ amed and adher-
ent appendix cannot be safely removed; in such 
 Box 24.1   A mass in the right iliac fossa 
 The causes of a mass in the right iliac fossa are best 
thought of by considering the possible anatomical 
structures in this region. 
  •    Appendix abscess or appendix mass  
  •    Carcinoma of caecum: differentiated from the 
above by usually an older age group, a longer 
history, often the presence of diarrhoea, anaemia 
with positive occult blood and ﬁ nally the barium 
enema examination  
  •    Crohn ’ s disease: always to be thought of when 
there is a local mass in a young patient with 
diarrhoea 
  •    A distended gallbladder, which may extend 
down as far as the right iliac fossa  
  •    Pelvic kidney (or renal transplant)  
  •    Ovarian or tubal mass  
  •    Aneurysm of the common, internal or external 
iliac artery  
  •    Retroperitoneal tumour arising in the soft tissues 
or lymph nodes of the posterior abdominal wall 
or from the pelvis  
  •    Ileocaecal tuberculosis (rare in the UK, common 
in India)  
  •    Psoas abscess  – now rare  

Acute appendicitis 203
 Treatment 
 Initial treatment is conservative. The outlines of 
the mass are marked on the skin, the patient is put 
to bed on a ﬂ uid diet and a careful watch kept on 
the general condition, temperature and pulse. 
Metronidazole is commenced, but prolonged 
antibiotics are not given, as these may merely 
produce a chronic inﬂ ammatory mass honey-
combed 
with 
abscesses 
(the 
so - called 
 ‘ antibioticoma ’ ). 
 On this regimen, 80% of appendix masses 
resolve. In the remaining cases, the abscess obvi-
ously enlarges over the next day or two and the 
temperature fails to subside. In these circum-
stances, drainage of the abscess is instituted. In 
neglected cases, an appendix abscess may burst 
spontaneously through the abdominal wall, into 
the rectum, or into the general peritoneal cavity. 
 If resolution occurs, appendicectomy is carried 
out after an interval of 3 months to allow the 
inﬂ ammatory condition to settle completely. 
Unless interval appendicectomy is performed, 
there is considerable risk of a further attack of 
acute appendicitis. 
 Appendicitis in 
 p regnancy 
 Appendicitis in pregnancy is no more rare or 
common than appendicitis in the general com-
munity, but it has a higher mortality and morbid-
ity because it is confused with other complications 
of pregnancy. Differentiation must be made from 
pyelonephritis, vomiting of pregnancy, red degen-
eration of a ﬁ broid or torsion of an ovarian cyst. 
 Because the appendix is displaced by the enlarg-
ing uterus, pain and tenderness are higher and 
more lateral than in the usual circumstances. 
There is considerable danger of abortion, particu-
larly in the ﬁ rst trimester. 
 
 
 
 

 25 
The  c olon  
 
 Learning  o bjectives 
  ✓   To know the different manifestations of diverticulosis of the colon 
and their management.  
  ✓   To have knowledge of carcinoma of the colon, its aetiology, 
pathology, staging and treatment. 
 4  Drugs: 
 a  aspirin; 
 b  opiate analgesics; 
 c  anticholinergics; 
 d  ganglion blockers. 
 5  Habit and diet: 
 a  dyschezia (rectal stasis due to suppression 
of urge to defaecate);  
 b  dehydration; 
 c  starvation; 
 d  lack of bulk in diet. 
 Diarrhoea 
 1  Speciﬁ c infections: 
 a  food poisoning (e.g.  Salmonella ); 
 b  dysentery (amoebic and bacillary); 
 c  cholera; 
 d  viral enterocolitis. 
 2  Inﬂ ammation or irritation of the intestine: 
 a  ulcerative colitis; 
 b  tumours of the large bowel; 
 c  diverticular disease; 
 d  Crohn ’ s disease. 
 3  Drugs: 
 a  antibiotics and antibiotic - induced colitis; 
 b  erythromycin (stimulates the motilin 
receptor); 
 c  purgatives; 
 d  digoxin. 
 4  Loss of absorptive surface: 
 a  bowel resections and short circuits; 
 b  sprue and coeliac disease; 
 c  idiopathic steatorrhoea. 
 Constipation and 
 d iarrhoea 
 Constipation and diarrhoea are two symptoms 
frequently attributable to diseases of the large 
bowel. There are, of course, many causes of these 
common complaints, owing not only to lesions of 
the large intestine but also to other parts of the 
alimentary canal being affected or to general dis-
eases. It is useful here to consider the commoner 
causes of these two symptoms.  
 Constipation 
 1  Organic obstruction: 
 a  carcinoma of the colon; 
 b  diverticular disease. 
 2  Painful anal conditions: 
 a  ﬁ ssure  in ano ; 
 b  prolapsed piles. 
 3  Adynamic bowel: 
 a  Hirschsprung ’ s disease; 1 
 b  senility; 
 c  spinal cord injuries and disease; 
 d  myxoedema; 
 e  Parkinson ’ s disease. 
Lecture Notes: General Surgery, 12th edition. © Harold Ellis, 
Sir Roy Y. Calne and Christopher J. E. Watson. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
  1   Harald Hirschsprung (1830 – 1916), Professor of Paediatrics, 
Queen Louisa Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark.  

The colon 205
 5  Pancreatic dysfunction:    steatorrhoea due to 
lipase deﬁ ciency. 
 6  Postgastrectomy and vagotomy . 
 7  General diseases: 
 a  anxiety states; 
 b  hyperthyroidism; 
 c  uraemia; 
 d  carcinoid syndrome (Chapter  23 , p. 197); 
 e  Zollinger – Ellison syndrome (Chapter  32 , 
p. 284). 
 Diverticulosis and 
 d iverticulitis 
 Background (Table  25.1 )  
 Diverticula of the colon consist of outpouchings of 
mucous membrane through the muscle wall of the 
bowel. Because they lack the normal muscle coats, 
they are examples of  ‘ false ’ diverticula, in contrast 
 Table 25.1   Diverticulum terminology 
 True diverticulum  
  An outpouching covered by all the layers of the bowel wall (e.g. Meckel ’ s diverticulum, 
jejunal diverticulum)  
 False diverticulum  
  Lacking the normal muscle coat of the bowel (e.g. colonic diverticula)  
 Diverticula  
  Plural of diverticulum  
 Diverticulosis  
  The presence of (usually colonic) diverticula  
 Diverticular disease  
  Complicated diverticulosis  
 Diverticulitis  
  Inﬂ ammation of a diverticulum  
 Figure 25.1   The relationship of diverticula of the colon to the taenia coli and to the penetrating blood vessels. 
(a) Normal colon. (b) Colon with diverticula. Both shown in transverse section.  
(a)
(b)
Appendix
epiploica
Mesocolon with
blood supply
Taenia coli
Diverticulum
to a Meckel ’ s diverticulum of the small bowel, 
which is a true diverticulum. They lie alongside 
the taenia coli, often overlapped by the appendi-
ces epiploicae. In the colon, diverticula are found 
most commonly in the sigmoid and descending 
colon, and become increasingly rare in passing 
from the left to the right side of the colon. They are 
unusual before the age of 40 years, but they are 
found in about 30% of all autopsies in the elderly. 
The sex distribution is roughly equal. Although 
colonic diverticula are common in Western com-
munities, they are extremely rare among people of 
the developing countries.  
 Pathogenesis 
 Hypertrophy of the muscle of the sigmoid colon 
produces high intraluminal pressures, which 
cause herniation of the mucosa at the sites of 
potential weakness in the bowel wall, correspond-
ing to the points of entry of the supplying vessels 
to the bowel (Figure  25.1 ). The aetiology of the 

206 
The colon
adhesion of a loop of small intestine to the 
inﬂ ammatory mass is not uncommon. 
 3  Blood and mucus per rectum.   There may be 
episodes of pain in the LIF, passage of mucus 
or bright red blood per rectum or of melaena, 
or there may be anaemia due to chronic occult 
bleeding. 
 Examination reveals tenderness in the LIF and 
there is often a thickened mass in the region of the 
sigmoid colon, which may also be felt per rectum. 
 More unusual presentations are the following: 
  •   Sudden severe rectal haemorrhage:   bleeding 
from a diverticulum is the most likely cause of 
a sudden, profuse, bright red bleed in an 
elderly, often hypertensive, patient. 
  •   Colovesical ﬁ stula:    ﬁ stula into the bladder with 
the passage of gas bubbles (pneumaturia) and 
faecal debris in the urine. Diverticulitis is the 
commonest cause of colovesical ﬁ stula, others 
being carcinoma of the colon, carcinoma of 
the bladder, Crohn ’ s disease and trauma. 
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   Computed tomography (CT)  is the investigation 
of choice in the acute stage and can help 
exclude other causes of lower abdominal pain 
in difﬁ cult cases. 
  •   Sigmoidoscopy : if the affected segment is low 
in the colon, there may be an oedematous 
block to the passage of the instrument beyond 
about 15   cm. Rigid sigmoidoscopes view only 
the rectum, and so do not visualize colonic 
diverticula. Fibreoptic sigmoidoscopes are 
longer and ﬂ exible, and do allow full 
visualization of the sigmoid colon.  
  •   Colonoscopy , like ﬂ exile sigmoidoscopy, may 
allow the affected segment of sigmoid colon to 
be inspected, but often the rigid and narrow 
sigmoid in this condition makes onward 
passage of the instrument impossible.  
  •   Barium enema  demonstrates diverticula as 
globular outpouchings, which often show a 
signet - ring appearance because of the ﬁ lling 
defect produced by contained pellets of faeces 
(faecoliths). Diverticular disease is 
characterized by stricture formation, which 
may closely simulate an annular carcinoma. 
More often, the oedema and thickening 
produce a  ‘ saw - tooth ’ narrowed segment in the 
sigmoid. This examination should not be 
performed in the acute phase to prevent 
muscular hypertrophy is unclear, but may relate 
to the nature of the intraluminal contents. Diets 
that are low in bulk tend not to distend the sigmoid 
colon, permitting high intramural pressures to 
develop, whereas high - ﬁ bre diets or bulking 
agents distend the colon and reduce intraluminal 
pressure. It may be that the modern, reﬁ ned, low -
 roughage diet may be responsible for the Western 
nature of the disease.    
 Diverticulitis 
 This results from infection of one or more diver-
ticula. An inﬂ amed diverticulum may do one of 
three things. 
 1  Perforate into: 
 a  the general peritoneal cavity to cause 
peritonitis;  
 b  the pericolic tissues with formation of a 
pericolic abscess;  
 c  adjacent structures (e.g. bladder, small 
bowel, vagina), forming a ﬁ stula. 
 2  Produce chronic infection  with inﬂ ammatory 
ﬁ brosis, resulting in obstructive symptoms  – 
acute, chronic or acute on chronic.  
 3  Haemorrhage , as a result of erosion of a vessel 
in the bowel wall. The bleeding varies from 
acute and profuse to a chronic occult loss.    
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Acute  d iverticulitis 
 This is well nicknamed  ‘ left - sided appendicitis ’ : an 
acute onset of low central abdominal pain, which 
shifts to the left iliac fossa (LIF) accompanied by 
fever, vomiting and local tenderness and guard-
ing. A vague mass may be felt in the LIF and also 
on rectal examination. Perforation into the general 
peritoneal cavity produces the signs of general 
peritonitis. A pericolic abscess is comparable to an 
appendix abscess but on the left side: a tender 
mass accompanied by a swinging fever and 
leucocytosis. 
 Chronic  d iverticular  d isease 
 This exactly mimics the local clinical features of 
carcinoma of the colon (see p. 212); there may be: 
 1  Change in bowel habit , with diarrhoea 
alternating with constipation.  
 2  Large bowel obstruction with vomiting, 
distension, colicky abdominal pain and 
constipation. Small bowel obstruction from 

The colon 207
ileostomy to divert the faecal stream until the 
anastomosis has healed; the ileostomy is 
subsequently closed. 
 Chronic  d iverticular  d isease 
 If the diagnosis is made with considerable cer-
tainty and symptoms are mild, this can be treated 
conservatively. The bowels are regulated by means 
of a lubricant laxative (e.g. Milpar). A high -
 roughage diet (fruit, vegetables, wholemeal bread 
and bran) is prescribed. If symptoms are severe or 
if carcinoma cannot be excluded, laparotomy and 
resection of the sigmoid colon is performed. 
 Colovesical ﬁ stula is treated by resection of the 
affected segment of the colon and bladder wall; a 
primary colonic anastomosis is fashioned and the 
defect in the bladder oversewn. The anastomosis 
may be defunctioned by a  ‘ covering ’  loop ileos-
tomy to permit healing without further ﬁ stula 
formation. 
 Angiodysplasia 
 This term is applied to one or multiple small 
( < 5   mm) mucosal or submucosal vascular malfor-
mations, usually a dilated vein or sheaf of veins. 
Because they occur most commonly in the elderly, 
they are considered to be degenerative vascular 
anomalies. The caecum and ascending colon are 
the sites most usually involved, although they may 
be found anywhere in the small or large bowel. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 They are usually asymptomatic, and were 
unknown before the advent of mesenteric angiog-
raphy and colonoscopy. Their only clinical mani-
festation is bleeding, which may take the form of 
continuous chronic intestinal blood loss, present-
ing with anaemia, or recurrent acute dark or bright 
red rectal haemorrhage, which may occasionally 
be severe and life - threatening. Recurrent bleeding 
is common. They account for some 5% of such 
emergency cases.  
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   Colonoscopy  is the investigation of choice, 
although it is often difﬁ cult to visualize the 
caecum in these elderly patients. The lesions 
appear as bright red 0.5 – 1  cm diameter 
submucosal lesions with small, dilated vessels 
iatrogenic perforation of friable and inﬂ amed 
bowel. 
 Differential  d iagnosis 
 The important differential diagnosis is from neo-
plasm of the colon. It is impossible to be certain 
of this differentiation clinically or even on special 
investigations, unless a positive biopsy is obtained 
by ﬂ exible sigmoidoscopy or colonoscopy to 
establish deﬁ nitively the diagnosis of carcinoma. 
Even at laparotomy, it is difﬁ cult to be sure whether 
one is dealing with carcinoma or diverticular 
disease; indeed, these two common conditions 
may coexist.  
 Treatment 
 Acute  d iverticulitis 
 This is managed conservatively; the patient is 
placed on a ﬂ uid diet and antibiotics (metronida-
zole with penicillin and gentamicin, or cipro-
ﬂ oxacin, are the combinations of choice). The 
great majority settle on this regimen. 
  •   A pericolic abscess  is diagnosed by CT, and may 
be drained percutaneously. This may 
occasionally be complicated by formation of a 
faecal ﬁ stula. Once the sepsis is controlled a 
laparotomy and resection of the diseased 
segment can be performed.  
  •   General peritonitis  from rupture of an acute 
diverticulitis is a dangerous condition. When 
peritonitis is the result of perforation of a 
diverticular abscess, laparoscopic lavage and 
drainage may sufﬁ ce; otherwise, laparotomy is 
performed and the affected segment of colon 
resected. A primary anastomosis may be 
performed after intraoperative colonic lavage, 
but more commonly a colostomy is fashioned, 
usually as a Hartmann ’ s procedure. Full 
antibiotic therapy is given.  
  •   Acute obstruction due to diverticulitis requires 
laparotomy to establish the diagnosis. It is 
important to determine whether or not the 
obstruction is caused by an adherent loop of 
small intestine, which is by no means 
uncommon. The affected segment of colon is 
resected and the bowel brought out as an end 
colostomy (see p. 216). In experienced hands, 
an intraoperative antegrade colonic lavage 
may be performed followed by a primary 
anastomosis, with or without a  ‘ covering ’ loop 

208 
The colon
 Pathology 
 The rectum and sigmoid colon are principally 
affected, but the whole colon may be involved. 
(Note that the sigmoid is the site of election for all 
the major diseases of the colon: colitis, volvulus, 
carcinoma, polyposis and diverticulitis. Why it 
deserves this notoriety is unknown.) 
 Initially, there is oedema of the mucosa, with 
contact bleeding and petechial haemorrhage, 
proceeding to ulceration; the ulcers are shallow 
and irregular. Oedematous islands of mucosa 
between the ulcers form pseudopolyps. The wall 
of the colon is oedematous and ﬁ brotic and is 
therefore rigid with loss of its normal haustrations. 
The changes are conﬂ uent, with no unaffected 
 ‘ skip lesions ’ as found in Crohn ’ s disease. 
Surprisingly, the inﬂ amed colon does not become 
adherent to its neighbouring intra - abdominal 
viscera. 
 Microscopically, the principal locus of the 
disease is mucosal; small abscesses form within 
the mucosal crypts ( ‘ crypt abscesses ’ ). These 
abscesses break down into ulcers whose base 
is lined with granulation tissue. The walls of 
the colon are inﬁ ltrated with polymorphs and 
round cells; there is oedema and submucosal 
ﬁ brosis. In the chronic, burnt - out disease the 
mucosa is smooth and atrophic; the bowel wall 
is thinned. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Manifestations of ulcerative colitis may be 
fulminant, intermittent or chronic. The com-
monest scenario is of diarrhoea, with blood 
and mucus. There may be accompanying cramp -
 like 
abdominal 
pains. 
Examination 
reveals 
nothing except some tenderness in the LIF, 
and blood on the glove of the examining ﬁ nger 
after rectal examination. The rectal mucosa may 
feel oedematous. 
 In severe attacks there is fever, toxaemia, severe 
bleeding and risk of perforation. Anorexia and loss 
of weight occur in the acute episodes. 
 Special  i nvestigations 
 Investigations aim to make the diagnosis, differ-
entiate it from Crohn ’ s colitis, exclude complica-
tions and assess the proximal extent. 
  •   Sigmoidoscopy  reveals oedema of the mucosa 
with contact bleeding in the early mild cases, 
visible on close inspection. They are invisible 
on barium enema.  
  •   Mesenteric angiogram.    Actively bleeding 
angiodysplasias may be detected on 
angiography as contrast medium leaks into the 
bowel lumen. 
 Treatment 
 Blood transfusion is necessary if haemorrhage is 
severe. Colonoscopic electrocoagulation or argon 
plasma coagulation may be curative. Resection, 
usually a right hemicolectomy, is sometimes 
required. 
 Colitis 
 Colitis, inﬂ ammation of the colon, presents with 
diarrhoea and often lower abdominal pain, and 
blood and mucus per rectum. The ﬁ ve main causes 
of colitis are as follows: 
 1  ulcerative colitis ; 
 2  Crohn ’ s colitis ; 
 3  antibiotic - associated colitis , e.g. 
pseudomembranous colitis due to  Clostridium 
difﬁ cile (see Chapter  4 , p. 18);  
 4  infective colitis , e.g.  Campylobacter and 
amoebic colitis;  
 5  ischaemic colitis , owing to mesenteric 
ischaemia, occurring spontaneously or 
following ligation of the inferior mesenteric 
artery in aortic surgery.    
 Ulcerative  c olitis 
 Ulcerative colitis is an inﬂ ammatory disease of the 
rectum extending for a variable distance proxi-
mally in the colon. Women are more often affected 
than men, and it is found in any age from infancy 
to the elderly, but the maximum incidence is 
between the ages of 20 and 40 with a second peak 
between 55 and 65. 
 Aetiology 
 The aetiology of ulcerative colitis is unknown, 
although it appears to combine environmental 
stimuli, autoimmune responses and genetic 
factors (there is an association with the human 
leucocyte antigen HLA - B27); it is one of the few 
diseases in which smoking appears to be 
protective. 

The colon 209
 Complications 
 Local 
  •   Toxic dilatation, in which the colon dilates in a 
fulminant colitis, leading to perforation.  
  •   Haemorrhage (acute, or chronic with 
progressive anaemia).  
  •   Stricture. 
  •   Malignant change (see below). 
  •   Perianal disease: anal ﬁ ssures are common; 
ﬁ stula  in ano , ﬁ stula into the vagina and 
perianal abscesses do occur, but are less 
common than in Crohn ’ s disease. 
 General 
  •   Toxaemia. 
  •   Weight loss and anaemia. 
  •   Arthritis (including ankylosing spondylitis) and 
uveitis. 
  •   Dermatological manifestations: pyoderma 
gangrenosum, erythema nodosum, other skin 
rashes and ulceration of the legs. 
  •   Primary sclerosing cholangitis is also 
associated with ulcerative colitis, as it is with 
Crohn ’ s disease. 
 Malignant  c hange 
 Patients with ulcerative colitis who have had 
chronic total colitis (affecting the whole large 
proceeding to granularity of the mucosa 
and then frank ulceration with pus and blood 
in the bowel lumen. Biopsy will give 
conﬁ rming histological evidence of the 
diagnosis. 
  •   Colonoscopy  enables the whole of the large 
bowel to be inspected, the proximal extent 
to be noted and biopsy material to be 
obtained.  
  •   Barium enema  shows a ragged surface, 
indicating ulceration. Oedema and ﬁ brosis 
produce loss of haustration and in the chronic 
case the typical smooth, narrow  ‘ drainpipe ’ 
colon.  
  •   Examination of the stools reveals pus and 
blood visible to the naked eye or under the 
microscope; no speciﬁ c organism has ever 
been grown. 
 Differential  d iagnosis 
 Ulcerative colitis may be difﬁ cult to differentiate 
from other causes of diarrhoea (Chapter  25 , 
p. 204), especially the dysenteries and carcinoma, 
or Crohn ’ s disease of the large bowel (Table  25.2 ). 
Differentiation from colonic Crohn ’ s disease may 
be particularly difﬁ cult, even when the resected 
colon is examined by an expert pathologist. 
Indeed, about 10% of cases have to be labelled 
 ‘ non - speciﬁ c colitis ’ . 
 Table 25.2   Crohn ’ s and ulcerative colitis *  
 
 Crohn ’ s colitis  
 Ulcerative colitis  
 Clinical features  
 Perianal disease, e.g. ﬁ ssure  in ano 
and ﬁ stula  in ano  common  
 Perianal disease rare  
 Gross bleeding uncommon  
  Often profuse haemorrhage  
 Small bowel may also be affected  
  Small bowel not affected  
 Pathology  
  
  
  Macroscopic differences  
  Any part of colon may be involved 
(skip lesions)  
 Disease extends proximally from 
rectum  
 Transmural involvement  
  Mucosal involvement only  
 Fistulae in adjacent viscera  
  No ﬁ stulae  
 No polyps  
  Pseudo - polyps of regenerating mucosa  
 Thickened bowel wall  
 No thickening of bowel wall  
 Malignant change rare  
  Malignant change common in 
long - standing cases  
  Microscopic differences  
  Granulomas present  
  No granulomas  
 * 10% of cases cannot be assigned clearly to one or other disease and are labelled as  ‘ non - speciﬁ c colitis ’ . 

210 
The colon
  •   Chronic disease not responding to medical 
treatment. 
  •   Prophylaxis against malignant change with 
long - standing disease. 
  •   Complications of colitis already listed. 
 The procedure usually comprises total removal 
of the colon and rectum with either a permanent 
ileostomy or an ileoanal anastomosis with an 
interposed pouch of ileum (Parks ’  pouch 2 ). 
 Most patients requiring surgery for ulcerative 
colitis are either on corticosteroids or have recently 
received them. Surgical procedures must therefore 
be covered by an increased dosage of corticoster-
oids to compensate for presumed suppression of 
endogenous glucocorticoids, which can then be 
tailed off gradually in the postoperative period.    
 Crohn ’ s  c olitis 
 Crohn ’ s disease, 3  although most commonly found 
in the terminal ileum (Chapter  23 , p. 195), may 
occur anywhere in the alimentary tract from the 
mouth to the anus. It may be conﬁ ned to the large 
bowel, or there may be involvement of both the 
small and large intestine. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Colonic Crohn ’ s disease closely mimics ulcerative 
colitis in its clinical manifestations. Unlike ulcera-
tive colitis, the affected segment of colon com-
monly becomes adherent to adjacent structures 
with abscess formation and ﬁ stulation. Perianal 
inﬂ ammation with abscesses and multiple ﬁ stulae 
 in ano is also common and indeed may be the ﬁ rst 
manifestation of the disease.  
 Treatment 
 This is similar to that of Crohn ’ s disease of the 
small intestine (Chapter  23 , p. 195). Resection of 
involved large bowel may require segmental colec-
tomy if small areas are involved or total excision 
with a permanent ileostomy for extensive disease. 
Restorative proctocolectomy and Parks ’  pouch 
formation is not performed for Crohn ’ s disease 
because of the immediate risks of sepsis and ﬁ stu-
lation, and the chance of recurrence. 
bowel), particularly if the ﬁ rst attack was in child-
hood, have a high risk of developing carcinoma of 
the colon. Statistics indicate that 5 – 12% of patients 
with colitis of 20 years ’  duration will develop 
malignant change. Patients should therefore be 
offered annual or biannual colonoscopy with mul-
tiple biopsies to seek the dysplasia that heralds 
malignant change. 
 Even in the absence of a total or pan - colitis, 
patients with ulcerative colitis are at far greater 
risk of developing carcinoma of the large bowel 
than a normal individual. Moreover, the tumours 
occurring in colitics are more likely to affect a 
younger age group, be anaplastic and be multiple 
compared with those arising in previously healthy 
bowels. Often, the condition is only diagnosed 
late, as both the patient and doctor attribute the 
symptoms (bleeding, diarrhoea and pus) to the 
colitis. 
 Treatment 
 Initially this is medical in the uncomplicated case, 
but surgery is required when medical treatment 
fails or when complications supervene. 
 Medical  t reatment 
 A high - protein diet is prescribed with vitamin 
supplements, iron and potassium (the last to 
replace electrolyte loss in the stools). Blood trans-
fusion is given if the patient is severely anaemic. 
Diarrhoea may be controlled with codeine phos-
phate or loperamide. Corticosteroids given sys-
temically, by rectal infusion or in combination, 
will often produce remission in an acute attack. 
Salicylates such as mesalazine or sulfasalazine 
(sulphonamide/salicylate combination) are used 
to maintain a remission. In more severe cases the 
anti - tumour necrosis factor antibodies inﬂ iximab 
or adalimumab, or immunosuppressants such as 
azathioprine or ciclosporin, may be required. 
 Patients with ulcerative colitis are often highly 
intelligent, tense and anxious, and treatment 
should be supplemented with sympathy and 
reassurance. 
 Surgery 
 The indications for surgery are the following: 
  •   Fulminating disease  not responding to medical 
treatment (deﬁ ned as the passage of more than 
six bloody motions per day, with fever, 
tachycardia and hypoalbuminaemia).  
  2   Sir Alan Parks (1920 – 1982), Surgeon, St Mark ’ s Hospital, London, 
UK.  
  3   Burrill Bernard Crohn (1884 – 1983), Gastroenterologist, Mount 
Sinai Hospital, New York, NY, USA. 

The colon 211
diagnosed before 45, the lifetime risk increases to 
1 in 10. 
 Familial  a denomatous  p olyposis 
 This is a rare disease, but it is important because 
it invariably proceeds to carcinoma of the colon 
unless treated and accounts for 0.5% of all colon 
cancers. It has an autosomal dominant inherit-
ance, and is associated with mutation in the famil-
ial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) gene. The polyps 
ﬁ rst appear in adolescence; symptoms of bleeding 
and diarrhoea commence about the age of 21 
years and malignant change occurs between 20 
and 40 years of age. Affected individuals usually 
have hypertrophy of the retinal pigment layer 
which is a useful, non - invasive screening test. 
Variants such as  Gardner ’ s syndrome 4 exist in 
which colonic polyps are associated with desmoid 
tumours and osteomas of the mandible and skull. 
 Treatment comprises a total colectomy with 
excision of the rectum, and formation of an ileo-
anal pouch. If the polyps are not profuse in the 
lower rectum, it is possible to resect the colon 
while leaving a stump of rectum to which an ile-
orectal anastomosis is performed, and then carry 
out regular diathermy of the polyps in the rectal 
stump through a sigmoidoscope.  
 Hereditary  n on - p olyposis 
 c olon  c ancer 
 This accounts for around 5% of colorectal cancers, 
and is also dominantly inherited. It results from a 
gene mutation affecting DNA mismatch repair, 
which leads to genomic instability. Tumours tend 
to occur in the right colon, and arise before the age 
of 50. Occurrence of colon cancer in at least three 
family members spanning two generations, with 
one before the age of 50, strongly suggests this 
syndrome. It is also associated with tumours of the 
ovary, uterus and stomach. 
 Pathology 
 Macroscopically, the tumours can be classiﬁ ed 
into the following groups: 
  •   papilliferous; 
  •   malignant ulcer; 
  •   annular; 
 Tumours 
 Classiﬁ cation 
 Benign 
  •   Adenomatous polyp. 
  •   Papilloma. 
  •   Lipoma. 
  •   Neuroﬁ broma. 
  •   Haemangioma. 
 Malignant 
 1  Primary: 
 a  carcinoma; 
 b  lymphoma; 
 c  carcinoid tumour (Chapter  23 , p. 197). 
 2  Secondary : invasion from adjacent tumours, 
e.g. stomach, bladder, uterus and ovary.      
 Carcinoma 
 Carcinomas affecting the large bowel are common. 
They are the second most common cause of death 
from malignant disease in this country, next in 
frequency to cancers of the lung in men and 
cancer of the breast in women. 
 Tumours may occur at any age. Women are 
affected more often than men (although, interest-
ingly, the incidence of rectal cancer is roughly 
equal in the two sexes). The sigmoid is the most 
common site in the colon, although the rectum 
accounts for one - third of all the large bowel 
cancers. Five per cent of tumours of the large 
bowel are multiple (synchronous). 
 Predisposing  f actors 
 Pre - existing polyps, ulcerative colitis and a 
number of inherited colorectal cancer syndromes 
are risk factors for the development of carcinoma 
of the large bowel. Inherited syndromes such as 
familial adenomatous polyposis and hereditary 
non - polyposis colon cancer account for a sign-
iﬁ cant proportion of colorectal cancers, and 
potential carriers should be offered screening 
(see below). Family history alone is sufﬁ cient to 
increase the risk, and it has been estimated 
that one ﬁ rst - degree relative contracting colon 
cancer aged over 45 years increases one ’ s lifetime 
risk from 1 in 50 to 1 in 17; if the relative was 
  4  Eldon John Gardner (1909 – 1989), Geneticist, later Professor of 
Zoology, Utah State University, Logan, UT, USA. 

212 
The colon
 3  Perforation of the tumour, either into the 
general peritoneal cavity or locally with the 
formation of a pericolic abscess, or by ﬁ stulae 
into adjacent viscera, e.g. a gastrocolic ﬁ stula 
or colovesical ﬁ stula, is an occasional 
presentation. 
 The  e ffects of  s econdary  d eposits 
 The patient may present with jaundice, abdomi-
nal distension due to ascites or hepatomegaly.  
 The  g eneral  e ffects of 
 m alignant  d isease 
 Presenting features may be anaemia, anorexia or 
loss of weight. 
 Tumours of the left side of the colon, where the 
contained stool is solid, are typically constricting 
growths, so obstructive features predominate. In 
contrast, tumours of the right side tend to be pro-
liferative and here the stools are semiliquid, and 
therefore obstructive symptoms are relatively 
uncommon and the patient with a carcinoma of 
the caecum or ascending colon often presents 
with anaemia and loss of weight.  
 Examination 
 This should seek evidence of the following: 
 1  The presence of a mass palpable either per 
abdomen or per rectum (a sigmoid tumour 
may prolapse into the pouch of Douglas 6 ). 
 2  Clinical evidence of intestinal obstruction. 
 3  Evidence of spread (hepatomegaly, ascites, 
jaundice or supraclavicular 
lymphadenopathy).  
 4  Clinical evidence of anaemia or loss of weight 
suggesting malignant disease. 
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   Occult blood in the stool is frequently present. 
  •   Sigmoidoscopy  will reveal tumours in the 
rectosigmoid region and allow positive 
evidence by biopsy to be obtained. Even if the 
tumour is not reached directly, the presence 
of blood or slime coming down from above 
is strongly suspicious of malignant 
disease. 
  •   diffuse inﬁ ltrating growth; 
  •   mucinous tumour. 
 Microscopically, these are all adenocarcinomas.  
 Spread 
  •   Local:  encircling the wall of the bowel and 
invading the coats of the colon, eventually 
involving adjacent viscera (small intestine, 
stomach, duodenum, ureter, bladder, uterus, 
abdominal wall, etc.).  
  •   Lymphatic:   to the regional lymph nodes, 
eventually spreading via the thoracic duct, and 
may involve supraclavicular nodes in late 
cases. 
  •   Bloodstream:  to the liver via the portal vein, 
and thence to the lung.  
  •   Transcoelomic:  producing deposits of 
malignant nodules throughout the peritoneal 
cavity. 
 Staging 
 Traditionally carcinoma of the colon has been 
staged according to the classiﬁ cation of Dukes, 5 
and depends upon the extent of transmural exten-
sion and lymph node spread (Chapter  26 , p. 227), 
although TNM staging (Chapter  7 , p. 39) is more 
commonly used nowadays.  
 Clinical  f eatures 
 The manifestations of carcinoma of the colon can 
be divided, as with any tumour, into those pro-
duced by the tumour itself, those arising from the 
presence of secondaries and the general effects of 
the tumour.  
 Local  e ffects 
 1  Change in bowel habit  is the most common 
symptom, either constipation or diarrhoea or 
the two alternating with each other. The 
diarrhoea may be accompanied by mucus 
(produced by the excessive secretion of mucus 
from the tumour) or bleeding, which may be 
bright, melaena or occult.  
 2  Intestinal obstruction  due to a constricting 
neoplasm, commonly found in the left 
(descending) colon (see Chapter  22 , p. 183). 
  5   Cuthbert Esquire Dukes (1890 – 1977), Pathologist, St Mark ’ s 
Hospital, London, UK.  
  6   James Douglas (1675 – 1742), Obstetrician and Anatomist, 
London, UK.  

The colon 213
this is undertaken only after serious 
consideration. The options would be to use an 
extended right colonic resection round to the 
splenic ﬂ exure, or bring out a defunctioning 
colostomy or ileostomy.  
  •   Postoperative.  Adjuvant chemotherapy with 
5 - ﬂ uorouracil (5 - FU), in combination with 
folinic acid, may reduce the risk of recurrent 
disease; for metastatic disease, the 
combination of 5 - FU together with folinic acid 
and irinotecan may prolong survival.  
  •   Follow - up cross - sectional imaging is performed 
to detect local recurrence and the appearance 
of liver metastases; metastatic spread to one 
lobe of the liver in the absence of other disease 
may be treated by resection of the affected 
liver lobe.  
  •   Follow - up surveillance colonoscopy is 
undertaken at intervals to detect new tumours 
and local recurrence. 
 The  i ncurable  c ase 
 Even if secondary spread is present, the best pal-
liation is achieved by resection of the primary 
tumour. If this is impossible, the tumour may be 
stented to relieve obstruction. Where stenting is 
not possible a palliative short - circuit or colostomy 
is performed. Irradiation and cytotoxic therapy 
may give temporary alleviation of symptoms.  
 Prognosis 
 Dukes ’  A tumours are usually curable with over 
90% 5 year survival. Survival with Dukes ’  B 
tumours, in which the disease is still conﬁ ned to 
the bowel wall, is around 65%, and the presence of 
lymph node metastases gives a 30% survival. If the 
apical lymph node, i.e. the node at the highest 
point of lymphatic drainage, is free from disease 
(C1), the prognosis is better than in C2 disease, in 
which the apical node is involved.  
 Colonic  s urgery  (Figure    25.2 ) 
 The different colonic resections are based on the 
blood supply to the colon coming from the supe-
rior mesenteric artery (midgut components, i.e. 
caecum, ascending colon and two - thirds of the 
transverse colon) and the inferior mesenteric 
artery (hindgut components, i.e. distal transverse 
colon, descending colon, sigmoid and rectum) 
together with a free anastomosis between the 
principal arteries via the marginal artery (of 
  •   Colonoscopy , using the ﬁ breoptic colonoscope, 
enables the higher reaches of the colon to be 
inspected and a biopsy to be obtained.  
  •   Barium enema will usually reveal the growth, 
as either a stricture or ﬁ lling defect ( ‘ apple -
 core ’ deformity). It is important to remember 
that a negative barium enema does not 
deﬁ nitely exclude the presence of a small 
tumour, particularly in the presence of 
extensive diverticulosis. False - positive X - rays 
may result from the presence of faecal material 
in the bowel lumen. It is by no means easy to 
differentiate radiologically between a 
carcinomatous stricture and one produced by 
diverticular disease; indeed, these two 
common conditions may coexist.  
  •   CT . In elderly patients who tolerate bowel 
preparation poorly, CT may give sufﬁ cient 
information for the diagnosis of colonic 
cancer, and identify any liver involvement.    
 Rarely, if there is reasonable doubt as to the 
diagnosis, laparotomy is indicated.  
 Differential  d iagnosis 
 Diseases  p roducing  l ocal  s ymptoms 
  •   Diverticular disease. 
  •   Ulcerative colitis. 
  •   The dysenteries and other causes of diarrhoea 
and constipation (Chapter  25 , p. 204). 
 Treatment 
  •   Preoperative.   The bowel is cleared by enemas 
and oral stimulant laxatives (e.g. Picolax). 
Metronidazole and gentamicin (or a 
cephalosporin) are given at the time of surgery. 
The haemoglobin level is checked and blood 
transfusion given if necessary. 
  •   Operative.  The principle of operative 
treatment is wide resection of the growth 
together with its regional lymphatics. In the 
unobstructed case, the bowel can be prepared 
beforehand and primary resection with 
restoration of continuity can be achieved. In 
the obstructed case, in which bowel 
preparation is contraindicated, the primary 
goal is to relieve obstruction. It may be 
possible to achieve primary resection with 
restoration of continuity at the same time, but 
the poor vascularity and high incidence of 
colonic anastomotic breakdown means that 

214 
The colon
Right hemicolectomy
Right colon: ulcerating lesions
Left colon: stenotic lesions
Ileocolic anastomosis
Watershed area:
between superior 
and inferior 
mesenteric
artery supply
Superior
mesenteric
artery
Inferior 
mesenteric
artery
Marginal
artery
 Figure 25.2   Typical colonic operations. For a lesion in the right colon a right hemicolectomy is performed, with an 
ileocolic anastomosis. For a lesion in the left colon a left hemicolectomy or sigmoid colectomy is performed, with 
anastomosis of the colon to the rectum; in an emergency situation, with unprepared bowel, a Hartmann ’ s operation 
can be performed with the bowel end exteriorized as a colostomy and the rectum oversewn. At a second stage the 
continuity of the bowel can be restored by colorectal anastomosis.  

The colon 215
Left hemicolectomy
Primary anastomosis
Sigmoid colectomy
End stoma
Elective
Emergency
(Hartmann's)
Rectum oversewn or
brought to surface
Figure 25.2 Continued

216 
The colon
to the surface. It may be used as a deﬁ nitive pro-
cedure in a patient undergoing total rectal exci-
sion, or following perforated diverticular disease 
in which the diseased bowel is removed and gross 
faecal contamination makes performing a primary 
anastomosis to restore continuity undesirable. In 
the latter, the distal bowel may be closed off and 
left within the abdomen (a Hartmann ’ s proce-
dure 8 ) or brought to the surface at a separate place 
as a mucous ﬁ stula. 
 Double - b arrelled  c olostomy 
 A double - barrelled (Paul – Mikulicz 9 ) colostomy 
comprises proximal and distal ends of colon 
brought out adjacent to each other, rather like a 
loop colostomy but with the intervening colon 
removed. This type of colostomy is not commonly 
used because the distal bowel is usually too short, 
but it is useful in the treatment of sigmoid volvu-
lus, in which there is usually sufﬁ cient distal colon.   
 Complications of  c olostomy 
 f ormation 
  •   Retraction , in which the colon disappears 
down the hole out of which it was brought. 
Retraction is either real and due to tension or 
apparent and due to necrosis of the terminal 
bowel. 
  •   Stenosis , in which the opening becomes 
smaller. This may be due to ischaemia or poor 
apposition of colonic mucosa with the skin 
edge. 
  •   Paracolostomy hernia , in which peritoneal 
contents herniate through the abdominal wall 
defect made to accommodate the stoma.  
  •   Prolapse , in which the colon intussuscepts out 
of the stoma.  
  •   Lateral space small bowel obstruction , which is 
caused by failure to obliterate the space 
between the terminal colon and the lateral 
abdominal wall. 
 In addition, there are psychological problems, 
excess gas production with certain foods, and 
leakage and skin excoriation due to ill - ﬁ tting 
stoma appliances or poorly constructed stomas.  
Drummond 7 ). Since survival of colonic cancer is, 
in the case of Dukes ’  C disease, dependent upon 
the adequacy of resection (clearing all affected 
lymph nodes), surgery for cancer involves taking 
as much of the lymphatic drainage as possible. 
In practice, this means resecting as far down the 
principal artery as possible, as the lymphatic 
drainage runs alongside the arterial inﬂ ow. In 
non - cancer operations, more conservative surgi-
cal techniques may be employed. 
 Colostomy 
 When the bowel is brought to the surface and 
opened, it is termed a stoma (meaning mouth); in 
the case of the colon, such an opening is termed a 
colostomy. Stomas may be permanent, e.g. when 
the distal bowel has been removed, or temporary, 
when there is a possibility of restoring continuity 
at a future date. 
 Indications for  c olostomy 
 f ormation 
 The common indications for colostomy formation 
are the following: 
  •   to divert faeces to allow healing of a more 
distal anastomosis or ﬁ stula; 
  •   to decompress a dilated colon, as a prelude to 
resection of the obstructing lesion;  
  •   removal of the distal colon and rectum. 
 Types of  c olostomy 
 Loop  c olostomy 
 The colon is brought to the surface and the antime-
senteric border opened. A rod or similar device is 
often used to stop the opened bowel loop from 
falling back inside. A loop colostomy is used tem-
porarily to divert faeces and is simple to reverse; 
more commonly nowadays, a loop ileostomy is 
preferred because of the better blood supply to the 
bowel facilitating subsequent closure.  
 End  c olostomy 
 An end (or terminal) colostomy is fashioned by 
dividing the colon and bringing the proximal end 
  7   Sir David Drummond (1852 – 1932), Professor of Medicine, 
University of Durham, Durham, UK.  
  8  Henri Hartmann (1860 – 1952), Professor of Surgery, H ô tel - Dieu, 
Paris, France. 
  9  Frank Thomas Paul (1851 – 1941), Surgeon, Liverpool Royal 
Inﬁ rmary, Liverpool, UK. Johann von Mikulicz - Radecki (1850 –
 1905), Professor of Surgery, successively at Cracow, Konigsberg 
and Breslau, Poland. 

The colon 217
 Stoma  a ppliances:  p rinciples 
 Modern - day stoma appliances have made the 
management of stomas straightforward. The 
principal components are the collecting pouch, 
or bag, into which the faeces are collected, and 
the adhesive ﬂ ange, which adheres to the skin 
and keeps the pouch in position. The ﬂ ange is 
cut to ﬁ t the stoma closely, and any exposed skin 
is covered with a barrier paste. Colostomies con-
trast with ileostomies by the nature of the efﬂ uent. 
Ileostomy efﬂ uent is very irritant and causes 
severe skin excoriation. For this reason, an ileos-
tomy is constructed with a spout to keep the efﬂ u-
ent off the skin, in contrast to a colostomy, which 
is ﬂ ush. 
 Management of a  c olostomy 
 In the ﬁ rst few weeks after performing a colos-
tomy, the faecal discharge is semiliquid, but this 
gradually reverts to normal, solid stools. The 
colostomy appliances, which are both waterproof 
and windproof, allow the patient to lead a normal 
life with little risk of leakage or unpleasant odour. 
 Although there is obviously no sphincteric 
control of the colostomy opening, most patients 
ﬁ nd that they pass a single stool a day, usually after 
breakfast. This can be helped by preparations such 
as Fybogel or Celevac, which produce a bulky, 
formed stool. Patients are best advised to avoid 
large amounts of vegetables or fruit, which may 
produce diarrhoea and excessive ﬂ atus. 
 
 
 
 

 26 
The  r ectum and 
 a nal  c anal  
 
 Learning  o bjectives 
  ✓   To know the causes and treatment of rectal bleeding. 
  ✓   To know the presentations and management of rectal cancer. 
  •   Diverticular disease. 
  •   Ulcerative colitis. 
  •   Trauma. 
  •   Angiodysplasia of the colon. 
  •   Rarely, massive haemorrhage from higher up 
the alimentary canal  – even a bleeding 
duodenal ulcer may produce bright red blood 
per rectum instead of the usual melaena, 
although such cases are commonly 
accompanied by haematemesis. 
 Haemorrhoids 
 Functional  a natomy 
 Continence is partly a function of the anal sphinc-
ters, and partly a consequence of the anal cush-
ions. The anal cushions comprise highly vascular 
tissue lining the anal canal, with a rich blood 
supply from the rectal arteries, which anastomose 
with the draining veins both through capillaries 
and through direct arteriovenous shunts. The 
draining veins form saccules, commonly just 
below the dentate line, which then drain via the 
superior rectal vein. The venous saccules are sup-
ported by smooth muscle to form the cushions. 
Apposition of these subepithelial vascular cush-
ions is important for continence of ﬂ atus and 
ﬂ uid. 
    The distribution around the anal canal of various 
conditions is shown in Figure  26.1 . 
 Bright  r ed  r ectal 
 b leeding  (Table    26.1  )  
 The passage of bright red blood per rectum is a 
common symptom, which the patient usually 
attributes to  ‘ piles ’ ; indeed, haemorrhoids are by 
far the commonest cause of rectal bleeding. It is 
important, however, to bear in mind a list of pos-
sible causes of this symptom.   
 General  c auses 
  •   Bleeding diatheses (rare). 
 Local  c auses 
  •   Haemorrhoids. 
  •   Fissure  in ano . 
  •   Tumours of the colon and rectum:  
  −   benign; 
  −   malignant. 
Lecture Notes: General Surgery, 12th edition. © Harold Ellis, 
Sir Roy Y. Calne and Christopher J. E. Watson. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

The rectum and anal canal  219
 Classiﬁ cation 
 Haemorrhoids (or piles; the words are synony-
mous) may be classiﬁ ed according to their rela-
tionship to the anal oriﬁ ce into internal, external 
and interoexternal. Internal haemorrhoids are 
congested vascular cushions with dilated venous 
components draining into the superior rectal 
veins. External haemorrhoids is a term that should 
be abandoned, as it is applied to a conglomeration 
of quite different entities including perianal hae-
matoma ( ‘ thrombosed external pile ’ ), the  ‘ sentinel 
pile ’ of ﬁ ssure  in ano  and perianal skin tags. 
 Figure 26.1   Distribution of different conditions around the anal canal.  
(a)
(b)
Anterior
Posterior
A
P
A
P
Posterior tear
   90% men
   70% women
Anterior fistulae
open directly
Posterior fistulae
open in midline
   Arrangement of
   haemorrhoids
   Fissure in ano
(c)   Goodsall's rule for
       fistula in ano
11
3
7
 Table 26.1   Rectal bleeding 
 
 Blood  
 Pain  
 Piles  
  Bright red blood on paper and in pan. 
May prolapse  
 Painless, unless prolapsed and thrombosed  
 Fissure  
  Bright red blood on paper and outside 
of stool  
 Painful, pain lasting long after passing stool  
 Colon and rectal 
cancer  
 Blood often mixed in with stool, 
especially if proximal tumour  
 Usually painless, unless distally placed in 
rectum or in anal canal, when causes tenesmus  
 Diverticular disease  
  Large volume of blood in the pan  
  Painless  
 Ulcerative colitis  
  Blood and mucus mixed with loose stool  
  Painless, unless coexistent ﬁ ssure  
Strictly speaking, internal piles that prolapse 
should be termed interoexternal haemorrhoids, 
but this term is seldom used except by literary per-
fectionists. In this chapter, which aims at being 
neither archaic nor pedantic, the terms  ‘ external ’  
and  ‘ interoexternal ’ haemorrhoids will not be 
used further.  
 Pathology 
 Internal haemorrhoids, or piles, are abnormal 
anal cushions, usually congested as a result of 
straining at stool, and traumatized by the passage 

220 
The rectum and anal canal 
  •   ﬁ ssure  in ano ; 
  •   perianal haematoma; 
  •   perianal or ischiorectal abscess; 
  •   tumour of the anal margin; 
  •   proctalgia fugax: benign episodic pain relieved 
by digital dilatation of the anal sphincter.    
 Every patient presenting with the story sugges-
tive of internal haemorrhoids is submitted to the 
following procedure: 
 1  Examination of the abdomen to exclude 
palpable lesions of the colon or aggravating 
factors for haemorrhoids, e.g. an enlarged liver 
or a pelvic mass, including the pregnant 
uterus. 
 2  Rectal examination . Internal haemorrhoids are 
not palpable but prolapsing piles are 
immediately obvious. The presence of 
prolapsing piles does not exclude a lesion 
higher in the bowel.  
 3  Proctoscopy , which will visualize the internal 
haemorrhoids. 
 4  Sigmoidoscopy is performed routinely, again to 
eliminate a lesion higher in the rectum  –  
proctitis, polyp or carcinoma. 
 5  Colonoscopy or ﬂ exible sigmoidoscopy is 
carried out when symptoms such as alteration 
in bowel habit point to a more sinister 
condition than internal haemorrhoids. A 
barium enema is carried out when 
colonoscopy is not readily available. 
 Complications 
  •   Anaemia : following severe or continued 
bleeding.  
  •   Thrombosis : this occurs when prolapsing piles 
are gripped by the anal sphincter 
( ‘ strangulated piles ’ ). The venous return is 
occluded and thrombosis of the pile occurs. 
The prolapsed haemorrhoids are swollen often 
to the size of large plums, purplish - black and 
tense, and are accompanied by considerable 
pain and distress. Suppuration or ulceration 
may occur. After 2 – 3 weeks, the thrombosed 
piles become ﬁ brosed, often with spontaneous 
cure. 
 Treatment 
 Before commencing treatment, it is essential to 
exclude either any predisposing cause or an asso-
ciated and more important lesion, e.g. carcinoma 
of the rectum. 
of hard stool. The anal cushions are particularly 
prominent in pregnancy owing to the venous con-
gestion caused by the large gravid uterus and the 
laxity of the supporting tissues caused by the 
inﬂ uence of progesterone. With the patient in the 
lithotomy position, the usual arrangement is that 
three major piles occur at 3, 7 and 11  o ’ clock. 
 Grading  h aemorrhoids 
  •   First - degree haemorrhoids  are conﬁ ned to the 
anal canal  –  they bleed but do not prolapse.  
  •   Second - degree haemorrhoids  prolapse on 
defaecation, then reduce spontaneously.  
  •   Third - degree haemorrhoids  prolapse outside 
the anal margin on defaecation; they may be 
manually replaced by the patient.  
  •   Fourth - degree haemorrhoids  remain prolapsed 
outside the anal margin at all times.     
 Predisposing  f actors 
 Most haemorrhoids are idiopathic, but they may 
be precipitated or aggravated by factors that 
produce congestion of the superior rectal veins. 
These include compression by any pelvic tumour 
(of which the commonest is the pregnant uterus), 
cardiac failure, excessive use of purgatives, chronic 
constipation and a rectal carcinoma. 
 Occasionally, anorectal varices, similar in 
appearance to oesophageal varices, coexist with 
haemorrhoids in patients with portal hyperten-
sion since the anorectal area is the site of porto-
systemic anastomoses between the superior and 
inferior rectal veins (Chapter  30 , p. 259 ). 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Rectal bleeding is almost invariable; this is bright 
red and usually occurs at defaecation. In the case 
of ﬁ rst - degree piles, this is the only symptom. 
More extensive piles prolapse and may produce a 
mucus discharge and pruritus ani. The prolapsed 
piles may result in soiling. 
 Note that pain is not a feature of internal haem-
orrhoids except when these undergo thrombosis 
(see below). When a patient complains of  ‘ an 
attack of piles ’ , it often means that some acute 
painful condition has developed at the anal 
margin. The most common and dramatic is stran-
gulation of prolapsing piles leading to thrombosis; 
apart from this, acute pain may be due to the 
following: 

The rectum and anal canal  221
 Stricture 
 This only occurs when excessive amounts of 
mucosa and skin are excised. It is important to 
leave a bridge of epithelium between each excised 
haemorrhoid.  
 Postoperative  h aemorrhage 
 This may be reactionary, usually on the night of 
the operation, or secondary, on about the seventh 
or eighth day. The bleeding may not be apparent 
externally, as the source of haemorrhage may be 
above the anal sphincter, with the blood ﬁ lling the 
large bowel with only a little escaping to the 
exterior. 
 General treatment comprises blood transfusion 
if haemorrhage is severe as evidenced by the 
general appearance of the patient, a pulse raised 
above 100 and a systolic blood pressure below 
100  mmHg. 
 Local treatment is carried out under general 
anaesthetic in the operating theatre. The blood is 
washed out of the rectum with warm saline. 
Occasionally in reactionary haemorrhage, a 
bleeding point is seen and can be diathermied 
or suture - ligated. More often, there is a general 
oozing from the operation ﬁ eld and the anal canal 
requires packing with gauze around a wide - bored 
rubber tube, which allows evacuation of ﬂ atus and 
escape of any blood from the bowel. The tube and 
gauze are removed after 48 hours.  
 Perianal  h aematoma 
 This lesion, which is also termed a thrombosed 
external pile, is produced by thrombosis within 
the inferior rectal venous plexus. Unlike internal 
haemorrhoids, it is covered by squamous epithe-
lium supplied by somatic nerves and is therefore 
painful. The onset is acute, often after straining at 
stool, with sudden pain and the appearance of a 
lump at the anal verge. Local examination shows 
a tense, smooth, dark - blue, cherry - sized lump at 
the anal margin. 
 Untreated, this perianal haematoma either sub-
sides over a few days, eventually leaving a ﬁ brous 
tag, or ruptures, discharging some clotted blood. 
 Treatment 
 In the acute phase, immediate relief is produced 
by evacuating the haematoma through a small 
incision, conveniently performed under local 
 Conservative  m anagement 
 Ideally, the patient should avoid straining at stool, 
and aim to pass a ﬁ rm, soft motion daily. A bulk 
laxative, together with advice on an adequate ﬂ uid 
intake, are often required.  
 Sclerotherapy 
 This is suitable for ﬁ rst - and second - degree 
piles; 2 – 3   mL of 5% phenol in almond oil (or 
arachis oil) is injected above each pile as a scleros-
ing submucous perivenous injection. (The phenol 
sterilizes the oil, which is the main sclerosant.) 
Because the injection is placed high in the anal 
canal above the dentate line, it is painless. One or 
more repeat injections may be required at monthly 
intervals. 
 Banding 
 Application of a small O - ring rubber band to 
areas of protruding mucosa results in stran-
gulation of the mucosa, which falls away after 
a few days. It can be successfully applied to 
ﬁ rst - , second - and third - degree piles, but care 
must be taken to position the bands above the 
dentate line, lest the patient should feel the 
application.  
 Surgery 
 Haemorrhoidectomy is performed for third -  and 
fourth - degree piles. 
 Thrombosed  s trangulated  p iles 
 Conservative management is instituted for these. 
The patient is placed in bed with the foot of the 
bed elevated. Opiate analgesia is given for the 
severe pain, which is also eased by local cold com-
presses. Often the thrombosed piles ﬁ brose com-
pletely with spontaneous cure. Many surgeons 
carry out haemorrhoidectomy at once in these 
patients. 
 Speciﬁ c  c omplications of 
 h aemorrhoidectomy 
 Acute  r etention of  u rine 
 This is the result of acute anal discomfort 
postoperatively. 

222 
The rectum and anal canal 
cant laxative may give relief. Application of glyc-
eryl trinitrate (GTN) or diltiazem cream relaxes the 
anal sphincter, allowing the torn epithelium to 
heal. 
 More intractable cases usually respond to divid-
ing the internal sphincter submucosally under 
general anaesthetic. It is important to take a 
detailed history of continence and to assess the 
anal tone prior to performing a sphincterotomy, as 
incontinence may result, particularly in patients 
who have suffered previous obstetric injury. It is 
for the same reason that an anal stretch is now 
seldom performed. A newer alternative is a chemi-
cal sphincterotomy using an injection of botuli-
num toxin (Botox) into the internal sphincter. This 
has the advantage that the sphincter paralysis is 
short lived, but gives a more sustained effect than 
GTN or diltiazem cream. 
 A chronic recurring ﬁ ssure  in ano requires 
excision. 
 Anorectal  a bscesses 
 Classiﬁ cation   (Figure   26.2 ) 
  •   Perianal : resulting from infection of a hair 
follicle, a sebaceous gland or perianal 
haematoma.  
  •   Submucous : infected ﬁ ssure or laceration of 
the anal canal.  
  •   Ischiorectal : from infection of an anal gland 
leading from the anal canal into the 
submucosa, spread of infection from a perianal 
abscess, or penetration of the ischiorectal fossa 
by a foreign body. The abscess may form a 
track like a horse shoe behind the rectum to 
the opposite ischiorectal fossa.  
  •   Pelvirectal : spread from pelvic abscess (rare). 
 Treatment 
 Early surgical drainage to prevent rupture and the 
possible formation of a ﬁ stula  in ano . 
 Fistula  in ano  
 Deﬁ nitions 
  •   A  ﬁ stula is an abnormal communication 
between two epithelial surfaces, e.g. between a 
anaesthetic. If the patient is seen when the hae-
matoma is already discharging or becoming 
absorbed, hot baths are prescribed and reassur-
ance given that all will soon be well.     
 Fissure  in ano  
 A ﬁ ssure is a tear at the anal margin, which usually 
follows the passage of a constipated stool. The site 
is usually posterior in the midline (90% of men, 
70% of women), occasionally anteriorly in the 
midline and rarely multiple. The posterior posi-
tion of the majority of ﬁ ssures has traditionally 
been explained by the anatomical arrangement of 
the external anal sphincter; its superﬁ cial ﬁ bres 
pass forward to the anal canal from the coccyx, 
leaving a relatively unsupported V posteriorly. 
However, mucosal tears are probably quite 
common and, while most heal spontaneously, 
those occurring posteriorly (or anteriorly) are slow 
to heal because of the relatively poor blood supply 
to the anal mucosa posteriorly. The anterior 
ﬁ ssures of women may be associated with 
weakening of the perineal ﬂ oor following tears at 
childbirth. Multiple ﬁ ssures may complicate 
Crohn ’ s disease 1  of the colon. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Acute anal pain is characteristic. It is stinging in 
nature and lasts for a while after the passage of 
stool, sometimes 2 or more hours later. Fissure is 
the commonest cause of pain at the anal verge 
(see    p. 220 ). There is often slight bleeding and, 
because of the pain, the patient is usually consti-
pated. On examination, the anal sphincter is in 
spasm, and there may be a  ‘ sentinel pile ’  protrud-
ing from the anus, which represents the torn tag 
of anal epithelium. The ﬁ ssure can usually be seen 
by gently pulling open the anal verge. It may be 
impossible to do a rectal examination without 
anaesthetic; the ﬁ ssure may then be palpable as a 
crack in the anal canal.  
 Treatment 
 Early small ﬁ ssures may heal spontaneously. A 
local anaesthetic ointment together with a lubri-
  1   Burrill Bernard Crohn (1884 – 1983), Gastroenterologist, Mount 
Sinai Hospital, New York, NY, USA. The disease was ﬁ rst described 
by Morgagni (1682 – 1771). 

The rectum and anal canal  223
 Superﬁ cial ﬁ stulae may be either subcutaneous 
or submucous, and are superﬁ cial tracks resulting 
from rupture, respectively, of subcutaneous and 
submucous abscesses. Intersphincteric and trans -
 sphincteric ﬁ stulae are examples of  low anal ﬁ stu-
lae , in which the track is below the anorectal ring; 
they constitute 95% of all ﬁ stulas. They differ in 
their penetration through the external sphincter, 
and most are at a low level with the track passing 
through the subcutaneous part of the sphincter. 
Suprasphincteric ﬁ stulae pass via the intersphinc-
teric space to open into the anus above the pub-
orectalis and are  high anal ﬁ stulae . Anorectal 
ﬁ stulae, fortunately rare, extend through levator 
ani to open above the anorectal junction. 
 Fistulae with external openings posterior to the 
meridian in the lithotomy position usually open in 
the midline of the anus, whereas those with ante-
rior external openings usually open directly into 
the anus  – Goodsall ’ s law 2 (Figure  26.1 ). 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 There is usually a story of an initial anorectal 
abscess, which discharges. Following this, there 
are recurrent episodes of perianal infection with 
persistent discharge of pus. Examination reveals 
the external opening of a ﬁ stula. The internal 
hollow viscus and the surface of the body or 
between two hollow viscera.  
  •   A  sinus is a granulating track leading from a 
source of infection to a surface. 
 Aetiology 
 The term ﬁ stula  in ano  is loosely applied to both 
ﬁ stulae and sinuses in relation to the anal canal. 
The great majority result from an initial abscess 
forming in one of the anal glands that pass from 
the submucosa of the anal canal to open within its 
lumen. Growth of bowel organisms, as opposed to 
skin ﬂ ora, from an anorectal abscess is suggestive 
of the presence of a ﬁ stula. Rarely, ﬁ stulae are 
associated with Crohn ’ s disease, ulcerative colitis 
and carcinoma of the rectum (occasionally, also, 
tuberculosis).  
 Anatomical  c lassiﬁ cation  
 (Figure   26.3 ) 
 Anal ﬁ stulae are classiﬁ ed according to their posi-
tion and relation to the internal and external anal 
sphincters. 
 •  Submucous  
 •  Subcutaneous  
 ⎫⎬⎭  
 Superﬁ cial 
 •  Intersphincteric  
 •  Trans - sphincteric  
 ⎫⎬⎭  
 Low anal  
 −  Suprasphincteric — high anal 
 −  Anorectal (extrasphincteric). 
 Figure 26.2   The anatomy of perianal abscesses.  
Longitudinal
muscle
Levator ani
Anorectal ring
External 
sphincter
Pelvirectal 
abscess
Ischiorectal
abscess
Perianal 
(subcutaneous)
abscess
Submucous 
abscess
Internal
sphincter
  2  David Goodsall (1843 – 1906), Surgeon, St Mark ’ s Hospital, 
London, UK. 

224 
The rectum and anal canal 
ture. Laying open of the whole track of a supras-
phincteric ﬁ stula in error will completely divide 
the sphincters and result in incontinence. 
 Recurrent ﬁ stulae that are associated with 
Crohn ’ s disease may respond to long - term antibi-
otics and treatment with an anti - tumour necrosis 
factor (TNF) antibody such as inﬂ iximab. 
 Stricture of the  a nal 
 c anal 
 Classiﬁ cation 
  •   Congenital . 
  •   Traumatic , particularly postoperative, after too 
radical excision of the skin and mucosa in 
haemorrhoidectomy. 
  •   Inﬂ ammatory : lymphogranuloma inguinale 
(mostly female), Crohn ’ s disease, ulcerative 
colitis. 
  •   Post irradiation . 
  •   Inﬁ ltrating neoplasm . 
 Treatment 
 Depends on the underlying pathology and may 
call for repeated dilatation, plastic reconstruction, 
defunctioning colostomy or, in the case of malig-
nant disease, excision of the rectum. 
opening may be felt per rectum, but probing of the 
track is painful and should be deferred until the 
patient is anaesthetized. Accurate assessment of 
the extent of the ﬁ stula track, in particular its rela-
tion to the anal sphincter, is crucial. Where doubt 
exists, endoanal ultrasound or magnetic reso-
nance (MR) can demonstrate the anatomy of a 
ﬁ stula very clearly. 
 Treatment 
 Superﬁ cial and low - level anal ﬁ stulae are laid 
open and allowed to heal by granulation. Because 
no sphincter, or only the subcutaneous part of the 
external and internal sphincters, is divided in this 
procedure, there is no loss of anal continence. 
Fistulae can only be treated in this manner when 
they quite deﬁ nitely lie below the level of the 
anorectal ring; careful assessment is therefore 
important. 
 In high ﬁ stulae (suprasphincteric, and trans -
 sphincteric close to the anorectal ring) the ﬁ stula 
track is either injected with ﬁ brin glue or a bio-
prosthetic  ‘ ﬁ stula plug ’  is passed along the track. 
If either of these sphincter - preserving treatments 
fails, the lower part of the track is laid open and 
a non - absorbable strong ligature (e.g. nylon), 
termed a seton, is passed through the upper part 
of the track and left in place for 2 – 3 weeks so that 
the sphincter is ﬁ xed by scar tissue; the track is 
then divided by repeated tightening of the liga-
 Figure 26.3   The anatomy of perianal ﬁ stulae.  
Levator ani
External anal
sphincter
Internal anal
sphincter
Rectal venous
plexus
Suprasphincteric
Trans-sphincteric
Intersphincteric
Superficial
Anal column

The rectum and anal canal  225
pelvis rather as a ring pessary may control vaginal 
prolapse. An alternative is the Altemeier 5 perineal 
rectosigmoidectomy, in which a full thickness 
resection of prolapsing rectum is performed. 
 Pruritus  a ni 
 There are four principal causes of pruritus ani: 
 1  Local causes within the anus or rectum . Any 
factor that causes moisture and sogginess of 
the anal skin, e.g. lack of cleanliness, excessive 
sweating, leakage of mucus from 
haemorrhoids, proctitis, colitis, ﬁ stula  in ano , 
rectal neoplasm or threadworms. 
 2  Skin diseases : scabies, pediculosis, fungal 
infections, e.g.  Candida albicans . 
 3  General diseases associated with pruritus: 
diabetes mellitus, Hodgkin ’ s disease, 
obstructive jaundice. 
 4  Idiopathic : here very often the original cause 
has disappeared but the pruritus persists 
because of continued scratching of the anal 
region by the patient. 
 Treatment 
 Directed to the underlying cause. The idiopathic 
group often responds dramatically to hydrocorti-
sone ointment and attention to local hygiene.   
 Tumours 
 Pathology 
 Benign 
  •   Adenoma. 
  •   Papilloma. 
  •   Lipoma. 
  •   Endometrioma. 
 Malignant 
 1  Primary : 
 a  adenocarcinoma; 
 b  squamous carcinoma of the lower anal 
canal;  
 Prolapse of the  r ectum 
 This may be partial or complete. 
  •   Partial prolapse  is conﬁ ned to the mucosa, 
which prolapses 2 – 5   cm from the anal verge. 
Palpation of the prolapse between the ﬁ nger 
and thumb reveals that there is no muscular 
wall within it. It may occur in infants who, 
unlike the usual textbook description, are not 
wasted but often perfectly healthy. Treatment 
of these babies requires nothing more than 
reassurance of the parents that the condition is 
self - curing. In adults, it usually accompanies 
prolapsing piles or sphincter incompetence, 
and may present with pruritus ani.  
  •   Complete prolapse involves all layers of the 
rectal wall. It usually occurs in elderly women. 
Apart from the discomfort of the prolapse, 
there is associated incontinence owing to the 
stretching of the sphincter and mucus 
discharge from the prolapsed mucosal surface.    
 Treatment 
 Treatment of partial prolapse in adults comprises 
excision of the redundant mucosa, or a submu-
cosal phenol - in - oil injection in order to produce 
sclerosis. In children, as already mentioned, self -
 cure without active treatment is the fortunate rule. 
 Repair of a rectal prolapse may be performed 
either transabdominally or perineally; the former 
being preferred in younger patients, the latter in 
the more elderly. Transabdominal mesh rectopexy, 
in which prosthetic mesh is partly wrapped 
around the mobilized rectum and sutured to the 
presacral fascia, relies on the resultant brisk 
ﬁ brous reaction to ﬁ x the rectum to the pelvic 
tissues. The classic perineal approach was anal 
encirclement with a Thiersch wire, 3  in which a 
wire or nylon suture is passed around the anal 
oriﬁ ce to narrow it and keep the prolapse reduced. 
This was complicated by obstruction and erosion 
of the wire and fell from favour. Today, a less trau-
matic approach is performed (Delorme ’ s proce-
dure 4 ), with excision of a sleeve of mucosa and 
pleating of the underlying muscle to form a 
doughnut - like ring, which holds the rectum in the 
  3   Karl Thiersch (1822 – 1895), Professor of Surgery, Erlangen then 
Leipzig, Germany. Devised the split skin graft. 
  4   Edmond Delorme (1843 – 1929), Chief of Surgery, French Army. 
  5   William Arthur Altemeier (1910 – 1983), Professor of Surgery, 
Cincinnati, OH, USA. 

226 
The rectum and anal canal 
 Carcinoma of the  r ectum 
 Pathology 
 The sexes are equally affected. It occurs in any 
age group from the twenties onwards, but is par-
ticularly common in the age range 50 – 70 years. 
Carcinoma of the rectum accounts for appro-
ximately one - third of all tumours of the large 
intestine. Predisposing factors (as with carcinoma 
of 
the 
colon) 
are 
pre - existing 
adenomas, 
familial adenomatous polyposis and ulcerative 
colitis. 
 Macroscopic  a ppearance 
 The tumours may be as follows: 
  •   papilliferous; 
  •   ulcerating (commonest); 
  •   stenosing (usually at rectosigmoid); 
  •   mucinous (colloid). 
 Microscopic  a ppearance 
 Rectal carcinomas are adenocarcinomas; about 
9% are associated with profuse mucus secretion 
( ‘ colloid tumours ’ ) and 1% are highly anaplastic 
adenocarcinomas. At the anal verge, squamous 
carcinoma may occur, but a malignant tumour 
protruding through the anal canal is more likely to 
be an adenocarcinoma of the rectum invading the 
anal skin. 
 Spread 
 1  Local : 
 a  circumferentially around the lumen of the 
bowel; 
 b  invasion through the muscular coat; 
 c  penetration into adjacent organs, e.g. 
prostate, bladder, vagina, uterus, sacrum, 
sacral plexus, ureters and lateral pelvic wall. 
 2  Lymphatic : to regional lymph nodes along the 
inferior mesenteric vessels. At a late stage, 
there is invasion of the iliac lymph nodes and 
of the groin lymph nodes (by retrograde 
spread) and involvement of the supraclavicular 
nodes via the thoracic duct.  
 3  Blood : via the superior rectal venous plexus, 
thence the portal vein to the liver and then 
lungs. 
 4  Transcoelomic : seeding of the peritoneal cavity. 
 c  melanoma; 
 d  carcinoid tumour; 
 e  lymphoma. 
 2  Secondary : invasion from prostate, uterus or 
pelvic peritoneal deposits. 
 Rectal  p olyps 
 Rectal 
polyps 
may 
be 
divided 
into 
four 
categories: 
 1  Hyperplastic : formerly termed metaplastic 
polyps, these are small, 2 – 3   mm, sessile, 
wart - like lesions. Often multiple and virtually 
always benign; it is an incidental ﬁ nding on 
sigmoidoscopy. 
 2  Neoplastic (adenomatous) polyp . There are 
three histological types of benign neoplastic 
polyp, all of which may undergo malignant 
change. Multiple polyps are present in 
familial adenomatous polyposis (Chapter  25  , 
p. 211 ): 
 a  tubular adenoma  – usually small and 
rounded, the most common type of 
adenomatous polyp; the epithelium is 
arranged in tubular fashion;  
 b  tubulovillous adenoma; 
 c  villous adenoma: appears like an anemone 
with many fronds growing from its base on 
the rectal wall. Often grows very large, and 
produces large amounts of mucus. Greatest 
potential for malignant change, so best 
completely removed. 
 3  Hamartomatous , e.g. the juvenile polyp; a 
developmental malformation which presents 
in children and adolescents and which looks 
like a cherry on a stalk. It is always benign, 
presents with bleeding and may prolapse 
during defaecation.  
 4  Inﬂ ammatory (pseudopolyp) : associated with 
colitis; is not a true polyp but is oedematous 
mucosa against a background of ulcerated, 
mucosa - denuded, bowel wall. 
 Diagnosis is by biopsy. Because of the propen-
sity for malignant change of neoplastic polyps, 
particularly villous adenomas, these should always 
be excised in full to ensure that no area of malig-
nant change is missed. Small polyps may be 
excised in the clinic; larger polyps will require 
an operating sigmoidoscope with diathermy 
coagulation.  

The rectum and anal canal  227
 Tis     The tumour involves the mucosa only.  
 T1  The tumour is conﬁ ned to submucosa. 
 T2  The tumour invades the muscle wall. 
 T3  The tumour invades through the muscle wall 
into the serosa or pericolic/perirectal tissue.  
 T4  The tumour invades other organs or has 
perforated into the peritoneal cavity  .  
 N0  No regional lymph nodes. 
 N1     Tumour involves one to three lymph nodes 
in pericolic or perirectal tissue.  
 N2     Tumour involves more than three lymph 
nodes in pericolic or perirectal tissue or any 
nodes more than 3   cm away from the 
primary tumour . 
 M0  No distant metastasis. 
 M1  Distant metastasis. 
 Prognosis 
 Depends largely on the stage of progression of the 
tumour and its histological degree of differentia-
tion. The more advanced its spread and the more 
anaplastic its cells, the worse the prognosis.  
 Clinical  f eatures 
 The patient may present with the following: 
  •   local disturbances owing to the presence of the 
tumour in the rectum;  
  •   manifestations of secondary deposits; 
  •   the general effects of malignant disease. 
 Effects of secondary deposits and malignant 
disease are similar to those of carcinoma of the 
colon (Chapter  25 , p. 212 ) with the addition that, 
rarely, carcinoma of the rectum may spread to the 
groin nodes as a late phenomenon. With carci-
noma at the anal verge, this commonly occurs.  
 Local  s ymptoms 
 Bowel disturbance (constipation and/or diar-
rhoea occur in 80% of cases) and bleeding, which 
is almost invariable and is the presenting com-
plaint in about 60% of patients. There may also be 
mucus discharge, rectal pain and tenesmus.  
 Examination 
 Abdominal palpation is negative in early cases, 
but careful attention must be paid to the detection 
of hepatomegaly, ascites or abdominal distension. 
Other general features that may be detected in late 
 Staging 
 The extent of spread of rectal tumours is tradition-
ally classiﬁ ed by Dukes ’  method 6 (Figure  26.4 ). 
 A  The tumour is conﬁ ned to the mucosa and 
submucosa.  
 B  There is invasion of the muscle wall.  
 C  The regional lymph nodes are involved. 
 D  Distant spread has occurred, e.g. to the liver or 
invasion into the bladder. 
 More recently, colonic and rectal cancers 
have been staged using the TNM system (see 
Chapter  7 , p. 39 ). 
 Figure 26.4   Staging of rectal cancer by Dukes ’ and 
TNM classiﬁ cations. Dukes ’ A, conﬁ ned to the bowel 
wall; B, penetrating the wall; C, involving regional lymph 
nodes; D, distant spread.  
A
B
B
C
D
T4
N1
Dukes’
stage
TNM
stage
N2
M1
T3
T2
T1
  6   Cuthbert Esquire Dukes (1890 – 1977), Pathologist, St Mark ’ s 
Hospital, London, UK.  

228 
The rectum and anal canal 
  •   Computed tomography (CT) of the chest, 
abdomen and pelvis is performed to detect 
metastatic spread.  
  •   Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging of the pelvis 
is useful for preoperative staging of the tumour 
and for planning preoperative radio -  and 
chemotherapy. 
 Differential  d iagnosis of a  r ectal 
 t umour 
 Differential diagnosis of a palpable tumour in the 
rectum must be made from the following: 
cases are enlarged supraclavicular nodes, nodes in 
the groin or jaundice. Rectal examination reveals 
the tumour in 90% of cases.  
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   Sigmoidoscopy  enables the great majority of 
tumours to be inspected and a biopsy to be 
taken.  
  •   Colonoscopy  is indicated to rule out 
synchronous tumours if a second tumour is 
suspected (5% of tumours in the large bowel 
are multiple) or if there is ulcerative colitis or 
familial polyposis. Barium enema is indicated 
when colonoscopy is not readily available.  
 Figure 26.5   Surgical procedures for carcinoma of rectum.  
Primary 
end-to-end
anastomosis
Anterior
resection
Rectum
Upper
third
Lower
third
Abdomino-
perineal
resection
Closed perineum
End colostomy
Abdomino-
perineal
resection

The rectum and anal canal  229
  •   Upper third tumours can be resected with 
restorative anastomosis between the sigmoid 
colon and the lower rectum (anterior 
resection). 
  •   Lower third tumours , less than 5  cm from the 
anal verge, are usually treated by 
abdominoperineal excision of the rectum, with 
a terminal colostomy. Adjunctive radiotherapy 
may reduce the incidence of local recurrence 
after abdominoperineal resection.  
  •   Mid - third rectal tumours can usually be treated 
by anterior resection, provided satisfactory 
distal clearance can be obtained. The 
operation is easier in women, in whom the 
wider pelvis facilitates dissection. 
 Palliative  p rocedures 
 Even if secondaries are present, palliation is best 
achieved when possible by excision of the primary 
tumour. A colostomy may be necessary for intes-
tinal obstruction, but this does not relieve the 
bleeding, mucus discharge and sacral pain. 
 In completely inoperable cases, radiotherapy, 
diathermy or laser of the tumour may give tempo-
rary relief, as may cytotoxic drugs. 
 
 
 
 
  •   benign tumours; 
  •   carcinoma of the sigmoid colon prolapsing 
into the pouch of Douglas and felt through the 
mucosal wall;  
  •   secondary deposits in the pelvis; 
  •   ovarian or uterine tumours; 
  •   extension from carcinoma of the prostate or 
cervix;  
  •   diverticular disease; 
  •   endometriosis; 
  •   lymphogranuloma inguinale; 
  •   amoebic granuloma; 
  •   the rare malignant tumours of the rectum (see 
 p. 226 ); 
  •   faeces (these give the classical physical sign of 
indentation).    
 The beginner may mistake the normal cervix for 
a palpable tumour, and should not be caught out 
by the presence of a ring pessary or tampon in the 
vagina, which are readily felt per rectum.  
 Treatment 
 Curative 
 Surgery depends upon the distance of the tumour 
from the anal verge (Figure  26.5 ). 

 27 
Peritonitis  
 
 Learning  o bjective 
 ✓  To know the causes and manifestations of peritonitis and of 
localized collections of pus. 
 Pathology 
 Peritonitis of bowel origin usually shows a mixed 
faecal 
ﬂ ora 
( Escherichia 
coli , 
 Streptococcus 
faecalis ,  Pseudomonas ,  Klebsiella  and  Proteus , 
together with the anaerobic  Clostridium and 
 Bacteroides ). Gynaecological infections may be 
chlamydial, gonococcal or streptococcal. Blood -
 borne peritonitis may be streptococcal, pneumo-
coccal, staphylococcal or tuberculous. In young 
girls, a rare gynaecological infection is due to 
pneumococcus. 
 The pathological effects of peritonitis are as 
follows: 
 1  Widespread absorption of toxins from the 
large, inﬂ amed surface. 
 2  The associated paralytic ileus (Chapter  28 , 
p. 236 ) with the following: 
 a  loss of ﬂ uid; 
 b  loss of electrolytes; 
 c  loss of protein. 
 3     Gross abdominal distension with elevation of 
the diaphragm, which produces a liability to 
lung collapse and pneumonia. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Peritonitis is inevitably secondary to some pre-
cipitating lesion, which may itself have deﬁ nite 
clinical features, e.g. the onset may be an attack of 
acute appendicitis or a perforated duodenal ulcer, 
with appropriate symptoms and signs. 
 Early peritonitis is characterized by severe pain; 
the patient wishes to lie still because any move-
ment aggravates the agony. Irritation of the dia-
phragm may be accompanied by pain referred to 
 General  c haracteristics 
of  p eritonitis 
 Aetiology 
 Bacteria may enter the peritoneal cavity via four 
portals: 
 1  From the exterior : penetrating wound, 
infection at laparotomy, peritoneal dialysis.  
 2  From intra - abdominal viscera : 
 a  gangrene of a viscus, e.g. acute appendicitis, 
acute cholecystitis, diverticulitis or 
infarction of the intestine;  
 b  perforation of a viscus, e.g. perforated 
duodenal ulcer, perforated appendicitis, 
rupture of the intestine from trauma;  
 c  postoperative leakage of an intestinal suture 
line. 
 3  Via the bloodstream : as part of a septicaemia 
(pneumococcal, streptococcal or 
staphylococcal). This has been wrongly termed 
primary peritonitis; in fact, it is secondary to 
some initial source of infection.  
 4  Via the female genital tract : acute salpingitis or 
puerperal infection.    
 Approximately 30% of all cases of peritonitis in 
adults result from postoperative complications: 
20% from acute appendicitis and 10% from a per-
forated peptic ulcer.  
Lecture Notes: General Surgery, 12th edition. © Harold Ellis, 
Sir Roy Y. Calne and Christopher J. E. Watson. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Peritonitis 231
resuscitation are followed, after an initial assess-
ment of the patient ’ s general condition. 
 1  Oxygen therapy if the patient is hypoxic, or 
haemoglobin oxygen saturations are less than 
95%.  
 2  Intravenous ﬂ uid and electrolyte replacement ; 
plasma expanders or blood may be required in 
the presence of shock.  
 3  Antibiotic therapy , with speciﬁ city to treat the 
broad spectrum of bowel organisms, e.g. 
penicillin and gentamicin or a cephalosporin 
together with metronidazole; therapy is 
guided, where possible, by checking the 
sensitivity of the responsible organisms 
isolated on a peritoneal swab or from blood 
cultures. 
 4  Relief of pain  with opiates, e.g. intravenous 
morphine. 
 5  Gastric aspiration by means of a nasogastric 
tube reduces the risk of inhalation of vomit 
under anaesthesia and prevents further 
abdominal distension by removing swallowed 
air. 
 6  Surgery is indicated if the source of infection 
can be removed or closed, e.g. the repair of a 
perforated ulcer or removal of the gangrenous, 
perforated appendix. 
 Any localized collection of pus requires drain-
age, and later surgery may be required for the 
evacuation of residual abscesses, e.g. subphrenic 
or pelvic collections. 
 Conservative treatment  is indicated, at least 
initially, when the infection has been localized, 
e.g. an appendix mass, or when the primary 
focus is irremovable, as in pancreatitis or post-
partum infection. When the patient is moribund 
or when there is a lack of surgical facilities, 
as on board a ship, reliance is placed on 
intravenous 
therapy, 
gastric 
aspiration 
and 
antibiotics. 
 Speciﬁ c causes of peritonitis are detailed 
below. 
 Peritoneal  d ialysis 
 p eritonitis 
 Patients with chronic renal failure on peritoneal 
dialysis are prone to peritonitis either from organ-
isms entering via the indwelling dialysis catheter 
the shoulder tip. Vomiting is frequent. The tem-
perature is usually elevated and the pulse rises 
progressively. Examination at this time shows 
localized or generalized tenderness, depending on 
the extent of the peritonitis. The abdominal wall is 
held rigidly and rebound tenderness is present. 
The abdomen is silent, or the transmitted sounds 
of the heart beat and respiration may be detected. 
Rectal examination may show tenderness in the 
pouch of Douglas. 
 In advanced peritonitis, the abdomen becomes 
distended and tympanitic, signs of free ﬂ uid are 
present, the patient becomes increasingly toxic 
with a rapid, feeble pulse, vomiting is faeculent 
and the skin is moist, cold and cyanosed (the 
hippocratic facies).  
 Special  i nvestigations 
 These are of only limited value; diagnosis depends 
on the clinical features. 
  •   Full blood count usually reveals a marked 
leucocytosis. 
  •   Serum amylase  will identify acute pancreatitis 
and prevent unnecessary surgery.  
  •   Chest X - ray  (performed with the patient erect) 
may reveal free gas under the diaphragm in 
cases of a perforated abdominal viscus (seen in 
70% of perforated peptic ulcers). It may also 
exclude pulmonary infection as a differential 
diagnosis. 
  •   Abdominal X - ray  may also demonstrate free 
gas, or may demonstrate another cause of 
peritonitis. 
  •   Computed tomography (CT)  is excellent at 
detecting free gas, and is most likely to 
pinpoint the cause of peritonitis. 
 Differential  d iagnosis 
 This is from intestinal obstruction and from uret-
eric or biliary colic, in all of which the patient 
tends to be restless. Basal pneumonia, myocardial 
infarction, 
intraperitoneal 
haemorrhage 
and 
leakage of an aortic aneurysm are other fairly 
common misdiagnoses.  
 Principles of  t reatment 
 In this section, only an outline of treatment is 
given, as speciﬁ c causes of peritonitis may require 
speciﬁ c therapy; these are dealt with in their 
appropriate chapters. The standard principles of 

232 
Peritonitis
 Haemolytic 
 s treptococcal  p eritonitis 
 This may occur in children, secondary to strepto-
coccal infection of the tonsil, otitis media, scarlet 
fever or erysipelas.  
 Staphylococcal 
 p eritonitis 
 This very rarely complicates staphylococcal 
septicaemia, which more often produces intra -
 abdominal or perinephric abscesses. 
 Tuberculous  p eritonitis 
 Always secondary to tuberculosis elsewhere, the 
primary focus may no longer be active. It usually 
occurs as a result of local spread from the 
mesenteric lymph nodes or via the female genital 
tract, although it may complicate generalized 
miliary tuberculosis. 
 With the diminution of tuberculosis elsewhere, 
tuberculous peritonitis is becoming increasingly 
rare in this country. It is seen most often in immi-
grants from developing countries and in patients 
who are immunosuppressed, either therapeuti-
cally or by disease (e.g. human immunodeﬁ ciency 
virus (HIV)). 
 Pathology 
 The peritoneum is studded with tubercles in the 
initial phase, with an accompanying serous effu-
sion. Later, the tubercles coalesce, local abscesses 
may develop and the intra - abdominal viscera 
become matted together with dense ﬁ brous 
adhesions. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 It may present as acute peritonitis, ascites or 
intestinal obstruction secondary to gross adhe-
sions. Diagnosis is usually made only at 
operation.  
(usually skin ﬂ ora such as  Staphylococcus spp.) 
or from perforation of a viscus, in which case 
the ﬂ ora are generally a mixture of colonic organ-
isms. Diagnosis is made by the presence of 
abdominal pain and turbid dialysate. Single 
organisms are treated by intravenous and intra-
peritoneal antibiotics. Multiple organisms, par-
ticularly if gut ﬂ ora, suggest perforation and 
require laparotomy as well as antibiotics. Once 
infected, the peritoneal dialysis catheter may form 
a focus for sepsis, in which case it should be 
removed. 
 Non -  s peciﬁ c  b acterial 
 p eritonitis 
 Patients with hepatic cirrhosis and ascites are at 
risk of developing spontaneous bacterial peritoni-
tis. Such patients are immunosuppressed by 
their disease, and the protein - rich ascitic ﬂ uid 
forms an efﬁ cient culture medium for organisms. 
Infection occurs when enteric organisms translo-
cate across the bowel wall. It is conﬁ rmed by a 
peritoneal tap rich in leucocytes and is treated 
with intravenous antibiotics. Such infections often 
precipitate encephalopathy, renal failure and 
hepatic decompensation.  
 Pneumococcal  p eritonitis 
 This may be secondary to the septicaemia 
accompanying a pneumococcal lung infection 
or, uncommonly these days, may result from an 
ascending infection from the vagina in girls 
between the ages of 4 and 10. 
 Clinically, there is peritonitis of sudden 
onset accompanied by severe toxaemia and 
fever. The white cell count is elevated above 
20  ×  10 9 /L. 
 Treatment 
 Usually, laparotomy is performed because perfo-
rated appendicitis is suspected. Clear or turbid 
ﬂ uid containing ﬁ brin ﬂ akes is discovered without 
an obvious primary cause. A slide made of the pus 
shows the characteristic Gram - positive pneumo-
cocci lying in pairs. The condition responds to 
penicillin therapy. 

Peritonitis 233
dependent parts of the peritoneal cavity when the 
patient lies supine.  
 Subphrenic  a bscess 
 Anatomy  (Figure   27.1 ) 
 The subphrenic region lies between the dia-
phragm above and the transverse colon with 
 Treatment 
 Treatment comprises antituberculous chemother-
apy. Operation may be required for the relief of 
intestinal obstruction from adhesions. 
 Bile  p eritonitis 
 This may occur as a result of the following: 
  •   traumatic rupture of the gallbladder or its 
ducts, e.g. open or closed injury, iatrogenic 
damage from liver biopsy or percutaneous 
cholangiography; 
  •   leakage from the liver, the gallbladder or its 
ducts after a biliary tract operation;  
  •   perforation of an acutely inﬂ amed 
gallbladder; 
  •   transudation of the bile through a gangrenous 
but non - perforated gallbladder; 
  •   spontaneous perforation of the gallbladder; or 
it may be  
  •   idiopathic  – a rare but well - recognized 
condition in which bile peritonitis occurs 
without obvious cause, possibly a small 
perforation due to a calculus, which then 
becomes sealed. 
 Bile peritonitis is only a rare accompaniment of 
acute cholecystitis, because unlike the appendix, 
which when inﬂ amed rapidly undergoes gan-
grene, the inﬂ amed gallbladder is usually thick-
ened and walled off by adhesions. In addition, 
again unlike the appendix, which only receives an 
end - artery supply from the ileocolic artery, the 
gallbladder has an additional blood supply from 
the liver bed, and therefore frank gangrene of the 
gallbladder is unusual. 
 The patient presents with all the features of 
general peritonitis. Laparotomy is required to deal 
with the underlying cause, but the mortality asso-
ciated with bile peritonitis is up to 50%. As with all 
other causes of peritonitis, it is the elderly patient 
with late disease who does badly.  
 Localized  i ntraperitoneal 
 c ollections of  p us 
 Following peritonitis, pus may collect in the sub-
phrenic spaces or in the pelvis. These are the most 
 Figure 27.1   The anatomy of the subphrenic spaces: 
(a) right; (b) left.  
Liver
Right
subphrenic 
space
Kidney
Right
subhepatic
space
(Morison's
pouch)
Duodenum
Hepatic
flexure of colon
Left
subphrenic 
space
Liver
Stomach
Left
subhepatic
space
(lesser sac)
Transverse
colon
Omentum
(a)
(b)
Pancreas
Duodenum

234 
Peritonitis
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   Full blood count : the white count is raised in 
the region of 15 – 20  ×  10 9 /L, with a polymorph 
leucocytosis. 
  •   Chest X - ray may show the following (Figure 
 27.2 ): 
  −   elevation of the diaphragm on the affected 
side;  
  −   pleural effusion and/or collapse of the lung 
base;  
  −   gas and a ﬂ uid level below the diaphragm.    
  •   Ultrasound may show diminished or absent 
mobility of the diaphragm, and may 
demonstrate the subphrenic abscess.  
  •   CT will demonstrate an abscess, and also 
locate any other intraperitoneal collections of 
pus. 
 Treatment 
 In early cases, where there is absence of gas and 
free ﬂ uid on X - ray, the patient is placed on broad -
 spectrum antibiotic therapy. If there is a rapid 
response, the diagnosis is one of a spreading cel-
lulitis of the subphrenic space. 
 If there is clinical or radiological evidence of a 
localized abscess, or if resolution fails to occur on 
chemotherapy, percutaneous drainage may be 
carried out under ultrasound or CT guidance. If 
this fails, or the abscess is loculated, surgical 
drainage is performed. Depending on the location 
of the abscess, this is carried out either by a pos-
terior extraperitoneal approach through the bed 
of, or just below, the twelfth rib or by an anterior 
approach via a subcostal incision.   
 Pelvic  a bscess 
 A pelvic abscess may follow any general peritoni-
tis, but it is particularly common after acute 
appendicitis (75%) or after gynaecological infec-
tions. In men, the abscess lies between the bladder 
and the rectum; in women, it lies between the 
uterus and posterior fornix of the vagina anteriorly 
and the rectum posteriorly (pouch of Douglas 3 ). 
 Left untreated, the abscess may burst into the 
rectum or vagina, or may discharge onto the 
mesocolon below and is divided further by the 
liver and its ligaments. The right and left  sub-
phrenic spaces lie between the diaphragm and the 
liver and are separated from each other by the fal-
ciform ligament. The right and left  subhepatic 
spaces  are below the liver, the right forming 
Morison ’ s pouch 1 and the left being the lesser sac, 
which communicates with the former through the 
foramen of Winslow. 2  The right  extraperitoneal 
space  lies between the bare area of the liver and 
the diaphragm. About two - thirds of subphrenic 
abscesses occur on the right side. Rarely, they are 
bilateral. 
 Aetiology 
 A localized collection of pus may occur in the 
subphrenic region following general peritonitis. 
Usually, the underlying cause is a peritonitis 
involving the upper abdomen  –  leakage following 
biliary or gastric surgery or a perforated peptic 
ulcer. Rarely, infection occurs from haematoge-
nous spread or from direct spread from a primary 
chest lesion, e.g. empyema.  
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Subphrenic infection usually follows general peri-
tonitis after 10 – 21 days, although, if antibiotics 
have been given, an abscess may be disguised and 
may only become manifest weeks or even months 
after the original episode. There may be no local-
izing symptoms, the patient presenting with 
malaise, nausea, loss of weight, anaemia and 
pyrexia; hence, the aphorism  ‘ pus somewhere, pus 
nowhere else, pus under the diaphragm ’ . At least 
half the patients have a fever, which continues 
from the original peritonitis, although the stand-
ard description is of a swinging temperature, 
which commences some 10 days after the initial 
illness. 
 Localizing features are pain in the upper 
abdomen or lower chest or referred to the shoul-
der tip with localized upper abdominal or chest 
wall tenderness. There may be signs of ﬂ uid or 
collapse at the lung base. In late cases, a swelling 
may be detected over the lower chest wall or upper 
abdomen.  
  1   James Rutherford Morison (1853 – 1939), Professor of Surgery, 
University of Durham, Durham, UK.  
  2   Jacob Winslow (1669 – 1760), Danish; became Professor of 
Anatomy and Surgery in Paris, France.  
  3   James Douglas (1675 – 1742), Obstetrician and Anatomist, 
London, UK.  

Peritonitis 235
 Treatment 
 An early pelvic cellulitis may respond rapidly to a 
short course of antimicrobial chemotherapy, but 
there is the risk that the prolonged antibiotic treat-
ment of an unresolved infection may produce a 
chronic inﬂ ammatory mass studded with small 
abscess cavities in the pelvis. It is safer therefore, 
when there is an established pelvic abscess, to 
withhold chemotherapy and await pointing into 
the vagina or rectum through which surgical 
drainage can be carried out. Very often, even this 
is not required, as ﬁ rm pressure by the ﬁ nger in 
the rectum may be followed by rupture of the 
abscess through the rectal wall.   
 
 
 
abdominal wall, particularly if there has been 
a previous abdominal laparotomy incision at 
the time of the original episode of peritonitis. 
Occasionally, the abscess may rupture into the 
peritoneal cavity. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
  •   General : swinging pyrexia, toxaemia, weight 
loss with leucocytosis.  
  •   Local : diarrhoea, mucus discharge per 
rectum and the presence of a mass felt on 
rectal or vaginal examination, which is 
occasionally large enough to be palpated 
abdominally. 
 Figure 27.2   Diagram of the 
radiological appearance of a right 
subphrenic abscess. The diaphragm 
is raised (and ﬁ xed on screening), a 
ﬂ uid level is present beneath it and 
there is a sympathetic pleural effusion 
with compression and/or collapse of 
the lung base.  
Pulmonary 
collapse and 
pleural effusion
Diaphragm 
elevated and 
immobile
Subphrenic 
gas and 
fluid level

 28 
Paralytic  i leus  
 
 Learning  o bjective 
 ✓  To know the causes and management of paralytic ileus. 
paralytic ileus is complicated by mechanical 
obstruction. 
 Metabolic  f actors 
 Severe potassium depletion, uraemia and diabetic 
coma may result in paralytic ileus.  
 Drugs 
 Paralytic ileus is produced by heavy dosages of 
anticholinergic 
agents 
and 
antiparkinsonian 
drugs. 
 Postoperative 
 Some degree of paralytic ileus occurs after every 
laparotomy. Its aetiology is complex, including 
sympathetic overaction, the effects of manipula-
tion of the bowel, potassium depletion (when 
there has been excessive preoperative vomiting), 
peritoneal irritation from blood or associated 
peritonitis and the atony of stomach and the large 
bowel, which occurs after every abdominal opera-
tion for a period of some 24 – 48 hours. 
 The distension that occurs on the ﬁ rst and 
second postoperative day is probably produced by 
swallowed air. This air passes through the small 
intestine (where peristalsis usually returns quickly) 
to the colon, which is atonic and produces a func-
tional hold - up. 
 Paralytic ileus that persists for more than 48 
hours postoperatively probably has some other 
aetiological factor present.  
 Pathology 
 The deleterious effects of paralytic ileus are similar 
to those of a simple mechanical obstruction. 
    The word ileus comes from the Greek verb  ‘ to 
roll ’ , from which it became applied to colic and 
hence to obstruction. Obstructions are subdivided 
into mechanical and paralytic, the latter produced 
by lack of intestinal motility. It is therefore a 
bad habit to say that a patient has  ‘ an ileus ’  
when one really means a  ‘ paralytic ileus ’ , as the 
word ileus alone implies merely intestinal 
obstruction. 
 Paralytic (or adynamic or neurogenic) ileus can 
be deﬁ ned as a state of atony of the intestine. Its 
principal clinical features are the following: 
  •   abdominal distension. 
  •   absolute constipation. 
  •   vomiting. 
  •   absence of intestinal movements and, hence, 
absence of colicky pain. 
 Aetiology 
 The state of paralytic ileus may be produced by a 
large number of factors, sometimes coexisting.  
 Peritonitis 
 Perhaps as a result of toxic paralysis of intrinsic 
nerve plexuses, the bowel in peritonitis becomes 
atonic. There may be an associated mechanical 
obstruction produced by kinking of loops of bowel 
by ﬁ brinous adhesions, so that frequently the 
Lecture Notes: General Surgery, 12th edition. © Harold Ellis, 
Sir Roy Y. Calne and Christopher J. E. Watson. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Paralytic ileus 237
  •   X - ray appearances . A plain X - ray of the 
abdomen showing a localized loop of 
distended small intestine without gas shadows 
in the colon or rectum is strongly suggestive of 
mechanical obstruction, in contrast to the 
diffuse appearance of gas throughout the small 
and large bowel in paralytic ileus.     
 Treatment 
 Prophylaxis 
 Biochemical imbalance is corrected preopera-
tively. The bowel is handled gently at operation. 
Postoperatively, gastric distension due to air swal-
lowing may require nasogastric suction. 
 In the  e stablished  c ase 
 Nasogastric suction is employed to remove swal-
lowed air and prevent gaseous distension. The 
aspiration of ﬂ uid also helps to relieve the associ-
ated gastric dilatation. Intravenous ﬂ uid and 
electrolyte therapy is instituted with careful bio-
chemical control. Pethidine, which has relatively 
little effect on intestinal motility compared with 
the other opioids, may be used to allay discomfort, 
and is combined with a phenothiazine such as 
prochlorperazine for nausea. Eventually, patience 
is rewarded and recovery from the ileus will occur 
unless it is secondary to some underlying cause, 
such as infection. 
 In the absence of any evidence of mechanical 
obstruction or infection, prolonged stubborn ileus 
is occasionally treated pharmacologically. Motility 
stimulants such as metoclopramide, together with 
erythromycin (which stimulates the motilin recep-
tor), may be tried. Metoclopramide is a dopamine 
antagonist that stimulates gastric emptying and 
small intestinal transit. 
 Pseudo -  o bstruction 
 Pseudo - obstruction, also known as adynamic 
ileus or Ogilvie ’ s syndrome, 1  is a particular form of 
paralytic ileus which mainly affects the large 
bowel. It results from interference with the auto-
nomic supply to the gut in which there is 
  •   There is severe loss of ﬂ uid, electrolytes and 
protein into the gut lumen and in the vomitus 
or gastric aspirate.  
  •   Gross gaseous distension of the gut, produced 
mainly from swallowed air that cannot pass 
through the bowel, impairs the blood supply of 
the bowel wall and allows toxin absorption to 
occur. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Paralytic ileus is most commonly seen in the post-
operative stage of peritonitis or of major abdomi-
nal surgery. There is abdominal distension, 
absolute constipation and effortless vomiting. 
Pain is not present, apart from the discomfort of 
the laparotomy wound and the abdominal disten-
sion. On examination, the patient is anxious and 
uncomfortable. The abdomen is distended, silent 
and tender. A plain X - ray of the abdomen will 
show gas distributed throughout the small and 
large bowel and some ﬂ uid levels may be present 
on an erect abdominal X - ray. 
 The paralytic ileus may merge insidiously into 
a mechanical obstruction produced by adhesions 
or bands following abdominal surgery, and an 
important, often extremely difﬁ cult, differential 
diagnosis lies between these two conditions. 
The diagnosis is important, since paralytic ileus 
is treated conservatively whereas mechanical 
obstruction usually calls for urgent operation.  
 Differential  d iagnosis 
 Differentiation of paralytic ileus from mechanical 
obstruction is based on the following criteria: 
  •   Duration . Paralytic ileus rarely lasts more than 
3 or 4 days; persistence of symptoms after this 
time is suspicious of mechanical obstruction.  
  •   Bowel sounds . The presence of bowel sounds is 
important. An absolutely silent abdomen is 
diagnostic of paralytic ileus, whereas noisy 
bowel sounds indicate mechanical obstruction. 
  •   Pain . Paralytic ileus is relatively painless, 
whereas colicky abdominal pain is present in 
mechanical obstruction.  
  •   Timing . If symptoms commence after the 
patient has already passed ﬂ atus or had a 
bowel action, it is very likely that a mechanical 
obstruction has supervened. The other 
possibility to consider is that there has been a 
leakage from an anastomosis and that 
peritonitis is now present.  
  1  Sir William Heneage Ogilvie (1887 – 1971), Surgeon, Guy ’ s Hospital, 
London, UK. 

238 
Paralytic ileus
absolute constipation. Examination conﬁ rms 
abdominal distension, and digital examination 
reveals a capacious empty rectum. 
 Treatment 
 The patient is made nil by mouth and identiﬁ able 
causes, such as electrolyte imbalances, are 
addressed. The colon is decompressed either at 
colonoscopy or pharmacologically with the 
administration of the cholinesterase inhibitor 
neostigmine. Laxatives, particularly stimulant 
laxatives, should be avoided since they are likely 
to precipitate perforation. 
 
predominant sympathetic activity. It typically 
complicates fractures of the spine or pelvis, 
retroperitoneal haemorrhage and retroperitoneal 
surgery, intestinal ischaemia, ureteric colic and 
occasionally parturition; Ogilvie described it ﬁ rst 
in patients with malignant inﬁ ltration of the 
coeliac plexus. Usually, the small bowel is unaf-
fected and peristalsis continues and passes intes-
tinal contents into the colon. The large bowel is 
atonic, so the colon, in particular the caecum, dis-
tends enormously, becomes ischaemic and, if 
unrelieved, will perforate. 
 Symptoms are typical of large bowel obstruc-
tion, with colicky abdominal pain, distension and 

 29 
Hernia  
 
 Learning  o bjective 
 ✓  To know the common sites of abdominal wall hernias, their 
anatomy, how they present and their treatment. 
canal, or the layers of the abdominal wall may be 
weakened following a surgical incision (incisional 
hernia), either by poor healing as a result of infec-
tion, haematoma formation or poor technique or 
by damage to nerves that results in paralysis of the 
abdominal muscles. 
 Hernias should also be thought of as portents 
of other diseases or conditions, as they are often 
associated with pathological increases in intra -
 abdominal pressure by conditions such as the 
following: 
  •   chronic cough , secondary to chronic 
bronchitis; 
  •   constipation , perhaps due to colonic 
carcinoma;  
  •   urinary obstruction , due to prostatic disease; 
  •   pregnancy ; 
  •   abdominal distension with ascites; 
  •   weak abdominal muscles , e.g. in gross obesity 
or muscle wasting in cachexia. 
 Varieties 
 A hernia at any site may be (Figure  29.1 ) 
  •   reducible; 
  •   irreducible; 
  •   strangulated. 
 Reducible  h ernia 
 The contents of a reducible hernia can be replaced 
completely into the peritoneal cavity.  
 Irreducible  h ernia 
 A hernia becomes irreducible usually because of 
adhesions of its contents to the inner wall of the 
 Deﬁ nition 
 A hernia is the protrusion of an organ or part of an 
organ through a defect in the wall of the cavity 
containing it, into an abnormal position. The 
term is usually used with reference to the 
abdomen.  
 Abdominal  w all  h ernias 
 Most hernias occur as a diverticulum of the peri-
toneal cavity and therefore have a sac of parietal 
peritoneum. The common varieties of hernias 
through the abdominal wall, in order of frequency, 
are as follows: 
  •   inguinal (indirect or direct); 
  •   femoral; 
  •   umbilical and paraumbilical; 
  •   incisional; 
  •   ventral and epigastric. 
 Aetiology 
 Hernias occur at sites of weakness in the abdomi-
nal wall. This weakness may be congenital, e.g. 
persistence of the processus vaginalis of testicular 
descent giving rise to a congenital inguinal hernia, 
or failure of complete closure of the umbilical scar. 
It may occur at the site of penetration of structures 
through the abdominal wall, e.g. the femoral 
Lecture Notes: General Surgery, 12th edition. © Harold Ellis, 
Sir Roy Y. Calne and Christopher J. E. Watson. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

240 
Hernia
is involved, perforation of the gangrenous loop 
will eventually occur.   
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Reducible  h ernia   (Box   29.1 ) 
 A reducible hernia simply presents as a lump that 
may disappear on lying down and that is usually 
not painful, although it may be accompanied by 
some discomfort. Examination reveals a reducible 
lump with a cough impulse.    
sac, or sometimes as a result of adhesions of its 
contents to each other to form a mass greater in 
size than the neck of the sac. Occasionally, inspis-
sated faeces within the loops of bowel in the 
hernia prevent reduction.  
 Strangulated  h ernia 
 When strangulation occurs, the contents of the 
hernia are constricted by the neck of the sac to 
such a degree that their circulation is cut off. 
Unless relieved, gangrene is inevitable and, if gut 
 Figure 29.1   The differences between (a) a reducible, (b) an irreducible and (c) a strangulated hernia.  
(a)   Reducible hernia
Adhesions
between sac
and loop of
intestine
Viable
bowel
(b)   Irreducible hernia
(c)   Strangulated hernia
Loop of intestine held inside sac
by adhesions. Intestine is healthy
and has normal blood supply
Loop of intestine is caught at
neck of hernia sac. Blood supply
is cut off and it is black and dead
Dilated
proximal
bowel

Hernia 241
is often plugged by omentum, which prevents the 
cough impulse from being felt.  
 Strangulated  h ernia 
 If strangulation supervenes, the patient complains 
of severe pain in the hernia and also of central 
abdominal colicky pain. The other symptoms of 
intestinal obstruction  –  vomiting, distension and 
absolute constipation  –  soon appear. Examination 
reveals a tender, tense hernia that cannot be 
reduced and has no cough impulse. The overlying 
skin becomes inﬂ amed and oedematous and 
there are are other features of intestinal obstruc-
tion with abdominal tenderness and noisy bowel 
sounds. These features are much less marked 
when omentum rather than intestine is contained 
within the sac. 
 The three common types of hernia to strangu-
late are, in order of frequency, femoral, indirect 
inguinal and umbilical.    
 Inguinal  h ernia 
 May be classiﬁ ed into the following: 
  •   indirect : entering the internal inguinal ring and 
traversing the inguinal canal;  
  •   direct : pushing through the posterior wall of 
the inguinal canal medial to the internal ring.    
 See Table  29.1  for a summary of the differences 
between indirect and direct inguinal hernias.   
 The anatomy of the inguinal canal is the key to 
the understanding of these hernias. 
 Box 29.1   A  l ump in the  g roin 
 A patient presenting with a lump in the groin is a 
common clinical problem. Whenever one considers 
the differential diagnosis of a mass situated in a 
particular area, a two - stage mental process is 
required: ﬁ rst, what are the anatomical structures in 
that particular region, and, second, what pathologi-
cal entities may arise therefrom? 
 In considering the groin, let these possibilities pass 
through your mind: 
 1   The hernial oriﬁ ces:  
 a   inguinal hernia  
 b   femoral hernia  
 2   The testicular apparatus: 
 a   hydrocele of the cord  
 b   ectopic testis  
 3   The vein: saphena varix  
 4   The artery: femoral aneurysm  
 5   The lymph nodes: lymphadenopathy due to 
infection, neoplasm or lymphoma  
 6   The psoas sheath: psoas abscess  
 7   The skin and subcutaneous tissues: lipoma  
 Table 29.1   Characteristic differences that help differentiate indirect and direct inguinal hernias 
 
 Indirect  
 Direct  
 Origin  
  Pass through internal ring, lateral 
to inferior epigastric vessels  
 Pass through posterior wall of 
inguinal canal, medial to inferior 
epigastric vessels  
 Congenital or acquired  
 May be congenital  
 Always acquired, rare in childhood 
and adolescence  
 Control by pressure over internal ring  
  Yes  
  No  
 Strangulates  
  Commonly, because of narrow 
neck (internal ring)  
 Rarely, because usually wide necked  
 Extends down into scrotum  
  Often  
  Rarely  
 Reduces on lying  
  Not readily  
  Spontaneously  
 Recurrence after surgery  
  Uncommon  
  More common  
 Irreducible  h ernia 
 If the hernia will not reduce but is painless and 
there are no other symptoms, irreducibility is 
diagnosed. The absence of a cough impulse alone 
does not indicate strangulation, because in an 
irreducible femoral hernia, for example, the neck 

242 
Hernia
 The internal ring represents the point at which 
the spermatic cord pushes through the transver-
salis fascia; it is demarcated medially by the infe-
rior epigastric vessels as they pass upwards from 
the external iliac artery and vein. 
 The external ring is an inverted V - shaped defect 
in the external oblique aponeurosis and lies 
immediately above and medial to the pubic 
tubercle. 
 The inguinal canal transmits the spermatic cord 
(round ligament in the female) and the ilioin-
guinal nerve.  
 Indirect  i nguinal  h ernia 
 This passes through the internal ring, along the 
canal in front of the spermatic cord and, if large 
enough, emerges through the external ring and 
descends into the scrotum. If reducible, such a 
hernia can be completely controlled by pressure 
with one ﬁ ngertip over the internal inguinal ring, 
which lies 1 – 2   cm above the point where the 
femoral artery passes under the inguinal ligament, 
 Anatomy   (Figure   29.2 ) 
 The inguinal canal represents the oblique passage 
taken through the lower abdominal wall by the 
testis and cord (the round ligament in the female). 
It is 4   cm long and passes downwards and medi-
ally, and from deep to superﬁ cial, from the inter-
nal to the external inguinal rings, lying parallel to, 
and immediately above, the inguinal ligament. 
  •   Anteriorly : skin, superﬁ cial fascia and external 
oblique aponeurosis cover the full length of the 
canal; the internal oblique covers its lateral 
third. 
  •   Posteriorly : the conjoint tendon (representing 
the fused common aponeurotic insertion of 
the internal oblique and transversus 
abdominis muscles into the pubic crest) forms 
the posterior wall of the canal medially; the 
transversalis fascia lies laterally. 
  •   Above : the lowest ﬁ bres of the internal oblique 
and transversus abdominis.  
  •   Below : lies the inguinal ligament. 
 Figure 29.2   The anatomy of the inguinal canal: (a) with the external oblique aponeurosis intact; (b) with the external 
oblique removed.  
Inferior
epigastric vessels
Internal
oblique
Anterior superior
iliac spine
Transversalis 
fascia
Conjoint 
   tendon
Conjoint 
tendon
Inguinal
ligament
Internal
ring
External oblique
aponeurosis
External 
   ring
Ilioinguinal 
   nerve
Spermatic 
cord
Femoral
artery
Femoral
nerve
Femoral
vein
Femoral 
canal
(a)
(b)
Femoral
nerve
Femoral
artery
Femoral
vein
Pubic tubercle
Pubic 
symphysis

Hernia 243
 Figure 29.3   The anatomy of the 
femoral canal and its surrounds to 
show the relationships of a femoral 
hernia.  
Iliacus
Femoral
artery
Femoral vein
Femoral
nerve
Pectineus
Lateral cutaneous nerve of thigh
Lacunar
part of
inguinal
ligament
Anterior superior 
iliac spine
Femoral canal
Psoas 
tendon
Fascia transversalis
Inguinal ligament
Fascia iliaca
External ring
with emerging
spermatic
cord
i.e. 1 – 2   cm above the femoral pulse. This can be 
felt at the mid - inguinal point, halfway between 
the anterior superior iliac spine and the symphysis 
pubis. 
 If the hernia protrudes through the external 
ring, it can be felt to lie above and medial to the 
pubic tubercle and is thus differentiated from a 
femoral hernia, which emerges through the 
femoral canal below and lateral to this landmark 
(Figure  29.3 ). 
 Indirect hernias may be congenital, due to per-
sistence of the processus vaginalis; these present 
at or soon after birth or may arise in adolescence. 
The acquired variety may occur at any age in adult 
life and here the sac is formed as an outpushing of 
the abdominal peritoneum. 
 The narrow internal opening through the inter-
nal inguinal ring accounts for two important fea-
tures of the indirect hernia. First, the hernia often 
does not reach its full size until the patient has 
been up and around for a little time, and then does 
not reduce immediately when the subject lies 
down, because it takes a little time for the hernial 
contents to pass in or out of the sac through its 
narrow neck. Second, the indirect hernia has a dis-
tinct tendency to strangulate at the site of this 
narrow oriﬁ ce. 
 Direct  i nguinal  h ernia 
 This pushes its way directly forwards through the 
posterior wall of the inguinal canal. Because it lies 
medial to the internal ring, it is not controlled by 
digital pressure applied over the ring immediately 
above the femoral pulse. On inspection, the hernia 
is seen to protrude directly forwards (hence its 
name), compared with the oblique route down-
wards towards the scrotum of an indirect inguinal 
hernia. 
 Other points that differentiate a direct from an 
indirect hernia are that the direct is always 
acquired and is therefore extremely rare in infancy 
or adolescence; it usually has a large oriﬁ ce and 
therefore appears immediately on standing, dis-
appearing again at once when the patient lies 
down. Moreover, because of this large opening, 
strangulation is extremely rare. It is uncommon in 
women. 
 Although clinically it is usually quite easy to tell 
the difference between the two types of inguinal 
hernia, the ultimate differentiation can only be 
made at operation: the inferior epigastric vessels 
demarcate the medial edge of the internal ring; 
therefore, an indirect sac will pass lateral, and a 
direct hernia medial, to these vessels. Quite often, 

244 
Hernia
and which lies at the medial extremity of the 
femoral sheath containing the femoral artery and 
vein. The boundaries of the femoral canal (Figure 
 29.3 ) are as follows: 
  •   Anteriorly : the inguinal ligament. 
  •   Medially : the sharp edge of the lacunar part of 
the inguinal ligament (Gimbernat ’ s ligament 3 ). 
  •   Laterally : the femoral vein.  
  •   Posteriorly : the pectineal ligament (of Astley 
Cooper 4 ), which is the thickened periosteum 
along the superior pubic ramus.    
 The canal contains a plug of fat and a lymph 
node (the node of Cloquet 5 ). 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Femoral hernias occur more commonly in women 
than in men because of the wider female pelvis 
(but note that indirect inguinal hernias are 
more common than femoral in women). They are 
never due to a congenital sac but are invariably 
acquired; although cases do rarely occur in chil-
dren they are usually seen in the middle - aged and 
elderly. 
 A non - strangulated hernia presents as a globu-
lar swelling below and lateral to the pubic tuber-
cle. It enlarges on standing and on coughing and 
may disappear when the patient lies down. 
However, in most cases, even when the hernia is 
completely reduced, a swelling can still be pal-
pated and this is due to extraperitoneal fat around 
the femoral sac. 
 As the hernia enlarges, it passes through the 
saphenous opening in the deep fascia (the site of 
penetration of the great saphenous vein to join the 
femoral vein), and then turns upwards so that it 
may project above the inguinal ligament. There 
should not, however, be any difﬁ culty in differen-
tiating between an irreducible femoral and 
inguinal hernia  –  the neck of a femoral hernia 
always lies below and lateral to the pubic tubercle, 
whereas the sac of an indirect inguinal hernia 
extends above and medial to this landmark (Figure 
 29.4 ). 
 The neck of the femoral canal is narrow and has 
a particularly sharp medial border. For this reason, 
a direct and an indirect hernia coexist; they bulge 
on either side of the inferior epigastric vessels like 
the legs of a pair of pantaloons. 
 Sixty per cent of inguinal hernias occur on the 
right side, 20% on the left and 20% are bilateral. 
 Treatment 
 Congenital inguinal hernias in infants do not 
obliterate spontaneously; the patent processus 
vaginalis is ligated and the hernial sac excised at 
the age of about 1 year (herniotomy). In adults, 
operation is usually advised. This comprises 
excision of the sac and repair of the weakened 
inguinal canal, commonly performed either by 
plicating the transversalis fascia in the posterior 
wall with a nylon suture (Shouldice repair 1 ) or by 
reinforcing the posterior wall with a nylon or poly-
propylene mesh (Lichtenstein repair 2 ). An alterna-
tive technique is to place a mesh from within the 
abdomen laparoscopically, covering the hernial 
oriﬁ ce. The laparoscopic technique has particular 
advantages in the treatment of recurrent or bilat-
eral hernias. 
 A truss is only prescribed in patients who are of 
very poor general condition and are unable to 
withstand an operation, although they often have 
difﬁ culty keeping a truss correctly in place. But, 
even in such cases, a painful hernia that threatens 
strangulation is much better repaired as an elec-
tive procedure, if necessary under local anaesthe-
sia, rather than as an emergency, should 
strangulation supervene. 
 Recurrent inguinal hernias may be caused by, 
for example, infection, haematoma or poor tech-
nique, and also by a failure to appreciate the 
underlying cause of the increased intra - abdominal 
pressure that initiated the hernia in the ﬁ rst place 
(e.g. continuing constipation or bladder neck 
obstruction by a large prostate).   
 Femoral  h ernia 
 Anatomy 
 A femoral hernia passes through the femoral 
canal. This is a gap normally about 1.5   cm in 
length, which just admits the tip of the little ﬁ nger 
  1   Edward Earle Shouldice (1890 – 1965), Surgeon, Toronto, Canada. 
  2  Irving L. Lichtenstein, (1920 - 2000), Surgeon, Cedars - Sinai 
Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, USA.  
  3  Manuel Gimbernat (1734 – 1816), Anatomist and Surgeon to King 
Carlos III of Spain. 
  4  Sir Astley Paston Cooper (1768 – 1841), Surgeon, Guy ’ s Hospital, 
London, UK.  
  5   Jules Germain Cloquet (1790 – 1883), Professor of Surgery, Paris, 
France. 

Hernia 245
of their great danger of strangulation. This is 
usually accomplished by suturing a plug of rolled 
up polypropylene mesh in the canal.   
 Umbilical  h ernia 
 Exomphalos 
 This is a rare condition in which there is failure of 
all or part of the midgut to return to the abdominal 
cavity in fetal life. The bowel is contained within a 
translucent sac protruding through a defective 
anterior abdominal wall. Untreated, this ruptures 
with fatal peritonitis, or rupture may occur during 
delivery. 
 Treatment 
 Immediate surgical repair if possible. When the 
sac is massive, it is protected with a dressing 
soaked in mild antiseptic. Gradual epithelializa-
tion takes place and later repair may then be 
undertaken. 
irreducibility and strangulation are extremely 
common in this type of hernia.   
 Richter ’ s  h ernia 
 A Richter ’ s hernia 6  is particularly likely to occur in 
the femoral sac. In this type of hernia, only part of 
the wall of the small intestine herniates through 
the defect, where it is then strangulated. Because 
the lumen of the bowel is not completely 
encroached upon, symptoms of intestinal obstruc-
tion do not occur, although the knuckle of bowel 
may become completely necrotic and indeed per-
forate into the hernial sac and thence into the 
peritoneal cavity causing acute peritonitis. 
 Treatment 
 All femoral hernias should be repaired by excision 
of the sac and closure of the femoral canal because 
 Figure 29.4   The relationships of an 
indirect inguinal and a femoral hernia 
compared: the inguinal hernia 
emerges above and medial to the 
public tubercle; the femoral hernia lies 
below and lateral to it.  
Iliacus
Femoral
nerve
Femoral
artery
Femoral
vein
Sac of femoral hernia
Sac of indirect inguinal hernia
Inferior epigastric vessels
Internal inguinal ring
External inguinal 
   ring
Pubic 
tubercle
  6  August Gottlieb Richter (1742 – 1842), Surgeon, G ö ttingen, 
Germany. 

246 
Hernia
 Epigastric  h ernia 
 A particular variety of ventral hernia is the epigas-
tric hernia, which consists of one or more small 
protrusions through defects in the linea alba 
above the umbilicus. These usually contain only 
extraperitoneal fat, but are often surprisingly 
painful. 
 Treatment 
 Simply suturing the defect is all that is required. 
 Incisional  h ernia 
 An incisional hernia occurs through a defect in the 
scar of a previous abdominal operation. The 
causes, which are the same as those of a burst 
abdomen, are given in Chapter  4  , p. 23   . 
 There is usually a wide neck, and strangulation 
is, in consequence, rare. 
 Treatment 
 If the general condition of the patient is good, the 
hernia is repaired by dissecting out and suturing 
the individual layers of the abdominal wall. Large 
hernias are repaired with a sheet of nylon or poly-
propylene mesh. If operation is considered inad-
visable, an abdominal belt is prescribed. 
 Unusual  h ernias 
 Obturator  h ernia 
 These are found particularly in thin, elderly 
women. The hernia develops through the obtura-
tor canal where the obturator nerve and vessels 
traverse the membrane covering the obturator 
foramen. Pressure of a strangulated obturator 
hernia upon the nerve may cause referred pain in 
its area of cutaneous distribution, so that intesti-
nal obstruction associated with pain along the 
medial side of the thigh in a thin, elderly woman 
should suggest this diagnosis. The hernia is often 
of the Richter type. Contrast - enhanced computed 
tomography (CT) will conﬁ rm the diagnosis. 
 Congenital  u mbilical 
 h ernia 
 This results from failure of complete closure of the 
umbilical cicatrix. It is especially common in black 
children. The vast majority close spontaneously 
during the ﬁ rst year of life. 
 Treatment 
 Surgical repair should not be carried out unless 
the hernia persists after the child is 2 years old. 
The parents of an infant with a congenital umbili-
cal hernia should be reassured that the majority 
disappear spontaneously. Strapping the hernia or 
providing a rubber truss are only required to allay 
parental anxiety. 
 Paraumbilical  h ernia 
 This is an acquired hernia that occurs just above 
or below the umbilicus. It especially occurs in 
obese, multiparous, middle - aged women. The 
neck is narrow and, like a femoral hernia, it is par-
ticularly prone to become irreducible or strangu-
lated. The contents are nearly always the omentum, 
and often in addition transverse colon and small 
intestine. 
 Treatment 
 The sac is excised and the edges of the rectus 
sheath are overlapped above and below the 
hernia (Mayo ’ s operation 7 ), or, for large defects, 
a polypropylene mesh is sewn across the 
defect. 
 Ventral  h ernia 
 An upper midline ventral hernia may exist as an 
elongated gap between the recti (divarication of 
the recti). In the majority of cases, no treatment is 
required. 
  7   William Mayo (1861 – 1939), Surgeon, Rochester, MN, USA.  

Hernia 247
 Diaphragmatic  h ernias 
 The diaphragmatic hernias can be classiﬁ ed as: 
 1  Congenital . 
 2  Acquired : 
 a  traumatic; 
 b  hiatal. 
 Congenital  d iaphragmatic  h ernia 
 Embryology 
 These hernias can best be understood by refer-
ence to the embryology of the diaphragm (Figure 
 29.5 ). The diaphragm is developed by fusion of the 
following: 
  •   The septum transversum , which forms the 
central tendon, and which develops from 
mesoderm lying in front of the head of the 
embryo. With the folding of the head, this 
mesodermal mass is carried ventrally and 
caudally to lie in its deﬁ nitive position at the 
anterior part of the diaphragm. During this 
migration, the cervical myotomes and cervical 
nerves contribute muscle and nerve supply, 
 Spigelian  h ernia 
 A Spigelian hernia 8  passes upwards through the 
arcuate (semilunar) line into the lateral border of 
the lower part of the posterior rectus sheath. It 
presents as a tender mass to one side of the lower 
abdominal wall. CT will conﬁ rm the diagnosis if 
doubt exists.  
 Gluteal  h ernia 
 Traverses the greater sciatic foramen. 
 Sciatic  h ernia 
 Passes through the lesser sciatic foramen.  
 Lumbar  h ernia 
 A lumbar hernia is most commonly an incisional 
hernia following an operation on the kidney, but 
may rarely occur through the inferior lumbar tri-
angle bounded by the crest of the ilium below, the 
latissimus dorsi medially and the external oblique 
on the lateral side.   
 Figure 29.5   The development of the 
diaphragm. The drawing shows the 
four contributory elements: septum 
transversum, dorsal mesentery of the 
oesophagus, body wall and 
pleuroperitoneal membrane.  
Spinal cord
Vertebra
Rib
Mesentery of 
oesophagus
Aorta
Contribution
from body 
wall
Oesophagus
Inferior
vena 
cava
Right
pleuro-
peritoneal
membrane
Left
pleuro-
peritoneal
membrane
Septum
transversum
  8   Adriaan van den Spiegel (Spigelius) (1578 – 1625), Professor of 
Anatomy and Surgery, Padua, Italy.  

248 
Hernia
 Treatment comprises urgent surgical repair, 
through either the chest or abdomen.  
 Acquired  h iatal  h ernias 
 Classiﬁ cation 
 These are divided into the following: 
  •   sliding (90%); 
  •   rolling (10%). 
 In the  sliding  variety, the stomach slides through 
the hiatus and is covered in its anterior aspect 
with a peritoneal sac while the posterior part is 
extraperitoneal. It thus resembles an inguinal 
hernia  en glissade  (Figure  29.6 a). This type of 
hernia produces both the effects of a space -
 occupying lesion in the chest and disturbances of 
the cardio - oesophageal sphincter mechanism. 
 In the  rolling (or paraoesophageal) hernia, the 
cardia remains in position but the stomach rolls 
up anteriorly through the hiatus, producing a 
partial volvulus. Because the cardio - oesophageal 
mechanism is intact, there are no symptoms of 
regurgitation (Figure  29.6 b). 
 These hernias probably represent a progressive 
weakening of the muscles of the hiatus. They 
occur in the obese, middle - aged and elderly, and 
are four times more common in women than in 
men. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Most are symptomless, but, when they occur, 
symptoms fall into three groups: 
 1  Mechanical , produced by the presence of the 
hernia within the thoracic cavity: cough, 
dyspnoea, palpitations, hiccough.  
 2  Reﬂ ux , resulting from incompetence of the 
cardiac sphincter: burning retrosternal or 
epigastric pain aggravated by lying down or 
stooping, and which may be referred to the 
jaw, or arms, thus simulating myocardial 
ischaemia. Alkalis provide relief. In severe 
cases, spillover into the trachea may cause 
pneumonitis. 
 3  The effects of oesophagitis : stricture formation 
with dysphagia and bleeding, which may be 
acute or occult. 
 Treatment 
 Sliding hiatus hernias are treated symptomati-
respectively; thus accounting for the long 
course of the phrenic nerve (C3, 4, 5) from the 
neck to the diaphragm.  
  •   The dorsal oesophageal mesentery . 
  •   The pleuroperitoneal membranes , which close 
the primitive communication between the 
pleural and peritoneal cavities.  
  •   A peripheral rim derived from the body wall. 
 In spite of this complex story, congenital abnor-
malities of the diaphragm are unusual. They 
may manifest as hernias through the following 
defects: 
  •   the foramen of Morgagni, 9  between the xiphoid 
and costal origins;  
  •   the foramen of Bochdalek, 10  a defect in the 
pleuroperitoneal canal;  
  •   a deﬁ ciency of the whole central tendon;  
  •   a congenitally large oesophageal hiatus. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Hernias through the foramen of Morgagni are 
usually small and unimportant. Those through the 
foramen of Bochdalek or through the central 
tendon are large and present as respiratory dis-
tress shortly after birth. Urgent surgical repair is 
required. 
 The congenital hiatal hernias present with 
regurgitation, vomiting, dysphagia and progres-
sive loss of weight in small children; they usually 
respond to conservative treatment and nursing 
the child in a sitting position. If this fails, surgical 
repair is necessary.   
 Traumatic  d iaphragmatic  h ernias 
 These are comparatively rare and follow blunt 
(crush) injuries to the chest or abdomen, or pen-
etrating injuries such as stab wounds, which 
implicate the diaphragm. The left diaphragm is far 
more often affected than the right (which is pro-
tected by the liver) and is accompanied by hernia-
tion of the stomach and spleen into the thoracic 
cavity. The gas - ﬁ lled stomach lying in the left chest 
after a crush injury may be mistaken for a tension 
pneumothorax on chest X - ray. Passage of a 
nasogastric tube or ingestion of a small amount of 
contrast material conﬁ rm the diagnosis. 
  9   Giovanni Battista Morgagni (1682 – 1771), Professor of Anatomy, 
Padua, Italy.  
  10  Vincent Bochdalek (1801 – 83), Professor of Anatomy, Prague, 
Czech Republic.  

Hernia 249
cally; if symptoms persist, laparoscopic repair is 
performed. Paraoesophageal (rolling) hernias are 
usually asymptomatic, but potentially more 
serious with the risk of complete gastric volvulus 
into the chest. Should this occur, urgent surgical 
repair is indicated. 
 Figure 29.6   (a) Sliding hiatus hernia: the stomach and lower oesophagus slide into the chest through a patulous 
oesophageal hiatus. (b) Rolling hiatus hernia: the stomach rolls up through the hiatus alongside the lower 
oesophagus (paraoesophageal hernia).  
Peritoneal sac
Diaphragm
(b)
Sliding hernia
(a)
Rolling hernia
 Reﬂ ux  o esophagitis 
 This is discussed in Chapter  20 , p. 163 . 
 
 
 
 
 

 30 
The  l iver  
 
 Learning  o bjectives 
 ✓  To know the common causes of liver enlargement.  
 ✓  To understand the different causes of jaundice, and how they may 
be diagnosed and treated.  
 ✓  To have knowledge of cirrhosis, its various manifestations and 
their management. 
 d  amoebic hepatitis and abscess; 
 e  hydatid; 
 f  leptospirosis (Weil ’ s disease 2 ); 
 g  actinomycosis. 
 3  Vascular : 
 a  right heart failure; 
 b  venous outﬂ ow obstruction, e.g. Budd –
 Chiari syndrome; 
 4  Neoplastic : 
 a  primary tumour; 
 b  secondary deposits. 
 5  Haematological : 
 a  Hodgkin ’ s disease; 3 
 b  non - Hodgkin ’ s lymphoma; 
 c  leukaemia; 
 d  myeloproliferative disorders. 
 6  Autoimmune : 
 a  autoimmune hepatitis; 
 7  Biliary tract disease : 
 a  primary biliary cirrhosis; 
 b  primary sclerosing cholangitis. 
 8  Metabolic diseases : 
 a  fatty inﬁ ltration (non - alcoholic and 
alcoholic fatty liver disease);  
 b  haemochromatosis; 
 c  amyloid; 
 d  glycogen storage diseases (e.g. Gaucher ’ s 
disease 4 ). 
 Liver  e nlargement 
 Physical  s igns 
 The normal liver in the adult is impalpable. In 
contrast, an infant ’ s liver is normally palpable two 
ﬁ nger breadths below the right costal margin. 
 The enlarged liver extends downwards below 
the right costal margin and may ﬁ ll the subcostal 
angle or even extend beneath the left costal margin 
in gross hepatomegaly. The liver moves with res-
piration, is dull to percussion and the liver dull-
ness may extend above the normal upper level of 
the ﬁ fth right interspace.  
 Causes of  h epatomegaly 
 1  Congenital : 
 a  Riedel ’ s lobe; 1 
 b  polycystic liver disease (which develops in 
adult life). 
 2  Infective : 
 a  viral hepatitis; 
 b  liver abscess; 
 c  malaria; 
Lecture Notes: General Surgery, 12th edition. © Harold Ellis, 
Sir Roy Y. Calne and Christopher J. E. Watson. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
  1   Bernhard Riedel (1846 – 1916), Professor of Surgery, Jena, 
Germany. Also described Riedel ’ s thyroiditis. 
  2  Adolf Weil (1848 – 1916), Professor of Medicine, Berlin, Germany. 
  3   Thomas Hodgkin (1798 – 1866), Curator of Pathology, Guy ’ s 
Hospital, London, UK. 
  4   Phillipe Gaucher (1854 – 1918), Physician, H ô pital St Louis, Paris, 
France. 

The liver 251
 Jaundice 
 The normal serum bilirubin is below 17  μ mol/L 
(1   mg/dL). Excess bilirubin becomes clinically 
detectable when the serum level rises to over 
35  μ mol/L (2   mg/dL), and gives a yellow tinge to 
the sclera and skin, termed jaundice (or icterus). 
 Bilirubin  m etabolism  (Figure   30.1 ) 
 Knowledge of bile pigment metabolism and excre-
tion is essential if the pathogenesis, presentation, 
 Whenever the liver is palpable, the patient 
must be examined to detect any accompanying 
splenomegaly or lymphadenopathy. If the spleen 
is palpable in addition to the liver, consider cir-
rhosis, haematological malignancy or amyloid as 
possible diagnoses. If, in addition, the lymph 
nodes are enlarged, the diagnosis is often lym-
phoma, but may be due to viral infection such as 
Epstein – Barr virus. 5 
 Figure 30.1   The metabolism of bilirubin.  
Liver
Spleen
Bilirubin and globin
Bilirubin glucuronide
+
Glucuronyl transferase
Red-cell
breakdown
Bile duct
Some 
reabsorbed
Kidney
Urobilinogen
Urobilin
Urobilin in faeces
Fe
Urobilinogen
  5   Michael Anthony Epstein (b. 1921), Professor of Pathology, 
University of Bristol, Bristol, UK. Yvonne Barr (b. 1932), Epstein ’ s 
assistant, Middlesex Hospital, London, UK.  

252 
The liver
less is excreted into the canaliculi. Thus, both 
unconjugated and conjugated bilirubin accumu-
late in the blood.  
 Posthepatic ( o bstructive)  j aundice 
 Obstruction of the intrahepatic or extrahepatic 
bile ducts prevents excretion of conjugated 
bilirubin. Without pigment, the stools become 
pale, and the conjugated bilirubin builds up in the 
blood and is excreted in the urine, turning it dark 
brown. 
 Sometimes the hepatic and posthepatic forms 
coexist. For example, a stone in the common 
bile duct may produce jaundice partly by obstruct-
ing the outﬂ ow of bile and partly by secondary 
damage to the liver (biliary cirrhosis). Similarly, 
tumour deposits in the liver and cirrhosis may 
both result in jaundice partly by actual destruction 
of liver tissue and partly by intrahepatic duct 
compression.   
 Causes 
 Prehepatic  j aundice 
 This is caused by increased production of 
bilirubin owing to increased red blood cell destruc-
tion. The most common cause is haemolysis (e.g. 
spherocytosis or incompatible blood transfusion), 
but it may occur during reabsorption of a large 
haematoma.  
 Hepatic  j aundice 
 This is a result of impaired bilirubin conjugation 
owing to the following: 
  •   hepatitis: viral (hepatitis viruses A, B, C), 
leptospirosis, glandular fever;  
  •   cirrhosis; 
  •   cholestasis from drugs, e.g. chlorpromazine; 
  •   liver poisons, e.g. paracetamol overdosage, 
chlorinated hydrocarbons such as carbon 
tetrachloride, chloroform and halothane; 
phosphorus; 
  •   liver tumours. 
 Posthepatic  j aundice 
 This is caused by obstruction to biliary drainage 
owing to the following: 
 1  Obstruction within the lumen : gallstones. 
 2  Pathology in the wall : 
investigation and treatment of jaundice are to be 
understood.   
 When red cells reach the end of their life in the 
circulation (approximately 120 days), they are 
destroyed in the reticuloendothelial system. The 
porphyrin ring of the haemoglobin molecule is 
disrupted and a bilirubin – iron – globin complex 
produced. The iron is released and used for further 
haemoglobin synthesis. The bilirubin – globin frac-
tion reaches the liver as a lipid - soluble, water -
 insoluble substance. In the liver, the bilirubin is 
conjugated with glucuronic acid in the hepato-
cytes and excreted in the bile as the now water -
 soluble bilirubin glucuronide. 
 In the bowel lumen, bilirubin is reduced by bac-
terial action to the colourless urobilinogen. Most 
of the urobilinogen is excreted in the faeces, where 
it is broken down into urobilin, which is pig-
mented and which, with the other breakdown 
products of bilirubin, gives the stool its normal 
colour. 
 A small amount of urobilinogen is reabsorbed 
from the intestine into the portal venous tributar-
ies and passes to the liver, where most of it is 
excreted once more in the bile back into the gut. 
Some, however, reaches the systemic circulation 
and this is excreted by the kidney into the urine. 
When urine is exposed to air, the urobilinogen it 
contains is oxidized to urobilin, which is darker.  
 Classiﬁ cation and  p athogenesis 
 The causes of jaundice are classiﬁ ed according to 
which was the abnormal stage in the metabolism 
of bilirubin that resulted in its accumulation. 
 Prehepatic  j aundice 
 Increased production of (unconjugated) bilirubin 
by the reticuloendothelial system, as may result 
from excessive destruction of red cells in haemoly-
sis, exceeds the ability of the liver to conjugate; 
therefore, the unconjugated bilirubin accumu-
lates in the blood. There is no increase in conju-
gated bilirubin in the blood, so none is found in 
the urine. However, there is an increase in the 
amount of urobilinogen produced in the gut, so 
more is resorbed and  ‘ overﬂ ows ’ into the systemic 
circulation, where it is excreted by the kidney.  
 Hepatic  j aundice 
 In the presence of hepatocellular damage, the liver 
is unable to conjugate bilirubin efﬁ ciently, and 

The liver 253
 Examination of the liver itself is helpful. In viral 
hepatitis, the liver is slightly enlarged and tender; 
in cirrhosis, the liver edge is ﬁ rm and may be irreg-
ular, although the liver may be shrunken and 
impalpable. A grossly enlarged, knobbly liver may 
also be present in malignant disease. 
 If the gallbladder is palpable and distended, it is 
probable that the cause of the jaundice is not a 
stone (Courvoisier ’ s law, 6 Chapter  31 , p. 271 ). The 
liver may be smoothly enlarged in posthepatic 
obstructive jaundice. 
 A pancreatic tumour may be palpable or a sepa-
rate primary focus of malignant disease may be 
obvious, e.g. a melanoma. 
 Splenomegaly suggests cirrhosis of the liver, 
blood disease or a lymphoma. In the last, there 
may also be obvious lymphadenopathy.  
 Special  i nvestigations   (Table   30.1 ) 
 The prehepatic causes of jaundice are relatively 
easy to distinguish from hepatic and posthepatic, 
but the last two are often very difﬁ cult to differen-
tiate one from the other and, as already stated, 
may be associated with each other. Laboratory 
tests are of some help but are by no means diag-
nostic. Imaging techniques are valuable in visual-
izing the liver, gallbladder and pancreas, whereas 
endoscopic cannulation of the bile ducts or tran-
shepatic duct puncture enable the bile duct 
system to be outlined. Percutaneous biopsy will 
usually conﬁ rm the hepatic cause of jaundice. 
 Bilirubin is not excreted by the kidney except in 
its water - soluble (conjugated) form. It is therefore 
absent from the urine in prehepatic jaundice 
(hence the old term  ‘ acholuric jaundice ’ ), although 
present when there is posthepatic obstruction. 
 In  prehepatic jaundice , large amounts of 
bilirubin are excreted into the gut; therefore, the 
urobilinogen in the faeces is raised, the amount 
absorbed from the bowel increases and there is 
therefore greater spill over into the urine. 
 In  hepatic damage , the urinary urobilinogen 
may also be raised because of the inability of the 
liver to re - excrete the urobilinogen reabsorbed 
from the bowel. 
 In  posthepatic obstruction , very little bile can 
enter the gut; therefore, the urobilinogen must be 
low in both the faeces and the urine. 
 The important laboratory ﬁ ndings in the various 
types of jaundice can now be summarized: 
 a  congenital atresia of the common bile duct; 
 b  traumatic stricture; 
 c  primary or secondary sclerosing cholangitis; 
 d  tumour of the bile duct 
(cholangiocarcinoma). 
 3  External compression : 
 a  pancreatitis; 
 b  tumour of the head of the pancreas;  
 c  tumour of the ampulla of Vater; 
 d  hilar lymphadenopathy. 
 Diagnosis 
 This is based on history, examination and special 
investigations. 
 History 
 A family history of anaemia, splenectomy or 
gallstones suggests a congenital red cell defect. 
Clay - coloured stools and dark urine accompany-
ing the episodes of jaundice indicate hepatic or 
posthepatic causes. Enquire after recent blood 
transfusions, drugs (chlorpromazine, paraceta-
mol, methyldopa, repeated exposure to haloth-
ane), injections and alcohol consumption. Has 
there been contact with cases of viral hepatitis? 
What is the patient ’ s occupation? (Farmers and 
sewer workers are at risk of leptospirosis  –  Weil ’ s 
disease.) 
 Usually painless jaundice of sudden onset with 
liver tenderness in a young person is viral in origin. 
Attacks of severe colic, rigors and intermittent 
jaundice suggest a stone. Remorselessly progres-
sive jaundice, often accompanied by continuous 
pain radiating to the back, is suspicious of malig-
nant disease. Recent onset of diabetes suggests 
carcinoma of the pancreas.  
 Examination 
 The colour of the jaundice is important; a lemon -
 yellow tinge suggests haemolytic jaundice (owing 
to combined anaemia and mild icterus). Deep 
jaundice suggests the hepatic or posthepatic 
types. 
 Other signs of cirrhosis should be sought: spider 
naevi, gynaecomastia, testicular atrophy, enceph-
alopathy, splenomegaly, liver palms, ﬂ apping 
tremor, leuconychia (white nails) and, occasion-
ally, ﬁ nger clubbing. There may also be ascites and 
leg oedema, but these may be associated with 
intra - abdominal malignant disease as well as 
cirrhosis. 
  6   Ludwig Courvoisier (1843 – 1918), Professor of Surgery, Basle, 
Switzerland. 

254 
The liver
  •   Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) is produced by 
cells lining the bile canaliculi. It is normal in 
prehepatic jaundice, raised in hepatic jaundice 
and considerably raised in posthepatic 
jaundice and in primary biliary cirrhosis. A 
raised ALP level and normal bilirubin are 
features of obstruction of some, but not 
necessarily all, of the intrahepatic bile ducts 
(note that a different isoenzyme of ALP is 
produced by bone and placenta, and isolated 
elevated levels should be isotyped to 
determine origin).  
  •   Serum proteins are normal in prehepatic 
jaundice, have a reversed albumin/globulin 
ratio with depressed albumin synthesis in 
hepatic jaundice and are usually normal in 
posthepatic jaundice, unless associated with 
liver damage.  
  •   Haptoglobin concentrations are low in 
haemolysis. Haptoglobin binds free 
haemoglobin released after haemolysis, and, 
once bound, the complex is catabolized faster 
than haptoglobin alone. It is also low in severe 
liver disease owing to impaired synthesis.  
  •   Serum transaminases such as alanine 
transaminase (ALT) and aspartate 
transaminase (AST) are raised with hepatocyte 
inﬂ ammation such as occurs in viral hepatitis 
and in the active phase of cirrhosis. Gamma 
  •   Urine : the presence of bilirubin indicates 
obstructive jaundice, either intra -  or 
posthepatic. Excess of urobilinogen indicates 
prehepatic jaundice or sometimes liver 
damage, whereas an absence of urobilinogen 
suggests obstructive causes.  
  •   Faeces : absence of bile pigment indicates 
intra - or posthepatic causes.  
  •   Haematological investigations : red blood cell 
fragility, Coombs ’ test 7  and reticulocyte count 
conﬁ rm haemolytic causes.  
  •   Serum bilirubin  is rarely higher than 
100  μ mol/L (5   mg/dL) in prehepatic jaundice, 
but may be considerably higher in obstructive 
cases. In late malignant disease, it may exceed 
1000  μ mol/L. 
  •   Conjugated bilirubin : in prehepatic jaundice, 
bilirubin is present in the unconjugated form. 
In pure posthepatic obstructive jaundice, the 
bilirubin is mainly in the conjugated form, 
whereas in hepatic jaundice it is present in the 
mixed conjugated and unconjugated forms 
owing to a combination of liver destruction 
and intrahepatic duct blockage.  
 Table 30.1   Diagnosis of jaundice 
 Test  
 Prehepatic  
 Hepatic  
 Obstructive  
 Urine  
  Urobilinogen  
  Urobilinogen  
  No urobilinogen  
 
  
  
  Bilirubin present  
 Serum bilirubin  
  Unconjugated bilirubin  
  Conjugated and 
unconjugated  
 Conjugated bilirubin  
 ALT (SGPT) and 
AST (SGOT)  
 Normal  
  Raised  
  Normal or moderately 
raised  
 ALP  
  Normal  
  Normal or moderately raised  
  Raised  
 Blood glucose  
  Normal  
  Low if liver failure  
  Sometimes raised if 
pancreatic tumour  
 Reticulocyte count  
  Raised in haemolysis  
  Normal  
  Normal  
 Haptoglobins  
  Low due to haemolysis  
  Normal or low if liver failure  
  Normal  
 Prothrombin time  
  Normal  
  Prolonged due to poor 
synthetic function  
 Prolonged due to 
vitamin K malabsorption; 
corrects with vitamin K  
 Ultrasound  
  Normal  
  May be abnormal liver 
texture, e.g. cirrhosis  
 Dilated bile ducts  
  7   Robin Royston Amos Coombs (1921 – 2006), Professor of 
Immunology, Cambridge, UK. Described the test for detecting the 
presence of antibodies to red blood cells.  

The liver 255
dilated bile duct is cannulated, may be 
necessary where ERCP is not possible. 
 Both ERCP and PTC may be used to 
introduce stents across obstructing bile duct 
lesions to decompress the bile ducts and 
resolve jaundice.  
  •   Needle biopsy . If the ultrasound scan reveals no 
dilatation of the duct system, an obstructive 
lesion is unlikely and needle biopsy of the liver 
may give valuable information regarding 
hepatic pathology (e.g. hepatitis or cirrhosis). If 
the ultrasound demonstrates focal lesions in 
the liver, an ultrasound - guided biopsy of one 
of the lesions can be obtained. Needle biopsy 
is potentially dangerous in the presence of 
jaundice, particularly where there is biliary 
dilatation or ascites. The prothrombin time, if 
prolonged, should ﬁ rst be corrected by 
administration of vitamin K, and fresh frozen 
plasma and platelet transfusions may also be 
indicated; a transjugular liver biopsy may be 
appropriate in the presence of severe 
coagulopathy. Should bleeding occur following 
biopsy, angiographic embolization or 
immediate laparotomy may be necessary. 
 Summary of  i nvestigations of  j aundice 
 The investigations of jaundice may be grouped as 
follows: 
  •   Exclusion of prehepatic causes : haptoglobin 
level, reticulocyte count, Coombs ’  test; split 
bilirubin (conjugated/unconjugated).  
  •   Liver synthetic function (hepatocellular 
dysfunction): prothrombin time, albumin.  
  •   Liver cell damage : transaminases,  γ - glutamyl 
transferase. 
  •   Bile duct obstruction : alkaline phosphatase, 
ultrasound of bile ducts, PTC, ERCP, MRCP and 
CT for pancreatic lesion.  
  •   Intrahepatic mass : cross - sectional imaging, 
such as ultrasound and CT, with needle biopsy. 
 Congenital  a bnormalities 
 Riedel ’ s  l obe 
 This anatomical variant is a projection downwards 
from the right lobe of the liver of normally func-
tioning liver tissue. It may present as a puzzling 
and symptomless abdominal mass.  
glutamyl transferase (GGT) is a more sensitive 
indicator of liver disease, and is often raised 
before the transaminases.  
  •   Prothrombin time  is normal in prehepatic 
jaundice, prolonged but correctable with 
vitamin K in posthepatic jaundice (in which 
functioning liver tissue is still present) and 
prolonged but not correctable in advanced 
hepatic jaundice, in which not only is 
absorption of fat - soluble vitamin K impaired 
but the damaged liver is also unable to 
synthesize prothrombin.  
  •   Ultrasound scanning  is extremely useful as well 
as non - invasive. Gallstones within the 
gallbladder can be demonstrated with a high 
degree of accuracy. Unfortunately, stones 
within the distal bile ducts are often missed 
because of overlying duodenal gas. Dilatation 
of the duct system within the liver is a good 
indication of duct obstruction; thus, if the 
ducts are not dilated, an obstructive cause for 
the jaundice is unlikely.  
  •   Computed tomography (CT)  and  magnetic 
resonance (MR)  scans are useful in addition to 
ultrasound in the demonstration of 
intrahepatic lesions (e.g. tumour deposits, 
abscess, cyst), which may then be accurately 
needle biopsied under imaging control. A mass 
in the pancreas may also be demonstrated, but 
differentiation between carcinoma and chronic 
pancreatitis is difﬁ cult. 
  •   Abdominal X - ray  may show gallstones (10% are 
radio - opaque). 
  •   Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography 
(MRCP) affords non - invasive high - resolution 
imaging of the biliary tree. However, it does 
not permit therapeutic intervention.  
  •   Endoscopic retrograde 
cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) , in which 
the ampulla of Vater 8  is cannulated using an 
endoscope passed via the mouth, may 
demonstrate the location and indicate the 
nature of an obstructing lesion within the bile 
ducts. A periampullary tumour is also directly 
visualized at this examination, and can be 
biopsied.  
  •   Percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography 
(PTC) , in which a needle is passed 
percutaneously into the liver substance and a 
  8  Abraham Vater (1648 – 1751), Professor of Anatomy, Wittenberg, 
Germany. 

256 
The liver
continues, the relevant main hepatic arterial 
branch should be tied, and, if the bleeding contin-
ues in spite of this, major hepatic lobar resection 
may be necessary. 
 Antibiotic cover must be given because of the 
danger of infection of areas of devitalized liver, 
and is particularly important when packing is 
used. 
 Acute  i nfections of 
the  l iver 
 Possible sources of infection are the following: 
  •   portal , from an area of suppuration drained by 
the portal vein, usually diverticular sepsis or 
appendicitis;  
  •   biliary , resulting from an ascending 
cholangitis;  
  •   arterial , as part of a general septicaemia  – this 
is unusual; 
  •   adjacent infections  spreading into the liver 
parenchyma, e.g. subphrenic abscess or acute 
cholecystitis. 
 Pyogenic  l iver  a bscess 
 Pyogenic liver abscess is a consequence of infec-
tion either in the portal territory, leading to a 
portal pyaemia (pyelophlebitis), or in the biliary 
tree. Multiple abscesses are common. Common 
infecting organisms include  Escherichia coli , 
 Streptococcus faecalis and  Streptococcus milleri . 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 The condition should be suspected in patients 
who develop rigors, high swinging fever, a tender 
palpable liver and jaundice. A previous history of 
abdominal sepsis, such as Crohn ’ s disease, 9 appen-
dicitis or diverticulitis may be obtained. The clini-
cal course is often insidious, with a non - speciﬁ c 
malaise for over a month before presentation and 
diagnosis. 
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   Blood culture , carried out before treatment is 
commenced, is often positive.  
 Polycystic  l iver 
 This is often associated with polycystic disease 
of the kidneys (and occasionally pancreas), and 
comprises multiple cysts within the liver paren-
chyma. The liver may reach a very large size, but 
functions normally. The commonest symptoms 
are discomfort and awareness of the grossly 
enlarged liver in the abdomen. Haemorrhage 
into the cysts and cholangitis are occasional 
complications. 
 Liver  t rauma 
 This may be due to penetrating wounds (gunshot 
or stab) or closed crush injuries, often associated 
with fractures of the ribs and injuries to other 
intra - abdominal viscera, especially the spleen. 
Severe abdominal trauma is becoming increas-
ingly common, and accurate preoperative diagno-
sis of the source of the haemorrhage may be 
impossible. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Following injury, the patient complains of abdom-
inal pain. Examination reveals shock (pallor, tach-
ycardia, hypotension), generalized abdominal 
tenderness together with the signs of progressive 
bleeding. 
 CT is essential to assess the severity of the injury 
and to identify any additional injuries, such as a 
ruptured spleen. Occasionally, there is delayed 
rupture of a subcapsular haematoma, so that 
abdominal pain and shock may not be in evidence 
until some hours or days after the initial injury.  
 Treatment 
 If the patient ’ s vital observations are stable, and 
a deﬁ nite diagnosis made by CT, the patient can 
initially be managed conservatively with blood 
transfusion and careful observation. Repeat CT 
is undertaken to monitor progress. 
 If bleeding continues, as denoted by falling 
blood pressure, rising pulse and falling haemo-
globin, and/or there is the risk of overlooking 
damage to other viscera, a laparotomy is per-
formed. Minor liver tears can be sutured. Packing 
of the injury with gauze packs, removed after 48 
hours, may be life - saving in severe trauma when 
the patient ’ s condition is deteriorating. If bleeding 
  9   Burrill Bernard Crohn (1884 – 1983), Gastroenterologist, Mount 
Sinai Hospital, New York, NY, USA. The disease was ﬁ rst described 
by Morgagni (1682 – 1771). 

The liver 257
 Treatment 
 The majority respond to medical treatment with 
metronidazole. Ultrasound - guided percutaneous 
drainage 
is 
required 
infrequently 
in 
non -
 responding cases. 
 Hydatid  d isease of 
the  l iver 
 The liver is the site of 75% of hydatid cysts in 
humans. 
 Pathology 
 Dogs are infected with the ova of  Echinococcus 
granulosus ( Taenia echinococcus ) as a result of 
eating sheep offal. The tapeworms develop in the 
dog ’ s small intestine from whence ova are dis-
charged in the faeces. Humans (as well as sheep) 
ingest the ova from contaminated vegetables and 
the ova penetrate the stomach wall to invade the 
portal tributaries and thence pass to the liver. 
Occasionally, the hydatids may pass on to the 
lungs, brain, bones and other organs. Hydatid 
disease is therefore common in sheep - rearing 
communities, e.g. in Australia, Iceland, Cyprus, 
southern Europe, Africa and Wales. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 A cyst may present as a symptomless mass. The 
contents may die and the walls become calciﬁ ed 
so that this inactive structure may be a harmless 
postmortem ﬁ nding. 
 The active cyst may, however, 
  •   rupture into the peritoneal cavity, pleural 
cavity, alimentary canal or biliary tree; 
  •   become infected ; 
  •   produce obstructive jaundice by pressure on 
intrahepatic bile ducts, although jaundice is 
much more often due to intrabiliary rupture 
and release of cysts into the bile ducts.     
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   Plain X - ray of the liver may show a clear zone 
produced by the cyst, or may show ﬂ ecks of 
calciﬁ cation in the cyst wall. 
  •   Ultrasound and CT scan localize the cyst. 
  •   Ultrasound or CT of the liver may identify and 
localize hepatic abscesses, as well as 
identifying the source of the pyaemia. 
 Treatment 
 The originating site of sepsis should be dealt with 
appropriately. A large liver abscess can be drained 
percutaneously 
under 
ultrasound 
guidance; 
smaller abscesses are treated by parenteral antibi-
otic therapy alone. 
 Portal  p yaemia ( p yelophlebitis) 
 Infection may reach the liver via the portal tribu-
taries from a focus of intra - abdominal sepsis, 
particularly acute appendicitis or diverticulitis. 
Multiple abscesses may permeate the liver; in 
addition, there may be septic thrombi in the 
intrahepatic radicles of the portal vein, and 
infected clot in the portal vein itself. The 
condition has become rare since the advent of 
antibiotics. 
 Biliary  i nfection 
 Multiple abscesses in the liver may occur in asso-
ciation with severe suppurative cholangitis sec-
ondary to impaction of gallstones in the common 
bile duct. Clinically, the features are those of 
 Charcot ’ s intermittent hepatic fever 10  – pyrexia, 
rigors and jaundice. (Rigors represent a bacterae-
mia and are commonly due to infection in either 
the renal or biliary tract.) 
 Urgent drainage of the bile ducts is performed, 
by either endoscopic sphincterotomy or percuta-
neous transhepatic drainage. 
 Amoebic  l iver  a bscess 
 This particular type of portal infection is second-
ary to an  Entamoeba histolytica  infection of the 
large intestine. From there, amoebae travel via the 
portal circulation to the liver, where they prolifer-
ate. The amoeba produces a cytolytic enzyme that 
destroys the liver tissue, producing an amoebic 
abscess, which is sterile, although amoebae may 
be found in the abscess wall. 
 CT and ultrasound of the liver are the most valu-
able special investigations. 
  10  Jean - Martin Charcot (1825 – 1893), First Professor of Neurology, 
Salp ê tri è re Hospital, Paris, France. 

258 
The liver
 b  primary sclerosing cholangitis; 
 c  secondary to prolonged biliary obstruction 
(secondary biliary cirrhosis). 
 4  Hepatic venous outﬂ ow obstruction : 
 a  Budd – Chiari syndrome 13  (hepatic venous 
occlusion);  
 b  severe chronic congestive cardiac failure. 
 5  Other causes : 
 a  chronic active hepatitis, which is an 
autoimmune disease;  
 b  schistosomiasis; 
 c  nutritional (protein - deﬁ cient diet); 
 d  idiopathic (cryptogenic); 
 e  parenteral nutrition related  – probably 
linked to the fat content. 
 In countries with a high consumption of alcohol 
(e.g. France), alcohol is the most common aetio-
logical factor. In the tropics, schistosomiasis 
heads the list (Egyptian splenomegaly). In the UK, 
alcohol accounts for half of the cases of cirrhosis.  
 Consequences of  c irrhosis 
 1  Hepatocellular failure: 
 a  impaired protein synthesis: prolonged 
prothrombin time and low albumin; 
 b  impaired metabolism of toxins: 
encephalopathy; 
 c  impaired bilirubin metabolism: jaundice. 
 2  Portal hypertension (see below). 
 3  Ascites due to portal hypertension. 
 4  Malignant change: hepatoma. 
 Clinical  f eatures of  c irrhosis 
 A number of clinical signs, separate from those of 
portal hypertension, are seen in cirrhosis. These 
include gynaecomastia, testicular atrophy, amen-
orrhoea, spider naevi, ﬁ nger clubbing and palmar 
erythema ( ‘ liver palms ’ ). 
 Hepatic  e ncephalopathy 
 A neuropsychiatric condition characterized by 
mental changes, ﬂ apping tremor and hepatic 
coma. It occurs because the liver is unable to 
detoxify the nitrogenous breakdown products of 
protein metabolism combined with portosys-
temic shunts that divert these products directly 
into the systemic circulation.  
  •   Serological tests  depend on the sensitization of 
the patient to hydatid ﬂ uid, which contains a 
speciﬁ c antigen, leakage of which induces the 
production of antibodies.  
  •   Eosinophil count : there may be  eosinophilia , 
which, while not speciﬁ c, should arouse 
clinical suspicion. 
 Treatment 
 A calciﬁ ed cyst should be left alone. Other cysts 
should be treated to prevent complications. 
Treatment with albendazole may result in shrink-
age or even disappearance of the cysts. Failure to 
respond or the presence of complications are indi-
cations for surgery. The cyst is exposed and aspi-
rated. It is then possible to excise the cyst, taking 
care not to liberate daughter cysts that are present 
within the cyst.   
 Cirrhosis 
 Deﬁ nition 
 Cirrhosis of the liver is a consequence of chronic 
hepatic injury, with healing by regeneration and 
ﬁ brosis. Fibrosis leads to further cell damage and 
destruction of hepatic architecture, progressing to 
liver failure and portal hypertension. 
 Aetiology 
 A convenient classiﬁ cation of the cirrhoses is as 
follows: 
 1  Parenchymal : 
 a  alcohol; 
 b  viral, commonly following hepatitis B and C 
infections;  
 c  non - alcoholic fatty liver disease. 
 2  Metabolic : 
 a  iron overload  – haemochromatosis; 
 b  copper overload  – hepatolenticular 
degeneration (Kinnier Wilson ’ s disease 11 ). 
 3  Biliary : 
 a  primary biliary cirrhosis (Hanot ’ s cirrhosis 12 ) 
 – an autoimmune disease characterized by 
raised serum antimitochondrial (M2) 
antibodies;  
  11   Samuel A. Kinnier Wilson (1877 – 1937), Neurologist, Hospital for 
Nervous Diseases, Queen Square, London, UK. 
  12   Victor Charles Hanot (1844 – 96), Physician, Paris, France.  
  13   George Budd (1808 – 1882), Professor of Medicine, King ’ s College, 
London, UK. Hans Chiari (1851 – 1916), Professor of Pathology, 
Prague, Czech Republic. 

The liver 259
 Portal  h ypertension 
 The normal portal pressure is less than 5   mmHg. 
In portal hypertension, this pressure is raised. 
 Aetiology 
 Portal hypertension results from an obstruction to 
portal venous drainage. The causes are classiﬁ ed 
according to the site of the block. 
 1  Prehepatic (obstruction of the portal venous 
inﬂ ow into the liver): 
 a  congenital malformation; 
 b  portal vein thrombosis: often secondary to 
portal pyaemia, prothrombotic disorders, or, 
in the neonatal period, spreading infection 
from the umbilicus;  
 c  occlusion by tumour or pancreatitis. In 
adults, there is a special case in which 
splenic vein thrombosis caused by 
pancreatic pathology can result in 
 ‘ segmental portal hypertension ’ with 
diversion of the splenic drainage via the 
short gastric veins, which results in the 
development of gastric and oesophageal 
varices. 
 2  Hepatic (obstruction of the portal ﬂ ow within 
the liver): e.g. cirrhosis.  
 3  Posthepatic (obstruction of the hepatic veins): 
Budd – Chiari syndrome. 
 a  Idiopathic hepatic venous thrombosis in 
young adults of both sexes. A possible 
complication of oral contraceptives in 
women. In many cases, there is an 
underlying haematological cause, e.g. 
polycythaemia or monoclonal gammopathy.  
 b  Congenital obliteration. 
 c  Blockage of hepatic veins by tumour 
invasion. 
 By far, the commonest cause of portal hyperten-
sion is cirrhosis, yet there is no strict relationship 
between the severity of the liver disease and the 
extent of portal hypertension, which is not there-
fore entirely explained on the basis of mechanical 
obstruction.  
 Pathological  e ffects 
 The four important effects of portal hypertension 
are the following: 
 1  collateral portosystemic venous drainage 
develops;  
 2  splenomegaly; 
 3  ascites (in hepatic and posthepatic portal 
hypertension only);  
 4  the manifestations of hepatic failure (in severe 
cirrhosis). 
 Collateral  c hannels 
 Portal obstruction results in the development of 
collateral channels between the portal and sys-
temic venous circulations (Figure  30.2 ). The sites 
of these channels are as follows: 
  •   between the left gastric vein and the 
oesophageal veins, forming gastric and 
oesophageal varices; these are the largest and 
clinically the most important connections;  
  •   along the obliterated umbilical vein to the 
superior and inferior epigastric veins, forming 
a  caput medusae around the umbilicus; 
  •   retroperitoneal and diaphragmatic 
anastomoses, which present technical hazards 
to the surgeon at the time of liver 
transplantation; 
  •   between the superior and inferior rectal veins 
with development of anal canal varices;  
  •   along any adhesions between the visceral and 
parietal peritoneum due to previous surgery or 
inﬂ ammation; 
  •   at the site of a colostomy or ileostomy. 
 The oesophageal varices, and to a much lesser 
extent anal varices, may result in gastrointestinal 
haemorrhage, which is the most serious complica-
tion of portal hypertension.  
 Splenomegaly 
 Progressive splenic enlargement occurs as a result 
of portal congestion together with some degree of 
hypertrophy of the splenic substance itself. This is 
often associated with the haematological changes 
of hypersplenism: leucopenia and thrombocyto-
penia. Anaemia accompanying splenomegaly can 
be accounted for by gastrointestinal bleeding and 
is not necessarily a result of splenic enlargement.  
 Ascites 
 This is due to a combination of factors: 
 1  Splanchnic vasodilatation occurs owing to 
accumulation of vasoactive mediators in the 
splanchnic circulation secondary to the liver 
failure, resulting in pooling of blood. Systemic 
hypotension is a consequence, with renal 
hypoperfusion and activation of the renin –
 angiotensin – aldosterone system, resulting in 
raised serum aldosterone which leads to avid 
salt (sodium) and water retention.  

260 
The liver
 Figure 30.2   The sites of occurrence of portal – systemic communications in patients with portal hypertension. PV, 
portal vein; SMV, superior mesenteric vein; IMV, inferior mesenteric vein; SV, splenic vein.  
Oesophageal varices
Splenic varices
to greater curve
Splenic hilar varices
to retroperitoneum
Shunts to 
retro-
peritoneum
Caput medusae
at umbilicus
(recanalized
umbilical 
vein drains to 
epigastric veins)
Anorectal 
varices
Shunts to diaphragmatic
surface and phrenic veins
Recanalized
umbilical
vein
SMV
SV
PV
IMV

The liver 261
  •   Ultrasound  will demonstrate portal venous 
ﬂ ow, splenomegaly, and the presence of 
intra - abdominal varices; it may also 
detect hepatic venous outﬂ ow 
occlusion.  
  •   Inferior vena cavagram , which will 
demonstrate hepatic venous occlusion.  
  •   Portal pressure measurement . This is achieved 
by means of a catheter passed via the 
transjugular route into the hepatic vein. The 
difference between the pressure in the vein 
with and without an occluding balloon inﬂ ated 
(the hepatic and hepatic wedge pressure) is the 
portal pressure, a technique akin to pulmonary 
pressure measurement with a Swan – Ganz 
catheter 14  (page 34) . 
  •   Magnetic resonance angiography and CT 
angiography for the accurate demonstration of 
the site of portal obstruction.     
 Treatment 
 The treatment of uncomplicated portal hyperten-
sion involves treatment of the underlying condi-
tion, e.g. cirrhosis is managed by a high - calorie, 
well - balanced diet with added protein in mal-
nourished patients (provided liver damage is not 
severe), and with avoidance of precipitating 
factors such as alcohol. If oesophageal varices are 
visible on endoscopy, they are banded or injected 
with sclerosant, since the ﬁ rst episode of variceal 
haemorrhage is associated with a 15 – 20% 
mortality. 
 The  m anagement of  h aemorrhage 
from  g astro - o esophageal  v arices 
 Haemorrhage from gastro - oesophageal varices is 
particularly dangerous, especially in patients with 
liver damage. In these subjects, the liver is further 
injured by the hypotension of blood loss, and 
encephalopathy may be precipitated owing to the 
absorption of large amounts of nitrogenous break-
down products from the  ‘ meal of blood ’  within the 
intestine. Prognosis is better in the small group of 
patients with normal liver function and portal 
hypertension due to a prehepatic block, e.g. portal 
vein thrombosis. 
 2  The portal venous pressure is raised owing to 
compression of the portal venous radicles in 
the liver by the scarred surrounding hepatic 
tissue. 
 3  The serum albumin, which is synthesized by 
the liver, is reduced, resulting in lowering of 
the serum osmotic pressure. 
 The  e ffects of  l iver 
 f ailure 
  •   Jaundice. 
  •   Encephalopathy. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 To the surgeon, portal hypertension presents as 
three problems: 
 1  as a differential diagnosis of jaundice or 
hepatomegaly; 
 2  as a cause of gastrointestinal haemorrhage; 
 3  as one of the causes of ascites (Box  30.1 ). 
 Special  i nvestigations 
 In addition to history and examination (which 
includes a careful search for the stigmata of liver 
disease), 
the 
following 
investigations 
are 
indicated: 
  •   Liver function tests , particularly transaminases 
and alkaline phosphatase.  
  •   Liver synthetic function tests , such as 
prothrombin time and albumin.  
  •   Liver biopsy  if necessary.  
  •   Fibreoptic endoscopy , which may demonstrate 
varices and differentiate between bleeding 
from this source and from a peptic ulcer or 
multiple gastric erosions, all of which are 
common in patients with cirrhosis.  
 Box 30.1   The  c auses of  a scites 
  •    Liver failure and portal hypertension  
  •    Carcinomatosis 
  •    Heart failure  
  •    Renal failure  
  •    Chronic peritonitis, e.g. tuberculous  
  •    Pancreatitis 
  14  Harold James Charles ( ‘ Jeremy ’ ) Swan (1922 – 2005), Cardiologist, 
Cedars of Lebanon Hospital, Los Angles, CA, USA. William Ganz 
(1919 – 2009), Professor of Medicine, UCLA, and Senior Research 
Scientist, Cedars of Lebanon Hospital, Los Angeles, CA, USA. 

262 
The liver
  •   Intravenous terlipressin , a vasopressin 
analogue, is given to reduce portal venous 
pressure and cause temporary cessation of 
bleeding by mesenteric arteriolar constriction. 
Therapeutic doses cause intestinal colic and 
myocardial ischaemia, which responds to 
glyceryl trinitrate infusion.  
  •   Balloon tamponade , achieved by passing a 
Sengstaken – Blakemore tube 15 via the mouth 
into the oesophagus and cardia. The gastric 
balloon on the end is inﬂ ated, following which 
gentle traction is applied to the tube such that 
the balloon impacts on the oesophagogastric 
junction, which stops ﬂ ow in the varices. 
Rebleeding after balloon decompression is 
common, so it is used to buy time pending 
deﬁ nitive treatment. 
  •   Transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt 
(TIPS) : a metal stent is inserted via the jugular 
vein and, under radiological control, passed 
through the liver substance to open up a 
passage between the hepatic vein and the 
portal vein. The resultant portosystemic shunt 
decompresses the portal system. TIPS has 
reduced the necessity for oesophageal 
transection or operative portosystemic shunt 
formation. Unfortunately, shunt procedures 
(surgical or radiological), in which an 
anastomosis is made between the portal and 
systemic circulations, are likely to precipitate 
encephalopathy. 
  •   Oesophageal transection , in which the 
oesophagus together with the varices are 
divided at the cardio - oesophageal junction 
using a circular stapling gun in order to 
interrupt the communications between the 
two systems of veins within the wall of the 
lower oesophagus. 
  •   Surgical portocaval shunt , by surgical 
anastomosis of the portal vein to the inferior 
vena cava or by splenic vein to the left renal 
vein used to be commonplace. Such 
procedures have now been superseded by TIPS 
and endoscopic control of oesophageal varices. 
Laparotomy should be avoided when possible 
if a subsequent transplant is planned, as the 
resulting vascular adhesions will add greatly to 
the dangers of the transplant operation. 
 Prophylaxis  a gainst  h aemorrhage 
 If varices are detected on screening endoscopy, 
pharmacological therapy with beta - blockers is 
instituted to reduce splanchnic blood ﬂ ow and 
lower portal venous pressure. Large varices in 
patients at increased risk of haemorrhage (e.g. 
severe liver disease) may be treated by endoscopic 
band ligation (small rubber bands applied to 
ligate the varices) or injection with sclerosant.  
 Establishing the  d iagnosis 
 An attempt must be made to conﬁ rm the diagno-
sis. The presence of established liver disease, an 
enlarged spleen and proven varices does not nec-
essarily mean that bleeding is from the varices. 
Such patients are prone to bleeding from gastric 
erosions and are commonly affected by peptic 
ulceration. Fibreoptic endoscopy should always 
be performed in order to visualize the bleeding 
point and to exclude non - variceal haemorrhage. 
Active bleeding may, however, prevent a satisfac-
tory view at endoscopy.  
 Immediate  t reatment 
 The ﬁ rst priority is airway protection, emergency 
resuscitation and stabilizing the patient prior to 
emergency endoscopy: 
  •   Preventing aspiration . Patients with liver 
disease have impaired consciousness and may 
be at risk of aspirating. They should be 
managed in conjunction with the critical care 
team.  
  •   Resuscitation with ﬂ uid and blood . 
Coagulation abnormalities should be corrected 
with fresh frozen plasma and/or platelet 
transfusions. 
  •   Antimicrobial therapy . Patients are at risk of 
bacterial infection and beneﬁ t from treatment 
with broad - spectrum antibiotics (e.g. third -
 generation cephalosporins) to reduce the risk 
of rebleeding and improve survival. 
 Stopping the  h aemorrhage 
 The bleeding may be arrested by a number of 
manoeuvres: 
  •   Endoscopic variceal band ligation or 
sclerotherapy . These procedures can stop 
bleeding with minimal trauma to the patient, 
although there is a risk of perforation of the 
oesophagus, and repeated injections may 
produce ulceration or ﬁ brosis and stenosis. 
  15   Robert Sengstaken (b. 1923), Neurosurgeon, New York, NY, USA. 
Arthur H. Blakemore (1897 – 1970), Surgeon, Columbia Presbyterian 
Medical Center, New York, NY, USA. 

The liver 263
 c  cholangiocarcinoma. 
 2  Secondary (most common): 
 a  portal spread (from alimentary tract); 
 b  systemic blood spread (from lung, breast, 
testis, melanoma, etc.); 
 c  direct spread (from gallbladder, stomach 
and hepatic ﬂ exure of colon). 
 Hepatocellular  c arcinoma 
 Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) exhibits marked 
geographical variation in incidence, being uncom-
mon in the West but common in central Africa and 
south - east Asia. This distribution largely reﬂ ects 
the prevalence of hepatitis B and C virus infection. 
In the UK, the incidence of HCC is increasing, a 
reﬂ ection of the increasing prevalence of viral 
hepatitis in particular, and cirrhosis in general. 
 Eighty per cent of cases of HCC arise in patients 
with cirrhosis of the liver, and it is most common 
when cirrhosis is caused by one of the following: 
  •   hepatitis B infection, the commonest cause of 
HCC worldwide; 
  •   hepatitis C infection, in which the lead - time 
from infection to HCC may be 25 years or 
more; 
  •   alcoholic liver disease; 
  •      haemochromatosis, in which the degree of iron 
overload is related to HCC; 
  •   non - alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD). 
 Pathology 
 The pathogenesis of HCC, when associated with 
cirrhosis, is related to the chronic inﬂ ammatory 
process within the liver. Macroscopically, the 
tumour either forms a large, solitary mass or there 
may be multiple foci throughout the liver. 
 Spread occurs through the liver substance and 
into the vessels, so that portal vein thrombosis is 
a common ﬁ nding. Metastasis outside the liver is 
late. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 The clinical presentation varies depending on the 
extent of liver disease. In the absence of cirrhosis, 
the presentation is with massive liver swelling and 
possibly ascites. In the presence of advanced liver 
disease, malignant change in the liver may be 
marked by rapid deterioration and decompensa-
tion with encephalopathy, ascites and impaired 
synthetic function.  
 Treatment of  a scites 
  •   Paracentesis gives immediate relief if 
discomfort is intense, but it has the 
disadvantage that the patient loses protein, 
which should therefore be replaced at the time 
(10  g albumin per litre of ascites removed). 
  •   Diet : low - sodium, high - protein diet; 
intravenous albumin. 
  •   Diuretics : spironolactone often combined with 
a thiazide or loop diuretic.  
  •   TIPS : see above. 
 Intractable ascites due to hepatic cirrhosis is an 
indication for liver transplantation, which is per-
formed after failure of medical therapy.   
 Hepatorenal  s yndrome 
 Renal failure is often associated with ascites and 
liver failure, particularly alcoholic cirrhosis. It is in 
part a consequence of depletion of the intravascu-
lar volume, as may be caused by diuretic therapy 
or surgery. There is a reduction in intrarenal blood 
ﬂ ow brought about by increased glomerular affer-
ent arteriolar tone, but the cause of this is 
unknown. The glomerular ﬁ ltration rate falls as 
the blood ﬂ ow is diverted away from the renal 
cortex. Established renal failure in the presence of 
liver disease is difﬁ cult to treat, and is best avoided 
by maintaining hydration during surgery. 
 Renal failure may occur in any patient with 
jaundice, particularly following surgery. It is best 
prevented by avoiding ﬂ uid depletion and main-
taining a good diuresis intraoperatively.   
 Liver  n eoplasms 
 Classiﬁ cation 
 Benign 
  •   Haemangioma. 
  •   Adenoma. 
  •   Focal nodular hyperplasia 
 Malignant 
 1  Primary : 
 a  hepatocellular carcinoma (hepatoma); 
 b  ﬁ brolamellar carcinoma, uncommon variant 
of hepatoma affecting young adults and 
children;  

264 
The liver
 Secondaries 
 The liver is an extremely common site for second-
ary deposits, which are often found at autopsy on 
patients who have died of advanced malignant 
disease. Necrosis at the centre of metastases leads 
to the typical umbilication of these tumours. 
 The clinical effects of secondary deposits in the 
liver are as follows: 
  •   hepatomegaly: the liver is large, hard and 
irregular; 
  •   jaundice: a late sign due to liver destruction 
and intrahepatic duct compression;  
  •   hepatic failure, also a late sign; 
  •   portal vein obstruction: producing 
oesophageal varices and ascites;  
  •   inferior vena cava obstruction: producing leg 
oedema. 
 Treatment of  s econdary  t umours 
 Resection of secondary tumours is not appropri-
ate in the case of disseminated malignancy. 
However, it may be considered when deposits can 
be surgically excised leaving an adequate residual 
liver volume in the absence of any demonstrable 
extrahepatic disease. Following resection, the liver 
will hypertrophy and regain normal functional 
capacity. This is mostly applicable to secondary 
deposits from a previous colonic carcinoma. For 
this reason, such patients should have regular 
ultrasound scans postoperatively to detect poten-
tially curable metastatic disease early. Following 
such a policy, 10 – 20% of patients who develop 
colorectal liver metastases can undergo resection 
with a 30 – 40% 5 year disease - free survival. 
 Liver  s urgery 
 Anatomical  c onsiderations 
 The liver has remarkable regenerative powers and, 
as such, will tolerate resection of up to two - thirds 
of its mass. However, anatomically it is not suited 
to resection, since the inﬂ ow structures (portal 
vein, hepatic artery and bile duct tributaries) cross 
the hepatic venous outﬂ ow. Nevertheless, there 
are recognized planes of resection that follow from 
an understanding of the segmental anatomy of the 
liver (Figure  30.3 ). 
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   Serum  α - fetoprotein (AFP)  may be signiﬁ cantly 
raised, but it is neither sensitive nor speciﬁ c 
for hepatocellular carcinoma and may rise in 
other diseases such as hepatitis C.  
  •   Cross - sectional imaging  with ultrasound, CT or 
MR will conﬁ rm the presence of a large 
tumour. Small tumours, 1   cm or less in 
diameter, are difﬁ cult to distinguish from 
regenerative nodules in the presence of 
cirrhosis. 
  •   Selective hepatic angiography  may distinguish 
regenerative nodules from small HCCs, or may 
reveal multifocal cancer. 
 Treatment 
 In the absence of cirrhosis, a primary hepatocel-
lular carcinoma conﬁ ned to one lobe can be 
treated by hemihepatectomy. In the presence of 
cirrhosis, removal of any liver substance is likely 
to precipitate hepatic decompensation and death. 
Localized treatments such as radiofrequency abla-
tion or transarterial chemoembolization (TACE) 
may be used, but in this situation the whole liver 
is  ‘ at risk ’  and, even after successful destruction of 
one lesion, further lesions are likely to develop. 
The only alternative is replacement of the dis-
eased liver by liver transplantation. Results from 
this procedure are good providing the tumour 
load is limited.   
 Cholangiocarcinoma 
 This is much less common (20% of primary 
tumours). It is an adenocarcinoma arising from 
the bile duct system that usually presents with 
jaundice and may complicate primary sclerosing 
cholangitis. Spread occurs directly through the 
liver substance and regional nodes with a fatal 
outcome. 
 Some tumours present early and are amenable 
to resection, which usually involves an extended 
liver resection (see below). For the more usual 
inoperable cases it may be possible to relieve the 
jaundice at ERCP by passing a plastic or an 
expanding metal stent upwards along the common 
bile duct through the growth into the dilated radi-
cles above the obstruction or downwards by per-
cutaneous intubation. This relieves the jaundice, 
often for many months.  

The liver 265
  •      left lobectomy involves resection of the left 
lobe segments II, III and IV; the caudate lobe 
(segment I) may also be removed;  
  •   trisegmentectomy is a misnomer, but indicates 
resection of most of the liver but leaving just 
the left lateral segments (II and III); since this 
resection removes the most liver, care has to be 
taken to ensure that sufﬁ cient viable liver 
remains to sustain life. 
 
 
 
 
 Surgical  r esections 
 The following are the common liver resections 
performed for primary and secondary (usually 
colonic) tumours of the liver: 
  •   right lobectomy involves removal of segments 
V to VIII by dividing the liver along a line 
between the gallbladder fossa and vena cava, 
and leaving the left lobe;  
 Figure 30.3   (a – c) Segmental anatomy of the liver showing inﬂ ow vessels (hepatic artery, portal vein and bile ducts) 
to the eight liver segments and the hepatic venous drainage via the three main hepatic veins.  (Reproduced from Ellis 
H, Mahadevan V. (2010)  Clinical Anatomy , 12th edn. Oxford: Wiley - Blackwell.)  
II
III
VII
IV
VI
VIII
I
V
Inferior vena cava
Inferior vena cava
Gallbladder
Falciform
ligament
Morphological left lobe
Morphological right lobe
Left hepatic vein
Right hepatic vein
Central hepatic vein
Portal vein
(c)
(a)
(b)

 31 
The  g allbladder and 
 b ile  d ucts  
 
 Learning objective 
 ✓  To know the causes of gallstones, their varying presentations and 
treatment. 
  •   A long mesentery to the gallbladder, which 
allows acute torsion of the gallbladder to occur 
with consequent gangrene and rupture.  
  •   Anomalies of the arrangement of the blood 
vessels supplying the gallbladder are common; 
for example, the right hepatic artery crosses in 
front of the common hepatic duct instead of 
behind it in 25% of subjects.  
  •   Cystic dilatation of the main bile ducts 
(choledochal cyst): one in 200   000, but more 
common in people of Asian descent (one in 
1000 Japanese). 
 Cholelithiasis ( g allstones) 
 Gallstones are rare in children (although they 
should still be considered in the differential diag-
nosis of abdominal pain in children if the diagno-
sis is not to be overlooked, and should always be 
considered in children with spherocytosis or ellip-
tocytosis), the incidence increasing with each 
decade. In the UK, they are found in approxi-
mately 10% of women in their forties, increasing 
to 30% after the age of 60 years. They are about 
half as common in men. Stones are particularly 
common in the Mediterranean races, and the 
highest incidence is found among the Indians of 
New Mexico. 
 The aphorism that gallstones occur in fair, fat, 
fertile women of 40 is only a distant approxima-
 Congenital  a nomalies 
 Developmentally, a diverticulum grows out from 
the ventral wall of the foregut (primitive duode-
num), which differentiates into the hepatic ducts 
and the liver. A lateral bud from this diverticulum 
becomes the gallbladder and cystic duct (Figure 
 31.1 ). 
 Anomalies are found in 10% of subjects and 
these are of importance to the surgeon during 
cholecystectomy. 
 The principal developmental abnormalities 
include the following: 
  •   A long cystic duct travelling alongside the 
common hepatic duct to open near the 
duodenal oriﬁ ce. This occurs in 10% of cases. 
  •   Congenital absence (agenesis) of the 
gallbladder: one in 10   000, often associated 
with other congenital anomalies.  
  •   Duplication of the gallbladder: one in 5000. 
  •   Congenital obliteration of the ducts (biliary 
atresia, one of the causes of neonatal 
jaundice): one in 10  000. 
  •   Absence of the cystic duct, the gallbladder 
opening directly into the side of the common 
bile duct.  
Lecture Notes: General Surgery, 12th edition. © Harold Ellis, 
Sir Roy Y. Calne and Christopher J. E. Watson. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

The gallbladder and bile ducts  267
tion to the truth; people of either gender, and any 
age, colour, shape or fecundity may have gall-
stones, but certainly the incidence is higher in 
overweight, middle - aged women. To understand 
gallstones, it is ﬁ rst necessary to understand bile. 
 Bile  c omposition and 
 f unction 
 Bile is a combination of cholesterol, phospholip-
ids (principally lecithin), bile salts (chenodeoxy-
cholic acid and cholic acid) and water. Bile also 
contains conjugated bilirubin, the breakdown 
product of haemoglobin, which is quite distinct 
from bile salts. Cholesterol is not water soluble 
and is carried in the bile in water - soluble micelles, 
in which the hydrophobic cholesterol is carried 
within a  ‘ shell ’ of phospholipid and bile salts. 
Once in the gut, bile salts act as a detergent, break-
ing up and emulsifying fats to facilitate their 
absorption. The bile salts themselves are resorbed 
in the distal small bowel, pass back via the portal 
venous system to the liver, from where they are 
once again secreted in the bile. This circulation of 
bile salts is termed the  enterohepatic circulation , 
permitting a relatively small pool of bile salts to 
circulate up to 10 times a day. Diversion or absence 
of bile from the gut, as may occur in obstructive 
jaundice, results in a malabsorption of fat and the 
fat - soluble vitamins (A, D, E and K).  
 Figure 31.1   Developmental anomalies of the gallbladder. (a) A long cystic duct joining the hepatic duct low down 
behind the duodenum. (b) Absence of the cystic duct  – the gallbladder opens directly into the common hepatic 
duct. (c) A double gallbladder, the result of a rare biﬁ d embryonic diverticulum from the hepatic duct. (d) The right 
hepatic artery crosses in front of the common hepatic duct; this occurs in 25% of cases. (Reproduced from Ellis H, 
Mahadevan V. (2010)  Clinical Anatomy , 12th edn. Oxford: Wiley - Blackwell.)  
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
 Gallstone  t ypes 
 There are three common varieties of stone 
(Figure  31.2 ). 
 1  Cholesterol (20%): these occur either as a 
solitary, oval stone (the cholesterol solitaire) or 
as two stones, one indenting the other, or as 
multiple mulberry stones associated with a 
strawberry gallbladder (see below). A cut 
section shows crystals radiating from the 
centre of the stone; the surface is yellow and 
greasy to the touch. 
 2  Bile pigment (5%): small, black, irregular, 
multiple, gritty and fragile. 
 3  Mixed (75%): multiple, faceted one against the 
other, and can often be grouped into two or 
more series, each of the same size, suggesting 
 ‘ generations ’ of stones. The cut surface is 
laminated with alternate dark and light zones 
of pigment and cholesterol respectively. 
 This traditional classiﬁ cation into three groups 
is an oversimpliﬁ cation; calculi with widely differ-
ent appearances simply represent different com-
binations of the same ingredients. 
 Cholesterol  s tones 
 These may be associated with elevated blood cho-
lesterol, but there is little evidence to suggest this 
as a cause. There is a deﬁ nite correlation between 

268 
The gallbladder and bile ducts 
submucous aggregations of cholesterol with an 
appearance similar to a strawberry skin ( ‘  straw-
berry gallbladder ’ ). 
 Pigment  s tones 
 Pigment 
stones 
are 
composed 
of 
calcium 
bilirubinate, with some calcium carbonate. They 
occur in the haemolytic anaemias, e.g. spherocy-
tosis and sickle - cell disease, in which excess of 
circulating bile pigment is deposited in the biliary 
tract. If such stones are found in the gallbladder 
of children or adolescents, haemolytic anaemia 
should be suspected, particularly if there is a 
family history of calculus.  
 Mixed  s tones 
 It is now considered that the majority of mixed 
stones have the same metabolic origin as choles-
terol stones, i.e. some slight alteration in the 
composition of bile enabling precipitation of cho-
lesterol together with bile pigment.  
cholesterol stones and the contraceptive pill and 
pregnancy, as well as an increase with age. Family 
history, obesity and low dietary ﬁ bre are also risk 
factors. The supersaturated bile from such patients 
is termed  ‘ lithogenic ’ (stone - forming) bile. Bile 
may also become supersaturated with cholesterol 
owing to a deﬁ ciency of bile salts, which may 
occur as a result of interruption of the enterohe-
patic circulation after removal of the terminal 
ileum, which, for example, may occur following 
resection in the treatment of Crohn ’ s disease. 
 Cholesterol stones form in the gallbladder when 
supersaturated bile is further concentrated. It may 
be that an excess of mucus production by the gall-
bladder wall is an important factor in forming 
calculi. In other cases, clumps of bacteria or 
desquamated mucosa, perhaps resulting from an 
episode of infection, may form the nucleus on 
which crystals may deposit. One rather pictur-
esque view of the aetiology of gallstones states that 
every gallstone is the tombstone of a dead bacte-
rium. When cholesterol precipitates on the gall-
bladder wall (cholesterosis), it forms yellow 
 Figure 31.2   The varieties of 
gallstones.  
Cholesterol
Pigment
Mixed
'Solitaire'
or clusters of 'mulberries'
Multiple, small, black
and brittle
Faceted, may be in 'generations'
Radiating crystals
Amorphous
Concentric 
rings
Cut surface

The gallbladder and bile ducts  269
  •   biliary colic; 
  •   acute cholecystitis; 
  •   chronic cholecystitis; 
  •   obstruction and/or infection of the common 
bile duct. 
 Two or more of these syndromes may occur in 
the same patient. 
 Biliary  c olic 
 The gallbladder contracts following stimulation by 
the hormone cholecystokinin, which is produced 
from the duodenum and small intestine in 
response to fat in the lumen of the bowel. 
Physiologically this delivers bile salts to aid the 
absorption of dietary fat, and the hormone also 
stimulates secretion of enzymes from the pan-
creas to aid digestion. 
 Biliary colic occurs when the gallbladder con-
tracts against an obstruction, such as a stone 
impacted in either Hartmann ’ s pouch or the cystic 
duct, producing severe pain, which usually comes 
on 2 – 3 hours after eating and often wakes the 
patient. It is a continuous pain, usually rising to a 
plateau, and may last for many hours. The pain is 
usually situated in the right subcostal region but 
may be epigastric, or it may spread as a band 
across the upper abdomen and be accompanied 
by vomiting and sweating. Radiation of the pain to 
the inferior angle of the right scapula is common. 
Characteristically, the patient tends to lie still. In 
contrast to acute cholecystitis the patient is usually 
not systemically unwell. 
 A variant of biliary colic occurs when a stone 
impacts in the sphincter of Oddi, in which case the 
patient is mildly jaundiced, the pain is colicky, and 
the patient is restless and rolls about in agony. 
Relief may be sudden as the stone passes into the 
duodenum. 
 Differential diagnosis is from the other acute 
colics, especially ureteric colic (Box  31.1 ). 
 Acute  c holecystitis 
 If the stone remains impacted in the gallbladder 
outlet, the gallbladder wall becomes inﬂ amed 
owing to the irritation of the concentrated bile 
contained within it producing a chemical chole-
cystitis. The gallbladder ﬁ lls with pus, which is 
frequently sterile on culture. In these instances, 
the pain persists and progressively intensiﬁ es. 
There is a fever in the range of 38 – 39 ° C with 
marked toxaemia and leucocytosis. The upper 
 The  p athological  e ffects of 
 g allstones 
  •   Silent : gallstones lying free in the lumen of the 
gallbladder produce no pathological 
disturbance of the wall and the patient is 
symptom free.  
  •   Impaction in gallbladder , either in Hartmann ’ s 
pouch 1 or in the cystic duct. Water is absorbed 
from the contained bile, which becomes 
concentrated and produces a chemical 
cholecystitis. This is usually at ﬁ rst sterile, but 
may then become secondarily infected. If a 
stone impacts in Hartmann ’ s pouch when the 
gallbladder is empty, the wall of the gallbladder 
may continue to secrete mucus and the 
gallbladder distends to form a mucocele.  
  •   Choledocholithiasis : gallstones may migrate 
into the common bile duct. These may be 
silent, or produce an intermittent or complete 
obstruction of the common bile duct with pain 
and jaundice.  
  •   Gallstone ileus : this is uncommon, and occurs 
when a large gallstone ulcerates through the 
wall of the gallbladder into the adjacent 
duodenum. The gallstone may pass per rectum 
or produce a gallstone ileus  –  this is impaction 
of the stone in the narrowest part of the small 
bowel (the distal ileum) with resulting 
intestinal obstruction. (Note that gallstone 
ileus is thus a misnomer and is in fact 
mechanical obstruction by an intraluminal 
stone, and not a paralytic ileus.) A key feature 
in such cases is the presence of air in the 
biliary tree that has entered the bile ducts via 
the ﬁ stula created when the gallstone ulcerates 
through into the gut and which can be readily 
seen on a plain abdominal radiograph 
provided the clinician looks closely in the 
appropriate area. 
 In addition, the presence of gallstones in the 
biliary tree is associated with the following: 
  •   acute and chronic pancreatitis ; 
  •   carcinoma of the gallbladder . 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 The following syndromes can be recognized: 
  1  Henri Hartmann (1860 – 1952), Professor of Surgery, H ô tel Dieu, 
Paris, France.  

270 
The gallbladder and bile ducts 
mation result in chronic ﬁ brosis and thickening of 
the entire gallbladder wall, which may contain 
thick, sometimes infected, bile. 
 There are recurrent bouts of abdominal pain 
owing to mild cholecystitis, which may or may not 
be accompanied by fever. Discomfort is experi-
enced after fatty meals as the gallbladder con-
tracts onto the stones; there is often ﬂ atulence. 
The picture may be complicated by episodes of 
acute cholecystitis or symptoms produced by 
stones passing into the common bile duct. 
 The  differential diagnosis  is from other causes of 
chronic dyspepsia, including peptic ulceration 
and hiatus hernia. Occasionally, the symptoms 
closely mimic coronary insufﬁ ciency. It is as well 
to remain clinically suspicious  –  any or all of these 
common diseases may well occur in association 
with gallstones. 
 Stones in the  c ommon  b ile  d uct 
( c holedocholithiasis) 
 This may be symptomless. More often, there are 
attacks of biliary colic accompanied by obstruc-
tive jaundice with clay - coloured stools and dark 
urine, the attacks lasting for hours or several days. 
The attack ceases either when a small stone is 
passed through the sphincter of Oddi or when it 
disimpacts and falls back into the dilated common 
duct. Above the impacted stone, other stones or 
biliary sludge may deposit. Occasionally, the jaun-
dice is progressive and, rarely, it is painless. 
 If the obstruction is not relieved either sponta-
neously or by operation, the chronic back - pressure 
in the biliary system may result in secondary 
biliary cirrhosis and liver failure. 
 The  differential diagnosis of stones in the 
common bile duct is as follows: 
 1  With jaundice (75% of cases): 
 a  carcinoma of the pancreas or other 
malignant obstructions of the common bile 
duct; 
 b  acute hepatitis; 
 c  other causes of jaundice (Chapter  30 , p. 252). 
 2  Without jaundice (25% of cases): 
 a  renal colic; 
 b  intestinal obstruction; 
 c  angina pectoris. 
 Ascending  c holangitis 
 Infection of the common bile duct, which occurs 
in the presence of an obstruction to the normal 
biliary drainage, usually as a complication of 
abdomen is extremely tender, and often a palpa-
ble mass develops in the region of the gallbladder. 
This represents the distended, inﬂ amed gallblad-
der wrapped in inﬂ ammatory adhesions to adja-
cent organs, especially the omentum. Occasionally, 
an empyema of the gallbladder develops or, rarely, 
gallbladder perforation into the general peritoneal 
cavity takes place. The swollen gallbladder may 
press against the adjacent common bile duct and 
produce a tinge of jaundice, even though stones 
may be absent from the duct system. 
 Ninety - ﬁ ve per cent of cases of acute cholecys-
titis are associated with gallstones. Occasionally, 
fulminating acalculous cholecystitis may occur 
and this may be associated with typhoid fever or 
gas gangrene. 
 The  differential diagnosis  is from acute appen-
dicitis, perforated duodenal ulcer, acute pancrea-
titis, right - sided basal pneumonia and coronary 
thrombosis. 
 Chronic  c holecystitis 
 This is almost invariably associated with the pres-
ence of gallstones. Repeated episodes of inﬂ am-
 Box 31.1   Abdominal colic 
 Colicky pain is the result of smooth muscle contrac-
tion against a resistance. The common causes of 
colic occur in the uterus and tubes, renal tract, intes-
tinal tract and biliary tract.  
 Biliary  t ract 
  •    Stone in Hartmann ’ s pouch  
  •    Stone in cystic duct  
  •    Stone in sphincter of Oddi  
 Renal  t ract 
  •    Ureteric colic due to stone, blood clot or tumour  
  •    Bladder colic in acute retention owing to 
enlarged prostate  
 Intestinal  t ract 
  •    Mechanical obstruction  
  •    Appendicular colic as appendix lumen occludes  
 Uterus and  f allopian  t ubes 
  •    Parturition 
  •    Menstruation 
  •    Ectopic pregnancy in a fallopian tube  

The gallbladder and bile ducts  271
obstruction is not usually complete. This allows 
some escape of bile into the duodenum, with 
decompression of the gallbladder. Obstruction of 
the common bile duct due to other causes (e.g. 
carcinoma of the head of the pancreas) is usually 
associated with a normal gallbladder, which can 
dilate. However, in carcinoma of the bile ducts 
arising above the origin of the cystic duct, the gall-
bladder, distal to the obstruction, will be collapsed 
and empty. 
 Note that the law is not phrased the other way 
round  –   ‘ If the gallbladder is  not  palpable, the 
jaundice is due to stone ’   –  as 50% of dilated gall-
bladders cannot be palpated on clinical examina-
tion, owing to either the patient ’ s obesity or 
overlap by the liver, which itself is usually enlarged 
as a result of bile engorgement. 
 Only rarely is the gallbladder dilated when jaun-
dice is due to stone. These circumstances occur 
when a stone impacts in Hartmann ’ s pouch to 
produce a mucocele while at the same time jaun-
dice is produced by a second stone in the common 
duct, or when a stone forms  in situ  in the common 
stones in the duct. Jaundice and pain are accom-
panied by rigors, a high intermittent fever and 
severe toxaemia (the intermittent hepatic fever of 
Charcot 2 ). In these instances, the duct system is 
severely inﬂ amed and ﬁ lled with pus, and the liver 
may be dotted with multiple small abscesses. 
Treatment is with appropriate antibiotics and 
urgent 
biliary 
drainage 
(e.g. 
endoscopic 
sphincterotomy). 
 Courvoisier ’ s  l aw 3 (Figure  31.3 ) 
  ‘ If in the presence of jaundice the gallbladder is 
palpable, then the jaundice is unlikely to be due to 
stone. ’  This is an extremely useful rule provided 
it is quoted correctly. The principle on which it 
is based is that, if the obstruction is due to stone, 
the gallbladder is usually thickened and ﬁ brotic 
and therefore does not distend. Moreover, unlike 
obstruction due to malignant disease, calculus 
 Figure 31.3   Obstructive jaundice due 
to stone is usually associated with a 
small, contracted gallbladder (a). 
Therefore, in the presence of jaundice, 
a palpable gallbladder indicates that 
the obstruction is probably due to 
some other cause  – the most 
common being carcinoma of the 
pancreas (b). Exceptions are a 
palpable gallbladder produced by one 
stone impacted in Hartmann ’ s pouch 
resulting in a mucocele, another in the 
common duct causing obstruction (c), 
which is very rare, or, more 
commonly, the gallbladder is indeed 
distended but is clinically impalpable 
(d).  
The rule
The exceptions to the rule
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
  2   Jean Charcot (1825 – 1893), Neurologist, Paris, France.  
  3   Ludwig Courvoisier (1843 – 1918), Professor of Surgery, Basle, 
Switzerland. 

272 
The gallbladder and bile ducts 
extraction, often after ﬁ rst carrying out a 
diathermy sphincterotomy opening up the 
sphincter of Oddi 4 to facilitate instrumentation 
of the bile duct. ERCP has been largely 
replaced by MRCP for diagnosis but remains 
an essential part of hepatobiliary management 
in offering endoscopic therapeutic options and 
removing the reliance on open surgical 
procedures. 
 Treatment 
 Acute  c holecystitis 
 At least 90% resolve on bed rest with antibiotics 
and pain relief. Elective cholecystectomy is com-
monly performed about 6 weeks later because of 
the undoubted danger of further attacks although 
early urgent cholecystectomy during the ﬁ rst 72 
hours of admission offers an excellent alternative 
to the patient, optimizing recovery and minimiz-
ing the disruption to their normal lifestyle. 
Cholecystectomy is routinely performed laparo-
scopically, with the advantages of minimal scar-
ring of the abdominal wall and rapid convalescence 
compared with an open procedure. Nevertheless, 
operative difﬁ culties, anatomical aberrations and 
equipment failures may necessitate conversion to 
an open operation in approximately 2 – 5% of 
cases. 
 An 
 empyema 
of 
the 
gallbladder 
usually 
requires more active intervention, with emer-
gency drainage (cholecystostomy), either per-
cutaneously under ultrasound guidance or at 
cholecystectomy. 
 Perforation  of the acutely inﬂ amed gallbladder 
is rare and requires urgent surgery. This complica-
tion carries a high mortality. 
 If diagnosis is in doubt in the early stages of 
acute cholecystitis, laparoscopy is performed. 
Cholecystectomy is comparatively easy in the ﬁ rst 
24 – 48 hours of the illness; dissection is facilitated 
by the oedema of adjacent tissues, although after 
this time operation becomes difﬁ cult because of 
the inﬂ ammatory adhesions. Many surgeons 
advise early surgical intervention in acute chole-
cystitis with early resolution of the presenting 
illness and its underlying cause.  
bile duct, the gallbladder itself being normal and 
therefore distensible.  
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   Ultrasound : this non - invasive technique gives 
three pieces of information: 
  −   the presence of gallstones within the 
gallbladder, revealed as intensely echogenic 
foci, which cast a clear acoustic shadow 
beyond them;  
  −   the thickened wall of the gallbladder in 
acute or chronic inﬂ ammation; 
  −   the diameter of the common bile duct 
which, if over 7   mm, is suggestive of the 
presence of stones within.   
 Unfortunately, ultrasound, like computed 
tomography (CT), is unreliable in detecting 
stones in the bile ducts, especially at the lower 
end where they are obscured by the overlying 
duodenal gas.  
  •   Plain abdominal X - ray reveals radio - opaque 
gallstones in only 10% of cases. These usually 
appear as rings due to calcium deposited on a 
central translucent organic core. Occasionally, 
the gallbladder may be seen to be calciﬁ ed 
( ‘ porcelain gallbladder ’ ). 
  •   Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy  may be 
advisable to exclude an associated peptic ulcer 
or hiatus hernia when there is any degree of 
uncertainty in the clinical picture, even though 
gallstones have been noted on ultrasound.  
  •   Liver function tests are performed whenever 
jaundice, present or past, is a feature. 
Persistently raised alkaline phosphatase is 
suspicious of choledocholithiasis. Prothrombin 
time should also be checked in the presence of 
jaundice lest any invasive procedure be 
required. 
  •   Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography 
(MRCP) permits visualization of the biliary tree 
and contained calculi can be detected. This 
non - invasive procedure provides the same 
diagnostic information as can be obtained 
with ERCP but without the small but important 
risk of complications (perforation, bleeding, 
pancreatitis) associated with ERCP.  
  •   Endoscopic retrograde 
cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) : endoscopic 
intubation of the bile ducts through the 
ampulla of Vater is more invasive than MRCP, 
but in addition to visualizing the ducts and 
contained stones it also permits their 
  4   Ruggero Oddi (1864 – 1913), Surgeon, Genoa, Italy. The sphincter 
was ﬁ rst described in 1654 by Francis Glisson (1597 – 1677), Regius 
Professor of Physic, Cambridge, UK. 

The gallbladder and bile ducts  273
biliary colic as small fragments of calculus pass 
through the bile ducts. Moreover, recurrences 
commonly occur after therapy is discontinued 
since an abnormal gallbladder remains. The 
indications for this treatment are limited and 
may be appropriate in less than 10% of cases. 
It is largely reserved as an option in elderly 
medically unﬁ t patients in whom there is a 
strong contraindication to laparoscopic 
cholecystectomy. 
  •   Lithotripsy.  Ultrasonic destruction of small 
stones as used in the renal tract appeared to be 
an attractive option, but there is the problem 
of the passage of small fragments of stone 
through the duct system that may cause biliary 
colic, biliary obstruction and pancreatitis. 
Additionally, the residual fragments in the 
gallbladder appeared to provide a nidus for 
further stone formation. Lithotripsy has thus 
been abandoned in routine practice. 
 The  s ymptomless  g allstone 
 The incidental diagnosis of gallstones is becoming 
increasingly common during routine ultrasound 
examination of the abdomen for a variety of 
non - biliary reasons. Cholecystectomy may be rec-
ommended when the patient is at signiﬁ cantly 
increased risk of complications owing to concomi-
tant comorbidities such as diabetes or chronic 
renal failure, but will not normally prompt surgical 
intervention unless they become symptomatic; 
the risks (albeit low) of elective cholecystectomy 
need to be balanced against the long - term risks of 
complications of cholelithiasis (acute cholecysti-
tis, obstructive jaundice, pancreatitis and gall-
bladder cancer). In younger patients, in whom 
the likelihood of complications over time is high 
and the risks of surgery low, cholecystectomy is 
advised; in older patients with asymptomatic 
stones and a shorter life expectancy, it is often 
unwise to intervene. 
 Complications of 
 c holecystectomy 
 There are two special dangers after cholecystec-
tomy, whether performed by laparotomy or 
laparoscopy. 
 1  Leakage of bile.    This may result from the 
following:  
 a  injury to bile canaliculi in the gallbladder 
bed of the liver;  
 Chronic  c holecystitis 
 Cholecystectomy is performed, usually laparo-
scopically. The cystic duct is intubated and an 
operative cholangiogram performed by injecting 
radio - opaque contrast medium into the common 
duct. If stones are demonstrated at laparoscopic 
operation an MRCP is performed following recov-
ery; many will have passed spontaneously. If they 
are still present they are removed at ERCP. If an 
open cholecystectomy has been performed, the 
common bile duct is explored, the stones removed 
and the bile duct drained using a latex T - tube 
inserted into the common duct. The T - tube is 
removed 10 days postoperatively, provided a check 
cholangiogram taken through the tube conﬁ rms 
that the ducts are clear and that there is free ﬂ ow 
of contrast into the duodenum. Alternatively, at 
laparoscopic cholecystectomy, the surgeon may 
perform a laparoscopic exploration of the bile 
ducts, but this is uncommon and most small 
stones seem to pass spontaneously following 
cholecystectomy. 
 Obstructive  j aundice  d ue to  s tones 
 Impacted stones are removed using a balloon or 
Dormia 5  basket at ERCP. Subsequent cholecystec-
tomy is performed as soon as possible lest new 
stones pass into the ducts. The presence of high 
fever makes removal of the impacted stones and 
drainage of the obstructed common bile duct 
imperative as an emergency procedure. Any inter-
vention is preceded by giving intravenous vitamin 
K, since a lack of bile salts in the gut reduces 
absorption of this fat - soluble vitamin; hence, 
serum prothrombin is lowered with consequent 
bleeding tendency.  
 Non - s urgical  t reatment of 
 g allstones 
  •   Gallstone dissolution.   Because cholesterol is 
held in solution by bile salts, dissolution of 
small cholesterol stones is possible by 
administering bile salts orally in the form of 
chenodeoxycholic or ursodeoxycholic acid. 
This therapy may be used for small, non -
 calciﬁ ed stones in a functioning gallbladder. 
Treatment must be continued for many 
months and may be interrupted by attacks of 
  5   Enrico Dormia (1928 - 2009), Professor of Urology, Milan, Italy. 

274 
The gallbladder and bile ducts 
ultrasound examination performed for reasons 
other than biliary symptoms; if they are situated 
distally in the gallbladder close to Hartmann ’ s 
pouch they may produce symptoms identical to 
those of gallstones.  
 Treatment 
 Polyps causing symptoms similar to those of 
cholelithiasis are appropriately managed by 
cholecystectomy. If there are three or fewer polyps 
detected in an otherwise asymptomatic patient, 
then the possible malignant potential is the key 
management issue. In these cases, 6 monthly sur-
veillance using ultrasound is recommended with 
cholecystectomy being indicated if the polyps are 
increasing in size and particularly when they 
reach or exceed 1   cm in diameter. The manage-
ment of multiple polyps is more controversial and, 
since they usually represent cholesterosis, it can 
be argued that intensive follow - up is therefore 
unnecessary. When the gallbladder is removed it is 
common to ﬁ nd that the polyps were in fact small 
gallstones adherent to the gallbladder wall.   
 Carcinoma of the 
 g allbladder 
 Pathology 
 This is a relatively uncommon tumour, but it 
is associated in about 85% of cases with the pres-
ence of gallstones. It is debatable whether this is 
due to chronic irritation or to the carcinogenic 
effect of cholic acid derivatives. Fifty per cent of 
 ‘ porcelain ’  gallbladders are associated with carci-
noma. As gallstones are commoner in women, 
carcinoma of the gallbladder is, not surprisingly, 
four times commoner in women than men. Ninety 
per cent are adenocarcinoma and 10% squamous 
carcinoma. 
 There is local invasion of the liver and its ducts 
and lymphatic spread to the nodes in the porta 
hepatis; portal vein dissemination to the liver may 
occur. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Carcinoma of the gallbladder usually presents 
with a picture closely resembling chronic chole-
cystitis, with right upper quadrant pain, nausea 
 b  injury to the common hepatic or common 
bile duct;  
 c  slipping of the ligature or clip from the 
cystic duct;  
 d  leakage from the common bile duct after 
exploration. 
 ERCP may identify the site of the leak, and 
temporary stenting 6  will ensure adequate 
biliary drainage, thus allowing the bile ﬁ stula 
to close spontaneously; if this does not occur, 
further exploration may be required. A 
percutaneous drain is usually placed to 
prevent generalized biliary peritonitis. 
 2  Jaundice.   This may be due to the following: 
 a  missed stones in the common bile duct;  
 b  inadvertent injury to the common bile duct; 
 c  cholangitis or associated pancreatitis. 
 Residual stones in the common duct can usually 
be removed by ERCP; if a T tube is still present in 
the common duct they can be removed by means 
of a Burhenne basket 7  passed along the track 
formed by the tube under X - ray control.   
 Gallbladder  p olyps 
 Pathology 
 Gallbladder polyps may be single or multiple and 
are increasingly being detected by ultrasound 
examination. They appear as lesions within the 
gallbladder which do not cast an acoustic shadow 
(as stones do) and which do not move when the 
patient rolls onto one side, indicating that they are 
attached to the gallbladder wall. When multiple, 
they represent the ultrasonographic appearance 
of cholesterosis of the gallbladder wall and are of 
no other signiﬁ cance. When a single polyp is 
present, it may represent a premalignant lesion, 
the risk of malignancy rising with increasing size 
of polyp, becoming signiﬁ cant when the size 
reaches 1   cm and probable when the size reaches 
1.5  cm. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Gallbladder polyps may be entirely asymptomatic 
and simply represent an incidental ﬁ nding on an 
  6   Charles Stent (1845 – 1901), English Dentist.  
  7   H. Joachim Burhenne (1925 – 1996), Radiologist, Vancouver, 
Canada. 

The gallbladder and bile ducts  275
extrahepatic bile ducts. The conﬂ uence of the 
left and right hepatic ducts, or the common 
hepatic duct with the cystic duct, are common 
sites. 
 Microscopically, 
they 
are 
mucin - secreting 
adenocarcinomas. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 The usual presentation is with painless progres-
sive jaundice, with dark urine and pale stools. 
Epigastric pain, steatorrhoea and weight loss are 
common. There may be hepatomegaly, usually 
without a palpable gallbladder because the 
tumour is proximal to, or at, the cystic duct conﬂ u-
ence. Conﬁ rmation is by MRCP, ERCP or percuta-
neous transhepatic cholangiography and brush 
cytology (poor sensitivity), and CT - guided needle 
biopsy if possible.  
 Treatment 
 The tumours are slow growing, and palliation is 
often achieved by endoluminal stenting at ERCP, 
or surgical bypass. The prognosis is poor, and cur-
ative resection is seldom possible, although, in a 
small percentage of cases with early presentation 
of hilar tumours (Klatskin tumour 8 ), good results 
have been reported with extended right hepatec-
tomy together with excision of the adjacent portal 
vein and venous reconstruction. In the rarer cases 
in which the tumour is located distally in the 
common bile duct, a Whipple ’ s resection (see 
Figure  32.2 ) may be possible. 
 
 
 
 
and vomiting, in addition to weight loss and, later, 
progressing to obstructive jaundice. At this stage, 
a palpable mass may be present in the gallbladder 
region. 
 Treatment 
 Occasionally, cholecystectomy performed for 
stones reveals the presence of an unexpected 
tumour. Under these circumstances, long - term 
survival may follow. Sadly, most cases present late 
with liver involvement and nodal spread leaving 
few surgical options. If direct inﬁ ltration into the 
liver has already occurred, as is common, local 
excision or radical liver resection is only rarely 
possible and the prognosis is therefore usually 
poor, with death within months.   
 Cholangiocarcinoma 
 Pathology 
 The incidence of carcinoma of the bile ducts, 
cholangiocarcinoma, is increasing. The disease 
commonly occurs after 50 years of age and is more 
common in men. It is associated with inﬂ amma-
tory bowel disease, particularly in the presence of 
sclerosing cholangitis. Congenital hepatic ﬁ brosis, 
choledochal cysts and polycystic liver are all 
associations. 
 Macroscopically, 
cholangiocarcinomas 
may 
occur within the liver substance, or in the larger 
  8   Gerald Klatskin (1910 – 1986), Liver Physician, Yale, New Haven, 
CT, USA; pioneered the liver biopsy and was considered to be one 
of the fathers of hepatology. 

 32 
The  p ancreas  
 
 Learning objectives 
 ✓  To know the causes and management of acute pancreatitis, and 
the factors that predict its severity.  
 ✓  To have knowledge of pancreatic cancer, its presentation and the 
surgical approach to treatment of carcinoma of the head of the 
pancreas. 
pancreatic tissue may be found in the stomach, 
duodenum or jejunum. This may produce obstruc-
tive or dyspeptic symptoms.   
 Acute  p ancreatitis 
 Acute inﬂ ammation of the pancreas is a common 
cause of acute abdominal pain, with signiﬁ cant 
morbidity and mortality. 
 Aetiology 
 Most cases of acute pancreatitis are associated 
with either gallstones or alcohol, although a 
number of less common causes have been 
identiﬁ ed. 
  •   Gallstones are present in half of the cases in 
the UK, and, indeed, small gallstones can be 
recovered from the faeces of many patients 
with acute pancreatitis.  
  •   Alcohol : the majority of cases of non - gallstone 
pancreatitis are alcohol related. This is 
particularly common in France and North 
America. Alcohol is also the most common 
cause of recurrent pancreatitis. The 
mechanism is unclear, and it may follow either 
chronic alcohol abuse or binge drinking.    
 Other less common causes of pancreatitis 
include the following: 
  •   Postoperative : particularly after 
cardiopulmonary bypass or damage to the 
 Congenital  a nomalies 
 The pancreas develops as a dorsal and a ventral 
bud from the duodenum (Figure  32.1 ). The ventral 
bud rotates posteriorly, thus enclosing the supe-
rior mesenteric vessels; it forms the major part of 
the head of the pancreas and its duct becomes the 
main duct of Wirsung, 1  which in the great majority 
of cases has a shared opening with the common 
bile duct in the ampulla of Vater. 2  The larger dorsal 
bud becomes the body and tail and its duct 
becomes the accessory duct of Santorini. 3 
 Annular  p ancreas 
 The two developmental buds may envelop the 
second part of the duodenum, producing this rare 
form of extrinsic duodenal obstruction.  
 Heterotopic  p ancreas 
 This is produced occasionally by an accessory 
budding from the primitive foregut. A nodule of 
Lecture Notes: General Surgery, 12th edition. © Harold Ellis, 
Sir Roy Y. Calne and Christopher J. E. Watson. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
  1   Johann Georg Wirsung (1589 – 1643), Professor of Anatomy, 
University of Padua, Italy, where he was murdered. 
  2  Abraham Vater (1684 – 1751), Professor of Anatomy, Wittenberg, 
Germany. 
  3   Giovanni Domenico Santorini (1681 – 1737), Professor of Anatomy 
and Medicine, Venice, Italy.  

The pancreas 277
  •   Carcinoma of the pancreas . 
  •   Infection , e.g. mumps, cytomegalovirus or 
coxsackie infection. 
  •   Trauma : particularly blunt trauma or crush 
injury. 
  •   Drugs , e.g. corticosteroids, sodium valproate. 
  •   Hypothermia . 
  •   Hypercalcaemia . 
pancreas during mobilization of the 
duodenum at partial gastrectomy or 
splenectomy. 
  •   After endoscopic retrograde 
cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) : particularly 
if pancreatography was performed or there was 
difﬁ culty cannulating the papilla with 
subsequent oedema and obstruction.  
 Figure 32.1   (a – d) The development of the pancreas and biliary tree.  (Reproduced from Ellis H, Mahadevan V. 
(2010)  Clinical Anatomy , 12th edn. Oxford: Wiley - Blackwell.)  
Foregut
Hepatic
diverticulum
Gallbladder
Ventral
pancreatic
bud
Gallbladder
and bile duct
Midgut
Dorsal
pancreatic bud
Dorsal and
ventral pancreatic buds
Accessory pancreatic
duct (Santorini)
Main pancreatic
duct (Wirsung)
Uncinate process
pancreas
Tail of pancreas
Superior mesenteric artery
Superior mesenteric vein
Duodenum
Head of
pancreas
Common
bile duct
Ampulla
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)

278 
The pancreas
acids and glycerol from fat; these acids combine 
with calcium to produce insoluble calcium soaps. 
The pancreas is swollen, haemorrhagic or, in 
severe cases, actually necrotic. Occasionally, sup-
purative pancreatitis may occur. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 The condition can present at any age but is 
uncommon in childhood and in young adults. The 
patient presenting with gallstone pancreatitis is 
commonly middle aged or elderly. By contrast, the 
alcohol - related form commonly ﬁ rst presents in 
patients who are younger than 40. Pain is of rapid 
onset, is severe, constant, usually epigastric and 
often radiates into the back. The patient typically 
sits forward, and repeated retching is common. 
Vomiting is early and profuse. The patient may be 
shocked with a rapid pulse, cyanosis (indicating 
circulatory collapse) and a temperature that may 
be either subnormal or raised up to 39.5 ° C (103 ° F). 
The abdomen reveals generalized tenderness and 
guarding. About 30% of patients are jaundiced 
owing to oedema of the pancreatic head obstruct-
ing the common bile duct. 
 On rare occasions, a few days after a severe 
attack, the patient may develop a bluish discolora-
tion in the loins from extravasation of blood -
 stained pancreatic juice into the retroperitoneal 
tissues (Grey Turner ’ s sign 4 ). The tracking of ﬂ uid 
that results in this sign can often be seen on com-
puted tomography (CT) imaging of patients with 
acute pancreatitis even when it is not clinically 
apparent.  
 Differential  d iagnosis 
 The less severe episode of acute pancreatitis simu-
lates acute cholecystitis; the more severe attack, 
with a marked degree of shock, is usually mistaken 
for a perforated peptic ulcer or coronary thrombo-
sis. Differentiation must also be made from high 
intestinal obstruction and from other causes of 
peritonitis. 
 Special  i nvestigations 
 The investigation comprises tests to conﬁ rm the 
diagnosis and tests to assess the severity of the 
disease (i.e. diagnostic and prognostic). 
  •   Hyperlipidaemia . 
  •   Vascular : pancreatitis may occur in malignant 
hypertension, cholesterol emboli and 
polyarteritis nodosa, probably as a result of 
local infarction causing enzyme liberation. 
 Pathology 
 Acute pancreatitis differs from other inﬂ amma-
tory conditions because of the autodigestion that 
may result from liberation of digestive enzymes. 
The pancreas is normally protected from autodi-
gestion by storing its enzymes in intracellular 
zymogen granules before secreting them as proen-
zymes. Trypsin, for example, is secreted as 
trypsinogen and converted to trypsin by the action 
of enterokinase in the gut. Trypsin itself then 
cleaves other proenzymes, thus activating them. 
One such enzyme is phospholipase A which, in 
pancreatitis, is involved in cell wall damage and fat 
necrosis along with pancreatic lipase. 
 The mechanisms initiating autodigestion are 
multiple. Duodenopancreatic reﬂ ux is an impor-
tant factor that may occur as a result of injury to the 
papilla following endoscopic cannulation, trauma 
or surgery in this region, or as a result of damage to 
the sphincter owing to the recent passage of a 
stone (hence the strong association of pancreatitis 
and biliary calculi). Duodenal ﬂ uid containing 
enterokinase then reﬂ uxes into the duct, activating 
the pancreatic proenzymes. Duodenal reﬂ ux can 
be shown experimentally to produce pancreatitis, 
and may be a common factor that underlies many 
of the aetiological associations mentioned above. 
As inﬂ ammation proceeds, local infarction may 
occur as arterioles thrombose, and more proen-
zymes leak out of the necrotic cells to be activated. 
Once started, pancreatitis can be rapidly progres-
sive, with widespread autodigestion not only con-
ﬁ ned to the pancreas. 
 As inﬂ ammation and autodigestion progress, 
liquefying necrotic material and inﬂ ammatory 
exudate collect in the lesser sac. This ﬂ uid, walled 
off by the stomach in front and necrotic pancreas 
behind, is the pancreas pseudocyst, and com-
monly appears from day 10 onwards.  
 Macroscopic  p athology 
 At operation, the appearances are quite typical. 
There is a blood - stained peritoneal effusion. White 
spots of fat necrosis are scattered throughout the 
peritoneal cavity; these are produced by lipase 
released from the pancreas, which liberates fatty 
  4   George Grey Turner (1877 – 1951), Professor of Surgery, University 
of Durham, then Foundation Professor of Surgery at the Royal 
Postgraduate Medical School, London, UK. 

The pancreas 279
 1  Trypsin produces the autodigestion of the 
pancreas. 
 2  Lipase results in the typical fat necrosis. 
 3  Amylase absorbed from the peritoneal cavity 
produces a rise in the serum level and is thus a 
helpful test in diagnosis. 
 Management 
 The management of a patient with suspected pan-
creatitis involves ﬁ rst conﬁ rming the diagnosis 
(serum amylase and/or CT) and determining the 
  •   Serum amylase . Amylase is liberated into the 
circulation by the damaged pancreas, and 
exceeds the kidney ’ s ability to excrete it, so the 
serum concentration rises. It is usually 
signiﬁ cantly raised (ﬁ vefold or more) in the 
acute phase, but returns to normal within 2 – 3 
days; the urinary amylase is elevated for a 
longer period and may be useful in the 
diagnosis of cases presenting late. 
Occasionally, an overwhelming attack of 
pancreatitis with extensive destruction of the 
gland, or an attack occurring as an acute 
exacerbation of chronic pancreatitis, is 
associated with a normal serum amylase. 
Other causes of raised serum amylase need to 
be borne in mind before assuming a diagnosis 
of pancreatitis (Box  32.1 ). 
  •   Full blood count : there is a moderate 
leucocytosis, and anaemia in severe cases.  
  •   Blood glucose  is often raised, with glycosuria in 
15% of cases.  
  •   Serum bilirubin  is often raised.  
  •   Arterial blood gases : hypoxia occurs in severe 
cases. 
  •   Serum calcium  may be lowered, partly as a 
result of fat saponiﬁ cation; tetany may occur. 
The prognosis is bad in such cases.  
  •   CT may conﬁ rm pancreatitis if the amylase is 
normal or the diagnosis otherwise unclear. At a 
later stage, necrotic pancreas, abscess or 
pseudocyst may be visualized.  
  •   Electrocardiography (ECG)  may show 
diminished T waves, or arrhythmia, and can 
cause confusion with cardiac ischaemia.  
  •   Abdominal X - rays often give no direct help. 
The absence of free gas or of localized ﬂ uid 
levels assists in the differential diagnosis of 
perforated duodenal ulcer or high intestinal 
obstruction. In some cases, a solitary dilated 
loop of proximal jejunum may be seen (the 
 ‘ sentinel loop sign ’ ). Radio - opaque pancreatic 
calculi may be present in cases of chronic 
pancreatitis. 
  •   Ultrasound  will demonstrate associated 
gallstones and dilatation of the common bile 
duct suggestive of choledocholithiasis. It may 
also show enlargement of the pancreas, 
although overlying bowel gas often prevents a 
good view of the pancreas. 
 Note that each of the three enzymes liberated by 
the pancreas plays a part in the overall picture of 
acute pancreatitis: 
 Box 32.1   Raised serum amylase 
 The causes of raised serum amylase are listed 
below. Only those marked with an asterisk cause a 
marked increase in amylase (ﬁ vefold or more).  
 Impaired  r enal  e xcretion 
  •    Renal failure * 
  •    Macroamylasaemia (amylase not cleared by 
kidneys owing to complexing or protein binding)  
 Salivary  g land  d isease 
  •    Salivary calculi  
  •    Parotitis 
 Metabolic  c auses 
  •    Severe diabetic ketoacidosis * 
  •    Acute alcoholic intoxication  
  •    Morphine administration (causing sphincter of 
Oddi spasm 5 ) 
 Abdominal  c auses 
  •    Acute pancreatitis * 
  •    Perforated peptic ulcer  
  •    Acute cholecystitis  
  •    Intestinal obstruction  
  •    Afferent loop obstruction following partial 
gastrectomy 
  •    Ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm  
  •    Ruptured ectopic pregnancy  
  •    Mesenteric infarction  
  •    Trauma, open or blunt  
  5  Ruggero Oddi (1864 – 1913). Identiﬁ ed the sphincter while a 
medical student in Perugia, Italy. 

280 
The pancreas
 Supportive  t reatment 
 In the established case, treatment is initially non -
 operative and consists of the following: 
  •   Analgesia : relief of pain, traditionally with 
pethidine to avoid the sphincter spasm 
associated with morphine.  
  •   Fluid replacement with colloid or blood 
transfusion, to treat shock and establish a 
diuresis. In less severe cases, electrolyte and 
water replacement alone may sufﬁ ce. 
  •   Resting the pancreas by removing stimuli for 
secretion: the patient is not allowed to take 
ﬂ uid or food by mouth, and nasogastric 
aspiration is started if the patient is vomiting.  
  •   Nutrition : total parenteral nutrition (TPN) may 
be instituted early in severe cases. There is 
good evidence that nasojejunal feeding may be 
superior to TPN in the absence of an ileus 
probably because of improved maintenance of 
the gut mucosal integrity decreasing bacterial 
translocation and reducing septic 
complications. 
  •   Antibiotics (e.g. co - amoxiclav) are commenced 
in severe cases and if the pancreatitis is 
associated with gallstones.  
  •   Prophylaxis against gastric erosions with 
sucralfate or an H 2 - receptor antagonist (e.g. 
ranitidine) or proton pump inhibitor (e.g. 
omeprazole). 
  •   Endoscopic sphincterotomy performed early in 
the admission may be indicated in severe 
gallstone pancreatitis; a dilated common bile 
duct on ultrasound associated with deranged 
liver function tests also represents an 
indication for urgent ERCP and 
sphincterotomy. 
 Attempts at treatment with drugs that reduce 
pancreatic enzyme activation (e.g. aprotonin) or 
secretion (e.g. probanthine or atropine) are of no 
proven beneﬁ t. 
 Surgery 
 Surgery should be avoided early in the acute attack 
when possible. Later in the disease percutaneous 
drainage of collections or abscesses may be indi-
cated, often requiring multiple drains; failure 
to resolve in spite of adequate drainage may be 
an indication for operative debridement of the 
necrotic pancreas (necrosectomy). Operative 
drainage of a pseudocyst may also be required at 
severity of the attack. Mortality in severe pancrea-
titis is high, so severe cases should be managed in 
an intensive care environment where pulmonary, 
renal and abdominal complications can be 
promptly diagnosed and treated.   
 Severe  a cute  p ancreatitis 
 Severe pancreatitis is associated with haemor-
rhagic necrosis of the pancreas and systemic 
release of many vasoactive peptides and enzymes, 
as well as sequestration of large volumes of ﬂ uid 
within the abdomen. Acute lung failure occurs, 
characterized by increased capillary permeability 
and reduced oxygen transfer, and the combination 
of toxins and loss of circulating ﬂ uid results in 
acute renal failure. Several criteria predictive of 
the development of severe pancreatitis have been 
identiﬁ ed (Box  32.2 ); the presence of three or more 
is predictive of severe pancreatitis. Both a raised 
C - reactive protein ( > 140  mg/L) and non - perfusion 
of areas of the pancreas on a contrast - enhanced 
CT also predict a poor prognosis. Identiﬁ cation of 
such high - risk cases enables aggressive intensive 
management to be instituted at an early stage. 
Nevertheless, severe acute pancreatitis has a mor-
tality of over 25%.   
 Box 32.2   Glasgow criteria for severe acute 
pancreatitis 
 The factors are assessed over the ﬁ rst 48 hours. 
Presence of three or more factors indicates severe 
pancreatitis with a high mortality. 
  •    Age over 55 years  
  •    Hyperglycaemia (glucose  > 10  mmol/L in the 
absence of a history of diabetes)  
  •    Leucocytosis ( > 15   ×  10 9 /L) 
  •    Urea  > 16   mmol/L (no response to intravenous 
ﬂ uids)  
  •    P O 2  < 8  kPa (60   mmHg) 
  •    Calcium  < 2.0  mmol/L 
  •    Albumin  < 32  g/L 
  •    Lactate dehydrogenase  > 600  IU/L 
  •    Raised liver transaminases (aspartate 
transaminase  > 100   IU/L) 

The pancreas 281
tion; hereditary pancreatitis and hypercalcaemia 
are uncommon causes. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 The patient may present with one or more of the 
following: 
  •   asymptomatic (X - ray diagnosis only from 
pancreatic calciﬁ cation); 
  •   recurrent abdominal pain radiating through to 
the upper lumbar region, relieved by sitting 
forward;  
  •   steatorrhoea due to pancreatic insufﬁ ciency, 
resulting in malabsorption and weight loss; 
  •   diabetes due to  β - cell damage; 
  •   obstructive jaundice , which even at operation 
can be very difﬁ cult to differentiate from 
carcinoma of the head of the pancreas.     
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   Serum amylase estimations performed during 
attacks of pain may be elevated, but in 
long - standing disease are often normal, there 
being insufﬁ cient pancreatic tissue remaining 
to cause a large rise.  
  •   Abdominal X - ray may show evidence of 
calciﬁ cation or calculi. 
  •   CT may demonstrate enlargement and 
irregular consistency of the gland together with 
calciﬁ cation and ductal changes, although the 
latter may be better appreciated by the use of 
magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography 
(MRCP).  
  •   ERCP may show dilatation and irregularity of 
the pancreatic duct and compression of the 
bile duct by the inﬂ amed pancreatic head. 
  •   Endoscopic ultrasound has become the 
standard technique for examining the head of 
the pancreas, and aspiration cytology can be 
carried out from any suspicious areas to help 
differentiate chronic pancreatitis or areas of 
focal pancreatitis from carcinoma.  
  •   Exocrine function tests , such as the faecal 
elastase test, have largely replaced older 
techniques such as faecal fat estimation.    
 However, despite preoperative investigation, it 
is still true that at times the differential diagnosis 
from a pancreatic carcinoma may only be estab-
lished following laparotomy and resection when 
formal histology is obtained.  
a later stage (peripancreatic collections in the 
lesser sac are common in the early stages but 
usually resolve without intervention). In the case 
of gallstone pancreatitis, cholecystectomy should 
be performed as soon as the patient recovers from 
the acute attack, preferably during the same 
admission.  
 Prognosis 
 Mortality is in the region of 10% and is directly 
proportional to the severity of the attack. 
 Complications 
  •   Abscess formation  with pancreatic necrosis, 
characterized by pyrexia and persistent 
leucocytosis. 
  •   Peripancreatic collections and pseudocyst 
formation , characterized by symptoms 
attributable to the pressure effect on the 
stomach with fullness and discomfort 
commonly associated with a palpable 
epigastric mass.  
  •   Gastrointestinal bleeding  from acute gastric 
erosions or peptic ulceration.  
  •   Renal failure  associated with shock and 
pancreatic necrosis.  
  •   Pulmonary insufﬁ ciency : acute lung injury. 
  •   Further attacks  (relapsing pancreatitis).  
  •   Diabetes mellitus , resulting from a severe 
attack with pancreatic necrosis, or chronic 
relapsing pancreatitis. 
 Chronic  p ancreatitis 
 Chronic and acute pancreatitis are clinically dis-
tinct entities, although bouts of acute pancreatitis 
may occur in the course of the development of 
chronic pancreatitis, and the pathogenesis of 
chronic pancreatitis has much in common with 
alcoholic acute pancreatitis. In acute pancreatitis 
the gland is normal before the attack; chronic pan-
creatitis is characterized by gradual destruction of 
the functional pancreatic tissue. 
 Aetiology 
 In the Western world, alcoholism is the main cause 
of chronic pancreatitis. In parts of Asia and Africa, 
chronic pancreatitis is associated with malnutri-

282 
The pancreas
 False 
 A collection of ﬂ uid in the lesser sac (80%): 
  •   after trauma to the pancreas; 
  •   following acute pancreatitis; 
  •   owing to perforation of a posterior gastric ulcer 
(rare). 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 A pancreatic cyst presents as a ﬁ rm, large, rounded, 
upper abdominal swelling. Initially, the cyst is 
apparently resonant because of loops of gas - ﬁ lled 
bowel in front of it, but as it increases in size the 
intestine is pushed away and the mass becomes 
dull to percussion.  
 Treatment 
 True cysts require surgical excision; false cysts are 
drained. This may be performed internally (by 
anastomosis either into the stomach or into the 
small intestine), or percutaneously, under ultra-
sound control.   
 Pancreatic  t umours 
 Classiﬁ cation 
 Benign 
 1  Adenoma. 
 2  Cystadenoma. 
 3  Islet cell tumour (see Box  38.1 ,  p. 324 ): 
 a  Zollinger – Ellison tumour; 
 b  insulinoma ( β - cell tumour); 
 c  glucagonoma ( α - cell tumour). 
 Malignant 
 1  Primary : 
 a  adenocarcinoma; 
 b  cystadenocarcinoma; 
 c  malignant islet cell tumour. 
 2  Secondary : invasion from carcinoma of the 
stomach or bile duct. 
 Treatment 
 The principal treatment is to remove causative 
factors such as alcohol consumption. Alcohol 
should be avoided by anyone with pancreatitis. 
  •   Analgesics : the pain is often sufﬁ cient to 
warrant opiate analgesia, but long - term use 
may result in addiction. Getting the analgesia 
right is often one of the most difﬁ cult aspects 
of management.  
  •   Diet : a low - fat diet with pancreatic enzyme 
supplements (pancreatin) by mouth.  
  •   Insulin when diabetes mellitus occurs.  
  •   Surgery if attacks are very frequent or if there is 
severe pain. Partial pancreatectomy or, in 
patients in whom the pancreatic duct is grossly 
dilated, drainage of the whole length of the 
pancreatic duct into a loop of intestine may be 
required (Puestow procedure 6 ). Occasionally, 
total pancreatectomy is required, with 
consequent diabetes and steatorrhoea. In 
these patients, the diabetes may be very 
difﬁ cult to control partly because of their poor 
compliance and partly because of the loss of 
the glucagon - secreting function when the 
whole pancreas has been removed.  
  •   Painless obstructive jaundice may be relieved 
by a bypass using a Roux - en - Y reconstruction, 
usually to the common hepatic duct. However, 
if diagnostic uncertainty remains or if there 
is a coincident problem with gastric 
emptying, a Whipple ’ s operation 
(pancreaticodoudenectomy) may be 
appropriate. 
 Pancreatic  c ysts 
 Classiﬁ cation 
 True (20%) 
  •   Congenital polycystic disease of pancreas. 
  •   Retention. 
  •   Hydatid. 
  •   Neoplastic: cystadenoma or 
cystadenocarcinoma. 
  6   Charles Puestow (1902 – 73), Professor of Surgery, College of 
Medicine, University of Illinois, Chicago, IL, USA. 

The pancreas 283
 1  Central nervous system phenomena : weakness, 
sweating, trembling, epilepsy, confusion, 
hemiplegia and eventually coma, which may 
be fatal. 
 2  Gastrointestinal phenomena : hunger, 
abdominal pain and diarrhoea. 
 These symptoms appear particularly when the 
patient is hungry, or during physical exercise. They 
are often present early in the morning before 
breakfast and are relieved by eating. Often, there 
is excessive appetite with gross weight gain. 
Although once the diagnosis has been made the 
cause of the symptomatology is clear, it is not 
uncommon for diagnosis to be delayed, and psy-
chiatric diagnoses and referrals being made during 
the course of the illness is common. 
 Diagnosis: Whipple ’ s  t riad  8  
 The main diagnostic characteristics of the syn-
drome are as follows: 
  •   The attacks are induced by starvation or 
exercise. 
  •   During the attack, hypoglycaemia is present. 
  •      Symptoms are relieved by sugar given orally or 
intravenously. 
 Differential diagnosis of spontaneous hypogly-
caemia in adults includes self - administration of 
insulin or alcohol, and suprarenal, pituitary or 
hepatic insufﬁ ciency. 
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   Insulin levels : raised insulin levels in the 
presence of hypoglycaemia. The 
hypoglycaemia can be prompted by a period of 
prolonged fasting (14 – 16 hours). 
  •   C - peptide levels may be measured to rule out 
exogenous insulin administration, as these will 
be high with insulinoma and low when 
exogenous insulin is administered. 
  •   Localization tests include CT, MR, endoscopic 
ultrasound (EUS) and selective angiography. 
Occasionally, localization is not achieved until 
laparotomy is performed, when the tumour 
can usually be located using careful palpation 
and intraoperative ultrasound. 
 Pancreatic 
 n euroendocrine  t umours 
 These tumours arise from cell types within the 
islets of Langerhans and, although rare (less than 
2% of pancreatic neoplasms), are of great interest 
because of their metabolic effects, even from 
small lesions, which may be difﬁ cult to localize 
even with CT and magnetic resonance (MR) 
imaging or selective angiography. 
 Types of  t umours 
 Pancreatic neuroendocrine tumours are derived 
from amine precursor uptake and decarboxyla-
tion (APUD) cells, and are thus sometimes termed 
APUD - omas. They secrete a number of polypep-
tides according to the cell type of origin. These 
may be active hormones and present relatively 
early, or polypeptides for which no function has 
been identiﬁ ed; often, more than one polypeptide 
is secreted. A pancreatic islet contains many cell 
types of which the alpha ( α ) cells (producing 
glucagon), beta ( β ) cells (insulin) and delta ( δ ) 
cells (somatostatin) are best known. In addition, 
interacinar cells produce pancreatic polypeptide 
(F cells) and serotonin (enterochromafﬁ n cells). 
The islet cells may also produce hormones not 
normally found in the pancreas, such as gastrin 
(gastrinoma), vasoactive intestinal polypeptide 
(VIP - oma), and adrenocorticotrophic hormone 
(ACTH) (Cushing ’ s syndrome 7 ). 
 The islet cell tumours may be associated with 
other endocrine tumours elsewhere as part of a 
multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) syndrome, 
often involving the parathyroid and the anterior 
pituitary gland (see Box  38.1 ,  p. 324 ). 
 Insulinoma ( β - c ell 
 t umour) 
 Ninety per cent are benign, 10% malignant and 
about 10% are multiple tumours. Because of the 
high production of insulin by the tumour, two 
groups of hypoglycaemic symptoms may be 
produced. 
  7   Harvey Cushing (1869 – 1939), Professor of Surgery, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.  
  8  Allen Oldfather Whipple (1881 – 1963), Professor of Surgery, 
Columbia University, New York, NY, USA. Also described the oper-
ation for carcinoma of the head of the pancreas.  

284 
The pancreas
Modern acid suppression therapy has largely 
replaced surgical treatment by total gastrectomy. 
 Pancreatic  c arcinoma 
 Pathology 
 Sixty per cent are situated in the head of the pan-
creas, 25% in the body and 15% in the tail. 
 Of the tumours of the head of the pancreas, one -
 third are periampullary, arising from the ampulla 
of Vater, the duodenal mucosa or the lower end of 
the common bile duct. 
 The incidence in the UK is 10 per 100   000 popu-
lation, with men and women now almost equally 
affected. It affects the middle - aged and elderly, 
and the disease is more common in those who 
smoke. 
 Macroscopically, the growth is inﬁ ltrating, hard 
and irregular; rarer types are characterized by 
cystic lesions near the tail of the pancreas. 
 Microscopically, the tumours may be 
  •   ductal adenocarcinomas (most common): 
tumours arising in the cells lining the 
pancreatic ducts;  
  •   acinar cell carcinoma; 
  •   undifferentiated. 
 Less common tumours include: 
  •   mucinous cystic neoplasm (MCN): cystic 
tumours that predominantly affect the tail of 
the pancreas and occur in middle - aged 
women;  
  •   intraductal papillary mucinous tumour 
(IPMN): ductal tumours that are characterized 
by the production of a large amount of mucus. 
They are slow - growing tumours that may be 
benign or malignant, and occur more 
commonly in older men. 
 Spread 
 1  Direct invasion into : 
 a  common bile duct  – obstructive jaundice; 
 b  duodenum  – occult or overt intestinal 
bleeding and duodenal obstruction;  
 c  portal vein  – portal vein thrombosis, portal 
hypertension and ascites;  
 d  inferior vena cava  – bilateral leg oedema. 
 2  Lymphatic : to adjacent lymph nodes and 
nodes in the porta hepatis.  
 Treatment 
 Treatment is excision of the tumour. Depending 
on the site, this may require either a Whipple ’ s 
procedure or a distal pancreatectomy, but in 
patients in whom the insulinoma is well deﬁ ned 
and superﬁ cial, simple enucleation is often 
possible. 
 Gastrinoma (Zollinger –
 Ellison  s yndrome,  9   n on -
 β - c ell  i slet  t umour) 
 This tumour of non -  β  - cells may be benign or 
malignant, solitary or multiple, and a quarter 
are part of an MEN syndrome. Malignant 
tumours are less common in sporadic forms 
(30%) than in those related to MEN syndromes 
(60%); the malignant tumours are also relatively 
slow growing, although they eventually produce 
hepatic metastases. The gastrinoma secretes a 
gastrin - like substance into the bloodstream, 
which produces an extremely high gastric secre-
tion of HCl. Many patients also develop oesophag-
itis owing to the high acid secretion; diarrhoea is 
common (probably related to the high acid 
output). The majority of patients develop fulmi-
nating peptic ulceration, presenting with bleeding 
or perforation, and have multiple duodenal 
ulcers. Symptoms relapse after cessation of 
medical therapy. 
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   Serum gastrin  concentration in the blood is 10 
times normal.  
  •   Basal acid output , measured by nasogastric 
aspiration, is very high ( > 15  mmol/h). 
  •   Localization : as for insulinoma. 
 Treatment 
 Treatment comprises excision of the tumour or, 
if this is not possible, control of the high acid 
secretion by means of proton pump inhibitors 
(e.g. omeprazole) or high doses of histamine 
H 2 - receptor antagonists (cimetidine, ranitidine). 
  9   Robert Milton Zollinger (1903 – 1992), Professor of Surgery, Ohio 
State University, Columbus, OH, USA. Edward Horner Ellison 
(1918 – 1970), Associate Professor at the same institution.  

The pancreas 285
tumour and its relationship to the portal vein 
and superior mesenteric artery and will 
demonstrate local extent of spread and also 
visualize enlarged lymph nodes. EUS is thus a 
key step in deﬁ ning the operability of a tumour 
in terms of local invasion and spread.  
  −   Needle aspiration under EUS control will 
allow cytological diagnosis of the tumour 
itself and lymph node metastases.  
  −   Needle aspiration of cystic lesions may 
distinguish between pseudocysts (high 
amylase content) and mucinous tumours 
(high Ca 19.9 and CEA; see Chapter  7 , 
Table 7.1,  p. 37 ). 
  •   MRCP and ERCP will demonstrate an 
obstruction in the bile duct.  
  •   Barium studies may show widening of the 
duodenal loop and a ﬁ lling defect or 
irregularity of the duodenum resulting from 
invasion by the tumour, but have largely been 
replaced by CT imaging with three -
 dimensional reconstruction when necessary. 
  •   Occult blood  may be present in the stools, 
especially from a periampullary tumour 
ulcerating into the duodenum. The stools are 
pale in the presence of jaundice, and may have 
a silvery appearance owing to the periampullary 
bleeding (the silvery stools of Ogilvie 11 ). 
  •   Serum amylase is rarely elevated. 
  •   Biochemical analysis conﬁ rms the changes of 
obstructive jaundice (high bilirubin and 
alkaline phosphatase). The tumour marker Ca 
19.9 may be elevated. 
 Differential  d iagnosis 
 This is from other causes of obstructive jaundice 
and from other causes of upper abdominal pain. 
Carcinoma of the body and tail of the pancreas, in 
which obstructive jaundice does not occur, is 
notoriously difﬁ cult to diagnose, the diagnosis 
often only being made at a late stage following 
many weeks or months of upper abdominal pain 
when a CT scan is performed. The tumour at this 
stage is usually inoperable.  
 Treatment 
 Treatment of carcinoma of the pancreas is usually 
symptomatic, and thus applicable to tumours of 
the head of the pancreas, which present with 
 3  Bloodstream : to the liver and then to the lungs. 
 4  Transcoelomic : with peritoneal seeding and 
ascites. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Carcinoma of the pancreas may present in a 
variety of ways: 
  •   Painless progressive jaundice  is the classical 
presentation, but this form is rather 
uncommon and is most often found in the 
periampullary type of tumour. This is because 
the bile duct is compressed at an early stage, 
before extensive painful invasion of 
surrounding tissues.  
  •   Pain : at least 50% of patients present with 
epigastric pain of a dull, continuous, aching 
nature, which frequently radiates into the 
upper lumbar region. This pain often precedes 
the development of jaundice.  
  •   Diabetes : recent - onset diabetes in the elderly is 
suspicious. 
  •   Thrombophlebitis migrans (Trousseau ’ s sign 10 ); 
the pathogenesis of this is unknown.  
  •   The general features of malignant disease : 
anorexia and, in particular, loss of weight.     
 Examination 
 The patient is frequently jaundiced, and half have 
a palpable gallbladder (Courvoisier ’ s law; see 
Figure  31.3 , p. 271). If the tumour is large, an epi-
gastric mass may be palpable. The liver is fre-
quently enlarged, either because of back - pressure 
from biliary obstruction or because of secondary 
deposits. 
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   Ultrasound  will conﬁ rm dilated bile ducts and 
a distended gallbladder, but should not be 
relied on to obtain adequate views of the 
pancreas. 
  •   CT may demonstrate the tumour mass and 
facilitate ﬁ ne - needle biopsy. 
  •   Endoscopy  may visualize a periampullary 
growth, which can then be biopsied.  
  •   EUS , in which a specialized endoscope is used 
to obtain ultrasound images of the pancreatic 
head from within the duodenum, will give 
detailed information about the location of the 
  10  Armand Trousseau (1801 – 1867), Physician, H ô pital St. Antoine 
and H ô pital Dieu, Paris, France.  
  11  Sir William Heneage Ogilvie (1887 – 1971), Surgeon, Guy ’ s 
Hospital, London, UK. 

286 
The pancreas
jejunal Roux loop. However, most tumours are 
inoperable and, even among the 15% which 
are operable, the long - term prognosis is poor 
except in early periampullary tumours without 
lymph node involvement.  
  •   Palliative surgical bypass comprises a short 
circuit between the distended bile duct and a 
loop of jejunum (choledochojejunostomy), 
together with a duodenal bypass by a 
gastroenterostomy if duodenal obstruction is 
present. 
  •   Palliative intubation , by passage of a stent 
across the ampulla and through the obstructed 
common bile duct, is the other alternative to 
treat the obstructive jaundice. This may be 
performed either endoscopically (ERCP) or 
transhepatically (percutaneous transhepatic 
obstructive jaundice and duodenal obstruction. In 
approximately 15% of cases, attempted curative 
resection may be possible; otherwise, palliation is 
more appropriate. 
  •   Curative surgical resection  is possible when 
disease is conﬁ ned to the periampullary 
region. The procedure (Whipple ’ s 
pancreaticoduodenectomy; Figure  32.2 ) 
involves removal of the duodenal  ‘ C ’ along 
with the pancreatic head and common bile 
duct; a gastroenterostomy and biliary drainage 
using a Roux loop 12  of jejunum are fashioned 
to restore continuity, together with the 
implantation of the pancreatic duct into the 
Dilated
pancreatic
duct
Dilated
gallbladder
(a)
Dilated
common
bile duct
Pancreatic
cancer
 Figure 32.2   Whipple ’ s pancreaticoduodenectomy. (a) The initial appearance characterized by a distended 
gallbladder, dilated bile duct and pancreatic duct, and mass in the head of the pancreas. (b) Following resection, 
the stomach remnant is anastomosed to the proximal jejunum as a gastrojejunostomy; the common hepatic duct is 
anastomosed to a Roux - en - Y loop of jejunum, the end of which is anastomosed to the pancreatic duct.  
  12   Cesar Roux (1857 – 1934), Professor of Surgery, Lausanne, 
Switzerland. 

The pancreas 287
Common hepatic
duct anastomosed
to Roux loop
Specimen comprising
duodenum, head of pancreas,
gastric antrum and gallbladder
Gastro-
enterostomy
End of Roux loop
anastomosed to
tail of pancreas
C’
C
A’
A
D’
D
B’
B
Enteroenterostomy
(b)
Figure 32.2 Continued

288 
The pancreas
cholangiography). Plastic stents are commonly 
used when the diagnosis has not been 
established or when operative resection is 
planned, but expanding metal stents can be 
used in the palliative situation when the 
diagnosis is clear because they have better 
patency rates. Duodenal obstruction can now 
also be treated by endoscopic stenting, 
potentially allowing the terminally ill patient to 
be spared the additional morbidity of a 
laparotomy and surgical bypass. Alternatively, 
laparoscopic gastroenterostomy can be used to 
palliate duodenal obstruction.  
  •   Severe pain  often requires management with 
opiates, but coeliac plexus block performed 
either via the percutaneous approach or under 
EUS guidance can offer good pain control in 
some cases. 
 Prognosis 
 The outlook for patients with carcinoma of the 
pancreas itself is gloomy; even if the growth is 
resectable, the operation has a mortality of about 
2 – 5% and only a small percentage survive for 5 
years. Periampullary growths, however, which 
present relatively early, have a reasonably good 
prognosis after resection, with about a 25% 5 year 
survival. 
 Palliative chemotherapy currently uses proto-
cols based on gemcitabine. The place of radio-
therapy is unclear, although some centres do use 
a combination of radiotherapy and chemotherapy 
in selected patients. Recent trials have shown a 
deﬁ nite survival beneﬁ t in patients who have 
undergone attempted curative resection and who 
receive postoperative chemotherapy. 
 Occasionally, a patient has a surprisingly pro-
longed survival after a palliative bypass operation. 
In such a case, the diagnosis was more likely to 
have been chronic pancreatitis mistaken for 
carcinoma. 
 
 
 
 

 33 
The  s pleen  
 
 Learning objective 
 ✓  To know the common causes of splenomegaly, the presentations 
of a ruptured spleen and the prophylaxis and treatment of 
post - splenectomy syndrome. 
 a  Viruses: glandular fever. 
 b  Bacterial: typhus, typhoid, septicaemia 
( ‘ septic spleen ’ ). 
 c  Protozoal: malaria, kala - azar, Egyptian 
splenomegaly (schistosomiasis).  
 d  Parasitic: hydatid. 
 2  Haematological diseases . 
 a  Leukaemia: chronic myeloid and chronic 
lymphocytic. 
 b  Lymphoma: Hodgkin ’ s and non - Hodgkin ’ s 
lymphoma.  
 c  Myeloﬁ brosis, idiopathic thrombocytopenia, 
polycythaemia rubra vera.  
 d  Haemolytic anaemias, e.g. spherocytosis, 
 β - thalassaemia. 
 3  Portal hypertension . Increased pressure in the 
portal system causes progressive enlargement 
of the spleen and may lead to hypersplenism 
with overactivity of the normal splenic 
functions such as removal of platelets, 
resulting in thrombocytopenia. 
 4  Metabolic and collagen disease . 
 a  Amyloid: secondary to rheumatoid arthritis, 
collagen diseases, chronic sepsis.  
 b  Storage diseases, e.g. Gaucher ’ s disease. 1 
 5  Cysts, abscesses and tumours of the spleen : all 
uncommon. 
 Massive splenomegaly in the UK is likely to be 
due to one of the following: chronic myeloid leu-
kaemia, myeloﬁ brosis, lymphoma, polycythaemia 
or portal hypertension. 
 Splenomegaly 
 Physical  s igns 
 The spleen must be enlarged to about three times 
its normal size before it becomes clinically palpa-
ble. It then forms a swelling that descends below 
the left costal margin, moves on respiration and 
has a ﬁ rm lower margin, which may or may not be 
notched. The mass is dull to percussion, the dull-
ness extending above the costal margin. 
 There 
are 
three 
important 
differential 
diagnoses: 
 1  An enlarged left kidney; unless this is 
enormous, there is resonance over the swelling 
anteriorly, as it is covered by the gas -
 containing colon. 
 2  Carcinoma of the cardia or upper part of the 
body of the stomach; by the time such a 
tumour reaches palpable proportions, there 
are usually symptoms of gastric obstruction, 
which suggest the site of the lesion.  
 3  An enlarged left lobe of liver. 
 Classiﬁ cation 
 It is essential to have a working classiﬁ cation of 
enlargements of the spleen. 
 1  Infections . 
Lecture Notes: General Surgery, 12th edition. © Harold Ellis, 
Sir Roy Y. Calne and Christopher J. E. Watson. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
  1   Phillipe Gaucher (1854 – 1918), Physician, H ô pital St Louis, Paris, 
France. 

290 
The spleen
cytic properties, as well as being the largest reposi-
tory of lymphoid tissue in the body. 
 Removal of the spleen in splenectomy predis-
poses the patient, especially a child, to infection 
with organisms such as the  Pneumococcus . The 
clinical course is of a fulminant bacterial infec-
tion, with shock and circulatory collapse, termed 
overwhelming postsplenectomy sepsis. 
 Prophylactic immunization with pneumococ-
cal, meningococcal and  H. inﬂ uenzae  type B vac-
cines should be administered, preoperatively 
when possible. In addition, children should have 
prophylactic daily low - dose penicillin at least until 
they reach adulthood. Adults should have penicil-
lin for at least the ﬁ rst 2 years after splenectomy, 
and longer if immunosuppressed. Annual ﬂ u 
immunizations are also recommended to mini-
mize the additional risk of bacterial superinfec-
tion and special care is required if the patient is to 
travel to malarial areas.    
 Ruptured  s pleen 
 This is the commonest internal injury produced 
by non - penetrating trauma to the abdominal wall. 
It usually occurs in isolation, but may coexist with 
fractures of the ribs, or rupture of the liver, the left 
kidney, the diaphragm or the tail of the pancreas. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Rupture of the spleen manifests in one of the fol-
lowing ways: 
 1  Immediate massive bleeding with rapid death 
from shock. This results from a complete 
shattering of the spleen or its avulsion from 
the splenic pedicle, and death may occur in a 
few minutes. Fortunately, this is rare. 
 2  Peritonism from progressive blood loss . 
Following injury, there are the symptoms and 
signs of progressive blood loss together with 
evidence of peritoneal irritation. Over a period 
of several hours after the accident, the patient 
becomes increasingly pale, the pulse rises and 
the blood pressure falls. There is abdominal 
pain, which is either diffuse or conﬁ ned to the 
left ﬂ ank. The patient may complain of pain 
referred to the left shoulder tip or admit to this 
only on direct questioning. 
 On examination, the abdomen is generally 
tender, particularly on the left side. There may 
 If the spleen is palpable, special attention must 
be paid to detecting the presence of hepatomegaly 
and lymphadenopathy (Chapter  34 ,  p. 292 ). 
 Splenectomy 
 Splenectomy is indicated under the following 
circumstances: 
  •   Rupture : either from closed or open trauma or 
from accidental damage during abdominal 
surgery. 
  •   Haematological disease : haemolytic anaemia, 
thrombocytopenic purpura.  
  •   Tumours and cysts . 
  •   Part of another operative procedure , e.g. radical 
excision of carcinoma of the stomach, distal 
pancreatectomy, splenorenal anastomosis for 
portal hypertension. 
 Complications of  s plenectomy 
 Gastric  d ilatation 
 Following splenectomy, there may be a gastric 
ileus. Swallowed air causes rapid dilatation of the 
stomach, which may tear ligatures on the short 
gastric vessels on the greater curve of the stomach, 
which are tied during splenectomy; haemorrhage 
results. To prevent this, a nasogastric tube is 
placed and regularly aspirated.  
 Thrombocytosis 
 Following splenectomy, the platelet count rises, 
often to a level of 1000    ×  10 9 /L (normal is 
 < 400  ×  10 9 /L). In time, the count falls, but while it 
is high the patient is at a greater than normal risk 
of deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolus. 
Antiplatelet agents such as aspirin are given as 
prophylaxis in addition to low - molecular - weight 
heparin.  
 Postsplenectomy  s epsis 
 One of the spleen ’ s functions is to clear capsulated 
microorganisms 
(such 
as 
 Pneumococcus , 
 Meningococcus  and  Haemophilus inﬂ uenzae ) 
from the bloodstream after they have been 
opsonized by the binding of host antibodies to 
their surface as part of the normal immune 
response. The spleen also has important phago-

The spleen 291
ﬂ exure of the colon, if containing gas, may be 
seen to be displaced downwards by the 
haematoma.  
  •   Ultrasound  may reveal free ﬂ uid, an 
intrasplenic haematoma or a laceration of the 
capsule, although the last may be overlooked. 
Ultrasound is increasingly used as a diagnostic 
tool in the accident and emergency 
department for such cases.  
  •   Computed tomography  is the investigation 
of choice in all cases of abdominal trauma, 
and will demonstrate the laceration of the 
spleen, the presence of intra - abdominal 
ﬂ uid and identify traumatic injuries to other 
organs. 
  •   Urinalysis for blood : haematuria will suggest 
associated coincidental renal damage. 
 Treatment 
 Resuscitation with plasma expanders initially and 
blood replacement as soon as blood is available is 
commenced, and laparotomy performed. If the 
spleen is found to be avulsed or hopelessly pulped, 
emergency splenectomy is required. If there is 
minor laceration of the spleen, an attempt is made 
to preserve it, especially in children and young 
adults, in whom there is a greater risk of post-
splenectomy sepsis. This may be carried out by 
using ﬁ ne sutures, ﬁ brin glues and haemostatic 
absorbable gauze. 
 Having controlled the bleeding at laparotomy, it 
is important to carry out a full examination to 
exclude injury to other organs.   
 
be marked generalized rigidity, or it may be 
conﬁ ned to slight guarding in the left ﬂ ank. 
Bruising of the abdominal wall is often absent 
or only slight.  
 3  Delayed rupture . This may occur from hours 
up to several days after trauma. Following the 
initial injury the concomitant pain soon 
settles. Then, following a completely 
asymptomatic interval, the signs and 
symptoms described above become manifest. 
This picture is produced by a subcapsular 
haematoma of the spleen, which increases in 
size and then ruptures the thin overlying 
peritoneal capsule with a resultant sudden, 
sharp haemorrhage.  
 4  Spontaneous rupture . A spleen diseased by, for 
example, malaria, glandular fever or leukaemia 
may rupture spontaneously or after only trivial 
trauma. 
 Special  i nvestigations 
 The diagnosis of a ruptured spleen is a clinical 
one, and an unstable patient must be resuscitated 
aggressively and the surgeon proceed at once to 
laparotomy. In the less acute situation, and only 
after resuscitation has begun, the following inves-
tigations are useful: 
  •   Chest X - ray may reveal associated rib fractures, 
rupture of the diaphragm or injury to the left 
lung.  
  •   Abdominal X - ray : the stomach bubble may be 
displaced to the right and there may be 
indentation of its gas shadow. The splenic 

 34 
The  l ymph  n odes and 
 l ymphatics  
 
 Learning objectives 
 ✓  To know the causes of lymphadenopathy and the appropriate 
management.  
 ✓  To have knowledge of lymphoedema and its causes. 
 2  The reticuloses : Hodgkin ’ s disease, 1 non -
 Hodgkin ’ s lymphoma, chronic lymphocytic 
leukaemia.  
 3  Sarcoidosis . 
 Clinical  e xamination 
 The clinical examination of any patient with a 
lymph node enlargement is incomplete unless 
the following three requirements have been 
fulﬁ lled: 
 1     The area drained by the involved lymph nodes 
has been searched for a possible primary 
source of infection or malignant disease. There 
are four important points to remember. 
 a  Cervical lymphadenopathy . In addition to 
examining the skin of the head and neck, 
the inside of the oropharynx together with 
the larynx should be examined for chronic 
sepsis or malignant disease.  
 b  Inguinal lymphadenopathy . If a patient has 
an enlarged lymph node in the groin, the 
skin of the leg, buttock and lower abdominal 
wall below the level of the umbilicus must 
be scrutinized, together with the external 
genitalia and the anal canal.  
 c  Testicular tumours drain along their 
lymphatics, which pass with the testicular 
    Enlarged lymph nodes are a common diagnostic 
problem. It is as well, therefore, to have a simple 
classiﬁ cation and clinical approach to this topic. 
 The  l ymphadenopathies 
 The lymphadenopathies are conveniently divided 
into those due to local and those due to general-
ized disease. 
 Classiﬁ cation 
 Localized 
 1  Infective : 
 a  acute, e.g. a cervical lymphadenopathy 
secondary to tonsillitis;  
 b  chronic, e.g. tuberculous nodes of neck. 
 2  Neoplastic : due to secondary spread of tumour.     
 Generalized 
 1  Infective : 
 a  acute, e.g. glandular fever (mononucleosis), 
septicaemia;  
 b  chronic, e.g. human immunodeﬁ ciency 
virus (HIV), secondary syphilis. 
Lecture Notes: General Surgery, 12th edition. © Harold Ellis, 
Sir Roy Y. Calne and Christopher J. E. Watson. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
  1   Thomas Hodgkin (1798 – 1866), Curator of Pathology, Guy ’ s 
Hospital, London, UK. 

The lymph nodes and lymphatics 293
 Lymphoedema 
 Lymphoedema results from the obstruction of 
lymphatic ﬂ ow, owing to inherited abnormalities 
of the lymphatics, their obliteration by disease or 
their operative removal. It is characterized by an 
excessive accumulation of interstitial ﬂ uid. The 
causes of lymphoedema may be divided into con-
genital and acquired (Box  34.1 ). 
 Inherited  l ymphoedema 
 There are two autosomal dominant inherited 
forms of lymphoedema. Both are more common 
in women. 
  •   Type 1 (also known as Milroy ’ s disease, 5 
Nonne – Milroy 6 disease and primary congenital 
lymphoedema) is very uncommon and is 
caused by a mutation in the  FLT4 gene, which 
encodes vascular endothelial growth factor 
receptor 3, itself involved in 
vessels to the para - aortic lymph nodes, and 
not to the inguinal lymph nodes.  
 d  Virchow ’ s node 2  is a prominent node in the 
left supraclavicular fossa arising from 
malignant disease below the diaphragm, e.g. 
gastric carcinoma, with secondaries 
ascending the thoracic duct to drain into the 
left subclavian vein (Troisier ’ s sign 3 ). A 
supraclavicular node may also signify spread 
from intrathoracic, testicular or breast 
tumours. 
 2  The other lymph node areas are examined, 
as enlarged lymph nodes elsewhere 
would suggest a generalized 
lymphadenopathy. 
 3  The liver and spleen are carefully palpated; 
their enlargement will suggest a reticulosis, 
sarcoid or glandular fever. 
 Special  i nvestigations 
 In many instances, the cause of the lymphaden-
opathy will by now have become obvious. The fol-
lowing investigations may be required in order to 
elucidate further the diagnosis: 
  •   Examination of a blood ﬁ lm  may clinch the 
diagnosis of glandular fever or leukaemia.  
  •   Chest X - ray  may show evidence of enlarged 
mediastinal nodes or may reveal a primary 
occult tumour of the lung, which is the source 
of disseminated deposits.  
  •   Serological tests : an HIV antibody test is 
performed if infection is suspected; syphilis 
may be conﬁ rmed by speciﬁ c treponemal 
antigen tests.  
  •   Lymph node biopsy : ultrasound - guided needle 
core biopsy, or surgical removal of one of the 
enlarged lymph nodes, may be necessary for 
deﬁ nite histological proof of the diagnosis. 
This is particularly so in Hodgkin ’ s disease and 
non - Hodgkin ’ s lymphoma. 
  •   Computed tomography  of chest, abdomen and 
pelvis to deﬁ ne the stage of any lymphoma, or 
to identify the primary tumour  
  •   X - ray of cervical nodes : enlarged painless 
cervical lymph nodes may be X - rayed; 
tuberculous nodes often show typical spotty 
calciﬁ cation. 
 Box 34.1   A swollen leg 
 Generalized  d isease 
  •    Cardiac failure  
  •    Nephrotic syndrome  
  •    Liver failure  
 Venous  d isease 
  •    Venous thrombosis * 
  •    Deep venous insufﬁ ciency  
  •    Arteriovenous ﬁ stula, * e.g. Klippel – Tr é naunay 
syndrome 4 
 Lymphatic  d isease 
  •    Primary lymphoedema * 
  •    Secondary lymphoedema, * e.g. ﬁ lariasis, 
malignant inﬁ ltration, following surgery or 
irradiation to lymphatics  
  2   Rudolf Ludwig Karl Virchow (1821 – 1902), Professor of Pathology 
in W ü rzburg and later Berlin, Germany. 
  3  Charles  É mile Troisier (1844 – 1919), Professor of Pathology, Paris, 
France. 
  4  Maurice Klippel (1858 – 1942), French Neurologist, Salp ê tri è re 
Hospital, Paris, France. Paul Tr é naunay (b. 1875), French 
Neurologist. The syndrome involves multiple congenital venous 
malformations producing varicose veins together with hypertro-
phy of bones and soft tissues and extensive cutaneous haeman-
giomas, usually affecting the lower limbs. 
  5  William Forsyth Milroy (1855 – 1942), Professor of Medicine, 
University of Nebraska, Omaha, NE, USA. 
  6   Max Nonne (1861 – 1959), Neurologist, Hamburg, Germany. 
 * Also may cause unilateral upper limb swelling. 

294 
The lymph nodes and lymphatics
  •   Magnetic resonance imaging may be used to 
conﬁ rm the cause of obstruction in secondary 
cases. 
 Differential  d iagnosis 
 The diagnosis of lymphoedema depends ﬁ rst of all 
on the exclusion of other causes of oedema, for 
instance venous obstruction, cardiac failure or 
renal disease, and, second, on demonstration of 
one of the causes mentioned above. It was previ-
ously taught that lymphoedema could readily be 
differentiated from other forms of oedema on the 
simple physical sign of absence of pitting in the 
lymphoedematous limb. However, lymphoedema 
of acute onset will initially pit on pressure, 
although it is true that, when it becomes chronic; 
the subcutaneous tissues become indurated from 
ﬁ brous tissue replacement, and pitting will not 
then occur. However, oedema of any nature, if 
chronic, will have this characteristic.  
 Treatment of  c ongenital 
 l ymphoedema 
 Conservative 
 Mild cases will respond to elevation and gradu-
ated elastic compression stockings.  
 Surgery 
 In severe cases, surgery may be appropriate. Two 
approaches are possible. The ﬁ rst is to remove all 
the oedematous subcutaneous tissue down to the 
deep fascia with removal of the overlying skin as a 
split - skin graft and its reapplication directly to the 
deep fascia. This leaves considerable scarring. The 
second approach is to provide alternative lym-
phatic drainage bypassing obstructions, such 
as by tunnelling a tongue of omentum down to 
the inguinal nodes, to provide drainage along 
mesenteric lymphatics to the thoracic duct, 
bypassing obstructed iliac nodes. Unfortunately, 
the results are poor. 
 
  
lymphangiogenesis. It is characterized by onset 
soon after birth with lower limb swelling.  
  •   Type 2 (also known as Meige ’ s syndrome 7 ) is 
associated with mutations in  FOXC2 , a 
forkhead family transcription factor gene. It is 
characterized by lymphoedema that is 
particularly severe below the waist. It has been 
arbitrarily divided into  lymphoedema praecox , 
which develops between puberty and the age 
of 35, and the less common  lymphoedema 
tarda , which develops in adult life. 
 There are three principal pathological processes 
affecting the lymphatic channels in congenital 
lymphoedema: aplasia, hypoplasia and varicose 
dilatation (megalymphatics).  
 Acquired  l ymphoedema 
  •   Post - inﬂ ammatory : the result of ﬁ brosis 
obliterating the lymphatics following repeated 
attacks of streptococcal cellulitis, particularly 
when the lymphatic drainage is already 
compromised.  
  •   Filariasis :  Filaria bancrofti 8  infects lymphatics; 
a chronic inﬂ ammatory reaction is set up with 
consequent lymphatic obstruction. There is 
gross lymphoedema, especially of the lower 
limbs and genitalia, often called elephantiasis.  
  •   Following radical surgery , particularly after 
block dissection of the axilla, groin or neck in 
which extensive removal of lymphatics is 
performed.  
  •   Post - irradiation ﬁ brosis . 
  •   Malignant disease : late oedema of the arm 
after axillary clearance and radical mastectomy 
is often indicative of massive recurrence of 
tumour in the axilla occluding the residual 
lymphatic pathways. 
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   Lymphoscintigraphy involves injecting a 
radiolabelled protein subcutaneously and 
monitoring its movement through the 
lymphatics. It will conﬁ rm lymphatic 
obstruction.  
  7   Henri Meige (1866 – 1940), Professor of Medicine, H ô pital de 
Salp ê tri è re, Paris, France. 
  8   Joseph Bancroft (1836 – 1894), Physician and Public Health 
Ofﬁ cer, Brisbane, Australia.  

 35 
The  b reast  
 
 Learning objectives 
 ✓  To know about benign and malignant breast disease. 
 ✓  In particular, to be able to recognize the features of breast cancer 
and have knowledge of its management.     
 Symptoms of  b reast 
 d isease 
 There are ﬁ ve common symptoms of breast 
disease that warrant urgent attention: 
  •   a new, discrete lump; 
  •   nipple discharge  – blood stained or persistent; 
  •   nipple retraction or distortion of recent onset; 
  •   altered breast contour or dimpling; 
  •   suspected Paget ’ s disease. 
 Other common symptoms that require further 
investigation include persistent asymmetrical 
nodularity, pain (mastalgia) that interferes with a 
patient ’ s lifestyle and a family history of breast 
cancer. 
 A  l ump in the  b reast 
 Ninety - ﬁ ve per cent of all lumps in the breast will 
be one of: 
 1  Carcinoma of the breast . 
 2  Cyst . 
 3  Fibroadenoma . 
 4  Fibroadenosis . 
 In addition, the following less common causes 
need to be considered: 
 1  Trauma : fat necrosis. 
 2  Other cysts : 
 a  galactocele; 
 b  abscess; 
 Developmental 
 a nomalies 
 Accessory  n ipples and  b reasts 
 Extra nipples or breasts may develop along the 
primitive milk line. Accessory nipples are usually 
found just below the normal breast, while the 
axilla is the commonest site for accessory breast 
tissue. They are inﬂ uenced by circulating hor-
mones, and the nipples may discharge during 
lactation.  
 Hypoplasia or  a bsence of 
the  b reast 
 Although asymmetry of the breasts is normal, 
complete failure of development of the breast may 
occur and is often associated with chest wall 
defects. Bilateral developmental failure may be 
associated with ovarian failure or Turner ’ s syn-
drome. 1  Asymmetry can be treated by a combina-
tion of ipsilateral breast augmentation and 
contralateral breast reduction.   
Lecture Notes: General Surgery, 12th edition. © Harold Ellis, 
Sir Roy Y. Calne and Christopher J. E. Watson. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
  1   Henry Hubert Turner (1892 – 1970), Endocrinologist and Professor 
of Medicine, University of Oklahoma, Norman, OK, USA. 

296 
The breast
 3  Multicoloured (often multiduct) : duct ectasia 
(discharge commonly yellow, brown or green).  
 4  Milky : galactorrhoea: may follow lactation but 
can also be drug - induced or a manifestation of 
hyperprolactinaemia (or, occasionally, 
hypothyroidism).  
 5  Purulent : breast abscess. 
 Management 
 The majority of cases of nipple discharge are 
benign, and this symptom is rarely a presenting 
feature of breast cancer, even when blood stained. 
Clear, single - duct or blood - stained discharge 
requires further investigation; if a lump is present, 
it should be managed by triple assessment (above). 
In the absence of a lump, the management of dis-
charge is as follows. 
 Multicoloured,  m ultiduct  d ischarge 
 If clinical examination and mammography are 
normal, a diagnosis of duct ectasia is likely and no 
further treatment is required. 
 Clear  s ingle - d uct  d ischarge 
 If mammography is normal, the diagnosis is likely 
to be an intraduct papilloma and excision of the 
affected duct (a microdochectomy) is indicated.  
 Bloody  n ipple  d ischarge 
 The presence of blood in the discharge should be 
conﬁ rmed by cytology. If blood is present, a mam-
mogram (for women over 35 years) is performed 
with a biopsy of any abnormal tissue. If mammog-
raphy is normal, a microdochectomy is performed 
if a single duct can be identiﬁ ed; a total duct clear-
ance (Hadﬁ eld ’ s procedure 4 ) is performed if a 
single duct cannot be clearly identiﬁ ed. 
 Pain in the  b reast ( m astalgia) 
 Breast pain (mastalgia) can be separated into 
cyclical and non - cyclical mastalgia, of which cycli-
cal mastalgia is the most common and is best con-
sidered as an alteration of the normal cyclical 
pattern that occurs during the reproductive years. 
 Cyclical  m astalgia 
 Cyclical mastalgia is breast pain that is usually 
bilateral, worse premenstrually and relieved fol-
 c  cystadenoma; 
 d  retention cyst of the glands of Montgomery. 2 
 3  Other tumours : 
 a  duct papilloma; 
 b  sarcoma (extremely rare); 
 c  hamartoma; 
 d  lipoma. 
 Uncommon chest wall swellings may rarely 
be confused with breast swellings. Examples of 
such are rib swellings (e.g. tumour, Tietze ’ s 
syndrome or tuberculosis), superﬁ cial venous 
thrombosis (Mondor ’ s disease 3 ), eroding aortic 
aneurysm (syphilitic) and cold abscess (empyema 
necessitans). 
 Management 
 The diagnosis of discrete breast lumps is based on 
a triple assessment that comprises the following: 
 1  Clinical examination. 
 2  Radiological imaging: 
 a  mammography , usually in older patients 
(over 35 years); 
 b  ultrasound , both diagnostic and to guide 
biopsy; 
 c  magnetic resonance , useful in symptomatic 
patients with breast implants in whom 
ultrasound is not diagnostic. It is also used 
to detect local recurrence when ultrasound 
and mammography are unhelpful. 
 3  Biopsy, usually ultrasound guided: 
 a  ﬁ ne - needle aspiration cytology; 
 b  core biopsy. 
 The predictive value for benign disease when all 
three components of the triple assessment are 
benign is 99%. If there is discordance between any 
of the three tests, open biopsy is considered.   
 Discharge from the  n ipple 
 1  Blood - stained : 
 a  duct papilloma, when blood arises from a 
single duct;  
 b  intraduct carcinoma; 
 c  Paget ’ s disease; 
 d  invasive carcinoma (rare). 
 2  Clear : intraduct papilloma.  
  2   William Featherstone Montgomery (1797 – 1859), Professor of 
Midwifery, Dublin, Ireland.  
  3   Henri Mondor (1885 – 1962), Professor of Surgery, H ô pital 
Salp ê tri è re, Paris, France. 
  4  Geoffrey John Hadﬁ eld (1923 – 2006), Surgeon, Stoke Mandeville 
Hospital, Aylesbury, UK. 

The breast 297
 Nipple  i nversion 
 This may be primary (present since birth) or sec-
ondary to duct ectasia or a carcinoma of the breast 
and of recent onset, when the process is more 
appropriately called nipple retraction. Primary 
indrawn nipples may cause problems during lac-
tation but are of no other signiﬁ cance. 
 Traumatic  f at  n ecrosis 
 Aetiology 
 Fat necrosis may be associated with a history of 
trauma and is a common result of seat belt injury 
or surgical trauma. Its importance lies in its ability 
to mimic breast carcinoma, and the fact that many 
women presenting with a lump in the breast 
attribute this to injury.  
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Fat necrosis commonly presents with a painless, 
irregular, ﬁ rm lump in the breast and there may be 
a previous history of trauma. It is often associated 
with skin thickening or retraction and as a result 
is often difﬁ cult to distinguish from carcinoma on 
clinical examination. The lump usually decreases 
in size with time, but following resolution may 
leave a fat cyst within the breast. 
 Treatment 
 Although 
mammography 
may 
demonstrate 
non - speciﬁ c changes, or mimic carcinoma, ultra-
sound will often reveal characteristic features. 
The diagnosis can be conﬁ rmed by core biopsy 
and the palpable mass should resolve. In the 
absence of a ﬁ rm diagnosis, an open biopsy is 
recommended. 
 Acute  i nﬂ ammation of 
the  b reast ( m astitis) 
 There 
are 
three 
causes 
of 
acute 
breast 
inﬂ ammation: 
  •   mastitis neonatorum : erythema of a breast 
bud, or abscess formation, secondary to 
 Staphylococcus aureus or  Escherichia coli ; 
lowing menstruation. It usually occurs in young 
women (under 35), and other potential risk factors 
for the development of breast pain include diet 
(caffeine, dietary fat intake), hormone prepara-
tions (the oral contraceptive pill (OCP) and 
hormone replacement therapy (HRT)) and other 
medications. In addition to a careful clinical exam-
ination, patients over 35 years should also have 
mammography; as with all mammograms, suspi-
cious areas should be subjected to core biopsy. 
 Management 
 Initial therapy comprises gamma - linolenic acid 
(GLA), which can take 4 – 6 weeks to have an effect. 
In addition, the patient is advised to reduce her 
intake of caffeine and animal fats. An alteration to, 
or introduction of, the OCP or HRT should be 
considered. If the patient remains symptomatic 
despite GLA, the following may be considered: 
  •   danazol , an anti - gonadotrophin that binds to 
oestrogen and progesterone receptors in the 
breast; 
  •   tamoxifen , an oestrogen receptor inhibitor; 
  •   luteinizing hormone - releasing hormone 
(LHRH) analogues , to inhibit ovarian hormone 
production. 
 Non - c yclical  m astalgia 
 Causes of non - cyclical mastalgia include the 
following: 
  •   breast abscess ; 
  •   carcinoma of the breast : uncommon presenting 
symptom, this may give rise to heaviness or a 
 ‘ pricking ’ sensation; 
  •   Tietze ’ s syndrome , 5  chondritis of the costal 
cartilage, is of unknown aetiology, affects one 
or more of the second, third or fourth 
costochondral junctions and, left alone, 
resolves over a number of months; 
  •   chest wall lesions , e.g. herpes zoster. 
 Duct  e ctasia 
 This is an involutional change in the ducts associ-
ated with the menopause. The terminal ducts 
behind the nipple become dilated (ectasia) and 
engorged with secretions. Secondary infection 
may lead to retroareolar abscess, and ﬁ brosis may 
result in nipple retraction.  
  5  Alexander Tietze (1864 – 1927), Surgeon, Breslau, Germany. 

298 
The breast
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Common features include pain and nipple dis-
charge. There may be cellulitis, nipple retraction 
or a mass deep to the nipple. An associated 
mammary duct ﬁ stula may be present in the peri-
areolar region. Ultrasound may conﬁ rm a thick-
ened or dilated duct or abscess formation.  
 Treatment 
 Initial treatment is with appropriate antibiotics 
(usually ﬂ ucloxacillin) and advice to stop smoking. 
Remove the ring if present. Patients with recurrent 
periareolar inﬂ ammation and duct discharge 
should be treated with total duct excision. A 
mammary duct ﬁ stula is treated by total duct exci-
sion combined with excision of the ﬁ stulous track 
between the duct and the skin.    
 Chronic  i nﬂ ammatory 
 c onditions of the  b reast 
 There are two uncommon chronic inﬂ ammatory 
conditions of the breast: 
 1  Lymphocytic lobulitis occurs in patients with 
autoimmune diseases, particularly type 1 
diabetes mellitus, and usually presents with a 
ﬁ rm, irregular lump. The diagnosis is made on 
core biopsy, with ﬁ brosis and lymphoid 
inﬁ ltrate on microscopy. No further treatment 
is required. 
 2  Granulomatous mastitis may be secondary to 
systemic conditions (sarcoidosis), infections 
(tuberculosis, fungal) or foreign material 
(silicone). Management includes treatment of 
any organisms cultured and exclusion of 
malignancy. 
 Benign  b reast  d isease 
 From the fourth decade onwards, the breast 
undergoes a process termed involution. This 
process includes microcyst formation and an 
increase in ﬁ brous tissue within the breast. 
Aberrations of this process include the formation 
of large cysts, which may present as palpable 
masses, and the formation of radial scars and scle-
rosing lesions. 
  •   acute bacterial mastitis : may be lactational or 
non - lactational; 
  •   periductal mastitis . 
 Acute  b acterial  m astitis 
 The most common and most important acute 
inﬂ ammation of the breast; the majority occur 
during lactation. It presents as cellulitis or abscess 
formation secondary to  S. aureus . 
 Non - lactational breast abscesses  may be associ-
ated with systemic conditions such as diabetes, 
steroid therapy and rheumatoid arthritis. The 
common organisms include  α - haemolytic strep-
tococci, enterococci and  Bacteroides . 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Common symptoms include pain, swelling and 
tenderness of the breast. The inﬂ ammation may 
be localized, with erythema and tenderness of a 
segment of the breast, or may spread to involve 
the entire breast. In the later stages, there may be 
a ﬂ uctuant mass and patients may have a pyrexia, 
tachycardia and leucocytosis.  
 Treatment 
 Cellulitis 
 In the early phase of mastitis, appropriate antibi-
otics can prevent abscess formation. In lactational 
mastitis, breast - feeding should be continued as it 
may speed up recovery. It is rarely necessary to 
suppress lactation.  
 Abscess 
 Patients with clinical or radiological evidence of 
pus should have aspiration performed in addition 
to appropriate antibiotic therapy. Repeat aspira-
tion may be necessary and resolution of the 
abscess can be monitored with sequential ultra-
sound examinations. If the abscess fails to resolve, 
or the overlying skin is thin or necrotic, incision 
and drainage should be performed.    
 Periductal  m astitis 
 This is an inﬂ ammatory process that occurs 
around dilated milk ducts near the nipple; hence, 
the alternative name periareolar mastitis. It is 
linked to smoking, and nipple rings may increase 
the risk of infection. It occurs in premenopausal 
women, in contrast to duct ectasia. 

The breast 299
 Non - n eoplastic  b reast 
 l umps 
 Fibroadenoma 
 Previously classiﬁ ed as a benign neoplasm, but 
now considered as an aberration of normal devel-
opment. They arise from an entire lobule and have 
both stromal and epithelial components. There is 
no increased risk of malignancy and the majority 
will resolve over a period of several years. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Fibroadenomas affect women of all ages, but the 
peak incidence is in the third decade. It is usually 
presents as a discrete, ﬁ rm, mobile lump usually 
under 3   cm in diameter; some patients present 
with multiple lumps. They are highly mobile 
 ‘ breast mice ’ which are not attached to the skin. 
 Treatment 
 Like all solid breast lumps ﬁ broadenomas must be 
investigated by  triple assessment . In those patients 
with multiple ﬁ broadenomas, the largest lump 
should undergo core biopsy. Surgery should be 
avoidable in the majority of cases but should be 
considered in the following circumstances: 
  •   lump increasing in size (clinically and/or at 
ultrasound);  
  •   symptomatic lump  – pain or tenderness; 
  •   patient preference . 
 Hamartoma 
 These rare lesions may present clinically as a 
breast lump or may be incidental ﬁ ndings on 
screening mammography, when they have the 
appearance of a  ‘ breast within a breast ’ . They have 
a well - deﬁ ned capsule and comprise a variable 
mixture of breast lobules, stroma and fat. Once the 
diagnosis has been conﬁ rmed no further treat-
ment is necessary.  
 Gynaecomastia 
 A benign condition arising from proliferation of 
male breast tissue in neonates, at puberty and in 
adults. It is thought to be due to an imbalance of 
oestrogens and androgens and must be excluded 
 Cystic  d isease 
 Cysts are common in the perimenopausal age 
group but uncommon after the menopause. This, 
together with an association with HRT, suggests an 
underlying hormonal aetiology. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Cysts often present with a short history as a 
painful, tender swelling in the breast. The lump 
may be ﬂ uctuant, but tense cysts may mimic a 
solid lump. Cysts may be multiple and bilateral. 
They appear as well - deﬁ ned, rounded opacities 
on mammography, and are clearly differentiated 
from a solid lump by ultrasound.  
 Treatment 
 Newly diagnosed or symptomatic cysts should be 
aspirated to dryness. Uniformly blood - stained 
ﬂ uid should be sent for cytology. If a palpable 
mass remains following aspiration, or if there is 
evidence of a solid area in the cyst wall on ultra-
sound, further investigation is necessary, either by 
ﬁ ne - needle aspiration cytology or by core biopsy. 
Patients with cystic disease may have an increased 
risk of breast cancer.   
 Radial  s cars 
 Radial scars are radiological ﬁ ndings, appearing as 
an area of distortion on screening mammography. 
The mammographic and ultrasound appearance 
is often difﬁ cult to distinguish from carcinoma 
with lines radiating out from a central scar; hence, 
excision biopsy is essential. A number of radial 
scars will be associated with atypical hyperplasia 
or carcinoma  in situ . 
 Sclerosing  a denosis 
 Patients may present with pain or lumpiness in 
the breast, or there may be areas of increased 
density or microcalciﬁ cation on screening mam-
mography which may be indistinguishable from 
 in situ  carcinoma. Deﬁ nitive diagnosis will only 
be made following stereotactic core biopsy. 
Characteristic microscopic features include prolif-
eration of lobular epithelial, myoepithelial and 
stromal cells with dense hyaline sclerosis and apo-
crine metaplasia. Once the diagnosis has been 
conﬁ rmed, no further treatment or follow - up is 
required. 

300 
The breast
 Intraduct  p apilloma 
 A benign neoplasm which may be single or multi-
ple and which usually arises in the subareolar 
ducts. It presents with watery - clear or blood -
 stained nipple discharge from a single duct. If the 
papilloma is large, there may be a palpable mass 
in the periareolar area. 
 Treatment involves excision of the affected duct 
(microdochectomy) through a circumareolar 
incision.  
 Phyllodes  t umour 
 Although phyllodes 6  tumours have many of the 
clinical features of ﬁ broadenomas, they are true 
neoplasms with a wide range of characteristics 
from benign to malignant. They arise from stromal 
cells in the breast and are classiﬁ ed as low, inter-
mediate or high grade depending on their micro-
scopic features. They rarely metastasize but can 
recur locally if inadequately excised. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 These lesions usually present as a ﬁ rm, discrete 
lump and patients may note a recent increase in 
size. They should be investigated by triple assess-
ment to conﬁ rm the diagnosis. 
 Treatment 
 All phyllodes tumours should be treated by wide 
excision to achieve a clear margin around the 
tumour. In large lesions, this may require mastec-
tomy with immediate reconstruction. 
 Carcinoma 
 This is an immensely important subject  –  the 
commonest malignant disease in the UK, with 
45   000 new cases and about 12   000 deaths annu-
ally; one in nine women will develop breast cancer 
during their lifetime. One in 10 breast lumps 
referred to a breast clinic will prove to be 
malignant. 
 Aetiology 
 There is an increased incidence of breast cancer 
with age, and, although any age may be affected, 
it is rare below the age of 30 years and 80% of cases 
from carcinoma of the male breast. Causes include 
the following: 
  •   drugs : digoxin, spironolactone, cimetidine, 
oestrogens or androgens;  
  •   cirrhosis of the liver ; 
  •   renal failure ; 
  •   hypogonadism ; 
  •   suprarenal tumours ; 
  •   testicular tumours ; 
  •   idiopathic . 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Gynaecomastia presents as a diffuse, bilateral 
soft swelling but may be unilateral. In patients 
with any suspicious features (ﬁ rm or eccentric 
lump or skin changes), carcinoma must be 
excluded. 
 Treatment 
 The majority of cases will resolve with no inter-
vention. Patients with gynaecomastia that does 
not settle, is symptomatic or which causes embar-
rassment may be offered surgery. Current surgical 
practice favours liposuction and/or excision 
biopsy. 
 Tumours 
 Classiﬁ cation 
 Benign 
  •   Intraduct papilloma. 
  •   Phyllodes tumour. 
 Malignant 
 1  Primary : 
 a  duct carcinoma  in situ ; 
 b  invasive duct carcinoma; 
 c  lobular carcinoma  in situ ; 
 d  invasive lobular carcinoma; 
 e  inﬂ ammatory carcinoma; 
 f  Paget ’ s disease of the nipple; 
 g  sarcoma. 
 2  Secondary : 
 a  direct invasion from tumours of the chest 
wall;  
 b  metastatic deposits, e.g. from melanoma. 
  6  Phyllodes means  ‘ leaf - like ’ , a reference to the lobulated appear-
ance of the cut surface of the tumour. 

The breast 301
menopause (over 50 years) are associated with 
a twofold higher risk. 
  •   Parity : nulliparous women have a higher risk 
than multiparous women; later age at ﬁ rst 
pregnancy increases risk compared with 
younger age. Breast - feeding may contribute to 
reducing overall risk. 
  •   HRT may slightly increase the incidence of 
breast cancer, with the risk proportional to the 
length of treatment.  
  •   Oral contraceptive users  have a small (1.25 
times) increased risk, which returns to normal 
over time after stopping the pill. 
  •   Obesity confers a 30% increase in risk in 
postmenopausal women. 
 Benign  b reast  d isease 
 A number of benign breast conditions are known 
to carry an increased risk of breast cancer. The 
presence of atypical lobular or ductal hyperplasia 
confers a four -  to ﬁ vefold increased risk.  
 Radiation  e xposure 
 Exposure to ionizing radiation in adolescence or 
early adulthood can cause marked increases in 
breast cancer risk. Young women treated with 
mantle radiotherapy for lymphoma may have a 
substantial increased risk, especially if they were 
under the age of 20 during treatment.   
 Pathology 
 Breast cancers arise in the terminal duct lobular 
unit, either from the ductal epithelium or from the 
lobular epithelium (Figure  35.1 ). Carcinomas 
occur in women aged 50 and over. In addition, the 
following have been identiﬁ ed as important risk 
factors. 
 Genetic  f actors 
 The majority of breast cancers are sporadic in 
nature, 
with 
up 
to 
10% 
due 
to 
genetic 
predisposition. 
  •   Family history . A premenopausal ﬁ rst - degree 
relative (mother or sister) with breast cancer 
confers a lifetime risk of 25%, which reduces 
to 14% if the same relative is postmenopausal. 
If both mother and sister develop 
premenopausal breast cancer, the risk is 33%. 
  •   Gene carriage . Two inherited susceptibility 
genes have been identiﬁ ed,  BRCA1  and  BRCA2 . 
These are autosomal dominant genes with 
variable penetrance of 80 – 90%. An individual 
whose mother carries a mutation in one of 
these genes has a 50% chance of inheriting 
that mutation, which will confer a lifetime risk 
of 80 – 90%. The presence of a mutation in 
 BRCA1  also confers an increased risk of ovarian 
cancer. The carriage rate for the  BRCA1 
mutation is 1 in 300 women. 
 Hormonal  f actors 
 A number of hormonal factors lead to minor 
increases in breast cancer risk; most correlate with 
increased exposure to oestrogens. 
  •   Gender : women are 100 times more likely to 
have a breast carcinoma than men.  
  •   Menarche and menopause : early age at 
menarche (under 12 years) and late 
 Figure 35.1   The different origins of  in situ  and invasive ductal and lobular carcinomas.  
Ductal 
carcinoma
in situ
Invasive
ductal 
carcinoma
Lobular
carcinoma
in situ
Ductal carcinoma
Lobular carcinoma
Invasive
lobular
carcinoma

302 
The breast
oriﬁ ces of the sweat ducts, giving the 
appearance of  peau d ’ orange (orange peel). 
Dermal lymphatic invasion produces 
daughter skin nodules and eventually  ‘ cancer 
 en cuirasse ’ , the whole chest wall becoming a 
ﬁ rm mass of tumour tissue (a cuirasse was an 
armour breastplate made of leather). The 
main lymph channels pass directly to the 
axillary and internal thoracic lymph nodes 
(Figure  35.2 ). Later, spread occurs to the 
supraclavicular, abdominal, mediastinal, 
groin and contralateral axillary nodes. 
  •   Bloodstream . Blood - borne spread is most 
commonly to lungs, liver and bones (at the 
sites of red bone marrow, i.e. skull, vertebrae, 
pelvis, ribs, sternum, upper end of femur 
and upper end of humerus). The brain, ovaries 
and suprarenals are also frequent foci of 
deposits. 
 Prognostic  f actors 
 A number of prognostic factors are routinely 
determined following breast cancer surgery to 
help predict the outcome of an individual patient 
and help plan adjuvant systemic therapy. 
  •   Axillary node spread . The best single 
determinant of prognosis; the greater the 
number of ipsilateral nodes involved, the 
worse the prognosis.  
  •   Tumour size . The size of a tumour has a 
positive correlation with the metastatic 
potential. Larger tumours are therefore more 
likely to be lymph node positive and to have a 
worse survival.  
  •   Tumour grade . Breast carcinoma is graded 
according to the level of differentiation. 
Histological grading is classiﬁ ed as I, II or III 
based on a scoring system comprising three 
components: tubular differentiation, nuclear 
pleomorphism and mitotic rate. Grade I 
tumours (well differentiated) have a better 
prognosis than grade III tumours (poorly 
differentiated), the latter being associated with 
a 5 year survival of approximately 45%. 
  •   Nottingham Prognostic Index (NPI) . Nodal 
status, tumour size and histological grade can 
be combined to form a prognostic index 
estimating long - term (10 year) survival. The 
NPI is calculated as follows:
 
NPI
tumour diameter(cm)
grade
nodal status
=
×
+
+
0 2.
 
which have not penetrated through the basement 
membrane are known as carcinoma  in situ . 
 Ductal  c arcinoma  in  s itu 
 Ductal carcinoma  in situ  (DCIS) arises in the duct 
epithelium and is completely retained within the 
ducts; it is the most common type of non - invasive 
breast cancer. It usually occurs in localized areas 
of the breast, but may be extensive; untreated it 
will become invasive. DCIS is generally asympto-
matic, appearing as a mammogram ﬁ nding, 
sometimes with microcalciﬁ cation. Because of its 
malignant potential, treatment is complete exci-
sion of the disease, and extensive disease ( ≥ 4  cm) 
may necessitate mastectomy.  
 Lobular  c arcinoma  in  s itu 
 Lobular carcinoma  in situ  (LCIS) arises in the 
lobular epithelium. It is a marker of increased risk 
of breast cancer (approximately 20% over a 20 year 
period). An incidental ﬁ nding of LCIS on diagnos-
tic biopsy requires no surgery. However, when 
LCIS is found on core biopsy of an area of mam-
mographic calciﬁ cation, it may be associated with 
invasive lobular carcinoma and therefore formal 
diagnostic excision biopsy should be considered.  
 Invasive  d uctal  c arcinoma 
 This is the most common type of breast cancer, 
accounting for about 85% of all breast cancers. It 
is often described as being of  ‘ no special type ’  
(NST) to distinguish it from  ‘ special types ’  of 
cancer such as invasive lobular cancer or rarer 
tumours such as tubular, cribriform, mucinous 
and medullary carcinomas.  
 Invasive  l obular  c arcinoma 
 Invasive lobular carcinoma accounts for about 
10% of breast cancers and is most common 
between the ages of 45 and 55. It does not always 
form a ﬁ rm lump but rather an area of thickening, 
so tends to present late.   
 Spread 
  •   Direct extension . Involvement of skin and 
subcutaneous tissues leads to skin dimpling, 
retraction of the nipple and eventually 
ulceration. Extension deeply involves 
pectoralis major, serratus anterior and, 
eventually, the chest wall. 
  •   Lymphatic . Blockage of dermal lymphatics 
leads to cutaneous oedema pitted by the 

The breast 303
 where tumour grade is scored between 1 and 3, 
and nodal status between 1 (no affected nodes) 
and 3 (more than three nodes affected). 
 Table  35.1  describes 10 year survival data, in ﬁ ve 
prognostic groups according to NPI, for patients 
treated by surgery alone and shows the improve-
ment with adjuvant therapy particularly in the 
poor prognosis (higher NPI) group.   
 Additional prognostic factors in invasive breast 
cancer include: 
  •   vascular invasion  by the tumour signiﬁ es a 
poor prognosis, even in the absence of nodal 
involvement;  
 Figure 35.2   The lymphatic drainage 
of the breast.  
Pectoralis
minor
Axillary 
vein
'Level' of 
lymph node
drainage
Internal mammary nodes
1
2
3
 Table 35.1   Nottingham Prognostic Index ( NPI ) and 10 year survival 
 NPI  
 Prognostic group  
 10 year survival (surgery 
alone) (%)  
 10 year survival (surgery 
and adjuvant therapy) (%)  
 < 2.4  
  Excellent  
  95  
 95  
 2.41 – 3.4  
  Good  
  85  
 90  
 3.41 – 4.4  
  Moderate 1  
  70  
 79  
 4.41 – 5.4  
  Moderate 2  
  50  
 71  
 > 5.4  
  Poor  
  20  
 41  
  •   hormone (oestrogen and/or progesterone) 
receptor expression  implies a less aggressive 
hormone - responsive tumour; 
  •   human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 
(HER2) overexpression signiﬁ es a more 
aggressive tumour; 
  •   histological type : mucinous, tubular and 
cribriform tumours have a better prognosis.     
 Clinical  f eatures 
 The majority of patients with invasive carcinoma 
will present with a lump in the breast. Other fea-
tures that warrant urgent investigation include 

304 
The breast
 Treatment 
 The treatment of breast cancer involves a multi-
disciplinary approach comprising the following 
elements: 
 1  Surgery. 
 a  Tumour excision . Surgery depends on the 
pathological type of the tumour, so that 
surgery for lobular carcinoma  in situ , ductal 
carcinoma  in situ  and invasive cancer all 
differ. 
 b  Surgery to the axilla also varies according to 
histological type.  
 c  Breast reconstruction . 
 2  Adjuvant systemic therapy. 
 a  Hormonal therapy . 
 b  Chemotherapy . 
 3  Adjuvant radiotherapy. 
altered breast contour, recent nipple inversion, 
blood - stained nipple discharge and unilateral 
nipple eczema (Paget ’ s disease). 
 The breasts are inspected with the patient both 
lying supine and sitting with the arms elevated. 
The latter often accentuates any skin tethering or 
dimpling. Any evidence of nipple inversion or 
eczema should be noted. 
 Palpation should be with the ﬂ at of the hand 
with the patient lying ﬂ at and the head supported. 
Both breasts and both axillae should be examined 
as well as the supraclavicular fossae. Any lump 
should be carefully examined for evidence of 
skin or muscle ﬁ xation and the clinical size 
and position in relation to the nipple noted. Large, 
ﬁ rm nodes in the axilla may suggest metastatic 
disease. In patients with suspected tumours, 
liver palpation and chest auscultation should be 
performed.  
 Special  i nvestigations 
 Diagnostic  i nvestigations 
 The diagnosis of breast carcinoma is made by 
triple assessment comprising clinical examina-
tion, imaging (mammography and/or ultrasound) 
and biopsy (see  p. 296   ). In the vast majority of 
cases the diagnosis has been conﬁ rmed prior to 
surgery. 
 Staging  i nvestigations 
 Depending on the size of the tumour, and the 
presence of other symptoms, the following inves-
tigations may be indicated to assess the extent of 
spread when it may affect management: 
  •   full blood count : anaemia and leucopenia 
suggest widespread bone marrow involvement;  
  •   liver function tests; 
  •   chest X - ray; 
  •   isotope bone scan; 
  •   liver ultrasound. The liver and chest imaging 
may alternatively be performed by computed 
tomography. 
 Staging 
 Cancers should be staged using the TNM class-
iﬁ cation. It should be noted that the TNM 
classiﬁ cation was originally based on clinical 
examination. As clinical staging can be inaccurate, 
a  ‘ pathological TNM ’ classiﬁ cation is now used. 
The TNM staging for breast cancer is shown in 
Table  35.2 . 
 Table 35.2   TNM staging for breast cancer. 
 TNM staging  
 
 T  
  Primary tumour  
 TX  
  Primary tumour cannot be assessed  
 T0  
  No evidence of primary tumour  
 Tis  
 Carcinoma  in situ  (DCIS, LCIS or 
Paget ’ s disease with no invasive 
tumour)  
 T1  
  Tumour 2   cm or less in greatest 
dimension  
 T2  
  Tumour  > 2  cm and  < 5  cm in 
greatest dimension  
 T3  
  Tumour  > 5  cm in greatest dimension  
 T4  
  Tumour of any size with skin or 
chest wall involvement  
 N   
  Regional lymph nodes  
 NX  
  Regional lymph nodes cannot be 
assessed (e.g. previously removed)  
 N0  
  No regional lymph node metastasis  
 N1  
  Metastasis to movable ipsilateral 
axillary nodes  
 N2  
  Metastasis to ﬁ xed ipsilateral axillary 
lymph nodes  
 N3  
  Metastasis to ipsilateral internal 
thoracic (mammary) nodes  
 M   
  Distant metastasis  
 MX  
  Distant metastasis cannot be 
assessed  
 M0  
  No distant metastasis  
 M1  
  Distant metastasis  

The breast 305
  •   Axillary sampling . A minimum of four nodes 
should be removed for histological analysis. If 
any of the four nodes are positive for tumour, 
then further treatment is necessary by axillary 
radiotherapy or surgical  ‘ clearance ’ of the 
axilla, removing all nodes lateral and deep to 
pectoralis minor (level II) (Figure  35.2 ). The 
use of blue dye (as for SLN) may increase the 
sensitivity of axillary sampling (blue dye -
 assisted sampling). 
 Breast  r econstruction 
 Breast reconstruction does not appear to impede 
the ability to detect local recurrence and may be 
of psychological beneﬁ t. It may be performed 
either at the time of mastectomy or as a delayed 
procedure. The combination of skin - sparing mas-
tectomy and immediate breast reconstruction has 
been reported to produce better cosmetic results. 
 The possibility of immediate breast reconstruc-
tion should be discussed with suitable patients 
prior to mastectomy. The choice of reconstruction 
for an individual patient will depend on several 
factors, including breast size, the adequacy of skin 
ﬂ aps, whether radiotherapy is planned or has pre-
viously been used, abdominal size and previous 
abdominal operations, the patient ’ s concern 
about silicone and the patient ’ s preference. Typical 
reconstructions involve the use of myocutaneous 
ﬂ aps of latissimus dorsi or rectus abdominis, aug-
mented when necessary with a silicone implant.  
 Adjuvant  s ystemic  t herapy 
 Adjuvant systemic therapy using cytotoxic agents 
and/or endocrine therapy improves survival, with 
greatest beneﬁ t in those women at greatest risk of 
relapse. 
 The choice of adjuvant systemic therapy will be 
based on known prognostic factors that predict 
relapse and survival, including node status, histo-
logical grade and tumour size, oestrogen receptor 
(ER) status and menopausal status. The NPI may 
help to categorize this risk and select appropriate 
adjuvant therapy (see  p. 303 ). 
  •   Endocrine therapy . Tamoxifen, an oestrogen 
receptor antagonist, reduces the incidence of 
recurrence and is particularly effective in 
women in whom nodal spread was present 
and in women with ER - positive tumours. 
Ovarian ablation (by radiotherapy, surgery or 
drug therapy) is indicated in premenopausal 
women with ER - positive tumours. 
 Tumour  e xcision 
  •   Wide local excision . A cylinder of breast tissue 
is excised down to the pectoral muscle in order 
to achieve complete excision ( ‘ clear resection 
margins ’ ). Postoperative radiotherapy to the 
breast is routine after such a procedure. For 
lumps of 4   cm or less, there is good evidence 
that such an approach is equally as effective as 
mastectomy with regard both to local control 
and to survival.  
  •   Mastectomy . A simple mastectomy involves 
excising the breast tissue. It is usually 
combined with reconstructive surgery to 
restore the breast contour. Axillary surgery is 
performed at the same time. The combination 
of mastectomy and axillary clearance avoids 
the need for postoperative radiotherapy in 
most cases, although this depends on axillary 
node status and tumour size and grade. 
 Surgical  t reatment of  i nvasive  d uctal or 
 l obular  c arcinoma 
 The aims of surgery are to remove the primary 
tumour and involved lymph nodes, to determine 
prognosis and to plan systemic therapy. Small 
tumours ( < 3   cm) may be suitable for breast -
 conserving surgery (wide local excision). Larger 
tumours ( > 3   cm), central tumours or multifocal 
tumours require mastectomy with or without 
breast reconstruction (see below). Other indica-
tions for mastectomy include patient preference 
and local recurrence following breast - conserving 
surgery. 
 Surgical  m anagement of the  a xilla 
 Axillary node status is the most important prog-
nostic indicator in the treatment of invasive breast 
cancer. As a result, axillary surgery should be per-
formed on all patients with invasive operable 
breast cancer, but is not generally required for  in 
situ disease. There are two surgical options: 
  •   Sentinel lymph node (SLN) biopsy , in which the 
ﬁ rst axillary lymph node(s) draining the cancer 
ﬁ eld is identiﬁ ed, excised and examined for 
metastatic tumour. An intradermal, periareolar 
injection of blue dye and radioisotope has 
been shown to be the most sensitive method 
for identifying the sentinel node(s) with the 
fewest false - negative results. Patients with a 
negative SLN require no further axillary 
surgery. 

306 
The breast
following axillary clearance, then radiotherapy 
should be considered. 
 Survival 
 Several factors are thought to have contributed to 
increased survival rates for breast cancer, includ-
ing breast screening, specialist multidisciplinary 
teams and more individualized treatment plans 
that optimize each aspect of patient treatment. 
The 10 year survival is now 72%, with 64% of all 
women surviving for 20 years as compared with 
44% in the 1980s. These ﬁ gures are likely to 
improve with recent advances in hormone therapy, 
chemotherapy and targeted therapies such as 
trastuzumab. 
 Inoperable and  l ocally  a dvanced 
 t umours 
 Locally advanced breast cancers are usually 
deﬁ ned as tumours greater than 5   cm with or 
without involved axillary lymph nodes or skin 
involvement. For the majority of these patients, 
the initial management will be non - surgical. In 
patients with locally advanced breast cancer, the 
overall response rates to chemotherapy are good, 
although the rate of complete pathological 
response is rarely more than 15%. As a result, the 
majority of these patients subsequently proceed 
to surgery and/or radiotherapy. Radiotherapy is 
not recommended as sole treatment for local 
control of advanced disease but may be an option 
in those patients unﬁ t for chemotherapy or 
surgery, for ulcerating tumours or for ER - negative 
tumours. 
 Inﬂ ammatory  b reast  c ancer 
 Inﬂ ammatory breast cancer is rare, representing 
only 2% of breast cancers. The breast appears 
swollen, red, ﬁ rm and warm to touch, all cardinal 
features of inﬂ ammation. Symptoms can appear 
quite quickly as cancer cells block the small lym-
phatics in the breast, and mastectomy is usually 
required. It is an aggressive disease associated 
with 5 and 10 year survival rates of the order of 
50% and 30%, respectively. The combination of 
chemotherapy, surgery and chest wall radiother-
apy is accepted as achieving the highest local 
control and survival. The majority of these tumours 
will be ER negative; tamoxifen is indicated if they 
are ER positive.  
  •   Combination chemotherapy (e.g. anthracyclines 
and taxanes)  also reduces the probability of 
recurrence. 
  •   Trastuzumab (Herceptin),  a monoclonal 
antibody to HER2, has been shown to be an 
effective therapy in HER2 - positive metastatic 
disease. HER2 is overexpressed in 15 – 20% of all 
breast cancers and is associated with a more 
aggressive breast cancer with a worse 
prognosis. 
 A suggested outline for adjuvant systemic 
therapy is as follows: 
 1  Premenopausal women. 
 a  Low - risk disease : tamoxifen if ER positive.  
 b  Intermediate/high - risk disease and ER -
 positive tumours : chemotherapy and 
tamoxifen possibly with ovarian ablation. 
Trastuzumab if HER2 positive. 
 c  Intermediate/high - risk disease which is ER 
negative : chemotherapy. 
 2  Postmenopausal women. 
 a  Low - risk disease : tamoxifen if ER positive.  
 b  Intermediate/high - risk disease : 
chemotherapy, with tamoxifen if ER positive. 
Trastuzumab if HER2 positive. 
 Adjuvant  r adiotherapy 
  •   Following wide local excision.    Following 
breast - conserving surgery, such as wide local 
incision for invasive cancer, radiotherapy 
signiﬁ cantly reduces the risk of recurrence 
within the breast.  
  •   Following mastectomy.    Radiotherapy after 
mastectomy reduces the risk of local 
recurrence. In premenopausal women 
receiving adjuvant chemotherapy, 
postmastectomy radiotherapy may also 
improve survival. The factors associated 
with a high risk of local recurrence are 
tumour size, high grade, nodal involvement, 
lymphatic invasion and involvement of 
deep margins.  
  •   Following axillary surgery.     After all forms of 
axillary surgery, the decision as to whether the 
axilla should be irradiated represents a balance 
between the risks of recurrence and the risk of 
morbidity. After axillary sampling, the axilla 
should be irradiated only if node positive or 
inadequately sampled. After axillary clearance, 
the axilla is not normally irradiated. If there is 
doubt about residual disease in the axilla 

The breast 307
therapy. For advanced disseminated disease, 
chemotherapy can produce reasonable palliation.   
 Paget ’ s  d isease of 
the  n ipple 
 Presentation 
 Paget ’ s 7 disease of the nipple occurs in middle -
 aged and elderly women. It presents as a unilateral 
red, bleeding, eczematous lesion of the nipple and 
areolar epithelium. Histologically, the epithelium 
of the nipple is thickened, with multiple clear 
malignant  ‘ Paget cells ’ with small dark - staining 
nuclei; these are hydropic malignant cells. It is 
associated with an intraduct carcinoma of the 
underlying breast in 50% of cases, which may or 
may not form a palpable mass. Diagnosis is con-
ﬁ rmed by biopsy. 
 Treatment 
 Treatment will be determined by any underlying 
breast carcinoma detected on clinical or radiologi-
cal investigation. Surgical management includes 
mastectomy and axillary surgery for lesions asso-
ciated with invasive disease. In the absence of 
invasive disease, or if a small central tumour lies 
close to the nipple, cone excision of the nipple and 
underlying tissue followed by breast radiotherapy 
may be considered.   
 Breast  s creening 
 A number of trials have demonstrated a reduction 
in breast cancer mortality for women aged 50 – 70 
who undergo breast screening. Screen - detected 
cancers tend to be smaller and node negative with 
an increasing detection rate of  in situ  disease. As 
a result, women aged 50 – 70 in the UK are offered 
3 yearly mammographic screening and there are 
plans to extend this further to cover the age range 
from 47 to 73 years. Recent evidence suggests that 
the screening programme is now contributing to 
reductions in breast cancer mortality rates in the 
UK. 
 
 
 
 
 Patients  u nﬁ t for  s urgery 
 These will usually be elderly patients, and some 
may have locally advanced tumours. The princi-
ples of management are closer to those for meta-
static disease, the aim of therapy being to control 
the primary tumour while maintaining the best 
quality of life. Many patients will respond to 
tamoxifen or other hormonal therapy.  
 Metastatic  d isease 
 The aim of treatment is to relieve symptoms 
while maintaining the highest quality of life. All 
patients with metastatic disease should be consid-
ered for some form of systemic therapy. Hormone 
therapy is less toxic than chemotherapy and is 
therefore often used as the ﬁ rst line of treatment. 
Patients who have had a long disease - free interval 
and/or soft tissue or bony metastases will often 
respond to hormone therapy, as will ER - positive 
tumours. 
 For patients with advanced visceral disease (e.g. 
liver metastases), the response to hormone 
therapy is low and these patients should be con-
sidered 
for 
chemotherapy. 
As 
the 
disease 
progresses patients may require referral to pallia-
tive care specialists for control of symptoms and 
to augment support for patients and carers.  
 Carcinoma of the  m ale  b reast 
 This accounts for less than 1% of all cases of breast 
cancer. In men, breast cancer affects an older age 
group, with a peak incidence at 60 years. 
 Clinically, it usually presents as a ﬁ rm, painless, 
subareolar lump, although gynaecomastia, breast 
tenderness and nipple discharge may also be 
present. Microscopically, it is usually a ductal car-
cinoma, and is quite advanced at presentation. 
 Treatment consists of an extended mastectomy 
with lymph node clearance. As so little skin is 
available, it may be necessary to perform recon-
struction with a latissimus dorsi ﬂ ap to cover the 
resulting cutaneous defect. For  in situ disease, 
simple mastectomy will sufﬁ ce. 
 The prognosis for men is worse than for women, 
probably because of the sparse amount of breast 
tissue present, which allows rapid dissemination 
of the growth into the regional lymphatics. 
 Postoperative radiotherapy reduces the inci-
dence of local recurrence, but does not affect 
overall survival; most tumours respond to 
tamoxifen, which is therefore given as adjuvant 
  7   Sir James Paget (1814 – 1899), Surgeon, St Bartholomew ’ s Hospital, 
London, UK. He also described diseases of the bone and penis, 
and discovered the parasite of trichinosis in humans while a ﬁ rst -
 year medical student. 

 36 
The  n eck  
 
 Learning  o bjectives 
  ✓   To know the different causes of neck lumps. 
  ✓   To know about the origin, presentation and management of 
branchial cysts. 
fossa. That a branchial cyst is a remnant of the 
second branchial arch has been questioned, based 
on the observation that the cysts are lined with 
stratiﬁ ed squamous epithelium rich in lymphatic 
tissue. This countertheory suggests that the cyst 
arises from cystic degeneration of lymphoid tissue 
in the neck and is thus better termed a lateral cer-
vical cyst.  
 Clinical  f eatures 
 A  branchial cyst usually presents in early adult life 
and forms a soft swelling  ‘ like a half - ﬁ lled hot 
water bottle ’ , which bulges forward from beneath 
the anterior border of the sternocleidomastoid. It 
is lined by squamous epithelium and contains 
pus - like material, which is in fact cholesterol. It 
often presents following an upper respiratory tract 
infection. Clinical diagnosis can be clinched by 
aspirating a few drops of this ﬂ uid from the cyst 
and demonstrating cholesterol crystals under the 
microscope. Occasionally, the cyst may become 
infected. 
 Differential diagnosis is from a tuberculous 
gland 
of 
the 
neck 
or 
from 
an 
acute 
lymphadenitis. 
 The rare  ﬁ rst branchial arch cyst may present 
just below the external auditory meatus at the 
angle of the jaw, with extension closely related to 
the VII nerve. 
 A  branchial sinus  presents as a small oriﬁ ce, dis-
charging mucus, which opens over the anterior 
border of the sternocleidomastoid in the lower 
part of the neck. The majority are present at 
birth but a secondary branchial sinus may form 
    The thyroid gland is considered separately in 
Chapter  37 , and the parathyroids in Chapter  38 . A 
summary of the possible causes of a lump in the 
neck is given in Box  36.1 . 
 Branchial  c yst and  s inus 
 Anatomy 
 There are six arches and ﬁ ve clefts in the branchial 
system (Figure  36.1 ). The ﬁ rst arch forms the lower 
face, its external cleft the external auditory meatus, 
and its internal cleft the eustachian tube. The 
second arch grows down over the third and fourth 
arches to form the skin of the neck. Normally, 
there is no external cleft, while the internal cleft 
forms the tonsillar fossa.    
 Aetiology 
 Persistence of remnants of the second branchial 
arch may lead to formation of a branchial cyst, 
sinus or ﬁ stula. The external cleft remnants open 
just anterior to the sternocleidomastoid, at the 
junction of the upper one - third and lower two -
 thirds. A sinus or ﬁ stula represents a patent second 
branchial arch sinus, which passes between the 
internal and external carotid artery to the tonsillar 
Lecture Notes: General Surgery, 12th edition. © Harold Ellis, 
Sir Roy Y. Calne and Christopher J. E. Watson. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

The neck 309
 Tuberculous  c ervical 
 a denitis 
 With a general decline in tuberculosis, this once 
common lesion (mainly of children) is now rela-
tively rarely seen in the UK, except in the aged, 
those with acquired immune deﬁ ciency syndrome 
(AIDS) and immigrants from developing coun-
tries. Cervical nodes are usually secondarily 
involved from a tonsillar primary focus, although 
the adenoids or even the dental roots may occa-
sionally be the primary source of infection. The 
organisms may be human or bovine, and occa-
sionally the disease is secondary to active pulmo-
nary infection. The upper jugular chain of nodes 
is most commonly affected. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 At ﬁ rst, the nodes are small and discrete; then, as 
they enlarge, they become matted together and 
caseate, and the abscess so formed eventually 
bursts through the deep fascia into the subcutane-
ous tissues. This results in one pocket of pus deep 
to and one superﬁ cial to the deep fascia, both con-
nected by a small track: a  ‘ collar stud ’  abscess. Left 
untreated, this discharges onto the skin, resulting 
in a chronic tuberculous sinus.  
 Differential  d iagnosis 
 Solid nodes must be differentiated from acute 
lymphadenitis, one of the lymphomas or sec-
ondary deposits. The breaking down abscess 
must be differentiated from a branchial cyst (see 
above). 
 Diagnosis may be assisted by an X - ray of the 
neck; usually, the chronic tuberculous nodes show 
ﬂ ecks of calciﬁ cation. 
 Treatment 
 A full course of antituberculous chemotherapy is 
given. Small nodes are treated conservatively and 
the patient is kept under observation. If the nodes 
enlarge, e.g. to 1   cm or more in diameter, they 
should be excised. If the patient presents with a 
 ‘ collar stud ’  abscess, the pus is evacuated, a search 
made for the hole penetrating through the deep 
fascia, and the underlying caseating node evacu-
ated by curettage. 
if an infected branchial cyst ruptures, or if part 
of the cyst is left behind at operation. The sinus 
extends upwards between the internal and exter-
nal carotid arteries to the sidewall of the pharynx. 
It may open into the tonsillar fossa (which repre-
sents the second internal cleft) to form a branchial 
ﬁ stula. 
 Treatment 
 Surgical excision is required.   
 Box 36.1   A lump in the side of the neck 
 When considering the swellings that may arise in any 
anatomical region, one enumerates the anatomical 
structures lying therein and then the pathological 
swellings that may arise from them. The side of the 
neck is an excellent example of this exercise.  
 Skin and  s uperﬁ cial  f ascia 
  •    Sebaceous cyst  
  •    Lipoma 
 Lymph  n odes 
  •    Infective 
  •    Malignant 
  •    The lymphomas, lymphatic leukaemia (Chapter 
 34 , p. 292).  
 Lymphatics 
  •    Cystic hygroma  
 Artery 
  •    Carotid body tumour  
  •    Carotid artery aneurysm  
 Salivary  g lands 
  •    Submandibular salivary tumours or sialectasis  
  •    Tumour in the lower pole of the parotid gland  
 Pharynx 
  •    Pharyngeal pouch  
 Branchial  a rch  r emnant 
  •    Branchial cyst  
 Bone 
  •    Cervical rib  

310 
The neck
highly vascular that it too demonstrates pulsation 
with a bruit on auscultation. Occasionally, pres-
sure on the carotid sinus from the tumour pro-
duces attacks of faintness. Extension of the tumour 
may lead to cranial nerve palsies (VII, IX, X, XI and 
XII), resulting in dysphagia and hoarseness. 
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   Duplex ultrasound  gives precise localization of 
the tumour and its relation to the carotid and 
its bifurcation. 
  •   Arteriography shows the carotid bifurcation to 
be splayed open by the mass and the rich 
vascularity of the tumour is demonstrated. 
  •   Magnetic resonance imaging and computed 
tomography show the tumour and its relation 
to the carotid artery, and have replaced 
arteriography in the assessment of the 
tumour. 
 Treatment 
 It is often possible to dissect the tumour away 
from the carotid sheath. If the carotid vessels are 
ﬁ rmly involved, resection can be performed with 
graft replacement of the artery. 
 In the elderly, these slow - growing tumours can 
be left untreated, or treated with local radiother-
apy (the  ‘ Gamma knife ’ ). 
 
 
 
 It is not usually necessary to treat the infected 
tonsils or adenoids, as the infection resolves with 
the chemotherapy. 
 Carotid  b ody  t umour 
( c hemodectoma) 
 Pathology 
 Also called carotid glomus tumours or paragangli-
onomas, these are slow - growing tumours that 
arise from the chemoreceptor cells in the carotid 
body at the carotid bifurcation. Most behave in a 
benign fashion; in a few patients, the tumour 
becomes locally invasive and may metastasize. 
There is a familial tendency to development of the 
tumour. 
 Macroscopically, it is a lobulated, yellowish 
tumour closely adherent to the internal and exter-
nal carotid arteries at the bifurcation. 
 Microscopically, it is made up of large chromaf-
ﬁ n polyhedral cells in a vascular ﬁ brous stroma. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 The tumour presents as a slowly enlarging mass in 
a patient over the age of 30 years, which transmits 
the carotid pulsation. The mass itself may be so 
 Figure 36.1   The derivatives of the 
branchial pouches and clefts. 
 (Reproduced from Ellis H, Mahadevan 
V. (2010)  Clinical Anatomy , 12th edn. 
Oxford: Wiley - Blackwell.)  
Pouch III
Inferior 
parathyroid
and thymus
Pouch II
Tonsil
Pouch IV
Superior 
parathyroid
Pouch I
Eustachian tube
and middle ear
Foramen 
caecum
Thyroid

 37 
The  t hyroid  
 
 Learning  o bjectives 
  ✓   To know the embryological course of the thyroid and related 
remnants. 
  ✓   To know the causes of goitres and their treatments, and to have 
knowledge of thyroid cancers and their management.     
thyroid, and may represent the sum total of thyroid 
tissue, or may be just a remnant that failed to 
descend.  
 Thyroglossal  c yst 
 A thyroglossal cyst forms in the embryological 
remnants of the thyroid and presents as a ﬂ uctu-
ant swelling in or near the midline of the neck. It 
is diagnosed by its characteristic physical signs. 
 1  It moves upwards when the patient protrudes 
the tongue, because of its attachment to the 
tract of the thyroid descent. 
 2  It moves on swallowing, because of its 
attachment to the larynx by the pretracheal 
fascia. 
 Treatment 
 Such cysts should be removed surgically, together 
with remnants of the thyroglossal tract and the 
body of the hyoid bone, to which the tract is 
closely related. 
 Thyroglossal  ﬁ stula 
 This presents as an opening onto the skin in the 
line of the thyroid descent, in the midline of the 
neck. It may discharge thin, glairy ﬂ uid and attacks 
of infection can occur. 
 Congenital  a nomalies 
 Embryology 
 The thyroid gland forms as a diverticulum origi-
nating in the ﬂ oor of the pharynx, and descends 
through the tongue, past the hyoid, to its position 
in the neck. The diverticulum usually closes, 
leaving a pit at the base of the tongue (the foramen 
caecum, which lies in the midline at the junction 
of the anterior two - thirds and the posterior third 
of the tongue). Failure of the thyroid to descend or 
incomplete descent of the track may result in 
ectopic thyroid tissue (Figure  37.1 ). Incomplete 
obliteration of the track may result in ﬁ stula or 
sinus formation. In all cases of unexplained 
midline nodules in the neck, thyroid tissue should 
be suspected. A radioiodine scan should be per-
formed to ensure that there is normal thyroid 
tissue present in the correct place before the lump 
is removed. 
 Lingual  t hyroid 
 Rarely, the thyroid fails to descend into the neck. 
Such a patient presents with a lump at the foramen 
caecum of the tongue. This is termed a lingual 
Lecture Notes: General Surgery, 12th edition. © Harold Ellis, 
Sir Roy Y. Calne and Christopher J. E. Watson. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

312 
The thyroid
calcitonin from the parafollicular C cells, which 
reduces the level of serum calcium and is therefore 
antagonistic to parathormone. 
 Iodine in the diet is absorbed into the blood-
stream as iodide, which is taken up by the thyroid 
gland. After entering the follicle, the iodide is con-
verted into organic iodine, which is then bound 
with the tyrosine radicals of thyroglobulin to form 
the precursors of the thyroid hormones. The 
colloid within the thyroid vesicles is composed of 
thyroglobulin, which is synthesized in the follicu-
lar cells, and T3 and T4. These hormones are 
released into the bloodstream after being sepa-
rated from thyroglobulin within the follicular cells. 
In the general circulation, about 99% of T3 and T4 
is bound to protein, and it is the minute amount 
of unbound  ‘ free ’  thyroid hormones in the circu-
lating blood that produces the endocrine effects of 
the thyroid gland. 
 Treatment 
 The treatment is to excise the ﬁ stula, and this exci-
sion must be complete. The track runs in close 
relationship to the body of the hyoid; therefore, 
this should be removed in addition to the ﬁ stula. 
Dissection is continued up to the region of the 
foramen caecum of the tongue.   
 Thyroid  p hysiology 
 The thyroid gland is concerned with the synthesis 
of the iodine - containing hormones thyroxine 
(tetra - iodothyronine, T4) and tri - iodothyronine 
(T3), which control the metabolic rate of the body; 
T3 is the active hormone, and T4 is converted to 
T3 in the periphery. The thyroid gland also secretes 
 Figure 37.1   The descent of the 
thyroid, showing possible sites of 
ectopic thyroid tissue or thyroglossal 
cysts, and also the course of a 
thyroglossal ﬁ stula. (The arrow shows 
the further descent of the thyroid that 
may take place retrosternally into the 
superior mediastinum.)  
Lingual
thyroid
Suprahyoid
thyroglossal cyst
Track of thyroid
descent and of a
thyroglossal fistula
Pyramidal lobe
Retrosternal goitre
Thyroglossal cyst
or ectopic thyroid
Hyoid
cartilage
Thyroid
cartilage

The thyroid 313
a varied appearance of the gland. Some follicles 
are lined with hyperactive epithelium and others 
with ﬂ attened atrophic cells. Some contain no 
colloid, others an excessive amount. The thyroid 
interstitium is excessive, with a certain amount of 
ﬁ brosis and mononuclear cell inﬁ ltration. Nodular 
goitres may produce a normal amount of T4, but 
sometimes excessive T4 production results in 
hyperthyroidism in this condition ( ‘ secondary 
hyperthyroidism ’ ). Radioactive iodine - 131 is the 
treatment of choice in such cases. 
 The thyroid is usually enlarged, irregular and 
nodular and, although one lobe often predomi-
nates at presentation, the condition does affect 
the entire gland. 
 Symptoms 
 The enlarging thyroid can produce a number 
of  ‘ pressure ’ symptoms including dysphagia, 
breathlessness, orthopnoea, hoarseness and facial 
swelling. 
 Investigation of  m ultinodular  g oitre 
 Patients require two speciﬁ c investigations: 
  •   TSH concentration is low in the few patients 
with hyperthyroidism in association with 
multinodular goitre.  
  •   Computed tomography (CT) scan of the neck 
and thoracic inlet to deﬁ ne the size of the 
goitre, the extent of the goitre including 
retrosternal extension, and to identify the 
presence of tracheal compression (Box  37.1 ). 
 Physiological  c ontrol of 
 s ecretion 
 The immediate control of synthesis and liberation 
of T3 and T4 is by thyroid - stimulating hormone 
(TSH) produced by the anterior pituitary. TSH is 
secreted in response to the level of thyroid hor-
mones in the blood by a negative feedback mecha-
nism. The secretion of TSH is also under the 
inﬂ uence of the hypothalamic thyrotrophin -
 releasing hormone. 
 Pharmacological  c ontrol of 
 s ecretion 
 The production of thyroid hormones can be inhib-
ited by the thiouracils and carbimazole, which 
block the binding of iodine but do not interfere 
with the uptake of iodide by the gland. Although 
less T3 and T4 is produced, the thyroid gland tends 
to become large and vascular with treatment by 
these drugs. 
 High doses of iodide given to patients with 
excessive thyroid hormone production result in an 
increase in the amount of iodine - rich colloid, and 
a diminished liberation of thyroid hormones; the 
gland also becomes less vascular. The effects of 
iodide treatment are maximal after 2 weeks of 
treatment and then diminish. 
 Lack of iodine in the diet prevents the formation 
of thyroid hormones, and excess pituitary TSH is 
produced, which may result in an iodine - deﬁ cient 
goitre. Thiocyanates prevent the thyroid gland 
from taking up iodide.   
 Pathology of  g oitre 
 The term  ‘ goitre ’  is used to describe any enlarge-
ment of the thyroid gland irrespective of the 
underlying pathology. It includes colloid goitre 
(see below) and the hyperplasia of Graves ’  disease 
but the commonest cause is multinodular goitre. 
 Multinodular  g oitre 
 The aetiology of multinodular goitre is unclear. 
One hypothesis for its development is the pres-
ence of less differentiated cells in the adult thyroid 
gland that have a higher growth potential than 
normal follicular cells, some of which may repli-
cate even in the absence of TSH. There is an exces-
sive degree of activity and regression resulting in 
 Box 37.1   Symptoms of multinodular goitre 
  •    Dysphagia : usually of solids, worse with certain 
food, e.g. meat  
  •    Breathlessness : worse on exertion, bending 
forward (especially retrosternal extension)  
  •    Orthopnoea : owing to the weight of the gland 
pressing on the trachea when lying ﬂ at  
  •    Hoarseness : from pressure on one recurrent 
laryngeal nerve  
  •    Stridor : from pressure on both recurrent 
laryngeal nerves or signiﬁ cant tracheal 
compression 
  •    Facial congestion : venous engorgement 
especially on raising arms (Pemberton ’ s sign 1 ) 
  1  Hugh Spear Pemberton (1890 – 1956), Physician, Liverpool, UK. 

314 
The thyroid
 The  t hyroid  s welling 
 The characteristics of an enlarged thyroid are a 
mass in the neck on one or both sides of the 
trachea, which moves on swallowing, since it is 
attached to the larynx by the pretracheal fascia.  
 Retrosternal  g oitre 
 Evidence of retrosternal enlargement of the 
thyroid should be sought by palpation and percus-
sion with the neck fully extended. A retrosternal 
thyroid can block the venous return to the supe-
rior vena cava and result in engorgement of the 
jugular veins and their tributaries and in oedema 
of the upper part of the body  –  a cause of the supe-
rior mediastinal syndrome. In such cases, CT 
imaging of the thoracic inlet should be performed 
to assess its extent.  
 Tracheal  d isplacement 
 The trachea should be examined to determine dis-
placement or compression by the thyroid enlarge-
ment; the patient should be asked to take a deep 
breath with the mouth open, when stridor may 
become apparent.  
 Vocal  c ord  i ntegrity 
 The vocal cords should be examined by indirect 
laryngoscopy, as thyroid carcinoma may inﬁ ltrate 
the recurrent laryngeal nerves and cause vocal 
cord paralysis. If surgery is contemplated, it is 
important to know whether or not the cords are 
functioning normally before operation.  
 Regional  n odes 
 As with any other lump, the regional lymph 
nodes must be examined in any case of thyroid 
swelling. The draining nodes of the thyroid lie 
along the carotid sheath on each side. Hard 
enlarged nodes strongly suggest malignant disease 
of the thyroid.  
 The  p hysiological  s tate of 
the  p atient 
 Determine whether the patient is euthyroid, 
hyperthyroid or hypothyroid. In the majority of 
patients, this can be determined from the clinical 
features. 
 Complications 
  •   Tracheal displacement or compression. 
  •   Haemorrhage into a cyst, producing pain and 
increased swelling (which may produce 
sudden tracheal compression).  
  •   Toxic change. 
  •   Malignant change (rare). 
 Colloid  g oitre ( e ndemic  g oitre) 
 All diseases of the thyroid are more common in 
geographical locations in which the water and diet 
are low in iodine. In the UK, the most notorious 
district was Derbyshire, and the frequency of 
goitres in this region gave rise to the term 
 ‘ Derbyshire neck ’ . Iodination of table salt has all 
but abolished this state of affairs. Switzerland, 
Nepal, Ethiopia and Peru are also areas where 
natural iodine is very scarce in the diet and 
water, and thyroid disease is common. The 
most common lesion of the thyroid gland due 
to iodine deﬁ ciency is the colloid goitre, in which 
the gland is enlarged and the acini are atrophic 
with a large amount of colloid. As has been men-
tioned, this accumulation of colloid is probably 
due to oversecretion of TSH from the anterior 
pituitary, acting on the thyroid, which is unable to 
produce T4. 
 Hyperplasia 
 In primary hyperthyroidism (Graves ’  disease 2 ), the 
thyroid is uniformly enlarged and there is hyper-
activity of the acinar cells with reduplication and 
infolding of the epithelium. The gland is very 
vascular and there is little colloid to be seen. 
Lymphocyte inﬁ ltration is usually a predominant 
feature. 
 Clinical  f eatures in 
 t hyroid  d isease 
 Patients may present complaining of a lump 
in the neck and/or with symptoms due to 
excessive or diminished amounts of circulating 
thyroxine. 
  2   Robert Graves (1796 – 1853), Physician, Meath Hospital, Dublin, 
Ireland. 

The thyroid 315
 Exophthalmos is an extremely distressing con-
dition for the patient and, if severe, the patient is 
unable to close the eyelids; the eyes are then liable 
to corneal ulceration and eventual blindness. This 
condition is difﬁ cult to treat, but may respond to 
high - dosage corticosteroids; surgical decompres-
sion of the orbit with suture of the eyelids across 
the eyeball (tarsorrhaphy) may be required.  
 The  h ands 
  •   Sweating : the hands are warm and moist. 
  •   Tachycardia : a rapid pulse is almost invariable 
and typically the sleeping pulse is also raised. 
There may be atrial ﬁ brillation and indeed the 
patient may present with heart failure. A rapid 
sleeping pulse rate permits differentiation of 
hyperthyroidism from an acute anxiety state; 
such patients when sleeping will have a 
normal pulse rate, whereas, in patients with 
hyperthyroidism, the sleeping pulse will 
remain elevated. 
  •   Fine tremor of the outstretched hands is 
present and reﬂ ects the increased sympathetic 
activity. 
  •   Finger clubbing , more accurately termed 
thyroid acropachy.  
  •   Onycholysis : the nail lifts off the nail bed, a 
condition also seen in psoriasis and with some 
fungal infections.  
  •   Pretibial myxoedema , thickening of the 
subcutaneous tissues in front of the tibia, is a 
rare feature. 
 Aetiology 
 Patients with hyperthyroidism fall into two groups, 
primary (Graves ’  disease) and secondary. 
 Primary  h yperthyroidism 
(Graves ’  d isease) 
 This occurs usually in young women with no pre-
ceding history of goitre. The gland is smoothly 
enlarged and exophthalmos common. Symptoms 
are primarily those of irritability and tremor; 
exophthalmos and ophthalmoplegia are often 
quite marked. Primary hyperthyroidism is due 
to the action of autoantibodies which bind 
to, and stimulate, the TSH receptor. These 
thyroid - stimulating antibodies have a prolonged 
stimulatory effect compared with TSH; hence, 
 Hyperthyroidism 
 Clinical features of hyperthyroidism are deter-
mined by examination of the eyes and the hands, 
as well as from the history and examination of the 
neck. Thyroxine potentiates the actions of adrena-
line (epinephrine), and many of the features of 
hyperthyroidism represent increased activity of 
the sympathetic nervous system. 
 History 
 The patient is irritable and nervous, and cannot 
keep still. The appetite is increased and yet 
there is loss of weight; diabetes mellitus is the 
other condition in which this paradox occurs. 
Diarrhoea is occasionally a feature. The patient 
prefers cold environments rather than warm. 
Palpitations due to tachycardia or atrial ﬁ brilla-
tion may occur.  
 Examination 
 The  t hyroid  g land 
 The thyroid itself is usually smoothly enlarged but 
not invariably so. It may be highly vascular and 
demonstrate a bruit and thrill.  
 Eye  s igns 
  •   Exophthalmos  is present in most patients with 
hyperthyroidism of Graves ’  disease, owing to 
oedema and inﬁ ltration by mononuclear cells 
of the orbital fat and extrinsic muscles of the 
eye. 
  •   Lid retraction : the innervation of the levator 
palpebrae superioris is partly under 
sympathetic control. In hyperthyroidism, it is 
tonically active, retracting the upper lid, giving 
the appearance that the patient is staring.  
  •   Lid lag : ask the patient to follow your ﬁ nger as 
you move it from over the head downwards  – 
the upper lid does not immediately drop, 
revealing the white sclera above the cornea.  
  •   Dilated pupils  owing to increased sympathetic 
pupil dilator tone.  
  •   Double vision  following the examiner ’ s ﬁ nger 
to the upper outer quadrant. This is due to 
inﬁ ltration of the extrinsic muscles of the eye, 
which causes exophthalmic ophthalmoplegia. 

316 
The thyroid
  •   Thyroid scintogram : radioiodine studies of 
the thyroid gland provide very useful 
information. A small tracer dose of  γ - ray -
 emitting iodine - 131 is injected intravenously 
and the gland scanned with a  γ - ray detector 
to map areas of high uptake reﬂ ecting high 
activity. A nodule in the thyroid gland that is 
hyperactive can be pinpointed by this method, 
a so - called  ‘ hot nodule ’ . Similarly, a nodule 
that is not producing T4 will not take up the 
radioiodine, e.g. a cyst or tumour ( ‘ cold 
nodule ’ ). 
  •   Thyroid antibodies , against thyroglobulin or 
the  ‘ microsomal ’ antigen (now identiﬁ ed as 
thyroid peroxidase), indicate an autoimmune 
pathology such as Hashimoto ’ s thyroiditis, or 
Graves ’  disease; other autoantibodies are often 
present. 
  •   Ultrasound  of the thyroid gives valuable 
information as to whether a mass is solid or 
cystic, unifocal or multifocal, and can be used 
to direct needle biopsy.  
  •   Fine - needle aspiration and core biopsy allow 
material to be obtained for cytological and 
histological examination. It is now the 
principal investigation for all solitary nodules, 
often under ultrasound guidance.  
  •   Serum cholesterol is usually raised in 
myxoedema and may be normal or a little low 
in hyperthyroidism.  
  •   Electrocardiogram (ECG) : in myxoedema, 
cardiac involvement will show low electrical 
activity with small complexes. Atrial ﬁ brillation 
complicating hyperthyroidism will be 
conﬁ rmed. 
  •   CT scan : allows deﬁ nition of size and extent 
of goitre and presence of tracheal 
compression. 
 Clinical  c lassiﬁ cation of 
 t hyroid  s wellings 
 The clinical assessment of a patient with a thyroid 
swelling has two components: 
 1  The physical characteristics of the gland itself. 
Is it smoothly enlarged? Is there a single 
nodule present? Is it multinodular?  
 2  The endocrine state of the patient. Is the 
patient euthyroid, hyperthyroid or 
hypothyroid? 
the traditional name of  ‘ long - acting thyroid 
stimulators ’ . 
 Secondary  h yperthyroidism 
 Secondary hyperthyroidism is overactivity devel-
oping in an already diseased and hyperplastic 
gland. It is a disease of middle age, occurring in 
patients with a pre - existing non - toxic (euthyroid) 
goitre. The gland is nodular and there are no eye 
changes. Symptoms fall more on the cardiovascu-
lar system, the patient often presenting in heart 
failure with atrial ﬁ brillation, although nervous-
ness, irritability and tremor may also be present. 
 Hypothyroidism 
 Congenital  h ypothyroidism 
 Congenital hypothyroidism or cretinism is a con-
dition in which the child is born with little or no 
functioning thyroid. The infant is stunted and 
mentally subnormal, with puffy lips, a large tongue 
and protuberant abdomen, often surmounted by 
an umbilical hernia.  
 Adult  h ypothyroidism 
 In adults, hypothyroidism (or myxoedema) usually 
affects women, and most often occurs in the 
middle - aged or elderly. These patients have a slow, 
deep voice and are usually overweight and apa-
thetic, with a dry, coarse skin and thin hair, espe-
cially in the lateral third of the eyebrows. In 
contrast with hyperthyroidism, myxoedematous 
patients usually feel cold in hot weather, have a 
bradycardia and are constipated. They are often 
anaemic and may suffer from heart failure owing 
to myxoedematous inﬁ ltration of the heart.   
 Investigations in  t hyroid 
 d isease 
  •   Serum free T4 and free T3 . Measurement of the 
biologically active unbound fraction is more 
accurate than measurement of total T3 and T4; 
elevation suggests hyperthyroidism.  
  •   TSH level : raised in myxoedema; suppressed in 
hyperthyroidism, in which the gland secretes 
T4 autonomously.  

The thyroid 317
 Single  e uthyroid  n odule 
 In the patient with a single nodule in the thyroid, 
this may be a solitary benign adenoma, a malig-
nant tumour or, most likely of all, a cyst in a 
thyroid showing the histological changes of a 
nodular goitre. Half of all solitary nodules are in 
fact prominent areas of multinodular goitres. 
 Traditionally, all solitary nodules were excised to 
make a diagnosis. Nowadays, ﬁ ne - needle aspira-
tion combined with isotope and ultrasound scans 
can usually differentiate nodules that should be 
excised from benign cysts. Cysts are aspirated, and 
checked at an interval to ensure that they do not 
re - collect. Cytology cannot distinguish benign 
adenomas from carcinomas, so these should all be 
excised. 
 Hyperthyroidism 
 The available therapy comprises the following: 
  •   antithyroid drugs, of which carbimazole is the 
drug of choice; 
  •   β - adrenergic blocking drugs; 
  •   antithyroid drugs combined with subsequent 
thyroidectomy; 
  •   radioactive iodine - 131. 
 Carbimazole 
 This is given in a dosage of 10   mg 8 hourly, and is 
combined with sedation and bed rest in the acute 
phase of hyperthyroidism. There is rapid regres-
sion of symptoms, the patient beginning to feel 
better and to gain weight with reduction of tachy-
cardia within 1 – 2 weeks. Treatment is continued 
for 12 months. If symptoms recur, a further 6 
months ’  treatment is given, after which surgery is 
advised. Unfortunately, a high relapse rate (up to 
60%) occurs after terminating the treatment, even 
if this is prolonged for 2 or more years. Medical 
treatment alone is therefore usually conﬁ ned to 
the treatment of primary hyperthyroidism in chil-
dren and adolescents. 
 The toxic effects of carbimazole include a drug 
rash, fever, arthropathy, lymphadenopathy and 
agranulocytosis; the last is a dangerous and poten-
tially lethal complication, but occurs in well under 
1% of patients. The ﬁ rst symptom is a sore throat 
and patients on carbimazole must be warned to 
discontinue treatment immediately if this occurs 
 A synthesis of these two observations gives a 
simple clinical classiﬁ cation of the vast majority of 
thyroid swellings, as follows: 
  •   Smooth, euthyroid enlargement of the thyroid 
gland : this is the  ‘ physiological ’ goitre, which 
tends to occur at puberty and pregnancy.  
  •   Nodular, euthyroid gland : this is the common 
nodular goitre, there being either a solitary 
nodule or multiple nodules.  
  •   Smooth, hyperthyroid goitre : primary 
hyperthyroidism or Graves ’ disease. 
  •   Nodular hyperthyroid goitre : secondary 
hyperthyroidism. 
 The less common ﬁ ndings are as follows: 
  •   Smooth, ﬁ rm enlargement with myxoedema : 
Hashimoto ’ s disease (see p. 321). Usually in a 
middle - aged woman, and the gland is 
sometimes asymmetrical and irregular.  
  •   Invasive enlargement, hard : carcinoma. 
 Riedel ’ s thyroiditis and acute thyroiditis are 
uncommon (see p. 322).  
 Outline of  t reatment 
of  g oitre 
 Euthyroid  n odular  e nlargement 
 Multinodular  g oitre 
 Thyroidectomy is advised in patients with an 
enlarged, euthyroid, nodular goitre when there 
are symptoms of tracheal compression and 
dyspnoea. In addition, in younger patients, it is 
reasonable to advise operation because of the 
danger of haemorrhage into a thyroid cyst with 
the risks of acute tracheal compression, and 
because of the small risk of toxic or malignant 
change in the gland. The patient may also be 
concerned with the cosmetic appearance of the 
swollen neck. 
 In elderly patients with a long - standing goitre 
that is symptomless, it is good practice to leave 
well alone. 
 T4 replacement may be effective by reducing 
TSH secretion, and so suppressing further enlarge-
ment. It is best given following thyroidectomy to 
suppress enlargement of the remaining gland 
tissue. 

318 
The thyroid
with or without a beta - blocker, may be used to 
control symptoms during this time. 
 There is a theoretical risk of malignant change 
in the irradiated gland, although it is very uncom-
mon. Nevertheless it is current practice not to use 
radioiodine in patients under the age 45 and, in 
addition, not to use it in young women who may 
become pregnant during treatment, as there is a 
very real danger of affecting the infant ’ s thyroid. 
Another disadvantage of this treatment is the high 
incidence of late hypothyroidism, which rises to 
near 30% after 10 years and which requires 
replacement therapy with T4. 
 Complications of 
 t hyroidectomy 
 In addition to the hazards of any surgical opera-
tion, there are special complications to consider 
following thyroidectomy. These can be divided 
into hormonal disturbances (the thyroid itself and 
the adjacent parathyroid glands) and injury to 
closely related anatomical structures. 
 1  Hormonal : 
 a  paraesthesiae, owing to coincidental 
parathyroid removal or bruising;  
 b  tetany (parathyroid removal or bruising); 
 c  thyroid crisis; 
 d  hypothyroidism, owing to extensive removal 
of thyroid tissue; 
 e  late recurrence of hyperthyroidism owing to 
inadequate excision of the hyperthyroid 
gland. 
 2  Damage to related anatomical structures : 
 a  recurrent laryngeal nerve; 
 b  injury to trachea; 
 c  pneumothorax. 
 3  The complications of any operation, especially : 
 a  haemorrhage; 
 b  sepsis; 
 c  postoperative chest infection; 
 d  hypertrophic scarring (keloid). 
 Some of these complications require further 
consideration here. 
 Hypoparathyroidism 
 This may result from inadvertent removal of 
the parathyroids or their injury during operation. 
The patient may develop paraesthesia or tetany 
(Chapter  38 , p. 323) a few days postoperatively 
and to report to hospital. Granulocyte colony -
 stimulating factor may be required.  
 β - Adrenergic  b locking  d rugs 
 In patients with severe hyperthyroidism, pro-
pranolol induces rapid symptomatic improve-
ment of the cardiovascular features by blocking 
sympathetic overactivity, while the hyperthy-
roidism comes under control with speciﬁ c antithy-
roid therapy.  
 Drugs and  s urgery  c ombined 
 The majority of adult patients in the UK are treated 
with preliminary carbimazole until euthyroid; 
relapse after medical therapy is an indication for 
subtotal thyroidectomy. Most patients will be 
euthyroid following a course of drug therapy 
although 50% will relapse and require further drug 
treatment at a later stage. At that stage, the treat-
ment options are either radioiodine or surgery. 
Radioiodine has a higher relapse rate than surgery, 
and a high incidence of late - onset hypothy-
roidism, but may be more suitable for treating 
older patients. It is not associated with increased 
malignancy. 
 The surgical management of primary hyperthy-
roidism (Graves ’  disease) is now usually limited to 
younger patients in their late teens or early twen-
ties who have relapsed following their second 
course of drug treatment and who are looking for 
a long - term cure for their disease. The traditional 
operation for primary hyperthyroidism has been 
subtotal thyroidectomy in an attempt to render 
the patient euthyroid with no need for exogenous 
thyroxine. Unfortunately, most patients will 
require thyroxine replacement in time, and, by 
leaving too much thyroid tissue  in situ , there is a 
risk of recurrence. As a result, total thyroidectomy 
is becoming the operation of choice for these 
patients in the same way as for patients with 
multinodular goitre.  
 Radioactive  i odine 
 From the patient ’ s point of view, this is the most 
pleasant treatment, as all the patient has to do is 
swallow a glass of water containing the radioiod-
ine. There is no need for prolonged treatment with 
drugs or the risk of operation; it is particularly 
useful in recurrence of hyperthyroidism after thy-
roidectomy. It usually takes 2 – 3 months before the 
patient is rendered euthyroid. Antithyroid drugs, 

The thyroid 319
phonation. However, if both recurrent nerves are 
damaged there is almost complete loss of voice 
and serious narrowing of the airway; a permanent 
tracheostomy may be required, although an 
incomplete injury may recover in time. It is esti-
mated that the nerve is injured in about 2 – 3% of 
thyroidectomies. 
 Vocal cord assessment by indirect laryngoscopy 
should be performed prior to thyroid surgery, and 
is essential for patients with known malignancy, 
previous neck surgery and for patients with 
hoarseness or stridor.  
 Haemorrhage 
 If this occurs shortly after thyroidectomy it is a 
dangerous condition, as bleeding into the thyroid 
bed may compress the trachea, which is already 
softened by pressure from the thyroid swelling. 
The neck becomes distended with blood; there is 
acute dyspnoea and stridor, as well as shock from 
blood loss. 
 Treatment 
 This may be an extreme emergency and must be 
dealt with at once by decompressing the neck in 
the ward. The skin and the subcutaneous sutures 
are removed, the wound is opened and the blood 
clot expressed. The patient can then be transferred 
to theatre, anaesthetized, bleeding points secured 
and the wound resutured. 
 Thyroid  t umours 
 Classiﬁ cation 
 Benign 
  •   Follicular adenoma. 
 Malignant 
 1  Primary (ﬁ ve main types):  
 a  papillary adenocarcinoma; 
 b  follicular adenocarcinoma; 
 c  anaplastic; 
 d  medullary carcinoma; 
 e  lymphoma (rare). 
 2  Secondary 
 a  direct invasion from adjacent structures, e.g. 
oesophagus;  
 b  very rare site for blood - borne deposits. 
with typical carpopedal spasms, which may be 
induced by tourniquet around the arm (Trousseau ’ s 
sign, Chapter  38 , p. 324), and a positive Chvostek ’ s 
sign (Chapter  38 , p. 324); this is elicited by tapping 
lightly over the zygoma, when the facial muscles 
will be seen to contract. The serum calcium falls 
to below 1.5   mmol/L. 
 Treatment 
 Treatment consists of giving 10   mL of 10% calcium 
gluconate intravenously followed by oral calcium 
together with vitamin D derivatives (ergocalciferol 
or alfacalcidol). Often, the tetany is transient and 
the injured parathyroids recover; in other cases, 
permanent treatment with alfacalcidol is required. 
Parathormone is not used. 
 In addition to frank tetany, which occurs in 
about 1% of cases, milder degrees of hypoparathy-
roidism may occur and may present with mental 
changes (depression or anxiety neurosis), skin 
rashes and bilateral cataracts. A low postoperative 
calcium is treated by the administration of oral 
calcium and/or vitamin D daily by mouth.   
 Thyroid  c risis 
 An acute exacerbation of hyperthyroidism seen 
immediately postoperatively is now extremely 
rare because of the careful preoperative prepara-
tion of these patients. It is, however, a frightening 
phenomenon with mania, hyperpyrexia and 
marked tachycardia, which may lead to death 
from heart failure. The cause is not fully under-
stood, but it may be due to a massive release of 
thyroxine from the hyperactive gland during the 
operation. 
 Treatment 
 Treatment comprises heavy sedation with barbit-
urates, propranolol, intravenous iodine and 
cooling by means of ice packs.   
 Recurrent  l aryngeal  n erve  i njury 
 The recurrent laryngeal nerve lies in the groove 
between the oesophagus and trachea in close rela-
tionship to the inferior thyroid artery. Here it is at 
risk of division, injury from stretching or compres-
sion by oedema or blood clot. 
 If one nerve alone is damaged, the patient may 
have little in the way of symptoms apart from 
slight hoarseness because the opposite vocal cord 
compensates by passing across the midline during 

320 
The thyroid
common. It has a tendency to bloodstream spread 
and therefore a worsened prognosis; lymph node 
spread is uncommon.  
 Medullary  c arcinoma 
 This arises from the parafollicular C cells and 
may secrete calcitonin. It may occur at any 
age and, unlike other thyroid tumours, has a 
roughly equal sex distribution. It may be familial 
and may be associated with other cancers in 
the multiple endocrine neoplasia syndrome 
(type II, associated with phaeochromocytoma 
and either parathyroid tumours or neuroﬁ bromas; 
Chapter  38 , p. 324). The characteristic ﬁ nding is 
deposits of amyloid between the nests of tumour 
cells. 
 The disease is multicentric in all familial 
forms, usually affects both thyroid lobes and is 
associated with C cell hyperplasia. In contrast, 
the sporadic form is usually unifocal with no 
associated hyperplasia. The tumour cells produce 
calcitonin, which acts as a tumour marker and 
can be used as a screening test in syndromic 
families or to detect recurrence in follow - up 
of operated patients. Fine - needle aspiration 
cytology of medullary thyroid carcinoma may be 
diagnostic. 
 Anaplastic  c arcinoma 
 This occurs in the elderly, thus reversing the 
usual state of affairs, in that the more malignant 
tumours of the thyroid occur in the older age 
group. Rapid local spread takes place with com-
pression and invasion of the trachea. There is early 
dissemination to the regional lymphatics and 
bloodstream spread to the lungs, skeleton and 
brain. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Tumours may present like other goitres as a 
lump in the neck, often more rapidly growing. 
Dysphagia is uncommon, and suggestive of an 
anaplastic tumour; more common is the com-
plaint that swallowing is uncomfortable. Pain may 
occur with local inﬁ ltration, and hoarseness is 
suggestive of inﬁ ltration of the recurrent laryngeal 
nerve. Deep cervical lymph nodes may be palpa-
bly enlarged. The patients are usually euthyroid. 
Ultrasound - guided core needle biopsy or ﬁ ne -
 needle aspiration cytology are used to conﬁ rm the 
diagnosis. 
 Benign  a denoma 
 Although benign encapsulated nodules in the 
thyroid gland are common, the majority are part 
of a nodular colloid goitre. A small percentage rep-
resent true benign adenomas, of which 10% are 
 ‘ hot nodules ’ , i.e. they produce excess thyroxine. 
Thyroid adenomas are four times more common 
in women.  
 Thyroid  c arcinoma 
 Thyroid carcinoma affects women twice as often 
as men, often arising in pre - existing goitres, and 
has been reported following radiation of the neck 
in childhood. It has an incidence of around 2 in 
100 000 and long - term survival rates following 
treatment are excellent. Forty year survival rates 
for papillary and follicular cancer are 94% and 
84%, respectively. Papillary and follicular cancer, 
together referred to as differentiated thyroid 
cancer, account for approximately 90% of all 
thyroid cancers. 
 Differentiated thyroid cancer is usually curable 
when detected at an early stage. The high cure rate 
can be attributed to a multidisciplinary approach, 
including specialist surgery, radioiodine ablation, 
TSH suppression and, ﬁ nally, the use of thyroglob-
ulin as a thyroid - speciﬁ c tumour marker. Despite 
this management strategy, a small number of 
patients will develop recurrence and 50% of 
thyroid cancer deaths will be due to respiratory 
failure secondary to either pulmonary metastasis 
or airway obstruction. 
 Pathology 
 Papillary  c arcinoma 
 This is the most common type of thyroid cancer, 
constituting 60% of thyroid cancers. It occurs in 
young adults, adolescents or even children. It is 
a slow - growing tumour and lymphatic spread 
occurs late. Deposits in the regional lymph nodes 
may be solitary and in the past have been mistak-
enly regarded as lateral aberrant thyroid tissue. 
However, a careful search of the thyroid gland will 
reveal a well - differentiated tumour in the ipsilat-
eral lobe. 
 Follicular  c arcinoma 
 This occurs in young and middle - aged adults, the 
incidence peaking in the ﬁ fth decade. It is more 
common in areas where endemic goitres are 

The thyroid 321
thyroxine dose to keep the serum TSH  < 0.03  U/L 
should be given. In general, this dose will be 
approximately double the normal replacement 
dose of thyroxine.  
 Thyroglobulin 
 Serum thyroglobulin is the best way of detecting 
the presence of normal or malignant thyroid 
tissue and most patients who are free of disease 
will have undetectable levels. In patients in whom 
the thyroglobulin rises during follow - up, careful 
clinical examination and whole body scanning 
should be performed to look for local or systemic 
recurrence. 
 Medullary  c arcinoma 
 Phaeochromocytoma and hyperparathyroidism 
should be excluded in the relevant syndromes. All 
patients with medullary carcinoma require total 
thyroidectomy and central lymph node dissec-
tion. Radical neck dissection may be required 
when cervical lymphadenopathy is present. 
 Prophylactic thyroidectomy is indicated in 
unaffected kindred members with the germline 
 RET  mutation. At present, this is often carried out 
in patients as young as 5 – 7 years old.  
 Anaplastic  c arcinoma 
 This condition has a very poor prognosis with a 1 
year survival of  < 15%. The main aim of treatment 
following diagnosis is local control of the disease. 
Useful palliation may be achieved with external 
beam radiotherapy, and tracheostomy should be 
avoided if at all possible.    
 Hashimoto ’ s  d isease 
 Hashimoto ’ s disease 3  is an uncommon thyroid 
disease that has received considerable attention, 
as it was the ﬁ rst of the autoimmune diseases to 
be elucidated. The patient is usually a middle -
 aged woman with clinical evidence of hypothy-
roidism. The gland is uniformly enlarged and ﬁ rm, 
although it may occasionally be asymmetrical and 
irregular. 
 Macroscopically, its cut surface is lobulated and 
greyish yellow. Microscopically, there is diffuse 
 Treatment of  d ifferentiated 
 t hyroid  c ancer 
 Surgery 
 Well - differentiated tumours can be treated by a 
combination of surgery, thyroid suppression by 
thyroxine and radioiodine. 
 Total thyroidectomy should be considered for 
patients at high risk of recurrence according to 
prognostic scoring systems. Adverse prognostic 
factors, which increase risk of recurrence, include 
tumour size, presence of lymph node metastasis 
and older age ( > 45 years) at presentation. 
Furthermore, radioiodine ablation is facilitated by 
total thyroidectomy. 
 Thyroid lobectomy is therefore appropriate 
surgery for unifocal, papillary tumours less than 
1   cm in diameter in the absence of lymph node 
metastasis. In addition, it may also be adequate 
for follicular tumours with minimal capsular inva-
sion, small tumour size and no metastatic disease. 
Most other patients with differentiated thyroid 
cancer will require total thyroidectomy and pos-
sible radioiodine therapy. 
 Radioiodine  a blation 
 Iodine - 131 ablation of the thyroid bed and 
remnant has become an essential component of 
the treatment of differentiated thyroid cancer. 
First, a large remnant may obscure the presence of 
metastatic disease and, second, the high TSH 
levels required to enhance  131 I tumour uptake are 
not possible if a large remnant persists. Finally,  131 I 
will be taken up by any remaining thyroid tissue, 
either in the thyroid bed or in occult metastasis, 
thereby reducing the risk of tumour recurrence. In 
general, those patients who require total thyroid-
ectomy may also require  131 I therapy. 
 Complications of  131 I therapy include oedema 
and swelling, or thyroiditis, in those patients with 
a large thyroid remnant. In addition, radiation sia-
ladenitis affecting the parotid or submandibular 
glands may present with painful swelling of the 
gland(s) after eating. There are few long - term 
sequelae from radioiodine providing that the 
cumulative dose is kept to a minimum.  
 TSH  s uppression 
 Recurrence rates are reduced by postoperative 
thyroxine therapy although there is uncertainty 
about the optimal dose. At present, the minimum 
  3   Hakaru Hashimoto (1881 – 1934), Surgeon, Kyushu University, 
Kyushu, Japan. 

322 
The thyroid
enlarged, but is woody hard with inﬁ ltration of 
adjacent tissues. The cause of this condition is 
not known, but it may represent a late stage of 
Hashimoto ’ s disease or possibly be inﬂ ammatory 
in origin. 
 It is mistaken clinically for a thyroid carcinoma, 
but histologically the gland is replaced by ﬁ brous 
tissue containing chronic inﬂ ammatory cells. It is 
associated with other conditions such as retro-
peritoneal ﬁ brosis, sclerosing cholangitis and 
ﬁ brosing mediastinitis. 
 A wedge resection of a portion of the gland may 
be required if symptoms of tracheal compression 
develop. 
 de Quervain ’ s  t hyroiditis 
 de Quervain ’ s thyroiditis 5  is a rare condition 
usually affecting young women. It often follows 
a viral infection of the upper respiratory tract. 
The gland is slightly enlarged, ﬁ rm and tender. 
It is generally self - limiting, and rarely leads to 
hypothyroidism.  
 
 
 
 
inﬁ ltration with lymphocytes, increased ﬁ brous 
tissue and diminished colloid. It is an autoim-
mune disease in which the patient has developed 
both a humoral and cell - mediated autoimmune 
reaction to elements within her own thyroid. 
Thyroglobulin and microsomal antibodies can be 
demonstrated in about 90% of patients. 
 It is important to diagnose the condition cor-
rectly by demonstrating the presence of thyroid 
antibodies and, if necessary, by biopsy, because 
thyroidectomy will precipitate severe hypothy-
roidism in these cases. Occasionally, lymphoma 
occurs in such glands. 
 Treatment 
 Thyroxine replacement therapy of up to 300    μ g/
day will shrink the gland and the symptoms of 
myxoedema should disappear.   
 Riedel ’ s  t hyroiditis 
 Riedel ’ s thyroiditis 4  is an extremely rare disease of 
the thyroid in which the gland may be only slightly 
  4   Bernhard Riedel (1846 – 1916), Professor of Surgery, Jena, 
Germany. 
  5   Fritz de Quervain (1868 – 1940), Professor of Surgery, Bern, 
Switzerland. 

 38 
The  p arathyroids  
 
 Learning  o bjective 
  ✓   To know the presentations of both hypoparathyroidism and 
hyperparathyroidism and their management. 
 2  It stimulates osteoclastic activity in the bones, 
resulting in the decalciﬁ cation and liberation 
of excessive amounts of calcium and 
phosphorus in the blood.  
 3  It activates the 1 α - hydroxylase enzyme in the 
kidney, which converts the inactive 
25 - hydroxycholecalciferol (25 - hydroxy - vitamin 
D) into 1,25 - dihydoxycholecalciferol. The 
resultant activated 1,25 form of vitamin D 
facilitates intestinal absorption of calcium.     
 Effects of  i ncreased  PTH 
 p roduction 
  •   A raised serum calcium and a lowered serum 
phosphate, as these substances are related 
reciprocally. 
  •   An increased excretion of phosphate in the 
urine (phosphaturic effect of PTH). 
  •   An increased excretion of calcium in the urine. 
The large amount of calcium ﬁ ltered (owing to 
the hypercalcaemia) exceeds the capacity of 
the tubules to reabsorb it all, so increased 
calcium excretion occurs.  
  •   Increased osteoclastic activity, with a raised 
serum alkaline phosphatase associated with 
decalciﬁ cation of the bones. 
 Hypoparathyroidism 
 Lack of PTH results in low serum calcium. This 
leads initially to paraesthesia (perioral and ﬁ nger-
tips) then hyperirritability of skeletal muscle with 
 Anatomy and 
 d evelopment 
 The parathyroids are four endocrine glands 
(sometimes three or ﬁ ve) about the size of split 
peas, which usually lie in two pairs behind the 
lateral lobes of the thyroid gland. The superior 
parathyroids arise from the fourth branchial 
pouch and owing to their short migration can 
usually be found posterior to the upper two - thirds 
of the thyroid. The inferior glands arise from the 
third pouch in association with the developing 
thymus (Figure  36.1 , p. 310). The inferior parathy-
roids may lie almost anywhere in the neck or supe-
rior mediastinum although the majority lie within 
1  cm of the lower thyroid pole.  
 Physiology 
 The parathyroids produce parathormone (PTH), 
which has profound inﬂ uence on calcium and 
phosphate metabolism. The exact mechanisms of 
its action are not known, but there appear to be 
three main effects. 
 1  It increases the excretion of phosphate from 
the kidney by inhibiting its tubular 
reabsorption (phosphaturic effect); tubular 
reabsorption of calcium is reciprocally 
increased.  
Lecture Notes: General Surgery, 12th edition. © Harold Ellis, 
Sir Roy Y. Calne and Christopher J. E. Watson. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

324 
The parathyroids
 Pathology 
 In 85 – 90% of patients, primary hyperparathy-
roidism is due to a solitary parathyroid adenoma. 
The lower glands are affected more commonly 
than the upper ones. The tumours are soft, encap-
sulated and brownish grey in colour. In 10% 
of cases, multiglandular hyperplasia is present, 
which may be associated with multiple endocrine 
neoplasia (MEN) type I (pancreatic tumours, pitu-
itary tumours, parathyroid tumours) (Box  38.1 ) or 
may be sporadic or induced by long - term lithium 
intake. 
 Parathyroid  c arcinoma 
 Parathyroid carcinoma is a very rare condition and 
accounts for less than 1% of all cases of primary 
hyperparathyroidism. Patients often have higher 
serum calcium and PTH levels, and are more likely 
to have a palpable neck mass than those with 
benign hyperparathyroidism. 
 Surgery 
is 
the 
only 
effective 
treatment. 
Malignancy should be considered with any gland 
that is ﬁ rm, has a grey appearance, or that is 
adherent to surrounding structures. If malignancy 
is conﬁ rmed surgery may involve simple excision 
carpopedal spasms, the syndrome being called 
 tetany . The most common cause of this is removal 
or bruising of the parathyroids in thyroidectomy 
(Chapter  37 , p. 318). Tetany is liable to occur if the 
serum calcium falls below 1.5   mmol/L. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Spasms may affect any part of the body, but 
typically the hands and feet. The wrists ﬂ ex 
and the ﬁ ngers are drawn together in extension, 
the so - called  ‘ main d ’ accoucheur ’ . This spasm 
may be induced by placing a tourniquet around 
the arm for a few minutes (Trousseau ’ s sign 1 ). 
Hyperirritability of the facial muscles may be 
demonstrated by tapping over the facial nerve, 
which results in spasm (Chvostek ’ s sign 2 ). 
 Note that clinical tetany may occur with a 
normal level of serum calcium in alkalosis (e.g. 
overbreathing, excessive prolonged vomiting) 
because of a compensatory shift of ionized calcium 
to the unionized form in the serum.   
 Hyperparathyroidism 
 There are four distinct types of pathologically 
increased PTH secretion: primary, secondary, ter-
tiary and that due to ectopic PTH production by 
tumours. 
 Primary  h yperparathyroidism 
 The diagnosis of primary hyperparathyroidism is 
made following the detection of hypercalcaemia 
in the presence of inappropriately normal or ele-
vated circulating PTH levels; the PTH should be 
low if calcium is raised. The hypercalcaemia is 
usually discovered on routine screening of patients 
who have general symptoms including fatigue, 
depression and weakness or less commonly 
during the investigation of osteopenia or nephro-
lithiasis, the two main complications of hyperpar-
athyroidism. The annual incidence is highest 
among middle - aged and elderly women (two per 
1000 population). 
 Box 38.1   Multiple endocrine neoplasia 
(MEN) syndromes 
 These syndromes are characterized by the develop-
ment of a number of endocrine adenomas, or ade-
nocarcinomas, in the same patient. Some, such as 
medullary carcinoma of the thyroid, may be familial, 
with autosomal dominant inheritance.  
 MEN  t ype  I  
  •    Pancreatic tumour: islet cell tumours except 
beta - cell tumours (insulinoma)  
  •    Hyperparathyroidism 
  •    Pituitary tumour, e.g. prolactinoma  
  •    Adrenocortical tumour  
 MEN  t ype  II  
  •    Medullary carcinoma of the thyroid  
  •    Phaeochromocytoma 
  •    Hyperparathyroidism  – only in type IIA  
  •    Neuroﬁ bromas of tongue, lips and eyelids  – only 
in type IIB  
  1  Armand Trousseau (1801 – 1867), Physician, H ô pital Necker, Paris, 
France. Also described thrombophlebitis migrans associated with 
cancer. 
  2   Frantisek Chvostek (1835 – 1884), Physician, Josefs - Akademie, 
Vienna, Austria.  

The parathyroids 325
disease with impaired excretion of phosphate 
may result in secondary hyperplasia of the 
parathyroid glands with features similar to 
those of a primary adenoma of the 
parathyroid.  
  •   Bone changes : spontaneous fractures or pain in 
the bones. X - ray will show decalciﬁ cation of 
the bones with cyst formation. The weakened 
bones may be deformed; this condition is 
known as osteitis ﬁ brosa cystica or von 
Recklinghausen ’ s disease 3 of bone. There may 
be metastatic calciﬁ cation in soft tissues, 
arterial walls and the kidneys. 
  •   Abdominal pain : constipation is common. 
Dyspepsia or frank duodenal ulceration is also 
sometimes associated with parathyroid 
adenoma, as is pancreatitis. If ulcer symptoms 
persist after treatment of the adenoma, the 
presence of a gastrinoma should be excluded 
by serum gastrin assay (MEN syndrome 
association).  
  •   Vague ill - health associated with high serum 
calcium : the patient very often complains of 
lassitude, mental disturbances, weakness, 
anorexia and loss of weight. Thirst and 
polyuria are common. 
  •   Cardiovascular : hypertension may be noted at 
the initial diagnosis and is often associated 
with left ventricular hypertrophy. Although 
serum PTH correlates strongly with left 
ventricular mass, the reduction in left 
ventricular mass following parathyroidectomy 
is not associated with a similar reduction in 
mean blood pressure. Primary 
hyperparathyroidism appears to be associated 
with an increased rate of premature death 
owing to cardiovascular disease, although early 
surgical intervention may result in improved 
survival. 
  •   Asymptomatic : an increasing number of 
patients with very few or no symptoms are 
now being diagnosed on routine biochemical 
screening. Despite this, the majority of these 
patients feel better following 
parathyroidectomy and this, combined with a 
recognition that up to 25% of patients will have 
progressive disease, has led to support for early 
surgical intervention following initial 
diagnosis. 
or  en bloc  resection, including excision of local 
structures such as ipsilateral thyroid, thymus, 
strap muscles and recurrent laryngeal nerve. 
Approximately 30% of tumours will metastasize, 
but death from the disease is usually attributable 
to hypercalcaemia, and its effects on the heart, 
pancreas and kidney, rather than metastatic 
tumour burden.   
 Secondary  h yperparathyroidism 
 In some 10% of patients with hyperparathy-
roidism, the condition is found to be due to a 
hyperplasia of all four parathyroid glands. This 
occurs most commonly in patients with renal 
failure maintained by dialysis, in whom renal con-
version of 25 - hydroxycholecalciferol (calcidiol) 
to 1,25 - dihydroxycholecalciferol (calcitriol) is 
impaired. This active form of vitamin D is required 
for absorption of calcium from the gut; deﬁ ciency 
results in hypocalcaemia, which chronically stim-
ulates PTH production. The parathyroid glands 
undergo hyperplasia in response. To prevent 
this, dialysis patients are routinely given 1 α -
 hydroxycholecalciferol (alphacalcidol), so bypass-
ing renal 1 α - hydroxylase. 
 Tertiary  h yperparathyroidism 
 Prolonged secondary hyperparathyroidism leads 
to autonomous PTH production, which continues 
even after renal transplantation replaces the pre-
viously deﬁ cient renal 1 α - hydroxylase conversion 
step. Total parathyroidectomy is required.  
 Ectopic  PTH  p roduction 
 Hyperparathyroidism is occasionally due to 
ectopic PTH production by tumours, such as 
squamous carcinoma of the bronchus.  
 Clinical  f eatures of 
 h yperparathyroidism 
 These depend on the results of excessive produc-
tion of PTH by the tumour (see above). Presenting 
symptoms may include the following: 
  •   Renal effects : renal stones, infection associated 
with renal calculi, calciﬁ cation in the renal 
substance (nephrocalcinosis) or uraemia. 
Urinary tract calculi are the most common 
clinical manifestation of hyperparathyroidism. 
It is important to remember that chronic renal 
  3   Friederich von Recklinghausen (1833 – 1910), Professor of 
Pathology, 
Strasbourg, 
France. 
He 
also 
described 
neuroﬁ bromatosis.  

326 
The parathyroids
(Kocher ’ s 4 ) incision just above the clavicle to 
provide access to both retrothyroid spaces to 
detect and remove one or more enlarged glands. 
 If a single gland is enlarged, it is likely to be an 
adenoma and is removed once the remaining 
glands have been visualized and conﬁ rmed to be 
normal. Frozen section of the gland, or urgent 
 ‘ near patient ’  estimation of PTH levels, will 
conﬁ rm the identity of the adenoma. 
 Unilateral  n eck  e xploration 
 Most (85 – 90%) patients with primary hyper-
parathyroidism have a single affected gland. 
Preoperative localization of the adenoma by ses-
tamibi scanning enables unilateral neck explora-
tion. Patients with multigland disease, MEN - related 
hyperplasia, familial hypocalciuric hypercalcae-
mia and renal disease are not suitable for this 
approach. In addition, patients with a short neck 
and previous neck surgery or irradiation may also 
not be suitable.  
 Focused  p arathyroidectomy 
 Following accurate preoperative localization of 
uniglandular disease, exploration is carried out 
through a small incision lateral in the neck. The 
patient is supine with the head in a neutral posi-
tion. The technique develops the space between 
the lateral border of the strap muscles and sterno-
mastoid to reach the retrothyroid space. This 
operation is suitable for day - case surgery and can 
be performed under either general anaesthesia or 
cervical local anaesthetic block. 
 This technique can be combined with intraop-
erative PTH measurement, a fall of at least 50% 
indicating removal of all hyperfunctioning par-
athyroid tissue. This technique has fewer overall 
complications, a shorter operating time and a sub-
stantially reduced postoperative stay compared 
with the traditional bilateral neck exploration.   
 Complications of  p arathyroid 
 s urgery 
 The main complications of parathyroid surgery 
include: 
  •   recurrent laryngeal nerve palsy : occurs in under 
1% of patients;  
 A careful family history should also be taken to 
exclude MEN and this, or presentation of primary 
hyperparathyroidism at an early age, should 
raise the suspicion of hyperplasia rather than an 
adenoma. 
 The main effects may be summarized as:  ‘ stones, 
bones, abdominal groans, mental moans ’ .  
 Special  i nvestigations 
 Diagnostic investigations include the following: 
  •   Serum calcium and PTH . A high serum 
calcium, corrected for plasma albumin, in 
the presence of detectable serum PTH should 
raise a strong suspicion of primary 
hyperparathyroidism. The PTH may be normal 
or elevated but in either case is  inappropriately 
elevated for the level of serum calcium. 
  •   Serum phosphate  may be low 
(hypophosphataemia) and  phosphaturia may 
also be present.  
  •   24 hour urine collection  should be taken to 
exclude familial hypocalciuric hypercalcaemia. 
  •   Serum urea and creatinine  should be measured 
to assess renal function.  
  •   Sestamibi scanning will identify a solitary 
parathyroid adenoma, and highlight an 
ectopic retrosternal location. Sestamibi 
is technetium - 99 - labelled 
 m ethoxy i so b utyl i sonitrile and, following 
injection, is taken up by parathyroid glands 
and retained at 2 hours by adenomas.     
 Indications for  s urgery 
 Surgery should be considered in any patient once 
a diagnosis of primary hyperparathyroidism has 
been conﬁ rmed and even patients with mild 
hypercalcaemia get symptomatic beneﬁ t follow-
ing surgery. When surgery is contraindicated in 
primary hyperparathyroidism, and in difﬁ cult to 
manage cases of secondary hyperparathyroidism, 
the calcimimetic drug cinacalcet may be used. 
Cinacalcet binds to the calcium - sensing receptor 
on the parathyroid chief cells, causing a reduction 
in PTH concentration. 
 Bilateral  n eck  e xploration 
 This procedure is normally carried out using 
endotracheal intubation and neck extension to 
facilitate access to the neck. Bilateral neck 
exploration is carried out through a transverse 
  4   Theodore Kocher (1841 – 1917), Professor of Surgery, Bern, 
Switzerland. Won a Nobel Prize in 1909 for work on the thyroid 
gland.  

The parathyroids 327
  •   hypocalcaemia : the remaining parathyroid 
glands are suppressed by the high PTH levels 
and may take some time to recover;  
  •   persistent hypercalcaemia : residual parathyroid 
tissue remains, possibly a ﬁ fth gland or an 
ectopic gland within the anterior mediastinum. 
 Management of  p ersistent or 
 r ecurrent  p rimary 
 h yperparathyroidism 
 Despite careful initial surgery, a number of patients 
will not be cured following initial surgery or will 
relapse at a later stage. This is most often due to 
a failure to diagnose multigland disease or the 
presence of an ectopic parathyroid gland. These 
patients require extensive imaging (sestamibi, 
computed tomography and magnetic resonance 
imaging) prior to surgery to localize and remove 
the abnormal gland(s). Selective venous sampling, 
with PTH measurement by catheterization of 
the venous tributaries in the neck, may also 
help localization and is often combined with 
arteriography. 
 
 
 

 39 
The  t hymus  
 
 Learning  o bjective 
  ✓   To have knowledge of the tumours of the thymus and their 
association with myasthenia gravis. 
 Treatment 
 Treatment is by thymectomy via median sternot-
omy, combined with radiotherapy if malignant, to 
prevent mediastinal recurrence. 
 Early invasion, with no more than pleural 
and mediastinal fat involvement, carries a good 
prognosis (90% at 5 years); involvement of the 
pericardium, great vessels or lung has a poor 
prognosis. 
 Myasthenia  g ravis 
 This condition is characterized by weakness 
of skeletal muscle caused by autoantibodies 
directed 
against 
the 
postsynaptic 
nicotinic 
acetylcholine receptors at the neuromuscular 
junction, as a consequence of which the motor 
endplate becomes refractory to the action of 
acetylcholine. About 15% of cases are associated 
with a tumour of the thymus, whereas thymic 
hyperplasia is present in most of the remaining 
cases. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Women are twice as commonly affected as men, 
and the disease usually commences in early adult 
life. The extrinsic ocular muscles are most often 
affected and may indeed be the only ones involved, 
with ptosis, diplopia and squint. The affected 
muscles become weak with use and recover, par-
tially or completely, after rest. The voice is weak 
and death may eventually occur from respiratory 
muscle failure.  
    The thymus gland controls the development of T 
lymphocytes in the embryo and neonate and lies 
in the anterior mediastinum between the sternum 
in front and great vessels and pericardium 
posteriorly. 
 In adult life, the thymus is a fat - inﬁ ltrated 
remnant, but to the surgeon it is of importance in 
having 
an 
ill - understood 
connection 
with 
myasthenia gravis and in being a rather rare site 
of mediastinal tumour.  
 Tumours 
 Tumours of the thymus are of complex pathology; 
they may arise from either the epithelium (Hassall ’ s 
corpuscles 1 ) or lymphoid tissue, or a mixture of 
both. They may be benign (occasionally cystic) or 
malignant and rapidly invasive. Peak incidence is 
in the sixth and seventh decades. The thymus may 
also be involved in cases of lymphoma, particu-
larly Hodgkin ’ s disease. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 There are three modes of presentation: 
 1  a mediastinal mass; 
 2  associated with myasthenia gravis; 
 3  associated with immune deﬁ ciency states. 
Lecture Notes: General Surgery, 12th edition. © Harold Ellis, 
Sir Roy Y. Calne and Christopher J. E. Watson. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
  1   Arthur Hassall (1817 – 1894), Physician, Royal Free Hospital, 
London, UK. Published the ﬁ rst textbook on histology in English.  

The thymus 329
Thymectomy is otherwise indicated if the disease 
is progressive and the prognosis is best in young 
women (under the age of 40 years) with a history 
of 5 years or less. 
 
 Treatment 
 The majority of cases are controlled by choline 
esterase inhibitors, e.g. pyridostigmine. 
 If a thymoma is present, it is excised, although 
such 
tumours 
are 
often 
locally 
invasive. 

 40 
The  s uprarenal  g lands  
 
 Learning  o bjective 
  ✓   To know the physiology of the suprarenal glands and hormone -
 producing tumours that derive from the separate parts of the 
gland, and their management. 
overlap in actions; thus, hydrocortisone (cortisol), 
a glucocorticoid, also affects salt and water metab-
olism and has sex steroid effects (acne, hirsutism) 
if given in large amounts.  
 Suprarenal  m edulla 
 The suprarenal medulla is richly innervated with 
sympathetic preganglionic ﬁ bres, and produces 
the catecholamines adrenaline (epinephrine) and 
noradrenaline (norepinephrine) in response to 
autonomic stimulation.  
 Pathology 
 The main pathologies affecting the suprarenal 
gland are increased function, owing to tumour or 
hyperplasia; decreased function, owing to atrophy, 
infarction or removal; or abnormal function, 
owing to enzyme disorders. 
 Increased  f unction 
  •   Glucocorticoids (Cushing ’ s syndrome): 
adrenocortical adenoma; ACTH - producing 
pituitary adenoma; ectopic ACTH production 
(paraneoplastic).  
  •   Androgenic corticoids : virilism (the 
adrenogenital syndrome).  
  •   Mineralocorticoids : primary 
hyperaldosteronism (Conn ’ s syndrome). 
  •   Catecholamines : phaeochromocytoma. 
 Decreased  f unction 
 Hypoadrenalism is most commonly a sequel of a 
prolonged corticosteroid therapy, in which endog-
    The suprarenal (adrenal) glands are paired glands 
situated above and medial to the upper pole of 
each kidney. The cortex derives from the meso-
derm of the urogenital ridge, while the medulla 
derives from neural crest ectoderm. These differ-
ent origins account for the different physiology of 
medulla and cortex, and the different pathology 
encountered surgically.  
 Physiology 
 Suprarenal  c ortex 
 The suprarenal cortex secretes three groups of 
steroids: 
 1  glucocorticoids , which regulate carbohydrate 
metabolism, protein breakdown and fat 
mobilization;  
 2  androgenic corticoids , which are virilizing;  
 3  mineralocorticoids , which regulate mineral and 
water metabolism. Aldosterone acts to retain 
sodium and water and to excrete potassium. 
 Glucocorticoids and androgens are under 
hypothalamic control via adrenocorticotrophic 
hormone (ACTH) secreted by the anterior 
pituitary gland; mineralocorticoids are under the 
control of the renin – angiotensin system (Chapter 
 11 , p. 77). As the steroids share a similar biochemi-
cal structure, it is not surprising that there is some 
Lecture Notes: General Surgery, 12th edition. © Harold Ellis, 
Sir Roy Y. Calne and Christopher J. E. Watson. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

The suprarenal glands 331
 Clinical  f eatures 
 The syndrome usually affects young adults (occa-
sionally children), women more often than men. 
The appearance is characteristic: adiposity with 
central distribution, abdominal striae, a red moon 
face and diabetes. There may be osteoporosis, 
leading to vertebral collapse. Associated mineral 
and androgenic corticoid oversecretion produce 
varying degrees of hypertension, hirsutism and 
acne, with amenorrhoea in women or impotence 
in men.  
 Special  i nvestigations 
 These may be thought of as investigations to 
conﬁ rm the diagnosis, and investigations to iden-
tify the cause. 
  •   Urinary 24 hour cortisol level is raised; but may 
also be raised in the obese and in patients 
under stress.  
  •   Plasma cortisol : raised levels, and loss of the 
normal diurnal variation (low at night, up in 
the morning) is suggestive.  
  •   Dexamethasone suppression test , in which 
the steroid dexamethasone is administered 
over a period of days and at different doses, 
and the plasma cortisol is measured: 
suppression of cortisol occurs with low - dose 
dexamethasone (1   mg) in normal subjects 
and high - dose (4  mg over 48 hours) 
dexamethasone in the presence of pituitary 
tumours; ectopic ACTH and suprarenal 
tumours do not suppress.  
  •   Plasma ACTH is raised in the presence of 
ectopic or pituitary ACTH - driven disease; its 
secretion is suppressed by autonomous 
suprarenal tumours. 
  •   Computed tomography (CT) and magnetic 
resonance (MR)  are the best imaging modalities 
for localization of a tumour in the suprarenal 
gland. 
 Treatment 
 If it is due to bilateral hyperplasia, bilateral adrena-
lectomy is performed and the patient placed on a 
maintenance dose of hydrocortisone. Removal of 
the affected suprarenal gland is carried out in 
cases of adenoma or carcinoma. 
 Cases due to basophil adenoma of the pituitary 
respond to hypophysectomy, usually performed 
via a trans - sphenoidal approach. 
enous steroid production is suppressed, followed 
by abrupt steroid withdrawal. It may also be due 
to the following: 
  •   congenital  suprarenal hypoplasia;  
  •   autoimmune destruction: Addison ’ s disease; 1 
  •   suprarenal infarction : a rare consequence of 
stress or sepsis (notably meningococcal 
sepsis);  
  •   bilateral adrenalectomy : intentionally (to treat 
Cushing ’ s syndrome) or secondary to bilateral 
nephrectomy; 
  •   suprarenal inﬁ ltration  by secondary 
tumours from primaries in bronchus and 
breast; 
  •   bilateral tuberculosis of the suprarenals. 
 Enzyme  d isorders 
 Congenital suprarenal hyperplasia, the collective 
description for the suprarenal hyperplasias 
resulting from increased ACTH secretion, may 
result from certain enzyme disorders. ACTH is 
produced in excess because glucocorticoids, 
the end point in the pathway of steroid hormone 
synthesis, are not produced as a result of one of 
many possible enzyme deﬁ ciencies. Instead, all 
the substrate synthesized is turned into an inter-
mediate hormone, such as an androgen.  
 Cushing ’ s  s yndrome 
 Cushing ’ s syndrome 2  is produced by increased cir-
culating corticosteroids. Excepting therapeutic 
exogenous steroid administration, the majority of 
cases result from a pituitary adenoma producing 
ACTH, resulting in hyperplasia of the suprarenal 
cortex (the disease that Cushing ﬁ rst described); 
about 10% are due to benign or malignant adreno-
cortical tumours or, rarely, ectopic ACTH produc-
tion by a distant tumour, e.g. carcinoma of the 
bronchus. 
  1  Thomas Addison (1773 – 1860), Physician, Guy ’ s Hospital, London, 
UK. 
  2   Harvey Cushing (1869 – 1939), Professor of Surgery, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. He was one of the founders of 
neurosurgery. 

332 
The suprarenal glands
 Congenital  a drenogenital 
 s yndrome 
 Also known as congenital suprarenal hyperplasia, 
this is due to an inborn defect of normal steroid 
synthesis (especially hydrocortisone) by the 
suprarenal cortex. Excessive ACTH production by 
the pituitary then occurs with resulting hyperpla-
sia of the cortex and hypersecretion of cortical 
androgens. 
 Acquired  a drenogenital 
 s yndrome 
 In children it is always due to an adrenocortical 
tumour, which is usually malignant. In young 
adults, the condition may be caused either by a 
tumour or by cortical hyperplasia in cases of 
Cushing ’ s syndrome, in which androgen produc-
tion is excessive.  
 Clinical  f eatures 
 These are conveniently divided into three varieties 
depending on age of onset. 
 Infancy 
 In the congenital variety of the adrenogenital 
syndrome, the newborn female child has a large 
clitoris and is often mistaken for male (female 
pseudohermaphrodite). Growth is initially rapid, 
but the epiphyses fuse early so that the ﬁ nal result 
is a stunted child. There may be episodes of acute 
adrenocortical insufﬁ ciency, especially with stress 
or infection. 
 Childhood 
 Virilization occurs in the female child and preco-
cious sexual development, particularly of the 
penis, in the male child. This can be well summa-
rized as  ‘ little girls become little boys and little 
boys become little men ’ . 
 Adults 
 Amenorrhoea, hirsutism and breast atrophy in 
women, often associated with other features of 
Cushing ’ s syndrome. In men, feminization is seen, 
but this is extremely rare.   
 Differential  d iagnosis 
 The diagnosis is based on detecting the excessive 
amount of steroid precursors, such as 17 α -
 Primary 
 h yperaldosteronism 
(Conn ’ s  s yndrome) 
 Conn ’ s syndrome 3  is a rare syndrome produced by 
an aldosterone - secreting adenoma of the suprar-
enal cortex. Characteristically, there is a low serum 
potassium (which results in episodes of muscle 
weakness or paralysis), raised serum sodium and 
alkalosis together with hypertension. There may 
also be polyuria and polydipsia. 
 The condition is interesting because, although 
rare, 
it 
represents 
a 
curable 
cause 
of 
hypertension. 
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   Serum electrolytes : hypernatraemia and 
hypokalaemia.  
  •   Plasma aldosterone : the diagnosis is conﬁ rmed 
by demonstration of excess aldosterone in the 
plasma.  
  •   Abdominal CT  may demonstrate the tumour, 
which is often small.  
  •   Selective angiography and selective venous 
sampling from the suprarenal veins with 
aldosterone estimations may be needed to 
delineate the lesion. 
 Treatment 
 Laparoscopic adrenalectomy has become the 
standard procedure for unilateral lesions; it 
has the advantage of lower morbidity and a 
shorter hospital stay than the traditional open 
procedure. 
 The  a drenogenital 
 s yndromes 
 These rare syndromes result from the hyper-
secretion of adrenocortical androgens, due 
either to a defect in the enzyme pathway of 
steroid production, commonly 21 - hydroxylase 
deﬁ ciency (the congenital form), or to an auto-
nomous tumour producing androgens (the 
acquired form). 
  3  Jerome Conn (1907 – 1994), Physician, University of Michigan, 
Ann Arbor, MI, USA.  

The suprarenal glands 333
 Secondary 
 A common site, especially from breast and 
bronchus. 
 Neuroblastoma 
 A highly malignant tumour of sympathetic cells 
occurring in children under the age of 5 years, and 
the most common malignant tumour in neonates 
and infants under 1 year old. It may be bilateral, 
and up to 80% are associated with chromosomal 
abnormalities. 
 Macroscopically, it varies from a small nodular 
tumour to a large retroperitoneal mass, contain-
ing 
areas 
of 
haemorrhage 
and 
necrosis. 
Microscopically, it arises from neuroblasts of the 
suprarenal medulla, or within any cells of neur-
oectodermal origin along the spine. 
 Capsular invasion occurs early with spread to 
adjacent tissues, the regional nodes and by the 
blood to bones and the liver. 
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   CT, MR, ultrasound and bone scan are all used 
to stage the disease.  
  •   Neurone - speciﬁ c enolase  is a sensitive marker 
of disseminated disease, and can be used as a 
tumour marker following treatment. 
 Treatment 
 A combined approach with surgical removal of 
local disease together with chemotherapy and/or 
radiotherapy is necessary. 
 Prognosis 
 Early disease, localized to the area of origin and in 
the absence of distant or lymph node spread, 
carries a favourable prognosis, as do absence of 
chromosome abnormalities, and age under 1 year 
together with histologically well - differentiated 
tumour. 
 Phaeochromocytoma 
 A physiologically active tumour of chromafﬁ n 
cells, which secretes adrenaline and noradrena-
line in varying proportions. Ten per cent are 
malignant and 10% are multiple; 10% occur 
outside the suprarenal gland in the sympathetic 
 hydroxyprogesterone, which is raised in the 
most common congenital form, 21 - hydroxylase 
deﬁ ciency. 
 Differentiation must be made from the mascu-
linizing tumour of ovary, in which the 17 - ketosteroid 
urinary excretion is normal, and also the common 
condition of simple hirsutism in women.  
 Treatment 
 Bilateral cortical hyperplasia in infancy is treated 
by suppressing the excess ACTH secretion with 
exogenous steroids (e.g. hydrocortisone); on this 
regimen the virilizing features clear, and growth 
progresses normally. In the acquired variety, when 
a tumour is present it can be removed by laparo-
scopic adrenalectomy, and hyperplasia can be 
treated by bilateral adrenalectomy with hydrocor-
tisone maintenance treatment. 
 Non - f unctioning  t umours 
of the  s uprarenal  c ortex 
 Small non - secreting adenomas of the suprarenal 
cortex are common postmortem ﬁ ndings which 
are of no signiﬁ cance, and which are increasingly 
detected by modern cross - sectional imaging tech-
niques such as CT and MR. Lesions less than 3  cm 
in diameter which are proven to be non - secreting 
and which do not change on repeated imaging 
over a 6 month interval can be safely left  in situ . 
Non - functioning carcinomas of the suprarenal 
cortex are rare; they resemble renal carcinoma in 
appearance (hence the original hypothesis that 
the hypernephroma was of suprarenal origin). 
They are highly malignant and frequently invade 
the subjacent kidney.  
 Adrenomedullary 
 t umours 
 Classiﬁ cation 
 Primary 
  •   Neuroblastoma. 
  •   Phaeochromocytoma. 
  •   Ganglioneuroma. 

334 
The suprarenal glands
noradrenaline, which is taken up by 
chromafﬁ n cells of the suprarenal medulla and 
concentrated in adrenergic granules; it is also 
taken up by phaeochromocytomas and is 
useful both in localizing occult primaries and 
in detecting secondary spread.  
  •   Selective venous sampling: blood from the 
suprarenal veins is taken at angiography and 
catecholamine concentrations measured; a 
raised value in the blood obtained from the 
inferior vena cava at this level is useful 
conﬁ rmatory evidence of the presence of a 
tumour in the absence of abnormality on 
scanning. 
 Treatment 
 Surgical excision is performed. This is usually per-
formed laparoscopically but larger tumours may 
require an open operation. Prior to surgery, the 
patient receives both alpha (e.g. phenoxyben-
zamine) and beta (e.g. propranolol) adrenergic 
blockade to negate the hypertensive effects of cat-
echolamines which are released as a consequence 
of manipulation of the tumour during the 
operation. 
 The catecholamines produced by phaeochro-
mocytomas 
cause 
marked 
vasoconstriction; 
hence, patients with phaeochromocytomas are 
relatively volume depleted. Immediately after 
removal of the tumour, the blood pressure may fall 
to very low levels; this is countered by volume 
replacement, although a noradrenaline infusion is 
sometimes required. 
 Ganglioneuroma 
 A benign, slow - growing tumour of sympathetic 
ganglion cells, which only becomes clinically 
manifest if it reaches a large size. Only about 15% 
arise in the suprarenal; the rest arise elsewhere 
along the sympathetic chain.  
 
 
chain or the organ of Zuckerkandl 4  near the aortic 
bifurcation; 10% are familial (the  ‘ 10% tumour ’ ). 
 Any age may be affected, but the tumour is par-
ticularly found in young adults. The sexes are 
equally affected. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 These are produced by excess circulating adrena-
line and noradrenaline. 
 There is hypertension, which is paroxysmal or 
sustained, and which may be accompanied by 
palpitations, headache, blurred vision, ﬁ ts, papil-
loedema and episodes of pallor and sweating. 
There may be hyperglycaemia with glycosuria. 
Attacks may be infrequent, or occur several times 
a day. 
 The diagnostic triad, with high speciﬁ city and 
sensitivity is as follows: 
  •   headache , sudden in onset, and pounding;  
  •   tachycardia  and/or palpitations;  
  •   sweating. 
 Occasionally, the tumour may coexist with neu-
roﬁ bromas and caf é - au - lait spots, medullary car-
cinoma of the thyroid or a parathyroid adenoma 
as part of a multiple endocrine neoplasia syn-
drome (Chapter  38 , p. 324).  
 Special  i nvestigations 
 Identifying the  p resence of a 
 p haeochromocytoma 
  •   Urinary catecholamines , particularly 
vanillylmandelic acid collected over a 24 hour 
period, are usually raised, particularly during 
an acute hypertensive attack.  
  •   Fasting plasma catecholamine concentrations 
are raised. 
 Locating a  p haeochromocytoma 
  •   CT or MR may demonstrate the site and size of 
the tumour.  
  •   131 I - MIBG scan : meta - iodobenzylguanidine 
(MIBG) is a structural analogue of 
  4   Emil Zuckerkandl (1849 – 1910), Professor of Anatomy in Graz, 
and later Vienna, Austria.  

 41 
The  k idney and  u reter  
 
 Learning  o bjectives 
  ✓   To understand the congenital renal anomalies and polycystic 
kidney disease. The reader should know the causes of haematuria 
and the appropriate investigation and management.  
  ✓   To understand the causes, presentations and management of 
urinary tract infections. 
  ✓   The causes of renal failure, its investigation and treatment should 
also be understood. 
 The kidney originally develops in the pelvis of 
the embryo and then migrates cranially, acquiring 
a progressively more proximal arterial blood 
supply as it does so. This complex developmental 
process explains the high frequency with which 
congenital anomalies of the kidney, the ureter and 
the renal blood supply are found.   
 Common  r enal 
 a nomalies 
  •   Pelvic kidney : owing to failure of cranial 
migration of the developing kidney. Occurs in 
1 in 500 – 1000 subjects. 
  •   Horseshoe kidney : produced by fusion of the 
two metanephric masses across the midline 
(see below). Occurs 1 in every 400 subjects.  
  •   Duplex system : double ureters and/or kidneys 
owing to duplication of the metanephric 
bud.  
  •   Congenital absence  of one kidney (1 in every 
2500 subjects). Congenital absence of a kidney 
is extremely rare, but should be borne in mind 
whenever the possibility of nephrectomy 
arises, for instance after kidney trauma. 
  •   Polycystic kidneys : genetically determined 
tendency for abnormal cyst formation 
throughout both kidneys (see below). Occurs 
in 1 in 500 – 1000 subjects.  
 Congenital  a nomalies 
 Embryology (Figure  41.1 )  
 The embryology of the kidney involves three 
separate stages. Initially, a pronephros develops 
in the posterior wall of the coelomic cavity. This 
is replaced by the mesonephric system, which 
comprises a long ridge of mesoderm, the mesone-
phros, with its duct, the mesonephric (Wolfﬁ an 1 ) 
duct. The mesonephros itself then disappears 
except that, in men, some of its ducts become 
the efferent tubules of the testis. At the lower end 
of the mesonephric duct a diverticulum develops. 
This diverticulum becomes the ureteric bud, on 
top of which develops a cap of tissue, the metane-
phric mesenchyme. The metanephric mesen-
chyme gives rise to the glomeruli and the proximal 
part of the renal duct system. The ureteric bud 
forms the ureter, renal pelvis, calyces and distal 
ducts. The mesonephric duct atrophies in women, 
the remnant being called the epo ö phron, and in 
men it gives rise to the epididymis and the vas 
deferens. 
Lecture Notes: General Surgery, 12th edition. © Harold Ellis, 
Sir Roy Y. Calne and Christopher J. E. Watson. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
  1   Kaspar Friedrich Wolff (1733 – 1794), born in Berlin, Germany; 
Professor of Anatomy, St Petersburg, Russia.  

336 
The kidney and ureter
 Clinically, horseshoe kidneys may present as a 
ﬁ rm mass in the pelvis, or with recurrent urinary 
tract infection. An intravenous urogram (IVU) will 
show rotation of the two renal pelvises with the 
ureters arising anteriorly close to the midline. 
Usually, the renal pelvises are directed laterally. 
 The main surgical importance of horseshoe 
kidneys is as the differential diagnosis of a lump in 
the pelvis, since the consequences of removing 
such renal tissue as an undiagnosed  ‘ mass ’  are dis-
astrous. Also, pelviureteric obstruction is more 
common, occurring in 10% of cases.  
 Duplex  s ystem 
 Instead of a single metanephric mass draining via 
a single ureter into the bladder, part of the system 
may be duplicated. Most common is separation of 
the renal pelvis into a double pelvis draining the 
upper and lower pole separately. This may extend 
distally as a biﬁ d ureter, which unites to form a 
single ureter in its distal third, entering the bladder 
by a common ostium. Occasionally, a second 
diverticulum grows from the mesonephric duct, 
producing a double ureter. In this circumstance, 
the upper pole ureter always enters the bladder 
  •   Congenital hydronephrosis : produced by 
neuromuscular incoordination at the 
pelviureteric junction.  
  •   Aberrant renal arteries : one or more arteries 
supplying the upper or lower pole of the 
kidneys are very common; they represent the 
persistence of aortic branches that pass to the 
kidney in its lower embryonic position.    
 Polycystic disease, the various types of redupli-
cation of the renal pelvis and the abnormal fusions 
are all associated with an increased incidence of 
infection when compared with kidneys that are 
anatomically normal.  
 Horseshoe  k idney 
 During the kidneys ’  ascent from their pelvic posi-
tion as the metanephros in the embryo, they may 
fuse. The commonest example is fusion of the 
lower poles across the midline, forming one large 
horseshoe - shaped kidney. The linked lower ends 
of the kidneys usually lie in front of the aorta in 
the region of the fourth or ﬁ fth lumbar vertebra 
and the ureters descend from the front of the 
fused kidneys. 
 Figure 41.1   Development of the pro - , 
meso -  and metanephric systems 
(after Langman).  
Vitelline
duct
Allantois
Cloacal
membrane
Pronephros
Mesonephros
Mesonephric
duct
Metanephric 
mesenchyme
Ureteric bud

The kidney and ureter 337
  •   loin pain , usually aching; 
  •   urinary tract infection ; 
  •   renal failure : presenting with headache, 
lassitude, vomiting and a refractory anaemia;  
  •   hypertension ; 
  •   intracranial haemorrhage , as a result of 
hypertension or  ‘ berry ’ aneurysm. 
 On examination, the enlarged lobulated kidneys 
are usually readily palpable. There may be the 
clinical features of chronic uraemia, and the blood 
pressure is often raised. 
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   Ultrasonography  is very accurate in detecting 
the multiple cysts in adults, but is less so in 
children because of the smaller size of the 
cysts. 
  •   Urea and creatinine rise as renal function 
deteriorates. 
  •   IVU demonstrates the typical elongated 
spidery calyces stretched out and indented by 
the cysts. 
 Treatment 
 Left untreated, many patients may survive in rea-
sonable health well past middle age. Medical 
treatment is required in the management of 
the complicating hypertension and renal failure 
(dialysis and transplantation). Nephrectomy is 
performed for recurrent pain, infection and hae-
maturia or, with very large kidneys, to provide 
enough room in the iliac fossae to accommodate 
a renal transplant; bilateral nephrectomy may be 
required to treat uncontrollable hypertension. 
 Renal  c ysts 
 Simple unilocular cysts of the kidney are quite 
common, the incidence increasing with age such 
that 50% of 50 year olds will be affected. A simple 
cyst may be small or may reach a very large size. 
Several cysts may be present and both kidneys 
may be affected. The cause is unknown, but may 
relate to two spontaneous somatic mutations in a 
tubular cell. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 The cyst may be symptomless and may be found 
as a mass on routine clinical examination. If 
below and medial to the lower pole ureter, which 
enters the bladder in the normal position. Rarely, 
the upper pole ureter drains in an ectopic position 
directly into the urethra below the external sphinc-
ter in men, or into the vagina or perineum in 
women. 
 Duplex anomalies are usually asymptomatic, 
but may present as a cause of hydronephrosis 
(p. 340) or urinary tract infection. Ectopic ureters 
often present with infection owing to reﬂ ux up the 
abnormal ureteric oriﬁ ce resulting in reﬂ ux neph-
ropathy (chronic pyelonephritis) of the upper 
pole. Ectopic ureters opening into the urethra or 
onto the vagina or perineum are a cause of drib-
bling incontinence.  
 Polycystic  d isease 
 Pathology 
 The condition is characterized by multiple cysts 
throughout the renal substance, nearly always in 
both kidneys. These cysts are surrounded by 
attenuated renal tissue. The condition is inherited 
as an autosomal dominant form presenting 
in middle age; a more uncommon autosomal 
recessive form also exists, presenting in childhood 
with renal failure. Genetically, the dominant form 
may result from a number of different gene muta-
tions, the most common being in the  PKD1 and 
 PKD2  genes; it is thought that a second, spontane-
ous somatic mutation is required for a cyst to 
form, accounting for the appearance of cysts in 
adulthood. 
 There may be associated multiple cysts in other 
viscera, particularly the liver (30%), lungs, spleen 
or pancreas (10%). In addition, there is a strong 
association with intracranial berry aneurysms 
and a history of subarachnoid haemorrhage. 
Diverticulosis coli is also more common in patients 
with polycystic kidneys.  
 Presentation of  a dult  p olycystic 
 k idney  d isease 
 Polycystic kidney disease usually presents between 
30 and 60 years of age with one of the following: 
  •   abdominal mass : symptomless, bilateral, 
lobulated renal swellings found on routine 
examination;  
  •   haematuria ; 

338 
The kidney and ureter
 Local 
  •   Kidney : trauma, polycystic disease, 
glomerulonephritis, tuberculosis, infarction 
(from emboli in mitral stenosis or infective 
endocarditis), stone and tumour.  
  •   Ureter : stone and tumour. 
  •   Bladder : trauma, cystitis, stone, tumour and 
bilharzia. 
  •   Prostate : prominent vessels in benign prostatic 
enlargement.  
  •   Urethra : trauma, stone and tumour. 
 Management 
 Blood in the urine is an alarming symptom and 
usually brings the patient rapidly to the doctor. 
It should always be taken seriously and requires 
full history, examination and appropriate special 
investigations. 
 History 
 Haematuria accompanied by pain in one or the 
other loin suggests renal origin, and colicky pain 
indicates a stone in the renal pelvis or ureter, or 
partial ureteric obstruction by clot or necrotic 
papilla. Terminal bleeding with severe pain and 
frequency indicates bladder calculus. Prostatic 
bleeding is more likely to be initial or terminal and 
usually painless. Dribbling of blood from the 
urethra independent of micturition is typical of a 
urethral origin for the blood. Completely painless 
and otherwise symptomless, haematuria is sug-
gestive of a tumour in the urinary tract. 
 A history of recent sore throat, especially in a 
child, would make a diagnosis of acute nephritis 
a possibility. Always check whether the patient 
is on anticoagulant therapy or if there is a 
history of bleeding tendencies; haematuria while 
on anticoagulation is still more commonly due 
to a renal pathology, which the anticoagulation 
has made symptomatic  –  full investigation is 
warranted.  
 Examination 
 One or the other kidney may be palpable; a carci-
noma of the bladder may be felt on bimanual 
examination. An enlarged prostate, particularly if 
the patient is hypertensive, may suggest a pros-
tatic source of bleeding, although other causes 
must be excluded before this diagnosis is ﬁ nally 
made. 
very large, it may present as an aching pain in 
the loin. Haematuria is absent, and this is an 
important point in differentiation from a renal 
carcinoma.  
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   Urine is clear, even on microscopic 
examination.  
  •   Ultrasonography conﬁ rms a cystic mass.  
  •   IVU demonstrates a round ﬁ lling defect, which 
displaces but does not invade the calyces.  
  •   Computed tomography (CT)  shows one (or 
more) ﬂ uid - ﬁ lled cysts, which do not enhance 
with intravenous contrast. 
 Ultrasound and CT are used to differentiate a 
simple cyst (thin wall, sharp and distinct border, 
homogeneous contents, non - enhancing) from a 
complex cyst that may be a renal cancer.  
 Treatment 
 No treatment is required for a simple cyst. 
Aspiration is performed if infection or malignancy 
is suspected. If cytology is unhelpful, then moni-
toring by serial CT or biopsy of the wall are per-
formed to exclude malignancy.   
 Haematuria 
 Classiﬁ cation 
 Two useful rules are as follows: 
 1  when considering the causes of bleeding from 
any oriﬁ ce in the body, always remember the 
general causes due to bleeding diatheses;  
 2  when considering any local cause of 
symptoms in the genitourinary tract, always 
think of the whole tract from the kidneys to 
the urethra. 
 Haematuria is an excellent example of these two 
general rules and the causes can be classiﬁ ed as 
follows (Figure  41.2 ). 
 General 
  •   Bleeding diatheses , e.g. anticoagulant drugs, 
thrombocytopenic purpura. However, most 
patients with haematuria and a bleeding 
diathesis have underlying renal tract pathology.     

The kidney and ureter 339
  •   Ultrasonography has replaced IVU as 
the investigation of choice, as it is able 
to detect parenchymal tumours, renal 
calculi and lesions in the collecting system 
and bladder. In cases of persistent 
haematuria, when ultrasonography is 
normal, further imaging by IVU or CT may be 
required. 
  •   Cystoscopy will show any intravesical lesion 
in addition to bleeding from the prostate 
or blood emerging from one or the other 
ureter. Cystoscopy is best performed 
immediately after presentation with 
haematuria. 
 These are the minimum investigations required 
for anyone with haematuria. Other investigations 
such as CT and selective renal angiography may 
be required in some cases. 
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   Urine microscopy . The presence of red cells will 
exclude haemoglobinuria and beeturia 
(following ingestion of beetroot). The presence 
of casts will indicate nephritis; pus cells and 
organisms suggest infection.  
  •   Urine cytology  is performed looking for 
evidence of malignancy; all but low - grade 
tumours should be detected.  
  •   IVU may reveal a localized renal lesion or may 
show a ﬁ lling defect in the ureter or bladder. 
Stones in the urinary tract will be displayed on 
this investigation; look for them carefully on 
the preliminary plain ﬁ lms, as they are 
obscured by contrast in the urogram. Upper 
tract (ureter and renal pelvis) urothelial 
tumours are usually demonstrated as ﬁ lling 
defects in the contrast.  
 Figure 41.2   Some important causes 
of bleeding in the urinary tract.  
Stone
Ulcerating TB
Tear
Parenchymal
disease,
e.g. nephritis
Stone
Tear
Tumour
Distended
veins over
large
prostate
Cystitis
Tear
Tumour
Stone

340 
The kidney and ureter
 Penetrating injuries usually require surgical 
exploration after imaging. Blunt injuries can nor-
mally be managed conservatively, with bed rest, 
serial observations of the urine to determine 
whether or not the haematuria is clearing and 
careful clinical charting of blood pressure and 
pulse rate. 
 Nephrectomy is required in renal trauma in the 
following circumstances: 
  •   continued bleeding , which threatens life; 
  •   severe hypertension persisting after renal 
injury; 
  •   lack of function in the affected kidney after 
several months, but only if symptomatic 
(e.g. recurrent infections, stone 
formation). 
 Hydronephrosis 
 Pathology 
 Hydronephrosis is a dilatation of the renal pelvis 
and calyces. The causes may be classiﬁ ed accord-
ing to whether or not the hydronephrosis was 
consequent on obstruction of the renal tract, as 
follows. 
 1  Hydronephrosis secondary to obstruction : 
 a  within the lumen, e.g. ureteric calculus; 
 b  in the wall, e.g. transitional cell tumour, 
pelviureteric obstruction owing to 
neuromuscular incoordination;  
 c  outside the wall, e.g. retroperitoneal ﬁ brosis, 
extrinsic tumour such as cervical cancer.    
 2  Hydronephrosis without obstruction : 
vesicoureteric reﬂ ux. 
 Obstruction may be unilateral (e.g. calculus 
stuck in one ureter) or bilateral (e.g. prostatic 
hypertrophy, urethral stricture, posterior urethral 
valve in newborn) with resultant bilateral 
hydronephrosis. It is important not to use 
the 
terms 
hydronephrosis 
and 
obstruction 
interchangeably. 
 Aberrant renal vessels were considered to be a 
common cause of hydronephrosis, because they 
frequently cross the dilated renal pelvis at its junc-
tion with the ureter. It is probably unusual for 
these aberrant vessels actually to initiate the 
hydronephrosis; more likely, they snare the con-
genitally dilated pelvis and merely act as a second-
ary constrictive factor.  
 Injury to the  k idney 
 The kidney may be injured by a direct blow in the 
loin or occasionally by a penetrating wound. The 
degree of damage varies from slight subcapsular 
bruising to complete rupture and fragmentation 
of the kidney or its avulsion from its vascular 
pedicle. Each kidney is contained within its own 
compartment of extraperitoneal fascia  –  the renal 
fascia. A closed rupture of the kidney is usually 
 ‘ tamponaded ’ within this compartment; hence, 
most ruptures can be treated conservatively. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Clinically, there is usually local pain and tender-
ness and haematuria is a common ﬁ nding. 
Retroperitoneal haematoma may cause abdomi-
nal distension due to ileus. There may be associ-
ated injury to other viscera, especially the spleen.  
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   Urine : macroscopic haematuria is usual.  
  •   IVU : damage to the kidney may be shown by 
extravasation of contrast medium outside the 
renal outline or distortion or rupture of the 
renal calyces. Vascular pedicle disruption may 
manifest as delayed or non - enhancement of 
the renal parenchyma. IVU will also determine 
the presence of a normal kidney on the other 
side. 
  •   Ultrasound examination  may delineate a renal 
tear as well as indicating injury to other solid 
viscera, the liver and spleen. Views of other 
organs may be obscured if there is 
considerable intra - abdominal gas. 
  •   CT : particularly useful in deﬁ ning solid visceral 
injuries and is not affected by distended loops 
of bowel. 
 Imaging in renal trauma is indicated in anyone 
with penetrating trauma to the ﬂ ank, back or 
abdomen, and in blunt trauma in patients with 
macroscopic haematuria, or microscopic haema-
turia and shock. The rapid data acquisition time 
and clarity of view of modern scanners make 
contrast - enhanced CT the investigation of choice.  
 Treatment 
 Associated injuries and shock will require appro-
priate treatment. 

The kidney and ureter 341
 Treatment 
 Obstruction of a kidney may warrant percutane-
ous drainage or retrograde passage of a double 
pigtail ureteric stent. Obstruction with infection 
and obstruction in a solitary kidney are indica-
tions for emergency drainage. 
 Subsequent treatment is directed at removal of 
any underlying cause of the hydronephrosis. 
When the cause is a neuromuscular incoordina-
tion, an operation to widen the pelviureteric junc-
tion (pyeloplasty) may save the kidney from 
progressive damage. 
 A poorly functioning (particularly an infected) 
kidney is an indication for nephrectomy, provided 
that the other kidney has reasonable function.   
 Urinary  t ract  c alculi 
 Aetiology 
 Knowledge of stone formation within the urinary 
tract is still inadequate and many stones form 
without 
apparent 
explanation. 
Predisposing 
factors may be classiﬁ ed into four main groups: 
 1  inadequate drainage; 
 2  excess of normal constituents in the urine; 
 3  lack of inhibitors of stone formation 
 4  presence of abnormal constituents in the 
urine. 
 Inadequate  d rainage 
 Calculi may form whenever urine stagnates, e.g. 
within a hydronephrosis or in a diverticulum of 
the bladder.  
 Excess of  n ormal  c onstituents 
 Increased concentration of solutes in the urine, 
because of either a low urine volume or increased 
excretion, may result in precipitation from a 
supersaturated solution. 
  •   Inadequate urine volume : renal stones are 
particularly common in people from temperate 
climates who go to live in the tropics, where 
dehydration produces extremely concentrated 
urine. 
  •   Increased excretion of calcium (hypercalciuria) 
may be secondary to hypercalcaemia or, more 
commonly, idiopathic. Common causes of an 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 An uncomplicated hydronephrosis on one side 
may be symptomless or may produce a dull, 
aching pain in the loin often mistaken for 
 ‘ lumbago ’ or  ‘ rheumatism ’ . Occasionally, there 
may be acute attacks of pain resembling ureteric 
colic, particularly after drinking large volumes of 
ﬂ uid (most notably beer). 
 Associated infection may present with fever, 
pyuria, rigors and severe loin pain. Bilateral 
hydronephrosis may present with the clinical fea-
tures of uraemia. Very often, it is the underlying 
cause, e.g. the ureteric calculus, the enlarged pros-
tate or the urethral stricture, that manifests itself 
clinically. 
 On examination, the enlarged kidney may be 
palpable. The size of this may vary according to 
the state of distension of the renal pelvis.  
 Complications 
  •   Infection : resulting in pyonephrosis (p. 346). 
  •   Stone formation : calculi readily deposit in the 
infected stagnant urine.  
  •   Hypertension : secondary to renal ischaemia. 
  •   Renal failure : where there is extensive bilateral 
destruction of renal tissue.  
  •   Traumatic rupture  of the hydronephrotic 
pelvis. 
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   Ultrasound  shows a dilated collecting system 
(calyces and pelvis).  
  •   CT may be required to determine the cause. 
  •   IVU conﬁ rms the diagnosis, demonstrating an 
enlarged renal pelvis and swollen, dilated, 
club - like calyces. If renal function is severely 
impaired, the kidney may not secrete contrast.  
  •   Diuretic renography , in which a furosemide 
injection is given at the time of, or 15 minutes 
before, MAG3 injection, will differentiate 
between an obstructed and non - obstructed 
dilated system, and will also provide 
information concerning the relative function of 
each kidney, which is important if 
nephrectomy is being considered.  
  •   Retrograde pyelogram , via a catheter inserted 
into the ureter at cystoscopy, may be required 
to show the exact anatomy of the 
hydronephrosis and to demonstrate any 
obstructive cause in the ureter.     

342 
The kidney and ureter
 Composition of  u rinary  c alculi 
 The three common stones are oxalate, phosphate 
and urate. 
  •   Oxalate stones (calcium oxalate) are the 
most common (60%). They are hard with a 
sharp, spiky surface, which traumatizes 
the urinary tract epithelium; the resultant 
bleeding usually colours the stone a dark 
brown or black. 
  •   Phosphate stones (33%) are composed of a 
mixture of calcium, ammonium and 
magnesium phosphate ( ‘ triple phosphate 
stone ’ ). They are hard, white and chalky. They 
are nearly always found in an infected urine 
and produce the large  ‘ stag - horn ’ calculus 
deposited within a pyonephrosis.  
  •   Uric acid and urate stones (5%) are moderately 
hard and brown in colour with a smooth 
surface. Pure uric acid stones are 
radiotranslucent but, fortunately for diagnosis, 
most contain enough calcium to render them 
opaque to X - rays. 
  •   Cystine stones account for about 1% of urinary 
calculi.    
 Note that a stone found in the lower urinary 
tract may have arisen there primarily or it may 
have migrated there from a primary source within 
the kidney.  
 Clinical  f eatures (Figure  41.3 ) 
 Pain is the presenting feature of the great majority 
of kidney stones, but if the calculus is embedded 
within the solid substance of the kidney it may be 
entirely symptom free. Within the minor or major 
calyx system, the stone produces a dull loin pain. 
Impaction of the stone at the pelviureteric junc-
tion, or migration down the ureter itself, produces 
the dreadful agony of ureteric colic; the pain radi-
ates from loin to groin, is of great severity and is 
accompanied by typical restlessness of the patient, 
who is quite unable to lie still in bed. Unlike the 
usual textbook description, the pain is not usually 
intermittent, but is continuous, although quite 
often with sharp exacerbations on a background 
of continued pain. There is often accompanying 
vomiting and sweating.   
 Haematuria, which may be microscopic or mac-
roscopic, is frequently present so that detection of 
blood in the urine is an extremely helpful means 
of conﬁ rming the clinical diagnosis. 
increase in serum calcium are 
hyperparathyroidism (Chapter  38 , p. 324) and 
prolonged immobilization (e.g. an orthopaedic 
patient on traction or a paraplegic person 
conﬁ ned to bed).  
  •   Increased serum uric acid  may be accompanied 
by uric acid stone formation. The most 
common cause is gout, but it may also occur 
following chemotherapy for leukaemia, 
lymphoma or polycythaemia.  
  •   Increased oxalate excretion  results from 
increased dietary intake, with strawberries, 
rhubarb, leafy vegetables and tea being among 
the culprits. Hyperoxaluria is also a 
complication of loss of the terminal ileum (e.g. 
in Crohn ’ s disease or after surgical resection), 
which results in increased oxalate absorption 
by the colon. 
 Lack of  i nhibitors of  s tone 
 f ormation 
  •   Low levels of citrate and magnesium in the 
urine make calcium complexes less soluble, 
which promotes calcium oxalate and 
phosphate stone formation. 
 Presence of  a bnormal  c onstituents 
  •   Urinary infection , particularly in the presence 
of obstruction, e.g. hydronephrosis or chronic 
retention, produces epithelial sloughs upon 
which calculi may deposit. In addition, 
infection may alter the urine pH, favouring 
precipitation of certain solutes. A high pH, 
brought about by the presence of urea - 
splitting organisms such as  Proteus , favours 
calcium phosphate stone formation, for 
example. 
  •   Foreign bodies , such as non - absorbable sutures 
inserted at operation, ureteric stents, sloughed 
necrotic renal papilla or a fragment of broken 
urinary catheter, may act as a nidus for stone 
formation.  
  •   Vitamin A deﬁ ciency , which may occur in 
primitive communities, results in 
hyperkeratosis of the urinary epithelium, 
which again provides the debris upon which 
stones may form.  
  •   Cystinuria , caused by a mutation in one of two 
different genes responsible for amino acid 
transfer in the kidney, may result in cystine 
stone formation. 

The kidney and ureter 343
gram. Never state that a kidney is free from 
stones without ﬁ rst carefully inspecting a plain 
X - ray of the renal area. 
  •   CT is replacing IVU as the investigation of 
choice to conﬁ rm the diagnosis of renal colic 
since it is rapid, is more sensitive at detecting a 
stone than IVU, and can diagnose alternative 
pathologies if present (e.g. torted ovarian cyst, 
ruptured aortic aneurysm). 
  •   MAG3 renography ( m ercapto - a cetyl tri g lycine) 
may also be used to determine the presence of 
obstruction and impairment of function. 
 Investigation of the  u nderlying 
 c ause 
  •   Urine microscopy and culture : the urine is 
cultured for bacteria and examined 
microscopically for the presence of cystine 
crystals. 
 Special  i nvestigations 
 These are usefully divided into investigations to 
conﬁ rm the diagnosis, and others to elucidate the 
aetiology of the stone. 
 Diagnostic  i nvestigations 
  •   Urine is tested for the presence of blood.  
  •   Plain abdominal X - ray speciﬁ cally looking at 
kidneys, ureters and bladder (a  ‘ KUB ’ ) will 
show the presence of stone in 90% of cases. 
  •   IVU will demonstrate the exact anatomy of the 
renal system, e.g. the presence of associated 
hydronephrosis, although a completely 
obstructed kidney may show no function 
whatsoever. 
 There is an important catch for the unwary; a 
small stone within the kidney may be com-
pletely obscured by the contrast of the pyelo-
 Figure 41.3   Diagram of the effects of 
urinary calculi.  
Stone distending
hydronephrotic kidney
Pain and 
 destruction of 
    renal tissue
Stone here
may be
symptomless
or cause
pain and
haematuria
Ureteric
colic
Pain,
haematuria
Retention
of urine

344 
The kidney and ureter
 Renal  c alculi 
 A small calculus lodged in the solid substance of 
the kidney without symptoms can be left alone 
but kept under periodic survey. Larger renal stones 
require removal. Initially, ESWL is employed to 
shatter the stone without any open surgery. 
Ultrasonic shock waves are focused onto the cal-
culus and cause it to shatter. The small fragments 
are passed spontaneously, often resulting in acute 
colic. 
 Stones that do not respond to ESWL may be 
removed percutaneously using a nephroscope 
(percutaneous nephrolithotomy). 
 Small symptomatic lower pole stones, which 
tend to be difﬁ cult to target with ESWL, may be 
treated 
by 
ﬂ exible 
nephroscopy 
and 
laser 
ablation. 
 Rarely is it necessary to perform open surgery 
simply to remove the stone, either through the 
kidney substance ( nephrolithotomy ) or, wherever 
possible, through its pelvis ( pyelolithotomy ). When 
the kidney is grossly and irreparably damaged, 
nephrectomy should be performed.  
 Acute  c alculous  a nuria 
 This may be due to blockage of both ureters by 
stones, or obstruction of a solitary kidney. It is best 
treated by percutaneous nephrostomy, although 
retrograde ureteric stenting is an alternative. If the 
patient is uraemic, haemo -  or peritoneal dialysis 
may also be required. The stone is then removed 
as indicated above. 
 Treatment of the  c ause 
 In every case of renal stone, an attempt is made to 
determine the underlying cause and eliminate it. 
Thus, renal infection is dealt with and surgical cor-
rection of any obstructive lesion performed. A 
small percentage of recurrent and bilateral stones 
are found to be due to parathyroid tumour 
(Chapter  38 , p. 324), removal of which will prevent 
further recurrences. In every case of renal calculus 
disease, the patient should be instructed to drink 
liberal quantities of ﬂ uid in order to encourage the 
production of a dilute urine. 
 Urinary  t ract  i nfections 
 The urinary tract may be divided into the upper 
tract, comprising ureter and kidney, and the 
  •   Analysis of the stone , whether passed 
spontaneously or removed surgically, should 
be performed.  
  •   Uric acid estimation. The serum uric acid is 
raised in gout with its associated uric acid 
stones. 
  •   Serum calcium  estimation is carried out. 
Hypercalcaemia (a value above 2.75   mmol/L) is 
suspicious of the presence of a parathyroid 
tumour, although the incidence of stones due 
to this cause is low. 
 Complications 
  •   Hydronephrosis : see p. 340.  
  •   Infection : pyelonephritis, pyonephrosis.  
  •   Anuria due to either impaction of calculi in the 
ureter on each side, or blockage of the ureter 
in a remaining solitary kidney. 
 Treatment 
 Acute  u reteric  c olic 
 Analgesia, either repeated injections of pethidine 
or rectal diclofenac, is given to relieve the 
severe pain. The great majority of small stones 
within the ureter (up to 5   mm) pass spontane-
ously. These ureteric stones tend to lodge at one of 
three places: 
 1  the pelviureteric junction; 
 2  the point at which the ureter crosses the pelvic 
brim; 
 3  the entrance of the ureter into the bladder.    
 The lower the stone, the more likely it is to pass 
spontaneously. 
 Ureteric  c alculi 
 If the stone remains in the ureter following an 
episode of acute colic and cannot or will not 
pass spontaneously, intervention is necessary. 
Extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy (ESWL) is 
the ﬁ rst - line treatment. Other options include 
ureteroscopy 
with 
stone 
disintegration 
by 
holmium laser, electrohydraulic lithotripter, or 
extraction with the aid of a Dormia basket. 2 If 
non - invasive methods fail, the stone may have to 
be removed by open or laparoscopic operation 
( ureterolithotomy ). 
  2   Enrico Dormia (1928 - 2009), Professor of Urology, Milan, Italy 

The kidney and ureter 345
symptomatic. This latter approach is less likely to 
result in antibiotic resistance. Any underlying 
cause, e.g. calculus or prostatic obstruction, must 
be dealt with.   
 Reﬂ ux  n ephropathy 
 Reﬂ ux nephropathy, formerly termed chronic 
pyelonephritis, is the consequence of recurrent 
infections, resulting in shrunken, scarred kidneys. 
It is more common in childhood, as the growing 
kidney seems most susceptible, and reﬂ ux neph-
ropathy accounts for almost 20% of chronic renal 
failure in adults. In childhood, it is due to a com-
bination of two factors: vesicoureteric reﬂ ux and 
intrarenal reﬂ ux. 
 Vesicoureteric  r eﬂ ux 
 When the normal valve mechanism at the vesi-
coureteric junction is deﬁ cient, such as with an 
ectopic ureter in a duplex system, urine can pass 
back up the ureter during bladder contraction.  
 Intrarenal  r eﬂ ux 
 The collecting duct enters the calyx of the kidney, 
leaving the renal papilla. The ducts normally open 
obliquely, such that, as the pressure within the 
calyx increases, the ducts close, preventing urine 
from reﬂ uxing into the kidney (intrarenal reﬂ ux). 
If the ducts do not open obliquely, as is seen in 
compound papillae, intrarenal reﬂ ux may occur. If 
the urine is infected, the resultant inﬂ ammation 
leaves a permanent scar and loss of nephrons. 
Repeated episodes of infection result in major 
damage and loss of function.  
 Clinical  f eatures 
 While the typical features of urinary infection, 
namely dysuria, frequency and pyrexia, may be 
present, subclinical infection, often only signiﬁ ed 
by urinary incontinence at night, is common, par-
ticularly in children.  
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   Micturating cystogram : contrast is ﬁ rst 
introduced into the bladder, the patient voids, 
and reﬂ ux of urine during voiding can be 
recorded. 
lower tract, comprising bladder and urethra. 
Lower tract infections arise from ascending infec-
tion up the urethra. Upper tract infection may be 
due to either haematogenous infection of the 
kidney or an ascending infection from the lower 
urinary tract. 
 Cystitis 
 Cystitis is usually an ascending infection which, 
because of the short urethra, is more common in 
women, often following copulation. In men, it is 
commonly the consequence of urethral or pros-
tatic obstruction. Urethral catheterization invari-
ably results in bacterial colonization of the bladder. 
 The principal symptoms are of a stinging/
burning pain on passing urine (dysuria), with 
increased frequency and urgency. Haematuria 
may be present, and examination conﬁ rms a low -
 grade pyrexia and suprapubic tenderness. Loin 
pain suggests ascending infection.  
 Special  i nvestigations 
 In women, recurrent infections are an indication 
for full investigation. In men and children, a single 
episode is unusual and merits investigation. 
  •   Urine microscopy and culture  to identify the 
causative organism (invariably bowel ﬂ ora, 
usually  Escherichia coli ). The presence of pus 
cells with no growth is a feature of bladder 
cancer. 
  •   Ultrasound scan  of the bladder and kidneys 
may reveal dilatation of the upper tracts. A 
postmicturition ultrasound scan may 
demonstrate a large residual volume of urine 
within the bladder, suggesting obstruction or 
atony. 
  •   Plain abdominal X - ray  to exclude a bladder 
stone as a source of recurrent infection.  
  •   Cystoscopy : bladder diverticula and other 
structural defects should be sought. 
 Treatment 
 Antibiotics are given according to sensitivity of the 
infecting organism. A high oral ﬂ uid intake is 
encouraged. Alkalinizing the urine with potassium 
citrate, and drinking cranberry juice, is helpful. 
Recurrent postcoital cystitis is an indication for 
prophylactic antibiotic therapy; an alternative is a 
self - start regimen of antibiotics in which the 
patient starts a course as soon as she becomes 

346 
The kidney and ureter
usually  Staphylococcus aureus , coming from a 
primary focus such as a cutaneous boil. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 There is pyrexia, toxaemia and pain and 
tenderness in the loin, and the kidney may be 
palpable. 
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   Urine is frequently sterile unless the abscess 
bursts into the calyceal system.  
  •   Full blood count : there is a leucocytosis. 
  •   CT or ultrasonography conﬁ rm the diagnosis. 
 Treatment 
 Percutaneous drainage together with antibiotics. 
 Perinephric  a bscess 
 Infection of the perinephric space is usually sec-
ondary to rupture of a carbuncle of the kidney. 
Rarely, it may complicate a pyonephrosis or infec-
tion of a traumatic perirenal haematoma. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 There is the constitutional evidence of acute infec-
tion and in addition a diffuse tender bulge in the 
affected loin. This is particularly well seen when 
the back is carefully inspected with the patient 
lying prone.  
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   Abdominal X - ray showing kidneys, ureters 
and bladder (a  ‘ KUB ’ ) may show loss of the 
psoas shadow owing to retroperitoneal 
oedema.  
  •   IVU may be normal or may show the features 
of a renal cortical abscess or a pyonephrosis.  
  •   CT will enable accurate localization of the 
abscess and its drainage. 
 Treatment 
 Surgical drainage is indicated only if CT - guided 
percutaneous drainage is unsuccessful.   
  •   Indirect micturating cystogram , an isotope 
(MAG3) study in which differential function of 
the kidneys can be assessed along with isotope 
reﬂ ux during micturition.  
  •   IVU may show scarring, with a thin cortex 
overlying a distorted calyx, particularly at the 
upper and lower pole. The normal cupping of 
the calyces is reversed, and is termed clubbing.  
  •   DMSA (dimercaptosuccinic acid) scan , which is 
used to demonstrate the degree of renal 
scarring as a result of reﬂ ux. 
 Treatment 
 The cause of the chronic pyelonephritis should be 
treated when identiﬁ ed. Long - term low - dose anti-
biotic prophylaxis is given to patients with asymp-
tomatic or frequent infections.   
 Pyonephrosis 
 This is an infected hydronephrosis in which the 
kidney becomes no more than a bag of pus. If the 
ureter is obstructed, there may be little to ﬁ nd on 
examining the urine, although, more commonly, 
pyuria is a marked feature. Usually, the enlarged 
tender kidney is easily palpable. 
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   Ultrasound  of the kidneys to conﬁ rm 
hydronephrosis. 
  •   IVU shows little or no function and an 
enlarged renal shadow.  
  •   DMSA scan  will quantify the residual function 
in the kidney after treatment.  
  •   MAG3 renography  will indicate function and 
conﬁ rmation of obstruction. 
 Treatment 
 There should be urgent drainage by percutaneous 
nephrostomy, which will often identify the cause 
of the obstruction. If there is no residual renal 
function, nephrectomy is required.   
 Carbuncle of the  k idney 
 This is better termed cortical abscess of the kidney 
and represents a haematogenous infection, 

The kidney and ureter 347
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   Urine is commonly sterile to ordinary culture 
but contains pus cells and is acid in reaction 
( ‘ sterile acid pyuria ’ ); protein and usually red 
cells are also found. Acid - fast bacilli may 
be present on Ziehl – Neelson 3 staining of a 
spun deposit from an early morning 
specimen of urine. Three early morning 
specimens of urine are sent for culture, which 
takes 6 weeks.  
  •   IVU may show failure of calyceal ﬁ lling, 
irregularity of calyces and patchy calciﬁ cation. 
  •   Chest X - ray may show a primary lung focus. 
  •   Cystoscopy  may reveal a decreased capacity of 
the bladder, an oedematous mucosa on which 
tubercles may be seen, and perhaps a  ‘ golf 
hole ’ ureteric oriﬁ ce, the ureter being held 
rigidly open by surrounding ﬁ brosis. 
 Treatment 
 Antituberculous therapy should not be com-
menced until the diagnosis has been conﬁ rmed 
as, once undertaken, treatment must be pro-
longed. Treatment usually involves isoniazid 
and rifampicin supplemented by pyrazinamide. 
Healing occurs with the production of ﬁ brous 
tissue, which in early cases merely produces a 
small scar. In an advanced stage of the disease, this 
ﬁ brous tissue may lead to stricture formation at 
the neck of a calyx or at the pelviureteric junction 
with a secondary hydronephrosis. Similar scarring 
of the heavily involved bladder may produce gross 
contraction on healing. 
 Surgery is indicated in only a minority of 
patients with advanced disease or when complica-
tions occur. 
 Renal  f ailure 
 Acute  r enal  f ailure 
 Acute renal failure is characterized by a reduced 
glomerular ﬁ ltration rate (GFR), retention of 
nitrogenous waste (urea and creatinine rise), 
 Renal  t uberculosis 
 Pathology 
 The kidney may be involved either as part of 
a generalized miliary spread of tuberculosis or 
more commonly as a focal lesion representing 
haematogenous spread from a distant site in 
the lungs (25% of patients have pulmonary 
tuberculosis), the bone or gut. The original focus 
may be quiescent at the time of active renal 
disease. 
 Early lesions are found near the junction of the 
cortex and medulla. These enlarge, caseate and 
then rupture into a calyx, eventually producing 
extensive destruction of renal substance. The 
ureter becomes inﬁ ltrated and thickened; its 
obstruction leads to tuberculous pyonephrosis. 
Rarely, a pyonephrosis becomes completely walled 
off as a symptomless, caseous and calciﬁ ed mass 
( ‘ autonephrectomy ’ ). 
 Spread of infected urine down the ureter fre-
quently produces a tuberculous cystitis and may 
result in infection of the epididymis and seminal 
vesicles. 
 Untreated, the contralateral kidney often 
becomes involved, but this probably represents a 
separate haematogenous spread.  
 Clinical  f eatures 
 The patient is usually a young adult, often with a 
present or previous history of tuberculosis else-
where. In the UK, the patient is likely to be an 
immigrant from a developing country. Symptoms 
in the early stages are mild and indeed may be 
entirely absent. There may be dysuria, frequency, 
pyuria or haematuria, which may be gross but is 
more usually slight or only microscopic. There 
may be loin pain on the affected side. 
 In more advanced cases, the dysuria and fre-
quency become intense because of extensive 
involvement of the bladder, and then constitu-
tional symptoms of tuberculosis, with fever, night 
sweats, loss of weight and anaemia, may be 
present. In some cases, a tuberculous epididymitis 
is the presenting feature (Chapter  46 , p. 379). 
 Examination is usually negative, but the kidney 
may be tender and palpable. The epididymis and 
seminal vesicles may be enlarged and thickened if 
involved. The epididymis often feels craggy owing 
to calciﬁ cation. 
  3   Franz Heinrich Paul Ziehl (1825 – 1898), Neurologist, L ü beck, 
Germany. Friedrich Karl Adolf Neelson (1854 – 1894), Professor of 
Pathology in Rostock, later Prosector in the State hospital, 
Dresden, Germany. 

348 
The kidney and ureter
 Renal  c auses 
 Renal causes of acute renal failure include factors 
directly acting upon the glomerular apparatus and 
tubules: 
  •   acute tubular necrosis (ATN); 
  •   acute cortical necrosis, due to severe 
ischaemia;  
  •   myoglobin secondary to rhabdomyolysis, e.g. 
following a crush injury, or reperfusion of an 
ischaemic limb;  
  •   drugs, e.g. antibiotics such as gentamicin, 
NSAIDs such as diclofenac;  
  •   acute nephritis  – interstitial nephritis or 
glomerulonephritis. 
 Postrenal ( o bstructive)  c auses 
 An obstruction lesion occurring at any level 
from the tubules to the urethra may cause renal 
impairment. Only in patients with a solitary 
kidney will an upper tract obstruction cause 
acute renal failure; otherwise, the obstruction is 
likely to be in the lower tracts and affect both 
kidneys. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 The majority of cases of acute renal failure are pre-
renal in aetiology, which means that the kidneys 
will recover as soon as the circulation is restored. 
The diagnosis is usually clear: the patient has 
failed to pass urine and bladder catheterization 
reveals no urine or a mere trickle. The most 
common  ‘ cause ’  of apparent oliguria while cath-
eterized is a blocked catheter, and this should 
always be excluded.  
 Special  i nvestigations 
 Initial investigation should be rapidly performed, 
since rapid treatment may prevent life - threatening 
sequelae, and the shorter the period of failure, the 
more quickly renal function will be restored. 
  •   Serum electrolytes : urea and creatinine are 
raised; potassium may be very high and 
demands immediate treatment (see below).  
  •   Renal tract Doppler ultrasound : are there two 
kidneys, and are they perfused? Are they of 
normal size, or is one small, suggesting 
prior renal disease? Is there evidence of 
hydronephrosis/hydroureter? Is the bladder 
full, or empty? If obstruction is documented, it 
impaired acid – base balance (acidosis develops) 
and, usually, a reduced urine output. 
 An absence of urine production is termed 
 anuria , whereas production of less than 400   mL/
day in the adult is  oliguria . 
 Aetiology 
 In the surgical context, acute renal failure may be 
a consequence of surgery or may be due to a surgi-
cally treatable lesion. 
 The causes of acute renal failure may be usefully 
divided into prerenal, renal and postrenal, in a 
similar way to the causes of jaundice relative to the 
liver. The presence of two kidneys means that the 
pathology must affect both kidneys in order to 
manifest, unless one kidney has previously failed 
or been removed. 
 Prerenal  c auses 
 Prerenal factors involve reduction in the blood 
ﬂ ow to the kidney, resulting in a decreased GFR. 
 1  Fluid loss : 
 a  blood loss, e.g. haemorrhage; 
 b  plasma loss, e.g. burns, generalized 
peritonitis;  
 c  electrolyte loss, e.g. vomiting, diarrhoea, 
ﬁ stula, inadequate replacement. 
 2  Impaired circulation : 
 a  general factors, e.g. hypotension due to 
sepsis, cardiac failure;  
 b  local factors, e.g. aortic dissection in which 
the renal arteries are excluded from the 
circulation. 
 Renal perfusion is maintained in the presence 
of mild hypoperfusion by a number of regulatory 
mechanisms: vasoconstriction of splanchnic, 
muscular and cutaneous vascular beds, and 
alteration of afferent and efferent renal arteriolar 
tone. The GFR is normally maintained even if 
the mean arterial pressure falls to 60 – 80   mmHg. 
In hypertensive patients, the elderly and patients 
with pre - existing renal disease (e.g. diabetic 
nephropathy), autoregulation may be impaired 
and 
the 
GFR 
maintained 
only 
at 
higher 
mean pressures. Some drugs, particularly non -
 steroidal anti - inﬂ ammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and 
angiotensin - converting enzyme inhibitors, also 
impair the normal compensatory mechanisms 
and 
make 
the 
kidney 
more 
sensitive 
to 
hypovolaemia. 

The kidney and ureter 349
 Once volume repletion is achieved, the infusion 
is stopped until the urine output picks up. Further 
infusion would result in ﬂ uid overload, and would 
require dialysis to remove the excess ﬂ uid in the 
absence of renal function.  
 Dopamine and  d iuretics 
 If rehydration is unsuccessful in inducing a diure-
sis, a bolus of furosemide (100 – 500   mg over 30   min) 
should be given; a low - dose dopamine infusion 
(1  μ g/kg/min) has been used in this setting but 
recent evidence questions its efﬁ cacy. 
 If these measures fail to induce a diuresis, it is 
likely that either ATN or, less commonly, acute 
cortical necrosis has occurred.  
 Hyperkalaemia 
 A potassium level of over 6.5  mmol/L should be 
treated immediately to avoid life - threatening ven-
tricular arrhythmias. The electrocardiogram (ECG) 
changes with increasing potassium: ﬁ rst, the T 
waves become peaked (tenting); next, the P waves 
disappear; and, ﬁ nally, the ECG becomes sinusoi-
dal. Resolution of these appearances can be moni-
tored with treatment. 
 Calcium gluconate (10   mL of 10% intravenously) 
should be given over a few minutes to stabilize the 
myocardium. Insulin and dextrose (15 units of 
soluble insulin in 50  mL of 50% dextrose) is given 
as an infusion over 10 – 20 minutes. This drives 
potassium into the cells, and lowers serum potas-
sium by 1 – 2   mmol/L. Because these measures do 
not remove potassium from the body, a more 
deﬁ nitive treatment is necessary before the potas-
sium rises once more. This is best achieved by 
establishing a diuresis, but, if this fails, urgent 
dialysis is indicated. Potassium exchange resins 
(e.g. calcium resonium), taken by mouth or given 
by enema, may give good interim potassium 
control. However, they tend to cause constipation, 
so a laxative (e.g. lactulose 10 – 20   mL twice a day) 
should also be prescribed. 
 Acute  t ubular  n ecrosis 
 Persistence of acute renal failure after correction 
of hypovolaemia is usually due to the develop-
ment of ATN. This is characterized by a prolonged 
period of oliguria lasting anywhere from a few 
days to 3 – 6 weeks. 
should be rapidly relieved and this may 
require bladder catheterization or even 
nephrostomy. 
  •   Urine microscopy and stick test  for blood and 
protein. Some blood may be present as a 
consequence of urethral catheterization. 
Rhabdomyolysis is suggested by a positive 
stick test for blood without red cells on 
microscopy. Acute nephritis should be 
considered when blood and protein are 
present. 
 Management 
 Replenish the  i ntravascular  v olume 
 Initial management requires a clinical assessment 
of the intravascular volume to determine the 
extent of volume depletion. The best signs are the 
following: 
  •   Jugular venous pressure  (JVP): is it visible and 
is it raised?  
  •   Postural hypotension : is there a fall in blood 
pressure when the patient stands up? (If the 
patient cannot stand, the blood pressure 
should be measured lying and sitting up in 
bed.) 
 Depletion of intravascular volume is suggested 
by a postural fall in blood pressure and a low (not 
visible) JVP. Treatment requires rapid infusion of 
a ﬂ uid that remains in the intravascular com-
partment (blood, colloid or saline, but not 
dextrose). Infusion is continued until the JVP is 
visible and postural hypotension corrected. 
Potassium additives should not be given until a 
diuresis is established since patients are likely to 
be hyperkalaemic. 
 A  central venous catheter  may be inserted at 
this stage to measure accurately the central 
venous pressure; the target pressure is 10   cmH 2 O 
measured relative to the mid - axilla. In septic 
patients or those with cardiac disease, a pulmo-
nary artery catheter (Swan – Ganz 4 ) may be 
helpful, both for measurement of the pulmonary 
capillary wedge pressure and to determine sys-
temic vascular resistance and so indicate the 
requirement for inotropes such as noradrenaline 
(norepinephrine). 
  4   Harold J. C. Swan (1922 – 2005) and William Ganz (1919 – 2009), 
Cardiologists, Cedars of Lebanon Hospital, Los Angeles, CA, USA; 
Ganz later became Professor of Medicine, UCLA, Los Angeles. 

350 
The kidney and ureter
 e  urothelial tumour affecting bladder base or 
both ureters. 
 Symptoms are of malaise, weakness, confusion, 
hiccoughs with pallor, hypertension and ﬂ uid 
overload (e.g. pulmonary oedema, ankle oedema) 
on examination. The investigations are those of 
acute renal failure, and are directed at ﬁ nding 
a treatable cause such as prostatic hypertrophy. 
In the absence of a treatable lesion, established 
renal failure is managed by renal replacement 
therapy with either peritoneal dialysis or haemo-
dialysis, with a view to renal transplantation in 
the future. 
 Renal  t umours 
 Tumours of the kidney are divided into those 
arising from the kidney substance itself and those 
originating from the renal pelvis. 
 Classiﬁ cation 
 Of the  k idney  i tself 
 1  Benign : 
 a  adenoma (small and symptomless); 
 b  oncocytoma (uncommon tumour, 
characteristic  ‘ scar ’ on CT); 
 c  angiomyolipoma (uncommon tumour, 
characteristic CT appearance);  
 d  haemangioma (a rare cause of haematuria). 
 2  Malignant . 
 a  Primary: nephroblastoma, adenocarcinoma. 
 b  Secondary: the kidney is an uncommon site 
for deposits of carcinoma although it may 
be involved in advanced cases of lymphoma 
and leukaemia, as well as tumours of breast 
and bronchus. 
 Of the  r enal  p elvis 
  •   Papilloma. 
  •   Transitional carcinoma. 
  •   Squamous carcinoma. 
 The two principal malignant tumours of the 
kidney are nephroblastoma in children and aden-
ocarcinoma in adults. 
 Pathology 
 The condition usually follows ischaemia to the 
kidneys. The blood supply to a nephron passes 
ﬁ rst to the glomerulus via afferent arterioles, and 
exits via the efferent arterioles to supply the 
tubules. In response to hypotension the efferent 
arterioles constrict to maintain blood ﬂ ow to the 
glomerulus, but in so doing further reduce the 
blood ﬂ ow to the tubules. Hence, although the 
glomerular apparatus is usually preserved, the 
tubules, especially the proximal tubules, suffer 
patchy ischaemic damage. The kidneys become 
enlarged and oedematous. As this damage recov-
ers, renal function returns.  
 Clinical  f eatures 
 The features are of a persistent oliguria, unrespon-
sive to replenishment of the intravascular circulat-
ing volume. The symptoms are those of acute 
renal failure described above. 
 Treatment 
 If ATN is established, the patient should be 
managed by regular dialysis until function returns. 
Recovery of function is characterized by a stepwise 
increase in urine output, although there may be a 
short polyuric phase during which maintenance 
of ﬂ uid balance can be difﬁ cult. 
 If function fails to return, it is more likely that 
acute cortical necrosis occurred with necrosis of 
glomeruli in addition to tubules.   
 Chronic  r enal  f ailure 
 Chronic renal failure may be classiﬁ ed into three 
groups, like acute renal failure. Most causes are 
non - surgical, but some surgically correctable 
causes are given below. 
 1  Prerenal : renal artery stenosis.  
 2  Postrenal (obstructive) : 
 a  congenital posterior urethral valves; 
 b  prostatic hyperplasia/carcinoma, which 
causes chronic retention and upper tract 
dilatation;  
 c  urethral stricture; 
 d  cervical carcinoma, inﬁ ltrating the ureters; 

The kidney and ureter 351
radiotherapy is given. When the tumour is unre-
sectable, chemotherapy is given and nephrectomy 
performed once the tumour regresses. 
 This intensive therapy has improved the prog-
nosis of a condition that previously could seldom 
be cured. Overall prognosis is 80% 5 year survival, 
with cure of early disease.   
 Adenocarcinoma 
( h ypernephroma or 
Grawitz ’ s  t umour 6 ) 
 Pathology 
 This tumour accounts for 80% of all renal tumours. 
Men are affected twice as often as women. The 
patients are usually 40 years of age or over. It 
may be associated with familial conditions such 
as tuberose sclerosis and von Hippel – Lindau 
disease, 7 and can be bilateral. 
 Macroscopically, the tumour appears as a large, 
vascular, golden yellow mass, usually in one or the 
other pole of the kidney (hence its earlier name 
hypernephroma). 
 Microscopically, the tumour cells are typically 
large with an abundant foamy cytoplasm and a 
small central densely staining nucleus. 
 The tumour originates from the renal tubules 
and not from suprarenal rests, as was postulated 
by Grawitz.  
 Spread 
  •   Directly throughout the renal substance with 
invasion of the perinephric tissues.  
  •   Via lymphatics to the para - aortic lymph nodes. 
  •   Via bloodstream with growth along the renal 
vein into the inferior vena cava (IVC), from 
which it may shower emboli. Metastases in the 
lung, bones and brain are common. Occlusion 
of the IVC results in a typical appearance with 
bilateral leg oedema. 
 The adenocarcinoma of the kidney is a tumour 
that may occasionally produce a solitary blood -
 borne deposit, so that removal of the primary 
 Nephroblastoma (Wilms ’  
 t umour 5 ) 
 Pathology 
 This is an extremely anaplastic tumour, which 
usually arises in children under the age of 5 years, 
although it occasionally affects older children and 
adolescents. It probably originates from embry-
onic mesodermal tissue. Bilateral tumours are 
present in 5 – 10% of cases, and there is an associa-
tion with congenital anomalies (aniridia, hemi-
hypertrophy, macroglossia) in a few patients. 
 Macroscopically, the tumours are large and may 
be difﬁ cult to distinguish from neuroblastoma 
(Chapter  40 , p. 333). They are pale on cut section, 
and contain areas of haemorrhage. 
 Microscopically, there is a mixture of mesenchy-
mal and epithelial components, with spindle cells, 
epithelial tubules and smooth or striated muscle 
ﬁ bres. 
 The regional lymph nodes are soon invaded, 
and spread occurs by the bloodstream to the lungs 
and liver.  
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Rapid growth produces a large mass in the loin, 
although involvement of the renal pelvis is late 
and therefore haematuria relatively uncommon. 
Other features include weight loss and anorexia, 
fever and hypertension. Children may also present 
on account of metastases, which occasionally 
involve bone. 
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   Ultrasonography  may distinguish the solid 
tumour from a cystic or hydronephrotic mass.  
  •   CT scan is useful for staging and preoperative 
assessment, in particular to look at the 
contralateral kidney. 
 Treatment 
 When possible, nephrectomy is performed. In 
early disease, with no residual tumour following 
surgery, cytotoxic chemotherapy alone will give 
prolonged survival. For more extensive disease, 
  5   Max Wilms (1867 – 1918), Professor of Surgery, ﬁ rst in Basle, 
Switzerland, and then in Heidelberg, Germany. 
  6   Paul Otto Grawitz (1850 – 1932), Pathologist, Grefswald, Germany.  
  7   Eugen von Hippel (1867 – 1939), Professor of Ophthalmology, 
G ö ttingen, Germany; Arvid Lindau (1892 – 1958), Pathologist, 
Lund, Sweden. 

352 
The kidney and ureter
  •   CT is the investigation of choice, providing 
accurate visualization of the tumour, indicating 
spread to lymph nodes and the chest and 
demonstrating caval invasion.  
  •   IVU reveals distortion of the calyces by a polar 
tumour, which may occasionally show ﬂ ecks of 
calciﬁ cation. 
  •   Bone scan , looking for metastatic disease, is 
indicated in the presence of a raised serum 
calcium or alkaline phosphatase.  
  •   Angiography may be necessary if partial 
nephrectomy is considered. 
 Treatment 
 For small ( < 5   cm) polar tumours, partial nephrec-
tomy is considered; central tumours and those 
over 5   cm in diameter are treated by radical 
nephrectomy. Cryoablation of small tumours may 
also be considered. 
 Postoperative immunotherapy with interleukin 
2 reduces the incidence of recurrence. Two per 
cent of patients develop a second cancer in the 
contralateral kidney. 
 The ﬁ ve - year survival rate after successful resec-
tion is about 50%, but metastases may occur many 
years after nephrectomy. Poor prognostic factors 
include perinephric and lymphatic invasion.   
 Tumours of the  r enal 
 p elvis 
 Transitional cell tumours of the renal pelvis vary 
in malignancy from benign papillomas to highly 
anaplastic transitional cell carcinomas. 
 A squamous carcinoma of the renal pelvis may 
occur when there has been squamous metaplasia 
of the epithelium; one - third of these cases are 
associated with renal calculus. Some may be 
associated with analgesic abuse and analgesic -
 associated nephropathy. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Patients present usually either with haematuria or 
with hydronephrosis due to ureteric obstruction. 
The tumour may seed down the ureter and even 
involve the bladder. 
 Treatment 
 Treatment is nephroureterectomy or, if feasible, 
local wide excision and plastic reconstruction.   
 
 
 
together with this deposit has been followed in 
some instances by prolonged survival.  
 Clinical  f eatures 
 The patient may present with symptoms either of 
local disease or of one of the paraneoplastic syn-
dromes with which it may be associated. 
 Local  d isease 
 The classic triad of symptoms of a renal cell carci-
noma, present in only 10% of cases, are as follows: 
 1  haematuria, present in half the cases  –  it may 
produce clot colic;  
 2  loin pain, aching, present in 40%;  
 3  loin mass, presenting in 25%. 
 Rarely, a left varicocele may occur (1%) as a con-
sequence of tumour spread along the left renal 
vein occluding the conﬂ uence with the testicular 
vein on that side. 
 General  f eatures 
 In addition to local symptoms, the patient may 
present with the general features of malignancy, 
namely anaemia, loss of weight and occasionally 
a pyrexia of unknown origin, or as a consequence 
of 
secondary 
deposits, 
e.g. 
a 
pathological 
fracture. 
 Paraneoplastic  s yndromes 
 A number of hormones may be released from 
renal adenocarcinomas. Among the results are 
hypertension (renin production), polycythaemia 
(erythropoietin) and hypercalcaemia (ectopic par-
athormone production).  
 Incidental  ﬁ nding 
 Between 30% and 50% of cases are detected inci-
dentally during imaging for symptoms unrelated 
to the renal tract. 
 On examination, the diseased kidney may be 
palpable. 
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   Urine nearly always contains either 
macroscopic or microscopic blood.  
  •   Ultrasonography  will differentiate cystic from 
solid mass.  

 42 
The  b ladder  
 
 Learning  o bjectives 
  ✓   To know the causes, presentation and management of bladder 
cancer. 
  ✓   To know about bladder stones and bladder diverticula, their 
causes and management. 
the bladder trigone open directly onto the anterior 
abdominal wall below the umbilicus. This is 
usually associated with a failure of fusion of the 
pubic bones and, in men, there is an associated 
epispadias. Typically, there is a widened pelvis 
with a waddling gait. 
 The infant is completely incontinent of urine, 
with excoriation of the abdominal skin and a per-
manent unpleasant ammoniacal smell of infected 
urine. If the condition is untreated, the child may 
die of pyelonephritis, or else frequently develops 
a stratiﬁ ed squamous carcinoma of the bladder 
rudiment after initial metaplastic change. 
 Treatment 
 Traditional treatment is reimplantation of the 
ureters either into the colon or into an ileal loop 
(ureteroileostomy) combined with excision of the 
bladder itself as a prophylaxis against malignant 
change. Nowadays, complex reconstructive oper-
ations are performed soon after birth to fashion a 
new bladder. 
 Rupture of the  b ladder 
 The bladder may rupture either intraperitoneally 
or extraperitoneally. 
 Intraperitoneal  r upture 
 This follows a penetrating wound (e.g. a bullet 
wound) or crush injury to the pelvis when the 
 Urachal  a nomalies 
 Urachal defects may result from anomalies of the 
primitive urachal connection. There are three 
principal anomalies. 
 1  Urachal ﬁ stula : a persistent urachal tract, 
resulting in a urinary discharge at the 
umbilicus. 
 2  Urachal diverticulum , an outpouching of the 
bladder, the urachal equivalent of a Meckel ’ s 
diverticulum and the vitellointestinal duct.  
 3  Urachal cyst : where the urachus persists but is 
closed above and below. The cyst often 
becomes infected in later life, presenting with 
periumbilical pain and inﬂ ammation. 
 Treatment 
 In all cases treatment is excision.   
 Bladder  e xstrophy 
( e ctopia  v esicae) 
 Failure of fusion of the structures forming the 
anterior abdominal wall may cause a number of 
anomalies. Lower urinary tract changes include 
bladder exstrophy, where the ureters together with 
Lecture Notes: General Surgery, 12th edition. © Harold Ellis, 
Sir Roy Y. Calne and Christopher J. E. Watson. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

354 
The bladder
 Diverticulum of the 
 b ladder 
 The vast majority of diverticula of the bladder are 
secondary 
to 
bladder 
outﬂ ow 
obstruction, 
although a small number are congenital in origin. 
As it is usually the male bladder which becomes 
obstructed, 95% of diverticula occur in men. 
Congenital diverticula have all the layers of the 
bladder wall; acquired diverticula contain only the 
mucosa. 
 Pathology 
 The muscle of the bladder wall hypertrophies as a 
result of obstruction, and becomes trabeculated. 
Outpouches of mucosa occur between the bands 
of muscle ﬁ bres. One or more of these sacs may 
increase in size to form a fully developed diver-
ticulum which, because it is devoid of practically 
all muscle in its wall, is unable to empty and 
undergoes progressive distension.  
 Complications 
  •   Urinary infection because of urinary 
stagnation.  
  •   Calculus formation because of a combination 
of infection and stasis.  
  •   Malignant change may occur in its wall, as 
commonly as elsewhere in the bladder 
mucosa. Such tumours are more difﬁ cult to 
treat, and may have a worse prognosis owing 
to the absent muscle wall.  
  •   Hydronephrosis may rarely occur owing to 
pressure of the diverticulum against the 
adjacent ureter. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 The majority of diverticula remain silent unless 
they undergo one of the complications listed 
above. Some are found incidentally during inves-
tigation of the underlying obstructive lesion, e.g. 
a prostatic hyperplasia or urethral stricture. 
Occasionally, a large, uninfected diverticulum 
gives the strange symptom of double micturition 
( ‘ pis en deux  ’ ). In this circumstance, the patient 
empties his bladder but a substantial amount of 
the urine passes into the distensible diverticulum. 
No sooner does micturition end than the diver-
bladder is distended. Occasionally, it is conse-
quent upon instrumentation of the bladder during 
transurethral resection of a tumour, and, rarely, 
the overdistended bladder of retention may 
rupture spontaneously.  
 Extraperitoneal  r upture 
 More common; the bladder may be torn by a 
spicule of bone in a pelvic fracture or occasionally 
may be wounded during a hernia operation or 
repair of a cystocele.  
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Intraperitoneal rupture  produces the typical 
picture of peritonitis with generalized abdominal 
pain, marked rigidity and a silent abdomen. 
 Extraperitoneal rupture  is associated with extra-
peritoneal extravasation of blood and urine pro-
ducing a painful swelling that arises out of the 
pelvis. In this case, differentiation must be made 
from rupture of the membranous urethra (Chapter 
 44 , p. 368), although this may not be possible until 
surgical exploration is carried out. Typically, 
however, a urethral tear is accompanied by 
anterior displacement of the prostate, which 
can be detected on rectal examination. In either 
circumstance, traumatic bladder rupture causes 
haematuria. 
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   Computed tomography demonstrates 
extravasation and any associated pelvic injury. 
  •   Cystography  will conﬁ rm rupture. 
  •   Urethrography  will demonstrate a urethral 
injury. 
 Treatment 
 Treatment is invariably surgical. The intraperito-
neal rupture is sutured and the bladder drained 
by means of an indwelling urethral (Foley 1 ) 
catheter. Small extraperitoneal ruptures are 
treated by urinary catheter drainage; larger leaks 
may necessitate exploration and repair, with 
drainage of the retropubic space and antibiotic 
therapy. 
  1   Frederick Foley (1891 – 1966), Urologist, St. Paul, MN, USA.  

The bladder 355
  •   Frequency is more troublesome during the day 
than at night, probably because, in the upright 
position, the stone lies over, and irritates, the 
bladder trigone.  
  •   Pain is felt in the suprapubic region, in the 
perineum and the tip of the penis; it 
particularly occurs at the end of micturition, 
when the bladder contracts down upon the 
calculus. 
  •   Haematuria tends to occur as the last few 
drops of urine are passed. 
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   Plain abdominal X - ray (speciﬁ cally a  ‘ KUB ’ to 
show kidneys, ureters and bladder): the 
majority of bladder stones are radio - opaque 
and are readily visible.  
  •   Cystoscopy allows stones to be seen as well as 
to be fragmented and retrieved. 
 Treatment 
 Unless the stone is very small, when there is a pos-
sibility that it will pass spontaneously, it should be 
removed either by crushing with an endoscopic 
lithotrite under direct vision or by disintegration 
with extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy.   
 Bladder  t umours 
 Pathology 
 Bladder tumours may be classiﬁ ed as follows, 
together with their relative incidence. 
 Benign 
  •   Transitional cell papilloma ( < 1%). 
 Malignant 
 1  Primary : 
 a  transitional cell carcinoma (90%); 
 b  squamous carcinoma arising in an area of 
metaplasia (7%);  
 c  adenocarcinoma (uncommon, but may 
occur in urachal remnants) (2%);  
 d  sarcomas (rare). 
 2  Secondary : direct invasion from adjacent 
tumours, i.e. colonic, renal, ovarian, uterine, 
prostatic tumours. 
ticulum passively empties again into the bladder, 
giving the surprised patient the desire once again 
to empty his bladder.  
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   Intravenous urogram (IVU) : contrast medium 
enters the diverticulum.  
  •   Cystoscopy : the mouth of the diverticulum can 
be visualized. 
 Treatment 
 Intervention is indicated for the complications of 
a diverticulum, but most are managed conserva-
tively; the treatment of outﬂ ow obstruction usually 
sufﬁ ces. 
 Bladder  s tone 
 The varieties of bladder calculi are the same as 
renal stones, namely phosphate, oxalate, urate 
and rarely cystine. 
 Aetiology 
 Bladder stones either originate in the kidney and 
pass down the ureter into the bladder, where they 
remain and grow, or originate  de novo  in the 
bladder. Stones that arise in the bladder are due to 
the following: 
  •   Stasis and infection : bladder stones commonly 
arise as a consequence of outﬂ ow obstruction 
(e.g. urethral stricture or prostatic 
enlargement). They may be secondary to an 
atonic bladder in a paraplegic person, and 
may have arisen ﬁ rst within a bladder 
diverticulum. 
  •   Foreign body : a calculus will deposit on a 
long - term indwelling catheter or on any 
foreign body inserted into the bladder.     
 Clinical  f eatures 
 The typical triad of symptoms of bladder stone are 
frequency, pain and haematuria. In addition, 
patients sometimes complain of intermittent 
stopping of the urinary ﬂ ow as the stone blocks 
the internal urinary meatus like a ball valve, and 
occasionally actual retention of urine may occur if 
the stone impacts in the urethra. 

356 
The bladder
more malignant tumours are sessile, solid growths, 
which inﬁ ltrate the bladder wall, then ulcerate, 
often with marked surrounding cystitis. Carcinoma 
 in situ  may produce a suspicious red area of 
bladder mucosa.  
 Microscopic  a ppearance 
 The TCCs have a connective tissue core and no 
involvement of the stem. The carcinomas may be 
well -  or poorly differentiated transitional cell 
tumours but, rarely, keratinizing squamous cell 
tumours or adenocarcinomas may be seen.   
 Spread 
  •   Local with inﬁ ltration of the bladder wall, the 
prostate, urethra, sigmoid colon and rectum or, 
in women, the pelvic viscera. The ureteric 
oriﬁ ces may be occluded, producing 
hydronephrosis and ultimately renal failure. 
The pelvic skeleton may be directly invaded.  
  •   Lymphatic , to the iliac and para - aortic lymph 
nodes. 
  •   Blood - borne  spread occurs late to the liver, 
lungs and bones.  
  •   Implantation may take place into the scar if 
open operation is performed. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Bladder tumours usually present with painless 
haematuria 
(macroscopic 
or 
microscopic). 
Malignant tumours may also cause dysuria, fre-
quency and urgency of micturition. Occasionally, 
the patient may present with hydronephrosis 
caused by ureteric obstruction or with retention of 
urine caused either by clot or by growth involving 
the urethra. In late cases, there may be severe pain 
from pelvic invasion or uraemia from bilateral 
ureteric obstruction. 
 Examination is usually negative, but tumours 
invading muscle may be palpable bimanually at 
the time of cystoscopy.  
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   Urine examination  usually reveals blood, either 
to the naked eye or microscopically.  
  •   Urine cytology  is usually positive in high - grade 
(G3 and carcinoma  in situ ) carcinomas; a 
positive urine test always indicates TCC in the 
urinary tract, but a negative cytology does not 
exclude it. 
 Transitional  c ell  p apilloma 
 Transitional cell papillomas, more properly called 
inverted papillomas on account of their inward 
growth into the bladder wall, grade imperceptibly 
into malignant tumours. Many pathologists regard 
them as low - grade carcinomas, especially because 
they have a tendency to recur after treatment, to 
seed elsewhere in the bladder and to undergo 
frank malignant change. 
 Most benign papillomas can be controlled by 
fulguration or resection via an operating cysto-
scope. Because of the high risk of further lesions 
occurring, once the patient has developed a papil-
loma, he or she should undergo regular cysto-
scopic surveillance.  
 Transitional  c ell  c arcinoma 
( TCC ) 
 These are commonly found in middle - aged and 
elderly patients. Men are far more frequently 
affected than women. 
 Aetiology 
 Risk factors include cigarette smoking (twofold 
increase in incidence), and workers in the aniline 
dye and rubber industry because of the excretion 
of carcinogens such as  β - naphthyl amine in the 
urine. The manufacture of many of the more dan-
gerous dyes and chemicals has been abolished in 
this country. There is a high incidence of malig-
nant change in the exposed bladder mucosa of 
ectopia vesicae (p. 353), in the bladder infected 
with schistosomiasis and in association with the 
long - term catheterization in paraplegic patients; 
in these cases, characterized by chronic inﬂ am-
mation and mucosal metaplasia, squamous carci-
noma is common.  
 Pathology 
 Although any part of the bladder may be involved, 
growths are particularly common at the base, 
trigone and around the ureteric oriﬁ ces. They are 
often multiple, signifying a ﬁ eld change through-
out the transitional urothelium with the tendency 
for tumours to develop anywhere from the renal 
pelvis to the urethra. 
 Macroscopic  a ppearance 
 The well - differentiated TCCs form ﬁ ne fronds, 
which resemble seaweed ﬂ oating in the urine. The 

The bladder 357
scopic resection followed by intravesical chemo-
therapy (mitomycin) to prevent recurrence. 
Follow - up cystoscopy is required to detect and 
treat recurrence. This severity of disease has a 
low chance (10 – 15%) of progression to muscle -
 invasive disease. 
 High - r isk  s uperﬁ cial  c ancers 
 High - risk superﬁ cial disease (G3pT1 and CiS) has 
a much greater chance of progression to muscle 
invasion (30 – 60%). Treatment comprises intra-
vesical bacille Calmette – Gu é rin (BCG) therapy, 2 
radiotherapy or early cystectomy. 
 Muscle - i nvasive  c ancers 
 Muscle - invasive cancers (pT2 and greater) have a 
poor prognosis, with approximately 50% 5 year 
survival. Treatment can be primary cystectomy or 
radiotherapy with cystoscopic follow - up (and 
cystectomy if recurrence is diagnosed, so - called 
 ‘ salvage cystectomy ’ ), or deep transurethral resec-
tion with or without systemic chemotherapy. 
 At cystectomy, the bladder and distal ureters are 
removed, along with the prostate or gynaecologi-
cal organs, with implantation of the ureters into a 
tube of ileum brought out as a stoma (an ileal 
conduit). 
 Chemotherapy may be used for metastatic 
disease but is relatively ineffective.   
 
 
  •   IVU may demonstrate a ﬁ lling defect and 
perhaps ureteric obstruction or 
hydronephrosis. At the same time, the 
presence of pelvic bony secondaries may be 
revealed. 
  •   Flexible cystoscopy  under local anaesthesia in 
the clinic is the most valuable investigation, 
permitting diagnosis and biopsy. 
 Treatment 
 Initial assessment of all tumours involves biman-
ual examination and transurethral resection under 
general anaesthesia; further treatment of TCC 
depends on the grade and stage of the tumour.  
 Staging 
 Staging is generally according to the TNM system 
(Chapter  7 , p. 39). The local staging (T) involves 
both bimanual palpation and histological exami-
nation to ascertain the depth of invasion through 
the bladder wall, and the grade of the tumour (G1, 
well differentiated, to G3, poorly differentiated). 
Carcinoma  in situ  (CiS) is a high - grade tumour 
conﬁ ned to the epithelium.   
 Low - r isk  s uperﬁ cial  c ancers 
 Well - differentiated (G1 and G2) tumours that do 
not invade the bladder wall (pTa) or invade only 
the lamina propria (pT1) are treated by endo-
  2   L é on Calmette (1863 – 1933), Director of Pasteur Institute, Paris, 
France. Camille Gu é rin (1872 – 1961), Veterinary Surgeon, Lille, 
France. 

 43 
The  p rostate  
 
 Learning  o bjectives 
  ✓   To know the causes and treatment of both benign and malignant 
prostatic enlargement. 
  ✓   To know about the presentation of urinary retention and its 
treatment. 
 Pathological  c onsequences of 
 o utﬂ ow  o bstruction 
  •   Trabeculation of the bladder : as a result of the 
obstruction, the bladder hypertrophies and the 
thickened muscle bands produce 
trabeculation. 
  •   Bladder diverticula form from saccules 
between muscle bands.  
  •   Bladder stones form as a consequence of 
urinary stasis, particularly in diverticula.  
  •   Urinary infection may occur (especially after 
catheterization).  
  •   Hydronephrosis results from back pressure on 
the ureters, which may result in renal failure.  
  •   Renal failure , due to progressive 
hydronephrosis, resulting in anaemia and 
uraemia. It is commonly referred to as 
obstructive nephropathy. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 There are three types of symptoms that result from 
prostatic hyperplasia. 
  •   Obstructive symptoms consequent upon 
bladder outﬂ ow impedance. 
  •   Irritative symptoms due to the muscular 
instability of the bladder (detrusor 
instability).  
  •   Symptoms of the sequelae , such as infection or 
renal failure. 
 It is important to realize that lower urinary tract 
symptoms are not always due to prostatic hyper-
plasia and bladder outﬂ ow obstruction. They may 
 There are two common conditions of the prostate 
that require consideration: benign enlargement 
and carcinoma.  
 Benign  e nlargement 
 Pathology 
 Some degree of enlargement of the prostate is 
extremely common from the age of 45 onwards, 
but this enlargement often produces either no or 
only minor symptoms. Seventy per cent of men 
have benign hyperplasia by the age of 70. 
 The prostate, like the breast and thyroid, is 
composed of glandular tissue and stroma, 
which have periods of activity and involution 
throughout life under the inﬂ uences of a 
changing milieu of hormones. Associated with 
these periods, the gland may become enlarged, 
with excessive proliferation of both ﬁ brous and 
epithelial tissue. 
 Enlargement of the lateral lobes of the prostate 
results in encroachment on the prostatic urethra. 
The median lobe may also enlarge as a rounded 
swelling overlying the posterior aspect of the 
internal urinary meatus. The three lobes may then 
obstruct the urethral lumen, impeding the passage 
of urine. Occasionally, only the median lobe is 
enlarged. 
Lecture Notes: General Surgery, 12th edition. © Harold Ellis, 
Sir Roy Y. Calne and Christopher J. E. Watson. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

The prostate 359
of the abdomen may reveal a large bladder, which 
may reach to the umbilicus or even above. The 
swelling has the typical globular shape of the 
bladder arising from the pelvis, and is dull to per-
cussion. If there is acute obstruction, the bladder 
will be tender to palpation. 
 On rectal examination, the prostate will be 
enlarged. Typically, in benign enlargement the 
lateral lobes are enlarged and a sulcus is palpable 
between them in the midline posteriorly. This is in 
contrast to carcinoma, which usually involves 
the posterior part of the gland and obliterates the 
sulcus with a craggy, hard mass. The size of the 
prostate may appear to be larger than it really is if 
the bladder is grossly enlarged and pushes the 
prostate down towards the examining ﬁ nger. The 
gland should therefore be palpated again after 
catheterization and before operation. Occasionally, 
only the middle lobe is enlarged. In such cases, the 
prostate appears normal in size on rectal exami-
nation, in spite of marked symptoms or even 
retention of urine. The diagnosis is established at 
cystoscopic examination.   
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   24 hour frequency/volume chart . The patient 
records when he passes urine, and how much 
he passes in a 24 hour period.  
  •   Serum urea and creatinine to identify renal 
failure. 
  •   Haemoglobin is estimated, since uraemia 
inhibits the bone marrow and leads to 
anaemia.  
  •   Prostate - speciﬁ c antigen  (PSA) is a sensitive 
indicator of prostatic carcinoma, and has 
superseded measurement of serum acid 
phosphatase. A PSA concentration below 
4.0  ng/mL is normal. Reﬁ nements in PSA 
include measurement of the free/total PSA 
ratio, which is over 0.15 in normal men. 
  •   Urinalysis for the presence of leucocytes. 
 Culture is performed if urinalysis is positive: an 
infected renal tract severely complicates 
prostatic disease. Most patients with prostatic 
disease do not have infected urine until the 
bladder and urethra have been instrumented. 
  •   Urine ﬂ ow rate assessment . A void volume of at 
least 200   mL is required for meaningful 
assessment of maximum ﬂ ow rate. A 
maximum ﬂ ow rate of less than 10  mL/s 
indicates obstructed ﬂ ow or weak bladder 
contractility. A ﬂ ow rate over 15  mL/s is 
be due to the ageing process of the bladder since 
they may also occur with age in women. 
 Obstructive  s ymptoms 
 The narrowing of the prostatic urethra by the 
lateral lobes on each side and the possible median 
lobe enlargement cause the patient difﬁ culty in 
passing urine, with a poor and intermittent stream. 
There may be difﬁ culty starting (hesitancy), and 
dribbling at the end of micturition (terminal 
dribbling). 
 Associated with the prostatic enlargement, 
there may be partial obstruction and congestion 
of the prostatic plexus of veins, which may produce 
haematuria, which usually occurs at the end of 
micturition when the bladder contracts around 
the enlarged intravesical part of the prostate. As a 
cause of haematuria, bleeding from distended 
veins should only be diagnosed after exclusion of 
intravesical and upper tract tumours. 
 Eventually, the bladder is likely to fail to over-
come the obstruction and this results in retention 
of urine. This may be acute, with sudden onset and 
severe pain, or chronic, in which the bladder grad-
ually becomes distended and the patient develops 
dribbling overﬂ ow incontinence, with little or 
no pain. It is in the latter group that uraemia is 
likely to occur. In some instances, a complete 
obstruction then supervenes ( ‘ acute on chronic 
obstruction ’ ). 
 Symptoms of  d etrusor  i nstability 
 Involuntary contractions of the distended bladder 
result in frequency, urgency and nocturia. Urinary 
tract infection may exacerbate the symptoms, or 
precipitate acute retention (see below).  
 Symptoms of  r enal  f ailure 
 The obstruction to the outﬂ ow of the bladder may 
result in renal failure, with drowsiness, headache 
and impairment of intellect owing to uraemia. It is 
therefore always wise to examine the bladder for 
enlargement and to determine the blood urea in 
an elderly man with inexplicable behavioural 
changes. 
 Examination 
 The patient with an enlarged prostate, if uraemic, 
is likely to be pale and wasted, with a dry, furred 
tongue; he may be mentally confused. Examination 

360 
The prostate
 1  Selective  α 1 - adrenergic antagonists (e.g. 
tamsulosin) are the mainstay of treatment for 
symptoms due to bladder neck obstruction. 
They act by causing relaxation of the smooth 
muscle of the bladder neck, improving 
symptoms and urinary ﬂ ow rate. 
 2  5 α - reductase inhibition (e.g. ﬁ nasteride) blocks 
the conversion of testosterone to its active 
metabolite, dihydrotestosterone, in the 
prostate. The beneﬁ cial effect may take up to 6 
months to appear. 
 Surgery is indicated for symptomatic patients in 
whom medical therapy has failed and who have 
bladder outﬂ ow obstruction on ﬂ ow rate and 
pressure/ﬂ ow assessment. Surgery is also indi-
cated for the complications of bladder outﬂ ow 
obstruction.  
 Surgical  t herapy 
 Surgery is indicated for symptomatic patients 
in whom medical therapy has failed and who 
have bladder outﬂ ow obstruction on ﬂ ow rate and 
pressure/ﬂ ow assessment. Surgery is also indi-
cated for the complications of bladder outﬂ ow 
obstruction. 
 Transurethral  p rostatectomy 
 The prostate can be removed endoscopically by 
means of an operating cystoscope, using a 
diathermy cutting loop or laser ﬁ bre. This is 
useful in dealing with ﬁ brotic and malignant 
prostatic obstruction but it is also used routinely 
for benign enlargement. The mortality and mor-
bidity in skilled hands are very low, and this 
technique is now the treatment of choice in all 
but very enlarged prostates. Removal of too 
much gland may damage the urethral sphincter 
mechanism.  
 Open  p rostatectomy 
 If the prostate is very large or if there is some coex-
istent intravesical pathology, such as a large diver-
ticulum or tumour that requires removal at the 
same time, an open operation may be necessary. 
This is performed either by the transvesical route 
or by the retropubic approach. 
 Complications of  p rostatectomy 
 Transurethral prostatectomy has a low morbidity 
and mortality, particularly in view of the elderly 
population in which it is usually performed. 
unlikely to be obstructed. Urodynamics 
(pressure ﬂ ow assessment) can be used to 
distinguish outﬂ ow obstruction from poor 
detrusor contraction, which will not improve 
following prostate surgery.  
  •   Ultrasound scan  may demonstrate bladder 
enlargement, hydronephrosis and hydroureter. 
Following voiding, it can be used to estimate 
the amount of residual urine in the bladder. 
Normally, there is none; however, in the 
presence of bladder outﬂ ow obstruction the 
bladder cannot be completely emptied. 
Ultrasound has replaced the intravenous 
urogram (IVU) in the routine investigation of 
patients with outﬂ ow obstruction. 
 Complications of  p rostatic 
 h yperplasia 
 These are classiﬁ ed as follows: 
 1  Prostatic complications : 
 a  acute retention; 
 b  chronic retention; 
 c  haemorrhage. 
 2  Bladder complications : 
 a  diverticula; 
 b  urinary infection; 
 c  stone formation. 
 3  Renal complications : 
 a  hydronephrosis. 
 b  uraemia. 
 Treatment 
 This depends on whether the patient is an elective 
case, with troublesome prostatic symptoms, espe-
cially marked nocturnal frequency, or whether he 
presents urgently with retention (see p. 364). 
 Conservative  m anagement 
 If the patient has few lower urinary tract symp-
toms, he is encouraged to perform simple bladder 
training. This simply means getting the patient 
to hold his urine for approximately 10 minutes 
after he would ordinarily want to void. One - sixth 
improve; one - third remain stable; and the rest 
develop worsening symptoms.  
 Medical  t herapy 
 This is indicated for moderately or severely symp-
tomatic patients. 

The prostate 361
 Microscopic  a ppearance 
 An adenocarcinoma, usually moderately differen-
tiated but occasionally anaplastic. The degree of 
differentiation is quoted in terms of the Gleason 
grade 1 from 2 to 10. 
 Spread 
  •   Local : there is invasion of the periprostatic 
tissues and adjacent organs (i.e. the bladder, 
urethra, seminal vesicles) and, rarely, invasion 
around and ulceration into the rectum.  
  •   Lymphatic : to the iliac and para - aortic nodes. 
  •   Blood - borne : especially to the pelvis, spine and 
skull, usually as osteosclerotic lesions. 
Secondaries may also be found in the liver and 
lung. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Prostate cancer may be asymptomatically detected 
on PSA screening or present with symptoms that 
are identical to those of benign enlargement. In 
addition, the patient may present with symptoms 
from secondary deposits, particularly with pain in 
the back from involvement of the vertebrae; occa-
sionally, surgery is required for the relief of spinal 
cord compression. As with cancer anywhere, the 
patient ’ s general condition is likely to be poor, 
with weight loss and anaemia. 
 Bimanual examination of the prostate may 
reveal four different stages (the Tumour assess-
ment of the TNM staging; Figure  43.1 ): 
 T1     The prostate feels benign, with no palpable 
tumour.  
 T2     A hard nodule in one lobe of the prostate or 
abolishing the normal sulcus between the two 
lateral lobes. The tumour is conﬁ ned to the 
prostate.  
 T3     A hard mass in the prostate together with 
inﬁ ltration of the tissues on either side of the 
prostate or into the seminal vesicles.  
 T4     A hard mass in the prostate which is ﬁ xed to 
the pelvic side wall or is invading the bladder.  
 Special  i nvestigations 
 The same initial investigations are performed as 
for benign enlargement. 
  •   Haemorrhage : primary haemorrhage is more 
common with malignant glands, with large 
resections, and in patients on aspirin or 
clopidogrel, which should therefore be stopped 
preoperatively. Postoperative irrigation and 
warming the patient are important in stopping 
ﬁ brinolysis. 
  •   Transurethral resection (TUR) syndrome : 
absorption of large volumes of the irrigating 
ﬂ uid through the open prostatic veins may 
result in hyponatraemia and confusion.  
  •   Infection  is particularly common in patients 
who are catheterized before surgery; 
prophylactic antibiotics are given. 
  •   Retrograde ejaculation  is almost certain after 
TUR.  
  •   Impotence  occurs in 5 – 15% of patients, 
depending on the level of potency 
preoperatively. 
  •   Bladder neck stenosis , due to stricturing of the 
bladder neck following resection, may occur 
and presents with outﬂ ow obstruction. 
  •   Urinary incontinence  is uncommon but may 
occur if the resection is extended below the 
verumontanum with damage to the urethral 
sphincter. 
  •   Recurrent lower urinary tract symptoms : late 
recurrence may be due to either regrowth of 
an adenoma or malignant change. 
 Carcinoma 
 Pathology 
 Carcinoma of the prostate is the most common 
cancer in men in the UK, but is rare below the age 
of 50. Above this age the incidence increases 
markedly, and it is estimated to affect 80% of men 
aged 80, though only 4% of men will die from it; it 
is more common to die with the disease than from 
it. Many prostates with apparent benign hyperpla-
sia have a malignant focus on careful histological 
examination of the resected gland or of autopsy 
material. 
 Macroscopic  a ppearance 
 The tumour is usually situated in the posterior 
part of the prostate beneath its capsule and 
appears as an inﬁ ltrating, hard, pale area.  
  1   Donald Gleason (1920 – 2008), Pathologist, Minneapolis, MN, 
USA.  

362 
The prostate
Gleason grade score, serum PSA and clinical 
stage, a prediction of the extent of spread of the 
tumour. 
 Localized  d isease 
 Small well - differentiated tumours in elderly men 
may be treated by  ‘ watchful waiting ’ , particularly 
if their anticipated life expectancy is poor (less 
than 10 years). 
  •   Radical prostatectomy , removing the prostate, 
seminal vesicles and pelvic lymph nodes with 
anastomosis of the bladder neck to the urethra 
just distal to the prostate, is the treatment of 
choice in young patients with a high chance of 
localized disease. The side - effects include 
impotence in half the patients, and urinary 
incontinence in a few.  
  •   Radical radiotherapy with or without hormone 
treatment has a lower impotence rate and 
virtually no chance of incontinence, but may 
leave proctitis or bladder irritation. 
 The long - term efﬁ cacy of each technique is yet 
to be subjected to a full randomized clinical trial, 
partly because the slow rate of growth of prostate 
cancer necessitates long follow - up. 
  •   PSA concentration  in the blood is usually raised 
in the presence of prostate carcinoma. A PSA 
over 20  ng/mL suggests disseminated disease. 
PSA is also useful as a tumour marker to follow 
the response to treatment.  
  •   Transrectal ultrasound gives good deﬁ nition of 
the prostate. It can detect small tumours and 
can assess extracapsular spread. It is also used 
to guide needle core biopsies, which are 
performed systematically through the gland, 
obtaining 10 – 15 cores. 
  •   Transrectal prostatic biopsy, or prostatic 
chippings retrieved at transurethral resection, 
will conﬁ rm the diagnosis and grade of 
tumour. 
  •   Bone scan is indicated if the PSA is greater than 
20  ng/mL, or if there is bone pain. It will show 
the presence and extent of bony metastases.  
  •   Magnetic resonance ( MR) imaging  is indicated 
in patients with higher grade tumours and 
those undergoing radical surgery to identify 
lymphadenopathy. 
 Treatment 
 Treatment is based on the likelihood of tumour 
conﬁ nement to the gland, derived from the 
T1: No tumour palpable clinically
Vas
deferens
Seminal
vesicle
T2: Tumour palpable but
confined to prostate
T3: Tumour extends outside
capsule or into seminal vesicles
T4: Tumour extends into
pelvic side wall or bladder
 Figure 43.1   The clinical staging of 
prostatic carcinoma.  

The prostate 363
faecal organisms, particularly  Escherichia coli and 
 Streptococcus faecalis . Non - bacterial prostatitis 
does not have an identiﬁ able cause, although an 
autoimmune process after prior sensitization, 
possibly by an infection, may be responsible. Not 
uncommonly, patients may present with the 
symptoms of prostatitis in the absence of any 
inﬂ ammation (prostatodynia). These two forms, 
non - bacterial prostatitis and prostatodynia, have 
been 
reclassiﬁ ed 
as 
chronic 
pelvic 
pain 
syndrome. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 In addition to asymptomatic prostatitis seen his-
tologically in prostatic chippings at the time of 
resection, the following three forms of prostatitis 
are recognized. 
 Acute  b acterial  p rostatitis 
 The patient presents with fever, rigors, perineal 
pain and difﬁ culty voiding, together with symp-
toms of a urinary tract infection; he may present 
with acute retention. In addition, pain on ejacula-
tion and blood in the semen (haematospermia) 
may be present. Rectal examination reveals an 
enlarged exquisitely tender prostate, and occa-
sionally an abscess may be palpable. Epididymitis 
is a common accompaniment, owing to infection 
passing along the vas deferens. 
 Treatment is a 6 week course of antibiotics with 
good prostatic penetration (e.g. ciproﬂ oxacin or 
trimethoprim). 
 Chronic  b acterial  p rostatitis 
 This presents as recurrent urinary tract infections. 
The prostate feels much ﬁ rmer, and may resemble 
a carcinoma. Diagnosis is made by urine samples 
before and after prostatic massage, and appropri-
ate antibiotic therapy started.  
 Chronic  p elvic  p ain  s yndrome 
 This is a common insidious problem affecting up 
to 9% of adult men. Characteristically, the patient 
experiences pain in the perineum, scrotum, tip of 
penis or bladder, along with pain on ejaculation or 
micturition. Symptoms of urinary frequency and 
a feeling of incomplete emptying are common. 
 The aetiology of the syndrome is unclear; cryptic 
infection, an autoimmune process and pelvic 
muscle abnormality have all been suggested. 
 Metastatic  d isease 
 Carcinoma of the prostate is more usually discov-
ered at a stage when it has already spread beyond 
its capsule and may well have involved other 
organs, particularly the pelvic cellular tissues, 
bladder base and bone. The mainstay of treatment 
of this disease is androgen suppression or the 
use of speciﬁ c androgen antagonists, which will 
produce symptomatic relief in disseminated pro-
static cancer in about 75% of patients. 
  •   Gonadotrophin - releasing hormone agonists , e.g. 
buserilin and goserilin, are the mainstay of 
treatment. They inhibit the release of luteinizing 
hormone from the anterior pituitary, with 
consequent reduction of testicular production 
of testosterone. Initiation of therapy may cause 
a ﬂ are of testosterone production, and hence a 
ﬂ are of disease, so a short 3 week course of 
androgen therapy is given.  
  •   Cyproterone acetate : a steroid androgen 
antagonist.  
  •   Castration  of patients with prostatic carcinoma 
often relieves their symptoms and sometimes 
produces dramatic remissions in the course of 
the disease.  
  •   Oestrogen administration , e.g. stilboestrol (with 
aspirin to prevent thromboembolic disease), 
may be used when the disease becomes 
hormone refractory. Stilboestrol may produce 
gynaecomastia, nipple and scrotal 
pigmentation and testicular atrophy. More 
importantly, it may result in ﬂ uid retention and 
precipitate congestive cardiac failure. 
 Palliation produced by hormonal treatment of 
prostatic cancer suppresses PSA to normal levels 
for an average of 2 years, after which it slowly rises, 
with symptoms returning a few months later. 
When the cancer is refractory to hormone therapy, 
the average life expectancy is 6 months. 
 Radiotherapy may relieve the pain of bony 
deposits and can also be used for local control to 
supplement hormonal therapy. 
 Urinary obstruction due to the prostatic carci-
noma may resolve on hormonal therapy; if not, an 
endoscopic prostatectomy is indicated. 
 Prostatitis 
 Once commonly due to tuberculosis, bacterial 
infection of the prostate is now more often due to 

364 
The prostate
 The deﬁ nitive treatment of urinary retention 
can only be decided upon after three essential 
steps have been carried out. These are as follows: 
 1  diagnosis of the cause; 
 2  assessment of renal damage caused by the 
back pressure;  
 3  assessment of the general condition of the 
patient  –  is the patient ﬁ t for any surgical 
procedure that may be necessary? 
 Diagnosis of the  c ause 
 The 
diagnosis 
can 
be 
classiﬁ ed 
into 
the 
following: 
 1  General causes (no organic obstruction to 
urinary ﬂ ow): 
 a  postoperative; 
 b  central nervous system (CNS) disease, e.g. 
tabes, multiple sclerosis, spinal tumour;  
 c  drugs, e.g. anticholinergics, tricyclic 
antidepressants. 
 2  Local causes : 
 a  in the lumen of the urethra, e.g. stone or 
blood clot;  
 b  in the wall, e.g. stricture; 
 c  outside the wall, e.g. prostatic enlargement 
(benign or malignant), faecal impaction, 
pelvic tumour, pregnant uterus. 
 General causes of retention of urine must always 
be borne in mind. The most common cause of 
acute retention is indeed seen postoperatively. 
The patient is not used to passing urine lying in 
bed, is weak and often in pain. Usually, the condi-
tion can be overcome by giving an injection of 
opiate and sitting the patient with his legs over the 
side of the bed within earshot of a running tap; if 
this does not succeed, catheterization may be 
required. The catheter can either be removed once 
the bladder has been emptied or, more commonly, 
left  in situ  until the following morning. Sometimes 
a patient with an enlarged prostate is precipitated 
into retention of urine following some other surgi-
cal procedure and it may then be necessary to 
proceed to prostatectomy. 
 In every case, the CNS must be carefully exam-
ined, as retention of urine may be due to interrup-
tion of the sacral nervous pathway. There is a 
tendency to think of retention of urine in an 
elderly man as being invariably due to prostatic 
disease, but every now and then one of these 
patients will be found to have a spinal tumour, 
tabes dorsalis or some other neurological condi-
Treatment options include pelvic ﬂ oor relaxation, 
doughnut seat cushions,  α - blockers, non - steroidal 
anti - inﬂ ammatory drugs, antibiotics and repeti-
tive prostatic massage. 
 Bladder  n eck  o bstruction 
 Bladder neck obstruction may be due to con-
genital valves in the region of the prostatic 
urethra and internal meatus, or ﬁ brosis of the 
prostate. 
 Posterior  u rethral  v alves 
 Congenital 
valves, 
which 
usually 
produce 
hydronephrosis and retention of urine in child-
hood. They are usually diagnosed on antenatal 
ultrasound, and the diagnosis conﬁ rmed by mic-
turating cystourethrogram. Early treatment by 
surgical incision of the valves before renal failure 
occurs is important.  
 Bladder  n eck  ﬁ  brosis 
 Bladder neck ﬁ brosis produces the symptoms of 
prostatic hyperplasia but without enlargement 
of the prostate. It is usually a consequence of 
scarring following instrumentation or prostatic 
resection. 
 Treatment 
 Endoscopic incision of the bladder neck is 
performed. 
 Urinary  r etention 
 Urinary retention may be acute, chronic or acute 
on chronic. 
  •   Acute retention  presents with inability to pass 
urine, suprapubic pain and a suprapubic mass. 
The differential diagnosis that must always be 
considered is a ruptured abdominal aortic 
aneurysm, in which the mass may be pulsatile, 
the pain radiates into the back and the patient 
is shocked (causing anuria).  
  •   Chronic urinary retention  is a more insidious 
process with gradual enlargement of the 
bladder, dribbling incontinence and little or no 
pain. 

The prostate 365
 Assessment of the  g eneral 
 c ondition of the  p atient 
 The average patient with retention of urine admit-
ted to hospital is an elderly man. Before proceed-
ing to major surgery, his general condition must 
obviously be carefully investigated, again under 
the three headings. 
 History 
 Exercise tolerance, the presence of cough and 
sputum and a history of previous coronary epi-
sodes are enquired into.  
 Examination 
 Chest, cardiovascular system and blood pressure. 
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   Chest X - ray and electrocardiogram are 
performed if necessary.  
  •   The haemoglobin level is checked. 
 Scheme of  m anagement of 
 a cute  u rinary  r etention 
 The three common causes for an emergency sur-
gical admission of a man with acute urinary reten-
tion are benign prostatic hyperplasia, malignant 
disease of the prostate and urethral stricture. The 
scheme shown in Figure  43.2  outlines the manage-
ment of such cases. An attempt is made to cathe-
terize the patient under full aseptic precautions. 
 Benign  p rostatic  e nlargement 
 Proceed to prostatectomy as soon as convenient if 
the renal function and general condition of the 
patient are satisfactory. If renal damage or general 
poor condition preclude operation, drainage by 
urethral catheter is continued until these can be 
improved. If the patient is in such poor health that 
operation is inappropriate, for example a bedrid-
den patient, then he is best managed by perma-
nent urethral drainage, the catheter being changed 
regularly and urinary antiseptics used if necessary, 
should urinary infection occur. A self - retaining 
Foley catheter 2  is far kinder to the patient than a 
leaky and smelly permanent suprapubic cysto-
stomy tube.  
tion such as the autonomic neuropathy of 
diabetes. 
 The diagnosis of the cause of retention is made 
by the usual three steps. 
 History 
 This may reveal the typical progressive symptoms 
of prostatism, a story of urethral infection suggest-
ing stricture, a preceding episode of ureteric colic 
suggesting stone, etc.  
 Examination 
 This includes a rectal examination to determine 
the size and nature of the prostate, palpation of 
the urethra for stone or stricture, inspection of the 
urethral meatus and examination of the CNS. 
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   X - ray of the pelvis may reveal a calculus at the 
bladder base or bony secondaries from 
prostatic carcinoma.  
  •   PSA should be measured, but not until 6 weeks 
have passed following the episode of retention 
since this can elevate the PSA. A raised value is 
suggestive of carcinoma. 
 Assessment of the  d egree of 
 r enal  d amage 
 The patient with retention of urine may have 
damaged his kidneys by back pressure; obviously, 
this is far more likely to occur in long - standing 
cases of chronic retention, but the possibility must 
be considered in every case. This assessment again 
is made under the three following headings. 
 History 
 Renal failure is suggested by headaches, anorexia, 
vomiting and mental disturbance. 
 Examination 
 Is the patient pale and drowsy with the dry, coated 
tongue of uraemia?  
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   Urea and cr eatinine  are estimated: a blood 
urea over 7   mmol/L and/or creatinine over 
135  μ mol/L suggest at least some degree of 
renal impairment. 
  2   Frederick Foley (1891 – 1966), Urologist, Boston, MA, then St. Paul, 
MN, USA. 

366 
The prostate
plastic operation on the stricture is indicated, but 
only rarely is permanent suprapubic drainage 
required. 
 Chronic  u rinary  r etention 
 If there is evidence of renal impairment, the 
patient is catheterized, and the catheter left in for 
a period to allow the renal function, and the 
general condition, to improve. Following relief of 
the hydronephrosis that accompanies chronic 
obstruction, there is a polyuric phase, and intra-
venous ﬂ uid replacement may be required to keep 
up with the ﬂ uid losses. Bleeding is common fol-
lowing decompression of a chronically distended 
bladder; there is no advantage in the intermittent 
catheter clamping that was once advocated when 
draining such bladders. 
 
 
 
 Malignant  d isease of the  p rostate 
 In the presence of metastatic spread, hormone 
therapy is commenced. Endoscopic prostatec-
tomy is required for localized tumours, or large 
tumours if symptoms persist on hormonal therapy.  
 Urethral  s tricture (Chapter  44 , 
 p . 368) 
 The catheter will not pass and the urethra must be 
gently dilated with bougies under local or general 
anaesthetic. Following this, it is possible to cath-
eterize the patient and to continue with regular 
urethral dilatations or, preferably, to divide the 
stricture endoscopically with an optical ure-
throtome. Rarely, the stricture is impassable and 
the patient requires a temporary suprapubic 
cystotomy prior to urethrotomy. Occasionally, a 
 Figure 43.2   Treatment of acute retention.  
Attempt to catheterize
Catheter cannot pass
= stricture
Catheter passes
(exclude general causes)
Endoscopic
prostatectomy
if necessary
Continue 
drainage until
fit for surgery
Benign hypertrophy
Fit patient
Malignant
Unfit patient
Hormone
therapy
Prostatectomy
Dilatation
Prostate
Suprapubic 
cystostomy
if impassable

 44 
The  m ale  u rethra  
 
 Learning  o bjectives 
  ✓   To know the congenital anomalies of the male urethra. 
  ✓   To know the different types of urethral injury and their 
management. The reader should also know the causes, 
investigation and treatment of urethral stricture.     
resulting in chronic retention of urine and uraemia 
in infants. 
 Injury to the  u rethra 
 This may be classiﬁ ed into rupture of the bulbous 
urethra and rupture of the membranous urethra. 
 The  b ulbous  u rethra 
 This may be damaged by a direct blow, e.g. a fall 
astride a bar (such as a bicycle cross - bar) or a kick 
in the perineum, or during forcible dilatation or 
cystoscopy. The patient will complain of severe 
pain in the perineum and usually bright - red blood 
will be seen dripping from the external meatus. 
There will be marked bruising in the region of the 
injury. 
 The  m embranous  u rethra 
 This is injured in pelvic fractures, especially those 
involving dislocation of a portion of the pelvis; 
it is torn at its junction with the prostatic urethra. 
As with extraperitoneal rupture of the bladder 
(Chapter  42 , p. 354), blood and urine are extrava-
sated in the extraperitoneal space and produce a 
swelling dull to percussion above the pubis. If the 
urethra is torn from the bladder, the prostate is 
displaced and there will be a feeling of emptiness 
on rectal examination. 
 The attempted passage of a catheter in a patient 
with a pelvic fracture can be both misleading and 
 Congenital  a nomalies 
 Hypospadias 
 The male urethra is formed by the inrolling of the 
genital folds, which themselves form the corpus 
spongiosum. If the genital folds fail to develop or 
fuse completely, the tube is either short or absent. 
The urethra thus opens onto the ventral surface of 
the penis anywhere from the perineum up to the 
glans. Hypospadias is associated with an abnor-
mal prepuce that is deﬁ cient ventrally, and so 
appears hooded. Proximal hypospadias is associ-
ated with a downward curvature of the penis 
on erection, termed  chordee . Treatment involves 
plastic procedures utilizing the prepuce as a skin 
ﬂ ap; circumcision before correction of the abnor-
mality is therefore contraindicated.  
 Epispadias 
 The urethra opens dorsally on the penis. It is asso-
ciated with other anterior abdominal wall defects 
including exstrophy of the bladder.  
 Posterior  u rethral  v alves ( s ee 
 a lso Chapter  43 ,  p . 364) 
 A valve - like membrane at the level of the veru-
montanum. This can obstruct the ﬂ ow of urine, 
Lecture Notes: General Surgery, 12th edition. © Harold Ellis, 
Sir Roy Y. Calne and Christopher J. E. Watson. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

368 
The male urethra
approximated to the ruptured urethra by 
means of sutures in the anterior prostatic 
capsule. The urethral catheter will remain  in 
situ for 2 weeks. 
  •   Incomplete rupture . If there is little 
extravasation, and continuity is preserved, a 
well - lubricated urethral catheter should be 
passed carefully, and left in place for 10 days.     
 Bulbous  u rethral  i njuries 
  •   Complete rupture . A complete laceration is an 
indication for urgent open repair, with suture 
of the tear and diversion of the urinary stream 
by suprapubic drainage. 
  •   Incomplete rupture . If there is little 
extravasation, and continuity is preserved, a 
well - lubricated urethral catheter may be 
passed carefully, and left in place for 10 days. 
Alternatively, a suprapubic catheter can be 
inserted. 
 Complications 
  •   Stricture formation often occurs following 
injuries to the urethra because of scarring; 
subsequent repair may be necessary.  
  •   Impotence occurs in half the patients, as a 
consequence of either a pelvic injury involving 
the terminal branches of the internal iliac 
arteries or injury to the nerves supplying the 
penis. 
 Urethral  s tricture 
 Aetiology 
 Congenital 
  •   Meatal stenosis in hypospadias. 
 Acquired 
 1  Trauma : 
 a  urethral instrumentation including 
catheterization;  
 b  rupture of the urethra; 
 c  previous urethral or prostatic surgery. 
 2  Postinfection : 
 a  gonococcal; 
 b  non - speciﬁ c urethritis, e.g.  Chlamydia . 
 3  Carcinoma of the urethra (extremely rare). 
dangerous: misleading in that the catheter may 
pass along a partially ruptured posterior urethra 
into the bladder so that the diagnosis is missed, 
and dangerous in that the catheter may complete 
the tear in a partially ruptured urethra or produce 
a false passage.  
 Management 
 Satisfactory management depends on a high index 
of suspicion leading to early diagnosis, as extrava-
sation of urine is liable to lead to secondary 
infection, which will greatly complicate the 
condition. The presence of bleeding from the 
meatus, or a fracture of the pelvis, combined 
with urinary retention, should alert to the 
possibility. 
 Initial  m anagement 
  •   Rectal examination  is performed to determine 
whether the prostate is palpable and in the 
normal position. An absent or high prostate 
implies a complete rupture of the 
membranous urethra, and urgent exploration 
is indicated.  
  •   A urethrogram using water - soluble contrast 
medium will identify extravasation or loss of 
continuity, and localize the site of injury.  
  •   Contrast - enhanced computed tomography is 
usually required to evaluate pelvic injuries 
fully. 
  •   The ABC of resuscitation  should not be 
forgotten, since many of these injuries occur in 
conjunction with a pelvic fracture. 
 Membranous  u rethral  i njuries 
  •   Complete rupture , in which rectal examination 
conﬁ rms that the prostate (and therefore 
bladder) is ﬂ oating out of the pelvis. Initial 
management is the passage of a suprapubic 
catheter. Subsequent management depends on 
the associated injuries, for example whether 
the pelvis is to be ﬁ xed by internal ﬁ xation. 
Surgery is either performed early, around the 
time of the pelvic ﬁ xation, or after an interval 
of around 6 weeks. 
 Primary anastomosis is rarely possible. 
Instead, the base of the bladder and the 
urethra are approximated. The retropubic 
space is explored and the haematoma 
evacuated. A urethral catheter is passed and 
railroaded into the bladder. The bladder is 

The male urethra 369
  •   Urethroscopy will visualize the stricture and 
facilitate treatment. 
 Treatment 
 Optical urethrotomy is the ﬁ rst - line treatment. 
Urethral strictures have a high chance of recur-
rence depending on the length of the stricture and 
the degree of corporal ﬁ brosis. About 50% of stric-
tures recur after optical urethrotomy, although 
this rate can be reduced to 20% by getting the 
patient to use intermittent self - catheterization 
with disposable catheters. 
 Recurrent strictures can be treated by further 
optical urethrotomy or urethroplasty, with either 
simple resection of the stricture with end - to - end 
anastomosis of the ends, or interposition of a tube 
of buccal mucosa. 
 The management of acute retention due to ure-
thral stricture is outlined on Chapter  43 , p. 366. 
 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 The patient with a urethral stricture complains of 
difﬁ culty in passing urine with a poor stream and 
states that only by straining can he empty his 
bladder. He is usually younger than 50 years (in 
contrast to prostatic disease), and may suffer 
urinary infection and acute retention as a conse-
quence of the stricture.  
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   Urethrogram  will demonstrate the location and 
length of the stricture.  
  •   Urethral ultrasound  will deﬁ ne the stricture 
and assess the presence of corporal ﬁ brosis, 
which is of prognostic value in determining the 
chance of recurrence.  
  •   Urinary ﬂ ow rate : the stricture limits the ﬂ ow 
of urine, and measurement of the ﬂ ow rate 
shows a ﬂ at plateau. 

 45 
The  p enis  
 
 Learning  o bjectives 
  ✓   To understand phimosis and paraphimosis and their treatment. 
  ✓   To know about carcinoma of the penis, its presentations and 
treatment. 
  ✓   To know the causes of impotence and its treatment. 
Once swelling starts, it becomes more difﬁ cult to 
replace the foreskin. 
 Paraphimosis 
commonly 
occurs 
after 
an 
erection. It may also occur following urethral 
catheterization, when the foreskin is forcibly 
retracted over the glans to expose the meatus. 
Once the catheter is inserted, the thickened 
scarred prepuce constricts the venous return, 
producing a paraphimosis. Hence it is important 
to ensure always that the patient ’ s prepuce is 
pulled forward again after the insertion of an 
indwelling catheter  –  if not, paraphimosis may 
follow. 
 Treatment 
 Once a paraphimosis has become established, 
it is difﬁ cult to reduce. There are two commonly 
used courses of action. Under a penile local anaes-
thetic block, the glans is squeezed for a few 
minutes to reduce the oedema, and enable the 
foreskin to be reduced. If squeezing fails, the fore-
skin may be slit dorsally to release the constricting 
band. 
 Having once had a paraphimosis, the patient 
should be considered for a formal circumcision to 
prevent recurrence. 
 Non - r etractile  p repuce 
 Many male infants are presented to the doctor or 
nurse because the parents notice that the prepuce 
 Phimosis 
 Phimosis is gross narrowing of the preputial 
oriﬁ ce. It occurs rarely as a congenital lesion, but 
may result from scarring following the trauma of 
forcible retraction of the prepuce (see below) or as 
a result of chronic balanitis. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 On micturition, the prepuce is seen to balloon and 
the urinary stream is reduced to a dribble.  
 Treatment 
 Circumcision is performed. In some cases of 
chronic balanitis with considerable inﬂ ammation 
of the prepuce, a dorsal slit is an efﬁ cient, but less 
aesthetic, method of cure. 
 Paraphimosis 
 Paraphimosis results from pulling a tight foreskin 
proximally over the glans. The foreskin acts as a 
constricting band, interfering with venous return 
from the glans, which therefore swells painfully. 
Lecture Notes: General Surgery, 12th edition. © Harold Ellis, 
Sir Roy Y. Calne and Christopher J. E. Watson. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

The penis 371
 Balanitis 
 Balanitis is an acute inﬂ ammation of the foreskin 
and glans and is usually due to the common pyo-
genic organisms, for instance coliform bacilli, 
staphylococci and streptococci. It may result in 
phimosis from scarring. 
 It is important to test the urine for sugar to 
exclude diabetes, which may predispose to the 
inﬂ ammation, in which case  Candida  may be the 
infecting organism. 
 Treatment 
 Treatment consists of administering the appropri-
ate antibiotic after the organism has been cultured 
and its sensitivity has been determined. Local 
toilet with weak disinfectant solutions may give 
relief symptomatically. 
 Carcinoma 
 Pathology 
 This tumour usually affects elderly subjects. It is 
uncommon in the UK, although relatively fre-
quently seen in Africa and the East. It is almost 
invariably associated with the presence of retained 
smegma and is virtually unknown among Jews, 
who are circumcised soon after birth. 
 The most frequent site of the tumour is in the 
sulcus between the glans and the prepuce. 
 Macroscopic  a ppearance 
 The premalignant stage is a persistent red patch 
on the penis progressing to either a papillary 
growth on the glans or an inﬁ ltrating ulcer; the 
latter is more common.  
 Microscopic  a ppearance 
 The lesions are squamous carcinomas, which are 
usually well differentiated. 
 Spread 
  •   Local : the tumour may fungate through the 
prepuce to present as an ulcerating lesion on 
the penile skin. Proximal spread along the 
shaft may destroy the substance of the penis.  
cannot be retracted. In fact, the foreskin is nor-
mally ﬁ rmly adherent to the glans until 3 years of 
age. Over the next 3 years, the congenital adhe-
sions between the glans and the foreskin lyse, pro-
gressively separating from the glans. 
 Forcible attempts to retract the foreskin trauma-
tize the tissues, and the resultant scarring may lead 
to a true phimosis. Inability to retract the foreskin 
in the infant is not an indication in itself for cir-
cumcision; indeed, in the  ‘ nappy ’ stage the prepuce 
protects the delicate glans and the urethral oriﬁ ce 
from the excoriation of ammoniacal dermatitis. 
 Circumcision  
 Circumcision is the resection of the foreskin, 
leaving the glans exposed. Indications for circum-
cision include the following: 
  •   phimosis; 
  •   paraphimosis; 
  •   religious custom; 
  •   non - retractile prepuce over 6 years of age. 
 Having the prepuce removed reduces the risk 
of carcinoma of the penis, probably because it 
prevents the accumulation of smegma, which is 
carcinogenic. 
 Ammoniacal  d ermatitis 
 This is a common cause of inﬂ ammation of the 
penis in children and is due to the presence of 
ammonia liberated by urea - splitting organisms. 
This is especially liable to occur if the child ’ s 
nappies are infrequently changed and he is 
allowed to remain wet. The ammonia causes a 
painful, red, oedematous rash on the perineum, 
penis and foreskin. 
 Treatment 
 Treatment is to change the child ’ s nappies fre-
quently, wash the area with warm water and to 
cover the skin with a protective barrier cream such 
as zinc oxide. Secondary bacterial or candidal 
infections may occur and require appropriate 
antimicrobials. 
 Circumcision should be avoided in the presence 
of ammoniacal dermatitis, as a meatal ulcer is 
likely to result. 

372 
The penis
 Aetiology 
 Impotence most commonly occurs as a conse-
quence of ageing, such that 70% of 70 year olds 
have some difﬁ culty with obtaining an erection 
(although 70% of 70 year olds also have sexual 
intercourse once a month). Aside from ageing, the 
other causes of erectile impotence are as follows. 
 Neurogenic 
 Erection is mediated via efferent parasympathetic 
ﬁ bres from S2, S3, S4. Reﬂ ex erection requires 
afferent signals via the pudendal nerve, while psy-
chogenic erection requires outﬂ ow from the brain 
via the spinal cord. Causes of neurogenic impo-
tence include the following: 
  •   congenital : spina biﬁ da; 
  •   spinal causes : spinal cord injury, spinal cord 
tumour; 
  •   central causes : hypothalamic injury, cerebral 
infarction/tumour; 
  •   postsurgical causes : e.g. pelvic surgery such as 
anterior resection, abdominoperineal resection 
and radical prostatectomy. 
 Vascular 
 Erection requires increased arterial ﬂ ow into 
the erectile tissue of the penis, together with 
some degree of venous outﬂ ow inhibition. Arterial 
disease affecting ﬂ ow in the internal iliac arteries, 
as may result from aortoiliac disease, can cause 
impotence and buttock claudication (Leriche ’ s 
syndrome 1 ). 
 Hormonal 
  •   Diabetes mellitus , the most common hormonal 
cause, but probably acting via a diabetic 
neuropathy. 
  •   Pituitary failure , primary testicular failure, 
hypothyroidism, and most other endocrine 
diseases may contribute to impotence. 
 Pharmacological 
 Some drugs, in particular antihypertensive agents, 
tranquillizers and oestrogens, may cause impo-
tence. Alcohol is also a common cause. 
  •   Lymphatic : the inguinal lymph nodes are 
frequently involved, often bilaterally. 
  •   Blood - borne  spread occurs late and is unusual. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 The patient may present with an ulcer on the 
glans or because of a purulent or blood - stained 
discharge from below the non - retractile prepuce. 
He may wait until the tumour has ulcerated 
through the prepuce or until most of his penis 
has been destroyed by growth. Surprisingly 
enough, carcinoma of the penis never seems to 
occlude the urethra sufﬁ ciently to produce reten-
tion of urine.  
 Treatment 
 Diagnosis is achieved by biopsy, which often 
necessitates excision of the foreskin. 
 Early growths can be treated adequately by local 
radiotherapy using iridium wires, or by partial 
amputation of the penis if the urethra is encroached 
upon. Survival from early disease is good (near 
100% at 5 years). 
 When the regional lymph nodes are involved, 
which is the case in 50% of patients at presenta-
tion, treatment is more difﬁ cult. Radical surgery 
may effect a cure, and consists of total amputation 
of the penis and bilateral block dissections of the 
inguinal lymph nodes, usually with some form 
of plastic surgical reconstruction. This operation, 
although mutilating, does not interfere with mic-
turition because both the internal and external 
sphincters are preserved. After a total amputation 
of the penis, the patient will need to micturate 
sitting down. 
 Inoperably ﬁ xed lymph nodes are treated by 
palliative irradiation. 
 In summary, 
  •   urethra intact : radiotherapy; 
  •   urethra involved : amputation; 
  •   lymph nodes involved : block dissection if 
operable, radiotherapy as a palliative measure 
if matted together and ﬁ xed. 
 Impotence 
 Impotence is the inability to achieve, or sustain, 
an erection satisfactory to permit penetration for 
sexual intercourse. 
  1   Ren é  Leriche (1879 – 1955), Professor of Surgery successively in 
Strasbourg, Lyon and Paris, France. 

The penis 373
  •   Sildenaﬁ l , a phosphodiesterase type 5 
inhibitor, is taken 1 hour before intercourse. It 
causes vasodilatation of the corporus 
cavernosum, but is contraindicated in patients 
on nitrate therapy, e.g. for ischaemic heart 
disease, since this combination can result in 
severe hypotension. 
  •   Sublingual apomorphine has a faster action 
than sildenaﬁ l, but is associated with nausea. 
  •   Alprostadil  (prostaglandin E1), given by 
intrapenile injection or by direct intraurethral 
application, is also effective.  
  •   A vacuum condom , or an  intrapenile inﬂ atable 
prosthesis may be required. 
 
 
 Psychogenic 
 Psychogenic impotence is usually of sudden onset, 
and the patient continues to have nocturnal erec-
tions and erections following masturbation, sug-
gesting there is not a physical cause.   
 Special  i nvestigations 
 A full history and examination are conducted to 
determine the cause. Other investigations include 
the following: 
  •   urine dipstick  to detect diabetes;  
  •   hormone screen : abnormalities in the blood 
levels of testosterone, follicle - stimulating 
hormone, luteinizing hormone, prolactin and 
thyroxine should be excluded. 
 Treatment 
 Treatable medical causes are excluded, and hor-
monal disturbances are corrected when possible. 
Other treatments include the following: 

 46 
The  t estis and  s crotum  
 
 Learning  o bjectives 
  ✓   To know the different causes of testicular maldescent and their 
treatment. 
  ✓   To have knowledge of testicular torsion, how it presents, its 
differential diagnosis and treatment.  
  ✓   To know the different causes of scrotal lumps, their differing 
clinical features and treatment, including the diagnosis and 
management of testicular tumours. 
 Classiﬁ cation of  m aldescent 
 Testicular maldescent can be subdivided accord-
ing to whether or not the testis followed the 
normal course of descent. 
 Ectopic  t estis ( u ncommon) 
 A testis that has strayed from the normal line of 
descent is termed ectopic. The commonest posi-
tion is in the superﬁ cial inguinal pouch, which lies 
anterior to the external oblique aponeurosis. The 
testis reaches this site after migrating through the 
external inguinal ring and then leaves the normal 
track of descent to pass laterally. Other situations 
are the groin, the perineum, the root of the penis 
and the femoral triangle.  
 Undescended  t estis ( c ommon) 
 A testis that has followed the normal course of 
descent but has stopped short of the scrotum is 
termed an undescended or, more properly, an 
incompletely descended testis. It may lie any-
where from the abdominal cavity, along the 
inguinal canal, to the top of the scrotum. The 
vast majority are due to a local defect in devel-
opment. The affected testis is always small and 
it is probable that this imperfect development 
impairs descent rather than that the imperfect 
descent impairs development. The incompletely 
descended testis is usually accompanied by per-
 Abnormalities of 
 t esticular  d escent 
 Embryology 
 The testis arises from the mesodermal germinal 
ridge in the posterior wall of the abdominal cavity. 
It links up with the epididymis and vas deferens, 
which develop from the mesonephric duct. As the 
testis enlarges, it undergoes caudal migration. By 
the third month of fetal life it is in the iliac fossa; 
by the seventh month it reaches the inguinal 
canal; by the eighth month it has reached the 
external inguinal ring; and by the ninth month, at 
birth, it has descended into the scrotum. During 
this descent, a prolongation of peritoneum, called 
the processus vaginalis, projects into the fetal 
scrotum; the testis slides behind this and is thus 
covered in its front and sides by peritoneum. The 
processus vaginalis becomes obliterated at about 
the time of birth, leaving the testis covered by the 
tunica vaginalis. As expected from the embryol-
ogy, abnormalities of descent are more common 
in premature infants (20% incidence) than in full -
 term infants (2%).  
Lecture Notes: General Surgery, 12th edition. © Harold Ellis, 
Sir Roy Y. Calne and Christopher J. E. Watson. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

The testis and scrotum 375
be seen on microscopy, which may lead to 
impaired spermatogenesis. The operation, termed 
orchidopexy, consists of mobilizing the testis and 
its cord, removing the coexisting hernial sac and 
ﬁ xing the testis in the scrotum without tension. 
 Complications of  m aldescent 
  •   Defective spermatogenesis, sterility if bilateral. 
  •   Increased risk of torsion. 
  •   Increased risk of trauma. 
  •   Increased risk of malignant disease, even if 
surgical correction is carried out.  
  •   Inguinal hernia  – persistence of the processus 
vaginalis. 
 Scrotal  s wellings 
 Examination 
 When considering any swelling in the scrotum, 
the following three questions should be consid-
ered in turn (Figure  46.1 ). 
 1  Can the examiner ’ s ﬁ ngers meet above the 
swelling ? If this is not possible, the swelling 
arises from the abdomen and is an 
inguinoscrotal hernia.  
 2  If it is possible to palpate clearly the upper edge 
of the swelling, is the swelling cystic ? If it is 
cystic on transillumination and the testis is 
palpable separate from the swelling, the 
swelling is a cyst of the epididymis. However, if 
the testis is not palpable because it lies within 
the cyst, it is a hydrocele.  
 3  If the swelling is solid, the following must be 
considered: 
 a  the swelling is an abnormal testis, e.g. a 
tumour or (rarely) a gumma;  
 b     the epididymis is involved  –  this is usually 
an inﬂ ammatory condition, either acute or 
chronic. 
 The latter is either tuberculous or the 
residual chronic thickening that may persist 
for many months after an acute pyogenic 
infection that has been treated with an 
antibiotic. 
 Special  i nvestigation 
 Ultrasound of the swelling  is valuable in determin-
ing whether there is an underlying solid mass in 
sistent patency of the processus vaginalis, pre-
senting as a congenital inguinal hernia. Unilateral 
undescended testes are four times as common as 
bilateral. The condition of bilateral undescended 
impalpable testes is termed  cryptorchidism . 
 Most, if not all, testes that are going to descend 
do so within the ﬁ rst few months of life. If the testis 
is not in its normal scrotal position in early child-
hood, it is very unlikely that it will be capable of 
spermatogenesis. However, the interstitial cells 
are functional, so that secondary sex characteris-
tics develop normally.   
 Differential  d iagnosis: 
the  r etractile  t estis 
 The most common mistake in diagnosis is to fail 
to differentiate a true maldescent from a retractile 
testis. The retractile testis is a normal testis with 
an excessively active cremasteric reﬂ ex, resulting 
in the testis being drawn up to the external 
inguinal ring. It is a common condition and often 
the parents think that the testes have failed to 
descend; indeed, when the scrotum is palpated 
the testes may not be felt. However, careful exami-
nation will probably reveal the testis at the exter-
nal inguinal ring or at the root of the scrotum and 
the testis can, by downward stroking or by gentle 
traction, be coaxed into the scrotum. A useful trick 
is to place the child in the squatting position for 
the examination; this often encourages a retractile 
testis to descend into the scrotum. It is also worth-
while asking the parents to examine the child 
when he is relaxed in a warm bath; again, the 
retractile testis may then slip into its normal 
position. 
 If the testis is easily palpable in the groin and 
remains easy to feel when the child tenses his 
abdominal wall muscles, it is lying in the ectopic 
position and not in the inguinal canal  – where it is 
usually impalpable or, at the most, in a thin boy, 
detected as a vague, tender bulge.  
 Treatment 
 The child with retractile testes is normal; reassur-
ance of the parents is all that is required. 
 The ectopic or undescended testis must be 
placed in the scrotum if it is to function as a sperm -
 producing organ. The optimum age for surgery 
has been revised in recent times, and current rec-
ommendations are for surgery around the age of 
2. After that age, deﬁ nite changes in the testis can 

376 
The testis and scrotum
eral, and produce a ﬂ uctuant and usually highly 
translucent swelling in the scrotum. As they arise 
from the epididymis, the testis is palpable sepa-
rately from, and in front of, the cyst. This is the 
main differentiating point from a hydrocele. The 
contained ﬂ uid may be water - clear or may be 
milky and contain sperm; hence, the old term 
spermatocele. Clinically, there is no way of differ-
entiating between a cyst of the epididymis and 
a spermatocele, and the latter term is best 
abandoned. 
relation to the presence of a scrotal cystic swelling, 
and may indicate its nature.   
 Cysts of the  e pididymis 
 Epididymal cysts arise as cystic degeneration of 
one of the epididymal or para - epididymal struc-
tures, and so are common in middle - aged and 
elderly men. They are often multiple, may be bilat-
 Figure 46.1   The differential diagnosis 
of a scrotal swelling.  
If not, it is an
inguinal hernia
If so, it is a primary
scrotal swelling
No palpable testis –
hydrocele
Testis felt separate –
cyst of epididymis
Epididymis –
chronic epididymitis:
probably TB or 
residium of 
acute infection
Confined to 
testis –
tumour or 
gumma (rare)
2   Is it cystic?
1   Can I get above it?
3   Is it solid?

The testis and scrotum 377
  •   Infantile hydrocele . Infantile hydrocele extends 
from the testis to the internal inguinal ring but 
does not pass into the peritoneal cavity.  
  •   Hydrocele of the cord . Hydrocele of the cord is 
rare. It lies in, or just distal to, the inguinal 
canal, separate from the testis and the 
peritoneum, and represents a length of patent 
processus vaginalis in which the upper and 
lower parts have closed. Diagnosis is 
conﬁ rmed by the simple test of downward 
traction on the testis, which pulls the 
hydrocele of the cord down with it. The 
equivalent in the female is a hydrocele of the 
round ligament within the inguinal canal, 
termed a  hydrocele of the canal of Nuck . 1 
 Secondary  h ydrocele 
 A secondary hydrocele is usually smaller and lax 
and the testis is diseased. It is due to the serosal 
sac surrounding the testis becoming ﬁ lled with an 
exudate secondary to tumour or inﬂ ammation of 
the underlying testis or epididymis.  
 Treatment 
 Infants 
 Hydroceles in infants should be left alone because 
most disappear spontaneously. If the hydrocele 
persists after the ﬁ rst year, operative treatment is 
 Large cysts of the epididymis may trouble the 
patient by getting in the way of his clothes and 
chaﬁ ng his legs. If producing symptoms, cysts 
of the epididymis should be removed surgically. 
Aspiration is usually unsuccessful because of 
recurrence. 
 Hydrocele 
 A hydrocele is an excessive collection of serous 
ﬂ uid in the processus vaginalis, usually the tunica. 
Hydroceles may be classiﬁ ed as follows. 
 Primary or  i diopathic  h ydrocele 
 (Figure   46.2 ) 
 This is usually large and tense. There is no disease 
of the underlying testis. Primary hydroceles may 
be subdivided into the following: 
  •   Vaginal hydrocele . The vaginal hydrocele is the 
usual type of hydrocele surrounding the testis 
and separated from the peritoneal cavity. The 
patient presents with a cystic transilluminable 
swelling in the scrotum. On examination, the 
testis is difﬁ cult to feel and lies at the back of 
the swelling which, owing to the anatomy of 
the tunica, encompasses the anterior and 
lateral portions of the organ.  
  •   Congenital hydrocele . Congenital hydrocele is 
associated with a hernial sac, the still patent 
processus vaginalis. It opens into the 
peritoneal cavity through a narrow oriﬁ ce. 
When elevated it gradually empties.  
 Figure 46.2   (a – d) The anatomical 
classiﬁ cation of hydroceles (the ring at 
the upper end of each diagram 
represents the internal inguinal ring).  
(a)   
Vaginal
hydrocele
(b)  
Congenital
hydrocele
(c)
Infantile
hydrocele
(d)
Hydrocele
of the cord
  1   Anton Nuck (1650 – 1692), Professor of Anatomy and Medicine, 
Leiden, The Netherlands. 

378 
The testis and scrotum
 Clinical  f eatures 
 The patient will have a very painful swelling of 
the epididymis, often with a secondary hydrocele 
and constitutional effects (pyrexia, headache 
and leucocytosis). There may be a history of 
dysuria, suggesting a urinary tract infection, or 
urethral discharge, suggesting a sexually transmit-
ted organism. Examination of the urine may 
reveal the presence of organisms and pus cells, 
but the urine need not be abnormal. Rectal exam-
ination of the prostate may reveal coexistent 
prostatitis. 
 Treatment 
 Treatment is bed rest and the appropriate antibi-
otic given over a prolonged course (6 weeks); cip-
roﬂ oxacin is a typical ﬁ rst - line agent with good 
speciﬁ city for the organisms most often encoun-
tered. If frank abscesses have formed (veriﬁ ed by 
ultrasound), drainage is required. However, with 
early adequate treatment, resolution is more likely. 
The patient will often have residual swelling of the 
epididymis, which may be rather ﬁ rm, and dif-
ferentiation from the tuberculous epididymitis 
may be difﬁ cult unless the history of the previous 
acute attack is obtained. When epididymitis arises 
as a consequence of  Chlamydia  or other sexually 
transmitted disease, it is important that the sexual 
partner is also treated; doxycycline is the antibi-
otic of choice. 
 Differential  d iagnosis 
 As with all acutely painful conditions of the testis, 
torsion must be excluded. If the patient is in his 
teens, torsion is more likely; if he is in his twenties 
and sexually active, epididymitis is more likely. 
However, if doubt exists, urgent exploration is 
mandatory. 
 Chronic  i nfections of 
the  t estis 
 Gumma 
 Although once common, syphilis of the testis is 
now a rarity. The testis is enlarged and is clinically 
difﬁ cult to distinguish from a carcinoma. On peni-
cillin therapy, gummas of the testis melt away.  
advisable. The sac is identiﬁ ed and excised, care 
being taken not to damage any other structures in 
the cord.  
 Adults 
 In young adults, the possibility of tumour should 
be borne in mind. Ultrasound examination will 
usually differentiate a normal from an abnormal 
testis in this situation. 
 The hydrocele can be treated by aspiration, the 
resultant ﬂ uid being straw - coloured with ﬂ ecks of 
cholesterol in it. Operative treatment is the treat-
ment of choice in all but the very elderly, as 
hydroceles recur after aspiration. 
 Secondary hydroceles require treatment for the 
underlying condition. 
 Acute  i nfections of the 
 t estis and  e pididymis 
 Acute infections usually arise as an ascending 
infection via the vas deferens, spreading ﬁ rst to 
the epididymis and thence to the testis; occasion-
ally, infection may be blood - borne. 
 Blood - b orne  i nfection 
 The commonest blood - borne agent to infect the 
testis is the  mumps virus , the testicular manifesta-
tion of which usually follows within a week of 
the onset of parotid enlargement. Occasionally, 
it may occur in the absence of other manifesta-
tions. Diagnosis is conﬁ rmed clinically and by 
the rising level of mumps antibodies in the 
serum. Young adults are particularly likely to be 
affected; there may be residual damage to the 
testis and, if both sides are involved, fertility may 
be impaired.  
 Ascending  i nfection 
 Ascending infection is usually a consequence of 
a preceding urinary tract infection (e.g. with 
 Escherichia coli ) or a urethritis or prostatitis from 
a sexually transmitted organism such as gonor-
rhoea or  Chlamydia , which result in epididymitis. 
Epididymitis may also follow urethral stricture in 
which straining causes reﬂ ux of urine up the vas, 
or instrumentation of the urethra such as during 
prostatectomy. 

The testis and scrotum 379
of previous attacks of pain in the testis due 
to partial torsion and spontaneous untwisting. 
Cycling, straining, lifting and coitus are typical 
precipitants. 
 The history is of a sudden onset of severe pain 
in the groin and lower abdomen, often accompa-
nied by vomiting. The abdominal pain occurs 
because the nerve supply of the testis is mainly 
from the T10 sympathetic pathway. Rarely, the 
pain is limited to the abdomen. Patients with 
torsion of the right testis have been mistakenly 
operated on for acute appendicitis because the 
testis has not been examined with care, or more 
often not at all. 
 Examination of the scrotum reveals a swollen 
testis, painful to touch and lying high in the 
scrotum.  
 Differential  d iagnosis 
 The differential diagnosis is from acute epidi-
dymitis and torsion of a testicular appendage; 
epididymitis does not come on suddenly. 
 1  Epididymitis.  The testis does not lie so high in 
the scrotum, there is a systemic reaction with 
pyrexia and leucocytosis and there is usually a 
history of urinary infection with pus cells and 
organisms in the urine. A useful factor in 
differential diagnosis is the age of the patient, 
as torsion of the testis is unusual after the age 
of 20 years, whereas epididymitis is rare before 
that age.  
 2  Torsion of a testicular appendage.   Two 
embryological remnants exist around the 
testis, the appendix testis and the appendix 
epididymis, which may themselves twist. They 
present in a similar fashion to testicular 
torsion, but on examination the testis does not 
lie high in the scrotum, and a dark blue 
pea - like swelling may be visible through the 
scrotal skin.  
 3  Strangulated inguinal hernia.   Torsion may 
also mimic a strangulated inguinal hernia. 
 Colour Doppler ultrasound  of the testis may be 
helpful in diagnosis, provided it can be carried out 
rapidly by an experienced operator, and without 
delaying surgical exploration. 
 Treatment 
 If there is  any  doubt as to the diagnosis, it is 
best to explore the testis as soon after admission 
as possible, because every hour increases the 
 Tuberculosis 
 This may occur in association with tuberculosis in 
other parts of the genitourinary tract by ascending 
infection, but more commonly is a consequence 
of haematogenous spread. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 The patient usually presents with swelling of the 
epididymis. The vas deferens may be thickened 
and feel nodular. A cold abscess may develop in 
relation to the epididymis and rupture through 
the scrotum, usually posteriorly, resulting in a 
chronic sinus. The seminal vesicles may be 
enlarged and palpable on rectal examination. 
 Diagnosis depends on isolating tubercle bacilli 
from the urine or biopsy material, and/or evi-
dence of tuberculosis elsewhere.  
 Treatment 
 This is the same as for tuberculosis in other situa-
tions. If a chronic sinus has developed, unilateral 
orchidectomy is probably the best form of treat-
ment, as the testis is unlikely to be functional, is a 
continued source of infection and may lead to 
spread of the disease elsewhere.    
 Torsion of the  t estis 
 Aetiology 
 Usually this is a torsion of the spermatic cord in a 
congenitally abnormal testis, often maldescended 
or hanging like a bell clapper within a completely 
investing tunica vaginalis. Occasionally, true 
torsion of the testis occurs without involving the 
cord, when there is an extensive mesorchium 
between the testis and epididymis. It is probably 
impossible for torsion to occur in an anatomically 
completely normal testis. Untreated, the testis 
undergoes irreversible infarction within a few 
hours and there is a typical transudation of blood -
 stained ﬂ uid into the tunica vaginalis. Torsion is 
more common in undescended and ectopic testes. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Torsion of the testis is a surgical emergency, which 
usually occurs in children or adolescents. There 
may be a history of mild trauma to the testis or 

380 
The testis and scrotum
 Disorders of the  s crotal 
 s kin 
 Idiopathic  s crotal  o edema 
 Characteristically affecting prepubescent boys, 
this inﬂ ammatory condition is characterized by 
an erythematous, oedematous swelling of the 
scrotal skin. It may involve both sides of the 
scrotum, and can extend into the groins. Unlike 
torsion, it is painless, and the testicular apparatus 
is normal on examination. Spontaneous resolu-
tion within a few days is usual.  
 Fournier ’ s  g angrene 
 Fournier ’ s gangrene, 2  or synergistic gangrene of 
the scrotum, is a result of synergistic infection 
with several species of bacteria, both aerobic and 
anaerobic; haemolytic streptococci, staphylococci 
and  E. coli are common isolates. 
 The patient is often diabetic and catheterized; 
there may be a history of minor trauma, perianal 
abscess or surgery, although there is no obvious 
precipitating factor in half the cases. The patient 
develops sudden pain in the scrotum, and rapidly 
becomes profoundly toxic. 
 This is a surgical emergency. Treatment 
involves high - dose broad - spectrum antibiotics 
and wide debridement of affected skin, often 
twice daily.  
 Carcinoma of the  s crotum 
 Rare nowadays, this tumour is noteworthy as 
the ﬁ rst described industrial malignant disease. 
Percival Pott 3  (1779) noted an association with 
chimney sweeps, in whom chimney soot acted as 
a carcinogen when ingrained into the scrotal skin. 
Later, it was described in workers with mineral oils 
whose trousers were soaked by the carcinogenic 
oils. 
 Presenting as an ulcerating growth, it is usually 
a squamous carcinoma and is treated by wide 
excision with block dissection of affected inguinal 
nodes. 
likelihood of irreversible damage to the testis. If 
still viable, the testis is untwisted and sutured to 
the tunica vaginalis. If infarcted, it is removed. In 
every case, ﬁ xation of the other testis should be 
performed at the same time, since any congenital 
anomaly is likely to be bilateral and torsion of the 
opposite testis may therefore occur.   
 Varicocele 
 This is a condition of varicosities of the pampini-
form plexus of veins. It usually occurs on the left, 
and manifests ﬁ rst in adolescence. It is present in 
nearly 10% of men, the proportion increasing with 
age and being higher in infertile men. 
 Its origin is said to be due to the drainage of the 
left testicular vein at right angles into the left renal 
vein, unlike the right testicular vein, which drains 
obliquely into the inferior vena cava. Patients with 
varicocele have absent or incompetent valves at 
the junction with the left renal vein. 
 Occasionally, a varicocele can be secondary to a 
tumour or other pathological process blocking the 
testicular vein. The best known example of this is 
a tumour of the left kidney involving the renal vein 
and obstructing the drainage of the left testicular 
vein. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 A varicocele may cause a dragging sensation in 
the scrotum. It is also associated with defective 
spermatogenesis, and patients with varicocele are 
often subfertile. On examination  in the standing 
position , the varicose veins within the scrotum feel 
like a  ‘ bag of worms ’ , but there may be little to feel 
when the patient lies down.  
 Treatment 
 Usually, the varicocele requires no treatment apart 
from reassurance that the condition is not likely to 
give rise to any dangerous complications. If the 
weight of the varicocele and testis causes an ache, 
close - ﬁ tting underpants may help. If the patient 
demands treatment, the varicocele can be cured 
radiologically by embolizing the left testicular 
vein; it may also be treated surgically by ligating 
and dividing all the testicular veins as they traverse 
the inguinal canal. There is  no evidence that treat-
ment of a varicocele has any effect on male 
infertility. 
  2  Jean Alfred Fournier (1832 – 1914),  ‘ Professeur des maladies 
cutan é es et syphilitiques ’ , H ô pital St. Louis, Paris, France. 
  3  Percival Pott (1714 – 1788), Surgeon, St Bartholomew ’ s Hospital, 
London, UK.  

The testis and scrotum 381
  •   Lymphatic : to the para - aortic nodes via 
lymphatics accompanying the testicular vein. 
In advanced cases, there may be enlargement 
of the supraclavicular nodes especially on the 
left side.  
  •   Blood - borne : spread from the teratoma occurs 
relatively early to the lungs and liver. In the 
seminoma this tends to be late in the disease. 
 Clinical  p resentations 
  •   As a lump in the testis. 
  •   As a hydrocele. 
  •   Rarely as a painful rapidly enlarging swelling, 
which may be mistaken for orchitis.  
  •   As secondaries, usually metastatic growths in 
the lung (presenting as breathlessness), as a 
mass in the abdomen due to involved 
abdominal lymph nodes or as a cervical 
lymphadenopathy. 
 Tumours of the testis usually present as a pain-
less, swollen testicle, or a lump on a testicle that is 
hard and may be associated with an overlying sec-
ondary hydrocele, which sometimes contains 
blood - stained ﬂ uid. There is often a misleading 
history of recent trauma, and rarely it may present 
having undergone torsion. 
 Occasionally, gynaecomastia may be a present-
ing feature, owing to the production of paraneo-
plastic hormones.  
 Special  i nvestigations 
  •   Scrotal ultrasound  may reveal a solid tumour 
in a hydrocele; the value of a negative 
ultrasound in the exclusion of malignancy 
depends on the skill of the ultrasonographer.  
  •   Tumour markers : NSGCTs (e.g. teratomas) 
usually produce  α - fetoprotein and many 
produce  β - human chorionic gonadotrophin 
( β - HCG); some pure seminomas also produce 
 β - HCG. These are useful not only in making a 
diagnosis but also in subsequent follow - up. 
  •   Chest X - ray and abdominal CT to seek 
secondary spread and so stage the disease. 
 Treatment 
 If it is suspected that the testicular swelling is due 
to a tumour, early exploration is mandatory. The 
spermatic cord is exposed through an inguinal 
incision, occluded by an atraumatic clamp and 
the testis delivered. The clamp prevents vascular 
 Tumours of the  t estis 
 Testicular tumours are the most common solid 
malignancy in young adult men, although they are 
relatively uncommon, representing around 2% of 
malignancies in men. 
 Aetiology 
 Testicular tumours are associated with unde-
scended and ectopic testis (sevenfold risk). There 
is also an increased incidence in patients who are 
infertile, and those who have had a previous con-
tralateral testicular malignancy.  
 Pathology 
 There are two main forms of malignant tumours 
of the testis  –  seminoma and non - seminomatous 
germ cell tumours (NSGCTs), of which teratoma is 
the main type. Rare tumours include lymphoma, 
which affects an older age group.  
 Seminoma 
 The seminoma (60%) arises from cells of the sem-
iniferous tubules, usually occurs between 30 and 
40 years of age and is relatively slow growing. 
Macroscopically, the tumour is solid, appearing 
rather like a cut potato on section. Microscopically, 
cells vary from well - differentiated spermatocytes 
to undifferentiated round cells with clear cyto-
plasm. Some 10% arise in undescended testes.  
 Teratoma 
 Teratoma (40%) occurs in a younger age group, the 
peak incidence being 20 – 30 years. It is thought 
to arise from primitive totipotential germ cells. 
Macroscopically, it has a markedly cystic appear-
ance and used to be called ﬁ brocystic disease. The 
cut surface may appear like a colloid goitre, and 
areas of haemorrhage and infarction are common. 
Microscopically, the cells are very variable and the 
tumour may contain cartilage, bone, muscle, fat 
and other tissues.  
 Spread 
  •   Local : the testis is progressively destroyed by 
the tumour. Spread through the capsule is 
unusual, but occasionally in an advanced case 
there may be ulceration of the scrotum.  

382 
The testis and scrotum
 Physical  p roblems 
  •   Post - infection , e.g. following mumps orchitis or 
epididymitis. 
  •   Trauma , with subsequent atrophy. 
  •   Neurological , e.g. spinal injury, producing 
erectile and ejaculatory dysfunction. 
  •   Temperature , e.g. varicocele, tight - ﬁ tting 
underpants. 
  •   Iatrogenic , e.g. vasectomy, damage during 
orchidopexy or hernia repair. 
 Hormonal 
  •   Pituitary insufﬁ ciency , e.g. from a pituitary 
tumour or craniopharyngioma.  
  •   Liver failure , causing increased circulating 
oestrogens. 
 Drugs 
  •   Chemotherapy and radiotherapy for cancer, 
usually teratoma or seminoma  –  patients are 
offered sperm - bank facilities prior to 
treatment. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 A full history and thorough examination are 
required to exclude obvious contributory pathol-
ogy. Previous surgery or infection of the testicular 
apparatus is particularly important, especially as 
a child. Coexisting diabetes or renal or hepatic 
failure may contribute to infertility, as can 
smoking. 
 Examination should include assessment of hair 
distribution and general build for evidence of tes-
ticular failure (female distribution). Examination 
of the penis and scrotal contents is particularly 
important, verifying the course of the vas deferens 
on each side, the size of the testis and the presence 
of a varicocele (with the patient standing). The 
presence of hypospadias (Chapter  44 , p. 367) 
should be noted as this may affect where the 
sperm are deposited. 
 Special  i nvestigations 
 Before embarking on investigation, it should be 
ascertained that coitus is occurring regularly. 
Invasive tests are withheld until the infertile 
partner is identiﬁ ed. 
  •   Semen analysis . Ideally, this is produced 
following a period of abstinence of 3 days and 
dissemination of tumour cells. If the diagnosis is 
now obvious, immediate orchidectomy is per-
formed. If the diagnosis is in doubt, a biopsy is 
taken and submitted to frozen section examina-
tion. Orchidectomy is performed if the malig-
nancy is conﬁ rmed. Inguinal, rather than scrotal, 
exploration is performed to avoid exposure to the 
scrotal lymphatics, which drain to the inguinal 
nodes, unlike the spermatic cord, which drains to 
the internal iliac nodes. 
 Seminomas  are highly radiosensitive so that, fol-
lowing orchidectomy, radiotherapy is given to the 
ipsilateral iliac and para - aortic lymph nodes. For 
extensive disease, cytotoxic chemotherapy may 
also be given. 
 Teratomas are not as radiosensitive and are best 
treated by combination cytotoxic chemotherapy. 
Retroperitoneal lymph node dissection also has 
a role, particularly in the treatment of residual 
tumour after chemotherapy. As cytotoxic chemo-
therapy is likely to render the patient infertile, 
prior sperm banking is now offered.  
 Prognosis 
 Node - negative cases have an extremely good 
prognosis of nearly 100% 5 year survival. Even 
with early abdominal lymph node spread, there is 
still a 95% 5 year survival and, with disseminated 
disease, long - term survivals are often achieved 
with chemotherapy. 
 Male  i nfertility 
 The majority of couples who are trying for a preg-
nancy will be rewarded within 2 years. However, 
one in 10 couples suffer infertility, with the 
problem distributed evenly between each partner, 
with one - third of cases due to factors in both the 
man and the woman. 
 Aetiology 
 Congenital  d isorder 
  •   Chromosome abnormality , e.g. Klinefelter ’ s 
syndrome (XXY). 4 
  •   Developmental anomaly , e.g. testicular 
maldescent, absent vas deferens. 
  4   Harry Fitch Klinefelter (1912 – 1990), Associate Professor of 
Medicine, Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, MD, USA.  

The testis and scrotum 383
  •   Vasectomy reversal is attempted. 
  •   An epididymal blockage is corrected. 
  •   Testicular biopsy is performed with sperm 
retrieval only where facilities for sperm storage 
exist. 
 The role of varicocele ligation in the treatment 
of male infertility is not supported by evidence.  
 Assisted  c onception 
 In vitro fertilization (IVF), in which fertilization of 
the ovum takes place outside the body, has revo-
lutionized the treatment of infertility. 
 Complementary techniques include intracyto-
plasmic sperm injection (ICSI), microsurgical 
epididymal sperm aspiration, percutaneous epidi-
dymal sperm aspiration, percutaneous testicular 
sperm aspiration and open testicular sperm 
extraction. Nowadays ICSI, with sperm procure-
ment through one of the above methods, or IVF 
are the treatments of choice, with birth rates per 
cycle of treatment of 15 – 20%. 
 Since the advent of contraceptive medication, 
there has been an increase in the age of planned 
conception with the result that more and more 
couples are having difﬁ culty in conception, with 
fewer children available for adoption. 
 
 
 
is examined within 4 hours. A semen volume 
over 2  mL, with over 20 million sperm per 
millilitre, of which 50% are motile at 4 hours, 
and at least 14% of normal morphology, is 
acceptable. 
  •   Hormone assays  in patients with no sperm 
(azoospermia), or few sperm. Raised prolactin 
is suggestive of a pituitary tumour. Raised 
follicle - stimulating hormone levels, with small 
testes, suggests primary testicular failure.  
  •   Seminal fructose levels . Fructose is produced 
by the seminal vesicles, and is absent in 
disease of the seminal vesicles and in 
congenital absence of the vasa deferentia.  
  •   Transrectal ultrasound  is performed where a 
low - volume ejaculate is produced to detect 
obstruction. 
 Treatment 
 Non - s peciﬁ c  m easures 
 Non - speciﬁ c measures, if no cause is found, 
include wearing loose - ﬁ tting underpants, avoid-
ing hot baths and cessation of smoking and excess 
alcohol intake. Regular intercourse throughout 
the menstrual cycle is encouraged.  
 Surgical 
 Any underlying disease is treated. 

 47 
Transplantation  s urgery  
 
 Learning  o bjectives 
  ✓   To know about organ donation. 
  ✓   To know the principles behind organ matching and 
immunosuppression, together with the different types of 
transplant and their complications. 
 Classiﬁ cation of  g rafts 
  •   Autograft : transplant from one part of the body 
to another, e.g. skin graft. 
  •   Allograft : between members of the same 
species, e.g. human to human. 
  •   Isograft : between identical twins. 
  •   Xenograft : between members of different 
species, e.g. pig to human. 
  •   Structural grafts : act as a non - living scaffold. 
Can be of biological origin (e.g. arterial and 
heart valve grafts) or synthetic (e.g. Dacron 
vascular prosthesis). 
 In addition to classifying a graft according to its 
source, organ grafts are also classiﬁ ed according to 
where they are implanted relative to the native 
organ. 
  •   Orthotopic : the diseased organ is removed 
and replaced by the transplanted organ lying 
in the normal anatomical position, e.g. heart, 
lung and liver transplants are usually 
orthotopic. 
  •   Heterotopic : the transplanted organ is placed 
in a different position from the normal 
anatomical position, e.g. kidney and pancreas 
transplants. The diseased organ is not usually 
removed. 
 This chapter will discuss organ allografts for the 
functional replacement of diseased organs such as 
kidney, liver, heart, lungs and pancreas. 
 Historical  b ackground 
 Early attempts at organ transplantation were 
fraught with failure owing to a lack of appreciation 
of the immune response that resulted in rapid 
destruction of the transplanted organ. It was not 
until 1954 that successful replacement of a dis-
eased organ with a transplanted organ occurred, 
when the immune response was bypassed by per-
forming kidney transplants between identical 
twins. In 1960, the ﬁ rst immunosuppressive drugs 
were used with which the immune response could 
be partly controlled, permitting longer useful 
function of organs from unrelated donors. In the 
subsequent decade, regular haemodialysis, and 
later peritoneal dialysis, became increasingly 
available, able to support patients with kidney 
failure while awaiting transplantation. In the 
1980s, the more powerful immunosuppressant 
ciclosporin permitted transplantation of the liver, 
heart, lungs and pancreas, and afforded better 
results following kidney transplantation. With the 
advances in immunosuppression, better tech-
niques of organ preservation and improved anaes-
thetic and intensive care management, organ 
transplantation to replace diseased organs is now 
an accepted treatment offering transplant recipi-
ents the possibility of long - term survival.  
Lecture Notes: General Surgery, 12th edition. © Harold Ellis, 
Sir Roy Y. Calne and Christopher J. E. Watson. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Transplantation surgery 385
 Donation  a fter  c ardiac  d eath 
( n on - h eart - b eating  d onation) 
 When patients have sustained a catastrophic brain 
injury, but do not fulﬁ l the criteria for the diagno-
sis of death by brain stem criteria, the supervising 
doctors may nevertheless decide that future 
treatment is futile. In such circumstances life -
 supporting treatment is withdrawn and the patient 
dies, death being certiﬁ ed by the absence of a cir-
culation. Following cardiac arrest the donor is 
transferred to the operating theatre, where the 
organs are rapidly cooled, perfused with preserva-
tion solution and removed. Unlike organs from 
brain dead donors, organs removed from donors 
after cardiac death suffer a period of warm ischae-
mia prior to cooling. During this period, the 
organs switch from aerobic to anaerobic metabo-
lism, which depletes intracellular energy stores 
and causes the accumulation of lactic acid. 
Unchecked, this process rapidly results in cell 
death. Organs vary in their tolerance of warm 
ischaemia, with kidneys remaining viable for 
about 60 minutes whereas the liver tolerates less 
than 30 minutes. In such cases, the initial function 
of the organs is inferior to those removed follow-
ing brain stem death, but the ultimate function is 
satisfactory. 
 Exclusions to  o rgan 
 d onation 
 There are three main reasons why a potential 
donor may be unsuitable. 
 1  Potential transmission of infection.   The 
transplanted organ could carry with it viral 
infections such as hepatitis B and C and 
human immunodeﬁ ciency virus, and any 
bacterial infection that was disseminated in 
the donor. Likewise, donors in whom there is a 
risk of prion infection such as new variant 
Creutzfeldt – Jakob disease are unsuitable. 
 2  Malignancy.  Malignant disease in the donor 
can be transplanted into the recipient, where it 
may become established in the 
immunosuppressed environment. Therefore, 
with the exception of low - grade primary brain 
tumours (which do not spread outside the 
central nervous system) and superﬁ cial 
non - melanoma skin tumours, active 
 Organ  d onors 
 There are two potential sources of donor organs. 
 Living  d onors 
 Living donation is possible when removal of 
either a paired organ (e.g. the kidney) or part of 
an unpaired organ (e.g. the liver or lung) leaves 
the donor with sufﬁ cient residual organ function, 
and provides an organ or part of an organ for a 
recipient. Live donation is most common in 
kidney transplantation, in which the donor can 
maintain adequate renal function with only 
one kidney and donate the other to a relative, 
partner or, less commonly, a friend. As with 
any operation, there are risks to the donor, 
especially of postoperative events such as chest 
and wound infection, deep vein thrombosis 
and pulmonary embolism; the risk of death fol-
lowing kidney donation is estimated to be between 
1 in 1600 and 1 in 3200. In the UK, there are 
now more living kidney donors than deceased 
kidney donors. Donation of a portion of the 
liver, either to a child or to another adult, involves 
a major operation and runs the risk of leaving 
the donor with borderline liver function from 
the remaining liver lobe; the risk of death 
following donation of a liver lobe is estimated at 
between 1 in 100 and 1 in 200. Live donation of a 
lung lobe is also possible, the recipients usually 
being children.  
 Deceased  d onors 
 There are two types of organ donation from 
deceased donors: 
 Donation  a fter  b rain  s tem  d eath 
 Most organs for transplantation come from donors 
who have sustained a lethal brain injury following 
a head injury, intracranial haemorrhage or primary 
brain tumour, and who have been certiﬁ ed dead 
by  ‘ brain stem ’ criteria (Chapter  15 , p. 125). The 
organs are removed from the donor in the operat-
ing theatre after isolating their vascular pedicles 
and while the heart is still beating; when circula-
tion ceases the organs are rapidly cooled by per-
fusion  in situ with an ice - cold organ - preservation 
solution.  

386 
Transplantation surgery
an elevation of serum bilirubin concentration over 
100  μ mol/L is an indication for transplantation. In 
acute liver failure, transplantation is indicated 
if the synthetic function of the liver is severely 
impaired, as best reﬂ ected by the degree of eleva-
tion of prothrombin time.  
 The  i mmunology of 
 o rgan  t ransplantation 
 The  m ajor  h istocompatibility 
 c omplex 
 When an organ is transplanted, it is recognized as 
foreign by the host ’ s immune system and the 
rejection response is initiated. The recognition is 
mediated by an interaction between host T lym-
phocytes (T cells) and histocompatibility antigens 
on the surface of the allograft (the foreign organ). 
The major histocompatibility complex (MHC) is a 
group of genes that encode molecules (antigens) 
expressed on the surface of cells. The MHC mol-
ecules are of two principal sorts. MHC class I anti-
gens are present on all nucleated cells. MHC class 
II antigens are present on certain cells (e.g. mac-
rophages, monocytes and dendritic cells), and can 
be induced to appear on others by the presence of 
cytokines such as interferon  γ (IFN - γ ). 
 The  h uman  l eucocyte  a ntigen 
 s ystem 
 The human leucocyte antigen (HLA) system 
describes the locus on chromosome 6 containing 
the genes encoding the MHC antigens in the 
human. HLA - A,  - B and  - C loci encode class I 
molecules, whereas class II molecules are 
encoded by HLA - DP,  - DQ and  - DR loci. The exten-
sive polymorphism at the loci, in particular the A 
and B loci, results in differences in the MHC 
antigens on allografts recognized by the host 
lymphocytes. 
 Organ  m atching 
 There are three levels of organ matching that 
can be performed, of which ABO matching is 
required for all transplants. Lymphocytotoxic 
cross - matching is required in recipients who have 
malignancy is a contraindication to organ 
donation.  
 3  Impaired function of donor organ.    If the 
function of the organ is impaired in the donor, 
it is unsuitable for transplantation. For 
example, a heart with severe coronary artery 
disease is unsuitable, while a donor with 
polycystic kidneys is an unsuitable kidney 
donor but may be a suitable heart donor.     
 Organ  p reservation 
 Once removed from the donor, the organs must be 
maintained in their optimum state prior to trans-
fusion. This is achieved by a combination of (1) 
cooling the organ to approximately 4 ° C to reduce 
metabolic activity and (2) perfusing it with, and 
storing it in, a preservation solution that contains 
a pH buffer to counter the lactic acid accumula-
tion and a compound to prevent cell swelling 
by osmosis. One such solution is the University 
of Wisconsin (UW) solution. In this solution, a 
kidney can be preserved for 36 – 40 hours, and a 
liver for up to 20 hours, although in both cases the 
shortest possible preservation period, or  cold 
ischaemia time (the time between cessation of cir-
culation in the donor and implantation in the 
recipient), is desirable. No comparable preserva-
tion solution exists for the heart and lungs, and 
implantation must occur within 4 – 6 hours, to 
ensure immediate life - sustaining function of 
these organs. An alternative for kidney preserva-
tion is to place the organ on a machine that 
continuously pumps ice - cold preservation ﬂ uid 
through it.  
 Organ  r ecipients 
 Patients are considered for transplantation when 
they are in chronic organ failure without hope 
of recovery, but still ﬁ t enough to withstand the 
operative procedure. For kidney transplantation, 
potential transplant recipients should be on or 
about to start dialysis. Patients with chronic liver 
disease are placed on the transplant waiting list 
when their liver disease warrants, such that their 
risk of death without a transplant is greater than 
the risk of death following transplantation. For 
example, in patients with primary biliary cirrhosis, 

Transplantation surgery 387
 MHC  m atching 
 In order to minimize the immune response to an 
organ allograft, the recipient ’ s MHC antigens can 
be matched to the donor. The best matching, in 
fact perfect matching, comes from an identical 
twin. The inheritance of MHC antigens follows 
Mendelian genetics, 1  and the antigens are codo-
minantly expressed with a degree of linkage. 
Therefore, within a family, there is a one in four 
chance that two siblings will share the same MHC 
antigens; a one in two chance of them differing by 
one haplotype; and a one in four chance of them 
inheriting a completely different set of HLA anti-
gens. One in four living related sibling donors will 
thus offer a signiﬁ cant immunological advantage 
by complete HLA identity. 
 Unrelated 
donor – recipient 
pairs 
are 
also 
matched with a view to minimizing differences 
between MHC antigens. Three HLA loci, A, B and 
DR, are speciﬁ cally considered. The object of 
organ matching is to reduce the number of mis-
matched antigens out of the six possible MHC 
antigens encoded by the three loci. This strategy 
has been shown to be beneﬁ cial for renal trans-
plantation. Retrospective analysis has also shown 
a beneﬁ t of matching for the survival of heart 
transplants, but the short preservation time pre-
vents prospective matching.   
 Rejection 
 Hyperacute  r ejection 
 Patients may develop antibodies to foreign HLA 
molecules following exposure to them during 
childbirth, blood transfusion or a previous trans-
plant. When the recipient has preformed antibod-
ies to HLA or ABO blood group antigens on the 
donor, the recipient antibody (HLA or ABO) binds 
to the donor cells, triggering graft destruction in 
minutes or hours.  
 Acute  r ejection 
 Acute rejection occurs when the initial dose of 
immunosuppression is inadequate to prevent the 
recipient ’ s immune system attacking the graft. 
Clinically, acute rejection is characterized by a 
previously been exposed to other HLA antigens 
following previous blood transfusions or trans-
plants or in childbirth. MHC matching is at present 
restricted to kidneys, where the availability of dial-
ysis enables recipients to wait for an optimally 
matched kidney, and the better tolerance of cold 
ischaemia provides the necessary time required to 
tissue type the donor organ and move it between 
centres to the best - matched recipient. This system 
requires central coordination of a large pool of 
recipients and donors which, in the UK, is based 
in Bristol. 
 ABO   m atching 
 Just like blood transfusions, the existence of pre-
formed ABO antibodies means that the trans-
planted organs must be ABO compatible. Thus, 
while a group A recipient can have an organ from 
either a group A or group O donor, a group O 
recipient can have only a group O organ because 
of the presence of preformed antibodies to group 
A (and B) antigens. Crossing the ABO barrier 
results in hyperacute rejection except in the case 
of the liver, which is relatively resistant to this 
process. Nevertheless, abiding by the ABO rules is 
also advisable in liver transplantation since the 
long - term outcome is better. 
 Crossing the ABO barrier is possible without 
hyperacute rejection in certain circumstances. In 
children, the development of anti - A and anti - B 
antibodies does not occur until after the ﬁ rst year. 
It is thus possible to perform ABO - mismatched 
heart transplants in very young children with 
excellent results. Some adults have low titres of 
ABO antibody, which can be removed immedi-
ately prior to an ABO - mismatched kidney trans-
plant from a live donor.  
 Lymphocytotoxic  c ross - m atch 
 To detect circulating antibodies in the recipient 
against donor HLA antigens, a direct lymphocyto-
toxic cross - match is performed. This involves 
mixing donor cells (lymphocytes) from peripheral 
blood, lymph node or spleen with the recipient ’ s 
serum in the presence of rabbit complement and 
observing for cytolysis. Alternatively, the presence 
of anti - donor antibodies can be detected using 
ﬂ ow cytometry. Presence of such antibodies in the 
cross - match test is associated with hyperacute 
rejection; hence, a positive cross - match is a con-
traindication to transplantation of all organs 
(except the liver).  
  1   Gregor Mendel (1882 – 1884), Augustinian Priest and Scientist, St 
Thomas ’ s Abbey, Brno, Czech Republic. 

388 
Transplantation surgery
after the initial few months the incidence of rejec-
tion is much less as the graft undergoes a degree 
of acceptance, so the total amount of immuno-
suppression may be reduced. This may be achieved 
either by reducing the dosage of the agents used 
or by discontinuing one or more of the initial 
immunosuppressive agents.  
 Complications of 
 t ransplantation 
 Following transplantation, the complications can 
be divided into early (those occurring in hospital) 
and late. 
 Early  c omplications 
 Early complications may be related to the four 
components of the transplant procedure. 
 1  The surgical operation , such as wound 
infection, anastomotic breakdown and 
vascular anastomotic thrombosis. 
 2  The quality of the organ , dependent both on 
the donor organ and on the quality of the 
preservation, in particular the age of the donor 
and the duration of ischaemia. A donor organ 
with a long cold ischaemic time would be 
expected to perform less well initially.  
 3  The immunological response of the recipient to 
the donor (acute rejection).  
 4  The effects of immunosuppression . Initially, 
high doses of immunosuppression are used, 
and it is in the early stages that the infective 
complications of immunosuppression are 
seen, in particular wound and chest infections; 
viral infections such as herpes simplex (cold 
sores) are also common early after transplant. 
 Late  c omplications 
 The late complications of transplantation are 
either immunological, related to the immunosup-
pression, or the result of recurrent disease. 
 1  Immunological complications include acute 
and chronic rejection.  
 2  Immunosuppressive complications reﬂ ect the 
difﬁ culty in achieving immunosuppression 
sufﬁ cient to stop rejection, but low enough to 
stop adverse effects. Such complications 
include the following:  
pyrexia, enlargement and tenderness over the 
transplanted organ, and biochemical dysfunction 
(a rise in creatinine in a kidney transplant, ele-
vated liver enzymes in a liver transplant). It is con-
ﬁ rmed by biopsy of the organ. The most common 
time for acute rejection is between 5 and 28 days 
after transplantation, and it usually responds to an 
increase in immunosuppression.  
 Chronic  r ejection 
 Chronic rejection, more properly termed chronic 
allograft damage, is an insidious process of graft 
attrition, which generally results in graft loss. It is 
characterized by a progressive vasculopathy in the 
graft, the aetiology of which is related to tissue 
compatibility between donor and recipient, to 
the immunosuppression, to damage to the graft 
during the transplant, to hypertension and possi-
bly also to infection of the graft by cytomegalovi-
rus. Although the vascular lesions are broadly 
similar in different organs, the time - course is not. 
In liver transplantation, chronic rejection may 
occur as early as the ﬁ rst month, whereas in kidney 
and heart transplantation it usually occurs after 
the ﬁ rst year. 
 Principles of 
 i mmunosuppressive 
 t herapy 
 Immunosuppressive therapy following organ 
transplantation is a balance between giving 
enough drug to prevent rejection, but not too 
much to make the patient susceptible to oppor-
tunist infection. In addition, individual drugs have 
their own undesirable side - effects, which may be 
reduced by combining drugs with different modes 
of action and with different side - effect proﬁ les, 
rather as is done with cancer chemotherapy regi-
mens. A common protocol would be to combine a 
steroid (e.g. prednisolone) with an anti - nucleotide 
such as azathioprine or mycophenolate and an 
inhibitor of T - cell activation such as ciclosporin or 
tacrolimus, the so - called  ‘ triple therapy ’ . 
 There are two other factors that inﬂ uence 
immunosuppressive therapy. Some organs, such 
as intestine and lung, have an increased suscepti-
bility to rejection, so higher doses of immunosup-
pression are required. Second, with most organs, 

Transplantation surgery 389
transplantation is between 90% and 95%, and is 
over 99% when the kidney resulted from an HLA -
 identical sibling donation. Thereafter, there is a 
gradual loss of around 3% per annum, giving a 5 
year survival of 70 – 80% (better still for related 
grafts). 
 Pancreas  t ransplantation 
 It is likely that transplantation for the treatment of 
diabetes will eventually involve  β - cells or islets, 
possibly with the help of genetic engineering, but, 
although several hundred islet grafts have so far 
been attempted in humans, long - term results 
have been poor until recently. Better short - term 
and long - term results follow transplantation of 
the vascularized pancreas. However, pancreatic 
transplantation involves a large operation, the 
principal complications of which include graft 
pancreatitis and consequent peritonitis as well as 
graft thrombosis. The favoured technique is to 
place the pancreas in the iliac fossa vascularized 
from the iliac vessels, with the exocrine drainage 
into a loop of small intestine. 
 Diabetic nephropathy is the main indication 
for pancreas grafting and is usually combined 
with a kidney transplant from the same donor. 
Approximately 70% of grafts are functioning 
after 3 years. There is accumulating evidence 
that combined kidney and pancreas transplanta-
tion prolongs life in patients with type 1 diabetes 
and renal failure compared with kidney transpl-
antation alone, in addition to reducing the 
number of cardiovascular events and improving 
other diabetic complications such as autonomic 
neuropathy. 
 Liver  t ransplantation 
 Liver transplantation is the treatment of choice for 
many forms of fatal liver disease. Patients are 
offered the operation before they become too sick 
for what is the most formidable of surgical assaults. 
The three main indications for liver transplanta-
tion are: 
 1  complications of cirrhosis : hepatocellular 
carcinoma, recurrent variceal haemorrhage, 
intractable ascites and poor synthetic 
function;  
 2  acute hepatic necrosis, e.g. paracetamol 
poisoning;  
 3  metabolic disease , e.g. oxalosis (in which 
kidney grafting may also be required).    
 a  drug side - effects, e.g. nephrotoxicity of 
ciclosporin and tacrolimus;  
 b  infection occurs more commonly, 
particularly opportunist infections such as 
 Pneumocystis jiroveci  (formerly  P. carinii ) 
and cytomegalovirus;  
 c  malignancy, which is more common after 
transplantation, particularly virus - related 
tumours such as Epstein – Barr 2 virus - related 
lymphomas and squamous carcinomas of 
the skin (in which human papilloma virus 
DNA can often be isolated).    
 3  Recurrent disease . In some cases, the original 
disease may recur in the transplanted organ. 
For example, glomerulonephropathies such as 
immunoglobulin A nephropathy and focal 
segmental glomerulosclerosis recur in the 
transplanted kidney; hepatitis B and C viruses 
reinfect the transplanted liver. 
 Results in  c linical  o rgan 
 t ransplantation 
 Kidney  t ransplantation 
 Kidney transplantation has been a routine treat-
ment for over 30 years, and there are several sur-
vivors with transplants functioning for that period. 
In the UK, 2500 kidney transplants are performed 
annually, with over 7000 people on dialysis await-
ing transplantation. The shortfall in supply is 
reﬂ ected worldwide. 
 The kidney is transplanted heterotopically into 
the iliac fossa, with the donor renal vessels anas-
tomosed to the external iliac vessels of the recipi-
ent, and the donor ureter anastomosed to the 
bladder directly to produce a new ureteric oriﬁ ce. 
Unless the recipient ’ s own kidneys are a danger to 
the recipient (e.g. a source of infection) they are 
left  in situ . 
 As with other organ transplants, results are 
usually quoted in terms of 1 year and 5 year graft 
survival, in which the losses in the ﬁ rst 12 months 
are higher and reﬂ ect the early complications, 
whereas the 5 year ﬁ gures reﬂ ect the rate of 
chronic losses from recurrent disease or chronic 
rejection. One year graft survival following renal 
  2   Michael Anthony Epstein (b. 1921), Professor of Pathology, 
University of Bristol, Bristol, UK. Yvonne Barr (b. 1932), Epstein ’ s 
assistant, Middlesex Hospital, London, UK.  

390 
Transplantation surgery
cardiomyopathy. Solitary lung transplantation 
without the heart is more common than com-
bined heart – lung transplantation in which both 
lungs are transplanted  en bloc  with the heart; 
in the latter case, only three anastomoses are 
required, namely aortic, tracheal and right atrial. 
The most common indications for lung transplan-
tation are primary pulmonary hypertension, 
chronic obstructive airways disease and cystic 
ﬁ brosis. The survival of recipients of both heart 
and combined heart and lung grafts is approxi-
mately 70% at 3 years.   
 
 
 Around 85 – 90% of liver transplant recipients 
survive for 1 year, and the 5 year ﬁ gure is around 
70%, with a lower annual loss than kidney trans-
plants after the ﬁ rst year. 
 Heart,  l ung and  c ombined  h eart –
 l ung  t ransplantation 
 Heart transplantation is a relatively straightfor-
ward operative procedure in a unit where open 
heart surgery is performed. The main indications 
are atherosclerotic coronary artery disease and 

Index
achalasia of cardia 158, 161–2
clinical features 161
investigations 161
treatment 161–2
‘acid drops’ 154
acidophil adenoma 108
acoustic neuroma 107–8
acral melanoma 54
acromegaly 108, 140
ACTH 330–1
congenital adrenogenital syndrome 332
Cushing’s syndrome 108, 283, 330, 331
ectopic 36, 37
small-cell carcinoma 67
acute renal failure 347–9
aetiology 348
clinical features 348
investigations 348–9
management 349
acute tubular necrosis 349–50
adamantinoma 152
adenocarcinoma
lung 66
oesophagus 166
adenolymphoma 156
adenoma
basophil 108
chromophobe 108
eosinophilic (acidophil) 108
lung 65
pleomorphic 155
sebaceous 55
sweat gland 56
thyroid 320
adrenal glands 330–4
cortex 330
non-functioning tumours of 333
Cushing’s syndrome 331
enzyme disorders 331
medulla 330
tumours of see adrenomedullary tumours
pathology 330–1
hyperadrenalism 330
hypoadrenalism 330–1
physiology 330–1
adrenalectomy 32, 331, 332, 333
A
abdomen
burst 23–4
dehiscence 23, 24
presentation of examination ﬁ ndings 3
rebound tenderness 3
referred pain 2, 2
abdominal aortic aneurysm 84
management 84
rupture 84–5
abdominal colic 193, 270
abdominal wall hernia 239–41, 240
aetiology 239–40
clinical features 240–1
abdominal X-ray
aneurysm 83
chronic pancreatitis 281
gallstones 272
intestinal obstruction 185–6
investigations 231
jaundice 255
pyloric stenosis 168
splenic rupture 291
urinary calculi 343
ABO compatibility 387
ABPI see ankle brachial pressure index
abscess 26–7
anorectal 222, 223
brain 109–10
breast 298
crypt 208
drainage 27
liver
amoebic 257
pyogenic 256–7
lung 64–5
pelvic 234–5
pericolic 207
perinephric 346
spinal extradural 134–5
subphrenic 233–4, 233, 235
Lecture Notes: General Surgery, 12th edition. © Harold Ellis, 
Sir Roy Y. Calne and Christopher J. E. Watson. Published 2011 by 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
Page numbers in italics denote ﬁ gures, those in bold denote tables.
ABC of resuscitation 118, 368

392 
Index
adrenaline
anaphylaxis 33
hypothermia prevention 35
adrenocortical failure 32
adrenocorticotrophic hormone see ACTH
adrenogenital syndromes 332–3
acquired 332
clinical features 332
congenital 332
differential diagnosis 332–3
treatment 333
adrenomedullary tumours 333–4
ganglioneuroma 334
neuroblastoma 333
phaeochromocytoma 333–4
aerocele 115
agranulocytosis 147
air embolism, cardiopulmonary bypass 69
airway
burns 43
head injury 118, 121–2
alanine transaminase, jaundice 254–5
alcohol
and acute pancreatitis 276
intake 11
aldosterone 6
plasma 332
primary hyperaldosteronism 332
alkaline phosphatase
choledocholithiasis 272
hyperparathyroidism 323
jaundice 254
liver failure 261
alkylating agents 39
allergies 11–12
allografts 384
alpha-fetoprotein 38
antenatal screening 126
hepatocellular carcinoma 263, 264
testicular tumours 381
as tumour marker 37, 38
alprostadil 373
amaurosis fugax 93
amelanotic melanoma 54
ameloblastoma 152
American Society of Anesthetists, risk grading 
system 14
ammoniacal dermatitis 371
amnesia, head injury 125
amoebic liver abscess 257
amoxicillin, Helicobacter pylori eradication 171
amputation
critical ischaemia 92
wound infection 17
amylase
pancreatic leak 24
pancreatitis 201, 231, 281
raised 279
anaemia
burns 43
postgastrectomy 173
anaesthetic history 11
anal ﬁ ssure 222
anal ﬁ stula 222–4, 224
Goodsall’s law 223
anal itching 225
anal stricture 224
anaphylaxis 32
management 33
androgenic corticoids 330
aneurysm 81–4, 82
abdominal aortic 84
rupture 84–5
acute aortic expansion 85
aetiology 82–3
congenital 82
degenerative 82
infection 82
inﬂ ammatory 83
traumatic 82
with arterial dissection 82
arteriovenous 82
clinical features 83
complications 83
differential diagnosis 83
false 81–2
fusiform 81
investigations 83
popliteal 85
saccular 81
thoracic aortic 75
treatment 83–4
angina 12, 90
angiodysplasia 207–8
angiography
aneurysm 83
arterial trauma 81
carotid artery disease 94
mesenteric 208
persistent ductus arteriosus 73
popliteal aneurysm 85
angioplasty 72
arterial disease 88
critical ischaemia 92
intermittent claudication 90
renal hypertension 79
angiotensin II 78
angular stomatitis 146
anhidrosis 142
ankle brachial pressure index (ABPI) 87, 92
ankyloglossia 150
anorectal abscess 222, 223
anorectal atresia 192
anorexia 181
appendicitis 200
anthrax 30

Index 393
antibioticoma 203
antibiotics
burns 46
cytotoxic 39
enterocolitis 18
peritonitis 231
prophylaxis 17
anticoagulation 12
artiﬁ cial heart valves 71
DVT 22
antidiuretic hormone (ADH) 6, 31
release in response to surgery 7
antihistamines, anaphylaxis 33
antimetabolites 39
antimicrobials see antibiotics
antral tumours 152
anuria 33, 76, 348
acute calculous 344
aortic arch, baroreceptors 31
aortic dissection 76–7, 76
aetiology 76
classiﬁ cation 76
clinical features 76
and embolism 96
investigations 77
pathology 76
treatment 77
aortic expansion, acute 85
aortic pulsation 87
aortic stenosis 71
aortography, thoracic aortic aneurysm 75
APACHE score 13
aphthous ulcer 146
apomorphine, impotence 373
appendicitis, acute 199–203
differential diagnosis 201
central nervous system 201–2
chest 201
gynaecological conditions 201
intra-abdominal disease 201
urogenital tract 201
examination 200
history 200
investigations 200–1
pathology 199–200, 200
in pregnancy 203
treatment 202
appendix mass 202–3
aqueduct of Sylvius 112
Arnold–Chiari malformation 112, 126
arterial blood gases
acute pancreatitis 279
pulmonary embolism 23
shock 34
arterial disease 85–8
atherosclerotic see atherosclerosis
examination 86–7
history 86
investigations 87–8
treatment 88
arterial dissection, with aneurysm 82
arterial thrombosis, mesenteric 189
arterial trauma 80–1
clinical features 81
closed injuries 80
consequences of 80
full thickness 80
intimal tear 80
mural contusion 80
open injuries 81
penetrating injuries 80
treatment 81
arteriography
arterial disease 88, 89
critical ischaemia 92
intermittent claudication 90
renal hypertension 79
arteriovenous aneurysm 82
arteriovenous ﬁ stula, associated ulcer 104
arteriovenous malformations 111–12
ascites 259, 261
treatment 263
aspartate transaminase, jaundice 254–5
asphyxia, traumatic 62
aspiration during anaesthesia 11
aspirin 11
assisted conception 383
asthma 12
astrocytoma 107
ataxia 105
atherosclerosis 86, 88–90
aetiology 88–9
diabetes 90
hyperlipidaemia 89
smoking 89
atherosclerotic occlusive arterial disease 90
atrial ﬁ brillation 86
and embolism 96
atrial myxoma 96
atrophie blanche 103
auscultation 2
blood vessels 87
autografts 384
autonephrectomy 347
axonotmesis 137
treatment 138
B
Bacillus anthracis 30
Bacteroides spp. 16
peritonitis 230
balanitis 370, 371
balloon tamponade, gastro-oesophageal varices 262
banding of haemorrhoids 221

394 
Index
barium enema
diverticulitis 206–7
hereditary non-polyposis colon cancer 213
ulcerative colitis 209
barium swallow 159
achalasia 161
pyloric stenosis 168
reﬂ ux oesophagitis 164
baroreceptors, aortic arch 31
Barrett’s oesophagus 166
basal cell carcinoma 52
basal cell papilloma 51
basophil adenoma 108
Battle’s sign 119
beeturia 339
Behçet’s syndrome 147
berry aneurysm 82, 110–11, 110
clinical features 110–11
treatment 111
beta-blockers, hyperthyroidism 318
beta-haemolytic Streptococcus 26
rheumatic fever 71
bicarbonate
gastrointestinal ﬂ uids 8
intravenous ﬂ uids 8
bile
composition 8
composition and function 267
daily volume 8
bile ducts
ascending cholangitis 270–1
carcinoma 264, 275
stones in 270, 271
see also gallbladder
bile peritonitis 233
biliary calculi, Crohn’s disease 196
biliary colic 269, 270
biliary infection 257
bilious vomiting 173
bilirubin
acute pancreatitis 279
conjugated 254
metabolism 251–2, 251
serum 254
urinary 254
see also jaundice
bioterrorism 30
black eye 116
bladder 353–7
diverticula 354–5, 358
exstrophy 353
paralysis 132
rupture 353–4
extraperitoneal 354
intraperitoneal 353–4
stones 355, 358
trabeculation 358
tumours 355–7
high-risk superﬁ cial cancers 357
low-risk superﬁ cial cancers 357
muscle-invasive cancers 357
pathology 355
transitional cell carcinoma 356–7
transitional cell papilloma 356
urachal anomalies 353
bladder neck stenosis 361, 364
ﬁ brosis 364
posterior urethral valves 364
bleeding see haemorrhage
bleeding disorders 12
bleomycin 39
blood count, acute pancreatitis 279
blood pressure 31
head injury 121
blood vessel tumours 56
capillary haemangioma 56
cavernous haemangioma 56
body water distribution 5–6, 6
body-packing 160
Boerhaave’s syndrome 160
boil 27
bone scan
prostatic carcinoma 362
rib fractures 60
bone tumours 151
botulism 30
bowel obstruction, ﬂ uid loss 46
Bowen’s disease 51
brachial plexus injuries 138–9
Erb’s paralysis 138
Klumpke’s paralysis 138–9
brain
space-occupying lesions 105–6
see also intracranial
brain abscess 109–10
aetiology 109
clinical features 109
investigations 109
treatment 109–10
brain death 125
brain injuries 116
coup and contre-coup 116, 117
diffuse 116
lacerations 116
localized 116
brain-stem death, organ donation after 385
brain tumours 106–9
acoustic neuroma 107–8
cerebral lymphoma 107
classiﬁ cation 106
glioma 107
meningioma 107
pituitary tumours 108–9
branchial cyst/sinus 308–9, 310
BRCA1/2 40
breast 295–307

Index 395
accessory 295
benign disease 298–9
cancer risk 301
cystic disease 299
radial scars 299
sclerosing adenosis 299
chronic inﬂ ammation 298
developmental anomalies 295
disease symptoms 295–7
duct ectasia 297
lumps 295–6
nipple discharge 296
nipple inversion 297
pain (mastalgia) 296–7
hypoplasia/absence of 295
lymphatic drainage 303
mastitis 297–8
reconstruction 305
traumatic fat necrosis 297
breast lumps 295–6
non-neoplastic 299–300
ﬁ broadenoma 299
gynaecomastia 299–300
hamartoma 299
breast screening 307
breast tumours 300–7
carcinoma 300–6
aetiology 300–1
clinical features 303–4
ductal carcinoma in situ 302
invasive ductal carcinoma 302, 305
invasive lobular carcinoma 302, 305
investigations 304
lobular carcinoma in situ 302
pathology 301–2, 301
prognostic factors 302–3, 303
spread 302
classiﬁ cation 300
inﬂ ammatory breast cancer 306
intraduct papilloma 300
male breast 307
metastatic disease 307
palliative care 306, 307
phyllodes tumour 300
staging 304, 304
survival 305
treatment 304–6
bronchopleural ﬁ stula 64
bronchoscopy
empyema 65
lung abscess 64
lung carcinoma 67
Brown-Séquard syndrome 131, 135
Buerger’s disease 86, 95
Buerger’s test 87
burns 41–6
chemical 41
clinical features 41, 43
airway 43
anaemia 43
hypovolaemic shock 43
pain 41, 43
plasma loss 32, 43
stress reaction 43
toxaemia 43
complications 46
electrical 41
full thickness 41, 42, 43
circumferential 44
inhalational 44
Lund and Browder chart 45
partial thickness 41, 42
prognosis 46
radiation 41
rule of nines 44
skin grafting 44
thermal 41
treatment 43–6
antibiotics 46
general 44–6, 44, 45
local 43–4
nutrition 46
burst abdomen 23–4
aetiology 23–4
clinical features 24
treatment 24
buserelin, prostatic carcinoma 363
busulphan 39
bypass surgery
coronary artery see coronary artery bypass surgery
intermittent claudication 90
C
CA15.3 38
CA19.9 38
CA27.29 38
CA125 38
caecal volvulus 188
calcium
acute pancreatitis 279
intravenous ﬂ uids 8
calculi
biliary 196
salivary 155
urinary 196, 341–4
see also stones
calf pump 98–9
Campbell de Morgan spots 56
canal of Nuck, hydrocele of 477
cancer en cuirasse 302
capillary haemangioma 56
capillary return 87
capsule endoscopy, GI bleeding 178
caput medusae 259

396 
Index
carbimazole, hyperthyroidism 317–18
carboplatin 39
carbuncle 27
kidney 346
carcinoembryonic antigen 38
carcinoid syndrome 197–8
clinical features 197–8
investigations 198
pathology 197
treatment 198
carcinoma
basal cell 52
breast 300–6
aetiology 300–1
clinical features 303–4
ductal carcinoma in situ 302
invasive ductal carcinoma 302, 305
investigations 304
lobular carcinoma in situ 302
pathology 301–2, 301
prognostic factors 302–3, 303
spread 302
colon 211
lung 66–8
oesphagus 164–5
oral cavity 146
ﬂ oor of mouth, alveolus and cheek 151
hard palate 150
lips 146, 149–50
nasopharynx 151
oro- and laryngopharynx 151
soft palate and fauces 175
surfact tumours 152
tongue 150
tonsil 151
pancreatic 284–8, 286, 287
parathyroid glands 324–5
penis 371–2
prostate 361–3
rectum 226–9, 227, 228
salivary glands 156–7
scrotum 380
stomach see gastric carcinoma
transitional cell of bladder 356–7
cardiac disease see heart disease
cardiac output 31
measurement 34
cardiac tamponade 64
cardiogenic shock 31–2
cardiopulmonary bypass 69–70, 70
complications 69–70
technique 69, 70
carotid artery disease 92–4, 93
clinical features 93–4
differential diagnosis 94
investigations 94
treatment 94
carotid body tumour 310
carotid endarterectomy 94
complications 94
carotid sinus 31
carpal tunnel syndrome 139–40
case presentation 3–4
castration, prostatic carcinoma 363
catecholamines
urinary 334
see also adrenaline; noradrenaline
cauda equina
claudication 133
injury 130–1
with spinal cord injury 131, 131
tumour 135
caustic stricture of oesophagus 161
cavernous haemangioma 56
cellulitis 26
breast 298
cerebral hypoperfusion 33, 93
cerebral occlusive disease 90
cerebral perfusion 116–17
cerebrovascular resistance 117
intracranial pressure 117
systemic arterial pressure 117
cerebral perfusion pressure 117
cerebral reactivity 94
cerebrospinal ﬂ uid
circulation 112, 112
otorrhoea 115
rhinorrhoea 114–15
cerebrovascular accident see stroke
cerebrovascular resistance 117
cervical spine
fractures 127–8
compression with ﬂ exion 128
hyperextension 128
hyperﬂ exion injuries 127–8
in head injury 118
X-ray 120
cervical spondylosis 134
cervical sympathetic nerve injuries see Horner’s 
syndrome
cetuximab 39
Charcot’s intermittent hepatic fever 257, 271
cheek, carcinoma 151
cheilosis 148
chemodectoma 310
chemotherapy
antimicrobial see antibiotics
cytotoxic 38, 39
lung carcinoma 68
see also individual drugs
chest drain 64
chest injuries 60
complications 61–2
ﬂ ail chest 61, 61, 63
haemothorax 62
pneumothorax 61, 63–4

Index 397
rib fractures 60, 63
subcutaneous emphysema 61
sucking wound 62, 64
traumatic asphyxia 62
treatment 62–3, 63
chest wall, paradoxical movement 61
chest X-ray
achalasia 161
aortic dissection 77
arterial disease 88
empyema 65
investigations 231
lung abscess 64
lung carcinoma 67
lymphadenopathies 293
oesophageal rupture 161
oral cancer 149
persistent ductus arteriosus 73
pulmonary embolism 23
rib fractures 60
space-occupying intracranial lesions 106
splenic rupture 291
thoracic aortic aneurysm 75
chlorambucil 39
chloride
gastrointestinal ﬂ uids 8
intravenous ﬂ uids 8
chlorphenamine, anaphylaxis 33
cholangiocarcinoma 264, 275
cholangitis 270–1
cholecystectomy, complications 273–4
cholecystitis 269–70
acute 201, 269–70, 272
chronic 270, 273
choledocholithiasis 269, 270
cholelithiasis 266–7
cholesterol
serum 88
thyroid disease 316
cholesterosis 268
chordee 367
choroid melanoma 54
chromogranin A serum concentration 198
chromophobe adenoma 108
chronic renal failure 13, 350
Chvostek’s sign 319, 324
ciproﬂ oxacin
anthrax 30
epididymitis 378
circulation, head injury 118
circumcision 370, 371
cirrhosis 177, 258–61
aetiology 258
clinical features 258–61, 260
consequences 258
deﬁ nition 258
cisplatin 39
clarithromycin, Helicobacter pylori eradication 
171
clawed hand 140
cleft lip 144–5, 145
embryology 143–4, 144
management 145
cleft palate 145
clopidogrel 11
Clostridium spp.
gas gangrene 29
peritonitis 230
Clostridium botulinum 30
Clostridium difﬁ cile enterocolitis 18
Clostridium perfringens (welchii) 29
Clostridium tetani 27, 29
coagulation screen 177
coarctation of aorta 74–5
pathology 74
Cock’s peculiar tumour 47
clinical features 74
investigations 75
treatment 75
cold injury 97
cold sores 146
colic
abdominal 193, 270
ureteric 201, 342
colitis 208–10
Crohn’s 210
ulcerative 208–10
colloid goitre 314
colon 204–17
angiodysplasia 207–8
distension 186
diverticulitis see diverticulitis
obstruction see intestinal obstruction
tumours 211–16
carcinoma 211
classiﬁ cation 211
familial adenomatous polyposis 211
hereditary non-polyposis colon cancer 211–16, 214, 
215
see also individual conditions
colonoscopy
angiodysplasia 207–8
diverticulitis 206
GI bleeding 178
haemorrhoids 220
hereditary non-polyposis colon cancer 213
rectal carcinoma 228
ulcerative colitis 209
colostomy 216–17
complications 216
double-barrelled 216
end 216
loop 216
stoma appliances 217
colovesical ﬁ stula 206
coma
causes of 115
Glasgow coma scale 118, 119

398 
Index
common peroneal nerve injuries 141
compartment syndrome 80
compound melanoma/naevus 53
compression stockings 22, 101
computed tomography see CT
concussion
post-concussional syndrome 
124
spinal 130
see also head injury
congenital anomalies
aneurysm 82
breast 295
gallbladder 266, 267
hernia
diaphragmatic 247–8, 247
umbilical 246
kidney 335, 336
liver 255–6
pancreas 276
pyloric stenosis 167–8, 168
thyroid 311, 312
Conn’s syndrome 332
constipation 204
appendicitis 200
hyperparathyroidism 325
intestinal obstruction 185
contre-coup injury 116, 117
coronary arteriography, ischaemic heart disease 
72
coronary artery bypass surgery 12
coronary occlusive disease 90
corticosteroids
gastric ulceration 176
hyperthyroidism 315
ulcerative colitis 210
cortisol, plasma 331
coup injury 116, 117
Courvoisier’s law 271–2, 271
craniopharyngioma 109
crepitation 61
critical ischaemia 92
Crohn’s colitis 210
clinical features 209
Crohn’s disease 195–6
aetiology 195
clinical features 195–6
complications 196
ileitis 201
investigations 196
pathology 195
prognosis 196
treatment 196
cross-infection 17
cryoglobulinaemia 95
crypt abscesses 208
cryptorchidism 375
CSF see cerebrospinal ﬂ uid
CT
aneurysm 83
aortic dissection 77
appendicitis 200
arterial disease 88
diverticulitis 206
extradural haemorrhage 123
gastric carcinoma 182
gastrointestinal stromal tumours 180
head injury 119–20
hereditary non-polyposis colon cancer 213
intestinal obstruction 186
investigations 231
jaundice 255
lung abscess 64
lymphadenopathies 293
oesophageal carcinoma 165
oral cancer 149
pancreatic carcinoma 285
pancreatitis
acute 279
chronic 281
rectal carcinoma 228
space-occupying intracranial lesions 106
spinal injuries 130
splenic rupture 291
thoracic aortic aneurysm 75
thoracoabdominal 161
thyroid disease 316
urethral injury 368
urinary calculi 343
CT angiography, liver failure 261
CT pulmonary angiography, pulmonary embolism 23
Curling’s ulcer 43
Cushing reﬂ ex 117
Cushing’s syndrome 331, 332, 333
Cushing’s ulcer 170
cyclophosphamide 39
cylindroma 56
cyproterone acetate, prostatic carcinoma 363
cystectomy 357
cystic hygroma 58
cystine stones 342
cystinuria 342
cystitis 344–5
cystoscopy 339
cysts
branchial 308–9, 310
breast 299
dermoid 47–8, 147
epididymal 376–7
pancreas 282
renal 337–8
retention 146, 147
sebaceous 47
suprasellar 109
thyroglossal 311
urachal 353

Index 399
D
danazol, mastalgia 297
de Quervain’s thyroiditis 322
debridement 29
decerebrate posture 120
decorticate posture 120
deep vein thrombosis 20–2, 21, 104
clinical features 21
investigations 21–2
progression of 21, 21
prophylaxis 22
treatment 22
Virchow’s triad 20
deep venous insufﬁ ciency 102–3
investigations 103
primary 102
secondary 102
treatment 103
venous hypertension 102–3
dementia 90
depressed skull fractures 116
Derbyshire neck 314
dermatitis, ammoniacal 371
dermoid cysts 47–8
implantation 47
oral 147
sequestration 47–8
desmopressin 13
detrusor instability 359
dexamethasone suppression test 331
dextrose/saline, composition 8
diabetes insipidus 7
diabetes mellitus 10, 12
atherosclerosis 90
impotence 372
preoperative assessment 10
diaphragmatic hernia 247–9, 247
acquired 248–9, 249
congenital 247–8, 247
traumatic 248
diarrhoea 204–5
Crohn’s disease 196
ﬂ uid loss 7, 46
differential diagnosis 1
dimercaptosuccinic acid (DMSA) scan 346
diplopia 105
disseminated intravascular coagulation 33
diuretic renography 341
diuretics 11
acute renal failure 349
diverticula
bladder 354–5, 358
colon 205
oesophagus 162
urachal 353
diverticulitis 205–7, 205, 205
acute 201, 206, 207
chronic 206, 207
clinical features 206
differential diagnosis 207
investigations 206–7
pathogenesis 205–6
treatment 207
diverticulosis 205–6, 205, 205
dobutamine, hypothermia prevention 35
docetaxel 39
doll’s eye reﬂ ex 125
dopamine
acute renal failure 349
hypothermia prevention 34–5
dopexamine, hypothermia prevention 35
Doppler ultrasound, arterial disease 88
double vision, hyperthyroidism 315
doxorubicin 39
doxycycline, epididymitis 378
drug history 11
DTPA radionuclide scanning, renal hypertension 
79
duct ectasia 297
dumping syndrome 173
duodenopancreatic reﬂ ux 278
duodenum/duodenal 167–82
atresia 168–9
ulcers 171, 173
duplex kidney 335, 336–7
duplex scanning
arterial disease 88
carotid artery disease 94
DVT 21–2
intermittent claudication 90
popliteal aneurysm 85
renal hypertension 79
varicose veins 101
venous insufﬁ ciency 103
Dupuytren’s contracture 141
DVT see deep vein thrombosis
dysphagia 158–60
causes 158
investigations 158–9, 159
swallowed foreign bodies 159–60
dysuria 345
E
Eaton–Lambert syndrome 37
ECG
acute pancreatitis 279
arterial disease 88
carotid artery disease 94
ischaemic heart disease 72
pulmonary embolism 23
shock 34
thyroid disease 316
Echinococcus granulosus 257

400 
Index
echocardiography
aortic dissection 77
carotid artery disease 94
persistent ductus arteriosus 73
thoracic aortic aneurysm 75
transoesophageal see transoesophageal 
echocardiography
ectopia vesicae 353
ectopic pregnancy 201
ectopic testis 374
eczema, and venous insufﬁ ciency 103
Ehlers–Danlos syndrome 110
electrocardiogram see ECG
electrolytes 5–9
intravenous ﬂ uids 8
losses 5–6
replacement in peritonitis 231
electromyography 138
embolectomy 97
embolism 95–7, 96
air 69
aortic 96
clinical features 95–6
mesenteric 189
paradoxical 96
underlying cause 96
emphysema, subcutaneous 61
empyema 64–5
endoscopic biopsy 171
endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography
chronic pancreatitis 282
gallstones 272
jaundice 255
pancreatic carcinoma 285
endoscopic ultrasound
chronic pancreatitis 281
gastric carcinoma 182
gastrointestinal stromal tumours 180
pancreatic carcinoma 285
endoscopic variceal band ligation 262
endoscopy 148
gastrointestinal stromal tumours 180
pancreatic carcinoma 285
enema, small bowel 196
enophthalmos 142
enoxaparin 22
Entamoeba histolytica 257
enteral feeding 9
enteroclysis 196
enterocolitis, antibiotic-associated 18
enterohepatic circulation 267
enteroscopy, GI bleeding 178
eosinophil adenoma 108
ependymoma 107
epididymal cysts 376–7
epididymitis
acute 378
chronic 378–9
differential diagnosis 379
epigastric hernia 246
epilepsy, head injury 125
epinephrine see adrenaline
epipodophyllotoxins 39
epispadias 367
epulis 147
Erb’s paralysis 138
ergot poisoning 86
ergotamine 86
erlotinib 39
erythema 41
erythrocyte sedimentation rate 88
Escherichia coli 19
cystitis 345
liver abscess 256
mastitis 297
peritonitis 230
prostatitis 363
testicular infections 378
etoposide 39
everolimus, mucosal ulceration 147
examination 2–3
exercise test, arterial disease 87
exomphalos 245
exophthalmos 315
extended spectrum beta-lactamases 19
extracellular ﬂ uid composition 5
extradural haemorrhage 122–3, 123
clinical features 122–3
investigations 123
treatment 123
extradural spinal abscess 134–5
extradural spinal tumour 135
extraperitoneal space 233, 234
eye, hyperthyroidism 315
eyelids, retraction 315
F
faecal occult blood
hereditary non-polyposis colon cancer 212
pancreatic carcinoma 285
peptic ulcer 171
faeces
absence of bile pigment 254
ﬂ uid loss in 6
fainting 32
familial adenomatous polyposis 211
fasciotomy, arterial trauma 81
fatty tumours 58–9
fauces, carcinoma 150
femoral hernia 244–5, 245
ﬁ breoptic endoscopy
liver failure 261

Index 401
peptic ulcer 171
upper GI 177
ﬁ brinogen, radiolabelled 22
ﬁ broadenoma of breast 299
ﬁ bromuscular dysplasia 79
ﬁ brous histiocytoma 57
Fick principle 34
ﬁ lariasis, lymphoedema 294
ﬁ nasteride 360
ﬁ ne-needle aspiration, lung carcinoma 67
ﬁ ngers
clubbing in hyperthyroidism 315
ﬂ exion deformities 141
ﬁ ssure in ano 222
ﬁ stula
anal (ﬁ stula in ano) 222–4, 224
arteriovenous 104
bronchopleural 64
colovesical 206
Crohn’s disease 195
gastrointestinal 46
pancreatic 7
postoperative 24–5
thyroglossal 311–12
urachal 353
ﬂ ail chest 61, 61
treatment 63
ﬂ uid compartments 5, 6
ﬂ uid loss 5–6, 32
abnormal 7
burns 32, 43
normal 6–7, 6
resuscitation 8–9
surgical patients 7–9
normal losses 7–8, 8
special losses 8, 8
ﬂ uids 5–9
effects of surgery 7
surgical patients, resuscitation 8–9
total body water 5
see also electrolytes
ﬂ uorouracil 39
foot drop 141
foramen of Bochdalek 248
foramen of Morgagni 248
foreign bodies
swallowed 159–60
wound infection 17
Fournier’s gangrene 29, 380
fractures
rib 60, 63
skull 114–16
spinal 127–30
frontonasal process 143–4
frostbite 97
fructose, seminal levels 383
furuncle 27
fusiform aneurysm 81
G
gallbladder 266–75
carcinoma 274–5
congenital anomalies 266, 267
empyema 272
perforation 272
polyps 274
porcelain 272, 274
strawberry 268
gallstone ileus 269
gallstones 266–7
acute pancreatitis 276
investigations 272
pathological effects 269
biliary colic 269, 270
cholecystitis 269–70
choledocholithiasis 269, 270
symptomless 273
treatment 273
dissolution 273
lithotripsy 273
types of 267–8, 267
cholesterol stones 267–8
mixed stones 268
pigment stones 268
gamma-linolenic acid 297
ganglion 48–9
ganglioneuroma 334
gangrene 90, 92
Fournier’s 29, 380
gas 29
intermittent claudication 90
synergistic 29–30
gas gangrene 29
gastric aspiration, peritonitis 231
gastric carcinoma
clinical features 181
differential diagnosis 182
investigations 182
macroscopic pathology 180–1
microscopic appearances 181
paraneoplastic syndromes 181–2
pathology 180
prognosis 182
risk factors 180
spread 181
treatment 182
gastric dilatation, postsplenectomy 290
gastric ﬂ uid
composition 8
daily volume 8
gastric ulcers 171
gastrinoma 170, 284
gastro-oesophageal varices, haemorrhage from 261–2
diagnosis 262
prophylaxis 262
treatment 262

402 
Index
gastroenteritis 201
gastrointestinal autonomic nervous tumour 179
gastrointestinal ﬁ stula, ﬂ uid loss 46
gastrointestinal ﬂ uids
composition 8
daily volume 8
losses 7
gastrointestinal haemorrhage 176–9
aetiology 176–7
assessment 176
examination 177
history 177
investigations 177–8
treatment 178–9
gastrointestinal stromal tumours 179–80
gastroscopy
gastric carcinoma 182
pyloric stenosis 175
gemcitabine 39
GI see gastrointestinal
Glasgow coma scale 118, 119
glioma 107
glomus tumour 50, 57
glucocorticoids 330
glucose, blood levels 87
gluteal hernia 247
goitre 313–14
colloid 314
multinodular 313–14, 317
retrosternal 314
treatment 317
gondatotrophin-releasing hormone agonists, prostatic 
carcinoma 363
Goodsall’s law 223
goserelin, prostatic carcinoma 363
granulomatous mastititis 298
Graves’ disease 314, 315–16
Grawitz’s tumour 351–2
Grey Turner sign 278
gummatous ulcer 104
gynaecomastia 299–300
H
haemangioma 56
haematemesis 176
haematoma
orbital 116
perianal 221–2
subdural 123–4, 123
haematuria 338–9, 339
bladder stone 355
classiﬁ cation 338, 339
examination 338
history 338
investigations 339
haemoglobin, estimation 88, 177
haemopneumothorax 62
haemorrhage 46
gastrointestinal 176–9
management 33
post-prostatectomy 361
post-thyroidectomy 319
varicose veins 102
haemorrhoidectomy 221–2
haemorrhoids 218–22, 219, 219
anatomy 218
classiﬁ cation 219
clinical features 220
complications 220
grading 220
pathology 219–20
predisposing factors 220
thrombosed strangulated 221
treatment 220–1
haemosiderin 103
haemosiderosis 100
haemothorax 62
hamartoma of breast 299
hands, in hyperthyroidism 315
haptoglobin, jaundice 254
hard palate, carcinoma 150
Hartmann’s solution
composition 8
hypovolaemia 45–6
Hashimoto’s disease 321–2
Hassall’s corpuscles 328
head injury 114–25
brain injuries 116
cerebral perfusion 116–17
complications 124–5
amnesia 125
epilepsy 125
hyperpyrexia 124
meningitis 124
post-concussional syndrome 124
decerebrate/decorticate posture 120
delayed management 121–2
nursing care 121–2
pulse, respiration and blood pressure 121
pupil size and responses 121
examination 118–19
history 118
immediate management 120–1
initial assessment 118
intracranial bleeding 122–4
classiﬁ cation 122
extradural haemorrhage 122–3, 123
intracerebral haemorrhage 124
intraventricular haemorrhage 124
subarachnoid haemorrhage 124
subdural haematoma 123–4, 123
investigations 119–20
orbital haematoma 116
scalp 114

Index 403
skull fractures 114–16
surgery 122
headache 105
heart disease 10, 12
ischaemic 72–3, 73
preoperative assessment 10
valvular see valvular heart disease
heart failure, shock 33
heart rate 31
heart transplantation 390
heart–lung transplantation 390
Heimlich’s manoeuvre 160
Helicobacter pylori 160–70
eradication 171
hemiparesis 123
hemiplegia 123
heparin
embolism 97
low molecular weight 22
hepatic encephalopathy 258
hepatocellular carcinoma 263–4
hepatomegaly 250–1
causes 250–1
physical signs 250
hepatorenal syndrome 13, 263
hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia 57
gastrointestinal haemorrhage 177
hereditary non-polyposis colon cancer 211–16, 
214, 215
clinical features 212
differential diagnosis 213
examination 212
investigations 212–13
palliative care 213
pathology 211–12
prognosis 213
spread 212
staging 212
surgery 213–16, 214, 215
treatment 213
hernia 239–49
abdominal wall 239–41, 240
deﬁ nition 239
diaphragmatic 247–9, 247
epigastric 246
femoral 244–5, 245
gluteal 247
incisional 246
inguinal 241–4, 241, 242, 243
irreducible 239–40, 241
lumbar 247
obturator 246
paraumbilical 246
reducible 239, 240
Richter’s 245
sciatic 247
Spigelian 247
strangulated 240, 241
umbilical 245
congenital 246
ventral 246
herpes simplex
cold sores 146
ulcers 146
heterotopic grafts 384
hiatus hernia 248–9, 249
hidradenitis suppuritiva 27
Hirschsprung’s disease 191–2
clinical features 191
differential diagnosis 191
investigations 191
pathology 191
treatment 191–2
history taking 1–2, 2, 2
Horner’s syndrome 66, 142, 142
horseshoe kidney 335, 336
hot shock 32
beta-human gonadotrophin 38
human leucocyte antigen (HLA) system 386
cross-matching 387
Hunter’s canal 98
hydatid disease of liver 257–8
hydrocele 377–8
primary/idiopathic 377–8, 377
secondary 377
treatment 377–8
hydrocephalus 112–13, 112
clinical features 113
communicating 112
CSF circulation 112, 112
investigations 113
non-communicating (obstructive) 112
spina biﬁ da 126
treatment 113
hydrocortisone
adrenocortical failure 32
adrenogenital syndromes 333
anaphylaxis 33
aphthous ulcer 146
Cushing’s syndrome 331
pruritus ani 225
hydronephrosis 340–1
benign prostatic hypertrophy 358
bladder diverticulum 354
clinical features 341
complications 341
congenital 336
investigations 341
pathology 340
treatment 341
5-hydroxyindole acid, urinary, carcinoid syndrome 198
hygroma 123–4
hyperkalaemia, acute renal failure 349
hyperlipidaemia 89
hypernephroma 351–2
hyperparathyroidism 324–7

404 
Index
clinical features 325–6
ectopic parathormone production 325
investigations 326
primary 324
parathyroid carcinoma 324–5
pathology 324
recurrent 327
secondary 325
surgery 326–7
tertiary 325
hyperpyrexia, head injury 124
hypertension 77–9
classiﬁ cation 77
hyperparathyroidism 325
primary 77
renovascular 77–9, 78
secondary 77
unilateral renal diseases producing 78–9
venous 102–3
hyperthyroidism 315–16
Graves’ disease 314, 315–16
secondary 316
treatment 317–18
hypertrophic pulmonary osteoarthropathy 37
hyperventilation, ﬂ uid loss 7
hypocalcaemia, tetany 28
hypochloraemic acidosis 175
hypoglossal neuropraxia 94
hypoparathyroidism 323–4
post-thyroidectomy 318–19
hypospadias 367
hypothermia, prevention 34–5
hypothermic injury, cardiopulmonary bypass 70
hypothyroidism 316
hypovolaemia 7
hypovolaemic shock
burns 43
treatment 44–5, 44, 45
I
illustrations 3, 3, 4
imatinib mesilate 39
gastrointestinal stromal tumours 180
immunosuppressive therapy 11
complications 388
transplantation surgery 388
triple therapy 388
impotence 372–3
hormonal 372
investigations 373
neurogenic 372
pharmacological 372
post-prostatectomy 361
psychogenic 373
treatment 373
vascular 372
in vitro fertilization 383
incisional hernia 246
infections
acute 26–30
abscess 26–7
boil 27
carbuncle 27
cellulitis 26
anthrax 27, 30
botulism 30
gas gangrene 29
liver 256–7
amoebic liver abscess 257
biliary 257
portal pyaemia (pyelophlebitis) 257
pyogenic liver abscess 256–7
surgical and bioterrorism 30
synergistic gangrene 29–30
tetanus 27–9
urinary tract 344–5
inferior vena cavagram 261
infertility, male 382–3
ingrowing toenail 49–50
inguinal hernia 241–4, 241
anatomy 242, 242
direct 243–4
indirect 242–3, 243, 245
strangulated 379
treatment 244
inherited cancer syndromes 40
insensible ﬂ uid losses 6, 7
inspection 2, 3
insulinoma 283–4
intercostal tube drain 64
intermittent claudication 90–1
investigations 90
management 91
treatment choices 91
interstitial cells of Cajal 179
intervertebral discs
herniation 133–4
prolapse 133
intestinal atresia 190
intestinal obstruction
acute 201
adhesive 187
closed loop 187
Crohn’s disease 195
ﬂ uid loss 7
mechanical 183–7
aetiology 183–4
classiﬁ cation 183
clinical features 184–5
examination 185
investigations 185–6
nature of 183
pathology 184
simple vs strangulating 185
site 183

Index 405
speed of onset 183
treatment 186–7
neonatal 189–92
anorectal atresia 192
Hirschsprung’s disease 191–2
intestinal atresia 190
meconium ileus 190
necrotizing enterocolitis 190–1
volvulus neonatorum 190
intracellular ﬂ uid composition 5
intracerebral haemorrhage 124
intracranial abscess see brain abscess
intracranial lesions, space-occupying 105–6
intracranial pressure 117
raised 105
intracranial vascular lesions 110–12
aneurysm 110–11, 110
arteriovenous malformations 111–12
intracytoplasmic sperm injection 383
intradermal melanoma/naevus 52, 53
intradural extramedullary tumour 135
intramedullary tumour 135
intrarenal reﬂ ux 345
intravenous ﬂ uids
electrolyte content 8
peritonitis 231
intravenous urogram
haematuria 339
urinary calculi 343
intraventricular haemorrhage 124
intussusception 192–3
aetiology 192
clinical features 193
colocolic 192
deﬁ nition 192
ileocaecal 192
ileocolic 192
ileoilial 192
treatment 193
investigations 1
iodine, radioactive
hyperthyroidism 318
thyroid carcinoma 321
ischaemia
critical 92
spinal 130
ischaemic heart disease 72–3, 73
aetiology 72
investigations 72
treatment 72, 73
ischaemic ulcer 104
isografts 384
J
jaundice 251–5, 251
causes 252–3
classiﬁ cation 252
Courvoisier’s law 271–2, 271
diagnosis 253, 254
examination 253
history 253
investigations 253–5
pathogenesis 252
posthepatic (obstructive) 13, 252–3, 271
treatment 273
prehepatic 252
jaw, tumours of 151
jugular venous pressure 349
junctional melanoma/naevus 52–3, 53
K
Kaposi’s sarcoma 57
keratoacanthoma 48
Kernig’s sign 111
kidney 335–52
acute tubular necrosis 349–50
autotransplantation 79
carbuncle 346
congenital absence 335
congenital anomalies 335, 336
cysts 337–8
duplex 335, 336–7
ﬂ uid losses
abnormal 7
normal 6–7, 6
horseshoe 335, 336
injury 340
pelvic 335
perinephric abscess 346
polycystic 335, 337
tumours 350–2
adenocarcinoma 351–2
classiﬁ cation 350
nephroblastoma (Wilms’ tumour) 351
renal pelvis 352
see also individual conditions
kidney transplantation 389
Killian’s dehiscence 162
Klatskin tumour 275
Klebsiella spp., peritonitis 230
Klinefelter’s syndrome 382
Klippel–Trenaunay syndrome 100
Klumpke’s paralysis 138–9
koilonychia 148
Krukenberg tumours 181
L
laminectomy 136
lanzoprazole 171
laparotomy, GI bleeding 178
large intestine see colon
laryngopharyngeal carcinoma 151

406 
Index
laser therapy, varicose veins 102
lateral cutaneous nerve of thigh, compression see 
meralgia paraesthetica
leather-bottle stomach 181
legs
arterial disease 86–7
inspection of 86–7
venous disorders 98–104
deep vein thrombosis 104
deep venous insufﬁ ciency 102–3
pathology 99
varicose veins 99–102
venous ulceration 103–4
venous drainage 98–9, 99
calf pump 98–9
deep venous system 98
perforating veins 98
superﬁ cial venous system 98
lentigo maligna 54
Leriche’s syndrome 90, 372
leucocyte count, appendicitis 200
leucoplakia 147, 148
LHRH analogues, mastalgia 297
lingual thyroid 311
linitis plastica 181
lipase 279
lipodermatosclerosis 100, 103
lipoma 58–9
liposarcoma 59
lips 143–6
angular stomatitis 146
carcinoma 146, 149–50
clinical features 149
differential diagnosis 150
cleft lip/palate 143–5
herpes simplex 146
retention cyst 146
lithotripsy 273
liver 250–65
cirrhosis see cirrhosis
congenital anomalies 255–6
polycystic liver 256
Reidel’s lobe 255
enlargement 250–1
hydatid disease 257–8
infections 256–7
amoebic liver abscess 257
biliary 257
portal pyaemia (pyelophlebitis) 
257
pyogenic liver abscess 256–7
jaundice see jaundice
surgery 264–5, 265
trauma 256
tumours 263–4
cholangiocarcinoma 264
hepatocellular carcinoma 263–4
secondary 264
liver biopsy
jaundice 255
liver failure 261
liver failure 261–3
clinical features 261
investigations 261
treatment 261
liver function tests 177
gallstones 272
liver failure 261
liver palms 258
liver transplantation 389–90
living organ donation 385
lock-jaw 28
lower limb see legs
lumbar hernia 247
lumbar puncture, spinal tumours 136
lumbar spine
disc herniation 133–4
fractures 128
lumbar sympathectomy, critical ischaemia 92
lung abscess 64–5
aetiology 64
clinical features 64
complications 64
investigations 64
treatment 64
lung transplantation 390
lung tumours 65–8
adenoma 65
carcinoma 66–8
adenocarcinoma 66
aetiology 66
clinical features 66–7
investigations 67–8
large-cell 66
pathology 66
small-cell (oat-cell) 66
spread 66
squamous cell 66
treatment 68
classiﬁ cation 65
secondary 68
Luschka’s foramen 112
lymph node biopsy 293
lymph vessel tumours 57–8
lymphadenopathies 292–3
cervical 292
classiﬁ cation 292
clinical examination 292–3
inguinal 292
investigations 293
lymphoedema 293–4
acquired 294
differential diagnosis 294
inherited 293–4
investigations 294
treatment 294

Index 407
lymphoedema praecox 294
lymphoedema tarda 294
lymphoma, cerebral 107
lymphoscintigraphy 294
lymphotoxic lobulitis 298
M
machinery murmur 87
Magendie’s foramen 112
magnetic resonance imaging see MRI
main d’accoucheur 324
main en griffe 140
major histocompatibility complex 386
malabsorption, Crohn’s disease 195
male breast carcinoma 307
male infertility 382–3
aetiology 382
clinical features 382
investigations 382–3
treatment 383
malignant hyperpyrexia 11
malignant melanoma 54–5
Breslow depth 55, 55
presentations 54
see also individual types
prognosis 55, 55
signs of malignant change 54
spread 54
staging 54–5
treatment 55
malignant ulcer 104
mallet ﬁ nger 141
Mallory–Weiss syndrome 177
mammography 296
management 1
mandibular process 144
Marfan’s syndrome 75
Marjolin’s ulcer 51–2, 103
mastalgia 296–7
mastectomy 305
mastitis 297–8
bacterial 298
granulomatous 298
periductal 298
maxillary processes 144
Meckel’s diverticulum 194, 201
meconium ileus 190
median nerve
compression see carpal tunnel syndrome
injuries 139, 139
mediastinoscopy, lung carcinoma 67
medical history 10
medulloblastoma 107
Meige’s syndrome 294
meiosis 142
melaena 176
melanoma 52–5
aetiology 52
amelanotic 54
classiﬁ cation 52
compound 53
intradermal 52, 53
junctional 52–3, 53
juvenile 53–4
malignant see malignant melanoma
subungual 50
melanuria 54
Meleney’s grangrene 29–30
meningioma 107
meningitis 28, 124
meningocele 126
meralgia paraesthetica 142
mesalazine, ulcerative colitis 210
mesenteric adenitis 201
mesenteric angiogram 208
mesenteric occlusive disease 90
mesenteric vascular occlusions 188–9
arterial thrombosis 189
embolism 189
non-occlusive infarction 189
venous thrombosis 189
methotrexate 39
meticillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus see MRSA
metronidazole, amoebic liver abscess 257
MHC see major histocompatibility complex
microdochectomy 296
micturating cystogram 345
indirect 346
middle meningeal artery, rupture 115
Mikulicz’s syndrome 155
Milroy’s disease 293–4
mineralocorticoids 330
mitral stenosis 71–2
clinical features 71
complications 72
pathology 71
treatment 72
molluscum sebaceum 48
Mondor’s disease 296
monoamine oxidase inhibitors 11
monoclonal antibodies, cytotoxic 39
mouth see oral cavity
MR angiography
carotid artery disease 94
liver failure 261
MR cholangiopancreatography
gallstones 272
jaundice 255
pancreatic carcinoma 285
MRI
aneurysm 83
jaundice 255
oral cancer 149
prostatic carcinoma 362

408 
Index
rectal carcinoma 228
space-occupying intracranial lesions 106
spinal injuries 130
spinal tumours 136
thoracic aortic aneurysm 75
MRSA 16, 18–19
clinical features 18–19
pathology 18
treatment 19
mucocele, appendicular 199
mucosal melanoma 54
multiple endocrine neoplasia syndromes 324
mumps 153–4
testicular involvement 378
mural thrombus 96
myasthenia gravis 328–9
myelocele 126
myelomeningocele 126
myelopathy 133
myocardial infarction
abdominal aortic aneurysm 84
complications 73
myocardial perfusion imaging 72
myxoedema 316
pretibial 315
N
nail bed lesions 50
nails 49–50
ingrowing toenail 49–50
onychogryphosis 50
paronychia 49
nasopharyngeal carcinoma 151
neck 308–10
branchial cyst/sinus 308–9, 310
carotid body tumour 310
cervical spondylosis 134
stiffness 105
tuberculous cervical adenitis 309–10
necrotizing enterocolitis 190–1
neonatal intestinal obstruction 189–92
anorectal atresia 192
Hirschsprung’s disease 191–2
intestinal atresia 190
meconium ileus 190
necrotizing enterocolitis 190–1
volvulus neonatorum 190
nephrectomy, unilateral 79
nephroblastoma (Wilms’ tumour) 351
nephrolithotomy 344
nerve grafts 138
nerve injuries see peripheral nerve injuries
nerve tumours 58
neurapraxia 137
treatment 138
neuroblastoma 333
neuroendocrine tumours of pancreas 283
neuroﬁ bromatosis 108
neuroﬁ brosarcoma 58
neurogenic impotence 372
neuropathic ulcer 104
neurotmesis 137
treatment 138
neutropenia 146
nipple
accessory 295
discharge 296
inversion 297
Paget’s disease 307
see also breast
nodular melanoma 54
non-heart-beating donation 385
non-steroidal anti-inﬂ ammatory drugs see NSAIDs
noradrenaline, hypothermia prevention 35
norepinephrine see noradrenaline
note taking 3, 3, 4
NSAIDs, rib fractures 63
nutrition 9
burns victims 46
enteral feeding 9
head injury 122
parenteral feeding 9
tetanus 29
O
oat-cell carcinoma 66
objective operative risk assessment 13, 14
obstructive pulmonary disease 12
obturator hernia 246
octreotide scintigraphy, carcinoid syndrome 198
oesophageal atresia 169
oesophageal manometry 161
oesophageal transection 262
oesophagitis, reﬂ ux 163–4
oesophagoscopy 161
oesophageal carcinoma 165
reﬂ ux oesophagitis 164
oesophagus 158–66
achalasia of cardia 161–2
adenocarcinoma 166
Barrett’s 166
carcinoma 164–5
clinical features 165
curative resection 165
differential diagnosis 165
investigations 165
palliation 165
pathology 165
spread 165
caustic stricture 161
diverticula 162
dysphagia 158–9
perforations 160–1
classiﬁ cation 160

Index 409
clinical features 160
investigations 161
treatment 161
pharyngeal pouch 162–3, 163
oestrogens, prostatic carcinoma 363
Ogilvie’s syndrome 237–8
oligodendroglioma 107
omeprazole 171
onychogryphosis 50
onycholysis 315
oral cavity 143–52
carcinoma
ﬂ oor of mouth, alveolus and cheek 151
hard palate 150
lips 146, 149–50
nasopharynx 151
oro- and laryngopharynx 151
soft palate and fauces 150
surface tumours 152
tongue 150
tonsil 151
epulis 147
leucoplakia 147
lips 143–6
malignant disease 147–9
causes of death 148
investigations 148–9
macroscopic appearance 148
microscopic appearance 148
pathology 148
predisposing factors 148
prognosis 149
sex distribution 148
spread 148
treatment 149
midline dermoid 147
ranula 147
retention cysts 147
ulcers 146–7
see also different parts
oral contraceptives 11
orbital haematoma 116
organ donation 385
exclusions to 385–6
organ preservation 386
organ transplantation see transplantation surgery
oropharyngeal carcinoma 151
orthopantogram 149
orthotopic grafts 384
Osler–Weber–Rendu syndrome 57, 146
otorrhoea, CSF 115
oxalate stones 342
oxygen therapy, peritonitis 231
P
P-POSSUM risk grading system 14
paclitaxel 39
Paget’s disease of nipple 307
pain
appendicitis 200
breast 296–7
burns 41, 43
history 2
intestinal obstruction 185
referred 2
palliative treatment 38–9
palpation 2, 3
Pancoast’s tumour 66
pancreas 276–88
annular 276
congenital anomalies 276
cysts 282
development 277
heterotopic 276
tumours 282–8
carcinoma 284–8, 286, 287
classiﬁ cation 282
gastrinoma 284
insulinoma 283–4
neuroendocrine 283
pancreas transplantation 389
pancreatic ﬁ stula, ﬂ uid loss 7
pancreatic ﬂ uid
composition 8
daily volume 8
pancreatitis 201
acute 276–80
aetiology 276–8
clinical features 278
differential diagnosis 278
investigations 278–9
macroscopic pathology 278
management 279–80
pathology 278
chronic 281–2
aetiology 281
clinical features 281
investigations 281
treatment 282
severe acute 280–1
papilloedema 105, 113
papilloma
basal cell 51
epidermal 50–1
intraductal of breast 300
transitional cell of bladder 356
paracentesis 263
paradoxical embolism 96
paralytic ileus 236–8
aetiology 236
clinical features 237
differential diagnosis 237
drug-induced 236
ﬂ uid loss 7
metabolic factors 236

410 
Index
pathology 236–7
peritonitis 236
postoperative 236
treatment 237
paranasal air sinuses, fractures 114–15
paraneoplastic syndromes 36, 37
gastric carcinoma 181–2
lung 67
paraphimosis 370
paraplegia, treatment 132
parathormone
ectopic production 325
increased production 323
parathyroid glands 323–7
anatomy and development 323
carcinoma 324–5
hyperparathyroidism 324–7
hypoparathyroidism 323–4
physiology 323
paraumbilical hernia 246
parenteral feeding 9
Parks’ pouch 210
paronychia 49
parotitis 154
patient assessment 10–12
allergies 11–12
drugs 11
past anaesthetic history 11
past medical history 10
past surgical history 11
presenting complaint 10
social habits 11
peau d’orange skin 302
pelvic pain syndrome 363–4
penetrating wounds
chest 64
wound infection 17
penis 370–3
ammoniacal dermatitis 371
balanitis 371
carcinoma 371–2
non-retractile prepuce 370–1
paraphimosis 370
phimosis 370
peptic ulcer 169–70
acute 170
aetiology 169–70
Helicobacter pylori 169–70
Zollinger–Ellison syndrome 170
chronic 170–3
clinical features 170
investigations 171
treatment 171–3, 172
complications 173
pathology 169
perforated 173–4, 201
prophylaxis 132
percussion 2
percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography 255
percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty 73
perforating veins 98
incompetent 101
perianal haematoma 221–2
pericolic abscess 207
perinephric abscess 346
peripheral nerve injuries 137–42
brachial plexus see brachial plexus injuries
carpal tunnel syndrome 139–40
classiﬁ cation 137
common peroneal nerve 141
ﬂ exion deformities of ﬁ ngers 141
Horner’s syndrome 66, 142, 142
investigation 138
median nerve 139, 139
meralgia paraesthetica 142
radial nerve 139, 139
sciatic nerve 141
treatment 138
ulnar nerve 140, 140
peripheral pulses 87
peritoneal dialysis, peritonitis 231–2
peritonism 290
peritonitis 230–5
aetiology 230
bile 233
clinical features 230–1
differential diagnosis 231
ﬂ uid loss 46
intraperitoneal pus 233
investigations 231
non-speciﬁ c bacterial 232
paralytic ileus 236
pathology 230
pelvic abscess 234–5
peritoneal dialysis 231–2
pneumococcal 232
staphylococcal 232
subphrenic abscess 233–4, 233, 235
treatment 231
tuberculous 232–3
persistent ductus arteriosus 73–4, 74
clinical features 73
investigations 73
pathology 73
treatment 73–4
PET
gastrointestinal stromal tumours 180
oesophageal carcinoma 165
space-occupying intracranial lesions 106
petrous temporal bone, fractures 115
Peutz–Jeghers circumoral pigmentation 146
phaeochromocytoma 333–4
pharyngeal pouch 158, 162–3, 163
pharynx
malignant disease 147–9
see also oral cavity

Index 411
phimosis 370
phlebitis 102
phosphate stones 342
phyllodes tumours 300
piles see haemorrhoids
pilonidal sinus 49
pineal gland, calciﬁ cation 106
pink ﬂ uid sign 24
pis en deux 354
pituitary tumours 108–9
basophil adenoma 108
chromophobe adenoma 108
clinical features 108
craniopharyngioma 109
eosinophil adenoma 108
plantar warts 48
plasma, composition 8
platelet count 177
platinum compounds 39
pleomorphic adenoma 155
pleuroperitoneal membranes 248
Plummer–Vinson syndrome 148, 162
oesophageal web 158
pneumococcal peritonitis 232
Pneumocystis jiroveci 389
pneumothorax
tension 61, 62
treatment 63–4
polycystic kidney disease 335, 337
polyps
gallbladder 274
rectal 226
popliteal aneurysm 85
population screening 40
porcelain gallbladder 272, 274
port-wine stain 56
portal hypertension 259–61, 260
aetiology 259
pathological effects 259–61, 260
splenomegaly 289
portal pressure measurement 261
portal pyaemia (pyelophlebitis) 257
portocaval shunt 262
positron emission tomography see PET
post-concussional syndrome 124
posterior urethral valves 364, 367
postgastrectomy syndromes 173
postoperative complications 15–25, 16
burst abdomen 23–4
classiﬁ cation 15
Clostridium difﬁ cile enterocolitis 18
deep vein thrombosis 20–2, 21
extended spectrum beta-lactamases 19
MRSA 18–19
postoperative ﬁ stula 24–5
postoperative pyrexia 25
pulmonary collapse/infection 19–20
pulmonary embolism 22–3
vancomycin-resistant enterococci 19
wound infection 15–18
postural hypotension 349
postvagotomy syndrome 173
potassium
gastrointestinal ﬂ uids 8
intravenous ﬂ uids 8
loss in urine 6
Pott, Percival 380
pre-existing medical conditions 12–13
asthma 12
bleeding disorders/anticoagulation 12
chronic renal failure 13
coronary artery bypass surgery 12
diabetes 12
obstructive jaundice 13
obstructive pulmonary disease 12
preﬁ xes/sufﬁ xes 4
pregnancy, appendicitis 203
preoperative assessment 10–14
objective operative risk assessment 13, 14
operative factors 13
patient assessment 10–12
allergies 11–12
drugs 11
past anaesthetic history 11
past medical history 10
past surgical history 11
presenting complaint 10
social habits 11
pre-existing medical conditions 12–13
asthma 12
bleeding disorders/anticoagulation 12
chronic renal failure 13
coronary artery bypass surgery 12
diabetes 12
obstructive jaundice 13
obstructive pulmonary disease 12
prepuce, non-retractile 370–1
presenting complaint 10
primary hyperaldosteronism 332
procarbazine 39
proctoscopy, haemorrhoids 220
progressive bacterial gangrene 29–30
prostate 358–66
benign enlargement 358–61
clinical features 358–9
complications 360
detrusor instability 359
examination 359
investigations 359–60
obstructive symptoms 359
outﬂ ow obstruction 358
pathology 358
renal failure 359
treatment 360–1, 365
carcinoma 361–3
clinical features 361

412 
Index
investigations 361–2, 362
localized disease 362
metastatic disease 363
pathology 361
treatment 362, 366
prostate-speciﬁ c antigen 38, 359, 362, 365
prostatectomy
complications 360–1
open 360
radical 362
transurethral 360
prostatitis 363–4
prosthetic heart valves 70
protein kinase inhibitors 39
proteins, serum 254
Proteus spp., peritonitis 230
prothrombin time, jaundice 255
proton pump inhibitors 171
pruritus ani 225
pseudo-obstruction 237–8
Pseudomonas spp. 16
peritonitis 230
Pseudomonas aeruginosa 46
psychogenic impotence 373
ptosis 142
pulmonary collapse 19–20
aetiology 20
clinical features 20
treatment 20
pulmonary embolism 22–3
clinical features 22–3
examination 23
investigations 23
prophylaxis 132
treatment 23
pulmonary infection 19–20
pulse, head injury 121
pulse oximetry 34
pupil
dilatation 123
size 121
pupillary responses 121
purpura 177
pyelolithotomy 344
pyelonephritis
acute 201
unilateral 79
pyelophlebitis 27, 257
pyloric stenosis 7, 174–6
biochemical disturbances 175
clinical features 175
congenital hypertrophic 167–8, 168
aetiology 167
clinical features 167
differential diagnosis 167, 169
investigations 167–8
treatment 168
differential diagnosis 175–6
investigations 175
pathology 174–5
treatment 176
pyogenic liver abscess 256–7
pyonephrosis 346
pyrexia, postoperative 25
pyridostigmine 329
Q
Queckenstedt’s test 136
R
rachischisis 126
radial nerve injuries 139, 139
radiation exposure, and breast cancer 301
radiculogram 136
radiculopathy 133
radiotherapy 38
breast cancer 306
lung carcinoma 68
palliative 38–9
prostatic carcinoma 362
Ramstedt’s pyloromyotomy 168
ranula 147
Raynaud’s phenomenon 86, 87, 94–5
aetiology 95
clinical features 94
treatment 95
rebound tenderness 3
rectum/rectal 218–29
bleeding 218, 219
history 2
examination
haemorrhoids 220
urethral injury 368
haemorrhage 206
prolapse 225
tumours 225–9
carcinoma 226–9, 227, 228
pathology 225–6
polyps 226
recurrent laryngeal nerve injury 319
red cell scintigraphy, GI bleeding 178
referred pain, abdominal 2, 2
reﬂ ux nephropathy 345–6
reﬂ ux oesophagitis 163–4
differential diagnosis 164
investigations 164
treatment 164
Reidel’s lobe 255
Reiter’s syndrome 147
rejection 387–8
acute 387–8
chronic 388
hyperacute 387

Index 413
renal arteries
aberrant 336
bypass 79
stenosis 79
renal calculi see urinary calculi
renal failure
acute 347–9
benign prostatic hypertrophy 358, 359
chronic 13, 350
renal hypoperfusion 33
renal tuberculosis 347
renin 79
renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system 31
renovascular hypertension 77–9, 78
reperfusion syndrome 94
respiration, head injury 118, 121
respiratory disease 10, 12
asthma 12
preoperative assessment 10
rest pain 92
restenosis 94
restlessness, post-head injury 122
resuscitation
ABC of 118, 368
ﬂ uid loss 8
retention cysts 146, 147
reticuloses 292
retrograde ejaculation 361
retrograde pyelogram 341
revascularization 72, 73
rheumatic fever 71
preoperative assessment 10
rheumatoid arthritis, preoperative assessment 10
rhinorrhoea, CSF 114–15
rib fractures 60–4
clinical features 60
investigations 60
treatment 63
Richter’s hernia 245
Riedel’s thyroiditis 322
risus sardonicus 28
rodent ulcer 52
S
saccular aneurysm 81
saline 0.9%, composition 8
salivary glands 153–7
calculi 155
inﬂ ammation 153
Mikulicz’s syndrome 155
mumps 153–4
parotitis 154
sialadenitis 154
tumours 155–6
adenolymphoma 156
carcinoma 156–7
pleomorphic adenoma 155
salmon pink patch 56
salpingitis 201
saphena varix 100
saphenous vein grafts 92
sarcoidosis 292
scalp haematoma 123
scalp injuries 114
Schatzki ring 158
sciatic hernia 247
sciatic nerve injuries 141
sciatica 133
scintigraphy, thyroid 316
sclerosing angioma 57
sclerotherapy
gastro-oesophageal varices 262
haemorrhoids 221
varicose veins 101
scoline apnoea 11
screening 40
high-risk individuals 40
scrotum
carcinoma 380
Fournier’s gangrene 29, 380
idiopathic oedema 380
skin disorders 380
swellings 375–6, 376
see also testis
sebaceous adenoma 55
sebaceous carcinoma 55
sebaceous cyst 47
seborrhoeic keratosis 51
seizures, tetanus 28
sella turcica 106
semen analysis 282–3
seminoma 381
sentinel lymph node biopsy 305
sepsis 32
postsplenectomy 290
septic shock 33
septum transversum 247–8
serum amylase
acute pancreatitis 279
chronic pancreatitis 281
serum transaminases, jaundice 254
shock 31–5
aetiology 31
cardiogenic 31–2
causes 32–3
adrenocortical failure 32
sympathetic interruption 32
vasovagal syndrome 32
confounding factors 32
ﬂ uid loss 32
hot 32
management 33–4
septic 33
sequelae 33

414 
Index
spinal 32
systemic vascular resistance in 32
shock lung 33
sialadenitis 154
sialogram 154
sickle cell disease 10
sigmoid volvulus 188
sigmoidoscopy
diverticulitis 206
haemorrhoids 220
hereditary non-polyposis colon cancer 212
rectal carcinoma 228
ulcerative colitis 208–9
sildenaﬁ l 373
silver sulfadiazine cream 43
sirolimus, mucosal ulceration 147
Sjögren’s syndrome 155
skin 47–59
ammoniacal dermatitis 371
dermoid cyst 47–8
eczema 103
ganglion 48–9
keratoacanthoma 48
nails 49–50
pigmentation 103
pilonidal sinus 49
sebaceous cyst 47
temperature 87
verruca vulgaris 48
skin care
head injury 122
in paralysis 132
skin tumours 50–5
classiﬁ cation 50
epidermal 50–2
basal cell carcinoma 52
Bowen’s disease 51
Marjolin’s ulcer 51–2
papilloma 50–1
seborrhoeic keratosis 51
solar (actinic) keratosis 51
squamous cell carcinoma 51
glomus tumour 57
Kaposi’s sarcoma 57
melanoma 52–5
sclerosing angioma 57
telangiectasia 57
skip lesions 208
skull fractures 114–16
depressed 116
paranasal air sinuses 114–15
petrous temporal bone 115
temporal bone 115
skull X-ray
extradural haemorrhage 123
head injury 119
space-occupying intracranial lesions 106
small intestine 194–8
carcinoid syndrome 197–8
Crohn’s disease 195–6
ﬂ uid 8
Meckel’s diverticulum 194
obstruction 186
tumours 197
volvulus 188
small stomach syndrome 173
smoking 11
atherosclerosis 89
social habits 11
sodium
gastrointestinal ﬂ uids 8
intravenous ﬂ uids 8
loss in urine 6
soft palate, carcinoma 150
solar (actinic) keratosis 51
space-occupying intracranial lesions 105–6
clinical features 105–6
investigations 106
spider naevus 56
Spigelian hernia 247
spina biﬁ da 126–7
clinical features 126–7
meningocele 126
myelocele 126
myelomeningocele 126
occulta 126
treatment 127
spinal claudication 90
spinal concussion 130
spinal cord
compression 130
injury 131, 131
transection 130
spinal degenerative disorders 133–4
lumbar disc herniation 133–4
neurological sequelae 133
prolapsed intervertebral disc 133
spinal stenosis 134
spinal extradural abscess 134–5
spinal injuries 127–32
fractures 127–30
clinical features 128, 130
investigations 130
stability 127
types of 127–8, 128
neurological 129, 130–1
Brown-Séquard syndrome 131
cauda equina injury 130–1, 131
cord compression 130
cord transection 130
direct injury 130
ischaemia 130
spinal concussion 130
rehabilitation 132

Index 415
treatment 131–2
immediate management 131
no neurological injury 132
paraplegia/tetraplegia 132
spinal ischaemia 75
spinal shock 32
spinal stenosis 134
spinal tumours 135–6
clinical features 135
differential diagnosis 135–6
investigations 136
treatment 136
spine X-ray 130
disc herniation 133
spinal tumours 136
spleen 289–91
ruptured 290–1
splenectomy 290
splenomegaly 259, 289
squamous cell carcinoma 51
staging of tumours 39
Staphylococcus spp.
gangrene 29
lung abscess 65
mastitis 297
meningitis 124
peritonitis 232
pyogenic 27
pyonephrosis 346
septicaemia 135
Staphylococcus aureus 16
meticillin-resistant see MRSA
Starling’s law 31
steatorrhoea 173
steroids 11
stilboestrol, prostatic carcinoma 363
stomach 167–82
cancer see gastric carcinoma
small stomach syndrome 173
see also gastric
stones
bile ducts 270, 271
bladder 355, 358
gallbladder see gallstones
see also calculi
strangulated hernia 240, 241
strawberry gallbladder 268
strawberry naevus 56
Streptococcus spp. 16
beta-haemolytic 26, 29
mitral stenosis 71
empyema 65
Streptococcus faecalis 16
peritonitis 230
prostatitis 363
Streptococcus milleri 256
Streptococcus pneumoniae, parotitis 154
Streptococcus pyogenes 46
Streptococcus viridans, parotitis 154
stress echocardiography, ischaemic heart disease 72
stress reaction, burns 43
stroke 93
stroke volume 31
structural grafts 384
strychnine poisoning 28
Sturge–Weber syndrome 111–12
subarachnoid haemorrhage 110, 124
subdural haematoma 123–4, 123
subhepatic spaces 233, 234
subphrenic abscess 233–4, 233, 235
subphrenic spaces 233, 234
substance abuse 11
subungual exostosis 50
subungual haematoma 50
subungual melanoma 50
succussion splash 175
sucking wound of chest 62
treatment 63, 64
sulfasalazine, ulcerative colitis 210
sun-setting sign 113
superﬁ cial spreading melanoma 54
suprarenal glands see adrenal glands
surgical history 11
surgical infections 30
Swan–Ganz catheter 34
sweat gland adenoma/carcinoma 56
Sydenham’s chorea 71
syndrome of inappropriate ADH 7
synergistic gangrene 29–30
syphilis
mouth ulcers 146
testicular gumma 378
systemic arterial pressure 117
systemic lupus erythematosus 86
systemic vascular resistance 31
reduced 32
T
tamoxifen
breast cancer 305
mastalgia 297
tamsulosin 360
tap test 100
taxanes 39
technetium scan, GI bleeding 178
telangiectasia 57
temporal bone, fractures 115–16
tendon transfers 138
tension pneumothorax 61, 62
treatment 64
teratoma 381
terlipressin 262

416 
Index
testicular pain 2
testicular torsion 201, 379–80
aetiology 379
clinical features 379
differential diagnosis 379
treatment 379–80
testicular tumours 292–3, 381–2
aetiology 381
clinical features 381
investigations 381
pathology 381
prognosis 382
spread 381
treatment 381–2
types of
seminoma 381
teratoma 381
testis 374–83
epididymal cysts 376–7
hydrocele 377–8, 377
infections
acute 378
chronic 378–9
maldescent 374–5
complications 375
differential diagnosis 375
ectopic testis 374
embryology 374
treatment 375
undescended testis 374–5
syphilitic gumma 378
tuberculosis 379
varicocele 380
see also scrotum
tetanospasmin 27
tetanus 27–9
clinical features 28
differential diagnosis 28
immunization 28
prophylaxis 28
treatment 28–9
tetany 324
hypocalcaemic 28
tethered cord syndrome 127
tetraplegia, treatment 132
thoracic aortic aneurysms 75
thoracic aortic disease 73–7
aortic dissection 76–7, 76
coarctation of aorta 74–5
persistent ductus arteriosus 73–4, 74
thoracic spine, fractures 128
thoracoabdominal aneurysm 75
thoracolumbar spine, fractures 128
thromboangiitis obliterans see Buerger’s disease
thrombocytosis, splenectomy 290
thrombolysis 97
intermittent claudication 90
thrombophlebitis 100
thrombophlebitis migrans 285
thymus 328–9
myasthenia gravis 328–9
tumours 328
thyroglobulin 321
thyroglossal cyst 311
thyroglossal ﬁ stula 311–12
thyroid acropachy 315
thyroid antibodies 316
thyroid crisis 319
thyroid disease
clinical features 314
de Quervain’s thyroiditis 322
goitre 313–14, 317
Hashimoto’s disease 321–2
hyperthyroidism 315–16, 317–18
hypothyroidism 316
investigations 316
Riedel’s thyroiditis 322
thyroid gland 311–22
congenital anomalies 311, 312
enlarged 314
clinical classiﬁ cation 316–17
hyperplasia 314
lingual 311
physiology 312–13
thyroid hormones 312–13
thyroid-stimulating hormone suppression 321
thyroid tumours 319–21
benign adenoma 320
carcinoma 320–1
anaplastic 320, 321
follicular 320
medullary 320, 321
papillary 320
classiﬁ cation 319
treatment 321
thyroidectomy 317
complications 318–19
Tietze’s syndrome 297
tissue perfusion, regulation of 31–2
TNM staging system 39
tongue, carcinoma 150
tonsil, carcinoma 151
total body water 5
toxaemia, burns 43
tracheal displacement 314
tracheostomy, ﬂ ail chest 63
transient ischaemic attack 93
transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt 262
transoesophageal echocardiography, aortic 
dissection 77
transplantation surgery 384–90
complications 388–9
graft classiﬁ cation 384
history 384
immunology 386
immunosuppressive therapy 388

Index 417
organ donation 385
exclusions to 385–6
organ matching 386–7
ABO antibodies 387
lymphocytotoxic cross-match 387
MHC matching 387
organ preservation 386
recipients 386
rejection 387–8
acute 387–8
chronic 387–8
hyperacute 387
results 389–90
heart, lung and combined heart–lung 
transplantation 390
kidney transplantation 389
liver transplantation 389–90
pancreas transplantation 389
wound infection 17
transrectal ultrasound 362, 383
transurethral resection syndrome 361
trash foot 84
trastuzumab 39
breast cancer 306
Trendelenburg test 101
triple therapy 388
Troisier’s sign 181, 293
Trousseau’s sign 182, 285, 319, 324
trypsin 279
tuberculosis
renal 347
testis 379
tuberculous cervical adenitis 309–10
tuberculous peritonitis 232–3
tumour markers 37, 38
tumours 36–40
anatomical situation 40
antral 152
bladder 355–7
blood vessels 56
bone 151
brain 106–9
acoustic neuroma 107–8
cerebral lymphoma 107
classiﬁ cation 106
glioma 107
meningioma 107
pituitary tumours 108–9
clinical features and diagnosis 36–7
colon 211–16
carcinoma 211
classiﬁ cation 211
familial adenomatous polyposis 211
hereditary non-polyposis colon cancer 211–16, 214, 
215
examination 37
familial clustering 40
fatty 58–9
glomus 50
histology 39
history 37
inherited cancer syndromes 40
investigations 37
jaw 151
kidney 350–2
lung 65–8
lymph vessel 57–8
nerve 58
oesophagus 164–5
oral cavity see oral cavity, carcinoma
pathology 36
patient’s condition 40
pituitary 108–9
prognosis 39
rectum 225–9
carcinoma 226–9, 227, 228
pathology 225–6
polyps 226
salivary glands 155–6
adenolymphoma 156
carcinoma 156–7
pleomorphic adenoma 155
screening 40
high-risk individuals 40
population 40
skin see skin tumours
small intestine 197
spinal 135–6
staging 39
stomach 179–82
carcinoma 180–2
gastrointestinal stromal tumours 179–80
sweat glands and sebaceous glands 55–6
testis 292–3, 381–2
thymus 328
treatment 37–9
curative 38
palliative 38–9
U
ulcerative colitis 208–10
aetiology 208
clinical features 208, 209
complications 209
differential diagnosis 209
investigations 208–9
malignant change 209–10
treatment 210
ulcers
aphthous 146
arteriovenous ﬁ stula 104
Cushing’s 170
duodenal 171, 173
gastric 171

418 
Index
gummatous 104
herpes simplex 146
ischaemic 104
malignant 104
Marjolin’s 51–2, 103
neuropathic 104
oral cavity 146–7
syphilitic 146
traumatic 146
venous 103–4
ulnar nerve injuries 140, 140, 141
ultrasound
acute pancreatitis 279
benign prostatic hypertrophy 360
endoscopic see endoscopic ultrasound
haematuria 339
jaundice 255
liver failure 261
pancreatic carcinoma 285
scrotal 381
splenic rupture 291
thyroid disease 316
transrectal 362, 383
urethral 369
umbilical hernia 245
congenital 246
urachal cyst 353
urachal diverticulum 353
urachal ﬁ stula 353
urea
breath test 171
serum 177
ureteric calculi 344
ureteric colic 201, 342
ureteroileostomy 353
ureterolithotomy 344
urethra, male 367–9
congenital anomalies 367
epispadias 367
hypospadias 367
posterior urethral valves 364, 367
injury 367–8
bulbous urethra 367, 368
complications 368
management 368
membranous urethra 367–8
urethral stricture 366, 368–9
aetiology 368
clinical features 369
investigations 369
treatment 369
urethrogram
urethral injury 368
urethral stricture 369
urethroscopy 369
uric acid/urate stones 342
urinary calculi 341–4
aetiology 341–2
clinical features 342–3, 343
complications 344
composition 342
Crohn’s disease 196, 341–4
investigations 343–4
treatment 344
urinary catheterization, head injury 122
urinary ﬂ ow rate 369
urinary incontinence, post-prostatectomy 361
urinary retention 358, 364–6
acute 364
causes 364–5
chronic 364
examination 365
history 365
investigations 365
management 365–6, 366
benign prostatic hypertrophy 365–6
chronic retention 366
prostatic carcinoma 366
urethral stricture 366
patient’s condition 365
renal damage 365
urinary tract infections 344–5
urine
bilirubin in 254
catecholamines in 334
cytology 339
ﬂ uid loss in 6, 32
haematuria 338–9, 339
microscopy 339
sugar in 87
urobilin 252
urobilinogen 252
uvula, biﬁ d 145
V
valvular heart disease 10, 70–1
allograft and xenograft valves 70
complications of valve replacement 71
preoperative assessment 10
prosthetic valves 70
valve repair/replacement 70
wound infection 17
see also individual heart valves
vancomycin-resistant enterococci 16, 19
vancomycin-resistant S. aureus 18
varicocele 380
varicose veins 99–102, 100
classiﬁ cation 99–100
primary (idiopathic) 99–100
secondary 100
clinical features 100
complications 102
examination 100–1
investigations 101

Index 419
recurrence 101–2
treatment 101–2
graded compression stockings 101
sclerotherapy 101
surgical treatment 101–2
vascular lesions, intracranial 110–12
vascular surgery, wound infection 17
vasovagal syndrome 32
venography
DVT 22
varicose veins 101
venous insufﬁ ciency 103
venous disorders of leg 98–104
deep vein thrombosis 104
deep venous insufﬁ ciency 102–3
pathology 99
varicose veins 99–102
venous guttering 87
venous hypertension 102–3
venous return 31
venous thrombosis, mesenteric 189
venous ulceration 103–4
ventilation–perfusion scintigraphy, pulmonary 
embolism 23
ventral hernia 246
ventricular aneurysm 72
ventriculoseptal defect, acute 72
verruca vulgaris 48
vesicoureteric reﬂ ux 345
vinblastine 39
vincristine 39
Virchow’s node 293
Virchow’s triad 20
visceral angiography, GI bleeding 178
vocal cords, thyroid disease 314
Volkmann’s ischaemic contracture 80, 141
volvulus 187–8
caecal 188
sigmoid 188
small intestine 188
volvulus neonatorum 190
vomiting 105
appendicitis 200
bilious 173
faeculent 185
ﬂ uid loss 7
intestinal obstruction 185
von Recklinghausen’s disease 58
W
waiter’s tip position 138
Wallerian degeneration 137
warfarin 11
wart see verruca vulgaris
Warthin’s tumour 156
Wegener’s granulomatosis 147
Whipple’s procedure 286
Whipple’s triad 283
Wilms’ tumour 351
wool sorter’s disease 30
wound infection 15–18
antimicrobial prophylaxis 17
clinical features 17
operative factors 16
postoperative factors 17
preoperative factors 16
treatment 17
X
xenografts 384
Z
Zadik’s operation 50
Zollinger–Ellison syndrome 170, 284
UPLOADED by [STORMRG]

