Introductory Human Physiology 
 
         ©copyright Jennifer Carbrey & Emma Jakoi 
 
                                                                                            
 
7. Regulation of breathing 
 
Breathing is essentially automatic and can only be altered temporarily by voluntary 
efforts. You cannot consciously stop breathing for long. Breathing is finely tuned to meet 
metabolic demands, such that during exercise ventilation increases to maintain arterial 
PO2, PCO2 and pH within a narrow range. To achieve this tight regulation, peripheral 
receptors send information to a CNS respiratory center whose output adjusts initiation, 
duration, depth, and rate of breathing.   
 
The intercostal muscles and diaphragm are skeletal muscles that will not contract 
unless stimulated. Thus breathing depends on cyclical excitation of the motor neurons 
that innervate these muscles. Destruction of these nerves by the polio virus for example 
results in paralysis and death if the individual is not ventilated.   
 
The underlying respiratory rhythm is established by respiratory centers in the medulla 
of the brain stem (Fig 4). The general term for this integration center is the respiratory 
rhythm generator. Inspiratory neurons located in the respiratory center initiate 
respiratory rhythm by sending signals to the motor neurons that innervate the effector 
skeletal muscles (intercostals and diaphragm). This rhythm is modified by input from 
peripheral sensors (chemoreceptors and mechanoreceptors) located in blood 
vessel walls and by central receptors (chemoreceptors) in the brain.    
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Reflex control of breathing. 
 
Inspiration is limited by several inputs including stretch of the lungs and innate rhythm 
generators within the brain stem (medulla). The medullary inspiratory neurons are quite 
sensitive to drugs such as barbiturates and morphine. Death from an overdose of these 
drugs is often due to cessation of breathing.  
 
Regulated Variable (PaO2, PaCO2, pH) 
Stimulus within 
desired range  
Stimulus outside  
desired range 
Peripheral 
Receptors 
activated 
(sensor) 
Respiratory Center in Medulla 
(Integration center) 
Motor neurons to diaphragm & intercostal muscle 
(Effectors) 
Efferent path
Afferent path 
Central Receptors (PaCO2) 

Introductory Human Physiology 
 
         ©copyright Jennifer Carbrey & Emma Jakoi 
 
                                                                                            
 
Inspiratory receptors in the lung include: 
 
1. Pulmonary stretch receptors located in the smooth muscle of the large and 
small airways of the lung are mechanoreceptors that fire with the inflation of the lung.  
These receptors stop inspiration as part of the Hering-Breuer reflex. In the adult this 
reflex is evoked only under conditions of large tidal volumes as in rigorous exercise.  
 
 
2. J Receptors located in the walls of the pulmonary capillaries which are 
stimulated by pulmonary vascular congestion, edema, air emboli (air in the blood), and 
low lung volumes. Stimulation of these receptors can result in rapid breathing 
(hyperpnea), and or labored breathing (dyspnea). 
 
3. Pulmonary irritant receptors located in airway epithelium and the nasal 
mucosa. Mechanical or chemical irritation elicits a cough reflex and 
bronchoconstriction.  
 
Transport of Hydrogen Ions 
Metabolism generates protons (H+) which are extruded to the interstitial fluid 
surrounding cells and eventually enter the blood by diffusion. As blood flows through the 
tissues, a fraction of the oxy-hemoglobin (O2-Hb) loses its oxygen to become deoxy-Hb. 
Deoxy-Hb has a much higher affinity for H+ and thus binds most of the newly generated 
H+. 
 
 
HbO2 + H+ = HbH + O2 
This effectively removes the H+ from the blood and thereby buffers the blood. As a 
consequence venous blood is slightly more acidic (pH of 7.36) than arterial blood (pH 
7.4).   
 
As venous blood passes through the lungs, HbH is converted to HbO2 and H+ is 
released. The H+ reacts with the bicarbonate (HCO3-) in the blood to give carbonic acid 
(H2CO3) which dissociates to H2O + CO2. The CO2 diffuses into the alveoli to be 
expired. Normally all of the H+ will be removed by this process and none will appear 
in the arterial blood. 
 
 
H+ + HCO3- = H2CO3 = H2O + CO2  
 
However, if an individual is either hypoventilating or has a lung disease that prevents 
normal elimination of CO2, then the PaCO2 will rise and the arterial H+ concentration will 
rise (by mass action). Increased arterial H+ concentration due to CO2 retention is called 
respiratory acidosis.     
 
Conversely, if a person is hyperventilating, then PaCO2 and H+ concentration will 
decrease, producing respiratory alkalosis.  
 
Ventilation is Regulated by Chemoreceptors  

Introductory Human Physiology 
 
         ©copyright Jennifer Carbrey & Emma Jakoi 
 
                                                                                            
 
Respiratory rate and tidal volume can increase or decrease over a wide range. At rest, 
chemoreceptors (Fig 4) located in the periphery and centrally within the CNS provide 
feedback to regulate these two factors.   
 
Peripheral chemoreceptors are the carotid receptors and aortic bodies. They are 
stimulated by: 
a. decrease in PaO2 (hypoxia) 
b. increase in PaCO2 (respiratory acidosis) 
c. decrease in pH within the arterial blood (metabolic acidosis). 
 
Of the two, the carotid receptor is the predominate input in controlling respiration. 
 
Central chemoreceptors are widely distributed throughout the brain stem. They 
respond to an increase in blood PCO2. These receptors actually sense H+ 
concentration in the interstitial fluid of the brain. They are not affected by changes 
in arterial pH because the blood brain-barrier is not permeable to H+ or HCO3-. Instead, 
CO2 equilibrates across this barrier, causing a change in the interstitial fluid pH. 
Because the interstitial fluid and the adjoining cerebrospinal fluid contain little protein, 
they are not well buffered. Hence small changes in PCO2 produce large changes in 
pH in this area.  
 
Ventilatory Response to Oxygen  
PaO2 must decrease to about 50-60 mm Hg before respiration is increased. It has been 
suggested that the carotid chemoreceptors (which respond to changes in PaO2), are 
designed to protect the organism against hypoxia rather than to regulate respiration. 
Note that the stimulation to hypoxia is arterial PO2 not arterial O2 content. That means 
that individuals with anemia do not have increased ventilation because their PaO2 is 
normal.  
 
Ventilatory Response to Carbon Dioxide 
A very small increase in PaCO2 (2-4 mm Hg) provides a powerful stimulus to increase 
respiration (doubles alveolar ventilation). What is the physiologic role of this response? 
Recall that changes in PaCO2 have profound effects on pH. Thus this tight regulation of 
PaCO2 allows for tight control of acid-base balance. For example, in emphysema 
patients retention of CO2 occurs because of the decrease in the elastic recoil. This 
raises their PaCO2 leading to increased minute ventilation (i.e, “blowing down” the CO2 
in the blood).  Of the two sets of receptors involved in this reflex response to elevated 
PaCO2, the central chemoreceptors are more important accounting for ~70% of the 
increased ventilation.  
 
Hypoxia (low PO2) potentiates the effects of CO2. The response curve is shifted to the 
left and has a steeper slope. Thus a lower PaO2 will result in a stronger ventilatory 
response for the same arterial PCO2.  
 
Very high levels of carbon dioxide (greater than 70-80 mm Hg) can depress respiration, 
cause headaches, restlessness, faintness, and even unconsciousness or coma.  

Introductory Human Physiology 
 
         ©copyright Jennifer Carbrey & Emma Jakoi 
 
                                                                                            
 
 
Changes in pH without changes in PaCO2 
Excess retention or elimination of CO2 causes respiratory acidosis or alkalosis, 
respectively. However, many normal and pathological conditions can change arterial H+ 
levels in which the primary cause is not a change in PCO2. These conditions are called 
metabolic acidosis (increased H+ concentration) and metabolic alkalosis (decreased 
H+ concentration).  
 
For example, in strenuous exercise, lactic acid is released by the working muscle. The 
addition of lactic acid to the blood lowers the pH and causes hyperventilation almost 
entirely by stimulating the peripheral chemoreceptors.  Recall that H+ do not cross the 
blood brain barrier, but CO2 does and is converted in the interstitial fluid to H+ and 
HCO3-.   
 
Predict what happens when arterial H+ concentration is decreased by vomiting (loss of 
acid from the stomach). Is ventilation increased or decreased? Answer: The peripheral 
chemoreceptors will reflexively decrease ventilation to conserve CO2 in the blood.  
Thus the respiratory system compensates for metabolic acidosis by increasing 
ventilation (hyperventilation) and for metabolic alkalosis by decreasing ventilation 
(hypoventilation). Notice that maintenance of PCO2 levels is not as important as 
maintenance of H+ concentration in the blood. This is because most enzymes of the 
body function best at physiological pH (pH = 7.4). 

