

Lecture Notes: Urology


Lecture Notes
Urology
John Blandy
CBE, MA, DM, MCh, FRCS, FACS, (Hon), FRCSI
Emeritus Professor of Urology
University of London
London Hospital Medical College
London
Amir Kaisary
MA, ChM, FRCS
Consultant Urologist
The Royal Free Hospital
London
Sixth Edition
A John Wiley & Sons, Ltd., Publication

This edition ﬁrst published 2009, C⃝by John Blandy and Amir Kaisary
Previous editions: 1976, 1977, 1982, 1989, 1998
Blackwell Publishing was acquired by John Wiley & Sons in February 2007.
Blackwell’s publishing program has been merged with Wiley’s global Scientiﬁc, Technical and Medical business to
form Wiley-Blackwell.
Registered ofﬁce: John Wiley & Sons Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK
Editorial ofﬁces: 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 2DQ, UK
The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK
111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030-5774, USA
For details of our global editorial ofﬁces, for customer services and for information about how to apply for permission
to reuse the copyright material in this book please see our website at www.wiley.com/wiley-blackwell
The right of the author to be identiﬁed as the author of this work has been asserted in accordance with the Copyright,
Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any
form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, except as permitted by the UK
Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, without the prior permission of the publisher.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print may not be
available in electronic books.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. All brand names and
product names used in this book are trade names, service marks, trademarks or registered trademarks of their
respective owners. The publisher is not associated with any product or vendor mentioned in this book. This
publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in regard to the subject matter covered. It is
sold on the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering professional services. If professional advice
or other expert assistance is required, the services of a competent professional should be sought.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Blandy, John P. (John Peter), 1927-
Lecture notes. Urology / John Blandy, Amir Kaisary. – 6th ed.
p. ; cm.
Includes index.
Rev. ed. of: Lecture notes on urology / John Blandy. 5th ed. 1998.
ISBN 978-1-4051-2270-2
1. Urinary organs–Diseases–Outlines, syllabi, etc.
2. Urology–Outlines, syllabi, etc.
I. Kaisary, Amir V.
II. Blandy, John P. (John Peter), 1927- Lecture notes on urology.
III. Title.
IV. Title:
Urology.
[DNLM: 1. Urologic Diseases. WJ 140 B642L 2009]
RC900.5.B53 2009
616.6–dc22
2009013376
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Set in 8/12pt Stone Serif by Aptara R⃝Inc., New Delhi, India
Printed in Singapore
1
2009

Contents
Preface, vi
Acknowledgements, vi
Further reading, vii
1
History and examination 1
2
Investigations 8
3
The kidney: structure and function 24
4
The kidney: congenital disorders 35
5
The kidney: trauma 47
6
The kidney: inﬂammation 51
7
Urinary calculi 67
8
Neoplasms of the kidney 82
9
Vascular disorders of the kidney and
hypertension 92
10
The adrenal gland 98
11
Renal failure 101
12
The renal pelvis and ureter 109
13
The bladder: structure and function 123
14
The bladder: congenital abnormalities and
trauma 132
15
Urinary tract infection 136
16
Bladder cancer 147
17
The bladder: disorders of micturition 161
18
The prostate gland: benign disorders 174
19
Prostate cancer 188
20
The urethra 201
21
The penis 217
22
The testicle 230
23
Male fertility 251
24
Minimally invasive urology: laparoscopy and
robotics 256
Self-assessment MCQs, 261
Answers, 267
Glossary, 268
Index, 271
v

Preface
More than 30 years ago, this book started as a set of
brief notes mimeographed for medical students on
the urology ﬁrm at The London Hospital. I hoped
that students might ﬁnd them helpful in under-
standing the patients and operations they saw on
the wards and in the operating theatre. I believed
that to understand the pathology of a condition
was the key to understanding symptoms, signs and
everything else. I also believed that pretty well ev-
ery pathological process could be explained sim-
ply, that long-winded jargon was almost never
needed, and in learning surgery as in most things,
a spoonful of sugar helps the medicine go down.
Over 30 years, urology has seen extraordinary
changes. New methods of imaging have trans-
formed the precision of diagnosis. New tech-
niques, especially laparoscopic surgery and the in-
troduction of new lasers, have transformed oper-
ative surgery.My friend Amir Kaisary has worked
hard to bring these notes up to date, without los-
ing sight of their original intention, which was
that students would ﬁnd the subject interesting
and yet has still managed to keep it clear and above
all, we both hope, fun to read.
John Blandy
Acknowledgements
During preparation of this new edition we were
both helped immensely by advice and contribu-
tions from many colleagues, for which we register
our thanks. Special thanks also go to the Medical Il-
lustration department at the Royal Free NHS Trust
Hospital and Joint Royal Free and UCLH Medical
School for the new artwork.
Anne and Karen, our wives, deserve a medal each
for putting up with our moods during preparation
of this book!
vi

Further reading
It is now acknowledged that electronic communi-
cations ensure immediate access to sources of in-
formation without delay. You will note that there
are no references listed at the end of chapters in
this book. It is estimated that few months elapse
between providing the text to publishers/printers
and by the time the book is available on the
market, few months have passed. This would in-
evitably make the material read not truly up to
date. Continuous medical education (CME) would
thus need the readers to get access to sources of
education available electronically to keep you up
to date. Useful sources are plentiful and here are
some examples:
1 http://www.emedicine.com
This is an American-based website which is now
internationally used. As a student you can register
with this website for free. This will enable you to
browse the information without having to pay for
a subscription. This website gives an overview of
the pathophysiology, epidemiology, clinical and
radiographic ﬁndings and management options
for most conditions.
2 www.pubmed.com or http://www.ncbi.nlm
.nih.gov/sites/entrez/
PubMed is a service of the U.S. National Library
of Medicine that includes over 18 million citations
from MEDLINE and other life science journals for
biomedical articles back to the 1950s. PubMed in-
cludes links to full text articles and other related
resources. It is a useful tool where MEDLINE is
not available to you or where you have not quite
grasped how to use MEDLINE yet. It is user-friendly
and provides links to articles that are relevant to
your search. However, you will need an Athens
password (and therefore subscription) to access
most e-journals and articles.
3 http://wok.mimas.ac.uk/
Sign into the Web of Knowledge website in or-
der to get to Web of Science. Again, you will
need an Athens subscription of Web of Knowledge
subscription. Web of Science R⃝consists of seven
databases containing information gathered from
thousands of scholarly journals, books, book se-
ries, reports and more.
The three citation databases contain the refer-
ences cited by authors of the articles. You can use
these references to do cite reference searching. This
type of search allows you to ﬁnd articles that cite
a previously published work.
Google scholar (http://scholar.google.co.uk) is a
handy search tool because it will often return ar-
ticles and books that have been published on the
topic you are searching. It is deemed less academic
compared to PubMed and is less useful if you are
looking for recently published articles. However,
with the power of Google as a search tool it will
often ﬁnd you active links to articles that can be
accessed without a subscription.
Other valuable sites are UroSource Newslet-
ters
from
European
Association
of
Urology
(EAU), Timely topics in Urology and web casts
(info@ttmed.com and www.ttmed.com/urology),
PeerView Press (webmaster@peerviewpress.com)
and many more to ﬁnd if you search.
This book gives you a lot and the initiative you
take will give you more.
Amir V. Kaisary
John Blandy
vii


Chapter 1
History and examination
Begin at the beginning: how old is your patient and
what is his or her occupation? Do they smoke? Do
they drink alcohol? Have they travelled in Africa
or Indochina? Ask retired people about their pre-
vious occupation especially if there was any ex-
posure to rubber, chemicals or plastics. Is there
a family history of cancer? Women should be
asked how many and how old are their children,
and whether there was any complication during
pregnancy or delivery that may have required
catheterisation, which might have introduced
infection.
What brings the patient to you? What were the
ﬁrst symptoms? When did they begin and how did
they change as time went by? Let the patient do
the talking – listening is the key to taking a history.
Try to get a clear picture of the way the illness has
developed over the years, and make sure you really
understand just what is really bothering him or her
right now. Never end your enquiry without asking
whether the patient has noticed blood in the urine:
haematuria is the single-most important symptom
in the whole of urology, particularly if it is painless.
Your notes should be brief, but sufﬁciently clear
that if you drop dead, another doctor can take up
management of the case. No note is of any use
if it cannot be read. If your handwriting is really
bad, teach yourself to use a word processor. Put
the date and name of the patient on every page.
Always bear in mind that your notes are now avail-
able to the patient and may at any time be used as
evidence in a court of law, so be polite about your
patient and never be tempted to make a disparag-
ing criticism of a professional colleague.
A drawing can save many words, so a sketch not-
ing where the pain starts from and radiates to can
be useful, together with a word or two to specify
the type of pain, e.g. sharp, colicky or dull (Fig.
1.1). Avoid pretentious Greek or Latin terms un-
less they are clear and unambiguous. Dysuria can
mean pain or difﬁculty or both: which do you re-
ally mean? Frequency is most simply expressed by
writing down how often your patient voids by day
and by night, e.g. D 6×, N 3×. Enuresis can be
Pain started
Monday
3 hours
2nd attack
Tuesday
  OE
tender 
in RIF
Figure 1.1 A sketch showing the main features in a patient
with right ureteric colic.
Lecture Notes: Urology, 6th edition. By John Blandy and
Amir Kaisary. Published 2009 by Blackwell Publishing.
ISBN: 978-1-4051-2270-2.
1

Chapter 1 History and examination
ambiguous: if you mean the patient wets the bed,
why not say so?
An exception is the term haematuria. It matters
not whether the blood has been seen by the pa-
tient or found in a dipstick test, nor whether it
is well mixed or appears at the beginning or the
end of the stream: any kind of blood in the urine
demands thorough investigation. Blood trickling
from the urethra between acts of urination is prob-
ably coming from the urethra, but it still needs
investigation.
Previous history
Ask about rheumatism and arthritis for which
analgesics
may
have
been
taken:
analgesic
nephropathy is surprisingly common and seldom
suspected unless you ask about the consumption
of painkilling tablets.
Students often feel awkward when asking about
venereal disease. In times past, men were usually
secretly ﬂattered at the suggestion that they might
have been a Don Juan when young: today, one
must be aware of the possibility of acquired im-
mune deﬁciency syndrome (AIDS).
Do not waste time. As you listen to the patient
it may be obvious that certain investigations are
going to be needed. Unobtrusively ﬁlling in the
relevant forms will not stop you from listening
politely but will save time, and more importantly,
may prevent you from writing down too much.
Listening is far more important than writing.
Physical examination
Physical examination begins as the patient comes
into the room. Does the patient look ill? Has the
patient obviously lost weight? Does the gait sug-
gest pain, Parkinsonism or ankylosing spondyli-
tis? Is there that faint whiff of urine that suggests
uraemia, or the ammoniacal reek of wet trousers?
To rise to shake your patient’s hand is not mere
politeness: it gives useful information. Whatever
your specialty, never forget that you are a doc-
tor ﬁrst and your concern is for the patient as a
whole. In an ideal world, where no doctor was ever
pushed for time and no patient ever in a hurry to
get back to work or children, you could spend all
day over one case, getting to know your patient
in depth and making a thorough examination of
every system. Something approaching such a thor-
ough clerking may indeed be necessary when ad-
mitting a patient to the ward, but in the outpatient
clinic it would be cruelly slow and unfair to the
others who are waiting.
In most patients who attend the urological
clinic, you are looking for enlargement of a kid-
ney or bladder, disorders in the inguinal region
or genitalia, hypertension and signs in the pelvis
that might be detected by vaginal or rectal exami-
nation.
Abdominal examination
Kidney
The traditional physical signs of an enlarged kid-
ney (Fig. 1.2) are:
r a rounded lump in the loin, bimanually palpa-
ble, moving on respiration;
r you can get your hand between the lump and
the edge of the costal margin; and
r there is said to be a band of resonance in front
of the kidney due to gas in the colon (Fig. 1.3).
Moves with
respiration
Bimanually
palpable
lump
You can ‘get above it’
Costal
margin
Figure 1.2 Physical signs of an enlarged kidney.
2

History and examination Chapter 1
Resonant to
percussion
Colon
Figure 1.3 There is often a band of resonance in front of
the kidney from gas in the colon.
None of these physical signs is trustworthy: on the
right side the supposed ‘kidney’ may turn out to
be the gall bladder or liver, and on the left it may
prove to be the spleen, even though you think
you can slide your hand between the lump and
the costal margin. A large mass may arise from or
displace the colon.
Bladder
An enlarged bladder (Figs. 1.4 and 1.5) may be
equally misleading. One expects to ﬁnd:
Resonant
Resonant
Dull
Figure 1.4 The bladder is dull to percussion.
Bladder
Figure 1.5 An enlarged bladder may go to one or other
side.
r a rounded swelling arising out of the pelvis; and
r dull to percussion.
In practice, a ﬂoppy, over-distended bladder may
be so soft that it is difﬁcult to feel, and the bladder
does not always rise up in the midline as expected,
but is often more to one side than the other. The
infallible sign is that the swelling goes away if you
let the urine out with a catheter. Do not forget that
an enlarged uterus arising from the pelvis could
mimic a full, tense bladder.
Groin
Examination of the inguinal regions is concerned
with three hernial oriﬁces on each side (Fig. 1.6).
Each must be felt with the patient standing up,
lying down and coughing.
r An indirect inguinal hernia emerges lateral to
the inferior epigastric vessels and slides down the
inguinal canal to the scrotum.
r A direct inguinal hernia emerges medial to the
inferior epigastric vessels, and seldom enters the
scrotum.
Remember that direct and indirect inguinal her-
niae may be present in the same patient, with the
two sacs emerging like a pair of trousers on either
side of the inferior epigastric vessels (Fig. 1.7).
3

Chapter 1 History and examination
Inferior
epigastric vessels
Rectus sheath
Direct hernia
Pubic tubercle
Femoral hernia
Saphena varix
Long saphenous vein
Femoral artery
Inguinal ligament
Indirect inguinal hernia
Anterior superior
iliac spine
Figure 1.6 Landmarks for groin hernias.
r A femoral hernia pushes out below the inguinal
ligament, medial to the femoral vein and then
bulges up and out through the gap in the deep
fascia where the saphenous vein joins the femoral
vein. The sac has a narrow neck, and is always sur-
rounded by a layer upon layer of fat like an onion,
so that a cough impulse can be difﬁcult to feel.
A femoral hernia is mimicked by a saphena varix,
Inferior epigastric
artery and vein
Anterior superior
iliac spine
Pubic tubercle
Femoral artery
Direct hernia
Femoral vein
Indirect hernia
Figure 1.7 Pantaloon hernia.
the dilated upper end of the saphenous vein, but
this has a cough thrill which runs down the saphe-
nous vein, and the lump disappears when the pa-
tient lies down. If you help the patient to assume
the sartorius position (hip ﬂexion and lateral rota-
tion), assessment of a possible femoral hernia can
be made easier.
4

History and examination Chapter 1
Testicle
Figure 1.8 Lump in the scrotum: can you get above it?
The scrotum and its contents
The term ‘testicle’ includes testis and epididymis.
When examining the scrotum, carry out the fol-
lowing simple steps:
r Can you ‘get above’ the swelling? If you can, it
must be scrotal (Fig. 1.8).
r Is the lump ﬂuctuant? Verify this by testing in
two planes (Fig. 1.9). If it is ﬂuctuant, then:
If it is in front or around the testis, it is likely to
be a hydrocele – ﬂuid in the sac of the tunica
vaginalis (Fig. 1.10); and
If it is separate or behind the testis, it is likely to
be a collection of cysts of the epididymis (Fig.
1.11).
Figure 1.9 Lump in the scrotum: check whether it is solid
or ﬂuctuant. Determine ﬂuctuation in two planes.
Parietal
tunica
vaginalis
Hydrocele
Testis
Epididymis
Figure 1.10 Hydroceles lie in front of the testis and tend
to surround it.
r Can you shine a light through it? (An empty
cylinder makes it easier to be sure of this in a well-
lit room (Fig. 1.12).) If light does not shine through
the swelling, either the wall of the swelling is
thickened, or it contains not innocent clear ﬂuid,
but pus, blood or cancer.
r If the lump is not ﬂuctuant, i.e. is solid, decide
whether it is arising from the testis or the epi-
didymis. A solid lump arising from the testis is
cancer until proved otherwise (Fig. 1.13). A solid
lump arising from the epididymis is usually be-
nign, but calls for further investigation (Fig. 1.14).
Cysts
of
epididymis
Testis
Figure 1.11 Cystic swellings behind the testis are cysts of
the epididymis.
5

Chapter 1 History and examination
Cylinder e.g.
roll of paper
Pen torch
Figure 1.12 To see if light shines through a swelling, it
helps to use a cylinder, e.g. one made from a rolled-up
paper.
The spermatic cord
r Varicocele: The veins draining the testicle may
become varicose and distended, feeling like a ‘bag
of worms’, and there is a cough impulse (Fig. 1.15).
(Like you, neither of us has ever actually felt a bag
of worms, but we both know what it would feel
like.)
r Vas deferens: The vas deferens lies posterior to
the spermatic cord. If the vas is inﬂamed or has
been operated on, e.g. by vasectomy, one may feel
nodules along its course. Multiple knotty swellings
are typical of tuberculosis (Fig. 1.16) and inﬂam-
matory swellings in the cord are seen in the tropi-
cal conditions of schistosomiasis and ﬁlariasis.
Vas deferens
Testis
Epididymis
Figure 1.13 A solid swelling in the testis is a cancer until
proved otherwise.
Epididymis
Testis
Figure 1.14 Solid swellings in the epididymis are usually
inﬂammatory.
r Encysted hydrocele of the cord: When the testis
descent in the scrotum is complete, the proces-
sus vaginalis closes completely forming a ﬁbrous
strand. If the closure happens proximally and dis-
tally only, this leaves a cystic structure within the
spermatic cord which is mobile with it.
Rectal examination
One may perform a rectal examination in either
sex in the supine, knee–elbow or left lateral posi-
tion. Explain to your patient, what you are going
Cough
impulse
Figure 1.15 Varicocele: enlarged testicular veins. There is
a cough impulse and the swelling disappears when the
patient lies down.
6

History and examination Chapter 1
Vas
deferens
Epididymis
Figure 1.16 Multiple knotty swellings in the epididymis
and a ‘beaded’ are highly suggestive of tuberculosis.
to do and ask his or her permission to do so. Al-
ways introduce your ﬁnger slowly and gently to
allow the sphincter to relax (everyone knows the
need to pass a constipated stool slowly). Once in-
side the rectum:
r Feel the wall of the rectum carefully – you will
sometimes detect an entirely unexpected cancer of
the rectum.
Ureter
Vas
Vesicle
Nodule
in
prostate
Figure 1.17 Anatomical landmarks that may be felt per
rectum.
r Feel the prostate carefully for hardness or nod-
ules which may mean cancer (Fig. 1.17). Even if it
feels normal, try to estimate its diameters. If the
prostate is tender on light palpation, it may be the
site of inﬂammation.
Mistakes are easy to make when performing a rec-
tal examination, but the worst mistake is not to do
one at all.
7

Chapter 2
Investigations
Testing the urine
For centuries the doctor has learnt much from the
urine: in times past, the doctor would look at it,
measure it, smell it and even taste it. Today, he or
she need not taste it. Infected urine usually stinks,
and is always cloudy. Crystal clear urine is never
infected. On many occasions a diagnosis may be
made by having the patient simply record the time
and volume of urine passed during 24 hours – the
voiding diary or urine output chart (Fig. 2.1).
Ofﬁce tests of the urine
pH
Indicator dyes impregnated on a paper strip mea-
sure pH sufﬁciently accurately for most purposes.
Very acid urine should make you suspect uric
acid stones. Very alkaline urine suggests infection
with a microorganism that splits urea, e.g. Proteus
mirabilis.
Protein
r Paper strips impregnated with tetrabromophe-
nol normally turn blue in the pH range found
in normal urine. Protein makes the colour yel-
lowish. The dye is an indicator, and is therefore
not reliable when the urine is very acid or very
alkaline.
r A more reliable test for protein is to add a drop
of 25% salicylsulphonic acid: this precipitates pro-
tein as a cloud unless the urine is exceptionally
dilute.
r Boiling the urine precipitates a cloud, which per-
sists when you add a drop of a dilute acid. If the
cloud disappears, it was due to phosphates.
r When it is essential to know whether the quan-
tity of protein in the urine is signiﬁcant, collect
the urine over 24 hours and have the protein mea-
sured quantitatively in the laboratory: more than
150 mg protein per 24 hours is abnormal and re-
quires further investigation.
Figure 2.1 Voiding diary or ﬂuid output chart.
Lecture Notes: Urology, 6th edition. By John Blandy and
Amir Kaisary. Published 2009 by Blackwell Publishing.
ISBN: 978-1-4051-2270-2.
8

Investigations Chapter 2
Glucose
r Paper strips are impregnated with potassium io-
dide and two enzymes: glucose oxidase converts
glucose to gluconic acid and hydrogen peroxide;
peroxidase then catalyses a reaction between hy-
drogen peroxide and potassium iodide to give a
green–brown colour.
r If paper strips are unavailable, boil the urine
with Fehling’s or Benedict’s solution. Glucose and
other reducing substances throw down an orange
precipitate of copper.
Blood in the urine
r Commercial stick tests for haematuria rely on
the oxidation of tetramethylbenzidine by cumene
peroxidase, which is catalysed by haemoglobin to
give a green–blue colour, i.e. you are detecting free
haemoglobin.
r If the test is positive, examine the urine under
a microscope to conﬁrm that red cells are present
(see below).
The sensitivity of these stick tests is adjusted by the
manufacturers to show a positive result when the
amount of haemoglobin corresponds to about 10
red cells per high power ﬁeld –twice the number
found in normal urine – so a positive stick test al-
ways demands a thorough investigation. Remem-
ber that false-positive tests may occur if the glass
container has been contaminated with povidone-
iodine or has been cleaned with a bleaching agent
such as hypochlorite.
Infection
Two stick tests for infection are available:
r based on bacterial conversion of nitrate to ni-
trite; and
r detection of leucocytes by leucocyte esterase ac-
tivity.
In practice they are of limited use.
Bladder tumour antigen
The Bard bladder tumour antigen (BTA) test is
based on the fact that bladder tumours break down
the basement membrane, and liberate a protein –
BTA – that can be detected by latex particles coated
with human immunoglobulin G. The test strip
produces a yellow band if positive, green if neg-
ative.
Microscopic examination of the urine
Blood
Put a drop of urine on a slide and cover with a
cover slip. To ﬁnd more than ﬁve red cells per high
power ﬁeld is abnormal.
Pus
A similar drop of urine will show more than ﬁve
white cells per high power ﬁeld if there is infec-
tion. When the pus cells come from the kidney,
they have a characteristic glittering appearance. A
Gram stain of the centrifuged deposit may identify
which bacteria are present.
Casts
Casts are the squeezed-out contents of the collect-
ing tubules of the kidney. When they are made of
protein they are clear (hyaline): when made of red
or white cells they are granular (Fig. 2.2).
Crystals
In cool urine there are always some crystals of
triple phosphate and calcium oxalate. The hexag-
onal plates of cystine give away the diagnosis of
cystinuria. Uric acid crystals are especially com-
mon in acid urine (Fig. 2.3).
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
The centrifuged urine is stained with auramine and
examined under ultraviolet light: the mycobacte-
ria shine as bright yellow dots.
Cancer cells
The urine is ﬁxed with a roughly equal volume of
10% formalin and sent to the laboratory. There it
9

Chapter 2 Investigations
Protein
(hyaline)
Leucocyte
(granular)
Red cell
(granular)
Figure 2.2 Casts in the urine.
is centrifuged: the deposit is made into a smear
and stained with methylene blue (Papanicolaou’s
method; Fig. 2.4). Anaplastic tumour cells are
larger and have bigger nuclei than normal urothe-
lium. Note common sources of error:
r False-negatives may occur if the tumour is well
differentiated when the shed cells are hardly dif-
ferent from normal urothelium.
Calcium
oxalate
Cystine
Triple
phosphate
Figure 2.3 Crystals in the urine.
r False-positives occur if part of the urothelium is
undergoing mitosis in course of healing after some
recent injury, e.g. from the passage of a stone.
Schistosoma ova
The centrifuged deposit of urine may show the
characteristic ova of Schistosoma. The different
species have ova of characteristic shape (Fig. 2.5).
Culture of urine
Urine is an excellent culture medium and is easily
contaminated from the wall of the urethra, pre-
puce or vulva, or by air-borne dust. At room tem-
perature contaminants grow rapidly so that urine
must either be plated out at once, or put in a re-
frigerator. A mistaken diagnosis of infection may
be made if the urine is allowed to stand around at
room temperature for a few hours before reaching
the laboratory. The urine is obtained in three ways:
r By needle aspiration of the bladder. Any organ-
isms found are abnormal.
r By catheterisation, but passing a catheter is un-
comfortable and may introduce infection.
r By ‘clean-catch’ specimen or ‘mid-stream urine’.
Urine is mixed with a culture medium before in-
cubation. Each organism gives rise to one colony,
so a colony count shows how many bacteria were
present in the urine. As a rule more than 50,000
(105) colonies/mL signiﬁes infection, and any-
thing less means contamination. Remember that
these ﬁgures only apply to clean-voided urine. One
easy way to make a colony-count is with a dip-slide
(Fig. 2.6). Plastic slides coated with culture media
are dipped in urine, drained off, placed in a sterile
bottle and incubated. After 12 hours, a glance at
10

Investigations Chapter 2
Figure 2.4 Centrifuged deposit from urine stained to show cancer cells.
the chart supplied with the slide shows whether
there are more than 105 colonies or not.
Imaging the urinary tract
Plain abdominal radiograph (‘scout
ﬁlm’; kidney, ureter and bladder (KUB)
etc.)
Check adequacy of the ﬁlm. It must include the
bladder base and the prostate urethral region in
order not to miss a urethral stone. Look at each
ﬁlm with four Ss in mind (Fig. 2.7):
r Side: Radiographers, being only human, some-
times put the wrong letter on the ﬁlm. Always
check that the soft tissue shadow of the liver is
on the right side and the gastric air bubble on the
left.
r Skeleton: Check the spine, ribs, hips and sacroil-
iac joints for bony metastases, the evidence of
ankylosing spondylitis, or loss of joint space in
the hips for which the patient might have taken
Figure 2.5 Ova of Schistosoma haematobium.
11

Chapter 2 Investigations
Plastice slide coated
with culture medium
Dip fully into urine
Label and incubate for
16–24 hours at about
37˚G
Compare numbers of
colonies with standard
chart
106
105
104
Figure 2.6 Dip-slide method of estimating colony count.
Quickly glance
at the bones,
sacroiliac and
hip joints, etc.
Stone in 
left kidney 
Gas in the stomach
Soft
tissue
shadow
of the
liver
Do not
trust
these
markers
Figure 2.7 Check the plain abdominal X-ray for the four Ss: side, skeleton, soft tissues and stones.
12

Investigations Chapter 2
analgesics and incurred the risk of analgesic
nephropathy. In children with enuresis, careful ex-
amination of the lumbosacral spine is essential to
exclude spina biﬁda defects.
r Soft tissues: In fat people the kidneys are sur-
rounded by radiolucent fat which deﬁnes their
outlines. A distended bladder or an enlarged uterus
will ﬁll the pelvis and displace the usual bowel gas
shadows. In order to detect a large bladder residual
volume, it is often helpful to obtain the ﬁlm after
voiding.
r Stones: Any radio-opaque shadow in the line of
the urinary tract might be a stone. If it seems to
be in the kidney, it should move up and down
with the kidney during respiration. ‘Stones’ in the
pelvis often turn out to be calciﬁed ﬁbroids or phle-
boliths. Only 60–70% of stones are dense enough
to be visible on radiographs.
Intravenous urogram or pyelogram
This investigation allows good visualisation of the
collecting systems and ureters. It is predominantly
used to investigate haematuria and also to deter-
mine the ureteric anatomy. More recently its use in
renal pain, ureteric colic and urinary stone disease
has been replaced by computerised axial tomogra-
phy/KUB (spiral CAT) studies.
Contrast media
Its high atomic number makes iodine relatively
opaque to X-rays. Free ionic iodine is toxic, but
when joined to benzoic acid it forms organic salts
which can be given in large quantities, usually
with safety. It does however have several draw-
backs:
r Chemical irritation: Occasionally irritation of the
vein results in ﬂushing, nausea and vomiting,
when the bolus of hypertonic contrast medium
reaches the systemic circulation. These effects are
not common and seldom serious. Chemical in-
ﬂammation and necrosis of skin could result if the
hypertonic solution is accidentally injected out-
side the vein. This is less of a concern now as the
contrast media used are non-ionic and of low os-
molarity.
r Allergy: True allergy to contrast medium is much
more serious. It can range from a trivial urticar-
ial rash which will vanish with an antihistamine,
to life-threatening oedema of the glottis, trachea
and bronchi, with widespread vasodilatation, hy-
potension and cardiac arrest. The allergen is the
complete iodobenzoate molecule, not free iodine,
so it is futile to perform skin tests with iodine.
The reaction is not avoided by giving the ﬁrst few
millilitres of contrast slowly.
Millions of intravenous urograms (IVUs) are
done every year, and fatal reactions occur only in
1:200,000. Patient anxiety increases the likelihood
of a reaction thus quick reassurance to patients by
the staff is helpful. Essential precautions are:
r Always enquire about even the most trivial
previous reaction to contrast media.
r Be always ready for one. Never start to give
intravenous contrast medium without ﬁrst mak-
ing sure for yourself that all the essentials for
treating an allergic reaction are to hand and
within reach of the X-ray table. There must be:
r adrenaline;
r hydrocortisone;
r oxygen, with face-mask and airway;
r a ‘minitracheostomy’ kit; and
r a ‘panic button’ that will summon the car-
diac arrest team.
Contrast medium in the kidney
Nephrogram
It takes 15–20 seconds for the contrast medium to
reach the kidney. Contrast medium should be in-
jected rapidly in order to ensure the bolus reaches
the kidneys quickly. A ﬁlm taken in the ﬁrst 30
seconds will catch the contrast as it lies in the
glomeruli and proximal tubules where water is be-
ing reabsorbed, so this, the ‘immediate’ or ‘nephro-
gram’ ﬁlm, gives an image of the renal parenchyma
(Fig. 2.8). Note that:
r When it is particularly important to obtain a
good picture of the renal outline, e.g. when scar-
ring or a tumour is suspected, then tomograms are
taken during the nephrogram phase to eliminate
unwanted shadows from gas in the bowel.
13

Chapter 2 Investigations
Clear cortical
outline
Papilla
Calix
Sinus fat
Pelvis
Figure 2.8 Nephrogram phase of IVU.
r In obstruction the ﬁltrate cannot escape down
the tubule, and so the nephrogram is denser and
lasts longer. (With a stone blocking the ureter it is
quite common to see the nephrogram persist for
24 hours or more.)
Pyelogram
In a normal patient the glomerular ﬁltrate con-
taining the contrast medium quickly reaches the
calices and pelvis to give the pyelogram (Fig. 2.9).
A ﬁlm taken at 5 minutes will therefore show the
relationships of the calices to the renal contour
and many centres obtain this ‘pyelogram’ ﬁlm in
place of the 1-minute ﬁlm in order to limit radi-
ation exposure dose. The calices can be ﬁlled out
by compressing the abdomen with a tight band
to squeeze the ureters for the ﬁrst 10–15 minutes.
This compression is only applied if there are more
of the following: evidence of obstruction, in chil-
dren, and history of trauma, aneurism or recent
abdominal surgery.
r A ﬁlm taken just after releasing the band will
then show the whole length of the ureter. If a
portion of the ureter is shown poorly, obtaining
oblique views often results in better visualisation.
r Later ﬁlms are taken to show the contrast in the
bladder (Fig. 2.10).
Pelvis
Contrast in
collecting
ducts
Contrast in ureter
Figure 2.9 Pyelogram phase of IVU.
r The patient then empties the bladder, and
if
there
is
any
question
about
the
urethra,
oblique ﬁlms are taken during micturition to
give a descending urethrogram. Afterwards a post-
micturition ﬁlm is taken which gives a rough idea
of the volume of residual urine.
If one kidney is very small or scarred, most of
the solute load has to be eliminated by the other
one. In the small kidney the ﬁltrate ﬂows only
slowly down the tubules, and in doing so becomes
sufﬁciently concentrated to give a misleadingly
clear image: never mistake a good image for good
function.
Preparation for IVU studies
The obsolete practice still lingers of preparing pa-
tients for an IVU by depriving them of ﬂuid for 6
hours or longer. This may give a slight increase in
the concentration of contrast in the ﬁltrate, and
perhaps a marginal improvement in the image,
but in a normal patient given the usual amount
of contrast the improvement does not justify the
14

Investigations Chapter 2
Figure 2.10 The upper tracts and bladder are shown in
the 20-minute ﬁlm of the IVU.
discomfort to the patient. Not only is the practice
usually futile, it can be dangerous:
r the period of starvation can be dangerous in di-
abetes; and
r in myeloma it may lead to anuria from protein
blocking the tubules.
To postpone an IVU merely because the patient ‘is
not prepared’ should not be accepted as an excuse.
Always obtain a control ﬁlm.
Retrograde urogram
A ﬁne ureteric catheter is passed up the ureteric
oriﬁce through a cystoscope and contrast medium
is injected to outline the ureter, pelvis and calices
Ureteric catheter
5 cm
10 cm
15 cm
20 cm
25 cm
Ureteric orifice
Figure 2.11 Retrograde pyelogram with a ureteric cathe-
ter.
(Fig. 2.11). A bulb-ended catheter jammed in the
ureteric oriﬁce allows dye injection up the whole
length of the ureter (the ureterogram; Fig. 2.12)
without possible leak back in the bladder. These
retrograde studies are performed under X-ray
control.
Antegrade or descending urogram
A ﬁne needle is passed into the renal pelvis under
X-ray or ultrasound control. A ﬂexible guidewire
is passed through the needle into the pelvis, the
needle is withdrawn, and a cannula slipped over
the guidewire into the pelvis to perform a percuta-
neous nephrostomy (Fig. 2.13). This is the ﬁrst step
in a whole range of percutaneous operations on
the kidney. Contrast medium injected through the
cannula will delineate the renal pelvis and ureter.
The pressure inside the cannula can be measured
at the same time in the course of investigating ob-
struction.
15

Chapter 2 Investigations
Chevassu’s bulb-ended
catheter lodged in right
ureteric orifice
Figure 2.12 Retrograde ureteropyelogram using a bulb-
ended catheter.
Cystogram
The image of the bladder in the standard IVU will
usually show diverticula or large tumours of the
bladder (Fig. 2.14). If the picture is not clear, or
when it is necessary to rule out reﬂux from the
bladder up the ureters, or in order to investigate
incontinence, then the bladder is ﬁlled with con-
trast and screened while the patient passes urine.
This is often combined with measurements of the
pressure inside the bladder and the urine ﬂow rate
in a micturating cystometrogram.
Urethrography
In investigating strictures and other disorders of
the urethra an ascending urethrogram is made by
injecting contrast medium into the urethra with a
small catheter. As opaciﬁcation of the female ure-
thra is technically difﬁcult, this study is predomi-
nantly performed in men.
Polythene
cannula
Figure 2.13 Percutaneous nephrostomy to obtain de-
scending or antegrade pyelogram.
Figure 2.14 Cystogram image at the end of the IVU, in
this case showing a diverticulum on the right side of the
bladder.
16

Investigations Chapter 2
Figure 2.15 Ultrasound image of kidney containing a cyst.
Ultrasound
Ultrasonography is cheap, painless and uses no
dangerous radiation. An AC current is applied to a
piezoelectric crystal which then pulsates and pro-
duces a sound wave. The resulting wave penetrates
soft tissues and is reﬂected by interfaces between
tissues of different density, e.g. renal calices and
parenchyma, or a renal cyst and parenchyma (Fig.
2.15). The returning echoes are received by the
crystal which reverses the process. The sound is
converted into an electrical impulse which is pro-
cessed by a computer to give an image. Ultrasound
images are more meaningful if you see them mov-
ing on a screen yourself. As images are obtained in
a real-time mode, it is an excellent guide to inter-
ventional procedures, e.g. nephrostomy. It is the
method of choice in paediatrics.
Transluminal ultrasound
By inserting a special probe into the rectum (tran-
srectal ultrasound; TRUS), high-resolution images
can be obtained of the prostate (Fig. 2.16). This al-
lows geographically mapped guided prostate biop-
sies. Transvaginal ultrasound has been particularly
valuable in the detection of urethral diverticula.
Angiography
A ﬂexible guidewire is passed through a needle in
the femoral artery over which a ﬂexible cannula
with a curved tip is slipped, and guided under X-
ray control into the opening of the renal artery.
Contrast is then injected into the renal artery or
its branches to give an arteriogram (Fig. 2.17). This
investigation can be of value in the diagnosis of
trauma, stenosis of the renal artery and where the
cause of haematuria proves to be particularly hard
to discover. Similar studies are made when it is sus-
pected that there may be extension of tumour into
the vena cava (cavography; Fig. 2.18). The image of
smaller vessels in the angiogram can be improved
if overlying shadows of bone and bowel gas are
removed: this can be done with a computer (Fig.
2.19) to give a digital subtraction angiogram. Re-
nal venography has been largely replaced by ul-
trasonography or contrast-enhanced CAT or MRI.
One remaining indication is the cannulation of
17

Chapter 2 Investigations
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.16 Transrectal ultrasound (TRUS) examination of the prostate: (a) transverse and (b) longitudinal.
the gonadal veins with a view to embolisation in
cases of scrotal varicocoeles.
Computed tomography
The CAT image is obtained by the computerised
calculation of X-ray absorption after thousands
of pencil thin beams of X-rays are transmitted
through a patient as a rotating source whilst the
patient moves through the source on a table
(hence producing a ‘spiral’ data set. This tech-
nique provides exquisitely good spatial resolu-
Figure 2.17 Arteriogram showing stenosis of left renal
artery.
tion but does involve a high radiation dose. It is
the test of choice in urolithiasis, staging of renal
cell carcinoma and the evaluation of renal tract
Figure 2.18 Inferior vena cavogram showing tumour in
the vena cava.
18

Investigations Chapter 2
Figure 2.19 Subtraction angiogram of a renal transplant
in the left iliac fossa.
trauma (dynamic CT scanning). It can be supple-
mented with contrast, e.g. intravenous dye injec-
tions (CAT/IVU combination) (see Fig. 2.20).
Magnetic resonance imaging
Atoms behave like gyroscopes whose axes are tilted
by a strong magnetic ﬁeld. When the ﬁeld is turned
off the gyroscopes whip back to their original po-
sition, and as they do so, give off a pulse of elec-
tromagnetic energy – magnetic resonance – which
can be detected by a set of electronic sensors,
mounted in a hoop and processed by computer
to give an image (Fig. 2.21). This technique is be-
coming increasingly available and has the advan-
tage of not involving irradiation or iodide contrast
medium. Current indications for urological MRI
include the local staging of pelvic urological can-
cers, assessing the degree of venous involvement
of a renal cell cancer and the detection of renal
artery stenosis. Some centres use MRI routinely in
patients with impaired renal function in whom
the use of nephrotoxic contrast medium is inad-
visable. Patients who have pacemakers and metal
surgical devices are not suitable for this type of
investigation.
Radio-isotope studies
Radionuclides are tagged on to various pharma-
ceuticals (often with very long names!) to create
radiopharmaceuticals. These are administered to
the patient to provide functional imaging, and in
some cases quantiﬁcation, of various bodily pro-
cesses. The radionuclide decays, and as it does
so, emits small packets of energy (usually gamma
photons) which interact with the detector crys-
tal on a gamma camera, to cause a small ﬂash
of light to be emitted. This ﬂash of light is then
converted into an electrical current and ampli-
ﬁed by an array of photomultiplier tubes on the
back of the crystal. The resulting current is then
put through a range of electronic wizardry and a
digital image is produced. The more radiopharma-
ceutical materials are taken up, the brighter the
image.
Four radiopharmaceuticals are most commonly
used in renal imaging:
1 99mTc
benzoylmercaptoacetyltriglycerine
(more
conveniently known as MAG3) is secreted by the
proximal tubules into the tubular lumen.
2 99mTc diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid (DTPA)
is excreted predominantly by glomerular ﬁltration.
Both of these agents are used for dynamic renog-
raphy, which allows time activity curves to be pro-
duced (Fig. 2.22) that show how the kidneys han-
dle the tracer and give a good idea of how well each
kidney is functioning. The images also give valu-
able information about the anatomical appearance
of the kidneys although in less detail than ul-
trasound or CAT. Better results in patients with
poorer renal function are obtained from MAG3
than DTPA.
3 99mTc 2,3 dimercaptosuccinic acid (DMSA) is taken
up and ‘ﬁxed’ by the tissues of the proximal con-
voluted tubules. This radiopharmaceutical is not
19

Chapter 2 Investigations
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 2.20 Computed tomography: (a) normal male longitudinal coronal; (b) normal transverse axial at kidney level;
(c) normal female transverse axial at bladder and uterus level; (d) normal male transverse axial at bladder level; and (e)
normal male transverse axial at prostate level.
20

Investigations Chapter 2
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 2.21 MRI scan: (a) normal upper abdomen; (b) normal pelvis; (c) lateral normal male pelvis; (d) transverse normal
female pelvis; (e) transverse normal male pelvis at prostate level; and (f) transverse normal male pelvis at seminal vesicles
level.
21

Chapter 2 Investigations
Left
Right
604.3
Frusemide
5
10
15
Minutes
20
25
I
2
Figure 2.22 DTPA renogram in a case of hydronephrosis
showing hold up of contrast on the right side, in spite of
frusemide.
used for renography, but does provide important
information about the renal cortex (e.g. detecting
renal scars Fig. 2.23), locating ectopic kidneys and
in evaluation of relative renal function (L:R ratios).
4 51Chromium EDTA is used to determine the
glomerular ﬁltration rate. This test involves only
measurements of radioactivity in blood samples
after intravenous injection of the radiopharmaceu-
tical. No images are acquired.
Figure 2.23 DMSA scan showing a normal right kidney
but almost no uptake on the left, due to severe scarring.
Figure 2.24 Bone scan in a man with carcinoma of the
prostate with widespread metastases.
Other nuclear medicine tests that are useful in
urology include the bone scan. This is usually
performed with 99m Tc methylene diphosphonate
(MDP) which is taken up wherever there is active
bone turnover and gives rise to a ‘hot spot’. It is
not a very speciﬁc test but is extremely sensitive.
The pattern of hot spots throughout the skeleton
is important. Bony metastases often give rise to a
random scatter throughout the axial skeleton and
proximal long bones. This appearance is typical of
prostate cancer (Fig. 2.24).
Positron emission tomography (PET) is a spe-
cial type of isotope scan in which two high-
energy gamma photons (180◦apart) are emitted
from each atomic disintegration. The isotopes used
in the radiopharmaceuticals have short half lives
(typically 10–60 minutes). The most commonly
used radiopharmaceutical for PET imaging is 18F
ﬂuoro-2 deoxyglucose (FDG). This is taken up by
any cell which actively metabolises glucose. Cells
which have more active metabolism (e.g. many
cancers) will take up more than surrounding cells.
These radiopharmaceuticals are detected by a PET
22

Investigations Chapter 2
scanner. Recent advances have made it possible
to combine a PET scan with a conventional CAT
scan. The patient undergoes a CAT scan imme-
diately followed by a PET scan. The images from
both scans can then be fused. This method of
scanning beautifully combines functional imag-
ing with high-resolution anatomical imaging so
that pathology on a CAT scan effectively ‘lights
up’. This method is very useful in oncological
imaging.
23

Chapter 3
The kidney: structure and function
Surgical relations of the kidney
Posterior relations
The kidneys are well protected, tucked in on either
side of the spine.
r Behind each kidney is the lung, constantly mov-
ing up and down, so the inferior border of the kid-
ney may lie anywhere between the 2nd and 4th
lumbar transverse processes.
r The other posterior relations of the kidney are
the 12th rib, diaphragm, quadratus lumborum and
Psoas muscles (Fig. 3.1).
r The ilioinguinal and hypogastric nerves cross
the quadratus lumborum muscle and are often in-
jured in approaching the kidney from the loin.
Anterior relations: left
r The tail of the pancreas and the spleen lie in
front of the left kidney and are easily injured at op-
eration. The duodenojejunal ﬂexure and descend-
ing colon also lie just in front of the left kidney, so
indigestion or bowel distension is common when
there is inﬂammation or obstruction of the kid-
ney, and cancer of the kidney easily invades the
adjacent bowel (Fig. 3.2a,b).
Anterior relations: right
r ascending colon;
r the second part of the duodenum; and
r common bile duct: it is not surprising that ‘indi-
gestion’ often accompanies disorders of the right
kidney (Fig. 3.3a,b)
Surgical approaches to the kidney
Posterior
Percutaneous nephrostomy
A needle passed into the renal pelvis goes through
skin, latisimus dorsi, quadratus lumborum, perire-
nal fat and renal parenchyma. It is easy to under-
stand how by mischance the needle may pierce the
pleura, liver, duodenum or colon.
Twelfth rib approach
Most open operations on the kidney are performed
through an incision along the bed of the 12th
rib. Despite every precaution the pleura is often
opened. The 11th and 12th subcostal nerves as well
as the ilioinguinal and hypogastric nerves are al-
ways stretched and sometimes cut: postoperative
pain is often severe and chest complications are
common (Fig. 3.4).
Lecture Notes: Urology, 6th edition. By John Blandy and
Amir Kaisary. Published 2009 by Blackwell Publishing.
ISBN: 978-1-4051-2270-2.
24

The kidney: structure and function Chapter 3
Lung
Pleura
12th rib
Diaphragm
Iliohypogastric
nerve
Quadratus
lumborum
Ilioinguinal
nerve
Psoas
Figure 3.1 Posterior anatomical relations of the kidney.
(a)
(b)
Adrenal
Pancreas
Duodenum
Colon
Psoas
Spleen
Spleen
Crus of
diaphragm
Pancreas
Adrenal
Figure 3.2 (a) Anatomical relations of the left kidney. (b) Left kidney and surrounding structures displayed at operation
by reﬂecting the colon, spleen and tail of pancreas medially.
Vertical lumbotomy
A vertical incision along the lateral border of
sacrospinalis may free the attachments of the ab-
dominal muscles. It gives limited access to the kid-
ney but avoids much of the pain of the 12th rib
approach (Fig. 3.5).
Thoracoabdominal incision
Very large cancers demand perfect exposure. The
incision is carried through the bed of the 10th rib,
across the pleura and into the abdomen. The lung
and liver are retracted. The improved access to the
inferior vena cava and aorta allows the surgeon to
avoid and control bleeding and remove tumour
that extends into the renal vein.
25

Chapter 3 The kidney: structure and function
(a)
(b)
Gall bladder
Common
bile duct
Duodenum
Colon
Gonadal vessels
Gall bladder
Liver
Colon
Duodenum
Liver
Figure 3.3 (a) Anatomical relations of the right kidney. (b) Right kidney and surrounding structures displayed at operation
by reﬂecting the colon and duodenum medially.
Anterior
Minimal access surgery
Extraperitoneal
A balloon is passed though a cannula introduced
into the perirenal fat. It is blown up to separate
the peritoneum, duodenum and colon from the
kidney and kept blown up long enough for bleed-
ing to stop. When it is deﬂated, it leaves an empty
space into which laparoscopic instruments may be
introduced to carry out various operations on the
kidney.
Transperitoneal
Carbon dioxide is introduced into the peritoneal
cavity with a small cannula and then a number
of ‘ports’ are made through which large cannulae
are pushed into the gas-ﬁlled space. Through these
other instruments are passed to reﬂect the colon
and duodenum off the front of the kidney and
allow the planned operation to take place.
Diaphragm
12th rib
Periosteum
Pleura
Figure 3.4 Twelfth rib bed approach to the right kidney.
26

The kidney: structure and function Chapter 3
Iliohypogastric
nerve
12th
subcostal
nerve
Figure 3.5 Vertical lumbotomy approach to the right
kidney.
Conventional open surgery
With a large cancer of the kidney safety demands
perfect exposure to control the renal artery and
vein. The choice of either a transverse or midline
incision is determined by the build of the patient
(Figs. 3.6 and 3.7). The ascending colon, hepatic
ﬂexure and duodenum are reﬂected medially to
give safe access to the right renal vessels (Fig. 3.8).
On the left side reﬂection of the splenic ﬂexure,
descending colon and duodenojejunal ﬂexure will
give safe access to the left renal vessels (Fig. 3.9).
Figure 3.6 Anterior transabdominal approach to right
kidney through a transverse incision.
Figure 3.7 Transabdominal approach through vertical in-
cision in a long thin patient.
Complications after renal surgery
The surgical relations of the kidney explain most
of the common postoperative complications.
Pain
There is always postoperative pain on breath-
ing and coughing. Postoperative pain can inhibit
coughing and lead to atelectasis and infection in
the empty lung segments. This is more common
when the pleura has been opened or if part of the
rib has had to be removed.
Pneumothorax
This
may
require
aspiration
or
underwater
drainage.
Ileus
Oedema or haematoma behind the bowel may lead
to a period of abdominal distension and paralytic
ileus.
27

Chapter 3 The kidney: structure and function
Colon
Duodenum
Common
bile duct
Gall bladder
Portal vein
Right renal vein
Left renal vein
Vena cava
Figure 3.8 Operative exposure of right kidney: colon and duodenum reﬂected.
Structure of the kidney
Renal pyramid
The basic unit of the mammalian kidney is the
pyramid. In porpoises the pyramids remain sepa-
rate so that the kidney looks like a bunch of grapes.
In most other mammals (including man) the por-
poise arrangement is still seen in the foetus. In the
adult, the dozen pyramids are squeezed together
(Fig. 3.10). Each pyramid is like a bunch of ﬂowers
in a vase (Fig. 3.11), the blooms are the glomeruli,
Spleen
Tail of pancreas
Vena cava
Left renal vein
Aorta
Left kidney
Duodenojejunal flexure
Descending colon
Figure 3.9 Operative exposure of left kidney: spleen, colon and duodenum reﬂected.
28

The kidney: structure and function Chapter 3
Cortex
Column
of Bertin
Papilla
Sinus fat
Calix
Figure 3.10 The kidney is formed of a collection of pyra-
mids squeezed together: where they merge they form the
columns of Bertin.
the stems the collecting ducts and the whole bunch,
the papilla, sits in a vase, the calix.
Renal papilla
The
collecting
ducts
open
onto
the
papilla
obliquely so that when pressure rises in the calix
the ducts are closed as if by a valve (Fig. 3.12).
Children may be born with papillae that are fused
together – compound papillae. These make the valve
mechanism ineffective so that if the pressure in the
pelvis rises, e.g., from obstruction or reﬂux, urine is
forced into the renal parenchyma where it may
cause inﬂammation and scarring (Fig. 3.13).
The collecting ducts gather the glomerular ﬁl-
trate from the nephrons which are arranged like
corn on the cob (Fig. 3.14). Each nephron has
two parts: a ﬁlter, the glomerulus, and a process-
ing plant, the renal tubules.
Glomerulus
The glomerulus is made of an arteriole, coiled like
a ball of wool, which is invaginated into a hollow
balloon – Bowman’s capsule – whose stem drains
into the proximal tubule (Fig. 3.15). The glomerular
arteriole is very permeable, with an endothelium
specially dimpled to increase its porosity. Its base-
ment membrane is supported like ﬁlter paper on a
grid formed by the foot processes of the epithelial
cells of Bowman’s capsule, which interlock like a
zip-fastener (Fig. 3.16). The spaces between the zip
are called slit-pores and their size has been mea-
sured using peroxidases of known molecular mass:
(a)
(b)
Glomeruli
Cortex
Medulla
Ducts of
Bellini
Papilla
Calix
Figure 3.11 The structure of the pyramid is like a bunch of ﬂowers in a vase.
29

Chapter 3 The kidney: structure and function
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.12 Valvular arrangement of a normal papilla.
those of molecular mass less than 40,000 can slip
through: those above 160,000 get stuck.
Filtration is not merely a matter of the size of
the molecule. The proteins of the basement mem-
brane are negatively charged. They repel nega-
tively charged molecules, e.g. albumen, but allow
positively charged molecules of similar size to pass
through. The pressure inside the glomerular arteri-
ole is about 60 mm Hg. The plasma oncotic pressure
is about 25 mm Hg, so that there is a ﬁltration
pressure of about 35 mm Hg. The pressure inside
Bowman’s capsule is about 10 mm Hg.
The arterioles of the glomeruli are 50 times more
permeable than those of arterioles elsewhere, e.g.
muscle, and they allow enormous volumes of ﬂuid
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.13 (a) Normal papilla and (b) compound papilla.
to leak out. The whole plasma water is ﬁltered
every 30 minutes and the entire body water pro-
cessed four times a day. The ﬁrst task of the tubules
is to recapture this huge amount of water.
Cortex
Medulla
Short
loop
of Henle
Collecting
tubule
Juxtamedullary
glomerulus
Long loop
of Henle
Fornix
of
calix
Duct
of Bellini
Calix
Figure 3.14 Nephrons arranged on their collecting tubule
like corn on the cob.
30

The kidney: structure and function Chapter 3
Afferent
arteriole
Juxtaglomerular
apparatus
Bowman's
capsule
Proximal
tubule
Thin descending 
limb to
loop of Henle
Collecting 
tubule
Thick 
ascending
limb of loop
of Henle
Distal
tubule
Mesangial
cell
Efferent
arteriole
Straight
connecting
segment
Figure 3.15 A nephron.
Tests of glomerular ﬁltration
For most purposes the plasma creatinine is an ade-
quate guide to glomerular function. Occasionally
a more precise measure is needed. The classical test
used to be the creatinine clearance. This required an
exactly timed collection of urine, which was dif-
ﬁcult in a busy hospital ward. The plasma creati-
nine was then measured at some convenient time.
Clearance was given by the formula UV/P, where
U is the urine creatinine mg/100 mL, V is the urine
volume in mL/min and P is the plasma creatinine
mg/100 mL. The answer was expressed in mL/min.
The exactly timed collection of urine was a source
of error and for this reason creatinine clearance
has been superseded by diethylene triamine pen-
tacetic acid (DTPA) clearance. 99mTc-labelled DTPA
is given and the rate of disappearance from the kid-
ney or forearm measured with a gamma camera.
Renal tubules
Proximal tubule
About 75% of the excess water is reabsorbed in
the proximal tubule, which is lined with active
cells whose surface area is enormously increased
by their brush border of microvilli (Fig. 3.17). These
metabolically busy cells also recover glucose, phos-
phate and amino acids from the glomerular ﬁl-
trate.
Loop of Henle
The ﬁltrate now passes through the loops of Henle.
Most of these are quite short, but those in the in-
ner part of the pyramid dip down like hairpins
into the papilla, where they run alongside collect-
ing tubules. The cells of the loops of Henle are
thin, and allow osmosis to withdraw salt and wa-
ter from the glomerular ﬁltrate into the concen-
trated tissue of the papilla. So-called ‘loop diuret-
ics’, e.g. frusemide, inhibit Cl−transport, reduce
hypertonicity in the papilla, and allow more wa-
ter to escape along with potassium. This effect is
further potentiated by spironolactone.
Distal tubule
The ﬁltrate now rises up into the distal convoluted
tubule whose cells are thick and metabolically ac-
tive but have no brush border. They exchange Na
for K and H ions to regulate the acid–base bal-
ance of the body. Disease of the distal convoluted
tubules prevents the urine from forming an acid
urine, the so-called renal tubular acidosis.
Collecting tubules
Leaving the distal convoluted tubule the ﬁltrate
enters the collecting tubule, and once more runs
the gauntlet of the hypertonic papilla. Here the last
ﬁne-tuning of the reabsorption of water takes place
under the control of the pituitary antidiuretic
hormone.
31

Chapter 3 The kidney: structure and function
Foot processes
(pedicels) of epithelial
cells of Bowman’s capsule
Glomerular basement
membrane
Nucleus
of endothelial
cell of glomerular
capillary
Nucleus of 
epithelial cell
Figure 3.16 Structure of the glomerular arteriole.
Tests of tubular function
DMSA
The rate of uptake of 99mTc DMSA is recorded by
a gamma camera. This is the usual test of renal
tubular function. Only occasionally is it necessary
to use the classical tests.
Acid load
After collecting two 1-hour specimens of urine
over 2 hours, the patient is given NH4Cl in gelatin-
coated capsules (0.1 g/kg body weight) in a litre
of water over 1 hour. Three hours later a third 1-
hour specimen of urine is collected. Healthy distal
tubules can handle this by secreting urine with a
pH over 5.3, a titratable acidity over 25 mmol/min
and over 35 mmol/min of ammonium. In practice,
the NH4Cl often makes patients vomit and the test
is void.
Urine concentration test
The patient may be deprived of water, or given
desmopressin, an analogue of pituitary antidi-
uretic hormone (40 µg/kg for adults, 20 µg/kg for
children) and the speciﬁc gravity of the urine is
measured over the next 6 hours. The test must
never be attempted in patients with renal failure.
Blood supply of the kidney
Renal arteries
Between them the kidneys receive one-ﬁfth of the
entire cardiac output. Usually there is one renal
artery on each side, with ﬁve segmental branches
arranged like the digits of the hand (Fig. 3.18).
r Each segmental branch supplies its own geo-
graphical zone of the parenchyma. They are end-
arteries and there are no anastomoses between
them (Fig. 3.19). The zones supplied by the seg-
mental arteries do not match the arrangement of
32

The kidney: structure and function Chapter 3
Figure 3.17 Electron photomicrograph showing the brush
border of the proximal renal tubule.
pyramids and calices. In open operations any inci-
sion into the renal parenchyma is made between
the main segmental arteries, which can be located
with a Doppler probe.
r Each segmental artery divides into smaller ar-
cuate arteries which run in the boundary between
Figure 3.18 Arrangement of the branches of the renal
arteries.
Apical
Upper
Middle
Posterior
Lower
Figure 3.19 Each segmental artery supplies its own geo-
graphical territory.
cortex and medulla, giving off branches which run
up and down parallel with the collecting tubules,
as well as giving an afferent artery to each glomeru-
lus (Fig. 3.20).
r The afferent artery enters the glomerulus near
the junction of the loop of Henle with the distal
convoluted tubule: the juxtaglomerular apparatus is
located here; its cells contain dark granules of the
precursor of renin. The juxtaglomerular apparatus
monitors the pressure in the afferent arteriole.
Renal veins
Unlike the segmental branches of the renal arter-
ies, the veins communicate freely with each other
(Fig. 3.21). Several veins can be ligated without
infarcting the kidney. The main left renal vein of-
ten splits into two, one part running in front of
the aorta, the other behind, posing a trap for the
surgeon who is unaware of this anomaly. The left
renal vein is about 5 cm long; the right is close to
the inferior vena cava, another reason why the left
kidney is preferred in live donor transplantation.
The collecting system
The thin cubical epithelium of the papilla is perfo-
rated with the collecting ducts (of Bellini) but the
rest of the pelvis and calix is lined by urothelium
like that of the bladder and ureters. The urothe-
lium is surrounded by a wall of smooth muscle
cells linked by jigsaw connections, nexuses, which
33

Chapter 3 The kidney: structure and function
Cortex
Medulla
Long loop of Henle
‘Arcuate’ artery
Vas rectum
Spiral atreries
of Baker
Figure 3.20 The blood supply of the renal papilla.
Figure 3.21 The veins of the kidney communicate with
each other.
transmit the wave of contraction from one muscle
cell to another without the need for any nerve sup-
ply, so a transplanted kidney continues to pump
out urine perfectly well.
Sinus fat
Figure 3.22 The calices are surrounded by sinus fat which
is ﬂuid at body temperature and allows them to move freely.
The
calices
are
separated
from
the
renal
parenchyma by a packing of sinus fat which is ﬂuid
at body temperature, and allows them to contract
freely (Fig. 3.22).
34

Chapter 4
The kidney: congenital disorders
Embryology
Primitive vertebrates were constructed like a rail-
way train: each identical somite had a pair of
nephrons which allowed ﬂuid from the coelom to
leak out into the surrounding sea. Later on these
nephrons came to be arranged into three groups:
r The most cranial of these, the pronephros, is to-
day only an evolutionary curiosity, found in a few
ﬁsh embryos, but of no relevance to humans.
r The second set, the mesonephros, corresponds to
the kidney of present day ﬁsh and frogs whose
mesonephric (Wolfﬁan) duct empties urine into
the cloaca.
r Human kidneys are derived from a third, most
caudal set of nephrons – the metanephros – which
drains into the ureter (Fig. 4.1).
Mesonephric (Wolfﬁan) ducts
In humans the mesonephros has disappeared, but
its duct persists as the vas deference in males and
the caudal part of the ureter.
If the mesonephric duct fails to develop then
there will be neither ureter, kidney nor a vas def-
erens on that side – renal agenesis (Fig. 4.2).
Paramesonephric (M ¨ullerian) ducts
These are a second pair of ducts parallel with the
mesonephric ducts:
r In females, they form the Fallopian tubes, which
fuse in the midline to form the uterus.
r In males, they persist as a pit on the verumon-
tanum in the prostatic urethra – the utriculus mas-
culinus – as well as a tiny cyst attached to the up-
per pole of the testis which sometimes twists on
its stalk and mimics torsion of the testicle.
The urogenital septum
While the ureters are growing up towards the
metanephros (Fig. 4.3) a shutter of tissue, the uro-
genital septum, grows down to separate the bladder
from the rectum, carrying with it the mesonephric
duct and the ureteric buds which are bent into a
loop.
r The lower part of the mesonephric duct is
absorbed into the trigone of the future bladder
(Fig. 4.4).
r In males the upper part of the mesonephric duct
– taken over as the vas deferens – swings down with
the testis into the scrotum (Fig. 4.5).
Duplex kidney and ureter
After budding out from the lower end of the
mesonephric duct, the ureter usually begins to
Lecture Notes: Urology, 6th edition. By John Blandy and
Amir Kaisary. Published 2009 by Blackwell Publishing.
ISBN: 978-1-4051-2270-2.
35

Chapter 4 The kidney: congenital disorders
Testis
Ureter
Ovary
Müllerian duct virtually disappears
except for utriculus masculinus
Paramesonephric duct
becomes fallopian
tubes and uterus
Wolffian mesonephric duct
virtually disappears
Wolffian
mesonephric
duct is
borrowed
to become
vas deferens
Ureter
Gonadal ridge
Pronephros
Mesonephros
Mesonephric
(Wolffian) duct
Metanephros
Ureter budding
out from
mesonephric duct
Paramesonephric
Müllerian
duct
Figure 4.1 Embryology of the kidney.
Agenesis of
kidney and
ureter
Absence of
half trigone
Absent vas
deferens and
epididymis
Figure 4.2 Renal agenesis.
branch when it gets near the metanephros but
sometimes it divides earlier and may produce
a complete double system of renal pelvis and
calyces
–
ren
duplex.
The
overlying
renal
parenchyma is never completely separated but a
distinct ‘waist’ marks the distinction between the
two halves, as does a prominent bulge in the
parenchyma, which may be mistaken for a car-
cinoma in X-rays (Fig. 4.6).
r The upper half of the kidney has two main ca-
lyces, the lower half has three and makes more
urine.
r Urine may be squirted from the lower half up
into the upper half, causing distension and pain –
yo-yo reﬂux (Fig. 4.7).
A duplex kidney is nearly always innocent and
symptomless, but it can be associated with three
conditions that cause trouble:
r Ectopic ureter: The ureter draining the upper half
of the kidney may open into the vagina, caudal to
the sphincter, and gives rise to continual inconti-
nence (Fig. 4.8).
36

The kidney: congenital disorders Chapter 4
Wolffian duct
Mesonephros
Ureteric bud
Metanephros
Mesonephros
Wolffian 
duct
Metanephros
Allantoic duct
Figure 4.3 Two ureteric buds from the Wolfﬁan duct reach the metanephros, and then the Wolfﬁan duct is bent round.
Urachus
Testis
Wolffian
duct
Wolffian duct
taken up into
trigone
Figure 4.4 The lower end of the Wolfﬁan duct is incorpo-
rated into the bladder.
Testis
Verumontanum
Vas deferens
Kidney
Figure 4.5 The Wolfﬁan duct becomes the vas deferens.
r Reﬂux: The ureter from the lower half of the kid-
ney has a short course through the wall of the
bladder thus less efﬁcient as a valve, and urine may
reﬂux from the bladder up to the kidney (Fig. 4.9).
r Ureterocele: If the lower end of the mesonephric
duct is incompletely absorbed into the trigone, it
may form a balloon just where the ureter enters
the trigone – ureterocele. This is most often seen at
the lower of two ureteric oriﬁces in duplex. Very
occasionally a ureterocele may prolapse out of the
urethra as a translucent ‘cyst’ causing painful acute
retention of urine (Fig. 4.10).
Columns of
Bertin
Renal
pseudotumour
Figure 4.6 In duplex kidney there is often a very prominent
column of Bertin.
37

Chapter 4 The kidney: congenital disorders
Yo-yo
reflux
Figure 4.7 Yo-yo reﬂux.
Sphincter
Ectopic ureter
draining upper
half of the kidney
Figure 4.8 If the ureter from the upper half of the kid-
ney opens below the sphincter in a girl there is continual
incontinence.
Hydronephrosis
Hydroureter
Reflux of urine
Figure 4.9 Reﬂux up the upper ureteric oriﬁce into the
lower half of the kidney.
Errors of position of the kidney
Rotated kidney
A kidney often faces forwards rather than medi-
ally. Its outline is then an ellipse and some of its
calices point medially (Fig. 4.11). This condition is
harmless.
Horseshoe kidney
If both the metanephroi get fused together in the
foetal pelvis, not only are both kidneys rotated,
but also their lower poles are joined in the shape
of a horseshoe (Fig. 4.12). The cause for this is un-
known. As the foetus grows, the joined kidneys
are held up by the inferior or superior mesenteric
arteries. In operations for aortic aneurysm, the
isthmus joining the two kidneys may have to
be divided, but otherwise it should be left alone.
38

The kidney: congenital disorders Chapter 4
Ureterocele
Ectopic
ureterocele
Figure 4.10 A ureterocele may prolapse into the urethra.
This condition is often associated with reﬂux,
ureterocele and hydronephrosis.
Each of these conditions should be dealt with in
the usual way, without meddling with the isthmus.
Crossed renal ectopia
Instead of being united in the midline like a horse-
shoe, the two kidneys may fuse together on one
side. Their ureters always run along their proper
side. As with horseshoe kidney, there is often some
other congenital anomaly such as reﬂux or ob-
struction (Fig. 4.13).
Pelvic kidney
Here the metanephros remains in the pelvis. One
might expect it would get in the way of the baby
Figure 4.11 Rotated kidney.
during childbirth, but it hardly ever does. A pelvic
kidney is usually detected by chance, and seldom
needs any treatment unless associated with some
other condition such as hydronephrosis. But there
is one unexpected and important hazard: at la-
parotomy for abdominal pain an unwary surgeon
may come across an unusual ‘tumour’ and go
ahead to remove it. In pelvic kidneys the segmen-
tal arteries arise directly from the aorta, common
and internal iliac arteries. If the condition is not
recognised there can by confusion and bleeding
(Fig. 4.14).
Thoracic kidney
This is not so much an error of development of the
kidney as of the diaphragm, where one kidney is
carried up into the chest along with other viscera.
Such a ‘thoracic’ kidney is found by chance in a
chest radiograph or an intravenous urogram (IVU).
Aorta
Isthmus
Figure 4.12 Horseshoe kidney.
39

Chapter 4 The kidney: congenital disorders
Figure 4.13 Crossed renal ectopia.
The kidney is not really in the thorax: a thin layer
of diaphragm and pleura always separates the two
compartments. The kidney itself needs no treat-
ment (Fig. 4.15).
Errors of development of
the kidney
Agenesis
If the mesonephric duct fails to develop there is
an absence of ureter, trigone, kidney and (in boys)
vas deferens (see Fig. 4.2).
Aplasia
The metanephros may not differentiate at all –
aplasia (Fig. 4.16).
Figure 4.14 Pelvic kidney.
Eventration
of diaphragm
Thoracic
kidney
12th rib
Figure 4.15 Thoracic kidney.
40

The kidney: congenital disorders Chapter 4
Aplasia of
kidney
Thin
ureter
Figure 4.16 Aplasia.
Dysplasia
The metanephros may develop poorly, with odd-
looking tissue including little cysts and lumps of
cartilage (Fig. 4.17).
Hypoplasia
This is a term to avoid: it implies that the kidney is
small but otherwise normal. This is never the case:
it is either dysplastic or scarred, or both.
Dysplasia
Figure 4.17 Dysplasia.
Cystic disorders of the kidney
Medullary sponge kidney
Here the collecting ducts are grossly dilated (Fig.
4.18). Part or all of one or both kidneys may be
affected, and the medulla becomes honeycombed
with cysts giving the appearance of a sponge.
The radiographic appearance is characteristic (Fig.
4.19).
Infection in the dilated tubules is soon followed
by the development of numerous small stones
which give repeated attacks of ureteric colic. With
extracorporeal lithotripsy the larger stones can be
broken up and allowed to pass before they give rise
to serious trouble, but repeated attacks of infection
and scarring ultimately lead to renal failure.
Obstruction cysts
Congenital obstruction of the ureter
The ureter may become narrowed in foetal life for
causes as yet unknown.
Figure 4.18 Medullary sponge kidney: dilated collecting
tubules and unilateral hemihypertrophy of the body.
41

Chapter 4 The kidney: congenital disorders
Figure 4.19 X-ray of medullary sponge kidney showing
multiple calculi in dilated collecting ducts.
r The kidney continues to make urine, and the
nephrons become distended, converting the kid-
ney into a so-called congenital multicystic kidney
(Fig. 4.20). If the condition is bilateral the foe-
tus forms no urine, so there is no amniotic ﬂuid,
and the baby’s face is characteristically ﬂattened –
Potter’s facies (Fig. 4.21). There are usually other
Figure 4.20 Congenital multicystic kidney.
Low ears
Deep lines
under eyes
Blunt nose
Deep recess
between lip and
chin
Figure 4.21 Potter’s facies.
congenital anomalies and the condition is incom-
patible with life.
r A minor version of this imperfect development
of the ureter is seen where there is a tiny, thin
ureter, above which a small kidney is found, largely
converted into small cysts – cystic dysplasia.
r A single calix may become obstructed, and the
pyramid draining into it becomes converted into
a hollow bag – caliceal cyst. These are found when
infection or stones develop in the cyst (Fig. 4.22).
Acquired obstruction
Scarring
Rather similar cysts occur as a consequence of
the scarring and contraction which takes place in
the later stages of pyelonephritis. The obstructed
nephrons occasionally become grossly distended
with protein (Fig. 4.23). This kind of cyst is often
seen in patients who survive for many years with
end-stage renal failure on dialysis.
Caliceal
cyst
Figure 4.22 Caliceal cyst.
42

The kidney: congenital disorders Chapter 4
Cyst
Scar
Scar
Figure 4.23 Obstructed cysts in pyelonephritic scarring.
Diverticula of the collecting tubules
The most common type of simple renal cyst arises
as a diverticulum from the collecting tubules of the
kidney. Simple cysts occur in middle age in almost
every normal kidney and are detected by accident
in an ultrasound scan (Fig. 4.24). Usually nothing
needs to be done about them (Fig. 4.25). Occasion-
ally these simple cysts may grow big enough to
obstruct a calyx and cause pain, especially if they
arise from the medulla (parapelvic cysts). They can
be emptied by ﬁne-needle aspiration, and if they
ﬁll up again, can be uncapped at an open or per-
cutaneous procedure. Very rarely the ﬂuid inside a
cyst becomes infected and requires drainage.
Polycystic disease
A bizarre exaggeration of this process is seen in
polycystic disease. There are two main forms of
this condition: childhood and adult.
(a) Childhood polycystic disease (Fig. 4.26).
This type of polycystic disease is inherited as a
Simple
cyst
Figure 4.24 Simple cysts of the kidney.
Mendelian recessive characteristic and is picked up
at four different ages.
1 Foetal: Ultrasound in pregnancy reveals that
both kidneys have been converted into giant
sponges. It is not compatible with survival.
2 Neonatal: A similar condition is discovered in
the neonate, who may survive for up to a year,
unless a transplant can be found.
3 Infantile: Between 3 and 6 months, these chil-
dren are found to have uraemia and enlarged
kidneys; there is also an associated ﬁbrosis of
the portal system.
4 Juvenile: This is discovered in later childhood,
and is also associated with hepatic ﬁbrosis.
(b) Adult polycystic disease (Fig. 4.27). This
is inherited by an autosomal dominant gene
on chromosome 16. It may appear in children,
but is usually diagnosed in adult life. It may
be associated with cysts in the liver and pan-
creas and berry aneurysms of the circle of Willis
which cause subarachnoid haemorrhage. Many pa-
tients have no symptoms at all. Often the diag-
nosis is made by accident when an abdominal
lump is found on routine palpation or ultrasound
scanning.
Complications include the following:
1 Hypertension: This can be treated medically for
many years.
2 Uraemia: At ﬁrst this can be managed with re-
striction of protein. Later the patient may need
dialysis, and ultimately may require a transplant.
3 Infection: It is rare for these cysts to become
infected, but occasionally they do, and call for
drainage. There is no other indication to drain
these cysts. (The so-called R¨ovsing operation has
been shown to do more harm than good.)
Congenital disorders of the
renal tubules
Proximal tubules
A number of congenital errors involve the enzymes
which transport amino acids across the mucosa
of the bowel and the epithelium of the proximal
renal tubule. The most important are as follows.
43

Chapter 4 The kidney: congenital disorders
Figure 4.25 Ultrasound showing a simple cyst. (Courtesy of Dr W. Hately.)
Figure 4.26 Childhood polycystic disease. (Courtesy of
the late Mr J. H. Johnston.)
Cystinuria
Four amino acids are affected: cystine, ornithine,
arginine and lysine (‘coal’) of which the only im-
portant one is cystine because it is poorly soluble in
urine. The deﬁciency is inherited as a Mendelian
autosomal recessive: only 3% of patients are ho-
mozygous. Heterozygous patients lose about 500
mg/24 hours of cystine in their urine: homozy-
gous patients lose twice as much and so their urine
is bound to be supersaturated for cystine. Cystine
stones are radiodense because of their sulphur con-
tent. Penicillamine binds the cystine in a soluble
form and if combined with a high ﬂuid input may
prevent stones from forming and even dissolve
those that are present (Fig. 4.28).
Hartnup disease
Here tryptophane cannot be absorbed from the
bowel resulting in nicotinamide deﬁciency, pella-
gra and cerebellar ataxia.
44

The kidney: congenital disorders Chapter 4
Figure 4.27 Adult polycystic disease.
Fanconi’s syndrome
A disorder where there is malabsorption of several
amino acids as well as phosphate. This is accom-
panied by proteinuria and acidosis as well.
Renal glycosuria
Here the tubules fail to reabsorb glucose which ap-
pears in the urine even when the blood sugar is
normal. It is quite harmless but has to be distin-
guished from diabetes mellitus.
Phosphate
If the tubules fail to reabsorb phosphate from the
glomerular ﬁltrate the result is vitamin D-resistant
rickets.
Distal renal tubules
Renal tubular acidosis
Disease of the distal tubule may make it unable to
pump out hydrogen ions so that the kidney cannot
form acidic urine and loses potassium, phosphate,
sulphate and other organic acids. The resulting
low plasma bicarbonate increases the proportion
of calcium that is not bound to a protein particle,
so more calcium escapes in the ﬁltrate where it is
precipitated in the tubules, leading to speckled cal-
ciﬁcation – nephrocalcinosis. At ﬁrst, these patients
have normal glomerular function, but the contin-
ual loss of calcium and phosphate leads to osteo-
malacia. The diagnosis is made by the acid load test
and the remedy is potassium bicarbonate or citrate
and additional vitamin D.
Cystine
Cysteine-Penicillamine
Cysteine
COOH
COOH
COOH
C
NH2
H
C
H
H
H3C
SH
C
NH2
H
C
H
H
S
S
S
C
NH2
H
C
H
H
S
SH
C
NH2
CH3
H
C
COOH
H
C
NH2
H
H
C
COOH
H3C
C
NH2
CH3
H
C
COOH
Penicillamine
Figure 4.28 Cystine, cysteine and penicillamine.
45

Chapter 4 The kidney: congenital disorders
Collecting tubules
A sex-linked Mendelian recessive gene in males
may prevent collecting tubules from responding
to the pituitary antidiuretic hormone – nephrogenic
diabetes insipidus. Continued diuresis may lead to
dehydration, severe enough to cause brain damage
in the baby and gross dilatation of the kidneys and
ureters.
Acquired disorders of the renal tubules
Obstructive uropathy
Back-pressure atrophy of the renal papillae is often
seen in chronic obstruction. Glomerular ﬁltration
may be more or less unaffected, but the kidney is
no longer able to acidify or concentrate the urine.
The urine from the obstructed side is pale and has
a ﬁxed speciﬁc gravity. When both kidneys have
been obstructed for a long time the patient may
become severely dehydrated.
Sickle-cell disease
In the sickle-cell trait, even though there may
never be a crisis, small vessels in the renal papilla
may become blocked by the malformed red cells.
The result is a series of ischaemic changes which re-
sult in an inability of the tubules to concentrate or
acidify the urine. Microscopic haematuria is nearly
always present.
46

Chapter 5
The kidney: trauma
Penetrating injuries
The kidney may be injured by a knife or bul-
let wound. In knife injuries, and those caused by
low-velocity bullets, the kidney can usually be re-
paired. In high-velocity missile injuries the blast
devitalises a large sphere of tissue, and if the kid-
ney is within this sphere, it must be removed or
else there is likely to be fatal secondary haemor-
rhage.
Closed injuries
Closed injuries of the kidney are often seen in
sport. To damage the kidney the blow has to be
quite severe and so it often fractures the lower ribs
and tips of the transverse processes of the lumbar
vertebrae (Fig. 5.1).
There are three grades of closed renal injury (Fig.
5.2):
1 The parenchyma is split, causing haematuria
and a haematoma is conﬁned by the strong thin
bag of Gerota’s fascia. The bleeding soon stops and
the parenchyma heals completely within a few
weeks.
2 The kidney splits into several fragments. Again
Gerota’s
fascia
limits
the
expansion
of
the
haematoma. The bleeding usually stops sponta-
neously and the kidney is expected to heal without
any obvious sequel.
3 There is, in addition, a tear of the main renal
artery or vein causing massive bleeding.
History
There is a story of an injury to the loin followed
by haematuria.
Management
On admission the patient is carefully examined to
rule out pneumothorax, and internal bleeding into
the chest or peritoneal cavity from associated in-
jury to the liver or spleen. Every patient is admitted
for observation because there is no way of telling
how severe the original laceration of the kidney is,
or how it is going to progress during the next few
hours.
Investigations
The chest is X-rayed. An emergency intravenous
urogram (IVU) is performed not so much to show
the type of the injury, but to make sure there is
a kidney on the other side. Recently, it has be-
come more common to perform computed tomog-
raphy (CT) in the early investigation of such pa-
tients. This can cause some confusion because the
Lecture Notes: Urology, 6th edition. By John Blandy and
Amir Kaisary. Published 2009 by Blackwell Publishing.
ISBN: 978-1-4051-2270-2.
47

Chapter 5 The kidney: trauma
11th and 12th
ribs
Lumbar
transverse
processes
Figure 5.1 The mechanism of closed injury of the kidney.
appearance of the ruptured kidney in the CT scan
can be frightening. It is not an indication for open
surgery. If the CT scan is performed after the pa-
tient has started to deteriorate it may cause dan-
gerous delay. The patient is then kept under close
observation, the pulse, blood pressure and abdom-
inal girth being recorded at regular intervals. Every
specimen of urine is saved for inspection. Nearly
all these patients get steadily better. The colour
of the blood in successive specimens of urine be-
comes less and less bright and the patient remains
well. But one cannot predict that this will happen
all the time. Every so often, things go wrong: there
is a rising pulse, falling blood pressure and abdom-
inal distension suggesting internal bleeding.
When there is clinical deterioration the most
useful investigation at this stage is a renal an-
giogram. This may identify the artery which is
bleeding, and allow it to be plugged with gelfoam
or chopped muscle injected through the catheter
(Fig. 5.3). If this is not possible, or if the patient is
obviously deteriorating, laparotomy must not be
delayed. The kidney is approached through a mid-
line incision. The surgeon ﬁrst secures the aorta
and renal vessels before opening Gerota’s fascia,
which, until then, will have been limiting the
bleeding by tamponade. Once the renal artery is
secured and the clot evacuated, it may be possible
to repair the damage. More often a nephrectomy
is needed.
Follow-up
Five important complications must be borne in
mind:
1 Secondary haemorrhage: When there has been a
severe laceration the clot that is holding the pieces
of kidney together may undergo lysis. Late sec-
ondary haemorrhage may occur at any time within
the ﬁrst 2 weeks, but is exceedingly rare when the
initial tear in the kidney was only a small one (Fig.
5.4).
2 Renal artery stenosis: A small laceration of the
renal artery may heal with stenosis and cause hy-
pertension (Fig. 5.5).
3 Page kidney: An organising haematoma may
form a thick tough shell around the kidney which
then shrinks, compressing the kidney leading to
ischaemia and hypertension (Fig. 5.6).
48

The kidney: trauma Chapter 5
Parenchymal
laceration
Subcapsular
haematoma
(a)
(b)
(c)
Multiple
fragments
Tears in
artery
or vein
Figure 5.2 Three grades of renal injury.
Plug of
gelfoam
Angiographic catheter
Figure 5.3 Bleeding from a segmental artery can be
blocked by injection of gelfoam through an angiography
catheter.
Secondary
haemorrhage
Figure 5.4 Secondary haemorrhage.
Renal artery
stenosis
Figure 5.5 Renal artery stenosis.
Compression
by organised
haematoma
(Page kidney)
Figure 5.6 Page kidney.
49

Chapter 5 The kidney: trauma
Figure 5.7 Hydronephrosis.
4 Hydronephrosis: It is rare to have evidence that
a kidney was formerly normal, and only became
hydronephrotic after injury. It is common for a
hydronephrosis to be discovered after an injury.
Just as distended balloon is more likely to burst
than a ﬂoppy one, a distended hydronephrosis is
more prone to trauma. Seldom is it possible to be
sure which came ﬁrst: the hydronephrosis or the
injury (Fig. 5.7).
5 Pseudocyst or urinoma: This is a rare but poten-
tially lethal complication. If the split in the renal
pelvis allows urine to escape into the surround-
Pseudocyst
Figure 5.8 Pseudocyst or urinoma.
ing tissue it may form a large collection – a uri-
noma (Fig. 5.8) – which becomes surrounded by
a ﬁbrous tissue wall which sometimes calciﬁes.
Sooner or later the collection of urine becomes in-
fected and needs to be drained. It may require total
excision.
50

Chapter 6
The kidney: inﬂammation
Immunological disorders
Anything can act as an antigen either by itself or in
combination with various peptides. The long list
of antigens that can cause allergic inﬂammation
in the kidney ranges from simple chemicals such
as penicillamine and butazolidine, to entire mi-
croorganisms such as Streptococcus and Plasmodium
malariae. Even the patient’s own DNA can some-
times act as the allergen. The immune system of a
healthy patient reacts to an unwanted antigen by
smothering it with insoluble complex, which is scav-
enged by the reticuloendothelial system before it
can reach the kidney. If there is too little antibody
to smother the antigen completely, smaller soluble
complexes may form which get trapped in the stalk
of the glomerulus – (the mesangium) or between
the slit pores of the basement membrane.
Nephrotic syndrome
Soluble complexes usually cause little damage. A
renal biopsy shows nothing wrong on light mi-
croscopy and even the electron microscope shows
only minimal damage to the basement membrane
(Fig. 6.1). The diagnosis of nephrotic syndrome
is made by the presence of the ﬁndings listed
below:
proteinuria (more than 3.5 g a day);
hypoalbuminaemia;
oedema; and
hypercholesterolaemia.
Main aetiological factors involved in the devel-
opment of nephrotic syndrome include glomeru-
lonephritis, drug reactions and allergic reactions.
Drug-induced nephropathy may be caused by
drugs such as penicillamine or even consump-
tion of heavy metals such as gold, mercury and
cadmium. Allergic reactions to allergens such as
beestings, pollen or even lactose in cow’s milk,
may cause the nephrotic syndrome.
Although there are many subtypes of nephrotic
syndrome, the main cause of nephrotic syndrome
is caused by membranous glomerulonephritis
in
approximately
25%
of
cases,
closely
fol-
lowed by minimal change nephropathy (or lipoid
nephropathy) in 20% of cases.
Capillary
endothelium
Basement
membrane
Fused foot
processes
Figure 6.1 Minimal change disease of the basement
membrane.
Lecture Notes: Urology, 6th edition. By John Blandy and
Amir Kaisary. Published 2009 by Blackwell Publishing.
ISBN: 978-1-4051-2270-2.
51

Chapter 6 The kidney: inﬂammation
Clinical picture
Clinically the picture is one of gross oedema. The
nephrotic syndrome is usually seen in children. Most
patients with nephrotic syndrome recover sponta-
neously. However, the recovery of these patients
is aided with dietary sodium restriction. Use of
thiazide diuretics (e.g. bendroﬂuazide) may help
reduce ﬂuid accumulation. A normal protein diet
is usually adequate as a high-protein diet usually
confers no additional beneﬁts.
Nephritic syndrome
Nephritic
syndrome
development
can
be
at-
tributed to humoral mechanisms leading to the
deposition of antibodies within the glomerulus.
These antibodies form immune complexes that set
off the cascade of inﬂammation, which results in
the perforation of cell membranes, the release of
histamine from mast cells and platelets, dilatation
of blood vessels and an inﬂux of leucocytes. If
the leucocytes remain within the mesangium or
glomerular tuft the changes are usually reversible
(Fig. 6.2), but if they burst out into the space of
Bowman’s capsule it becomes choked with cells
and the outlook is far worse (Fig. 6.3).
Diagnosis of acute nephritic syndrome can be
made by the presence of:
haematuria (microscopic or macroscopic);
proteinuria;
hypertension;
Thickened vessels
Hyalinised
capillary walls
Figure 6.2 Mesangiocapillary disease: inﬂammatory exu-
date in the mesangium and the glomerular tuft.
Space of
Bowman’s
capsule
Crescent
Figure 6.3 Extracapillary proliferative disease: exudate ﬁlls
up Bowman’s capsule.
oliguria;
uraemia; and
oedema (usually lower limb, periorbital or sacral
oedema).
The causes of acute nephritic syndrome can
be
classiﬁed
according
to
whether
it
is
of
immunological origin or otherwise. Clear im-
munological causes of the nephritic syndrome are
conditions such as: (1) post-streptococcal glomeru-
lonephritis (usually attributed to Lanceﬁeld group
A β-haemolytic streptococci); (2) IgA nephropa-
thy; (3) membranous nephropathy (e.g. secondary
to SLE, gold and penicillamine); (4) Henoch-
Sch¨onlein purpura; and (5) anti-glomerular base-
ment membrane disease. The aetiology of con-
ditions such as minimal change nephropathy,
focal glomerulosclerosis, haemolytic–uraemic syn-
drome and Wegener’s granulomatosis, do not have
clearly established immunological mechanisms.
Clinical picture
The clinical picture of the nephritic syndrome
is more dramatic. There is a rapid onset with
haematuria, hypertension and (if the tubules are
clogged with red and white cells) there may be
anuria. If the kidneys fail to clear themselves,
they heal with scarring. The clinical management
in these patients is mainly conservative and in-
volves managing the hypertension and generalised
body oedema. Dietary protein restriction may be
required in severe uraemia; however, ﬂuid and
sodium restriction is always necessary.
52

The kidney: inﬂammation Chapter 6
Matrix deposit diseases
There are three main disorders in which matrix are
deposited throughout the kidney:
r Diabetic nephropathy: An eosinophilic matrix is
deposited in the glomerular arteriolr, causing its
wall to thicken. There is loss of albumen and red
cells, and hypertension follows.
r Amyloidosis:
Amyloid
is
deposited
in
the
glomerulus to give a glassy eosinophilic deposit
throughout the glomerulus and Bowman’s cap-
sule. The whole picture may be suddenly worsened
by thrombosis of the renal vein.
r Myelomatosis: In multiple myeloma the bone
marrow produces an excess of immunoglobulins.
Light-chain immunoglobulins may appear in the
urine as the Bence-Jones protein which coagulates
when the urine is warmed to 50◦C and dissolves
again as it is warmed up even further.
Urinary tract infection
Uncomplicated lower urinary
tract infection
This condition refers to a urinary tract infection
that is conﬁned to the urinary bladder and is more
common in females compared with males. The
shorter length of the female urethra predisposes
to the introduction of pathogenic organisms into
the bladder from the distal urethra and perineum.
As many as one third of women in their thirties
would have had at least one episode of lower uri-
nary tract infection. Common bacterial organisms
that cause lower urinary tract infections include
Escherichia coli, Klebsiella, Streptococcus faecalis or
Proteus mirabilis.
Upper urinary tract
infection/pyelonephritis
Presence of lower urinary tract infections can cause
upper urinary tract infections (or pyelonephritis),
which involves the kidneys. Ureters that permit
vesicoureteric reﬂux of infected urine into the kid-
neys may cause pyelonephritis. Other factors that
predispose to upper urinary tract infections in-
clude poor ureteric peristalsis, ureteric obstruction,
renal scarring and poor renal blood ﬂow.
Haematogenous infection
Blood-borne infection may also carry microorgan-
isms to the kidney where they form multiple small
abscesses in the renal parenchyma. These are nor-
mally dealt with by the usual defence mechanisms
and heal without signiﬁcant scarring. They are of-
ten seen postmortem in patients who have had a
terminal episode of bacteraemia. A previous scar
in the kidney makes it more susceptible to such
haematogenous infection. Important blood-borne
infections include those due to staphylococci and
Mycobacterium tuberculosis.
Factors predisposing to urinary infection
(Fig. 6.4)
Some factors that predispose to urinary tract infec-
tions include the following.
Urinary stasis
Urine is an excellent culture medium in which
microorganisms multiply at body temperature un-
less the pool of urine is regularly and completely
Old
scar
Hiding place
for
organisms
e.g. stone
Vesicocolic
fistula
Stagnant
urine
Figure 6.4 Factors contributing to urinary infection.
53

Chapter 6 The kidney: inﬂammation
Carcinoma of sigmoid colon
Diverticular disease
Crohn’s regional ileitis
Figure 6.5 Infection from enterovesical ﬁstulae.
emptied out. Stagnant pools of urine occur during
the following circumstances:
r Infrequent voiding: Some people empty their blad-
ders very infrequently. As bacteria divide every 15
minutes, an inoculum of only 10 bacteria may in
theory increase to 8 × 106 within 6 hours. A practi-
cal way to prevent urinary infection is for patients
to undergo bladder re-training, where they are per-
suaded to empty their bladders every hour.
r Obstruction:
Whatever
the
cause,
e.g.
hy-
dronephrosis, a stone or an obstructing prostate
gland, the end result is the same – a pool of stag-
nant urine which sooner or later becomes infected.
r Undrained pockets of urine: Diverticula occur any-
where in the urinary tract, especially in the blad-
der and kidney, forming a pool of urine that never
empties out completely.
r Dilated and reﬂuxing ureters: Many conditions
cause the ureters to become dilated. There may
be obstruction, e.g. by a stone or a tumour, or the
ureterovesical valve may be deﬁcient. The end re-
sult is the same – a pool of urine that is never
completely drained out, and invites infection.
Hiding places for microorganisms
r Stones: Stones are often crumbly, and a bioﬁlm
between the crystals allows organisms to lurk, shel-
tered from antibiotics that cannot diffuse into the
centre of the stone.
r Necrotic tissue: Very similar hiding places for bac-
teria are provided by necrotic tissue, e.g. necrotic
tissue in a cancer, or a foreign body such as a nylon
stitch or a fragment of a catheter.
Sources of reinfection
Microorganisms may be repeatedly injected into
the urinary tract from a ﬁstula into adjacent bowel,
e.g.
r diverticular disease of the colon;
r cancer of the colon; and
r Crohn’s disease of the small bowel (Fig. 6.5).
Lowered resistance to infection
It is a clinical commonplace to note that the symp-
toms of an ordinary urinary infection often begin
a few days after an inﬂuenza-like illness which has
impaired host resistance. More signiﬁcant and im-
portant causes of impaired host resistance are:
r diabetes mellitus;
r acquired immune deﬁciency syndrome (AIDS);
and
r immunosuppression for transplantation or dur-
ing cancer chemotherapy.
End result of urinary infection
Infection in the kidney, like infection anywhere
else in the body, can be followed by one of four
processes (Fig. 6.6):
54

The kidney: inﬂammation Chapter 6
Suppuration
Resolution
Scarring
Granuloma
Figure 6.6 Four possible outcomes from renal infection.
r Resolution: This is the usual result. Most patients
with bacterial infection in the bladder or kidney
end up with an absolutely normal bladder and an
undamaged kidney.
r Suppuration: When the kidney is obstructed the
entire kidney may be converted into a bag of pus –
pyonephrosis. A minor form of this is seen when
one calix is obstructed – pyocalix. Suppuration after
haematogenous infection may cause an abscess in
the renal cortex which spreads into the surround-
ing fat to cause a renal carbuncle (see p. 59).
r Scarring: Scarring occurs when there has been
both obstruction and infection: it may be dif-
fuse – interstitial nephritis – or localised, to produce
a deeply pitted scar in the parenchyma (see reﬂux
nephropathy below).
r Granuloma: Organisms which cause chronic in-
ﬂammation elsewhere, e.g. tuberculosis, brucel-
losis and actinomycosis, can cause granuloma for-
mation in the kidney. There are also a group of
very unusual granulomas which follow infection
with E. coli.
Reﬂux nephropathy
Many children are born with defective valves at
the entry of the ureters into the bladder, especially
when there are other congenital anomalies such
as duplex kidney or ureterocele. When the bladder
contracts the urine is forced back up to the ureter
to the kidney. If in addition, the compound papillae
Cortex draining
into central
tubules
Columns
Scar
Scar
Loss of
lower pole
Column
‘Hypertrophy’
of column
Figure 6.7 Formation of the pitted scars of reﬂux
nephropathy.
do not have effective valves to protect the collect-
ing tubules, urine is forced into the parenchyma.
Uninfected urine probably causes little harm, but
infected urine sets up acute inﬂammation which
is followed by typical deeply pitted scars of reﬂux
nephropathy
which
become
more
pronounced
as the rest of the kidney continues to grow.
Compound papillae are usually found at the
upper and lower poles of the kidney so it is here
that the scarring of reﬂux nephropathy is most
marked (Fig. 6.7).
55

Chapter 6 The kidney: inﬂammation
I
II
III
Figure 6.8 Three grades of reﬂux.
The diagnosis is made by a micturating cystogram
or ultrasound scan using aerated water in the blad-
der which shows up on scanning. Three grades of
reﬂux are recognised (Fig. 6.8). In grades I and II,
where the reﬂux is not severe, the urine can usually
be kept sterile with a small daily dose of an antimi-
crobial such as trimethoprim and it is safe to wait
for the valve to mature and become competent.
In grade III, where the reﬂux is gross, it may be
impossible to keep the urine sterile, or there is re-
Teflon or collagen
Figure 6.9 A blob of Teﬂon paste or collagen is injected under the urothelium of the ureteric oriﬁce.
peated breakthrough infection, and it may be bet-
ter to perform an operation to prevent reﬂux. The
most simple of these is to inject a small amount
of collagen paste through a cystoscope under the
mucosa of the ureteric oriﬁce to change its open-
ing into a crescent (Fig. 6.9). When the ureters
are vastly dilated it may be necessary to reim-
plant the ureter through a long tunnel between the
urothelium and muscle of the wall of the bladder
(Fig. 6.10).
56

The kidney: inﬂammation Chapter 6
Figure 6.10 Reimplantation of the ureter using Cohen’s method.
Complications of urinary
tract infection
Acute renal failure
Whether blood- or urine-borne the immediate
effect on the parenchyma is like inﬂammation
anywhere else: the kidney becomes hyperaemic,
swollen and may lose its function.
Oedema: The patient has pain in the loin and the
kidney is tender on palpation. The outline of the
kidney and border of the psoas muscle are made
fuzzy by oedema, which compresses the necks of
the calices (Fig. 6.11).
Loss of function: The intravenous urogram (IVU)
may show no excretion of contrast. A dimercapto
succinic acid (DMSA) renogram shows no uptake
Oedema of
renal
cortex
Narrow
‘spider’ calices
Figure 6.11 IVU in acute infection.
of isotope in one or more pyramids. There may
still be complete recovery (Fig. 6.12).
In acute renal failure, there is an abrupt deteri-
oration in renal function, which is reversible over
a period of days or weeks. The aetiologies of acute
renal failure are typically classiﬁed into pre-renal,
post-renal or renal parenchymal causes (discussed
in further detail in Chapter 11). Post-renal failure
normally results from obstruction of the urinary
tract at any point from the renal calyces to the
urethra. Some causes of post-renal obstruction in-
clude renal/ureteric calculi disease, transitional cell
carcinoma causing ureteric obstruction, bladder
Figure 6.12 DMSA renogram in acute infection showing
lack of uptake of the isotope in a pyramid of the left kidney.
Courtesy of Dr Neil Garvie.
57

Chapter 6 The kidney: inﬂammation
Fever
Peripheral
vasodilatation
Depressed
cardiac function
Endotoxin
Gram-negative organisms
Figure 6.13 Gram-negative septicaemia.
outlet obstruction from an enlarged prostate, ure-
thral strictures and iatrogenic causes such as a
blocked urethral catheter.
Obstruction to the urinary tract will predispose
to upper urinary tract infections/pyelonephritis.
Patients with upper urinary tract infections can de-
velop septicaemia if microorganisms escape from
the urinary tract into the bloodstream.
Septicaemia
The most serious of all the complications of acute
urinary tract infection is septicaemia. There is only
a very thin layer of tissue between the blood vessels
of the kidney and the lumen of the urinary tract,
and any increase of pressure in the lumen may
force microorganisms into the blood stream.
Pathology of gram-negative septicaemia
The organisms most likely to reach the blood-
stream are Gram-negative bacilli, which contain
lipid-A endotoxin. This releases kinins which:
r make small blood vessels dilate and become
leaky;
r depress the function of the cardiac muscle; and
r stimulate the hypothalamus to cause fever.
Gram-negative septicaemia may occur after any
urological operation without warning. There is at
ﬁrst a brief warning stage when the peripheral cir-
culation is dilated, the patient has rigors, fever and
a bounding pulse. The face and limbs are ﬂushed
and warm. Within half an hour this picture alters
dramatically. The blood pressure falls to an un-
recordable level. There is vasoconstriction of pe-
ripheral vessels and the limbs are cold: the patient
looks as though he has suffered a myocardial in-
farct (Fig. 6.13).
Management
You have no time to lose. Summon help from the
team in the Intensive Therapy Unit. Conﬁrm the
diagnosis by getting a needle into a vein while you
still can ﬁnd one (which may not be easy). Send
blood for culture. Through the same needle inject
a massive dose of the most appropriate antibiotic.
The choice of antibiotic may be obvious from the
preoperative cultures of the urine, but if there is no
bacteriological information, ask your colleagues in
the hospital microbiology department to advise
58

The kidney: inﬂammation Chapter 6
you as to the most likely cause of septicaemia and
the most appropriate antibiotic.
Set up a saline infusion. Insert a central venous
catheter to monitor the pressure in the right heart
and then give enough plasma-expander to return
the central venous pressure to normal. This may
need 5 or 10 L of ﬂuid, and unless the central pres-
sure is carefully monitored you may overload the
heart.
Improvement usually takes place within 1 hour,
and within 2 hours the peripheral vessels have re-
covered their tone and the lost ﬂuid begins to re-
turn to the circulation. There is now a theoretical
risk of overloading the circulation and precipitat-
ing heart failure. Usually natural diuresis quickly
gets rid of the surplus ﬂuid, but a diuretic is some-
times needed.
When the patient has been resuscitated the un-
derlying urological problem can be considered. Any
localised pocket of infected urine must be drained,
e.g. by percutaneous nephrostomy, emptying the
bladder or draining an abscess.
Stone
Stones can form within weeks of an episode of in-
fection. They may form upon a sloughed papilla
(see p. 64) or bacterial debris in the urinary tract
(Fig. 6.14). Infection with a urea-splitting organism
such as Proteus mirabilis promotes the formation of
a stone.
Necrotic
papilla
Stone
formed by
urea-
splitting
infection
Figure 6.14 Stones may form on a sloughed papilla or
bacterial debris.
Suppuration renal carbuncle
Blood-borne infection of the renal parenchyma be-
gins as a collection of little abscesses which coa-
lesce into a collection of pus. In the days before
antibiotics staphylococci from a boil in the skin
were the usual organisms (Fig. 6.15). Today it is
usually E. coli from the urinary tract in people who
are ill for some other reason, e.g. diabetes melli-
tus, or immunosuppression. Clinically the patient
has a high fever and a swollen, tender kidney.
When the infection is conﬁned to the parenchyma
there may be no pus cells or organisms in the
urine. The X-rays show a soft tissue mass, and in
the ultrasound and computed tomography (CT)
scans the appearances may be confused with car-
cinoma. Clinical suspicion will suggest the right
diagnosis, and it is conﬁrmed by aspirating pus
from the abscess. With effective antibiotic treat-
ment these parenchymal abscesses usually resolve,
with a surprising absence of scarring. Diagnosed
late, the carbuncle may burst into the perinephric
fat forming a perinephric abscess pointing in the
loin through the lumbar triangle of Petit, where it
is easily drained.
Granulomas
Tuberculosis
At present time, tuberculosis remains a serious
problem. The emergence of multi-drug resistant
tuberculosis is proving to be a new challenge to
physicians worldwide, and for this reason, newer,
more effective drugs against Mycobacterium tuber-
culosis will very likely be needed in the future.
The organism is usually transmitted airborne
and is initially inhaled into the lungs, where it
establishes infection. This is known as primary tu-
berculosis. Within 1 hour of pulmonary infection,
the bacilli are able to inﬁltrate the pulmonary lym-
phatics and thus enter the bloodstream. Although
the initial numbers of these bacilli are not high,
there is now a small risk of the patient developing
extra-pulmonary TB by the process of seeding.
In the urinary tract, one of two things may hap-
pen: disseminated bacilli that become lodged in
59

Chapter 6 The kidney: inﬂammation
Perinephric abscess
  pointing in lumbar
  triangle
Resolution
Renal cortical
abscess
Figure 6.15 Blood-borne infection may give rise to cortical infection which may resolve or proceed to an abscess.
the renal cortex from the bloodstream may be de-
stroyed by normal host tissue resistance and no
infection is established. However, if the bacilli are
of sufﬁcient numbers and virulence, an infective
focus may be established (Fig. 6.16). At this stage
patients may notice frequency of micturition and
haematuria. The IVU may show an irregularity in
a renal papilla which can be easy to overlook.
Later the abscess in the papilla enlarges, grows
out to involve the rest of the pyramid, and may
calcify (Fig. 6.17). The inﬂammation may narrow
the neck of one or more calices which then ﬁll with
calciﬁed debris (Fig. 6.18) and eventually the entire
kidney can be converted into a bag of calciﬁed
caseation tissue which has a striking appearance
in the plain X-ray — cement kidney (Fig. 6.19).
From the kidney the infection spreads down the
ureter to the bladder. The ureter becomes stiff,
Tuberculous abscess
eroding into renal
papilla
Pus and
debris pass down
the ureter
Figure 6.16 Tuberculous abscess in a renal papilla.
oedematous and shortened so that the ureteric
oriﬁce is pulled up to give the appearance of a
golf-hole (Fig. 6.20). Later on, as antituberculous
chemotherapy begins to work and the unsuspected
granulomas in the wall of the ureter heal up, the
ureter may become narrowed by scarring to cause
hydronephrosis (Fig. 6.21).
In the bladder the early phase of tuberculosis
may cause oedema, ulceration or inﬂammatory
polypi resembling a tumour on cystoscopy. Biopsy
shows the characteristic tubercles, giant cells and
acid-fast bacilli. The lesions in the bladder rapidly
heal with treatment, but as with the ureter, scar-
ring may cause the bladder to shrink with the re-
sult that the patient may have severe frequency of
micturition.
Large cold abscess
in parenchyma
Multiple caliceal
lesions
Figure 6.17 Extension of the tuberculous abscess to the
calix.
60

The kidney: inﬂammation Chapter 6
Blocked neck
of calix
Tuberculous
pyocalix
Figure 6.18 Multiple tuberculous pyocalices.
Diagnosis
It needs suspicion to diagnose genitourinary tuber-
culosis. One good rule is to insist that every patient
with pus in the urine, not explained by bacterial
infection, must have tuberculosis excluded. The
diagnosis of tuberculosis is not easy to make be-
cause Mycobacterium are notoriously slow growing
and cultures of this bacteria take up to six weeks
to be ready. Diagnosis may be made on the basis
of the following investigations:
Early morning urine specimens (three in total)
are stained for acid and alcohol-fast bacilli (AAFB)
using the Ziehl-Nielsen (ZN) stain or auramine
and UV light. Urine is then tested for tubercu-
losis by incubating on Lowenstein-Jensen (solid)
or Bectan-Dickinson (liquid) cultures. Any posi-
tive growths will require a further month before
antibiotic sensitivities can be determined.
Fresh tissue biopsies from the affected area of the
urinary tract can be used for cultures if the above
tests do not yield any results.
Each pyramid
filled with
caseous debris
Figure 6.19 The cement kidney.
Ureteric wall
thickened and
shortened
‘Golf-hole’ ureteric
orifice
Figure 6.20 Shortening of the tuberculous ureter.
Treatment
Tuberculosis is a systemic disease. The patient of-
ten has active disease in the chest. The disease
must be notiﬁed so that contacts can be traced. In
practice this means you should summon the help
of a colleague, usually a chest physician, who can
treat the whole patient and will be expert in the
dosage and details of combination chemotherapy.
Anti-tuberculous treatment typically consists of
once daily rifampicin 600 mg (reduced to 450 mg
if body weight is less than 55 kg) and isoniazid
300 mg for a total of 6 months. In combination
to the above, pyrazinamide 2 g daily is admin-
istered for the ﬁrst 2 months of treatment. Pyri-
doxine 10 mg is given daily to reduce the risk of
isoniazid-induced poly-neuropathy. Second-line
treatments can include ethambutol and strepto-
mycin. Today more cases are being found where
the mycobacteria are resistant to these ﬁrst-line
antibiotics: another reason for getting expert
help.
This does not mean that the urologist has
handed over his or her responsibilities: each case
61

Chapter 6 The kidney: inﬂammation
Ureteric
stricture
Contracted
bladder
Unsuspected
tuberculous
granulomas
in wall of
ureter and
bladder
Figure 6.21 Healing leading to obstruction of the ureter.
must be carefully followed up. With small lesions
in one or two renal papillae one expects a complete
resolution with, at worst, a ﬂeck of calciﬁcation to
mark the site of the tuberculous granuloma. Heal-
ing may lead to stenosis of the ureter and to detect
this the intravenous urogram (IVU) or ultrasound
must be repeated within 2 weeks of starting treat-
ment. Early stenosis of the ureter may be prevented
by means of a double-J splint for a few weeks, and
so long as the sensitivity of the mycobacteria is cer-
tain and antibiotics are being given, steroids may
assist in the prevention of scarring.
If a stricture does form up near the renal pelvis
a pyeloplasty may be performed. When the nar-
rowing is near the bladder the ureter may need to
be reimplanted. If the entire length of the ureter
is stenosed, it can be replaced with ileum. A con-
tracted bladder can be enlarged by one or other
types of cystoplasty.
Unfortunately patients often come up at a stage
when the kidney is too badly affected to recover
useful function: in these cases, after preliminary
treatment with antibiotics nephrectomy should
be performed. Thanks to the efﬁcacy of modern
chemotherapy there is no longer any need to re-
move the ureter as well.
In males urinary tuberculosis may be accompa-
nied by tuberculosis of the prostate, seminal vesi-
cles, epididymes and vasa deferentia. In women
there may be involvement of the fallopian tubes
and uterus.
Xanthogranuloma
This is a rare disorder that can give rise to granulo-
mas and renal masses in children. The patient usu-
ally has pyrexia, loin pain, urinary tract infection
and weight loss. This can occur around a renal cal-
culus usually in association with Proteus mirabilis
62

The kidney: inﬂammation Chapter 6
Nephrocolic
fistula
Honeycomb
abscess
under psoas
fascia
Spread of
granuloma
outside kidney
Invasion of
liver
Subphrenic
abscess
Figure 6.22 Xanthogranuloma burrows into the surrounding tissues.
infection. Macroscopically, the renal mass consists
of a ﬁrm, yellow and lobulated tissue, which re-
sembles renal cell carcinoma. However, microscop-
ically, histiocyte cells are stuffed with lipid. The
inﬂammation burrows into the tissues around the
kidney (Fig. 6.22) as well as adjacent viscera, e.g.
liver, colon and duodenum. Antibiotics alone are
insufﬁcient for treatment. Xanthogranulomas are
traditionally managed with surgical excision.
Malacoplakia
Another curious granuloma of the urinary tract
gives rise to multiple abscesses and dense ﬁbrosis.
In the bladder and ureter it produces soft brown
plaques which bleed easily, and may cause ob-
struction. It may respond to a prolonged course
of trimethoprim.
Brucellosis
Brucellosis is a zoonotic disease that may cause
granulomatosis in the human kidney. The Brucella
family is quite varied and there are subspecies that
can be found in farm and household domesticated
animals (cattle – Brucella abortus; sheep – B. ovis;
dogs – B. canis). They are small gram-negative coc-
cobacilli that are non-motile.
The
routes
of
transmission
include
direct
contact with infected animals or their secretions
through cuts and abrasions on the skin, ingestion
of unpasteurised dairy products or inhalation
of infectious aerosols. Renal complications are
rare,
however,
interstitial
nephritis,
glomeru-
lonephritis
and
IgA
nephropathy
have
been
previously reported. Chronic renal abscess forma-
tion may indeed mimic tuberculotic granulomas.
Epididymo-orchitis occurs in up to 20% of men
with brucellosis.
Interstitial nephritis,
pyelonephritis, papillary necrosis
A wide variety of causes lead to a spectrum of
changes in the kidney which vary from diffuse
63

Chapter 6 The kidney: inﬂammation
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 6.23 Spectrum of changes in pyelonephritis.
scarring throughout the renal parenchyma – inter-
stitial nephritis to – at the other end, necrosis of en-
tire renal papillae, which may become completely
detached – papillary necrosis (Fig. 6.23). Among
these causes are:
1 Infection: Severe infection, particularly when
combined with obstruction, can lead to intersti-
tial nephritis, and in severe cases, to necrosis of
the papilla especially when there is obstruction or
some other underlying disorder such as diabetes
mellitus.
2 Analgesic abuse: There have been epidemics in
which whole populations have taken to consum-
ing large amounts of aspirin, phenacitin and sim-
ilar analgesic medications: examples include the
housewives of Newcastle (Australia), the watch-
makers of Switzerland, and the motorcycle workers
of Husqvarna in Sweden. They show every combi-
nation of interstitial nephritis and papillary necro-
sis.
3 Balkan nephropathy: In isolated villages in the
Balkans epidemics occur in which large num-
bers of people develop interstitial nephritis and
papillary necrosis, probably caused by a herb, see
below.
4 Chinese herbal sliming medicines: Belgian ladies
attending a fashionable slimming clinic were given
an extract of Aristolochia fang-ji by mistake. Many
developed renal failure, and a few survivors went
on to develop multifocal cancer. It has been sug-
gested that perhaps a similar herb, Aristolochia
clematis, may be responsible for Balkan nephropa-
thy (see above).
5 Gout and nephrocalcinosis: The sharp needles of
uric acid found in gout, and crystals of calcium
salts found in nephrocalcinosis are deposited in and
around the renal tubules and may provoke scarring
similar to interstitial nephritis.
Clinical features
Whatever the cause, the clinical features of inter-
stitial nephritis are similar. There is loss of protein
and progressive failure of the function, at ﬁrst of
the renal tubules, and later of the glomeruli. In
severe cases the sloughed renal papillae may be-
come detached and pass down the ureter (causing
obstruction) or remain and calcify in the kidney,
to form a stone with a typically radiolucent centre
(Fig. 6.24). Many of these patients come to dialy-
sis, and years later, the survivors are prone to de-
velop multifocal transitional cell cancer involving
the renal pelvis and calices.
Hydatid disease
The tapeworm Echinococcus granulosus normally
lives in sheep. Dogs may eat uncooked sheep of-
fal containing the worms, which thrive inside the
dog, and shed eggs which collect on the dog’s
fur. Children fondle the dogs, forget to wash their
hands, and swallow the ova. The eggs hatch out,
and the worms burrow through the wall of the
child’s gut to reach the liver and kidney where
they grow, multiply and form collections of cysts.
The cysts are multilocular. Their walls are more or
less calciﬁed, and the appearances are easily mis-
taken for cancer on ultrasound or CT scanning
(Fig. 6.25). An immunoassay for a speciﬁc circulat-
ing antigen conﬁrms the diagnosis. If, by mistake,
64

The kidney: inﬂammation Chapter 6
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.24 Calciﬁcation on a dead papilla forming a stone which is blocking a calix.
the ﬂuid inside the hydatid cyst is aspirated it will
be found to be full of little hooklets (Fig. 6.26)
but aspiration is avoided because it may spread
the disease as well as precipitate an acute allergic
attack.
After a course of albendazole the affected kidney
should be removed, taking great care not to spill
the cysts. The kidney is approached through the
loin and the wound protected with packs soaked
in 1% formalin or hypertonic saline. The biggest
cysts are then aspirated, and the ﬂuid replaced with
1% formalin or hypertonic saline, reaspirated, and
only when there is no risk of the kidney bursting,
is it removed en bloc. If the tiny tapeworms inside
the cysts are spilt they give rise to local recurrence
which may be inoperable.
Figure 6.25 Multiple hydatid cysts in a human kidney.
65

Chapter 6 The kidney: inﬂammation
Figure 6.26 Hooklet in ﬂuid aspirated from a hydatid cyst.
Chyluria
The passage of protein-rich ﬂuid with chyle or lym-
phatic ﬂuid is known as chyluria. This is frequently
noted by the patient by the presence of milky
white urine. This condition is usually attributed
to a lymphatic urinary ﬁstula caused by obstruc-
tion of the renal lymphatics, resulting in forniceal
rupture and leakage. Occasionally, chyluria may
be caused by ﬁlariasis infestation, trauma, tuber-
culosis or retroperitoneal tumours. In the Far East,
ﬁstula formation between the perirenal lymphatics
Figure 6.27 Lymphangiogram and retrograde urogram
showing connection with lymphatics of the kidney, in a
case of chyluria.
and the renal pelvis may be caused by infestation
with the roundworm Wuchereria bancroftii, which
is transmitted by mosquitoes (Fig. 6.27).
The management of chyluria is usually conser-
vative as it tends to resolve spontaneously. How-
ever, in persistent and severe proteinuria, silver ni-
trate or hypertonic saline can be injected through
a ureteric catheter to seal off the communications.
If this fails, the kidney may be dissected from the
lymphatics, which must all be carefully ligated.
66

Chapter 7
Urinary calculi
Operations for the stone were well known in the
time of Hippocrates, whose Oath enjoined young
doctors to leave ‘cutting for the stone’ to those who
were properly trained to do it. The incidence of
stone varies in different populations. In the West
there has been a steady rise in the incidence of
calculi in the kidney and ureter, interrupted only
by two World Wars, from which it is argued that
stones reﬂect afﬂuence and overfeeding with re-
ﬁned sugar and protein. Stones are more common
in those whose work causes them to become de-
hydrated and form more concentrated urine. It is
probable that the incidence of bladder stones in
children in underdeveloped countries is a mani-
festation of infantile diarrhoea diseases and dehy-
dration.
A stone consists of crystalline material arranged
in layers on an organic scaffold like ferroconcrete
or ﬁbreglass (Fig. 7.1). We know little about the
organic scaffold, but a lot about the formation of
the crystals.
Salt added to water continues to dissolve until
no more will do so: this is the saturation concen-
tration, which is measured by the solubility prod-
uct of the concentration of ions making up the
salt (Fig. 7.2). In urine a metastable solution forms
Figure 7.1 Cross section of a stone showing its lamina-
tions.
which does not precipitate crystals, even though
the saturation concentration has been exceeded,
unless the solution is left undisturbed for a long
time, or is seeded with a nucleus on which stones
Nucleation
Formation
concentration
Increasing ion concentration in solution
Saturation
concentration
Metastable
Undersaturation
Figure 7.2 Increasing ion concentration in a ﬂuid such as
urine.
Lecture Notes: Urology, 6th edition. By John Blandy and
Amir Kaisary. Published 2009 by Blackwell Publishing.
ISBN: 978-1-4051-2270-2.
67

Chapter 7 Urinary calculi
can precipitate. If the concentration exceeds that
of the metastable region, crystals precipitate to
make their own nuclei – nucleation. Human urine
is always metastable with respect to the main
crystalline components of stones, calcium and
oxalate.
The metastable state is inﬂuenced by tempera-
ture, the presence of colloids, the rate of ﬂow of
the urine, the concentration of the solutes and
the presence of anything which can act as a nu-
cleus, e.g. dead papillae, necrotic carcinoma, a
non-absorbable suture, a fragment of catheter, or
a previously existing fragment of stone (Fig. 7.3).
The pH of the urine may be important in the for-
mation of calculi: magnesium ammonium phos-
phate is insoluble in alkaline urine, and is precipi-
tated by infection with Proteus mirabilis and other
urea-splitting organisms. Uric acid is insoluble in
acid urine, but may dissolve if the urine is made
alkaline.
All crystals prefer to be undisturbed if they are
to grow, so calculi tend to form wherever there
is stagnant urine, as in a ureterocele, a diverticu-
lum, a hydronephrosis or a chronically obstructed
bladder.
Supersaturation stones
The best examples of supersaturation stones are
cystine and uric acid.
Cystine
In cystinuria there is a congenital (Mendelian re-
cessive) defect in the enzymes necessary for the
transport of cystine, ornithine, arginine and lysine
in the proximal tubule (see p. 45). Homozygotes
pass about 1 g/24 h, heterozygotes about 0.5 g.
Cystine is more soluble in alkaline urine: penicil-
lamine produces a soluble penicillamine–cysteine
molecule.
Uric acid
Uric acid is a weak acid and is only half-ionised
in urine of pH 5.75. A much greater proportion
Existing
stone
Necrotic
papilla
Non-absorbable
stitch
Necrotic
carcinoma
Foreign body
Figure 7.3 Many things can act as a nucleus for stone
formation.
is found in a soluble ionised form in the alkaline
urine. If the urine is allowed to become acid, most
of it will be precipitated. An excess of uric acid oc-
curs when there is a primary defect of metabolism
of uric acid (as in gout) or rapid catabolism of
protein, e.g. after cancer chemotherapy. Uric acid
stones occur whenever the urine is very concen-
trated and very acid, as is seen in dehydration and
in patients with ulcerative colitis and ileostomies.
In addition, the distal tubules in some patients are
not able to form alkaline urine, and thus they tend
to have uric acid stones.
Treatment consists of encouraging a large water
intake, together with bicarbonate to keep the urine
alkaline, and perhaps allopurinol to inhibit xan-
thine oxidase and prevent the formation of uric
acid.
Calcium stones
Most non-infective stones are made of calcium ox-
alate and/or calcium phosphate.
Oxalate
Primary (hepatic) oxaluria
An excess of oxalate is formed in primary hy-
peroxaluria, because of an inherited liver enzyme
68

Urinary calculi Chapter 7
α OH β Ketoadipate
Glyoxalate carboligase
Glyoxalic acid
  Glycerate
   δ Glycerate dehydrogenase
Hydroxypyruvate
δ
Oxalate
Products of normal
metabolism
Alternative metabolic
pathway
Harmless
by-products
Figure 7.4 Primary or hepatic oxaluria.
deﬁciency (either of glyoxalate carboligase, or
gamma-glycerate dehydrogenase) leading to an ex-
cess of oxalate in the urine which precipitates in
the collecting tubules and eventually leads to re-
nal failure (Fig. 7.4). Unfortunately, a transplanted
kidney suffers the same fate, but a combined liver
and kidney transplant can be successful.
Secondary (ileal) oxaluria
Hyperoxaluria also occurs in diseases of the termi-
nal ileum where bile acids are normally absorbed.
If bile acids are not reabsorbed and recycled in the
liver to be added to bile, then dietary fat cannot
be emulsiﬁed, and remains in the bowel where
it forms an insoluble soap with dietary calcium
(Fig. 7.5). This in turn leaves an excess of di-
etary oxalate which is absorbed, excreted in the
urine, and forms a stone. This type of hyperox-
aluria may be prevented by giving cholestyramine
(which binds the oxalate in the gut) and by avoid-
ing food rich in oxalate such as tea, chocolate, cof-
fee, spinach and rhubarb.
Hypercalciuria
An excess of calcium in the urine (i.e. >350 mg/
24 h in males, >300 mg/24 h in females) may be
a cause of stones in some males. These are of three
types:
1 Renal, where there is decreased renal tubular re-
absorption of calcium. Little can be done about
this.
2 Absorptive, where too much calcium is absorbed
from the bowel. Many types of treatment were for-
merly given to diminish this, e.g. cellulose phos-
phate was given to precipitate calcium salts in
the bowel: patients were advised to give up milk
products as well as all those rich in oxalate. In
addition, magnesium salts were given to try to
keep calcium particles in suspension in the urine.
In fact, all these treatments were ineffective and
69

Chapter 7 Urinary calculi
Bile acids
reabsorbed
from
terminal
feet of
ileum
Unabsorbed fat
forms insoluble
calcium soaps
Free
oxalate
Figure 7.5 Ileal oxaluria.
it is far more important to keep the urine dilute
by drinking plenty of water, and perhaps encour-
age this with a small dose of a diuretic such as
frusemide.
3 Resorptive hypercalciuria, where an excess of
calcium is absorbed from the bones, depends on
the function of the parathyroid glands.
Most of the calcium in the blood is bound to pro-
tein; only a small fraction is in solution, and of
this an even smaller part is ionised. The product
of the ions [Ca × PO4] is kept constant. If [Ca]
is increased, then [PO4] must fall, and vice versa.
Parathyroid hormone encourages osteoclasts to
dissolve bone and release calcium into the blood:
the output of the hormone is regulated by the con-
centration of ionised [Ca]. There are three types of
hyperparathyroidism as follows.
Primary hyperparathyroidism
For no known reason, the parathyroid glands
start to secrete more parathyroid hormone than
is needed with the result that calcium is reab-
sorbed from the skeleton and added to the blood.
The plasma [Ca] rises and the plasma [PO4] has to
fall. The excess calcium enters the urine where it
precipitates in the renal tubules as one form of
nephrocalcinosis, or forms a stone in the renal
tract (Fig. 7.6).
The diagnosis of primary hyperparathyroidism
is usually made by the chance ﬁnding of an ele-
vated [Ca] in the course of a routine blood test or
in the investigation of a patient with a stone. It
is very rare to ﬁnd the classical changes of osteitis
ﬁbrosa cystica where massive collections of osteo-
clasts cause cystic cavities in bones and sometimes
a pathological fracture. The ﬁnding of elevated
plasma [Ca] must always be double checked, and if
conﬁrmed, then the plasma parathyroid hormone
is measured by radioimmunoassay.
Secondary hyperparathyroidism
In chronic renal failure, phosphate is one of the
metabolic products that is not adequately ex-
creted; so, the plasma [PO4] rises, and the [Ca] has
to fall. The [Ca] is precipitated in soft tissues as
heterotopic calciﬁcation where it may cause joint
stiffness and deafness. The parathyroids respond
to the lowered [Ca] by secreting more parathyroid
hormone, and all four glands become hyperplas-
tic. Secondary hyperparathyroidism is still seen in
patients undergoing dialysis for renal failure, but
can largely be prevented by large doses of vitamin
70

Urinary calculi Chapter 7
Primary excessive
activity of parathyroids
Nephrocalcinosis
and stones
Calcium set free
from bones,
osteitis fibrosa
cystica
Ca
PO4
Figure 7.6 Primary hyperparathyroidism.
D which encourage the absorption of calcium from
the bowel (Fig. 7.7).
Tertiary hyperparathyroidism
Here the overactive parathyroid glands seem not to
know when to stop and in spite of extra vitamin D,
keep on putting out far more parathyroid hormone
than is needed to maintain a constant [Ca]. When
this occurs, they must be removed.
Parathyroidectomy
The four parathyroid glands are each about the
size of a pea and lie behind and buried in the
lateral lobes of the thyroid gland near the supe-
rior and inferior thyroid arteries (Fig. 7.8). Primary
hyperparathyroidism may be caused by an ade-
noma in one gland or hyperplasia of all four. The
glands are localised by subtraction of radioisotope
scans, and at operation all four glands are con-
ﬁrmed by biopsy and frozen section. Occasionally,
a ‘missing’ parathyroid gland is found in the me-
diastinum.
Formation of renal calculi
Tiny spheres of calcium phosphate are often found
in normal collecting ducts – Carr’s concretions.
Collections of these concretions gather near the
tip of a papilla to form shining plaques easily seen
with a nephroscope – Randall’s plaques. When
these become detached, they may act as a nucleus
for further stone formation (Fig. 7.9). A similar nu-
cleus is formed by a necrotic renal papilla. From
then on, the stone continues to grow as layer af-
ter layer of calcium salts, together with a protein
matrix, is laid down.
Investigation of a calculus
Where is the stone, and is it likely to do
any harm?
An intravenous urogram (IVU) or a computed to-
mography (CT) IVU will usually show where the
stone is situated, and whether it is likely to get
stuck and cause obstruction. The exceptions are
those made of uric acid and cystine. Stones made
of uric acid are completely radiolucent, and do not
71

Chapter 7 Urinary calculi
Secondary over-
activity
of parathyroids
Accumulation of
PO4 from
kidney failure
PO4
Ca
Figure 7.7 Secondary hyperparathyroidism.
show in a plain radiograph, but they do cast an
acoustic shadow on ultrasound scan and show up
in a CT scan. Stones made of cystine are faintly
radio-opaque because of their sulphur content,
and are always easily located with ultrasound or
CT scan. A combination of CT IVU is the best in-
vestigation when a stone is suspected.
Thyroid
cartilage
Inferior
parathyroid
Inferior
thyroid
artery
Superior
parathyroid
Superior
thyroid
artery
Figure 7.8 Anatomical relations of the parathyroid glands.
What is the cause of the stone, and can
it be prevented?
Hyperparathyroidism must be ruled out by mea-
suring the plasma [Ca]. The urine should be
checked for infection especially with urea-splitting
organisms. The whole state of the urinary tract
needs to be examined for possible collections of
stagnant urine, and one must always consider the
possibility that the stone may have formed on a
non-absorbable suture or other foreign body.
Management of a renal stone
As a general rule the normal ureter will allow a
stone to pass if it is less than 5 mm in diameter.
Stones larger than this are likely to get stuck and
should usually be removed.
When a stone is stuck it causes obstruction,
but this rarely remains complete for very long,
and the urine soon ﬁnds its way past the stone.
If the urine also happens to be infected there is
a risk that back-pressure will cause septicaemia
and/or obstructive nephropathy so then it is ur-
gently necessary to overcome the obstruction ei-
ther by an emergency percutaneous nephrostomy
or by passing a double-J splint from below. The
infection cannot usually be eradicated if a stone
72

Urinary calculi Chapter 7
Carr’s concretions
in collecting ducts
Microliths forming a
Randall’s plaque
Plaque about to
work loose
Stone
Stone nest
Figure 7.9 Formation of calculus in a renal papilla.
is present because it shields microorganisms from
antibiotics. Urea-splitting organisms will precipi-
tate layers of magnesium ammonium phosphate
(apatite) on any existing stone.
Methods for removing stones
Extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy
Shock waves travel through water. Different types
of lithotriptors generate shock waves, and focus
them on the stone by means of X-rays or ultrasonic
Figure 7.10 Extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy.
scanners. The shock waves break the stone up into
fragments small enough to pass down the ureter.
Many different types of lithotriptors are avail-
able, differing in the method by which the shock
wave is generated and the stone is localised. To
generate the shock wave some use a spark plug,
others an array of piezoceramic shock emitters
(Fig. 7.10). Some localise the stone with ultra-
sound, others use X-rays.
However, the stone is broken up, the little frag-
ments have to go down the ureter. There, they may
73

Chapter 7 Urinary calculi
Figure 7.11 Steinstrasse – collection of fragments held up
in the lower ureter after ESWL.
cause temporary obstruction – the steinstrasse –
and diclofenac may be needed for ureteric colic
(Fig. 7.11) but with a large ﬂuid throughput the
steinstrasse usually clears within a few days. Alpha-
blockers help these little particles of stone to pass
spontaneously.
It may be necessary to repeat the lithotripsy
several times, according to the density of the
stones. For larger stones extracorporeal shock wave
lithotripsy (ESWL) is often combined with percu-
taneous nephrolithotomy (PCNL).
Percutaneous nephrolithotomy
After placing a needle under X-ray or ultrasound
control into the renal pelvis, a guidewire is passed,
and the needle withdrawn. A series of dilators of
increasing size are then passed over the guidewire
Hollow cylinder oscillating
at ultrasonic frequency
Fragments of
calculus aspirated
Stone being
fragmented
by oscillating
toothed cylinder
Figure 7.12 Percutaneous nephrolithotomy.
until a track has been made into the kidney big
enough to admit a working sheath, through which
instruments can be passed (Fig. 7.12). The stone is
now examined with a nephroscope, and broken up
with one of several ingenious gadgets: one emits a
stream of sparks which cracks the stone; another
does the same thing with a Q-switched laser; a
third grinds the stone to powder with a toothed
cylinder oscillated at ultrasonic frequency; and a
fourth uses a miniature jackhammer to break up
the stone. Some probes are hollowed so that the
fragments can be sucked out while the stone is be-
ing broken up. A variety of forceps are available to
pick out the bits (Fig. 7.13).
Double-J ureteric stent
To help the ureter to dilate, and encourage the
passage of the fragments of stone after ESWL, a
double-J stent is often passed up the ureter over
a guidewire introduced through a ﬂexible or rigid
cystoscope (Fig. 7.14). The double-J splint can be
left in for several weeks, but there is a risk that the
double-J splint may itself act as a nucleus for stone
formation, and strict precautions have to be taken
to follow the patient up and make sure the stent is
retrieved within a reasonable time.
Ureteroscopy
A ureteroscope, rigid or ﬂexible, may be passed up
the ureter to break up and remove small stones
74

Urinary calculi Chapter 7
Figure 7.13 Storz ultrasonic lithotriptor.
that are stuck in the ureter: miniature versions of
the Q-switched laser and jackhammer are available
for this procedure (Fig. 7.15).
Stones in common sites
Stone in a calix
Caliceal stones seldom cause any trouble and can
as a rule be safely kept under observation. Very
Dilated
ureter
Double-J
stent
Figure 7.14 A double-J stent helps the ureter to dilate.
occasionally, they seem to cause pain and may be
fragmented by ESWL.
Stone in the renal pelvis
A stone in the renal pelvis which is more than
5 mm in diameter will probably get stuck when it
tries to go down the ureter. Some urologists advo-
cate utilising ESWL or PCNL to get rid of the stone
before the patient has any symptoms. These renal
pelvic stones can cause repeated attacks of renal
pain or ureteric colic and haematuria, and may be
associated with infection.
Stones in the pelvis used to be removed by
open pyelolithotomy. The kidney was approached
through the 12th rib tip incision, and mobilised to
give access to the renal pelvis, which was opened
between stay stitches: the stone was removed, the
pelvis closed and the wound closed with a drain
(Fig. 7.16). The same procedure can be done la-
paroscopically.
75

Chapter 7 Urinary calculi
Figure 7.15 Storz ureteroscope.
Staghorn stones
Stones sometimes ﬁll the entire pelvis and nearly
all the calices (Fig. 7.17), usually in the presence of
Proteus mirabilis infection. The body of the stone is
usually removed by PCNL while the outlying bits
in the calices are broken up with extracorporeal
lithotripsy in a series of sessions. This can require
the patient to undergo a long series of operations,
even though none of them are very major, and
at the end of the day small bits of stone are of-
ten left behind. From time to time it is still neces-
sary to perform an open extended pyelolithotomy
(Fig. 7.18).
Here the kidney is approached through the
loin, fully mobilised, its renal artery taped (for
safety) and the bloodless plane between the renal
pelvis and parenchyma opened up to allow the
parenchyma to be lifted up, after which the pelvis
is laid open up from the upper to the lower calix.
The stone is then extracted completely, and the
kidney conﬁrmed to be clear with an X-ray in situ.
The renal pelvis is sewn up and the wound closed
with drainage. Again the same operation can be
done laparoscopically.
Stones in the ureter
‘Little dogs make the most noise’. The pain of a stone
in the ureter is excruciating. It comes on suddenly,
in waves that make the patient roll and twist to
get relief. Extravasation of urine into the retroperi-
toneal tissues may cause vomiting, and distension
of the bowel mimics intestinal obstruction. There
may be tenderness over the loin and iliac fossa
(Fig. 7.19). A trace of blood is often present in the
urine.
Stones less than 5 mm in diameter will usually
pass down the ureter on their own, at the expense
of several bouts of pain that are usually relieved
by diclofenac. Alpha-blockers may help the stone
progress steadily. If there is no infection, no oper-
ation is indicated but infection calls for an imme-
diate percutaneous nephrostomy.
When the stone is not making progress, is obvi-
ously too big, or remains stuck for several weeks, it
is removed by ESWL. It can be broken up with an
instrument introduced via the ureteroscope, but
this carries a risk of injury to the ureter and is used
with the utmost caution. Successful retrieval of a
stone is more likely in the lower third of the ureter
than the upper third.
The classical operation was open ureterolitho-
tomy. Under general anaesthetic a short incision
was made over the appropriate part of the ureter,
76

Urinary calculi Chapter 7
Incision through
wall of pelvis
directly onto stone
Peripelvic fat
(a)
(b)
(c)
Watson–Cheyne’s
dissector–director
Figure 7.16 Pyelolithotomy.
77

Chapter 7 Urinary calculi
Figure 7.17 Staghorn stones may ﬁll the entire collecting system.
Mayo’s
scissors
Incision in pelvis
Calculus
Figure 7.18 Extended pyelolithotomy.
Distension
atrophy
Haematuria
Bladder
irritation, frequency
oedema
of ureteric orifice
Extravasation
Obstruction
Loin
pain
Segmental
referred pain
Figure 7.19 Clinical features of a stone in the ureter.
the peritoneum was reﬂected medially and the
stone located with a ﬁnger. A short incision in
the ureter allowed the stone to be prised out, and
the wound was then closed with drainage. Un-
like ureteroscopic operations, the incision in the
ureter always healed spontaneously, did not need
to be sutured and was never followed by a stricture
(Fig. 7.20). This procedure may also be done la-
paroscopically.
Stones in the bladder
A stone that is small enough to pass down the
ureter can usually get out of the bladder, and
most ureteric stones pass without being noticed.
78

Urinary calculi Chapter 7
Watson–Cheyne
dissector
(a)
(c)
Peritoneum
(b)
(d )
(e)
Penrose
drain
Figure 7.20 Ureterolithotomy.
79

Chapter 7 Urinary calculi
Secondary
infection
Irritation and
inflammation
of trigone
haematuria,
frequency, pain
referred to tip
of penis
Squamous
metaplasia
      carcinoma
Figure 7.21 Clinical features of a stone in the bladder.
Obstruction to the outﬂow of the bladder may trap
the stones and today, in the West, bladder stones
are seen only in elderly men with prostatic obstruc-
tion. In women, bladder stones are even more rare
and usually formed on a non-absorbable stitch.
The symptoms are those of outﬂow obstruction
without pain or haematuria (Fig. 7.21), but some-
times pain is referred to the tip of the penis, and
is made worse by exercise and is relieved by lying
down.
Small bladder stones are seen through a resecto-
scope sheath, broken up with forceps and washed
Figure 7.23 Storz ultrasonic lithotriptor. (Courtesy Rimmer Bros, UK Agents for Karl Storz.)
Figure 7.22 Classical lithotrite.
out. Larger ones are crushed with the classical
lithotrite (Fig. 7.22), its modern visual counter-
part (Fig. 7.23), the Swiss jackhammer or the Q-
switched laser.
80

Urinary calculi Chapter 7
In little boys, and in adults with very large stones
that ﬁll the bladder, a suprapubic lithotomy is
safer. A short incision is made over the full blad-
der which is opened between stay sutures and the
stone lifted out. The bladder is closed with an in-
dwelling catheter that remains in place for 5–6
days.
Key messages
1 Single stone formers might not require extensive
metabolic evaluation but the patient’s dietary habits,
oral ﬂuid intake and excessive intake of certain foods
and medications ought to be recorded.
2 Stone analysis can direct metabolic investigations
and save the need for a complete metabolic evalua-
tion.
3 Recurrent stone formers are recommended to un-
dergo a complete metabolic evaluation.
4 Patients should be strongly encouraged to consume
ﬂuid enough to produce an average of 1.5–2 L of urine
daily.
5 Dietary intake which increases the risk of stone for-
mation includes high protein and low-carbohydrate
diet and large doses of vitamin C (>2 g/day).
6 Calcium supplements are safest if taken with diet.
7 Obesity is an independent risk factor for urinary
stone formation, particularly in females.
81

Chapter 8
Neoplasms of the kidney
Embryoma (Wilms’ tumour)
Embryoma accounts for 10% of all childhood can-
cers and is seen in 1:13,000 children. There are
two types of which one is inherited: this group
is caused by an autosomal dominant with loss of
genetic material on chromosome 11. It is associ-
ated with aniridia, hemihypertrophy, macroglos-
sia, multicystic disease, neuroﬁbromatosis and
adult renal cell cancer.
In the ﬁrst few months, one particular sub-
group has to be distinguished because it behaves
almost as though it were benign – mesoblastic
nephroma. It must be completely excised. One in
10 Wilms’ tumours is bilateral. There are two dis-
tinct pathological entities – favourable and un-
favourable, according to the amount of undiffer-
entiated tissue that is present. The worst of this
is usually rhabdomyosarcoma. Embryomas spread
both by direct invasion into the adjacent mus-
cle and bowel as well as by the bloodstream to
the lungs. Erosion of the renal pelvis occurs rel-
atively late, so that when haematuria occurs the
prognosis is bad. The International Union Against
Cancer (UICC) system of staging is represented
in Fig. 8.1.
I
II
III
V
IV
Figure 8.1 Stages of Wilms’ tumour.
Lecture Notes: Urology, 6th edition. By John Blandy and
Amir Kaisary. Published 2009 by Blackwell Publishing.
ISBN: 978-1-4051-2270-2.
82

Neoplasms of the kidney Chapter 8
Clinical features
‘A big lump in a wasted baby’
A mother bathing her baby notices a lump: this
is the classical presentation (Fig. 8.2), but these
tumours may present with pain and haematuria,
as well as hypertension, fever and a raised red or
white cell count. Ultrasound is the ﬁrst investi-
gation, followed by computed tomography (CT)
scanning, even if this may require a general anaes-
thetic. In practice, the differential diagnosis is from
neuroblastoma, which usually has speckled calciﬁ-
cation, and displaces the kidney downwards.
Management
Today, thanks to a combination of radical surgery
and chemotherapy one can expect 96% 4-year sur-
vival in stage I disease, and even in stage III disease,
so long as the histology is ‘favourable’ the survival
is >87%. But to achieve these results requires
expert management by a dedicated team. Every
child with a Wilms’ tumour deserves to be referred
to a specialised centre regularly auditing its results
in trials of the latest protocols. It is not for the
occasional surgeon in a small hospital. One such
protocol calls for a 5-day course of actinomycin D
followed by laparotomy at which the renal vessels
are tied before the tumour is handled, and the op-
Figure 8.2 Wilms’ tumour – a big lump in a wasted baby.
posite kidney is carefully examined. The kidney is
then removed radically, with a wide margin. Post-
operatively vincristine is given. Radiotherapy is
not necessary in stage I tumours. It is always given
in stage III. Its role in stage II is still under review.
Renal cell cancer – Grawitz tumour
(hypernephroma)
Grawitz tumour is a tumour of grandfathers
(Fig. 8.3). It is rare before puberty, and less com-
mon in females. It may be associated with cad-
mium pollution. More and more new tumours are
now being found by ultrasound scanning of pa-
tients who have been on long-term renal dialy-
sis. It is associated with the von Hippel–Lindau syn-
drome, i.e. angiomas in the cerebellum and retina
and cysts in the liver and pancreas.
Pathology
Many healthy adults have small ‘adenomas’ in
their kidneys, which arise from the renal tubule,
are bright yellow, and resemble cancer in all
histological respects. When they are small they
are innocent. By convention, they are called
Figure 8.3 Grawitz tumour.
83

Chapter 8 Neoplasms of the kidney
Figure 8.4 Typical clear-celled renal cell carcinoma of the kidney.
adenoma if they are less than 3 cm in diameter, and
cancer if more than 3 cm. But metastases can occur
from tumours which are less than 2 cm.
Grade
Typical clear-celled renal cell carcinoma of the kid-
ney (Fig. 8.4) show a number of nuclear varied fea-
tures which lead to a number of grading systems
addressing this issue. Fuhrman’s system has been
most generally adopted. It is now recognised as
an important independent prognostic factor. It is
based on such features as nuclear size and shape
and the presence or absence of prominent nuclei
(Table 8.1).
Stage
The UICC system, based on the ﬁndings on CT
scanning and pathological examination of the
excised specimen is described in Fig. 8.5 and
Table 8.1 Fuhrman grading
system.
Grade 1
Nuclear shape
Round, uniform
Nucleoli
None
Grade 2
Nuclear shape
Slightly irregular
Nucleoli
Visible at high power ×400 magniﬁcation
Grade 3
Nuclear shape
Very irregular outlines
Nucleoli
Prominent visible at ×100 magniﬁcation
Grade 4
Nuclear shape
Bizzare and multilobed spindle-shaped cells
Nucleoli
Prominent
Table 8.2. This allows stage grouping as seen in
Table 8.3.
Clinical features
Today, most kidney cancers are detected inciden-
tally when they are quite small because of an ultra-
sound scan done for some entirely unrelated rea-
son. The classical symptoms of haematuria, pain
and a lump are all features of late, large cancers
(Fig. 8.6). Haematuria means that the cancer has
already invaded the collecting system: pain means
spread into the surrounding tissues a lump has to
be very big indeed if it can be felt.
Neoplastic hormone syndromes
There is an interesting subgroup of patients
present with features which can often be related
to a speciﬁc chemical or hormone produced by
the malignant renal cells Table 8.2.
84

Neoplasms of the kidney Chapter 8
(1)  < 2.5 cm
(2)  > 2.5 cm
(b)
(a)
(3c)
Adrenal
Vein
Gerota’s fascia
(3)
Figure 8.5 Stages of renal cell carcinoma.
Table 8.2 Neoplastic hormone syndromes in renal cell cancer.
Pyrogen
Loss of weight, pyrexia, night sweats, raised ESR
Erythropoietin
Erythrocytosis without increase in platelets
Marrow toxin
Anaemia
Renin
Hypertension
Parathyroid hormone
Hypercalcaemia
Stauffer’s factor
Hepatosplenomegaly
Glucagon
Diarrhoea, enteropathy
Tumour proteins
Glomerulonephritis
Amyloid
Amyloid in contralateral kidney
Unknown factor
Paraneoplastic motoneurone disease
85

Chapter 8 Neoplasms of the kidney
Table 8.3 International TNM system of staging for
renal cell carcinoma (2002).
Pathological factor
Score
pT category of primary tumour
pT1a
0
pT1b
2
pT2
3
pT3-4
4
Regional lymph node status
pNx or pN0
0
pN1 or pN2
2
Tumour size
<10 cm
0
>10 cm
1
Nuclear grade
1 or 2
0
3 (= Fuhrman 3)
1
4 (= Fuhrman 4)
3
Histological tumour necrosis
No
0
Yes
1
Investigations
Ultrasound shows a mass in the kidney which con-
tains echoes. Strict ultrasound criteria for simple
cysts have been identiﬁed. Bosniak classiﬁcation
divides renal cystic lesions into four categories that
Invasion of
renal vein
and inferior vena cava
Haematuria
Lymphatic
spread
Pain and
lump
Figure 8.6 Clinical features of renal cell
carcinoma.
Table 8.4 Stage grouping.
Stage I
T1 N0 M0
Stage II
T2 N0 M0
Stage III
T3 N0 M0
T1, T2, T3 N1 M0
Stage IV
T4 N0, N1 M0
Any T N2 M0
Any T Any N M1
are distinct in terms of the likelihood of malig-
nancy (Table 8.4).
The intravenous urogram (IVU) and CT scan
show a mass distorting the collecting system
(Fig. 8.7) but may not be able to distinguish
between a collection of cysts and cancer. With a
very large tumour, one needs to know whether the
vena cava has been invaded: here spiral magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) is more accurate than
either CT or a cavogram (Fig. 8.8). Many tumours
are detected only when a distant metastasis is
biopsied and the unmistakable histological picture
of a renal cell cancer is found.
Treatment
Small tumours
Many tumours now detected incidentally in the
course of ultrasound and CT scanning can be
86

Neoplasms of the kidney Chapter 8
Table 8.5 Bosniak renal cyst classiﬁcation system.
Solid
Measures
Category
Wall
Septa
Calciﬁcation
component
water density
Enhance
I
Hairline thin
No
No
No
Yes – uniformly
No
II
Hairline thin
Few (<1 mm
thick)
Yes – ﬁne
thickened
No
Yes
No
IIF∗
Smooth
thickening
Multiple
Yes – thick and
nodular
No
Some parts may
No
III
Thickened or
irregular
Yes (>1 mm
thick)
Yes – thick and
irregular
No
Some parts may
Yes
IV
Thickened or
irregular
Yes
Yes
Yes
Some parts may
Yes
∗These lesions are poorly deﬁned but possess features requiring follow-up.
removed leaving a safe clear margin of healthy tis-
sue by partial nephrectomy.
Partial nephrectomy
After exposing the kidney, the renal artery is se-
cured. If it seems likely that the operation will be a
Figure 8.7 IVU showing left renal pelvis grossly distorted
by huge soft tissue mass arising from the lower pole.
long one, the kidney is packed in sterile ice slush.
The cancer is then removed with a clear margin
(checked by frozen section). Every vessel is then
suture ligated to secure complete haemostasis. In
selected cases this operation can be done laparo-
scopically.
Large tumours
Radical nephrectomy
Through a generous incision (either vertical or
transverse – according to the build of the patient
(Fig. 8.9) – the colon and duodenum are reﬂected
from the front of the kidney (Fig. 8.10). The re-
nal artery is ligated. Then the vein is divided be-
tween ligatures, and an intact block of tissue is
then removed containing the kidney, all the sur-
rounding fat inside Gerota’s fascia, and the lymph
nodes along the side of the aorta (on the left) or the
vena cava (on the right). When tumour is found
growing into the renal vein, after taping the cava,
lumbar veins and opposite renal veins, the vena
cava is clamped and the lump of tumour removed
cleanly (Fig. 8.11).
When preoperative investigations have shown
that the tumour has extended along the inferior
vena cava into the heart the abdominal incision
is prolonged through the sternum. The patient is
put on cardiac bypass. The vena cava is secured be-
low and above the liver and the tumour extension
removed. Worthwhile survival has been reported
following this intervention.
87

Chapter 8 Neoplasms of the kidney
Figure 8.8 MRI image showing renal cell carcinoma in right kidney.
The choice between partial and total nephrec-
tomy, either performed in an open fashion or la-
paroscopically, is an ongoing topic for debate. Pa-
tients with a solitary kidney, severe renal insuf-
ﬁciency or bilateral renal masses are candidates
for partial nephrectomy if possible as more radi-
cal surgery would render them dependent on dial-
ysis. Suitability for partial nephrectomy depends
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 8.9 Incisions for radical nephrectomy chosen according to the site and size of the tumour and the build of the
patient.
on the size and position of the tumour and the
experience of the surgeon. The disadvantages of
partial nephrectomy include tumour recurrence in
the remaining part of the kidney and the poten-
tial complications and morbidity of the procedure.
Frozen section pathological examination of the tu-
mour margin seems to be unreliable and its routine
use cannot be supported.
88

Neoplasms of the kidney Chapter 8
Figure 8.10 The renal artery is ligated before mobilising
the mass.
Prognosis
If the cancer is conﬁned to the kidney, nephrec-
tomy alone is followed by over 80% 5-year sur-
vival. The outlook is worse when the lymph nodes
are involved or the fat and vena cava are invaded.
Sometimes, miraculously, distant metastases go
away once the primary tumour has been removed,
suggesting that there might be a powerful natural
immune system against renal cell cancer although
good survival is only seen in otherwise ﬁt patients
whose tumours are relatively well differentiated.
Analysis of prognostic factors using the Leibovich
scoring system has increased our predictive capa-
bility and nomograms are being developed for es-
timating the probability of survival after radical
nephrectomy (see Tables 8.5 and 8.6). Chemother-
apy based on inhibiting the factors involved tu-
mour growth and angiogenesis have proved to
be effective (Sunitinib, Sorafenib and RAD100
Everolimus are examples of a growing list).
Rare tumours that imitate renal cell cancer
B: Benign multilocular cysts imitate all the radio-
logical, CT and ultrasonic features of the cystic
form of a Grawitz cancer.
A: Angiomyolipoma is a tumour which is some-
times associated with tuberose sclerosis. Its
Tape on left
renal vein
Tape around
inferior vena
cava
Ligature
on lumbar
vein
Figure 8.11 Extension of tumour into the inferior vena
cava: the veins are all taped before opening the vena
cava.
Table 8.6 Leibovich score.
Pathological factor
Score
pT category of primary tumour
pT1a
0
pT 1b
2
pT2
3
pT3-4
4
Regional lymph node status
pNx or pN0
0
pN1 or pN2
2
Tumour size
<10 cm
0
>10 cm
1
Nuclear grade
1 or 2
0
3 (= Fuhrman 3)
1
4 (= Furhman 4)
3
Histological tumour necrosis
No
0
Yes
1
89

Chapter 8 Neoplasms of the kidney
Table 8.7 Estimated metastasis free
survival.
Group
Scores
Year 5 (%)
Year 10 (%)
Low risk
0–2
97.1
92.5
Intermediate risk
3–5
73.8
64.3
High risk
6 or more
31.2
23.6
content
of
fat
gives
it
an
unmistakable
appearance in the CT scan. Some of these
tumours bleed spontaneously and cause fatal
retroperitoneal haemorrhage. Others become
malignant, so they should always be removed.
Urothelial cancer of the renal
pelvis and ureter
The renal pelvis and ureter are lined with urothe-
lium which is identical with that of the bladder,
Figure 8.12 Filling defects in the renal pelvis and calices
from multifocal urothelial carcinoma of the right kidney.
and gives rise to identical urothelial or transitional
cell cancer. Urothelial cancer is seen in patients
with recurrent bladder cancers and in the West is
associated with smoking, and all the causes of in-
terstitial nephritis and papillary necrosis.
Pathology
Urothelial cancer in the upper tract, like that in
the bladder, is classiﬁed in three grades: 1, 2 and
3. Metaplasia of the transitional epithelium gives
rise to squamous cell cancers and adenocarcino-
mas, both of which are usually very anaplastic.
The tumours spread directly into the muscle of
the pelvis and the renal parenchyma as well as into
the surrounding fat. They can seed further down
the urinary tract and they metastasise via lymph
nodes rather than veins.
Clinical features
Haematuria is the most important symptoms: pain
is late.
Figure 8.13 Coagulation of a small tumour in the renal
pelvis with the YAG laser through a ﬂexible ureteroscope.
90

Neoplasms of the kidney Chapter 8
Catheter protects
opposite ureter
Line of excision of
intramural ureter
(b)
(a)
Figure 8.14 Nephroureterectomy: (a) the kidney and ureter are mobilised and (b) the lower end of the ureter is removed
with a cuff of trigone.
Investigations
The IVU shows a ﬁlling defect (Fig. 8.12) which
may be difﬁcult to detect when the tumour is
small. Malignant cells may be recognised on cyto-
logical examination of the urine in G2 and G3 tu-
mours. The CT and ultrasound scans do not help.
A retrograde ureterogram gives a clearer picture of
the ﬁlling defect, and a small brush may be used to
acquire cells from the tumour for cytology. Many
of these tumours can now be visualised with a
ureteroscope through which a biopsy can be ob-
tained.
Treatment
The majority of these cancers are G3, multi-
focal, and have already invaded the muscle of
the renal pelvis, so that the correct treatment is
nephroureterectomy. However, when the tumour
is well differentiated and still uninvasive, it is some-
times possible to perform a conservative resection.
Some of the smaller tumours can be effectively
treated with a Holmium:YAG or Neodymium:YAG
laser (Fig. 8.13).
Others are treated percutaneously. A work-
ing sheath is introduced as for percutaneous
nephrolithotomy and the tumour is coagulated
with a laser or diathermy. There is a risk that
tumour cells may be implanted in the track so
postoperative radiation is given. When local re-
section is not appropriate, the kidney may be ap-
proached through the 12th rib tip approach, as
for pyelolithotomy the pelvis is opened, and the
tumour locally excised.
Nephroureterectomy
The kidney and ureter are removed en bloc
(Fig. 8.14) by either open surgery or laparoscop-
ically. If the ureter is left behind there is an almost
inevitable chance of recurrence. In G3 tumours,
adjuvant radiotherapy is often given before the
nephroureterectomy, or combination chemother-
apy given afterwards.
91

Chapter 9
Vascular disorders of the kidney
and hypertension
Arterial infarction
Since the branches of the renal artery do not
anastomose with each other if one of them is
blocked its territory becomes infarcted. This is
sometimes seen with mural thrombi following car-
diac infarction. The patient has loin pain and
haematuria, and a urogram will show atrophy of
a segment of the kidney. If the main renal artery
is blocked the entire parenchyma atrophies, but
the pelvis and collecting systems are not affected
(Fig. 9.1).
Venous thrombosis
The veins of the kidney intercommunicate freely
with each other and with the veins in the sur-
rounding fat so that even when the main renal
vein is completely blocked recovery is usually com-
plete (Fig.9.2). Renal vein thrombosis is sometimes
seen in children who are ill and dehydrated. They
have pain and swelling in the loin, with profuse
haematuria. A urogram may show no contrast on
that side for a while, but in spite of this, recovery
may be complete. In adults renal vein thrombosis
may occur if intravenous contrast medium is given
to a patient with amyloid.
(a)
(b)
Figure 9.1 Embolism in a segmental artery leads to infarc-
tion and atrophy of an entire segment.
Aneurysm of the renal artery
Aneurysms of the renal artery may be saccular or
fusiform, and may involve the main segmental
branches as well as the main artery. The wall is
often calciﬁed (Fig. 9.3). On clinical examination
a bruit may be heard over the kidney. The diagno-
sis depends on good selective angiography.
Treatment
The risk of spontaneous rupture in a saccular
aneurysm increases with size. Those that are less
than 1 cm in diameter can safely be kept under
observation, but those more than 2 cm should
be operated on. Fusiform aneurysms may be
Lecture Notes: Urology, 6th edition. By John Blandy and
Amir Kaisary. Published 2009 by Blackwell Publishing.
ISBN: 978-1-4051-2270-2.
92

Vascular disorders of the kidney and hypertension Chapter 9
Figure 9.2 Blockage of renal vein is sel-
dom followed by infarction due to the rich
collateral venous circulation.
associated with patchy narrowing of branches of
the renal artery causing hypertension, and may
require reconstruction.
Arteriovenous aneurysms
Most of these follow trauma, including that
of taking a renal biopsy. The shunting effect
may give rise to heart failure. A similar kind of
arteriovenous ﬁstula is seen in some types of
very vascular renal cell cancer. Nephrectomy is
usually necessary but increasingly utilisation of
Figure 9.3 Arteriogram showing aneurysm of right renal artery.
selective embolisation techniques can be success-
ful in occluding the ﬁstula and stops bleeding
(Fig. 9.4).
Renal hypertension
The juxtaglomerular apparatus continually mon-
itors the pressure in the glomerular arteriole (Fig.
9.5). When the pressure is lowered, it secretes
renin, an enzyme which splits angiotensinogen –
one of the alpha 2-globulins in serum – to release
93

Chapter 9 Vascular disorders of the kidney and hypertension
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 9.4 An arteriovenous post-traumatic ﬁstula treated with embolisation.
94

Vascular disorders of the kidney and hypertension Chapter 9
Blocked by saralasin
Angiotensin II
Releases
aldosterone
Retains Na
loses K
Angiotensinogen
Angiotensin I
Blocked by captopril and
teprotide
Renin
Increases peripheral
resistance
Figure 9.5 Mechanism of renal hypertension.
angiotensin I. This is at ﬁrst inactive, but on passing
through the lungs it is converted into angiotensin
II,
which
has
two
powerful
pharmacological
effects that raise the blood pressure:
1 it constricts peripheral arteries; and
2 it stimulates the outer layer of the adrenal cor-
tex to secrete aldosterone which makes the distal
renal tubules conserve sodium and water and so
increases the blood volume.
This renin–angiotensin mechanism can be trig-
gered by a whole range of disorders of the kidney,
including scarring from whatever cause, tubercu-
losis, cancer, polycystic disease, trauma and hy-
dronephrosis. Its most striking form is seen when
the main renal artery is stenosed.
Investigation
A renal cause should always be sought in a young
patient with hypertension because it can usually
be corrected. An intravenous urogram (IVU) will
reveal hydronephrosis or scarring. Dimercaptosuc-
cinic acid (DMSA) isotope studies show an im-
paired blood ﬂow, and angiography with digital
vascular imaging will localise the stenosis in the
renal artery.
Although one can measure plasma renin, it is
easier to detect its action indirectly. Captopril and
teprotide block the release of angiotensin II in the
lungs. Saralasin blocks the pharmacological effects
of angiotensin II.
95

Chapter 9 Vascular disorders of the kidney and hypertension
(a) Guide-wire passed through stenosis
(b) Followed by angioplasty balloon
(c) Balloon inflated
(d) Stenosis dilated
Figure 9.6 Angioplasty.
Figure 9.7 Angiogram showing irregular beading of the left renal artery from ﬁbromuscular dysplasia.
Patch on stenosed renal artery
By-pass graft from aorta to distal healthy
renal artery
Figure 9.8 Patching or bypassing a renal artery stenosis.
96

Vascular disorders of the kidney and hypertension Chapter 9
(a)
(b)
Figure 9.9 Renal artery stenosis nephrectomy specimen: (a) post-stenotic aneurysm with a thrombus formation and
(b) multiple petechiae noted submucosally in the renal pelvis. Note the overall small size of the kidney.
If these substances lower the blood pressure, one
can assume that renin is responsible.
Renal artery stenosis
There are two main causes of renal artery stenosis:
r Atheroma may form a plaque at the origin of the
main renal artery which can be treated by dilata-
tion with a balloon catheter – angioplasty (Fig. 9.6).
r In dysplasia the artery is irregularly narrowed
like a string of beads (Fig. 9.7). This can be
bypassed with a graft, or enlarged by adding on a
patch (Fig. 9.8).
When there is a small scarred kidney, it is usually
futile to try to deal with the narrowed artery, and
better to perform nephrectomy. Arterial stenosis
can occasionally lead to a post-stenotic aneurismal
formation. A thrombus forming in a post-stenotic
arterial aneurysm can be a source of emboli (see
Fig. 9.9). When both kidneys are affected, one may
obtain a useful improvement in renal function and
avoid the need for dialysis by operating on the
arteries.
Patients with signiﬁcant renal artery disease
could beneﬁt from several revascularisation tech-
niques. Aortorenal bypass with a free graft of auto-
genous blood vessels have been attempted (utilis-
ing the hypogastric artery or the saphenous vein).
Percutaneous endoluminal balloon dilatation of
arterial
stenosis
(angioplasty)
gained
interest
which culminated in proceeding to stenting. The
quality of the abdominal aorta and visceral arteries
walls and atherosclerotic changes play a major role
in patient case selection and possible outcome.
97

Chapter 10
The adrenal gland
Surgical anatomy
Each adrenal gland lies just medial to the up-
per pole of the kidney. The arteries supplying the
adrenals arise from the aorta, phrenic and renal
arteries and are all quite small. The right adrenal
vein drains into the vena cava: it is short and eas-
ily torn. The left adrenal vein enters the left renal
vein (Fig. 10.1).
The adrenal gland is like a three-layer sandwich –
the cortex – folded over a jam ﬁlling – the medulla.
The outer layer of the cortex – the zona glomeru-
losa, secretes aldosterone. The middle layer, the
zona fasciculata, secretes cortisol. The inner layer,
zona reticularis, secretes androgens (Fig. 10.2). The
medulla is made of sympathetic nerve endings and
pheochromocytes which secrete adrenaline and no-
radrenaline.
Adrenal tumours
Tumours can arise from any part of the adrenal,
and may or may not secrete the appropriate
hormone.
Non-functioning tumours
These are usually detected by accident in the
course of an ultrasound or computed tomography
(CT) scan. From time to time they present with
metastases. Size is the usual, but rather oversimple
guide to malignancy, i.e. tumours less than 3 cm
diameter are mostly benign, those more than 6 cm
diameter are usually malignant. Each case has to be
considered on its merits and sometimes a biopsy is
required.
Zona glomerulosa tumours
(Conn’s syndrome)
These may be single or multiple and may occur on
both sides. They are usually benign. The secretion
of aldosterone leads to retention of sodium caus-
ing hypertension, and loss of potassium causing
weakness. The diagnosis is made by the combina-
tion of hypertension, low plasma [K], high level of
aldosterone, and low level of renin. It is conﬁrmed
by giving spironolactone which reverses the pic-
ture. The patient can often be controlled with
spironolactone but its side effects, e.g. enlarge-
ment of the breasts, indigestion and impotence,
may be unbearable and the patient may prefer an
operation. The adrenals are exposed through two
12th rib tip incisions. If a single adenoma is found
the entire adrenal is removed: if both adrenals
are involved with multiple adenomas, both are
Lecture Notes: Urology, 6th edition. By John Blandy and
Amir Kaisary. Published 2009 by Blackwell Publishing.
ISBN: 978-1-4051-2270-2.
98

The adrenal gland Chapter 10
Right adrenal vein
Left adrenal
Left adrenal vein
Left renal vein
Left gonadal vein
Aorta
Right renal vein
Inferior
vena
cava
Figure 10.1 Anatomical relations of the adrenal gland.
removed and adrenal replacement given after-
wards. Laparoscopy approach can be offered by
experts in the technique.
Zona fasciculata tumours
(Cushing’s syndrome)
The excess of cortisol gives the patient a buffalo
hump at the back of the neck, hirsutes, a red face,
subcutaneous haemorrhages, cutaneous striae, hy-
pertension, diabetes and osteoporosis which may
lead to pathological fractures (Fig. 10.3).
There may be a single cortisol-secreting tumour,
or there may be bilateral hyperplasia. In turn hy-
perplasia is sometimes caused by a basophil ade-
noma of the pituitary which is secreting adreno-
corticotrophic hormone (ACTH). Very rarely the
Zona glomerulosa
(aldosterone)
Zona reticularis
(androgens)
Adrenaline and noradrenaline
Medulla
Zona fasciculata
(cortisol)
Figure 10.2 The folded sandwich arrangement of the
adrenal.
ACTH may be secreted by another tumour, e.g.
carcinoma of the bronchus.
The diagnosis of Cushing’s syndrome is made by
measuring the urinary metabolites of cortisol, the
17-hydroxycorticosteroids. If due to ACTH stimu-
lation, an intravenous dose of ACTH will increase
these: if there is a primary adrenal tumour, a dose
of dexamethasone will lower them.
If a CT/MRI scan reveals a primary adrenal tu-
mour it is removed. If there is hyperplasia of both
adrenals, a pituitary tumour must be excluded, and
if none is found, then both adrenals are removed
and adrenal replacement given afterwards.
Zona reticulosa tumours (virilisation)
Isolated androgen-secreting tumours causing viril-
isation are rare but an excess of androgens is often
secreted by malignant adrenal tumours that are
also producing cortisol. In children this causes in-
creased growth, hirsutes, enlarged genitalia, a deep
voice and, in girls, precocious menstruation. In
adults there may be acne, hirsutes and disturbance
of menstruation.
Tumours of the adrenal medulla
(pheochromocytoma)
Pheochromocytoma may occur in association with
inherited disorders such as the multiple endocrine
99

Chapter 10 The adrenal gland
Fatiguability
Moon face
Hirsutes and acne
Cutaneous striae
Obesity
Weak limbs
Thin skin
‘Buffalo’ hump
Figure 10.3 Cushing’s syndrome.
COOH
HCOH
OH
OH
OH
Adrenaline
HNCH2
CH2
HCOH
3-methoxy
4-hydroxy
mandelic
acid (VMA)
Noradrenaline
NH2
CH2
HCOH
CH3O
HO
HO
Figure 10.4 Adrenaline, noradrenaline and VMA.
neoplasia type II and von Hippel–Lindau disease.
They arise either in the adrenal medulla or on
the aorta at the origin of the inferior mesenteric
artery, and very rarely, in the bladder. The excess
of adrenaline and noradrenaline causes paroxysms
of hypertension with headache, sweating, ﬂush-
ing, tremor and pain in the chest.
Diagnosis is based on a 24-hour collection of
urine acidiﬁed with hydrochloric acid, and mea-
sured for adrenaline, noradrenaline, and their
metabolic end
product,
vanillylmandelic acid
(VMA) (Fig. 10.4). During this test the patient
avoids anything containing vanilla, e.g. bananas,
chocolate and coffee. Although these tumours are
so vascular that they show up vividly in an an-
giogram, but are more easily located with a CT
scan or MRI.
The tumour must be removed. About 10% are
malignant. To protect the patient from a sudden
surge of catecholamines, phenoxybenzamine is
given to block the alpha-receptors and propanolol
to block the beta-receptors. Even though these
have been blocked, the tumour is handled as little
as possible until the veins have all been ligated, at
which moment the anaesthetist must be ready to
deal with a fall in blood pressure. How the tumour
is approached depends on its position: tumours
near the adrenal are reached through a 12th rib tip
incision; those near the inferior mesenteric artery
through a midline laparotomy.
Neuroblastoma
These are malignant tumours arising from nerve
cell elements. They occur in toddlers, frequently
with widespread metastases. The most common
site of origin of the primary is in the region of the
adrenal, but they can arise anywhere. They grow to
an enormous size, and displace the kidney down-
wards. They must be distinguished from Wilms’ tu-
mours. Occasionally, they secrete catecholamines
and elevated levels of VMA are found in the urine.
They are treated in specialised children’s hospitals
by a combination of surgery and chemotherapy.
100

Chapter 11
Renal failure
Acute or chronic renal failure? It is sometimes
not easy to differentiate between these two con-
ditions. The history, duration of symptoms and
measurements of renal function may help make
the distinction. A rapid change of serum urea and
creatinine suggests an acute process; whereas pres-
ence of a normochromic and normocytic anaemia
suggests chronic disease. A renal ultrasound scan
may help: small, shrunken kidneys seen on ultra-
sound scan usually indicate chronic renal failure.
Acute renal failure
In acute renal failure, there is an abrupt deteriora-
tion of renal function which is usually reversible
over a period of days or weeks. The causes of acute
renal failure are categorised into three groups: (1)
pre-renal; (2) interstitial or renal parenchymal; and
(3) post-renal or obstructive. The causes may occur
in combination (Fig. 11.1).
1 Pre-renal failure is usually caused by inade-
quate renal perfusion because of hypovolaemia,
hypotension, impaired cardiac function or renal
vascular disease. The end result is renal ischaemia
and subsequently oliguria.
2 Interstitial or renal parenchymal disease can be
caused by conditions such as acute tubular necro-
sis, vasculitis, acute tubulointerstitial nephritis,
haemolytic uraemic syndrome, pre-eclampsia and
thrombotic thrombocytopaenic purpura.
3 Post-renal or obstructive causes of acute renal
failure result from obstruction of the urinary tract
at any point from the renal calices to the urethra,
e.g. stones in the kidney or ureter, transitional cell
carcinomas, bladder outlet obstruction from en-
larged prostate or urethral stricture and iatrogenic
causes such as blocked urinary catheters and acci-
dental ligation of ureters during surgery.
Pathology
In acute renal failure the kidney is swollen. The
blood is usually shunted from cortex to medulla so
that the medulla is congested and the cortex pale.
Debris clogs up the tubules and resembles necrosis
– hence the old term acute tubular necrosis –
which is misleading because the condition is
often reversible, especially when mainly caused by
underperfusion. If the cause cannot be reversed,
then the cortex does indeed die, and a line of
calciﬁcation may appear at the edge of the dead
tissue (Fig. 11.2).
Clinical features and management
The cause of the acute renal failure will have its
own particular symptoms, e.g. septicaemia or mul-
tiple trauma. Against this background three phases
Lecture Notes: Urology, 6th edition. By John Blandy and
Amir Kaisary. Published 2009 by Blackwell Publishing.
ISBN: 978-1-4051-2270-2.
101

Chapter 11 Renal failure
Block
Renal
tubules
poisoned
Underperfusion
Figure 11.1 The causes of acute renal failure.
can be distinguished: prodromal, oliguria–anuria
and recovery.
r Prodromal phase: At ﬁrst, while there is still some
glomerular ﬁltration, urine continues to form but
is loaded with debris and granular casts.
r Anuria or oliguria: Next comes a stage when
there may be either no urine at all, or too little
to cope with the products of protein catabolism,
e.g. urea, creatinine, potassium and phosphates.
The blood urea, creatinine and potassium continue
to rise, at a rate which is accelerated when there
Necrotic
cortex
Lines of
calcification
Cortex
ischaemic
Blood
shunted to
medulla
Figure 11.2 Necrosis of cortex with tramline calciﬁcation.
is massive breakdown of tissue from trauma or
sepsis.
r Recovery: At ﬁrst the glomerular ﬁltrate that starts
to emerge is almost unprocessed by the sick tubules
and is pale and isotonic. Soon the trickle is fol-
lowed by such a huge volume of dilute urine that
the patient may need many litres of ﬂuid to pre-
vent dehydration and keep up with the massive
losses of water and sodium.
In pre-renal acute renal failure, patients usually
complain of thirst or dizziness, with or without
102

Renal failure Chapter 11
orthostatic hypotension. Weight loss occurs over
days which reﬂects the degree of dehydration.
Physical examination reveals signs of dehydration
and also postural changes in blood pressure and
pulse. The output of urine and central venous
pressure are low, consistent with hypovolaemia.
An increase in urine output in response to ﬂuid
challenge is usually diagnostic. The management
of pre-renal acute renal failure involves calcu-
lated ﬂuid replacement during which a central
venous pressure line may be useful to ensure
that the patient is not being overloaded with
ﬂuid.
When interstitial or renal parenchymal disease
is causing the acute renal failure, there may be a
history of sore throat (Streptococcal glomerulonephri-
tis), upper respiratory tract infection, diarrhoea,
recent use of antibiotics or recreational drugs.
Patients may complain of bilateral loin pain, there
may be frank haematuria, associated systemic
sepsis and dehydration. Urine microscopy may
reveal numerous red blood cells and leucocytes,
together with cellular and granular casts. Throm-
bocytopaenia may be present on examination of
the blood ﬁlm and a renal biopsy will show the
characteristics
changes
of
glomerulonephritis.
The management involves treating the cause of
the renal failure, e.g. antibiotics for infection, re-
moval of toxic drugs and suppression of immune
mechanisms. Dialysis may be required.
In post-renal or obstructive causes of acute renal
failure, the patient may complain of unilateral
tenderness in the loin or renal angle. An example
would be a stone causing unilateral ureteric ob-
struction and pain. There may not be a decrease in
urine volume as there is usually a normal kidney
on the other side. Indeed, large volumes of urine
may be obtained from urethral catheterisation,
particularly if the cause of the obstruction is
in the lower urinary tract (e.g. benign prostatic
hyperplasia or urethral stricture). A plain X-ray
of the kidneys, ureters and bladder (KUB X-ray)
may show a stone in the renal pelvis or ureter.
An ultrasound scan may reveal a dilated renal
pelvis and an intravenous urogram may show
delayed excretion of contrast on the affected
side. The treatment is to remove the cause of the
obstruction, e.g. stenting for a ureteric calculus,
transurethral
resection
of
prostate
or
optical
urethrotomy for urethral strictures.
Chronic renal failure
Chronic renal failure is the presence of longstand-
ing and usually progressive impairment in renal
function. The many causes of chronic renal failure
are classiﬁed according to the general aetiology of
the disease:
1 congenital causes such as adult or infantile poly-
cystic kidney disease;
2 glomerular disease such as systemic lupus ery-
thematosus, Wegener’s granulomatosis and amy-
loidosis;
3 vascular diseases such as atherosclerosis and vas-
culitis;
4 tubulointerstitial
diseases
caused
by
drug
overdose,
tuberculosis
and
nephrocalcinosis;
and
5 urinary tract obstruction caused by, for example,
benign prostatic hyperplasia.
Clinical features and management
There are many clinical features of chronic renal
failure listed below:
r Generalised malaise, nausea, loss of libido and
forgetfulness.
r Hypertension and signs of volume or ﬂuid over-
load.
r Retarded and stunted growth in children.
r Skin: itching, pigmentation and jaundice.
r Anaemia:
want
of
erythropoietin
leads
to
anaemia. Synthetic erythropoietin can correct this
distressing feature.
r Neuropathy from loss of myelin in peripheral
nerves causes weakness, numbness and paraesthe-
siae, notably in the feet.
r Pericarditis may result in a pericardial effusion;
it is a warning that the patient is being under-
dialysed.
r Osteomalacia as the bowel becomes less sensi-
tive to vitamin D, and so less calcium is absorbed.
Growing bone is imperfectly calciﬁed, forming
103

Chapter 11 Renal failure
Figure 11.3 Rugger-jersey spine.
osteoid rather than true bone – osteomalacia –
which is weak and prone to fracture. At the
same time phosphate accumulates and lowers the
plasma [Ca], which stimulates the parathyroid
to secrete more parathyroid hormone (see Fig.
7.7). In turn more calcium is leached from the
bones and deposited in soft tissues as heterotopic
calciﬁcation which can cause stiffness of joints,
especially in the middle ear, leading to deafness,
as well as the rugger-jersey spine where stripes of
decalciﬁed bone alternate with bands of soft tissue
calciﬁcation (Fig. 11.3).
The management of chronic renal failure is at
ﬁrst conservative with restriction of dietary pro-
tein, potassium and phosphorus whilst taking
care to maintain sodium balance. The patient is
weighed every day. If conservative measures fail to
control the progress of chronic renal failure, then
dialysis may have to be needed.
Dacron collar
Silicone rubber
Figure 11.4 Peritoneal dialysis with Tenckhoff cannula.
Dialysis
Peritoneal dialysis
A silicone catheter is placed permanently in the
pelvis (Fig. 11.4) and dialysis ﬂuid is run in, left for
several hours, and run out again after creatinine
and products of catabolism have diffused into the
ﬂuid. Patients perform the instillation themselves.
There are three main forms of peritoneal dialysis:
1 Continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis is
the most common. Up to 3 L of dialysate are al-
lowed to run into the peritoneal cavity, run out,
and replaced three to ﬁve times a day.
2 Nightly intermittent peritoneal dialysis using an
automated device which performs the ﬂuid ex-
changes whilst the patient is asleep.
3 Tidal dialysis allows the residual volume within
the peritoneal cavity to be continuously cycled
and exchanged with a smaller volume of dialysate.
Complications from peritoneal dialysis are due
to infection. Peritonitis may be caused by an in-
fected catheter or dialysate ﬂuid. Minimal han-
dling of the catheter and strict aseptic techniques
are taught to all patients for self-administering
peritoneal dialysis.
Haemodialysis
Blood from the patient is allowed to ﬂow over
a semi-permeable membrane separating it from
104

Renal failure Chapter 11
(a)
(b)
Figure 11.5 (a) Artiﬁcial kidney and (b) disposable cartridge.
dialysis ﬂuid. There are a variety of devices,
some of which are disposable and others used
several times (Fig. 11.5). Unwanted products of
catabolism diffuse out of the blood, while protein
and red cells are retained. Access to the blood-
stream is provided by an arteriovenous ﬁstula,
vascular grafts, subclavian perm-catheters or a
Scribner shunt (Fig. 11.6) tied into a paired artery
and vein. All these methods provide rapid and
repetitive access into the vascular system. For pro-
longed dialysis, a peripheral artery is anastomosed
to a vein to form an arteriovenous ﬁstula. Within
a few weeks large varicose veins have formed into
which the patient inserts needles enabling blood
to run out through the machine and back again
(Fig. 11.7). Repeated needling eventually leads to
thrombosis or infection of these ﬁstulae and every
year more ingenious techniques are devised to
provide suitable vascular access for intermittent
haemodialysis.
105

Chapter 11 Renal failure
Teflon
Silastic
Figure 11.6 Scribner shunt.
Renal transplantation
The operation is in principle quite simple. A kidney
from a living related donor or a cadaver is placed in
one or other iliac fossa. The renal artery is anasto-
mosed to the internal or external iliac artery, and
the renal vein to the external iliac vein. The ureter
is led through a tunnel into the bladder to prevent
reﬂux (Fig. 11.8).
Obtaining cadaver kidneys
It is always a waste when kidneys that could save
two lives are allowed to decay in a dead patient.
Radial artery
Cephalic vein
Figure 11.7 Cimino ﬁstula.
Mucosa
Muscle
Figure 11.8 Renal transplant in right iliac fossa: the ureter
is placed in a submucosal tunnel to prevent reﬂux.
Relatives seldom refuse to give permission for kid-
neys to be used, and then usually for religious rea-
sons. The shortage of donors does not stem from
the refusal of relatives, but from failure on the part
of doctors and nurses to ask for permission, and
a shortage of staff and facilities in intensive care
units to keep patients on a ventilator after they are
clearly brain-dead.
The donor
Suitable donors must not have infection or can-
cer (except for some brain tumours). They should
have extensive and irrecoverable brain damage,
e.g. from severe head injury, intracranial haem-
orrhage, cardiac arrest or respiratory arrest. Such
patients must be maintained on a ventilator. Strict
tests are carried out to make sure that the brain
damage is irreversible. Since not only kidneys but
also other organs such as the heart, lungs and liver
might be usable, the opportunity should never be
lost to consider the possibility of using more than
one organ.
The major histocompatibility system
There is a strong positive correlation between his-
tocompatibility matching for the human lympho-
cyte antigens (HLAs) (A, B and DR) and the success
rate of transplant kidney survival. The transplant
antigens, i.e. HLAs, are inherited on the sixth chro-
mosome and expressed on the surface of every cell.
Some are detected with serum antibodies (serum
106

Renal failure Chapter 11
detected). Others can only be detected in mixed
lymphocyte culture where the host lymphocytes
react to foreign lymphocytes by swelling up and
undergoing division (lymphocyte-activating de-
terminants).
Rejection can only be prevented by getting an
exact match between the HLA of host and donor
but can be overcome by drugs which paralyse vari-
ous components of the immune system. Immuno-
suppressive agents that are in common use at
present include cyclosporin A, prednisolone, aza-
thioprine, tacrolimus (FK506), rapamycin and my-
cophenolate mofetil:
r Cyclosporin A works by preventing the formation
of cytotoxic T-cells by the host.
r Prednisolone seems to complement azathioprine
and may affect the function of lymphocytes.
r Azathioprine works in a similar way, but is more
toxic.
r Tacrolimus
(FK506)
works
by
suppressing
interleukin-2 (IL-2) production from CD4 lympho-
cytes, and thus suppresses transplant rejection.
r Rapamycin similarly blocks the effect of IL-2.
r Mycophenolate mofetil is an anti-metabolite that
inhibits purine synthesis and suppresses lympho-
cyte activity.
The prevention, recognition and treatment of
rejection call for great skill and judgement.
HLA matching
Because of the way homologous pairs of chromo-
somes are split at meiosis and transmitted by hap-
loid gametes from parents to children, each child
receives half its genetic programming from one
parent and half from the other (Fig. 11.9).
Living related donors
Transplants between siblings and between parents
and children always share one complete set of
transplant antigens, and generally do well. In a
family with more than ﬁve children, one pair of
siblings will always be identical with respect to
their transplant antigens and if they exchange
kidneys one might expect virtually no rejection.
In fact there are other, weaker antigens, and
Father
Mother
1
Children
2
5
7
1
3
5
8
5th child
2
4
7
9
1
4
5
9
2
3
7
8
3
4
8
9
1
3
5
8
Figure 11.9 Inheritance of the HLA genes.
immunosuppressive drugs are needed except with
identical twins. A good HLA match can double the
survival of transplants and for this reason kidneys
are moved from one centre to another to ensure
the optimum match.
Living unrelated donors
The chance of ﬁnding a good HLA match in a liv-
ing unrelated donor is always much smaller than
in a relation, so much so that this is seldom done in
the West, and is regarded as unethical and indeed
unlawful if done as a commercial transaction.
Rejection episodes
Hyperacute rejection
Hyperacute rejection is similar to a blood trans-
fusion reaction. A recipient may unwittingly have
107

Chapter 11 Renal failure
been sensitised to antigens on the donor kidney
so that as soon as blood enters the kidney there is
an accelerated second set reaction: within minutes
the kidney becomes thrombosed. It is a humoral
response mediated by recipient antibodies against
the HLAs expressed on the donor renal vascular
endothelium. For this reason, these pre-existing
cytotoxic antibodies can be detected by a cross-
match, which is always performed prior to any
transplant.
Accelerated rejection
This is a second set reaction and begins within two
or three days of the transplant: it can respond to
prompt diagnosis and intensive immunosuppres-
sive treatment.
Acute rejection
Acute rejection episodes are quite common, with
approximately 40% of patients having at least one
episode of acute rejection after renal transplanta-
tion. Episodes of rejection may occur at any time
after the transplant, but are most common in the
ﬁrst few weeks. The kidney becomes tender and
swollen. The patient is pyrexial and has pain over
the transplant. The urine output diminishes, the
diethylene triamine pentacetic acid clearance falls
off (see p. 32) and Doppler studies show a dimin-
ished circulation. Fine-needle aspiration cytology
from the graft shows blast cells and macrophages
to be present, although T-lymphocytes are the
predominant
cells
involved
in
this
process.
T-lymphocytes are stimulated and activated by
foreign HLA antigens found in the transplanted
kidney. Subsequently, IL-2 production by the
recipient stimulates a cytotoxic T-cell response
that promotes destruction of the graft.
Larger doses of immunosuppressive agents, es-
pecially cyclosporin A, usually reverse the reaction.
Acute rejection may come on many months af-
ter a transplant and may be precipitated by failure
to take immunosuppressive medication or a blood
transfusion.
Chronic rejection
Chronic rejection is the process of gradual, pro-
gressive decrease in renal function. The gradual de-
terioration does not respond to immunosuppres-
sive therapy and its underlying mechanisms are
poorly understood. Eventually the transplanted
kidney fails and must be removed. The patient re-
turns to dialysis and may be put on the waiting list
for another renal transplant.
Preservation of kidneys for
transplantation
An ice-cold solution – the Wisconsin University
solution – which imitates the content of intracel-
lular ﬂuid, is used to wash out the donor kidney,
which is placed in a pair of sterile plastic bags in
a container surrounded by ice. Such a kidney will
recover normal function even after 36 hours of
cold ischaemia time. What damages the kidney is
the warm ischaemia time, i.e. the delay between
cessation of perfusion of the kidney and its being
cooled with preservative solution.
Long-term results of transplantation
There is a continuing and steady improvement in
the results of renal transplantation. The current
survival of renal transplants in the best transplant
centres at the end of three years is more than 80%
for living related and unrelated donors and ap-
proximately 76% for cadaveric renal transplants.
108

Chapter 12
The renal pelvis and ureter
Anatomy
The ureters descend in front of the psoas muscle
and the iliohypogastric and ileoinguinal nerves.
Halfway down, they are crossed in front by the
vessels of the testis or ovary, and near the lower
end by branches of the internal iliac artery and
veins going to and from the uterus and bladder.
In women, the ureter is vulnerable during the
operation of hysterectomy where it passes under
the uterine artery and veins (Fig. 12.1). If there is
bleeding, the ureter is easily injured in the course
of efforts to secure haemostasis.
Blood supply
The main blood supply of the ureter comes down
from the inferior segmental artery of the kidney
(Fig. 12.2), which runs down the ureter, and is
reinforced by unimportant small branches from
the lumbar arteries. Towards the lower end, it is
joined by an ascending branch of the superior vesi-
cal artery. If the ureter is divided near the bladder,
this ascending branch is cut and the lower end of
the ureter may be ischaemic.
Renal artery and vein
Lower pole artery
Ovarian or testicular
vessels
Common iliac artery
Obliterated hypogastric
artery
Vesical and uterine
arteries
Vas deferens
Internal
iliac artery
External
iliac artery
Figure 12.1 Anatomical relations of the right ureter.
Nerve supply
Sensory nerves from the ureter follow a segmental
pattern: the upper part, like the kidney, is sup-
plied by T10, and pain is referred to the umbilicus.
Lower down pain is referred to more caudal seg-
ments (L2,3,4) until pain from the lowest part of
Lecture Notes: Urology, 6th edition. By John Blandy and
Amir Kaisary. Published 2009 by Blackwell Publishing.
ISBN: 978-1-4051-2270-2.
109

Chapter 12 The renal pelvis and ureter
Lumbar branches
Ascending
branches
from superior
vesical artery
Figure 12.2 Blood supply of the ureter.
the ureter may be referred to the vulva or tip of the
penis (S2,3) (Fig. 12.3).
Peristalsis
The ureter is lined by urothelium on a thin layer of
submucosa (Fig. 12.4) outside of which the smooth
muscle cells are connected with each other so that
excitation passes along the muscle without the
need for nerves or ganglia (Fig. 12.5). Peristalsis
in the ureter can be provoked by pinching or irri-
tation. As a result, the denervated ureter of a trans-
plant functions perfectly well.
Ureteric peristaltic waves speed up as more urine
is formed until the point is reached when the walls
of the ureter no longer come together and it now
functions as a drainpipe. To allow free movement
of the ureter during peristalsis, it is surrounded by
a thin slippery sheath of connective tissue.
Congenital abnormalities
The embryology of the ureter and some of the
more important congenital abnormalities are de-
T10
L2,3,4
S2,3
Figure 12.3 Pain from a stone in the ureter is referred to
relevant dermatome.
scribed in Chapter 4. It may be helpful to be re-
minded of a few of them:
r In duplex, the ureteric bud branches early. The
ureter from the smaller upper half of the kidney
drains into the trigone caudal to that from the
lower, larger half of the kidney.
r In ectopic ureter, the ureter from the upper half
of the kidney opens into the vagina downstream
of the urethral sphincter and causes continual in-
continence (Fig. 12.6).
r In ureterocele, there is a balloon-like swelling
where the ureter opens into the bladder, which
may obstruct the ureter, allow a stone to form in
Loose
submucosa
Urothelium
Helical smooth
muscle fibres
Connective tissue
Sheath
Figure 12.4 Transverse section of the ureter.
110

The renal pelvis and ureter Chapter 12
Pacemaker
Ureteric peristalsis
forming so-called
‘spindles’ in the
ureterogram X-ray
Waldeyer’s sheath
Trigone
Verumontanum
Figure 12.5 Peristalsis in the ureter.
Ureter from upper
half of the kidney
draining into
ectopic orifice
External sphincter
Ectopic ureter
Figure 12.6 If an ectopic duplex ureter opens downstream
of the sphincter there is incontinence.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 12.7 Ureteroceles may (a) cause no trouble at all;
(b) cause obstruction and possibly a stone; (c) prolapse into
the urethra to cause acute retention of urine.
its stagnant pool, or prolapse and obstruct the ure-
thra. Most ureteroceles cause no trouble and need
no treatment: the very large ones can be incised,
but then there may be reﬂux requiring reimplan-
tation (Fig. 12.7).
r Reﬂux has been considered in relation to uri-
nary infection (Fig. 12.8). One of the less common
conditions seen with duplex kidney is yo-yo reﬂux
where urine runs from the lower half of the kidney
to the upper one.
r One of the ureteric buds may fail to rendezvous
with its part of the metanephros and no kidney
is induced. The resulting ureteric diverticulum may
harbour infection but usually needs no treatment
at all.
r Ureteric atresia has been noted in connection
with dysplasia and congenital cysts of the kidney.
111

Chapter 12 The renal pelvis and ureter
Figure 12.8 Vesicoureteric reﬂux.
Inﬂammation of the ureter
Acute
Acute ureteritis may explain much of the pain in
the groin which patients so often describe during
acute urinary infection. It is rarely investigated or
documented, and always recovers completely with
time and antibiotics.
Chronic
Non-speciﬁc
Ureteritis cystica
Following a prolonged urinary infection, the intra-
venous urogram (IVU) or ureterogram may show
multiple rounded ﬁlling defects in the ureter and
renal pelvis. These are caused by a particular
kind of chronic inﬂammation of the urothelium –
ureteritis cystica – where little nests of urothelium
get buried and swell up to form tiny cysts. It re-
solves completely when the underlying infection
has been cured.
Speciﬁc
Tuberculosis
The ureter is often involved in tuberculosis.
Bilharziasis
The wall of the ureter is always involved in bil-
harziasis. Pairs of Schistosoma ﬂukes nest in the
submucosal veins and lay eggs which provoke
chronic inﬂammation, turning the ureter into a
stiff, inert tube which is dilated, obstructed and
often calciﬁed.
Diagnosis of obstruction in
the ureter
To distinguish between a ureter that is obstructed
from one that is widened from some other rea-
son, renography is usually sufﬁcient. Retrograde
and antegrade radiological studies are usually
provide
the
answer.
Renal
isotope
studies,
99mTc benzoylmercaptoacetyltriglycerine (MAG3),
99mTc diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid (DTPA)
and 99mTc 2,3-dimercaptosuccinic acid (DMSA)
are utilised to evaluate the renal function and
impact
of
obstruction.
In
exceptional
cases,
Whitaker’s test can be performed. A ﬁne per-
cutaneous nephrostomy tube is introduced into
the renal pelvis and contrast medium is run in
at a rate known to be greater than the maxi-
mum likely to be encountered during diuresis, e.g.
10 mL/min. If the pressure rises, it means there
must be obstruction downstream in the ureter
(Fig. 12.9).
Megaureter
This is a common and important entity in
children. It causes confusion because it is often
112

The renal pelvis and ureter Chapter 12
Pressure
Saline at
constant rate
Catheter in
bladder
Figure 12.9 Whitaker’s test.
assumed
that
whenever
a
dilated
ureter
is
discovered, there must necessarily be obstruction.
r Reﬂux: Most megaureters are caused by reﬂux.
r Congenital stenosis at the lower end of the ureter:
A narrowing, from an unknown cause, occurs at
the lower end of the ureter, giving rise to obstruc-
tion upstream (Fig. 12.10). Diagnosis may need a
Whitaker’s test.
r Idiopathic: In a number of boys the ureters are
found to be huge, but there is no reﬂux, and no
narrowing at the lower end. The cause is a mys-
tery. One plausible suggestion is that at some time
in foetal life there was a posterior urethral valve,
which gave rise to gross obstruction and dilatation
of the ureters, and then the valve ruptured sponta-
neously, leaving the child with large ureters with-
out any apparent reason for them.
r Diabetes insipidus: Children may be unable to
concentrate their urine, and a constant diuresis
may be associated with dilated ureter.
Figure 12.10 Obstructed ureter caused by stenosis at the
lower end.
Ureteric obstruction
Pelviureteric junction obstruction
This is a common condition. There is a ring of ﬁ-
brous tissue where the renal pelvis joins the ureter
of unknown cause. The renal pelvis and calices are
obstructed and undergo dilatation – hydronephro-
sis (Fig. 12.11).
In the foetus, hydronephrosis is often detected
by ultrasound scanning. Many of these show spon-
taneous cure during follow-up and surgical correc-
tion is only required if there is a deterioration in
renal function, as judged by serial renography us-
ing DMSA.
In later life, hydronephrosis may be noted at any
time. At ﬁrst, its symptoms are often intermittent,
so that pain occurs only when patients drink a lot,
and because the pain follows a meal it is easy to
misdiagnose a peptic ulcer.
The dilated renal pelvis bulges forwards between
the two lower branches of the renal artery giving
rise to the idea that an ‘anomalous’ renal artery is
the cause of the obstruction (Fig. 12.12).
113

Chapter 12 The renal pelvis and ureter
(a)
(b)
Figure 12.11 Hydronephrosis from obstruction at the pelviureteric junction: (a) longitudinal and (b) transverse.
Diagnosis
The difﬁculty in practice is to distinguish between
a large baggy renal pelvis and one that is dilated
because of obstruction. A DTPA renogram is per-
formed, and after a few minutes frusemide is given
to cause a diuresis. If there is obstruction, the iso-
tope continues to accumulate in the renal pelvis:
in a normal pelvis the isotope is washed away in
the next few minutes (Fig. 12.13).
When the kidney is very distended, it is some-
times difﬁcult to know whether it is worth trying
to save it. A DMSA scan will show how much useful
renal parenchyma is.
Management
Patients found by chance to have a large re-
nal pelvis, but no DTPA evidence of obstruction,
can safely be kept under observation year after
Lower polar
segmental artery
and vein
Figure 12.12 The obstructed renal pelvis often bulges out between the two lower segmental arteries.
114

The renal pelvis and ureter Chapter 12
5
Minutes
Frusemide
Left
Right
2
74982
92.3
10
15
20
25
Figure 12.13 DTPA renogram showing retention of iso-
tope in the left kidney in spite of frusemide.
year. In those with obvious obstruction, or severe
symptoms, then something needs to be done to
overcome the obstruction. There are several alter-
native methods:
r Balloon dilatation: An angioplasty catheter is
passed up the ureter over a guidewire into the nar-
row segment and distended there. A double-J stent
is left in situ for 10–14 days (Fig. 12.14).
r Percutaneous ureterolysis: A working sheath is in-
troduced into the renal pelvis as for percutaneous
nephrolithotomy (see Fig. 7.12). Using a nephro-
scope, a guidewire is passed down the ureter over
which a knife is passed to incise the ﬁbrous ring
in the wall of the ureter. This is followed with a
Angioplasty
balloon
Double-J stent
Guidewire
Figure 12.14 Balloon pyeloplasty.
double-J stent which is left in position for about 6
weeks (Fig. 12.15).
r Pyeloplasty: If these simple non-invasive meth-
ods are not feasible, or have been tried with-
out success, a formal pyeloplasty is performed.
Ureterogram is ﬁrst made to deﬁne the length
of the narrow segment of the ureter. Then the
kidney is approached through an anterior trans-
verse incision or laparoscopically. The peritoneum
is reﬂected to reveal the pelvis and ureter. There
are mainly two principles: dismembered and ﬂap
pyeloplasty techniques as shown in Fig. 12.16. The
anastomosis is stented with a double-J stent for
about 10 days. The follow-up is done with renog-
raphy.
Retrocaval ureter
Very rarely the postcardinal veins of the embryo
fail to become obliterated, and the ureter has to
wind round behind the inferior vena cava. The
IVU appearance is unmistakable (Fig. 12.17). There
is no need to meddle with the little bit of ureter
behind the vena cava. The lower end is detached
and anastomosed to the dilated upper part just as
in any other hydronephrosis.
Retroperitoneal ﬁbrosis
Metastatic cancer, usually arising from the colon,
may convert the retroperitoneal tissue into a hard
plaque inside which the ureters cannot wriggle
freely. Something similar is rarely seen in associa-
tion with inﬂammation of the bowel in Crohn’s
disease or ulcerative colitis. But the most inter-
esting of these types has no known cause, and is
therefore called idiopathic retroperitoneal ﬁbrosis.
These patients have backache, fever, weight loss,
an elevated sedimentation rate and hypertension.
The ureter is encased in a stiff plaque of ﬁbrous tis-
sue, and cannot writhe sideways or up and down,
and so becomes obstructed, even though it is easy
to pass a catheter up and down. By the time the
diagnosis is made the patient is often severely
uraemic. The same plaque of ﬁbrous tissue encases
the vena cava and aorta, and may extend up into
the porta hepatis and mediastinum (Fig. 12.18).
115

Chapter 12 The renal pelvis and ureter
Lower pole artery and
vein lie anterior to
pelviureteric junction
Blade of knife
cuts posteriorly
(b)
(a)
Ureteric stent
Ureterotomy
Guidewire
Amplatz tube
(c)
Figure 12.15 Percutaneous pyelolysis.
The ﬁrst step is to relieve the obstruction with
percutaneous nephrostomy. Once the patient has
recovered from the uraemia, it is necessary to
distinguish this from the other types of ﬁbrosis
listed above. Prednisolone has occasionally been
reported to produce rapid and complete resolu-
tion of the obstruction, but more often the im-
provement is slow and incomplete. A more certain
method is to free the ureters from the surrounding
ﬁbrous tissue, and wrap them in omentum to stop
it coming back (Fig. 12.19).
All these patients must be very carefully fol-
lowed up because they usually develop other com-
plications of hypertension.
116

The renal pelvis and ureter Chapter 12
(a) Dismembered pyelopasty
(B)- Flap pyelopolasty
1. Y-V technique
2. Culp (flap technique)
3. Scardino-Prince (spiral technique)
Figure 12.16 Open pyeloplasty.
Ureteric injury
Accidental trauma
Closed injuries of the ureter are very rare. Open
injuries caused by a knife or bullet are easily
overlooked at the time the wound is explored, and
may only be noticed afterwards when urine leaks
from the wound.
Iatrogenic trauma
The ureter is at risk in any operation in the pelvis,
especially hysterectomy. The ureter is most prone
117

Chapter 12 The renal pelvis and ureter
Inferior
vena cava
Atretic
segment
Figure 12.17 Retrocaval ureter.
to be injured where it is crossed by the uterine
arteries and veins, but it can also be caught a little
higher up by a suture used to close the peritoneum.
There are three distinct clinical scenarios.
Injury noticed at operation
If the ureter is healthy, it may be repaired by end-
to-end anastomosis using absorbable sutures and a
splint left in.
Immediate postoperative symptoms
1 Loin pain and fever: More often the injury to
the ureter is not noticed during the operation.
The patient may have pain in the loin after-
wards, and if the urine is infected, a fever. These
are important symptoms demand an immediate
IVU.
2 Anuria: If both ureters have been obstructed at
the time of injury, the patient will be anuric. In
practice, the problem arises in just the kind of op-
eration where there is likely to have been consid-
erable loss of blood, and it is reasonable to think
Plaque of hard
fibrous tissue
Figure 12.18 Retroperitoneal ﬁbrosis.
that shock has caused renal failure from underper-
fusion. When there is any doubt, an IVU should be
done: if there is obstruction there will be a delayed
nephrogram.
Late leak of urine
Sadly, the pain in the loin is often put down to
normal postoperative discomfort. After 7–10 days,
ﬂuid begins to escape from the vagina.
First and most urgent task is to conﬁrm that the
ﬂuid is urine. This is easy: have it sent to the lab-
oratory for an urgent creatinine measurement. If
the creatinine is greater than that in the blood the
ﬂuid just has to be urine.
The second step is to get an IVU. This will usu-
ally show some obstruction, and occasionally will
show extravasation of the contrast into the vagina
or soft tissues (Fig. 12.20). Forget the traditional
arcane ritual of putting a series of swabs into the
vagina or methylene blue into the bladder. These
confuse the issue and waste time. Forget the no-
tion that one must delay intervention for 40 days
and 40 nights (or some such nonsense). The sooner
118

The renal pelvis and ureter Chapter 12
Nephrostomy
Omental
wrap round
ureter
Figure 12.19 Wrapping the ureter in omentum prevents recurrence of retroperitoneal ﬁbrosis.
Figure 12.20 IVU in ureterovaginal ﬁstula following hysterectomy: contrast medium outlines the vagina. The ureter is a
little obstructed.
119

Chapter 12 The renal pelvis and ureter
Figure 12.21 Retrograde ureterogram showing contrast
leaking out from the ureter.
the diagnosis is conﬁrmed and the injured ureter
is repaired the better (and the easier to do).
A bulb-ended catheter is placed in the ureter and
contrast injected to give a ureterogram. This will
show extravasation or a block. It ought to be done
on the other side as well since the injury is often
bilateral (Fig. 12.21).
Repair of the ureter
The previous incision is reopened. The ureter is
traced down to the site of injury, divided where it
is healthy, and implanted into a U-shaped (Boari)
ﬂap made from the wall of the bladder, with a
tunnel to prevent reﬂux (Fig. 12.22).
Carcinoma of the ureter
Since the ureter is lined with urothelium, it can
form all the types of transitional cell cancer that
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 12.22 Reimplantation of an injured ureter with a Boari bladder ﬂap.
120

The renal pelvis and ureter Chapter 12
Hydronephrosis
Filling defect
Blood and clot
from orifice
Figure 12.23 Clinical features of a carcinoma of the ureter.
Figure 12.24 IVU showing ﬁlling defect in the lower ureter
caused by carcinoma.
Figure 12.25 Nephroureterectomy specimen showing tu-
mour in the lower ureter and excision of a cuff of the
bladder wall.
are seen in the renal pelvis and bladder. They
present with haematuria, or pain from obstruction
to the ureter (Fig. 12.23).
Diagnosis
The diagnosis is suggested by the IVU, and con-
ﬁrmed by an ureterogram (Fig. 12.24). Malignant
cells may be found in the urine on cytology if the
tumour is G2 or G3. Ureteroscopy gives a clear
picture of the tumour and allows a biopsy to be
taken.
121

Chapter 12 The renal pelvis and ureter
Treatment
Single G1 tumours can occasionally be removed
locally, or coagulated with a laser through the
ureteroscope, but unfortunately they are usually
multiple. G3 tumours have a very bad prognosis,
and have often invaded through the wall of the
ureter by the time they are detected, so that in
addition to nephroureterectomy (Fig. 12.25), ad-
juvant radiotherapy or chemotherapy is usually
necessary.
122

Chapter 13
The bladder: structure and function
Surgical anatomy
In children the bladder is an abdominal organ, eas-
ily felt and aspirated. In adults it cannot be felt
unless it is distended because it lies deep behind
the symphysis. Above, the dome of the bladder
is covered by peritoneum, against which lie loops
of small bowel and sigmoid colon. A long tail of
urachus tethers the dome of the bladder to the um-
bilicus: this is the vestige of the foetal allantois.
As the bladder becomes distended it rises, not
always in the midline, and it may bulge out into
the inguinal canal to form the ‘bladder ears’ often
seen in cystograms in normal children. In adults
the bladder is just medial to the neck of an inguinal
or femoral hernia.
Posteriorly, the bladder is separated from the rec-
tum by the fascia of Denonvilliers which is made
of two fused layers of peritoneum. This forms a re-
markable biological barrier which prevents carci-
noma of the bladder or prostate spreading into the
rectum, and acts as a most useful plane of cleavage
in radical surgery on the prostate (Fig. 13.1).
In the male the bladder rests on the prostate
gland, below which is the levator ani muscle. In
females the bladder rests on the anterior wall of
the vagina (Fig. 13.2).
The ﬁbres of the detrusor muscle of the bladder
are not arranged in layers as in the bowel but run
criss-cross, like a basket, each ﬁbre passing from
outer to inner layers and back again. Unlike most
other viscera, the bladder has no capsule; its mus-
cle lies against fat, connective tissue and a plexus
of large veins.
The detrusor muscle is lined by a thin layer of
submucosa on which lies the waterproof urothe-
lium (Fig. 13.3).
Blood supply
The arteries come from branches of the internal
iliac artery of which the largest, the superior vesi-
cal artery, crosses in front of the ureter (Fig. 13.4).
The veins of the bladder drain into the internal
iliac veins, but in addition, a second ‘backstairs’
system drains into the marrow of the pelvic bones,
femora and vertebral bodies. Any increase in intra-
abdominal pressure forces blood from the bladder
into the bone marrow; hence, metastases from can-
cer of the prostate and bladder are often found
there.
The rich network of lymphatics in the deeper
layers of the detrusor muscle drains into the lymph
nodes of the pelvis. Like the veins, there are also
direct communications with the bone marrow of
the pelvis, vertebrae and femora.
Lecture Notes: Urology, 6th edition. By John Blandy and
Amir Kaisary. Published 2009 by Blackwell Publishing.
ISBN: 978-1-4051-2270-2.
123

Chapter 13 The bladder: structure and function
Umbilicus
Note symphysis
right in front
of prostate
Denonvilliers’ fascia
(useful in total cystectomy
as plane of cleavage for
surgeon, also stops cancer
of prostate spreading
back into rectum)
Peritoneum
Urachus
(remnant
of
allantois)
Figure 13.1 Surgical anatomy of the male bladder.
Rectosigmoid
Uterus
Peritoneum
Urachus
Levator ani,
sandwiched
between two
layers of fascia,
pierced by holes
for rectum,
vagina and urethra
Plane of cleavage persists
between Denonvilliers’ fascia
(peritoneum stuck together)
Figure 13.2 Surgical anatomy of the female bladder.
124

The bladder: structure and function Chapter 13
Urothelium
Basement
membrane
Lamina propria
Muscle
Fat
Figure 13.3 Diagram of section through
wall of bladder.
Nerves of the bladder
Spinal cord segments
The S2 and S3 segments of the spinal cord lie in the
conus medullaris at the level of T12/L1 which is
just where the back is most often injured in trafﬁc
or industrial accidents.
Chief pedicle is
superior vesical
artery (first big
branch of internal
iliacs).  Note two other
pedicles also present
which bleed furiously
Figure 13.4 Blood supply of the bladder.
Afferent
Afferent impulses from the bladder pass up in the
pelvic parasympathetic nerves – nervi erigentes –
to the S2 and S3 segments of the spinal cord.
Sensation of pain is also conveyed in sympathetic
ﬁbres which run via the presacral plexus and
lumbar sympathetic ganglia to reach surprisingly
125

Chapter 13 The bladder: structure and function
Detrusor
Pelvic parasympathetic
nerves
Bladder neck
Supramembranous
sphincter
Levator ani
Pudendal
nerve
T12
L1
Descending
facilitation
and 
inhibition
Spinal cord
S2 and S3
Figure 13.5 Nerve supply of the bladder.
high levels in the spinal cord: indeed to block all
pain from the bladder, a spinal anaesthetic must
reach as high as T6. The ﬁbres of both sets of
autonomic nerves follow the arterial branches to
reach the bladder (Fig. 13.5).
Efferent
From the S2 and S3 segments efferent motor im-
pulses go to the bladder along three sets of nerves:
1 parasympathetic ﬁbres to ganglia in the wall of
the detrusor muscle causing it to contract;
2 sympathetic
ﬁbres
to
the
supramembranous
sphincter and the neck of the bladder (alpha-
adrenergic receptors); and
3 somatic myelinated ﬁbres in the pudendal nerve
supply the striated muscle of the levator ani.
Micturition
Filling of the bladder stimulates stretch receptors
which send impulses up the parasympathetic affer-
ent ﬁbres. The reﬂex arc in the S2 and S3 segments
returns impulses to the detrusor along parasym-
pathetic ﬁbres causing it to contract, and at the
same time, inhibits not only the efferent sym-
pathetic impulses going to the bladder neck and
supramembranous sphincter, but also those going
in the myelinated ﬁbres of the pudendal nerve to
the levator ani and pelvic ﬂoor.
When the bladder has been emptied out, ﬁrst the
pelvic ﬂoor contracts, then the supramembranous
sphincter milks back urine from the upper part
of the urethra into the bladder, and ﬁnally the
bladder neck is closed (Fig. 13.6).
Like all reﬂexes, that for micturition is modiﬁed
by inﬂuences from higher up in the nervous sys-
tem which may either facilitate or inhibit the reﬂex
arc. We all are aware that on occasions the urge to
empty an overdistended bladder drives all other
thoughts from consciousness, and that anxiety or
fright may bring on an urge to urinate.
Urodynamics
Cystometry
Through a ﬁne catheter, water is slowly run into
the bladder while its pressure (Pves) is continually
recorded through a second catheter, introduced
either alongside the ﬁrst in the urethra, or through
a small needle inserted suprapubically (Fig. 13.7). A
third catheter placed inside the rectum measures
intra-abdominal pressure (Pabd), and a computer
126

The bladder: structure and function Chapter 13
Supramembranous
external sphincter
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Detrusor
contracts
Milk-
back
Internal sphincter
Figure 13.6 Emptying of the bladder.
subtracts this from the intravesical measurement
to give the true detrusor pressure (Pdet) (Fig. 13.8).
The measurements are made while the bladder
is ﬁlled, and while the patient passes urine into
an electronic ﬂow meter, a device that automat-
ically records the ﬂow rate (Qmax) and the vol-
ume of urine that has been collected (Vcomp) (Fig.
13.9).
Filling line
Bladder pressure
Abdominal pressure
Figure 13.7 Cystometry.
Voiding cystometrogram
These measurements can be combined with a
video X-ray recording of the cystogram by using
dilute contrast medium instead of water. Study of
the recording allows one to see the bladder neck
opening and closing, and to note any reﬂux of
urine up the ureters.
127

Chapter 13 The bladder: structure and function
Pressure (cmH2O) 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Time (minutes)
Pves 10 cmH2O
Pdet 10 cmH2O
Pabd 10 cmH2O
Vinfus 100 mL
Figure 13.8 Cystometrogram.
Electromyography
The activity of the striated muscle of the levator
ani can be recorded from small needle electrodes
inserted into the muscle. This is not a routine in-
vestigation and calls for considerable experience
in its use and interpretation. At rest there is nor-
mally a constant level of activity in the levator ani,
which, when the electromyogram is connected to
a loudspeaker, sounds like a constant buzz. While
the bladder is emptying and the impulses down
the pudendal nerve are inhibited, there should be
silence (Fig. 13.10).
Urethral pressure proﬁle
The pressure inside the lumen of the urethra can
be measured with a catheter that is withdrawn at
a constant rate along the urethra. The pressure is
drawn on a graph which measures the distance
0
10
20
30
40
Voiding time
Flow time
Time to max.  flow
Max.  flow rate
Average flow rate
Voiding rate
          
t100
tQ
tQmax
Qmax
Qave
Vcomp
 28
 27
  5
 25.7
12.9
347
s
s
s
mL/s
mL/s
mL/s
Seconds
Results of uroflowmetry
25 mL/s flow rate 
Figure 13.9 Normal uroﬂow measurement.
along the urethra, giving the urethral pressure pro-
ﬁle. This is not a routine investigation, but is of
help in some cases of incontinence (Fig. 13.11).
Cystoscopy
Flexible cystoscopy
Fine glass ﬁbres are ﬂexible. If made of completely
clear optical glass, and coated with glass of a differ-
ent refractive index; the entire light entering one
end will leave the other (Fig. 13.12). A large num-
ber of these ﬁbres are wound on a wheel, glued at
one spot, and cut through. The result is a ﬁbre-
optic cable which can be introduced into any ori-
ﬁce of the body, and will transmit an image in a
series of tiny dots like ground glass (Fig. 13.13).
The modern ﬂexible cystoscope has channels for
irrigation, for light, and for passing ﬂexible in-
struments such as biopsy forceps, laser ﬁbres or
128

The bladder: structure and function Chapter 13
92.05.08 12:23  ID:
EMG
10uV
Qura
2 mL/s
0:16
0:56
0:36
0:16
min : sec
Uroflowmetry
Post _ Processing
P _FRM
Figure 13.10 Electromyogram from external sphincter during voiding. (Courtesy of Dr C Fowler.)
External
sphincter
80
60
40
Pressure (cm H2O)
20
0
0
5
Length (cm)
Length (cm)
Cannula with
side hole
Pressure transducer
10
15
Figure 13.11 Urethral pressure proﬁle.
129

Chapter 13 The bladder: structure and function
Figure 13.12 Total internal reﬂection along a glass ﬁbre.
Figure 13.13 Image obtained through ﬂexible cystoscope.
Figure 13.15 Variety of instruments used in modern cystoscopy.
Figure 13.14 The ﬂexible cystoscope can give a view of
the trigone and bladder neck.
130

The bladder: structure and function Chapter 13
Correct position for
cysto-urethroscopy
So-called lithotomy
position
Figure 13.16 Correct position for cystoscopy.
a diathermy electrode. Passing the cystoscope is
painless. It is gently advanced along the urethra
under vision as water is slowly run in. After exam-
ining the urethra, sphincter, prostatic urethra and
bladder neck, the inside of the bladder is carefully
inspected. By bending the cystoscope back on it-
self the bladder neck and prostate can be viewed
from inside (Fig. 13.14). Flexible cystoscopy is usu-
ally done in the outpatient clinic/day surgery units
which is very convenient for the majority of pa-
tients and is cost effective.
Rigid cystoscope
The image seen through the rigid cystoscope is
much clearer than that of the ﬂexible instru-
ment, and the instrument channel allows a large
variety of gadgets to be used inside the bladder
(Fig. 13.15). Biopsies can be taken, tumours re-
sected, stones crushed, ureters catheterised and
examined. It is less comfortable for the patient
than the ﬂexible cystoscopy, and for some of these
manoeuvres a general or spinal anaesthetic is re-
quired. The patient is placed in the cystoscopy po-
sition (Fig. 13.16).
Technological advances are being made all the
time to improve the instruments and give better
vision. Attaching a camera to the telescope eye-
piece saves the urologist ‘bending’ down to look
into the telescope saving untoward physical strain
on his neck. Using the camera allows projection
of the view on large screens which is valuable in
teaching members of staff. It also allows photog-
raphy and video recording for record keeping and
exchange of information.
131

Chapter 14
The bladder: congenital abnormalities
and trauma
Congenital abnormalities
During the complicated process of the bladder
embryological evolution, the foetal hindgut, the
cloaca, curls round. Its tip becomes the urachus,
and the urogenital septum comes down to sepa-
rate the future bladder from the rectum. It brings
with it the mesonephric ducts which sprout the
ureters (Fig. 14.1). There are many opportunities
for things to go wrong, and a variety of congenital
abnormalities may occur:
1 Agenesis: The cloaca may not form at all; both
ureters are obstructed, and the condition is not
compatible with survival.
2 Duplication: Very rarely the bladder is divided
by a septum either in the midline or lying trans-
versely.
3 Patent urachus: If there is obstruction at the neck
of the bladder or the urethra the urachus may re-
main patent and leak urine at the umbilicus. Cysts
may form in the remnant of the urachus and may
become infected in later life. Because the urachus
is a remnant of the hindgut, and is lined with
bowel epithelium, it can give rise to an adenocar-
cinoma. This presents with haematuria, and on
cystoscopy a small red lump like a cherry is seen
at the apex of the bladder which is always much
smaller than the mass which can be felt outside
(Fig. 14.2).
4 Exstrophy: In early foetal life the cloacal mem-
brane may extend up to the umbilicus, and pre-
vent the ingrowth of the future abdominal wall.
Normally the cloacal membrane dissolves only at
the site of the future anus, vagina and urethra.
In exstrophy it exposes tissue below the umbili-
cus varying in extent from a dorsal cleft in the
penis – epispadias – to the entire cloaca. In the
most common variety, the bladder opens like a
ﬂat red patch on the abdomen onto which the
ureters discharge urine. This is often accompa-
nied by a prolapse of the rectum, undescended
testes, and wide separation of the symphysis pubis
(Fig. 14.3).
Untreated, the condition is miserable. The child
is continually soaked in urine. The exposed urothe-
lium is always irritated, painful and inﬂamed,
and eventually may undergo glandular metaplasia
which in time goes on to develop adenocarcinoma.
All this can be prevented.
Firstly, it is important to reassure the distraught
parents that all will be well. Secondly, transfer
the baby to a specialist paediatric unit where the
operation to close the bladder is performed as
soon as possible after birth. The bladder is mo-
bilised, sewn into a sphere, and the abdominal
wall closed over it. The sacroiliac joints may be
divided to allow the pelvis to be closed like an
Lecture Notes: Urology, 6th edition. By John Blandy and
Amir Kaisary. Published 2009 by Blackwell Publishing.
ISBN: 978-1-4051-2270-2.
132

The bladder: congenital abnormalities and trauma Chapter 14
Allantois
Urogenital sinus
Genital tubercle
Cloacal membrane
5 mm embryo
Wolffian mesonephric duct
Metanephros
Ureteric 
bud
Urachus
Bladder
Urorectal
septum
Ureter
Rectum
Dehiscence of
cloacal membrane
results in exposure
of entire
infraumbilical
triangle
Basic defect in exstrophy
is abnormal extension
 of the cloacal
membrane onto lower
abdominal wall
preventing fusion of
two halves of
abdominal wall
(b)
(a)
Figure 14.1 Embryological evolution of the bladder and the role of the cloacal membrane in the cause of exstrophy.
oyster (Fig. 14.4). Additional operations will be
required later to reconstruct the bladder neck to
restore continence, to reconstruct the penis, and
to bring down the testicles. Eventually these chil-
dren grow up to lead a normal life: the boys
have a normal sex life, and the girls can have
children.
Patent
urachus
Urachal
cyst
Adenocarcinoma
of urachus
Figure 14.2 Disorders of the persistent urachus.
5 Epispadias: In this minor version of exstrophy,
the urethra opens on the proximal end of the dor-
sum of a short, ﬂat penis which curves upwards
(Fig. 14.5). This can also be completely refashioned
in expert hands: ﬁrst a new urethra is formed, and
later the bladder neck is reconstructed to restore
continence.
133

Chapter 14 The bladder: congenital abnormalities and trauma
Undescended
testicle and
inguinal hernia
Separation of
symphysis pubis
Short flat penis
Ureteric
orifices
Exposed 
bladder
Verumontanum
Prolapse of
anus
Figure 14.3 Exstrophy.
Figure 14.4 Iliac osteotomy to assist closure of exstrophy.
Proximal urethra may gape
and be incontinent
Short, broad, upturned penis
with ventral foreskin
Figure 14.5 Epispadias.
134

The bladder: congenital abnormalities and trauma Chapter 14
Trauma
Open and penetrating injuries
The bladder may be injured in any penetrating ab-
dominal injury. It is closed with absorbable sutures
and a catheter is left in for about a week. The same
management is used when the bladder is opened
in the course of some abdominal operation. The
outcome is a perfectly functioning bladder.
One new type of penetrating injury has recently
become of importance: people with a patch of
small intestine added on to the bladder to increase
its capacity or cure detrusor instability often have
to catheterise themselves, and from time to time
the catheter may perforate the bladder. The clini-
cal features are those of a delayed perforation (see
below).
Closed injury: intraperitoneal rupture
The typical patient is run over while he lies drunk
with a distended bladder (Fig. 14.6). The bladder
bursts and a large volume of urine enters the peri-
toneal cavity but it is dilute and does not at ﬁrst
Figure 14.6 Closed injury to the bladder.
cause any chemical irritation. Only after several
hours does the patient become ill.
Diagnosis
1 Paracentesis: If there is some reason to think
there may be other intra-abdominal injuries, a
four-quadrant tap is performed. If this shows
blood, laparotomy or laparoscopy is performed
and if a tear is found in the bladder, it is repaired
with absorbable sutures and a catheter left in the
bladder.
2 Cystogram: A cystogram may show contrast leak-
ing into the peritoneal cavity, but only if the blad-
der is fully distended.
3 Cystoscopy: A ﬂexible cystoscopy will show the
tear.
Treatment
If there is no evidence of peritonitis an indwelling
catheter is left in the bladder for about a week, and
then tested with a cystogram to show that the tear
has healed.
Delayed perforation
After coagulation of a small recurrent cancer in
the bladder, the necrotic wall of the bladder may
give way about a week later, and allow urine to
leak into the peritoneal cavity. Typically there
is very little pain, and there are almost no ab-
normal physical signs at ﬁrst, but after a few
hours the abdomen becomes distended and the
bowel sounds can no longer be heard. Paracen-
tesis will yield evil smelling ﬂuid. If detected
early, the condition is relieved by keeping the
bladder emptied with a catheter, but if there is
any doubt, or if the patient’s condition is not
improving, laparotomy, evacuation of the ﬂuid
and repair of the lacerated bladder is the safest
course.
135

Chapter 15
Urinary tract infection
Urinary tract infection (UTI) is a broad term used
to describe microbial colonisation of the urine. It
includes infection of the structures of the urinary
tract from the kidney down to the urethral mea-
tus. Infection of organs such as the prostate and
epididymis are also included in the deﬁnition.
Bacteriuria denotes the presence of bacteria in
the urine, which is usually free of bacteria. It can be
symptomatic or asymptomatic. Pyuria is the pres-
ence of white blood cells (WBCs) in the urine and
is generally accepted as an indication of infection
and as an inﬂammatory response of the urothe-
lium to the bacteria. It is to be noted that bacteri-
uria without pyuria is an indication of bacterial
colonisation of the urinary tract without infection.
Such sterile pyuria would warrant consideration of
other pathological conditions, including tubercu-
losis, stone disease or cancer.
Uncomplicated UTI is a term describing in-
fection in healthy patients who have a struc-
turally and functionally normal urinary tract.
Complicated UTI is usually associated with el-
ements which increase the chances of acquir-
ing bacteria and decreasing treatment efﬁcacy.
Risk factors for complicated UTI include anatom-
ical and functional urinary tract abnormalities,
pregnancy, old age, diabetes, immunosuppres-
sion, urinary tract instrumentation and indwelling
catheters.
UTI can affect both females and males, including
the newly born, infants and young children. UTI
in women is common and the incidence increases
with age. Sexually active women are at the highest
risk.
Pathogenesis
Most UTIs are caused by anaerobic bacteria, usu-
ally from the bowel ﬂora. Gram-negative bacteria
include Escherichia coli (by far the most common),
Proteus, and Klebsiella. Gram-positive bacteria in-
clude E. faecalis and S. saprophyticus.
Bacterial virulence factors play a role in deter-
mining which bacteria invade the urinary sys-
tem, and determine the extent of infection.
Bacterial adherence to vaginal and urothelial ep-
ithelial cells is an essential step in the initiation
of UTI. It has been noted that some women have
recurrent UTI/cystitis at regular intervals possi-
bly linked to oestrogen levels. In postmenopausal
women, where there are lowered oestrogen levels,
the incidence of UTI can be decreased by oestrogen
replacement therapy. Alterations to host defensive
mechanisms are to be noted when causes of UTI
are addressed. These include obstruction, prostate
enlargement in men, urethral stenosis in women,
Lecture Notes: Urology, 6th edition. By John Blandy and
Amir Kaisary. Published 2009 by Blackwell Publishing.
ISBN: 978-1-4051-2270-2.
136

Urinary tract infection Chapter 15
vesicoureteric reﬂux, diabetes mellitus, human im-
munodeﬁciency virus and spinal cord injuries with
high-pressure bladders.
Urine specimen collection
The correct collection of a urine specimen is
important. In men, the glans penis is carefully
cleaned and, during reasonably forceful urination,
initial, mid-stream and terminal specimens can be
collected in separate containers. In women, clean-
liness in collection of urine specimens is important
and attention must be focused on avoiding con-
tamination. In the sitting position, and with the
labia held apart with two ﬁngers from one hand,
it is possible to collect a specimen of urine with-
out touching the skin. In infants and young chil-
dren, the penis or female pudendum is cleaned in
a similar manner as with adults. Urination can be
stimulated by pressure over the suprapubic area
or stroking of the paraspinal muscles to elicit the
Perez reﬂex. In some cases catheterisation or a
suprapubic tap are necessary.
If urine is to be cultured, but cannot be cul-
tured within 4 hours of collection, the sample
should be refrigerated or preserved with boric acid
immediately. Inspection of infected urine shows
it to be cloudy; crystal clear urine is never in-
fected. It smells ﬁshy. Microscopy shows it to be
full of pus cells (more than 5 per high power
ﬁeld) and bacteria can be seen along the edge of
the leucocytes (Fig. 15.1). The urine is cultured
at once using a dip-slide, or cooled and sent as
soon as possible to a laboratory where a colony
count is performed and antibiotic sensitivities are
determined.
Different types of UTI and
associated disorders
UTIs are often discussed clinically by their pre-
sumed site of origin, behaviour pattern or both. In
addition to the prescription of antibiotics, where
indicated, making the urine alkaline by giving up
to 6 g sodium bicarbonate per day, or a simi-
lar amount of potassium citrate, and keeping the
Figure 15.1 Pus in the urine. (Courtesy of Professor Jo
Martin.)
urine dilute by drinking 3 L of ﬂuid a day makes
urination less painful.
Simple cystitis
Acute cystitis involves only the lower urinary tract;
it is an inﬂammation of the bladder due to bac-
terial or nonbacterial causes (i.e. radiation, viral).
Patients with cystitis may present with a variety of
symptoms, including urinary frequency, urgency,
dysuria and suprapubic pain (Fig 15.2). It occurs in
approximately 1% of pregnant women, of whom
60% have a negative result on initial screening.
In females, acute cystitis is common and usually
innocent. Bloody urine is reported in as many as
10% of cases of UTI in otherwise healthy women;
this condition is called haemorrhagic cystitis. In
males, acute cystitis usually signiﬁes an impor-
tant underlying disorder and needs thorough in-
vestigation. Bacterial cystitis without concomitant
137

Chapter 15 Urinary tract infection
Pain, frequency
Afferent stimulation
Inflamed oedematous
epithelium
Haematuria
smelly urine
Figure 15.2 Clinical features of cystitis.
infection in other portions of the genitourinary
tract is believed to be rare in males. The abrupt on-
set of irritative voiding symptoms (e.g. frequency,
urgency, nocturia, dysuria) and suprapubic pain
are clinically diagnostic. Symptoms alone do not
distinguish cystitis (lower UTI) from pyelonephri-
tis (upper UTI). Although simple lower UTI (cysti-
tis) may resolve spontaneously, effective treatment
lessens the duration of symptoms and reduces the
incidence of progression to upper UTI.
Uncomplicated cystitis should be treated for 3
days. A 7-day course of appropriate antimicrobial
therapy is recommended in patients who have had
symptoms for 1 week or more, those with compli-
cating factors, and in men.
Like a dustbin, the bladder only stays clean if
it is emptied regularly (Fig. 15.3). Even when the
last drop of urine has been expelled, some bacteria
cling to the urothelial cells after the bladder has
been emptied. Normally these are easily dealt with
by the natural bactericidal action of the urothelial
cells, but this function is impaired in diabetes and
in cancer cells. Deliberate infection of the bladder
with an inoculum of microbes does not cause an
infection if the bladder is emptied regularly. How-
ever, if the bladder does not empty out completely,
because of outﬂow obstruction or a diverticulum,
then a tiny inoculum will divide at body tempera-
ture to become millions.
Pathology of chronic cystitis
Follicular cystitis: Here repeated infections give
rise to collections of lymphocytes under the
urothelium which can be recognised as pale
specks on cystoscopy (Fig. 15.4).
Cystitis cystica: In severe infections parts of
the urothelium are shed, leaving islands of
cells which get buried under the regenerating
urothelium: these form little cysts under the
mucosa which look like little bubbles on cys-
toscopy – cystitis cystica. This is usually harm-
less, but if the infection persists, the buried
cysts
of
urothelium
undergo
metaplasia,
Figure 15.3 The chief defence of the bladder against in-
fection is to keep itself regularly emptied out completely.
138

Urinary tract infection Chapter 15
Figure 15.4 Cystitis follicularis.
secrete mucus, and turn into intestinal mu-
cosa
–
adenomatous
metaplasia
–
which
may be the precursor of adenocarcinoma
(Fig. 15.5).
Malacoplakia: A variation on this theme is
malacoplakia, which forms collections of soft
brown lumps in the urothelium which are eas-
ily mistaken for cancer.
Squamous metaplasia: Persistent infection, espe-
cially when associated with a stone, stricture
or schistosomiasis, causes the urothelium to
undergo squamous metaplasia. This is very
sinister because it often progresses to squa-
mous cell cancer.
Alkaline encrusted cystitis: Infection with Proteus
mirabilis can lead to a peculiarly disabling
condition in which chronic inﬂammation ac-
companied by calciﬁcation involves the entire
wall of the bladder, converting it into a rigid
sphere. Cystoscopy shows stony encrustation
all over the wall of the bladder. The urine reeks
of ammonia.
Pyelonephritis
Patients with pyelonephritis are generally diag-
nosed based upon their clinical presentation.
The classic presentation of fever chills and cos-
tovertebral angle tenderness is frequently seen
on
physical
examination.
Patients
may
also
experience nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea and/or
irritative voiding symptoms. Along with positive
urine cultures, excessive numbers of white blood
cells, sometimes in casts, as well as red blood cells
are found in the urine. Blood cultures may also be
Figure 15.5 Cystitis cystica.
positive, and serum studies may reveal an elevated
erythrocyte sedimentation rate and elevations
in C-reactive protein and/or creatinine. Acute
pyelonephritis can lead to septicaemia and is best
treated initially by injection of a broad-spectrum
antibacterial such as cefuroxime or a quinolone
especially if the patient is severely ill; gentamicin
can also be used. Therapy should be tailored to the
patient. In a patient without complicating factors,
outpatient therapy with an oral ﬂuoroquinolone
or trimethoprim–sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMX) is
effective. In patients who appear ill or are unable
to tolerate oral therapy due to nausea or vomiting
and
warrant
hospitalisation,
therapy
with
a
parenteral ﬂuoroquinolone, aminoglycoside (with
or without ampicillin), or an extended spectrum
cephalosporin is advisable. The recommended
duration of treatment is 7–14 days. Many pa-
tients have intermittent fevers and ﬂank pain
despite appropriate anti-microbial therapy, but
these symptoms typically resolve after 72 hours.
Imaging is indicated when the patient does not
respond after 3 days. Repeat urine cultures should
be obtained after 5–7 days of therapy, and again
4–6 weeks later, to ensure sterility. Up to 30% of
patients may relapse after 14 days of treatment
but are usually cured by a repeat 14-day course of
appropriate antimicrobial therapy.
Recurrent UTI reinfections
Recurrent UTIs with new infections from bacteria
outside the urinary tract should be distinguished
139

Chapter 15 Urinary tract infection
from cases of persistent bacteria within the urinary
tract. Recurrent infections often occur in women
and girls secondary to ascending colonisation from
faecal ﬂora. In healthy women, further work-up
is not required. However, imaging studies and
cystoscopy should be considered in women with
evidence of upper tract infections, obstructive
symptoms, unexplained haematuria, suspected
neurogenic bladder, multiple sclerosis or diabetes
mellitus.
Postmenopausal women also appear to have an
increased risk of recurrent UTI due to changes in
vaginal ﬂora, and vaginal oestrogen cream should
be considered as a preventative measure. Women
are also at risk.
Long-term low-dose therapy may be required
in selected patients to prevent recurrence of in-
fection; indications include frequent relapses and
signiﬁcant kidney damage. Trimethoprim, nitro-
furantoin and cefalexin have been recommended
for long-term therapy.
Depending on the clinical scenario, prophylaxis
can be continuous or post-intercourse. The mech-
anism of action of trimethoprim or TMP-SMX is
via elimination of gut colonisation. Nitrofuran-
toin, however, does not alter gut ﬂora, and faecal
and vaginal ﬂora remain unchanged. It is associ-
ated with adverse reactions, including pulmonary
and allergic reactions, the risk of which increases
in patients over 50 years of age.
Complicated UTI
These cases include those that occur in patients
with a compromised urinary tract system, or those
caused by very resistant bacteria. The clinical vari-
ations range from mild cystitis to life-threatening
urinary sepsis. Urine analysis, culture and sensitiv-
ity are mandatory. Radiological and non-invasive
scanning tools are usually necessary to evaluate
any underlying urinary tract abnormalities and
should be employed. As there are no adequate
guidelines for antibiotic therapy in such cases,
broad-spectrum antibiotics with excellent urinary
and tissue levels and safety proﬁle should be
utilised.
Unresolved UTI bacterial resistance
Microbes are now emerging that are resistant
to cheap and effective ﬁrst-line drugs. Bacte-
ria are particularly efﬁcient at developing resis-
tance, not only because of their ability to mul-
tiply very rapidly but also because they can
transfer their resistance genes when the bacteria
replicate. Infections caused by resistant microbes
fail to respond to treatment, resulting in pro-
longed illness. This resistance has come about from
both over- and under-use of antibiotics: physi-
cians have prescribed antimicrobials in the ab-
sence of appropriate indications or over-prescribed
broad-spectrum injectable agents when a narrow-
spectrum oral agent would have been more appro-
priate. Conversely, patients forget to take medica-
tion or interrupt their treatment when they be-
gin to feel better, thereby creating an ideal en-
vironment for microbes to adapt rather than be
killed. Widespread bacterial resistance, especially
to ampicillin, amoxicillin and trimethoprim, has
increased the importance of urine culture before
therapy.
To prevent the creation of resistant microbes,
it is best to start with a safe and cheap antimicro-
bial, e.g. trimethoprim, nitrofurantoin or nalidixic
acid. Reserve expensive wide-spectrum antibiotics
for severe cases, and use them under microbiolog-
ical control. A patient who has suffered previous
attacks will know which antimicrobial agent made
them better last time, and it is sensible to use it
again, pending sensitivity studies from the labora-
tory. While awaiting culture results, empiric treat-
ment with ﬂuoroquinolone may be appropriate in
patients whose symptoms are severe.
The UK Health Protection Agency advises pre-
scribing an antibiotic only when there is likely to
be a clear clinical beneﬁt. Other recommendations
include avoiding broad spectrum antibiotics (e.g.
co-amoxiclav, quinolones and cephalosporins)
when standard and less expensive antibiotics re-
main effective, as they increase the risk of Clostrid-
ium difﬁcile, MRSA and resistant UTIs. Amoxicillin
resistance is common; therefore, only use this
if a culture conﬁrms susceptibility. Do not treat
asymptomatic bacteriuria in the elderly; it is not
140

Urinary tract infection Chapter 15
Table 15.1 NICE guideline
for UTI in children.
Age group
Symptoms and signs
Most common to least common
Infants younger than
3 months
Fever
Poor feeding
Abdominal pain
Vomiting
Failure to thrive
Jaundice
Lethargy
Haematuria
Irritability
Offensive urine
Infants and children,
3 months or older
Preverbal
Fever
Abdominal pain
Lethargy
Loin tenderness
Irritability
Vomiting
Haematuria
Poor feeding
Offensive urine
Failure to thrive
Verbal
Frequency
Dysfunctional voiding
Fever
Dysuria
Changes to continence
Malaise
Abdominal pain
Vomiting
Loin tenderness
Haematuria
Offensive urine
Cloudy urine
associated with increased morbidity. In the pres-
ence of a catheter, antibiotics will not eradicate
bacteriuria; only treat if the patient is systemically
unwell or if pyelonephritis seems likely.
Alternative treatments for resistant organisms
suggested by the British National Formulary in-
clude co-amoxiclav (amoxicillin with clavulanic
acid), an oral cephalosporin, pivmecillinam or a
quinolone.
NICE guideline for UTI in children
UTI is a common bacterial infection in infants
and children. It may be difﬁcult to recognise
because the presenting symptoms and signs are
non-speciﬁc, particularly in infants and children
younger than 3 years.
Symptoms and signs
Table 15.1 is a guide to the symptoms and signs
infants and children may present:
1 Infants and children presenting with an unex-
plained fever of 38◦C or other symptoms sugges-
tive of a UTI should have a urine sample tested.
The following risk factors for UTI and serious un-
derlying pathology should be recorded:
r poor urine ﬂow;
r history suggesting previous UTI or conﬁrmed
previous UTI;
r recurrent fever of uncertain origin;
r antenatally diagnosed renal abnormality;
r family history of vesicoureteric reﬂux or renal
disease;
r constipation;
r dysfunctional voiding;
r enlarged bladder;
r abdominal mass;
r evidence of spinal lesion;
r poor growth; and
r high blood pressure.
2 Infants and children who have bacteriuria and
fever of 38◦C should be considered to have acute
pyelonephritis/upper UTI.
3 Infants and children presenting with fever of
<38◦C with loin pain/tenderness and bacteri-
uria should also be considered to have acute
pyelonephritis/upper UTI. All other infants and
children who have bacteriuria but no systemic
symptoms or signs should be considered to have
cystitis/lower UTI.
141

Chapter 15 Urinary tract infection
Acute management
Early recognition and prompt treatment of UTIs
are important to prevent progression of infection
to pyelonephritis or urosepsis and to avoid late
sequelae such as renal scarring or renal failure.
1 Infants younger than 3 months with a possible
UTI should be referred immediately to the care of
a paediatric specialist.
2 For infants and children 3 months or older with
acute pyelonephritis/upper UTI:
r Consider referral to a paediatric specialist.
r Treat with oral antibiotics for 7–10 days.
The use of an oral antibiotic with low resis-
tance patterns is recommended, for example
cephalosporin or co-amoxiclav.
r If oral antibiotics cannot be used, treat with
an intravenous antibiotic agent such as cefo-
taxime or ceftriaxone for 2–4 days followed by
oral antibiotics for a total duration of 10 days.
3 For infants and children 3 months or older with
cystitis/lower UTI:
r Treat with oral antibiotics for 3 days. The
choice of antibiotics should be directed by
locally developed multidisciplinary guidance.
Trimethoprim, nitrofurantoin, cephalosporin or
amoxicillin may be suitable.
r Parents or carers should be advised to bring
the infant or child for reassessment if the infant
or child is still unwell after 24–48 hours. If
an alternative diagnosis is not made, a urine
sample should be sent for culture to identify the
presence of bacteria and determine antibiotic
sensitivity if urine culture has not already been
carried out.
Start antibiotics after urinalysis and culture are
obtained. Do not use short-course therapy in chil-
dren because it is more difﬁcult to differentiate
cystitis from pyelonephritis. An exception is the
use of short-course therapy in adolescent females
with classic cystitis.
Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines
Network
Management of suspected bacterial UTI in adults
has been recommended in a national clinical
guideline (Table 15.2).
Table 15.2 Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network
(SIGN): Management of suspected bacterial urinary
tract infection in adults – a national clinical guideline.
Symptoms of UTI include:
Dysuria
Urgency
Frequency
Polyuria
Suprapubic tenderness
Fever
Flank or back pain
Signs of upper UTI include:
Loin pain
Flank tenderness
Fever
Rigors
Other manifestations of systematic inﬂammatory
response
Diagnosis and treatment of UTI
In women
In otherwise healthy women presenting with
symptoms or signs of a UTI, treatment with an
antibiotic should be considered. If dysuria and uri-
nary frequency are both present, the probability
of UTI is >90%. In women with symptoms of
vaginal itch or discharge, explore alternative di-
agnoses and consider pelvic examination. Women
with limited signs of UTI (no more than two symp-
toms) should have a dipstick test performed to di-
agnose bacteriuria. If the test is negative for leu-
cocyte esterase and nitrate, empirical antibiotic
treatment should be offered. If a woman remains
symptomatic after a single course of treatment, she
should be investigated for other potential causes.
In elderly patients (>65 years), diagnosis should be
based on a full clinical assessment, including vital
signs.
Symptomatic bacteriuria occurs in 17–20% of
pregnancies, and a standard quantitative urine cul-
ture should be routinely performed at the ﬁrst an-
tenatal visit. Bacteriuria should be conﬁrmed with
a second urine culture.
Non-pregnant women with symptoms or signs
of acute lower UTI and either a high probability
of, or proven bacteriuria, should be treated with
142

Urinary tract infection Chapter 15
trimethoprim or nitrofurantoin for 3 days. If the
response to this treatment is not adequate, a urine
culture should be taken to guide the next choice
of antibiotic.
Non-pregnant women with symptoms or signs
of
acute
upper
UTI
should
be
treated
with
ciproﬂoxin for 7 days. A urine culture should be
taken before treatment is started, to guide treat-
ment choice if the response to this treatment
is not adequate. Alternative treatments include
cotrimoxazole, pivmecillinam, coamoxiclav and
ceﬁxime.
Non-pregnant women with asymptomatic bac-
teriuria, including those >65 years, should not re-
ceive antibiotic treatment.
Women with recurrent UTI should be advised to
take cranberry products to reduce the frequency of
recurrence.
Pregnant women with symptomatic UTI or
asymptomatic bacteriuria should be given an an-
tibiotic. Some antibiotics should not be used dur-
ing pregnancy due to their effects on the foe-
tus. These include tetracyclines (adverse effects
on foetal teeth and bones, congenital defects),
quinolones (various congenital defects), trimetho-
prim in the ﬁrst trimester (facial defects, car-
diac abnormalities), and chloramphenicol and sul-
fonamides in the last trimester (Gray syndrome;
haemolytic anaemia in mothers with glucose-
6-phosphate dehydrogenase [G-6-PD] deﬁciency,
jaundice and kernicterus, respectively). Trimetho-
prim is a folate antagonist. In some women low fo-
late levels have been associated with an increased
risk of malformations. However, in women with
normal folate status, who are well nourished, ther-
apeutic use of trimethoprim for a short period is
unlikely to induce folate deﬁciency. A number of
retrospective reviews and case reports indicate that
there is no increased risk of foetal toxicity follow-
ing exposure to nitrofurantoin during pregnancy.
Check the British National Formulary to ensure
the antibiotic is not toxic in pregnancy.
In men
All men with symptoms of a UTI should have a
urine sample cultured. In men older than 50 years,
the incidence of UTI rises dramatically because of
enlargement of the prostate, prostatism and sub-
sequent instrumentation of the urinary tract. In
men with a history of fever or back pain, upper
UTI should be considered. Differential diagnoses
include prostatitis, chlaymidial infection and epi-
didymitis.
Bacterial UTI should be treated with a 2-week
course of quinolone. Alternative treatments in-
clude trimethoprim, deoxycycline and coamoxi-
clav. Patients who do not respond to treatment
should be investigated for prostatitis. Elderly men
(>65 years) with asymptomatic bacteriuria should
not receive antibiotic treatment. Patients with
symptoms of upper UTI, recurrent UTI or those
who fail to respond to appropriate antibiotics
should be referred for urological investigation.
Key message
UTI is a common problem which can be at times chal-
lenging. It can be easily managed provided there is clear
understanding of a simple clinical framework. Careful
assessment of the clinical categories and identifying
the possible underlying causative factors is essential.
The choice of antibiotics available, used sensibly, can
be the basis of a successful clinical outcome. Guidelines
for the treatment of children and of adults have been
released by NICE and SIGN, respectively. Simple antibi-
otics such as trimethoprim and nitrofurantoin are ﬁrst-
line treatment for most symptomatic UTIs, and their
use will also help reduce the occurrence of bacterial
resistance.
Interstitial cystitis – Hunner’s ulcer
The cause of this strange condition is still un-
known. Clinically, the patient, usually a middle-
aged woman, has intense pain whenever the blad-
der is half-ﬁlled. The pain is often felt in one
place. There is severe frequency. Cystoscopy at ﬁrst
shows no abnormality, but after the bladder has
been ﬁlled, and the water is allowed to run out,
the urothelium seems to be cracked, and blood
trickles out – cascade haemorrhage.
Biopsy shows chronic inﬂammation of the
urothelium and the underlying submucosa. It has
been suggested (but not proved) that excess of
mast cells are present which secrete histamine.
143

Chapter 15 Urinary tract infection
Figure 15.6 Schistosoma haematobium: pair of adult
worms removed from a vein Schistosomes (about 1 cm
long).
Every year there is a new remedy for this condition
but a consistently reliable treatment remains elu-
sive. Some patients are improved if the bladder is
stretched; others are better if the ‘ulcer’ is diather-
mised; others improve if dimethylsulphoxide is in-
stilled. The condition usually comes back, and the
only remedy may be to remove the entire bladder,
replacing it with some form of cystoplasty.
Investigations
Every patient with chronic cystitis must be inves-
tigated by repeated urine cultures, including those
for Mycobacterium tuberculosis, by intravenous uro-
gram and cystoscopy to rule out some mechanical
cause for persistent infection. In patients who have
travelled in Africa the urine should be examined
for the ova of Schistosoma. Any cause of stagnation
in the urinary tract such as a diverticulum, and any
local cause for persistent infection such as a stone
or necrosis in a tumour must be carefully ruled out.
Treatment
Having excluded remediable causes such as a
pocket of undrained urine, a stone, tuberculosis
or cancer, then we are left with a large number of
patients, usually women, with persistent urinary
infection. What can be done for them?
S. mansoni
S. japonicum
S. haematobium
Figure 15.7 Bilharzia ova.
A high ﬂuid throughput often helps dramati-
cally, e.g. 3–4 L/day. This must be combined with
frequent emptying of the bladder at least every
2 hours. Busy women should keep a jug of water
on their desk and urinate every 2 hours by the
clock whether they want to go or not.
This simple, if boring, advice will reduce the
number of attacks. But when resistance is low,
there will be reinfection. Patients who have had
many attacks always know when another is com-
ing on, and they also know which medication is
likely to cure them. There is no need to withhold
treatment until the laboratory has conﬁrmed what
the patient already knows: it is far more sensible
to supply your patient with a simple antimicrobial,
e.g. trimethoprim or nitrofurantoin, to take when-
ever an attack threatens. This will often nip the
episode in the bud, and she will be cured within
24 hours; if so, there is no need to continue medi-
cation any longer.
When this simple system does not work a pa-
tient may be given long-term methenamine man-
delate or hippurate to reinforce their natural de-
fences.
Schistomiasis (Bilharziasis)
The trematode ﬂukes Schistosoma haematobium,
S. mansoni and S. japonicum are ﬂatworms with a
life cycle that involves one stage in a mollusc and
another in a vertebrate. The adult ﬂukes are about
5 mm in length and live inside human veins, at-
tached to the endothelium by a sucker (Fig. 15.6).
The male enfolds the female in a long slit down
his belly – hence the name schisto (split) and soma
(body). They were discovered in the portal vein of
144

Urinary tract infection Chapter 15
Figure 15.8 Plain X-ray in schistosomiasis showing calciﬁ-
cation in the bladder.
children by the German pathologist Theodor Bil-
harz when he was working in Cairo – hence the
alternative name bilharziasis. The females lay eggs
with terminal spines which vary according to the
species (Fig. 15.7).
When the adult ﬂukes are living in the sub-
mucosal veins of the bladder their eggs not only
bore their way through the urothelium to cause
haematuria, but they cause ulceration and polyp
formation. The dead eggs calcify, and can be seen
on cystoscopy to glisten like grains of sand under
the urothelium. The urothelium undergoes squa-
mous metaplasia and eventually may form squa-
mous cell cancer.
A plain X-ray shows the outline of the blad-
der, lower ureters and vasa deferentia, traced by
the millions of dead calciﬁed ova (Fig. 15.8). Low
power microscopy of the urine shows the ova.
If the patient urinates into a slow-moving river
or irrigation channel, the eggs hatch into miracidia
which are attracted to fresh-water snails, which
Adult worms live in liver vessels and
mate, then swim to venules of pelvis;
worms survive in veins up to 30 years
Systemic infestation
mainly to liver vessels
(within 3 weeks)
Lungs (1 week)
Lymphatics
Skin
Cercariae penetrate skin
with enzymes from
penetration glands
12 hours
Cercariae leave snail
during daylight hours
Sporocysts bud
off cercariae
Biomphalaria pfeifferi
(S. mansoni)
Bulinus globosus
(for S. haematobium)
Penetrates in 45 minutes
snail
sporocysts
Miracidium finds appropriate
snail with 1 hour
Penetration glands
Cilia
Miracidia hatch from
eggs within 30 minutes
S. haematobium
S. mansoni
Each pair of worms lays
up to 400 eggs per day
Figure 15.9 Life cycle of Schistosoma haematobium.
145

Chapter 15 Urinary tract infection
they invade. They divide inside the body of the
snail, form sporocysts which burst to liberate thou-
sands of minute ﬂukes – cercariae. These penetrate
the skin of any unwary human whose hand or foot
happens to be in the water at the right time. It
only takes a few seconds for them to enter the skin
(Fig. 15.9).
Under the skin, the cercariae cause an itching
rash – swimmer’s itch. Later they reach the circula-
tion through the lymphatics, and cause a systemic
illness – Katagama fever. Finally, adult ﬂukes settle
in little veins, which may be anywhere in the body
including the brain and spinal cord. In small chil-
dren large masses congregate and obstruct the por-
tal vein. Schistosomiasis is second only to malaria
as a cause of disease and its eradication depends on
the provision of clean water and effective disposal
of sewage.
Treatment
It is futile to treat infestation if the patient at
once returns to work in an infected paddy-ﬁeld.
Treatment consists of a single dose of praziquantel
which may be repeated after 1 month. Surgical re-
section of polypi and ulcers may be necessary, and
the squamous cell cancer may require cystectomy.
Obstruction, dilatation and stone formation in the
ureters may require appropriate surgery.
146

Chapter 16
Bladder cancer
Bladder cancer
Because the bladder is lined by urothelium its neo-
plasms are nearly always transitional cell carci-
nomas, but if urothelium undergoes metaplasia
into squamous or glandular epithelium (as hap-
pens with prolonged irritation or infection) then
squamous cell cancer and adenocarcinoma can oc-
cur. Secondary cancer is sometimes seen from di-
rect invasion from a primary tumour in the colon,
rectum or uterus.
Cancer of the urothelium
Aetiology
In 1894, Rehn noticed that workers in the ani-
line dye industry were developing an unduly large
number of cancers of the bladder. Hueper subse-
quently showed that the cause was neither ani-
line, nor the ﬁnished dyestuffs, but a group of in-
termediate nitrophenols (Fig. 16.1) of which the
most dangerous were β-naphthylamine and ben-
zidine. These substances were also present in to-
bacco smoke and other industries including rub-
ber moulding and the coal gas industry. All these
industries have now eliminated these chemicals
NH2
NH2
Aniline
2–Naphthylamine
NH2
NH2
4,4–Diaminodipheny (benzidine)
Figure 16.1 Aniline and its carcinogenic relatives.
from their factories, but tobacco smoking contin-
ues to be the major hazard. In other parts of the
world the prolonged irritation of the urothelium
by schistosomiasis continues to be a major cause,
probably added to by tobacco smoking.
Pathology
Bladder tumours are transitional cell cancers, but
transitional epithelium (urothelium) can undergo
metaplasia into either squamous epithelium or
something which resembles glandular epithelium
of the bowel. Bladder tumours may be single or
multiple, and like all cancers, can take the shape
of a cauliﬂower, an ulcer or a solid lump (Fig. 16.2).
Truly benign papillomas are exceedingly rare, and
Lecture Notes: Urology, 6th edition. By John Blandy and
Amir Kaisary. Published 2009 by Blackwell Publishing.
ISBN: 978-1-4051-2270-2.
147

Chapter 16 Bladder cancer
Cauliflower
(papillary)
Bun
(solid)
Ulcer
Figure 16.2 Macroscopic features of bladder cancer.
it is a pity that the term is often misused for the
papillary forms of cancer. There are three grades of
malignancy: G1, G2 and G3; G3 being the worst
(Fig. 16.3).
Squamous carcinoma
Squamous changes are often seen in patches in G3
transitional cell cancers, and carry a bad prognosis.
Pure squamous cancers arise in areas of squamous
metaplasia and occur from the irritation of a stone,
or in schistosomiasis: they have a thick layer of
white keratin over them.
(a)
(c)
(b)
Figure 16.3 Grades of bladder cancer: (a) G1, (b) G2 and (c) G3.
Adenocarcinoma
The glandular metaplasia seen in chronic infection
and exstrophy may proceed to adenocarcinoma.
Adenocarcinoma may also arise in the vestige of
the foetal allantois, the urachus, as a cherry-like
lump at the top of the bladder.
Spread of bladder cancer
Direct spread
Cancer may invade the surrounding fat and adja-
cent organs but never seems to cross Denonvilliers’
148

Bladder cancer Chapter 16
fascia into the rectum, although cancer of the rec-
tum appears to have no difﬁculty crossing into the
bladder.
Implantation
Bladder cancer may be seeded into the urethra and
possibly onto the opposite wall of the bladder – kiss
cancer.
Lymphatic spread
Once a bladder cancer has invaded the detrusor
muscle it ﬁnds there a rich plexus of lymphatics,
and may spread into the nodes along the internal
iliac artery and up along the aorta. There is also a
direct connection between these lymphatics and
the bone marrow of the pelvis, the upper end of
the femur and the lower vertebrae.
Systemic spread
Metastases are occasionally seen in the lungs, liver
or brain, but they are rare when compared with
other cancers of the viscera.
Staging of bladder cancer
The International Union against Cancer uses the
TNM system of staging, which is intended to en-
able different centres to compare their results (Fig.
16.4).
T staging system takes into account the evidence
on which the depth of invasion has been assessed;
e.g., the preﬁx T means a clinical guess, based on
the assessment at the time of cystoscopy. A lower
case p is added when there is a deep biopsy show-
ing enough muscle to tell whether it has been in-
vaded or not. An upper case P means that part or
all of the bladder muscle has been removed.
N staging – the assessment of lymph node in-
volvement – is always guesswork unless the lymph
nodes have been removed surgically and sent for
histological examination. Computed tomography
(CT) and magnetic resonance imaging can detect
the larger metastases with much less accuracy.
T3a
T3b
T4b
T4a
Tis
Ta
T1
T2
Figure 16.4 Staging of bladder cancer.
M staging – the detection of visceral metastases –
depends on chest X-rays and ultrasound scanning
of the liver.
The differences in the methods used to stage
bladder cancer make it necessary to be wary
of comparing the results of different forms of
treatment, e.g. total cystectomy (where there is
pathological evidence of depth of invasion and
lymph
node
involvement)
with
radiotherapy,
or chemotherapy, where staging based only on
biopsies, CT and ultrasound scanning tends to
underestimate the stage.
Clinical features
Screening of symptomless patients
Patients thought to be at risk, e.g. who worked
in the chemical and rubber industry before the
carcinogens were eliminated, have their urine
screened annually for malignant cells. The cyto-
logical diagnosis of cancer depends on recognis-
ing large, multinucleated malignant cells in the
urine (Fig. 16.5). If the tumour is G1 (well differ-
entiated), the cells may go unrecognised unless by
chance a broken-off frond of a papillary tumour is
discovered. Automated ﬂow cytometry measures the
nuclear:cytoplasm ratio in large numbers of cells,
thus avoiding observer error.
149

Chapter 16 Bladder cancer
Figure 16.5 Malignant cells in the urine.
Symptoms
More than 80% of patients with bladder cancer
present with haematuria (Fig. 16.6), which is the
reason why every patient with haematuria must be
cystoscoped. This rule applies whether the blood
has been seen with the naked eye, or found by the
stix test. The other 20% have not noticed blood in
their urine and it is important to be aware of the
other symptoms that should raise suspicion.
Hydronephrosis
(pyonephrosis
uraemia)
Bleeding
(haematuria
anaemia)
Obstruction
(irritable bladder)
Figure 16.6 Clinical features of bladder cancer.
‘Cystitis’ with sterile pyuria: The urothelium
around a bladder tumour is often inﬂamed,
and the patient may have frequency and pain
on voiding, just like bacterial ordinary cysti-
tis. The clue is to ﬁnd many ‘pus cells’ in the
urine on microscopy, but no microorganisms
in culture. Cancer cells can look very like leu-
cocytes on ordinary microscopy. Sterile pyuria
equals cancer until proven otherwise.
The decoy prostate: Most bladder cancers occur in
elderly men, in whom irritability of the blad-
der often suggests prostatic outﬂow obstruc-
tion. To avoid this pitfall every man with ‘pro-
statism’ must have his urine tested for blood
and cytology, and before prostatectomy the
bladder must always be carefully examined by
cytoscopy to rule out a small cancer.
Anaemia: Continued loss of blood in the urine
sometimes brings a patient to the doctor with
anaemia, out of all proportion to the size of
the cancer.
Urinary infection: Infection occurring for no ob-
vious reason in an elderly patient, particularly
a heavy smoker, should be regarded with sus-
picion: it may be arising in the necrotic super-
ﬁcial part of a solid tumour.
Pain: This usually means that the cancer has in-
vaded outside the bladder.
Physical signs
There are usually none, except in the rare tumour
that arises from the urachus, when a hard mass
is felt between the symphysis and the umbilicus.
Otherwise if a mass can be felt, it signiﬁes gross
extension of the cancer.
Investigations
Doctors should respond to the ﬁnding of haema-
turia almost with a knee-jerk: haematuria = intra-
venous urogram (IVU) + cystoscopy.
The IVU
It may show a ﬁlling defect in the bladder
(Fig.16.7), if a ureter is obstructed, it usually means
150

Bladder cancer Chapter 16
Figure 16.7 IVU in bladder cancer showing large ﬁlling
defect.
the muscle near the ureteric oriﬁce is invaded by
tumour (T2).
Ultrasound
Scanning of the bladder may show a large tumour
(Fig. 16.8) and can also indicate if there is obstruc-
tion of the ureters.
Cystoscopy
Flexible cystoscopy is quick and painless and does
not require admission to hospital, but if a can-
cer has already been detected in the IVU the ﬂexi-
ble cystoscopy can be bypassed and arrangements
made for cystoscopy under general or regional
anaesthesia.
Under anaesthesia the tumour is resected with
the resectoscope, or at the very least a biopsy is ob-
Figure 16.8 Ultrasound image showing bladder tumour.
tained with the resectoscope or cup forceps (Fig.
16.9). An adequate biopsy must include muscle
from the base of the tumour to establish its depth
of invasion (Fig. 16.10). After the tumour has been
resected, bimanual examination is performed to
detect induration which might signify deep mus-
cle invasion, e.g. T3.
Treatment of bladder cancer
Carcinoma in situ (G3 pTis)
This usually presents as ‘cystitis’ in a heavy smoker,
who has seldom noticed haematuria. The urine is
sterile on culture but full of cells which may be
mistaken as leukocytes but prove to be malignant
on cytological examination (Fig. 16.11). On cys-
toscopy the bladder may look a little inﬂamed.
Biopsies of the urothelium conﬁrm the diagnosis.
The condition often responds with instillations of
Figure 16.9 Storz cup biopsy forceps.
151

Chapter 16 Bladder cancer
Figure 16.10 Biopsy taken with cup forceps.
bacille Calmette–Gu´erin (BCG) but must be kept
under close review because it very easily turns into
G3 invasive cancer.
Ta and T1 urothelial cancer
These tumours are initially removed by the resec-
toscope (Fig.16.12) at the time of the initial assess-
ment. If two or three have been resected with an
adequate base of muscle (Fig.16.13), the remain-
der may be coagulated with the diathermy ball
(Fig.16.14). The same coagulation can be obtained
using the neodymium–yttrium/aluminium/garnet
Malignant cells can be identified
in urine by Papanicolaou test
Tis
Lamina propria
Mucosa
Basement
membrane
Jewett’s
half-way
line
Deep muscle
Superficial muscle
Fat
Figure 16.11 Flat carcinoma in situ.
(YAG) laser (Fig.16.15). Patients are all carefully
followed up at regular intervals by cytology and
ﬂexible cystoscopy. Recurrences are treated by
transurethral resection or coagulation.
Transurethral resection of a bladder
tumour
If the IVU or ﬂexible cystoscopy has revealed a
bulky tumour, serum should be sent for group-
ing in case blood is needed. The operation re-
quires general or spinal anaesthetic, and can be
prolonged and often quite difﬁcult. The object is to
152

Bladder cancer Chapter 16
Penetration of
basement
membrane
Lamina propria
Ta
T1
Figure 16.12 Ta and T1 carcinoma of the
bladder.
cut away the ‘bush’ to reveal the ‘stalk’ of the can-
cer (Fig. 16.16). This is thoroughly coagulated to
control bleeding, and then removed down to the
deeper layers of the detrusor muscle. The ‘bush’
and the ‘stalk’ are sent separately to the labora-
tory so that the pathologist can tell how deeply
the muscle is invaded. After all the bleeding has
been stopped, a catheter is left in for a day or two.
Possible complications include perforation of the
Bladder muscle
fibres
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 16.13 Small papillary tumour removed with resec-
toscope loop.
wall of the bladder, absorption of irrigating ﬂuid
and bleeding.
Adjuvant treatment
When there are very frequent and multiple recur-
rences the patient is given a course of intravesi-
cal instillations of BCG or some other antimitotic
agent such as Mitomycin, Adriamycin or Epodyl. The
most useful of these is BCG, but it causes a more
or less painful cystitis. Although the response to
the ﬁrst course of BCG may be permanent, sev-
eral maintenance courses are usually needed. Oc-
casionally, the mild form of tuberculosis caused by
the attenuated BCG may be followed by hepatitis,
and require systemic antituberculous therapy. In-
stillation of a single dose of Mitomycin following
the resection is often given to reduce the chance
of recurrences.
Mitomycin treatment may cause an allergic re-
action if it gets into contact with skin.
Figure 16.14 Small papillary tumour coagulated with roly-
ball electrode.
153

Chapter 16 Bladder cancer
Figure 16.15 Small papillary tumour coagulated with YAG
laser through ﬂexible cystoscope.
G3 superﬁcial cancers
Notable exceptions to this rather conservative pol-
icy are the uncommon G3 superﬁcial papillary tu-
mours. These carry such a bad prognosis that they
are generally treated as if they are already invading
the wall of the bladder (see below).
T2 and T3 invasive cancers
Most of these invasive cancers are G3. The dis-
tinction between T2 and T3 is somewhat artiﬁ-
(a)
(d)
(e)
(b)
(c)
Figure 16.16 Transurethral resection of a bladder tumour.
Superficial muscle
invaded
Jewett’s half-way line
T2
Figure 16.17 T2 bladder cancer.
cial, being based on an imaginary half-way line in
the bladder muscle (Fig. 16.17). and (Fig. 16.18).
Although the T2 cancers have a slightly better
prognosis than T3, the difference is slight when
compared with the dramatic worsening in survival
once muscle begins to be invaded.
There are three main methods of treatment but
there is no agreement as to how best to combine
them.
Radiotherapy
About half of the G3 muscle-invading cancers will
disappear completely after a course of 5500cGy
from the linear accelerator. There is at present no
way of predicting which cancer will respond, al-
though the presence of squamous metaplasia and
154

Bladder cancer Chapter 16
Invasion through wall
of the bladder
T3b
T3a
Deep muscle invaded
Jewett’s half-way
line
Figure 16.18 T3 bladder cancers.
staining for β-human chorionic gonadotrophin
in the tissue strongly suggest that it will not.
Whether radiotherapy is chosen as the primary
treatment or cystectomy, patients are followed up
regularly for recurrences. If radiotherapy is chosen,
‘salvage’ cystectomy can be offered when the can-
cer fails to go away completely or comes back later.
The disadvantages of radiotherapy are that if cys-
tectomy is needed later on because of persistent or
recurrent cancer, it is more difﬁcult because radia-
tion impairs healing. For the same reason it is more
difﬁcult to construct a new bladder from bowel,
and the patient usually requires an ileal loop di-
version. There may be also late complications from
stricture in the bowel due to irradiation. The disad-
vantage of performing cystectomy as the method
of ﬁrst choice is that it denies the patient the pos-
Third or inferior
ribbon of vessels
Figure 16.19 Dividing the main vessels of the bladder.
sible adjuvant effect of radiation, and the chance
of escaping cystectomy altogether. The long-term
results are much the same and it is usual nowadays
to explain the pros and cons of each method to the
patient. Neo-adjuvant chemotherapy given before
radiotherapy in three cycles over a 3- to 4-month
period may improve the results.
Radical cystectomy
The operation has the advantage of giving a true
P staging, and can be combined with removal of
pelvic lymph nodes which may not only provide
Figure 16.20 The empty pelvis after the bladder has been
removed.
155

Chapter 16 Bladder cancer
Ureter
Sigmoid
Figure 16.21 Ureterosigmoidostomy.
an accurate N staging, but may be curative. This
is still a very major operation, and the patient
needs to understand fully its grave implications.
Nearly every male is rendered impotent although
it is sometimes possible to protect the nerve supply
to the penis and preserve potency. It is essential to
discuss all the implications and problems that are
associated with various forms of urinary diversion
or the reconstruction of a new bladder from small
or large bowel.
Preparation
The bowel is prepared with a high ﬂuid intake
and antibiotics. Anaemia is corrected by appro-
priate transfusion. Smoking is forbidden to min-
Peritoneum
Ileal conduit
Figure 16.22 Ileal conduit.
imise chest infection. Six units of blood are cross-
matched. The site for the ileal conduit is carefully
selected and marked, using a dummy bag contain-
ing water.
Operative steps
All the lymph nodes are dissected off the aorta,
common and internal iliac vessels on each side and
sent for frozen section. If they are involved, the op-
eration may be abandoned subject to the surgeon’s
choice. All the vessels supplying the bladder from
the internal iliac artery are divided between liga-
tures, one after the other (Fig. 16.19). The ureters
are divided about 5 cm away from the bladder
(Fig. 16.20). When there are multiple tumours,
there is a chance of recurrent cancer in the ure-
thra so it is removed en bloc with the bladder and
prostate.
Urinary diversion
Ureterosigmoidoscopy
This is the oldest technique. The ureters are led
through tunnels in the wall of the sigmoid to pre-
vent faeces from reﬂuxing up them to the kidney
(Fig. 16.21). Unfortunately, this operation was fre-
quently followed by infection, and absorption of
urine from the colon led to hyperchloraemic aci-
dosis and renal failure. It has been almost entirely
abandoned.
Ileal conduit
The ureters are anastomosed to one end of an iso-
lated loop of ileum whose other end is led onto
156

Bladder cancer Chapter 16
Antireflux
anastomosis
Ileal loop
Urethra
Figure 16.23 Neocystoplasty by Camey’s method.
the skin to form a urostomy which is ﬁtted with
an adhesive bag (Fig. 16.22). Care must be taken
in choosing the site for the stoma: it must not rub
against the belt or lie in a scar or crease or else the
bag will come unstuck.
15 cm
20 cm
15 cm
(a)
(b) Window in mesentery
Ureters
Abdominal
stoma
(c)
(d)  One nipple intussuscepted
       and fixed with staples
(e)  Second nipple
intussuscepted
(f)
Figure 16.24 Kock’s continent pouch.
Continent reservoir
After removing the bladder, a new one is con-
structed out of intestine. Numerous different
methods are in use, but they all share certain prin-
ciples: the bowel is open and closed in such a way
that powerful peristaltic waves do not generate an
increase in pressure, and precautions are taken to
prevent reﬂux of urine from the new bladder up
the ureters (Fig. 16.23).
If the urethra has been removed, a stoma is made
onto the skin which is designed to be continent,
so that the patient empties it from time to time
with a catheter (Fig. 16.24).
If the urethra has not been removed, the reser-
voir can be sewn onto the stump of urethra
and in many cases normal voiding is established
(Fig. 16.25).
Absorption of urine from the bowel that has
been used to make the new bladder still leads to
the biochemical complication of hyperchloraemic
acidosis, and these patients all need to be carefully
followed to make sure that infection and stone
157

Chapter 16 Bladder cancer
Urethra
Figure 16.25 A Kock pouch may be anastomosed to the
urethra.
formation in the new reservoir are detected and
treated.
In Egypt, where cystectomy is required for squa-
mous cell cancer after schistosomiasis, and the
poor farm labourers cannot afford adhesive appli-
ances, an ingenious method of diversion has been
devised that makes use of the anal sphincter for
continence (Fig. 16.26).
Ureter
Rectosigmoid
intussuscepted
to form nipple
valve
Ureter
Incision in
anterior wall of
rectosigmoid
Sigmoid
Ureter
De-tubularised
patch of ileum
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 16.26 Ghoneim’s continent diversion.
Complications of cystectomy
Ileus is always prolonged after cystectomy, the
more so if there has been irradiation. During this
time the bowel is kept deﬂated with a nasogastric
tube or gastrostomy. Parenteral nutrition is given.
Leakage from the anastomoses between the
ureters and the new bladder or ileal conduit, or
from the reconstructed bladder, calls for strict vig-
ilance in the early postoperative period. It is not
unusual to have to revise the reservoir.
Pulmonary infection may require physiotherapy
and antibiotics.
Deep venous thrombosis and pulmonary em-
bolism are common complications and call for the
usual prevention.
As with other urological operative procedures
where minimally invasive surgical treatment is
considered, laparoscopic cystectomy is being per-
formed in suitably selected patients. It promises
minimal blood loss, reduced length of ileus and
quicker recovery.
Carcinoma of the urachus
This is very uncommon. The tumour is found
on cystoscopy as a cherry-like swelling at the
top of the bladder. Outside it is a much larger
mass (Fig. 16.27). Biopsy shows adenocarcinoma.
It is treated by a wide excision that takes all the
158

Bladder cancer Chapter 16
Figure 16.27 Carcinoma of the urachus.
triangle of tissue from the umbilicus down to the
upper part of the bladder as well as all the regional
lymph nodes. The small residual bladder is closed,
but enlarges to its former capacity within a few
weeks (Fig. 16.28).
Tumour
Clear
margin
<2 cm
Figure 16.28 Subtotal cystectomy for carcinoma of the
urachus.
Combination chemotherapy
Various combinations of chemotherapeutic agents
have been used which may give ‘complete remis-
sion’ in about half of the cases, but the treatments
are all toxic and the response seldom prolonged. In
most centres these regimes are reserved for patients
who refuse or are not ﬁt to undergo cystectomy,
or as part of a combination with radiotherapy and
‘salvage’ cystectomy.
Palliation
When treatment has failed we are faced with an el-
derly patient, who has to void blood-stained urine
with pain and difﬁculty every few minutes by day
and night. Pain and infection in recurrent necrotic
tumour makes the patient even more ill. Cancer of
the bladder seldom brings a quick and merciful
end from metastases.
Surgeons can do much towards the relief of
suffering. A palliative urinary diversion with a
ureterosigmoidostomy or an ileal conduit may
stop the painful frequency. Palliative radiotherapy
may stop bleeding and control pain. Pain-relieving
159

Chapter 16 Bladder cancer
medication should be provided at the control of
the patient, i.e. when needed, not according to
the hour, for pain knows no clock.
In the end, you are the doctor. You may be em-
barrassed and reluctant to visit your patients be-
cause you are ashamed of having so little to offer.
Do not be mistaken: you can provide something
of special value merely by being there from time
to time. You can at least show that you are still the
patient’s friend, and that you care.
160

Chapter 17
The bladder: disorders of micturition
Diuresis
Polydipsia
Some patients, who are otherwise perfectly nor-
mal, form the habit of drinking an excessive
amount of ﬂuid: what goes in must come out. The
diagnosis is made by asking the patient to keep a
diary of his or her input and output of ﬂuid.
Diabetes mellitus
Nothing is simpler than to test for glucose in the
urine.
Diabetes insipidus
The anterior pituitary may fail to secrete antidi-
uretic hormone so that the patient is unable to
concentrate urine. In children the enormous out-
put of urine may lead to dilatation of the entire
urinary tract. It can be treated with small doses of
desmopressin.
Renal tubular disorders
The renal tubules fail to concentrate urine for three
main reasons:
1 Obstruction: In bilateral hydronephrosis there is
loss of the renal papillae so that water and salt are
not reabsorbed. The urine is pale and of ﬁxed spe-
ciﬁc gravity: the patient may become dehydrated
and short of salt.
2 Old age: The pituitary fails to secrete the usual
amount of antidiuretic hormone at night in old
people, and at the same time the inferior vena cava
fails to contract when the patient lies down, so that
there is continued secretion of the atrial natriuretic
hormone. Often this coexists with a mild degree of
heart failure: the ﬂuid retained in the lower limbs
in the day as oedema is excreted at night. The diag-
nosis is easily made by asking the patient to keep
a diary of the volumes of urine he or she passes
at night. A small dose of desmopressin, e.g. 10–20
µg at bedtime, may give the patient a good night’s
rest.
3 Sickle-cell disease: Both homozygous and het-
erozygous forms of the disease may give rise to
loss of function of the renal papillae. There is of-
ten microscopic haematuria; the urine has a ﬁxed
speciﬁc gravity and there is often a mild diuresis.
Neuropathy
Overstimulation of the afferent arm of
the micturition reﬂex
Anything which makes the lining of the bladder
more sensitive may provoke detrusor contraction
Lecture Notes: Urology, 6th edition. By John Blandy and
Amir Kaisary. Published 2009 by Blackwell Publishing.
ISBN: 978-1-4051-2270-2.
161

Chapter 17 The bladder: disorders of micturition
Afferent arc
Source of
irritation in
bladder
Figure 17.1 Overstimulation of the afferent arm of the
micturition reﬂex.
before the bladder is full (Fig. 17.1), e.g. a stone, in-
fection or carcinoma. At its worst the patient may
be unable to inhibit this contraction and there
is urge incontinence. Urodynamic studies will show
uninhibited detrusor contractions, a normal ﬂow
rate, normal sphincters but a small voided volume.
Excessive central facilitation
Every examination candidate knows that anxiety
can cause frequency (Fig. 17.2). In major anxiety
states, frequency and even urge incontinence are
common, and can make life intolerable. As a gen-
eral rule this type of frequency only occurs in the
daytime, in contrast to the frequency caused by
irritation of the urothelium (above).
Lack of central inhibition of the reﬂex
(Fig. 17.3)
Bed-wetting
Babies, like puppies and kittens, have to learn to
inhibit the reﬂex emptying of the full bladder until
Excess central facilitation
Figure 17.2 Excessive central facilitation.
time and place are convenient. In some children
this learning process is delayed: many children
who wet the bed seem to sleep unusually deeply.
In practice it is difﬁcult to know how far investi-
gate an otherwise normal child, since bed-wetting
is normal up to the age of 5 or 6. The urine should
always be tested to exclude infection. Treatment
exploits three principles:
1 A small dose of pituitary antidiuretic hormone
is given (desmopressin 5–20 µg at bedtime).
2 Imipramine may work by lightening sleep, or by
soothing the detrusor.
3 A buzzer which sounds when soaked with urine
may establish a conditioned reﬂex provided the
child is woken up and taken to the lavatory.
Senility
A humiliating feature of old age is incontinence of
urine. A brief visit to a residential home for older
people is enough to show how poorly we deal with
it. There is usually a mixture of causes:
lack of central inhibition, e.g. after a stroke;
unawareness of a full bladder;
detrusor instability; and
immobility, from arthritis or weakness, prevent-
ing the person from getting to the lavatory on
time.
The management is difﬁcult and takes patience.
A friendly reminder at regular intervals may en-
courage emptying of the bladder before there is
an accident. Underpants with an absorbent pad
placed outside a layer of unwettable material may
keep the skin relatively dry, but the pads must be
changed regularly, or they stink of ammonia. For
men a condom urinal may keep him dry and com-
fortable (Fig. 17.4).
High spinal cord lesions
Messages from higher centres may be prevented
from descending to S2 and S3 because of a lesion
in the spinal cord. As a result there may be no coor-
dination between contraction of the detrusor and
relaxation of the sphincters. The detrusor contracts
but the sphincters stay shut; the intravesical pres-
sure rises and may cause dilatation of the ureters
162

The bladder: disorders of micturition Chapter 17
Injury
Spinal
centre
isolated
Reflex activity continues in
isolation. Pudendal inhibition
may be incomplete
Figure 17.3 Lack of central inhibition.
Figure 17.4 Condom urinal.
163

Chapter 17 The bladder: disorders of micturition
Pudendal nerve not inhibited
Figure 17.5 Failure of the external sphincter to relax when
the detrusor contracts.
and obstructive uropathy (Fig. 17.5). The intrav-
esical voiding pressure above which upper tract
damage occurs is remarkably low, e.g. about 40 cm
H2O.
Trauma
When the spinal cord lesion is caused by trauma
there is a period of spinal shock during which
oedema makes the lesion seem worse than it re-
ally is. Hence at ﬁrst no irreversible steps are taken,
and the bladder is merely kept empty by regular in-
termittent catheterisation. When enough time has
elapsed to allow the spinal shock to recover, urody-
namic measurements may show that the sphincters
are failing to relax in harmony with the contrac-
tion of the detrusor. There are now ﬁve possible
options:
1 Intermittent
self-catheterisation:
The
patient
learns to pass a catheter regularly to keep the blad-
der empty. Unfortunately, with some high spinal
cord lesions the detrusor may contract sponta-
neously even when the bladder is almost empty,
so that the patient is wet, and a dangerously high
pressure may be generated inside the bladder.
2 Sphincterotomy: The three parts of the sphincter
in the male may be divided through a resectoscope
one at a time, in the hope that the bladder will
empty at a less than dangerously high pressure.
Sometimes sphincterotomy of the bladder neck is
enough to allow the patient to remain dry. More
often it is necessary to divide the supramembra-
nous and external sphincters as well.
3 Clam cystoplasty: When there is a very high pres-
sure inside the bladder, it is opened like a clam,
and a length of ileum is isolated, slit open and
sewn into the gap (Fig. 17.6). When the detrusor
contracts, the patch of bowel balloons out and the
pressure does not rise. This protects the kidneys. In
some cases, with the assistance of a partial sphinc-
terotomy, continence can be preserved. In others,
the patient may still have to empty the bladder by
intermittent clean self-catheterisation.
4 Nerve root division and stimulation: The afferent
nerve roots to S2 and S3 may be divided, and the
efferent nerve roots may be ﬁtted with stimulators
that enable the bladder to contract at will. These
new procedures are undergoing trial and develop-
ment (Fig. 17.7).
5 Diversion: Unfortunately many patients, partic-
ularly those with weakness of the upper limbs, or
who are conﬁned to a wheelchair, are not able
to practice intermittent clean self-catheterisation.
For them an ileal conduit or a form of con-
tinent diversion may be the most appropriate
solution.
Lesions of the bladder centre at S2
and S3
Destruction of S2 and S3
The S2 and S3 segments are situated in the conus
medullaris at the tip of the spinal cord, just op-
posite the disc between T12 and L1 vertebrae
which are most often injured in accidents. To show
whether they are intact there are three useful tests
(Fig. 17.8):
1 The bulbospongiosus reﬂex: Pinch the glans penis
and feel for a contraction of the bulbospongiosus
muscle (Fig. 17.9).
2 Cystometrogram: The return of detrusor contrac-
tions (which can be provoked with ice-cold water)
means that the reﬂex arc must be intact.
3 Electromyography of the levator ani: When the S2
and S3 segments are destroyed there are no action
potentials in the levator ani.
Management
Without a reﬂex arc to drive it, the bladder be-
comes an inert ﬂoppy bag which ﬁlls up and
then starts to leak – overﬂow incontinence. It can
164

The bladder: disorders of micturition Chapter 17
Figure 17.6 Clam cystoplasty.
sometimes be emptied by suprapubic compression
although this may raise the pressure inside the
bladder and threaten the upper tracts. Emptying
may be incomplete and infection often develops
in the residual urine. For these reasons patients
are usually advised to perform intermittent clean
self-catheterisation at least twice a day.
Irritation of S2 and S3
Cauda equina lesions
The most medial ﬁbres of the cauda equina going
to and from S2 and S3 may be irritated by a cen-
tral prolapse of a lumbar intervertebral disc, caus-
ing a combination of frequency and impotence.
165

Chapter 17 The bladder: disorders of micturition
Figure 17.7 Nerve root division and stimulation.
Removal of the offending disc may cure both dis-
orders (Fig. 17.10).
Lesions of the pelvic autonomic nerves
Parasympathetic nerves
The pelvic parasympathetic nerves may be torn in
fractures of the pelvis or removed in the course
of radical surgery for cancer. Their myelin sheaths
are frequently involved in diabetes mellitus and the
Shy–Drager syndrome. The result is a big ﬂoppy
bladder with an inert detrusor.
Sympathetic nerves
If the presacral sympathetic nerves are affected by
these conditions the seminal vesicles and bladder
T12
L1
fracture-
dislocation
S2 and S3 segments
destroyed
Pudendal nerve
Parasympathetic nerves
Figure 17.8 Destruction of the S2 and S3 segments, e.g. by fracture.
Figure 17.9 Bulbospongiosus reﬂex.
neck do not contract during ejaculation with the
result that there is retrograde emission of semen.
The detrusor function is unaffected.
Detrusor instability
When no cause can be found for uninhibited
contractions of the detrusor, it is called detru-
sor instability, so it is a diagnosis that can be
made only by exclusion. A degree of detrusor
instability is found in many normal people if
subjected to careful urodynamic studies. Such de-
trusor contractions can be precipitated by cough-
ing or straining, and can easily be confused
with stress incontinence (see below). At present
166

The bladder: disorders of micturition Chapter 17
All nerve roots irritated
T12
L1
L5
Disc
Cauda
equina
S2,3
Figure 17.10 Cauda equina lesion irritating afferent and efferent limbs of the reﬂex arc.
the cause of detrusor instability is not known,
with the result that there are many theories and
many types of treatment, none of which are very
effective.
Mechanical lesions of the bladder
outlet
Obstruction
Whether the cause is neuropathic failure of the
sphincters to relax in harmony with the contrac-
tion of the detrusor, obstruction by enlargement
of the prostate, or a stricture of the urethra, there
are two phases to the response of the detrusor:
1 Compensatory hypertrophy: The detrusor responds
to the demand for a stronger contraction by an in-
crease in the size and strength of its smooth muscle
ﬁbres, and a coarsening of the network in which
they are arranged – trabeculation (Fig. 17.11). The
urothelium begins to bulge out through the gaps
in the network forming saccules which eventually
balloon right outside the bladder as diverticula.
During this phase of compensatory hypertrophy
unstable detrusor contractions occur, generating
a high pressure, and sometimes leading to incon-
tinence of urine. This is one form of instability
which can be reversed by removing the cause of
the obstruction.
2 Detrusor failure: Like any muscle that has to go
on working against abnormal resistance, the detru-
sor eventually gives up. Instead of emptying the
bladder completely, it slowly permits the quantity
of residual urine to increase. The time comes when
detrusor contractions disappear entirely from the
cystometrogram, perhaps because any weak end
efforts of the muscle are absorbed by the thin-
walled diverticula. The ﬂow is reduced to a trickle,
and then only the pressure in the bladder is in-
creased by abdominal straining or coughing. Be-
fore long the huge ﬂoppy bladder dribbles with-
out control – retention with overﬂow (Fig. 17.12).
Such a bladder never recovers its normal function
even with prolonged drainage and removal of the
obstruction. The residual urine easily becomes in-
fected. Stones or cancer may develop silently in the
diverticula.
Detrusor–sphincter dyssynergia
Detrusor contraction without synchronous relax-
ation of the sphincters is easily understood when
there is an obvious neurological disorder, but it
may occur from time to time in otherwise normal
people. Urodynamic studies show a high detrusor
pressure, but one or other part of the sphincter
fails to relax.
167

Chapter 17 The bladder: disorders of micturition
Normal
Hypertrophy with
diverticulum formation
Detrusor failure with chronic retention
Figure 17.11 Compensatory hypertrophy
of the detrusor.
Prostatic
obstruction
Distorted external
sphincter
Thin fibrotic atonic detrusor muscle
Presence of diverticula
impairs efficiency of
detrusor contraction
Intact reflex arc
Figure 17.12 Detrusor failure.
168

The bladder: disorders of micturition Chapter 17
Bladder neck
resected
External sphincter
cut
Figure 17.13 Incontinence following division of both
sphincters.
The most common form is seen in middle-aged
men, where the alpha-adrenergic ﬁbres of the blad-
der neck fail to relax. This can be successfully
treated with alpha-blockers such as prazosin, indo-
ramin or tamsulosin. If this gives a good clinical
result, the ﬁbres may be divided by transurethral
incision of the bladder neck.
When it is the striated muscle component of the
sphincter that fails to relax, the diagnosis can be
conﬁrmed by electromyography of the levator ani
muscle, which will show the action potentials con-
tinuing loudly when there ought to be electrical
silence. Sometimes listening to the noise of the
action potentials on a loudspeaker enables the pa-
tient to inhibit them herself – so-called biofeed-
back.
Sphincter damage
Prostatectomy: The bladder neck is removed
as a deliberate part of the operation of
transurethral resection for benign enlarge-
ment of the prostate and radical prostatec-
tomy for cancer. Sometimes the supramem-
branous component of the external sphincter
is cut by accident during transurethral resec-
tion (Fig. 17.13).
Fractured pelvis: The sphincters may be injured
if the bladder neck is lacerated by a fracture
of the pelvis, or if the fracture ruptures the
presacral sympathetic nerves.
Cancer of the prostate: Prostatic cancer may inﬁl-
trate the sphincters causing them to lie per-
manently stiff and half-open.
Investigation
Urodynamic measurements show a normal, stable
detrusor, but negligible outﬂow resistance.
Treatment
When the lesion is minor, the external sphincter
may be strengthened by pelvic ﬂoor exercises. In
more serious cases an appliance is used to compress
the urethra.
The oldest is the Cunningham clip (Fig. 17.14),
whose sponge–rubber jaws gently compress the
urethra. It can be put on and off by the patient,
is cheap and relatively safe but risks pressure in-
jury to the urethra.
The
newest
is
the
Brantley–Scott
artiﬁcial
sphincter. A thin silicone balloon-shaped like a
doughnut is placed round the urethra and con-
nected to a reservoir which can be emptied or ﬁlled
by a bulb placed under the skin where the patient
can compress it. These expensive miracles of engi-
neering are apt to suffer mechanical failure, infec-
tion and erosion into the urethra (Fig. 17.15).
Herniation of the base of the bladder
through the pelvic ﬂoor
In women there is a short length of urethra above
the levator ani shelf. When she coughs, the ab-
dominal pressure squeezes this length of urethra
Figure 17.14 Cunningham clamp.
169

Chapter 17 The bladder: disorders of micturition
Filling/emptying
cylinder
Fluid
reservoir
Sphincter
Figure 17.15 Brantley–Scott artiﬁcial sphincter.
by exactly the same amount as it squeezes the blad-
der. In many women, especially (but not always)
those who have borne children, the normal gap
in the levator ani for the urethra is enlarged, and
allows it to descend so that the intra-abdominal
pressure can no longer squeeze it shut (Fig. 17.16).
Now when the patient coughs or laughs there is a
little spurt of urine – stress incontinence.
Diagnosis
Clinical examination
In genuine stress incontinence (GSI) there is leak-
age of urine when the patient coughs. This can
be prevented by lifting up the anterior wall of
the vagina with a ﬁnger on either side of the
urethra (Bonney’s or Marshall’s test). The test
should be done with the patient standing upright
(Fig. 17.17).
Urodynamics
Because a similar escape of urine is seen in detrusor
instability these patients need urodynamic testing
Urethro-trigonal
angle
Intra-abdominal pressure
Figure 17.16 Herniation of the bladder through the pelvic
ﬂoor: the aim of all operations is to lift the urethra up
again so that any increase of intra-abdominal pressure will
compress the urethra.
Figure 17.17 Marshall’s test.
170

The bladder: disorders of micturition Chapter 17
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 17.18 Stamey sutures.
to rule it out before they are accepted as having
GSI.
Treatment of GSI
There are ﬁve procedures as follows:
1 Stamey, Raz, Pereira sutures: Described by vari-
ous surgeons, non-absorbable sutures are placed
to lift up the vaginal wall on either side of the ure-
thra, just as in the Bonney–Marshall clinical test
(Fig. 17.18). The operation is easy for the patient,
but the stitches tend to cut out like cheesewire and
there is a high recurrence rate after 2 years.
2 Anterior colporrhaphy: Through a vaginal incision
the connective tissue on either side of the urethra
is approximated to support the neck of the bladder.
The long-term results are discouraging (Fig. 17.19).
3 Burch colposuspension: This is the classical and
most reliable procedure, which has been ‘in-
vented’ by several surgeons. Essentially, stitches
are placed into the vaginal wall on either side of
the urethra, and then through the pectineal fas-
cia (Burch). The end result is to achieve some-
thing comparable to the Marshall–Bonney test
(Fig. 17.20).
171

Chapter 17 The bladder: disorders of micturition
Vaginal
mucosa
closed
Plicating
sutures
Vaginal
mucosa
Figure 17.19 Anterior colporrhaphy.
4 Sling operations: A sling of some convenient ma-
terial, preferably living rather than artiﬁcial, is
used to lift up the bladder neck on a hammock.
Millin used a strip of rectus abdominis fascia. Oth-
ers use fascia or artiﬁcial materials, but these tend
eventually to erode-like cheesewire into the blad-
der and form a stone (Fig. 17.21). New materials are
continually being tried in the hope of improving
the results of these sling operations.
Figure 17.20 Vaginal colposuspension.
5 Periurethral injections: Various substances have
been injected around the bladder neck to give
bulk to the tissue around the bladder neck
and sphincter. A suspension of Teﬂon was the
ﬁrst, but was given up when it was discovered
that the material got into the brain of experi-
mental animals. Collagen paste and suspensions
of the patient’s own fat are now under trial
(Fig. 17.22).
Gimbernat
Figure 17.21 Millin’s sling operation.
172

The bladder: disorders of micturition Chapter 17
Figure 17.22 Injections of Teﬂon or collagen paste around
the bladder neck.
Pharmacological treatment
Medication
can
be
helpful
in
the
common
disorders of bladder function (Fig. 17.23). The
smooth muscle of the detrusor is cholinergic.
To encourage the bladder to empty, one can
give bethanechol to release acetylcholine from
Bethanecol
Acetylcholine
Blocked by
atropine,
propantheline
Ephedrine,
imipramine 
etc.
Alpha-adrenergic
Blocked by
phenoxybenzamine
Figure 17.23 Action of drugs on the bladder.
the postganglionic ﬁbres in the detrusor. To
discourage an over-active bladder, one may try
propantheline or one of the many medications
which belong to the anticholinergic family and are
claimed to have more efﬁcacy and fewer adverse
effects. The smooth muscles of the sphincters
are alpha-adrenergic (Fig. 17.23). Weakness of
the smooth muscle of the sphincters is occa-
sionally helped by an adrenergic drug such as
ephedrine or imipramine, and alpha-blockers are
sometimes effective in treating detrusor sphincter
dyssynergia.
173

Chapter 18
The prostate gland: benign disorders
Surgical anatomy
The prostate is made up of several zones which
ﬁt into each other like an egg in an egg-cup. Be-
nign enlargement mainly arises in the transition
zone, cancer in the peripheral zone. The ejac-
ulatory ducts run between the two main zones
and empty into the urethra at the verumontanum
(Fig. 18.1).
The prostate is closely related to the three ele-
ments of the sphincter in the male:
The bladder neck (internal sphincteric mech-
anism) is a collection of alpha-adrenergic
smooth
muscle,
supplied
by
sympathetic
nerve ﬁbres.
The
supramembranous
external
sphincter,
partly smooth muscle, partly striated, is just
below the verumontanum, and also supplied
by sympathetic nerve ﬁbres.
The levator ani, voluntary striated muscle sup-
plied by the pudendal nerve.
Anatomical relations
Anterior to the prostate is the symphysis pubis.
Posteriorly, the prostate is separated from the rec-
tum by the fascia of Denonvilliers. Behind and
above the prostate lie the bladder, seminal vesi-
cles, vasa deferentia and ureters (Fig. 18.2).
Structure of the prostate
The prostate is made up of glandular tubules
which open into the back of the urethra. Each
tubule is emptied by a contractile sleeve of smooth
muscle. Tubules and muscles are supported by
stroma of connective tissue. The three elements
of the prostate – glands, muscle and stroma – can
all enlarge and shrink at different times of life
(Fig. 18.3).
The prostate gland has a thin ﬁlm of connec-
tive tissue which separates the surrounding fat and
veins from the glandular tissue. This is important,
because the ‘capsule’ is repeatedly referred to in
discussions on the surgery of the prostate, nearly
always incorrectly (Fig. 18.4). The anterior ﬁbro-
muscular stroma is a thick sheet of connective tis-
sue that covers the entire anterior surface of the
prostate. The peripheral zone is the largest zone
of the prostate. The central zone is a small region
traversed by the ejaculatory ducts. The transition
zone is a small group of ducts arising at a single
point at the junction of the proximal and distal
urethral segments.
In childhood there are very few glands: they
appear and develop in puberty. In old age hy-
pertrophy of one or all three elements in the
Lecture Notes: Urology, 6th edition. By John Blandy and
Amir Kaisary. Published 2009 by Blackwell Publishing.
ISBN: 978-1-4051-2270-2.
174

The prostate gland: benign disorders Chapter 18
Figure 18.1 Inner and outer zones of the prostate.
transition zone around the periurethral area gives
rise to the nodules of benign prostatic enlarge-
ment. These nodules vary in size and may com-
press the outer zone of the prostate into a thin
shell and deform the prostate so as to give the
appearance of having two ‘lateral lobes’ and one
‘middle lobe’. These ‘lobes’ are not true func-
tional entities, but artefacts caused by the way
the prostate is conﬁned by the symphysis and the
bladder.
Vas deferens
Ureter
Seminal 
vesicle
Fascia of
Denonvilliers
Ejaculatory 
duct
Bulbar 
urethra
Peritoneum
Symphysis pubis
Verumontanum
External sphincter
Cowper's gland
Figure 18.2 Surgical anatomy of the prostate.
Physiology
The prostate is an accessory sex gland whose pri-
mary function is the support and promotion of
male sperm function and fertility. During ejacu-
lation it is thought that the prostate contracts to
secrete about 0.5–1.0 mL of ﬂuid which is added
to the ejaculate. The acini of these ducts are com-
posed of secretory cells, basal cells and neuroen-
docrine cells. It is the epithelial secretory cells
175

Chapter 18 The prostate gland: benign disorders
Prostatic ducts
Radial muscle
Verumontanum
Utriculus
masculinus
Circular muscle
of bladder neck
Longitudinal
smooth muscle
from detrusor
Ejaculatory duct
External sphincter
Figure 18.3 Structure of the prostate.
Figure 18.4 Section through the edge of the prostate
showing how the connective tissue of the ‘capsule’ is
continuous with that surrounding the vessels outside.
(Courtesy of the late Mr Basil Page.)
that produce both prostate-speciﬁc antigen and
prostate acid phosphatase.
Inﬂammation of the prostate
Prostatitis is overdiagnosed in patients with non-
speciﬁc perineal discomfort or lower urinary tract
symptoms. In 1995, classiﬁcation of the prostatitis
syndromes addressed the categories of the disease
based on the patient history, physical examination
and urine analysis/culture as the cornerstones (Ta-
ble 18.1).
Acute prostatitis
Acute bacterial prostatitis is a febrile illness with
sudden abrupt onset. There are marked genitouri-
nary symptoms and often a positive bacterial urine
culture.
Obstruction downstream to the prostate may
force urine up into its ducts and if the urine is
infected it causes inﬂammation. Blood-borne in-
fection is equally common.
Whatever the route of the infection, the prostate
becomes enlarged, painful on rectal palpation,
and may cause painful and obstructed micturi-
tion. Pathogens may be recovered from the urine.
Colour Doppler transrectal ultrasound scanning
may show hyperaemia (Fig. 18.5).
176

The prostate gland: benign disorders Chapter 18
Table 18.1 Classiﬁcation of the
prostatitis syndromes.
Category
Name
Deﬁnition
I
Acute bacterial
Acute infection of the prostate
II
Chronic bacterial
Chronic infection of the prostate
III
Chronic pelvic pain
syndrome
Symptoms without evidence of infection
IV
Asymptomatic
Incidental inﬂammation (prostate biopsy)
National Institutes of Health Summary Statement, 1995.
Treatment
An antibiotic that can reach the alkaline milieu
of the prostate is needed, e.g. trimethoprim, ery-
thromycin or ciproﬂoxacillin. A good combination
is a short course of ciproﬂoxacillin in the acute
attack, followed by 4–6 weeks of a low dose of
trimethoprim. In most cases acute prostatitis re-
solves completely. Very rarely there is suppura-
tion and an abscess forms which is best drained
transurethrally, before it bursts spontaneously into
the rectum (Fig. 18.6). Acute prostatitis is a disor-
der which may relapse without warning.
Chronic prostatitis
Persistent discomfort in the perineum with painful
micturition is often attributed to chronic prostati-
tis. To prove it, urine is collected for culture in two
parts (VB1 and VB2). Then the prostate is massaged
transrectally to express ﬂuid, which is collected
(EPS). Finally a third urine specimen is collected
(VB3). A diagnosis of infection in the prostate is
made if the colony count of bacteria in EPS and
VB3 is more than in VB1 and VB2.
Figure 18.5 Transrectal Doppler scan showing hyperaemia
in a case of acute prostatitis.
The organisms that are recovered may be the
usual Escherichia coli but Chlamydia trachomatis
and Trichomonas vaginalis are found from time
to time. Their detection requires special culture
techniques.
Investigations
Transrectal ultrasound with colour Doppler imag-
ing will show hyperaemia.
Treatment
The principles of the treatment of chronic bacte-
rial prostatitis are the same as for any persistent
bacterial infection, with the added difﬁculty that
in the prostate the milieu is alkaline and many
of the standard antibiotics do not penetrate the
gland. For Chlamydia, tetracyclines are usually ef-
fective. Trichomonas requires a week’s course of
metronidazole.
Non-bacterial prostatitis
An inﬂammatory syndrome is symptomatically in-
distinguishable from chronic bacterial prostatitis.
It similarly presents with pyuria but no typical
uropathogens are cultured in prostatic secretions
and urine. Specialised cultures may grow Chlamy-
dia, Candida, Cryptococcus, Mycobacterium or
parasites (e.g. T. vaginalis).
Prostatodynia
For each patient who has proven bacterial infec-
tion, there are dozens who complain of vague pain
in the perineum, discomfort on voiding and sex-
ual inadequacy. Usually there is a psychosexual
problem, made worse when they are told that their
chronic prostatitis must be treated by a course of
177

Chapter 18 The prostate gland: benign disorders
Endoscopy:acutely
swollen and
inflamed gland
oozing pus from
ducts
Opening the 
abscess with
resectoscope pus
pours out and
abscess deflates 
like a balloon
Usually resolves, but may
suppurate      abscess
Figure 18.6 Acute prostatitis usually resolves but may form an abscess.
‘prostatic massage’, a treatment which is as un-
comfortable as it is irrational – no other inﬂamma-
tion is made better by being forcibly squeezed.
In the absence of any scientiﬁc explanation for
it, the treatment is necessarily unsatisfactory. The
important thing is not to make it worse by futile
or meddlesome intervention. Sympathy and the
provision of analgesia, e.g. with diclofenac sup-
positories, often brings about symptomatic relief.
Inevitably patients with prostatodynia are treated
with alpha-blocker medications, and sitz baths and
given various herbal preparations for which the
claims are seldom supported by any evidence.
Benign enlargement of the
prostate
Aetiology
Over the age of 40, all men have some nodu-
lar hyperplasia in the transition zone of their
prostate. The cause is not known although there is
endless speculation as to some imbalance between
oestrogens
and
androgens,
based
on
animal
experiments of doubtful relevance to humans.
Only one in ten will ever develop obstruction that
needs treatment. Size is irrelevant: the smallest
prostates may cause severe obstruction; huge
glands none at all. Constriction of the prostatic
urethral lumen is the issue.
Pathology
Three factors act to cause obstruction as follows:
1 Smooth muscle: The alpha-adrenergic smooth
muscle ﬁbres in the prostate, especially around
the bladder neck, fail to relax as the detrusor con-
tracts. This may accompanied by hypertrophy of
the smooth muscle (Fig. 18.7) and endoscopy may
show a tight ring at the bladder neck without en-
largement of the prostate.
2 Adenoma: A more or less large bulge of any
or all three ‘lobes’ of the prostate may obstruct
178

The prostate gland: benign disorders Chapter 18
Circular muscle
of bladder neck
Figure 18.7 Hypertrophy of the smooth muscle of the
bladder neck.
the lumen. The middle lobe alone may protrude
like a thumb into the bladder (Fig. 18.8). As the
inner zone of the prostate enlarges, the outer
zone is compressed into a shell, often (incorrectly)
called the ‘capsule’, while the verumontanum is
displaced down towards the external sphincter
(Fig. 18.9).
3 Detrusor failure: In the ﬁrst phase the detrusor
muscle ﬁbres hypertrophy and become stronger
and more jumpy. Later they become weaker and
less forcible, and this weakness is often an ad-
ditional factor contributing to the development
of further obstruction. Detrusor failure may occur
suddenly or gradually.
Sudden acute detrusor failure may be precipi-
tated by some other unrelated illness, e.g. a heart
Figure 18.8 The middle ‘lobe’ may protrude into the
bladder.
Benign nodular hyperplasia 
of prostate in inner zone
Normal outer zone 
prostatic tissue squeezed
into ‘capsule’
External 
sphincter 
pushed
downwards
Figure 18.9 Formation of bulky adenomas in the prostate.
attack or conﬁnement to bed for an operation on
some other system, and it causes acute retention
of urine. This is very painful. The bladder is felt as
a hard suprapubic mass. Often all that is necessary
is to let the urine out with a catheter and normal
voiding will be resumed.
In gradual chronic detrusor failure there is no
pain. The big distended bladder is often soft and
difﬁcult to feel. A little urine escapes from time to
time – overﬂow incontinence (Fig. 18.10). Among
these men some develop a third, common con-
dition: after a long crescendo of progressive ob-
struction, they suddenly cannot void at all. This is
referred to as acute-on-chronic retention.
Retention
Dribbling
incontinence
Wet trousers
Figure 18.10 Overﬂow incontinence.
179

Chapter 18 The prostate gland: benign disorders
Complications of obstruction
1 Changes in the detrusor: If the obstruction is
not relieved, the detrusor will develop trabecula-
tion, sacculation and form diverticula. Eventually
it loses the power to contract, which may be irre-
versible.
2 Complications from residual urine: Infection and
stone formation are apt to occur whenever there is
a large pocket of stagnant urine.
3 Obstructive uropathy: Neglected obstruction leads
to loss of renal tubular function, the inability to
conserve water or salt, and ultimately to impaired
glomerular ﬁltration leading to uraemia.
The objectives of the management of benign en-
largement of the prostate are quite simple, to di-
agnose and relieve obstruction before any of these
three complications occurred.
Table 18.2 International Prostate Symptom Score (I-PSS).
Not at
<1
<Half
About half
>Half
Almost
all
in 5
the time
the time
the time
always
Score
1 Incomplete emptying
Sensation of not emptying the
bladder completely after ﬁnishing
urination
0
1
2
3
4
5
2 Frequency
You have to urinate again less
than 2 hours after you ﬁnished
urinating
0
1
2
3
4
5
3 Intermittency
Stop and start frequently when
urinating
0
1
2
3
4
5
4 Urgency
Difﬁculty to postpone urinating
0
1
2
3
4
5
5 Weak stream
0
1
2
3
4
5
6 Straining
You have to push or strain to
begin urination
0
1
2
3
4
5
7 Nocturia
0
1
2
3
4
5
Total I-PSS =
Quality of life due to urinary symptoms
How do you feel if you have to spend the rest of life with urinary function as it is now?
Delighted
Pleased
Satisﬁed
Mixed
Dissatisﬁed
Unhappy
Terrible
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
There are no standard recommendations in grading patients with mild, moderate or severe symptoms, but patients can
be classiﬁed as follows: mild symptoms = 0–7, moderate symptoms = 8–19 or severe symptoms = 20–25 points.
Diagnosis of prostatic obstruction
History
The symptoms that bring the patient to the doc-
tor before the patient has developed complica-
tions are usually frequency of micturition and
a poor ﬂow, but these are not speciﬁc, and ev-
ery patient requires a careful history. An attempt
to quantify patients’ symptoms was introduced
by the American Urological Association Clinical
Practice Guidelines (International Prostate Symp-
tom Score – I-PSS) who suggest that it should
be used by all primary care physicians who eval-
uate patients with benign prostate hypertrophy
(Table 18.2). The questions cover both obstructive
and irritative symptoms. Generally the patients
are divided into patients with mild score (<7),
180

The prostate gland: benign disorders Chapter 18
Feel the same
Figure 18.11 The ﬁnger in the rectum cannot distinguish
urine under pressure in the bladder from a big prostate.
moderate (8 to 19) and severe (>20). It should
never be a substitute for listening to the patient
carefully, especially since these symptom scores do
not match objective evidence of obstruction.
Physical signs
Abdominal palpation may reveal a chronically ob-
structed bladder but this is a late feature of the
disease. Rectal examination cannot distinguish be-
tween a tight bladder full of residual urine and a
large prostatic adenoma (Fig. 18.11), nor can it feel
a middle lobe that sticks up into the bladder out
of reach of the ﬁnger (Fig. 18.12).
Investigations
1 Flow rate: Flow rates vary from day to day, and a
poor ﬂow may not necessarily mean obstruction:
it may result from a weak detrusor, while on the
Figure 18.12 The rectal ﬁnger cannot feel a large middle
lobe.
other hand if the detrusor has undergone consid-
erable hypertrophy it can compensate for obstruc-
tion and produce a good ﬂow rate. Nevertheless an
impaired ﬂow rate of <10 mL/s is a signiﬁcant part
of the clinical pattern (Fig. 18.13).
2 Residual urine: The residual urine can be mea-
sured by abdominal ultrasound. Again this may
vary from day to day. The abdominal ultrasound
may also detect dilatation of the ureters and re-
nal pelves and will reveal gross trabeculation and
diverticula (Fig. 18.14).
3 Transrectal
ultrasound:
The
volume
of
the
prostate can be measured from the ultrasound im-
age, and may help in planning treatment. It may
detect prostatic cancer (Fig. 18.15).
4 Urodynamic studies: The only way of making cer-
tain that there is outﬂow obstruction to the blad-
der is by means of a comprehensive urodynamic
investigation which must include the measure-
ment of the pressure inside the bladder during mic-
turition. Since, to be accurate, this involves insert-
ing urethral catheters and rarely a suprapubic one,
these tests are only used when there is real doubt
about the diagnosis, especially when the patient’s
main symptoms are frequency and urgency.
Differential diagnosis
1 Cancer: The symptoms of bladder cancer may so
closely mimic prostatism that every elderly man
complaining of frequency should have his urine
examined for red cells and cancer cells.
2 Stricture: The symptoms of obstruction by en-
largement of the prostate are identical to obstruc-
tion from a urethral stricture, so that if there is,
for example, a history of previous catheterisation,
e.g. during cardiac surgery or some other urethral
instrumentation, the diagnosis of stricture should
be considered.
3 Neuropathy: Neuropathic lesions, especially a
central lumbar disc protrusion, can mimic pro-
statism.
4 Polyuria: The alteration in the excretion of the
pituitary antidiuretic hormone that occurs in old
age and in mild heart failure causes nocturnal uri-
nary frequency which has nothing to do with the
prostate.
181

Chapter 18 The prostate gland: benign disorders
Flow rate mL/s 
0
10
10
20
20
30
40
Voiding time
Flow time
Time to max.  flow
Max.  flow rate
Average flow rate
Voided volume
t100
tQ
tQmax
Qmax
Qave
Vcomp  
 30
 26
   6
 18.0
   9.4
247
s
s
s
mL/s
mL/s
mL
Weeks
Results of uroflowmetry
Voiding time
Flow time
Time to max.  flow
Max.  flow rate
Average flow rate
Voided volume
t100
tQ
tQmax
Qmax
Qave
Vcomp  
 54
 51
 12
   5.3
   3.6
183
s
s
s
mL/s
mL/s
mL
(a)
(b)
50
5
15
25
0
10
20
5
15
25
Figure 18.13 Urine ﬂow rates in (a) normal and (b) benign enlargement of the prostate.
5 Depression: Many a sad old widower wakes in the
small hours because he is lonely and depressed. He
goes to the toilet, but cannot get back to sleep. So,
he gets up and makes a cup of tea. Then he must
urinate again, and so on. The patient will tell you
the diagnosis if you only listen.
Treatment
1 Wait and see: Many elderly men go through a
year or two during which their prostate irritates
Figure 18.14 Ultrasound after trying to empty the bladder
showing large residual as well as a diverticulum.
them, but not very severely, and then it gets bet-
ter without any treatment (or if they are given a
placebo in the course of a clinical trial). They may
still have to urinate once or twice in the night, but
their daytime activities are unaffected. They have
a reasonable ﬂow rate and their residual urine is
negligible. The patient is advised to come back and
report progress in 6 months or so.
2 Drugs:
(a) Alpha-blockers: When the prostate is small
and the patient’s symptoms dominated by
Figure 18.15 Transrectal ultrasound images showing en-
largement of the prostate.
182

The prostate gland: benign disorders Chapter 18
frequency, the problem may be a mild form
of detrusor–sphincter dyssynergia and an alpha-
blocker, e.g. Tamsulosin, often relieves symp-
toms. It is a tablet which aims at relaxing the
circular muscle ﬁbres around the bladder outlet
(neck). It is taken at a dose of one tablet daily.
The response to therapy is usually swift. It is a
member of a family of medications that is com-
monly taken to reduce the elevated blood pres-
sure. However, it does not necessarily lead to
problems with patients receiving it to help with
bladder emptying. Some patients might experi-
ence dizziness or a tendency to faint with sud-
den quick movements. These symptoms seem
to settle down gradually in most patients. The
tablet can have an impact in some patients with
regards to sexual function. This takes the form
of decreased ejaculate volume and some men
might describe it as ‘dry orgasm’.
(b) 5 Alpha-reductase inhibitor (Finasteride): This
drug prevents a hydrogen atom being added to
testosterone to activate it inside the prostate cell,
and aims at shrinking the glandular part of the
prostate. It makes the prostatic-speciﬁc antigen
level fall, and in many patients appears to relieve
symptoms. It is taken at a dose of one tablet at
night for at least 3–6 months. Response to ther-
apy can take up to 12 months in some cases, and
unfortunately only 50% of patients will respond
to treatment. There is no way of predicting who
will and who will not respond. Those who do
respond continue to receive tablets indeﬁnitely.
It occasionally has an effect on sexual function
which includes: loss of potency (approximately
8%),
decreased
libido
(approximately
5%)
and decreased ejaculate volume (approximately
4%).
(c) The two drugs may be taken together in the
ﬁrst instance for a short period, usually for 3
months, to achieve a quick response following
which a decision with regard to maintain one
agent only is taken.
(d) Phytotherapy: These products are not the ac-
tual plants but are extracts derived from either
the roots, the seeds, the bark or the fruits of the
various plants used. Their mechanism of action
is generally unknown. Examples include Saw
Palmetto Berry (Serenoa repens), African Plum
(Pygeum africanum), South African Star Grass
(Hypoxis rooperi) and others.
3 Surgery:
Open prostatectomy: Around 1890, it was found
almost by accident that the adenoma in the
inner zone could be enucleated from the com-
pressed shell of outer zone with a ﬁnger. In
the early days this was performed via a supra-
pubic incision into the bladder, or through a
perineal incision. In 1943, Millin developed
the retropubic approach which is still used for
very large glands (Fig. 18.16).
Transurethral
resection:
Improved
technology
made it possible to remove the inner zone ade-
noma with a telescope passed along the ure-
thra (Fig. 18.17). This operation, which is usu-
ally performed under televisual control, car-
ries an operative mortality of less than 1%,
but there are still complications. Bleeding can
be severe during the operation.
Stricture develops in the urethra afterwards
in about 3% of men. Because the bladder neck
is removed along with the prostate there is
retrograde ejaculation of semen.
Impotence occurs in 10–15% after prosta-
tectomy. Incontinence of urine may be the
result of a technical mistake whereby the
supramembranous external sphincter is in-
jured, or may be due to persistent detrusor in-
stability. It is one reason for being cautious in
men who have frequency as their presenting
feature.
4 Transurethral incision of the prostate: Instead of
removing the inner zone, an incision is made
through
the
bladder
neck
and
prostate
(see
Fig. 18.18). There is less bleeding and a shorter
hospital stay. No tissue is removed for histological
diagnosis and the long-term results are still uncer-
tain.
5 Transurethral vaporisation of the prostate: The pro-
static tissue can be coagulated or vaporised by a
special diathermy current or a laser (Fig. 18.19).
The method appears to remove the inner zone tis-
sue in a way that is comparable to transurethral
resection but the long-term complication rate and
results are still unknown.
183

Chapter 18 The prostate gland: benign disorders
Incision in
prostatic capsule
Adenoma
Scissors entering cleft
between lateral lobes
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 18.16 Retropubic prostatectomy.
Transurethral prostatectomy
Figure 18.17 Transurethral resection of the prostate.
184

The prostate gland: benign disorders Chapter 18
Figure 18.18 Transurethral incision of the prostate.
6 Transurethral hyperthermia microwave therapy: In
this recent method, a beam of thermal energy
emission from a urethral catheter targets the cen-
tral part of the prostate gland (Fig. 18.20). It is
focused to reach a high intensity in the target
tissue where absorption of the energy heats and
cooks the tissue at 42–44◦C inducing cell death. A
cooling balloon surrounds the probe to protect the
urethral mucosa from the high temperature. Early
results claim there may be some improvement in
symptom scores in the I-PSS.
7 Balloon dilatation: A balloon is introduced in the
prostatic urethra and inﬂated to a high pressure
stretching the bladder neck and prostatic urethra.
It is relatively a simple procedure but the results
have been short lived and disappointing.
8 Intraprostatic stents: Insertion of a hollow tube
within the prostatic urethra has been proposed
as an alternative to long-term catheterisation in
patients who are medically unﬁt for surgery. Sev-
eral materials had been produced including spiral
Figure 18.19 Transurethral vaporisation of the prostate us-
ing diathermy.
Figure 18.20 Transurethral hyperthermia of the prostate.
185

Chapter 18 The prostate gland: benign disorders
stainless steel, titanium mesh and biodegradable
stents. Their use is associated with risks of encrus-
tations, spontaneous displacement and tendency
to long-term failure. Careful evaluation of long-
term outcome is necessary.
Conclusion
More studies are needed to establish the long-term
outcomes and complications of all these newer
techniques in comparison to the conventional sur-
gical prostatectomy. The choice should be dis-
cussed with the individual patient.
Practical management of
retention disorders
r Acute retention of urine: When this follows some
other illness, e.g. a recent heart attack or an op-
eration to replace the hip, the bladder is emptied
with a catheter which is left in position until the
patient is up and about. When it occurs out of the
blue, it is reasonable to see if the patient can empty
his bladder – the so-called trial without catheter.
r Acute-on-chronic retention: When acute retention
develops after a long crescendo of prostatic symp-
toms the catheter is left in, and arrangements are
made for prostatectomy as soon as possible. The
patient can safely go home during this interval
wearing an indwelling catheter but he should be
given a deﬁnite date, within a week or two, for his
operation.
r Chronic retention: This is an entirely different en-
tity because (i) the detrusor is often badly dam-
aged, and (ii) there may be severe impairment of re-
nal function with dehydration, salt-depletion and
anaemia. If the creatinine is elevated one may be
sure that the patient is also dehydrated, etc.
After the bladder is emptied, there may be a pro-
fuse post-obstructive diuresis during which such
a large volume of ﬂuid is lost that the patient
may become shocked. Intravenous saline may be
needed to make up the deﬁciency in extracellular
volume. Fortunately the renal tubules usually re-
cover, but during this time anaemia may require
transfusion, heart failure may require treatment,
and the mental condition of the patient may need
care. The old man is sick, frightened, confused and
fuddled by medication. He needs kind voices to
talk to, plenty of light, company and stimulation.
The last things he needs are isolation and sedation.
There is no company he needs so much as that of
his family and friends. A little alcohol, within rea-
son, may comfort him: it never did the kidneys any
harm whatever it might have done to his liver.
As soon as his ﬂuid balance is corrected and his
creatinine is levelled off, his operation should be
carried out. Such patients should not be submitted
to a fruitless trial without catheter.
Preparations for prostatectomy
r Consent: Whatever technique is used, retrograde
ejaculation is likely to occur and must be ex-
plained. The younger man who might still wish
to have children might want to weigh this in the
balance against the risks of putting off the removal
of the obstruction. At any age the risks of ejacula-
tory impotence must be explained.
r Blood loss: After open or transurethral resection,
loss of blood can be sudden, unpredictable and
occasionally life-threatening. Blood should always
be grouped and if the gland is known to be very
large, two to three units should be cross-matched.
r Antibiotics: If there is known infection, or if a
catheter has been in position, then antibiotics are
always given to protect against septicaemia. It is
still a matter of debate whether they are needed in
every cold operation.
Postoperative care
r The catheter: After all forms of prostatectomy a
catheter is left in the bladder, usually a three-way
catheter which allows saline to run in and out of
the bladder to dilute blood and prevent clots from
blocking the catheter (Fig. 18.21). Some surgeons
rely on natural formation of urine to irrigate the
bladder, and encourage this with a diuretic. If a
chip of prostate or a blood clot does block the
catheter an attempt is made to wash it out with
a bladder syringe using strict aseptic precautions.
If this fails the catheter is removed and a new one
is passed.
186

The prostate gland: benign disorders Chapter 18
Isotonic saline
3-Way Foley catheter
Figure 18.21 Irrigation of the prostatic fossa with a three-
way catheter.
r Reactionary haemorrhage: Reactionary haemor-
rhage may occur after any type of prostatectomy.
The bladder ﬁlls with blood clot which cannot be
evacuated with a bladder syringe. The patient is re-
turned at once to the operating theatre where the
clot is removed with an Ellik evacuator and the of-
fending vessels are coagulated. Very occasionally
the reactionary bleeding can be so furious that the
only way to stop it is to open the retropubic space
and pack the prostatic fossa.
r Removal of the catheter: All the bleeding has usu-
ally stopped within 24–48 hours, and the catheter
is then removed. At ﬁrst there may be some dis-
comfort on passing urine, and an occasional leak
if the patient coughs or strains. This soon recovers.
r Going home: Patients usually go home after 4 or
5 days, but the empty cavity from which the inner
zone tissue has been removed is still raw and un-
healed, and secondary haemorrhage may occur at
any moment. It makes sense to advise him to avoid
strain: a good rule is to do anything he ordinarily
can do in his carpet slippers. Around the tenth
postoperative day there is often a little haema-
turia. Patients understand this if it is explained
beforehand that it may bleed a little when the
‘scab’ comes away. Very rarely the patient must
be readmitted to have clot irrigated out of the
bladder.
r Recovery: Recovery is not complete until the
prostatic fossa has been completely relined with
urothelium. This takes about 6 weeks. Until then
the patient will notice some frequency and ur-
gency, and the urine will continue to be a little
cloudy, raising the suggestion of infection. Antibi-
otics are not needed, however, unless there is a
signiﬁcant growth of bacteria.
187

Chapter 19
Prostate cancer
Aetiology
There are unexplained differences in the incidence
of prostate cancer in different parts of the world:
it is relatively uncommon in men of Japanese and
Indian ancestry, and more common in those of
African ancestry. It is twice as common in men
of African-American descent and is more likely to
present at an advanced stage. The number of re-
ported cases seems to be increasing, but this may
be due to an increased awareness, the growing
number of elderly men who are surviving, and bet-
ter ways of making the diagnosis.
Incidence
Prostate cancer is the most common non-skin
cancer in men. At the age of 50, about 15% of
prostates contain islands of cancer; by the age of
80, the ﬁgure is nearly 100%. Prostate cancer ac-
counts for less than 0.5% deaths in each age group
over the age of 60. European age-standardised in-
cidence and mortality for prostate cancer (EU es-
timates) are shown in Fig. 19.1. Introduction of
the prostate-speciﬁc antigen (PSA) blood test in the
late 1980s enhanced prostate cancer detection. A
dramatic increase in the detection rate in the early
1990s was followed by a subsequent decline and
was thought to be due to detection of early small
tumours. Cancer which is found by an elevated
PSA or a prostate nodule on digital rectal examina-
tion is referred to as a clinical cancer. Cancer found
only at autopsy is called a latent tumour. However,
the total annual number of new cases shows an
increase and this is frequently interpreted in an
alarmist way to justify programmes of screening.
Pathology
Cancer usually arises in the peripheral zone which
is usually compressed into a shell by benign en-
largement of the central zone (Fig. 19.2). It is not
uncommon that cancer does also arise in the inner
zone.
Most prostate adenocarcinomas are composed
of acini arranged in patterns variable in space, size
and shape. Mucin and crytalloids are often present
in the acinar lumens. The stroma frequently con-
tains collagen. Perineural and microvascular inva-
sion is a strong indicator of malignancy and corre-
lates with histological grade.
Prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia
This pathological change is characterised by cel-
lular proliferation within pre-existing ducts and
acini with cytological changes mimicking can-
cer, including nuclear and nucleolar enlargement.
Despite these changes, an intact or fragmented
Lecture Notes: Urology, 6th edition. By John Blandy and
Amir Kaisary. Published 2009 by Blackwell Publishing.
ISBN: 978-1-4051-2270-2.
188

Prostate cancer Chapter 19
United States of America
Sweden
Canada
Switzerland
Australia
France
The Netherlands
Brazil
United Kingdom
South African Republic
Denmark
Hungary
Mexico
Cameroon
Poland
Nigeria
Phillipines
Kenya
Japan
Morocco
India
Rate per 100,000 population
Incidence rates
Mortality rates
China
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Jamaica
Italy
Figure 19.1 European age-standardised incidence and mortality for prostate cancer, EU 1998 estimates (Cancer Research
in 2004).
Figure 19.2 Cancer arises in the outer zone of the prostate.
189

Chapter 19 Prostate cancer
Figure 19.3 Prostaic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN).
basal cell layer is retained unlike cancer where a
basal cell layer is lacking. There are two grades:
low-grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN)
and high-grade PIN (Fig. 19.3). A high level of
inter-observer variability with low-grade PIN lim-
its its clinical value and indeed many pathologists
do not report it. High-grade PIN is now generally
accepted as a potential likely preinvasive stage of
adenocarcinoma and its presence in prostate biop-
sies warrants repeat biopsy for concurrent or sub-
sequent invasive adenocarcinoma.
Histological grade
The Gleason system is based on the assessment of
the pattern of growth seen in two low-power ﬁelds
(Figs. 19.4 and 19.5), each assigned a number from
1
2
3
4
5
Figure 19.4 The Gleason system: for each tumour, two low-power ﬁelds are assigned a score from 1 to 5; the Gleason
score is the sum.
1 to 5. The two numbers are added together to pro-
vide a Gleason sum score between 2 and 10. The
Gleason system provides important prognostic in-
formation. It correlates very well with the clinical
behaviour of the tumour and its response to treat-
ment.
Tumour markers
Prostate-speciﬁc antigen
This is a protein secreted only by prostate cells
whether benign or malignant. It is normally se-
creted into semen or lost in urine. It spills over into
the bloodstream where it can be measured. It can
also be detected by immunoﬂuorescent methods
in histological sections. Production of PSA by both
normal and malignant prostate glands is depen-
dent on male hormones (androgens) being present
in the body at normal levels. The presence of an
elevated PSA suggests that either the prostate is
enlarged or an abnormal condition exists within
it (inﬂammation, infection, trauma or cancer). An
elevated PSA is not cancer speciﬁc.
Free and total PSA
PSA may exist in either a free form or one bound
to proteins in the blood (alpha 2-macroglobulin
or alpha 1-antichymotrypsin). For any given total
PSA value with levels between 4 and 10 ng/mL, the
chance of prostate cancer being present may be
190

Prostate cancer Chapter 19
(a)
(b)
Figure 19.5 (a) Benign hyperplasia and (b) cancer – an area of Gleason 2 is surrounded by anaplastic Gleason 5.
Table 19.1 Total PSA age reference ranges.
Age range (years)
Reference range (ng/mL)
40–49
0–2.5
50–59
0–3.5
60–69
0–4.5
70–79
0–6.5
determined based on the percentage free PSA. For
men with a percentage free PSA more than 25, the
risk of prostate cancer being present may be so low
that prostate biopsy may be avoided or delayed.
This characteristic should not be used as a sole
indicator and other factors such as the digital rectal
examination should be taken into account.
Age-speciﬁc PSA levels
There is a consistent rise in the size of the prostate
in the aging male (range 0.4–1.2 g/year). So, PSA
increases with age (Table 19.1). The use of age-
speciﬁc PSA levels enhances the speciﬁcity and
sensitivity of the test and may avoid unnecessary
biopsies. One should be suspicious of prostate can-
cer if the patient’s age-speciﬁc PSA level is abnor-
mal. The PSA cut-off levels are continuously being
challenged in an attempt to improve prostate can-
cer detection at an earlier age and stage.
PSA density
An enlarged prostate gland of benign nature might
produce an elevated PSA. In order to allow for the
contribution of benign hyperplasia, a calculation
to enhance PSA speciﬁcity was proposed by divid-
ing the serum PSA by prostate volume (cc). PSA
density values more than 0.15, might indicate a
risk of prostate cancer and prostate biopsy is rec-
ommended. There is no complete agreement in the
literature about the accuracy of this tool, which
many urologists consider useful.
PSA velocity
This is a measurement of change in PSA serum
levels
in
nanograms
per
millilitre
per
year
(ng/mL/year). A series of at least three PSA blood
tests must be obtained. If the PSA increase is more
than 0.75 ng/mL/year, one ought to suspect that
prostate cancer might be causing the rise.
Doubling time
Evaluation of the rate of PSA change in men with
prostate disease may provide a means to improve
management. In patients with prostate cancer, PSA
changes seem to have both a linear and an expo-
nential phase. During the exponential phase, PSA
doubling time for patients with local/regional car-
cinoma seem to range from 1.5 to 6.6 years (me-
dian 3 years). In those with advanced/metastatic
disease, the range is 0.9 to 8.5 years (median 2
years). The PSA doubling time may be helpful in
191

Chapter 19 Prostate cancer
guiding the diagnosis and treatment of prostate
cancer patients.
PCA3Plus
PCA3 gene is speciﬁc to the prostate cells and
is over-expressed only by malignant tissue. It
is signiﬁcantly upregulated 60- to 100-fold in
prostate cancer. Massaging the prostate gland re-
leases prostate cells into the urinary tract where
they can be collected in the ﬁrst urine that is
passed. The prostate cells are harvested and the
expression of mRNA from the PCA3 gene assessed.
PCA3 mRNA along with the mRNA of PSA is
measured quantitatively and examined as a ra-
tio. High ratios have been shown to be indica-
tive of prostate cancer. It is of particular value in
follow-up treatment of patients with an elevated
serum PSA and negative biopsy results. The test
has shown a sensitivity of 67% and a speciﬁcity of
89% claiming an overall accuracy of 81% for de-
tection of prostate cancer in comparison to PSA of
approximately 40%.
Staging of prostate cancer
Staging of prostate cancer takes into account
its method of spread which is directly up into
the bladder and seminal vesicles. It seldom goes
through Denonvilliers’ fascia into the rectum but
instead can grow around it to cause obstruction.
It quickly invades the pelvic lymph nodes, and
spreads by veins and lymphatics into the marrow
of the lumbar spine, pelvis and femora. The T stag-
ing in the TNM classiﬁcation system is set out in
Fig. 19.6.
Clinical presentation
Screening
Today carcinoma of the prostate is most often de-
tected by screening with PSA. Knowing that little
islands of cancer are present in most elderly men, it
is surprising that cancer is not detected more often.
Chance ﬁnding at transurethral
prostate resection
Carcinoma is found by chance in about 10% of
patients undergoing transurethral resection of the
prostate (TURP) for what was until then thought
to be a benign enlargement of the prostate. Know-
ing the true incidence of cancer in the prostate,
one would expect the ﬁgure to be higher, but of
course TURP takes out mostly inner zone tissue,
and spares the compressed outer zone where most
of the cancers arise.
Local symptoms
r Prostatism: Compression of the urethra may
cause symptoms identical with those due to be-
nign enlargement.
r Rectal obstruction: If the cancer is encircling the
rectum the patient may complain of pencil-thin
stools and progressive constipation.
r Uraemia: Ureteric obstruction may lead to hy-
droureter and hydronephrosis and, if bilateral, to
uraemia.
Distant metastases effects
Metastases may occur anywhere, but usually affect
the lumbar vertebrae, pelvis and femora. These
may cause bone pains, pathological fractures or
spinal cord compression. In an X-ray these metas-
tases are typically denser than the normal bone
(osteosclerotic) because carcinoma of the prostate
secretes acid phosphatase, an enzyme which lays
down bone (Fig. 19.7). Osteolytic bone lesions
are also found but much less often. Occasionally
ﬁbrinolysins produced by metastases can cause
bruising and haemorrhages; anaemia is not un-
common.
Soft tissue metastases lead to symptoms accord-
ing to the affected site, e.g. chronic cough in lung
metastases disease.
Investigations
Transrectal ultrasound
The echogenicity of the prostate is determined by
the amount of calcium in the tissues, which in
192

Prostate cancer Chapter 19
T1a
>_ 5% TURP
T2a
<_ Half of one lobe
T3a
unilateral extraprostatic
extension
T4a
Invasion of bladder neck,
rectum, or external sphincter
T4b
Invasion of levator muscle
of pelvic floor
T3b
Bilateral extraprostatic
extension
T3c
Invasion of seminal vesicies
T1b
> 5% TURP
T2b
> 5% Half of one lobe
T2c
both lobes
T1c
Cancer on needle biopsy
(nonpalpable)
Figure 19.6 The T staging in the TNM classiﬁcation system of prostatic cancer.
cancer may be greater or lesser than normal (Fig.
19.8). Any suspicious area is biopsied using a
biopsy needle placed under ultrasonic control.
Often a prostate harbouring cancerous changes
shows normal echogenic features where the exam-
ination is driven by an elevated PSA value in the
presence of a normal digital rectal examination.
Antibiotic prophylaxis therapy is routinely given
and the complications of bleeding or infection are
rare. Local anaesthesia may be given. The biopsies
are obtained in a predetermined pattern to sam-
ple the peripheral zone. Transition zone biopsies
are added when necessary. The ultrasound image
may show that cancer has invaded the seminal
193

Chapter 19 Prostate cancer
Figure 19.7 X-ray of pelvis showing areas of increased
density caused by metastases.
vesicles or the peri-prostatic fat and so help to stage
the case. At the time of biopsy, determination of
the prostate size and shape is obtained and any
anatomical abnormalities are detected.
Computed tomography
The computed tomography (CT) scan may reveal
enlarged pelvic lymph nodes and invasion of the
seminal vesicles (Fig. 19.9) as well as spread of can-
cer to the liver and other organs.
Figure
19.8 Transrectal
ultrasound
showing
cancer
breaching the capsule on the left side.
Figure 19.9 CT scan showing carcinoma of the prostate
with impending ureteric obstruction due to extraprostatic
invasion of the bladder base.
Magnetic resonance imaging
This relies on the characteristics of tissues to pro-
vide two-dimensional pictures with different ori-
entations. These images may be even more pre-
cise in staging the cancer and are often performed
when
radical
prostatectomy
is
contemplated
(Fig. 19.10).
Figure 19.10 Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) T2-
weighted image showing invasion of the seminal vesicle
on the right side.
194

Prostate cancer Chapter 19
Figure 19.11 Bone scan showing multiple ‘hot spots’ from
metastases.
Bone scan
The radionuclide 99mTc-MDP (methylene diphos-
phonate) is taken up by bone in proportion to the
blood ﬂow, so the increased vascularity of a metas-
tasis shows a ‘hot spot’ (Fig. 19.11). False-positives
are common from osteoarthritis and old fractures
of the ribs. When the bones are so very widely
Table 19.2 Prostate nomogram.
Prostate nomogram results – pre-treatment
Pre-treatment PSA
9.1
Organ-conﬁned disease
49%
Biopsy primary Gleason
3
Extra-capsular penetration
40%
Biopsy secondary Gleason
4
Seminal vesicle involvement
8%
Biopsy Gleason sum
7
Lymph node involvement
3%
1992 clinical tumour stage
T1C
5 years progression-free probability radical
prostatectomy
77%
1997 clinical tumour stage
T1C
Prescribed external radiation dose
(64.8–86.4 Gy)
86.4
5 years progression-free probability external
beam radical therapy
87%
Neoadjuvant hormones
No
5 years progression-free probability
brachytherapy
72%
Neoadjuvant radiation
No
invaded as to be almost uniform there may be a
‘superscan’.
Treatment
Management of prostate cancer is dependent on
the man who is diagnosed to have prostate can-
cer. Characters recognised include familial his-
tory, ethnic origin, life expectancy and the disease
stage whether localised or metastatic. Involving
the patient in view of the considerable debate
that exists as to the preferred choice of treat-
ment, the pros and cons of each different method
of treatment should be explained so that an in-
formed choice can be made. To advise patients
one must be able to predict the outcome of
each method of treatment. Here a nomogram
may be helpful. A nomogram is a graphic repre-
sentation of a statistical model that incorporates
several variables to predict a particular end point.
Predictive pre-treatment nomograms make out-
come predictions based on the characteristics of
individual patient: clinical stage, biopsy Gleason
sum, pre-treatment PSA level, receipt of neoadju-
vant hormonal deprivation therapy and total ra-
diation dose as predictor variables. An example is
shown in Table 19.2. Some men ﬁnd it repugnant
to think that they might be walking around with
cancer. Others ﬁnd the prospect of incontinence
and impotence no less undesirable and prefer to
take their chance.
195

Chapter 19 Prostate cancer
Table 19.3 Predictive risk
groups’ criteria in prostate
cancer.
High
Intermediate
Low
Clinical T3
Clinical T2 with
Clinical T2 with
Clinical T2 and PSA
PSA 10.1–20
PSA ≤10
>20
Or
And
Radiation failure pre-RT > T2b
Gleason score > 7
Gleason score ≥7
Gleason score ≤7
Localised disease
Taking into account the prognostic parameters
that have been identiﬁed, patients are divided
into risk groups: high, intermediate and low
(Table 19.3). The options in localised prostate can-
cer include watchful waiting/active surveillance,
surgery, irradiation and methods of ablation in-
cluding cryosurgery and high-intensity focused ul-
trasound.
Watchful waiting/active surveillance
In certain patients a policy of observation and
monitoring might be a preferred management op-
tion. In an incidental prostate cancer found at
transurethral prostate resection (T1a) the probabil-
ity of disease progression may be very low. Patients
who have reduced life expectancy might be moni-
tored with regular PSA measurements, proceeding
to therapy only if there was clear evidence of dis-
ease progression. Gleason histological grading is
believed to be the best indicator of the probability
of signiﬁcant disease progression.
Radical prostatectomy
There is a heated debate between those who
favour radical prostatectomy for cancers that
appear to be conﬁned to the prostate, and those
who are against it.
The arguments in favour of radical surgery are:
r More of those who survive for 10–15 years after
radical surgery do so without residual cancer.
r Radical prostatectomy avoids the misery of local
recurrence in the pelvis.
r Improved surgical techniques can achieve po-
tency preservation and continence.
The arguments against radical prostatectomy
are:
r Almost every elderly man has a small cancer in
his prostate, but less than 0.5% die of it; i.e., 99.5%
do not.
r The only prospective controlled studies to have
been carried out showed no differences in sur-
vival after 20 years between men treated by radical
surgery or surveillance.
r Larger retrospective studies of Medicare patients
show no difference in survival between those un-
dergoing radical surgery and surveillance.
r The morbidity of radical prostatectomy includes
incontinence, stricture and impotence in a (de-
bated but large) proportion of patients.
Staging lymph node dissection
Most surgeons consider that radical prostatectomy
is futile if the lymph nodes are involved and usu-
ally sample the lymph nodes around the obturator
nerve and vessels before going ahead with radical
surgery. This can be performed laparoscopically a
few days before surgery is planned, or as the ﬁrst
stage of an open operation.
Radical prostatectomy
The prostate is approached through a lower ab-
dominal incision. The lymph nodes along the in-
ternal iliac and obturator vessels are dissected and
sent for frozen section, unless this has already been
done. The dorsal veins of the penis are doubly
ligated and divided behind the symphysis, and
the neurovascular bundles going to the penis are
pushed aside out of harm’s way (Fig. 19.12). The
urethra is transected, and the prostate lifted up,
to reveal the seminal vesicles, whose vessels are
196

Prostate cancer Chapter 19
Neurovascular
bundle to
corpus
cavernosum
Dorsal vein of
penis divided
Sling round
urethra
Figure 19.12 Radical retropubic prostatectomy: the neu-
rovascular bundles to the penis can be preserved.
ligated. The bladder is then cut across at the level
of the bladder neck, which is then narrowed, and
sutured to the stump of the urethra over a catheter
(Fig. 19.13).
Transperineal prostatectomy is a different surgi-
cal approach offered to selected patients where no
lymphadenectomy is contemplated. Laparoscopic
radical prostatectomy is an approach gaining wide
appeal. Both techniques rely on the expertise of
the urological surgeon and meticulous patient se-
lection.
Open retropubic surgical excision is gradually
now being challenged by laparoscopic and robotic
techniques.
Bladder
Urethra
Mucosa
everted
Neurovascular
bundles
preserved
Figure 19.13 After the prostate has been removed, the bladder is sutured to the stump of the urethra.
Radiotherapy
There are numerous ways to deliver therapeutic ra-
diation including external beam radiotherapy with
the linear accelerator and brachytherapy (inserting
radioactive sources into the prostate under tran-
srectal ultrasound control (Fig. 19.14). There is no
clear consensus as to which method of radiother-
apy is best. What is clear is that certain patients
may be better suited for one or another or, in
fact, a combination of these modalities. Pretreat-
ment PSA levels and Gleason histological score are
very important tools for prediction of response.
It is important to deﬁne the patient’s risk sta-
tus (high, intermediate or low) to determine the
method of choice offered to the individual patient.
No randomised prospective controlled study has
ever shown that any type of radiation is better or
worse than surveillance or radical prostatectomy.
Survival is much the same, but residual cancer is
found more often after radiation in the survivors
than in those treated by surgery, even though
it does not necessarily cause symptoms. Neoad-
juvant and adjuvant hormone suppression com-
bined with radiotherapy improves local control,
may prolong disease-free survival, and may delay
the time to the development of metastatic dis-
ease and extend overall survival in some subsets of
patients.
Painful proctitis is a common early sequel of
radiation, and impotence occurs in a proportion,
probably as a result of radiation arteritis.
197

Chapter 19 Prostate cancer
Figure 19.14 Brachytherapy.
Cryosurgery
Complete cell destruction occurs in response to
freezing down to temperatures reaching −40◦C.
The direct effects of cryosurgery on cells include:
r Crystallisation of extracellular ﬂuid leading to
cellular dehydration.
r Cellular pH changes leading to electrolyte ab-
normalities resulting in denaturation of cellular
proteins.
r Lipoproteins are damaged in response to the
thermal shock.
r Cellular membrane disruption occurs as a result
of intracellular crystallisation.
r Membrane disruption occurs due to ﬂuid inﬂux
during thawing following freezing.
r Thrombosis and vascular stasis occurs after
freezing.
Cryosurgery clinical experience continues to ad-
vance. Improvements and reﬁnement of the deliv-
ery systems are promising and may lead to increase
in its use.
High-intensity focused ultrasound
therapy
A recent method of treatment carried out under a
spinal or general anaesthetic is thought to be of-
fering an advance in prostate cancer management.
A beam of ultrasound emission from a rectal probe
targets the prostate gland. It is focused to reach
a high intensity in the target tissue where absorp-
tion of the ultrasound energy creates an increase in
the temperature which destroys tissue. A cooling
balloon surrounds the probe to protect the rectal
mucosa from the high temperature. A urethral or
a suprapubic catheter is inserted after the proce-
dure to aid urinary drainage during the time the
necrotic debris is expelled. The long-term clinical
outcome, safety and efﬁcacy, reduction in PSA lev-
els, post-treatment biopsy ﬁndings, survival and
impact on quality of life are being audited.
Advanced/metastatic disease
Hormonal manipulation
Malignant prostate cells start off by requiring a
daily supply of testosterone without which they
die. In cancer, mutant clones eventually emerge
which no longer depend on testosterone, and this
(on average) occurs in about 80% of men within
2 years of the diagnosis of metastases; however,
among the 20% who do not develop metastases
within 2 years there are many who survive for
decades without any other treatment. Largely as
a result of these and other anecdotal experiences,
there was a feeling that no harm arose from defer-
ring the treatment until metastases began to cause
symptoms. This was the subject of a recent Med-
ical Research Council controlled prospective trial
but this showed an unacceptably high incidence
of serious metastatic complications in patients for
whom hormone therapy had been deferred.
The different ways of hormonal manipulation
and the adverse effects encountered are illustrated
in Fig. 19.15. The testosterone metabolic pathway
in Fig. 19.16 demonstrates the effects of with-
drawal of testosterone and its metabolites or an-
tagonism for the metabolites only on target tissue.
The supply of testosterone can be cut off or inter-
fered within a number of ways:
r Orchidectomy: The testicles may be removed, or
a subcapsular orchidectomy may be performed
which leaves something behind which feels like
a normal testicle.
r Diethylstilboestrol: This is a synthetic oestrogen
which blocks the products of metabolism of testos-
terone. Given in large doses of 5 mg/day it had a
high incidence of cardiovascular side effects but
a dose of 1 mg daily seems to be just as effective
without cardiovascular sequelae.
198

Prostate cancer Chapter 19
r Luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone agonist:
Luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH)
overstimulates the anterior pituitary gland and ini-
tially more Luteinizing hormone is released during
the ﬁrst 2 weeks of treatment and thus an increased
testosterone secretion. This may cause a ‘ﬂare-up’
with pain and other complications from metas-
tases; thus, LHRH agonists are given in combina-
tion with drugs which block the action of testos-
terone in the cells – anti-androgens (see below).
However, downregulation of the prostate cell re-
ceptors leads to a decreased Luteinizing hormone
production, which in turn results in the testis no
longer secreting testosterone with maintenance
therapy.
r Gonadotrophin-releasing hormone antagonist: Re-
cent interest in novel gonadotrophin-releasing
hormone antagonist formulation is appealing as
it can avoid the initial testosterone rise seen in the
usage of LHRH agonist.
r 5-Alpha-reductase inhibitors: 5-Alpha-reductase
inhibitors, such as ﬁnasteride, prevent the acti-
vation of testosterone to dihydrotestosterone but
they are seldom used in the treatment of prostate
cancer.
r Anti-androgens: Dihydrotestosterone acts on re-
ceptors in the cytosol of the prostate cell. These re-
ceptors are blocked by two types of anti-androgen:
◦steroids such as megestrol and cyproterone;
and
◦non-steroids such as ﬂutamide, nilutamide
and bicalutamide.
Bone formation
Breast tissue
Muscle mass
Skeletal growth
Spermatogenesis
Sexual function
Oestradiol
Facial and body hair
Acne
Scalp hair growth
Prostate growth
Dihydrotestosterone
Testosterone
Figure 19.16 The testosterone metabolic pathway.
Hypothalamus
ACTH
-ve
feedback
control
Pituitary Gland
LHRH
Adrenal
Gland
Androgens
Other
target tissues
T
DHT
DHEA-S
DHEA
Dione
Nucleus
Prostate Cell
Androgen
Receptor
5-alpha
Reductase
Circulating
Testosterone
Testis
LH
Figure 19.15 Androgen hormonal pathway and metabolic
changes demonstrating sites of various treatment ap-
proaches.
199

Chapter 19 Prostate cancer
T1-2NOM0
T1-2NOM0
D3
D3
D2.5
D2.5
D1.5
D1.5
T3-4
T3-4
D2
D2
High-grade PIN
Localised
prostate
cancer
Locally
advanced
Metastatic
disease
Hormone
insensitive
Chemotherapy
Hormonal therapy
Radiotherapy
Hormonal therapy
Watchful waiting
Radical prostatectomy
Radiotherapy
Watchful waiting
T1-2NOM0
D3
D2.5
D1.5
T3-4
D2
Time (years)
PIN, prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia
Treatment opotions:
Figure 19.17 Prostate continuum.
r Aromatase inhibitors: These prevent the action of
aromatase, an enzyme in the prostate cell which
converts adrenal steroids into testosterone. They
are still under trial.
Maximal androgen blockade
A combination of LHRH agonists given together
with anti-androgens is claimed to give a small im-
provement (a matter of weeks) in survival but not
everyone is convinced that this is justiﬁed by the
side effects, let alone the expense of this additional
therapy.
Radiotherapy
Isolated painful metastases respond dramatically
to small doses of radiation, which can particularly
be useful when there is a pathological fracture or
spinal cord compression. Severe pain in the skele-
ton can be helped by hemi-body radiation, a tech-
nique in which one half of the body is irradiated,
to control bony metastases. This also destroys the
bone marrow in the irradiated bones, but after a
few weeks to allow this marrow to be repopulated
by haematogenous cells from the rest of the bone,
the other half is irradiated.
Similar relief of pain can be produced by radioac-
tive phosphorus-32, strontium-89 and diphospho-
nate.
Chemotherapy
The development of hormone independence is
observed in a majority of the patients at some
time following androgen deprivation. Chemother-
apy has been found to have limited relative value
and a potential for toxicity, although some new
drugs e.g. Docetaxel (Taxotere), show a satisfac-
tory role in management of metastatic hormone-
refractory prostate cancer with generally manage-
able and predictable adverse effects.
New approaches
Attempts
at
developing
new
treatment
com-
pounds are currently based on increased under-
standing of prostate cancer biology. Anti-sense
compounds, tumour vaccines, endothelin antago-
nists and gene therapy are some of the current ex-
tensive clinical ongoing advances (see Fig. 19.17).
200

Chapter 20
The urethra
Anatomy
In both sexes the urethra is lined with urothe-
lium near the bladder and squamous epithelium
near the external meatus. In between is modiﬁed
columnar epithelium. Para-urethral glands enter all
along the urethra, secreting mucus. Some of these
glands are of special importance.
In males the most important para-urethral
glands make up the prostate: in addition there is
a pair of Cowper’s glands in the levator ani, and
a pair of Littr´e’s glands near the external meatus.
Any of these may become infected and form an
abscess (Fig. 20.1).
Ejaculatory duct
Cowper's gland
External sphincter
Paraurethral glands
Figure 20.1 Anatomy of the male urethra.
The urethra is surrounded by the corpus spon-
giosum which in males expands to form the glans
penis. Each corpus spongiosum is supported by
a pair of corpora cavernosa, which is attached
to the medial aspect of the ischiopubic rami
(Fig. 20.2).
In females the urethra is shorter, and surrounded
by a sleeve of erectile corpus spongiosum which
Figure 20.2 The ﬁxed attachments of the corpora caver-
nosa to the ischiopubic rami below and the prostate to
the symphysis pubis above: the membranous urethra is the
weak link.
Lecture Notes: Urology, 6th edition. By John Blandy and
Amir Kaisary. Published 2009 by Blackwell Publishing.
ISBN: 978-1-4051-2270-2.
201

Chapter 20 The urethra
Clitoris
Corpus
clitoridis
Urethra
Figure 20.3 Anatomy of the female urethra and clitoris.
continues into the glans of the clitoris, ﬂanked by
two smaller corpora cavernosa (Fig. 20.3).
Sphincters
In males the three components of the sphinc-
ter surround the urethra at the bladder neck,
the supramembranous sphincter and the leva-
tor ani.
In females there are the same three elements
to the sphincter: the bladder neck, the intramu-
ral sleeve, made up of a mixture of striated and
smooth muscle, and below this the levator ani
(Fig. 20.4).
Bladder neck
Intrinsic urethral
sphincter
External sphincter,
levator ani
Corpus spongiosum
Figure 20.4 Structure of the female urethra.
Congenital disorders of the urethr
Errors in the genital folds
Hypospadias
As the embryonic genital folds roll in to form the
male urethra and corpus spongiosum, they may
fail to fuse together, resulting in a urethra which
opens on the underside of the penis – hypospadias.
There are different degrees of hypospadias accord-
ing to how far down the urethra the defect extends
(Fig. 20.5).
Glandular hypospadias (Fig. 20.6): Here the ure-
thra opens on the underside of the glans, but
there is no other deformity. It causes no trou-
ble in later life, and it is very questionable
whether anything needs to be done about it at
all. It can be corrected by an operation, but it
is doubtful whether this is justiﬁed merely on
the basis of some fancied cosmetic advantage.
Penile
hypospadias:
Here
the
urethra
opens
about half-way along the penis. Correction
is necessary, and the important thing is
to refer the baby to a paediatric urological
centre where these operations are done often
enough to give the team experience. As so
often in paediatric urology, this is not a job
for the occasional amateur who would like to
have a try. In specialised centres a one-stage
operation is often successful (Fig. 20.7).
202

The urethra Chapter 20
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 20.5 Incomplete inrolling of the genital folds results in different degrees of hypospadias.
Complete hypospadias: Correction of this defor-
mity is even more difﬁcult and referral to an
expert, who can sometimes correct the defor-
mity in one stage, is even more necessary.
Duplex urethra
Wrinkling of the genital folds as they roll in may
give rise to a double urethra which is seldom
complete. Sometimes the two channels commu-
nicate with the result that the lower one balloons
out and obstructs urination – the so-called anterior
urethral valve (Fig. 20.8).
Errors in the development of the cloacal
membrane
These are dealt with under exstrophy and epispa-
dias.
Congenital posterior urethral valves
The embryological explanation of this anomaly re-
mains a mystery. There is a thin tough membrane
1 Glandular
2 Coronal
3 Penoscrotal and perineal
More chordee
No chordee
Dorsal
foreskin
Pit
Meatus may
be stenosed
Short sharply curved penis
with marked chordee
Figure 20.6 Varying degrees of hypospadias.
203

Chapter 20 The urethra
Figure 20.7 One-stage operation for hypospadias.
just below the verumontanum, with a hole in it
like a parachute (Fig. 20.9). It causes obstruction.
The bladder goes through all the phases of obstruc-
tion responding with hypertrophy, trabeculation
and so on, followed by failure. If the condition is
detected in the foetus by ultrasound scanning, a
grommet may be inserted between the distended
bladder and the amniotic cavity to relieve the pres-
sure.
Prune-belly syndrome
The distended bladder of the foetus squeezes the
abdominal wall and prevents ingrowth of muscle
Figure 20.8 Duplication of the urethra – anterior urethral valve.
from either side so that the belly is thin and wrin-
kled. The testicles cannot descend. By the time the
baby boy is born the valve may be intact, but some-
times it has ruptured, leaving the prune-belly with-
out an explanation (Fig. 20.10). Spontaneous cure
has been recorded in utero when serial ultrasound
scans suddenly show the huge bladder to have dis-
appeared.
Treatment. Once the child has been delivered,
nothing is easier than to destroy the little mem-
brane with a hook equipped with diathermy
(Fig. 20.11).
204

The urethra Chapter 20
Hypertrophy
of detrusor
Dilated prostatic
urethra
Valve is always an
oblique saucer-
shaped diaphragm
with a slit in it
Endoscopy valve
Bilateral
hydronephrosis
and hydroureter
Figure 20.9 Congenital posterior urethral valves.
Trauma
Iatrogenic trauma
Instrumental injury to the urethra is very com-
mon. A clean cut will heal with an inconspicuous
scar, and no stricture. When the injury is caused by
pressure of a catheter leading to ischaemic necrosis
– essentially a bedsore – healing leads to a stricture.
These are typically found near the meatus, at the
penoscrotal junction, or at the external sphincter
(Fig. 20.12).
There is one important variation on this theme.
After open heart or aortic surgery multiple stric-
tures may occur along the length of the urethra. At
ﬁrst these were thought to be caused by some toxic
chemical in latex catheters. Later the same kind
of stricture, though less common, was seen with
other types of catheter. It is now thought that the
strictures are due to a combination of ischaemia
(while the circulation is suspended) and pressure
of the catheter, perhaps made worse by chemicals
in the material of the catheter itself (Fig. 20.13).
Perineal injury
In past times many a jack tar would fall from the
rigging of a sailing ship astride a spar, or a Johnny
Head-in-Air would trip over a man-hole cover in
the street. Today the injury occurs in sport and
industry. The blunt force compresses the bulbar
urethra up against the inferior edge of the symph-
ysis and tears the corpus spongiosum and urethra
(Fig. 20.14). Because the corpus spongiosum is
ﬁrmly attached to the corpora cavernosa its ends
do not retract (Fig. 20.15). Urine and blood
escape into the scrotum, in a space which is lim-
ited by the fasciae of Scarpa and Colles. The con-
centrated or infected urine may cause necrosis
of the fat and overlying skin (Fig. 20.16). In ne-
glected cases the entire skin of the scrotum and
penis may slough away, leaving only the testes
preserved by the blood supply of the spermatic
cord.
Management
The ﬁrst priority is to prevent urine escaping into
the scrotum. A suprapubic tube is put in the blad-
der as an emergency. If there is a collection of urine
and blood in the scrotum it must be drained, but
no attempt is made to repair the urethra at this
stage.
About 10 days later the urethra is examined with
the ﬂexible cystoscope: in nearly every case it will
205

Chapter 20 The urethra
Figure 20.10 Prune-belly syndrome. (Courtesy of the late
Mr J.H. Johnston.)
be found to have healed completely. Occasionally
the scar shrinks and causes a stricture, but it is
always short and easy to treat.
To diathermy
Insulation
Steel exposed
Hook catches posterior
urethral valve
Figure 20.11 Insulated diathermy hook for destroying posterior urethral valve.
Fractured pelvis with rupture of
the membranous urethra
The membranous urethra is very thin and con-
nects two ﬁxed points, the prostate above, which
is ﬁrmly attached to the symphysis, and the bul-
bar urethra below, which is bound to the corpora
cavernosa on either side: these are in turn ﬁxed
to the ischiopubic ramus. If a fracture separates
these two ﬁxed points the membranous urethra is
ﬁrst stretched, and may be torn across completely.
There are three types of injury: (i) minimal dis-
placement of the pelvis; (ii) gross displacement of
the pelvis; and (iii) combined urethral and rectal
injuries.
Minimal displacement of the pelvis
When the pelvic ring is compressed from front to
back, e.g. by a car backing into a man leaning over
a wall, it gives way where it is thinnest – at the pu-
bic and ischial rami on either side of the symph-
ysis (Fig. 20.17). The symphysis carries the prostate
back with it while the bulbar urethra remains at-
tached to the ischiopubic rami. The membranous
urethra is ﬁrst stretched, and may be torn com-
pletely or incompletely. The car backs off and the
pelvic ring springs back almost to its original posi-
tion, but in practice the symphysis ends up being
displaced a little posteriorly to its original posi-
tion. If the lumen of the urethra is intact it will
206

The urethra Chapter 20
Secretion
dammed
up in
gland
Paraurethral
gland
Pressure
sore
Pressure sore at
penoscrotal angle
Figure 20.12 Dangers of a snugly ﬁtting catheter.
now have an S-shaped bend. If torn completely,
the prostatic urethra will come to lie behind the
bulb (Fig. 20.18).
Management
In the accident and emergency department X-rays
show the typical fracture. Blood escaping from the
urethra shows that there has been some damage.
Using sterile precautions, about 20 mL of soluble
contrast medium is gently injected into the ure-
Figure 20.13 Long urethral stricture following cardiac surgery.
Figure 20.14 Perineal injury to the urethra.
thra: extravasation conﬁrms that the urethra has
been damaged. At this stage, do not try to pass a
catheter: put in a suprapubic tube.
The next step depends on the general state of
the patient. Usually there are other more impor-
tant injuries to be taken care of and it takes several
days for the patient to recover sufﬁciently for the
urethral injury to be investigated. A ﬂexible cys-
toscope is passed. In an incomplete injury the way
can be seen into the bladder and nothing more
207

Chapter 20 The urethra
Corpus
cavernosum
Corpus
spongiosum
Figure 20.15 The attachments to the corpora cavernosa
prevent the ends of the injured urethra from retracting.
need be done at this stage. About 2 weeks later
the cystoscopy is repeated and at worst may show
the S-shaped bend whose thin septa can easily be
incised (Fig. 20.19).
If the urethra has been completely torn and the
ﬂexible cystoscope does not show any way into
the bladder, the bulbar urethra is exposed through
a perineal incision, the haematoma is evacuated,
and the separated ends are anastomosed together
over a silicone catheter (Fig. 20.20). The sooner
this can be done the easier it is, but the timing of
this operation is nearly always determined by the
patient’s other injuries.
(Scarpa’s fascia)
Perineal body –
where Colles’ fascia
is bound down
Figure 20.16 Urine and blood escape into the
scrotum and perineum.
Figure 20.17 Anteroposterior injury: the pelvic ring gives
way at its thinnest part.
Gross displacement of the pelvis
Here the anatomy of the injury is different. The
patient has usually been driving a car with an out-
stretched lower limb, and the force of the impact
208

The urethra Chapter 20
Backward
displacement
of symphysis
S-shaped
deformity
of urethra
Figure 20.18 The displaced segment of pelvic ring returns almost to its original position but the prostatic end now lies
posterior to the bulbar end of the ruptured urethra.
is transmitted along the limb, forcing the head of
the femur through the acetabulum, and dislocat-
ing one half of the pelvis upwards, fracturing the
pubic and ischial rami and dislocating the sacroil-
iac joint (Fig. 20.21). The half pelvis carries up the
bladder and prostate. If the bulbar urethra rides up
as well, then the urethra may escape damage, but
more often the bulbar urethra remains attached to
the opposite half of the pelvis and the membra-
nous urethra is torn across. The gap between the
severed ends of the urethra is now equal to the dis-
tance between the dislocated halves of the pelvis.
Management
In this type of injury the two halves of the pelvis do
not spring back together: on the contrary, reduc-
Light from
cystoscope shining
through walls
of urethra
(b)
(a)
Figure 20.19 Urethroscopy may show an S-
shaped bend, whose walls can be incised.
tion can be very difﬁcult. There is always severe
internal haemorrhage from torn pelvic vessels as
well as other major injuries, e.g. to the head, liver
and chest. For the ﬁrst 48 hours the priority is re-
suscitation and saving life. One of the best ways
to limit the internal bleeding is to reduce the dis-
located pelvis, and maintain the correct position
with an external ﬁxator (Fig. 20.22).
A urethrogram performed (as above) in the
accident and emergency department will show
whether or not the urethra is damaged. If there
is no extravasation, it is safe to pass a urethral
catheter. But if there is extravasation, or if there
is any doubt, it is better to put in a suprapubic
tube. This can be difﬁcult in the presence of the
pelvic haematoma, but is greatly helped by using
209

Chapter 20 The urethra
Left corpus
cavernosum
Severed
membranous
urethra
External
sphincter
Figure 20.20 End-to-end anastomosis of the ruptured ure-
thra through a perineal approach.
ultrasound to locate the bladder and make sure the
suprapubic tube is in the right position.
Correct reduction of the dislocated pelvis will
bring the separated ends of the urethra nearly to-
gether. When the general condition of the patient
permits, a combination of cystogram and urethro-
gram (an ‘up-and-down-a-gram’) shows where the
separated ends of the urethra are lying and an op-
(a)
(b)
Figure 20.21 Fracture of pelvis with gross displacement of one half-pelvis.
Figure 20.22 External ﬁxation after reduction of a dis-
placed fracture of the pelvis.
eration is performed to anastomose them together.
The timing of this operation is determined by the
general condition of the patient, and it is seldom
possible for several weeks.
The bulbar urethra is mobilised through a per-
ineal incision, and the prostatic urethra exposed
through a retropubic incision. In practice the
prostate may have to be mobilised so that the
torn ends can be brought together without tension
(Fig. 20.23).
210

The urethra Chapter 20
Bladder
Catheter
Pelvic fascia
Figure 20.23 It may be necessary to mobilise the prostate
through a retropubic approach.
Unreduced dislocation
Sometimes it proves to be impossible to effect an
accurate reduction of the dislocated half pelvis,
and by the time the patient is ready to undergo
any urological reconstruction, the pelvis is ﬁxed
and the severed ends of the urethra are separated
by a long gap. To reconstruct this is exceedingly
difﬁcult. Essentially part of the malunited callus
has to be removed to allow the mobilised bulbar
urethra to be brought up to the lower end of the
prostate. There are a number of different methods
for doing this, which indicates that none of them
is always successful (Fig. 20.24).
Figure 20.24 Unreduced displaced frac-
ture of pelvis: end-to-end anastomosis
after removing a window of symphysis.
211

Chapter 20 The urethra
Figure 20.25 Massive crush injury with laceration of rec-
tum.
Combined urethral and rectal injuries
Combined urethral and rectal injuries may be
caused by gun-shot wounds which are rare and
very dangerous. In civilian cases the cause is usu-
ally a rolling-crushing injury (Fig. 20.25). If the
rectum is torn, it is essential that faeces are di-
verted as soon as possible or clostridial infection
is likely to lead to gas gangrene. A colostomy is
performed and the distal colon and rectum thor-
oughly washed out. A careful d´ebridement of the
wound is performed, bleeding controlled, and a
suprapubic tube inserted. The wound is packed.
No attempt is made to perform a primary suture. Plans
can then be made for secondary suture and delayed
reconstruction.
Complications of urethral injuries
Stricture: Stricture is a common result of any type
of urethral injury.
Impotence: Impotence can occur after pelvic frac-
tures without urethral injury, and is caused
by damage to the neurovascular bundle of
the penis or the pelvic autonomic nerves
by the fracture and dislocation of the pelvic
bones.
Impaired ejaculation: Damage to the sympathetic
nerves may cause paralysis of the bladder neck
and seminal vesicles resulting in retrograde or
dry ejaculation.
Incontinence: If the bladder neck has been den-
ervated or destroyed, or if the supramembra-
nous intramural sphincter is damaged by the
injury, then the patient may be incontinent.
Inﬂammation of the urethra
Gonorrhoea has been with mankind from time im-
memorial. Pharaohs took catheters with them to
the after-life, and Socrates made jokes about it. In-
fection with Neisseria gonorrhoeae causes acute in-
ﬂammation in the periurethral glands. There is a
profuse discharge of yellow pus in which a Gram
stain will show the typical Gram-negative intracel-
lular diplococci. The patient suffers painful urina-
tion, and the oedema and inﬂammation may cause
the penis to bend when erect – chaudepisse cord´ee.
Eventually the inﬂammation subsides, but if not
treated promptly with antibiotics, leads to scar-
ring in the periurethral tissues which contracts and
causes a stricture (Fig. 20.26). There are other bac-
terial causes of urethritis, notably Chlamydia tra-
chomatis, in which the organism is more difﬁcult to
identify, but which can also progress to a stricture.
Clinical features of a stricture
The symptoms of a urethral stricture are those of
outﬂow obstruction, indistinguishable from those
caused by an enlarged prostate.
Physical signs
There are usually no physical signs, but in long-
standing strictures palpation of the urethra will re-
veal thickening and induration in the corpus spon-
giosum.
Complications of a stricture
Urinary infection: Infected urine upstream of the
stricture, whatever the cause, may be forced
into the paraurethral ducts proximal to the
stricture and cause further urethritis, with a
progression of the stricture along the urethra
(Fig. 20.27).
212

The urethra Chapter 20
Abscess in paraurethral gland
Corpus spongiosum
Inflammation of corpus spongiosum
(a)
(b)
(c)
Scarring of corpus spongiosum
Figure 20.26 Acute gonorrhoea followed by scarring.
Para-urethral abscess: An infected para-urethral
gland may suppurate, and pus may point in
the scrotum, and after it has been incised or
has discharged, urine may leak through a ﬁs-
tula. When these are multiple the result is a
‘watering-can perineum’. Stones may form in
these ﬁstulae (Fig. 20.28).
Sterility: Even though urine may ﬂow, the thicker
semen may be obstructed by the stricture and
lead to sterility.
Cancer: In strictures that have been present for
many years, especially when complicated by
ﬁstulae, squamous cell cancer may arise.
Investigations
A ﬂow rate will document the progress of a stric-
ture, but may give a false reassurance that all is
well since ﬂow is proportional to the square of the
diameter of the urethra.
Urethrography
using
a
water-soluble
con-
trast medium shows the stricture (Fig. 20.29),
the
ﬁbrous
changes
in
the
corpus
spongio-
sum, are better imaged with ultrasound scan
(Fig. 20.30).
The ﬂexible cystoscope is an easy way to exam-
ine the stricture directly.
213

Chapter 20 The urethra
Figure 20.27 Progression of a stricture.
Figure 20.28 Multiple ﬁstulae after a stricture – watering-can perineum.
Treatment
Regular intermittent dilatation: This is the tradi-
tional method of managing a stricture. An-
cient instruments were adapted from wax ta-
pers, and the best wax came from the Alge-
rian port of Bujiyah, so ﬂexible dilators are
still called bougies even though they are nowa-
days made of plastic not wax. Curved pol-
ished steel dilators are usually called sounds
because they resemble the ancient instrument
used before the days of X-rays, to ‘sound’ for
stone in the bladder (Fig. 20.31). Whether ﬂex-
ible or rigid, dilators come in sets of gradu-
ally increasing size. They are used to stretch
the stricture. Today, patients are given a self-
lubricating catheter which they pass on them-
selves to keep the stricture dilated just as they
used to do in ancient Greece.
Internal urethrotomy: When a stricture is too tight
to allow a dilator to be passed, the scar tissue
is incised under vision with the Sachse optical
urethrotome (Fig. 20.32). Urethrotomy is then
followed up by regular self-catheterisation.
214

The urethra Chapter 20
Figure 20.29 Urethrogram showing typical post-traumatic
stricture with backward displacement of upper prostatic
part.
20 
24 
CH 
Figure 20.31 Urethral sound and bougie.
Figure 20.32 Sachse optical urethrotome. (Courtesy of Messrs Rimmer Bros, UK Agents for Karl Storz.)
Figure 20.30 Ultrasound image of urethra showing peri-
urethral ﬁbrosis. (Courtesy of Dr W. Hately.)
215

Chapter 20 The urethra
Figure 20.33 Pedicled skin graft urethroplasty.
Urethroplasty: To prevent scar tissue from con-
tracting after burns in the skin, plastic sur-
geons apply a skin graft, and there are many
ways of adapting this principle to the urethra.
The graft can be made of buccal mucosa, split
skin or whole thickness skin used as a free graft
or on a pedicle of dartos (Fig. 20.33). There are
many variations of this principle and the fact
that there are so many is sufﬁcient evidence
that none of them is completely successful.
Urethroplasty is only used when urethrotomy
and regular dilatation fail to keep the stricture
well controlled.
216

Chapter 21
The penis
Surgical anatomy
The penis is made of the two corpora cavernosa
and the corpus spongiosum surrounding the ure-
thra which expands to form the glans penis (Fig.
21.1). All three are surrounded by the tough rub-
bery Buck’s fascia. When they ﬁll with blood there
is an erection. The spongy spaces of the corpora are
made of compartments lined with smooth muscle:
those of the two corpora cavernosa intercommu-
nicate freely, but not with the corpus spongiosum
and glans.
The glans penis is developed from the genital
tubercle, into which a tunnel is formed during the
last stage of the embryological development of the
penis. Sometimes this tunnel is imperfect, leading
to glandular hypospadias.
A hood of skin then grows over the glans to
form the prepuce, and in the later months of foetal
life, this hood becomes adherent to the glans. This
congenital adherence breaks down spontaneously
during the ﬁrst few years of childhood and almost
never causes any trouble.
Circumcision
The ancient religious rite of circumcision is of
great anthropological interest, but is not indicated
on any surgical grounds and is followed by many
complications. The arguments for and against
neonatal circumcision have been raging for many
centuries, with passion inversely proportional to
evidence.
True phimosis, i.e. where there is obstruction to
the escape of urine from the preputial space, is very
rare, and easily dealt with by a small incision in the
narrow meatus – preputioplasty (Fig. 21.2).
Balanitis, recurrent inﬂammation behind a pre-
puce that cannot be retracted after the age of 5 or
6, can be dealt with by circumcision or preputio-
plasty, but can usually be avoided by gentle retrac-
tion of the prepuce in the bath.
Blood supply
Arteries
The penis receives blood from three terminal
branches of the internal pudendal artery (Fig. 21.3)
on each side: the deep arteries of the corpora, the
dorsal arteries and the bulbourethral arteries.
Veins
There are three groups of veins (Fig. 21.4):
r The deep dorsal veins drain the corpora caver-
nosa and lead under the symphysis pubis into
the large veins which surround the prostate and
bladder.
Lecture Notes: Urology, 6th edition. By John Blandy and
Amir Kaisary. Published 2009 by Blackwell Publishing.
ISBN: 978-1-4051-2270-2.
217

Chapter 21 The penis
Superficial dorsal vein of the penis
Deep dorsal vein of the penis
Dorsal artery
Dorsal nerve
Corpus cavernosum
Septum
Deep artery
of corpus
Fascia of
corpus cavernosum
Buck’s fascia
Corpus spongiosum
Urethra
Arteries of corpus spongiosum
Figure
21.1 Transverse
section
through the penis.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 21.2 Preputioplasty.
Superficial dorsal artery
Bulbar
artery
Deep artery of corpus
cavernosum
Internal
pudendal
artery
Figure 21.3 Arterial blood supply to the penis.
Superficial
veins
Cavernous
veins
Intermediate
veins
To left
saphenous
vein
Figure 21.4 Venous drainage of the penis.
218

The penis Chapter 21
r The superﬁcial veins, under the skin, mostly
drain into the saphenous veins.
r The intermediate veins, deep to Buck’s fascia,
drain blood from the glans penis into both deep
and superﬁcial systems.
Nerves
Sensation
Sensation from the penis is carried in the dorsal
nerves which run beside each dorsal artery to join
the pudendal nerve (S2, S3).
Motor nerves
The cavernous nerves carry parasympathetic ﬁbres
in two discrete bundles on either side of the
prostate, surrounding the arteries. Care is taken
to preserve them in the operation of radical nerve-
sparing prostatectomy.
Physiology of erection
There are three phases:
r Flaccid state: The ﬂaccid penis has a relatively
low blood ﬂow through its spongy tissues.
r Tumescence: Parasympathetic stimulation, me-
diated by neurotransmitter substances (whose ac-
tion is imitated by papaverine, phentolamine and
prostaglandin E), causes the small branches of the
deep arteries of the corpora cavernosa to dilate
and ﬁll the spaces of the spongy tissue with blood,
while their smooth muscle walls relax. This relax-
ation is effected by cyclic guanosine monophosphate,
which in turn is degraded by phosphodiesterase.
The pressure inside the corpus cavernosum rises
to about 40 mm Hg (Fig. 21.5).
r Rigidity: During the third phase of erection
further parasympathetic stimulation occludes the
veins
leading
out
of
the
corpora
cavernosa
and spongiosum trapping blood inside them.
The pressure rises inside the corpora to over
150 mm Hg.
Ejaculation
There are ﬁve steps in ejaculation (Fig. 21.6). The
ﬁrst four are under autonomic control: the ﬁfth
is mediated by somatic motor components in the
pudendal nerve:
r the seminal vesicles pump themselves up;
r the bladder neck contracts;
r the vas deferens undergoes peristalsis, eject-
ing about 0.5 mL of ﬂuid containing its store of
sperms;
r the seminal vesicles expel their contents, ﬂush-
ing the semen out along the urethra; and
r the bulbospongiosus muscles contract repeat-
edly to squirt the semen out from the bulbar
urethra.
Erectile impotence
Unrealistic expectations
Some men consult the doctor because they feel
their performance is below par, e.g. if they can-
not ejaculate more than three times per night. Age
brings a normal diminution in sexual activity.
Wrong partner
Some patients can ejaculate perfectly well in their
dreams or on masturbation and with one partner
but not another. This is a psychological mineﬁeld
where expert counselling is essential.
No desire
Many patients wake with an erection in the morn-
ing, but with no desire for intercourse. Sometimes
this is a feature of overwork: frustration, alco-
hol and divorce are common features of the syn-
drome. A holiday may cure the condition, but ex-
pert counselling may be needed.
No erection at all
There are a number of organic causes for malfunc-
tion of the physiology of erection:
219

Chapter 21 The penis
Tunica albuginea
Cavernous muscle
contracted
Arterioles
contracted
Sinusoids
From cavernosal artery
(a)
(b)
Tributary of
deep dorsal
vein
Small veins
compressed
Emissary veins
occluded in
tunica vaginalis
Arterioles dilated
From cavernosal artery
Emissary vein
Cavernous muscle
relaxed
Figure 21.5 Mechanism of erection: (a) ﬂaccid and (b) erect.
r arterial obstruction (diabetes and arteriosclero-
sis);
r parasympathetic
disorders
(diabetes,
Shy–
Drager syndrome);
r damage to the autonomic nerves from trauma
or surgery in the pelvis; and
r medication
especially
with
antidepressant
drugs.
Investigation
The investigation of organic impotence should
proceed in logical steps. Diabetes is easily ex-
cluded. The recent introduction of oral selec-
tive inhibitors of phosphodiesterase-5 (PDE-5)
such as sildenaﬁl has made a major impact on
the investigations of erectile dysfunction. It is
220

The penis Chapter 21
Vas
deferens
(a)
(b)
Seminal
vesicle
Internal
sphincter
Seminal
vesicle
fluid
Sperm-rich
fraction
Figure 21.6 Mechanism of ejaculation.
easier to test the patient’s response to one of
these PDE-5 inhibitors before embarking on other
investigations.
Obstruction to the blood supply of the penis
can be tested by Doppler studies of the penile
blood ﬂow or by a test injection into the corpus
cavernosum of one of the substances that mimics
parasympathetic stimulation, e.g. papaverine or
prostaglandin E. Nocturnal tumescence, which ac-
companies dreaming in the phase of sleep marked
by rapid eye movements, can be monitored by
means of paper strips (Fig. 21.7) or an electronic
device (Fig. 21.8). Failure of the occlusion of the pe-
nile veins during the third, rigid phase of erection
– venous leakage – can be diagnosed by injecting
contrast into the corpora cavernosa and monitor-
ing the pressure while an artiﬁcial erection is pro-
duced by the injection of prostaglandin (Fig. 21.9).
Treatment
r Drugs: Sildenaﬁl may be taken by mouth up to
30–40 minutes before intercourse. It is contraindi-
cated in men with myocardial insufﬁciency and
care is warranted in hypertensive patients. Yohim-
bine is an alkaloid similar to reserpine, and may in
some cases restore erection if given as 5 mg three
times per day.
r Vacuum devices: These are available which suck
blood into the penis to produce an artiﬁcial tumes-
cence which is then maintained with a rubber
band around the base of the penis. Many patients
ﬁnd this satisfactory.
r Self-injection: If a test injection of prostaglandin
E produces a successful erection, the patient can
be taught to do it himself. It is essential that he
knows whom to telephone if the erection fails to
subside after 3 or 4 hours so that the condition can
be promptly corrected (see priapism).
Figure 21.7 Paper strip to record expansion of penis during
sleep.
221

Chapter 21 The penis
Basal
Subcoronal strain gauges
To plethysmograph
Time to plateau
Time
to
plateau
Subcoronal
11 cm
8.4 cm
11.5 cm
8.4 cm
3 minutes
Time
Basal
Increase circumference
Figure 21.8 Recording of tumescence and elongation of penis. (Courtesy of Mr P. Blacklay.)
r Implanted penile prostheses: Devices are available
which can be inserted into the corpora cavernosa
to stiffen them. Some can be bent and made to
straighten out, others are inﬂated from a concealed
reservoir (Fig. 21.10). They are all expensive, and
their insertion calls for great care. Being a mechani-
cal foreign body, there is a risk of infection, erosion
and mechanical failure.
r Vascular operations: Arterial insufﬁciency: at-
tempts to improve arterial blood ﬂow in selected
patients have been tried, e.g. the inferior epigas-
tric artery is anastomosed to the dorsal artery of
the penis. Venous insufﬁciency: the objective is
to prevent blood leaking out of the penis when a
venous leak has been demonstrated.
Ejaculatory failure
Premature ejaculation
The problem here is a trigger that is too sensitive: it
is not physiologically abnormal. Counselling may
help, but the most simple remedy is to let the cou-
ple have a rest and try again at some convenient
later time.
Inhibited ejaculation
Guilt, anxiety, a squeaky bed, fear of discovery –
most young lovers and all novelists know how
such factors can inhibit lovemaking. A counsellor
may help.
222

The penis Chapter 21
Contrast
X-ray
Pressure recorder
Pump
X-ray screen
Figure 21.9 Corpus cavernosography.
No ejaculation
1 The seminal tract may be blocked at the ejacula-
tory ducts. Ejaculation may be painful. Transrectal
ultrasound may reveal distended seminal vesicles.
It may be possible to unblock the ejaculatory ducts
by incision or resection of their openings on the
verumontanum.
Inflatable
cylinders
Release ring
Reservoir
Figure 21.10 Inﬂatable penile prosthesis. (Surgitek Uni-
ﬂate 1000.)
2 A urethral stricture may prevent the escape of
semen.
3 Retrograde ejaculation may be taking place be-
cause of previous surgery at the bladder neck, or be-
cause the sympathetic innervation of the bladder
neck has been destroyed by trauma or surgery in
the pelvis, or by medication with an alpha-blocker.
A sympathomimetic drug, e.g. ephedrine may cure
the problem.
Priapism
In priapism the corpora cavernosa are rigid, but the
glans penis is soft. There are two types of priapism:
r Low-ﬂow priapism: This may occur after normal
intercourse, after medication with alpha-blocking
drugs such as prazosin, in certain haematolog-
ical conditions such as sickle-cell disease and
leukaemia, and in patients undergoing haemodial-
ysis. It is most often seen after self-injection with
papaverine or prostaglandin E for impotence.
r High-ﬂow priapism: This is rare, and occurs when
injury has led to an aneurysm of the deep artery of
223

Chapter 21 The penis
Trucut biopsy
needle
Figure 21.11 Hole made between glans penis and corpus
cavernosum with biopsy needle.
the corpus cavernosum. A Doppler study will show
the high blood ﬂow and measurement of the pO2
of blood aspirated from the penis will show that it
resembles arterial blood.
Treatment
Low-ﬂow priapism when seen in leukaemia and
dialysis, requires no treatment other than bed rest
and analgesia. In sickle-cell disease plasmaphere-
sis can be used to rid the blood of misshapen red
cells. In the other more common forms of pri-
apism an intracavernosal injection of noradrenaline
or aramine is given and usually rapidly reverses the
process. If this fails, a hole is made between the
ﬂaccid glans penis or corpus spongiosum and the
rigid corpora cavernosa either with a biopsy needle
(Fig. 21.11) or by surgical anastomosis. The treat-
ment is urgent because delay may be followed by
irreversible changes in the lining of the sinuses of
the spongy tissue of the corpora which may lead
to permanent erectile impotence.
In high-ﬂow priapism selective angiography and
embolisation may produce a cure.
Peyronie’s disease
Plaques of ﬁbrous tissue develop in Buck’s fascia
or the septum between the corpora cavernosa (Fig.
Plaque
Figure 21.12 Peyronie’s disease.
21.12). During an erection the part affected by
ﬁbrosis does not ﬁll so the penis bends over. The
cause is not known. It may occur in association
with similar lumps of ﬁbrous tissue in the palms
of the hands (Dupuytren’s contracture), nodules
in the ears and retroperitoneal ﬁbrosis.
The treatment of Peyronie’s disease offers rich
pickings to the quack: everything from acupunc-
ture
to
radiotherapy
has
been
used.
Potaba
(potassium amino benzoate) is thought to be
efﬁcacious
but
is
poorly
tolerated
by
some
patients and is costly. Vitamin E is thought to be
effective and is safe and inexpensive. The latest
in a long line of medications is tamoxifen, which
is said to be promising. Whatever treatment is
given, in many cases the discomfort ceases and
the deformity reduces spontaneously. Large lumps
of ﬁbrous tissue disappear. Frequently all that the
patient needs is reassurance. Recent attempts at
shock waves fragmentation of hard, nearly calci-
ﬁed plaques, are being evaluated.
When the condition is particularly painful, or
the angulation of the penis prevents intercourse,
the penis can be straightened by taking a series
of tucks in the tunica on the side opposite to the
plaque (Fig. 21.13). The patient should be made
aware that some loss of penile shaft length can
occur. Excision of the plaques and tissue replace-
ment (dermal grafts or venous patches) has been
considered. A penile prosthesis can be offered in
more advanced cases.
224

The penis Chapter 21
Figure 21.13 Correction of the curvature in Peyronie’s dis-
ease.
Inﬂammation of the penis
Acute balanitis
Acute balanitis occurs in men who cannot re-
tract the foreskin to keep the preputial space and
glans penis clean. It can be due to a speciﬁc in-
fection, e.g. Haemophilus ducreyii, which causes
chancroid, and Candida albicans, which occurs par-
ticularly commonly in diabetic men. Recurrent
acute balanitis is one indication for therapeutic
circumcision.
Ulceration on the glans penis may be due to
primary infection with syphilis, in which case the
spirochaetes of Treponema pallidum can be identi-
ﬁed in the serum which is expressed from the ulcer.
Its diagnosis and treatment is a matter for the ap-
propriate experts to whom the patient should be
referred.
Cancer of the penis
Aetiology
Cancer of the penis occurs in uncircumcised men
who are usually old and unwashed and whose fore-
skin has never been pulled back to keep the glans
clean.
There has been endless debate over the issue of
preventing cancer of the penis by routine neonatal
circumcision. Childhood circumcision certainly
does prevent cancer of the penis, but has its own
mortality and morbidity, and it has been calcu-
lated that slightly more deaths would occur if all
boys were to be circumcised than would occur
from cancer of the penis, at least in the West. Soap
and water appear to be just as effective in prevent-
ing penile cancer.
Other known predisposing factors are smoking,
papillomavirus infections and previous recurrent
balanitis. There are also four well-recognised pre-
cancerous conditions:
r Erythroplasia of Queyrat: This is a form of carci-
noma in situ of the skin of the glans. It resembles
balanitis, and is diagnosed by means of a biopsy.
It can be cured with local coagulation with a CO2
laser, or 5-ﬂuorouracil cream. If neglected it pro-
gresses to overt cancer (Fig. 21.14).
r Balanitis xerotica obliterans: This is a skin condi-
tion, identical with lichen sclerosus et obliterans.
It is common, and usually benign, but may pro-
ceed to cancer and should always be followed up.
There is a whitish alteration in the skin of the pre-
puce causing it to become stiff, tight and difﬁcult
to retract. When the condition affects the glans
penis it produces a stenosis of the external uri-
nary meatus which may require surgical correction
(Fig. 21.15).
Figure 21.14 Erythroplasia of Queyrat.
225

Chapter 21 The penis
Figure 21.15 Balanitis xerotica obliterans.
r Condyloma acuminatum: This is a benign wart
caused by one of the family of papilloma viruses
(Fig. 21.16). It responds to local measures such as
podophyllin, freezing and diathermy.
r Giant condyloma acuminatum: It is sometimes
seen in a giant form, the Buschke–L¨owenstein tu-
mour. At ﬁrst this contains papilloma virus and
seems histologically to be benign, but if not
treated radically always progresses to invasive
cancer.
Pathology
Cancer of the penis occurs in three macroscopic
forms, an ulcer, a papilliferous cauliﬂower or a
nodule (Fig. 21.17). There is always secondary in-
fection, and many of these cases present late in the
course of the disease with a profuse, evil-smelling
discharge from beneath an inﬂamed prepuce. The
inguinal lymph nodes are often enlarged because
of infection.
Figure 21.16 Condyloma acuminatum.
Grade
These are all squamous cell cancers. There are three
histological grades of tumour, G1–G3, according
to the frequency of mitoses that are present (Fig.
21.18).
Stage grouping (see Fig. 21.19)
Stage I: Tumour conﬁned to glans penis, prepuce
or both.
Stage II: Tumour involves penile shaft or cor-
pora; negative nodes.
Stage III: Tumour conﬁned to penis with opera-
ble inguinal lymph node metastases.
Stage IV: Tumour extends beyond penile shaft
with inoperable inguinal or distant lymph
nodes, or distant metastases.
TNM classiﬁcation
T – Primary tumour:
Tis: cancer in situ
Ta: non-invasive verrucous carcinoma
T1: tumour invades subepithelia connective
tissue
226

The penis Chapter 21
Figure 21.17 Papillary and ulcerated types of carcinoma of the penis.
T2: tumour invades corporal body
T3: tumour invades urethra or prostate
T4: tumour invades other adjacent struc-
tures
N – Regional lymph nodes:
Nx: not assessed
N0: no regional lymph node metastases
N1: a single superﬁcial lymph node metas-
tases
N2: multiple or bilateral superﬁcial lymph
node metastases
N3: deep inguinal or pelvic lymph node
metastases, unilateral or bilateral
M – Distant metastases:
Mx: not assessed
M0: no distant metastases
M1: distant metastases present
Diagnosis
At ﬁrst the diagnosis is in doubt, and the ﬁrst
step is a circumcision to uncover the tumour
Figure 21.18 Squamous cell carcinoma
of penis. (Courtesy of Professor Jo
Martin.)
227

Chapter 21 The penis
(I)
(II)
(III)
(IV)
Figure 21.19 Staging of carcinoma of the penis.
and obtain a biopsy. At this stage there is
usually much secondary infection and the in-
guinal lymph nodes are often enlarged because of
inﬂammation.
Treatment
Stage I
If not entirely removed by circumcision, the choice
of treatment is partial amputation (Fig. 21.20) or
local radiotherapy. Both can produce 100% cure
but after radiotherapy there is a 20% chance of lo-
cal recurrence that eventually requires partial am-
putation.
Stage II
Local radiation still offers 100% cure, but 50% will
require partial amputation for residual or recurrent
disease. Preliminary radiation improves the long-
term survival. It is important to know that even
after partial amputation patients can still enjoy a
normal sex life.
Stage III
If the scrotum is involved, wide radical excision
offers an excellent chance of cure.
Stage IV
When the inguinal nodes are involved, as may
be shown by cytological examination of ﬂuid
228

The penis Chapter 21
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 21.20 Partial amputation of the penis.
aspirated from an inguinal node, computed to-
mography scanning is performed to detect in-
volvement
of
nodes
along
the
iliac
vessels
and aorta. Treatment is by a combination of
chemotherapy and block dissection of all the
nodes that are found to be involved. The major
complication of block dissection of the inguinal
lymph nodes is distressing oedema of the lower
limb, which can only in part be prevented or re-
lieved by supportive stockings.
229

Chapter 22
The testicle
Embryology
The germ cells arise in the yolk sac of the foetus,
migrate along the umbilical cord, and bury them-
selves in the urogenital gonadal ridge on the back
of the coelom (Fig. 22.1). Later the future testis
bulges forwards, and then follows a lump of jelly
called the gubernaculum downwards into the scro-
tum, carrying with it a bag of peritoneum in front
Yolk sac
Coelom
Urogenital
ridge
Figure 22.1 The incredible journey of the germinal cells
from the yolk sac to the urogenital ridge.
and reaching the scrotum shortly before birth (Fig.
22.2).
Surgical anatomy
The term testicle includes both testis and epi-
didymis. The testis lies in front of the epididymis,
slung from the external inguinal ring by the
spermatic cord. In front of the testis and nearly
surrounding it is the tunica vaginalis, remnant
of the peritoneum. It contains only a trace of
ﬂuid.
Blood supply
The testicular artery arises from the aorta near the
renal arteries and passes in front of the ureter and
curls round lateral to the inferior epigastric vessels
to enter the inguinal canal. The numerous large
veins which drain the testicle form the pampini-
form plexus which join together to enter the vena
cava on the right and the renal vein on the left
(Fig. 22.3).
Structure
Testis
Each testis is made up of sets of tubules arranged
in loops, which empty into a sac, the rete testis.
This drains through a dozen vasa efferentia into the
Lecture Notes: Urology, 6th edition. By John Blandy and
Amir Kaisary. Published 2009 by Blackwell Publishing.
ISBN: 978-1-4051-2270-2.
230

The testicle Chapter 22
Wolffian duct (vas deferens)
Mesonephric tubules
Seminiferous tubules
Processus
vaginalis
testis
(a)
(b)
Figure 22.2 Normal descent of the testicle.
epididymis (Fig. 22.4). The testicular tubule con-
tains two types of cell – germinal cells and Sertoli
cells. In between them there is a packing of Leydig
cells (Fig. 22.5).
Right
testicular
artery
Left
testicular
vein
Figure 22.3 Blood supply of the testicle.
The germinal cells divide into successive gen-
erations of spermatocytes which ultimately de-
velop by mitosis and meiosis into spermatozoa
(Fig. 22.6).
The Sertoli cells secrete inhibin which regulates
the pituitary supply of luteinizing hormone (Fig.
22.7).
The Leydig cells secrete testosterone.
Epididymis
The epididymis is a long coiled tube lying behind
the testis, which continues as the vas deferens. It is
lined with microcilia similar to those in the bron-
chioles (Fig. 22.8).
Vas deferens
The vas deferens runs along the back of the sper-
matic cord, curls around the inferior epigastric
vessels, crosses in front of the ureter and passes
in the cleft between the inner and outer zones
of the prostate to join the common ejaculatory
duct and open into the prostatic urethra on the
231

Chapter 22 The testicle
Appendix epididymis
Wolffian
Appendix testis
Mullerian
Tunica vaginalis
testis
Seminiferous
tubule
Septa c. 250
lobules
Tunica albuginea
testis
Cauda
epididymis
Vas deferens
Caput
epididymis
Vasa
efferentia testis
Rete testis
Tunica albuginea
Epididymis
Septa
Tunica vaginalis
Lobules
(b)
(a)
Figure 22.4 Structure of the testicle.
verumontanum. The vas deferens has a powerful
muscular wall, and is lined with columnar epithe-
lium. It acts as a reservoir for sperms, emptying on
ejaculation (Fig. 22.9).
Seminal vesicle
The seminal vesicle lies behind the prostate, just
under the bladder. It is a long duct, coiled up so
that on cross-section it resembles a honeycomb.
Its duct joins the vas deferens to form the common
ejaculatory duct (Fig. 22.10).
Congenital anomalies of
the testicle
Undescended testicle
There are two kinds of undescended testicle,
those in which the gubernaculum has gone off
Basement membrane
Leydig cells ‘lie around lazily making T (estosterone)’
Sertoli cells ‘stand
around like sisters
offering soothing
sympathy and
sustenance’
Germinal cells: spermatogonia dividing
by meiosis and mitosis, generation after
generation, ending up with spermatozoa
in the lumen of the testis
Figure 22.5 Diagram of testicular tubule.
232

The testicle Chapter 22
Mitosis
Spermatogonium
Meiosis
Spermatozoa
Spermatids
Secondary
spermatocytes
Primary
spermatocytes
Spermatogonium
22 X
22 X
22 Y
22 Y
22 X
22 Y
44  XY
44 XY
44 XY
Figure 22.6 Spermatogenesis.
course – ectopic – and those in which the descent
to the bottom of the scrotum is incomplete – in-
complete descent (Fig. 22.11).
Inhibin
Germinal
cells
Sertoli
cell
Follicle-
stimulating
hormone
Figure 22.7 Sertoli cells and the pituitary.
Ectopic testicle
The errant gubernaculum may guide the ectopic
testicle into one of four positions:
inguinal, in the abdominal wall near the external
inguinal ring;
perineal;
penile, near the base of the penis; and
crural, in the thigh (Fig. 22.12).
Vasa 
efferentia
Rete testis
Testis
Cauda
Vas
deferens
Corpus
Vasculum
aberrans
of Haller
Caput
Figure 22.8 Anatomy of the epididymis.
233

Chapter 22 The testicle
Inferior
epigastric
artery
Ureter
Verumontanum
Vas
deferens
Figure 22.9 Surgical anatomy of the vas deferens.
Incomplete descent
The testicles always move up and down, and are
deﬁned according to their range of movement
as:
r abdominal, which may move in and out of the
internal inguinal ring;
Processus
vaginalis
Peritoneum
Gubernaculum
Figure 22.11 The gubernaculum opens the way for the testicle to follow into the scrotum.
Figure 22.10 Histology of seminal vesicle.
r inguinal,
which
move
along
the
inguinal
canal;
r emergent, when they appear at the external
ring;
r high retractile, when they move up and down
but cannot be made to go to the bottom of the
scrotum; and
r low retractile, when they descend to the bot-
tom of the scrotum in a warm bath, under gen-
eral anaesthesia, or with gentle persuasion by a
doctor’s warm hand. Low retractile testes are es-
sentially normal, and will always end up in the
scrotum with puberty.
234

The testicle Chapter 22
Ectopic
(‘off course’)
Incompletely descended
(‘on course’)
Abdominal
Entrant
inguinal
High
retractile
Low
retractile
Abdominal
Penile
Perineal
Crural
Figure 22.12 Undescended testicles may be off or on course.
Complications
1 Torsion: There is often a large loose sac of peri-
toneum in front of an emergent or retractile unde-
scended testicle which makes it prone to torsion
(see below) (Fig. 22.13).
Patent processus vaginalis
Baggy sac
’Stalk‘
Figure 22.13 The baggy peritoneal sac associated with
incomplete descent favours torsion.
2 Infertility: It is common with bilateral unde-
scended testicles, but not with unilateral undes-
cent.
3 Cancer: About 1 in 10 testicular tumours is asso-
ciated with maldescent.
Diagnosis
In most cases the diagnosis is made by inspection
and palpation. Difﬁculty may arise with the low
retractile testis: seldom is this difﬁcult for an expe-
rienced doctor with warm hands, and a child who
is not frightened. When in doubt the child should
be examined in a warm bath, and if there is still
doubt he may be given a general anaesthetic to
see if the testicle descends to the bottom of the
scrotum.
When no testicle can be felt on one side, it is
often in the inguinal canal. The testicle is easily
found with a computed tomography (CT) scan,
even in the abdomen.
235

Chapter 22 The testicle
Ureter
Testicular
vessels
Testis
Inferior epigastric
vessels
Peritoneum
Vas deferens
Figure 22.14 The ﬁrst step in the Fowler–Stephens procedure: the testicular vessels are clipped laparoscopically.
Management
Ectopic testes
These never ﬁnd their way into the scrotum and
require orchiopexy.
Incomplete descent
1 Abdominal: These are now located by CT scan,
if necessary conﬁrmed by laparoscopy. In prepu-
bertal boys an effort should be made to preserve
the testis. In the Fowler–Stephens procedure the
testicular artery is divided as a ﬁrst step which
may be performed through a laparoscope (Fig.
22.14). Some 6 months later at a second opera-
tion the testicle is mobilised and brought down
into the scrotum, by which time it will have ac-
quired a new blood supply from the artery to the
vas (Fig. 22.15) and it is safe to divide the testicular
vessels.
2 Inguinal: Most of these are brought down by the
routine operation of orchiopexy.
Through a crease incision over the internal ring,
the external oblique is opened, the testicle is mo-
bilized, taking care not to injure its artery or the
vas deferens. The testicular vessels are followed
up behind the peritoneum and mobilised medi-
ally by dividing ﬁbrous bands. This allows the
testicle to be placed in a sac between the dartos
muscle and skin of the scrotum without tension
(Fig. 22.16).
Timing of orchiopexy. Although 90% of testicles are
in the scrotum at birth, the next 9% do not de-
scend until 12 months, after which no more do.
Infertility, and possibly the late development of
cancer, is thought to be prevented by orchiopexy
performed before the age of 3, so there is a window
of opportunity between ages 2 and 3, but at this
age the technique is difﬁcult. The best results are
only obtained in specialised paediatric centres.
After puberty the chance of improving fertility is
minimal, and the risk of cancer increases rapidly,
but most young men wish to keep both testes.
When an undescended testicle is found in a ma-
ture grown man, orchiectomy is the procedure that
should be advised in view of the risks of malig-
nancy. If the patient is concerned about his cos-
metic appearance he may be offered a silicone
prosthesis.
Hormone treatment. Puberty can be brought on
early by giving pituitary gonadotrophins, which
accelerate the descent of a low retractile testis
but at the price of premature puberty and stunt-
ing of growth from early fusion of epiphyses. The
method is no longer used.
236

The testicle Chapter 22
Testicular
artery and
veins
Testis
Epididymis
Peritoneum
Vas deferens
Inferior epigastric
artery and vein
Artery of the
vas deferens
Internal ring
Long loop of vas deferens
Figure 22.15 Second stage in the Fowler–Stephens procedure: the testicular vessels are divided and the testicle brought
down.
Peritoneum
Fibrous
bands
(a)
(b)
(c)
Peritoneal sac
Dartos
Pouch between
dartos and skin
Figure 22.16 Orchiopexy.
237

Chapter 22 The testicle
Figure 22.17 Neonatal extravaginal torsion.
Torsion
Extravaginal
This is rarely seen in newborn boys. The testicle
has rotated on the spermatic cord and it is almost
never possible to save the testis by untwisting it
(Fig. 22.17).
Intravaginal
The tunica vaginalis may be unusually roomy even
with a normally descended testicle, and the testis
and epididymis can twist on a stalk like a light-
bulb in its socket (Fig. 22.18). Patients often re-
call attacks of pain that come on and are relieved
equally suddenly, and a history of such warning
attacks is sufﬁcient reason to explore the testicle
and ﬁx it.
Torsion may occur at any age, but is most com-
mon around puberty.
Clinical features
There is a sudden onset of pain and swelling in the
testicle which may wake the boy. On examination
the scrotum is tender, red and swollen, and it is
seldom possible to make out testis from epididymis
(Fig. 22.19).
Tunica
vaginalis
Epididymis
Torsion
Testis
Figure 22.18 Intravaginal torsion of the testicle.
Figure 22.19 Appearance of torsion of the testicle.
238

The testicle Chapter 22
The differential diagnosis is from:
1 mumps orchitis, which never attacks boys before
puberty;
2 epididymitis, which is always secondary to obvi-
ous urinary infection;
3 fat necrosis, which is occasionally seen in infants;
4 cancer, which in older boys and men can present
with inﬂammation; and
5 torsion of an appendix testis, which cannot be dis-
tinguished from torsion of the testis without ex-
ploration.
Investigations
It is important to untwist the testicle before it dies
from ischaemia, and no investigation should be
allowed to delay surgical exploration. A Doppler
or radioisotope scan may show absence of arterial
circulation in the testicle but is justiﬁed only if it
will not delay matters.
Treatment
The testicle is explored through a transverse scrotal
incision. The tunica vaginalis is opened, and the
testicle is untwisted. If there is any doubt about
the viability of the testis it can be incised to see if
it still bleeds. All too often it is necrotic and must
be removed.
Because torsion occurs in about 10% of cases on
the other side, the other testicle should be ﬁxed
then or at a later operation.
Torsion of the appendix testis
Tiny cysts are usually present at the upper pole,
one on the epididymis (Wolfﬁan duct origin), the
other on the testis (M¨ullerian duct origin). Apart
from being of interest to embryologists either can
twist on its stalk, exactly mimicking torsion of the
testicle and equally requiring urgent exploration
(Fig. 22.20).
Varicocele
The normal pampiniform plexus of veins drain-
ing the testicle has been thought to act as a heat-
exchanger to keep the testicle cool. A varicocele
Figure 22.20 Torsion of an appendix testis.
is a physiological dilatation of these veins (Fig.
22.21). It is widely believed to depress spermatoge-
nesis and lead to atrophy of the testis, and many
operations are performed for this reason although
every controlled study so far has shown that the
operations make no difference. The testicular ves-
sels are approached through a short incision above
and parallel to the inguinal ligament, the veins are
separated from the testicular artery, ligated and di-
vided. It has become fashionable to do the same
thing via a laparoscope.
Hydrocele
Fluid accumulates in the cavity of the tunica vagi-
nalis testis. These may be primary or idiopathic
(i.e. there is no obvious cause), or they may be sec-
ondary to obstruction to the lymphatic drainage of
the testicle, or part of widespread oedema caused
by heart failure, or as an inﬂammatory effusion
from underlying disease in the testis or epididymis
(Fig. 22.22). The swelling is ﬂuctuant and a light
shines easily through it.
Neonatal
When a hydrocele in a neonate is associated with
a hernia, it is operated on almost as an emergency
in view of the risk of strangulation. The processus
vaginalis is found at the external ring and ligated.
There is no need to do anything about the tunica
vaginalis testis (Fig. 22.23).
239

Chapter 22 The testicle
Skin
Dartos muscle
External spermatic
fascia
Internal spermatic
fascia
Vas deferens
Dartos
Skin
Cremaster muscle
Testicular artery
Figure 22.21 The veins of the spermatic
cord.
(a)
Inferior epigastric
artery and vein
Vas deferens
Processus
vaginalis
Inguinal ligament
Hydrocele
Testis
(b)
Figure 22.22 Hydrocele: (a) clinical presentation and (b) diagram.
240

The testicle Chapter 22
Hernia
Patent processus
vaginalis
Hydrocele
Hydrocele
Figure 22.23 Infantile hydrocele.
Adult
In an adult there is always a suspicion that that the
hydrocele may be concealing some mischief in the
testis. Ultrasound screening is performed to ensure
that the underlying testis is healthy, and if there
is any doubt, tumour markers are measured to rule
out cancer of the testis.
Few hydroceles need any treatment: a good rule
is to offer an operation if the patient’s wife or his
tailor complains. The options are to aspirate the
ﬂuid (Fig. 22.24), warning the patient that it will
ﬁll up again, or remove the surplus tunica vaginalis
(Fig. 22.25).
Intracath
Figure 22.24 Tapping a hydrocele.
Cord
Testis extruded
from sac
Tunica
vaginalis
Figure 22.25 Jaboulay operation for hydrocele.
Cysts of the epididymis
A few tiny cysts are always present in the upper end
of the epididymis, arising as diverticula of the vasa
efferentia and epididymal tubules. In middle age a
few pea-sized cysts can usually be felt. Occasionally
these cysts become large enough to be a nuisance.
The swellings are always ﬂuctuant and usually
transmit light easily. If aspirated, the ﬂuid may
look opalescent, like lime water, because a few
sperms are present. Occasionally there are so many
to make the ﬂuid look like cream. Pregnancy has
been reported by injecting these sperms.
The diagnosis is easily conﬁrmed by ultrasound.
Treatment is seldom necessary. Aspiration is usu-
ally futile because the cysts ﬁll up again and they
are always multilocular. Excision of the cysts of-
ten results in a blockage of the vasa efferentia, and
should be postponed until the patient has com-
pleted his family (Figs. 22.26 and 22.27).
Figure 22.26 Cysts of the epididymis (a diagram).
241

Chapter 22 The testicle
Figure 22.27 An epididymal cyst (a photograph).
Trauma to the testicle
The testis is easily injured in sport or at work. Blood
collects in the cavity of the tunica vaginalis. The
danger is that expansion of the clot may produce
pressure-atrophy of the rest of the testis, and for
this reason injured testes should all be explored,
the clot evacuated, and the rent in the tunica al-
buginea sewn up (Fig. 22.28).
Testicular tumours are notoriously apt to present
after trauma and surgeons must always keep this
possibility in mind because an orchiectomy may
be needed.
Inﬂammation of the testicle
Acute orchitis
Most infections in the testis are caused by viruses,
e.g. Coxsackie or mumps. Mumps orchitis only oc-
curs after puberty, when it may be bilateral and the
oedema may lead to pressure necrosis and atrophy
of the testis. When unilateral it may be impossible
to distinguish from torsion and therefore demands
to be explored. There is some evidence that inci-
sion of the tunica albuginea will decompress the
testis and prevent atrophy.
Acute epididymitis
Bacterial infection ﬁnds its way down the vas
deferens from the urinary tract to cause acute
inﬂammation. This is seen after operations on
the urinary tract especially if a catheter has been
left in the urethra. The organisms are usually Es-
cherichia coli. Acute epididymitis arising out of
the blue may be caused by Chlamydia trachoma-
tis, which can be identiﬁed in ﬂuid aspirated from
the epididymis with special culture techniques.
Rarely, tuberculosis can cause surprisingly acute
symptoms and should be excluded in every acute
case where there is no obvious cause for infec-
tion such as a recent operation on the urinary
tract.
Split in tunica albuginea
Atrophied testis
Old haematocele
Figure 22.28 Closed injury of the testis: if not evacuated, the clot may cause atrophy of the testis.
242

The testicle Chapter 22
Chronic orchitis
Syphilitic gumma of the testis was for a generation
only a pathological curiosity. Cancer is far more
likely and in any event, orchiectomy is probably
the right treatment.
Granulomatous orchitis occurs with repeated uri-
nary infections and does not always respond to
antibiotics, and usually requires orchiectomy.
Chronic epididymitis
Tuberculosis
Blood-borne infection with Mycobacterium tubercu-
losis occurs in the head of the epididymis: urine-
borne infection involves the tail along with the
vas deferens (Fig. 22.29). The epididymis is knob-
bly and hard, and there may be nodules along the
vas. In late cases a sinus may form and discharge
on the skin of the scrotum. Rectal ultrasound scan-
ning may show tuberculosis of the prostate and
seminal vesicles. The diagnosis and treatment fol-
low the rules for tuberculosis elsewhere. After a
full course of treatment a residual mass in the epi-
didymis may have to be removed.
Seminal granuloma
After vasectomy many men have induration in the
epididymis caused by an inﬂammatory response
Sinus
Figure 22.29 Tuberculosis of the epididymis and vas def-
erens.
to extravasated sperms. It may respond to pred-
nisolone.
Orchialgia
There is a sad group of men who complain of per-
sistent pain in the testicle. Often there has been
some previous minor surgical operation, e.g. vasec-
tomy or hydrocelectomy, and pain persists. Care-
ful clinical examination can ﬁnd nothing wrong.
An ultrasound scan is normal. Frequently the tes-
ticle is explored and nothing abnormal can be
found. Before long the patient seeks a second opin-
ion, and almost inevitably another surgeon will
attempt to denervate the testicle. The result is in-
stant relief of pain – for a while, but then it comes
back.
Before long the patient has persuaded yet an-
other surgeon to remove the testicle. This is done:
once again the relief of pain is dramatic – for a
while, and then it comes back on the other side. It
is most important to recognise these unfortunate
men because they need help, but from the psychi-
atrist not the surgeon.
Cancer of the testis
Aetiology
Although there are only about 500 new cases in
the UK per annum (about 4.5 per 100,000 males),
it is the most common cancer in men under the
age of 35. It is rare in men of African ancestry both
in Africa and elsewhere. It is rare before puberty,
and peaks in the early twenties.
One in 10 tumours occurs in association with
maldescent of the testis.
Pathology
Cancer may arise from any of the cell types present
in the testis; over 90% arise from germ cells (Fig.
22.30).
243

Chapter 22 The testicle
Figure 22.30 Cellular origin of testicular tumours.
(a)
(b)
Figure 22.31 Seminoma: (a) a small tumour nodule within the testis and (b) a tumour replacing all normal testicular
tissue.
Germ cell tumours
Gonadocytes and spermatocytes
These give rise to a spectrum of tumours, from
highly anaplastic seminoma which shows nu-
clear polymorphism and may even stain for hu-
man chorionic gonadotrophin, through interme-
diate types with sheets of cells ﬁlled with glyco-
gen that stain for placental alkaline phosphatase
(PLAP), to well-differentiated spermatocytic semi-
noma which seldom metastasize (Figs. 22.31 and
23.32).
Embryonal carcinoma
Here the tissues attempt to form organs, with
papillary and glandular elements. They stain for
alpha-foetoprotein (AFP) which betrays the ori-
gin of germ cells from the foetal yolk-sac. Pure
244

The testicle Chapter 22
Figure 22.32 Seminoma: microscopic appearance.
yolk-sac tumours are occasionally found in infants
(Fig. 22.33).
Epidermoid cyst
A cyst containing mature tissue, mainly skin, is
occasionally found. Some of them are possibly be-
Figure 22.33 Embryonal carcinoma.
Figure 22.34 Teratocarcinoma: macroscopic appearance.
nign, but it can take very careful histological ex-
amination to distinguish it from teratocarcinoma.
Teratocarcinoma
In this there is a spectrum from the most benign-
looking adult tissues, e.g. cartilage and hair, to
wildly malignant choriocarcinoma. Of all the pos-
sibilities, choriocarcinoma is the worst, spreading
rapidly through the bloodstream (Figs. 22.34 and
22.35).
Non-germ cell tumours
Leydig cell tumours
These arise from the Leydig cells that are packed in
between the tubules of the testis and normally pro-
duce testosterone. They can give rise to precocious
puberty.
Sertoli cell tumours
These are very rare, seldom metastasize and cause
gynaecomastia.
Figure 22.35 Teratocarcinoma: microscopic appearance.
245

Chapter 22 The testicle
T4 a into cord
T3 into epididymis
T4 b into scrotal skin
T2 through tunica
albuginea
T1 confined to testis
carcinoma in situ
(inside tubules)
Figure 22.36 T staging of testis tumours.
Lymphomas
They may be conﬁned to the testis, and tend to
occur in older men.
TNM staging of testicular tumours
T stage
The T stage is determined only after careful his-
tological examination of the entire testicle (Fig.
22.36).
N stage
The testis drains to the para-aortic lymph nodes at
the level of the origin of the renal arteries, and only
later via the cisterna chyli into the thoracic duct
and systemic circulation. The nodes are localised
by CT scanning (Fig. 22.37).
M stage
Venous spread can occur early if trophoblastic el-
ements are present.
Supraclavicular
nodes
Pulmonary
metastases
Or
liver
metastases
IV
III
IIa
I
IIb
Para-aortic nodes
> 2 cm
diameter
< 2 cm
diameter
Figure 22.37 N staging of testis tumours (Royal Marsden Hospital system).
246

The testicle Chapter 22
Deforming the
epididymis
Secondary hydrocele
Figure 22.38 Some testicular tumours are difﬁcult
to feel.
Clinical features
Symptoms
r Lump in the testicle: This is in the body of the
testis. It is not ﬂuctuant or translucent. The tragedy
is that so many young men report this so late (see
below).
r ‘Inﬂammation’: About 15% have signs of inﬂam-
mation that are all too easily mistaken for epi-
didymitis.
r Trauma: Another 10–15% of men have a history
of injury which may lead to loss of valuable time
in making the proper diagnosis.
r Gynaecomastia: Transient swelling of the breasts
is common at puberty, but can be due to tro-
phoblastic elements secreting human chorionic
gonadotrophin (HCG), which should be measured
in every case.
r Back pain: The back pain in a ﬁt young man
should always make one think of metastases from
a testicular tumour.
Physical signs
A hard lump is found in the body of the testis.
Difﬁculty arises if the lump is near the epididymis,
concealed in the body of the testis, or impossible
to feel because of a tense hydrocele (Fig. 22.38).
Inﬂammation can be misleading.
Always examine the breasts for gynaecomastia.
Investigations
r Ultrasound scan: This investigation is so quick
and painless that it should be performed on ev-
ery suspicious testicle (Fig. 22.39). Mistakes are
rare.
r Tumour markers: Blood is sent for placental al-
kaline phosphatase (PLAP) which is secreted by
gonadocytes, for HCG which is secreted by tro-
phoblastic cells, and AFP secreted by yolk-sac cells.
(An ordinary ‘pregnancy test’ is a quick and cheap
way of detecting abnormal amounts of HCG.) Lac-
tic acid dehydrogenase has low speciﬁcity (high
false-positive rate) and should be correlated with
other clinical ﬁndings. High levels can be detected
in smooth, cardiac and skeletal muscle, liver, kid-
ney and brain. It is thought to have a direct
relationship with tumour burden, thus it seems
to be most useful as a marker for tumour bulk
tissue.
r Exploration of the testicle: The spermatic cord is
clamped at the internal ring before the testicle is
delivered: the diagnosis of cancer is usually obvi-
ous to the naked eye, but can be veriﬁed by frozen
section if in doubt. The cord is transected above
the clamp (Fig. 22.40).
r CT scan: A CT scan is performed of the chest and
abdomen to identify lymph node and pulmonary
metastases (Fig. 22.41).
247

Chapter 22 The testicle
Figure 22.39 Ultrasound scan of a testicular teratoma. (Courtesy of Dr W. Hately.)
Internal
oblique
External
oblique
slit open
Cord covered
by cremaster
Cremaster fibres
divided
Clamp on
spermatic
cord
Cord doubly
transfixed,
tied and cut
Inferior epigastric
vessels beneath
transversalis fascia
Figure 22.40 Left orchiectomy.
248

The testicle Chapter 22
Figure 22.41 CT scan showing para-aortic mass on the
left side of the aorta.
Treatment
The treatment of testicular tumours has been
revolutionised by platinum-based chemotherapy.
Chemotherapy is so unpleasant for the patient
that attempts have been made to select out those
Lumbar
veins
Right testicular
vessels and
lymphatics
Inferior vena
cava
Figure 22.42 Removal of residual para-aortic nodes.
patients who do not need it, and follow them by
surveillance. After many trials surveillance is now
restricted to a small group from which excludes all
seminomas, any germ cell tumours which have in-
vaded the tissues around the testis, and any that
secrete AFP or HCG.
Stage I
Staging retroperitoneal lymph node dissection
This is performed in many centres to identify mi-
croscopic metastases with the advantage that re-
moving the lymph nodes may cure those with
small volume disease. Where there are larger
amounts of tumour present in the lymph nodes,
chemotherapy is given afterwards. In most UK cen-
tres reliance is placed for staging on CT scanning.
Seminoma
Prophylactic
radiation
to
the
retroperitoneal
lymph nodes can given 100% cure with stage I
seminoma. An identical rate of cure is obtained
with a single course of single-agent carboplatin.
Surveillance is not an option, because of the high
rate of relapse.
249

Chapter 22 The testicle
Other germ cell tumours
Surveillance is reasonable for non-seminomatous
germ cell tumours without invasion of the veins
or lymphatics of the testis, without yolk-sac el-
ements, and without undifferentiated elements
but because of the high rate of relapse some
centres have reverted to a policy of giving all
these men prophylactic platinum-based combina-
tion chemotherapy.
Stage II
All patients are given chemotherapy to start with
and are then followed carefully, by serial tumour
markers and CT scans.
Stage III
All patients are given as much chemotherapy as
they can tolerate. If a mass remains after two or
sometimes three cycles of treatment, it is removed
surgically. If the mass of lymph nodes is in the
retroperitoneal tissue, this requires careful dissec-
tion of all the tumours off the aorta and inferior
vena cava (Fig. 22.42). Residual masses in the lungs
or mediastinum are removed through the chest.
The continual advances in the management of
testicular cancer have resulted in a miraculous im-
provement in results. In one group of 9288 pa-
tients in Southeast England between 1960 and
2004, the 10-year relative survival increased from
78% in 1960–1969 to 99% in 1990–2004 for semi-
nomas (5555 cases), and from 55 to 95% for
non-seminomas (3733 cases). This improvement
is largely attributable to chemotherapy where the
trend to further reducing its toxicity should con-
tinue to improve the future health of the growing
numbers of survivors of testicular cancer.
Key messages
Can you get
above it?
Scrotal swelling
Yes: it is a scrotal swelling
No: it is an inguioscrotal hernia
Swelling separate
from the testis
Epididymal cyst
Varicocele
(bag of worms)
Cannot feel testicle:
Hydrocele
Hard testicular lump:
Tumour
Is it diffuse?
Yes
No
250

Chapter 23
Male fertility
History and general examination
Gross endocrine deﬁciencies are usually obvious:
the young man who shaves daily and has a nor-
mal physique is unlikely to have a deﬁciency of
androgens. Corticosteroids taken by athletes may
suppress pituitary gonadotrophins. Note any his-
tory of previous surgery to the bladder neck or
pelvis that may have injured the autonomic ner-
vous system leading to probably retrograde ejac-
ulation. Chronic illnesses such as diabetes, renal
failure and liver failure can impair spermatogene-
sis. A past history of genitourinary infections may
be relevant (e.g. mumps, gonorrhoea and non-
speciﬁc urethritis). Endogenous toxins as a result of
smoking and drinking alcohol could harm sperm
production. Patients with recurrent sinusitis and
chest infections may have epididymal obstruction
(cystic ﬁbrosis).
It is important to establish if normal ejaculation
occurs within the vagina. Sexual intercourse taking
place around the point of maximal female fertility
(i.e. ovulation) is of prime value.
Testicles
Very small testes should raise the suspicion of
Klinefelter’s syndrome (XXY) (Fig. 23.1). The diag-
nosis is easily conﬁrmed by cytology of a scraping
from the mucosa of the cheek, looking for the Barr
body – the index of the extra X chromosome. Note
the clinical features (Table 23.1). Previous surgery
for repair of a hernia, or orchidopexy, may suggest
damage to the vas deferens. Previous bilateral or-
chidopexy often, but not always, means that both
testicles are not producing sperm.
Investigations
Semen analysis (Table 23.2)
Semen is collected by masturbation after 72 hours
abstinence into a clean plastic container.
r Volume: The normal range is from 1 to 8 mL.
(The most usual cause for a low semen volume is
clumsy collection of the specimen!)
r Sperm density and motility: Most traditional lab-
oratory methods for measuring sperm density and
motility are so inaccurate as to be useless. When
the computerised Hamilton–Thorn system is used,
normal fertility is found with a sperm density as
low as 1 × 106 per mL provided motility is ade-
quate.
r Morphology: There is very little correlation be-
tween morphological abnormalities and infertility.
Many more are picked up by electron microscopy
(Fig. 23.2), but are of doubtful relevance.
r Antibodies: Antibodies to the head and tail of
the sperm may occur in blood, seminal plasma and
cervical mucus. These may account for some of the
Lecture Notes: Urology, 6th edition. By John Blandy and
Amir Kaisary. Published 2009 by Blackwell Publishing.
ISBN: 978-1-4051-2270-2.
251

Chapter 23 Male fertility
Tall, thin
Gynaecomastia
Small testes
and penis
Elevated
gonadotrophins
hyalinised
testis tubules
Figure 23.1 Klinefelter’s syndrome.
immotile sperms which are sometimes found in a
post-coital test.
Luteinizing hormone and
follicle-stimulating hormone
measurements
A follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) level more
than 15 mIU/mL means that the tubules are not
producing sperms, and for all practical purposes,
there is no point in doing a testicular biopsy. If
normal, it suggests that there may be a blockage
somewhere between the testis and the ejaculatory
duct.
Testis biopsy
A needle sample is taken from the testis, or a tiny
snippet of tubules is taken at open operation (Fig.
23.3). The tissue is put immediately into Bouin’s
Table 23.1 Klinefelter’s syndrome.
Tall thin
Gynaecomastia
Small testes and penis
Elevated gonadotrophins and hyalinised testicular tubules
Table 23.2 Normal semen parameters.
Key features
Colour
Grey–yellow
Volume
2.5 mL
Sperm density
20–200 million/mL
Motility
>50% at 4 hours
Abnormal forms
<50%
Fructose
Present
preservative ﬂuid (not ordinary formalin) to avoid
distortion of the histology. It is rare for a testis
biopsy to show any condition that can be put right
by treatment.
Treatment
Azospermia
If the FSH and luteinizing hormone (LH) are el-
evated, testicular biopsy will add nothing to the
diagnosis. If the biopsy shows maturation arrest
(Fig. 23.4), completion of the cycle of spermatoge-
nesis may be attempted by medical therapy. The
presence of lymphocytes in the biopsies suggests an
immunological problem.
Blockage to the seminal tract may occur from a
number of causes. There may have been exposure
to mercury in childhood, once a common com-
ponent of ‘teething powders’ which paralysed the
microcilia in the bronchioles as well as in the epi-
didymis. Congenital absence of vasa could occur. A
blockage in the vas deferens can be demonstrated
with a vasogram (Fig. 23.5) which may be treated
by epididymovasostomy (Fig. 23.6). A transrectal
ultrasound scan may show dilatation of the semi-
nal vesicles, secondary to blockage of the ejacula-
tory ducts which may be relieved by transurethral
incision of the ejaculatory ducts.
Oligospermia
When a ‘low sperm count’ has been reported, the
ﬁrst step must be to check it with a properly vali-
dated computerised technique. Because of the er-
rors in the usual methods, claims that any form
of treatment has done good must be treated with
considerable scepticism. Loose pants and ice packs
have had their vogue. Operations on varicoceles,
252

Male fertility Chapter 23
(b)
(a)
Figure 23.2 Scanning electron microscopy of ‘abnormal’ morphology of sperms.
Bouin
Figure 23.3 Biopsy of testis.
Figure 23.4 Maturation arrest: the arrow shows immature
cells shed into the lumen of the tubule.
Figure 23.5 Vasogram showing ﬁlling of the vas deferens
and seminal vesicle on the left side.
253

Chapter 23 Male fertility
Figure 23.6 Epididymovasostomy.
whether they can be seen, or have to be detected
by Doppler studies in symptomless men, should
be regarded with even more scepticism. This is an
area which cries out for ‘evidence-based’ decision
making.
Vasectomy
Consent
Both partners must understand that vasectomy is
likely to be irreversible. It must also be explained
that however carefully the vasa are divided, the
ends may join each other again. Usually this is de-
tected within the ﬁrst few months after the vasec-
tomy (early failure) but in something like 1:2000
cases, it occurs some years later (late failure) and
takes place irrespective of what type of operation
has been done. Until all the sperms have disap-
peared from the ejaculate the couple must con-
tinue to use contraceptive precautions.
Because of the risk of medicolegal consequences,
all these points should be fully discussed, and
spelled out on the consent form.
Procedure
Vasectomy can be performed under local or gen-
eral anaesthesia. When there has been previous
surgery in the inguinal region or scrotum, general
anaesthesia may be preferable.
The large number of different techniques de-
scribed today shows that none of them is per-
fect. There is no objective evidence that any one
method is superior to another in terms of prevent-
ing either early or late reunion.
Usually a small length of vas is removed, and the
ends are treated to seal them off in the hope of pre-
venting spontaneous reunion (Fig. 23.7). The ends
may be ligated with absorbable or non-absorbable
material or diathermised. Some surgeons seal one
vas, others both. Some surgeons back one end,
some both. Some stitch the sheath of the vas to
interpose a layer of ‘fascia’ between the two ends.
Many do not. Both early and late recurrence have
been reported after all of these methods, and it al-
most certainly takes place more frequently than is
generally appreciated: in 10% of one series of men
who came up to have their vasectomy reversed it
was found that spermatozoa were present in their
pre-reversal specimens.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 23.7 Variety of methods used in vasectomy in the
hope of preventing early or late recanalisation.
254

Male fertility Chapter 23
Complications
1 Haematoma
is
common,
from
reactionary
bleeding from small scrotal veins that go into
spasm during the operation and escape notice. A
large haematoma is dealt with by early evacuation
of the clot and haemostasis. Small collections usu-
ally resolve spontaneously.
2 Infection may take place, usually at the site of a
skin suture, sometimes in a haematoma.
3 Pain in the scrotum: A small number of patients
continue to complain of pain in the scrotum for
which no cause can be found.
4 Sperm granuloma: Sometimes a sperm granu-
loma is found at the site of the division of the
vas or epididymis to give a typical tender nodular
swelling.
‘Reversal’ of vasectomy:
reanastomosis of the vas
The ends of the vas are found, trimmed back to
the lumen, and sewn together (Fig. 23.8). Most
Figure 23.8 Reversal of vasectomy.
surgeons use magniﬁcation when performing this
operation. Success in terms of sperms ﬁnding their
way through the anastomosis can be expected in
over 80%, but only about 50% will father children.
There are many possible reasons for this, including
the possible development of auto-antibodies dur-
ing the time that sperms have been obstructed in
the epididymis.
255

Chapter 24
Minimally invasive urology:
laparoscopy and robotics
Surgery is a therapeutic approach adopted by sur-
geons to enter various cavities in the body to rem-
edy various pathological ailments in the body. In-
cisions are needed to allow surgeons access into the
necessary cavities and use their eyes and hands to
carry out therapeutic manoeuvres. Advances and
innovations gave surgeons the chance to change
routes of access and offer signiﬁcant improve-
ments in surgical operative treatments performed
under magniﬁcation. Although open surgery is
still often necessary, minimally invasive surgery
is being increasingly applied in various surgical
ﬁelds.
Laparoscopy
Laparoscopy is a surgical procedure in which a
ﬁbre-optic instrument is inserted through the ab-
dominal wall to view the organs in the abdomen
and permit small-scale surgery.
Patient selection
Adequate history and physical examination are the
cornerstones for patient selection for laparoscopy.
Contra-indications
r Relative: Prior abdominal and pelvic surgery,
pelvic
ﬁbrosis,
obesity,
hiatus
hernia,
non-
reducible herniations of the abdomen/inguinal
hernia, umbilical abnormalities and abdominal
aortic/iliac aneurysm.
r Absolute: Abdominal wall infections, generalised
peritonitis, bowel obstruction and uncorrected co-
agulopathy.
Anaesthetics
The ideal anaesthetic technique should aim at
maximal safety for the patient. The technique
should provide adequate muscle relaxation and
analgesia, and allow for rapid postoperative re-
covery. Laparoscopic procedures often need the
Trendelenberg position and frequent alteration in
the position of the operating table. Thus precau-
tions to safeguard against the risk of peripheral
neuropathy and protection of bony prominences
by adequate padding and secure velcro strapping
to the operating table. Laparoscopic surgery has
been performed under local, regional and gen-
eral anaesthesia. The technique chosen should
be based on the medical condition of the pa-
tient, the indication for the procedure, the pref-
erence or choice of the patient and the surgeon’s
needs.
Lecture Notes: Urology, 6th edition. By John Blandy and
Amir Kaisary. Published 2009 by Blackwell Publishing.
ISBN: 978-1-4051-2270-2.
256

Minimally invasive urology Chapter 24
(a)
(b)
Figure 24.1 Trocar placement: (a) prostate surgery and (b) renal surgery.
Pneumoperitoneum
Insufﬂation of CO2 aims at instilling approxi-
mately 3–6 L of CO2 into the abdomen.
1 Insufﬂator: This is a piece of equipment which
has a CO2 gas cylinder attached to it and has an
insufﬂation tube line to be attached to the pa-
tient. Dials indicate clearly the total CO2 delivered,
actual and set CO2 ﬂow rate, pressure set point
and intra-abdominal pressure. A spare tank of CO2
should always be available in the operating room.
2 Trocars/ports: A laparoscopic trocar is a means
through which access into the abdomen is secured.
All trocars have two common components: a sharp
obturator to facilitate access into the abdominal
cavity and a sheath through which the obturator
passes. The sheath may have a side port for CO2
insufﬂation. The sheath has a valve or a membrane
through which instruments may be introduced
without loss of CO2 from the abdomen. Trocars
are reusable or disposable. A primary trocar is the
ﬁrst trocar to be placed after a pneumoperitoneum
is obtained. Secondary trocars follow. Sites for tro-
car placements are chosen to facilitate access to the
organ to be operated upon (Fig. 24.1).
3 Laparoscopic instruments: A wide assortment fa-
cilitates all laparoscopic procedures. They are avail-
able in both re-usable and disposable types. Most
standard laparoscopic instruments are available
in diameters ranging from 3 to 12 mm and 35
cm in length. These diameters allow their pas-
sage through a given trocar and are of a sufﬁcient
length to reach the operative site. They include
graspers, incising instruments, retractors, needle
holders, knot pushers, specimen entrapment sacks
and aspiration/irrigation devices. Surgical clips
257

Chapter 24 Minimally invasive urology
and staplers have been adapted for use through the
laparoscopy ports to secure/ligate vessels, close lu-
minal structures and re-approximate tissue edges.
Improvements in design and material are con-
tinually being made laparoscopy equipments and
instruments.
Complications of laparoscopy
These mainly fall into two main categories: intra-
operative and postoperative groups.
1 Intraoperative: These are either associated with
anaesthesia or related to laparoscopic technique.
(a) Cardiovascular:
r Gas embolus: It can cause cardiovascular col-
lapse. It is usually due to inadvertent place-
ment of the insufﬂations needle into a blood
vessel or vascular organ. When a large vol-
ume of gas reaches the right ventricle, an air
lock impedes the pulmonary circulation. The
consequent cascade of events may lead to a
catastrophic right ventricular failure, drop in
venous ﬂow and left ventricular of output.
r Hypotension: Intra-peritoneal abdominal in-
sufﬂation up to pressure of 20 mm Hg is well
tolerated. However, intra-abdominal pressure
more than 30 mm Hg may decrease the car-
diac output and arterial blood pressure.
r Hypertension: Hypercapnia due to absorp-
tion of CO2 may stimulate the sympathetic
nervous system leading to tachycardia and
hypertension. Patients with essential are vul-
nerable.
r Arrhythmias: Bradycardia, tachycardia and
premature ventricular contractions could oc-
cur.
(b) Pulmonary:
r Hypoxaemia: Ventilation–perfusion imbal-
ance can be caused by a combination of the
Trendelenburg position and the abdominal
contents resting on the diaphragm. This can
in turn lead to decreased lung volume, at-
electasis and blood pooling in the dependent
parts of the lungs.
r Acidosis: Absorption of insufﬂated CO2 and
ventilation–perfusion imbalance could lead
to autonomous stimulation of the central ner-
vous system. This may lead to acidosis, my-
ocardial depression, vaso-dilatation and hy-
potension.
r Aspiration: Trendelenburg position and in-
creased intra-abdominal pressure could put
the anaesthetised patient at risk of regurgi-
tation and aspiration of gastric contents.
r Pneumothorax,
pneumo-mediastinum
and
pneumo-pericardium: These can occur if a tro-
car is placed above the 12th rib, or if there are
presence of diaphragmatic defects or positive
pressure trauma to the lings.
(c) Miscellaneous:
r subcutaneous emphysema;
r vascular injuries range from haematoma
formation in the abdominal wall to laceration
of the abdominal aorta;
r perforation of a solid organ or a hollow vis-
cous; and
r peripheral nerve damage.
2 Postoperative:
(a) Fever/peritonitis: It may represent the ﬁrst
sign of a missed intra-operative bowel perfora-
tion or urinary leakage.
(b) Delayed haemorrhage: It could be one of the
causes of postoperative haemodynamic instabil-
ity.
(c) Incisional hernia: Risk of abdominal contents
herniation via a small diameter trocar (≤5 mm)
is low but could occur via a trocar ≥10 mm site.
(d) Impaired renal functions: It could be sec-
ondary to intra-operative unrecognised bladder
perforation or urinary leakage.
Establishing a well-trained laparoscopy team
with an experienced surgical assistant and a scrub
nurse is a must. The role played by an attentive
anaesthetic team cannot be overestimated. Metic-
ulous attention to details is essential to success in
successful laparoscopy procedures.
Robotics
Robotics is a branch of technology concerned
with the design, construction, operation and ap-
plication of robots. A robot is a mechanical de-
vice that can perform pre-programmed repetitive
258

Minimally invasive urology Chapter 24
tasks creating a ‘Master–Slave’ system. In indus-
try, robots are used for mass production and im-
proved efﬁciency. Advances in the ﬁeld led to
the creation of robotic integrated surgical sys-
tems which can assist surgeons in performing sur-
gical procedures in real time with improved vi-
sion and surgical precision. It allows computer-
Assistant
monitor
Anesthesiologist
Surgical cart
Interchangeable instruments
with EndoWrist     technology
simultaneously follow surgeon’s
hand and wrist movements
Nurse
Surgeon uses open-surgery
hand movements which are
precisely replicated in the
operative field by the instruments
Assistant
Heart and lung specialist
Surgeon at
operative console
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 24.2 da Vinci Robot: (a) system; (b) theatre layout; (c) EndoWrist; (d) hand control; and (e) operator view. Photos
courtesy of Intuitive Surgical, Inc., 2008.
assisted control of laparoscopic instruments with
enhanced degree of manoeuvrability and stereo-
scopic vision. A range of surgical procedures in-
cluding cardiac bypass surgery, mitral valve re-
pair, hernia repair, hysterectomy and other pro-
cedures are examples of a growing list. In urol-
ogy, prostatectomy for early prostate cancer was
259

Chapter 24 Minimally invasive urology
(e)
Figure 24.2 (Continued)
probably the ﬁrst attractive urological procedure to
attract application of robotic-assisted surgery. The
da Vinci Surgical System (Fig. 24.2) offers 10x op-
erative magniﬁcation allowing for more precise
surgical performance and subsequently improving
outcomes relating to sexual function and conti-
nence. Less likely requirement for blood transfu-
sion, less postoperative pain, faster recovery times
and equivalent cancer outcome control are ex-
pected advantages. Outcome data on robotic ver-
sus traditional surgery are becoming increasingly
recognised. It is also expensive. Thus opinion
on the future of robotic surgery remains divided
among surgeons despite the growing list of vari-
ous urological procedures performed with robotic
assistance.
260

Self-assessment MCQs
1. A 27-year-old man is shot in the left ﬂank.
IVP shows extravasation of contrast just
below the ureteropelvic junction. On CT
scan, the spleen and bowel appear to be
uninvolved. The next step in management
is:
a. emergency arteriogram
b. percutaneous nephrostomy
c. percutaneous nephrostomy and
antegrade catheter
d. explore the injury transabdominally
e. explore the injury through the ﬂank
2. A girl of 14 is kicked by her horse and suffers
a rupture of her kidney. Correct initial
management is likely to be:
a. resuscitation followed by cystoscopy and
retrograde ureterography as soon as
stable
b. renal arteriography followed by
immediate exploration
c. resuscitation, intravenous urography and
initial observation in ITU
d. renal ultrasound and percutaneous
nephrostomy drainage of the kidney
e. immediate exploration of the kidney
3. Theories of urinary stone formation include
the following:
a. sub-epithelial Randall’s plaque
b. renal hypersecretion of stone-forming
salts
c. primary hypoparathyroidism
d. renal tubular acidosis
e. immobilisation
4. A 61-year-old man with a history of stone
disease and multiple bilateral
ureterolithotomies is seen with a fever of
103◦F, pyuria and microheamaturia. An IVP
reveals a 6-mm right mid-ureteral calculus
with delayed function of the right kidney
and marked obstruction. In addition to
beginning parenteral antibiotics, the most
reasonable immediate management option
is:
a. emergency ESWL
b. placement of a ureteral stent to bypass
the obstruction
c. percutaneous nephrostomy and
antegrade basketing of the calculus under
ﬂuoroscopy
d. ureteroscopic stone extraction
e. emergency ureterolithotomy
5. Renal calculi could contain the following
except:
a. cholesterol
b. oxalate
c. phosphate
d. urate
e. cysteine
6. The major cause of uric acid stone formation
in patients with ileostomy is:
a. dehydration
b. hyperuricemia
c. low urinary pH
d. hyperurucosuria
e. malabsorption
7. A previously ﬁt young woman of 28 years
presents with acute loin pain and a fever. An
emergency IVU shows a right
hydronephrosis with obstruction of the right
ureter caused by a 10-mm stone impacted in
261

Self-assessment MCQs
the right ureter at the level of a sacroiliac
joint. The most appropriate immediate
treatment will be:
a. MSU, antibiotics and observe for 48
hours before any further intervention
b. immediate percutaneous nephrostomy
c. immediate cystoscopy and the passage of
a ureteric catheter by-passed the stone to
relieve the obstruction
d. immediate operation with endoscopic
ureteroscopy and destruction of the stone
with endoscopic removal of fragments
e. analgesia and a forced diuresis
8. Complications of shock wave lithotripsy of a
renal stone include:
a. haematuria
b. sub-capsular haematoma
c. ureteric obstruction by stone fragments
d. signiﬁcant loin brushing
e. all of the above
9. Metabolic causes of renal stone formation
include all the following except:
a. hypercalcuria
b. cystinuria
c. renal tubular acidosis
d. myxoedema
e. hyperoxaluria
10. Bladder stones have been associated with:
a. squamous carcinoma of the urothelium
b. non-absorbable sutures in the bladder
c. obstructive large prostate hypertrophy
d. strangury
e. all of the above
11. In renal cell carcinoma, stage III indicates:
a. tumour limited to renal capsule
b. lung metastases
c. regional lymph node involvement
d. none of the above
e. all of the above
12. A 71-year-old man has sudden, dull, right
ﬂank pain, nausea and gross haematuria.
KUB shows no signiﬁcant calciﬁcation. IVP
shows non-function of the right kidney with
developing dense nephrogram effect at six
hours. The next step should be:
a. CT scan
b. renal scan
c. renal aniography
d. renal ultrasound
e. retrograde pyelogram
13. Possible symptoms/ﬁndings of a patient
with a renal parenchymal carcinoma could
include:
a. a renal mass
b. haematuria
c. intermittent fevers
d. erythrocytosis
e. all of the above
14. Aetiology of urethelial carcinoma includes
exposure to the following possible
carcinogens or related conditions except:
a. aniline dyes
b. tobacco
c. schistosomiasis
d. alcohol
e. leukoplakia of the urothelium
15. Intravesical therapy in management of an
advanced bladder carcinoma (T4) include
the following:
a. Epodil
b. BCG
c. Mitomycin-C
d. Adriamycin
e. none of the above
16. Stage T2 transitional cell carcinoma of the
bladder indicates:
a. a non-invasive lesion unto the
suburothelial tissue
b. deep inﬁltration into the muscle; a
mobile mass
c. a ﬁxed mass
d. superﬁcial inﬁltration into the muscle;
ill-deﬁned thickening on bimanual
examination
e. carcinoma in situ
262

Self-assessment MCQs
17. Transitional cell carcinoma of the ureter is
most frequently associated with:
a. chronic pyelonephritis
b. recurrent renal stones
c. cigarette smoking
d. chronic aspirin ingestion
e. Balkan ancestry
18. Valuable routine investigations of painless
haematuria include:
a. urine cystology
b. intravenous urography (IVU)
c. cysto-urethroscopy
d. all of the above
e. none of the above
19. Painless haematuria in a male patient aged
78 years could be due to all the following
except:
a. renal cell carcinoma
b. bladder carcinoma
c. seminoma
d. ureteric carcinoma
20. Bimanual examination of the bladder under
general anaesthetic in a case of T2 bladder
carcinoma would be:
a. no abnormality
b. a well-deﬁned ﬁxed mass
c. an ill-deﬁned localised thickening
d. a well-deﬁned mobile mass
e. an ill-deﬁned ﬁxed mass
21. Urinary diversion metabolic complication is:
a. hypernatimic alkalosis
b. hypercholaraemic acidosis
c. hypercapnic alkalosis
d. renal metabolic acidosis
22. The following drugs can sometimes
precipitate retention of urine in men with
symptoms of bladder outlet obstruction:
a. Sudafed
b. Oxybutynin hydrochloride
c. Tricyclic anti-depressants
d. Carbachol
e. Cimetidine
23. The prostate contains the highest organ
concentration of which of the following:
a. magnesium
b. cholesterol
c. urokinase
d. citric acid
e. zinc
24. In men with benign prostatic hyperplasia,
the symptoms which correlate most with
obstruction are all the following except:
a. nocturia
b. urgency
c. frequency
d. slow stream
e. terminal dribbling
25. A man of 60 is investigated for symptoms of
bladder outlet obstruction and the diagnosis
is made of moderate benign prostatic
hypertrophy leading to an obstructed
urinary ﬂow and incomplete bladder
emptying. It is decided to treat him
conservatively with medication. He is on no
other medication and is otherwise ﬁt.
Appropriate drugs would include:
a. terazosin (Hytrin)
b. prazosin (Hypovase)
c. tamsulosin (Flomax)
d. ﬁnasteride
e. all of the above
26. A 65-year-old man has continuous urinary
dribbling following a trans-urethral resection
of the prostate for benign hyperplasia.
Possible explanations include:
a. chronic retention of urine
b. damage to the sphincter mechanism
c. urinary tract infection
d. gross detrusor instability
e. all of the above
27. Complications of prostatectomy include:
a. clot retention
b. urethritis and stricture
c. infertility
d. osteitis pubis
e. all of the above
263

Self-assessment MCQs
28. Chronic urine retention in prostatic
hypertrophy is:
a. painful
b. painless
c. intermittently painful
d. continuously painful
e. occasionally painless
29. Hormonal management of metastatic
prostatic carcinoma include:
a. bilateral orchidectomy
b. oestrogen
c. LHRH agonists
d. LHRH antagonist
e. all of the above
30. The most frequent site of distant metastases
in prostates carcinoma is:
a. lungs
b. lymph nodes
c. liver
d. bones
e. brain
31. Prostatic-speciﬁc antigen appears to be most
accurate in:
a. differentiating carcinoma from benign
hyperplasia of the prostate
b. predicting residual disease post-radical
prostatectomy
c. predicting stage of carcinoma of the
prostate
d. predicting elevations of acid phosphatase
e. predicting urinary obstruction
32. A 75-year-old man has a well-differentiated
(Gleason 2 + 1) adenocarcinoma in 2 of 88
chips of a trans-urethral prostatectomy
(TURP) specimen. All chips were examined.
The most appropriate management is:
a. periodic rectal examination and PSA
measurement
b. immediate repeat TURP
c. immediate repeat TURP plus needle
biopsy
d. repeat TURP in three months
e. repeat TURP plus needle biopsy in three
months
33. Complications of urethral stricture
include:
a. periurethral abscess
b. urethral diverticulum
c. urine extravasation
d. all of the above
e. none of the above
34. A urethral stricture may develop in men as a
consequence of:
a. an indwelling catheter
b. gonocaccal urethritis
c. syphilis
d. urethral trauma
e. all of the above
35. The single most important sign of urethral
injury after pelvic trauma is:
a. pelvic fracture
b. blood in the urethral meatus
c. inability to void
d. haematuria
e. pelvic haematoma
36. The most frequent complication of rupture
of the prostatomembranous urethra
is:
a. impotence
b. incontinence
c. abscess
d. ﬁstula
e. stricture
37. A fall stride injury could be associated with
a. rupture of the bulbar urethra
b. rupture of the posterior urethra
c. a risk of subsequent stricture
d. none of the above
e. all of the above
38. Klinefelter’s syndrome includes the
following criteria:
a. tall and thin
b. small testes and penis
c. elevated gonadotrophins
d. hyalinised testicular tubules
e. all of the above
264

Self-assessment MCQs
39. Normal semen parameters include all the
following except:
a. colour: grey–yellow
b. volume: 2.5 mL
c. sperm density: 20–200 million/mL
d. motility: >50% at 4 hours
e. abnormal forms: < 50%
f. fructose: absent
40. Carcinoma of the penis is:
a. squamous cell type
b. transitional cell type
c. glandular adenocarcinoma
d. basal cell type
e. small cell carcinoma
41. The most frequent testicular tumour is:
a. seminoma
b. teratoma
c. lymphoma
d. interstitial tumour of Leydig
e. lipoma
42. A 29-year-old man was seen by a
dermatologist for a lesion of the glans penis.
A shave biopsy was performed which
revealed squamous cell carcinoma in situ.
Physical examination shows a well-healed
scar and no inguinal adenopathy. The next
step in management should be:
a. simple penectomy
b. laser fulgration of the lesion
c. excision of previous scar
d. total penectomy with biopsy of sentinel
nodes
e. observation only
43. A 9-year-old boy is referred with an enlarged
left side of the scrotum approximately for
15-hour duration. The boy noted mild
discomfort in the scrotum following a
football rugby game. The discomfort
progressed during the night and prevented
him from sleeping. A 6-year-old sister had
mumps one month ago. The left side of the
scrotum was markedly enlarged and slightly
erythematous. The scrotum was diffusely
tender without localisation. His temperature
was 100◦F and white blood cell count was
8,400 with a normal differential. Urine
analysis was normal. The most likely
diagnosis is:
a. acute epididymitis
b. torsion of the spermatic cord
c. mumps orchitis
d. traumatic haematocoele
e. incarcerated inguinal hernia
44. The major complication from long-term oral
androgenic agents in the treatment of
impotence is:
a. development of benign enlargement of
the prostate
b. gynaecomastia
c. hepatotoxicity
d. weight gain
e. infertility
45. Common causes of azospermia include:
a. previous syphilitic infection
b. previous gonorrhoeal infection
c. vasa aplasia
d. epididymal cyst
e. all of the above
46. In an 8-year-old boy with retractile testis, the
best management would be:
a. periodic re-examination
b. no further follow up
c. orchidopexy
d. LHRH agonist
e. HCG
47. A 20-year-old man with a 2-cm palpable area
of induration on the left testicle.
Ultrasonography reveals a non-homogenous,
well-circumscribed, intratesticular mass. The
best course of management is:
a. observation and serial ultrasonography
b. surgical exploration
c. ultrasound guided needle biopsy of the
testicular mass
d. repeat ultrasonography with coloured
Doppler scanning
e. none of the above
265

Self-assessment MCQs
48. The obliterated umbilical artery originates
from which of the following arteries:
a. superior gluteal artery
b. obturator artery
c. middle sacral artery
d. internal iliac artery
e. external iliac artery
49. True priapism:
a. usually resolves spontaneously
b. may result in a pulmonary embolus
c. is most commonly the outcome of
trauma
d. usually involves the corpus cavernosum
e. may result in ﬁbrosis of the corpus
spongiosum
50. A 27-year-old man developed sudden onset
of pain in the penis during vigorous sexual
intercourse. He heard a “pop” sound which
was followed by a swelling of the penis,
ecchymosis and distortion of the right side
of the penis at mid-shaft. An urethrogram
performed was normal. The preferred
management plan should be:
a. suprapubic catheter and pressure dressing
of penile shaft
b. Foley urethral catheter and ice pack
c. pressure dressing and allow home for
review after 48 hours
d. exploration and repair of the corpora
e. ice pack and delayed exploration if the
swelling persists
266

Answers to MCQs
1. b
2. c
3. b
4. b
5. b–e
6. e
7. c
8. e
9. d
10. e
11. d
12. a
13. e
14. d
15. e
16. d
17. c
18. d
19. c
20. c
21. d
22. b
23. x
24. b
25. e
26. e
27. e
28. b
29. e
30. d
31. b
32. a
33. d
34. e
35. b
36. e
37. e
38. e
39. f
40. a
41. a
42. b
43. c
44. a
45. c
46. a
47. b
48. d
49. d
50. d
267

Glossary
agenesis: Greek α plus γε’νεσις (creation)
albumen: Latin, egg-white
allantois: Greek αλλας (sausage)
Alport, Cecil (1880–1959): South African physi-
cian
ampulla: Latin, a ﬂask
aplasia: Greek α plus πλασσειν (to form)
balanitis: Greek βαλανoς (the glans penis)
Barr, Murray (1908): Contemporary Canadian
anatomist
Behc¸et, Hul´usi (1889–1948): Turkish dermatol-
ogist
Bellini, Lorenzo (1643–1704): Anatomist of
Pisa
Bence-Jones,
Henry
(1814–73):
Physician,
London
Benedict, Stanley Rossiter (1884–1936): Bio-
chemist, New York
Bertin, Exup`ere Joseph (1712–81): Associate
anatomist, Academy of Sciences, Paris
Bilharz,
Theodor
Maximilian
(1825–62):
German physician working in Cairo who discov-
ered Schistosoma haematobium
Boari, Achille (b. 1894): Italian urologist
Bonney, W.F. Victor (1872–1953): Gynaecolo-
gist, Middlesex Hospital, London
bougie: French, candle (the best wax came from
Bujiyah in Algeria)
Bouin, Paul (1870–1962): Histologist of Stras-
bourg: devised ﬁxative containing picric and
acetic acids as well as formalin
Bowman, Sir William (1816–92): Ophthalmic
surgeon, London
Brucella:
Microorganisms
discovered
by
Sir
William Bruce (1855–1931), British surgeon
Buck, Gordon (1807–77): Surgeon, New York
Burch, J.C: American gynaecologist
Buschke,
Abraham
(1868–1943):
German
pathologist
calix. Greek κα’λιξ (cup). Often confused with
Graeco-Latin κα’λυξ (the leaves covering the
bud of a ﬂower), and incorrectly written as calyx
Camper, Peter (1772–89): Physician of Amster-
dam
cannula: Latin (canna, a reed)
catheter:
Greek
καθετηρ,
καθεµη (to
send
down)
Chlamydia: Greek χλα’µυς (cloak)
chord´ee: Painful curvature of the penis: French
cord´ee
clitoris: Greek (κλειτoρι’ς)
Colles, Abraham (1773–1843): Professor of
Surgery in Dublin
Conn, Jerome W. (1907): American physician
Cowper, William (1666–1709): Surgeon of
London
creatinine: Greek κρε’ας
(ﬂesh: product of
catabolism of protein)
Crohn, Burrill B. (1884–1983): Gastroenterol-
ogist, New York
Cushing, Harvey (1869–1939): Neurosurgeon
of Boston
de la Peyronie, Franc¸ois (1678–1747): Sur-
geon of Paris
Denonvilliers, Charles Pierre (1802–72): Sur-
geon of Paris
detrusor: Latin (detrudere, to push down)
diabetes: Latin (syphon)
dilate: Latin, dilatare: di- plus latus (wide) hence
dilatation (dilation is incorrect)
Doppler, Christian Johann (1803–53): Aus-
trian physicist
Ducrey, Augusto (1860–1940): Dermatologist
of Rome
268

Glossary
Dupuytren, Baron Guillaume (1777–1835):
French surgeon and pathologist
dysplasia: Greek δυς (difﬁcult, bad etc.) plus
πλασσειν (formation)
Echinococcus:
Greek
ε′χι¯νoς
(hedgehog),
κo’κκoς (grain, seed)
ectopic. Greek εκτω’πoς (displaced)
enuresis: Greek ε’νoυρειν (incontinence): usu-
ally applied today to bed-wetting
epididymis: Greek ε′πι plus διδυµoι (twins –
testes)
epispadias: Greek ε′πι plus σπα’δoν (a rent or
tear)
Escherich, Theodor (1857–1911): Paediatri-
cian of Munich
exstrophy: Greek ε′ξστρεφειν (to turn inside
out)
Falloppius, Gabriel (1523–62): Anatomist of
Padua: favourite pupil of Vesalius
fasciculata: Latin fasciculus (packet, bundle)
Foley, Frederic Eugene Basil (1891–1966):
Urologist of Minneapolis–St Paul
fossa: Latin (ditch)
fraenum, fraenulum: Latin (bridle)
fundus: Bottom
Ghoneim,
Mohamed: Egyptian urologist of
Mansoura
Gimbernat, Don Manuel Louis (1734–1816):
Anatomist, Barcelona
Giraldes,
Joachim
(1808–75):
Professor
of
Surgery, Paris
Gleason,
D.F:
Pathologist
of
Minneapolis
St Pauls, USA
glomerulus: Latin (little ball)
Goodpasture, Ernest William (1886–1960):
American pathologist
Grawitz, Paul Albert (1850–1932): Patholo-
gist of Greifswald
gubernaculum: Latin (rudder; described by John
Hunter, sometimes called Hunter’s gubernacu-
lum)
Hartnup: Surname of English family in whom
the disease was ﬁrst described
Henle,Freidrich(1809–85): AnatomistofBerlin
Henoch, E. (1820–1910): Paediatrician, Berlin
hilum: Latin (eye of seed or bean, hence applied
to kidney)
Hounsﬁeld, Sir Godfrey Newbold (1919–
2004): Nobel laureate, inventor of CT and MRI
scanners
Hunner, Guy Leroy (1868–1951): Gynaecolo-
gist, Johns Hopkins, Baltimore
hyaline: Greek υ′αλoυ (glass)
hydatid: Greek υ′δϖρ (drop of water)
hydrocele:
Greek
υδϖρ (water)
plus
κη’λη
(swelling; often misspelt hydrocoele from con-
fusion with κo’ιλιακoς meaning belly)
insipidus: Latin (tasteless; diabetes insipidus, the
urine does not taste sweet)
Jaboulay, Mathieu (1860–1913): Surgeon of
Lyons
Jensen, Carl Oluf (1864–1934): Pathologist of
Copenhagen
Katayama,
Kunika
(1886–1931):
Japanese
Physician
Klinefelter, Harry Fitch (b. 1912): Contempo-
rary radiologist, Massachusetts General Hospital
Leydig, Franz von (1821–1908): Anatomist of
Bonn
litho-: Greek λιθoς (stone), hence tripsy, from
τριβειν (to crush), τoµη’ (cut), λα’παξειν (to
evacuate)
Littr´e, Alexis (1658–1726): Anatomist of Paris
L¨owenstein, Ernst pathologist of Vienna
malacoplakia: Greek µαλακo’ς and πλακoς
(plaque)
Marshall, Victor F. (1913–1996): Urologist,
New York Memorial Hospital
meatus: Latin (passage or channel)
mellitus: Latin mel (honey, honey-sweet; diabetes
mellitus, urine tastes sweet)
micturition: Latin (urinate), derived from min-
gere (to mix). Originally meant frequency
Millin, Terence (1903–1980): Irish urologist
working in London
Morgagni, Giovanni Battista (1682–1771):
Anatomist of Padua
M¨uller, Johannes (1801–58): Physiologist of
Berlin
navicularis: Latin (shaped like a boat)
Neisser, Albert Ludwig Siegmund (1855–
1916):Dermatologist, Breslau
nephro-: Greek νε’φρoν. Nephrosis, -oσις (con-
dition), nephritis, -ητις (inﬂammation)
269

Glossary
nexus: Latin (tying together, as in connect etc.)
nocturia: Latin nocte (night: passing abnormal
amounts of urine in the night)
Page, I. Harriet Contemporary American physi-
cian, Cleveland clinic
pampiniform: Latin pampinus (tendril)
Papanicolaou, George N. (1883–1962): Greek
pathologist working in New York
papilla: Latin (nipple)
papilloma: Latin (nipple) plus Greek ωµα (tu-
mour)
Petit, Jean Louis (1674–1760): Parisian sur-
geon, elected to the Royal Society of London
Pfannenstiel,
Hermann
Johann
(1862–
1909): Gynaecologist, Breslau
polyuria: Greek πo′λυ (much) plus o′υρια (pass-
ing much urine)
posthitis: Greek πo’σθε (foreskin)
Potter, Edith Louise (b. 1901): American peri-
natal pathologist
Queyrat, L. (b. 1911):Dermatologist, Paris
Randall, Alexander (1883–1930): Urologist,
Philadelphia
Raz, Shlomo Contemporary American urologist,
UCLA
Rehn, Ludwig (1849–1930): Surgeon, Frankfurt
reticularis: Latin (net-like)
Rovsing,
N.T.
(1862–1927):
Professor
of
Surgery, Copenhagen
Sachse, Hans Contemporary German urologist
Scarpa,
Antonio
(1747–1832):
Anatomist,
Pavia
Schistosoma: Greek σχιστω (split) plus σωµα
(body)
Sch¨onlein, Johann L. (1793–1864): German
physician
Scott,
F.
Brantley
Contemporary American
urologist
Scribner, Belding H. (b. 1921): Contemporary
American nephrologist
Sertoli, Enrico (1842–1910): Anatomist, Pavia
Shy–Drager,
Milton
G.
Shy
(1919–1967),
Glen A. Drager (b. 1917): American neurolo-
gists
spermatozoa: Greek σπερµα (seed) plus ζωιoν
(animal)
Stamey, Thomas A. Contemporary American
Urologist, Stanford, California
strangury: Greek στρα’γξ (drop squeezed out)
plus oυπoν (slow and painful urination)
teratoma: Greek τε’ρας
(monster) plus oµα
(swelling)
testis: Latin (witness)
Treponema.
Greek
τρεπειν
(turn),
νεµα
(thread)
Trichomonas: Greek θριξ (hair) plus µoνoς
(one; though it has three to ﬁve hairs)
trocar: French trois carr´es (three sharp edges)
urethra: Greek oυρηθρα
utriculus: Latin (small bag)
varicocele: Latin varus (bent) plus Greek κη’λη
(swelling)
vas: Latin (a vessel)
verumontanum: Latin veru (a spit) montanum
(mountainous)
vesicle: Latin (a little bladder)
von
Brunn,
A.
(1841–95):
Professor
of
Anatomy, Gottingen
von Fehling, Hermann Christian (1812–85):
German chemist
vulva: Latin (a wrapper)
Whitaker, Robert H. (b. 1939): Contemporary
urologist and anatomist, Cambridge
Wilms, Max (1867–1918): Surgeon, Heidelberg
(nephroblastoma had previously been described
by Rance in 1814)
Wolff, Kaspar Friedrich (1733–94): German
anatomist, working in St Petersburg
xanthogranuloma: Greek ξανθo’ς (yellow)
270

Index
abdominal examination
enlarged bladder, 3
enlarged kidney, 2–3
inguinal regions
femoral hernia, 4
hernial oriﬁces, 3–4
scrotum
lump in, 5–6
swelling, 5–6
spermatic cord
encysted hydrocele, 6
varicocele, 6
vas deferens, 6, 7
acid load, 32
acute balanitis, 225
acute cystitis, 137–8
acute epididymitis, 242
acute orchitis, 242
acute prostatitis
clinical features of, 176
hyperaemia in, 176
treatment of, 177
acute renal failure
causes of, 57–8, 102–3
chronic and, difference between, 103
clinical features of, 101–3
prodromal and oliguria–anuria, 102
recovery phase, 102–3
IVU and DMSA renogram in, 57
oedema, 57
pathology of, 101
treatment of, 103
acute ureteritis, 112
adenocarcinoma, 148–9
adenoma, 71, 83–4
adrenal gland
anatomical relations of, 99
folded sandwich arrangement of, 99
tumours of. See adrenal tumours
adrenaline, 100
adrenal medulla, tumours of. See pheochromocytoma
adrenal tumours
Conn’s syndrome, 98–9
Cushing’s syndrome, 100
non-functioning, 98
pheochromocytoma, 99–100
virilisation, 99
adult polycystic disease, 43, 45
afferent motor impulses, 125–6
allergy to contrast media, 13
alpha-blockers, 182–3
5-Alpha-reductase inhibitor, 183, 199
analgesic abuse, 64
aneurysms of renal artery
arteriogram showing, 93
arteriovenous aneurysms
arteriovenous ﬁstula, 92
treated with embolisation, 93
angiomyolipoma, 89
anterior colporrhaphy, 171
aplasia, 40–41
appendix testis, torsion of
hydrocele. See hydrocele
varicocele, 239
Aristolochia clematis, 64
aromatase inhibitors, 200
arterial infarction, 92
arteriovenous aneurysms
arteriovenous ﬁstula, 93
treated with embolisation, 94
atheroma, 97
azospermia, 252
bacterial cystitis, 137
bacterial UTI
diagnosis and treatment
in men, 143
in women, 141–3
management of, 142
bacteriuria, 136
balanitis, 217
balanitis xerotica obliterans, 225
Balkan nephropathy, 64
balloon pyeloplasty, 115
Bard bladder tumour antigen (BTA) test, 9
bed-wetting, 162
benign multilocular cysts, 89
bilharzia ova, 144
bilharziasis. See schistomiasis
bladder
action of drugs on, 173
blood supply of, 123, 125
congenital abnormalities
agenesis and duplication, 132
epispadias, 133
exstrophy, 132
patent urachus, 132
cystoscopy of. See cystoscopy
emptying of, 127
enlarged, physical signs of, 2
herniation of, 169–70
injuries to
delayed perforation, 135
intraperitoneal rupture, 135
open and penetrating, 135
micturition, 126
271

Index
bladder (Cont.)
nerve supply of, 126
surgical anatomy of
fascia of Denonvilliers, 123
male and female bladder, 124
urothelium, 123, 125
urodynamics. See urodynamics
bladder cancer
clinical features of
haematuria, 150
symptomless patients, 150
combination chemotherapy for, 159
diagnosis of
IVU, 150–51
ultrasound and cystoscopy, 151
palliation, 159
pathology of, 147
spread of, 148
staging of, 148–9
transurethral resection of, 152–3
treatment of
G3 pTis, 151–2
Ta and T1 urothelial cancer, 153
bladder centre at S2 and S3, lesions of
S2 and S3 irritation, 165–6
S2 and S3 segment destruction
management of, 164–5
tests for, 164
bladder outlet, mechanical lesions of
detrusor–sphincter dyssynergia, 167–8
genuine stress incontinence
diagnosis of, 170
treatment of, 171
herniation, 169–70
obstruction, 167
sphincter damage, 169
bladder stones, 79
clinical features of, 80
components of, 67
incidence of, 67
laminations of, 68
management of, 80
outﬂow obstruction, 80
supersaturation stones, 68
bone scan, 22, 195
Bosniak renal cyst classiﬁcation system, 87
Bowman’s capsule, 29
Brantley–Scott artiﬁcial sphincter, 169–70
brucellosis, 63–4
bulbospongiosus reﬂex, 164
Burch colposuspension, 171
calcium stones
hypercalciuria, 69–70
oxalate, 68–9
calculi. See renal calculi
caliceal cyst, 42, 43
caliceal stones, 75
carcinoma in situ, 151–2
carcinoma of urachus. See urachus, carcinoma of
cauda equina lesions, 165–6
cement kidney, 60
central facilitation, excessive, 162
childhood polycystic disease, 43–4
Chlamydia trachomatis, 177, 212, 242
51Chromium EDTA, 22
chronic epididymitis, 243
chronic orchitis, 243
chronic prostatitis, 177
chronic renal failure, 71
acute and, difference between, 101
causes of, 103
clinical features of, 103–4
management of, 104
chyluria, 66
clam cystoplasty, 164
collecting tubule
congenital disorders of, 46
functionality of, 31
compensatory hypertrophy, 167
computed tomography
PET scan with, 23
of prostate cancer, 194
subtraction angiogram of renal transplant,
18–19
supplemented with contrast, 19–20
condom urinal, 162–3
condyloma acuminatum, 225
congenital multicystic kidney, 42
congenital posterior urethral valves, 203, 205
Conn’s syndrome. See zona glomerulosa tumours
contrast media
allergy to, 13
chemical irritation, 13
in kidney
nephrogram, 13–14
pyelogram, 14
corpus cavernosography, 223
cortical and blood-borne infection, 59–60
creatinine clearance, 31
crossed renal ectopia, 39–40
cryosurgery, 198
Cunningham clamp, 169
Cushing’s syndrome. See zona fasciculata tumours
cystic dysplasia, 42
cystine, 68
cystinuria, 45
cystitis
acute, 137
chronic, 138
clinical features of, 138
cystica, 139
interstitial. See interstitial cystitis
cystometrogram, 128
cystometry, 127
cystoscopy
correct position for, 131
ﬂexible, 128, 130
instruments used in, 130
rigid, 131
da Vinci Robot, 259–60
detrusor
compensatory hypertrophy of, 167–8
272

Index
failure, 167–8
instability, 166–7
detrusor–sphincter dyssynergia, 167–8
diabetes insipidus, 161
dialysis
haemodialysis, 104–5
peritoneal, 104
99mTc diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid (DTPA), 19
diethylstilboestrol, 198
99mTc 2,3 dimercaptosuccinic acid (DMSA), 19, 22, 32
dip-slide method of estimating colony count, 12
distal tubules
acid–base balance regulation by, 31
congenital disorders of, 46
diuresis, 161
diverticula, 43, 54
docetaxel, 200
double-J ureteric stent, 74
duplex kidney
column of Bertin in, 37
and ureter, 36
yo-yo reﬂux, 111
dysplasia, 41
Echinococcus granulosus, 64
ectopic testicle, 232
efferent motor impulses, 126
ejaculation
inhibited, 222
mechanism of, 219, 221
premature, 222
ejaculatory failure, 222–3
embryoma
causes of, 82
clinical features of, 83
management of, 83
stages of, 82
embryonal carcinoma, 243–4
enterovesical ﬁstulae, infection from, 54
epidermoid cyst, 245
epididymis, 230
anatomy of, 234
cysts of, 241–2
tuberculosis of, 243
epididymovasostomy, 252, 254
epispadias, 132–4
erectile impotence
causes of, 219–20
investigation of, 220–21
treatment of, 221–2
erection physiology, 219
erythroplasia of Queyrat, 225
exstrophy, 132–4, 148
extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy (ESWL), 73–4
Fanconi’s syndrome, 45
female urethra
and clitoris, anatomy of, 202
structure of, 203
femoral hernia, 4
ﬂexible cystoscope, 128
bladder image obtained through, 130
small papillary tumour coagulated with YAG laser
through, 154
follicular cystitis, 138
18F ﬂuoro-2 deoxyglucose (FDG), 22
G3 superﬁcial cancers
carcinoma of urachus
clinical features of, 158–9
subtotal cystectomy for, 159
T2 and T3 invasive cancers, 154
radical cystectomy for, 155–6
radiotherapy for, 154–5
urinary diversion for, 156–8
genitourinary tuberculosis
diagnosis of, 61
treatment of, 61–2
genuine stress incontinence (GSI)
diagnosis of, 170–71
treatment of, 171–2
germ cell tumours, 244–5
Ghoneim’s continent diversion, 158
giant condyloma acuminatum, 225
Gleason system, 190
glomerular ﬁltration test, 31
glomerulus
arterioles of, 29–30
ﬁltration, 30
gonadotrophin-releasing hormone antagonist, 199
gout and nephrocalcinosis, 64
gram-negative septicaemia, 58
granuloma, 55
granulomatous orchitis, 243
Grawitz tumour
Fuhrman grading system, 84
pathology of, 83–4
stages of, 84
groin hernias, landmarks for, 4
gynaecomastia, 245, 247
haematogenous infection, 53
haematuria, 1
haemodialysis, 104–5
haemorrhagic cystitis, 137
Hartnup disease, 45
hepatic oxaluria, 68–9
hernia
direct and indirect, 3, 5
femoral, 4
pantaloon, 5
high-intensity focused ultrasound therapy, 198
hormonal manipulation, prostate cancer
androgen blockade, 200
testosterone withdrawal effects, 198–9
horseshoe kidney, 38–9
human lymphocyte antigens (HLA)
expression of, 106
matching, 107
Hunner’s ulcer. See interstitial cystitis
hydatid disease, 64–5
hydrocele
clinical presentation of, 240
infantile, 241
273

Index
hydrocele (Cont.)
in neonate, 239
tapping, 241
hydronephrosis, 50, 54
bilateral, 161
DTPA renogram in, 22
hyperacute rejection, 107–8
hypercalciuria
absorptive, 69–70
reabsorptive, 70
renal, 69
hypernephroma. See Grawitz tumour
hyperoxaluria, 68
hyperparathyroidism
primary, 70
secondary, 70–71
tertiary, 71
hypoplasia, 41
hypospadias
complete, 203
glandular, 202
one-stage operation for, 204
penile, 202–3
iatrogenic trauma
clinical features of, 118
late leak of urine, 118–20
postoperative symptoms of, 118
idiopathic retroperitoneal ﬁbrosis, 115
ileal oxaluria, 69–70
iliac osteotomy, 134
immunosuppressive agents, 107–8
inﬂatable penile prosthesis, 223
inguinal region examination, 3–4
internal urethrotomy, 214–15
interstitial cystitis
cause of, 143
clinical features of, 143–4
investigations of, 144
treatment of
antimicrobial for, 144
high ﬂuid throughput, 144
interstitial nephritis
causes of, 63–4
clinical features of, 64
intraperitoneal rupture, 135
intravaginal torsion of the testicle
clinical features of, 238–9
treatment of, 239
intravenous urograms (IVU)
left renal pelvis, 87
nephrogram and pyelogram phase of, 14
patient preparation for, 14–15
upper tracts and bladder, 15
uses of, 13
kidney
blood supply of
collecting ducts, 33–4
renal arteries, 32–3
renal veins, 33
calyces of, 36
clear-celled renal cell carcinoma of, 84
closed injuries of
complications in, 48–50
grades of, 47
mechanism of, 48
contrast media in
antegrade urogram, 15
arteriogram and angiogram, 17
cystogram, 16
IVU studies, 14–15
nephrogram, 13–14
pyelogram, 14
retrograde urogram, 15
urethrography, 16
cystic disorders of, 41
cysts of, 44. See also obstruction cysts
DMSA scan of, 22
duplex. See duplex kidney
embryology of, 35, 36
enlarged, physical signs of, 2
errors of development of
agenesis, 40
aplasia, 40–41
dysplasia and hypoplasia, 41
errors of position of
crossed renal ectopia, 39, 40
horseshoe kidney, 38–9
pelvic kidney, 39
rotated kidney, 38
thoracic kidney, 39–40
penetrating injuries of, 47
preservation for transplantation, 108
structure of
glomerulus, 29–30
papilla, 29
pyramids, 28–9
renal tubules, 31
surgical approaches to
12th rib approach, 24
conventional open surgery, 27
minimal access surgery, 26
percutaneous nephrostomy, 24
thoracoabdominal incision, 25
vertical incision, 25, 27
surgical relations of
posterior and anterior, 24, 25
postoperative complications, 27
transplantation. See renal transplantation
veins of, 33, 34
Kock’s continent pouch, 157
laparoscopy
anaesthetic technique for, 256
complications of, 258
patient selection for, 256
left kidney
anatomical relations of, 25
operative exposure of, 28
retention of isotope in, 115
left orchiectomy, 248
Leibovich scoring system, 89
Leydig cell tumours, 245
274

Index
lithotriptors
stone removal by, 73–7
Storz ultrasonic, 75, 80
loop of Henle, 31
Luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH)
agonist, 199
lymphomas, 246
magnetic resonance imaging
abdomen and pelvis, 21
of prostate cancer, 194
renal cell carcinoma, 88
urological, indications for, 19
malacoplakia, 63, 139
Marshall’s test, 170
matrix deposit diseases, 53
medullary sponge kidney, 41
megaureter, 112–13
membranous urethra, fractured pelvis with rupture of
combined urethral and rectal injuries in, 212
gross displacement of pelvis in, 208–10
minimal displacement of pelvis in, 206–8
mesonephric ducts, 35
mesonephros, 35
metanephros, 35
metastases, 192
99mTc methylene diphosphonate (MDP), 22
micturition reﬂex, overstimulation of the afferent arm
of, 161–2
Millin’s sling operation, 172
M¨ullerian ducts. See paramesonephric ducts
mycophenolate mofetil, 107
neocystoplasty by Camey’s method, 157
neonatal extravaginal torsion, 238
nephritic syndrome, 52
nephron, 31
arranged on collecting tubule, 30
embryology, 35
nephrotic syndrome
cause of, 51
clinical features of, 51
diagnosis of, 51
nephroureterectomy, 91
nerve root division and stimulation, 164, 166
neuroblastoma, 83, 100
neuropathy
central inhibition of reﬂex, 163
excessive central facilitation, 162
high spinal cord lesions, 162–4
overstimulation of afferent arm of micturition reﬂex,
161–2
non-germ cell tumours, 245
noradrenaline, 98–100
obstruction cysts
acquired
polycystic disease, 42–3
scarring and diverticula, 42
congenital, 41–2
obstructive uropathy, 46
oligospermia, 252–3
open prostatectomy, 183
orchialgia, 243
orchidectomy, 198
osteomalacia, 103–4
Page kidney, 48–9
palliative urinary diversion, 159
pantaloon hernia, 5
papilla, renal
back-pressure atrophy of, 46
compound, 29
necrosis of, 64
tuberculous abscess in, 61
valvular arrangement of, 30
papillary necrosis, 63–4
paramesonephric ducts, 35
parapelvic cysts, 42
parathyroidectomy, 71
parathyroid glands
anatomical relations of, 72
overactive, 72
para-urethral glands, 201
partial nephrectomy
choice between total and, 88
disadvantages of, 88
for renal cell carcinoma, 87
patient examination
abdominal examination. See abdominal
examination
medical history, 1–2
physical examination, 2
rectal examination. See rectal examination
PCA3 gene overexpression, 192
pelvic autonomic nerves, lesions of, 166
pelvic kidney, 39–40
pelviureteric junction obstruction
clinical features of, 114
diagnosis of, 114
management, 114–16
penis
anatomy of, 217
blood supply to, 217–18
cancer of
aetiology of, 225
diagnosis of, 227–8
histological grades of, 226
papillary and ulcerated types, 227
pathology of, 225–6
squamous cell carcinoma, 227
stage grouping of, 228
TNM classiﬁcation of, 226–7
treatment of, 228–9
circumcision, 217
ejaculatory failure, 222–3
erectile impotence. See erectile impotence
erection physiology, 218–19
inﬂammation of, 225
priapism, 223–4
recording of tumescence and elongation of, 222
percutaneous nephrolithotomy, 74
percutaneous nephrostomy, 24
percutaneous pyelolysis, 116
275

Index
perineal injury to urethra, 207
peristalsis, 109
peritoneal dialysis, 104
periurethral injections, 172
persistent urachus, 133
Peyronie’s disease, 224–5
pheochromocytoma, 99–100
physical examination, 2
phytotherapy, 183
pneumoperitoneum, 257–8
polycystic disease
adult, 43
childhood, 42–3
polydipsia, 161
positron emission tomography (PET)
with CAT scan, 23
radiopharmaceutical for, 22
postoperative pain, renal surgery, 27
pre-renal failure, 101
priapism
treatment of, 224
types of, 223–4
Primary hyperparathyroidism, 70
primary oxaluria. See hepatic oxaluria
pronephros, 35
prostaic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN), 190
prostate
benign enlargement of
aetiology of, 178
pathology of, 178–9
urine ﬂow rates in, 182
inﬂammation of
acute prostatitis, 176–7
chronic prostatitis, 177
non-bacterial prostatitis, 177
prostatodynia, 177–8
nomograms, 195
physiology of, 175–6
retention disorders. See retention disorders
structure of, 175–7
surgical anatomy of, 174
zones of, 174–5
prostate cancer
clinical presentation of, 192
incidence of, 188–9
investigations
bone scan, 195
CT scan and MRI, 194
transrectal ultrasound, 192–4
management of
chemotherapy, 200
cryosurgery, 198
factors inﬂuencing, 195
high-intensity focused ultrasound therapy, 198
hormonal manipulation, 198–200
lymph node dissection, 196
maximal androgen blockade, 200
radical prostatectomy, 196–7
radiotherapy, 197, 200
pathology of
PCA3 gene overexpression, 192
PIN, 188, 190
PSA levels, 190–91
predictive risk groups’ criteria in, 196
staging of, 192–3
prostatectomy
postoperative care, 186–7
preparations for, 186
radical, 196–7
prostate-speciﬁc antigen (PSA)
doubling time, 191–2
free and total, 190–91
levels, age-speciﬁc, 191
production of, 190
prostatic obstruction
causes of, 178–9
complications of, 180
diagnosis of
differential, 181–2
investigations, 181
obstructive and irritative symptoms, 180–81
physical signs, 181
treatment of
balloon dilatation, 185
drugs for, 182–3
intraprostatic stents insertion, 185–6
surgery for, 183
transurethral hyperthermia microwave therapy,
185
transurethral incision for, 183, 185
transurethral vaporisation, 183, 185
prostatitis
acute, 176–7
chronic, 177
non-bacterial, 177
prostatodynia, 177–8
proximal tubule
congenital disorders of, 44–6
functionality of, 31
prune-belly syndrome, 204, 206
pseudocyst, 50
pyelogram, 14
pyelolithotomy
for hydronephrosis, 117
open extended, 78
for removing stone in renal pelvis, 75, 77
pyelonephritic scarring, obstructed cysts in, 43
pyelonephritis
causes of, 53
diagnosis of, 139
spectrum of changes in, 63
pyuria, 136
radical cystectomy
complications of, 158
for G3 superﬁcial cancers, 155–6
radical nephrectomy, 87–8
radical prostatectomy, 196–7
radio-isotope studies
radiopharmaceuticals for
51chromium EDTA, 22
DMSA, 19, 22
MAG3 and DTPA, 19
renal imaging, 19–20
276

Index
radiotherapy
for G3 superﬁcial cancers, 155–6
for prostate cancer, 197, 200
for T2 and T3 invasive cancers, 154–5
rectal examination, 7
recurrent UTIs, 139–40
reﬂux nephropathy
clinical features of, 55
diagnosis of, 56
rejection of renal transplants
accelerated and acute, 108
chronic, 108
hyperacute, 107–8
immunosuppressive agents for preventing, 107
renal agenesis, 36
renal arteries
afferent artery, 33
aneurysms of. See aneurysms of renal artery
arrangement of branches of, 33
segmental arteries, 32–3
renal artery stenosis, 48
causes of, 98
nephrectomy specimen, 97
patching/bypassing, 97
renal calculi
in calix. See caliceal stones
cause of, 72
cystine, 73
formation and urine pH, 67
formation of, 71, 73
management of, 73
double-J stent, 74
extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy,
73–4
percutaneous nephrolithotomy, 74
ureteroscopy, 74–5
uric acid, 71–2
renal cell carcinoma
clear-celled, 84
clinical features of, 86, 88
diagnosis of, 86
international TNM system of staging for, 86
prognosis of, 89
stages of, 85
treatment by, 86
partial nephrectomy, 87
radical nephrectomy, 87–8
tumours imitating, 89–90
renal failure
acute. See acute renal failure
chronic. See chronic renal failure
renal glycosuria, 45
renal hypertension
diagnosis of
IVU and DMSA isotope studies, 95
plasma renin, 97
mechanism of, 95
renal injury
complications
hydronephrosis, 50
page kidney, 48, 49
pseudocyst, 50
renal artery stenosis, 48
secondary haemorrhage, 48
grades of, 47, 49
management
diagnostic investigation, 47–8
patient examination, 47
renal isotope studies, 112
renal papilla. See papilla, renal
renal parenchymal disease, 101
renal pelvis
gross displacement of
management of, 209–11
sacroiliac joint, 209
minimal displacement of
anteroposterior injury, 206
management of, 207–8
obstructed, 114–15
stone in
complications in, 75
open pyelolithotomy for removing, 77
unreduced displaced fracture of, 211
urothelial cancer of. See urothelial cancer
renal pyramid, 28–9
renal stone. See renal calculi
renal transplantation
cadaver kidneys for, 106
donors for, 106–7
long-term results of, 108
major histocompatibility system and,
106–7
preservation of kidneys for, 108
rejection of, 107–8
in right iliac fossa, 106
renal tubular acidosis, 31, 46
renal tubular disorders, 161
renal tubules
acquired disorders of, 46
congenital disorders of, 44–6
loop of Henle, 31
proximal, distal, and collecting, 31
renal veins
blockage of, 93
left and right, 33
renin–angiotensin mechanism, 95
retention disorders
clinical features of, 186
prostatectomy in
catheter, 186
preparations for, 186
reactionary haemorrhage after, 187
retrocaval ureter, 115, 118
retroperitoneal ﬁbrosis, 118
retroperitoneal lymph node dissection, 248
right kidney
anatomical relations of, 26
anterior transabdominal approach to, 27
DMSA scan, 22
operative exposure of, 28
renal cell carcinoma in, 88
twelfth rib bed approach to, 26
vertical lumbotomy approach to, 27
rigid cystoscope, 131
277

Index
robotics. See also da Vinci Robot
advances in, 259
deﬁnition of, 258
scarring, 55
schistomiasis, 112–13, 145–6
Schistosoma haematobium
life cycle of, 145
removed from vein schistosomes, 144
Schistosoma ova, 10–11
schistosomiasis
eradication of, 146
plain X-ray in, 145
Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network (SIGN),
142
Scribner shunt, 106
scrotum
examination, 4–5
pain in, 255
urine and blood escape into, 205, 208
secondary haemorrhage, 48
secondary hyperparathyroidism, 70–71
secondary oxaluria. See ileal oxaluria
segmental artery
bleeding from, 49
embolism in, 93
seminal granuloma, 243
seminal vesicle
functionality of, 231
histology of, 234
seminoma, 244, 249
senility, 162
septicaemia
management of, 58–9
pathology of, 58
Sertoli cells
and pituitary, 234
tumours of, 245
sickle-cell disease, 46, 161
snugly ﬁtting catheter, dangers of, 207
soft tissue metastases, 192
spermatic cord
encysted hydrocele, 7
varicocele, 5
vas deferens, 5, 7
spermatogenesis, 233
sphincter
artiﬁcial, 170
components of, 201
damage, 169
ectopic duplex ureter and, 111
failure to relax, 164
incontinence following division of, 169
prostate and, 174
sphincterotomy, 164
spinal cord lesions
detrusor and sphincters, 162
intravesical voiding pressure, 164
spinal shock
detrusor instability, 166–7
lesions of bladder centre at S2 and S3,
164–6
spinal cord segments, 125
squamous metaplasia, 139
staghorn stones, 76
Stamey sutures, 171
stick tests
for haematuria, 9
for infection, 9
stones
in bladder, 78–81
in calix, 75
in pelvis, 75
staghorn, 75
in ureter
clinical features of, 78
open ureterolithotomy for, 76, 78
ureterolithotomy for, 79
Storz cup biopsy forceps, 151
Storz ultrasonic lithotriptor, 75, 80
Storz ureteroscope, 76
supersaturation stones, 68
suppuration, 55
symptomatic bacteriuria, 142
T2 and T3 invasive cancers, 154
distinction between, 154
radical cystectomy for, 155–6
radiotherapy for, 154–5
urinary diversion for, 156–8
Ta and T1 urothelial cancer, 152–3
Taxotere. See docetaxel
teratocarcinoma, 245
tertiary hyperparathyroidism, 71
testicle
blood supply to, 230
cancer of. See testicular tumours
congenital anomalies of
complications in, 235
ectopic testicle, 233
incomplete descent, 234–7
undescended testicle, 231, 232
inﬂammation of, 242–3
Klinefelter’s syndrome
clinical features of, 251
investigations of, 251–2
treatment of, 252–4
normal descent of, 231, 238–9
structure of
epididymis, 231
seminal vesicle, 232
testis, 230–31
vas deferens, 231–2
surgical anatomy of, 230, 234
torsion of, 238–41
trauma to, 242
testicular tubule
diagram of, 232
germinal cells and Sertoli cells, 231
testicular tumours
cellular origin of, 244–6
clinical features of, 247–50
diagnosis of, 247–8
incidence of, 243
278

Index
pathology of, 243
germ cell tumours, 244–5
non-germ cell tumours, 245–6
TNM staging of, 246
treatment of, 249–50
testis
biopsy of, 252
structure of, 230–31
testosterone metabolic pathway, 198–9
thoracic kidney, 39–40
thoracoabdominal incision, 25
transrectal ultrasound (TRUS), 192–3
enlargement of prostate, 181–2
of prostate, 17, 197
transurethral hyperthermia microwave therapy,
185
transurethral incision of prostate, 183, 185
transurethral resection of prostate (TURP), 183–4,
192
transurethral vaporisation of prostate, 183,
185
tubular function, tests of, 32
twelfth rib bed approach, 24, 26
ultrasound, 17
of bladder tumour, 151
cyst, showing, 44
in pregnancy, 43
simple cysts, 44, 87
of testicular teratoma, 248
of urethra, 215
urachus, carcinoma of
clinical features of, 158–9
subtotal cystectomy for, 159
ureter
anatomy of, 109–10
blood supply of, 109
carcinoma of
clinical features of, 121
diagnosis of, 121
treatment of, 122
congenital abnormalities of, 110
caliceal cyst, 42
congenital multicystic kidney, 42
ureteric bud, 110
yo-yo reﬂux and infection, 112
diagnosis of obstruction in, 112–13
dilated and reﬂuxing, 54
ectopic, 36
healing leading to obstruction of, 62
inﬂammation of, 112
from lower half of kidney, 37
peristalsis in, 110–11
reimplantation using Cohen’s method,
57
sensory nerves from, 109
stones in, 76–8
clinical features of, 78
open ureterolithotomy for, 76
ureterolithotomy for, 76, 79
from upper half of kidney, 38
urothelial cancer of. See urothelial cancer
ureteric atresia, 111
ureteric injury
accidental trauma, 117
iatrogenic trauma, 117–18
reimplantation, 57, 120
ureteric obstruction
pelviureteric junction obstruction. See pelviureteric
junction obstruction
in prostate cancer, 192, 194
retrocaval ureter, 115, 118
retroperitoneal ﬁbrosis, 118–19
ureteritis cystica, 112
ureteroceles, 37
balloon-like swelling, 110
obstruction by, 113–16
ureteroscopy, 74–5 121
ureterosigmoidostomy, 156
urethra
anatomy of, 201
congenital disorders of
congenital posterior urethral valves,
203–4
errors in genital folds, 202–4
exstrophy and epispadias, 203
damage of, 170
duplex, 35–7, 111, 203
inﬂammation of
investigations of, 213
treatment of, 214–16
urethral stricture, 212–13
injury to
complications of, 212–13
iatrogenic trauma, 205
management of, 205–6
perineal, 205
urethral pressure proﬁle, 128, 129
urethral stricture
complications of, 212–13
diagnosis of, 213
following cardiac surgery, 207
symptoms of, 212
treatment of
internal urethrotomy, 214
regular intermittent dilatation, 214
urethroplasty, 216
urethrography, 16, 213
urethroplasty, 216
uric acid, 68
urinary diversion
continent reservoir, 157
ileal conduit, 156–7
ureterosigmoidostomy, 156
urinary stasis, 53
urinary tract
imaging. See urinary tract imaging
source of reinfection, 54
urinary tract imaging
ﬁlm for, 11
intravenous urogram, 13
plain abdominal X-ray, 11–13
skeleton, 11, 13
soft tissues and stones, 13
279

Index
urinary tract infection (UTI)
bacterial. See bacterial UTI
bacterial resistance, unresolved,
140–41
in children, NICE guideline for
acute management, 142
risk factors for, 141
symptoms and signs, 141
complicated, 136, 140
complications of
acute renal failure, 57–8
brucellosis, 63
malacoplakia, 63
septicaemia, 58–9
stones, 59
suppuration renal carbuncle, 59
tuberculosis, 59–62
xanthogranuloma, 62–3
factors predisposing to, 53–4
lower, 53
lowered resistance to, 54
outcomes of, 54–5
pathogenesis of, 136–7
types of
acute cystitis, 137–8
chronic cystitis, 138–9
pyelonephritis, 139
recurrent UTIs, 139–40
uncomplicated cystitis, 138
uncomplicated, 136, 138
upper. See pyelonephritis
urine
culture of, 10–11
increasing ion concentration in, 69
microscopic examination of
cancer cells, 9–10, 11
crystals, 9, 10
pus and casts, 9
schistosoma ova, 10
specimen collection, 137
tests of, 8–9
urine concentration test, 32
urinoma. See pseudocyst
urodynamics
cystometry, 126–7
electromyography, 128
urethral pressure proﬁle, 128
voiding cystometrogram, 127
uroﬂow measurement, 128
urogenital septum, 35
urothelial cancer
adenocarcinoma, 148
aetiology of, 147
clinical features of, 90
diagnosis of, 91
pathology of, 90–91, 147–8
squamous changes, 148
treatment of, 91
urothelium
cancer. See urothelial cancer
chronic inﬂammation of, 112
vaginal colposuspension, 172
vanillylmandelic acid (VMA), 100
vas deferens
functionality of, 231
surgical anatomy of, 234
tuberculosis of, 243
vasectomy
complications in, 255
procedure, 254
reversal of, 255
venous thrombosis, 92
vertical lumbotomy, 25, 27
virilisation. See zona reticulosa tumours
Wilms’ tumour. See embryoma
Wolfﬁan ducts. See mesonephric ducts
xanthogranuloma, 62–3
Yo-yo reﬂux, 36, 38, 111
zona fasciculata tumours, 99
zona glomerulosa tumours, 98–99
zona reticulosa tumours, 99
280
UPLOADED BY [STORMRG]

