Introductory Human Physiology 
 
         ©copyright Jennifer Carbrey & Emma Jakoi 
 
                                                                                            
 
4. Pulmonary function tests and alveolar ventilation 
 
FORCED EXPIRATORY VITAL CAPACITY TEST 
provides an indirect assessment of airway 
resistance. In this pulmonary function test, the 
subject inhales to total lung capacity and then 
exhales into a spirometer as forcefully, rapidly, and 
as completely as possible. The volume expired 
under these conditions is called the forced vital 
capacity (FVC) (Fig 3).   
 
The forced expiratory vital capacity test also 
measures the volume exhaled in 1 second, called 
the 1-second forced expiratory volume (FEV1). 
This value is often expressed as a % of FVC (i.e., 
FEV1/FVC %). Normally FEV1 is at least 80% of 
FVC (curve Y). Patients with restrictive lung disease 
will have a normal value of 80% (curve Z). In patients 
such as asthmatics, who have obstructed airways, 
this value will be reduced (<80%) (curve X).  
 
 
Exchange of Gases in Alveoli & Tissues  
Respiration involves two processes:  
 
(1) Delivery of O2 to and removal of CO2 from the cells of the body.  
 
(2) Use of O2 in oxidative metabolism to generate ATP, water, and CO2.  
 
In a steady state, the amount of O2 that is consumed by the cells per unit time is equal 
to the amount of O2 added to the blood in the lungs during the same time period. 
Likewise the rate at which CO2 is generated by the cells is equal to the rate at which 
CO2 leaves the blood in the lungs and is exhaled.   
 
Gases move by diffusion from regions of high concentration to regions of low 
concentration. Therefore to provide adequate gradients for diffusion, the pulmonary 
system must increase the amount of oxygen in the alveoli above that found in the mixed 
venous (MV) blood of the lung. Additionally it must lower the carbon dioxide in the 
alveoli below that of mixed venous blood.  
 
A second set of gradients must exist at the tissue-blood interface. Here the amount of 
O2 consumed by cells and CO2 produced are not necessarily identical and depend on 
the fuel source consumed. The ratio of CO2 produced to O2 consumed is called the 
respiratory quotient (RQ). For a mixed diet, 8 molecules of CO2 are produced for 
every 10 molecules of O2 consumed (i.e., RQ = 0.8). For a diet composed of 
carbohydrates, the RQ is 1.0. For a diet of fat, the RQ is 0.7.   
 
VOLUME
(LITERS)
TIME (SECONDS)
0
2
4
6
8
10
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Y
X
Z
Figure 3. Forced expiratory vital 
capacity curves generated by 
individuals X, Y and Z.   

Introductory Human Physiology 
 
         ©copyright Jennifer Carbrey & Emma Jakoi 
 
                                                                                            
 
Minute & Alveolar Ventilation  
Minute ventilation (VE) is the total volume of gas entering (or leaving) the lung per 
minute. It is equal to the tidal volume (TV) multiplied by the respiratory rate (f).  
 
 
Minute ventilation = VE = TV x f 
 
At rest, a normal person moves ~450 ml/breath x 10 breath/min = 4500 ml/min.  
 
However, because of the anatomical dead space (VD), not all of this entering air is 
available for exchange with the blood . Recall that the conducting airway (anatomical 
dead space) has a volume of ~150 ml. If 450 ml of fresh air is inspired, the first gas to 
reach the respiratory zone comes from this anatomical dead space (150 ml). Then 300 
ml of fresh gas reaches the respiratory zone and the last 150 ml of inspired gas remains 
in the dead space. Thus, the total amount of fresh air reaching the alveoli during each 
inspiration equals the tidal volume minus the volume of the anatomical dead space: 
 
 
 TV – VD = 450 - 150 ml = 300 ml.  
 
Alveolar ventilation (VA) is the total volume of fresh air entering the alveoli per minute. 
It is calculated as: 
 
 
Alveolar ventilation = VA = (TV – VD) x f 
 
When evaluating the efficiency of ventilation, one should focus on the alveolar 
ventilation not minute ventilation.  
 
For example, in the table below, Subjects A and B have the same minute ventilation (VE 
= 6 L) but very different alveolar ventilations (VA).  Subject A has no alveolar ventilation 
and would be become unconscious in a few minutes but Subject B is breathing 
normally.  
 
Subject 
TV 
 
  f 
VE 
 
 
VD  
   
VA 
 
 
A 
 
150ml  
40 
6000ml 
 
150ml  
0 
B 
 
500ml  
12 
6000ml 
 
150ml  
4200ml 
 
One other important point shown in the table above is that the depth of breathing (TV) 
is far more effective in elevating the alveolar ventilation than an increase in ventilation 
rate (f). This is because for each tidal breath a fixed volume is dead space. As tidal 
volume decreases, the fraction going to dead space increases. The respiratory system 
will respond to O2 need (as in exercise) by reflexively increasing ventilation by 
increasing the depth of breathing.     
 
The anatomical dead space is not the only type of dead space in the lung. Some fresh 
air is not used for gas exchange even though it reaches the alveoli because some 
alveoli may have little or no blood supply (i.e., blood perfusion). This volume of air is 
called alveolar dead space. In normal individuals this is quite small but may be large in 

Introductory Human Physiology 
 
         ©copyright Jennifer Carbrey & Emma Jakoi 
 
                                                                                            
 
several kinds of lung disease. As we will discuss later, a mismatch in ventilation and 
blood perfusion is minimized by local mechanisms that match air and blood flow. The 
sum of the anatomical dead space and alveolar dead space is the physiologic 
dead space.  
 
Partial Pressure of Gases   
The amount of various gases can be measured by comparing the pressure they exert. 
Gas molecules behave like individual particles that are in a constant state of motion. 
When the particles collide with one another or the sides of the container they exert a 
pressure. The pressure exerted depends on the number of collisions. Two factors affect 
the number of collisions: the temperature of the gas and the number of gas 
molecules. Dalton's law states that in a mixture of gases, the pressure exerted by each 
gas is the same as it would be if that gas alone occupied the entire container. These 
individual pressures are called partial pressures and are denoted as P in front of the 
symbol for the gas.  
 
To calculate the partial pressure of gas "X": 
 
 
 PX = Patm x FX  
 
Where, Patm is the atmospheric pressure (at sea level = 760 mm Hg), and FX is the 
fractional concentration of gas X.  
 
Atmospheric air contains mostly nitrogen (79%) and oxygen (21% O2) with trace 
amounts of CO2 and other gases. Air also contains water vapor. At sea level, water 
vapor is 47 mm Hg. For simplicity, respiratory physiologists and physicians generally 
assume that room air is always dry. Since 21% of dry room air is oxygen, the fraction 
of O2 in inspired air (FiO2) is: 
 
 
 
FiO2 x Patm = 0.21 X 760 mm Hg = 160 mm Hg.  
 
The concentration of carbon dioxide in room air is so low (0.04%), it is considered to be 
0. 
 
When inspired, the room air is warmed to 37oC and becomes humidified as it passes 
through the nasal passages. The water vaporizes into the air until the PH2O= 47 mm Hg. 
What this means is that only 760 - 47 mm Hg or 713mm Hg is available for other gases 
besides water. Therefore, 
 
 
PO2 of inspired gas = 0.21 X (760mm Hg - 47 mm Hg) = 150 mmHg. 

