Introductory Human Physiology 
 
 
 
©copyright Emma Jakoi 
 
DIGESTIVE SYSTEM -1 
Emma Jakoi. Ph.D. 
 
LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
1. Describe the functional anatomy and role of the digestive system.  
2. Describe the production of gastric acid in the stomach.  
3. Describe the time course of acid secretion in the fed and fasted states  
 
OVERVIEW 
The digestive system provides nutrients, water, and electrolytes to the cells of the body from the 
external environment. Food enters the oral cavity and is propelled by muscular contractions 
through the gastrointestinal (GI) tract moving towards the anus. At various points along the GI 
tract, acid, digestive enzymes, and buffers are added to facilitate the breakdown of complex foods 
(such as steak and rice) into simple molecules (such as amino acids, glucose, and fatty acids). 
These products are then absorbed into the body and delivered to the liver. The various secretions 
of the GI tract (enzymes, mucus, and water) sum to about 7 liters. This fluid is reabsorbed to 
prevent dehydration. Unabsorbed nutrients and waste products are eliminated from the body as 
feces (100 mL – 500mL per day).   
 
ANATOMY 
The digestive system includes the gastrointestinal tract and accessory organs (Fig 1).  
 
The gastrointestinal tract is a muscular tube about 5 meters in length. It includes the mouth, 
pharynx, esophagus, stomach, small intestine and large intestine (colon). Voluntary control 
occurs at the top and bottom of the tube. Movement through the rest of the gastrointestinal tract 
is involuntary and unidirectional from mouth to anus.   
 
                                               
 
 
Figure 1. Functional regions of the gastrointestinal tract. X marks the sphincters under voluntary 
control.  
 
The outside wall of the gastrointestinal tract has two layers of smooth muscle which are oriented 
perpendicular to each other (Fig 2). Constriction of the innermost layer of muscle changes the 
diameter of the tube. Constriction of the outermost layer of muscle shortens the tube.  
Pancreas 
Liver 
Gall 
 bladder 
Salivary 

 
2
 
Figure 2. Layers of the gastrointestinal tract. 
 
The lumen of the gastrointestinal tract is lined by a layer of cells (called epithelium) which differs 
in structure along the tract. At the two ends, esophagus and anus, there is a “wear and tear” 
non-secretory, non-absorptive epithelium (Fig 3). The stomach has a secretory epithelium and 
the small intestines, absorptive epithelium.  
 
Figure 3. Changes in the gastrointestinal tract epithelium reflect function. 
 
There are four accessory organs (salivary glands, liver, pancreas and gall bladder) (Fig 1). 
Secretions from the salivary gland are added to the oral cavity. Those from the liver are stored 
within the gall bladder and then released along with those from the pancreas into the duodenum 
(first portion of the small intestine). 
 
INGESTION & FRAGMENTATION 
Ingestion and fragmentation (chewing) of food occur within the oral cavity. Chewing reduces 
the size of the food particle and increases its surface area to facilitate attack by digestive 
enzymes. Chewing and later swallowing are aided by the secretion of saliva from three salivary 
glands. Enzymes in saliva initiate the breakdown of complex carbohydrates such as bread and 
cereals. The bolus of shredded food is then conveyed to the esophagus by the actions of the 
tongue during swallowing. Transit through the esophagus to the stomach is rapid.  
 
ACID SECRETION & DIGESTION 
The stomach can hold ~2 liters of food and fluid. It is divided into four regions, cardiac, fundic, 
antrum, and pyloric. The epithelium in all four regions secretes a protective barrier of mucus, a 
carbohydrate rich material that coats the surface of the lumen. The cells of the fundic region 
produce hydrochloric acid (HCl) into the lumen of the stomach. The cells of the antrum regulate 
the production of acid.   
 
Digestion of dietary protein starts in the fundic region of the stomach. Here the epithelium lining 
the lumen contains 3 cell types: mucous secreting cells, chief cells and parietal cells. Their 
specific functions are as follows: 
 
Mucous cells secrete mucus that protects the epithelium from acid.   
 
Epithelium 
Submucosa 
Muscularis externa 
(inner & outer layers) 

 
3
 
Chief cells secrete pepsinogen, an inactive enzyme, which is converted to an active 
 
enzyme called pepsin by acid in the lumen of the stomach.   
 
 
Parietal cells secrete intrinsic factor and hydrochloric acid (HCl). Intrinsic factor is a 
 
carrier required for the absorption of vitamin B12 by the ileum (distal region of the small 
 
intestine). Vitamin B12 is necessary for the formation of red blood cells. In the absence 
 
of intrinsic factor, vitamin B12 absorption is insufficient resulting in pernicious anemia. 
 
HCl is a strong acid which lowers the stomach contents to a pH of 2.0- 5.0.   
 
SECRETION OF HYDROCHLORIC ACID BY PARIETAL CELLS 
The production of hydrochloric acid (HCl) by the parietal cells requires the activity of the 
enzyme, carbonic anhydrase. In the presence of carbonic anhydrase, CO2 and H2O are converted 
to HCO3
- and H+. 
 
 
 
      c.a.  
 
 
CO2 + H2O = H2CO3 = HCO3
- + H+ 
 
As shown in figure 4, the newly generated proton (H+) is transported into the lumen of the 
stomach via the H+- K+ ATPase (called the proton pump).  Concurrently, HCO3
- exits from the 
basal surface (blood side) of the parietal cell via the HCO3
- - Cl- antiporter.  
 
The chloride ion (Cl-) needed to form HCl, enters the parietal cell from the blood via the HCO3
- - 
Cl- antiporter and exits at the luminal side by the Cl- channel. Once within the lumen of the 
stomach, Cl- combines with H+ to form HCl.  
 
The luminal K+ that is needed to maintain the activity of the proton pump (H+-K+ ATPase), 
enters the parietal cells from the stomach lumen by the H+-K+ ATPase and is then recycled back 
into the lumen of the stomach by the K+ channel (Fig 4).   
 
Why is acid needed? The acidic pH in the stomach lumen is needed to convert pepsinogen 
(inactive pepsin) to pepsin (active enzyme) and to provide an optimal pH for pepsin action. 
Within the lumen of the stomach, muscle contractions mix the food particles with the HCl and the 
enzyme pepsin producing a semi-digested liquid called chyme. This starts the digestion of 
proteins. In addition, the HCl kills any bacteria that enter with the food.  
 
Figure 4. Mechanism of HCl secretion by parietal cells.   
 

 
4
With entry of food into the lumen of the stomach, acid secretion increases and reaches a peak 
output by 90 minutes (Fig 5). Acid production subsequently falls as food leaves the stomach 
lumen to enter the small intestine. It takes ~ 4 hours to empty the stomach after a meal because 
only a few milliliters of acidic chyme exit to enter the proximal small intestine (duodenum) at any 
time. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Secretion of gastric acid during fed and fasting states. Why does the pH initially rise 
then fall by 2 hours after a meal? 
 
GENERAL CONCEPTS 
 
1. The digestive system provides nutrients, water and solutes to the cells of the body from the 
external environment. 
2. The digestive system is comprised of accessory glands and the gastrointestinal tract (tube) that 
coordinates four basic processes: fragmentation, secretion, digestion, and absorption. 
3. The four regions of the gastrointestinal tract are specialized in structure and function and 
include: esophagus and anus (passive conduits), stomach (secretory) and intestines (absorptive). 
4. The stomach produces acid from CO2 and water. This reaction occurs in the parietal cells and 
is catalyzed by carbonic anhydrase. The acid secretion of the stomach starts the digestion of 
protein and provides a barrier against the entry of bacteria.   
 
 
QUESTIONS 
Case: A 23- year old male develops severe vomiting for 48 hours. 
 
1.  Will this change his acid-base status? If so, then how?   
2.  Will this alter his minute ventilation? 
 
 
ANSWERS 
1. Yes. Loss of protons in the vomit will lead to metabolic alkalosis. 
2. Yes. Minute ventilation will decrease to retain CO2.  
60 
120 
180 
240 
60 
120 
180 
240 
Minutes after a meal 
pH 
Acid  
Secretion 
(mmol/hr) 
10 
30 
PAO 
(peak acid output) 
5 
 
4 
 
3 
 
2 
 
1 

