Introductory Human Physiology 
 
 
 
 
©copyright Emma Jakoi 
 
1 
 
 
 
 
HYPOTHALAMUS – PITUITARY-ADRENAL AXIS 
Emma R. Jakoi, Ph.D. 
 
 
Learning objectives 
• 
Describe the structural and functional organization of the adrenal gland. 
• 
Describe the synthesis and secretion of cortical adrenal hormones. 
• 
Describe the mechanism of action and physiologic effects of adrenal hormones.  
• 
Explain the control of adrenal hormone synthesis and secretion. Describe the major feedback 
loops that integrate the hypothalamic axis and body homeostasis. 
• 
Explain the physiologic roles of the adrenal hormones in normal physiology.  
 
OVERVIEW 
The adrenal glands maintain homeostasis in response to stress. Three major classes of hormones are 
secreted by these glands: aldosterone (mineralocorticoid), cortisol (glucocorticoid), DHEA (weak 
androgen), and catecholamines (epinephrine and norepinephrine). 
 
FUNCTIONAL ANATOMY  
The adrenal gland  is located on top of the kidney.  Like the pituitary, two distinct tissues merge during 
development to form the adrenal cortex (glandular tissue) and medulla (modified neuronal tissue) (Fig 1).  
 
Figure 1.  Structure of the adrenal gland. The cortex secretes three steroid hormones: 1. aldosterone, 2. 
cortisol, 3. a weak androgen, DHEA. The medulla secretes epinephrine (Epi) and norepinephrine 
(NorEpi).  
 
cortex 
medulla 
1 
2 
3 

Introductory Human Physiology 
 
 
 
 
©copyright Emma Jakoi 
 
2 
 
MINERALOCORTICOIDS 
The major mineralocorticoid in humans is aldosterone.  Aldosterone is NOT under the hypothalamus-
pituitary control and does not mediate a negative feedback to this axis.  Aldosterone secretion is 
increased by the vasoconstrictor, angiotensin II, and by elevated plasma K+ concentration. Elevated 
plasma Na+ inhibits the secretion of aldosterone. 
 
Aldosterone, acts in the kidney to promote secretion of K+ into the urine from the blood and the 
reabsorption of Na+ from the urine into the blood. Water follows the sodium thereby increasing blood 
volume (Fig. 2). The loss of the adrenal glands can be life threatening due to reduced ECF volume, 
reduced cardiac output, and elevated blood K+ levels. 
 
Aldosterone also acts in acid-base balance. We will consider this action when we discuss the urinary 
system.  
 
 
Figure 2. Mechanism of aldosterone action. Aldosterone acts in the kidney to stimulate Na+ reabsorption 
from the urine and to move K+ from blood into the urine (excretion).  
 
 
GLUCOCORTICOIDS 
In response to stress, the glucocorticoid, cortisol, maintains blood glucose levels for “fight or flight”. 
Cortisol mobilizes energy stores. It changes metabolism in the body to degrade protein and fat and to 
synthesize glucose. These are catabolic actions that elevate blood glucose levels. Cortisol also suppresses 
the immune system.  
 
Regulation of cortisol is governed by the hypothalamus-pituitary –adrenal axis in response to stress and 
sleep-wake cycles (Fig 3).  Cortisol level is highest in the circulation in early morning just before waking. 
 
Figure 3. Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis.  
 ADRENAL 
Angiotensin II and 
 
decreased 
 
blood pressure 
 
Reabsorption of Na+ & 
water  
Excretion of K+ in urine 
[K+] in 
blood 
KIDNEY 

Introductory Human Physiology 
 
 
 
 
©copyright Emma Jakoi 
 
3 
 
Cortisol is a steroid derivative. It follows the typical steroid hormone pattern for synthesis, release, 
transport, and action. Upon synthesis, cortisol diffuses into the blood, where it binds to a carrier for 
delivery. A small fraction of the hormone is free. The free hormone diffuses into cells where it binds to 
the intracellular glucocorticoid receptor and changes transcription.   
 
In general the response to glucocorticoids is 60-90 minutes because cortisol is synthesized on demand.   
 
All nucleated cells of the body have glucocorticoid receptors. However cortisol is inactivated in tissues 
that express the minearlocorticoid receptor to prevent inappropriate activation.  
  
PATHOLOGY  
Too much: Cushing’s disease is caused by over-secretion of ACTH leading to an excess of circulating 
cortisol. These patients develop hyperglycemia (high blood glucose levels) which is not corrected by 
insulin from the pancreas. Elevated levels of cortisol cause wasting of the muscle, bone and fat depots in 
the legs and arms of these individuals but also increased deposition of fat in the trunk (‘beer belly”), face 
(“moon face”) and at the back of the neck (“buffalo hump”).  
 
Too little: Addison’s disease is caused by the destruction of the adrenal gland. This is a life threatening 
condition due to the loss of aldosterone and cortisol. These patients exhibit lowered serum Na+ 
concentration, elevated serum K+ concentration, and low blood pressure. Why do these patients have low 
blood pressure? Would someone with Addison’s disease have normal, low or high levels of ACTH in the 
blood?  
 
ADRENAL MEDULLA HORMONES 
Cells in the adrenal medulla synthesize and secrete norepinephrine (NorEPI) and epinephrine (EPI). The 
ratio of the two catecholamines differs considerably among species but in humans roughly 80 % of the 
catecholamine output is epinephrine.  
EPI and Nor EPI are stored in granules. Their secretion is stimulated by the sympathetic nervous system 
in response to heavy exercise, hypoglycemia, and trauma (Fig 5).  
The physiologic effects of EPI and NorEPI are mediated by adrenergic receptors on target cells. The 
physiologic consequences of increased medullary catecholamine include: 
- 
Increased heart rate and force of contraction of heart muscle. 
- 
Constriction of blood vessels (increased blood pressure). 
- 
Dilation of bronchioles to assist in pulmonary ventilation. 
- 
Increased metabolic rate, oxygen consumption, and heat production. 
-  
Stimulation of lipolysis in adipose cells to provide additional sources of energy (free fatty 
acids) for “fight or flight” response.   
-  
Inhibition of insulin release from the pancreas to help maintain elevated blood glucose levels 
(Fig 4). 
The adrenal hormones, cortisol and epinephrine work in concert in stress conditions with a third 
hormone, glucagon which is secreted by the pancreas. All three hormones act to raise blood glucose 
levels in a synergistic manner (Fig 4).  
 

Introductory Human Physiology 
 
 
 
 
©copyright Emma Jakoi 
 
4 
 
 
Figure 4. Synergistic actions of cortisol, epinephrine (EPI), and glucagon raise blood glucose.  
 
KEY CONCEPTS 
1. Adrenal gland contains two distinct glands that are regulated separately and produce different hormone 
products. 
2. Adrenal cortex produces steroid hormones. 
a. Aldosterone acts on the kidneys and influences Na+ and K+ balance in the body. 
b. Cortisol affects metabolism, resulting in release of stored fuels. 
c. DHEA, a weak androgen, affects secondary sex traits. 
3. Adrenal medulla functions as part of the sympathetic nervous system and secretes primarily 
epinephrine (EPI). EPI acts on the cardiovascular and respiratory systems to increase delivery of oxygen 
to tissues and on the pancreas to inhibit insulin secretion to help raise plasma glucose levels. Combined 
effects of cortisol, EPI and glucagon (from the pancreas) act synergistically to raise blood glucose for 
“fight or flight response”. 
 
QUESTIONS 
1. When compared to the resting state, which of the following is increased in the blood 
during strenuous exercise? 
A. glucagon 
B. epinephrine 
C. insulin 
D. A and B 
E. A, B and C 
 
2. Excess secretion of aldosterone would lead to: 
A. Increased loss of K+  in the urine 
B. Increased ECF volume 
C. Increased loss of Na+  in the urine 
D. A and B 
E. B and C 
Stress 
Pancreas 
        beta  cell  alpha cell 
glucagon 
insulin 
 
hypothalamus 
CRH 
pituitary 
ACTH 
adrenal 
cortisol 
liver 
Plasma 
Glucose 
SYNERGY 
EPI 
fat
EPI 

Introductory Human Physiology 
 
 
 
 
©copyright Emma Jakoi 
 
5 
 
ANSWERS 
1. D 
2. D 
 
 

