Introductory Human Physiology 
 
         ©copyright Jennifer Carbrey & Emma Jakoi 
 
                                                                                            
 
8. Exercise and hypoxia 
Exercise Affects Ventilation  
With moderate physical activity, both oxygen consumption and carbon dioxide 
production increase. Minute ventilation can increase up to 25-fold. It would seem logical 
to guess that the increase in CO2 production increases PaCO2 which would, in turn, 
stimulate ventilation. However, measurements of PaCO2 during moderate exercise 
show that it does not change appreciably. In fact, neither does PaO2 nor pH. However, 
at near maximal exercise, arterial H+ concentration does rise and PaCO2 falls. Why 
does the H+ concentration increase while PaCO2 decreases?  
 
The mediators that cause increased ventilation in response to moderate exercise are 
likely to include increased body temperature, increased epinephrine level, reflex input 
from the mechanoreceptors of the joints and muscles, and conditioned behavior (feed 
forward).  
 
The deep breathing after exercise removes the “Oxygen Debt” restoring oxygen storing 
molecule (myoglobin) and energy storing (creatine phosphate) in the muscles, as well 
as removing lactic acid and H+.   
 
HYPOXIA (LOW PO2) & VENTILATORY CONTROL  
Hypoxia is defined as a deficiency of oxygen at the tissue level. There are many causes 
of hypoxia but they can be grouped into four classes. 
 
1. hypoxia- hypoxia in which arterial PO2 is reduced. 
2. anemic hypoxia in which arterial PO2 is normal but the content of O2 is 
reduced because of inadequate numbers of red blood cells or incompetent Hb or 
competition of carbon monoxide for Hb. 
 
3. ischemic hypoxia in which blood flow to the tissues is too low. 
4. histotoxic hypoxia in which the O2 content in the tissue is normal but the cell 
is unable to utilize it because a toxic agent (such as cyanide) interferes with 
oxidative metabolism.  
 
Individuals who reside at high altitudes (where O2 tension is reduced) or who have 
sleep apnea syndrome (that is, they stop breathing for prolonged periods during sleep) 
may have diminished hypoxia drive to breathe. This is due to the “resetting” of their 
chemoreceptors set point.   
 
The effects of O2 deprivation vary from individual to individual but most people who 
ascend rapidly to altitudes above 10,000 ft experience some degree of altitude 
sicknesss. The symptoms of altitude sickness are headache, nausea, vomiting, fatigue 
and possible mental confusion. In severe cases, life threatening pulmonary edema can 
occur due to pulmonary hypertension.  Over a course of a several days these symptoms 
will disappear due to acclimatization which includes increased hematocrit (more red 
blood cells), increased 2,3, DPG and a shift in the O2 dissociation curve to the right to 
facilitate unloading in the tissues.  
 

Introductory Human Physiology 
 
         ©copyright Jennifer Carbrey & Emma Jakoi 
 
                                                                                            
 
During sleep, breathing frequency and inspiratory flow rate are reduced and minute 
ventilation decreases. This is accompanied by a relaxation of the skeletal muscle tone 
throughout the body including those muscles associated with the larynx, pharynx and 
tongue. Relaxation of muscle tone in these areas can cause partial obstruction of the 
upper airways and snoring. However, in some individuals the airways are completely 
occluded which can lead to sleep apnea. In sleep apnea, respiration stops for long 
periods (30-60 sec) and PaCO2 rises; the respiratory center is stimulated. The individual 
reacts by gasping and often awakens. 

