Introductory Human Physiology 
 
         ©copyright Jennifer Carbrey & Emma Jakoi 
 
                                                                                            
 
5. Oxygen transport 
 
Partial Pressures of Alveolar Gases 
In the alveoli, the partial pressures of oxygen and carbon dioxide vary during the 
respiratory cycle. As gas exchange occurs, the alveolar partial pressure of carbon 
dioxide will rise and the alveolar partial pressure of oxygen will fall. Because these 
fluctuations are small (a few mm Hg) as compared with the 3000 ml present at the end 
of tidal exhalation, they are generally ignored and only mean values PO2 and PCO2 are 
considered.  
 
The relationship between PO2 and PCO2 in the alveoli is described by the alveolar gas 
equation:  
 
 
 
 PAO2 = (Patm- PH2O) x FiO2 – PACO2/RQ 
 
Because diffusion is so rapid and complete in the lung, the PACO2 and PAO2 in the 
alveoli normally determine these gas pressures in arterial blood (PaCO2 and PaO2). But 
there is a slight difference between alveolar and arterial gas pressures even in normal 
subjects such that PAO2 and PaO2 differ by 5-15 mm Hg. This difference is due to 
anatomical shunting of blood (reduced perfusion) and to the mismatch between 
ventilation and perfusion that exists even in normal lungs. Both of these conditions will 
be discussed later in detail.  
 
Normal values for arterial PaO2 and PaCO2 are: 
 
 
PaO2 = 100 mm Hg  
 
PaCO2= 40 mm Hg.  
 
The PaO2 and PaCO2 can be measured directly from arterial blood draws. PAO2 is 
calculated by the alveolar gas equation. For a patient breathing room air at sea level, 
this equation simplifies to: 
 
 
 
PAO2 = 150 - PaCO2/0.8 
 
Notice that alveolar PO2 is determined by three factors:  
 
1. PO2 of atmospheric air  
 
2. Alveolar ventilation rate  
 
3. Rate of tissue O2 consumption (RQ).  
 
Each of these factors can change independent of another. For example, a decrease in 
either PO2 of the atmospheric air (changes with altitude) or in alveolar ventilation 
(hypoventilation) will decrease the amount of fresh air entering the alveoli per unit time. 
Likewise, an increase in the rate of total body O2 consumption will decrease PO2 in the 
alveoli.  
 

Introductory Human Physiology 
 
         ©copyright Jennifer Carbrey & Emma Jakoi 
 
                                                                                            
 
Because there is essentially no PCO2 in inspired air, only the rate of ventilation and the 
rate of tissue metabolism affect the PCO2 levels in the alveoli. In this instance, 
hypoventilation and/or increased cellular metabolism will increase PCO2 in the alveoli.  
 
Hypoventilation exists when there is an increase in the ratio of CO2 production to 
alveolar ventilation. That is the alveolar ventilation cannot keep up with CO2 
production resulting in a rise in alveolar PACO2 > 40 mm Hg. Hypoventilation can be 
caused by drugs such as barbiturates that depress the part of the central nervous 
system that drives breathing, or by damage to the chest wall, lungs, or respiratory 
muscles and when the movement of the chest wall is limited (e.g., caused by arthritis or 
deformation of the thoracic cavity). 
 
Hyperventilation exists when there is a decrease in the ratio of CO2 production to 
alveolar ventilation. That is the alveolar ventilation is too great for the CO2 produced 
resulting in PACO2 < 40mmHg. Hyperventilation will occur in response to hypoxia, high 
altitude, or some drugs such as cocaine which can cause anxiety attacks.  
 
***Notice that hyperventilation is not "increased ventilation" that accompanies mild 
to moderate aerobic exercise. In aerobic exercise the increase in production of CO2 is 
matched to increased alveolar ventilation (depth and rate of breathing).  
 
Transport of Oxygen and Carbon Dioxide 
To enhance delivery and transport of O2 and CO2 to and from tissues, specialized 
mechanisms (O2-hemoglobin and bicarbonate transport of CO2) have evolved.  
 
OXYGEN TRANSPORT 
Oxygen is not very soluble in water and therefore requires the carrier, hemoglobin (Hb), 
for transport in blood. Blood normally contains about 15 g of Hb per 100 ml. This 
effectively raises the solubility of O2 from 3ml/L of plasma (blood minus the red blood 
cells) to 200 ml/L plasma. Since oxygen consumption ranges from 250 to 1500 L/min, 
this extra O2 carrying capacity of Hb enables the heart and lungs to provide for the O2 
needs of the body.  
 
Hemoglobin binds up to 4 molecules of O2 tightly, cooperatively, and reversibly. 
Normally Hb is almost completely saturated (96%) when exposed to room air (FiO2 = 
21%). This occurs because of the transit time (0.75 seconds) for the red blood cell 
through the alveolus-capillary unit and the rapid equilibration (0.3 seconds) for both 
carbon dioxide and oxygen within this region of the lung.  
 
This rapid equilibration reflects the driving pressure for diffusion and the solubility of the 
gas. The driving pressure for diffusion of CO2 in the alveolus-capillary unit is lower 
(PMVCO2-PaCO2 = 46 mm Hg - 40mm Hg = 6 mm Hg) than that for O2 (PaO2 - PMVO2 
= 100 - 40 = 60 mm Hg), but the solubility of CO2 in plasma is much greater. The net 
result is that the rates of diffusion for CO2 and O2 are approximately equal in the 
alveolus-capillary unit. This means that there is ALWAYS adequate time to saturate 
Hb with O2 regardless of ventilatory rate.  

Introductory Human Physiology 
 
         ©copyright Jennifer Carbrey & Emma Jakoi 
 
                                                                                            
 
Oxygen concentration in the blood is dependent on the Hb concentration in the red 
blood cells, the number of red blood cells (hematocrit), and on the adequacy of 
perfusion of the lungs rather than on diffusion rate itself.  
 
Not all of the O2 bound to Hb is released in the tissues. At rest only about 25% of the O2 
in blood is released. This provides a large driving force for diffusion and a large 
reservoir of O2 to be called upon when needed as in exercise.  
 
The Hb-O2 dissociation curve is S-shaped because the interaction of oxygen with 
hemoglobin is cooperative. That is, when one oxygen molecule binds, it increases the 
affinity of the hemoglobin for the next oxygen molecule. Each hemoglobin molecule can 
bind four oxygen molecules.  
 
The plateau of the Hb-O2 dissociation curve is called the “association part” of the 
curve, because oxygen is loaded in the lungs at relatively high partial pressures. 
Increasing the partial pressure above 100 or down to about 80 mm Hg, does not result 
in a large change in the % saturation. This tends to stabilize arterial O2 content, making 
it relatively insensitive to moderate changes in breathing or altitude. 
 
The “dissociation part” of the curve is the steep part of the curve. In this region a small 
change in PO2 results in a large change in % saturation which allows for large quantities 
of oxygen to be dumped in the tissues.  
 
The P50 is the partial pressure of oxygen required to saturate 50% of the hemoglobin. A 
normal P50 is about 26-27 mm Hg. This value is a useful measure of the affinity of 
hemoglobin for O2.  
 
Oxygen-Hb binding and association is affected by a number of parameters including 
temperature, the red blood cell metabolite 2,3 diphosphoglycerate (DPG), and pH.  
Elevated temperature, low pH and increased 2,3 DPG shift the curve to the right 
(decrease affinity) which enhances unloading of O2 from Hb.  Note that these are 
conditions found within the interstitial tissue surrounding actively contracting muscle. 
Hypoxic conditions also result in increased formation of 2,3-DPG by the red blood cells.   
 
Conversely, a decrease in temperature, high pH and a decrease in 2,3, DPG shifts the 
O2-Hb dissociation curve to the left (increase affinity) which promotes loading of O2 
onto Hb. 

