

Respiratory Medicine
Lecture Notes


Respiratory Medicine
Lecture Notes
Stephen J. Bourke
Consultant Physician
Royal Victoria Inﬁrmary
Newcastle upon Tyne;
Honorary Senior Lecturer
Newcastle University
Graham P. Burns
Consultant Physician
Royal Victoria Inﬁrmary
Newcastle upon Tyne;
Honorary Senior Lecturer
Newcastle University
Eighth Edition

This edition ﬁrst published 2011  2011 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Wiley-Blackwell is an imprint of John Wiley & Sons, formed by the merger of Wiley’s global Scientiﬁc, Technical and Medical
business with Blackwell Publishing.
Registered ofﬁce:
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK
Editorial ofﬁces:
9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 2DQ, UK
The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK
111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030-5774, USA
For details of our global editorial ofﬁces, for customer servicesand for information about how to apply for permission to reuse the
copyright material in this book please see our website at www.wiley.com/wiley-blackwell
The right of the author to be identiﬁed as the author of this work has been asserted in accordance with the UK Copyright, Designs
and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by
any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, except as permitted by the UK Copyright, Designs and
Patents Act 1988, without the prior permission of the publisher.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. All brand names and product
names used in this book are trade names, service marks, trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective owners. The
publisher is not associated with any product or vendor mentioned in this book. This publication is designed to provide accurate
and authoritative information in regard to the subject matter covered. It is sold on the understanding that the publisher is not
engaged in rendering professional services. If professional advice or other expert assistance is required, the services of a
competent professional should be sought.
The contents of this work are intended to further general scientiﬁc research, understanding, and discussion only and are not
intended and should not be relied upon as recommending or promoting a speciﬁc method, diagnosis, or treatment by physicians
for any particular patient. The publisher and the author make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or
completeness of the contents of this work and speciﬁcally disclaim all warranties, including without limitation any implied
warranties of ﬁtness for a particular purpose. In view of ongoing research, equipment modiﬁcations, changes in governmental
regulations, and the constant ﬂow of information relating to the use of medicines, equipment, and devices, the reader is urged to
review and evaluate the information provided in the package insert or instructions for each medicine, equipment, or device for,
among other things, any changes in the instructions or indication of usage and for added warnings and precautions. Readers
should consult with a specialist where appropriate. The fact that an organization or Website is referred to in this work as acitation
and/or a potential source of further information does not mean that the author or the publisher endorses the information the
organization or Website may provide or recommendations it may make. Further, readers should be aware that Internet Websites
listed in this work may have changed or disappeared between when this work was written and when it is read. No warranty may
be created or extended by any promotional statements for this work. Neither the publisher nor the author shall be liable for any
damages arising herefrom.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Bourke, S. J.
Lecture Notes: Respiratory Medicine / Stephen J. Bourke, Graham P. Burns. – 8th ed.
p. ; cm.
Respiratory medicine
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-470-65442-2 (pbk. : alk. paper) 1. Respiratory organs–
Diseases–Outlines, syllabi, etc. I. Burns, Graham P. II. Title. III. Title:
Respiratory medicine.
[DNLM: 1. Respiratory Tract Diseases. WF 140]
RC731.B69 2011
616.2–dc22
2010047390
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Set in 8.5pt/11pt Utopia font by Thomson Digital, Noida, India.
1
2011

Contents
Preface, vii
Part 1 Structure and Function
1 Anatomy and physiology of the lungs, 1
Part 2 History Taking, Examination
and Investigations
2 History taking and examination, 13
3 Pulmonary function tests, 23
4 Radiology of the chest, 37
Part 3 Respiratory Diseases
5 Upper respiratory tract infections and
inﬂuenza, 46
6 Pneumonia, 52
7 Tuberculosis, 68
8 Bronchiectasis and lung abscess, 78
9 Cystic ﬁbrosis, 87
10 Asthma, 98
11 Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, 115
12 Carcinoma of the lung, 130
13 Interstitial lung disease, 142
14 Occupational lung disease, 151
15 Pulmonary vascular disease, 160
16 Pneumothorax and pleural effusion, 169
17 Acute respiratory distress syndrome, 179
18 Sleep-related breathing disorders, 185
19 Lung transplantation, 192
Part 4 Self-assessment
Multiple choice questions, 197
Answers to multiple choice questions, 207
Index, 215


Preface
It is now more than 35 years since the ﬁrst edition of
Lecture Notes: Respiratory Medicine was written by
our predecessor and colleague, Dr Alistair Brewis. It
rapidly became a classic textbook that opened
the eyes of generations of students to the special
fascinations of the subject such that many were
attracted into the specialty. Thus, students became
teachers, and continued to learn by teaching.
Subsequent editions show how respiratory medi-
cine has developed over the years to become such a
major specialty in hospitals and in the community,
treating a wide range of diseases from cystic ﬁbrosis
to lung cancer, asthma to tuberculosis, sleep
disorders to occupational lung diseases.
In the eighthedition the text has been revisedand
expanded to provide a concise up-to-date summa-
ry of respiratory medicine for undergraduate stu-
dents and junior doctors preparing for postgradu-
ate examinations. Dr Graham Burns who has a
particular interest in the teaching of respiratory
physiology and who was also a student of Dr
Alistair Brewis joins the authorship. A particular
feature of respiratory medicine in recent years has
been multidisciplinary teamwork, focusing the
skills from a variety of disciplines in providing the
best care for patients with respiratory diseases, and
this book should be useful to colleagues such as
physiotherapists, lung function technicians and
respiratory nurse specialists. Some of Dr Alistair
Brewis’ original drawings and diagrams have been
retained. The emphasis of Respiratory Medicine:
Lecture Notes has always been on information that
is useful and relevant to everyday clinical medicine,
and the eight edition remains a patient-based book
to be read before and after visits to the wards and
clinics where clinical medicine is learnt and prac-
tised. As Respiratory Medicine: Lecture Notes devel-
ops over time, we remain grateful to our teachers
and their teachers, and we pass on our evolving
knowledge of respiratory medicine to our students
and their students.
S. J. Bourke
G. P. Burns


1
Anatomy and physiology of
the lungs
The anatomy and physiology of the respiratory
system are designed in such a way as to bring air
from the atmosphere and blood from the circula-
tion into close proximity across the alveolar cap-
illary membrane in order to facilitate the exchange
of oxygen and carbon dioxide.
Clinical anatomy
Bronchial tree and alveoli
The trachea has cartilaginous horseshoe-shaped
‘rings’ supporting its anterior and lateral walls. The
posterior wall is ﬂaccid and bulges forward during
coughing. The trachea divides into the right and
left main bronchi at the level of the sternal angle
(angle of Louis). The left main bronchus is longer
than the right and leaves the trachea at a more
abrupt angle. The right main bronchus is more
directly in line with the trachea so that inhaled
material tends to enter the right lung more readily
than the left. The main bronchi divide into lobar
bronchi (upper, middle and lower on the right;
upper and lower on the left) and then segmental
bronchi as shown in Fig. 1.1. The position of the
lungs in relation to external landmarks is shown in
Fig. 1.2. Bronchi are airways with cartilage in their
walls, and there are about 10 divisions of bronchi
beyond the tracheal bifurcation. Smaller airways
without cartilage in their walls are referred to as
bronchioles. Respiratory bronchioles are periph-
eral bronchioles with alveoli in their walls. Bronch-
ioles immediately proximal to alveoli are known as
terminal bronchioles. In the bronchi, smooth
muscle is arranged in a spiral fashion internal to
the cartilaginous plates. The muscle coat becomes
more complete distally as the cartilaginous plates
become more fragmentary. The epithelial lining is
ciliated and includes goblet cells. The cilia beat
with a whip-like action, and waves of contraction
pass in an organised fashion from cell to cell so that
material trapped in the sticky mucus layer above
the cilia is moved upwards and out of the lung. This
mucociliary escalator is an important part of the
lung’s defences. Larger bronchi also have acinar
mucus-secreting glands in the submucosa that are
hypertrophied in chronic bronchitis. Alveoli are
about 0.1–0.2 mm in diameter and are lined by a
thin layer of cells of which there are two types:
type I pneumocytes have ﬂattened processes that
extend to cover most of the internal surface of the
alveoli; type II pneumocytes are less numerous
and contain lamellated structures that are con-
cerned with the production of surfactant (Fig. 1.3).
There is a potential space between the alveolar
cells and the capillary basement membrane that
Respiratory Medicine Lecture Notes, Eighth Edition. Stephen J. Bourke and Graham P. Burns.
 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

is only apparent in disease states when it may
contain ﬂuid, ﬁbrous tissue or a cellular inﬁltrate.
Lung perfusion
The lungs receive a blood supply from both the
pulmonary and systemic circulations. The pulmo-
nary artery arises from the right ventricle and
divides into left and right pulmonary arteries,
which further divide into branches accompanying
the bronchial tree. The pulmonary capillary net-
work in the alveolar walls is very dense and pro-
vides a very large surface area for gas exchange. The
pulmonary venules drain laterally to the periphery
of lung lobules and then pass centrally in the
interlobular and intersegmental septa, ultimately
Apical
UL
Posterior
Anterior
Superior
Inferior
Lateral basal
Posterior basal
Anterior basal
Apical
lower
Apical
lower
Medial basal
Anterior basal
Posterior basal
Lateral basal
Medial
Lateral
Anterior
Posterior
Apical
Right lung
Left lung
Left lung
LING
LL
UL
ML
LL
Figure 1.1 Diagram of
bronchopulmonary segments. LING,
lingula; LL, lower lobe; ML, middle
lobe; UL, upper lobe.
Level of
angle of
Louis
LUL
LLL
RUL
RML
RLL
RUL
RML
RLL
Lower edge
of lung
Lower limit of pleura
(a)
Clavicle
6th Costal
cartilage
8th Rib
10th Rib
Mid-axillary line
Lower limit
of pleura
Lower edge
of lung
4th Thoracic
spine
(b)
Figure 1.2 Surface anatomy. (a) Anterior view of the lungs. (b) Lateral view of the right side of chest at resting end-
expiratory position. LLL, left lower lobe; LUL, left upper lobe; RLL, right lower lobe; RML, right middle lobe; RUL, right
upper lobe.
2
Structure and function

joining to form the four main pulmonary veins that
empty into the left atrium. Several small bronchial
arteries usually arise from the descending aorta
and travel in the outer layers of the bronchi and
bronchioles supplying the tissues of the airways
down to the level of the respiratory bronchiole.
Most of the blood drains into radicles of the pul-
monary vein contributing a small amount of de-
saturated blood that accounts for part of the
‘physiological shunt’ (blood passing through the
lungs without being oxygenated) observed in
normal individuals. The bronchial arteries may
undergo hypertrophy when there is chronic pul-
monary inﬂammation, and major haemoptysis in
diseases such as bronchiectasis or aspergilloma
usually arises from the bronchial rather than the
pulmonary arteries and may be treated by thera-
peutic bronchial artery embolisation. The pulmo-
nary circulation normally offers a much lower
resistance and operates at a lower perfusion pres-
sure than the systemic circulation. The pulmonary
capillaries may be compressed as they pass
through the alveolar walls if alveolar pressure rises
above capillary pressure.
Physiology
The core business of the lungs is to bring oxygen
into the body and to take carbon dioxide out.
This is brought about by a process best consid-
ered in two steps:
1 moving air in and out of the lungs (between the
outside world and the alveoli);
2 gas exchange: the exchange of oxygen and car-
bon dioxide between the airspace of the alveoli
and the blood.
This process continues throughout life largely
unconsciously, coordinated by a centre in the
brain stem. The factors that regulate the process,
‘the control of breathing’ will also be considered
here.
Moving air in and out of the lungs
To understand this process we need to consider
the muscles that ‘drive the pump’ and the resistive
forces they have to overcome. These forces include
the inherent elastic property of the lungs and
the resistance to airﬂow through the bronchi
(airway resistance).
The muscles that drive the pump
Inspiration requires muscular work. The dia-
phragm is the principal muscle of inspiration. At
the end of the previous expiration the diaphragm
sits in a soft, domed position high in the thorax
(Fig. 1.4). To inspire, the strong muscular sheet
contracts, it stiffens and tends to push the abdom-
inal contents down. There is variable resistance to
this downward pressure by the abdomen; which
means that to accommodate the new shape of the
diaphragm the lower ribs (to which it is attached)
also move upwards and outwards. The degree of
resistancetheabdomenpresentscanbevoluntarily
increased by contracting the abdominal muscles,
inspiration then leads to a visible expansion of
the thorax. The resistance may also be increased
by abdominal obesity. In such circumstances there
Alveolus
Ib
Ia
II
Ib
IS
Ib
Capillary
endothelium
Nucleus of
endothelial
cell
RBC
IS
Lamellar
inclusion
bodies
Figure 1.3 Structure of the alveolar
wall as revealed by electron
microscopy. Ia, type I pneumocyte;
Ib, ﬂattened extension of type I
pneumocyte covering most of the
internal surfaceof the alveolus; II, type
II pneumocyte with lamellar inclusion
bodies that are probably the site of
surfactant formation; IS, interstitial
space; RBC, red blood corpuscle.
Pneumocytes and endothelial cells
rest upon thin continuous basement
membranes that are not shown.
Anatomy and physiology of the lungs 3

is an involuntary limitation to the downward ex-
cursion of the diaphragm and, as the potential for
upward movement of the ribs is limited, the capac-
ityforfullinspirationisdiminished.Thisinabilityto
fully inﬂate the lungs is an example of a restrictive
ventilatory defect (see Chapter 3).
Other muscles are also involved in inspiration.
The scalene muscles elevate the upper ribs and
sternum. These are active even in quiet breathing
although they were once considered, along with
the sternocleidomastoids, as ‘accessory muscles
of respiration’, only brought into play during the
exaggerated ventilatory effort of acute respiratory
distress.
The intercostal muscles bind the ribs to ensure
the integrity of the chest wall. They therefore
transfer the effects of actions on the upper or lower
ribs to the whole rib cage. They also brace the chest
wall, resisting the bulging or indrawing effect of
changes in pleural pressure during breathing. This
bracing effect can be overcome to some extent by
the exaggerated pressure changes seen during per-
iods of more extreme respiratory effort, and in slim
individuals intercostal recession may be observed
as a sign of respiratory distress.
Whereas inspiration is the result of active mus-
cular effort, quiet expiration is a more passive
process. The inspiratory muscles steadily release
their contraction and the elastic recoil of the lungs
brings the tidal breathing cycle back to its start
point. Forced expiration however, either volitional
or as in coughing for example, requires muscular
effort. The abdominal musculature is the principal
agent in this.
The inherent elastic property of the
lungs
Lung tissue has a natural elasticity. Left to its own
devices a lung would tend to shrink to little more
than the size of a ﬁst. This can sometimes be
observed radiographically in the context of a com-
plete pneumothorax (Chapter 16). The lung’s ten-
dency to contract is counteracted by the semi-rigid
chest wall that has a tendency to spring outward
from its usual position. At the end of a normal tidal
expiration the two opposing forces are nicely bal-
anced and no muscular effort is required to hold
this ‘neutral’ position. Breathing close to this lung
volume (normal tidal breathing) is therefore rela-
tively efﬁcient and minimises the work of breath-
ing. Unfortunately in some diseases (asthma,
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD))
tidal ventilation is obliged to occur at higher lung
volumes (see Chapter 3). This increases the work of
breathing, a factor that contributes to the sensa-
tion of breathlessness. Test this yourself; take a
good breath in and try to breathe normally at this
high lung volume for a minute.
The opposing forces from the lung and chest wall
generate a negative pressure within the pleural
space. This negative pressure maintains the lung
in its stretched state. Clearly at higher lung vo-
lumes the lung is at greater stretch and a more
negative pleural pressure is required to hold it in
position. The relationship between pleural pres-
sure (the force on the lung) and lung volume can be
plotted graphically (Fig. 1.5). The lung, however,
does not behave as a perfect spring. You may recall
the length of a spring is proportional to the force
applied to it (Hooke’s law). In the case of the lung,
as its volume increases, greater and greater force is
needed to achieve the same additional increase in
volume i.e. the lung becomes less ‘compliant’ as its
volume increases. Lung compliance is deﬁned as:
‘the change in lung volume brought about by a unit
change in transpulmonary (intrapleural) pressure’.
(a)
(b)
Inspiration
Figure 1.4 Effect of diaphragmatic contraction. Dia-
gram of the ribcage, abdominal cavity and diaphragm
showing the position at the end of resting expiration (a).
As the diaphragm contracts it pushes the abdominal
contentsdown(the abdominal wallmovesoutwards)and
reduces pressure with the thorax which ‘sucks’ air in
through the mouth (inspiration). As the diaphragm short-
ens and descends it also stiffens. The diaphragm meets
a variable degree of resistance to downward discursion
that forces the lower ribs to move up and outward to
accommodate its new position (b).
4
Structure and function

Airway resistance
In addition to overcoming the elastic properties of
the lungs and the chest wall, during active breath-
ing the muscles of respiration also have to over-
come the frictional forces opposing ﬂow up and
down the airways.
Site of maximal resistance
It is generally understood that resistance to ﬂow
in a tube increases sharply as luminal radius (r)
decreases (with laminar ﬂow, resistance is in-
versely proportional to r4). It may be surprising
to learn therefore that in a healthy individual the
greater part of total airway resistance is situated in
the large airways (larynx, trachea and main bron-
chi). This is in part due to the fact that the ﬂow
velocity is greatest and ﬂow more turbulent here
but also due to the much greater total cross-
sectional area in the later generations of airway
that effectively function in parallel (Fig. 1.6). Con-
ditions may be different in disease states. Asthma
and COPD, diseases which affect airway calibre,
tend to have a greater proportionate effect
on smaller generations of airways. The reduced
calibre of the smaller airways then becomes
4
3
2
1
-30
-20
-10
A
B
Oesophageal pressure
(cmH2O)
Volume inspired
(litres)
Maximum
recoil pressure
Figure 1.5 Graph of (static) lung
volume against intrapleural pressure.
In both subjects A and B, we see that
lung compliance – the change in lung
volume per unit change in intrapleural
pressure (or slope of the curve) is
reduced at higher lung volumes. A:
normal individual. B: individual with
reduced lung compliance e.g. lung
ﬁbrosis.
Trachea
Divisions
Cross-sectional area
0
5
10
15
Figure 1.6 Diagrammatic
representation of the increase in total
cross-sectional area of the airways at
successive divisions.
Anatomy and physiology of the lungs 5

overwhelmingly important and the site of princi-
pal resistance moves distally.
Consider the model of the lung represented in
Fig. 1.7. Here the tube represents a route through
generations of airways from the alveoli to the
mouth. The smaller generations of airways, with-
out cartilaginous support, are represented by the
‘ﬂoppy’ segment (B). Airways are embedded within
the lung and are attached externally to lung tissue
whose elastic recoil and ultimate connection to the
chest wall supports the ﬂoppy segments. This re-
coil force is represented by the springs. During
expiration a positive pressure is generated in the
alveolar space (A). Air ﬂows from A along the
airway, past point B where the pressure is lower
(it must be otherwise the air would not have ﬂowed
in this direction) and on to the mouth where the
pressure is nominally ‘zero’. The pressure differ-
ence across the walls of the ﬂoppy segment (A
minus B) would tend to cause this part of the
airway to collapse. It is prevented from doing so
by the tension within the springs.
The ﬂow-limiting mechanism
During expiration the extent of the pressure drop
between A and B is proportional to the ﬂow rate.
Clearly with increased effort, ﬂow rate will be
increased . . . up to a point. Eventually a critical
ﬂow rate will be reached where the pressure gra-
dient between A and B will be sufﬁcient to over-
come the retractive force of the lung, the airway
wall will collapse and airﬂow will cease. The pres-
sure inside the airway at point B will rise and
almost immediately equal that at A. The retractive
force of the lung will then open the airway again
and ﬂow will recommence. The cycle thus starts
again. It will be apparent that this mechanism
determines a maximum ﬂow rate along the airway.
As each route out of the lung will similarly have a
maximal possible ﬂow rate, the expiratory ﬂow
from the lung as a whole will have an absolute
limit. It can be seen that this limit is set by the
internal mechanics of the lung, not by muscular
effort (above a certain level of effort). If that were
not the case then peak expiratory ﬂow rate
(PEFR), for example, would not be a lung function
test; it would be a test of muscular strength.
The effects of disease on maximum
ﬂow rate
In asthma (Chapter 10) airway narrowing occurs
leading to agreater resistance between the alveolus
INSP
EXP
INSP
EXP
A
A
A
A
B
Rec
Res
Figure 1.7 Model of the lung to
demonstrate the ﬂow limiting
mechanism (see text). The
chest is represented as a
bellows. The airways of the
lungs are represented
collectively as having a distal
resistive segment (Res) and a
more proximal collapsible or
‘ﬂoppy’ segment. The walls of
the ﬂoppy segment are kept
apart by the retractive force of
lung recoil (Rec). EXP,
expiration; INSP, inspiration.
6
Structure and function

(A) and point B. The pressure drop, A to B, for any
given ﬂow rate will therefore be greater than in the
healthy lung. The critical (maximal) ﬂow rate
(when the pressure difference between A and B is
just enough to overcome the retractive force of the
lung) will therefore be lower. You may have known
for some time that peak expiratory ﬂow is reduced
in asthma but now you understand why. In COPD
(Chapter 11) the loss of alveolar walls (emphyse-
ma) reduces the elastic recoil of the lung. There is
therefore less protective retractive force on the
airway wall and the critical pressure drop along
the airway required to cause airway collapse will
occur at a lower ﬂow rate. Thus maximum expira-
tory ﬂow is also reduced in COPD.
Airway resistance and lung volume
It can easily be seen in the model that as lung
volume decreases, lung elastic recoil (tension with-
in the springs) diminishes and so provides less and
less support for the ﬂoppy airway. It is clear there-
fore that the maximum ﬂow rate achievable is
dependant on lung volume and is reduced as lung
volume is reduced. For any given lung volume
there will be a maximum expiratory ﬂow that can-
not be exceeded no matter what the effort. A true
PEFR can therefore only be achieved by beginning
expiration at full inspiration. You can conﬁrm this
by inspecting the shape of a ﬂow loop (Chapter 3).
Although I would suggest you have been aware of
this fact for longer than you realise. Immediately
prior to blowing the candles out on your second
birthday cake you probably took a big breath in,
instinctively understanding the relationship be-
tween lung volume and the power of your puff.
Lung volume and site of maximal airway
resistance
As discussed above (in health) the greater part of
airway resistance resides in the central airways.
These airways are well supported by cartilage so
generally maintain their calibre even at low lung
volumes. The calibre of the small airways, without
cartilaginous support, are heavily dependant on
lung volume. As lung volume diminishes resis-
tance in the smaller generations of airway in-
creases substantially. During expiration therefore
as lung volume is diminished, the site of principal
resistance moves from the central airways to the
peripheral airways. The PEFR (Chapter 3) tests
expiratory ﬂow at high lung volume. The forced
expiratory volume in one second, FEV1 (Chapter
3) is also heavily inﬂuenced by the central airway
(though not as much as PEFR). Specialised lung
function tests that measure expiratory ﬂow at low-
er lung volumes (e.g. FEF25–75 and _Vmax50 see
Chapter 3) are believed to provide more informa-
tion about the smaller airways.
Gas exchange
The lung is ventilated by air and perfused by blood;
for gas exchange to occur these two elements must
come into intimate contact.
Where does the air go?
An inspired breath brings air into the lung. That air,
however, does not distribute itself evenly. Some
parts of the lung are more compliant than others
and are therefore more accommodating. This var-
iability in compliance occurs on a gross scale
across the lungs (upper zones verses lower zones)
and also on a very small scale in a more random
pattern. At the gross level, the lungs can be imag-
ined as ‘hanging’ inside the thorax, the effect of
gravity means that the upper parts of the lungs are
under considerable stretch whereas the bases sit
relatively compressed on the diaphragm. During
inspiration, as the upper parts of the lung are
already stretched it is difﬁcult for them to accom-
modate more air, the bases, on the other hand, are
ripe for inﬂation. Therefore far more of each in-
spired breath will go to the lower zones then the
upper zones. On a small scale adjacent lobules or
even alveoli may not have the same compliance,
airway anatomy is not precisely uniform either and
airway resistance between individual lung units
will vary. It can be seen therefore that ventilation
will vary in an apparently random fashion on a
small scale throughout the lung. This phenome-
non may be rather modest in health but is likely to
be exaggerated in many lung diseases in which
airway resistance or lung compliance is affected.
Where does the blood go?
The pulmonary circulation operates under much
lower pressure than the systemic circulation. At
rest, the driving pressure is only in the order of
15 mmHg. In the upright posture therefore there is
barely enough pressure to ﬁll the upper parts of the
system and the apices of the lung receive very little
perfusion at all from the pulmonary circulation.
The relative overperfusion of the bases mirrors the
pattern seen with ventilation (which is fortunate if
our aim is to bring blood and air into contact) but
Anatomy and physiology of the lungs 7

the disparity is even greater in the case of perfu-
sion. Thus, at the bases of the lungs perfusion
exceeds ventilation, at the apices ventilation ex-
ceeds perfusion. The distribution of perfusion is
also heavily inﬂuenced by another factor – hypox-
ia. By a mechanism we do not fully understand low
oxygen levels in a region of the lung have a direct
vasoconstrictor effect on the pulmonary artery
supplying it. This has the beneﬁcial effect of di-
verting blood away from the areas of lung that are
poorly
ventilated
towards
the
well-ventilated
areas.
This
‘automatic’
ventilation/perfusion
(V/Q) matching system aims to maximise the
contact between air and blood and is critically
important to gas exchange.
Relationship between PO2 and PCO2
During steady-state conditions the relationship
between the amount of carbon dioxide produced
by the body and the amount of oxygen absorbed
depends upon the metabolic activity of the
body and is referred to as the respiratory
quotient (RQ).
RQ ¼ CO2 produced
O2 absorbed
The actual value varies from 0.7 during pure fat
metabolism to 1.0
during
pure carbohydrate
metabolism. The RQ is usually about 0.8 but it is
often assumed to be 1.0 to make calculations easier.
Carbon dioxide
If carbon dioxide is being produced by the body at a
constant rate the PCO2 of alveolar air depends only
upon the amount of outside air that the carbon
dioxide is mixed with in the alveoli, i.e. it depends
only upon alveolar ventilation. If alveolar ventila-
tion increases the PCO2 will fall. If alveolar ventila-
tion decreases PCO2 will rise. Alveolar PCO2 (indeed
arterial PCO2 likewise) isasensitive index of alveolar
ventilation.
Oxygen
The level of alveolar PO2 also varies with alveolar
ventilation. If alveolar ventilation were increased
greatly the PO2 would rise and begin to approach
the Po2 in the inspired air. If alveolar ventilation
were reduced PO2 would be reduced. Whilst arterial
PO2 would also vary with alveolar ventilation (in the
same direction as alveolar PO2) it is not a reliable
index of alveolar ventilation as it is profoundly
affected by regional changes in ventilation/perfu-
sion (V/Q) matching (see below).
The possible combinations of PCO2 and PO2 are
shown in Fig. 1.8. Moist atmospheric air at 37C has
mmHg
kPa
150
20
16
100
12
8
50
40
0
4
5.3
4
8
12
16
50
100
150 mmHg
(c)
(b)
(a)
RQ = 0.8
RQ = 1
Underventilation
Overventilation
Po2 of air
Po2
20 kPa
Pco2
Figure 1.8 Oxygen–carbon dioxide
diagram. The continuous and
interrupted lines describe the possible
combinations of PCO2 and PO2 in
alveolar air when the RQ is 1 and 0.8,
respectively. (a) A hypothetical sample
of arterial blood. (b) Progressive under-
ventilation. (c) PO2 lower than can be
accounted for by underventilation
alone.
8
Structure and function

a PO2 of about 20 kPa. In this model, oxygen could
be exchanged with carbon dioxide in the alveoli to
produce any combination of PO2 and PCO2 de-
scribed by the oblique line that joins PO2 20 kPa
and PCO2 20 kPa. The position of the cross on this
line represents the composition of a hypothetical
sample of alveolar air. A fall in alveolar ventilation
would result in an upward movement of this point
along the line and conversely an increase in alve-
olar ventilation would result in a downward move-
ment of the point.
In practice RQ is not 1.0 but closer to 0.8. In other
words:
alveolar PO2 þ ðalveolar PCO2=0:8Þ ¼ 20 kPa
This is represented by the dotted line in the ﬁgure.
Point (a) represents the PCO2 and PO2 of arterial
blood (it lies a little to the left of the RQ 0.8 line
because of the small normal alveolar–arterial ox-
ygen tension difference). Point (b) represents the
arterial gas tension after a period of underventila-
tion. If the arterial PCO2 and PO2 were those repre-
sented by point (c) this would imply that the fall in
PO2 was more than could be accounted for by
reduced alveolar ventilation alone.
The carriage of CO2 and O2 by
blood
The quantity of gas carried by blood when exposed
to different partial pressures of the gas is described
by the dissociation curve. The dissociation curves
foroxygenandcarbondioxideareverydifferentand
are shown together on the same scale in Fig. 1.9.
Over the range normally encountered the amount
of carbon dioxide carried by the blood is roughly
proportional to the PCO2. However, the quantity of
oxygen carried is roughly proportional to the PO2
only over a very limited range of about 3–7 kPa
(22–52 mmHg). Above 13.3 kPa (100 mmHg) the
haemoglobin is fully saturated and hardly any
additional oxygen is carried.
Effect of local differences in VQ
In the normal lung the vast majority of alveoli
receive ventilation and perfusion in about the right
proportion ((a) in Fig. 1.10). In diffuse disease of
the lung however, it is usual for ventilation and
perfusion to be irregularly distributed so that a
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
20 40 60 80 100120140160 mmHg
Partial pressure
Venous blood
Arterial blood
Arterial blood
Venous blood
OXYGEN
4
0
8
12
16
20
kPa
CARBON
 DIOXI
DE 
Oxyg
enat
ed 
Reduced 
Volume of gas contained in blood (ml/100 ml)
Figure 1.9 The blood oxygen and carbon dioxide dis-
sociation curves drawn to the same scale.
(a) Normal lung
(b) Diseased lung
Number of
alveoli
High V/Q
Low V/Q
Overall V/Q
Figure 1.10 Distribution of ventilation/perfusion
relationships within the lungs. Although the overall
ventilation/perfusion (V/Q) ratio is the same in the two
examples shown, the increased spread of V/Q ratios
within the diseased lung (b) will result in a lower
arterial oxygen tension and content than in the normal
lung (a). Arterial PCO2 will be similar in both cases.
Anatomy and physiology of the lungs 9

greater scatter of V/Q ratios is encountered ((b) in
Fig. 1.10). Even if the overall V/Q remains normal
there is wide local variation in V/Q. Looking at
Fig. 1.10 it is tempting to suppose the effects of the
alveoli with low V/Q might be nicely balanced by
the alveoli with high V/Q. In fact this is not the case;
the increased range of V/Q within the lung affects
the transport of CO2 and O2 differently.
In Figure 1.11 (b) and (c) are regions of low
and high V/Q respectively and the result of mixing
blood from these two regions is shown at (d) where
the arterial CO2 and O2 contents are represented.
(a)
(b)
(c)
content
content
content
V
Q
V
Q
V
Q
VENTILATION/
PERFUSION
RATIO
DISSOCIATION
CURVE
BLOOD GAS
CONTENT
CO2
O2
Pco2
Po2
Pco2
Po2
Pco2
Po2
CO2
O2
(d)
Figure 1.11 The effect of ventilation/perfusion imbalance. (a) Appropriate V/Q. The ventilation (V)/perfusion (Q)
ratio is showndiagrammatically on the left. When ventilation is appropriately matchedto perfusionin an alveolusor in
the lung as a whole, the PCO2 is about 5.3 kPa (40 mmHg) and the PO2 is about 12.6 kPa (95 mmHg). The dissociation
curves shown in the centre of the diagram describe the relationship between the blood gas tension and the amount
of gas carried by the blood. The normal blood gas contents are represented very diagrammatically on the right. (b)
Low V/Q. Reduced ventilation relative to blood ﬂow results in a rise in PCO2 and a fall in PO2. Reference to the
dissociation curves shows that this produces a rise in arterial CO2 content and a fall in O2 content. (c) High V/Q.
Increased ventilation relative to blood ﬂow results in a fall in PCO2 and a rise in PO2. Reference to the dissociation
curvesshowsthatthisresultsinafall inCO2contentbelowthenormallevelbutinthe caseofO2thereisnoincreasein
content.Inhealth,the vastmajorityofalveolihavean appropriate balanceofventilationand perfusionandthe arterial
blood has a normal CO2 and O2 content as shown in (a). In many disease states the V/Q ratio varies widely between
areas. Such variation always results in a disturbance of blood gas content. The effects of areas of low V/Q are not
corrected by areas of high V/Q. The result of mixing blood from areas of low and high V/Q is shown diagrammatically
on the extreme right of the diagram (d). It will be seen that with respect to CO2 content, the high content of the blood
from underventilated areas is balanced by the low content from the overventilated areas. However in the case of O2,
the low content of the blood from underventilated areas cannot be compensated for by an equivalent increase in the
O2 content of blood from overventilated areas. Arterial hypoxaemia is inevitable if there are areas of low V/Q (relative
underventilation or overperfusion).
10
Structure and function

Effect on arterial CO2 content
Blood with a high CO2 content returning from low
V/Q areas mixes with blood with a low CO2 content
returning from high V/Q areas and the net CO2
content of arterial blood may be near normal, as
the two balance out.
Effect on arterial O2 content
Here the situation is different. Blood returning
from low V/Q areas has a low PO2 and low O2
content but there is a limit to which this deﬁcit
can be made good by mixture with blood returning
from high V/Q areas; which although it has a high
PO2 cannot carry more than the ‘normal’ quantity
of oxygen as its O2 content limited by saturation of
the haemoglobin.
. Areas of low V/Q result in a rise in arterial CO2
and a fall in arterial O2 content.
. Increased ventilation in the areas of high V/Q
may balance the effect on CO2 content but will
only partially correct the reduction in O2 content
of arterial blood; a degree of hypoxaemia is
inevitable.
. It follows that where arterial oxygen levels are
lower than would be expected from consider-
ation of PCO2 (overall ventilation alone), then
there must be a disturbance to the normal V/Q
matching system in the lung i.e. there is likely to
be an intrinsic problem with the lung or its
vasculature.
When looking at arterial blood gas results, how
can we distinguish a low oxygen level due to under-
ventilation from a level caused by intrinsic lung
disease? Answer: The alveolar gas equation.
The alveolar gas equation
An understanding of the relationship between
PaCO2 and PaO2 is critical to the interpretation of
blood gases (Chapter 3). The relationship can be
summarised in an equation known as ‘the alveolar
gas equation’.
. Pure underventilation leads to an increase in
PCO2 and a ‘proportionate’ fall in PO2. This is
known as type 2 respiratory failure.
. A disturbance of VQ matching leads to a fall in
PO2 but no change in PCO2. This is known as a type
1 respiratory failure.
. These two problems can, of course, occur simul-
taneously. The alveolar gas equation is then
needed to determine if the fall in PO2 can be
accounted for by underventilation alone or
whether there is also an intrinsic problem with
the lungs.
Rather than merely memorising the alveolar gas
equation, spend just a moment here understand-
ing its derivation (this is NOT a rigorous mathe-
matical derivation, merely an attempt to impart
some insight into its meaning).
Imagine a lung, disconnected from the circula-
tion, being ventilated. Clearly, in a short space of
time the alveolar partial pressure of PAo2 would
come to equal the partial pressure of oxygen in the
inspired air:
PAO2 ¼ PIO2
A pulmonary circulation does exist of course and it
is continuously removing O2 from the alveoli. The
alveolar partial pressure of O2 is therefore equal to
the partial pressure in the inspired air minus the
amount removed. If the exchange of oxygen for
carbon dioxide were a 1:1 swap then the amount of
O2 removed would equal the amount of CO2 added
to the alveoli and the equation would become:
PAO2 ¼ PIO2  PACO2
The CO2 : O2 exchange, as discussed above is, how-
ever, not usually 1:1. The RQ is usually taken to be
0.8.
Thus:
PAO2 ¼ PIO2  ðPACO2=0:8Þ
As CO2 is a very soluble gas the alveolar partial
pressure (PACO2) is virtually the same as the arterial
partial pressure (PaCO2). The arterial partial pres-
sure of CO2 (available in the blood gas analysis) can
therefore be used in the equation in its place:
PAO2 ¼ PIO2  ðPaCO2=0:8Þ
This is (the simpliﬁed version of) the alveolar gas
equation. If the inspired pressure of oxygen is
known then the PAO2 can be calculated.
Unlike in the case of CO2, there is normally a
difference between alveolar and arterial PO2 (which
should be the greater?). The difference PAO2  PaO2
is often written: PA–aO2 and is known as the
alveolar–arterial (A–a) gradient. In healthy young
adults this gradient is small and would be expected
to be comfortably less than 2 kPa. If the gradient is
greater than this then the abnormality in the blood
gas result cannot be accounted for by a change in
ventilation alone; there must be an abnormality
Anatomy and physiology of the lungs 11

intrinsic to the lung or its vasculature causing a
disturbance of VQ matching.
For examples see the multiple choice questions
at the end of the book.
The control of breathing
To understand this we ﬁrst have to remember why
we breathe. Although oxygen is an essential re-
quirement for life; to survive we do not need the
high level of oxygenation usually seen in health. We
operate with a substantial margin of safety. This
safety margin allows us to vary our ventilation
(sometimes at the expense of a normal oxygen
level) in order to precisely regulate the CO2 content
of the blood. CO2 is intimately linked with pH.
Although it is possible to live for years with low
oxygen levels, we cannot survive long at all with pH
outside of the normal range. Keeping pH in the
normal range is therefore a priority and CO2 rather
than O2 is the principal driver of ventilation.
In health PCO2 is maintained very close to 5.3 kPa
(40 mmHg). Any increase above this level provokes
hyperventilation, any dip leads to hypoventilation.
In practice, PCO2 is so exquisitely tightly regulated
that such ﬂuctuations are not observable. Even
when substantial demands are placed on the re-
spiratory system, such as hard physical exercise,
with its dramatic increase in O2 utilisation and CO2
production, the arterial PCO2 will barely budge.
Like any ﬁnely tuned sensor however, if it is
exposed to levels it is not designed to deal with for
long enough, it will tend to break. In some pa-
tients
with chronic
lung disease (commonly
COPD) the CO2 sensor begins to fail. Underven-
tilation then occurs and over time, PCO2 drifts
upward. In addition PO2 will, of course, fall al-
though initially the respiratory centre remains
blissfully unconcerned. Only when a PO2 level of
around 8 kPa (60 mmHg) is reached does a pre-
viously dormant sensor, the hypoxic sensor, wake
up and declare that ‘enough is enough!’ Prepared
to put up with a certain degree of hypoxia, it
springs into action when the PO2 reaches this
important threshold. Hypoxia then takes up the
reins as the driver to ventilation and prevents
what would have been a progressive decline to
death. Once an individual is dependent on this
‘hypoxic drive’ they need a certain level of hyp-
oxia to keep breathing. This is not always appre-
ciated. At times a ‘high ﬂow’ oxygen mask may be
applied to a patient by a well-meaning doctor,
which may abolish the hypoxia. The result can be
catastrophic underventilation which, if not dealt
with properly, can be fatal. When treating hypoxic
patients who may have chronic lung disease, until
their ventilatory drive is known (from arterial
blood gas analysis) oxygen should be judiciously
controlled to achieve an oxygen saturation (based
on pulse oxymetry) between 88% and 92%. At this
level the patient will not die of hypoxia, nor is
ventilation likely to be depressed to any signiﬁ-
cant degree.
KEY POINTS
. The essential function of the lungs is the ex-
change of oxygen and carbon dioxide between
the blood and the atmosphere.
. Ventilation is the process of moving air in and
out of the lungs, and it depends on the tidal
volume, respiratory rate, resistance of the air-
ways and the compliance of the lungs. A fall in
ventilation leads to a rise in PCO2 and a fall in
PO2; type 2 respiratory failure.
. Derangement in the matching of ventilation and
perfusion in the lungs (which may be caused by
any disease intrinsic to the lung or its vascu-
lature) leads to a fall in Po2; type 1 respiratory
failure.
. The respiratory centre in the brain stem is re-
sponsible for the control of breathing, pH and
PCO2 are the primary stimuli to ventilation.
Hypoxia only acts as a stimulant when PO2 is
less than about 8 kPa.
FURTHER READING
Brewis RAL, White FE. Anatomy of the thorax. In:
Gibson GJ, Geddes DM, Costabel U, Sterk PJ,
Corrin B, eds. Respiratory Medicine. Edinburgh:
Elsevier Science, 2003: 3–33.
Cotes JE. Lung Function: Assessment and Applica-
tion in Medicine. Oxford: Blackwell Science,
1993.
Gibson GJ. Clinical Tests of Respiratory Function.
Oxford: Chapman and Hall, 2009.
West JB. Pulmonary Pathophysiology – The Essen-
tials. Baltimore, MD: Williams and Wilkins, 1987.
12
Structure and function

2
History taking and
examination
History taking
History taking is of paramount importance in the
assessment of a patient with respiratory disease.
Difﬁcult diagnostic problems are more often
solved by a carefully taken history than by labora-
tory tests. It is during history taking that the doctor
also gets to know the patient and the patient’s
fears and concerns. The relationship of trust thus
established forms the basis of the therapeutic
partnership. Start by asking the patient to describe
the symptoms in his or her own words. Listening to
the patient’s account of the symptoms is an active
process in which the doctor is seeking clues to
underlying processes, judging which items require
further exploration and noting the patient’s atti-
tude and anxieties. By carefully posed questions
the skilled clinician directs the patient to focus on
pertinent points, to clarify crucial details and to
explore areas of possible importance. History-
taking skills develop with experience and with a
greater knowledge of respiratory disease.
It is important to appreciate the differences
between symptoms, which are a patient’s subjec-
tive description of a change in the body or
its functions that may indicate disease, signs,
which are abnormal features noted by the doctor
on examination and tests, which are objective
measurements undertaken at the bedside or in
the diagnostic laboratories. Thus, for example,
a patient might complain of pain on breathing,
the doctor might elicit tenderness on pressing on
the chest and an X-ray might show a fractured rib.
Symptoms (Table 2.1)
Dyspnoea
This is an unpleasant sensation of being unable to
breathe easily (i.e. breathlessness). Analysis of this
symptom requires an assessment of the speed of
onset, progression, periodicity and precipitating
and relieving factors. The severity of dyspnoea is
graded according to the patient’s exercise toler-
ance (e.g. dyspnoeic on climbing a ﬂight of stairs;
dyspnoeic at rest). Onset may be sudden as in the
case of a pneumothorax, or gradual and progres-
sive as in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD). An episodic dyspnoea pattern is charac-
teristic of asthma with symptoms typically being
precipitated by cold air or exercise. Orthopnoea is
dyspnoea that occurs when lying ﬂat and is
relieved by sitting upright. It is a characteristic
feature of pulmonary oedema or diaphragm
Respiratory Medicine Lecture Notes, Eighth Edition. Stephen J. Bourke and Graham P. Burns.
 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

paralysis but is also found in many respiratory
diseases. Paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnoea (PND)
refers to the phenomenon of the patient waking up
breathless at night. It is most commonly associated
with pulmonary oedema but must be distin-
guished from the nocturnal wheeze and the sleep
disturbance of asthma. It is important to note what
words the patient uses to describe the symptoms:
‘tightness in the chest’ may indicate breathlessness
or angina. Dyspnoea is not a symptom that is
speciﬁc to respiratory disease and it may be
associated
with
various
cardiac
diseases,
anxiety, anaemia and metabolic states such as
ketoacidosis.
Wheeze
This is a whistling or sighing noise that is charac-
teristic of air passing through a narrow tube. The
sound of wheeze can be mimicked by breathing
out almost to residual volume and then giving
a further sharp forced expiration. Wheeze is
a characteristic feature of airways obstruction
caused by asthma or COPD but can also occur in
pulmonary oedema. In asthma, wheeze is charac-
teristically worse on waking in the morning and
may be precipitated by exercise or cold air. Wheeze
that improves at weekends or on holidays away
from work and deteriorates on return to the work
environment is suggestive of occupational asthma.
In asthma and COPD wheezing is more prominent
in expiration. An inspiratory wheeze – stridor – is
a feature of disease of the central airways (e.g.
obstruction of the trachea by a carcinoma).
Cough and sputum
Cough is a forceful expiratory blast produced by
contraction of the abdominal muscles with bracing
by the intercostal muscles and sudden opening
of the glottis. It is a protective reﬂex that removes
secretions or inhaled solid material, and it is
provoked by physical or chemical stimulation of
irritant receptors in the larynx, trachea or bron-
chial tree. Cough may be dry or associated with
sputum production. The duration and nature of
the cough should be assessed, and precipitating
and relieving factors explored. It is important to
examine any sputum produced, noting whether it
is mucoid, purulent or bloodstained, for example.
Cough occurring on exercise or disturbing sleep
at night is a feature of asthma. A transient cough
productive of purulent sputum is very common
in respiratory tract infections. A weak ineffective
cough that fails to clear secretions from the airways
is a feature of bulbar palsy or expiratory muscle
weakness, and predisposes the patient to aspira-
tion pneumonia. Cough is often triggered by the
accumulation of sputum in the respiratory tract.
Chronic bronchitis is deﬁned as cough productive
of sputum on most days for at least 3 months of
2 consecutive years. Bronchiectasis is charac-
terised by the production of copious amounts of
purulent sputum. A chronic cough may also be
caused by gastro-oesophageal reﬂux with aspira-
tion, sinusitis with post-nasal drip and occasion-
ally by drugs (e.g. lisinopril). Violent coughing can
generate sufﬁcient force to produce a ‘cough
fracture’ of a rib or to impede venous return
and cerebral perfusion causing ‘cough syncope’.
Patients with alveolar cell carcinoma sometimes
produce very large volumes of watery sputum:
bronchorrhoea. Patients with coalworker’s pneu-
moconiosis will occasionally cough up black
material: melanoptysis.
Haemoptysis
This is the coughing up of blood. It is a very
important symptom that requires investigation. In
particular, it may be the ﬁrst clue to the presence
of bronchial carcinoma, and early investigation
may detect the tumour at a stage when curative
surgery can be performed. All patients with
haemoptysis should have a chest X-ray performed,
and further investigations such as bronchoscopy,
computed tomography (CT), sputum cytology and
microbiology may be indicated depending on the
circumstances. The most important causes of hae-
moptysis are bronchial carcinoma, lung infections
(pneumonia, bronchiectasis, tuberculosis), chron-
ic bronchitis, pulmonary infarction, pulmonary
oedema and pulmonary vasculitis (Table 2.2). In
some cases no cause is found and the origin of the
blood may have been in the upper airway (e.g. nose
(epistaxis), pharynx or gums).
Table 2.1 Main respiratory symptoms
. Dyspnoea
. Wheeze
. Cough
. Sputum
. Haemoptysis
. Chest pain
14
History taking, examination and investigations

Chest pain
Pain that is aggravated by inspiration or coughing is
described as pleuritic pain, and the patient
can often be seen to wince when breathing in, as
thepain‘catches’. Irritation ofthepleura may result
from inﬂammation (pleurisy), infection (pneumo-
nia), infarction of underlying lung (pulmonary
embolism) or tumour (malignant pleural effusion).
Chest wall pain resulting from injury to the inter-
costal muscles or fractured ribs, for example, is also
aggravated by inspiration or coughing and is asso-
ciated with tenderness at the point of injury.
Inadditiontothesemajorrespiratorysymptomsit
is important to consider other associated symp-
toms. For example, anorexia and weight loss are
features of malignancy or chronic lung infections
(e.g. lung abscess). Pyrexia and sweating are fea-
tures of acute (e.g. pneumonia) and chronic infec-
tions(e.g.tuberculosis).Lethargy,malaiseandcon-
fusion may be features of hypoxaemia. Headaches,
particularly on awakening in the morning, may be a
symptomofhypercapnia.Oedemamayindicatecor
pulmonale. Snoring and daytime somnolence may
indicate
obstructive
sleep
apnoea
syndrome.
Hoarseness of the voice may indicate damage to
the recurrent laryngeal nerve by a tumour.
Many respiratory diseases have their roots
in previous childhood lung disease or in the
patient’s environment so that it is crucial to make
speciﬁc enquiries concerning these points during
history taking.
History
Past medical history
Did the patient suffer any major illness in child-
hood? Did the patient have frequent absences
from school? Was the patient able to play games
at school? Did any abnormalities declare them-
selves at a pre-employment medical examination
or on chest X-ray? Has the patient ever been
admitted to hospital with chest disease? A long
history of childhood ‘bronchitis’ may in fact in-
dicate asthma. Severe whooping cough or measles
in childhood may cause bronchiectasis. Tubercu-
losis acquired early in life may reactivate many
years later.
General medical history
Has the patient any systemic illness that may
involve the lungs (e.g. rheumatoid arthritis)? Is the
patient taking any medications that might affect
the lungs (e.g. amiodarone), which can cause in-
terstitial lung disease, or b-blockers (e.g. atenolol),
which may provoke bronchospasm? What effect
will the patient’s lung disease have on other ill-
nesses (e.g. ﬁtness for surgery?).
Family history
Is there any history of lung disease in the family? An
increased prevalence of lung disease in a family
may result from ‘shared genes’, that is inherited
traits such as cystic ﬁbrosis, a1-anti-trypsin deﬁ-
ciency, asthmatic tendency; or from ‘shared en-
vironment’ (e.g. tuberculosis).
Social history
Does the patient smoke, or have they ever smoked?
Is the patient exposed to passive smoking at home?
It is important to obtain a clear account of total
smoking exposure over the years so as to assess the
patient’s risk for diseases such as lung cancer or
COPD. Does the patient keep any pets or partici-
pate in any sports (e.g. diving) or hobbies (e.g.
pigeon racing) that may be important in assessing
the lung disease?
Table 2.2 Major causes of haemoptysis
Tumours
. Bronchial carcinoma
. Laryngeal carcinoma
Infections
. Tuberculosis
. Pneumonia
. Bronchiectasis
. Infective bronchitis
Infarction
. Pulmonary embolism
Pulmonary oedema
. Left ventricular failure
. Mitral stenosis
Pulmonary vasculitis
. Goodpasture’s syndrome
. Wegener’s granulomatosis
History taking and examination 15

Occupational history
What occupations has the patient had over the
years, what tasks were performed and what mate-
rials used? Did symptoms show a direct relation-
ship to the work environment as in the case of
occupational asthma improving away from work
and deteriorating on return to work? Has the
patient been exposed to substances that may give
rise to disease many years later as in the case of
mesothelioma arising from exposure to asbestos
20–40 years previously?
Examination
Examination of the respiratory system is, of
course, integrated into the general examination
of the patient as a whole, but outlining the different
stages in the assessment of the respiratory system
is useful in focusing attention on the features of
particular importance to be sought. Powers of
observation are developed by training; and know-
ing what to look for and how to look for it are
learned by experience.
General examination
Be alert to clues to respiratory disease that may be
evident from the moment the patient is ﬁrst seen
(Fig. 2.1) or that become apparent during history
taking. These include the rate and character of
breathing, signs of respiratory distress such as use
of accessory muscles of respiration (e.g. sterno-
cleidomastoids), the shape of the chest, spine
and shoulders and the character of any cough.
Hoarseness of the voice may be a clue to recurrent
laryngeal nerve damage by a carcinoma. Stridor or
wheeze may be audible. Count the respiratory
rate over a period of 30 seconds. The respiratory
rate is best counted surreptitiously, perhaps while
feeling the pulse, as patients tend to breath faster
if they are aware that you are focusing on their
breathing. Avoid proceeding directly to examina-
tion of the chest but ﬁrst pause to look for signs
in the hands such as clubbing, tar staining or
features of rheumatoid arthritis. Signs of carbon
dioxide retention include peripheral vasodilata-
tion and asterixis, a ﬂapping tremor detected by
asking the patient to spread his or her ﬁngers and
cock the wrists back. It may be accentuated by
applying gentle pressure against the patient’s
hands in this position. Count the pulse rate over
30 seconds and note any abnormalities in rhythm
(e.g. atrial ﬁbrillation) or character (e.g. a bounding
pulse of carbon dioxide retention). Next examine
the head and neck, particularly seeking signs of
cyanosis, anaemia (pallor of conjunctiva), eleva-
tion of jugular venous pressure or lymph node
enlargement. Be alert for uncommon signs such as
Horner’s syndrome (ptosis, meiosis, enophthal-
mos, anhydrosis) indicating damage to the sym-
pathetic nerves by a tumour situated at the lung
apex (see Chapter 12).
Clubbing
This is increased curvature of the nail with loss of
the angle between the nail and nail bed (Fig. 2.2). It
is a very important sign that is associated with
a number of diseases (Table 2.3), most notably
bronchial carcinoma and ﬁbrotic lung disease,
such as idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis and asbes-
tosis. Advanced clubbing is sometimes associated
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 2.1 Which man has airways
obstruction? (Answer at foot of
this page.)
AnswertoquestioninFig.2.1:(b)hasairwaysobstruction–
note the high position of the shoulders.
16
History taking, examination and investigations

with hypertrophic pulmonary osteoarthropathy in
which there is new bone formation in the subper-
iosteal region of the long bones of the arms and legs
that is detectable on X-ray and is associated with
pain and tenderness.
Cyanosis
This is a bluish discolouration of the skin and
mucous membranes as a result of an excessive
amount of reduced haemoglobin (usually >5 g/dL).
Central cyanosis is best seen on the tip of the
tongue and is the cardinal sign of hypoxaemia,
although it is not a sensitive sign because it is not
usually detectable until the oxygen saturation has
fallen to well below 85%, corresponding to a PO2 of
< 8 kPa (60 mmHg). Cyanosis is more difﬁcult to
detectifthepatientisanaemicorhasdark-coloured
skin. Because of the poor sensitivity of cyanosis it is
essential to measure oxygenation by oximetry or
arterial blood gas sampling in patients at risk for
hypoxaemia. Peripheral cyanosis may be caused
by local circulatory slowing in the peripheries
resulting in more complete extraction of oxygen
from the blood (e.g. blue hands and ears in cold
weather).
Jugular veins
Jugular veins are examined with the patient in
a semi-reclining position with the trunk at an angle
of about 45 from the horizontal. The head is
turned slightly to the opposite side and fully sup-
ported so that the sternocleidomastoid muscles
are relaxed. The jugular venous pulse is seen as
a diffuse superﬁcial pulsation of multiple wave
form that is distinct from the carotid arterial pulse.
The height of the pulse wave is measured from the
top of the oscillating column of blood vertically to
the sternal angle. The jugular venous pressure
normally falls during inspiration. It is elevated in
right heart failure, which may occur as a result of
pulmonary embolism or cor pulmonale in COPD,
for example. Other signs of right heart failure such
(a)
Clubbing
(b)
(c)
Figure 2.2 Clubbing. (a) Normal,
showing the ‘angle’. (b) Early
clubbing; the angle is absent.
(c) Advanced clubbing. The nail
shows increased curvature in all
directions, the angle is absent, the
base of the nail is raised up by spongy
tissue and the end of the digit is
expanded.
History taking and examination 17

as hepatomegaly and peripheral oedema may also
be present.
Chest examination
Ask the patient to undress to the waist, and proceed
to examine the chest in a methodical way using
the techniques of inspection, palpation, percus-
sion and auscultation.
Inspection
Look at the chest from the front, back and sides
noting the overall shape and any asymmetry, scars
or skeletal abnormality. The normal chest is ﬂat-
tened anteroposteriorly whereas the hyperinﬂated
chest of COPD is barrel-shaped with an increased
anteroposterior diameter. Watch the movement of
the chest carefully as the patient breathes in and
out. Diminished movement of one side of the chest
is a clue to disease on that side. Overall movement
is reduced if the lungs are hyperinﬂated (e.g.
emphysema) or have reduced compliance (e.g.
ﬁbrosis). The costal margins normally move up-
wards and outwards in inspiration as the chest
expands. In a chest that is already severely over-
inﬂated (e.g. COPD) there is sometimes paradox-
ical movement of the costal margins such that
they are drawn inwards during inspiration: costal
margin paradox (Fig. 2.3). The abdominal wall
normally moves outwards on inspiration as the
diaphragm descends. Abdominal paradox, in
which the abdominal wall moves inwards during
inspiration when the patient is supine, is a sign of
diaphragm weakness.
Palpation
Chest movements during respiration may be
more easily appreciated by placing the hands
exactly symmetrically on either side of the upper
sternum with the thumbs in the midline. The
relative movement of the two hands and the
separation of the thumbs reﬂect the overall move-
ment of the chest and any asymmetry between the
two sides. The position of the mediastinum is
assessed by locating the tracheal position and
the cardiac apex beat. Inserting a ﬁnger between
the trachea and the sternocleidomastoid muscle
on each side is a useful way of detecting any
tracheal deviation. Running a ﬁnger gently up and
down the trachea from the cricoid cartilage to the
sternal
notch
may indicate
the direction
of
the trachea as it enters the chest. Reduction
in the crico-sternal distance is a sign of a hyper-
inﬂated chest. The apex beat is the most inferior
and lateral point at which the cardiac impulse can
be felt. The intercostal space in which the apex
beat is felt should be counted down from the
second intercostal space, which is just below the
sternal angle, and its location should also be
related to landmarks such as the mid-clavicular
or anterior axillary lines. It is normally located in
the ﬁfth left intercostal space in the mid-clavicular
line. The mediastinum may be deviated towards
or away from the side of disease. For example,
ﬁbrosis of the apex of the lung caused by previous
tuberculosis may pull the trachea to that side,
whereas a large pleural effusion or tension pneu-
mothorax may push the trachea and apex beat
away from the side of the lesion. Tactile fremitus
refers to the ability to palpate vibrations set up by
the voice in the large airways and transmitted to
the chest wall. Ask the patient to say ‘99’ or ‘1, 1, 1’
Table 2.3 Causes of clubbing
Respiratory
. Neoplastic
& Bronchial carcinoma
& Mesothelioma
. Infections
& Bronchiectasis
& Cystic ﬁbrosis
& Chronic empyema
& Lung abscess
. Fibrosis
& Idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis
& Asbestosis
Cardiac
. Bacterial endocarditis
. Cyanotic congenital heart disease
. Atrial myxoma
Gastrointestinal
. Hepatic cirrhosis
. Crohn’s disease
. Coeliac disease
Congenital
. Idiopathic familial clubbing
18
History taking, examination and investigations

and palpate the vibrations, which are reduced in
conditions such as pleural effusion or pleural
thickening that mufﬂe the transmission of the
vibrations from the lung to the chest wall (Fig. 2.4).
Consolidation of the lung may sometimes en-
hance transmission of the vibration.
Normal
Airways obstruction
Inspiration
Expiration
Figure 2.3 Movement of the costal margin. The arrows indicate the direction of movement in normal individuals and
in those with airways obstruction (see text).
Consolidation
Normal
Effusion
H
L
Figure 2.4 Summary of sound transmission in the lung. Sound is generated either by turbulence in the larynx and
large airways or by the voice. Both sources are a mixture of high- (H) and low- (L) pitched components. Normal
aeratedlung ﬁlters off the high-pitched component but transmits the low-pitched component quite well. This results
in soft low-pitched breath sounds, well-conducted vocal resonance and easily palpable very-low-pitched sound
(vocal fremitus). Consolidatedlung transmits high-pitched sound well and ﬁlters off some of the lower pitched sound.
This results in loud high-pitched breath sounds (bronchial breathing), high-pitched bleating vocal resonance
(aegophony) and easy transmission of high-pitched consonants of speech (whispering pectoriloquy). Pleural
effusion causes reduction in the transmission of all sound – probably because of reﬂection of sound waves at the
air–ﬂuid interface. Breath sounds are absent, vocal resonance much reduced and vocal fremitus is absent.
History taking and examination 19

Percussion
Percussion over normal air-ﬁlled lung produces
a resonant note whereas percussion over solid
organs such as the liver or heart produces a dull
note. Abnormal dullness is found over areas of lung
consolidation (e.g. lobar pneumonia) or ﬂuid (e.g.
pleural
effusion).
Hyper-resonance
may
be
present in emphysema or over the area of a pneu-
mothorax, although it is rarely a reliable sign.
Percussion technique is important and requires
practice. The resting ﬁnger should be placed ﬂat
against the chest wall in an intercostal space. The
percussing ﬁnger should strike the dorsal surface
of the middle phalanx and should be lifted clear
after each percussion stroke. All areas should be
percussed, paying particular attention to compar-
ison between the two sides. When percussing the
back of the chest it is helpful to ask the patient to
rotate his or her arms such that one elbow is placed
on top of the other in order to bring the scapulae
forward and out of the way.
Auscultation
Listenwith thediaphragmorbellof the stethoscope
to the intensity and character of the breath
sounds, comparing both sides symmetrically, and
note any added sounds (e.g. wheeze, crackles,
pleural rub). The sources of audible sound in the
lungs are turbulent airﬂow in the larynx and central
airways and the voice. Reduction in the intensity
of breath sounds (sometimes loosely referred to as
reduced ‘air entry’) over an area of lung is an
important sign that may, for example, indicate
obstruction of a large bronchus preventing air from
entering a lobe of the lung, or the presence of
a pleural effusion reducing transmission of sound
to the stethoscope. In normal individuals the
inspiratory phase of respiration is usually longer
than the expiratory phase. Prolongation of the
expiratory phase is a feature of airways obstruction
and this is often accompanied by wheeze (rhonchi)
– a high-pitched whistling or sighing sound. Diffuse
wheeze is a feature of asthma or COPD. Wheeze
localised to one side, or one area of the lung,
suggests obstruction of a bronchus by a carcinoma
or foreign body (e.g. inhaled peanut). Crackles
(crepitations) may be loud and coarse or ﬁne and
high pitched, and may occur early or late in inspi-
ration. It is thought that crackles are produced by
the opening of previously closed bronchioles. The
‘crackling’ noise may be imitated by rolling a few
hairs together close to the ear. Early crackles are
sometimes heard at the beginning of inspiration in
patients with COPD but these usually disappear
when the patient is asked to cough. Persistent
pan-inspiratory or late-inspiratory crackles are a
feature of pulmonary oedema, lung ﬁbrosis (e.g.
idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis) or bronchiectasis.
During inspiration, areas of lung open up in se-
quence according to their compliance (distensibil-
ity). In airways obstruction there may be terminal
airway closure during expiration, particularly in
relatively compliant (ﬂoppy) parts of the lung dam-
aged by emphysema. During inspiration air initially
enters these areas more readily and crackles are
probably produced by the opening of these airways
early ininspiration. Coarse late-inspiratory crackles
are particularly associated with diseases where
there is reduced lung compliance (increased stiff-
ness), which is to some extent patchily distributed.
During inspiration, air ﬁrst enters the more com-
pliant parts of the lung and then enters the stiffer
partslaterininspirationaselasticrecoilforces build
up in the stretching lung. Pleural rubs are
‘creaking’ sounds that are often quite localised and
indicate roughening of the normally slippery pleu-
ral surfaces.
Vocal resonance is assessed by listening over the
chest with the stethoscope asthe patient says‘99’ or
‘1, 1, 1’ in much the same way as vocal fremitus is
palpated.Normalaeratedlungtransmitstheboom-
ing low-pitched components of speech and attenu-
ates the high frequencies. Consolidated lung, how-
ever, ﬁlters off the low frequencies and transmits
the higher frequencies so that speech takes on a
bleating quality, aegophony. The facilitated trans-
mission of high frequencies can be demonstrated
by the clear transmission of whispering over con-
solidated lung, whispering pectoriloquy. The term
‘bronchial breathing’ refers to the harsher breath
sounds normally heard over the trachea and main
bronchi. It is also heard over areas of consolidated
lung that conduct the higher frequency ‘hiss’ com-
ponent from the larger airways.
Signs
See Fig. 2.5 for signs of localised lung disease. It is
important to realise that major disease of the lungs
may be present without any detectable physical
signs and it is therefore essential to obtain a chest
X-ray where there is good reason to suspect loca-
lised lung disease.
20
History taking, examination and investigations

Consolidation (e.g. lobar pneumonia)
   Movement of affected side may be reduced
   Percussion note is dull
   Crackles may be heard
   Bronchial breathing may be present
   Whispering pectoriloquy and aegophony may occur
   Vocal fremitus and resonance are sometimes increased
Pleural effusion
   Trachea and apex beat may be displaced away from 
    the effusion if it is large
   Movement of affected side may be reduced
   Percussion note is stony dull
   Vocal fremitus and resonance are reduced
   Breath sounds are reduced
Collapsed lung (atelectasis)
   Trachea and apex beat may be displaced to the side
    of collapse
   Movement of affected side is reduced
   Breath sounds are diminished
Tension pneumothorax
   Trachea and apex beat are displaced away from the
    affected side
   Percussion note may be hyper-resonant
   Breath sounds are reduced over pneumothorax
   Vocal fremitus and resonance may be reduced
Figure 2.5 Signs of localised lung disease.
History taking and examination 21

KEY POINTS
. The main respiratory symptoms are breath-
lessness, wheeze, cough, sputum, haemopty-
sis and chest pain.
. Haemoptysis is an important symptom which
requires investigation as it may indicate lung
cancer, laryngeal cancer, bronchitis or
tuberculosis etc.
. Diminished movement of one side of the
chest on inspiration is a clue to disease on
that side.
. Major disease of the chest may be present
without detectable signs, and tests
(e.g. chest X-ray) are required where
there is suspicion of lung
disease.
FURTHER READING
Alverti A, Quaranta M, Chakrabarti B, Albuquerque
ALP, Calverley PM. Paradoxical movement of the
lower rib cage at rest and during exercise in
COPD patients. Eur Respir J 2009; 33: 49–60.
Douglas G, Nicol F, Robertson C. Macleod’s Clin-
ical Examination. Churchill Livingston Elsevier,
2009.
Morice AH, McGarvey L, Pavord I, British Thoracic
Society guideline. Recommendations for the
management of cough in adults. Thorax 2006;
61 (suppl 1): 1–24.
Spiteri M, Cook D, Clarke S. Reliability of eliciting
physical signs in examination of the chest.
Lancet 1988; 1: 873–5.
Vyshedsky A, Alhashem RM, Paciej R, et al. Mech-
anism of inspiratory and expiratory crackles.
Chest 2009; 135: 156–64.
22
History taking, examination and investigations

3
Pulmonary function tests
Despite the bewildering array of sophisticated tests
and investigations now available a few, fairly basic,
tests of lung function remain central to clinical
practice. Together with a good history, clinical
examination and a chest X-ray these tests provide
most of the information needed for diagnosis,
quantiﬁcation
of
severity
and
monitoring
of
disease.
This chapter covers all you will probably ever
need to know about lung function. The tests are not
difﬁcult to understand, yet despite their simplicity,
they are all too often misinterpreted or even mis-
understood. Master the next few pages and you
may ﬁnd you acquire the status of ‘expert’ in
whatever medical circle you move in.
Normal values
Ventilatory performance varies greatly with the
patient’s height, age and sex. Tables and prediction
equations are available for determining a patient’s
‘predicted normal value’. The patient’s test result
may be compared with the mean reference value
and the standard deviation of results obtained in
the healthy population or (more commonly,
though less usefully) expressed as a percentage of
the population’s mean reference value. For exam-
ple: the standard deviation for vital capacity (VC) is
about 500 ml. So, if a medium-sized adult has a VC
750 ml below the predicted value, that may be the
result of respiratory disease; on the other hand,
being only 1.5 standard deviations from the mean,
many normal individuals (of the same age and size)
with no apparent lung disease will have values
lower than this. The same result could have been
expressed as 75% of the predicted mean, however
an injudicious interpretation of this may have led
to the mistaken assumption that there was a 25%
‘disability’.
Pulmonary function tests should not be inter-
preted in isolation and should be considered in the
context of all additional information concerning
the patient.
In this chapter we will look at: simple tests of
ventilatory function, transfer factor and arterial
blood gases.
Simple tests of ventilatory
function
Ventilation refers to the process of moving air in
and out of the lungs.
Lung volumes (Fig. 3.1)
Tidal volume is the volume of air that enters and
leaves the lungs during normal breathing. The
volume of gas within the lungs at the end of
a normal expiration is the functional residual
capacity. The volume of gas in the lungs after a
full inspiration is the total lung capacity. After a
full expiration there is still some gas remaining in
Respiratory Medicine Lecture Notes, Eighth Edition. Stephen J. Bourke and Graham P. Burns.
 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

the lungs: the residual volume. Vital capacity (VC)
VC is the volume of air expelled by a full expiration
from a position of full inspiration. VC and its sub-
divisions can be measured directly by spirometry,
whereas measurements of residual volume and
total lung capacity require the use of gas dilution
or plethysmography methods.
Spirometry
Spirometry is the most commonly used test of pul-
monary function. It is the measurement of the
amount(volume)and/orspeed(ﬂow) ofair that can
be exhaled. Traditionally, the result of this test is
representedgraphicallyasa plot of the volume ofair
exhaled against time during a forced expiratory ma-
noeuvre:the forced expiratoryspirogram(Fig. 3.2).
Vital capacity
This is the volume of air expelled by a full expi-
ration from a position of full inspiration. The
patient is usually encouraged to exhale with max-
imum effort, in which case it is referred to as the
forced vital capacity (FVC). It may also be mea-
sured by a slow exhalation and this is sometimes
referred to as the ‘slow’ VC. In normal individuals,
slow VC and FVC are very similar but in patients
with airways obstruction, air trapping occurs dur-
ing forced expiration so that the FVC may be
signiﬁcantly smaller than the slow VC. VC may be
reduced by any condition that limits the lungs
ability to achieve a ‘full’ inspiration, such as:
. reduced lung compliance (e.g. lung ﬁbrosis, loss
of lung volume);
. chest deformity (e.g. kyphoscoliosis, ankylosing
spondylitis);
. muscle weakness (e.g. myopathy, myasthenia
gravis)
It may also be reduced in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) when air trapping
causes increased residual volume.
Forced expiratory volume in 1
second (FEV1) and FEV1/FVC ratio
FEV1 is the volume of air expelled in the ﬁrst second
of a maximal forced expiration from a position of
full inspiration. It is reduced in any condition that
reduces VC but it is particularly reduced when
there is diffuse airways obstruction. Normally,
during a forced expiratory manoeuvre at least
70% of the air is expelled in the ﬁrst second. In
diffuse airways obstruction the FEV1 is affected
to a greater extent than the FVC and the ratio of
FEV1/FVC is reduced to below 0.70. This pattern is
referred to as an obstructive defect and is most
commonly seen in asthma and COPD. When lung
volume is restricted (by for example: reduced lung
compliance, chest deformity or muscle weakness),
the VC is reduced and the FEV1 is also reduced
roughly in proportion so that the FEV1/FVC ratio is
essentially normal. This pattern of ventilatory im-
pairment is referred to as a restrictive defect.
Maximal mid-expiratory ﬂow
In addition to FEV1 and FVC a number of other
indices may be calculated from a forced expiratory
spirogram. The forced expiratory ﬂow measured
over the middle half of expiration (FEF25–75%)
reﬂects changes in the smaller peripheral airways
whereas peak expiratory ﬂow (PEF) and FEV1 are
predominantly inﬂuenced by diffuse changes of
Full inspiration
Vital capacity
Total lung capacity
Residual
volume
Full expiration
Functional
residual
capacity
Tidal
volume
Figure 3.1 Total lung capacity and its
subdivisions.
24
History taking, examination and investigations

Seconds
0
(a)
(b)
(d)
(c)
1
1
2
2
3
3
4
4
5
6
5
Seconds
0
1
1
2
2
3
3
4
4
5
6
5
Seconds
0
1
1
2
2
3
3
4
4
5
6
5
Seconds
0
1
1
2
2
3
3
4
4
5
6
5
Litres
Litres
Litres
Litres
Figure 3.2 Forced expiratory spirogram tracing obtained with a Vitalograph spirometer. (a) Normal. Four expira-
tions have been made. Three of these were true maximal forced expirations as indicated by their reproducibility.
The forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) is 3.2 L and the forced vital capacity (FVC) is 3.8 L. The forced
expiratory ratio (FEV1/FVC) is 84%.(b) Restrictive ventilatory defect. Patient with pulmonary ﬁbrosis. The FVC in this
case was 2 L less than the predicted value for the patient. The FEV1 is also reduced below the predicted value but it
represents a large part of the FVC. The forced expiratory ratio is greater than 90%. (c) Obstructive ventilatory defect.
The FEV1 is much reduced. The rate of airﬂow is severely reduced as indicated by the reduced slope of the curve.
Note that the forced expiratory time is increased – the patient is still blowing out at 5 seconds. The VC has not been
adequately recordedin this casebecause the patient did not continue the expiration after the chart stoppedmoving;
he or she could have expired further. (This is a common technical error.) (d) Severe airways obstruction. The FEV1 is
about 0.5 L. FVC is also reducedbut not so strikinglyas FEV1. Forced expiratory ratio is 23%. Very low expiratory ﬂow
rate. This pattern of a very brief initial rapid phase followed by a straight line indicating little change in maximal ﬂow
rate with change in lung volume is sometimes associated with severe emphysema. (e) Airways obstruction and
bronchial hyper-reactivity. Five expirations have been made. FEV1 and FVC become lower with each expiration.
Patient with asthma. These features suggest poor control of asthma and liability to severe attacks. (f) A non-maximal
expiration. Compare with (a). In a true forced expiration the steepest part of the curve always occurs at the beginning
of expiration; which is not the case in (f). A falsely low FEV1 and forced expiratory ratio are obtained. Usually the
patient has not understood what is required or is unable to coordinate his or her actions. Some patients wish to
appear worse than they really are. This pattern is unlikely to be mistaken for a true forced expiration because of its
shape and because it cannot be reproduced repeatedly. (g) Escape of air from the nose or lips during expiration.
(h) Inability to perform the manoeuvre. Five attempts have been made. In some the patient has breathed in and out.
Other attempts are either not maximal forced expirations or are unﬁnished. Bizarre patterns such as this are often
seen in patients with psychogenic breathlessness and in elderly people and those with dementia. Even with poor
cooperation it is often possible to obtain useful information. In the example shown (h), signiﬁcant airways obstruction
can be excludedbecause of the steep slope of at least two of the expirationsthat follow an identicalcourse and show
appropriate curvature (dotted line) and the FVC can be estimated as not less than 3.2 L. The pattern seen in large
airways obstruction is shown in Fig. 3.5.
Pulmonary function tests 25

the medium-sized and larger airways, at least in
health (see Chapter 1).
Peak expiratory ﬂow
The PEF is the maximum rate of airﬂow that can be
achieved during a sudden forced expiration from a
position of full inspiration. The best of three at-
tempts is usually accepted as the peak ﬂow rate. It
is somewhat dependent on effort but is mainly
determined by the calibre of the airways and is
therefore an index of diffuse airways obstruction.
Its principal advantage is derived from its porta-
bility and low cost (Fig. 3.3). This allows for mul-
tiple measurements performed independently by
patients at different times and in different envir-
onments. Variability can thus be observed which
makes it useful in the diagnosis and monitoring of
asthma (see Chapter 10).
Flow–volume loop
The familiar spirogram plots volume against time
(Fig. 3.2). Forced expiratory manoeuvres may also
be displayed by plotting ﬂow against volume.
(e)
(f)
(h)
(g)
Seconds
0
1
1
2
2
3
3
4
4
5
6
5
Seconds
0
1
1
2
2
3
3
4
4
5
6
5
Seconds
0
1
1
2
2
3
3
4
4
5
6
5
Seconds
0
1
1
2
2
3
3
4
4
5
6
5
Litres
Litres
Litres
Litres
Figure 3.2 (Continued)
Figure 3.3 Measurement of peak expiratory ﬂow (PEF).
The subject takes a full inspiration, applies the lips to the
mouthpiece and makes a sudden maximal expiratory
blast. A piston is pushed down the inside of the cylinder
progressively exposing a slot in the top, until a position
of rest is reached. The position of the piston is indicated
by a marker and PEF read from a scale. It is customary
to take the best of three properly performed attempts as
the PEF.
26
History taking, examination and investigations

Although the result may be less familiar, it is worth
remembering it contains precisely the same infor-
mation. When an inspiratory manoeuvre is also
included the trace returns to its starting point and a
Flow–volume loop is formed. A normal ﬂow–
volume loop is shown in Fig. 3.4.
By convention the starting point of full inspira-
tion (total lung capacity, TLC) is to the left, expi-
ratory ﬂow appears above the horizontal, inspira-
tory ﬂow below it. At TLC the airways are at their
most stretched (dilated) and airway resistance
minimised, so the maximum (peak) expiratory
ﬂow is reached quickly after the start of the forced
expiration (see Chapter 1). As expiration continues,
lung volume progressively diminishes, airway re-
sistance increases and the maximum ﬂow achiev-
able (for the given lung volume) declines. In health
this declining portion of the expiratory limb is
surprisingly straight. When no further air can be
exhaled ﬂow is zero and the loop reaches the
horizontal axis. The inspiratory manoeuvre can
then begin. This tends to be more effort dependent
and therefore less reproducible. Even when per-
fectly performed, the inspiratory limb is NOT a
mirror image of the expiratory limb. Although
airway calibre would again favour faster ﬂow
nearer TLC, mechanical advantage for the muscles
of inspiration means more inspiratory force can be
applied nearer RV. The coexistence of these two
factors produces a more symmetrical inspiratory
portion to the loop, with maximum inspiratory
ﬂow being at the mid-point of inspiration. Note
too, maximum inspiratory ﬂow is less than maxi-
mum expiratory ﬂow.
(FEF25–75%) and the maximum ﬂow at speciﬁc
lung volumes (e.g. [ _V]max50, [ _V]max25) can be de-
rived from the ﬂow–volume loop.
The ﬂow–volume loop really comes into its own
when assessing localised narrowing of the central
airways as illustrated in Figs. 3.5 and 3.6. Although
the traditional spirogram has a characteristic ap-
pearance in this context (Fig. 3.5), the abnormality
is not so striking as when observed in the ﬂow–
volume loop (Fig. 3.6 (c) and (d)). Without the
ﬂow–volume loop large airway obstruction may
be overlooked. By comparing the relative effects on
the expiratory and inspiratory limbs it is also pos-
sible to determine if the large airway obstruction is
inside (e.g. tracheal stricture) or outside the thorax
(e.g. compression by a goitre in the neck, Fig. 3.7).
Total lung capacity
The measurement of TLC is not considered in
detail here, the interested reader is referred to the
reading list at the end of the chapter.
Whereas VC and its subdivisions can be mea-
sured directly by spirometry, measurement of re-
sidual volume and TLC require the use of helium
dilution or plethysmography methods. In the di-
lution technique a gas of known helium concen-
tration is breathed through a closed circuit and the
volume of gas in the lungs is calculated from a
measure of the dilution of the helium, which, being
Expiratory
flow rate
Inspiratory
flow rate
TLC
Z
RV
Z
Volume expired
Vital capacity
PEF
Figure 3.4 The ﬂow–volume loop.
Airﬂow is represented on the vertical
axis and lung volume on the horizontal
axis. The line Z–Z represents zero ﬂow.
Expiratory ﬂow appears above the line;
inspiratory ﬂow below. PEF, peak
expiratory ﬂow; RV, residual volume;
TLC, total lung capacity.
Pulmonary function tests 27

an inert gas, is neither absorbed nor metabolised.
This dilution method measures only gas in com-
munication with the airways and tends to under-
estimate total lung capacity in patients with severe
airways obstruction because of the presence of
poorly ventilating bullae. The body plethysmo-
graph is a large airtight box that allows the simul-
taneous determination of pressure–volume rela-
tionships in the thorax of a patient placed inside
the box. When the plethysmograph is sealed,
changes in lung volume are reﬂected by a change
in pressure within the plethysmograph. Plethys-
mography tends to overestimate TLC because it
measures all intrathoracic gas, including gas in
bullae,
cysts,
stomach
and
oesophagus.
The
chest X-ray can be used to give a rough estimate
of TLC. In airways disease, TLC is increased as a
manifestation of hyperinﬂation and as a result of
increased lung compliance in emphysema (Chap-
ter 1). TLC is reduced in restrictive lung disease.
Respiratory muscle function tests
Weakness of the respiratory muscles causes a re-
strictive ventilatory defect with reduced TLC and
VC. Comparison of the VC in the erect and supine
position is useful because the pressure of the ab-
dominal contents on a weak diaphragm typically
causes a fall of around 30% in the supine VC. Chest
X-ray often shows small lung volumes with basal
atelectasis and high hemi-diaphragms. Ultra-
sound screening may show paradoxical upward
movement of a paralysed diaphragm during inspi-
ration. Global respiratory muscle function may be
assessed by measuring mouth pressures. Maxi-
mum inspiratory mouth pressure, PI max, is mea-
sured during maximum inspiratory effort from
residual volume against an obstructed airway
using
a
mouthpiece
and
transducer
device.
Maximum expiratory mouth pressure, PE max, is
measured during a maximal expiratory effort from
TLC. When there is severe respiratory muscle
weakness
ventilatory
failure
develops
with
hypercapnia.
Transfer factor for carbon
monoxide
At one time the rate at which gases diffused across
the alveolar–capillary membrane was thought to
be the principal factor limiting gas exchange. The
term ‘diffusing capacity’ was thus coined, deﬁned
as: ‘The quantity of gas transported across in each
minute for every unit of pressure gradient’.
Although the measurement proved to be very
useful clinically, it was later realised that it was
affected by many other factors as well as diffusion;
V/Q matching particularly. It was therefore re-
named ‘transfer factor’.
Clearly, it is the transfer of oxygen that is of most
interest to clinicians. This is very difﬁcult to mea-
sure in practice however as transfer of oxygen into
the blood quickly becomes limited by the satura-
tion of haemoglobin. Carbon monoxide is used as a
5
6
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
0
6
Seconds
Litres
Figure 3.5 Large (central) airways obstruction. Typ-
ical tracing obtained with a Vitalograph spirometer. The
subject has made three maximal forced expirations.
Each shows a strikingly straight section that then
changes relatively abruptly, at about the same volume,
to follow the expected curve of the forced expiratory
spirogram. The straight section is not as reproducible
as a normal spirogram. A ‘family’ of similar tracings is
thus obtained, each with straight and curved sections.
Explanation: over the straight section, ﬂow is limited
by the ﬁxed localised obstruction in a large airway. This
is little inﬂuenced by lung recoil so the critical ﬂow
is similar during expiration and the spirogram appears
straight. A lung volume is eventually reached where
maximum ﬂow is even lower than that permitted by the
central obstruction. The ordinary forced expiratory spir-
ogram is described after this point. In the example
shown there must also be an element of diffuse airways
obstruction, as forced expiratory time is somewhat
prolonged (see Fig. 3.2c).
28
History taking, examination and investigations

(a)
Tidal
Tidal
Ef
(b)
(d)
(c)
(e)
Figure 3.6 Further ﬂow–volume loops. The dotted outline represents a typical normal loop. The small graphs show
the appearances of a forced expiration on a Vitalograph spirometer (as in Fig. 3.4). (a) Demonstration of maximum
ﬂow. A normal individual makes an unhurried expiration from full inspiration and then about halfway through the vital
capacity, a maximal expiratory effort (Ef) is made. The ﬂow–volume tracing rejoins the maximum ﬂow–volume curve
that describes the highest ﬂow which can be achieved at that lung volume. Also shown in (a) is the ﬂow–volume
loop of typical tidal breathing. At the resting lung volume there is an abundant reserve of both inspiratory
and expiratory ﬂow available.(b) Moderate airway obstruction (asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease).
Maximum expiratory ﬂow is reduced. The declining portion of the expiratory limb has a characteristic curvilinearity.
Inspiration is less severely affected.(c) Very severe airways obstruction. Maximum expiratory ﬂow is very severely
reduced. There is a brief peak, followed by an abrupt fall in ﬂow rate (probably caused by airway closure) after which
ﬂow falls very slowly. Also shown in (c) is a loop representing quiet tidal breathing. It is clear that every expiration is
limited by maximum ﬂow. Expiratory wheezing or purse lip breathing would be expected. The tidal loop has been
obliged to move to the left, the patient is ventilating at a higher lung volume. This has obviated, to some degree,
the airway narrowing but adds to the work of breathing and contributes to the sensation of breathlessness (see
Chapter 1). (d) Intrathoracic large airways obstruction: here the peak inspiratory and expiratory ﬂows have been
truncated in a characteristic pattern. Intrathoracic lesions (e.g. tracheal compression by a mediastinal tumour)
have a more pronounced effect on the expiratory limb than the inspiratory limb. (e) Extrathoracic obstruction (e.g.
tracheal compression by a goitre in the neck) results in inspiratory collapse of the airway below the obstruction
(but still outside the thorax) attenuating maximum inspiratory ﬂow rate to a greater degree than maximum
expiratory ﬂow rate.
Pulmonary function tests 29

1. Intrathoracic large airway obstruction
2. Extrathoracic large airway obstruction
Expiration
Inspiration
Expiration
Inspiration
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
+
+
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
+
+
+
+
+
+
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
Figure 3.7 The relative effects on expiratory and inspiratoryﬂow of intra- and extrathoracic large airway obstruction.
1 Large airway obstruction within the thorax. (a) Positive intrathoracic (alveolar) pressure generated during
expiration acts to compress the airway and further narrow the point of obstruction. (b) Negative intrathoracic
pressureduringinspirationacts toreduce narrowingat the point of obstruction.Thereforein large airwayobstruction
within the thorax, expiratory ﬂow is diminished to a greater degree than inspiratory ﬂow (see Fig. 3.6 (d)). 2 Large
airway obstruction outside the thorax. (c) Positive pressure within the airway during expiration in relation to
atmospheric (‘zero’) pressure outside, acts to reduce narrowing at the point of obstruction. (d) Negative pressure
within the airwayduring inspiration actsto compress the airwayandfurthernarrowthe point ofobstruction.Therefore
in large airway obstruction outside of the thorax, inspiratory ﬂow is diminished to a greater degree than expiratory
ﬂow (see Fig. 3.6 (e)).
30
History taking, examination and investigations

surrogate for oxygen in this measurement. Very
low concentrations are used so that haemoglobin
remains avid for the gas as it passes through
the alveolar capillaries. Theterm diffusion capacity
(DLco) can still be found in some texts, this is
synonymous with transfer factor (TLco).
To measure TLco we need to know:
1 The amount of CO transferred per minute.
2 The pressure gradient across the alveolar mem-
brane (in effect the alveolar partial pressure as
the partial pressure in blood is zero)
Single-breath method (Fig. 3.8)
The patient inspires a gas mixture of helium and
carbon monoxide, holds the breath for 10 seconds
and then breathes out. An initial volume equiva-
lent to the dead space (the part of the respiratory
tract not involvedin gas exchange) is discarded and
then a sample of the expired gas is collected and
analysed for alveolar concentrations of helium and
carbon monoxide. The change in concentration of
helium (which, being an inert gas, is neither ab-
sorbed nor metabolised) between the inspired and
alveolar sample is the result of gas dilution and
gives a measurement of the alveolar gas volume
(VA). The expired concentration of carbon monox-
ide is also lower than the inspired level but the fall
is proportionately greater than in the case of he-
lium because some of the carbon monoxide has
been absorbed into the bloodstream. The rate of
uptake of carbon monoxide can then be calculated
as the uptake per minute per unit of partial pres-
sure of carbon monoxide (mmol/min/kPa).
Many factors inﬂuence TLco including:
. V/Q imbalance (disturbed in many diseases af-
fecting lung parenchyma or vasculature);
. the
area
of
the
membrane
(reduced
in
emphysema);
. the thickness of the alveolar capillary membrane
(increased in ﬁbrotic lung disease);
. the pulmonary capillary blood volume (in-
creased in high cardiac output states);
. the haemoglobin concentration.
Free blood in the lungs from pulmonary haemor-
rhage will also avidly absorb carbon monoxide and
lead to an elevated TLco.
Transfer coefﬁcient (KCO)
Clearly TLCO can be reduced by a number of disease
processes within the lung, it is also reduced if there
is simply ‘less lung’ (a reduced lung volume) par-
ticipating in gas transfer (e.g. respiratory muscle
weakness causing restriction or after pneumonec-
tomy). It is useful to distinguish between these two
very different mechanisms.
Transfer coefﬁcient (KCO) is the transfer factor
divided by the alveolar volume (VA). This tells us
about the transfer factor ‘per unit lung volume’.
Like TLCO, KCO is reduced when there is intrinsic
lung disease, but unlike TLCO, when a healthy lung
Expired
alveolar
sample
He
CO
CO
0
5
10
Breath-holding (seconds)
Theoretical
alveolar
mixture at
start of
breath-holding
He
Inspired mixture
0.3
0.2
0.1
15
10
5
Helium concentration (%)
Carbon monoxide concentration (%)
Figure 3.8 Measurement of transfer
factor by the single-breath method.
Schematic representation of the helium
and carbon monoxide concentrations
in the inspired mixture and in alveolar
air during breath holding.
Pulmonary function tests 31

is reduced in volume by some external factor KCO is
not diminished.
Interpretation
In the presence of normal ventilatory function
(spirometry) a reduced KCO is a strong indicator of
intrinsic lung disease (affecting the alveoli or vas-
culature; consider pulmonary hypertension or a
combination of emphysema and ﬁbrosis).
In restrictive conditions, a reduced KCO suggests
an intrapulmonary cause (e.g. ﬁbrosis). In extra
pulmonary causes (e.g. chest wall deformity, re-
spiratory muscle weakness, obesity) the KCO tends
to be elevated. This is because the KCO is effectively
telling us about the transfer of CO only in the
alveoli that are ventilated. The non-ventilated al-
veoli are discounted because they don’t contribute
to VA. As the V/Q matching system will divert blood
away from the non-ventilated alveoli, the ventilat-
ed alveoli will have more than the normal share of
blood. The greater blood volume increases CO
absorption and thus gas transfer.
In obstructive conditions a reduced KCO sug-
gests COPD (emphysema). In asthma the KCO may
be elevated. Asthma does not affect every airway to
an identical degree; there is therefore an exagger-
ated heterogeneity of ventilation. As discussed
above KCO is more heavily inﬂuenced by the well
ventilated areas which, because of V/Q matching,
have more than their fair share of perfusion.
Arterial blood gases
Normal values are listed in Table 3.1.
A sample of arterial blood may be obtained
from any artery but the radial artery at the wrist
or the brachial artery in the antecubital fossa are
the sites most commonly used. The blood enters
the heparinised needle and syringe under its own
pressure with a pulsatile action. The syringe con-
taining the arterial blood is capped, placed in ice
and analysed in the laboratory within 30 minutes of
sampling.
Review of acid–base balance
CO2 dissolves in H2O and forms carbonic acid
(H2CO3) that dissociates into H þ and HCO3
 in
a constant relationship:
K ¼ ½H þ ½HCO3
 
½H2CO3
thus:
H þ
½
 a ½H2CO3
½HCO3
 
As [H2CO3] directly relates to the partial pressure of
CO2then:
H þ
½
 a
Pco2
½HCO3
 
In other words, for a given concentration of bicar-
bonate PCO2 has a direct linear relationship with
[H þ] (and thus an inverse relationship with pH
that is the negative logarithm of [H þ]).
Similarly, for a given PCO2 there is a direct rela-
tionship between [HCO3
] and pH.
These relationships can be represented graphi-
cally (Fig. 3.9).
Bicarbonate concentration
Most blood gas analysers provide two different
measurementsofbicarbonate:‘actualbicarbonate’
and ‘standard bicarbonate’ and another value;
‘base excess’. This can cause confusion, although
it need not. The analyser measures the bicarbonate
levelinthebloodsample.Thisactualmeasurement
is(conveniently)knownasthe‘actualbicarbonate’
(aHCO3
). As can be seen in Fig. 3.9, the actual
level is directly dependant on the PCO2 (for a given
Table 3.1 Normal values for arterial blood
gases while breathing normal room air at sea
level
Arterial blood gases
Normal values
pH
7.35–7.45
PCO2
4.5–6.0 kPa
(34–45 mmHg)
PO2
12–14 kPa
(90–105 mmHg)
Actual bicarbonate
(aHCO3
)
22–26 mmol/L
Standard bicarbonate
(sHCO3
)
22–26 mmol/L
Base excess
 3 to þ 3 mmol/L
Oxygen saturation
96–99%
32
History taking, examination and investigations

pH, the higher the PCO2 the higher the aHCO3
, the
lower the PCO2 the lower the aHCO3
). If pH and
PCO2 are known the bicarbonate level can be calcu-
lated. For a given pH the level of bicarbonate can be
calculated for a ‘standard’ PCO2 (5.3 kPa). This cal-
culated value is (conveniently) known as the
‘standard bicarbonate’ (sHCO3
). There is little
to choose between these two indices but the
sHCO3
 takes out the immediate effect of CO2 on
the bicarbonate levelandcouldbeloosely regarded
as giving a more direct indication of the metabolic
activity inﬂuencing acid– base balance. The base
excess takes into account the fact that there are
other buffers apart from bicarbonate in the blood.
It tells a similar story to the bicarbonate level in
terms of acid–base disturbance. Its principal
advantage is the ease with which its normal range
can be remembered. As one might anticipate from
the name, the ‘excess’ should be zero (normal
range is zero þ/ 3 mmol/litre). There are not
many numbers easier to remember than zero.
Acid–base disturbances
The three variables pH, PCO2 and bicarbonate are
yoked together as described above. Analysis of
their values provides information on the acid–base
balance of the body and the broad nature of its
cause. It may also provide information about the
chronicity of an abnormality.
Changes in the acid–base status caused by
changes in PCO2 (hyper- or hypoventilation) are
termed respiratory. Changes in acid–base status
caused by changes in bicarbonate are termed
metabolic. A disturbance in one system tends to
prompt a compensatory response in the other.
When needed, the respiratory system responds
promptly and changes are evident within seconds
to minutes. The metabolic system, largely regu-
lated via renal excretion, is mush slower; taking
between hours and days to equilibrate. In respi-
ratory disturbances therefore, the degree of
correction achieved by the metabolic system
can tell us something about the duration of
the abnormality.
As a general principal physiological compensa-
tory mechanisms do not overcompensate, in fact
they often stop just short of total correction. This is
auseful fact to remember when trying to interpret a
blood gas result that displays respiratory and met-
abolic changes. If the pH is in the normal range, it
could be difﬁcult to determine which is the pri-
mary abnormality and which the compensatory
response. Look again at the pH. If the pH is towards
the higher end of the normal range, the primary
abnormality was probably an alkalosis, if at the
lower end then the primary disturbance was an
acidosis.
In reading the following examples of acid–base
disturbance refer to Figs. 3.9 and 3.10.
Hyperventilation
Hypoventilation
Metabolic
alkalosis 
Metabolic
acidosis
6kPa
7.4
pH
PCO2
O
Figure 3.9 In the ﬁgure the diagonal lines are
bicarbonate isopleths (the bicarbonate level is
constant along the line). It can be seen there-
fore that if the bicarbonate level and Pco2 are
known then the pH can be calculated. Indeed, if
any two of the three values of: bicarbonate, pH
and PCO2 are known then the other value can be
calculated. Theses values are yoked together.
A change in ventilation will move the arterial
point up or down an isopleth as shown,
changing pH (bicarbonate level does not
change). A pure metabolic disturbance (before
any respiratory response) changes the bicar-
bonate level, moving from one bicarbonate
isopleth to another and changing pH.
Pulmonary function tests 33

. Respiratory acidosis (acute): pH reduced,PCO2
raised, bicarbonate normal. A reduction in al-
veolar ventilation causes an increase in arterial
PCO2. The pH falls. In the short term there is
insufﬁcient time for renal correction so the bi-
carbonate concentration remains almost un-
changed. This pattern is seen where there is a
sudden reduction in ventilation, for example
obstruction of the airway, overdose of sedative
drugs or acute neurological damage.
. Respiratory acidosis (chronic): pH normal (lower
half of normal range), PCO2 raised, bicarbonate
high. If underventilation, from whatever cause, is
sustained beyond a few days renal tubular reab-
sorption of bicarbonate will achieve a signiﬁcant
elevation in plasma bicarbonate level that will
correct the acidosis caused by the underventila-
tion. This can be caused by any process that
results in sustained hypoventilation – commonly
seen in COPD.
. Respiratory alkalosis (cases are usually acute as
the causes are rarely sustained): pH raised,
PCO2 reduced, bicarbonate normal. Alveolar
hyperventilation causes a fall in PCO2 and a
corresponding rise in pH. Bicarbonate con-
centration is virtually unchanged. This pattern
is seen in any form of acute hyperventilation,
for example pulmonary embolism, acute severe
asthma, anxiety-related hyperventilation, salic-
ylate poisoning.
. Metabolic acidosis: pH reduced, PCO2 reduced,
bicarbonate reduced. The primary disturbance
is generally an increase in acid. This has an effect
on the equilibrium H þ þ HCO3
  H2O þ CO2
pushing it to the right. The carbon dioxide pro-
duced is removed by increased ventilation and
the net result is a lowering of plasma bicarbon-
ate. In practice the fall in pH causes further
respiratory stimulation so that carbon dioxide is
promptly blown off and the pH changes are
therefore much less dramatic than they would
have been. The arterial point moves in the direc-
tion indicated in Fig. 3.10. This respiratory com-
pensation is an inevitable accompaniment of
metabolic acidosis – acute and chronic – unless
there is some other factor limiting ventilatory
function or responsiveness. This pattern is seen
in diabetic ketoacidosis, renal tubular acidosis,
acute circulatory failure, sepsis and other forms
of lactic acidosis.
. Metabolic alkalosis: pH raised, PCO2 high normal
or slightly raised, bicarbonate raised. An in-
crease in bicarbonate concentration causes a rise
in pH. To compensate ventilation is reduced in
order to accumulate CO2. This occurs despite the
inevitable fall in PO2. For this reason however,
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
0
6.9
7.0
7.1
7.2
7.3
7.4
7.5
pH
7.6
7.7
2
0
4
6
8
10
12
Metabolic acidosis 
Respiratory alkalosis 
Metabolic 
alkalosis 
Acute
respiratory
acidosis
(d)
(a)
(b)
(c)
Chronic
respiratory acidosis
PCO2 (mmHg)
PCO2 (kPa)
Figure 3.10 Acid–base disturbances.
The oval indicates the normal position.
The shaded areas indicate the direction
of observed ‘pure’ or uncomplicated
disturbances of acid–base balance.
Bicarbonate levels are omitted for
clarity. Letters (a)–(d) are referred to in
the text (see Mixed disturbances).
34
History taking, examination and investigations

scope for correction is limited and the compen-
satory fall in alveolar ventilation is modest and
correction in pH may not be complete. This
pattern is seen where there has been adminis-
tration of excessive alkali, loss of acid through
vomiting, or reabsorption of bicarbonate (e.g. in
hypokalaemia).
. Mixed disturbances: mixed respiratory and met-
abolic disturbances are common and there are
usually a number of possible explanations, there-
fore it is essential to consider all the clinical
details before interpreting the acid–base data.
Figure 3.10 shows the situations that may arise
in complex acid–base disturbances. For example:
point (a) in Fig. 3.10 (low pH, normal PCO2, low
bicarbonate) indicates a mixed metabolic and
respiratory acidosis. The metabolic disturbance
was perhaps obvious, the respiratory component
could have been deduced as the Pco2 is higher
than might have been suspected had this been a
pure metabolic problem. This pattern could arise
in a number of different clinical scenarios: a
patient with acute severe pulmonary oedema
with low cardiac output and ventilatory compro-
mise. The same blood gas result could arise in a
patient in renal failure given a narcotic sedative
suppressing ventilatory response to acidosis.
Blood gas results should be interpreted in light
of clinical data. Point (b) could represent the
situation soon after a cardiac arrest where severe
lactic acidosis exists and ventilation has been
insufﬁcient. Point (c) could represent the situa-
tion in severe aspirin poisoning where aspirin-
induced hyperventilation has been complicated
by aspirin-induced metabolic acidosis. Point (d)
could represent the situation in an individual
with chronic ventilatory failure as a result of
COPD who is stimulated to increase ventilation
by a pulmonary embolism.
Arterial oxygenation
Arterial oxygen tension (Pao2)
In addition to the acid–base balance arterial blood
gas analysis provides valuable information on Pao2.
Respiratory failure
Respiratory failure is a clinical term used to de-
scribe failure to maintain oxygenation (usually
taken as an arbitrary cut-off point of PO2 8.0 kPa
(60 mmHg)).
. Type I respiratory failure is hypoxaemia in the
absence of hypercapnia. Overall alveolar venti-
lation is therefore normal. This pattern of abnor-
mality usually indicates a disturbance of the V/Q
matching system within the lung. Such a distur-
bance can be caused by any intrinsic lung disease
affecting the airways, parenchyma or vasculature
(e.g. acute asthma, lung ﬁbrosis or pulmonary
embolism).
. Type II respiratory failure is hypoxaemia with
hypercapnia and indicates alveolar hypoventila-
tion. Note this is NOT merely a severe form of
type I respiratory failure, it is brought about by an
entirely different mechanism. This may occur
from reduced ventilatory drive (e.g. sedative
overdose), reduced neuromuscular power (e.g.
myopathy) or resetting of the chemoreceptors
that drive ventilation in chronic lung disease (e.g.
COPD).
Of course, type I and Type II respiratory failure can
coexist (and commonly do). These matters are
dealt with in more detail in Chapter 1.
Oxygen saturation can be measured non-inva-
sively and continuously using a pulse oximeter.
Oxygenated blood appears red whereas reduced
blood appears blue (clinical sign of cyanosis). An
oximeter measures the ratio of oxygenated to total
haemoglobin in arterial blood using a probe placed
on a ﬁnger or ear lobe, which comprises two light-
emitting diodes – one red and one infrared – and a
detector. The light absorbed varies with each pulse,
and measurement of light absorption at two points
of the pulse wave allows the oxygen saturation of
arterial blood to be determined. The accuracy of
measurement is reduced if there is reduced arterial
pulsation (e.g. low-output cardiac states) or in-
creased venous pulsation (e.g. tricuspid regurgita-
tion, venous congestion). Skin pigmentation or use
of nail varnish may interfere with light transmis-
sion. Oximetry is also inaccurate in the presence of
carboxyhaemoglobin (e.g. in carbon monoxide
poisoning), which the oximeter detects as oxyhae-
moglobin. The relationship of PO2 to oxygen satu-
ration is described by the oxyhaemoglobin disso-
ciation curve (see Fig. 1.9). This curve is sigma-
shaped so that oxygen saturation is closely related
to PO2 only over a short range of about 3–7 kPa.
Above this level the dissociation curve begins to
plateau and there is only a small increase in oxygen
saturation as the PO2 rises. Oximetry can reduce the
need for arterial puncture, but arterial blood gas
analysis is necessary to determine accurately the
Pulmonary function tests 35

PO2 on the plateau part of the oxyhaemoglobin
dissociation curve, to measure carbon dioxide level
and to assess acid–base status.
A simple algorithm for reviewing
blood gas results
Most blood results in medicine are relative easy to
make sense of; there is one value and it’s either
high, low or normal. When faced with the results of
an arterial blood gas measurement the clinician
usually has six different values that have to be
drawn together and interpreted as one. The inex-
perienced often ﬁnd their attention skipping from
one number to the next, mumbling something
about ‘not retaining’ before becoming utterly con-
fused and giving up. A simple stepwise system for
interpreting blood results would help. The follow-
ing algorithm is easy to follow and will make sense
of most of results you will come across in clinical
practice.
1 Look at the pH. Decide whether this is an aci-
dosis or alkalosis. Once that fact is determined
don’t be diverted from this essential truth after
reviewing theother values.Itwon’t change.Ifthe
pH is in the normal range note if it is erring
towards one end of the range or another. If there
isacompensated abnormality theposition ofthe
pH within the range may indicate the nature of
the primary disturbance. Remember physiolog-
ical
compensatory
mechanisms
don’t
over
compensate.
2 Look at the PCO2. Ask if the PCO2 is contributing
to or attempting to compensate for the abnor-
mality identiﬁed in the pH. That will allow you to
know whether the primary disturbance is respi-
ratory or metabolic.
3 Look at the bicarbonate. I would suggest either
the sHCO3
 or base excess. In the case of a
primary metabolic problem the bicarbonate
may hold no surprises. In the case of a primary
respiratory problem the bicarbonate may be:
normal (suggesting the problem is acute), at-
tempting to correct the respiratory effect on the
pH (suggesting the problem is chronic) or com-
pounding the problem (suggesting a mixed
disturbance).
4 Look at the PO2. Knowing the inspired partial
pressure of oxygen ask whether the PO2 is what
you would expect given the level of ventilation
(Pco2),or lower. This may be difﬁcult to gauge, in
which case the alveolar gas equation should be
applied (Chapter 1). One can then determine if
type I respiratory failure is present.
KEY POINTS
. A reduced FEVl / VC ratio indicates airways
obstruction, for example asthma, COPD.
. A reduced KCO and TLCO indicates disease of
the lung parenchyma or its blood supply for
example emphysema, lung ﬁbrosis, pulmonary
embolism.
. Type 1 respiratory failure is hypoxia without
hypercapnia and may occur in any disease
intrinsic to the lung e.g. asthma, pulmonary
oedema, pulmonary embolism and lung
ﬁbrosis.
. Type 2 respiratory failure is hypoxia with hy-
percapnia and indicates hypoventilation that
occurs in sedative overdose, neuromuscular
disease (andmoderate to severe COPDwhereit
occurs in conjunction with a type 1 respiratory
failure).
. An elevated alveolar–arterial gradient implies a
problem intrinsic to the lung.
FEV1: forced expiratory volume in one second; VC:
vital capacity.
TLCO: transfer factor for carbon monoxide; KCO:
transfer coefﬁcient (¼ TLCO corrected for lung
volume).
FURTHER READING
Cotes JE. Lung Function: Assessment and Applica-
tion in Medicine. Oxford: Blackwell Scientiﬁc
Publications, 1993.
Flenley DC. Interpretation of blood-gas and acid–
base data. Br J Hosp Med 1978; 20: 384–94.
Gibson GJ. Clinical Tests of Respiratory Function.
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009.
Gibson GJ. Measurement of respiratory muscle
strength. Respir Med 1995; 89: 529–35.
Hanning CD, Alexander-Williams JM. Pulse oxim-
etry: a practical review. BMJ 1995; 311: 367–70.
36
History taking, examination and investigations

4
Radiology of the chest
Chest X-ray
The chest X-ray has akey role in the investigation of
respiratory disease. The standard view is the erect,
postero-anterior(PA) chest X-ray taken at full
inspiration with the X-ray beam passing from back
to front. A lateral X-ray gives a better view of
lesions lying behind the heart or diaphragm, which
may not be visible on a PA X-ray, and allows
abnormalities to be viewed in a further dimension.
Supine and antero-posterior (AP) views are usu-
ally taken at the bedside using mobile equipment
in patients who are too ill to be brought to the X-ray
department. AP ﬁlms are less satisfactory in deﬁn-
ing many abnormalities, producing magniﬁcation
of the cardiac outline, for example.
The main landmarks of the normal chest X-ray
are shown in Figs 4.1 and 4.2. X-rays should be
examined both close up and from a short distance
on a viewing box or computer screen in an area
with reduced background lighting. It is important
to conﬁrm the name and date on the X-ray and to
check the technical quality of the ﬁlm. Symmetry
between the medial end of both clavicles and the
thoracic spine conﬁrms that the ﬁlm has been
taken without any rotation artefact. If the ﬁlm has
been taken in full inspiration the right hemidiaph-
ragm is normally intersected by the anterior part
of the sixth rib. The vertebral bodies are usually
visible through the cardiac shadow if the X-ray
exposure is satisfactory. It is helpful to examine
the ﬁlm systematically to avoid missing useful
information. The shape and bony structures of the
chest wall should be surveyed and the position of
the hemidiaphragms and trachea noted. The shape
and size of the heart and the appearances of the
mediastinum and hilar shadows are examined. The
size, shape and disposition of the vascular shadows
are noted and the pattern of the lung markings in
different zones are carefully compared. It is advis-
able to focus attention on areas of the chest X-ray
where lesions are commonly missed such as the
lung apices, hila and the area behind the heart. Any
abnormality detected should be analysed in detail
and interpreted in the context of all clinical infor-
mation. It is often helpful to obtain previous X-rays
or to monitor the evolution of abnormalities over
time on follow-up X-rays. Some of the radiological
features of the major lung diseases are shown in
individual chapters. In some circumstances chest
X-ray abnormalities follow a speciﬁc pattern that
allows a differential diagnosis to be outlined.
Abnormal features
Collapse
Obstruction of a bronchus by a carcinoma, foreign
body (e.g. inhaled peanut) or mucus plug causes
loss of aeration with ‘loss of volume’ and collapse
of the lung distal to the obstruction. Collapse of
each individual lobe of the lung produces its own
Respiratory Medicine Lecture Notes, Eighth Edition. Stephen J. Bourke and Graham P. Burns.
 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

particular appearance on chest X-ray (Figs 4.3
and 4.4) with shift of landmarks such as the me-
diastinum resulting from loss of volume. Obstruc-
tion of a main bronchus usually causes obvious
asymmetry (Fig. 4.5). Compensatory expansion of
other lobes may result in increased transradiency
of adjacent areas of the lung. In right middle lobe
collapse there may be little to see on a PA X-ray
apart from lack of deﬁnition of the right heart
border. This is a useful sign that helps to distin-
guish it from lower lobe collapse where the right
border of the heart remains clearly deﬁned. Left
lower lobe collapse is manifest as a triangular
area of increased density behind the heart shadow,
often with a shift of the heart shadow to the left
and increased transradiency of the left hemithorax
because of compensatory expansion of the left
upper lobe (Fig. 4.4). Collapse is a sinister sign
often indicating an obstructing carcinoma that
may be conﬁrmed by bronchoscopy.
Consolidation
Air
in
the
lungs
appears
black
on
X-ray.
Consolidation appears as areas of opaciﬁcation
sometimes conforming to the outline of a lobe or
segment of lung in which the air has been replaced
by an inﬂammatory exudate (e.g. pneumonia),
ﬂuid (e.g. pulmonary oedema), blood (e.g. pulmo-
nary haemorrhage) or tumour (e.g. alveolar cell
carcinoma).
Bronchi
containing
air
passing
through the consolidated lung are sometimes
clearly visible as black tubes of air against the white
background of the consolidated lung: air bronch-
ograms (see Fig. 17.2). Structures such as the heart,
mediastinum and diaphragm are usually clearly
outlined as a silhouette on an X-ray because of the
contrast between the blackness of aerated lung and
the whiteness of these structures. When there is
abnormal shadowing in the lung adjacent to these
structures there is loss of the sharp outline, and this
is often referred to as the silhouette sign.
Pulmonary masses (Table 4.1,
Fig. 4.6)
Table 4.1, Fig. 4.6 Various descriptive terms such as
‘rounded opacity’, ‘nodule’ or ‘coin lesion’ are
used to refer to pulmonary masses. Carcinoma of
the lung is the most important cause of a mass
on chest X-ray but several other diseases may
cause a similar appearance. Features such as
(a)
(b)
(d)
(e)
(c)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
Figure 4.1 Diagram of chest X-ray
(PA view). The right hemidiaphragm is
1–3 cm higher than the left (a) and on
full inspiration it is intersected by the
shadow of the anterior part of the sixth
rib (b). The trachea (c) is vertical and
central or very slightly to the right. The
horizontal ﬁssure (d) is found in the
position shown and should be truly
horizontal. It is a very valuable marker
of change in volume of any part of the
right lung. The left border of the
cardiac shadow comprises: (e) aorta;
(f) pulmonary artery; (g) concavity
overlying the left atrial appendage;
(h) left ventricle. The right border of
the cardiac shadow normally overlies
the right atrium (i) and above that
of the superior vena cava.
38
History taking, examination and investigations

cavitation, calciﬁcation, rate of growth, the pres-
ence of associated abnormalities (e.g. lymph node
enlargement) and whether the lesion is solitary or
whether multiple lesions are present, may provide
clues to diagnosis. However, these features are
often not reliable indicators of aetiology, and
the X-ray appearances must be interpreted in the
context of all the clinical information. Further
investigations such as computed tomography
(CT) and biopsy (bronchoscopic, percutaneous,
surgical) are often necessary.
Cavitation
Cavitation is the presence of an area of radiolu-
cency within a mass lesion. It is a feature of
bronchial
carcinoma
(particularly
squamous
carcinoma) (Fig. 4.7), tuberculosis, lung abscess,
pulmonary infarcts, Wegener’s granulomatosis
and some pneumonias (e.g. Staphylococcus aure-
us, Klebsiella pneumoniae).
Fibrosis
Localised ﬁbrosis produces streaky shadows with
evidence of traction upon neighbouring struc-
tures. Upper lobe ﬁbrosis causes traction upon
the trachea and elevation of the hilar vascular
shadows. Generalised interstitial ﬁbrosis produces
a hazy shadowing with a ﬁne reticular (net-like) or
nodular pattern (see Chapter 13). Advanced inter-
stitial ﬁbrosis results in a honeycomb pattern with
diffuse opaciﬁcation containing multiple circular
translucencies a few millimetres in diameter.
Figure 4.2 Diagram of chest X-ray
(lateral view). (a) Trachea. (b) Oblique
ﬁssure. (c) Horizontal ﬁssure. It is
useful to note that in a normal lateral
view the radiodensity of the lung ﬁeld
above and in front of the cardiac
shadow is about the same as that
below and behind (x). Ao, aorta.
Radiology of the chest 39

Figure 4.3 Radiographic patterns of
lobar collapse. Collapsed lobes occupy
a surprisingly small volume and are
commonly overlooked on the chest X-ray.
Helpful information may be provided by
the position of the trachea, the hilar
vascular shadows and the horizontal
ﬁssure. LLL, left lower lobe; LUL, left
upper lobe; RLL, right lower lobe; RML,
right middle lobe; RUL, right upper lobe.
Figure 4.4 Left lower lobe collapse. The left lower lobe
has collapsed medially and posteriorly and appears as
a dense white triangular area behind the heart close to
the mediastinum. The remainder of the left lung appears
hyperlucent because of compensatory expansion.
Bronchoscopy showed an adenocarcinoma occluding
the left lower lobe bronchus.
40
History taking, examination and investigations

Mediastinal masses
Metastatic tumour or lymphomatous involvement
of the mediastinal lymph nodes are the most com-
mon causes of mediastinal masses but there are
a number of other diseases that may cause medi-
astinal masses (Fig. 4.8). Thymic tumours, thyroid
masses and dermoid cysts are most commonly
situated in the anterior mediastinum whereas neu-
ral lesions (e.g. neuroﬁbroma) and oesophageal
cysts are often situated posteriorly. Aneurysmal
enlargement of the aorta or ventricle may produce
masses in the middle compartment of the medi-
astinum. CT scans are helpful in delineating the
Figure 4.5 Left lung collapse. There is complete op-
aciﬁcation of the left hemithorax with shift of the
mediastinum to the left. Bronchoscopy showed a
small-cell carcinoma occluding the left main bronchus.
Table 4.1 Causes of pulmonary masses
Neoplastic
. Primary bronchial carcinoma
. Metastatic carcinoma
. Benign tumours (hamartoma)
Non-neoplastic
. Tuberculoma
. Lung abscess
. Hydatid cyst
. Pulmonary infarct
. Arteriovenous malformation
. Encysted interlobar effusion (‘pseudotumour’)
. Rheumatoid nodule
Figure 4.6 Chest X-ray showing multiple partially calci-
ﬁed rounded masses in both lungs due to benign
chondromas.
Figure 4.7 A cavitating lesion in the left upper lobe.
A cavity appears as an area of radiolucency (black)
within an opacity (white). Sputum cytology showed cells
from a squamous carcinoma. Computed tomography
showed left hilar and subcarinal lymphadenopathy.
Radiology of the chest 41

anatomy of mediastinal lesions. Thoracotomy with
surgical excision is often necessary.
Ultrasonography of the
chest
Normal
air-ﬁlled
lung
does
not
transmit
high-frequency sound waves so that ultrasonogra-
phy is not useful in assessing disease of lung
parenchyma. It is helpful in assessing lesions of
the pleura and is particularly useful for localising
loculated pleural effusions and guiding chest tube
insertion (see Chapter 16).
Computed tomography
CT scanning uses a technique of multiple projec-
tion with reconstruction of the image from X-ray
detectors by a computer so that structures can be
displayed in cross-section. A number of different
techniques can be used depending on the area
of interest. CT scanning is particularly useful in
providing a detailed cross-sectional image of me-
diastinal disease, which is often difﬁcult to assess
on plain chest X-ray. Figure 4.9 shows the principal
mediastinal structures with horizontal lines indi-
cating the levels of the CT sections illustrated
diagrammatically in Fig. 4.10. CT scanning is a key
investigation in the staging of lung cancer (see
Chapter 12), and has replaced bronchography (in-
stillation of radiocontrast dye into the bronchial
tree) in detecting and determining the extent of
bronchiectasis (see Chapter 8). High-resolution CT
scans are much more sensitive than plain X-ray
in assessing the lung parenchyma and can provide
a detailed image of emphysema (see Chapter 11)
and interstitial lung disease. A ‘ground glass’
appearance on a high-resolution CT scan of
a
patient
with
interstitial
lung
disease,
for
example, often corresponds to alveolar inﬂamma-
tion whereas a ‘reticular honeycomb pattern’
indicates advanced ﬁbrosis with less active inﬂam-
mation and less response to steroids (see Chapter
13). Modern CT scanners have the capacity to
perform very rapid spiral images and this imaging
technique combined with injection of radiocon-
trast material into a peripheral vein can be used to
identify emboli in central pulmonary arteries in
thromboembolic disease (see Chapter 15).
Figure 4.8 Mediastinal masses.
Diagram of lateral view of the chest,
indicating the sites favoured by some of
the more common mediastinal masses.
42
History taking, examination and investigations

Figure 4.9 Mediastinal structures.
Principal blood vessels and airways.
Top: Heart and major blood vessels
showing the aorta curling over the
bifurcation of the pulmonary trunk
into left and right pulmonary arteries
(arrows). The horizontal lines (a)–(d)
indicate the levels of the computed
tomography sections illustrated in
Fig. 4.10. 1, right brachiocephalic vein;
2, left brachiocephalic vein; 3,
innominate or brachiocephalic artery;
4, left common carotid artery; 5, left
subclavian artery.
Bottom: Structures with the heart
removed. The aorta curls over the left
main bronchus, which lies behind the
left pulmonary artery. Pulmonary
arteries are shown shaded, pulmonary
veins unshaded and bronchi are
shown striped. In general the arteries
loop downwards, like a handlebar
moustache; veins radiate towards a
lower common destination – the left
atrium. The veins are applied to the
front of the arteries and bronchi and
take a slightly different path to
the respective lung segments. On the
right, the order of structures from front
to back is vein–artery–bronchus; on the
left, the pulmonary artery loops over the
left upper lobe bronchus and descends
behind so that the order is
vein– bronchus–artery.
Radiology of the chest 43

Positron emission
tomography
Positron emission tomography (PET) scanning is
being increasingly used in the diagnosis and stag-
ing of lung cancer. It is based on the concept that
neoplastic cells have greater metabolic activity and
a higher uptake of glucose than normal cells.
18F-ﬂuoro-2-deoxy-glucose (FDG) is a glucose
analogue that is preferentially taken up by neo-
plastic cells after intravenous injection and which
then emits positrons. PET scanning is particularly
helpful in the staging of lung cancer to detect
metastases and to determine involvement of
lymph nodes in patients being considered for
radical treatment such as surgical resection or
high-dose radiotherapy (see chapter 12). PET scan-
ning is also particularly useful in the differential
diagnosis of an indeterminate solitary pulmonary
nodule. Often such a nodule is small and not
amenable to biopsy. Calciﬁcation or lack of growth
of the lesion over time suggest that the nodule is
benign
(e.g.
hamartoma,
healed
tuberculous
granuloma). If the patient is a smoker at high risk
of cancer and otherwise ﬁt it may be advisable
to proceed directly to surgical resection of such
a lesion without preoperative histological conﬁr-
mation. Active accumulation of FDG in the lesion
on PET scanning suggests malignancy. False-neg-
ative ﬁndings can occur in tumours < 1 cm and
false-positive uptake can occur in inﬂammatory
conditions such as tuberculosis, sarcoidosis, his-
toplasmosis and coccidioidomycosis.
KEY POINTS
. The chest X-ray has a key role in the investi-
gation of lung disease. It should be studied in
a systematic way and interpreted in the context
of all clinical information.
. CT is more sensitive than the chest X-ray and is
crucial in the staging of lung cancer, in asses-
sing interstitial lung disease and in diagnosing
pulmonary emboli.
. Ultrasonography is useful in assessing pleural
effusions and is used to guide placement of
a chest tube when draining a pleural effusion.
. PET is helpful in diagnosing and staging lung
cancer.
Figure 4.10 Principal mediastinal
structures on computed tomography.
The sections (a)–(d) are at levels (a)–(d)
in Fig. 4.9. The sections should be
regarded as being viewed from below
(i.e. the left of the thorax is on the right
of the ﬁgure). (a) Section above the
aortic arch. Many large vessels and an
anterior sausage shape are seen; the
trachea has not bifurcated (black
circle). Numerals refer to Fig. 4.9 and its
legend. (b) Section at the level of aortic
arch. A large oblique sausage shape
representing the aortic arch is seen
(ao); oes, oesophagus which is visible
in all of the sections; svc, superior vena
cava.(c) Section below the aortic arch.
Both ascending (aao) and descending
(dao) aortas are visible, the trachea is
bifurcating and the pulmonary arteries
are seen; pa, left pulmonary artery.
(d) Section at thelevel of pulmonary veins
(pv). Lower lobe intrapulmonary arteries
and bronchi are not shown in the
diagram.
44
History taking, examination and investigations

FURTHER READING
Hansell DM. Thoracic imaging. In: Gibson GJ,
Geddes DM, Costabel U, Sterk PJ, Corrin B, eds.,
Respiratory Medicine. London: WB Saunders Co,
2003: 316–51.
Lynch DA, Godwin JD, Safrin S, et al. High-reso-
lution computed tomography in idiopathic
pulmonary ﬁbrosis. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
2005; 172: 488–93.
MacMahon H, Austin JHM, Gamsu G, et al.
Guidelines for the management of small pulmo-
nary nodules on CT scans: a statement from
the Fleischner Society. Radiology 2005; 237:
395–400.
Remy-Jardin M, Ghaye B, Remy J. Spiral comput-
ed
tomography
angiography
of
pulmonary
embolism. Eur Respir Monograph 2004; 27:
124–43.
Vansteenkiste JF. Imaging in lung cancer: position
emission tomography scan. Eur Respir J 2002; 19
(suppl 35): 49–60.
Verschakelen JA, DeWever W, Bogaert J, Stroobants
S. Imaging: staging of lung cancer. Eur Respir
Monograph 2004; 30: 214–44.
Radiology of the chest 45

5
Upper respiratory tract
infections and inﬂuenza
Introduction
Acute upper respiratory tract infections (URTIs)
are a very common cause of morbidity, visits to
doctors and absence from school or work. They are
the most common respiratory complaint account-
ing for about 9% of all consultations in general
practice. A child suffers about eight, and an
adult about four respiratory infections each year.
Although unpleasant, most URTIs are mild and
self-limiting, but a small number give rise to seri-
ous problems, most notably acute epiglottitis in
children and inﬂuenza A in elderly patients debil-
itated by chronic underlying disease. Difﬁculties
arise in distinguishing URTIs from more serious
lower respiratory tract infections such as pneumo-
nia (Fig. 5.1), and alertness combined with careful
assessment and clinical judgement are required.
Most URTIs are of viral origin but a variety of
viruses and bacteria may produce the same clinical
pattern of illness (e.g. pharyngitis, sinusitis).
Common cold
The common cold (coryza) is an acute illness
characterised by rhinorrhoea, sneezing, nasal ob-
struction
and
sore
throat
(pharyngitis)
with
minimal fever or systemic symptoms. It may be
caused by about 200 different strains of viruses
including rhinoviruses, coronaviruses, respirato-
ry syncytial, parainﬂuenza and inﬂuenza viruses.
Infection is transmitted by droplet spread, and
attack rates are highest in young children attend-
ing school who then transmit infection to their
parents and siblings at home. The multiplicity of
viral strains prevents the development of immu-
nity. The bacterial ﬂora of the nasopharynx re-
mains unchanged for the ﬁrst few days of the
illness but then may show an increase in the num-
ber of Haemophilus inﬂuenzae and Streptococcus
pneumoniae organisms, and there is the potential
for secondary bacterial infection to occur with
extension of infection beyond the nasopharynx,
giving rise to sinusitis, otitis media, bronchitis or
pneumonia. Most people with the common cold
do not need to see their general practitioner
and can be encouraged to manage the condition
themselves or to seek advice from a pharmacist.
No speciﬁc treatment is possible for the common
cold but symptoms are often alleviated by use of
paracetamol or aspirin.
Pharyngitis
Pharyngitis may occur as part of the common cold
or as a separate illness. Most cases are caused by
Respiratory Medicine Lecture Notes, Eighth Edition. Stephen J. Bourke and Graham P. Burns.
 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

viruses (Table 5.1) but pharyngitis may also be
caused by group A b-haemolytic streptococci,
Mycoplasma
pneumoniae
or
Chlamydophila
pneumoniae, for example. The patient complains
of a sore throat and there is erythema of the
pharynx often with enlargement of the tonsils.
Infectious mononucleosis (glandular fever) often
involves pharyngitis but is also associated with
lymphadenopathy
and
splenomegaly,
and
is
caused by the Epstein–Barr (EB) virus. A blood ﬁlm
may show atypical mononuclear cells and the
Monospot or heterophile antibody test is positive.
Characteristically, patients with infectious mono-
nucleosis develop a rash if given amoxicillin as
treatment of pharyngitis. It is not possible to dis-
tinguish between viral and bacterial pharyngitis on
clinical grounds. b-haemolytic streptococci may
be found on microbiology of a throat swab but this
does not differentiate between active infection and
a carriage state. Even when pharyngitis is caused
by bacterial infection antibiotics are not usually
necessary, as the illness tends to be self-limiting.
Local extension of infection may result in otitis
media, tonsillitis or quinsy (peritonsillar abscess).
Streptococcal
infection
may
be
complicated
by glomerulonephritis or rheumatic fever but
these are rare nowadays. Antibiotic treatment
of pharyngitis is usually only given to severe or
complicated cases. Streptococci are sensitive to
phenoxymethylpenicillin or amoxicillin. Myco-
plasma pneumoniae or Chlamydophila pneumo-
niae require a tetracycline or macrolide antibiotic
(e.g. clarithromycin).
Sinusitis
Infection of the maxillary sinuses causes facial
pain, nasal obstruction and discharge, often
accompanied by fever and malaise. A variety of
organisms may cause sinusitis including respira-
tory viruses, Haemophilus inﬂuenzae, Strepto-
coccus pneumoniae, Staphylococcus aureus and
Sinusitis
H. influenzae
S. pneumoniae
Viruses
Common cold
Rhinovirus
Coronavirus
Resp. syncytial virus
influenza viruses
Laryngitis
Viruses
M. pneumoniae
C. pneumoniae
Acute bronchitis
Infective
exacerbation of
chronic bronchitis
(Chapter 11)
Flu
Influenza A, B
Pharyngitis
Viruses
β haem streptococcus
Epiglottitis
H. influenzae Type B
UPPER RESPIRATORY
TRACT INFECTIONS
LOWER RESPIRATORY
TRACT INFECTIONS
Pneumonia
(Chapter 6)
Figure 5.1 Acute respiratory infections.
Upper respiratory tract infections and inﬂuenza 47

anaerobic bacteria. In chronic sinusitis X-rays
may show mucosal thickening, opaciﬁcation or
the presence of a ﬂuid level in the sinus. Recurrent
sinusitis may beaccompanied by more widespread
respiratory
tract
infection
in
patients
with
bronchiectasis
caused
by
cystic
ﬁbrosis,
hypogammaglobulinaemia or ciliary dyskinesia.
Post-nasal drip from sinusitis is irritating to the
larynx and may cause a persistent cough. Sinusitis
is usually treated with antibiotics (e.g. amoxicillin,
trimethoprim), nasal decongestants (e.g. ephed-
rine) and analgesia (e.g. paracetamol). Surgical
drainage may be necessary for relief of chronic
sinusitis.
Acute laryngitis
This term is used when temporary hoarseness
or loss of voice occurs with pharyngitis or the
common cold, and is caused by oedema of the
vocal cords. No treatment is necessary.
Table 5.1 Principal respiratory viruses
Virus
Disease
Notes
Rhinovirus
Common cold, pharyngitis, chronic
bronchitic exacerbations
More than 100 serotypes;
identiﬁcation and study difﬁcult
Coronavirus
Common cold
Numerous serotypes; identiﬁcation
difﬁcult
Severe Acute Respiratory
Syndrome (SARS)
SARS coronavirus (see Chapter 6)
Adenovirus
Pharyngitis, conjunctivitis, severe
bronchitis in childhood, rarely
severe pneumonia
About 30 serotypes
Respiratory
syncytial virus
Bronchiolitis in infants, common cold
in adults
One serotype, winter epidemics
Inﬂuenza A
Inﬂuenza – may be severe
Epidemics, continuous antigenic
variation
Inﬂuenza B
Inﬂuenza
Milder illness, minor epidemics
Parainﬂuenza
Croup, other upper respiratory tract
infections, some bronchiolitis
Serotypes 1–4, A and B
Measles
Measles, severe illness with
pneumonia in immunocompromised
Vaccination effective
Cytomegalovirus
Silent infection or minor respiratory
illness, pneumonia in
immunosuppressed
One serotype
Herpes simplex
Stomatitis, rarely pharyngitis,
pneumonia in immunosuppressed
One serotype, severe infection
treatable with aciclovir or vidarabine
Herpes zoster
Pneumonia in adult infection
Severe infection treatable with
aciclovir, leaves scattered calciﬁc
lesions
Coxsackie,
enteroviruses and
ECHO viruses
Minor part in respiratory infection,
Coxsackie A may cause herpangina;
B causes ‘pleurodynia’ and
pericarditis/myocarditis
Local epidemics
Epstein– Barr virus
Pharyngitis, lymphadenitis, infectious
mononucleosis
Heterophile antibody test, typical
blood picture
ECHO, enteric cytopathic human organ.
48
Respiratory diseases

Croup
Croup (acute laryngotracheobronchitis) is usually
caused by viruses such as parainﬂuenza virus,
respiratory syncytial virus, inﬂuenza A and B, rhi-
noviruses, adenovirus and measles. Characteristi-
cally, the child develops a harsh barking cough
with an upper respiratory infection and this may
progress to stridor. Often no treatment is required
but some children develop more severe lower
respiratory infections and progressive respiratory
distress requiring intubation and ventilation. Oral
prednisolone is sometimes beneﬁcial in severe
croup and nebulised high-dose budesonide may
be associated with more rapid recovery in less
severely affected patients.
Acute epiglottitis
Epiglottitis is a very serious disease that is usually
caused by virulent strains of Haemophilus inﬂu-
enzae type B, and there is often an accompanying
septicaemia. Death may result from occlusion of
the airway by the inﬂamed oedematous epiglottis.
It is most common in children of about 2–3 years of
age, but cases have also occurred in adults. The
patient is ill with pyrexia, sore throat, laryngitis
and painful dysphagia. Symptoms of upper airway
obstruction may develop rapidly with stridor and
respiratory distress. A lateral neck X-ray may show
epiglottic swelling. Blood cultures often isolate
Haemophilus inﬂuenzae type B. Patients with sus-
pected epiglottitis should be admitted to hospital
and attempts at examining the upper airway
should only be performed when facilities are
available for tracheal intubation and ventilation.
Because of possible amoxicillin resistance chlor-
amphenicol or cefuroxime are appropriate anti-
biotics. The widespread use of vaccination against
Haemophilus inﬂuenzae in childhood is making
epiglottitis increasingly rare.
Inﬂuenza
Seasonal inﬂuenza
Inﬂuenza is an acute illness characterised by
pyrexia,
malaise,
myalgia,
headache
and
prostration as well as upper respiratory symptoms.
Lethargy and depression may persist for several
days afterwards. Although the term ‘ﬂu’ is used
very loosely by the public, it is the systemic features
that characterise true infection with the inﬂuenza
viruses. Inﬂuenza virus type A undergoes frequent
spontaneous changes in its haemagglutinin and
neuraminidase surface antigens. Minor changes,
referred to as ‘antigenic drift’, result in outbreaks
of seasonal inﬂuenza in the winter months each
year. Major changes, referred to as ‘antigenic
shift’, result in epidemics and pandemics of
infection reﬂecting the lack of immunity in the
population to the new strain. Type B is more
antigenically stable and produces less severe
disease. Type C causes only mild sporadic cases
of upper respiratory infection.
Inﬂuenza is highly infectious so that all mem-
bers of a household often become ill together.
Outbreaks
of
inﬂuenza
cause
considerable
morbidity even in healthy adults. It is usually
a self-limiting illness but can be complicated by
bronchitis, otitis media and secondary bacterial
pneumonia (e.g. Staphylococcus aureus, Strepto-
coccus pneumoniae or Haemophilus inﬂuenzae).
The greatest morbidity and mortality occur in
patients who are elderly with underlying cardiac
or respiratory disease and seasonal inﬂuenza out-
breaks cause an average annual excess mortality of
about 12 000 deaths in the UK.
The diagnosis of inﬂuenza can be conﬁrmed
by immunoﬂuorescent microscopy of nasal secre-
tions or by serology. Oseltamivir and zanamivir
are drugs that reduce the replication of inﬂuenza
viruses by inhibiting viral neuraminidase. Oselta-
mivir is given orally whereas zanamivir is only
available by inhalation. These drugs have to be
given within 48 hours of the onset of symptoms
to be effective. They reduce the duration of illness
by about 1 day and they may reduce complications
in at-risk patients with severe inﬂuenza. They can
also be given for post-exposure prophylaxis in at-
risk adults not protected by vaccination. Vaccina-
tion remains the most effective way of preventing
illness from seasonal inﬂuenza. However, if new
pandemic strains of inﬂuenza emerge it will take
time to develop vaccines. Amantadine is an older
antiviral agent that blocks the ion channel function
of a protein in the inﬂuenza virus, but some strains
are resistant to this drug and it is not currently
recommended for the treatment of inﬂuenza in
the UK. Use of aspirin or paracetamol relieves
symptoms. Antibiotics are used when there are
Upper respiratory tract infections and inﬂuenza 49

features of secondary bacterial infection (e.g. otitis
media, sinusitis). Pneumonia associated with in-
ﬂuenza may be severe and requires treatment with
broad-spectrum antibiotics including antibiotics
against Staphylococcus aureus (e.g. co-amoxiclav,
cefuroxime, ﬂucloxacillin).
Inﬂuenza vaccination
The inﬂuenza vaccine is prepared each year using
the virus strains most likely to be prevalent that
year. The vaccine contains inactivated virus and is
about 70–80% effective in protecting against infec-
tion. Where infection occurs despite vaccination
it is usually less severe and associated with less
morbidity and mortality than the disease seen
in unvaccinated patients. Selective immunisation
is recommended to protect those most at risk of
serious illness or death from inﬂuenza. Annual
vaccination is recommended for those over the
age of 65 years and those with chronic respiratory
disease (e.g. chronic obstructive pulmonary dis-
ease, asthma, bronchiectasis, etc.), chronic heart
disease, renal failure, diabetes mellitus, immuno-
suppression and for patients living in nursing
homes.
Adverse reactions to inﬂuenza vaccine are usu-
ally mild, consisting of fever and malaise in some
patients and local reactions at the site of injection.
The vaccine is contraindicated in patients with
egg allergy. Patients should be advised that the
vaccine will not protect them from all respiratory
viruses.
Pandemic inﬂuenza
Inﬂuenza pandemics have occurred sporadically
and unpredictably over the last century. They
arise when there are major changes in the hae-
magglutinin and neuraminidase surface antigens
of the inﬂuenza A virus. In 1918 a pandemic of
inﬂuenza caused by the H1N1 strain (Spanish ﬂu)
killed about 30 million people worldwide. In this
pandemic the mortality was particularly high in
those aged 20–40 years. There were further pan-
demics in 1957, caused by the H2N2 strain (Asian
ﬂu), and in 1968, caused by the H3N2 strain
(Hong Kong ﬂu), each killing about 1 million
people worldwide. In recent years there is concern
about the transmission of an avian strain of in-
ﬂuenza (H5N1) from birds such as ducks and
poultry to humans. This has occurred mainly in
South
East
Asia
and
has
produced
severe
inﬂuenza pneumonia in humans, with a high
death rate. Spread of infection was contained by
slaughtering large numbers of birds in affected
areas. In 2009/2010 a further pandemic, caused by
H1N1 (‘swine ﬂu’) occurred. It ﬁrst appeared in
Mexico but then spread globally. This virus was
not particularly pathogenic and therefore the
number of deaths was relatively low. There is the
potential for inﬂuenza viral strains to undergo
mutations that might increase their virulence
and the capacity for transmission from human to
human. During pandemics the number of patients
with inﬂuenza can overwhelm the normal health-
care systems and contingency plans have been
developed for such circumstances.
KEY POINTS
. Most upper respiratory infections are self-
limiting, caused by viruses, and antibiotics are
not usually indicated.
. Seasonal inﬂuenza A causes an acute systemic
illness with substantial morbidity and mortality,
particularly in elderly at-risk patients.
. Inﬂuenza A vaccine is prepared each year
for the prevalent strains and gives effective
protection against seasonal inﬂuenza.
. Pandemic inﬂuenza occurs when there are
major mutations in the virus that result in
increased virulence and a lack of immunity
in the population.
FURTHER READING
British Infection Society, British Thoracic Society,
Health Protection Agency in collaboration with
the Department of Health. Pandemic ﬂu: clinical
management of patients with an inﬂuenza-like
illness during an inﬂuenza pandemic. Thorax
2007; 62 (suppl 1): 1–46.
Husby S, Agertoft L, Mortensen S, Pedersen
S. Treatment of croup with nebulised ste-
roid
(budesonide):
a
double-blind
placebo
controlled study. Arch Dis Child 1993; 68:
352–6.
Lagace-Wiens PR, Rubinstein E, Gurnel A. Inﬂu-
enza epidemiology – past, present and future.
Crit Care Med 2010; 38 (suppl): e1–e9.
50
Respiratory diseases

Little PS, Williamson I, Shvartzman P. Are antibio-
tics appropriate for sore throats? BMJ 1994; 309:
1010–12.
Mansel JK, Rosenow EC, Smith TF, Martin JW. My-
coplasma pneumoniae. Chest 1989; 95: 639–46.
Nguyen-Van-Tam JS, Openshaw PJ, Hashim A,
et al. Risk factors for hospitalization and poor
outcome with pandemic A/H1N1 inﬂuenza.
Thorax 2010; 65: 645–51.
Vernon DD, Sarnaik AP. Acute epiglottitis in
children: a conservative approach to diagnosis
and management. Crit Care Med 1986; 14:
23–5.
Wilson R. Inﬂuenza vaccination. Thorax 1994; 49:
1079–80.
Wong SSY, Yuen KY. Avian inﬂuenza virus infec-
tions in humans. Chest 2006; 129: 156–68.
Upper respiratory tract infections and inﬂuenza 51

6
Pneumonia
Lower respiratory tract
infections
The lower respiratory tract, below the larynx, is
normally sterile. Infections can reach the lungs bya
number of routes: inhalation, aspiration, direct
inoculation (e.g. stab wound to chest) and blood
borne (e.g. from intravenous drug misuse). In
some situations lower respiratory tract infection
may be regarded as a primary exogenous event in
which inhalation of a large dose of a virulent
pathogen produces a severe infection in a previ-
ously healthy person. Thus, Legionella pneumo-
phila may be inhaled from a contaminated water
system, or Chlamydophila psittaci from an in-
fected bird resulting in a severe pneumonia. In
other circumstances infection is a secondary
endogenous event. Thus, a patient who is debili-
tated by major trauma and requiring endotracheal
ventilation in an intensive therapy unit (ITU) may
develop pneumonia. Typically in these circum-
stances the patient’s oropharynx becomes colo-
nised by Gram-negative enteric bacteria that are
usually acquired from endogenous sources within
the patient such as the upper gastrointestinal tract,
subgingival dental plaque and periodontal cre-
vices. These bacteria may then reach the lower
airway by microaspiration.
Pneumonia
Pneumonia is a general term denoting inﬂamma-
tion of the gas exchange region of the lung. Usually
it
implies
parenchymal
lung
inﬂammation
caused by infection, and the term ‘pneumonitis’
is sometimes used to denote inﬂammation caused
by physical, chemical or allergic processes. Pneu-
monia is an important cause of morbidity and
mortality in all age groups. Globally it is estimated
that 5 million children under the age of 5 years die
from pneumonia each year (95% in the developing
countries). In the UK about 1 in 1000 of the pop-
ulation are admitted to hospital with pneumonia
each year and the mortality in these patients is
about 10%. There are about 3000 deaths from
pneumonia each year in the age group 15–55 years.
About 25% of all deaths in elderly people are
related to pneumonia, although this is often the
terminal illness in a patient with serious concom-
itant disease.
Classiﬁcation in relation to clinical
context (Fig. 6.1)
A microbiological approach to pneumonia focuses
primarily on identiﬁcation of the pathogen and its
susceptibility to antibiotics. However, many of
the major respiratory pathogens may be present
Respiratory Medicine Lecture Notes, Eighth Edition. Stephen J. Bourke and Graham P. Burns.
 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

in the oropharynx in a normal person so that
identiﬁcation of an organism in respiratory tract
secretions may not be sufﬁcient to implicate it as
the cause of the illness. Conversely the same path-
ogen can cause various illnesses at different levels
in the respiratory tract such as sinusitis, bronchitis
or pneumonia, and different bacteria may cause an
identical clinical syndrome such as pneumonia. A
clinical approach to pneumonia focuses on the
clinical context of the illness, the patient’s previous
health status and on the circumstances of the
illness. Pneumonia is the result of a complex
Previously well infant
1  RSV
2  Adenovirus and other viruses
3  Bacterial    
Previously ill infant
1  Staphylococcus
2  E. coli and Gram-negative bacteria
3  Viruses and opportunistic organisms
Children
1  Viruses
2  Pneumococcus
3  Mycoplasma
4  Others
Previous respiratory illness;
elderly and debilitated
1  Pneumococcus
2  H. influenzae
3  Staphylococcus
4  Klebsiella and
    Gram-negative organisms
Previously fit adults
1  Pneumococcus
2  Mycoplasma
3  H. influenzae
4  Viruses
5  Staphylococcus
6  Legionella
7  Others
If no response think of:
TB, Mycoplasma, Legionella,
carcinoma
Severely immunocompromised
and AIDS
1  Pneumocystis pneumonia
2  Cytomegalovirus
3  Adenovirus
4  Herpes simplex
5  Bacteria (Legionella,
    Staphylococcus, Pneumococcus)
6  Opportunistic mycobacteria;
    tuberculosis
Hospital-acquired pneumonia
1  Gram-negative bacteria
    (Pseudomonas, Klebsiella,
    Proteus)
2  Staphylococcus
3  Pneumococcus
4  Anaerobic bacteria, fungi
5  NB aspiration pneumonia
6  Others
Figure 6.1 Likely causes of pneumonia in different clinical circumstances. Age and previous health are important
factors.
Pneumonia 53

interaction between the patient, the environment
and the infecting organism, and the pattern of the
disease depends on the virulence of the pathogen
and the vulnerability of the patient. The circum-
stances of the illness include the following:
. site of infection in the respiratory tract;
. age of the patient;
. community- or hospital-acquired infection;
. concurrent disease;
. environmental and geographical factors;
. severity of the illness; and
. microbiology of the pneumonia.
Site of infection
The term ‘chest infection’ is an imprecise term
often used by lay people to refer to non-speciﬁc
respiratory symptoms. In assessing and treating
respiratory tract infections it is important to deﬁne
the site of infection as clearly as possible. Upper
respiratory tract infections (above the larynx) are
often viral in origin and self-limiting, not requiring
treatment (see Chapter 5). Lower respiratory tract
infections may affect the bronchial tree such as
bronchitis, or the lung parenchyma such as pneu-
monia. Infective exacerbations of chronic bronchi-
tis (see Chapter 11) are often caused by organisms
of low virulence (e.g. non-typeable Haemophilus
inﬂuenzae) when the patient’s defences against
infection are compromised by smoking-induced
damage to the bronchial mucosa. Penetration of
antibiotics into the scarred mucosa and viscid
secretions may be difﬁcult. Extension of bronchial
infection into the surrounding lung parenchyma is
often referred to as bronchopneumonia. Infection
of the lung parenchyma with extensive consolida-
tion of a lobe of a lung – lobar pneumonia – is
usually caused by organisms of greater virulence
(e.g. Streptococcus pneumoniae). Infection may
spread to the pleura resulting in empyema or to
the bloodstream causing septicaemia.
Age of the patient
In children under the age of 2 years pneumonia is
commonly caused by viruses such as respiratory
syncytial virus (RSV), adenovirus, inﬂuenza and
parainﬂuenza viruses. Chlamydia trachomatis in-
fection may be transmitted to the infant from the
mother’s genital tract during birth resulting in
pneumonia. In older children and adults of all
ages Streptococcus pneumoniae is the most com-
mon cause of primary pneumonia. Mycoplasma
pneumoniae infection is rare in elderly people and
particularly affects young adults. The incidence of
pneumonia increases greatly in elderly people and
the high frequency of underlying chronic diseases
(e.g.
chronic
obstructive
pulmonary
disease
(COPD), heart failure) in this group is associated
with a high mortality.
Community- or hospital-acquired
pneumonia
The characteristics of the patients and the spec-
trum of pathogens differ greatly depending on
whether pneumonia is contracted in the commu-
nity or in hospital. When pneumonia is acquired in
the community it may be a primary infection in a
previously healthy individual or it may occur in
association with concomitant disease (e.g. COPD),
but a few pathogens (notably Streptococcus pneu-
moniae) account for the majority of cases and
Gram-negative organisms are rare. Most patients
are treated at home with only about 25% needing
hospital admission. The most important organ-
isms identiﬁed as causing community-acquired
pneumonia are as follows:
. Streptococcus pneumoniae
50–60%
. Mycoplasma pneumoniae
10%
. Chlamydophila pneumoniae
10%
. Viruses (e.g. inﬂuenza)
10%
. Haemophilus inﬂuenzae
5%
. Staphylococcus aureus
3%
. Legionella pneumophila
2%
. Others
2%
Hospital-acquired (nosocomial pneumonia) is
deﬁned as pneumonia developing 2 or more days
after admission to hospital for some other reason.
It istherefore asecondary infection in patients with
other illnesses. In those with milder pneumonia on
general wards the causative organisms may be
similar to those found in the community. However,
pneumonia in the context of endotracheal venti-
lation on ITU or in those who have already received
antibiotics is different. In these circumstances
Gram-negative
organisms
(e.g.
Pseudomonas
aeruginosa, Escherichia coli) are the most impor-
tant pathogens, and meticillin-resistant staphylo-
coccus aureus (MRSA) is an increasing problem. A
variety
of
factors,
including
use
of
broad-
spectrum antibiotics and impaired host defences,
promote the colonisation of the nasopharynx of
hospitalised
patients
with
Gram-negative
54
Respiratory diseases

organisms. Aspiration of infected nasopharyngeal
secretions into the lower respiratory tract is facil-
itated by factors that compromise the defence
mechanisms of the lung (e.g. endotracheal intu-
bation in ITU) impaired cough associated with
anaesthesia, surgery or cerebrovascular disease.
The spectrum of causative organisms varies de-
pending on the exact circumstances but the most
common pathogens in hospital-acquired pneu-
monia are as follows:
. Gram-negative bacteria
50%
. Staphylococcus aureus
20%
. Streptococcus pneumoniae
15%
. Anaerobes and fungi
10%
. Others (e.g. Legionella pneumophila)
5%
Concurrent disease
Alcohol misuse, malnutrition, diabetes and un-
derlying cardiorespiratory disease predispose to
pneumonia and are associated with a greatly
increased mortality. Patients with COPD have im-
paired mucociliary clearance and organisms of
quite low virulence (e.g. Haemophilus inﬂuenzae)
may spread from the bronchi into the peribron-
chial lung parenchyma causing bronchopneumo-
nia. Mortality from inﬂuenza infection, either as a
cause of primary pneumonia or associated with
secondary bacterial pneumonia, is highest in
elderly people. Aspiration pneumonia is likely to
occur in patients with impaired swallowing as a
result of oesophageal or neuromuscular disease, or
in patients with impaired consciousness (e.g. ep-
ileptic ﬁts, anaesthesia). Patients who have under-
gone splenectomy are particularly vulnerable to
pneumococcal pneumonia and septicaemia and
are usually given pneumococcal vaccination and
maintained on life-long penicillin prophylaxis.
Environmental and geographical
factors
Although in some cases pneumonia arises by as-
piration of endogenous infective organisms from
the oropharynx, in other cases the patient’s envi-
ronment is the source of infection with the inha-
lation of infected droplets from other patients (e.g.
inﬂuenza, tuberculosis), from an animal source
(e.g. Chlamydophila psittaci from birds, Coxiella
burnetti from farm animals) or from other envi-
ronmental sources (e.g. Legionella pneumophila
from contaminated water systems).
Some infections have a particular geographical
distribution
(e.g.
histoplasmosis
in
North
America, Burkholderia pseudomallei in East Asia,
typhoid in tropical countries) and need to be
considered in patients who live in, or have recent-
ly visited, these areas. A knowledge of the local
pattern of prevalent infections and antibiotic
resistance in a community is important. For ex-
ample, Mycoplasma pneumoniae infection partic-
ularly occurs in outbreaks about every 4 years and
requires treatment with tetracycline or a macro-
lide (e.g. clarithromycin) antibiotic. Although
Streptococcus pneumoniae in the UK is usually
sensitive to penicillin, about 30% of strains iso-
lated in Spain are resistant and this should be
borne in mind when choosing initial antibiotic
therapy.
Severity of pneumonia (Fig. 6.2)
Community-acquired pneumonia has awide spec-
trum of severity from a mild self-limiting illness to
a fatal disease. It is therefore vital to assess accu-
rately the severity of the pneumonia, as this is an
important factor in determining the choice of anti-
biotics, the extent of investigations and in deciding
whether a patient should be treated in hospital
rather than at home or in an ITU rather than on a
general ward. Severe pneumonia can rapidly de-
velop into multiorgan failure with respiratory,
circulatory and renal failure. Patients who have
certain core adverse prognostic features have a
greatly increased risk of death: acute confusion,
elevated urea (>7 mmol/L), increased respiratory
rate (30/min) and low blood pressure (systolic
< 90 mmHg, diastolic < 60 mmHg), age over 65
years. A CURB-65 score (confusion, elevated urea,
respiratory rate, blood pressure, age >65 years) is
useful in assessing the severity of pneumonia
(Fig 6.2). Patients with severe pneumonia are likely
to beneﬁt from more intensive monitoring (arterial
catheter, central venous catheter, urinary catheter)
and treatment (rapid correction of hypovolaemia,
inotropic support, ventilatory support) in an ITU.
Clinical features
Patients with pneumonia typically present with
cough, purulent sputum and fever, often accom-
panied by pleuritic pain and breathlessness.
There may be a history of a recent upper respira-
tory tract infection. Diagnosing the site and sever-
ity of respiratory tract infection is notoriously
Pneumonia 55

difﬁcult and careful assessment combined with
good clinical judgement is important. Early review
of the situation is crucial in the event of deterio-
ration because the severity of the illness is often
underestimated by the patient and doctor alike.
Localised chest signs such as crackles, dullness or
bronchial breathing indicate pneumonia rather
than bronchitis, for example, but may not always
be present. Cyanosis and tachypnoea are features
of respiratory failure. Rigors, high fever or prostra-
tion suggest septicaemia. Elderly patients, in par-
ticular, may present with non-respiratory symp-
toms such as confusion.
The initial clinical approach focuses on an as-
sessment of the circumstances and severity of the
illness because these guide decisions as to how and
where the patient should be treated. Rather than
diagnosing a patient as having a ‘chest infection’
an effort should be made to use an appropriate
descriptive phrase such as: ‘a previously ﬁt adult
with severe community-acquired pneumonia and
suspected septicaemia (rigors, prostration)’ or
‘probable bronchopneumonia (crackles) and re-
spiratory failure (cyanosis) in a patient with
COPD’.
Investigation
Patients with mild pneumonia that responds rap-
idly to antibiotics are usually treated at home and
in this situation investigations do not usually in-
ﬂuence management or outcome. Nonetheless,
microbiology laboratories will often request that
general practitioners send sputum and serology
samples from some patients treated in the com-
munity so as to be able to alert clinicians to out-
breaks of inﬂuenza or Mycoplasma pneumoniae
for example, and to provide information on local
patterns of bacterial resistance to antibiotics. More
extensive investigations are indicated for patients
requiring admission to hospital.
General investigations
. Chest X-ray (Fig. 6.3) conﬁrms the diagnosis of
pneumonia by demonstrating consolidation, de-
tects complications such as lung abscess or em-
pyema, and helps to exclude any underlying
disease (e.g. bronchial carcinoma).
. Haematology and biochemistry tests are useful
in assessing the severity of the disease.
• Confusion
• Urea >7mmol/L
• Respiratory rate ≥30/min
• Blood pressure (systolic <90mmHg or diastolic <60mmHg)
•  Age ≥65 years
Score 1 point for each feature present
3 or more
2
0 or 1
Consider hospital
supervised treatment
Options may include:
(i) short stay in-patient
(ii) hospital supervised out-patient
Likely suitable for
home treatment
Manage in hospital as
severe pneumonia
Assess for ITU
admission especially if
CURB-65 score = 4 or 5
CURB-65
Score
Figure 6.2 CURB-65 Severity Score. The severity of pneumonia can be assessed using a scoring system based on
the key parameters of new onset confusion, an elevated urea, respiratory rate, blood pressure and age >65 years,
giving a CURB-65 score. Patients with a score of >3 are at high risk of death and may need to be treated in an
intensive therapy unit (ITU). Patients with a score < 1 may be suitable for treatment at home. Clinical judgement,
social circumstances and the stability of comorbid illness are also important in assessing disease severity.
56
Respiratory diseases

. Oxygenation is assessed by pulse oximetry and
those with O2sat < 94% should have arterial
blood gas measurements.
Further investigations may be indicated if alter-
native diagnoses are being considered (e.g. com-
puted tomographic angiography for pulmonary
embolism). Where there isasuspicion of aspiration
pneumonia a radiocontrast oesophagogram (e.g.
‘Gastrograﬁn swallow’) is useful in assessing swal-
lowing problems. Recurrent pneumonia may be an
indication of an immunodeﬁciency state and tests
such as measurement of immunoglobulin levels or
human immunodeﬁciency virus (HIV) testing
shouldbeperformedasappropriate.Measurement
of C-reactive protein may help in differentiating
pneumonia from non-infective diseases and in
monitoring response to treatment.
Speciﬁc investigations
These are aimed at detecting the pathogen causing
the pneumonia.
. Sputum Gram stain may give a valuable and
rapid clue to the responsible organism in an ill
patient.
. Sputum culture is the main test used to detect
bacterial causes of pneumonia but contamina-
tion of the sample by oropharyngeal organisms,
prior use of antibiotics and inability to produce
sputum limit the sensitivity and speciﬁcity of the
test.
. Blood cultures should be performed on all pa-
tients admitted to hospital with moderate or
severe pneumonia but are positive in only about
15% of cases.
. Pleural ﬂuid should be aspirated in all patients
with pleural effusions and may yield a causative
organism or reveal empyema (see Chapter 16).
. Antigen detection tests are available for some
pathogens. Pneumococcal antigen may be iden-
tiﬁed in sputum, urine, pleural ﬂuid or blood and
may be positive in cases where prior antibiotics
limit the sensitivity of cultures. Direct ﬂuores-
cent antibody staining may detect Legionella
pneumophila in bronchoalveolar lavage ﬂuid,
and tests for Legionella antigen in urine are
available. Pneumococcal and Legionella urine
antigen tests should be performed in those with
severe pneumonia.
. Serological tests allow a retrospective diagnosis
of the infecting organism if a rising titre is
found between acute and convalescent samples.
This is most useful for some viruses and pneu-
monia caused by atypical organisms such as
Mycoplasma
pneumoniae
or
Chlamydophila
pneumoniae.
Invasive investigations such as bronchoscopy
with bronchoalveolar lavage may be indicated in
severe pneumonia and in immunocompromised
patients.
Treatment
General
Mild pneumonia in a ﬁt patient can be treated at
home. Admission to hospital is necessary for
Figure 6.3 This 60-year-old man was admitted to
hospital with a 2-week history of myalgia, headache,
dyspnoea and cough without sputum. He was severely
ill, cyanosed and confused with a fever of 39 C,
tachycardia of 110/min, respiratory rate 40/min and
blood pressure of 110/60 mmHg. Po2 was 5.7 kPa
(43 mmHg), Pco2 4.9 kPa (37 mmHg), white cell count
4.6  109/L and urea 31 mmol/L. He had received
amoxicillin
for
6
days
before
admission
without
improvement. Chest X-ray shows extensive bilateral
multilobar consolidation. He kept birds as a hobby
and one of his budgerigars had died recently. The
clinical diagnosis of psittacosis was subsequently
conﬁrmed by serology tests. He was treated with
intravenous
ﬂuids,
oxygen
and
tetracycline
and
recovered fully.
Pneumonia 57

patients who demonstrate features of severe pneu-
monia, who have concomitant disease or who do
not have adequate family help at home. The se-
verity of the pneumonia should be formally as-
sessed at the time of admission to hospital and
elective transfer to an ITU should be considered for
patients with severe disease.
Sufﬁcient oxygen should be given to maintain
arterial Po2 >8 kPa (60 mmHg) and an oxygen
saturation of 94–98%. Adequate non-sedative an-
algesia (e.g. paracetamol or non-steroidal anti-
inﬂammatory drugs) should be given to control
pleuritic pain. Fluid balance should be optimised,
using intravenous rehydration as required for de-
hydrated patients. Chest physiotherapy may be
beneﬁcial to patients with COPD and copious se-
cretions but is not helpful in patients without un-
derlying lung disease. Nutritional support (e.g. oral
dietary supplements, nasogastric feeding) should
be given in prolonged illnesses. The patient’s gen-
eral condition, pulse, blood pressure, temperature,
respiratory rate and oxygen saturation should be
monitoredfrequentlyandanydeterioration should
prompt reassessment of the need for transfer to
ITU. Prophylaxis of venous thromboembolism
with low molecular weight heparin should be given
to patients who are not fully mobile.
Antibiotic treatment
The initial choice of antibiotics is based upon an
assessment of the circumstances and severity of
the pneumonia. Treatment is then adjusted in
accordance with the patient’s response and the
results of microbiology investigations. Careful pa-
tient selection for treatment and appropriate an-
tibiotic choice are important in reducing the risks
of antibiotic resistance, MRSA and Clostridium
difﬁcile infection. Hospitals often have their own
antibiotic policies based on their particular cir-
cumstances, and specialist advice should be
sought for complex problems. For community-
acquired pneumonia, Streptococcus pneumoniae
is the most likely pathogen and amoxicillin
500 mg t.d.s. orally is an appropriate antibiotic.
Doxycycline or clarithromycin are alternatives for
those allergic to penicillins. Where there is a sus-
picion of an ‘atypical pathogen’ (e.g. Mycoplasma
pneumoniae, Chlamydophila psittaci) addition of
a macrolide antibiotic, such as clarithromycin
500 mg b.d. is required. In severe pneumonia the
initial antibiotic regimen must cover all likely
pathogens and allow
for potential
antibiotic
resistance, and intravenous co-amoxiclav 1.2g
t.d.s. and clarithromycin 500 mg b.d. are appro-
priate. Cefuroxime is an alternative for those with
allergy to penicillin. In severe hospital-acquired
pneumonia, Gram-negative bacteria are common
pathogens, and a combination of an aminoglyco-
side (e.g. tobramycin) and a third-generation
cephalosporin (e.g. ceftazidime)
or an anti-
pseudomonal penicillin (e.g. piperacillin with ta-
zobactam) is commonly used.
Patients should be reviewed frequently and
switched from intravenous to oral antibiotics when
improving. Failure to respond or failure of the C-
reactive protein level to fall by 50% within 4 days
suggests the occurrence of a complication (e.g.
empyema), infection with an unusual pathogen
(e.g. Legionella pneumophila), the presence of an-
tibiotic resistance or incorrect diagnosis (e.g. pul-
monary embolism).
Speciﬁc pathogens
Pneumococcalpneumonia(Fig.6.4)
Streptococcus pneumoniae is the causative organ-
ism in about 60% of community-acquired pneu-
monias and in about 15% of hospital-acquired
pneumonias. Research studies using tests for
pneumococcal antigen suggest that it may ac-
count for many cases where no organism is iden-
tiﬁed. It is a Gram-positive coccus, which can
cause infections at all levels in the respiratory
tract including sinusitis, otitis media, bronchitis
and pneumonia. Up to 60% of people carry Strep-
tococcus pneumoniae as a commensal in the
nasopharynx and infection is transmitted in air-
borne droplets. Nasopharyngeal carriage may
progress to infection where there is a breach in
the respiratory tract defences, and smoking and
viral infections are important factors disrupting
surface defence mechanisms. There are many
different serotypes that vary in their virulence,
but virulent strains can render a previously ﬁt and
healthy person critically ill within a few hours.
Pneumococcal infection in asplenic patients
(e.g. post-splenectomy) is severe with a high mor-
tality, such that these patients are usually given
pneumococcal
vaccination
and
long-term
prophylactic phenoxymethylpenicillin 500 mg b.
d. Streptococcus pneumoniae is usually sensitive
to
penicillin
antibiotics
(e.g.
amoxicillin
or
58
Respiratory diseases

benzylpenicillin) but antibiotic resistance is an
emerging problem particularly in certain coun-
tries such as Spain, where about 30% of isolates are
resistant, so that it is necessary to give broad
antibiotic cover to a patient who has acquired
pneumonia in a country with a high prevalence of
antibiotic-resistant pneumococcus. Pneumococ-
cal vaccine is recommended for those above 65
years of age and for patients with chronic lung
disease, diabetes, renal and cardiac disease and
for patients who are asplenic or immunodeﬁcient
(e.g. hypogammaglobulinaemia, HIV).
Haemophilus inﬂuenzae
pneumonia
Haemophilus
inﬂuenzae
is
a
Gram-negative
bacillus. Virulent strains are encapsulated and
divided into six serological types. Haemophilus
inﬂuenzae type B (Hib) is a virulent encapsulated
form that causes epiglottitis, bacteraemia, men-
ingitis and pneumonia. Hib vaccine is given to
children to reduce the risk of meningitis and this
vaccine also provides protection against epiglotti-
tis. However, it is the less virulent form of the
organism – non-typeable unencapsulated Hae-
mophilus inﬂuenzae – that is a common cause of
respiratory tract infection, predominantly where
there has been damage to the bronchial mucosa by
smoking or viral infection. Haemophilus inﬂuen-
zae often forms part of the normal pharyngeal
ﬂora. Deﬁcient mucociliary clearance in patients
with smoking-induced chronic bronchitis facili-
tates spread of the organism to the lower respira-
tory tract, where it gives rise to exacerbations of
COPD. Spread of infection into the lung parenchy-
ma causes bronchopneumonia. It is usually trea-
ted with amoxicillin but about 10% of strains
are resistant and alternative antibiotics include
co-amoxiclav (amoxicillin with clavulanic acid),
trimethoprim and moxiﬂoxacin.
Staphylococcal pneumonia
Staphylococcus aureus is a Gram-positive coccus
that forms clusters resembling a bunch of grapes.
Although it is a relatively uncommon cause of
either community- or hospital-acquired pneumo-
nia it may produce a very severe illness with a high
mortality. It particularly occurs as a sequel to
inﬂuenza so that anti-staphylococcal antibiotics
should be given to patients who develop pneumo-
nia after inﬂuenza. Infection may also reach the
lungs via the bloodstream when staphylococcal
bacteraemia arises from intravenous cannulae in
hospitalised patients or from intravenous drug
misuse, for example. The production of toxins (e.
g. Panton-Valentine leukocidin) may cause tissue
necrosis with cavitation, pneumatocele formation
and pneumothoraces. It is usually sensitive to
ﬂucloxacillin, co-amoxiclav or cefuroxime. MRSA
is an increasing problem. Most isolates are sus-
ceptible to vancomycin and linezolid.
Klebsiella pneumonia
Klebsiella pneumoniae is a Gram-negative organ-
ism that generally causes pneumonia only in pa-
tients who have impaired resistance to infection
(e.g. alcohol misuse, malnutrition, diabetes) or
underlying lung disease (e.g. bronchiectasis). It
Figure 6.4 Pneumococcal pneumonia. This 70-year-
old
man
was
admitted
to
hospital
with
severe
community-acquired pneumonia. He was confused
with a fever of 39 C, respiratory rate 32/min, blood
pressure 90/50 mmHg and a urea of 22 mmol/L. His
CURB-65 score was 5, indicating severe pneumonia.
He was admitted to the ITU but died despite treatment
with
antibiotics,
mechanical
ventilation
and
full
supportive care. Blood cultures isolated Strepto-
coccus pneumonia. In the UK about 1 in 1000 of the
population are admitted to hospital each year with
community-acquired pneumonia and about 10% of
these patients die.
Pneumonia 59

often produces severe infection with destruction of
lung tissue, cavitation and abscess formation.
Treatment requires attention to the underlying
disease state and prolonged antibiotic therapy,
guided by the results of microbiology culture and
sensitivity. Often a third-generation cephalospo-
rin (e.g. ceftazidime) or piperacillin with tazobac-
tam is appropriate.
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
pneumonia
Pseudomonas aeruginosa is a Gram-negative ba-
cillus that is a common cause of pneumonia in
hospitalised patients, particularly those with
neutropenia and those receiving endotracheal
ventilation in ITU. It is usually treated with a
combination of an aminoglycoside (e.g. tobramy-
cin) and a third-generation cephalosporin (e.g.
ceftazidime)
or
anti-pseudomonal
penicillin
(e.g. meropenem or piperacillin with tazobactam).
Pneumonia caused by 'atypical
pathogens'
‘Atypical pathogens’ is an imprecise term that is
sometimes used in clinical practice to refer to
certain pathogens that cause pneumonia such as
Mycoplasma pneumoniae, chlamydial organisms
and Legionella pneumophila. Characteristically,
these organisms are not sensitive to penicillins
and require treatment with tetracycline or macro-
lide (e.g. clarithromycin) antibiotics. These or-
ganisms are difﬁcult to culture in the laboratory
and the diagnosis is often made retrospectively by
demonstrating a rising antibody titre on serologi-
cal tests.
Mycoplasma pneumonia
Mycoplasma pneumoniae is a small free-living
organism, which does not have a rigid cell wall
and which is therefore not susceptible to antibio-
tics such as penicillin that act on bacterial cell
walls. Infection is transmitted from person to per-
son by infected respiratory droplets. It particularly
affects children and young adults although any
age group may be affected. Infection typically
occurs in outbreaks every 4 years and spreads
throughout families, schools and colleges. Myco-
plasma pneumoniae typically causes an initial up-
per respiratory tract infection with pharyngitis,
sinusitis and otitis, followed by pneumonia in
about 30% of cases. A variety of extrapulmonary
syndromes may occur and may be related to im-
mune responses to infection. These include lym-
phocytic meningoencephalitis, cerebellar ataxia,
peripheral neuropathy, rashes, arthralgia, spleno-
megaly and hepatitis. Cold agglutinins to type O
red cells are often present and haemolytic anaemia
may occur. Mycoplasma pneumoniae causes sig-
niﬁcant protracted morbidity but is rarely life
threatening.
Chlamydial respiratory infections
There are three chlamydial species that cause re-
spiratory disease.
. Chlamydophila psittaci is primarily an infection
of birds that is transmitted to humans as a zoo-
nosis (a disease contracted from animals) by
inhalation of contaminated droplets. Psittacosis
or ornithosis is the name given to the resultant
illness which is often severe and characterised by
high fever, headache, delirium, a macular rash
and severe pneumonia.
. Chlamydophila pneumoniae was identiﬁed as a
respiratorypathogenin1986.Infectionisconﬁned
to humans and there is no avian or animal reser-
voir of infection. Infection with this organism is
extremely common in all age groups and spreads
directly from person to person, with outbreaks
occurring in families, schools and colleges. It
typically produces upper respiratory disease in-
cluding pharyngitis, otitis and sinusitis but may
also cause pneumonia that is usually mild. Other
bacterial pathogens (e.g. S. pneumoniae) are often
identiﬁed at the same time so that the direct path-
ogenic role of C. pneumoniae is uncertain.
. Chlamydia trachomatis is a common cause of
sexually transmitted genital tract infection and
infants may acquire respiratory tract infection
with this organism from their mother’s genital
tract during birth.
Legionella pneumonia
Legionella pneumophila is a Gram-negative bacil-
lus that is widely distributed in nature in water.
The organism was ﬁrst identiﬁed in 1976 when an
outbreak of severe pneumonia affected delegates
at a convention of the American Legion, who con-
tracted infection from a contaminated humidiﬁer
system (Legionnaires’ disease). In sporadic cases
there is often no apparent source for the infection.
60
Respiratory diseases

Sometimes infection can be traced back to a con-
taminated water system such as a shower in a
hotel room. Epidemics of infection may occur from
a common source such as a contaminated humid-
iﬁcation plant, water storage tanks or heating cir-
cuits. Infection does not spread from patient to
patient. Legionella pneumophila typically causes a
severe pneumonia with prostration, confusion,
diarrhoea, abdominal pain and respiratory failure,
with an associated high mortality. Direct ﬂuores-
cent antibody staining may detect the organism in
bronchoalveolar lavage ﬂuid, and tests to detect
Legionella antigen in urine are available, and allow
rapid diagnosis. A combination of clarithromycin
or a ﬂuoroquinolone (e.g. levoﬂoxacin, moxiﬂox-
acin, ciproﬂoxacin) and rifampicin is often used to
treat severe Legionella pneumonia.
Severe acute respiratory
syndrome
In2003therewasaglobalepidemicofasevereacute
respiratory syndrome (SARS) characterised by a
severe pneumonia with a high mortality. The caus-
ative organism was identiﬁed as a new coronavirus
thatwasnamedSARScoronavirus,anditislikelyto
have evolved from coronaviruses which infect civet
catsandbats.Theepidemicseemstohaveemerged
from the Guandong province of China and then
spread explosively with outbreaks in Hong Kong,
Beijing, Taiwan, Singapore, Hanoi and Toronto. A
particularfeatureoftheepidemicwastheveryrapid
global spread of infection by airplane travel. For
example, an infected person travelled by plane
from Hong Kong to Toronto resulting in spread of
infection to a new continent. Passengers on the
planeand taxi drivers in contact with the index case
developed infection. The SARS coronavirus is very
virulent and highly infectious spreading from per-
son to person by direct aerosol transmission or by
indirect aerosolisation from contaminated sur-
faces. Secondary spread of infection from patients
to healthcare workers and medical students was a
major feature of the epidemic. Tertiary cases then
occurred in the families of healthcare workers.
Aerosolising procedures (e.g. nebulisation, suc-
tioning of secretions, tracheal intubation) are par-
ticularly hazardous for transmission of infection
from patients to healthcare workers. Many of the
patients also had diarrhoea and in some outbreaks
transmission may also have occurred by aerosoli-
sation from sewage drainage systems. In total dur-
ing 2003 approximately 8500 cases of SARS
occurred in 29 countries with 916 deaths, giving
a global case fatality of 11%. Patients presented
with fevers, rigors, myalgia, cough, vomiting and
diarrhoea and typically had peripheral consolida-
tion on chest X-ray. Treatment mainly consisted of
supportive care and 20% of patients required care
on an ITU. Broad-spectrum antibiotics were given
for potential secondary bacterial infections and
some patients seemed to beneﬁt from corticoster-
oids. Currently available antiviral drugs do not
seem to be effective against the SARS coronavirus.
The global epidemic was brought to an end by late
2003 using public health measures including rap-
id case detection, case isolation, contact tracing
and strict infection control procedures such as
isolation of patients in negative pressure cubicles,
use of respiratory protective masks, gowns, gog-
gles and gloves. Vigilance is needed as there is the
potential for the SARS coronavirus to re-emerge,
and contingency plans emphasise the importance
of infection control procedures in limiting spread
of infection.
Immunocompromised
patients
There is an increasing number of patients who are
severely immunocompromised by a variety of dis-
eases and by use of immunosuppressive drugs.
Patients with neutropenia are particularly vulner-
able to bacterial infections (e.g. Streptococcus
pneumoniae, Gram-negative bacteria) and inva-
sive fungal infections (e.g. Aspergillus fumigatus,
Candida albicans), and patients with depressed T-
lymphocyte function are vulnerable to Pneumo-
cystis pneumonia(PCP), tuberculosis and cyto-
megalovirus (CMV) infection, for example.
There are three particular situations where pro-
found immunosuppression commonly arises:
1 Patients with cancer receiving anti-neoplastic
chemotherapy.
2 Patientswithinﬂammatorydiseases(e.g.connec-
tive tissue diseases, Wegener’s granulomatosis,
inﬂammatory bowel disease, etc.) receiving im-
munosuppressive drugs (e.g. corticosteroids,
cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, inﬂiximab).
3 Patients
post-organ
transplantation
(bone
marrow, renal,lung, etc.)receiving immunosup-
pressive drugs (e.g. ciclosporin, azathioprine).
Pneumonia 61

The problem is often that of a patient with one of
these conditions presenting with pulmonary inﬁl-
trates on chest X-ray accompanied by breathless-
ness and sometimes fever. The inﬁltrates in these
circumstances may be caused by pulmonary in-
volvement by the underlying disease process, a
reaction to drug treatment, infection resulting
from immunosuppression or to other coincidental
disease processes. Treatment is crucially depen-
dent upon accurate diagnosis.
Assessment involves a careful clinical history
and examination focusing on the clinical context
and clues to aetiology (Table 6.1). Microbiology of
sputum, urine and blood may identify speciﬁc
pathogens. Induced sputum is particularly useful
in diagnosing PCP. If these initial tests are not
diagnostic it is often advisable to proceed directly
to bronchoscopy with bronchoalveolar lavage for
detailed microbiology. Transbronchial lung biopsy
is useful in obtaining tissue for histological diag-
nosis but carries the risk of pneumothorax or
haemorrhage. Occasionally, surgical lung biopsy
is warranted.
Pulmonary complications
of HIV infection (Table 6.2)
The human immunodeﬁciency virus (HIV) is a
retrovirus that binds to the CD4 molecule of T-
lymphocytes resulting in a progressive fall in the
number and function of CD4 lymphocytes. The
occurrence of various infections reﬂects the CD4
T-lymphocyte count and depends on the patient’s
previous and current exposure to pathogens (e.g.
reactivation of previous tuberculosis or re-infec-
tion with tuberculosis in areas with a high preva-
lence, e.g. Africa). As the CD4 T-lymphocyte count
falls there is initially an increase in the frequency of
infection with common standard pathogens (e.g.
Streptococcus pneumoniae, Mycobacterium tuber-
culosis). Then, as the CD4 count falls below about
200/mm3, infections with opportunistic patho-
gens (e.g. Pneumocystis jirovecii) develop. These
are infections that do not usually cause disease in
immunocompetent people. In the later stages of
Table 6.1 Differential diagnosis of pulmonary inﬁltrates in immunocompromised patients
Chest X-ray inﬁltrates
. Is it the underlying disease?
. Is it a reaction to drugs?
. Is it infection?
. Is it some other disease process?
Disease
Cancer
Inﬂammatory disease
Organ transplant
(e.g. lymphoma, carcinoma)
(e.g. rheumatoid disease)
(e.g. bone marrow, renal)
Lymphangitis
Interstitial lung disease
Graft versus host disease
Lung metastases
Drugs
Lung ﬁbrosis or pneumonitis (e.g. bleomycin, busulfan, cyclophosphamide, methotrexate,
gold, penicillamine)
Infection
Bacterial or opportunistic infections (PCP, CMV)
Other process
Pulmonary oedema, haemorrhage, embolism, etc.
Pulmonary inﬁltrates
#
Clinical assessment
Microbiology of sputum, urine, blood (e.g. TB, bacteria)
Induced sputum (e.g. PCP)
Bronchoscopy and bronchoalveolar lavage (CMV, PCP, TB)
Transbronchial lung biopsy
Surgical lung biopsy (histology)
Diagnosis!
Speciﬁc treatments
CMV, cytomegalovirus; PCP, pneumocystis pneumonia; TB, tuberculosis.
62
Respiratory diseases

AIDS neoplastic diseases (e.g. Kaposi’s sarcoma,
B-cell lymphomas) occur. There is an increased
incidence of airways disease and emphysema in
HIV patients due to pathogenic synergy between
HIV and smoking.
Bacterial respiratory infections
Patients with HIV have an increased incidence of
respiratory tract infections with sinusitis,bronchi-
tis, bronchiectasis and pneumonia occurring as a
result of standard bacterial pathogens. Infection
with
Streptococcus
pneumoniae,
Haemophilus
inﬂuenzae and Staphylococcus aureus are co-
mmon, and may precede the diagnosis of HIV
infection or the onset of opportunistic infections.
InfectionwithGram-negativeorganisms(e.g.Pseu-
domonas aeruginosa) occurs in more advanced
disease. The clinical features may be unusual with
a higher frequency of complications such as bac-
teraemia, abscess formation, cavitation and empy-
ema. Pneumococcal and inﬂuenza vaccination
may be helpful and sometimes long-term prophy-
lacticantibioticsareused.Withtheadventofhighly
active anti-retroviral treatment (HAART) HIV is
now a treatable condition with a good prognosis,
butitisestimatedthatintheUKone-thirdofpeople
donotknowthattheyareinfectedsuchthattheydo
not get the beneﬁts of HAART. Late diagnosis is a
major factor in HIV-related morbidity and mortal-
ity. Patients with a wide range of conditions (e.g.
pneumonia, bronchiectasis, tuberculosis) should
now be offered HIV testing.
Pneumocystis pneumonia
Pneumocystis jirovecii (formerly known as carinii)
is a fungus that only causes disease in immuno-
compromised individuals, and in HIV infection it
typically occurs at the stage when the CD4 T-
lymphocyte count has fallen to below 200/mm3.
PCP typically presents as a subacute illness over a
few weeks with cough, dyspnoea, fever, hypox-
aemia, reduced transfer factor for carbon mon-
oxide and bilateral perihilar interstitial inﬁltrates
on chest X-ray (Fig. 6.5). These clinical features
are not speciﬁc to PCP and can be caused by a
variety of other infections, and more than one
pathogen may be present. The chest X-ray may
be normal in early PCP and high-resolution com-
puted tomography is more sensitive. Sometimes
the radiological features are unusual showing
unilateral consolidation, nodules or upper lobe
consolidation, for example. Cavitating lesions
may occur and pneumothorax is a recognised
complication.
The diagnosis is usually conﬁrmed by detecting
Pneumocystis jirovecii using a monoclonal anti-
body immunoﬂuorescent technique on specimens
obtained by sputum induction or by bronchosco-
py and bronchoalveolar lavage. To induce sputum
the patient is given 3% hypertonic saline by neb-
ulisation followed by chest physiotherapy. If this
test is negative it is usual to proceed to bronch-
oalveolar
lavage
whereby
a bronchoscope
is
advanced into a subsegmental bronchus and
Table 6.2 Pulmonary complications of HIV
infection
Infectious diseases
Bacterial infections
Streptococcus pneumoniae
Haemophilus inﬂuenzae
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Tuberculosis
Opportunistic infections
Fungal
Pneumocystis jirovecii
Aspergillus fumigatus
Candida albicans
Viral
Cytomegalovirus
Herpes simplex
Mycobacterial
Mycobacterium avium–intracellulare
Immune reconstitution syndromes
Sarcoid-like syndrome
Paradoxical deterioration of pneumonia
Non-infectious diseases
Neoplastic
Kaposi’s sarcoma
B-cell lymphoma
Primary effusion cell lymphoma
Inﬂammatory
Lymphocytic alveolitis (#TLco)
Non-speciﬁc interstitial pneumonitis
Lymphocytic interstitial pneumonitis
Airways disease and emphysema
Primary pulmonary hypertension
Pneumonia 63

60 mL aliquots of warmed sterile saline are instilled
and aspirated. More invasive procedures, such as
transbronchial
or
surgical
lung
biopsy,
are
usually only performed in complex cases where
the aetiology of lung inﬁltrates cannot be deter-
mined by other tests and where a histological
diagnosis is considered essential for guiding treat-
ment decisions.
Treatment of PCP consists of high-dose intra-
venous co-trimoxazole (trimethoprim 15 mg/kg/
day and sulfamethoxazole 75 mg/kg/day in four
divided doses) subsequently converted to oral
therapy, usually continued for 3 weeks. Side-ef-
fects (e.g. allergic rashes, nausea, marrow suppres-
sion) are common and intravenous pentamidine
or clindamycin with primaquine are alternatives.
Patients with moderate or severe PCP (e.g. Po2
< 9.5 kPa (70 mmHg)) beneﬁt from the addition
of
corticosteroids
(e.g.
prednisolone
40 mg/
day) to reduce the pulmonary inﬂammatory re-
sponse. High-ﬂow oxygen is often required and
use of
continuous positive airway
pressure
(CPAP) may reduce the need for ventilation in
severe cases.
Primary prophylaxis is given to HIV-infected
patients whose CD4 T-cell count is < 200/mm3, to
prevent ﬁrst infection. Secondary prophylaxis is
given to prevent recurrence in patients who have
already suffered an episode of PCP. Co-trimoxa-
zole (trimethoprim and sulfamethoxazole) 960 mg
given on 3 days/week is the regimen of choice.
Nebulised pentamidine given once monthly, ato-
vaquone or a combination of oral pyrimethamine
and dapsone are alternatives for patients who
cannot tolerate co-trimoxazole. PCP prophylaxis
may be stopped in patients who have responded
well to HAART with control of viral replication and
recovery of CD4 cell counts.
Mycobacterial infection
Mycobacterium tuberculosis (see
also Chapter 7)
Patients with HIV infection and impaired CD4
lymphocyte function are highly susceptible to de-
veloping reactivation of previously acquired latent
tuberculosis and to contracting the disease from
an exogenous source, with rapid progression to
active disease. Early in HIV disease, tuberculosis
resembles the typical disease seen in non-HIV
patients, with upper lobe consolidation and cavi-
tation. In severely immunocompromised patients
the clinical features may be very non-speciﬁc with
fever, weight loss, malaise, diffuse shadowing on
chest X-ray and a high incidence of extrapulmon-
ary disseminated disease. Standard anti-tubercu-
losis treatment is given using isoniazid, rifampicin,
pyrazinamide and ethambutol (see Chapter 7).
Bacillus Calmette– Guerin (BCG) vaccination is
contraindicated in HIV infection because of the
risk of active infection developing with the live
attenuated vaccine bacillus in severely immuno-
compromised patients. Because of their impaired
cellular immunity, patients with HIV are very sus-
ceptible to contracting and transmitting tubercu-
losis so that strict isolation precautions are war-
ranted, particularly for patients with multidrug-
resistant tuberculosis.
Figure 6.5 Pneumocystis pneumonia. This 28-year-old
woman,
who
was
an
intravenous
drug
misuser,
presented with fever, dyspnoea and hypoxaemia (Po2
8.2 kPa (62 mmHg)). Chest X-ray shows diffuse bilateral
perihilar and lower zone shadowing. HIV antibody test
was positive and CD4 T-lymphocyte count was 100/
mm3 (normal 600–1600/mm3). Induced sputum was
positive
for
Pneumocystis
jirovecii
on
immuno-
ﬂuorescent monoclonal antibody testing. The patient
responded
fully
to
high-dose
intravenous
co-
trimoxazole, prednisolone and oxygen, and she was
then commenced on long-term secondary prophylaxis
with
oral
co-trimoxazole
3 days/week.
When
her
pneumocystis pneumonia had been fully treated
highly active anti-retroviral therapy was started.
64
Respiratory diseases

Mycobacterium avium–intracellulare
complex
This is an opportunistic mycobacterium that does
not usually cause disease in normal subjects but
which commonly infects patients with advanced
AIDS, particularly when the CD4 count is < 100/
mm3.Extrapulmonary diseaseis morecommonthan
pulmonary disease and the diagnosis of disseminat-
ed Mycobacterium avium–intracellulare complex
(MAIC) is usually made when the organism is cul-
tured from blood, bone marrow, lymph node or
liver biopsy. The organism is not usually responsive
to standard anti-tuberculosis drugs and it is treated
with a combination of rifabutin, ethambutol, cip-
roﬂoxacin and clarithromycin or azithromycin.
Viral infections
Cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection is common in
AIDS, usually causing systemic infection with hep-
atitis, retinitis, encephalitis and colitis, rather than
overt pulmonary infection. CMV is often isolated
from the lungs of AIDS patients but it is not always
pathogenic, sometimes being present as a com-
mensal. It is treated with ganciclovir. Epstein–Barr
virus, adenovirus, inﬂuenza and herpes simplex
virus may cause pneumonia in AIDS patients.
Herpes simplex virus is frequently present in the
mouth of HIV-infected patients so that its isolation
from the respiratory tract often indicates coloni-
sation rather than infection.
Fungal pulmonary infections
Invasive pulmonary infections with Aspergillus
fumigatus or Candida albicans are unusual but
may occur late in the course of AIDS. Cryptococcal
pneumonia may occur as part of a disseminated
infection but usually meningoencephalitis domi-
nates the clinical picture. Treatment is with ﬂu-
conazole, ﬂucytosine and amphotericin. Pulmo-
nary histoplasmosis and coccidioidomycosis may
occur in areas where these fungi are endemic
(e.g. USA).
HIV-related neoplasms
Kaposi's sarcoma
This is the most common malignancy in HIV-
infected patients. Characteristically, it occurs in
HIV-infected homosexual men and it is thought
that this may relate to co-infection with human
herpes virus 8. Pulmonary Kaposi’s sarcoma is
nearly always accompanied by lesions in the skin
or buccal mucosa. Chest X-ray appearances are
variable as the tumour may affect the bronchi, lung
parenchyma, pleura or mediastinal lymph nodes.
At bronchoscopy Kaposi’s sarcoma appears as
red or purple lesions. The diagnosis isusually made
on the basis of the visual appearances in the con-
text of mucocutaneous Kaposi’s sarcoma as biopsy
of the bronchial lesions is often non-diagnostic
and
may
cause
haemorrhage.
Anti-retroviral
therapy (HAART) may lead to regression of
Kaposi’s sarcoma but anti-neoplastic chemother-
apy (e.g. doxorubicin, paclitaxel) is often needed.
Lymphoma
Late in the course of AIDS, high-grade B-cell
lymphomas arise. The lungs are often involved as
part of multiorgan involvement. Primary effusion
lymphoma can occur and may present with
pleural, pericardial or peritoneal effusions. The
response to chemotherapy is often poor.
Interstitial pneumonitis
Patients with HIV infection may develop non-
speciﬁc interstitial pneumonitis (NSIP). This pre-
sents as episodes of dyspnoea with pulmonary
inﬁltrates, reduced gas diffusion and hypoxaemia.
Bronchoalveolar lavage is negative for infection
and lung biopsy shows evidence of lymphocytic
inﬂammation. It may be a manifestation of direct
HIV infection of the lung. It is often self-limiting
but prednisolone may be beneﬁcial.
Lymphoid interstitial pneumonitis is usually
seen only in children with HIV infection, and the
pneumonitis may be part of more widespread
lymphocytic inﬁltration of liver, bone marrow and
parotid glands with hypergammaglobulinaemia.
Its aetiology is uncertain but it may be related to
Epstein–Barr virus co-infection.
Primary pulmonary hypertension
(see Chapter 15)
ThisisararecomplicationofHIVinfectionandmay
result from the effect of inﬂammatory mediators
and cytokines, produced by infection of the lung
with the HIV virus, on the pulmonary circulation.
Immune reconstitution syndromes
When anti-retroviral therapy (HAART) inhibits vi-
ral replication there is a corresponding increase in
Pneumonia 65

the population of T-cells, enhancement of lympho-
proliferative responses and increased 1L-2 recep-
tor expression. These proinﬂammatory effects may
give rise to certain syndromes associated with
immune reconstitution. Some patients develop a
sarcoid-like granulomatous disorder with diffuse
opacities on chest X-ray, lymphadenopathy, sali-
vary gland enlargement and elevated serum an-
giotensin-converting enzyme levels. Pulmonary
hypersensitivity reactions to anti-retroviral drugs
have also been described. Paradoxical deteriora-
tion of opportunistic pneumonia (e.g. PCP, tuber-
culosis), despite antibiotic therapy, may occur as
the patient mounts an inﬂammatory response.
This may be severe enough to cause acute respi-
ratory failure and requires corticosteroid therapy.
In patients presenting with HIV infection and low
CD4 counts, opportunistic infections should be
sought and treated before starting HAART.
Respiratory emergencies Pneumonia
. Urgent chest X-ray is key in conﬁrming the
diagnosis.
. Enquire about travel, recent inﬂuenza, contact
with animals, allergy to antibiotics.
. Full blood count, urea/electrolytes, C-reactive
protein.
. Assess severity: CURB-65 score – Confusion,
Urea, Respiratory rate, Blood pressure, age.
. Assess oxygenation (02sat/blood gases), social
circumstances, comorbid illness.
. In severe pneumonia send blood and sputum for
microbiology cultures, and urine for pneumo-
coccal and legionella antigen.
. Give antibiotics urgently: mild – amoxicillin
500 mg t.d.s. orally, moderate/severe – IV
co-amoxiclav 1.2 g t.d.s. þ clarithromycin
500 mg b.d.;
. Consider prophylaxis for venous thrombosis e.g.
tinzaparin 3500 units subcutaneously daily;
. Monitor respiratory rate, 02sat, pulse, blood
pressure, temperature;
. Review frequently. Switch from intravenous to
oral antibiotics when improving. If not improving
consider other diagnoses (e.g. pulmonary em-
bolism) or complications (e.g. empyema);
. Arrange clinical review and chest X-ray 6 weeks
after discharge from hospital.
KEY POINTS
. Pneumonia is an important cause of morbidity
and mortality in all age groups.
. About 1 in 1000 of the UK population are ad-
mitted to hospital each year with pneumonia
and the mortality is 10%.
. Streptococcus pneumoniae is the most com-
mon cause of community-acquired pneumo-
nia, but atypical pathogens (e.g. Mycoplasma
pneumoniae) are also important such that
treatment is often with a combination of
amoxicillin and a macrolide antibiotic (e.g.
clarithromycin).
. Gram-negative organisms (e.g. Pseudomonas
aeruginosa) are the main cause of hospital-
acquired pneumonia such that treatment is
often with antibiotics such as ceftazidime,
meropenem or piperacillin with tazobactam.
. The severity of community-acquired pneumo-
nia should be assessed using the CURB-65
score (confusion, elevated urea, respiratory
rate, blood pressure, age >65 years)
. Patients with HIV are initially vulnerable to lung
infections with bacteria (e.g. Streptococcus
pneumoniae, Mycobacterium tuberculosis).
When the CD4 count falls below 200/mm3
opportunistic infections (e.g. PCP) develop.
FURTHER READING
American Thoracic Society. Guidelines for the
management of adults with hospital-acquired,
ventilation-associated and healthcare-associat-
ed pneumonia. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2005;
171: 388–416.
Barlow G, Nathwani D, Davey P. The CURB65
pneumonia severity score outperforms generic
sepsis and early warning scores in predicting
mortality in community- acquired pneumonia.
Thorax 2007; 62: 253–9.
British Society for Antimicrobial Chemotherapy.
Report
of
the
working
party
on
hospital-
acquired pneumonia of the British Society for
Antimicrobial Chemotherapy. JAC2008;62: 5–34.
British Thoracic Society Community Acquired
Pneumonia in Adults Guideline Group. Guide-
lines
for
the
management
of
community
acquired pneumonia in adults: update 2009.
Thorax 2009; 64 (Suppl III): 1–61.
66
Respiratory diseases

Hoare Z, Lim WS. Pneumonia: update on diagnosis
and management. BMJ 2006; 332: 1077–9.
Hull MW, Phillips P, Montaner JSG. Chang-
ing global epidemiology of pulmonary mani-
festations of HIV/AIDS. Chest 2008; 134: 1287–
98.
Ong ELC. Common AIDS-associated opportunistic
infections. Clin Med 2008; 8: 539–43.
Woodhead M, Blasi F, Ewig S, et al. European
Society Task Force. Guidelines for the manage-
ment of adult lower respiratory tract infections.
Eur Respir J 2005; 26: 1138–80.
World Health Organization. Consensus document
on the epidemiology of severe acute respiratory
syndrome (SARS). WHO, 2003 (http://www.
who.int/csr/sars/en/WHOconsensus.pdf)
Pneumonia 67

7
Tuberculosis
Tuberculosis is an infection caused by Mycobac-
terium tuberculosis that may affect any part of the
body but most commonly affects the lungs. It is
spread by a person inhaling the bacterium in
droplets coughed or exhaled by someone with
infectious tuberculosis.
Epidemiology
The World Health Organization estimates that
2 billion people (one-third of the world’s popu-
lation) have latent infection with Mycobacterium
tuberculosis, 15–20 million people have active
disease and 1.8 million deaths occur each year
from tuberculosis (95% in the developing world).
One hundred years ago in the UK more than 30000
people died from tuberculosis each year (about the
same as for lung cancer at present). Mortality and
notiﬁcation rates declined steadily from 1900 on-
wards because of improvement in nutritional and
social factors, with a sharper decline occurring
from the late 1940s onwards after the introduction
of effective treatment (Fig. 7.1). Notiﬁcation rates
in England and Wales reached a low point of about
5000 a year in 1987 but have increased again to
about 8500 a year recently. This increased inci-
dence of tuberculosis is mainly seen in those born
abroad and in ethnic minority groups. The notiﬁ-
cation rates for tuberculosis are highest in the
Black African (211 per 100 000 population), Pakis-
tani (145 per 100 000) and Indian (104 per 100 000)
ethnic groups and lowest in the White ethnic group
(4 per 100 000). The recent increase in notiﬁcation
rates is partly the result of patterns of immigration
and increasing international travel. Other groups
of people with a high incidence of tuberculosis are
the homeless, those misusing drugs and alcohol
and people co-infected with the human immuno-
deﬁciency virus (HIV). In younger age groups
tuberculosis is often newly acquired infection
whereas in the older age groups it is often reacti-
vation of latent infection acquired many years
previously. Factors that reduce resistance and
precipitate reactivation include ageing, alcohol
misuse,poornutrition,debilityfromotherdiseases,
use of immunosuppressive drug therapy and co-
infection with HIV. In the UK, overlap between the
populationwithHIVinfection(mainlyyoungWhite
men) and the population with tuberculosis (mainly
older White people and younger immigrants from
the Indian subcontinent) is limited so that only 5%
of patients with acquired immune deﬁciency syn-
drome (AIDS) have tuberculosis and about 6% of
patients with tuberculosis are identiﬁed as having
HIV infection. However, 4.5 million people world-
wide areestimated tobeco-infected with HIV and
tuberculosis (98% in developing countries).
Clinical course (Fig. 7.2)
The clinical course of tuberculosis often evolves
over
many
years
and
represents
a complex
Respiratory Medicine Lecture Notes, Eighth Edition. Stephen J. Bourke and Graham P. Burns.
 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

interaction
between
the
infecting
organism
(Mycobacterium tuberculosis) and the person’s
speciﬁc immune response and non-speciﬁc resis-
tance to infection. Traditional descriptions of
tuberculosis divide the disease into two main
patterns, primary and post-primary tuberculosis,
although these are mainly based upon the charac-
teristic evolution of the disease in the days before
effective chemotherapy.
Primary tuberculosis
Primary tuberculosis is the pattern of disease seen
with ﬁrst infection in a person (often a child)
without speciﬁc immunity to tuberculosis. Infec-
tion is acquired by inhalation of organisms from an
infected individual, and the initial lesion typically
develops in the peripheral subpleural region of
the lung followed by a reaction in the hilar lymph
nodes. The primary complex appears on chest
X-ray
as
a
peripheral
area
of
consolidation
(Gohn focus) with hilar adenopathy. Occasionally,
erythema nodosum develops at this stage. An
immune response develops, the tuberculin test
becomes positive and healing often takes place.
This stage of the disease is often asymptomatic but
may leave calciﬁed nodules on chest X-rays repre-
senting the healed primary focus. Active progres-
sion of ﬁrst infection may occur. Bronchial spread
of infection may cause progressive consolidation
and cavitation of the lung parenchyma, and pleural
effusions may develop. Lymphatic spread of infec-
tion may cause progressive lymph node enlarge-
ment, which in children may compress bronchi
with obstruction, distal consolidation and the
development
of
collapse
and
bronchiectasis.
Bronchiectasis of the middle lobe is a very typical
outcome of hilar node involvement by tuberculosis
in childhood. Haematogenous spread of infection
results in early generalisation of disease that may
cause miliary tuberculosis, and the lethal compli-
cation of tuberculous meningitis (particularly in
young children). Infection spread during this
initial illness may lie dormant in any organ of the
body (e.g. bone, kidneys) for many years only to
reactivate many years later.
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
1950–1995
Notifications
Deaths
Notifications/deaths (thousands)
Figure 7.1 Notiﬁcations of tuberculosis and deaths in England and Wales, 1950–1995. Notiﬁcations of tuberculosis
have declined from about 50 000 in 1950 to 5000 in 1987, since when notiﬁcations have increased to about 6500 per
year. The recent increase is related to factors such as immigration, international travel and co-infection with HIV.
(Reproduced with permission from The Prevention and Control of Tuberculosis in the United Kingdom, Department of
Health, 1996.)
Tuberculosis 69

Post-primary tuberculosis
Post-primary tuberculosis is the pattern of disease
seen after the development of speciﬁc immunity.
It may occur following direct progression of the
initial infection or result from endogenous reacti-
vation of infection or from exogenous re-infection
(inhalation of Mycobacterium tuberculosis from
another infected individual) in a patient who has
had previous contact with the organism and has
developed a degree of speciﬁc immunity. Reacti-
vation particularly occurs in old age and in circum-
stances where immunocompetence is impaired
(e.g. illness, alcohol misuse, immunosuppressive
drug treatment). The lungs are the most usual site
of post-primary disease and the apices of the lungs
are the most common pulmonary site.
Diagnosis
Clinical features
Deﬁnitive diagnosis requires identiﬁcation of
Mycobacterium tuberculosis because the clinical
features of the disease are non-speciﬁc. The most
typical chest symptoms are persistent cough, spu-
tum production and haemoptysis. Systemic symp-
toms include fever, night sweats, anorexia and
Primary complex
Primary tuberculosis
Post-primary tuberculosis
Most asymptomatic
healing in 4–8 weeks
Healed quiescent
tuberculosis
Calcified primary
focus
Reactivation
?
Reinfection
Lymph node
Collapse
bronchiectasis
Pneumonic spread
Effusion
Blood-
borne
spread
Miliary
TB
TB meningitis
(Late)
Kidney       Bone
(+  extrapulmonary
forms)
Miliary TB
(Often
'occult')
Adult pulmonary tuberculosis
Figure 7.2 Summary of the natural history of tuberculosis (TB).
70
Respiratory diseases

weight loss. A range of chest X-ray abnormalities
occur (Figs 7.3 and 7.4). Cavitating apical lesions
are characteristic of tuberculosis but such lesions
may also be caused by lung cancer. Irregular mot-
tled shadowing (particularly of the lung apices),
streaky
ﬁbrosis,
calciﬁed
granuloma,
miliary
mottling, pleural effusions and hilar gland enlarge-
ment may all be features of tuberculosis.
Diagnosis depends on the doctor having a high
level of awareness of the many presentations of
tuberculosis and undertaking appropriate investi-
gations (e.g. sputum acid- and alcohol-fast bacilli
(AAFB) staining and culture for tuberculosis) in
patients with persistent chest symptoms or abnor-
mal X-rays. A high index of suspicion is required in
assessing patients who have recently immigrated
from a high-prevalence area (e.g. Africa, Indian
subcontinent), and in patients at risk for reactiva-
tion of infection because of factors that lower
their resistance (age, alcohol misuse, debilitating
disease, use of immunosuppressive drugs).
Although tuberculosis most commonly affects
the lungs, any organ in the body may be involved
and the diagnosis needs to be considered in pa-
tients with a pyrexia of unknown origin and in
patients with a variety of indolent chronic lesions
(e.g. in bone, kidney or lymph nodes). The term
miliary tuberculosis refers to a situation where
there has been widespread haematogenous dis-
semination of tuberculosis, usually with multiple
Figure
7.3 This
24-year-old man
presented with
malaise, fever and weight loss without any respiratory
symptoms. Six months previously he had immigrated to
the UK from Pakistan. X-ray shows multiple 1–2 mm
nodules
throughout
both
lungs
characteristic
of
miliary tuberculosis. Sputum and bronchoalveolar
lavage did not show acid- and alcohol-fast bacilli
(AAFB). Transbronchial biopsies, however, showed
caseating granulomas characteristic of tuberculosis.
His
symptoms
resolved
and
the
chest
X-ray
appearances returned to normal after 6 months of
anti-tuberculosis chemotherapy.
Figure 7.4 This 68-year-old man was persuaded to
consult a doctor because of a 6-month history of
cough, haemoptysis, night sweats and weight loss. He
suffered from alcoholism and lived in a hostel for
homeless men. His chest X-ray shows cavitating
consolidation throughout the right upper lobe with
further areas of consolidation in the left upper and
right lower lobes. Sputum acid- and alcohol-fast bacilli
(AAFB) stains were positive and cultures yielded
Mycobacterium
tuberculosis
sensitive
to
standard
drugs. He was treated with directly observed anti-
tuberculosis therapy. Six of 38 residents of the hostel
were
found
to
have
active
tuberculosis.
DNA
ﬁngerprinting techniques showed that this cluster of
six cases was caused by three different strains of
Mycobacterium tuberculosis arising as a result of both
reactivation of latent tuberculosis in debilitated elderly
men and spread of infection within the hostel.
Tuberculosis 71

‘millet-seed’ size nodules evident on chest X-ray.
Chest symptoms are often minimal and typically
the patient is ill and pyrexial with anaemia and
weight loss.
Laboratory diagnosis
Identiﬁcation
of
Mycobacterium
tuberculosis
by laboratory tests may take some time and anti-
tuberculosis treatment may have to be com-
menced based on clinical and radiological features
while awaiting the results of laboratory tests. Once
the diagnosis is suspected, repeated sputum sam-
ples should be examined by the Ziehl–Neelsen
(ZN) method looking for AAFB that appear as red
rods on a blue background. Sputum cultures
require special media (e.g. L€owenstein–Jensen
medium) and the tubercle bacillus grows slowly
taking 4–7 weeks to give a positive culture and
a further 3 weeks for the in vitro testing of antibiotic
sensitivity. Biopsy of an affected site (e.g. pleura,
lymph node, liver, bone marrow) may show the
characteristic features of caseating granuloma
(central cheesy necrosis of a lesion formed by
macrophages, lymphocytes and epithelial cells).
Biopsy specimens should also be submitted for
mycobacterial cultures. Newer techniques are
being developed to improve the speed, sensitivity
and speciﬁcity of the laboratory diagnosis of
tuberculosis. The Bactec radiometric system,
for example, uses a liquid medium containing
a radioactively labelled 14C-labelled substance that
releases 14CO2 when metabolised, and detection of
this reﬂects the growth of Mycobacterium tuber-
culosis. DNA techniques using the polymerase
chain reaction are being developed and may, for
example, prove useful in detecting evidence of
infection in cerebrospinal ﬂuid in tuberculous
meningitis. DNA ﬁngerprint techniques make it
possible to distinguish different strains of Myco-
bacterium tuberculosis. This can give useful
insights into the likely sources and spread of
infection and help assess the relative contribution
of newly acquired and reactivated infection in
different populations.
Treatment (Table 7.1)
Before effective antibiotics became available in the
late 1940s, about 50% of patients with sputum-
positive tuberculosis died of the disease. Patients
were admitted to sanatoria for bed rest, ‘sunshine
and fresh air’ therapy and nutritional support in an
attempt to enhance their own resistance to the
disease. When large tuberculous cavities devel-
oped in the lungs attempts were made to collapse
the cavities by inducing an artiﬁcial pneumotho-
rax, crushing the phrenic nerve, instilling various
materials outside the pleura to compress the lung
(plombage) or performing thoracoplasty, whereby
the ribs were excised and the lung compressed
Table 7.1 Treatment of tuberculosis
Dose
Drug
Children
Adult
Duration
Adverse effects
Isoniazid
10 mg/kg
300 mg
6 months
Hepatitis, neuropathy
Rifampicin
10 mg/kg
< 50 kg 450 mg
6 months
Hepatitis, rashes
>50 kg 600 mg
Enzyme induction
Pyrazinamide
35 mg/kg
< 50 kg 1.5 g
Initial
Hepatitis, rashes
>50 kg 2.0 g
2 months
Elevated uric acid
Ethambutol
15 mg/kg
15 mg/kg
2 months
Optic neuritis
. 6 months of rifampicin and isoniazid, with pyrazinamide and ethambutol for ﬁrst 2 months
. Monitor treatment meticulously (e.g. monthly review)
. Check compliance
. Use directly observed therapy if problems with compliance
. Notify the diagnosis to Public Health Authorities
. Contact tracing of close family contacts.
72
Respiratory diseases

against the mediastinum (Fig. 7.5). In the late 1940s
streptomycin and para-amino salicylic acid (PAS)
were introduced into clinical practice and the out-
look for patients with tuberculosis was revolutio-
nised. It soon became apparent that treatment had
to be prolonged and combinations of antibiotics
had to be used because of the capacity of the
tubercle bacillus to lie dormant in lesions for long
periods and to develop resistance to antibiotics.
The current standard treatment of tuberculosis
consists of 6 months of rifampicin and isoniazid,
supplemented by pyrazinamide and ethambutol
for the ﬁrst 2 months. All drugs are usually given in
a single daily dose. Rifampicin and isoniazid are
bactericidal drugs that kill extracellular bacilli
which are actively metabolising. Both rifampicin
and pyrazinamide are effective against intracellu-
lar bacilli within macrophages. Prolonged treat-
ment is needed to eradicate bacilli lying dormant.
The use of the combination of drugs also prevents
the emergence of resistance from the small num-
ber of bacilli that are naturally resistant to any one
of the antibiotics. Ethambutol is bacteriostatic and
is included in the treatment regimen to prevent the
emergence of resistance to other drug. Meticulous
supervision of treatment is essential and patients
should be seen at least monthly for prescription of
medication, checking of compliance with treat-
ment and monitoring for side-effects (e.g. liver
function tests). Errors in the prescription of med-
ication or failure of the patient to comply with
treatment may have serious consequences with
the emergence of resistant organisms. Directly
observed therapy should be instituted for patients
who have difﬁculty complying with treatment,
whereby the patient is observed to ensure that he
or she swallows the medication. Sometimes this
can be achieved by giving high doses of the anti-
tuberculosis medication three times per week with
the patient attending a hospital or general practice
clinic to be given the medication under the super-
vision of a doctor or nurse. Flexible strategies
are required to ensure compliance of patients
with social (e.g. homelessness) or psychological
(e.g. alcohol misuse, mental illness) problems
and there is an important role for community
health workers or trained laypersons in these
circumstances.
At present, drug-resistant tuberculosis is rare in
the initial treatment of patients from the White
ethnic group in the UK, but is more common in
patients who have had previous treatment or who
come from Africa or the Indian subcontinent.
Overall about 7.8% of isolates of Mycobacterium
tuberculosis are resistant to isoniazid, 1.7% are
resistant to rifampicin and 1.2% have multiple drug
resistance.
Multidrug-resistant
tuberculosis
results from inadequate previous treatment. The
development of resistant organisms in a patient
failing to comply with treatment may make the
tuberculosis very difﬁcult to treat, and such
a patient poses a risk to public health because he
Figure 7.5 Thoracoplasty. Before effective antibiotics
became available in the late 1940s about 50% of pa-
tients with sputum-positive tuberculosis died of the
disease. At that time attempts were sometimes made
to collapse large tuberculous cavities by performing
a thoracoplasty, an operation in which the ribs were
resected and the lung was compressed against the
mediastinum
Tuberculosis 73

or she may infect others with drug-resistant tuber-
culosis. Some outbreaks of multidrug-resistant
tuberculosis have occurred in prisons and hospi-
tals with high mortality rates.
The most dangerous of the adverse reactions to
anti-tuberculosis treatment is hepatotoxicity, and
patients should be advised to stop treatment and
report for medical advice if they develop fever,
vomiting, malaise or jaundice. Isoniazid, rifampi-
cin and pyrazinamide may all cause hepatitis and
allergic reactions such as rashes. Isoniazid may
cause a peripheral neuropathy and this is pre-
ventable by pyridoxine 10 mg/day, which is given
routinely to those at risk of neuropathy (e.g. pa-
tients with diabetes or alcohol misuse). Intermit-
tent rifampicin may cause ‘ﬂu-like’ symptoms, and
the induction of microsomal hepatic enzymes
reduces the serum half-life of drugs such as
warfarin,steroids,phenytoinandoestrogencontra-
ceptives so that patients may need adjustment in
dosage of medications and may need to use alter-
native contraceptive measures. Rifampicin pro-
duces a reddish discoloration of urine (which may
be used to monitor compliance) and may cause
stainingof softcontactlenses.Pyrazinamidesome-
times causes initial facial ﬂushing, and may cause
an elevation of uric acid levels with arthralgia.
Ethambutol causes a dose-related optic neuritis,
whichisrareatdosesbelow15 mg/kg/day.Patients
should have their visual acuity checked before
starting treatment and should stop the drug if
visual symptoms occur, and the drug should be
avoided if possible in patients with impaired renal
function or pre-existing visual problems.
Latent tuberculosis
The term ‘latent tuberculosis’ refers to the
situation where a person has been infected with
Mycobacterium tuberculosis at some time but does
not currently have active disease. The immune
response has controlled the primary infection but
all viable organisms might not have been elimi-
nated. It is estimated that there is a 5–10% risk of
a person with latent tuberculosis developing active
disease at some stage over the course of their life.
The greatest risk of progression to disease is within
2 years of the initial infection and this is particu-
larly relevant when undertaking contact tracing
procedures of people who may have acquired in-
fection
recently
from
a
patient
with
active
tuberculosis. Factors that increase the risk of re-
activation of latent infection include ageing, alco-
hol misuse, poor nutrition, co-infection with HIV
and use of immunosuppressive drugs. Recently,
for example, tumour necrosis factor alpha antago-
nists are being used in the treatment of Crohn’s
disease and rheumatoid arthritis, and these im-
munosuppressive treatments are associated with a
signiﬁcant risk of reactivation of latent tuberculous
infection such that latent infection should be
sought and treated before starting such treat-
ments. People with latent tuberculosis are asymp-
tomatic and usually have a normal chest X-ray.
Detection of latent infection depends on demon-
strating an immune response to Mycobacterium
tuberculosis using a tuberculin test or an interfer-
on-gamma-based blood test.
Tuberculin testing
(Fig. 7.6)
Hypersensitivity to the tubercle bacillus can be
detected by the intradermal injection of a puriﬁed
protein derivative (PPD) of the organism. The
response is of the type IV cell-mediated variety
and results in a raised area of induration and
reddening of the skin. In the Mantoux test 0.1 mL
of tuberculin solution is injected intradermally
(not subcutaneously) and the test is read at
48–72 hours. A positive result is indicated by red-
ness and induration at least 10 mm in diameter. If
active tuberculosis is suspected the lowest dilution
may be used initially to prevent a severe reaction,
and higher concentrations used if there is no
reaction.
The
Heaf
test
is
performed
with
a spring-loaded needled ‘gun’. A drop of undiluted
PPD (100 000 TU/mL) is placed on the volar surface
of the forearm and the ‘gun’ is used to puncture
through the PPD solution. The reaction is graded
from I to IV according to the formation of papules
and the extent of induration. A positive tuberculin
test indicates the presence of hypersensitivity to
tuberculin resulting from either previous infection
with tubercle bacillus or from bacillus Calmette–
Guerin (BCG) vaccination. A weak reaction may
be non-speciﬁc and indicate contact with other
non-tuberculous
environmental
mycobacteria.
A strongly positive test in a child who has
not received BCG vaccination is likely to indicate
primary
infection.
If
there
is
evidence
of
74
Respiratory diseases

active disease, full anti-tuberculosis treatment is
required; if there is no evidence of active disease
chemoprophylaxis is advisable. A source among
adult contacts of the child must be carefully
sought. A negative tuberculin test makes active
tuberculosis unlikely and indicates a lack of im-
munity so that BCG vaccination is recommended.
Interferon-gamma release assays
Tuberculin
skin
tests
lack
speciﬁcity
in
diagnosing Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection
since a positive reaction may be the result of
previous BCG vaccination or to exposure to non-
tuberculous mycobacteria. In recent years labora-
tory assays have been developed that measure
the release of interferon gamma from a patient’s
T-cells when exposed to speciﬁc antigens from
Mycobacterium tuberculosis. There are currently
two such assays available in the UK: the Quantifer-
on Gold assay (Cellestis Limited, Australia) and the
T-spot TB assay (Oxford Immunotec, Oxford, UK).
These tests require only a single blood test but
it needs to be analysed in the laboratory within
a few hours. These interferon-gamma blood tests
are most useful in more speciﬁc diagnosis of
MANTOUX
HEAF
Test dose
0.1 ml of solution by
intradermal injection
Dilution
Tuberculin
units
1:10 000
1:1000
1:100
1
10
100
Usually give 10 TU and
repeat 100 TU if negative
Place a drop of PPD
(100 000 TU/ml) on skin.
Fire spring-loaded
needled 'gun'.
3–7 days
48–72 hours
Read at:
1 mm
10 mm
Papule
Grade I
 4 papules
Grade II
confluent ring
Grade III (<10 mm)
+ raised centre
Grade IV (>10 mm)
+ vesiculation
Grade III and IV
reactions
Positive reactions
Papule 1 mm high
           10 mm diameter
with 100 TU or less
Figure 7.6 Tuberculin testing. In or-
der to standardise procedures the
Mantoux test is nowadays preferred
to the previous Heaf test.
Tuberculosis 75

latent Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection, but
they should not be used as a routine diagnostic tool
for active tuberculosis.
Control
Treating active disease
Prompt identiﬁcation and treatment of patients
with active tuberculosis limits the spread of infec-
tion. Sputum-positive patients (AAFB positive)
should be considered as potentially infectious until
they have completed 2 weeks of treatment. The
patient’s family will already have been exposed to
the risk of infection so that segregation of the
patient from contact with his or her family at the
time of diagnosis is not useful, and most patients
can be treated as outpatients. Where patients with
suspected or conﬁrmed tuberculosis are admitted
to hospital they should be kept in a single room.
Particular care is required if the patient has mul-
tidrug-resistant tuberculosis and these patients
should be treated in a negative pressure ventilation
room to prevent transmission of infection to other
patients or healthcare workers.
Contact tracing
When a diagnosis of tuberculosis is made there is
a statutory requirement in the UK for the doctor
to notify the patient to the public health author-
ities who are then responsible for undertaking
screening of contacts. The index patient may
have acquired infection from, or transmitted
infection to, someone in his or her close environ-
ment. It is usual to limit contact tracing to
household contacts and to close friends sharing
a similar level of contact with the index patient. If
initial investigations reveal a large number of
contacts with tuberculosis, consideration should
be given to widening the circle of contacts who
are offered screening. Typically about 1–3% of
close contacts of smear-positive cases are found
to have active disease, and many more have latent
infection.
Screening of contacts consists of a combination
of checking for symptoms of tuberculosis, chest
X-ray,
tuberculin
testing,
interferon-gamma
tests and assessment of BCG status. Most cases
of active tuberculosis are found at the ﬁrst clinic
visit in unvaccinated close contacts of smear-
positive disease. If the contact has not had BCG
vaccination a tuberculin test is performed and if
this is negative vaccination is recommended. For
children a tuberculin test is the usual initial
screening test. Children with a strongly positive
tuberculin test should have a chest X-ray. A
strongly positive tuberculin test with a normal
chest X-ray suggests that the child has been in-
fected with tubercle bacillus, has not developed
active disease but remains at risk of doing so in the
future. The risk of future activation of such latent
infection is reduced by chemoprophylaxis; which
consists of treatment for 6 months with isoniazid
alone
or
for
3
months
with
isoniazid
and
rifampicin. In latent tuberculosis there are many
thousand times fewer bacteria than in active
tuberculosis and treatment with a single drug for
6 months or two drugs for 3 months is sufﬁcient
to kill dormant bacteria. Those with a negative
tuberculin test should have it repeated 6 weeks
later (to ensure they are not in the process of
developing immunity to recently acquired infec-
tion), and if they remain tuberculin-negative BCG
vaccination is advisable.
Screening of immigrants
Immigrants from areas with a high prevalence of
tuberculosis (e.g. Africa, Indian subcontinent)
should be screened for tuberculosis on arrival in
a country of low prevalence such as the UK. Adults
should have a chest X-ray and children should have
a tuberculin test. Thereafter the procedure is as for
close contacts, with treatment of active disease,
chemoprophylaxis of latent infection or BCG vac-
cination as appropriate.
BCG vaccination
BCG is a live attenuated strain of tuberculosis that
provides about 75% protection against tubercu-
losis for about 15 years. It is given by intradermal
injection (not subcutaneous injection) and pro-
duces a local skin reaction. In the UK BCG vacci-
nation used to be offered to children at the age of 13
years. In 2005 this policy was changed from routine
to targeted vaccination whereby BCG vaccination
is offered to infants in communities with a high
incidence of tuberculosis (>40 per 100 000) and to
unvaccinated individuals who come from, or
whose parents come from, countries with a high
prevalence of tuberculosis.
76
Respiratory diseases

Non-tuberculous
mycobacteria (atypical
opportunist mycobacteria)
There are a number of other mycobacteria that can
cause pulmonary disease and that do not belong
to the Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex. These
are called ‘atypical’ or ‘opportunist’ mycobacteria
and the most common of these are Mycobacterium
kansasii, Mycobacterium avium-intracellulare
complex, Mycobacterium malmoense, Mycobac-
terium xenopi, Mycobacterium abscessus and
Mycobacterium chelonae. They are widespread in
nature and can be found in water and soil so that
sometimes contamination of clinical specimens
occurs from environmental sources. They act as
low-grade pathogens that do not usually pose a risk
to normal individuals. Infections occur mainly in
patients with impaired immunity (e.g. AIDS, see
Chapter 6) or in those with damaged lungs (e.g.
advanced emphysema, cystic ﬁbrosis, bronchiec-
tasis). They are often associated with chronic
symptoms such as cough, sputum production,
haemoptysis and weight loss. Diagnosis is made
on the basis of their characteristics on laboratory
culture tests. Treatment is often difﬁcult requiring
prolonged (e.g. 2 years) treatment with rifampicin
and ethambutol because these organisms often
show resistance to some standard anti-tuberculo-
sis antibiotics. Some more recently developed anti-
biotics (e.g. clarithromycin or ciproﬂoxacin) may
be useful in treatment. These organisms are
low-grade pathogens and do not pose a threat to
contacts of infected patients so that there is no
need for contact tracing procedures.
FURTHER READING
Ahmed AB, Abubakar I Delpech V, et al. The
growing impact of HIV infection on the epide-
miology of tuberculosis in England and Wales:
1999–2003. Thorax 2007; 62: 672–6.
American Thoracic Society/Centers for Disease
Control
and
Prevention/Infectious
Diseases
Society of America: Controlling tuberculosis in
the United States. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
2005; 172: 1169–227.
British Thoracic Society. Recommendations for as-
sessing risk and for managing Mycobacterium
tuberculosis infection and disease in patients due
to start anti-TNF-a treatment. Thorax 2005; 60:
800–5.
British Thoracic Society. Management of oppor-
tunist mycobacterial infections: Joint Tubercu-
losis Committee guidelines. Thorax 2000; 55:
210–18.
British Thoracic Society. Chemotherapy and man-
agement of tuberculosis in the United Kingdom.
Thorax 1998; 53: 536–48.
Davies PDO, Drobniewski F. The use of interferon-
gamma-based blood tests for the detection of
latent tuberculosis infection. Eur Respir J 2006;
28: 1–3.
Moore-Gillon J, Davies PD, Ormerod LP. Rethink-
ing TB screening: politics, practicalities and the
press. Thorax 2010; 65: 663–5.
National
Institute
for
Health
and
Clinical
Excellence. Clinical Guideline 33: Tuberculosis:
Clinical Diagnosis and Management of Tubercu-
losis, and Measures for its Prevention and
Control. London: NICE, 2006. ( http://www.
nice.org.uk/CG33).
KEY POINTS
. Worldwide, 2 billion people have latent infec-
tion with Mycobacterium tuberculosis and
15–20 million people have active tuberculosis.
. IntheUKtheincidenceoftuberculosisishighest
in the African, Pakistani and Indian ethnic
groups, in homeless people and in people with
reduced immunity because of ageing, alcohol
misuse, poor nutrition, immunosuppressive
drug treatments and co-infection with HIV.
. Diagnosis depends on having a high level of
awareness of the presentations of tuberculosis
and undertaking appropriate investigations
(e.g. sputum AAFB staining) to identify
Mycobacterium tuberculosis.
. Treatment consists of 6 months of rifampicin
and isoniazid with pyrazinamide and etham-
butol for the ﬁrst 2 months.
. Control of tuberculosis involves detection and
meticulous treatment of cases of active tuber-
culosis, notiﬁcation of the diagnosis to the
public health authorities, contact tracing to
detect active or latent infection in contacts
of the index case, and targeted vaccination of
groups with a high incidence of tuberculosis.
Tuberculosis 77

8
Bronchiectasis and lung
abscess
Bronchiectasis
Bronchiectasis is a chronic disease characterised
by irreversible dilatation of bronchi caused by
bronchial wall damage resulting from infection
and inﬂammation. These morphological changes
are usually accompanied by chronic suppurative
lung disease with cough productive of purulent
sputum.
Pathogenesis
Bronchiectasis represents a particular type of
bronchial injury that may result from a number of
different underlying disease processes. Damage to
the bronchial wall causes disruption of the muco-
ciliary escalator and allows bacteria to adhere to
the respiratory epithelium and colonise the lung.
Adherence of bacteria to the respiratory epitheli-
um often involves speciﬁc interactions between
adhesive structures on the bacterial membrane
and receptors on the mucosal surface. After injury
the airway epithelium undergoes a process of re-
pair that involves the spreading, migration and
proliferation of epithelial cells. During this process
epithelial cells synthesise ﬁbronectin, which is
required for cell migration, and integrin, that is
important for cell-to-cell adhesion. These ﬁbro-
nectin and integrin epithelial receptors are used by
the outer membrane protein of bacteria such as
Pseudomonas aeruginosa as sites of bacterial ad-
herence. Thus, key elements in the repair process
of epithelium are also major receptors for bacterial
adherence. The presence of bacteria at a normally
sterile site stimulates an inﬂammatory response as
part of the body’s attempt to eradicate infection.
However, in bronchiectasis this inﬂammatory re-
sponse is ineffective in eradicating infection and a
persistent cycle of chronic infection and inﬂam-
mation ensues resulting in further tissue damage.
Bronchiectasis may be conﬁned to one area of
the lung if there is a local cause (e.g. bronchial
obstruction by a foreign body) or may be diffuse if
there is a generalised cause (e.g. immunoglobulin
deﬁciency). The walls of the bronchi are inﬁltrated
by inﬂammatory cells, and are scarred and dilated
with reduced elastin content. The exact mechan-
isms giving rise to bronchiectasis are not fully
understood but the disease may become self-
perpetuating through a vicious circle of steps that
may be initiated in a variety of ways (Fig. 8.1).
. Impaired mucociliary clearance leads to accu-
mulation of secretions.
. Accumulated secretions predispose to bacterial
infection.
Respiratory Medicine Lecture Notes, Eighth Edition. Stephen J. Bourke and Graham P. Burns.
 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

. Infection provokes an inﬂammatory response,
increased mucus production and impaired cili-
ary function.
. Excessive inﬂammation causes tissue damage.
. Damage to the bronchial wall produces dilata-
tion of bronchi and disruption of mucociliary
clearance, and the vicious circle of injury
progresses.
Aetiology (Table 8.1)
Infections
Severe infections are one of the most common
causes of bronchial wall damage and bronchiecta-
sis. In childhood, pertussis (whooping cough) or
measles are important causes that are declining in
frequency as a result of childhood vaccination pro-
grammes. In adults, bronchiectasis may compli-
cate pneumonia resulting from virulent organisms
such as Streptococcus pneumoniae, Staphylococcus
aureus or Klebsiella pneumoniae.Better useof anti-
biotics has resulted in an overall decline in post-
infective bronchiectasis. Tuberculosis is still a
common cause of bronchiectasis in developing
countries. Recurrent aspiration pneumonia may
also lead to bronchiectasis. Many adults with idio-
pathic lower lobe bronchiectasis attribute their
disease to childhood lung infections.
Bronchial obstruction
Bronchiectasis may develop in an area of lung
obstructed by a bronchial carcinoma. In children,
inhalation of a foreign body (e.g. peanut) may give
rise to bronchial obstruction and distal bronchi-
ectasis. Lymph node enlargement as part of tu-
berculosis may compress a bronchus and give rise
to bronchiectasis. This particularly occurs in the
middle lobe.
Immunodeﬁciency states
Patients with congenital hypogammaglobulinae-
mia or selective immunoglobulin deﬁciencies
usually present with recurrent respiratory tract in-
fections in childhood. Sometimes the diagnosis
is not established until adulthood when bronchi-
ectasis may have developed. All patients with
bronchiectasis should have measurement of im-
munoglobulins IgG, IgA and IgM with serum elec-
trophoresis. Patients with immunoglobulin deﬁ-
cienciesrequirespecialistimmunologyassessment
Mucus
hypersecretion
Bacterial 
proliferation
3
3
2
Impaired 
ciliary action
Loss of
ciliated cells
Bacterial
proliferation
Accumulation of
secretions
Inflammatory
response
Proteases
3
4
Tissue
damage
5
1
Figure 8.1 Bronchiectasis is often a
progressive disease because
bronchial damage results in impaired
ciliary function with the accumulation
of secretions, secondary bacterial
infection, a destructive inﬂammatory
response and further bronchial
damage in a vicious
self-perpetuating circle.
Bronchiectasis and lung abscess 79

with
regard
to
intravenous
immunoglobulin
replacement therapy. Baseline speciﬁc antibody
levels to tetanus toxoid and the capsular polysac-
charides of Streptococcus pneumoniae and Haemo-
philus inﬂuenzae type b should be measured. If
baseline levels are low the adequacy of the humoral
responseshould beassessedbyimmunisation with
appropriate vaccines and re-measurement of anti-
body levels after 21 days. Immunoglobulin deﬁ-
ciencies may also arise secondary to malignancies
such as lymphoma or myeloma. Patients with
human immunodeﬁciency virus(HIV) infection
arealsosusceptibletorecurrentbacterialinfections
and bronchiectasis, and HIV testing should be
offered when appropriate (see Chapter 6).
Allergic bronchopulmonary
aspergillosis (Fig. 8.2)
Aspergillus fumigatus is a ubiquitous fungus that
may colonise the respiratory tract as an incidental
ﬁnding without giving rise to symptoms. Patients
with lung cavities (e.g. post-tuberculosis or sar-
coidosis) may develop an aspergilloma, which is a
ball of fungal hyphae that appears on X-ray as a
mass in the centre of a cavity surrounded by a halo
of radiolucency (Fig. 8.3). This is often asymptom-
atic, but associated inﬂammation may cause bron-
chial artery hypertrophy and haemoptysis requir-
ing surgical resection or therapeutic bronchial
artery embolisation. Invasive aspergillosis (e.g.
necrotising pneumonia or fungaemia) occurs in
immunocompromised patients.
Patients with asthma may develop an allergic
reaction to Aspergillus and demonstrate precipi-
tating antibodies to Aspergillus in their serum and
positive responses to skin prick tests. Some of
these patients develop allergic bronchopulmon-
ary aspergillosis in which there is intense bron-
chial inﬂammation with eosinophilia and high IgE
levels in the blood. Eosinophilic inﬁltrates in the
lung give rise to ﬂeeting X-ray shadows. Thick
mucus plugs cause obstruction of small bronchi
and give rise to bronchiectasis that is usually
proximal in location. All patients with bronchiec-
tasis should have measurement of serum IgE, skin
prick testing or speciﬁc serum IgE to Aspergillus
fumigatus and aspergillus precipitins. Treatment
requires suppression of the inﬂammatory immune
response by oral prednisolone and high-dose in-
haled corticosteroids.
Ciliary dyskinesia
The epithelial cells of the bronchi possess cilia that
beat in an organised way so as to move particles in
the layer of mucus on their surface upwards and
out of the lung. This mucociliary escalator is an
essential clearance mechanism. Ciliary function is
impaired by cigarette smoke and bacterial toxins.
Viral infections may cause widespread shedding of
ciliated respiratory cells. Bronchial damage of
whatever cause often disrupts the mucociliary
clearance mechanism impairing the lung defence
mechanisms and perpetuating the vicious circle of
bronchiectasis.
Primary ciliary dyskinesia is an autosomal re-
cessive condition in which there is an abnormality
of the ultrastructure of cilia throughout the body
such that they do not beat in a coordinated fashion.
Failure of ciliary function in the respiratory tract
gives rise to otitis, sinusitis and bronchiectasis. The
tail of sperm is also a ciliary structure and males
with primary ciliary dyskinesia are subfertile. It is
thought that cilia are also responsible for the
Table 8.1 Aetiology of bronchiectasis
Severe infection
Childhood pertussis
Bacterial pneumonia
Recurrent aspiration pneumonia
Tuberculosis
Bronchial obstruction
Foreign body (e.g. peanut)
Bronchial carcinoma
Lymph node enlargement
Immunodeﬁcient states
Hypogammaglobulinaemia
Immunodeﬁciency as a result of lymphoma
HIV infection
Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis
Cystic ﬁbrosis (see Chapter 9)
Ciliary dysfunction
Primary ciliary dyskinesia
Kartagener’s syndrome
Associated diseases
Ulcerative colitis
Rheumatoid arthritis
Idiopathic bronchiectasis
80
Respiratory diseases

normal rotation of internal structures in embry-
onic life so that failure of ciliary function results in
random rotation with about 50% of patients having
dextrocardia and situs inversus (e.g. appendix in
left iliac fossa). Ciliary dyskinesia with situs inver-
sus is known as Kartagener’s syndrome (Fig. 8.4).
An estimate of ciliary function can be obtained
by timing the nasal clearance of saccharin. In this
test a 1-mm cube of saccharin is placed on the
inferior turbinate of the nose. The time from plac-
ing the particle to the patient tasting the saccharin
is usually less than 30 minutes, and is a measure of
nasal ciliary clearance. However, this test is difﬁ-
cult to perform and a simple cold can disrupt
mucociliary clearance for up to 6 weeks. Patients
with primary ciliary dyskinesia characteristically
have low exhaled nasal nitric oxide levels. In men,
sperm motility may be assessed by microscopy of
seminal ﬂuid. However, deﬁnitive testing for pri-
mary ciliary dyskinesia requires referral to a des-
ignated specialist centre where a brush biopsy
of nasal mucosa is performed. The ultrastructure
Incidental finding
Incidental isolation from sputum
Isolation in atopic asthma (a)
Allergic aspergillosis
Asthma (a)
Fleeting lung shadows (b)
Eosinophilia
Later:
Upper lobe fibrosis (c)
'Proximal' bronchiectasis (d)
Mucoid impaction
Recurrent, segmental or lobar
collapse associated with
aspergillus plugs and bronchial
damage (e)
Mycetoma (f)
Fungus ball in cavity – from old TB,
cystic disease or ? spontaneous
Haemoptysis or symptomless
(a)
(a)
(d)
(c)
(e)
(f)
(b)
Figure 8.2 Summary of the clinical spectrum of Aspergillus lung disease. TB, tuberculosis.
Bronchiectasis and lung abscess 81

of cilia can then be assessed by electron micros-
copy and ciliary function can be assessed by mi-
croscope photometry that assesses the ciliary beat
frequency and pattern.
Cystic ﬁbrosis
Cystic ﬁbrosis usually presents in early childhood
with recurrent respiratory infections and failure to
thrive due to pancreatic insufﬁciency (see chapter
9). Nowadays it is usually detected by newborn
screening. However more than 1700 mutations of
thecysticﬁbrosisgenehavebeendescribedandthe
clinical spectrum of the disease has been extended
to include patients with less severe lung disease
and normal pancreatic function. Some of these
patients present with bronchiectasis in adulthood.
As such it is recommended that all children and
adults up to the age of 40 years should have sweat
tests and gene analysis for cystic ﬁbrosis. The
diagnosis of cystic ﬁbrosis should also be consid-
ered in older patients with persistent isolation of
Staphylococcus aureus, progressive bronchiectasis
or associated features such as malabsorption, pan-
creatitis, nasal polyposis or male infertility.
Associated diseases
Patients with certain diseases seem to have an
increased incidence of bronchiectasis. These dis-
eases include rheumatoid arthritis, ulcerative co-
litis, Crohn’s disease and coeliac disease but the
mechanism by which bronchiectasis arises in
these diseases is unclear.
Clinical features
The cardinal feature of bronchiectasis is chronic
cough productive of copious purulent sputum.
There is considerable variation in the severity of the
disease and mild cases are often misdiagnosed as
chronic bronchitis. Haemoptysis is common and
may occasionally be severe, requiring therapeutic
embolisation of hypertrophied bronchial arteries to
Figure 8.3 This 70-year-old woman had suffered from
tuberculosis in the 1950s that had resulted in bilateral
apical lung ﬁbrosis and severely impaired lung function
(forcedexpiratory volumein 1 second,0.5 L; forced vital
capacity, 1.1 L). She presented with recurrent major
haemoptysis,
and
chest
X-ray
showed
features
characteristic of an aspergilloma with an opacity in
the left apex surrounded by a halo of radiolucency.
Aspergillus hyphae were seen on sputum microscopy
and Aspergillus precipitins were present in her blood.
Tests for carcinoma and tuberculosis were negative.
Bronchial arteriography showed marked hypertrophy of
the bronchial artery to the left upper lobe and
therapeutic embolisation was performed resulting in
resolution of the haemoptysis.
Figure 8.4 This 60-year-old woman has primary ciliary
dyskinesia, which is an autosomal recessive disorder in
which abnormalities of ciliary structure and function
give rise to chronic upper and lower respiratory tract
infections such as otitis, sinusitis and bronchiectasis.
Cilia are also involved in the normal rotation of internal
structures in embryonic life and failure of ciliary function
results in random rotation such that 50% of these
patients have dextrocardia and situs inversus (e.g.
heart on the right side and appendix in the left iliac
fossa).
82
Respiratory diseases

control the bleeding source. Infective exacerbations
may be associated with fever and pleuritic pain.
Chronic severe bronchiectasis may cause malaise,
weight loss and halitosis (foul breath). Coarse
crackles may be audible over affected areas and
clubbing is sometimes present. Systemic spread of
infection (e.g. cerebral abscess) and secondary am-
yloidosis are now very rare because of control of
infection by antibiotics.
Investigations (Fig. 8.5)
A chest X-ray may show features of bronchiectasis
such as peribronchial thickening, which is evident
as parallel tramline shadowing, or cystic dilated
bronchi. However, the chest X-ray is often normal
in less severe cases and high-resolution computed
tomography(CT) is the key investigation in con-
ﬁrming the diagnosis and in determining the lo-
cation and extent of the disease. The CT features of
bronchiectasis are bronchial dilatation (internal
bronchial lumen diameter greater than the accom-
panying pulmonary artery) and lack of the normal
tapering of the bronchi peripherally. Diffuse bron-
chiectasis is seen in immune deﬁciency, ciliary
dyskinesia and cystic ﬁbrosis. Localised bronchi-
ectasis may follow an episode of pneumonia.
Having conﬁrmed the presence of bronchiecta-
sis, an attempt should be made to diagnose the
underlying cause of the bronchiectasis, and further
speciﬁc tests performed as indicated, for example
Aspergillus precipitins and skin prick tests (allergic
bronchopulmonary aspergillosis), immunoglobu-
lin level (hypogammaglobulinaemia), ciliary func-
tion tests (ciliary dyskinesia), and sweat tests with
genetic analysis for cystic ﬁbrosis. Bronchoscopy is
useful in detecting any endobronchial obstruction
in cases of
localised bronchiectasis. Sputum
microbiology should be performed to deﬁne what
infective organisms are present as a guide to anti-
biotic treatment. Mycobacterial cultures should
also be performed as non-tuberculous mycobac-
teria (e.g. Mycobacterium avium complex) are
sometimes associated with bronchiectasis (see
chapter 7). Lung function tests deﬁne the level of
any deﬁcit and help determine whether broncho-
dilator drugs may be helpful.
Treatment
. Speciﬁc treatment of the underlying cause is
rarely possible but relief of endobronchial ob-
struction (e.g. foreign body) is the key treatment
for some patients, intravenous immunoglobulin
replacement therapy is essential for patients with
hypogammaglobulinaemia, and suppression of
the inﬂammatory response by oral or inhaled
corticosteroidsisimportantinallergicaspergillosis.
. Chest physiotherapy is an effective treatment in
clearing secretions. Patients should receive in-
struction from a physiotherapist in airway clear-
ance techniques such as the active cycle of
breathing technique, oscillating positive expira-
tory pressure devices (e.g. ﬂutter, Acapella de-
vices), autogenic drainage and postural drainage
using gravity-assisted positions based on the
location of the bronchiectasis on CT scans. Neb-
ulised 7% hypertonic saline may be useful in
improving
sputum
clearance.
It
sometimes
provokes bronchoconstriction such that pre-
treatment with a bronchodilator (e.g. salbuta-
mol, terbutaline) is needed. Oral carbocisteine
is sometimes used as a mucolytic agent but
nebulised DNase, used in cystic ﬁbrosis, is not
effective in other forms of bronchiectasis.
. Antibiotics are used to suppress chronic infec-
tion and to treat exacerbations. High doses are
sometimes required to penetrate the scarred
bronchial mucosa and purulent secretions and
Figure8.5 This50-year-oldmanhad sufferedpertussis
pneumonia at the age of 18 months. He had chronic
cough productive of copious purulent sputum isolating
Pseudomonas
aeruginosa on
culture. CT
showed
extensive bilateral bronchiectasis with dilatation of
bronchi, cyst formation and patchy peribronchial
consolidation. He was treated with postural drainage
physiotherapy,
salbutamol,
long-term
nebulised
antibiotics (colistin) and intermittent courses of oral
ciproﬂoxacin or intravenous ceftazidime.
Bronchiectasis and lung abscess 83

it is often recommended that treatment should
be prolonged for 14 days. The choice of antibio-
tics is guided by the results of sputum microbi-
ology. Haemophilus inﬂuenzae and Streptococ-
cus pneumoniae are common and are usually
sensitive to amoxicillin. Long-term oral antibio-
tics (e.g. amoxicillin, doxycycline) are sometimes
used in severe disease but there is a risk of
promoting
antibiotic
resistance.
Moraxella
catarrhalis is usually associated with the pro-
duction of beta-lactamase so that co-amoxiclav
or ciproﬂoxacin may be useful. Pseudomonas
aeruginosa is common in severe disease and may
be treated by oral ciproﬂoxacin or intravenous
anti-pseudomonal antibiotics (e.g. meropenem,
ceftazidime, tobramycin). Chronic pseudomo-
nas infection is an adverse feature associated
with more severe bronchiectasis. When this or-
ganism is ﬁrst identiﬁed an attempt should be
made to eradicate it using oral ciproﬂoxacin 750
mg b.d. for 14 days. If this is not successful
options include a 4-week course of ciproﬂoxacin
with nebulised colistin, or a course of intrave-
nous anti-pseudomonas antibiotics. If pseudo-
monas is isolated persistently long-term nebu-
lised antibiotics (e.g. colistin, tobramycin) may
be used to suppress the infection and associated
inﬂammation.. Long-term treatment with a
macrolide antibiotic (e.g. azithromycin) may re-
duce the frequency of exacerbations of bronchi-
ectasis, possibly by an anti-inﬂammatory rather
than an anti-microbial effect. Pneumococcal
and inﬂuenza vaccinations are recommended
for patients with bronchiectasis.
. Bronchodilator drugs (e.g. salbutamol, terbuta-
line) and an inhaled steroid (e.g. beclometasone,
budesonide, ﬂuticasone)
are indicated
only
where there is associated reversible airways
obstruction.
. Surgical excision is a potential treatment for the
few patients who have localised disease and
troublesome symptoms. Lung transplantation
is an option for some patients whose disease has
progressed to respiratory failure.
Lung abscess (Fig. 8.6)
A lung abscess is a localised collection of pus
within a cavitated necrotic lesion in the lung
parenchyma. The chest X-ray characteristically
shows a cavitating lesion containing a ﬂuid level.
The patient typically complains of cough with ex-
pectoration of large amounts of foul material often
accompanied by haemoptysis, fever, weight loss
and malaise. It is important to distinguish between
a lung abscess and other causes of cavitating lung
lesions, such as a squamous cell carcinoma, and
bronchoscopy or percutaneous ﬁne-needle aspira-
tion of the lesion may be required.
The infection giving rise to a lung abscess may
arise via a number of routes. Oropharyngeal
Aspiration
Unconsciousness (e.g. alcohol)
Oropharyngeal sepsis
Oesophageal disease
Neuromuscular disease
Bronchopulmonary
sequestration
Transdiaphragmatic
Subphrenic abscess
Hepatic abscess
Trauma
Penetrating chest injury
Blood-borne sepsis
IV drug misuse
Infected pulmonary infarct
Necrobacillosis
Cavitating pneumonia
Staphylococcus aureus
Klebsiella pneumoniae
Streptococcus pneumoniae
Tuberculosis
Bronchial obstruction
Foreign body (e.g. peanut)
Tumour
Figure 8.6 Aetiology of lung abscess.
84
Respiratory diseases

aspiration is the most common cause and occurs
in states of unconsciousness (e.g. alcohol excess,
epilepsy, anaesthesia), and where there is dyspha-
gia as a result of oesophageal or neuromuscular
disease. Infection of the upper airways (e.g. sinus-
itis, dental abscess) may be an important source
of bacteria, and anaerobic organisms (e.g. Fuso-
bacteria, Prevotella) are common. Infection may
arise distal to bronchial obstruction caused by a
tumour or foreign body (e.g. inhaled peanut). The
centre of an area of destructive pneumonia may
break down to form a lung abscess particularly
when the pneumonia results from Staphylococcus
aureus or Klebsiella pneumoniae. Tuberculosis
may present as a lung abscess. Blood-borne in-
fection may occur by intravenous injection of
infected material by drug addicts. Pulmonary
emboli may cause pulmonary infarction, with
secondary infection giving rise to an abscess.
Penetrating chest trauma is an unusual cause of
lung
abscess.
Transdiaphragmatic
spread
of
infection may occur from a subphrenic abscess
(e.g. post-cholecystectomy) or a hepatic abscess
(e.g. amoebic abscess).
Drainage of pus from the abscess cavity is a key
aspect of treatment. This can often be achieved by
bronchial drainage using postural drainage phys-
iotherapy. Sometimes percutaneous drainage is
achieved by positioning a catheter drainage tube
under radiological guidance. Prolonged antibiotic
therapy is given in accordance with the likely
organism and the results of microbiology tests
(e.g. metronidazole
for anaerobic
infections).
Surgical excision of the abscess cavity is some-
times required where medical treatment fails.
Necrobacillosis
Necrobacillosis (Lemiere’s disease) is an unusual
cause of lung abscess that is associated with a very
characteristic clinical picture ﬁrst described by
Lemiere. Typically, a young adult develops a se-
vere sore throat with cervical adenopathy be-
cause of infection with the anaerobe, Fusobacter-
ium necrophorum. This is associated with a local
venulitis followed by a septicaemic illness with
haematogenous spread of infection. The lungs are
frequently involved with multiple abscesses form-
ing, often with a pleural empyema and evidence of
infection elsewhere (e.g. septic arthritis, osteomy-
elitis). Prolonged anaerobic blood culture is
required to identify the organism, which is sensi-
tive to metronidazole.
Bronchopulmonary
sequestration
Bronchopulmonary sequestration is a congenital
anomaly in which an area of lung is not connected
to the bronchial tree (i.e. ‘sequestered’) and has an
anomalous blood supply usually from the aorta. If
infection develops in the sequestration it often
progresses to an abscess because of lack of drain-
age to the bronchial tree. Surgical resection is
required but pre-operative bronchial arteriogra-
phy is necessary to identify the anomalous blood
supply.
KEY POINTS
. Bronchiectasis is characterised by permanent
dilatation of bronchi due to bronchial damage
caused by infection and inﬂammation.
. High-resolution CT is the key investigation in
conﬁrming the diagnosis.
. Investigations for speciﬁc causes of bronchi-
ectasis include sweat tests (cystic ﬁbrosis),
immunoglobulin levels (hypogammaglobuli-
naemia), Aspergillus preciptins (allergic asper-
gillosis) and ciliary tests (primary ciliary
dyskinesia).
. Treatment involves chest physiotherapy, anti-
biotics, inhaled bronchodilators, and speciﬁc
treatment of any underlying cause.
. A lung abscess is a localised collection of pus
within a cavitated necrotic lesion in the lung
parenchyma.
FURTHER READING
Barbato A, Frischer T, Kuehni CE, et al. Primary
ciliary dyskinesia: a consensus statement on
diagnostic and treatment approaches in chil-
dren. Eur Respir J 2009; 34: 1264–76.
Davies G, Wilson R. Prophylactic antibiotic treat-
ment
of
bronchiectasis
with
azithromycin.
Thorax 2004; 59: 540–1.
Bronchiectasis and lung abscess 85

DeBoeck
K,
Wilschanski
M,
Castellani
C,
et
al.
Cystic
ﬁbrosis:
terminology
and
diagnostic
algorithms.
Thorax
2006;
61:
627–35.
Ooi GC, Khong PL, Chan-Yeung M, et al. High-
resolution CT quantiﬁcation of bronchiectasis:
clinical and functional correlation. Radiology
2002; 225: 663–72.
Pasteur MC, Bilton D, Hill AT on behalf of the
British Thoracic Society Guideline for (non-CF)
Bronchiectasis Group. British Thoracic Society
guideline for non-CF bronchiectasis. Thorax
2010; 65: Suppl 1: 1–64.
Shoemark A, Ozerovitch L, Wilson R, et al. Aetiol-
ogy in adult patients with bronchiectasis. Respir
Med 2007; 101: 1163–70.
Ten Hacken NH, Van der Molen T. Bronchiectasis.
BMJ 2010; 341: 146–7.
The primary ciliary dyskinesia family support
group ( www.pcdsupport.org.uk/).
86
Respiratory diseases

9
Cystic ﬁbrosis
Introduction
Cystic ﬁbrosis is the most common life-limiting
inherited disease of Caucasians. It affects about 1
in 2500 live births in the UK and is inherited in an
autosomal recessive manner. About 1 in 25 of the
population is a carrier of the disease.
The basic defect
Cysticﬁbrosisiscausedbymutationsofalargegene
on the long arm of chromosome 7 that codes for a
1480-amino-acid protein, named cystic ﬁbrosis
transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR).
The most common mutation is traditionally desig-
nated DF508 (F508del), in which deletion of three
base pairs of the gene results in the loss of phenyl-
alanine(‘deltaF’)atposition508oftheprotein.This
causes misfolding of the mutant CFTR that is then
degraded in the endoplasmic reticulum such that
no CFTR protein reaches the cell membrane. CFTR
functions as a cyclic AMP-dependent chloride
channel in the apical membrane of epithelial
cells and the primary physiological defect in
cystic ﬁbrosis is reduced chloride conductance
at epithelial membranes, most notably in the
respiratory, gastrointestinal, pancreatic, hepato-
biliary and reproductive tracts. Other ion chan-
nels such as the epithelial sodium channel
(ENaC) and calcium activated chloride channels
(CaCC) also play an important role in membrane
physiology (Figure 9.1). Although CFTR’s main
function is as a chloride channel it has other
regulatory roles including inhibition of sodium
transport through ENaC, inhibition of CaCC,
regulation of intracellular vesicle transport and
regulation of bicarbonate– chloride exchange. In
sweat ducts, failure of reabsorption of chloride
ions results in elevated concentrations of chlo-
ride and sodium in the sweat, a characteristic
feature of the disease and the basis for the sweat
test used in diagnosis.
More than 1800 mutations of the CFTR gene
have now been identiﬁed and these are divided
into ﬁve major classes according to their effect on
CFTR function:
. class I: defective protein synthesis (e.g. G542X);
. class II: defective protein processing (e.g. DF508);
. class
III:
defective
protein
activation
(e.g.
G551D);
. class IV: impaired chloride conductance (e.g.
R117H);
. class IV: reduced amount of functioning CFTR
(e.g. A455E).
Generally mutations in classes I–III result in no
CFTR function at the cell membrane. This is typi-
callyassociatedwithmoresevereclinicaldisease.In
classIVandVmutationsthemutantCFTRmayhave
somedegree of functionandthis maybeassociated
with less severe clinical disease. However, many
other factors inﬂuence the clinical phenotype.
Respiratory Medicine Lecture Notes, Eighth Edition. Stephen J. Bourke and Graham P. Burns.
 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

CFTR
CFTR
TRAFFICKING
CFTR PROTEIN
ENaCC
CaCC
mRNA
DNA
ENDOPLASMIC
RETICULUM
GOLGI
APPARATUS
CLASS I
NO 
PRODUCTION
CLASS II
PROCESSING
DEFECT
CLASS III
ACTIVATION
DEFECT
CLASS IV
CONDUCTANCE
DEFECT
CLASS V
REDUCED
SYNTHESIS
Figure 9.1 The cystic ﬁbrosis gene codes for a 1480-amino-acid protein named cystic ﬁbrosis transmembrane
conductance regulator (CFTR) that is trafﬁcked through the cell via the endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi apparatus
and inserted into the apical membrane where it functions as a cAMP-dependent chloride channel. Class I mutations
disrupt synthesis of CFTR and include nonsense and frameshift mutations leading to premature termination codons
(PTC) and lack of protein production. Class II mutations result in misfolded CFTR that is then degraded in the
endoplasmic reticulum. In class III mutations CFTR reaches the apical membrane but is not activated. Class IV
mutations result in reduced CFTR conductance. In Class V mutations there is reducedsynthesisof normal CFTR and
therefore reduced CFTR function at the cell membrane. CFTR has additional regulatory effects on epithelial sodium
channels (ENaC) and on calcium activated chloride channels (CaCC).
Lungs
In the bronchial mucosa reduced chloride secre-
tion and increased sodium reabsorption results in
secretions of abnormal viscosity with reduced
water content of the airway surface liquid and
reduced depth of the periciliary ﬂuid, which dis-
rupts mucociliary clearance. The high salt content
of the airway surface ﬂuid inactivates defensins
that are naturally occurring antimicrobial peptides
on the epithelial surface. There is some evidence
that the CFTR also has a role in the normal uptake
and processing of Pseudomonas aeruginosa from
the respiratory tract. Patients with cystic ﬁbrosis
also have abnormal mucus glycoproteins that act
as binding sites such that bacteria adhere to the
mucosa and proliferate. Thus, the gene defect
results in dysfunction of CFTR and predisposes
to severe chronic lung infection by a variety of
mechanism at the cellular level. The inﬂammatory
response is unable to clear the infection and a
vicious cycle of infection and inﬂammation devel-
ops, progressing to lung damage, bronchiectasis,
respiratory failure and death.
Gastrointestinal tract
In the pancreas the abnormal ion transport
results in the plugging and obstruction of ductules
with progressive destruction of the gland. The
88
Respiratory diseases

pancreatic enzymes (e.g. lipase) fail to reach the
small intestine and this results in malabsorption of
fats with steatorrhoea and failure to gain weight.
Progressive destruction of the endocrine pancreas
may cause diabetes. Abnormalities of bile secretion
and absorption cause an increased incidence of
gallstones and biliary cirrhosis. Sludging and des-
iccation of intestinal contents probably accounts
for the occurrence of meconium ileus (neonatal
intestinal obstruction) in about 10% of babies with
cystic ﬁbrosis, and for the development of distal
intestinal obstruction syndrome (meconium ileus
equivalent) in older children and adults.
Clinical features (Fig. 9.2)
Infants and young children
About 10% of children with cystic ﬁbrosis present
at birth with meconium ileus, a form of intestinal
obstruction caused by inspissated viscid faecal
material resulting from lack of pancreatic enzymes
and from reduced intestinal water secretion. More
than half of children affected by cystic ﬁbrosis
have obvious malabsorption by the age of 6
months with failure to thrive associated with
abdominal
distension
and
copious
offensive
stools from steatorrhoea as a result of malab-
sorbed fat. Rectal prolapse occasionally occurs.
Recurrent respiratory infections rapidly become a
prominent feature with cough, sputum production
and wheeze. Newborn screening programmes are
being introduced that allow the early diagnosis
of cystic ﬁbrosis, before the onset of symptoms
and complications.
Older children and adults
Respiratory disease (Fig. 9.3)
Persistent cough and purulent sputum character-
ise the development of bronchiectasis. Progressive
lung damage is associated with the development of
digital clubbing and progressive airways obstruc-
tion, sometimes associated with wheeze. Serial
measurements of forced expiratory volume in 1
second (FEV1) give an indication of the severity and
progression of the disease. Some patients show a
signiﬁcant asthmatic component with reversible
airways obstruction and some develop colonisa-
tion of the bronchi by Aspergillus fumigatus and
may show features of allergic bronchopulmonary
aspergillosis (see Chapter 8). Initially, the typical
organisms isolated in sputum cultures are Staph-
ylococcus aureus, Haemophilus inﬂuenzae and
Streptococcus pneumoniae. By the teenage years
many have become infected with mucoid strains of
Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Burkholderia cepacia
complex is a group of Gram-negative plant patho-
gens that cause onion rot. It was initially thought
that these organisms were not pathogenic to hu-
mans but in the 1980s it became apparent that
patients with cystic ﬁbrosis were vulnerable to
these bacteria and that infection could spread from
patient to patient in an epidemic way, particularly
among children with cystic ﬁbrosis in close social
contact in holiday camps, for example. The clinical
course of patients with Burkholderia cepacia com-
plex infection is very variable but some show an
accelerated rate of decline in lung function and
some develop a fulminant necrotising pneumonia,
the so-called ‘cepacia syndrome’ (Fig. 9.4). It is
now recognised that there are many different
strains of this bacterium but Burkholderia cenoce-
pacia genomovar III is associated with the worst
prognosis. Because of the potential for transmis-
sion of infection between patients with cystic
ﬁbrosis it is now standard practice to segregate
patients with different infections such that they
attend different clinics and wards, and social
contact between patients with cystic ﬁbrosis is
discouraged. Non-tuberculous mycobacteria (e.g.
Mycobacterium abscessus) can also colonise and
infect the lungs in cystic ﬁbrosis.
As the cycle of infection and inﬂammation pro-
gresses, lung damage worsens with deteriorating
airways obstruction, destruction of lung parenchy-
ma, impairment of gas exchange and the develop-
ment of hypoxaemia, hypercapnia and cor pul-
monale. The persistent pulmonary inﬂammation
provokes hypertrophy of the bronchial arteries,
and haemoptysis becomes common. Occasional-
ly, when severe bleeding occurs, therapeutic em-
bolisation of the bronchial arteries may be re-
quired. Pneumothorax occurs in about 5–10% of
patients with advanced disease and may require
prompt tube drainage. Pleurodesis may be re-
quired for recurrent pneumothoraces but this
should be performed with care so as not to com-
promise future potential lung transplantation.
Gastrointestinal disease
About 85% of patients with cystic ﬁbrosis have
pancreatic insufﬁciency with malabsorption of
Cystic ﬁbrosis 89

fat because of lack of lipase. Unless these patients
receive adequate pancreatic enzyme supplements
they develop steatorrhoea with frequent bulky
offensive stools and failure to gain weight. Progres-
sive destruction of the endocrine pancreas is man-
ifest by an increasing incidence of diabetes as
these patients get older. A variety of hepatobiliary
abnormalities occur including fatty liver, gall-
stones and focal biliary ﬁbrosis, and about 5% of
patients develop multinodular cirrhosis with he-
patosplenomegaly, portal hypertension, oesopha-
geal varices and liver failure. Distal intestinal ob-
struction syndrome (meconium ileus equivalent)
(Fig. 9.5) results from inspissated fatty semi-solid
Figure 9.2 Clinical features of cystic ﬁbrosis. Cystic ﬁbrosis is a multisystem disease resulting from mutations of the
gene that codes for a protein, cystic ﬁbrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR), that functions as a
chloride channel on epithelial membranes. Failure of chloride conductance results in abnormal secretions and
organ damage in the respiratory, pancreatic, hepatobiliary, gastrointestinal and reproductive tracts.
90
Respiratory diseases

faecal material obstructing the terminal ileum.
A number of factors contribute to the development
of this complication including malabsorption of
fat, disordered intestinal motility and dehydrated
intestinal contents resulting from defective intes-
tinal chloride transport. The clinical features vary
depending on the severity of the obstruction. Typ-
ically, the patient suffers recurrent episodes of
colicky abdominal pain and constipation, and
thereisoftenapalpable massinthe rightiliacfossa.
In severe cases complete intestinal obstruction
may develop with abdominal distension, vomiting
and multiple ﬂuid levels in distended small bowel
on an erect X-ray of abdomen. It is treated by
a balanced intestinal lavage solution (e.g. Klean-
Prep) that is taken orally or by nasogastric tube.
The radiocontrast Gastrograﬁn (sodium diatrizo-
ate) may also be used as this agent has detergent
properties that allow it to penetrate the inspissated
fattymaterialanditshypertonicitythendrawsﬂuid
into the faecal bolus. Other measures include
rehydration, stool softeners (e.g. lactulose) and
N-acetylcysteine; which probably acts by cleaving
disulphide bonds in the mucoprotein faecal bolus.
Prevention of recurrence requires adequate pan-
creatic enzyme supplements, avoidance of dehy-
dration and sometimes use of laxatives.
Other complications
Nearly all male patients are infertile because of
congenital bilateral absence of the vas deferens.
The exact mechanism by which this complication
occurs is not known but it has been suggested that
it may result from resorption of the vas deferens
after it has become plugged with viscid secretions
in foetal life. Techniques such as microsurgical
sperm aspiration from the epididymis or testes,
with in vitro fertilisation by intracytoplasmic
sperm injection can facilitate parenthood for men.
Females have near normal fertility although some
abnormalities of cervical mucus are present. Preg-
nancy places additional burdens on the mother’s
Figure 9.3 Chest X-ray of this 37-year-old man with
cystic
ﬁbrosis
shows
hyperinﬂation,
peribronchial
thickening, cystic bronchiectasis and perihilar ﬁbrosis.
A Portacath central venous system is in place with the
access port situated subcutaneously in the left lower
chest.HehaschronicPseudomonasaeruginosainfection
and receives about three courses of intravenous
ceftazidime and tobramycin at home each year. His
FEV1 is 1.5 L (42% of predicted) and his general
condition and lung function have remained stable over
the last 5 years on treatment including long-term
nebulised
colistin,
nebulised
deoxyribonuclease,
physiotherapy and nutritional supplements.
Figure 9.4 ‘Cepacia syndrome’: chest X-ray of this 23-
year-old man with cystic ﬁbrosis shows the typical
appearance of ‘cepacia syndrome’ with fulminant
bilateral necrotising pneumonia. He had acquired
Burkholderia cenocepacia genomovar III infection 7
years previously during an outbreak of infection
among
patients
with
cystic
ﬁbrosis
attending
a
holiday
camp.
His
lung
function
showed
an
accelerated rate of decline in the years after infection
and he then developed a severe exacerbation that
failed to respond to treatment and progressed to a
fatal fulminant pneumonia over a 2-week period.
Cystic ﬁbrosis 91

health and is sometimes associated with deterio-
ration in the disease because of increased nutri-
tional stress and impaired bronchial clearance.
However, the main risk is of the mother failing to
maintain all aspects of her own treatment as she
focuses on the care of the baby.
Upper airway involvement causes troublesome
sinusitis and nasal polyps. Cystic ﬁbrosis arthrop-
athy probably results from the deposition in joints
of antigen–antibody complexes produced by the
immune response to bacterial lung infections.
Vasculitic rashes may also occur. In hot weather,
patients with cystic ﬁbrosis are at risk of develop-
ing heat prostration as a result of excess loss of salt
in sweat. As these patients are living longer, a
number of other complications are being de-
scribed such as osteoporosis and amyloidosis.
Patients with cystic ﬁbrosis face major social and
emotional stresses relating to their reduced life
expectancy, outlook for employment, ability to
form relationships and undertake marriage and
their general capacity to cope with a complex
disease and its treatment.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of cystic ﬁbrosis is based upon the
demonstration of elevated sweat chloride concen-
trations on a sweat test, in association with char-
acteristic clinical features such as recurrent re-
spiratory infections or evidence of pancreatic in-
sufﬁciency. Nowadays the diagnosis is usually con-
ﬁrmed by the demonstration of two known cystic
ﬁbrosis mutations (e.g. DF508/G542X) on DNA
analysis. It is possible to detect abnormal chloride
conductance directly by measuring the potential
difference of the nasal mucosa although this is a
specialist research technique.
Sweat testing
In cystic ﬁbrosis the ion-transport defect results in
a failure to reabsorb chloride ions from the sweat,
so that elevated sweat chloride and sodium con-
centrations are a characteristic feature of the dis-
ease. Sweating is induced by pilocarpine ionto-
phoresis, the sweat is collected on ﬁlter paper and
then analysedfor sodium and chloride. Pilocarpine
is placed on the skin of the forearm and a small
electrical current is passed across it to enhance its
penetration of the skin and stimulation of the
sweat ducts. Meticulous technique is required to
avoid evaporation of secretions or contamination.
A sweat ﬂow rate of at least 100 mL/min is required
for accurate analysis and sweat chloride levels
above 60 mmol/L on repeated tests are highly sug-
gestive of cystic ﬁbrosis. Sweat chloride values of
30–59 mmol/L are considered intermediate and
may be associated with atypical cystic ﬁbrosis.
DNA analysis
The discovery of the cystic ﬁbrosis gene in 1989 led
to the development of genotyping as an aid to
diagnosis. Genotyping can also be used to detect
carrier status, and can be applied to chorionic
villus biopsy material for antenatal diagnosis.
However, there are more than 1800 mutations of
Figure 9.5 Meconium ileus equivalent. This 31-year-
old woman with cystic ﬁbrosis was admitted to hospital
complaining of abdominal distension, colicky pain and
constipation. A mass of inspissated faecal material was
palpable in the right iliac fossa. Erect abdominal X-ray
(after taking Gastrograﬁn) shows distended loops of
small bowel containing multiple ﬂuid levels. A diagnosis
of
meconium
ileus
equivalent
(distal
intestinal
obstruction
syndrome)
was
made
and
she
was
treated with Gastrograﬁn (orally and by enema), N-
acetylcysteine orally, intravenous ﬂuids, followed by
ﬂushing of the bowel using balanced intestinal lavage
solution.
92
Respiratory diseases

the cystic ﬁbrosis gene currently identiﬁed and
routine analysis assesses only the most common
mutations so that it can be difﬁcult to exclude
cystic ﬁbrosis resulting from rare mutations. DNA
analysis has established the diagnosis in some
individuals with only mild clinical features, and
this has extended our knowledge of the clinical
spectrum of the disease to include some very rare
older, less severely affected patients. Affected in-
dividuals have two gene mutations, one inherited
from each of their parents. Carriers of the disease
have only one abnormal gene, and do not show any
evidence of the disease.
Atypical cystic ﬁbrosis
As an increasing number of mutations of the CFTR
gene are identiﬁed the clinical spectrum of the
disease has been extended to include atypical or
non-classic cystic ﬁbrosis. The vast majority of
patients with two mutations of the CFTR gene
develop classic cystic ﬁbrosis, characterised by
the development of pancreatic malabsorption and
recurrent respiratory infections in early childhood,
with progressive severe lung disease over the years.
About 5–10% of patients have a late-diagnosis of
cystic ﬁbrosis in later childhood or adulthood,
having been misdiagnosed as having other dis-
eases such as asthma, bronchitis or bronchiectasis.
Sometimes these patients have had less severe lung
disease and may also have had normal pancreatic
function. It is recommended that all children and
adults up to the age of 40 years presenting with
bronchiectasis should have sweat tests and CFTR
gene analysis. The diagnosis of cystic ﬁbrosis
should also be considered in older patients with
bronchiectasis who have persistent Pseudomonas
aeruginosa or Staphylococcal aureus infections,
progressive disease or additional features such as
malabsorption, pancreatitis, nasal polyps or male
infertility. Although diagnosed late these patients
have classic cystic ﬁbrosis and have often already
developed severe lung disease by the time of di-
agnosis with the risk of progressive disease over
time. In contrast a small number of patients are
now being identiﬁed who have truly atypical or
non-classic disease associated with CFTR gene
dysfunction. Sometimes these patients present
with isolated manifestations such as male infer-
tility due to congenital bilateral absence of the vas
deferens, nasal polyps, recurrent pancreatitis,
sclerosing cholangitis, neonatal hypertrypsino-
genaemia or excessive skin wrinkling in water.
These patients often have intermediate sweat chlo-
ride levels of 30–59 mmol/L and rare, class IV or V
mutations with some residual CFTR function that
may protect them from more severe lung disease.
These patients need careful assessment and fol-
low-up in specialist cystic ﬁbrosis centres.
Newborn screening
Early diagnosis of cystic ﬁbrosis allows speciﬁc
treatment to be commenced rapidly, and this is
associated with an improved prognosis. Infants
with cystic ﬁbrosis have elevated serum immuno-
reactive trypsin activity. This can be measured
on a single dried blood spot obtained on a
Guthrie card as part of the newborn screening
programme for diseases such as phenylketonuria
and hypothyroidism.
Treatment
Cystic ﬁbrosis is a complex multisystem disease,
and skills from several disciplines are needed in
treating these patients. The optimal use of current-
ly available treatments and the introduction of new
treatments is best achieved by concentrating the
care of these patients in regional specialist cen-
tres,
with
a
comprehensive
multidisciplinary
team. The basic elements of treatment comprise
clearance of bronchial secretions by physiother-
apy, treatment of pulmonary infection by antibio-
tics and correction of nutritional deﬁcits by use of
pancreatic enzyme supplements and dietary sup-
port. Patients and their families require continu-
ous encouragement and support in coping with
this complex disease. The Cystic Fibrosis Trust acts
as a focus of information and support, and co-
ordinates fund raising for research.
Chest physiotherapy
The viscid purulent sputum results in airways
obstruction, and clearance of airway secretions by
chest physiotherapy is important at all stages of the
disease. A variety of techniques can be used in-
cluding postural drainage (using gravity-assisted
positions to aid drainage), chest percussion and
positive expiratory pressure devices to aid dis-
lodgement and expectoration of sputum from the
peripheral airways. As patients mature it is impor-
tant that they learn to perform bronchial clearance
Cystic ﬁbrosis 93

themselves. The ‘active cycle of breathing tech-
nique’ is often effective and popular with adult
patients. This involves a cycle of breathing con-
trol, thoracic expansion exercises and the forced
expiratory technique (‘hufﬁng’) which releases
secretions from peripheral bronchi. Some patients
beneﬁt from using oscillating positive expiratory
pressure devices (e.g. ﬂutter, Acapella devices).
Exercise is an excellent adjunct to physiotherapy
but should not replace it.
Antibiotics
Children with cystic ﬁbrosis should be immunised
against pertussis and measles as part of the child-
hood vaccination programme, and should receive
annual inﬂuenza vaccination thereafter. They
should avoid contact with people with respiratory
infections and avoid inhalation of cigarette smoke.
A variety of antibiotic strategies are used. Staphy-
lococcus aureus is a major pathogen in the disease
from early childhood and long-term continuous
ﬂucloxacillin is often used to suppress this infec-
tion. Further oral antibiotics are given during ex-
acerbations in accordance with sputum cultures
and sensitivity testing. Common pathogens in-
clude Haemophilus inﬂuenzae and Streptococcus
pneumoniae
which
are
usually
sensitive
to
amoxicillin.
Infection with Pseudomonas aeruginosa be-
comes an increasing problem as children get older,
and an important strategy in antibiotic therapy is
to postpone for as long as possible the colonisation
of the airways by this organism. Frequent sputum
cultures are performed and intensive anti-pseudo-
monal antibiotic therapy is given when the organ-
ism is ﬁrst isolated. This often comprises an initial
prolonged course
of oral ciproﬂoxacin
and
nebulised colistin or tobramycin. If this does
not eradicate infection then intravenous anti-
pseudomonal
antibiotics
are
recommended.
Eventually, chronic infection with Pseudomonas
aeruginosa
becomes
established.
Attempts
at
suppressing the effects of this infection involve
long-term use of nebulised antibiotics such as
colistin or tobramycin with additional courses of
intravenous anti-pseudomonal antibiotics during
infective exacerbations or when there is a decline
in lung function. Usually an aminoglycoside (e.g.
gentamicin, tobramycin) is given in combination
with a third-generation cephalosporin (e.g. cefta-
zidime) or a modiﬁed penicillin (e.g. piperacillin).
Treatment is usually given for 14 days and high
doses are required to achieve adequate penetra-
tion of antibiotics into scarred bronchial mucosa
because patients with cystic ﬁbrosis have in-
creased renal clearance of antibiotics.
Intravenous antibiotic treatment is often given
at home by the patient after training. Where
venous access is difﬁcult a totally implanted cen-
tral venous device can be inserted (e.g. Portacath).
This comprises a central venous cannula con-
nected to a subcutaneous port that is accessed
by inserting a special non-cutting needle through
the skin and the diaphragm of the subcutaneous
chamber.
Burkholderia cepacia complex organisms are
usually resistant to many of the commonly used
anti-pseudomonal antibiotics such as colistin, cip-
roﬂoxacin and aminoglycosides, but are often sen-
sitive to ceftazidime or meropenem.
Bronchodilator medication
Some patients with cystic ﬁbrosis have a reversible
component to their airways obstruction, and ben-
eﬁt from bronchodilator drugs (e.g. salbutamol,
terbutaline) and inhaled steroids (e.g. beclometa-
sone, budesonide, ﬂuticasone).
Mucolytic medication
The sputum of patients with cystic ﬁbrosis con-
tains high levels of DNA, which is derived from the
nuclei of decaying neutrophils. This makes the
sputum very viscid and difﬁcult to expectorate.
Recombinant human deoxyribonuclease (Dn-
ase/dornase alfa) is a genetically engineered
enzyme that cleaves DNA. This treatment is ad-
ministered by nebulisation and improves the lung
function and reduces the number of exacerbations
in some patients. Nebulised 7% hypertonic saline
improves mucociliary clearance by drawing water
into the dehydrated periciliary layer. It sometimes
provokes bronchoconstriction such that pre-treat-
ment with a bronchodilator (e.g. salbutamol, ter-
butaline) is needed. Mannitol, administered via a
dry powder inhaler, is an osmotic agent that also
increases the water content of the airway surface
liquid with improved mucociliary clearance.
Anti-inﬂammatory
The inﬂammatory response is unable to eradicate
infection and contributes to the progressive lung
damage. Corticosteroid drugs (e.g. prednisolone)
may have a beneﬁcial effect but their use is limited
94
Respiratory diseases

by adverse effects. High-dose ibuprofen may also
be useful in reducing lung injury by inhibiting the
migration and activation of neutrophils. Macrolide
antibiotics (e.g. azithromycin) have been shown to
improve lung function in patients with cystic ﬁbro-
sis. This seems to be due to an anti-inﬂammatory
effect by suppression of inﬂammatory cytokines,
reducing neutrophil function and impairing bio-
ﬁlm formation around Pseudomonas aeruginosa.
Nutrition
Pancreatic enzyme supplements (e.g. Creon,
Pancrease, Nutrizym) are taken with each meal
and
with
snacks
containing
fat.
Enteric-
coated
preparations
protect
the
lipase
from
inactivation by gastric acid, and use of antacid
medication (e.g. omeprazole, lansoprazole) may
improve effectiveness. The dose of enzyme is ad-
justed according to the dietary intake to optimise
weight gain and growth and to control steator-
rhoea. Use of high doses of pancreatic enzymes
has been associated with the development of stric-
tures of the ascending colon – so-called ‘ﬁbrosing
colonopathy’ – in a small number of children so
that it is recommended that the dose of lipase
should not exceed 10000 U/kg/day. Supplements
offat-solublevitamins(A,D,E)areroutinelygiven.
Patients with cystic ﬁbrosis suffer from nutri-
tional deﬁciencies as a result of malabsorption and
the increased energy requirements resulting from
increased energy expenditure because of chronic
lung infection. Most patients with cystic ﬁbrosis
require 120–150% of the recommended daily cal-
orie intake for individuals without cystic ﬁbrosis,
so that healthy eating for a patient with cystic
ﬁbrosis includes high-energy foods and frequent
snacks between main meals. Dietary supplements
(e.g. Fortisip, Scandishake) are useful when fac-
tors such as anorexia limit intake. In advanced
disease nocturnal enteral feeding of high-energy
formulas, through a nasogastric tube or gastro-
stomy, may be required.
Advanced disease
The clinical course of cystic ﬁbrosis is very variable
but an FEV1 of less then 30% of the predicted value,
for example, is associated with a 50% 2-year mor-
tality rate. An awareness of the stage of the disease
and the likely prognosis assists in planned man-
agement. Oxygen saturation should be measured
by oximetry at each clinic visit in patients with
advanced disease and when hypoxaemia develops
domiciliary oxygen may alleviate the complica-
tions of respiratory failure. Lung transplantation
is the main option to be considered for patients
with advanced disease but the lack of donor organs
severely limits the use of this treatment (see Chap-
ter 19). Some patients will opt for a palliative care
approach avoiding unpleasant interventions and
focusing on measures that alleviate symptoms.
Death is usually peaceful after a short coma due
to ventilatory failure.
Prognosis
The prognosis of patients with cystic ﬁbrosis has
improved dramatically over the years. In the 1950s,
survival beyond 10 years was unusual. Now the
median survival is about 38 years and it is predicted
to be at least 50 years for children now being born
with the disease. There are now about 9000 pa-
tients with cystic ﬁbrosis in the UK, and more than
50% are adults (aged 16 or over). Patients entering
adulthood with cystic ﬁbrosis face a number of
problems, particularly relating to their chronic
lung disease and reduced life expectancy (e.g. life
insurance, choice of career, relationships, mar-
riage, pregnancy, fertility). The improved survival
of patients with cystic ﬁbrosis has been attributed
to a combination of factors including improved
management of meconium ileus in neonates, ear-
lier diagnosis, better dietary management and
pancreatic enzyme supplementation and meticu-
lous attention to physiotherapy and antibiotic
treatments in specialist centres. Although cystic
ﬁbrosis typically produces severe progressive lung
disease there is a wide clinical spectrum of sever-
ity. Some ‘milder mutations’ are associated with
residual chloride conductance and less severe clin-
ical disease but there is generally a poor correlation
between speciﬁc gene mutations and clinical man-
ifestations. Environmental factors, therapeutic
regimens and additional ‘modiﬁer genes’ that
inﬂuence cytokine responses, for example, are
important. Some patients are well and leading
relatively normal lives, well into adulthood, and
there is a need to adapt treatment to the stage
and
severity
of
the
disease.
With
improved
survival treatments need to be planned with care
over
decades
to
avoid
adverse
effects
(e.g.
aminoglycoside nephrotoxicity, antibiotic allergy
and
resistance)
and
to
prevent
long-term
Cystic ﬁbrosis 95

complications of the disease (e.g. osteoporosis,
diabetic complications)
Prospective treatments
Ongoing reﬁnements of conventional care in spe-
cialist centres continue to improve survival rates.
New formulations of inhaled antibiotics (e.g. in-
haled ciproﬂoxacin, nebulised aztreonam) may
help control of airway infection. The identiﬁcation
of the cystic ﬁbrosis gene in 1989 has revolutio-
nised our understanding of the detailed molecular
biology of this disease and offers the prospect of
developing treatments directed against the basic
underlying defects. Perhaps the most exciting ap-
proach is the direct replacement of the defective
gene by gene therapy. The cystic ﬁbrosis gene has
been cloned and given to patients in experimental
trials using liposomes or inactivated viruses as
gene transfer agents to introduce the gene into
epithelial cells. Expression of the gene can be
detected by measuring transepithelial potential
differences. Gene transfer and expression have
been achieved and clinical trials are now underway
to establish the clinical effectiveness and role of
gene therapy. Substantial progress is being made
in pharmacological treatments that address the
molecular biology processes of CFTR transcription
from DNA, trafﬁcking through the cell, and acti-
vation and regulation at the apical membrane.
Thus, PTC124 is a small molecule that induces
ribosomes to read through premature termination
codons (PTC) during mRNA translation. It corrects
the electrophysiological defect in patients with
some class I mutations (e.g. G542X, W1282X).
Vx770 (Vertex pharmaceuticals) is a CFTR poten-
tiator that improves CFTR function in patients
with the class III mutation, G551D. Some agents
(e.g. phenylbutyrate, milrinone) regulate the ex-
pression of molecular chaperons (e.g. heat shock
proteins) that improve the trafﬁcking of CFTR
through the cell, rescuing the mutant CFTR from
degradation by the endoplasmic reticulum (e.g.
DF508, class II mutation). Sometimes the term
‘protein repair therapy’ is used for mutant-spe-
ciﬁc therapies using a combination of correctors,
chaperons and potentiators to improve CFTR
function. A further approach is to attempt to cor-
rect the ion channel defect by stimulating alter-
native chloride channels (e.g. CaCC) or inhibiting
sodium channels (e.g. ENaC). Amiloride and
benzamil inhibit ENaC but have not yet shown
clinical beneﬁt. Denufosol is a purinergic receptor
agonist that stimulates chloride and ﬂuid transport
via a non-CFTR mechanism, and initial trials
show promising clinical results. Attempts at mod-
ifying the inﬂammatory response involve the
assessment of the role of some currently available
(e.g. ibuprofen, azithromycin) and some novel
anti-inﬂammatory agents (e.g. glutathione, anti-
elastases, lipoxins). Improvements in the ﬁeld of
lung transplantation (e.g. extending the donor
pool by use of reconditioned lungs) offer the best
hope for patients in the advanced stages of the
disease. Advances in many different areas of sci-
entiﬁc research are being brought into clinical
practice in order to improve the outlook for
patients with cystic ﬁbrosis.
KEY POINTS
. Cystic ﬁbrosis is a multisystem disease re-
sultingfrommutationsof a genethat codesfora
chloride channel on epithelial membranes.
. In the lungs viscid secretions predispose to
infection and inﬂammation with progressive
bronchiectasis.
. Staphylococcus aureus, Pseudomonas aeru-
ginosa and Burkholderia cepacia complex are
the main pathogens.
. Antibiotics, chest physiotherapy, nutritional
support and anti-inﬂammatory drugs are key
elements in treatment.
. Lung transplantation is the main option to be
considered for patients with advanced lung
disease.
FURTHER READING
Bott J, Blumenthal S, Buxton M, et al. Guidelines
for the physiotherapy management of the
adult, medical, spontaneously breathing patient.
Thorax 2009; 64 (suppl 1): 1–51.
Bourke SJ, Doe SJ, Gascoigne AD, et al. An inte-
grated model of provision of palliative care to
patients with cystic ﬁbrosis. Palliative Medicine
2009; 23: 512–7.
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation (USA): www.cff.org
Cystic Fibrosis Trust (UK): www.cftrust.org.uk/
Davis PB. Cystic ﬁbrosis since 1938. Am J Respir
Crit Care Med 2006; 173: 475–82.
96
Respiratory diseases

De Boeck K, Wilschanski M, Castellani C, et al.
Cystic ﬁbrosis:terminology and diagnostic algo-
rithms. Thorax 2006; 61: 627–35.
Dodge JA, Lewis PA, Stanton M, et al. Cystic ﬁbrosis
mortality and survival in the UK. Eur Respir J
2007: 522–6.
Elkins MR, Robinson M, Rose BR, et al. A controlled
trial of long term inhaled hypertonic saline in
patients with cystic ﬁbrosis. N Engl J Med 2006;
354: 229–40.
Farrell PM, Robenstein BJ, White TB, et al.
Guidelines for diagnosis of cystic ﬁbrosis in new-
borns through older adults: cystic ﬁbrosis foun-
dation consensus report. J Pediatr 2008; 153:
S4–14.
Flume PA, O’Sullivan BP, Robinson KA, et al. Cystic
ﬁbrosis pulmonary guidelines. Am J Resp Crit
Care Med 2007; 176: 957–69.
O’Sullivan BP, Freedman SD. Cystic Fibrosis. Lan-
cet 2009: 373: 1891–904.
Cystic ﬁbrosis 97

10
Asthma
Deﬁnition
Asthmaisadiseasecharacterisedbyairwayinﬂam-
mation with increased airway responsiveness
resulting in airway obstruction. The cardinal fea-
tureof theairway obstruction inasthma is variabil-
ity. This can occur spontaneously over short peri-
ods of time or in response to treatment; when it is
referred to as reversibility. Patients experience
symptoms such as wheeze, cough and dyspnoea.
It is not a static uniform disease state but rather a
dynamic and heterogeneous clinical syndrome
that has a number of different patterns and which
may progress through different stages so that not
all features of the disease may be present in an
individual patient at a particular point in time. For
example, many patients with well-controlled asth-
ma are asymptomatic with normal lung function
between attacks although if further investigations
were performed there would be evidence of airway
inﬂammation and increased airway responsive-
ness. By contrast, in some patients with chronic
asthma the disease may have progressed to a state
of irreversible airways obstruction. Some patients
with smoking-related chronic obstructive pulmo-
nary disease (COPD), bronchiectasis or cystic
ﬁbrosis may demonstrate airways obstruction with
a degree of reversibility but it is important to
appreciate that these diseases are different from
asthma with distinct aetiologies,
pathologies,
natural history and responses to treatment.
Prevalence
Asthma has been recognised since ancient times
and it is now estimated that 300 million people
worldwide have asthma. The reported prevalence
of asthma greatly depends on the criteria used to
deﬁne it and is confused by changes in diagnostic
habit (labelling shift) whereby patients may now
be diagnosed as having asthma whereas previously
they were labelled as having ‘wheezy bronchitis’
in the case of children, or ‘COPD’ in the case of
adults, for example. However, despite such label-
ling shifts there is a general consensus that the
prevalence of asthma has increased greatly in
recent decades. Studies using objective measures
of reversible airways obstruction and airway
hyper-responsiveness in combination with symp-
toms suggest that about 7% of the adult popula-
tion in the UK have asthma. There is considerable
interest in the reasons for the increased prevalence
of asthma but no ﬁrm consensus on the environ-
mental factors that underlie it.
Aetiology
Asthma is multifactorial in origin, arising from a
complex interaction of genetic and environmen-
tal factors. It seems likely that airway inﬂamma-
tion
occurs
when
genetically
susceptible
Respiratory Medicine Lecture Notes, Eighth Edition. Stephen J. Bourke and Graham P. Burns.
 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

individuals are exposed to certain environmental
factors but the exact processes underlying asthma
may vary from patient to patient. In many cases the
most important environmental factors are proba-
bly the intensity, timing and mode of exposure to
aeroallergens that stimulate the production of IgE.
However, it is often not possible in an individual
case to identify a speciﬁc allergen that could be
regarded as the cause of the asthma, let alone one
for which exposure avoidance would bring about
resolution or even an improvement of symptoms.
Genetic susceptibility
There is strong evidence of a hereditary contribu-
tion to the aetiology of asthma. It has long been
known that asthma and atopy run in families.
First-degree relatives of asthmatics have a signif-
icantly higher prevalence of asthma than relatives
of non-asthmatic patients. It is important to
appreciate, however, that families share environ-
ments as well as sharing genes, and that environ-
mental factors are necessary for the expression of a
genetic predisposition. Atopy is a constitutional
tendency to produce signiﬁcant amounts of IgE on
exposure to small amounts of common antigens.
Atopic individuals demonstrate positive reactions
to antigens on skin prick tests and have a high
prevalence of asthma, allergic rhinitis, urticaria
and eczema. Several potential gene linkages (e.g.
chromosome 11q13 location) to asthma and atopy
have been suggested but it is clear that the genetic
contribution
to asthma
is complex,
possibly
involving polygenic inheritance (several genes
contributing to the asthmatic tendency in an in-
dividual) and genetic heterogeneity (different
combinations of genes causing the asthmatic
tendency in different individuals). The ADAM33
gene on chromosome 20p13, which is a disintegrin
and metalloprotease gene, has been identiﬁed as
being involved in the structural airway compo-
nents of asthma, such as airway remodelling,
which relates to the development of chronic per-
sistent asthma with irreversible (ﬁxed) airways
obstruction and excess decline in FEV1 over time.
Environmental factors
The importance of environmental factors in the
aetiology of asthma has been particularly evident
in studies of populations who have migrated from
one country to another. For example, children
from the Paciﬁc atoll of Tokelau were found to have
developedasthmawithsimilarprevalencetonative
NewZealandchildrenwhentheywereevacuatedto
New Zealand following a typhoon that devastated
the local economy, whereas children remaining in
Tokelau had a signiﬁcantly lesser prevalence. Sim-
ilarly, movement of people from East to West
Germany in the 1990s was associated with an in-
creased incidence of asthma and atopy. There may
be very many aspects of the environment that are
important but a change to a modern, urban, eco-
nomically developed society seems to be partic-
ularly associated with the occurrence of asthma.
Indoor environment
People spend at least 75% of their time indoors and
overall exposure to air pollutants and allergens is
determined more by concentrations indoors than
outdoors. The indoor environment is particularly
important in the case of young children because
allergen exposure early in life may be particularly
important in determining sensitisation. House
dust mites (Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus) are
found in high concentrations in carpets, soft fur-
nishings and bedding. Exposure to high levels in
early life is associated with an increased likelihood
ofsensitisation tohousedustmitesby3to7yearsof
age. In one UK study environmental manipulation
commencedinearlypregnancyandfocusedmainly
on house dust mite avoidance and showed some
reduction in respiratory symptoms in the ﬁrst year
oflife.However,subsequently therewasaparadox-
ical effect of increased allergy but better lung func-
tion. Pet-derived allergens are widespread in
homes where dogs, cats or budgerigars are kept.
Epidemiological studies suggest that close contact
withacatordoginearlylifemayreducesubsequent
prevalence of asthma and allergy, perhaps via the
provocation of immune tolerance. In general,stud-
iesondomesticallergenavoidanceareinconsistent
and there is no clear strategy that can be recom-
mended. Passive exposure to cigarette smoke in
thehomehasanadverseeffectonasthmaandother
respiratory diseases in children in particular.
Outdoor environment
Although there is a widespread view among the
general public that the increasing prevalence of
asthma is attributable to atmospheric pollution
from motor vehicles, the balance of evidence
suggests that any such inﬂuence on the initiation
of asthma is small. Nevertheless, interactions be-
tween atmospheric pollutants, aeroallergens and
climatic conditions plays an important, although
Asthma 99

complex and incompletely understood, part in
triggering exacerbations of pre-existing asthma.
Climatic conditions such as high pressure and
humidity with calm still air can result in an accu-
mulation of airborne pollutants (e.g. particulates,
ozone) and of allergens (e.g. pollens, fungal
spores). Several epidemics of acute asthma have
been associated with thunderstorms, and these
have particularly affected patients with pre-exist-
ing atopic asthma. Warm dry weather may cause a
rapid rise in pollen concentrations and also in
levels of ozone (O3), nitrogen dioxide and sulphur
dioxide because of atmospheric stability. Gusts of
wind at the start of a thunderstorm lift allergens
into the air. Rain disrupts pollen grains into a
number of smaller allergenic particles. Under
these
circumstances
atopic
individuals
with
pre-existing asthma or hay fever are particularly
vulnerable to the resultant allergen challenge.
Occupational environment
Many agents encountered in the workplace may
induce occupational asthma (e.g. isocyanates,
epoxyresins, persulphates, hard wood dusts (see
Chapter 14)).
Pathogenesis and
pathology (Fig. 10.1)
A series of factors combine to produce increasing
airway inﬂammation and airway responsiveness,
and when these features reach a sufﬁcient level
bronchoconstriction and asthma symptoms are
triggered. In a sensitised atopic asthmatic, typical-
ly, the inhalation of an allergen results in a two-
phase response consisting of an early asthmatic
reaction reaching its maximum at about 20 min-
utes, and a late asthmatic reaction developing
about 6–12 hours later. These atopic asthmatics
have high levels of speciﬁc IgE that binds to
receptors on inﬂammatory cells, most notably
mast cells. Interaction of the IgE antibody and
inhaled antigen results in the activation of these
inﬂammatory cells and release of preformed med-
iators such as histamine, prostaglandins and leu-
kotrienes that cause contraction of smooth muscle
of the airways producing bronchoconstriction. The
inﬂammatory response in asthma is highly com-
plex involving the full spectrum of inﬂammatory
cells including mast cells, eosinophils, B and T
lymphocytes and neutrophils, which release an
array of mediators and cytokines. These media-
tors regulate the response of other inﬂammatory
cells, and have a number of effects resulting in
contraction of airway smooth muscle, increased
vascular permeability and stimulation of airway
mucus secretion.
T-helper lymphocytes have an important role in
the regulation of the inﬂammatory response.
These cells may be divided into two main subsets
on the basis of the proﬁle of cytokines that they
produce. Th2 cells produce pro-inﬂammatory
interleukins and up-regulate the speciﬁc form of
airway inﬂammation of asthma by enhancing IgE
synthesis and eosinophil and mast-cell function.
In contrast, Th1 cells produce cytokines that
down-regulate the atopic response. In those who
Mucosal
shedding
Cellular
infiltration
Eosinophils
Inflammatory exudate
Dilated blood vessels
Oedema
Hypertrophied
muscle
Goblet cells
Thickened
basement
membrane
Mucus plugging
Figure 10.1 The pathogenesis and
pathology of asthma. Asthma is
characterised by a complex pattern of airway
inﬂammation as a result of an interaction of
genetic and environmental factors.
Eosinophils, mast cells, neutrophils, B and T
cells are all involved in the cellular inﬁltration.
Mediators and cytokines regulate the
inﬂammatory response and result in
contraction of airway smooth muscle,
increased permeability of blood vessels and
mucus secretion. In chronic asthma airway
remodelling results in structural changes and
ﬁxed airways obstruction.
100
Respiratory diseases

are genetically susceptible to developing asthma,
antigen presentation to T-helper cells leads to a
Th2 response. Infection with respiratory syncytial
virus augments a Th2 response, whereas some
other microbial antigens lead to a Th1 response.
It has been suggested that exposure to allergens
and infections in early childhood is important in
determining the pattern of immune response
thereby modulating the genetic susceptibility to
developing asthma. In afﬂuent countries declining
family size, improved household amenities and
higher standards of cleanliness seem to be associ-
ated with an increased incidence of asthma. The
‘hygiene hypothesis’ suggests that allergic dis-
eases may be prevented by certain infections in
early childhood. Thus, for example, children with
older siblings are more likely to be exposed to
childhood infections and have a lower incidence
of asthma.
The wall of the airway in asthma is thickened by
oedema, cellular inﬁltration, increased smooth-
muscle mass and glands (Fig. 10.1). With increas-
ing severity and chronicity of the disease remodel-
ling of the airway occurs leading to ﬁbrosis of the
airway wall, ﬁxed narrowing of the airway and a
reduced response to bronchodilator medication.
Mucus plugging of the lumen of the airway is a
prominent feature of acute severe asthma. Al-
though in clinical practice patients with asthma
are sometimes classiﬁed as having atopic asthma
(occurring in relation to inhalation of environmen-
tal antigens in a susceptible person) or non-atopic
asthma (occurring without any deﬁnable relation-
ship to an environmental antigen), the patholog-
ical features of the airway inﬂammation are iden-
tical. It is likely that the inﬂammatory cascade of
asthma can be initiated by a variety of different
factors in different patients.
Clinical features
The typical symptoms of asthma are wheeze, dys-
pnoea, cough and a sensation of ‘chest tightness’.
These symptoms may occur for the ﬁrst time at any
age and may be episodic or persistent. In mild
asthma the patient may be asymptomatic between
episodes but experiences symptoms of asthma
during viral respiratory tract infections or after
exposure to certain allergens or other triggers.
Sometimes the clinical pattern is of more persis-
tent
symptoms
with
chronic
wheeze
and
dyspnoea. The variable nature of symptoms is a
characteristic feature of asthma. Typically, there is
a diurnal pattern with symptoms and peak expi-
ratory ﬂow (PEF) measurements being worse early
in the morning – so-called ‘morning dipping’.
Symptoms such as cough and wheeze often disturb
sleep and the term ‘nocturnal asthma’ emphasises
this. In some asthmatics symptoms can be pro-
voked by exercise (‘exercise induced asthma’).
This is different from normal exertional dyspnoea,
the excess ventilation associated with exercise
leads to measurable bronchoconstriction. Cough
can sometimes be the predominant or only symp-
tom and the lack of wheeze or dyspnoea may lead
to a delay in making the diagnosis: so-called,
‘cough variant asthma’. Work in recent years has
identiﬁed a condition termed: eosinophilic bron-
chitis. This is also a condition of airways inﬂam-
mation, although the presence and activation of
inﬂammatory cells is limited to the superﬁcial
layers of the airway walls rather than penetrating
further to involve the airway smooth muscle. It
usually presents as a chronic cough, perhaps dis-
playing an asthmatic type of diurnal variability,
although lung function is essentially normal. This
feature may be the semantic divide that separates it
from asthma although clearly the two conditions
are very closely related. As with asthma inhaled
corticosteroids are often a very effective treatment.
When
assessing
a
patient
presenting
with
breathlessness many of these clinical features can
be vital clues to the diagnosis of asthma. A careful
clinical history is therefore often the principal tool
in diagnosis and should include the following.
. Family history: there is a signiﬁcantly increased
prevalence of asthma in relatives of patients with
asthma or other atopic diseases (eczema, hay
fever, allergic rhinitis).
. Home environment: smoking, or exposure to
passive smoking in the home environment, is an
adverse factor. Indoor allergens, particularly cat
dander
may
be
important
in
perpetuating
asthma symptoms.
. Occupational history: it is important to identify
if the patient’s asthma could have been caused by
exposure to asthmagenic agents at work, by
enquiring about current and previous jobs, the
tasks performed and materials used. Do symp-
toms improve away from work at weekends or on
holidays? Are symptoms worse on return to work,
particularly the evening or night after work?
(See Chapter 14.)
Asthma 101

. Trigger
factors: are
there
any
factors
that
precipitate symptoms?
(a) exercise;
(b) cold air;
(c) viral respiratory infections;
(d) allergen exposure (e.g. feather pillows, cat
dander);
(e) seasonal factors (e.g. grass pollen);
(f) drugs (e.g. b-blockers, aspirin).
. Response
to
treatment: enquiry
about
the
effectiveness of previous treatment with bron-
chodilator drugs or prednisolone yields clues to
the reversibility of the disease and is particularly
important in detecting asthma in older patients
who may have been erroneously labelled as
having COPD.
The characteristic features on examination of
patients with asthma are diffuse bilateral wheeze,
a prolonged expiratory phase to respiration and
lower costal margin paradox (see Chapter 2) but
there are often no signs detectable between epi-
sodes. There may be features of associated diseases
such as allergic rhinitis, nasal polyps and eczema.
It is essential to be alert for atypical features such as
unilateral wheeze that suggests local bronchial
obstruction by a foreign body (e.g. inhaled peanut)
in a child or a carcinoma in an adult, for example. It
is also important to ensure that there are no signs
of cardiac or other respiratory disease. During
acute attacks of asthma features such as tachycar-
dia, tachypnoea, cyanosis, use of accessory mus-
cles of respiration and features of anxiety and
general distress indicate a severe episode. Chronic
severe childhood asthma may cause chest defor-
mity with the lower rib cage being pulled inwards
(Harrison’s sulcii) but these features are rarely seen
nowadays.
Diagnosis
Although diagnosing asthma is straightforward
when the patient presents with classic symptoms
and evidence of variable or reversible airways ob-
struction, there are many pitfalls, and errors in
diagnosis are common. Failure to diagnose asth-
ma results in the patient being deprived of appro-
priate asthma treatment, for example a child with
cough receiving recurrent courses of antibiotics for
‘chest infections’ when in fact he or she is suffering
from asthma. Conversely, incorrect diagnosis of
asthma might expose the patient to the risks of
inappropriate treatment (e.g. recurrent courses of
prednisolone) and delay appropriate management
of other lung disease, e.g. inhaled foreign body in a
child or tracheal tumour in an adult producing
wheeze simulating asthma. On the one hand it is
necessary to be alert to less well-recognised pre-
sentations of asthma, for example cough without
wheeze, and on the other hand to be prepared to
review the evidence for asthma if the response to
treatment is poor or if unusual features emerge
(e.g. could this child possibly have cystic ﬁbrosis?).
Evidence establishing the diagnosis of asthma and
excluding other diseases often emerges over time
and it is sometimes wise to use interim terms such
as ‘suspected asthma’ while gathering evidence of
variable or reversible airways obstruction that al-
lows a ﬁrm diagnosis of asthma to be established.
Doubt may arise where it is difﬁcult to obtain
accurate peak ﬂow or spirometry measurements
as in the case of young children. Even when the
diagnosis of asthma is established the diagnostic
process should be taken further: could this be
occupational asthma? Is there evidence of addi-
tional lung disease such as bronchiectasis or aller-
gic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis? The doctor
needs to exercise good clinical skills in applying
two critical questions: could this patient’s symp-
toms be caused by asthma? Does this patient
really have asthma?
Investigations
In a straight forward case, a careful history and
clinical assessment may strongly suggest the diag-
nosis of asthma. In such cases a trial of asthma
treatment may be a reasonable next step. (Be
prepared to be wrong; if there is not a clear re-
sponse to treatment reconsider the diagnosis). In
most cases however, given the likely need for treat-
ment over many years it is important to try to gain
objective support for the diagnosis.
Lung function tests
Conﬁrmation of the diagnosis hinges on the dem-
onstration of airﬂow obstruction that changes over
short periods of time, either spontaneously (vari-
ability) or in response to treatment (reversibility).
Spirometry allows clearer conﬁrmation of air-
ﬂow obstruction than the PEF rate (PEFR) and in
102
Respiratory diseases

that sense is preferable. A reduced FEV/VC ratio
(usually taken to be < 0.7) conﬁrms airway ob-
struction. However, the variability of asthma
means that in some individuals (especially with
relatively mild disease) spirometry may be normal
between attacks.
. Reversibility: if airways obstruction is detected
by spirometry the next step is to assess its re-
versibility to bronchodilator drugs. Typically, the
patient is given 200 mg salbutamol and spirome-
try is repeated 15–20 minutes later. An alternative
approach is to employ a 6-week trial of inhaled
corticosteroid (e.g. 200 mg of beclometasone) or a
2-week trial of oral steroid (e.g. 30 mg/day of
prednisolone). In each of these trials a >400 ml
improvement in FEV1 strongly suggests a diag-
nosis of asthma. Smaller improvements are more
difﬁcult to interpret and certainly do not exclude
the diagnosis. In chronic severe asthma for ex-
ample, the response to such treatments may
become blunted over time. The diminution of
response however does not alter the diagnosis. It
remains asthma.
. Variability: in spirometry (irrespective of treat-
ment) may be observed over a number of visits to
the clinic for example. However, in the assess-
ment of variability PEFR has the advantage of
beingmeasurable byacheap,portabledevicethat
can be taken away from the clinic by the patient.
In this way multiple measurements can be made
with the potential for recording variability in
relation to time of day or environment (in the of
case asthma triggered by an occupational expo-
sure for example). The patient needs to be taught
how to use the device and record measurements
in a peak ﬂow diary. A characteristic pattern in
asthma is ‘morning dipping’ in which peak ﬂow
values are lowest in the morning, improving
throughout the day. This diurnal variability is
most marked in active, poorly controlled asthma.
PEFR variability is calculated as the difference
between the highest and lowest recording ex-
pressed as a percentage of the highest. A 20% or
greater variability is highly suggestive of asthma.
Total lung capacity is usually increased in asthma
as a manifestation of hyperinﬂation, and residual
volume is elevated indicating air trapping. In
contrast to patients with COPD (see Chapter 11),
the airway obstruction of asthma is not associated
with any impairment of gas diffusion so that trans-
fer factor for carbon monoxide (TLco) is character-
istically normal and transfer coefﬁcient (Kco) is
often slightly elevated (see Chapter 3 for explana-
tion). During an acute severe attack of asthma,
hypoxia develops and is usually associated with
increased ventilation and a reduced Pco2. An ele-
vated (or even normal) Pco2 in a patient with acute
severe asthma is a sign of a critically ill patient who
is failing to maintain ventilation (see below).
Airway responsiveness is a measure of the gen-
eral ‘irritability’ of the airways, the degree to
which bronchoconstriction develops in response
to physical or chemical stimuli.
. Exercise testing: one of the most useful ways of
demonstrating increased airway responsiveness
or hyper-reactivity is to measure peak ﬂow or
spirometry before and after 5–10 minutes of
vigorous exercise. A post-exercise fall in FEV1 or
peak ﬂow of 20% is highly suggestive of asthma,
as normal subjects usually show a degree of
bronchodilatation, rather than bronchoconstric-
tion, during exercise. An exercise provocation
test is most useful if a patient with suspected
asthma has normal peak ﬂow or spirometry
when seen in the clinic, such that reversibility
testing may be of little use, and a ‘provocation’
test is more useful. The response is greater if
exercise is performed in cold air.
. Methacholine (or histamine) provocation tests:
the degree of airway responsiveness can be mea-
sured precisely in the laboratory. Under careful
supervision, the patient inhales increasing doses
of nebulised methacholine or histamine, starting
at a very low dose, and serial spirometry is per-
formed. By plotting the percentage fall in FEV1
the concentration (C), or dose (D), of the chem-
ical provoking (P) a 20% fall in FEV1, can be
calculated and expressed as a ﬁgure (e.g. PD20
methacholine200 mgorPC20histamine4 mg/mL).
Methacholine or histamine provocation tests are
not usually required for the diagnosis of asthma in
routine practice but are particularly useful in
assessing changes in airway responsiveness in
relation to exposure to environmental or occupa-
tional allergens (see Chapter 14) and in research
studies.
Tests for hypersensitivity
Skin prick tests (Fig. 10.2) may be performed to
identify atopy and to detect particular sensitivity to
a speciﬁc antigen with a view to exclusion of
exposure where possible (e.g. cat allergens). Drops
of antigen extracts are placed on the ﬂexor surface
Asthma 103

of the forearm and the tip of asmall stylet is pressed
into the superﬁcial epidermis through the drop of
allergen. A positive reaction is manifest as a weal
with a surrounding erythematous ﬂare at about 15
minutes. The reaction to allergens should be com-
pared with the reaction to a drop of histamine and
to a drop of control solution containing no anti-
gens. Total IgE level is often elevated in patients
with atopic asthma and they sometimes have a
mild peripheral blood eosinophilia.
Radioallergosorbent testing (RAST) is a means
of measuring the levelof circulating IgEspeciﬁcally
directed towards a particular antigen.
Some asthmatics develop an allergic reaction to
Aspergillus fumigatus, a ubiquitous fungus which
may colonise the airways. In these circumstances
the asthma is typically severe and persistent requir-
ing systemic steroid treatment. There is often as-
sociated severe airway inﬂammation and mucus
plugging resulting in bronchiectasis (see Chapter
8). In addition to a positive skin prick test to Asper-
gillus these patients often have signiﬁcant eosino-
philia and precipitating antibodies to Aspergillus
in their serum. Very rarely, asthma occurs as part of
an eosinophilic vasculitis such as Churg–Strauss
syndrome (see Chapter 15); in which case very high
levels of blood eosinophilia occur.
General investigations
Further general investigations may be necessary
to exclude other cardiorespiratory diseases. Chest
X-ray is essential in older patients who have
smoked, to exclude bronchial carcinoma, for
example, and may be needed in children if
there are any clinical features to suggest other
diseases such as cystic ﬁbrosis or bronchiectasis.
Bronchoscopy is occasionally necessary to assess
for vocal cord dysfunction, inhaled foreign bod-
ies, bronchial carcinoma or rarer causes of
bronchial obstruction such as carcinoid tumours.
Exhaled nitric oxide (NO) levels are increased in
patients with asthma and this is a marker of
airway inﬂammation that
can be measured
non-invasively. The equipment needed to mea-
sure exhaled NO is expensive and this test is
mainly used in research studies rather than in
routine clinical practice.
Management (Fig. 10.3)
Patient education
Asthma is frustrating, frightening and much mis-
understood. Successful management of asthma
requires that patients, or the parents of a child
with asthma, understand the nature of the condi-
tion. The complexity of this explanation will of
course vary with the background knowledge and
character of the patient but it is a necessary foun-
dation to an understanding of (and ultimately
adherence to) treatment. When asthma has only
recently developed, for example, the patient may
be entirely focused on ﬁnding the once-and-for-all
cure. Such a patient will not be receptive to the idea
of ﬁnely tuning lifelong therapy to merely control
the disease unless the practicality of the hoped for
cure is discussed carefully. Time spent in discus-
sion is very worthwhile. It is particularly important
at the time of diagnosis, although education is an
ongoing process and should play some part in most
consultations.
At clinical review when attempting to assess the
degree of symptom activity, general questions
such as: ‘How’s your asthma?’ are ineffective and
should be avoided. They produce a reply rarely
more informative than; ‘Fine doctor’. Speciﬁcs,
such
as
the
Royal
College
of
Physicians
‘3
Figure 10.2 Skin prick test. Drops of
antigen extracts and antigen-free
control solution are placed on the
ﬂexor surface of the forearm. Each
drop is pricked with a ﬁne needle. The
needle is held parallel to the skin
surface, advanced slightly and a
tiny fold of skin lifted brieﬂy as shown.
Deep stabs and bleeding should be
avoided. Weal and ﬂare are mea-
sured after 10–20 minutes.
104
Respiratory diseases

* BDP or equivalent
Step 3: Add-on therapy
Add inhaled long-acting 2-agonist (LABA)
Assess control of asthma:
•  good response to LABA; continue LABA
•  Benefit form LABA but control still inadequate; continue LABA and
    increase inhaled steroid dose to 800g/day* (if not already on this dose)
•  no response to LABA; stop LABA and increase inhaled steroid to
   800 µg/day*.  if control still inadequate, institute trial of other therapies,
   e.g. leukotriene receptor antagonist or SR theophylline
Use daily steroid tablet in lowest dose providing adequate control
Step 5: Continuous or frequent use of oral steroids
Maintain high-dose inhaled steroid at 2000 µg/day*
Consider other treatments to minimise the use of steroid tablets
Refer patient for specialist care
Step 4: Persistent poor control
Consider trials of:
•  increasing inhaled steroid up to 2000 µg/day*
•  addition of a fourth drug e.g. leukotriene receptor antagonist,
    SR theophylline, 2-agonist tablet
Step 2: Regular preventer therapy
Add inhaled steroid 200–800 g/day*
400 µg is an appropriate starting dose for many patients
Start at dose of inhaled steroid appropriate to severity of disease
Step 1: mild intermittent asthma
Inhaled short-acting 2-agonist as required
Figure 10.3 Summary of the stepwise management of asthma in adults (Reproduced with permission from British
Thoracic Society/Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network. British Guideline on the Management of Asthma 2009
(www.brit-thoracic.org.uk/).
Questions’, are needed to gain a more accurate
picture of asthma control.
1 In the last month/week have you had difﬁculty
sleeping due to your asthma (including cough
symptoms)?
2 Have you had your usual asthma symptoms (e.g.
cough, wheeze, chest tightness, shortness of
breath) during the day?
3 Has your asthma interfered with your usual daily
activities (e.g. school, work, housework)?
Asthma 105

The patients who reported their asthma to be ‘ﬁne’,
when asked if they wake at night may, after a brief
pause to ensure they have heard you correctly, say:
‘Of course I do doctor – I’ve got asthma!’ This high-
lights another important issue that needs to be
tackled. Many patients (indeed many doctors) have
inappropriately low expectations of what can be
achieved with appropriate use of modern inhaled
medications. Although we are still some way from a
cure, many people with asthma, particularly the
young, should be able to achieve something close
to, if not complete alleviation of day-to-day symp-
toms; ‘total control’. Time often needs to be spent
in consultation raising expectations of what can be
achieved. Many keen sports men and women have
given up their sport, believing serious competition
or even enjoyment of the sport is entirely precluded
by asthma. This hardly ever need be the case. Clin-
ical consultation then is as much about redeﬁning
goals as the practicalities of treatment regimens.
The practicalities must be addressed however.
Good asthma control for most patients does not
depend on the latest, expensive, high-tech treat-
ment; it depends on getting the basics right. Un-
fortunately it is the basics that are so often ne-
glected. Good inhaler technique is critical but
disappointingly rare. The fault almost always lies
with the clinician, not the patient. An inhaler
should never be prescribed unless time is taken to
coach (and then check) technique.
Most patients with asthma should be able to
monitor and manage their own condition to a
considerable degree and to recognise when med-
ical advice is needed, in much the same way as
patients with diabetes monitor their blood sugar
levels and adjust insulin therapy.
The amount of information given to each patient
needs to be varied in accordance with their needs
and, indeed, wishes but all patients should know
about features that indicate when their asthma is
deteriorating and what action to take in these
circumstances. Healthcare professionals should
be aware that it is often those patients least inter-
ested in learning about their disease who are at
greatest risk and that features such as depression,
anxiety, denial of disease and non-adherence with
treatment are strongly associated with asthma
deaths. Particular effort is required to identify and
target resources at such patients. Information con-
veyed in discussion with the patient should be
supplemented by written information. Many orga-
nisations such as the British Lung Foundation and
the National Asthma Campaign in the UK provide
excellent
literature
for
patient
use.
But
a
pre-printed leaﬂet may sometimes seem to be
about ‘someone else’s asthma’. A few carefully
selected notes including a personalised asthma
plan handwritten in front of the patient can be a
very powerful communication tool. Advice, so con-
veyed, is often highly valued by the patient as it is
seen as being about them and their asthma.
Avoidance of precipitating factors
Most patients with atopic asthma react to many
different antigens so that environmental control
measures are generally not particularly helpful.
The level of house dust mite can be reduced by
encasing mattresses in occlusive covers and by
frequent washing of blankets and duvets but the
improvement in asthma control, even in those
known to be sensitised, is usually disappointing.
Avoidance of exposure to pet allergens from dogs
or cats, for example, is more feasible but the result
of these interventions is often not dramatic either.
Similarly, it is difﬁcult to avoid exposure to out-
door allergens although some patients beneﬁt
from precautions such as increasing asthma treat-
ment or remaining indoors with closed windows
when pollen counts are high.
Desensitisation (immunotherapy) is a highly
specialised technique in which repeated injections
of an allergen are given to a sensitised subject in an
attempt to produce ‘blocking antibody’ of IgG type
that prevents the allergen binding to speciﬁc IgE on
mast cells. It is most commonly used in the treat-
ment of well-documented life-threatening ana-
phylactic reactions to insect stings but there is no
evidence of its beneﬁt in asthma and there are
major concerns about the risk of anaphylaxis.
Avoidance of irritants such as cigarette smoke
or generally dusty environments is advisable.
Avoidance of b-blocker drugs is important for all
patients with asthma, and patients who are sensi-
tive to aspirin should avoid all aspirin-containing
products and non-steroidal anti-inﬂammatory
drugs. Viral infections often precipitate attacks of
asthma so that it is advisable for patients to mon-
itor peak ﬂow measurements or symptoms care-
fully during such infections and to intensify asthma
treatment as required. Because inﬂuenza infection
may precipitate severe exacerbations of asthma,
annual inﬂuenza vaccination is recommended.
Exercise is a particular factor precipitating asth-
ma. Bronchoconstriction may develop within min-
utes of onset of vigorous activity. This response
106
Respiratory diseases

usually resolves within 30 minutes and there then
follows a refractory period of about 2 hours when
further bronchoconstriction is more difﬁcult to
provoke. A warm-up period before the main exer-
cise may help. It is important to remember that
exercise induced asthma is indeed asthma. It re-
sponds as asthma does to all the standard thera-
pies. Good overall asthma control is therefore
probably more important than the ‘quick ﬁx’ be-
fore the event.
Drug treatment
Short-acting bronchodilator drugs (‘relievers’)
are used to relieve symptoms of bronchoconstric-
tion. Inhaled corticosteroids (‘preventers’) treat
the underlying chronic inﬂammatory process in
asthma and are used either alone or in combina-
tion with a long-acting bronchodilator as main-
tenance therapy. Most patients with chronic asth-
ma should be able to live perfectly normal lives on a
combination of these treatments. The need for oral
prednisolone (‘rescue medication’) should be rare
indeed, although recognising when it is required is
an important part of good asthma management.
Bronchodilators
. Short-acting b2-agonists: (e.g. salbutamol, ter-
butaline)
stimulate
b-adrenoceptors
in
the
smooth
muscle
of
the
airway,
producing
smooth-muscle relaxation and bronchodilata-
tion. They have an onset of action within 15
minutes and a duration of action of 4–6 hours.
Side-effects include tremor and palpitations but
these are uncommon unless very high doses are
used. The principal safety issue with bronchodi-
lators (long acting, as well as short acting) is not
one of side effects but of over-reliance at the
expense of appropriate use of inhaled corticos-
teroids. The prompt relief they offer is seductive
but they do nothing to control the underlying
disease process; inﬂammation. Such symptom-
atic relief can disguise the severity of asthma and
only delay its treatment. Anyone needing more
than three doses of short-acting b2-agonists per
week should have their maintenance therapy
increased. Increasing need for bronchodilator
medication is a warning of declining control and
should act as a prompt to action. As a group,
patients consuming more than 10–12 puffs of
b2-agonists per day, have a recognised increased
risk of fatal asthma.
. Long-acting b2-agonists: (e.g. salmeterol, for-
moterol) have a duration of action of more than
12 hours. This gives them a convenient twice-
daily dosing regime (which coincides nicely with
the usual regimen employed for inhaled corti-
costeroids). Not long after their introduction
there was concern about an increase in asthma
deaths associated with their use. This, however,
seems to have been as a result of a concomitant
reduction in the use of corticosteroids rather that
a direct pharmacological effect of the drugs
themselves. Their use is only recommended as
an adjunct to inhaled corticosteroids so that
control of the airway inﬂammation is not ne-
glected. Combination inhalers, which combine
a long-acting b2-agonist and a corticosteroid, are
now very widely used in asthma management.
They enjoy the beneﬁts of simplicity and conve-
nience (factors associated with better adherence
to treatment). They are also a way of ensuring the
improved symptom control brought about by the
use of the long-acting b2-agonist does not result
in a neglect of corticosteroids. The particular
combination inhaler Symbicort contains for-
moterol as its long-acting b2-agonist. Formoter-
ol has the same duration of action as other long-
acting b2-agonists but also beneﬁts from an
onset of action as brisk as that seen with the
short-acting b2-agonists. Symbicort can there-
fore be used, as both a Maintenance And Re-
liever Therapy. The rationale for the so-called
SMART regimen is that it automatically delivers
an increase in the corticosteroid treatment at
times when declining control would naturally
lead to increasing reliever usage. In selected
patients this has proved to be a useful strategy
but careful patient education about the speciﬁc
issues related to this regimen is needed.
. Anti-muscarinic bronchodilators: (e.g. ipratro-
pium or the long-acting tiotropium) produce
bronchodilatation by blocking the bronchocon-
strictor effect of vagal nerve stimulation on bron-
chial smooth muscle. They take about 1 hour to
reach their maximum effect and have a duration
of action of about 4–6 hours in the case of Ipra-
tropium, >24 hours in the case of Tiotropium.
Side-effects are uncommon but nebulised anti-
cholinergic drugs may be deposited in the eyes,
aggravating glaucoma. In most patients with
asthma they are less effective than b2-agonists.
Inhaled preparations are therefore not used
widely in chronic asthma management. Nebu-
lised ipratropium, on the other hand, provides a
Asthma 107

useful adjunct to salbutamol in the treatment of
acute severe asthma (see later).
. Theophyllines: increase cyclic adenosine mono-
phosphate (cAMP) stimulation of b-adrenocep-
tors by inhibiting the metabolism of cAMP
by the enzyme phosphodiesterase. They may
also have other effects including some anti-
inﬂammatory actions. They are not available in
inhaler form and absorption from the gastroin-
testinal tract and clearance of the drug by the
liver are variable so that the dose needs to be
titrated carefully in accordance with blood levels.
Side-effects such as nausea, vomiting, headache,
tachycardia and malaise are common. Hepatic
clearance of theophyllines is reduced by drugs
such as cimetidine, ciproﬂoxacin and erythro-
mycin, and toxicity can occur if these medica-
tions are prescribed without adjustment in the
dose of theophylline. Aminophylline is an intra-
venous form of theophylline (combined with
ethylenediamine for solubility) that may be used
in severe attacks of asthma. It must be given
slowly (over at least 20 minutes) with careful
adjustment of dose in accordance with blood
levels in order to avoid serious toxicity such as
convulsions and cardiac arrhythmias. It does not
usually result in any additional bronchodilata-
tion compared with standard treatment with
nebulised bronchodilators and systemic ster-
oids, and side-effects are common so that its use
is usually reserved for very severe asthma not
responding to standard treatment.
. Magnesium: magnesium sulphate (1.2–2 g as an
intravenous infusion over 20 minutes) acts as a
smooth-muscle relaxant and is safe and effective
in treating patients with acute severe asthma
who have not had a satisfactory initial response
to nebulised salbutamol.
Anti-inﬂammatory drugs
. Inhaled corticosteroids: (e.g. beclometasone, bu-
desonide, ﬂuticasone, mometasone, ciclesonide)
are the mainstay of asthma treatment because
they counteract airway inﬂammation; which is
the key underlying process in asthma. It is es-
sential that the patient understands that this is a
preventative treatment that needs to be taken
regularly. It is important to explain to patients
that, in contrast to the short-acting b2-agonists,
these drugs provide no immediate relief of symp-
toms. Without proper patient education the
drugs may be neglected on the mistaken as-
sumption that ‘they’re not working’. Adherence
is improved by using a twice-daily regime where-
by the patient’s ‘preventative’ steroid inhaler is
left at their bedside or by their toothbrush and
taken regularly every night and morning. The
dose is adjusted to give optimal control and
varies greatly from patient to patient. The po-
tency of the various available inhaled steroids
differs; the same anti-inﬂammatory effect can be
achieved with one drug at half the dose required
with another. Clinical guidelines, in specifying
steroid dosage, therefore refer to ‘beclometasone
equivalent’. This variation does NOT imply su-
periority of one steroid over another. The critical
comparator is not potency but the efﬁcacy to
side-effect proﬁle. In this regard there is no great
difference between any of the available products.
In choosing an inhaled steroid it is probably as
wise to choose on the basis of the inhaler device
the drug is available in. The device the patient
can use is likely to be the most effective. Many
adult
patients
with
relatively
mild
asthma
achieve good control with a dosage of about
400 mg/day beclometasone, but some patients
with chronic severe asthma may require up to
2000 mg/day. In adult patients ‘low-dose’ (below
the equivalent of about 800 mg/day beclometa-
sone) inhaled steroids are not usually associated
with any signiﬁcant adverse effects apart from
oropharyngeal candidiasis or hoarseness of the
voice, which can be reduced by using a spacer
device in the case of metered dose inhalers or a
dry powder device and gargling the throat with
water after inhalation. With ‘high-dose’ inhaled
steroids (above about 800 mg/day beclometa-
sone) biochemical evidence of suppression of
adrenal function, and increased bone turnover
are detectable in some patients. The clinical
signiﬁcance of such systemic effects needs to be
considered in the context of the dangers of un-
controlled asthma and alternative therapies such
as oral prednisolone. The dosage of inhaled ster-
oids should be reviewed regularly to ensure that
the patient is taking as much as is required to
control their asthma (‘step up’) but, equally, as
little as necessary (‘step down’) so as to minimise
the risk of adverse effects with long-term usage.
Patients taking high-dose inhaled corticosteroid
should carry a steroid treatment card advising of
the risk of adrenal suppression.
. Sodium cromoglycate is a preventative inhaled
treatment
that
has
a
number
of
anti-
108
Respiratory diseases

inﬂammatory actions including stabilisation of
mast cells. It is mainly used in children with mild
asthma and it has no signiﬁcant adverse effects.
However, it is less effective than inhaled steroids.
Nedocromil is another inhaled compound with
similar properties to cromoglycate.
. Oral steroid treatment: ‘rescue’ courses of oral
steroids may be needed to control exacerbations
of asthma. Typically, this consists of 30–40 mg/
day of prednisolone for about 7 days in an adult.
Treatment is continued until asthma control has
been achieved. Most patients should be taught to
start their own short course of oral prednisolone
in accordance with a predetermined action plan
(for example, when peak ﬂow falls below 60% of
the patient’s best value). Patients should under-
stand the potential adverse effects of long-term
use of prednisolone and the difference between
this and infrequent short-courses which (if truly
infrequent) are safe. A very small number of
patients require long-term systemic predniso-
lone to control severe asthma. These patients
should be attending a hospital specialist and it
should have been clearly established that their
asthma cannot be controlled by other measures.
The dosage of steroids needs to be kept as low as
possible. All other effective therapies, particular-
ly inhaled steroids, should be continued at full
dose. In these circumstances the patient should
be given a ‘steroid treatment card’ documenting
the dosage of steroids used, advising about ad-
verse effects and warning patients that steroids
should not be stopped suddenly because of the
risk of adrenal insufﬁciency. Booster doses may
be required during illnesses and patients may be
particularly susceptible to infections such as
chickenpox. Other adverse effects include peptic
ulceration, myopathy, osteoporosis, growth sup-
pression, depression, psychosis, cataracts and
cushingoid features. Patients receiving long-
term oral prednisolone should be considered for
preventative treatment of osteoporosis such as
smoking cessation, exercise, hormone replace-
ment therapy, adequate dietary calcium intake
and
bisphosphonate
treatment
where
appropriate.
. Leukotriene receptor antagonists: (e.g. monte-
lukast, zaﬁrlukast) block the effects of cysteinyl
leukotrienes; which are metabolites of arachido-
nic acid with bronchoconstrictor and pro-in-
ﬂammatory actions. Leukotriene antagonists are
a modality of anti-inﬂammatory therapy in asth-
ma, which are given orally in tablet form. Some
patients report a clear improvement in symp-
toms although in many the response is disap-
pointing. Their place is as add-on therapy (only
to be used after inhaled steroids and a long-
acting bronchodilator). As such they are a rea-
sonable option to try. If no beneﬁt can be dis-
cerned after 1 month however, they should be
stopped.
. Anti-IgE treatment (omalizumab) is a monoclo-
nal antibody that binds to IgE. It is a new form of
add-on therapy for some patients with severe
persistent
IgE-mediated
asthma
to
inhaled
allergens, who are not controlled by high dose
inhaled corticosteroid and long-acting b-agonist
medication. It is administered by subcutaneous
injection every 2–4 weeks and the dose depends
on the baseline IgE level. Its use is currently
restricted to hospital-based physicians who
are experienced in the treatment of severe
persistent asthma.
. Bronchial thermoplasty is a novel, still rather
experimental, technique whereby heat is applied
directly to the central airways via bronchoscopy.
Thermal ‘damage’ to smooth muscle reduces
its
quantity
and
functionality
and
in
one
major study led to improved lung function and
reduced need for reliever medication over a
22-week follow-up. More evidence of both safety
and efﬁcacy will be required before the tech-
nique could be established as a component of
clinical practice.
Stepwise approach to treatment of
asthma (Fig 10.3)
The British Thoracic Society guidelines on the
management of asthma recommend a stepwise
approach to treatment according to the severity
of the asthma. The aim of treatment is to control
the disease. Control is deﬁned as:
. no daytime symptoms;
. no night-time wakening due to asthma;
. no need for reliever medication;
. no exacerbations;
. no limitations on activity including exercise;
. normal lung function (in practical terms FEV1
and/or PEF >80% predicted or best);
. with minimal or no side-effects.
Patients should start treatment at the step most
appropriate to the initial severity of their asthma
and treatment is adjusted as appropriate thereaf-
ter. For the majority of patients, asthma is
Asthma 109

controlled by a combination of a regular inhaled
steroid and use of an inhaled bronchodilator drug
as required. Bronchodilator drugs are primarily
intended to provide symptom relief whereas in-
haled steroids are targeted at the underlying in-
ﬂammatory process in the airways. Treatment
should be ‘stepped up’ as much as necessary to
control the asthma; when control has been
achieved treatment may be ‘stepped down’ so that
the patient is on no more treatment than is
necessary.
Asthma is a dynamic condition changing over
time and ongoing management requires an assess-
ment of the level of control of the asthma that has
been achieved and adjustment of medication to
ﬁnd the optimal balance between control of the
asthma, use of medication and potential adverse
effects of treatment.
Inhaler devices
The inhaled route is preferred for bronchodilator
and corticosteroid drugs because it allows these
drugs to be delivered directly to the airway reduc-
ing the risk of systemic adverse effects. A large
number of different inhaler devices and drug for-
mulations are available. Current evidence suggests
that
there
is
no
major
difference
in
the
clinical effectiveness of the various devices pro-
vided the patient is able to use the device
appropriately.
. Metered-dose inhalers: (Fig. 10.4) pressurised
metered-dose inhalers use hydroﬂuoroalkane
(HFA) as a propellant. It is essential to instruct
the patient in the correct use of the inhaler and
this should be rechecked frequently. About 10%
of the drug is delivered to the lower airways and
the remainder is mainly deposited in the oro-
pharynx and swallowed, it is absorbed into the
blood, but mostly metabolised by ﬁrst-pass me-
tabolism in the liver.
. Spacer devices: (e.g. Volumatic, Nebuhaler,
Aerochamber) (Fig. 10.5) Poor inhaler tech-
nique is a signiﬁcant problem in the use of
metered-dose inhalers. Large-volume spacer de-
vices overcome some of these problems and
improve deposition of the drugs in the lower
airway to about 20% on average. The canister
(cr) of pressurised aerosol is inserted into one
end of the spacer device and the patient breathes
through the other end via a one-way valve (v) that
closes on expiration; (e) expiratory port. This
reduces the need for coordination of inspira-
tion and actuation of the inhaler. Distancing the
inhaler from the mouth (‘spacing’) results in a
ﬁne aerosol of smaller particles improving de-
livery of the drug to the lower airways. Spacer
devices should be cleaned monthly by washing in
detergent and allowing them dry in air. They
should be replaced at least every 12 months.
. Breath-actuated aerosol inhalers: (e.g. Auto-
haler, Easi-breathe) avoid the need for the
patient to coordinate actuation of the inhaler
and breathing. The valve on the inhaler is actu-
ated as the patient breathes in, delivering the
drug only during inspiration.
•  Remove the cap and shake the inhaler
•  Tilt the head back slightly and exhale
•  Position the inhaler in the mouth (or
   preferably just in front of the open
    mouth)
•  During a slow inspiration, press down
    the inhaler to release the medication
•  Continue inhalation to full inspiration
•  Hold breath for 10 seconds
•  Actuate only one puff per inhalation
Figure 10.4 Pressurised metered-dose inhaler.
110
Respiratory diseases

. Dry-powder devices: (Turbohaler, Accuhaler,
Clickhaler) (Fig. 10.6) in these devices the
b-agonist or steroid drug is formulated as a dry
powder without a propellant. Inspiratory airﬂow
releases the powder from the device so that they
are breath actuated, and this reduces the prob-
lem of coordination of inspiration and inhaler
actuation. Some patients ﬁnd dry-powder de-
vices easier to use but they require an adequate
inspiratory ﬂow rate to achieve drug delivery.
. Nebulisers: (Fig. 10.7) in this form of inhaled
therapy, oxygen or compressed air is directed
through a narrow hole creating a local negative
pressure (Venturi effect) that draws the drug
solution into the air stream from a reservoir
chamber. The droplets are then impacted against
a small sphere, and small particles are carried as
an aerosol, whereas larger particles hit the side
wall of the chamber and fall back into the reser-
voir solution. The aerosol is administered by
mask, or via a mouthpiece. Nebulisers are a
convenient means of giving high doses of bron-
chodilator drugs in acute attacks of asthma
where coordination of inhaler administration
(a)
(b)
W
L
M
C
T
Figure 10.6 Examplesof dry-powderinhalers:(a) Turbohaler (AstraZeneca); (b) Accuhaler (Allen and Hanbury).
(a) Turbohaler: the inhaler is shown with the cover removed, the mouthpiece is to the left. Up to 200 doses of the
powdered drug are stored in a reservoir through which the air channel passes. A dose of the dry powder is rotated
into the air channel by turning the distal section (arrow). The number of doses remaining is indicated in a small
window (W). (b) Accuhaler: the inhaler is opened by pushing the thumb grip (T) right around until it clicks. The
inhaler is shown open. Sliding the lever (L) around as far as it will go pierces an individual blister and places a dose of
the drug in the mouthpiece (M). There is a counter (C) indicating how many doses are left.
cr
v
e
Figure 10.5 Example of a spacer device for use with
metered-dose inhalers that allows the patient to inhale
after discharge of the aerosol. The Volumatic (Allen
and Hanbury) is a large-volumed device, designed to
allow free dispersal of the discharged material so that a
high proportion of it forms particles small enough to be
inhaled. It also allows large doses of aerosol to be
inhaled relatively efﬁciently (see text). cr, canister of
pressurised aerosol; e, expiratory port; v, valve that
closes on expiration.
Asthma 111

may be difﬁcult in a distressed patient. They may
also be used for delivering inhaled steroids (e.g.
budesonide) in very young children although it is
important to realise that properly used dry-pow-
der devices, for example turbohaler, or metered-
dose inhalers and spacer devices deliver a greater
percentage of the administered dose to the lower
airway and are therefore the devices of choice for
routine long-term treatment. The danger of pa-
tients having nebulisers at home for administra-
tion of bronchodilators lies in the fact that they
may over-rely on the temporary alleviation of
symptoms by nebulised bronchodilators to the
detriment of regular anti-inﬂammatory therapy.
They may also lead to a delay in seeking urgent
medical advice during acute severe asthma
attacks.
Acute severe asthma
Some patients with asthma are particularly sus-
ceptible to recurrent sudden attacks of severe
asthma but any patient with asthma may develop
an acute attack under certain circumstances (e.g.
viral infection, allergen exposure). It is crucial that
all patients with asthma know how to recognise the
features of a severe attack and know what action to
take. Most of the people who die of acute asthma
do so because the severity of the attack was under-
estimated and not treated adequately or promptly.
It is important therefore that doctors and patients
recognise the features of worsening asthma control
and a severe attack.
Signs of acute severe asthma
Any one of:
. PEF 33–50% of best or predicted;
. respiratory rate 25 /min;
. heart rate 110 bpm;
. inability to complete sentences in one breath.
Life-threatening asthma
Any one of the following in a patient with acute
severe asthma:
. clinical signs:
T altered conscious level
T exhaustion
T arrhythmia
T hypotension
T cyanosis
T silent chest
T poor respiratory effort
. measurements:
T PEF < 33% of best or predicted
T O2 saturation < 92%
T Pao2 < 8kPa
T Normal Paco2
Oxygen or
compressed air
Drug
solution
To mask or
T piece
(a)
(b)
Figure 10.7 Nebuliser treatment.
(a) Diagram of typical nebulisation
mechanism. (b) Nebuliser mask for
administration of high-dose
bronchodilator (see text).
112
Respiratory diseases

Near-fatal asthma
Raised Paco2 and/or requiring mechanical venti-
lation with raised inﬂation pressures.
Immediate management
. Oxygen: the highest concentration available
should be used. Masks delivering 24 or 28% are
not appropriate. Aim for a saturation >94%.
. High-dose nebulised b-agonist, for example sal-
butamol 5 mg or terbutaline 10 mg. This may be
repeated after 15–30 minutes if the patient’s
condition is not improving. Multiple doses from
an inhaler should be given with a spacer device if
a nebuliser is not available.
. High-dose systemic steroid, for example prednis-
olone 30–50 mg orally, or hydrocortisone 100mg
6-hourly intravenously, or both, immediately.
If response to this initial therapy is poor add the
following.
. Nebulised ipratropium: add ipratropium 0.5 mg
to the nebulised b-agonist.
. Intravenous magnesium sulphate: 1.2–2 g infu-
sion over 20 minutes.
. Intravenous bronchodilators: intravenous ami-
nophylline is unlikely to result in any additional
bronchodilatation compared with standard care.
Side-effects such as arrhythmias may also be
problematical. Some patients with near fatal or
life threatening asthma may gain additional ben-
eﬁt from intravenous aminophylline (5 mg/kg
loading dose over 20 minutes unless on mainte-
nance oral therapy, then infusion of 0.5 mg/kg/
hour) but such patients have been difﬁcult to
identify in trials and are probably rare.
. Intravenous b2-agonists: are sometimes used
(salbutamol or terbutaline 250 mg over 10 min-
utes, then infusion of 5 g/min) but they should be
reserved for those patients in whom nebulised
therapy cannot be used reliably.
Investigations
Arterial blood gases, urea and electrolyte concen-
trations, electrocardiogram in older patients, chest
X-ray.
Monitoring treatment
Continued vigilance is required. The patient’s con-
dition may deteriorate some hours after an initial
improvement (e.g. during the night after admis-
sion). Measure and record PEF 15–30 minutes after
starting treatment and thereafter according to the
response (at least 4 times daily measurements).
Monitor respiratory rate, pulse, patient’s general
condition and oxygen saturation frequently. Nurs-
ing staff should be asked to call the doctor if there is
a deterioration in these signs. Acute severe asthma
usually acts as a powerful stimulus to ventilation
resulting in a reduced Pco2. By the time of admis-
sion however, the patient may have had progres-
sive symptoms over a few days with very little
sleep. Fatigue and exhaustion are often present.
Even a normal Pco2 (let alone an elevated value)
in the context of acute severe asthma is therefore
an ominous sign. Transfer of the patient to an
intensive therapy unit (ITU) may be advisable
so that their condition can be monitored more
closely. Intermittent positive pressure ventilation
is only rarely necessary but is used when the
patient shows signs of exhaustion (rising Pco2),
Table 10.1 Diagnosing asthma. 'All that wheezes is not asthma and not all asthma wheezes'
Underdiagnosis: Could this patient’s symptoms be caused by asthma?
Overdiagnosis: Does this patient really have asthma?
. Recognise symptoms suggestive of asthma (e.g. wheeze, cough, recurrent ‘chest infections’)
. Establish evidence of airways obstruction (e.g. # peak ﬂow, # FEV1, # FEV1/VC ratio)
. Assess variability, reversibility, provocability of airway obstruction: serial peak ﬂow chart (e.g. morning
dipping; response to bronchodilator and steroid trial; exercise-induced fall in peak ﬂow)
. Monitor progress and review diagnosis (e.g. has ‘wheezy bronchitis’ of childhood evolved into established
asthma or was it a result of viral bronchiolitis?)
. Consider additional diagnoses (e.g. occupational asthma, allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis)
. Exclude alternative diagnoses (e.g. cystic ﬁbrosis, COPD, carcinoma, inhaled foreign body)
COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; FEV1, forced expiratory volume in 1 second; VC, vital capacity.
Asthma 113

failure to maintain oxygenation or deterioration
in vital signs.
Management during recovery
in hospital and following
discharge
The opportunity should be taken to improve
the patient’s understanding of asthma and its
management, and to provide written guidance
on future management. Ways of improving the
patient’s response to worsening asthma should
be identiﬁed. Most crises resulting in hospital
admission are probably preventable. The imp-
ortance of peak ﬂow measurement in determin-
ing treatment changes should be explained.
Possible precipitating factors should be identi-
ﬁed. Inhaler technique should be checked and
performance recorded. If necessary, alternative
inhaler devices should be used. Specialist follow
up is advisable.
KEY POINTS
. Asthma is a dynamic heterogenous clinical
syndrome, characterised by chronic
airway inﬂammation, airway hyper-
responsiveness, symptoms and airways
obstruction.
. Asthma is multifactorial in origin, arising from a
complex interaction of genetic and environ-
mental factors.
. The clinical diagnosis of asthma should be
supported by evidence of variable or reversible
airways obstruction on spirometry or peak ﬂow
measurements.
. Most patients with asthma can be managed
perfectly well by proper attention to detail
with the basic therapies (regular inhaled
corticosteroids and an inhaled
bronchodilator).
. Instruction in the correct use of an appropriate
inhaler device is crucial in the treatment of
asthma.
. Most patients (and many doctors) have inap-
propriately low expectations of disease control.
Aim for 'total control'.
Respiratory emergencies Asthma
. Oxygen: high ﬂow. Aim for a saturation >94%.
. Nebulised b-agonist: salbutamol 5 mg or ter-
butaline 10 mg. This may be repeated after
15–30 minutes if the patient's condition is not
improving. Continue 4–6 hourly or more fre-
quently, as required
. High-dose systemic steroid, for example
prednisolone 30–50 mg orally, or hydrocortisone
100 mg 6-hourly intravenously, immediately.
If response to initial therapy is not adequate add
the following.
. Nebulised ipratropium. 0.5 mg, 6-hourly
. Intravenous magnesium sulphate.
1.2–2 g infusion over 20 minutes.
Closely monitor: clinical condition, PEF and ar-
terial blood gases. If poor response to treatment,
fatigue, failure to achieve adequate oxygenation
or Pco2 within normal range, discuss with ITU.
FURTHER READING
Asthma UK: www.asthma.org.uk.
British Thoracic Society/Scottish Intercollegiate
GuidelinesNetwork.BritishGuidelineontheMan-
agementofAsthma2009.London:BritishThoracic,
2009 ( http://www.brit-thoracic.org.uk/).
Carlsen KH, Delgado L, DelGiacco S. Diagnosis,
prevention and treatment of exercise-related
asthma, respiratory and allergic disorders in
sports. Eur Respir Mon 2005; 10: 1–105.
Chu EK, Drazen JM. Asthma: one hundred years of
treatment and onward. Am J Respir Crit Care
Med 2005; 171: 1202–8.
Dolovich MB, Ahrens RC, Hess DR, et al. Device
selection and outcomes of aerosol therapy: evi-
dencebasedguidelinesoftheAmericanCollegeof
Chest Physicians/American College of Asthma,
AllergyandImmunology.Chest2005;127:335–71.
Global Initiative for Asthma (GINA): www.ginasth-
ma.com.
Holgate ST, Yang Y, Haitchi HM, et al. The genetics
of asthma. Proc Am Thorac Soc 2006; 3: 440–3.
Masoli M, Fabian D, Holt S, Beasley R. The global
burden of asthma: executive summary of GINA
Dissemination Committee report. Allergy 2004;
59: 469–78.
114
Respiratory diseases

11
Chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease
Introduction
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is
a major cause of morbidity and mortality world-
wide. It has a profound effect on both the quantity
and quality of life. In the UK an estimated 3 million
people have COPD yet more than 2 million of these
remain undiagnosed. There are 110 000 admis-
sions to hospital with exacerbations of COPD and
30 000 people die of the disease each year. Mor-
tality has fallen in men but continues to rise in
women, reﬂecting smoking patterns over the sec-
ond half of the twentieth century. As the worldwide
epidemic of smoking spreads, with increasing
smoking rates in China, Africa and Asia it is pre-
dicted that COPD will become the third most
common cause of death worldwide by 2020. There
is an urgent need to improve awareness, preven-
tion and treatment of this disease.
Deﬁnitions
Chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease
COPD is deﬁned as a chronic, slowly progressive
disorder characterised by airﬂow obstruction that
does not change markedly over several months.
Although there is some overlap in the features of
COPD and asthma, they are separate disorders
with different aetiologies, pathologies, natural his-
tory and responses to treatment. In asthma, airway
inﬂammation and hyper-reactivity are the key fac-
tors giving rise to bronchial muscle contraction
and airways obstruction. In COPD, structural and
pathological changes occur that manifest in the
various facets of the condition: chronic bronchitis,
airway obstruction and emphysema.
Chronic bronchitis
Chronic bronchitis is a hypersecretory disorder
deﬁned as the presence of cough productive of
sputum on most days for at least 3 months of
2 successive years in a patient in whom other
causes of a chronic cough have been excluded
(e.g. tuberculosis, bronchiectasis). The diagnosis
is made on the basis of symptoms. The airways
of patients with chronic bronchitis show mucous
gland hypertrophy and an increased number of
goblet cells. Although chronic bronchitis and
obstructive lung disease result from inhaling cig-
arette smoke, they do not show a clear relationship
to each other and are distinct components of
the spectrum of COPD. Mucus hypersecretion is
mainly caused by changes in the central airways
Respiratory Medicine Lecture Notes, Eighth Edition. Stephen J. Bourke and Graham P. Burns.
 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

whereas progressive airways obstruction arises
principally from damage to the peripheral airways
and alveoli.
Airway obstruction (see Chapter 3)
Airway obstruction is an increased resistance to
airﬂow caused by diffuse airway narrowing. The
term denotes a disturbance of physiology as man-
ifest by a reduced forced expiratory volume in 1
second/vital capacity (FEV1/VC) ratio. From
a practical perspective a FEV1/VC ratio less than
0.7 is deemed to denote airway obstruction, though
in truth the normal value of this ratio varies with
age (see later). A number of factors contribute
to airway obstruction in COPD : destruction of
alveoli by emphysema leads to loss of elastic recoil
and a loss of outward traction on the small airways
such that they collapse on expiration (Figs. 11.1
and 11.2); airway inﬂammation with thickening of
the airway wall (different to that seen in asthma
and usually the result of tobacco smoke); accumu-
lation of mucous secretions obstructing the airway
lumen.
Emphysema
Emphysema is deﬁned in terms of its pathological
features that consist of dilatation of the terminal
air spaces of the lung distal to the terminal bron-
chiole with destruction of their walls. Physiolog-
ically, emphysema is characterised by a reduction
in the transfer factor for carbon monoxide and
transfer coefﬁcient (Chapter 3). High-resolution
computed tomography (CT) scans can demon-
strate
the
parenchymal
lung
destruction
of
emphysema. Two main patterns of emphysema
are recognised (Fig. 11.1): centriacinar (centrilob-
ular) emphysema involves damage around the
respiratory bronchioles with preservation of the
more distal alveolar ducts and alveoli. Character-
istically, it affects the upper lobes and upper parts
of the lower lobes of the lung. Panacinar (panlob-
ular)
emphysema
results
in
distension
and
destruction of the whole of the acinus, and partic-
ularly affects the lower half of the lungs. Although
both types of emphysema are related to smoking
and may be present together, it is possible that
they may arise bydifferent mechanisms. Panacinar
(a)
(b)
Figure 11.1 Emphysema.
Diagrammatic view of lobule and
whole lung section in (a) centrilobular
and (b) panacinar emphysema.
116
Respiratory diseases

emphysema is the characteristic feature of patients
with a1-anti-trypsin enzyme deﬁciency.
Aetiology
Worldwide, a number of factors may be important
in the development of COPD, the smoke from
indoor cooking on open ﬁres for example, but in
the developed world tobacco smoking is far and
away the most important cause. Even in the
developing world smoking is of increasing impor-
tance. The total dose of tobacco inhaled is critical
and depends on factors such as age of starting
smoking, depth of inhalation and total number of
cigarettes smoked (one ‘pack year’ isdeﬁned as the
equivalent of 20 cigarettes per day for 1 year).
Although nearly all patients with COPD have
smoked heavily, only about 15% of smokers devel-
op COPD, suggesting that genetic susceptibility
plays a part. There is a higher prevalence of COPD
in men than in women, in patients of lower socio-
economic status and in urban rather than rural
areas.
There is evidence that COPD may be aggravated
by air pollution but the role of pollution in the
aetiology of COPD appears to be small when com-
pared with that of cigarette smoking. Some dusty
occupational environments are associated with
the development of chronic bronchitis and COPD,
for example those involving exposure to coal dust,
cotton dust and grain (see Chapter 14). However,
the contribution of occupation to the development
of COPD is small when compared with the dom-
inant effect of cigarette smoking.
A variety of factors in early childhood have
an important inﬂuence on the development of
obstructive airways disease in adulthood by deter-
mining the maximum lung function achieved in
adolescence and possibly also the subsequent
rate of decline in lung function. Such factors in-
clude passive exposure to cigarette smoke either
transplacentally in utero or environmentally in the
home. Some studies suggest that the presence of
airway responsiveness predicts an accelerated
rate of decline in lung function in smokers. The
genetic factors that contribute to the differences
between individuals in their susceptibility to de-
veloping COPD if they smoke are poorly deﬁned
except in the case of the inherited deﬁciency of
anti-protease enzymes. It is thought that emphy-
sema develops as a consequence of destruction of
lung tissue by proteolytic digestion resulting from
an imbalance between proteases and anti-pro-
teases and between oxidants and anti-oxidants.
Genetic deﬁciency of the principal anti-protease,
a1-anti-trypsin, is associated with the develop-
ment of severe emphysema at a young age. a1-
anti-trypsin deﬁciency accounts for fewer than 1%
of all cases of COPD but it is possible that other,
unidentiﬁed proteases may be important.
Clinical features and
progression
COPD has a wide spectrum of severity. The char-
acteristic feature of the airway obstruction and
emphysema of COPD is gradually progressive
breathlessness
sometimes
associated
with
wheeze. Because of the large pulmonary reserve,
patients with a sedentary lifestyle often do not
notice breathlessness until a great deal of lung
Elastic
recoil
(a)  Normal
(b)   Emphysema
Figure 11.2 Emphysema consists of
dilatation of the terminal air spaces
of the lungs, distal to the terminal
bronchiole with destruction of their
walls. Small peripheral airways lack
cartilage and depend on the support of
the surrounding alveoli to maintain their
patency (a). Alveolar destruction in
emphysema results in a loss of elastic
recoil and a loss of outward traction on
the small airways such that they
collapse on expiration contributing to
the airways obstruction (b).
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 117

function has been permanently lost. Many people
are in their ﬁfties at the time of diagnosis and may
have been smoking since their teens. Figure 11.3
illustrates the insidious progressive way in which
lung function is lost in COPD. The graph also
demonstrates the beneﬁts of smoking cessation
(see later).
Chronic cough and sputum production are the
clinical manifestations of the mucus hypersecre-
tion of chronic bronchitis that affects about 15%
of men and 5% of women in the UK. Infective
exacerbations of bronchitis are common and are
characterised by an increased cough with purulent
sputum. Non-typable unencapsulated strains of
Haemophilus inﬂuenzae often colonise the normal
upper respiratory tract. In chronic bronchitis dis-
ruption of the mucociliary defence mechanism
facilitates spread of infection to the bronchial tree,
where infection may provoke inﬂammation and
a self-perpetuating vicious circle of inﬂammation
and infection, further compromising pulmonary
clearance mechanisms and aggravating airways
obstruction. Extension of infection into the lung
parenchyma, if it occurs, gives rise to broncho-
pneumonia (see Chapter 6).
Two main clinical patterns of disturbance may
be discerned in patients with advanced COPD,
which differ mainly in the extent to which venti-
latory drive is preserved in the face of increasing
airway
obstruction:
‘pink
puffers’
and
‘blue
bloaters’ (Fig. 11.4). These represent two extremes
of a spectrum and most patients do not ﬁt either
pattern completely, but have some features of
both. ‘Pink puffers’ have well-preserved ventilato-
ry drive even in the presence of severe airways
obstruction. Dyspnoea is usually intense but PCO2
is often maintained in the normal range at rest until
the terminal stages of the disease. ‘Blue bloaters’
have poor ventilatory drive and easily drift into
respiratory failure with hypercapnia, hypoxaemia
and
right
heart
failure,
particularly
during
exacerbations.
Investigations
There is no single diagnostic test for COPD. Making
a diagnosis relies on clinical judgement based on
a combination of history, physical examination
and conﬁrmation of the presence of airﬂow ob-
struction using spirometry.
Lung function tests (Chapter 3)
Spirometry is the most accurate measure of air-
ﬂow obstruction and is therefore crucial in the
diagnosis of COPD. In the context of COPD, the
diagnosis of airﬂow obstruction and the assess-
ment of severity is based on post-bronchodilator
spirometry.
The FEV1/VC ratio declines naturally with age
and the deﬁnition of airway obstruction should
more correctly be deﬁned by the lower limit of the
normal range for the patient’s age but for conve-
nience a ratio: FEV1/VC < 0.7 is generally taken to
100
75
50
25
25
50
75
Age (years)
Never smoked
+ non-susceptible
Stopped at 45
          Stopped at 65
Affected smoker
Disability
Death
0
FEV1 (% of those aged 25)
Figure 11.3 Change in FEV1 with age: effect of smoking and stopping smoking. Non-smokers show a small
progressive decline in function with age. Many smokers are unaffected by smoking and show the same decline as
non-smokers. Some smokers are affected and show a steeper decline. By the time disability is noted, ventilatory
function is seriously reduced to about one-third of predicted normal values. Those affected by smoking can be
detected by measurement of FEV1 many years before they become disabled. Stopping smoking slows the rate of
decline. (From Fletcher & Peto, 1977.)
118
Respiratory diseases

deﬁne airway obstruction irrespective of age. The
severity of airﬂow obstruction can be arbitrarily
deﬁned, as mild (FEV1 >80% predicted), moderate
(FEV1 79–50% predicted), severe (FEV1 49–30%
predicted)
and
very
severe
(FEV1
< 30%
predicted).
Spirometry can also be used to assess the degree
of reversibility of the airways obstruction to
bronchodilators or corticosteroids but this is a
complex area. There is considerable variability in
the change in FEV1 in response to the same
stimulus from day to day and the overall clinical
usefulness of inhaled corticosteroids is generally
not predicted by the response to a reversibility
test (see management below). Nevertheless the
performance of reversibility tests can be very use-
ful in identifying an unsuspected case of asthma.
Asthma and COPD are different conditions with
different treatment algorithms. The two can co-
exist. When they do, treatment strategies must deal
with both conditions.
Total lung capacity and residual volume are
often elevated signifying hyperinﬂation and air
trapping. Transfer factor for carbon monoxide
and transfer coefﬁcient are typically reduced in
emphysema.
Oximetry is useful in measuring oxygen satura-
tion non-invasively but a sample of arterial blood
is necessary to assess PO2 and PCO2 levels.
Radiology (Fig. 11.5)
The chest X-ray typically shows hyperinﬂation of
the chest with ﬂattened low hemidiaphragms, an
increased retrosternal airspace and a long narrow
cardiac shadow. The chest X-ray is also an
important investigation in excluding additional
diagnoses (e.g. lung cancer) and in detecting
complications
of
COPD
(e.g.
pneumothorax,
bronchopneumonia). High-resolution CTscans can
demonstrate the extent of emphysema and the pres-
ence of bullae but are not required for the routine
care of patients with COPD.
Figure 11.4 ‘Blue bloater’ (above) and ‘pink puffer’
(below). (Original drawings reproduced by kind per-
mission of Dr R.A.L. Brewis. From Lecture Notes on
Respiratory Disease, 1st edn.)
Figure 11.5 This 42-year-old man had smoked 20
cigarettes a day since the age of 14. He presented
with a 5-year history of progressive breathlessness and
could walk only 100 metres. He had severe airways
obstruction with a FEV1 of 0.5 L, and transfer factor
for carbon monoxide and transfer coefﬁcient were
reduced to 30% of the predicted values. High-
resolution computed tomography shows extensive
emphysematous
bullae
with
dilated
distal
airspaces,
cysts
and
destruction
of
alveolar
architecture. a1-anti-trypsin levels were unrecordable.
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 119

A multisystem disease
It is important to assess the full impact of the
disease on all aspects of the patient’s life. Breath-
lessness can be quantiﬁed using the Medical
Research Council Dyspnoea Scale:
. grade 1: breathless only on strenuous exertion;
. grade 2: breathless when walking up a slight hill;
. grade 3: more breathless than contemporaries
when walking on level ground;
. grade 4: breathless on walking about 100 metres;
. grade 5: breathless on dressing or undressing.
A number of questionnaires are available for asses-
sing the overall function, quality of life and impact
of the disease, such as the COPD Assessment Test
(CAT). Depression and anxiety are common and
should be sought out (e.g. Hospital Anxiety and
Depression questionnaire) and treated appropri-
ately. Severe COPD can result in cachexia and loss
of muscle mass; which reduces mobility and adds
to the restriction on the patient’s social function.
Nutritional issues should also be identiﬁed and
treated. TheBODE index (body massindex, airﬂow
obstruction, dyspnoea and exercise capacity) can
be calculated to give an indication of prognosis.
Some patients with chronic hypoxaemia develop
polycythaemia with elevated haemoglobin levels.
Patients with cor pulmonale may show features of
right ventricular hypertrophy (right axis deviation,
dominant R wave in V1) on electrocardiography
(ECG) and
a dilated
hypertrophied
ventricle
with tricuspid regurgitation on echocardiography
(ECHO).
Management
For years COPD was dogged by a negative image.
Being characterised by airway obstruction it fared
poorly in its comparison with asthma. Airway ob-
struction in asthma is reversible, in COPD it is not
in general. ‘Non-reversible’ was often confused
with ‘non-treatable’. It was the disease for which
‘little could be done’, indeed little was done. Over
the last four decades of the twentieth century, as
we began to get to grips with many diseases in the
developed world, the age-adjusted death rate for
coronary heart disease (CHD), for example, fell by
almost 60%; a testament to what medicine and
good public health measures can achieve. Over
the same period of time, the age-adjusted death
rate for COPD, a disease in which the risk factors
were just as well understood, rose by 163%. The
reasons for this stark divergence in fortunes are
manifold but it is noteworthy that, where CHD was
a disease of the afﬂuent and articulate in society,
COPD has perhaps been, a disease of the ‘disen-
franchised’.
The
socioeconomic
inﬂuence
on
COPD persists. Not only is there a higher preva-
lence of COPD in patients of lower socioeconomic
status, this group also has the highest rate of
underdiagnosis. COPD accounts for a considerable
part of the reduced life expectancy in areas of
deprivation compared with England as a whole.
In the past ten years there has been a revolution
in our approach to COPD.
With the development of some new treatments,
and indeed a fresh look at some of the old, we have
managed to move beyond the nihilistic mindset. In
COPD we now recognise that it is possible to have a
very positive impact on a great number of clinically
important outcomes, including: breathlessness,
cough, sputum, exacerbation rate, hospital admis-
sion rate, disability, exercise endurance, quality of
life, anxiety, depression, rate of progression of the
disease and even mortality. The interventions that
achieve these outcomes still do not have a great
short-term impact on FEV1, but in the face of such
evidence it would be difﬁcult to continue to view
COPD as an ‘untreatable’ condition.
In managing patients with COPD we now have
a great array of tools at our disposal including
pharmacological, physical and psychological in-
terventions. The appropriateness of each, needs to
be considered carefully for every single patient
and integrated into an overall comprehensive
individualised management plan.
The ﬁrst consideration in any patient still
smoking has to be smoking cessation. If this can
be achieved it will have a far greater impact on the
long-term progression of the disease then any
other intervention.
Smoking cessation
Figure 11.3 illustrates the decline in lung function
seen in smokers with COPD. Many patients are
well down the slippery slope before the diagnosis is
established. The graph also demonstrates the
effect of smoking cessation on disease progression.
Although it is clear that the lung function lost is
never regained (emphysema is permanent dam-
age), smoking cessation changes the course of the
disease. Indeed despite the vast sums of money
120
Respiratory diseases

spent on drug development, smoking cessation
remains the only proven disease-modifying inter-
vention for COPD. If smoking cessation occurs
early enough in the course of the disease then the
rate of decline in FEV1 returns (approximately) to
what it would have been had the patient never
smoked – a natural age-related decline. Clearly the
earlier smoking cessation can be achieved, the bet-
ter the preservation of lung function. Although lung
function never returns to normal it is clear that the
patient will be far better off than if they had contin-
ued to smoke. Year on year they will experience
fewer symptoms and a better quality of life as
well, of course, as living longer. Smoking cessation
therefore remains one of the most important com-
ponents of management. Doctors need to do more
than just pay lip service to smoking cessation. All
patients still smoking, regardless of age, should be
encouraged to stop, and offered help to do so, at
every opportunity. The risks of lung cancer and
heart disease are important issues to discuss of
course but many patients are well aware of this
increased ‘risk’ and have already rationalised
the issue in their own mind. What many COPD
patients are not aware of is the startling decline in
qualityoflifethatawaitsthem(notarisk,acertainty)
if they continue to smoke. A description of the
practical implications of declining lung function;
a transition from mild breathlessness to being
entirely housebound can have a powerful impact
on a patient’s determination to quit. Without
this ﬁrm commitment by the individual, smoking
cessations aids will achieve little. When used in
conjunction with willpower, pharmacotherapy can
improve quit rates.
Pharmacotherapy for smoking
cessation
Small doses of nicotine produce predominantly
stimulant effects such as arousal, whereas larger
doses produce mainly depressant effects such as
relaxation and relief of stress. Nicotine withdrawal
can cause irritability, restlessness, anxiety, insom-
nia and a craving for cigarettes. Nicotine replace-
ment therapy approximately doubles the success
rates of attempts
at smoking cessation and
smokers should be encouraged to use it to avoid
withdrawal symptoms. Typically, a heavy smoker
is given transdermal nicotine patches 21 mg/day
for 4 weeks, reducing to 14 mg/day for 2 weeks
and then 7 mg/day for 2 weeks. Most withdrawal
symptoms have resolved within that period of
time. The patch is applied to the skin each morning
and delivers a constant dose over 16–24 hours, but
the onset of action is quite slow. Patients who
experience marked cravings for cigarettes may
beneﬁt
from
using
nicotine
chewing
gum,
lozenges, inhalator or nasal spray that provide
more rapid peak blood levels from absorption of
the nicotine through the buccal or nasal mucosa.
Nicotine replacement therapy is safe, but is not
recommended in pregnancy. Addiction to nicotine
replacement therapy can occur in a few patients
who use it in the long term, but most patients can
be weaned off treatment over a few weeks. Bupro-
pion (amfebutamone) is a newer antidepressant
drug that signiﬁcantly improves the success of
attempts at smoking cessation, although its mode
of action is uncertain. It has some signiﬁcant side-
effects, most notably a 1 in 1000 risk of epileptic
seizures such that it is contraindicated in patients
with convulsive disorders, central nervous system
disease, bulimia or anorexia nervosa, and in pa-
tients experiencing symptoms of withdrawal from
alcohol or benzodiazepines. Varenicline is a nic-
otinic receptor partial agonist. As such, it both
reduces cravings for and decreases the pleasurable
effects of cigarettes, and through these mechan-
isms it can assist some patients to quit smoking.
Side-effects include: nausea (common), headache,
difﬁculty sleeping and abnormal dreams.
Pharmacological treatments in the
management of stable COPD
Short-acting bronchodilators
Short-acting b2-agonists, such as salbutamol and
terbutaline, relax bronchial smooth muscle by
stimulation of b-adrenoreceptors. Short-acting
anti-cholinergic
drugs,
such
as
ipratropium,
produce
bronchodilatation
by
blocking
the
bronchoconstrictor effect of vagal nerve stimula-
tion of bronchial smooth muscle. Although some
bronchodilatation is in fact achievable it is the
impact on breathlessness that is of most relevance.
These old, long-established drugs are reasonably
effective, short-term, symptom relievers and (b2-
agonists at least) remain ﬁrst-line drugs, particu-
larly in mild COPD.
Long-acting bronchodilators
Long-acting b2-agonists, such as salmeterol and
formoterol, give more prolonged relief of symp-
toms with a duration of action of about 12 hours
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 121

and are a reasonable additional maintenance
therapy when short-acting bronchodilators alone
fail to provide adequate relief of symptoms.
Tiotropium is a long-acting anti-cholinergic
drug that has greater afﬁnity and a slower rate of
dissociation from muscarinic receptors than ipra-
tropium. It has a duration of action of at least
24 hours and therefore a convenient once daily
dosage. As it also outperforms the short-acting
ipratropium on all important indices, it has effec-
tively superseded it. Tiotropium is a very good
maintenance therapy. Although it can be used
along side a long-acting b2-agonists it cannot be
used in conjunction with ipratropium. Ipratro-
pium therefore, once a stalwart of COPD treat-
ment, now has no real place in the management
of chronic stable disease.
Although symptomatic relief of breathlessness is
an important aim of treatment, COPD is a multi-
faceted
disease
and
modern,
comprehensive
treatment strategies must therefore offer more
than just short-term relief from this symptom.
Corticosteroids
COPD is a chronic progressive condition. In many
other chronic progressive conditions ‘disease
modifying’ drugs have been developed (disease-
modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs) in
rheumatoid arthritis and statins in ischaemic heart
disease for example). These drugs do not merely
relieve symptoms at the time of use, they alter the
long-term course of the disease. In COPD, disease
progression is most commonly deﬁned by the rate
of decline in FEV1. The drug that can halt or even
slow that decline has long been sought. At the turn
of the millennium two large international studies
set out to determine if inhaled corticosteroids
might be the disease modifying drug for COPD.
It transpired that corticosteroids are not that
drug. Out of that investigation however, emerged
evidence that inhaled corticosteroids could have
a signiﬁcant beneﬁcial impact in the frequency of
exacerbations; an outcome crucially important
to many COPD patients. Subsequent studies have
re-investigated this effect comparing it with the
effect from long-acting b2-agonists as well as the
two drugs used together in a combination inhaler
(e.g. Seretide and Symbicort). Although the in-
dividual components both have a positive impact,
the greatest beneﬁt is seen with the combination,
which typically produces a 30% reduction in ex-
acerbation frequency. There is also a positive
knock on effect in reducing hospital admission
rates. These important beneﬁts are seen principal-
ly in moderate to severe disease; at the mild end of
the spectrum the impact seems slight. The com-
bination inhalers are now licensed for use with the
indication of reducing exacerbation frequency in
patients with an FEV1 < 60% predicted. Inhaled
corticosteroids alone are not licensed and have no
place in the management of COPD.
Tiotropium
The symptomatic relief of breathlessness offered
by tiotropium has already been discussed. In this
sense tiotropium is effective in all grades of sever-
ity. In addition, as with the combination inhalers,
in moderate to severe disease tiotropium has a
beneﬁcial impact on both exacerbation frequency
and hospital admission rates.
Treatment strategy
In relation to the inhaled therapies the treatment
strategy differs depending on the severity of the
disease. In mild disease (other than smoking ces-
sation support, for which the beneﬁt is prognostic)
treatment is principally aimed at short-term symp-
tom control. Options such as tiotropium and long-
acting b2-agonists can be tried. They are usually
effectivebutifnot,itislikelytobeevidentwithinthe
ﬁrst month and they should be stopped. In mod-
erate and severe disease the situation is very differ-
ent.Althoughsymptomcontrolremainsimportant,
thereis,inaddition,evidenceof‘prognosticbeneﬁt’
from certain treatments. Group mean data from
very large studies tells us that the use of tiotropium
and/or a combination inhaler will reduced the
frequency of both exacerbations and hospitalisa-
tions. In contrast to the symptom controllers in
mild disease, prognostic treatments should not be
stopped if the patient reports no perceived beneﬁt
in the ﬁrst month. This may seem obvious enough
but the approach is quite a radical departure from
traditional practice with inhaled therapies, where
a ‘try it and see’ approach has been the norm. The
principal of prognostic treatment is, of course, well
understood and accepted in other clinical contexts
such as: blood pressure control, hypercholestero-
laemia and the use of b-blockers post myocardial
infarction.
Inhaler technique
If you assume that most people who have inhalers
don’t use them properly, you’ll not go far wrong!
This is not usually the fault of the patient but of the
122
Respiratory diseases

prescriber who failed to spend time teaching and
checking inhaler technique. There seems to be a
general assumption that getting the inhaler tech-
nique ‘about right’ is good enough. It’s not; lung
delivery falls sharply if technique is not perfect and
in many cases technique is so poor lung delivery is
likely to be zero. Whenever an inhaler is prescribed
care must be taken to coach (and then test) inhaler
technique. This should, of course, be done by
someone who understands it themselves. Tech-
nique should then be tested every time the patient
is reviewed.
Oral medications
Methylxanthines such as aminophylline and theo-
phyllines have a number of effects including cyclic
adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) stimulation
of b-adrenoceptors by inhibiting the metabolism
of
cAMP
by
the
enzyme
phosphodiesterase.
Theophylline should only be used after a trial of
short-acting
bronchodilators
and
long-acting
bronchodilators. Plasma levels need to be moni-
tored as the therapeutic window is narrow. The
dose should be reduced if a macrolide or ﬂuroqui-
nolone antibiotic is prescribed
A long-acting PDE-4 inhibitor roﬂumilast was
launched in 2010. It has some beneﬁt in reducing
exacerbation frequency in patients at the severe
end of the spectrum with the chronic bronchitis
phenotype. It is licensed for use in Europe but not
in the United States.
Mucolytics are drugs that increase the expecto-
ration of sputum by reducing its viscosity. They
were blacklisted in the NHS for a period of time;
deemed not to work. The rational for this belief
stemmed from the fact that they did not improve
FEV1. A reappraisal of the earlier studies rather
than a rash of new studies led to a signiﬁcant
change in opinion. Although mucolytics do not
have an impact on FEV1, they can reduce the
frequency of exacerbations in some patients with
COPD who have a chronic productive cough. To
most patients this would be a far more important
outcome than a change in the result of a lung
function test they barely understand. Doctors have
ﬁnally recognised this priority too. The drugs are
no longer banned, but recommended in patients
with a chronic cough productive of sputum.
Psychological treatment
Anxiety and depression are common in COPD of all
grades of severity and not just conﬁned to severe
disease. Cognitive–behavioural therapy (CBT)
should be the ﬁrst-line therapy although it is not
yet widely available.
Pulmonary rehabilitation
Pulmonary rehabilitation is a multidisciplinary
programme of care for patients with COPD that is
individually tailored and designed to optimise the
patient’s physical and social performance and
autonomy. Typically a pulmonary rehabilitation
programme involves the skills of doctors, respira-
tory nurse specialists, physiotherapists, dieticians,
social workers and occupational therapists. Many
patients with COPD are in a vicious cycle of breath-
lessness, reduced physical activity and decondi-
tioning of skeletal muscles, with resultant loss of
social contact and autonomy. Pulmonary rehabil-
itation can break this vicious cycle and can reduce
dyspnoea, improve exercise tolerance and qual-
ity of life. The key components of a rehabilitation
programme need to be adjusted to meet the needs
of the individual patient, but typically include the
following.
. Exercise training: breathless patients often re-
duce their level of exercise and lose general
ﬁtness and muscle mass that causes a vicious
cycle of deteriorating exercise capacity. Exercise
training (e.g. walking, cycling) can counteract
muscle atrophy and improve ﬁtness. Improve-
ment in lower limb function may help walking,
and arm training improves performance of day-
to-day tasks such as lifting, dressing, washing
and brushing hair, for example. Typically an
exercise training programme involves three
supervised aerobic exercise sessions per week
over a period of 8 weeks.
. Smoking cessation: advice, encouragement and
support in achieving and maintaining smoking
cessation.
. Optimising drug treatment: ensuring that the
patient is taking a comprehensive treatment
regimen, with a good inhaler technique.
. Education of the patient and family about the
nature and cause of the disease and its manage-
ment. The programme should include aspects
such as how and when to take medications, the
beneﬁts of exercise, the importance of smoking
cessation and the use of techniques such as
breathing control, relaxation and anxiety man-
agement. Patients who are vulnerable to exacer-
bations can be taught to recognise the onset of
symptoms of an exacerbation and instructed to
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 123

start a course of prednisolone and to increase
their use of bronchodilator drugs, with an anti-
biotic for purulent sputum.
. Breathing control techniques involve pursed lip
breathing, slower deeper respirations and better
coordination of breathing patterns. Physiother-
apy techniques such as active cycle breathing,
chest percussion and forced expiratory techni-
ques may be useful in patients who have difﬁ-
culty expectorating secretions.
. Social support: patients with advanced disabil-
ity may have difﬁculty in performing daily
tasks such as climbing stairs, shopping and
washing, and may beneﬁt from assessment by
an occupational therapist with regard to home
aids such as stair lifts and bath aids. Assess-
ment by a social worker allows the patient to
obtain appropriate allowances, such as dis-
ability or mobility allowances, from govern-
ment agencies.
. Psychological support: depression and social
isolation are common and can be helped by
psychological support focusing on restoring
coping skills. Patient self-help groups may be
useful. Some patients will require referral for
more formal treatment such as CBT.
. Nutrition: poor nutrition is common in patients
with advanced COPD and is associated with poor
overall health status and an increased mortality.
Patients with COPD are often underweight be-
cause of the increased work of breathing, the
systemic
effects
of
inﬂammatory
cytokines
and decreased food intake from anorexia and
breathlessness. Some patients, in contrast, are
overweight because of reduced activity and over-
eating. The patient’s weight and body mass index
should be measured and appropriate dietary
advice given.
Pulmonary rehabilitation is an enormously valu-
able intervention but if the patient does not
continue to exercise after completion of the
formal programme the beneﬁts in exercise per-
formance are likely to be lost gradually over the
following 6 months. Ideally patients should be
encouraged to continue regular exercise and
many such opportunities exists in local sports
centres and gyms. Patients also beneﬁt in this
context
from
being
on
appropriate
inhaled
medication. The right symptom relievers are
proven to both amplify the ﬁtness beneﬁts gained
from pulmonary rehabilitation and slow the ‘post
programme’ decline.
Oxygen therapy in stable disease
‘Short of breath’ does not imply ‘short of oxygen’. It
is important to understand that it is quite possible
to experience breathlessness from a physiological
cause without being hypoxic. In this context
breathing supplemental oxygen will achieve noth-
ing. As a simple analogy; imagine a car breaking
down despite a full tank of petrol, in such circum-
stances supplying more petrol will do nothing
to get the car re-started. Supplemental oxygen in
a patient who is not hypoxic is similarly pointless.
Many breathless patients ask their doctor for
oxygen therapy, many well-meaning doctors duly
prescribe it. These prescriptions are costly and
many are of no beneﬁt to the patient whatsoever.
There are, nevertheless, a number of circum-
stances when oxygen therapy can not only improve
symptoms but also extend life. Proper (specialist)
assessment is required to ensure that the patients
who need oxygen therapy receive it and those that
do not, do not.
Long-term oxygen therapy
Hypoxia within the lung leads to pulmonary vaso-
constriction that puts a strain on the right heart.
The right heart struggles for a while, hypertrophies
but eventually fails. Right heart failure caused by
lung disease is known as cor pulmonale. The ﬁrst
sign is often ankle swelling. This is sometimes
(incorrectly) perceived as a minor ‘cosmetic’ issue
to
be
ﬁxed
with
a
small
dose
of
diuretic.
A moment’s reﬂection however, would remind one
that having half of the heart not working is likely
to be a serious matter. It is. Cor pulmonale is a fatal
disease. Patients with COPD and chronic hypoxia
have apoor prognosis with a mortality rate of about
50% within 3 years.
The clinical features of hypoxia are non-speciﬁc,
and periodic measurement of oxygen saturation by
oximetry is useful in detecting these patients. In
the early 1980s two major studies, the British
Medical Research Council (MRC) Study and the
American
Nocturnal
Oxygen
Therapy
Trial
(NOTT), showed that the administration of oxygen
for at least 15 hours/day (preferably longer) im-
proved survival in patients with severe airﬂow
obstruction
(FEV1
< 1.5 L)
and
hypoxia
(PO2
< 7.3 kPa (55 mmHg). It is important to under-
stand that oxygen therapy has no impact on the
progression of COPD (rate of decline of FEV1); the
improvement in survival is via the relaxation of
pulmonary vasoconstriction and the alleviation of
124
Respiratory diseases

the strain on the right heart. It is the premature
death from a complication of COPD, cor pulmo-
nale, that is prevented.
Prescribing criteria
Long-term home oxygen therapy is indicated for
patients with severe COPD (FEV1 < 1.5 L) and
persistent hypoxia (PO2 < 7.3 kPa (55 mmHg)).
Many patients who are hypoxic during an exacer-
bation will recover over a few weeks and will not
require long-term oxygen. Arterial blood gases
should therefore be measured on two occasions,
at least 3 weeks apart, during a stable phase
before diagnosing persistent hypoxia. Patients
with more borderline oxygen levels (7.3–8.0 kPa
(55–60 mmHg)) who have elevated haematocrit or
already have features of cor pulmonale such as
oedema are also likely to beneﬁt from long-term
oxygen. The oxygen is usually given via nasal
cannulae at a ﬂow rate of about 2 L/min but the
dose required and mode of administration should
be decided by a specialist in the context of the
patient’s arterial blood gas measurement.
Oxygen concentrator
Long-term home oxygen therapy is often provided
from an oxygen concentrator. This is an electrically
powered machine that separates oxygen from the
ambient air using a molecular sieve. The machine
is installed in the patient’s house and plastic
tubing relays oxygen to points such as the bedroom
and living room. Providing oxygen cylinders to the
patient’s home for long-term oxygen therapy is
impractical and much more expensive than instal-
lation of an oxygen concentrator. The patient and
family should be warned not to smoke in the
presence of oxygen because of the risk of causing
a ﬁre. It is essential that the patient understands
that the main aim of long-term oxygen therapy is to
improve prognosis (reduce mortality rate) rather
than to alleviate symptoms and that it is necessary
to comply with oxygen therapy for at least
15 hours/day. Patients often have to be reminded
of this 15-hour rule as it runs counter to the
instruction (‘don’t take more than. . .’) that accom-
panies most other prescriptions.
When ﬁrst advised of the need to spend so much
of the day ‘tied to an oxygen machine’ patients are
often visibly deﬂated. They imagine sitting next to
a large oxygen cylinder, looking at the clock and
waiting for 15 hours to pass. In fact the treatment
can be accommodated far more easily than ﬁrst
imagined and time should be spent reassuring the
patient on this matter. For a start, oxygen can be
applied atnight asthe patient sleeps(that is8 hours
clocked up with no effort at all). Sufﬁcient tubing
around the home allows the patient to continue
ordinary domestic activities during the day. A fur-
ther 7 hours can therefore usually be clocked up
without any limitation to lifestyle. Remind patients
that the 15-hour rule still leaves them 9 hours in the
day to be ‘out and about’. Most patients ﬁnd that if
they simply use the oxygen whenever they are at
home they can quite easily accumulate a sufﬁcient
number of hours with no deleterious effect on
quality of life.
Ambulatory oxygen
Ambulatory oxygen may be appropriate for pa-
tients who are active enough to leave the home
regularly, who demonstrate a fall in oxygen satu-
ration to below 90% on exercise and who show
symptomatic beneﬁt from oxygen in terms of walk-
ing distance (assessed formally using a 6-minute
walk test). It is given using a reﬁllable portable
container of liquid oxygen.
Short-burst oxygen is the use of oxygen for short
periods to relieve dyspnoea after exercise. In these
circumstances the patients typically breathes
oxygen from a cylinder for a few minutes after
exercise around the house. However, the beneﬁt
of this form of oxygen therapy is not clearly estab-
lished. It is most commonly employed as a palli-
ative measure in ‘end-stage’ disease.
Hypoxia during air travel
Patients with lung disease are vulnerable to devel-
oping hypoxia when travelling by plane. Commer-
cial aircraft routinely ﬂy at about 38 000 feet (11
400 m) and are pressurised to a cabin altitude of
8000 feet (2438 m) The reduced partial pressure
of oxygen at this altitude is equivalent to breathing
15% oxygen at sea level, and causes the PO2 of
a healthy passenger to fall to between 7.0 and
8.5 kPa (52–64 mmHg). Although this does not
usually cause symptoms or problems for most
passengers it can produce critical hypoxia for
patients with lung disease. Pre-ﬂight assessment
should include an overall assessment of the pa-
tient’s condition and treatment with particular
regard to dyspnoea, exercise capacity, previous
ﬂying experience, spirometry and oxygenation. If
the oxygen saturation is >95% then in-ﬂight oxy-
gen is not required. If oxygen. saturation is < 92%
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 125

supplementary in-ﬂight oxygen is usually pre-
scribed at a rate of 2–4 L/min by nasal cannulae.
If the oxygen saturation is between 92 and 95%
then further assessment is recommended. This
may include a hypoxic challenge test during
which arterial blood gases are measured when
the patient has been breathing 15% oxygen for
20 minutes, and in-ﬂight oxygen is usually recom-
mended if the PO2 falls below 7.4 kPa (56 mmHg).
Surgery
A small number of patients with COPD may beneﬁt
from surgery. Lung transplantation is an option,
although lack of donor organs severely limits the
utilisation of this procedure. Bullectomy may be
appropriate where a large bulla is compressing
surrounding viable lung. Lung volume reduction
surgery is an option for selected patients with
severe disability. In emphysema, destruction of
the alveoli results in a loss of elastic recoil with
collapse of small airways on expiration and hyper-
inﬂation of the lungs with ﬂattening of the dia-
phragm. Volume reduction surgery aims to resect
functionally useless areas of lung thereby reducing
the overall volume of the lungs in order to restore
elastic recoil so that there is an increased outward
traction on the small airways, relief of compression
of normal lung and restoration of more normal
diaphragmatic and thoracic contours allowing bet-
ter respiratory motion during breathing. Patients
whose emphysema preferentially affects the upper
lobes may be the most suitable patients for this
procedure. In certain patients lung function, exer-
cise performance and quality of life are improved
but the beneﬁt tends to decline with time.
Emergency treatment
Exacerbations of COPD are characterised by an
acute worsening of symptoms with increased
breathlessness,
sputum
volume
and
sputum
purulence. They may occur spontaneously or as
a result of infections. There are associations
between COPD admissions and the weather. The
strongest relate to cold weather (admissions peak
12 days after a cold snap) and season (worse over
the New Year).
Patients can be taught to recognise the onset of
an exacerbation and to institute a self-manage-
ment plan whereby they increase the dose and
frequency of bronchodilator medication and start
a course of oral prednisolone and an antibiotic,
according to a predetermined plan. Mild exacerba-
tions can be managed at home but patients with
severeexacerbationsrequireadmissiontohospital.
Deciding whether a patient can be managed
at home requires an overall assessment of the se-
verity of the COPD (e.g. baseline FEV1, oxygen sat-
uration,exercisecapacity),thehomecircumstances
(e.g. family support, able to cope), and key adverse
features that indicate a severe exacerbation (e.g.
confusion, cyanosis, severe respiratory distress).
Patients admitted to hospital should have a chest
X-ray, oximetry, arterial blood gas measurement,
an ECG (to exclude comorbidities), full blood
count and urea and electrolyte measurements.
Culture of sputum is often performed but rarely
produces a result in time to inﬂuence antibiotic
prescribing. Blood cultures should be taken if the
patient is pyrexial and a theophylline level should
be measured in patients on theophylline therapy.
Bronchodilator therapy is usually given by
nebuliser using a combination of salbutamol
2.5–5 mg and ipratropium 500 mcg with prednis-
olone 30 mg/day for 5–7 days.
Antibiotics
In some cases, exacerbations of COPD are associ-
ated with infections with viruses or with bacteria
and antibiotics should be used to treat exacerba-
tions of COPD associated with a history of more
purulent
sputum.
Common
bacteria
include:
Haemophilus inﬂuenzae, Streptococcus pneumo-
niae or Moraxella catarrhalis. Although amoxicil-
lin has a reasonably good spectrum of activity
against many of these organisms, 15–20% of
Haemophilus inﬂuenzae and many strains of
Moraxella catarrhalis are resistant to amoxicillin
so that other antibiotics such as co-amoxiclav
(amoxicillin and clavulanic acid), trimethoprim,
ciproﬂoxacin, tetracycline or clarithromycin may
be needed. In many cases exacerbations of COPD
seem to arise as a result of a spontaneous worsen-
ing or are provoked by non-infectious events such
as air pollution, smoking or adverse weather con-
ditions. Patients with exacerbations without more
purulent sputum do not need antibiotic therapy
unless there is consolidation on a chest radiograph
or clinical signs of pneumonia.
Pneumococcal vaccination and annual inﬂuen-
za vaccination are recommended for patients with
COPD.
126
Respiratory diseases

Emergency oxygen
Oxygen is delivered in most emergency situations
with the aim of achieving a near normal saturation
(94–98%). However, for some patients such levels
are dangerous and may be life threatening.
Patients with established respiratory failure who
have chronically raised PCO2 (type 2 respiratory
failure) become unresponsive to the carbon diox-
ide stimulus to ventilation and rely increasingly
on hypoxaemia to maintain the drive to breathe. If
they are given high concentrations of oxygen they
breathe less and underbreathing results in increas-
ing hypercapnia, acidosis, narcosis, respiratory
depression and ultimately death. Uncontrolled
oxygen therapy poses a risk to this subset of pa-
tients with COPD. The risk of course, must be
balanced against the threat of hypoxia. Because of
the shape of the oxyhaemoglobin dissociation
curve, there is little beneﬁt in increasing the pa-
tient’s oxygen saturation above about 90% (PO2
above about 8 kPa (60 mmHg)).
In patients at risk of hypercapnic respiratory
failure (which unless proven otherwise includes
any patient with an exacerbation of COPD) treat-
ment should be commenced using a 28% Venturi
mask (Fig. 11.6) in pre-hospital care or a 24%
Venturi mask in the hospital settings with an initial
target saturation of 88–92% pending urgent blood
gas assessment to determine the patient’s ventila-
tory status (pH and PCO2) (Chapter 3).
It is essential to document carefully the amount
of oxygen being breathed when measuring arterial
gases. Avoid measuring gases immediately after
the patient has received nebulised drugs using
high-ﬂow oxygen.
Sometimes there is concern about using high-
ﬂow oxygen (e.g. 6–8 L/min) to nebulise broncho-
dilator drugs in patients with hypercapnia and
occasionally air is used to nebulise these drugs.
However, nebulising drugs using air during acute
exacerbations of COPD may leave the patient dan-
gerously hypoxic. One option it to deliver concom-
itant supplemental oxygen via nasal cannulae.
Alternatively it is safe to use oxygen to nebulise
the drug provided the nebulisation time can be
strictly limited to 10 minutes. The patient is
then not exposed to the risk of either hypoxia or
prolonged high-concentration oxygen.
Ventilatory support
At times despite the best efforts of doctors acute
respiratory acidosis supervenes (when high-ﬂow
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 11.6 Oxygen administration. (a) Simple uncontrolled high-concentration face mask with oxygen supplied
directly to the mask space. (b) Fixed performance Venturi mask delivering a controlled (ﬁxed) dose of low-
concentration oxygen. (c) Nasal cannulae delivering an uncontrolled level of oxygen in a convenient continuous
manner.
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 127

oxygen is inappropriately delivered it may occur
because of the efforts of doctors). It is crucially
important to recognise respiratory acidosis when
present and blood gas analysis is essential to the
management of acute exacerbations of COPD in
hospital.
After
initial
management
with
nebulised
bronchodilators and appropriate oxygen therapy
if the pH is below the normal range ( < 7.35) then
Non-Invasive Ventilation(NIV) should be em-
ployed (unless there is a speciﬁc contraindication
(rare) or the patient declines it). It should be de-
livered in a dedicated setting with staff who have
been trained in its application and there should be
a clear plan covering what to do in the event of
deterioration.
When used in this context, NIV not only reduces
the likelihood that the patient will progress to need
intubation and invasive ventilation, it has also
been demonstrated to reduce inpatient mortality
by 50%. Despite the overwhelming evidence
of such substantial clinical beneﬁt, a number of
national audits have demonstrated that NIV is not
utilised as often as it should be. This seems to be as
a result of both a lack of knowledge of the speciﬁc
indication and a failure to appreciate the magni-
tude of the beneﬁt. A rather laissez faire and
fatalistic approach is still worryingly common. In
the light of current evidence such an approach is
frankly wrong.
Practical application
NIV is delivered via a tight-ﬁtting mask strapped in
place over the nose and mouth and connected to a
speciﬁcally designed ventilating machine. The
spontaneous respiratory efforts of the patient are
used to trigger the ventilator to deliver additional
tidal volume under positive pressure. Lack of
familiarity with the technical aspects of NIV may
be what deters many doctors from employing this
therapy. Yet in most UK hospitals the practical
aspects of NIV use are handled by the on-call
physiotherapy team or specialist nurses. All the
doctor really needs to know is the arterial pH and
how to pick up a telephone.
Prior to the advent of NIV, the intravenous
respiratory stimulant doxapram was used in
a similar context. This option may still be useful
for those few patients unable to tolerate NIV
but
invasive
ventilation
(i.e.
endotracheal
intubation and ventilation on ITU) should be
considered.
Admission avoidance
and early supported
discharge for COPD
Novel ways of managing patients with acute
exacerbations of COPD are being developed. In
some cases admission to hospital can be avoided
by undertaking an initial assessment, in the
patient’s home, usually by a specialist nurse
according to an agreed protocol with the back up
of a respiratory specialist and admission to hospi-
tal if needed. Easy access to such a reassuring
review can often prevent patients calling an am-
bulance unnecessarily. Such schemes are being
increasingly adopted, although they are perhaps
still rather probationary with, as yet, no proven
model ﬁrmly established.
For other patients early supported discharge is
more appropriate whereby after initial treatment
and stabilisation in hospital ongoing care is pro-
vided to the patient in their own home. This model
of care is now well established. It is safe, effective
and very popular with patients.
Respiratory emergencies COPD
Tests
Chest X-ray, oximetry, arterial blood gases, ECG,
sputum culture, blood count, urea, electrolytes
Treatment
. Bronchodilators, for example nebulised
salbutamol 2.5–5 mg and ipratropium
500 mcg; repeat as needed and continue
4–6 hourly.
. Steroids: prednisolone 30 mg/day orally for
5–7days.
. Antibiotics, for example amoxicillin 500 mg t.i.d.
orally or intravenously. Check previous
sputum microbiology and consider doxycycline,
ciproﬂoxacin, clarithromycin, co-amoxiclav if
needed.
. Oxygen: aim for O2 saturation 88–92% unless
and until hypercapnia is excluded on arterial
blood gases.
. Ventilatory support: non-invasive ventilation
if hypercapnic with pH < 7.35 or endotracheal
ventilation in ITU if appropriate
128
Respiratory diseases

Both of these models of care are very cost -effective
compared with a standard, prolonged hospital ad-
mission. Their safety and success however, is en-
tirely dependant on the expertise and experience of
the staff delivering them.
KEY POINTS
. Smoking-related COPD is a major cause of
morbidity and mortality worldwide.
. Spirometry is essential in assessing airways
obstruction (FEV1/FVC ratio < 0.7) in COPD.
. Smoking cessation is the most important
intervention in reducing the rate of progression
of COPD.
. COPD is an eminently treatable condition.
. Inhaled b2-agonist and anti-cholinergic
bronchodilators improve: symptoms, exercise
capacity and quality of life.
. Combination inhalers and tiotropium can
reduce exacerbations and hospitalisations
in moderate to severe disease.
. During exacerbations of COPD patients who
remain hypercapnic and acidotic (pH < 7.35)
despite nebulised bronchodilators, systemic
steroids, antibiotics and controlled oxygen
therapy should be treated with NIV.
. Pulmonary rehabilitation improves the patient's
physical and social performance and quality of
life.
. Long-term oxygen therapy at home improves
the prognosis of patients with COPD who
have persistent hypoxia (PO2 < 7.3 kPa
(55 mmHg)).
FURTHER READING
British
Thoracic
Society
Standards
of
Care
Committee. Guideline for Emergency Oxygen
Use in Adult Patients. Thorax 2008; 63 (suppl
VI): 1–81 ( www.brit-thoracic.org.uk).
British Thoracic Society Standards of Care Com-
mittee Intermediate Care. Hospital-at-Home in
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease Guide-
line. Thorax 2007; 63 (suppl 3): 200–10 (www.
brit-thoracic.org.uk).
British
Thoracic
Society
Standards
of
Care
Committee. Non-invasive ventilation in acute
respiratory failure. Thorax 2002; 57: 192–211
(www.brit-thoracic.org.uk).
British Thoracic Society Standards of Care Com-
mittee. Managing passengers with respiratory
disease planning air travel. Thorax 2002; 57:
289–304 (2010 update available www.brit-tho-
racic.org.uk).
Celli BR, MacNee W. Standards for the diagnosis
and treatment of patients with COPD: a sum-
mary of the ATS/ERS position paper. Eur Respir J
2004; 23: 932–46.
Department of Health Home Oxygen Service:
http://www.homeoxygen.nhs.uk/2.php
Fletcher C, Peto R. The natural history of chronic
airﬂow obstruction. BMJ 1977; 1: 1645.
National Institute for Health and Clinical Excel-
lence. Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease:
Management of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary
Disease in Adults in Primary and Secondary Care
(2010). NICE, 2010 (http://guidance.nice.org.
uk/CG101/Guidance/pdf/English).
Ram FSF, Wedzicha JA, Wright J, Greenstone M.
Hospital at home for patients with acute exacer-
bations
of
chronic
obstructive
pulmonary
disease: systematic review of evidence. BMJ
2004; 329: 315.
Royal College of Physicians, British Thoracic
Society, Intensive Care Society. The Guideline
Development Group. Non-Invasive Ventilation
in
Chronic
Obstructive
Pulmonary
Disease:
Management of Acute Type 2 Respiratory Failure.
Concise Guidance to Good Practice Series No 11.
London: Royal College of Physicians, 2008
(http://bookshop.rcplondon.ac.uk/).
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 129

12
Carcinoma of the lung
Introduction
Lung cancer is the most common cause of cancer
death in the world with more than one million
deaths occurring yearly. In the UK it kills about
34 000 people each year and it has overtaken breast
cancer as the leading cause of cancer deaths in
women. It is a lethal disease with only 25% of
patients surviving 1 year, and only 7% surviving
5 years from diagnosis. About 90% of lung cancers
are caused by smoking, and smoking prevention
and smoking cessation are the crucial issues in
dealing with this major public health problem.
Aetiology (Table 12.1)
The epidemic spread of lung cancer in the twen-
tieth century followed about 20 years after in-
creases in tobacco-smoking habits (Fig. 12.1). The
commercial manufacture of cigarettes started
around 1900 and smoking soon became popular
among men. At that time lung cancer was a very
rare disease. By the end of the 1940s about 70% of
men and 40% of women smoked. Doctors then
started to be aware of an increasing incidence of
lung cancer and noticed that the patients were
smokers. By 1950 an epidemic of lung cancer had
become apparent and studies, such as those of Doll
and Hill in the 1950s, established the causative link
between smoking and lung cancer. Doll and Hill
studied the smoking habits and cause of death of
UK doctors and showed a signiﬁcant and steadily
rising incidence of deaths from lung cancer as the
amount of tobacco smoked increased. At that time
83% of doctors had smoked but thereafter the
medical profession were the ﬁrst to put research
into practice, by stopping smoking! In the early
1960s the Royal College of Physicians of London
and the Surgeon General of the USA published
their landmark reports documenting the causal
relationship between smoking and lung cancer.
The risk of death from bronchial carcinoma in-
creases by a factor roughly equal to the number of
cigarettes smoked per day. For example, a man
smoking 30 cigarettes/day has over 30 times the
risk of dying from lung cancer than a man who has
never smoked. On stopping smoking, excess risk is
approximately halved every 5 years thereafter.
Smoking has decreased in popularity such that
now in the UK about 29% of men and 28% of
women smoke. Reﬂecting these changes, lung can-
cer mortality rates have begun to decline in men
and in younger women, although rates in older
women are still rising. Although smoking in the UK
is declining, it is increasing in developing countries
so that the epidemic of smoking-related mortality
and morbidity that has dominated health trends in
the Western world in the twentieth century may
be repeated in the developing world in the next
hundred years.
Breathing other people’s tobacco smoke –
passive or environmental smoke – is also a cause
Respiratory Medicine Lecture Notes, Eighth Edition. Stephen J. Bourke and Graham P. Burns.
 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

of lung cancer. For example, a woman who has
never smoked has an estimated 24% greater risk of
developing lung cancer if she lives with a smoker.
Genetic factors may be important in determining
the way individuals metabolise inhaled carcino-
gens or in the expression of oncogenes or tumour-
suppressor genes, and a family history of lung
cancer is a risk factor for the development of the
disease. There is an increased incidence of lung
cancer in patients with diffuse lung ﬁbrosis such
as idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis and so-called
‘scar carcinomas’ may occur in areas of focal
ﬁbrosis resulting from previous tuberculosis. The
male to female ratio for lung cancer is approxi-
mately 1.5:1 reﬂecting past smoking differences.
Smoking and lung cancer are both associated
with social deprivation. Some studies suggest that
a high dietary intake of fruit and vegetables con-
taining b-carotene reduces the risk of lung cancer.
Exposure to ionising radiation such as from radon
gas arising from the ground and building materials
in some homes may be important and accounts
for a proportion of lung cancers in non-smokers.
Occupational exposure to asbestos is associated
Table 12.1 Aetiology of carcinoma of the lung
. Tobacco smoking
. Passive smoking
. Genetic factors
. Ionising radiation (e.g. radon gas)
. Asbestos exposure
. Diffuse lung ﬁbrosis (e.g. ﬁbrosing alveolitis)
. Lack of dietary fruit and vegetables
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
(a)
10 000
8000
6000
4000
2000
0
1926–30 1936–401946–50 1956–60 1966–70 1976–80 1986–90
Year of death
Year of death
Deaths per million
80–84
75–79
70–74
65–69
60–64
55–59
50–54
45–49
(b)
1000
800
600
400
200
0
1400
1600
1800
2000
1200
1926–30 1936–40 1946–50 1956–60 1966–70 1976–80 1986–90
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
80–84
75–79
70–74
65–69
60–64
55–59
50–54
45–49
+
+
+
+
Male
Female
Deaths per million
Figure 12.1 (a) Male and (b) female
mortality from lung cancer by age and
year of death, England and Wales,
1921–90. (Reproduced with permis-
sion from the Lung and Asthma Infor-
mation Agency. From Trends in Lung
Cancer and Smoking. Factsheet 93/1
www.laia.ac.uk).
Carcinoma of the lung 131

with an increased risk of lung cancer with an
approximately linear relationship between the
dose of asbestos and the occurrence of lung cancer.
The interaction between asbestos and smoking is
multiplicative.
Pathology (Fig. 12.2)
Although the pathology of lung cancer is complex,
for clinical purposes the disease is classiﬁed into
two groups:
1 Small-cell carcinoma (20% of lung cancer).
2 Non-small-cell carcinoma (80%), comprising
squamous-cell carcinoma (45%), adenocarci-
noma (20%) and large-cell (undifferentiated)
carcinoma (15%).
Small-cell (oat-cell) carcinoma arises from neuro-
endocrine cells of the bronchial tree and its endo-
crine potential is sometimes manifest clinically
by ectopic hormone production. This is a highly
malignant cancer that grows rapidly and metasta-
sises early. Squamous-cell carcinoma is the most
common type of lung cancer and shows the great-
est tendency to cavitate. The incidence of adeno-
carcinomas seems to be rising and is currently
about 20%. These tumours often arise in the pe-
riphery of the lung, sometimes as ‘scar carcinomas’
and show the least relationship to smoking.
About 15% of lung cancers do not show squamous
or glandular differentiation and are classiﬁed as
large-cell undifferentiated carcinomas.
Diagnosis
Lung cancers arising centrally in the bronchial tree
often present with chest symptoms (e.g. haemop-
tysis) whereas peripheral tumours may grow
silently without causing local symptoms until late
in the course of the disease (Fig. 12.3). Such
tumours may be found coincidentally on a chest
X-ray or present with non-speciﬁc general symp-
toms (e.g. weight loss), with effects of metastases
(e.g. to brain, bone) or with non-metastatic para-
neoplastic syndromes.
Paraneoplastic syndromes arise at sites distant
from the tumour or its metastases and result from
the production of hormones, peptides, antibodies,
prostaglandins or cytokines by the tumour. The
syndrome of inappropriate anti-diuretic hor-
mone (ADH) secretion is most common with
small-cell cancer and results in a low serum sodi-
um, potassium and urea, a serum osmolarity below
280 mosmol/L and a urine osmolarity greater than
500 mosmol/L. Treatment consists of restriction
of ﬂuid intake, and drugs such as tolvaptan
(a vasopressin receptor antagonist) 15–60 mg/day
or demeclocycline (which competes for ADH
Death
Usual diagnosis
First diagnosis
Small-cell carcinoma
Squamous-cell carcinoma
40
30
20
10
2
0
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Adenocarcinoma
Years
Tumour volume doublings 
Figure 12.2 Lung cancer growth rates. As a rough approximation, small-cell carcinomas double monthly,
squamous-cell carcinomas 3 monthly and some adenocarcinomas 6 monthly. A tumour typically becomes evident
on a chest X-ray when it reaches about 1 cm in diameter, corresponding to about 30 doubling volumes. Symptoms
usually arise later than this. By 40 doublings death will usually have occurred. Diagnosis occurs late in the course of
the disease and most of the tumour’s life history is subclinical.
132
Respiratory diseases

renal tubular binding sites) 600–1200 mg/day.
Hypercalcaemia in patients with lung cancer
may be indicative of bone metastases but squa-
mous-cell carcinomas sometimes secrete a para-
thyroid hormone-related protein that causes
non-metastatic hypercalcaemia. Clearly, some
patients will present primarily with chest symp-
toms, often against a background of pre-existing
smoking-related
lung
disease
(e.g.
chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)). Equally,
a diagnosis of lung cancer must be considered
in patients presenting with a variety of medical
problems.
Tumours in certain speciﬁc locations may cause
problems by direct invasion of adjacent structures.
Direct invasion of the mediastinum may cause
paralysis of the phrenic nerve, manifest by eleva-
tion of the hemidiaphragm, or of the recurrent
laryngeal nerve, particularly on the left side where
it passes around the aortic arch to the superior
mediastinum,
causing vocal
cord
palsy
with
hoarseness and diminished cough reﬂex. Injection
of Teﬂon or Bioplastique into the paralysed
vocal cord under general anaesthesia can improve
voice quality by building up the volume of the vocal
cord enabling better apposition. Obstruction of
the superior vena cava causes venous engorge-
ment of the upper body with facial oedema,
headache, distended pulseless jugular veins and
enlarged collateral veins over the chest and arms.
These symptoms require urgent treatment by
chemotherapy in the case of small-cell cancer or
radiotherapy in the case of other tumours. Inser-
tion of an expandable metallic wire stent into the
strictured vein under radiological guidance can
give rapid relief of symptoms in severe cases. A
Pancoast tumour (Fig. 12.4) is a carcinoma sit-
uated in the superior sulcus of the lung where the
subclavian artery forms a groove over the lung
apex. Because of its particular anatomical loca-
tion a tumour here gives rise to a characteristic
syndrome: ipsilateral Horner’s syndrome (ptosis,
meiosis, enophthalmos, anhydrosis) because of
stellate ganglion involvement; pain caused by
erosion of the posterior ﬁrst and second ribs, and
wasting of the small muscles of the hand as
a result of brachial plexus invasion. The tumour
may invade a vertebral foramen giving spinal
cord compression. These tumours are notoriously
difﬁcult to detect on a chest X-ray and the cause
of
the
patient’s
pain
is
often
misdiagnosed
initially.
Chest symptoms
Haemoptysis
Cough
Wheeze
Stridor
Pain
Hoarse voice
General symptoms
Weight loss
Anorexia
Lethargy
Anaemia
Chest X-ray
Lobar collapse
Peripheral nodule
Cavitating mass
Enlarged hilar nodes
Pleural effusion
Physical examination
Clubbing
Lymph node enlargement
Localized chest signs
Superior vena cava obstrution
Metastases
Bone: pain
Brain: hemiparesis; fits
Liver: jaundice
Skin: nodules
Paraneoplastic syndromes
Peripheral neuropathy
Cerebellar degeneration
Lambert–Eaton myasthenic syndrome
Dermatomyositis
Nephrotic syndrome
Thrombophlebitis migrans
Neuroendocrine syndromes
Hypercalcaemia
Syndrome inappropriate ADH
Gynaecomastia
Cushing's syndrome
PRESENTATIONS OF
LUNG CANCER
Figure 12.3 Presentations of lung cancer. ADH, anti-diuretic hormone.
Carcinoma of the lung 133

The chest X-ray plays a pivotal role in the inves-
tigation of lung cancer, and a range of abnormal-
ities may be apparent. A peripheral tumour may
be seen as a small nodule or mass in the lung. A
cavitating mass is characteristic of squamous-cell
carcinoma (Fig. 4.7). Central tumours may cause
bronchial
obstruction
typically
giving
rise
to atelectatic collapse of a lung or lobe of a lung
(Fig. 12.5), or to pneumonic consolidation distal to
the obstruction. Thus, ‘loss of volume’ of a lobe
(atelectatic collapse) on a chest X-ray in a patient
with apparent pneumonia is a sinister feature
suggesting bronchial obstruction by a carcinoma.
The chest X-ray may show evidence of spread of
the tumour to bone (e.g. rib or vertebral destruc-
tion), pleura (e.g. effusion), hilar or mediastinal
structures. Computed tomography (CT) scanning
is the next key investigation in deﬁning the extent
and spread of the tumour and in planning the best
approach to obtaining histological diagnosis.
Histological–cytological diagnosis should be
obtained wherever possible. Sputum cytology is
positive in about 40% of cases, and is particularly
useful in patients unﬁt for invasive tests. Bron-
choscopy allows direct visualisation and biopsy of
central tumours. Peripheral tumours seen on chest
X-ray may not be accessible to bronchoscopy and
percutaneous needle biopsy of these lesions
under radiological guidance is a useful technique
(Fig. 12.6). Small peripheral cancers need to be
distinguished from rare benign tumours (e.g. ha-
martomas) and from granulomas resulting from
Figure 12.4 Pancoast tumour. This 68-year-old man presented with a 3-month history of left shoulder pain. On
examination he had features of a left Horner’s syndrome (ptosis, meiosis, enophthalmos, anhydrosis). Chest X-ray
shows a mass at the apex of the left lung eroding the ﬁrst and second ribs posteriorly. Percutaneous biopsy showed
squamous-cell carcinoma. He was treated with palliative radiotherapy.
Figure 12.5 Right upper lobe collapse. This 65-year-
old smoker presented with haemoptysis. Chest X-ray
shows a triangular-shaped opacity in the right upper
zone indicating collapse of the right upper lobe.
Bronchoscopy showed a tumour occluding the oriﬁce
to the right upper lobe and biopsy showed a large-cell
undifferentiated carcinoma. Computed tomography
showed that the tumour was conﬁned to the right upper
lobe without mediastinal invasion or metastases. He
was treated by right upper lobectomy. Coincidentally
the X-ray also shows an old un-united fracture of the
right clavicle.
134
Respiratory diseases

previous tuberculosis, but it may be advisable to
proceed to surgical resection without histological
conﬁrmation of the diagnosis if the risk of cancer is
high. Diagnosis may also be achieved by obtaining
material from a site of metastasis (e.g. lymph node,
skin, pleural effusion).
Bronchoscopy
Flexible ﬁbreoptic bronchoscopy is usually per-
formed as an outpatient procedure under sedation
(e.g. midazolam) and topical anaesthesia (e.g.
lidocaine to the vocal cords and airways). The
bronchoscope is usually passed through the nose
into the orophayrynx, and then through the vocal
cords into the trachea and bronchial tree to the
subsegmental level. The bronchial tree is illumi-
nated by light transmitted from a light source to
the tip of the bronchoscope and the image is
transmitted to the eyepiece or displayed on
a screen. About two-thirds of lung cancers are
visible through the bronchoscope, and therefore
bronchoscopy is a key investigation for lung cancer
or haemoptysis. A biopsy forceps or cytology brush
may be passed through the channel to obtain
samples from a tumour and saline washings can
be aspirated for cytology or microbiology tests
(Fig. 13.1). Bronchoscopy is a very safe procedure
but is contraindicated in patients with uncon-
trolled angina or recent myocardial infarction.
Sedation should be avoided or used with particular
caution in patients with respiratory depression.
Pulse oximetry is used to monitor oxygen satura-
tion and supplemental oxygen is given. The bron-
choscope is carefully cleaned with detergent and
immersed in glutaraldehyde to prevent transmis-
sion of infection between patients. It is recom-
mended that the bronchoscopist and nurses
should wear masks, goggles and gowns to prevent
contracting infections (e.g. tuberculosis) from the
patient by aerosols generated by coughing.
Endobronchial ultrasound(EBUS) is a newer
technique that allows needle aspiration to be per-
formed, under ultrasound guidance via a specially
designed bronchoscope, of mediastinal lymph
nodes (e.g. subcarinal, paratracheal nodes) and of
tumours causing extrinsic compression of bronchi.
It is a very useful technique in the diagnosis and
staging of lung cancer. Ultrasound needle biopsy
of small supraclavicular nodes is also a useful,
minimally invasive, method of obtaining cytology.
About 50% of patients with mediastinal adenopa-
thy on CT scan will also have small pathological
supraclavicular nodes that can be detected and
aspirated using ultrasound.
Communicating
the diagnosis
Telling a patient of the diagnosis of lung cancer is
a difﬁcult clinical skill that needs to be developed
by training and experience. Patients want to talk
honestly about what is happening to them and to
know more about the way ahead. The patient’s
awareness of the diagnosis often emerges over
a number of consultations and the time that
elapses between initial suspicion of tumour and
histological conﬁrmation of the diagnosis is often
useful in allowing the patient an opportunity to
come to terms with the situation. When discussing
the diagnosis it is essential to allow adequate time
for questions, to ensure privacy during the inter-
view, to encourage a relative or friend to accom-
pany the patient for support and to have further
counselling available for the patient from skilled
Figure 12.6 This 66-year-old smoker was found to have
a mass in the periphery of the lung when an X-ray was
performed during an exacerbation of COPD. Percuta-
neous ﬁne needle aspiration of the lesion was per-
formed under computed tomography guidance and
showed adenocarcinoma on cytology. The procedure
has caused a small pneumothorax that resolved spon-
taneously without the need for intervention.
Carcinoma of the lung 135

nurses. Some patients may ﬁnd written informa-
tion about lung cancer and its treatment useful.
Inevitably, patients will experience emotions
such as shock, anger and denial and the doctor
must work through these emotions with the pa-
tient. It is useful to be able to bring the interview to
a conclusion on a more positive note by discussing
a management plan. Many patients will initially be
too shocked to understand the information given
and it is often useful to arrange a further interview
either with the hospital doctor, nurse or general
practitioner to answer the patient’s questions.
Rapid communication between all members of the
medical team is crucial in these circumstances.
Treatment (Fig. 12.7)
Treatment depends on the histological cell type,
the stage of the disease and the ﬁtness of the
patient. The management plan is discussed by
the multidisciplinary team following a review of
the patient’s radiological, histopathological and
clinical details.
Small-cell carcinoma (20%)
Small-cell carcinoma is a highly malignant cancer
that has usually disseminated widely by the time of
diagnosis such that systemic treatment in the form
of chemotherapy is required. On rare occasions
when small-cell carcinoma is diagnosed by surgi-
cal resection of a peripheral nodule, adjuvant
chemotherapy is given post-operatively. Various
combinations of chemotherapeutic agents are
available using drugs such as carboplatin, cisplat-
in, etoposide, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin,
vincristine, gemcitabine, vinorelbine, irinotecan
and taxanes (paclitaxel, docetaxel). Combinations
of these drugs (e.g. carboplatin and etoposide) are
usually given as a day treatment in pulses at
intervals of about 4 weeks for up to six cycles of
treatment. Untreated patients with small-cell
carcinoma are usually very symptomatic with a
median survival of only 3 months. Combination
chemotherapy achieves a symptom-relieving re-
mission of the cancer in about 70% of patients with
reduction in tumour size and prolongation of sur-
vival. Small-cell cancer is staged as limited disease
when it can be encompassed within a ‘tolerable’
radiotherapy port (involving one hemithorax,
including ipsiplateral mediastinal, subcarinal and
supraclavicular nodes or contralateral hilarnodes),
or extensive disease when it has spread beyond
a radiotherapy port (distant metastases or spread
beyond one hemithorax). In limited stage disease
chemotherapy improves survival from an average
of 3 months without treatment to 12 months with
treatment, and 5–10% of patients achieve a 5-year
survival. In extensive stage disease chemotherapy
improves survival from an average of 6 weeks to
8 months. Consolidation radiotherapy is usually
given to the site of the tumour and mediastinal
nodes. Cerebral metastases are common so that
prophylactic cranial radiotherapy is also given to
patients with limited disease who have responded
to chemotherapy. Patients receiving chemothera-
py require careful monitoring of their full blood
count to avoid problems arising from bone marrow
suppression such as anaemia, haemorrhage or
infection. Hair loss occurs with some drugs and
patients may choose to wear a wig. Careful atten-
tion to anti-emetic medications (e.g. ondansetron,
domperidone, metoclopramide) can usually pre-
vent nausea and vomiting.
Non-small-cell cancer (80%)
Surgical resection of the tumour offers the best
chance of cure in non-small-cell carcinoma but is
only possible if the patient is ﬁt for surgery and if
the tumour has not already metastasised. Staging
(Table 12.2) is the assessment of the extent and
spread of the disease and is important in deter-
mining the potential resectability of the tumour
and the prognosis of the patient. The TNM system
is the most widely used and is based upon the size,
location and degree of invasion of the tumour (T),
the presence of regional lymph node involvement
(N) and distant metastases (M). The accuracy of
staging depends on the degree of assessment, for
example staging at thoracotomy may show more
advanced disease than was apparent on CT
scanning.
When staging a tumour the patient’s symptoms
should be carefully reviewed for any indication of
metastatic disease (e.g. bone pain). Clinical exam-
ination may show evidence of tumour spread to
lymph nodes or reveal features of distant metas-
tases. Bronchoscopy allows direct visualisation of
many tumours and may show features of inoper-
ability (e.g. vocal cord palsy, splaying of the carina
by subcarinal lymphadenopathy or extension of
the tumour to within 2 cm of the main carina).
Elevated liver function tests or bone biochemistry
136
Respiratory diseases

SMOKING
SYMPTOMS
CHEST X-RAY
HISTOLOGICAL DIAGNOSIS
(Bronchoscopy, sputum cytology)
PREVENTION
DIAGNOSIS
COMMUNICATING
DIAGNOSIS
SPECIFIC
TREATMENT
PALLIATIVE
CARE
PALLIATIVE CARE
INOPERABLE
OPERABLE
Non-small-cell carcinoma (80%)
(Squamous, 45%;  adenocarcinoma, 20%;
large cell, 15%)
STAGING
CT-PET
(10–20%)
SURGICAL
RESECTION
Radiotherapy
Chemotherapy
(80–90%)
CURE
(30%)
Relapse 
(70%)
Relapse
(90%)
Cure 
(10%)
Radiotherapy
Chemotherapy
Small-cell carcinoma (20%)
CT-SCAN
Figure 12.7 The 5-year mortality rate of lung cancer is about 93%, emphasising the fact that the disease is usually
disseminated at the time of presentation. Prevention of lung cancer by avoidance of smoking is the most important
strategy in the ﬁght against this disease. Choice of treatment depends on cell type and stage of disease. About 20%
of lung cancers are small-cell carcinomas and are best treated by chemotherapy followed by radiotherapy. There is
usually a good response to chemotherapy but relapse is likely. About 80% are non-small-cell carcinomas and
require careful staging and assessment for potential operability. About 10–20% of non-small-cell carcinomas are
suitable for surgery but only 30% of patients undergoing resection will be alive in 5 years. A judicious plan of
assessment allows careful selection of the best choice of speciﬁc anti-cancer treatment with either curative or
palliative intent. Symptom relief and palliative care are crucial aspects in the overall management, and the
communication of information between doctor and patient at all stages of the disease is of paramount importance.
CT, computed tomography; PET, positron emission tomography.
Carcinoma of the lung 137

are indications for imaging of the liver by ultra-
sound or CT scans, and bone by isotope scans. CT
scanning is the key investigation in staging lung
cancer particularly in assessing mediastinal inva-
sion by the tumour and involvement of hilar and
mediastinal nodes. Enlarged (>1 cm) lymph nodes
are suggestive of malignant involvement, but if the
tumour otherwise
appears operable positron
emission tomography (see Chapter 4) is under-
taken to assess active disease in mediastinal nodes
Table 12.2 Outline of the main examples of TNM staging of non-small-cell lung cancer
Stage
TNM
Operability
5-year survival (%)
IA
T1a,b
N0
M0
70%
IB
T2a
N0
M0
50%
IIA
T1a,b
N1
M0
Resectable
T2a
N1
M0
45%
T2b
N0
M0
IIB
T2b
N1
M0
Resectable
30%
IIB
T3
N0
M0
IIIA
T1,T2
N2
M0
T3
N1
M0
Not-resectable
< 10%
T4
N0,N1
M0
(chemo/radiotherapy)
IIIB
T4
N2
M0
Any T
N3
M0
IV
Any T
Any N
M1
0%
Tumour (T)
T1 Tumour < 3 cm without invasion more proximal than a lobar bronchus
T1a Tumour < 2 cm
T1b Tumour >2 cm < 3 cm
T2 Tumour >3 cm < 7 cm, or tumour involving main bronchus (but more than 2 cm away from carina), or invading
visceral pleura
T2a Tumour >3 cm < 5 cm
T2b Tumour >5 cm < 7 cm
T3 Tumour >7 cm or invading chest wall, diaphragm, phrenic nerve, mediastinal pleura or within 2cm of carina or
separate tumour nodule in same lobe
T4 Tumour of any size invading mediastinum, heart, great vessels, trachea, recurrent laryngeal nerve,
oesophagus, vertebrae, carina; separate tumour nodule in different ipsilateral lobe
Nodes (N)
N0 No node metastasis
N1 Metastasis in ipsilateral bronchial or hilar nodes
N2 Metastasis in ipsilateral mediastinal or subcarinal nodes
N3 Metastasis in contralateral mediastinal, hilar or supraclavicular nodes
Metastasis (M)
M0 No distant metastasis
M1 Distant metastasis
Carcinomas that are stage I or IIA are treated by surgical resection with curative intent, if the patient is ﬁt for surgery. Some
tumours that are Stage IIb have poor results when surgery is attempted. Sometimes the tumour is up-staged after surgery when
histology shows more extensive disease, and adjuvant chemotherapy may be used. Carcinomas that are stage III or IV are not
suitable for surgery, but may be suitable for treatment with chemotherapy and radiotherapy with palliative intent.
138
Respiratory diseases

and to detect distant metastases. Biopsy of the
mediastinal nodes may then be undertaken by
mediastinosopy or endobronchial ultrasound-
guided needle aspiration.
. Surgery: unfortunately only about 10–20% of
non-small cell carcinomas are suitable for sur-
gical resection because of the advanced stage of
the disease at diagnosis. The decision about
the patient’s ﬁtness to undergo resection of the
tumour is based particularly upon the lung func-
tion tests and the patient’s general ﬁtness. Un-
fortunately, these patients often have substantial
cardiovascular
disease
and
smoking-related
COPD. No single test predicts feasibility of sur-
gical resection and greater risks may be justiﬁed
for a tumour that is otherwise curable by resec-
tion, but a forced expiratory volume in 1 second
(FEV1) < 50% of predicted or the presence of
hypoxaemia (PO2
< 8 kPa (60 mmHg)) would
suggest that the patient is not ﬁt for thoracotomy.
Lobectomy has a 30-day mortality of about 3%,
compared to 8% for pneumonectomy. Mortality
and morbidity increase with age. Surgery typi-
cally achieves a 70% 5-year survival in patients
with stage IA (T1N0M0) disease, a 40% 5-year
survival in stage IB (T2N0M0) disease, and 25%
5-year survival in stage 2 (T1–2,N1M0) disease.
Adjuvant chemotherapy (i.e. post surgery) can
improve survival rates by about 4% at 5 years in
selected patients.
. Radiotherapy is chieﬂy undertaken for the relief
of symptoms. Superior vena caval obstruction,
lobar collapse from bronchial obstruction, hae-
moptysis or chest wall pain usually respond well
to radiotherapy. Radical radiotherapy, using
larger doses, is occasionally used with curative
intent for small localised tumours that are not
treatable by surgery because of poor patient
ﬁtness. This sometimes involves continuous
hyperfractionated
accelerated
radiotherapy
(CHART) with fractions of radiotherapy being
given at 8 hour intervals in a concentrated
fashion.
. Chemotherapy can improve the survival and
quality of life of some patients with advanced
non-small-cell lung cancer. First-line chemo-
therapy typically consists of cisplatin or carbo-
platin combined with gemcitabine, paclitaxel or
vinorelbine. Docetaxel may be used as second-
line therapy when relapse occurs after previous
chemotherapy, although a variety of regimens
are
available.
For
patients
with
advanced
(stage III or IV) non-small cell cancer, who are
ﬁt to undergo chemotherapy (Table 12.3), treat-
ment on average extends survival by about
2 months, improving 1-year survival from 5% to
25%. The role of chemotherapy before (neo-
adjuvant) or after (adjuvant) surgery is being
studied in ongoing clinical trials.
Advances in the understanding of cancer cell bi-
ology has led to new treatments. Over-expression
of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is
a feature of non-small-cell lung cancer. Two oral
EGFR
inhibitors,
geftinib
and
erlotinib
have
demonstrated anti-tumour activity in patients
with non-small-cell lung cancer who have failed
to respond to chemotherapy. Bevacizumab is
a monoclonal antibody that binds vascular endo-
thelial growth factor, which is being evaluated in
the treatment of advanced disease.
Palliative care
Palliative care focuses on improving the patient’s
functioning and psychosocial well-being with
relief of symptoms. Even when the disease cannot
be cured, rapid assessment and diagnosis is im-
portant in addressing the patient’s symptoms
and anxieties. Regular review of patients with lung
cancer is essential in providing support for the
patient and his or her family and in identifying the
nature and origin of symptoms as they arise.
When dealing with a symptom such as pain,
speciﬁc anti-cancer treatment (e.g. radiotherapy)
is often the most effective method of symptom
relief. Where there is persistent pain, analgesics
need to be given regularly and prophylactically in
Table 12.3 World Health Organization perfor-
mance status scale. Patients with performance
status 3 or 4 are usually regarded as not being ﬁt
enough to tolerate chemotherapy
WHO Performance Status
0: Fully active
1: Restricted on strenuous activity but ambulatory
and able to do light work
2: Ambulatory for >50% of day, able to self-care
but unable to work
3: In bed or chair >50% of day, unable to care
for self
4: Conﬁned to bed or chair, unable to self-care
Carcinoma of the lung 139

advance of the return of pain. Mild pain may be
treated by a non-opioid analgesic (e.g. a non-
steroidal anti-inﬂammatory drug (NSAID) or para-
cetamol). More severe pain may be treated by a
combination of a weak opioid (e.g. codeine) and
a non-opioid (e.g. naproxen) drug. Strong opioids
should be used immediately for any severe pain.
Often pain control is achieved by use of slow-
release morphine tablets 12 hourly combined with
a NSAID, with additional use of morphine solution
for any breakthrough pain. Certain types of pain
may beneﬁt from use of co-analgesics such as
steroids (e.g. dexamethasone for nerve compres-
sion), benzodiazepines (anxiolytic), tricyclic anti-
depressants or anti-epileptics (e.g. gabapentin or
pregabalin for neuropathic pain). Whenever opi-
ates are prescribed it is necessary to prescribe
a laxative (e.g. co-danthramer) to prevent consti-
pation and an anti-emetic (e.g. metoclopramide)
may be required initially.
Anorexia, weight loss, fatigue and general de-
bility are common in the advanced stages of lung
cancer. It is important to check for conditions
requiring speciﬁc treatment such as anaemia
(blood transfusion) or hypercalcaemia (pami-
dronate). Prednisolone may be useful in boosting
appetite, and nutritional supplements may be
helpful. Attention needs to be given to the pa-
tient’s level of social support and help often
needs to be given with tasks of daily living. If
control of symptoms is not being achieved, help
should be sought from a specialist in palliative
care.
Other thoracic neoplasms
Alveolar cell carcinoma
This is a rare malignant tumour that arises in the
alveoli of the lung and spreads along the alveolar
and
bronchiolar
epithelium.
Histologically,
it
resembles adenocarcinoma. Occasionally, this
tumour produces large amounts of mucin causing
copious sputum production (bronchorrhoea). On
chest X-ray it may appear as more diffuse shadow-
ing, resembling pneumonic consolidation, rather
than as a discrete mass, and it is sometimes mul-
tifocal in origin. A transbronchial biopsy of alveolar
tissue is often necessary for diagnosis. When the
tumour is conﬁned to one lobe surgical resection is
the treatment of choice.
Carcinoid tumour
This rare tumour is less malignant than bronchial
carcinomas in that it rarely metastasises and is
often slow growing, although it may invade local-
ly. It is not related to smoking and often affects
younger patients. Most arise in the main bronchi
and present with haemoptysis and wheeze. At
bronchoscopy the tumour often has a smooth
rounded appearance resembling a cherry and it
may bleed profusely on biopsy because of its
vascularity. Most can be cured by surgical resec-
tion. Very rarely, a carcinoid tumour of lung me-
tastasises to the liver where secretion of sub-
stances such as 5-hydroxy indoleacetic acid (5-
HIAA) produces the carcinoid syndrome of ﬂush-
ing, diarrhoea and wheeze.
Respiratory
emergencies
Superior
vena caval obstruction (SVCO)
. SVCO presents with headache, distended neck
veins that are non-pulsatile, oedema of the face
and arms, and dilated collateral veins over the
chest.
. Lung cancer is the most common cause of
SVCO. Lymphoma, metastatic carcinoma,
mediastinal tumours and thrombosis of central
veins can also cause SVCO.
. Urgent diagnosis of the underlying cause is
needed to allow speciﬁc treatment. Chest x-ray
and urgent CTscan allows a decision as to the
best method of obtaining histological diagnosis.
. A short tapering course of dexamethasone
(initially 16 mg/day) may be useful in reducing
oedema and inﬂammation around a tumour.
. Insertion of a metallic stent into the compressed
vein under radiological guidance can provide
rapid relief of symptoms.
. Urgent chemotherapy for small-cell carcinoma
or radiotherapy for non-small-cell carcinoma
are likely to achieve tumour shrinkage with relief
of SVCO
. Anticoagulation is sometimes used to reduce
thrombosis but carries an increased risk of
haemorrhage., and is usually only indicated
if there is associated thrombosis in the
compressed vein.
140
Respiratory diseases

KEY POINTS
. Lung cancer is the most common cause of
cancer death, killing about 34000 each year
in the UK.
. Cigarette smoking is the main cause of lung
cancer.
. Non-small-cell canceraccounts for80% of lung
cancer and is suitable for surgical resection in
10–20% of cases.
. Chemotherapy and radiotherapy improve sur-
vival and quality of life when surgery is not
feasible.
. Small-cell cancer accounts for 20% of lung
cancers and is treated by chemotherapy fol-
lowed by radiotherapy.
FURTHER READING
Auvinen A, Pershagen G. Indoor radon and deaths
from lung cancer. BMJ 2009; 338: 184–5.
British Thoracic Society Lung Cancer and Meso-
thelioma
Specialty
Advisory
Group.
Giving
information to lung cancer patients. London:
British Thoracic Society, 2008 (http://www.
brit-thoracic.org.uk).
British Thoracic Society. Guidelines on the selec-
tion of patients with lung cancer for surgery.
Thorax 2001; 36: 89–108.
Demedts IK, Vermaelan KY, Van Meerbeeck JP.
Treatment of extensive stage small cell lung
carcinoma. Current status and future prospects.
Eur Respir J 2010; 35: 202–15.
Detterbeck FC, Boffa DJ, Tanoue LT. The new
lung cancer staging system. Chest 2009; 136:
260–71.
Doll R, Hill AB. The mortality of doctors in relation
to their smoking habits. BMJ 1954; i: 1451–5.
Macmillan Cancer Support: http://www.macmil-
lan.org.uk/
National Institute for Health and Clinical Excel-
lence. The Diagnosis and Treatment of Lung
Cancer. Clinical Guideline 24. London: NICE,
2005 (http://guidance.nice.org.uk/CG24/Guid-
ance/pdf/English).
Price A. State of the art radiotherapy for lung
cancer. Thorax 2003; 58: 447–52.
Sculier J.P., Moro-Sibilot D. First and second-line
therapy for advanced nonsmall cell lung cancer.
Eur Respir J 2009; 33: 915–30.
Silvestri GA, Rivera MP. Targeted therapy for the
treatment of advanced non-small cell lung
cancer: a review of the epidermal growth factor
receptor antagonists. Chest 2005; 128: 3975–84.
Carcinoma of the lung 141

13
Interstitial lung disease
Introduction
Clinical presentation
The terms ‘interstitial lung disease’ and ‘diffuse
parenchymal lung disease’ are imprecise clinical
terms used to refer to a diverse range of diseases
that result in inﬂammation and ﬁbrosis of the
alveoli, distal airways and septal interstitium of
the lung. Patients with these diseases typically
present with progressive breathlessness, a dry
cough, lung crackles and diffuse inﬁltrates on
chest X-ray. Lung function tests usually show
a restrictive defect (reduced total lung capacity
and vital capacity (VC)), with normal forced
expiratory volume in 1 second/VC (FEV1/VC) ratio,
impaired gas diffusion (reduced transfer factor)
and hypoxaemia with hypocapnia.
Differential diagnosis
At presentation the differential diagnosis includes
a number of other diseases such as infective pneu-
monia, pulmonary oedema, bronchiectasis and
malignancy (e.g. alveolar cell carcinoma). The
overall context of the disease is important and
exclusion of other diseases may require further
investigations (e.g. echocardiography) or observ-
ing the response to treatments (e.g. antibiotics,
diuretics). Once the clinical features suggest inter-
stitial lung disease a careful search for potential
causes is undertaken. Particular attention is paid to
any environmental antigens (e.g. budgerigar), tox-
ins (e.g. paraquat) or dusts (e.g. asbestos) that
patients encounter in their occupational or home
environments. Systemic diseases (e.g. rheuma-
toid disease) commonly involve the lung paren-
chyma and many drugs can cause lung ﬁbrosis
(e.g. amiodarone, nitrofurantoin, bleomycin) or
eosinophilic reactions in the alveoli (e.g. sulpho-
namides, naproxen).
Investigations
After a detailed clinical assessment, chest X-ray
and lung function tests, the next key investigation
is high-resolution computed tomography (CT) that
gives precise information about the extent and
pattern of the disease. In some cases this allows
a diagnosis to be made with reasonable certainty
but it may be useful to proceed to biopsy of the lung
parenchyma to study the histological pattern of the
disease. Small samples can be obtained by trans-
bronchial biopsy of the lung parenchyma through
a ﬂexible bronchoscope (Fig. 13.1). Larger samples
can be obtained by surgical biopsy under general
anaesthesia by video-assisted thoracoscopy. In
many cases the histological features are character-
istic of a particular disease (e.g. granulomas in
sarcoidosis or extrinsic allergic alveolitis; tumour
cells in lymphangitis
carcinomatosa), but in
advanced disease the histology may show non-
speciﬁc
lung
ﬁbrosis
without
clues
to
its
aetiology. Bronchoalveolar lavage may be per-
formed through the bronchoscope at the same
Respiratory Medicine Lecture Notes, Eighth Edition. Stephen J. Bourke and Graham P. Burns.
 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

time as transbronchial biopsy. Aliquots of saline
are instilled via the bronchoscope, which is held in
a wedged position in a subsegmental bronchus,
and ﬂuid is then aspirated for cell analysis. A
lymphocytic alveolitis is characteristic of sarcoid-
osis, for example. Many of these diseases are char-
acterised in their early stages by an inﬂammatory
alveolitis, which is responsive to corticosteroids,
whereas in the later stages there may be irrevers-
ible lung ﬁbrosis. Careful clinical investigation of
patients presenting with features of interstitial
lung disease aims to move from this imprecise
clinical label to a diagnosis of a speciﬁc disease
process (Fig. 13.2).
Idiopathic pulmonary
ﬁbrosis
Idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis (IPF) (cryptogenic
ﬁbrosing alveolitis) is the classic example of
a diffuse ﬁbrotic lung disease. It is a serious disease
that kills about 2500 people each year in the UK. It
is more common in men (male/female ratio 2:1)
and in the older age groups (mean age 70 years).
It presents withthe typical features of an interstitial
lung
disease
as
progressive
dyspnoea,
dry
cough, crackles, restrictive defect in lung function
and reticulonodular inﬁltrates on chest X-ray
(Fig. 13.3). About 60–70% have clubbing. The
aetiology is unknown but it appears to be the result
of a failure of repair of lung tissue, whereby epi-
thelial injury culminates in ﬁbrosis rather than
a controlled inﬂammatory and healing process.
A possible association with previous exposure to
environmental dusts (e.g. metal or wood dust) has
been found in some epidemiological studies, cig-
arette smoking may be a co-factor for the initiation
of the disease, and about 30% of patients have
autoantibodies
(e.g.
rheumatoid
factor,
anti-
nuclear factor) in their serum, suggesting that in
some cases it may be a form of connective tissue
disease primarily affecting the lungs. Lung biopsy
shows a characteristic pattern of ‘usual interstitial
pneumonia’ with a heterogenous appearance
such that there are alternating areas of normal
lung, interstitial inﬂammation, ﬁbrosis and hon-
eycombing. The changes are more severe subpleu-
rally. High-resolution CT scan typically shows
evidence of advanced ﬁbrosis with extensive areas
of reticulation and honeycombing in a predom-
inantly lower zone, subpleural distribution with
minimal evidence of inﬂammation as ground-
glass opacities (Fig. 13.4). Patients are usually
treated with a combination of low-dose predniso-
lone, azathioprine and N-acetyl cysteine but
unfortunately the response to treatment is poor
and about 50% of patients die within 3 years of
diagnosis. For younger patients lung transplanta-
tion may be an option (see Chapter 19). N-acetyl
cysteine is an antioxidant that has been shown to
slow the rate of decline in lung function, suggesting
that the aberrant ﬁbrosis may involve imbalances
in the oxidant–antioxidant and protease–antipro-
tease systems of the lung.
Idiopathic interstitial
pneumonias
The
broad
term
‘idiopathic
interstitial
pneumonias’ is used to describe a spectrum of
inﬂammatory and ﬁbrotic lung diseases of un-
known cause, including IPF.
Figure 13.1 Transbronchial lung biopsy. A small
specimen of lung parenchyma can be obtained
by passing a biopsy forceps through a ﬂexible
bronchoscope, usually under radiological guidance,
into the lung periphery. A sample of lung tissue is
obtained
by
biopsying
between
two
limbs
in
a branching small bronchus. There is a small risk
of causing haemorrhage or pneumothorax, so the
patient’s
condition
and
lung
function should
be
adequate to tolerate these complications.
Interstitial lung disease 143

Non-speciﬁc interstitial pneumonia is charac-
terised by more uniform inﬂammatory changes
and less ﬁbrosis on lung biopsy with correspond-
ingly more ground-glass opaciﬁcation on CT,
a better response to corticosteroids and a more
favourable prognosis than IPF. In cryptogenic
organising pneumonia histology shows intra-
alveolar buds of organising ﬁbrosis. This seems
to be a pattern of response in the lungs to a variety
of insults. It particularly occurs in association
with some drugs (e.g. amiodarone), connective
tissue diseases (e.g. rheumatoid disease) or ulcer-
ative colitis but often no cause is identiﬁable.
Clinically, patients often have cough, malaise,
Cyanosis
PO2
PCO2
Fine
crackles
VC
Transfer factor
Clubbing
Chest X-ray
Clinical features
Dyspnoea
Dry cough
Crackles
Clubbing
Chest X-ray
Reticulonodular 
shadows
Lung function
Restrictive defect
Reduced gas diffusion
Hypoxaemia
High-resolution CT scan
Bronchoalveolar lavage
Lympocytic:  e.g. sarcoidosis
Neutrophilic:  e.g. idiopathic
pulmonary fibrosis
Histology
Transbronchial biopsy
Surgical biopsy
DIFFUSE PARENCHYMAL 
SHADOWING
ALVEOLITIS
(inflammation)
LUNG FIBROSIS
(honeycomb lung)
Organic dusts
Extrinsic allergic alveolitis
e.g.  Farmer's lung
        Pigeon fancier's lung
        Budgie fancier's lung
Inorganic dusts
Asbestosis
Coal miner's pneumoconiosis 
(see Chapter 14)
Inhaled toxins
Paraquat
Drugs
Amiodarone
Bleomycin
Nitrofurantoin
Systemic diseases
Rheumatoid disease
Systemic sclerosis
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Dermatomyositis
Amyloidosis
Tuberose sclerosis
Neurofibromatosis
Lymphangitis carcinomatosa
Idiopathic
Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis
Sarcoidosis
Crytogenic organizing pneumonitis
x
x
x
xx
x
x x
x
x
x
Blood tests
Rheumatoid factor
Antinuclear factor
Eosinophils
Avian precipitins
Figure 13.2 Summary of the clinical investigations and differential diagnosis of interstitial lung disease. CT,
computed tomography; VC, vital capacity.
144
Respiratory diseases

fever, dyspnoea with chest X-ray inﬁltrates and an
elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR).
Often the patient is thought to have infective pneu-
monia but the differential diagnosis is widened
when no pathogen is identiﬁed and the patient
fails to respond to antibiotics. There is typically
a dramatic response to corticosteroids although
relapse may occur as the dose is reduced.
Desquamative
interstitial
pneumonia
and
respiratory bronchiolitis–interstitial lung dis-
ease are relatively rare forms of interstitial lung
disease that affect smokers. They have particular
features of desquamation of alveolar macrophages
or bronchiolitis on biopsy. They respond well to
smoking cessation and corticosteroids. Lymphoid
interstitial pneumonia is characterised by the
presence of lymphoid cells in the interstitium. It
may occur as a complication of human immuno-
deﬁciency virus (HIV) infection or connective
tissue diseases. Acute interstitial pneumonia
is a very aggressive form of interstitial lung disease
characterised
by
rapidly
progressive
diffuse
alveolar damage.
The idiopathic interstitial pneumonias, there-
fore, are a complex array of inﬂammatory and
ﬁbrotic lung diseases. The lungs may respond to
different insults with a similar pattern of inﬂam-
mation and ﬁbrosis, and conversely a single
agent, such as amiodarone, may produce a range
of reactions within the lung. The overall clinical
management requires the integration of clinical,
radiological and histological features.
Connective tissue
diseases
The typical clinical features of IPF with the histo-
pathological pattern of usual interstitial pneumo-
nia can occur in association with a connective
tissue disease. When a patient presents with inter-
stitial
lung
disease
a
careful
search
should
be undertaken for features of connective tissue
diseases e.g. Raynaud’s phenomenon, inﬂamma-
tory arthritis, sicca syndrome (dry eyes, dry
mouth), myositis and skin changes. These diseases
have a number of other lung complications.
Rheumatoid disease (Fig. 13.5)
Involvement of the crico-arytenoid joint causes
hoarseness and sometimes stridor. Obliterative
bronchiolitis results in progressive peripheral air-
ways obstruction. Pleural effusions are common
and analysis of the pleural ﬂuid characteristically
shows a high protein level (exudate) with a low
glucose concentration and a high titre of rheuma-
toid factor. Rheumatoid nodules may develop in
Figure 13.3 This 70-year-old man presented with
a 6-month history of progressive breathlessness,
crackles and clubbing with reduced lung volumes
and impaired gas diffusion. The chest X-ray shows
small
lung
volumes
with
reticular
shadowing
particularly affecting the lung peripheries and bases
suggesting idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis. He failed to
respond to prednisolone and died 1 year later of
respiratory failure.
Figure 13.4 High-resolution computed tomography
scan of a 70-year-old man with idiopathic pulmonary
ﬁbrosis showing ‘honeycombing’ that is a cluster or row
of cysts due to advanced ﬁbrosis in the subpleural area.
Interstitial lung disease 145

the lung parenchyma and show the same histo-
logical features as the rheumatoid subcutaneous
nodules. When rheumatoid disease occurs in
association with coalworker’s pneumoconiosis,
large cavitating pulmonary nodules may develop
(Caplan’s
syndrome).
Fibrotic
lung
diseases
complicating rheumatoid disease is managed in
the same way as IPF, but the prognosis is generally
better. Drugs (e.g. methotrexate, inﬂiximab) used
to treat rheumatoid disease may cause inﬂamma-
tory reactions within the lung and may also give
rise to lung infections. In these circumstances
diffuse inﬁltrates on chest X-ray could be as a result
of infection, a drug reaction, lung involvement by
the connective tissue disease or co-incidental lung
disease (see Table 6.1). Bronchoalveolar lavage is
useful in detecting infection. Where adrug reaction
is suspected information is available on a website
(http://www.pneumotox.com) and prompt cessa-
tion of the drug and treatment with corticosteroids
are important.
Systemic sclerosis (scleroderma)
Diffuse lung ﬁbrosis is the most common compli-
cation. Chest wall restriction by contraction of the
skin is rare. Aspiration pneumonia may occur
because of oesophageal dysmotility in the CREST
variant of the disease: calcinosis, Raynaud’s phe-
nomenon, oesophageal dysfunction, sclerodactyly
and telangiectasia. Pulmonary hypertension may
also develop in patients with the CREST syndrome
as a primary vascular phenomenon, often in the
absence of signiﬁcant pulmonary ﬁbrosis (see
Chapter 15).
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Pleural effusions are common and may cause
pleural
thickening.
The
phenomenon
of
‘shrinking lungs’, in which the chest X-ray shows
high hemidiaphragms with small lungs, is proba-
bly caused by myopathy of the diaphragm. Lung
ﬁbrosis may occur. Immunosuppressive treat-
ments predispose to opportunistic infections
(e.g. Pneumocystis pneumonia).
Extrinsic allergic alveolitis
Extrinsic allergic alveolitis (hypersensitivity pneu-
monitis) is an immunologically mediated lung
disease in which a hypersensitivity response oc-
curs in a sensitised individual to an inhaled an-
tigen. Typical examples of this disease are farmer’s
lung and bird fancier’s lung. When hay is har-
vested and stored in damp conditions it becomes
mouldy, generating heat that encourages growth of
fungi such as Thermoactinomyces vulgaris or
Saccharoployspora rectivirgula. When the hay is
subsequently used for foddering cattle, fungal
spores may be inhaled. Avian antigens are inhaled
by people who participate in the sport of pigeon
racing or who keep pet birds such as budgerigars.
Various water systems in the home or work
Cricoarytenoid 
arthritis
Caplan's syndrome
Diffuse pulmonary
fibrosis
Pleurisy and pleural
effusion
Obliterative disease
of airways
Rheumatoid nodules
Figure 13.5 Summary of pulmonary complications of rheumatoid disease.
146
Respiratory diseases

environment can be contaminated by fungi or
mycobacteria giving rise to extrinsic allergic alveo-
litis. Metalworking ﬂuid alveolitis, for example,
has been described in workers in car manufactur-
ing from contamination of ﬂuid used to cool and
lubricate metals. The inhalation of these antigens
provokes a complex immune response in suscep-
tible individuals involving antibody reactions,
immune-complex formation, complement activa-
tion and cellular responses, resulting in alveolitis.
These diseases are less common in smokers, prob-
ably because of the immunosuppressive effects of
cigarette smoke..
In the acute form of the disease the patient
typically experiences recurrent episodes of dys-
pnoea, dry cough, pyrexia, myalgia and a ﬂu-like
sensation, occurring about 4–8 hours after antigen
exposure. During such an episode lung function
tests may show a reduction in lung volumes and
gas diffusion, and chest X-ray may show diffuse
shadowing. Sometimes the chest X-ray may be
normal and CT is more sensitive in detecting the
changes of extrinsic allergic alveolitis (Fig. 13.6).
The acute illness is often misdiagnosed as pneu-
monia. The chronic form is characterised by the
insidious development of dyspnoea and lung
ﬁbrosis. Lung biopsies show features of ﬁbrosis,
alveolitis and granuloma formation. Bronchoal-
veolar lavage typically shows evidence of a lym-
phocytic alveolitis with a predominance of T-sup-
pressor lymphocytes. Precipitating antibodies to
avian or fungal antigens can be detected in serum
but are also found in many asymptomatic indivi-
duals so that they are not diagnostic.
Complete cessation of exposure to the provok-
ing antigen is the main treatment. However,
pigeon fanciers, for example, are very committed
to their sport and will often wish to continue
keeping pigeons. They can reduce antigen contact
by wearing a mask and a loft-coat and hat (so as to
avoid carrying antigen on their clothing or hair).
Steroids (e.g. prednisolone 40 mg/day) hasten
the resolution of the alveolitis and are often used
during
severe
acute
episodes.
The
immune
response in extrinsic allergic alveolitis is complex
and a variety of modulating factors inﬂuence
the interaction of antigenic stimulus and host
response so that the longitudinal course of the
disease is variable with some patients developing
lung ﬁbrosis and others showing spontaneous
improvement despite continued antigen exposure.
Sarcoidosis
Sarcoidosis is a mysterious multisystem disease
characterised by the occurrence in affected organs
of non-caseating granulomatous lesions that
may progress to cause ﬁbrosis. The aetiology is
unknown but the accumulation of CD4 lympho-
cytes at disease sites is suggestive of an immuno-
logical
reaction
to
an
unidentiﬁed
poorly
degradable antigen. The frequent involvement of
the lungs raises the possibility that such a putative
antigen enters thebodyviathe lungs.Thecompart-
mentalisation of CD4 lymphocytes in affected
tissuesisassociatedwithacorrespondingdepletion
ofCD4cellsinothertissuesanddepressionofsome
delayed-type hypersensitivity responses such that
patients with sarcoidosis often demonstrate nega-
tive reactions to tuberculin (i.e. negative Heaf or
Mantoux tests despite previous bacillus Calmette–
Guerin (BCG) vaccination). Serum immunoglobu-
lin
levels
are
usually
elevated
and
immune
complexes are often present in acute sarcoidosis.
The clinical features of sarcoidosis are very var-
ied but it is useful to consider two broad categories
of disease: an acute form that is usually transient
and often resolves spontaneously; and a chronic
Figure 13.6 This 65-year-old man who kept 150 racing
pigeons
presented
with
recurrent
episodes
of
dyspnoea, cough, fever and ‘ﬂu’. Computed tomo-
graphy
scan
shows
a
characteristic
pattern
for
extrinsic allergic alveolitis of ‘ground-glass’ shad-
owing with areas of decreased attenuation and air
trapping on expiratory scans.
Interstitial lung disease 147

form that is persistent and may cause ﬁbrosis
(Fig. 13.7).
Acute sarcoidosis
The acute form typically develops abruptly in
young adults with erythema nodosum and bilat-
eral hilar lymphadenopathy(BHL), sometimes
with uveitis, arthritis and parotitis.
Erythema nodosum
This
appears as
round red
raised
nodules,
typically over the shins. It is a manifestation of
hypersensitivity and is also found in other diseases
such
as
streptococcal
infection,
tuberculosis,
ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s disease, and with
drugs (e.g. sulphonamides, contraceptive pill), but
in many cases no cause is identiﬁed.
Bilateral hilar lymphadenopathy
BHL is not associated with any signs on examina-
tion of the chest or with any loss of lung function
and is often found incidentally on a chest X-ray,
but often the X-ray was taken in a patient with
other features suggestive of sarcoidosis (Fig. 13.8).
Although sarcoidosis is the most common cause
of BHL, other causes include lymphoma, metastat-
ic
carcinoma,
tuberculosis,
fungal
infections
such as coccidioidomycosis and histoplasmosis
in endemic areas (e.g. North America); and, in the
past, berylliosis (e.g. beryllium used in ﬂuorescent
lighting).
Chronic sarcoidosis
The chronic form of sarcoidosis pursues a more
indolent course, often in an older age group, with
involvement of many tissues of the body.
Chronic pulmonary sarcoidosis
This involves the lung parenchyma with reticular
shadowing often distributed in a perihilar fashion
on chest X-ray (Fig. 13.9). There are often remark-
ably few signs on examination of the chest, and
Acute uveitis
BHL
Erythema
nodosum
Acute
arthritis
Acute
Chronic
CNS, meninges
VII palsy
Parotitis
Lupus pernio
Nasal and sinus
Skin infiltrations
Liver
Splenomegaly
Renal stones
Bone cysts
MAJOR COMPLICATIONS
OCULAR
Uveitis–cataract
glaucoma
PULMONARY
Fibrosis
Cor pulmonale
Endobronchial 
 disease
HYPERCALCAEMIA
Nephrocalcinosis
Figure 13.7 Principal clinical features of sarcoidosis. BHL, bilateral hilar lymphadenopathy.
148
Respiratory diseases

lung function may be well maintained but the
disease may progress in some patients causing
progressive ﬁbrosis and loss of lung function
with impairment of gas diffusion, reduction in lung
volumes and sometimes airways obstruction with
air trapping and bulla formation.
Chronic extrapulmonary sarcoidosis
Sarcoidosis may affect virtually any organ in the
body. Ocular sarcoidosis often presents as pain
and redness of the eye as a result of anterior
uveitis. Chorioretinitis, keratoconjunctivitis sicca
and lacrimal gland enlargement may complicate
chronic sarcoidosis. Parotid gland enlargement
may be painful and sometimes causes facial nerve
palsy. Central nervous system involvement may
cause cranial nerve palsies, chronic meningitis,
obstructive
hydrocephalus
and
a
variety
of
neurological
syndromes.
Posterior
pituitary
involvement may rarely cause diabetes insipidus.
Cutaneous sarcoidosis may cause maculopapu-
lar eruptions, plaques, nodules and lupus pernio
(a violaceous chronic skin lesion particularly
affecting the nose and cheeks). Bone cysts are
sometimes found and are often asymptomatic.
Cardiac sarcoid may cause conduction system
damage and arrhythmias. Hypercalcaemia may
result
from
increased
bone
resorption,
and
nephrocalcinosis, hypercalcuria and renal calculi
may occur. Sarcoid granulomas and ﬁbrosis may
also be found in the liver, spleen, lymph nodes
and muscle, for example.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of sarcoidosis can often be made on
clinical grounds, particularly when a young adult
presents with classic features such as erythema
nodosum and BHL. In less typical cases it is helpful
to obtain biopsy of an affected organ. Bronchial
and transbronchial biopsies are particularly use-
ful and may be combined with bronchoalveolar
lavage, which typically demonstrates evidence of
a CD4 lymphocyte alveolitis. Mediastinoscopy
and biopsy of hilar lymph nodes is sometimes
Figure 13.8 This 25-year-old woman presented with
uveitis, arthralgia and erythema nodosum of her shins.
The chest X-ray shows bilateral hilar lymphadenopathy.
She was otherwise well and lung function tests were
normal. A diagnosis of probable acute sarcoidosis was
made. The disease resolved spontaneously without the
need for any medical intervention.
Figure 13.9 This 60-year-old woman presented with
cough and progressive breathlessness. There were no
crackles on auscultation of her chest but transfer factor
for carbon monoxide and transfer coefﬁcient were
reduced to 60% of the predicted values. The chest X-
ray shows extensiveupper lobeﬁbrosis. Transbronchial
lung biopsy showed non-caseating granulomas and
lung ﬁbrosis. Tests for tuberculosis were negative.
She
was
treated
with
prednisolone
with
some
improvement in lung function.
Interstitial lung disease 149

indicated to exclude other diagnoses such as lym-
phoma. The histological appearances must be con-
sidered in the clinical context because they are not
inthemselvesdiagnostic,andothergranulomatous
disease(e.g.tuberculosis)mustbeexcluded.Serum
angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) levels are
elevated in about two-thirds of patients with active
sarcoidosis but this test lacks sensitivity and spec-
iﬁcity and is therefore of limited value in diagnosis
or in monitoring the course of the disease.
Treatment
In most patients sarcoidosis is a self-limiting
disease
that
resolves
spontaneously
without
treatment. However, a minority of patients with
chronic sarcoidosis develop progressive ﬁbrosis.
Because the cause of sarcoidosis is unknown no
speciﬁc treatment is available but corticosteroids
suppress inﬂammation in the affected organs, fre-
quently improving local and systemic symptoms.
Their effect on the long-term natural history of
sarcoidosis is less clear. They are usually used in
patients with progressive disease and studies
suggest some beneﬁt from steroid therapy at the
cost of adverse effects (e.g. osteoporosis, Cushing’s
syndrome). A short course of prednisolone is
KEY POINTS
. Interstitial lung disease typically presents with
breathlessness, crackles, reduced gas diffusion
and VC and diffuse inﬁltrates on chest X-ray.
. Exclude other diagnoses, e.g. pulmonary
oedema, bronchiectasis, pneumonia, alveolar
cell carcinoma.
. Seek potential causes such as drugs
(e.g. amiodarone), antigens (e.g. pet birds),
occupational dust exposure (e.g. asbestos) and
systemic diseases (e.g. rheumatoid disease).
. High-resolution CT shows the pattern and
extent of ﬁbrosis and alveolitis and lung biopsy
may be needed to determine the histopatho-
logical pattern.
. Treatments such as prednisolone and azathi-
oprine should be used judiciously assessing
the beneﬁts and adverse effects carefully.
sometimes used for particularly troublesome acute
symptoms such as parotitis, arthritis or erythema
nodosum
if
non-steroidal
anti-inﬂammatory
drugs are not sufﬁcient. Uveitis may be treated by
topical steroids, and skin manifestations may be
amenable to steroid creams or steroid injections.
Inhaled steroids have been tried for pulmonary
disease but evidence of efﬁcacy is lacking. In
chronic sarcoidosis deciding who to treat and
when to treat requires careful judgement to
balance the beneﬁt and risks of chronic steroid
therapy.
FURTHER READING
American Thoracic Society and European Respi-
ratory Society. International multidisciplinary
consensus classiﬁcation of the idiopathic inter-
stitial pneumonias. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
2002; 165: 277–304.
American Thoracic Society and European Respi-
ratory Society. Idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis:
diagnosis and treatment: international consen-
sus statement. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2000;
161: 646–64.
Bourke SJ, Dalphin JC, Boyd G, McSharry C, Bald-
win CI, Calvert JE. Hypersensitivity pneumoni-
tis: current concepts. Eur Respir J 2001; 18 (suppl
32): 81–92.
British Thoracic Society Interstitial Lung Disease
Guideline Group. Interstitial lung disease guide-
line. Thorax 2008; 63 (suppl V): 1–58.
Demedts M, Behr J, Buhl R, et al. High-dose acet-
ylcysteine in idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis.
N Engl J Med 2005; 353: 2229–42.
Fischer A, West SG, Swigris JJ, Brown KK, DuBois
RM. Connective tissue disease-associated inter-
stitial lung disease. Chest 2010; 138: 251–6.
Martin W, Iannuzzi MC, Gail DB, Peavy HH. Future
directions in sarcoidosis research. Am J Respir
Crit Care Med 2004; 170: 567–72.
Pneumotox-drug reactions: www.pneumotox.com
Strieter RM, Mehrad B. New mechanisms of
pulmonary ﬁbrosis. Chest 2009; 136: 1364–70.
Westhovens R, DeKeyser F, Van den Hoogen
FH, et al. The clinical spectrum and patho-
genesis
of
pulmonary
manifestations
in
connective tissue diseases. Eur Respir Mon
2006; 34: 1–26.
150
Respiratory diseases

14
Occupational lung disease
Introduction
The importance of the work environment as a
cause of lung disease has been recognised since
ancient times. Hippocrates (460–377 BC) taught his
pupils to observe the environment of their pa-
tients. Ramazzini urged physicians to ask patients
what work they did and to visit the workplace. In
1713 he published a treatise on work-related dis-
eases (De Morbis Artiﬁcium) which included de-
scriptions of baker’s asthma and what is now
known as extrinsic allergic alveolitis.
Occupational lung diseases result from the in-
halation of dusts, gases, fumes or vapours encoun-
tered in the workplace, and the hazards of the work
environment are constantly changing as old indus-
tries are replaced by new ones. The effects of
inhaled substances depend on many factors in-
cluding particle size, physical characteristics (e.g.
solubility), toxicity, the intensity and duration of
exposures and the person’s susceptibility. Particles
>10mm in diameter are usually ﬁltered out of the
inhaled airstream in the nose; particles of 1–10mm
are mainly deposited in the bronchi; and particles
< 1mm penetrate to the alveoli. Inhaled substances
may exert their effects in various ways, and in many
circumstances the precise mechanisms involved
are incompletely understood. Some substances
exert a non-speciﬁc irritant effect (e.g. generally
dusty environment) or are toxic to the airways (e.g.
chlorine, ammonia) with all workers exposed being
similarly affected. Other substances induce hyper-
sensitivity or allergic reactions in susceptible in-
dividuals giving rise to asthma or extrinsic allergic
alveolitis (see Chapter 13), for example. Some in-
haled dusts promote ﬁbrosis in the lung paren-
chyma (e.g. silica, asbestos, coal dust) and some
are carcinogenic (e.g. cigarette smoke, asbestos).
Occasionally, infective organisms are inhaled (e.g.
Mycobacterium tuberculosis in healthcare workers,
Chlamydophila psittaci in bird handlers). Occupa-
tional exposure to tobacco smoke is a hazard to
those working in places such as bars, restaurants
and nightclubs and smoking bans are being intro-
duced in many places as part of the requirements
to provide a safe working environment.
Occupational asthma
Asthma is now the most common type of occupa-
tional lung disease. In the UK approximately 3000
new cases are diagnosed each year. Occupational
asthma may be deﬁned as variable airways
obstruction caused by workplace exposures. In
most cases it is the result of a hypersensitivity
reaction to a substance at work but it may result
from an irritant effect after high exposure to a gas,
fume or vapour at work. This deﬁnition excludes
the triggering of episodes of wheezing in patients
with pre-existing asthma by mechanisms such
as cold air or exercise at work. Occupational
Respiratory Medicine Lecture Notes, Eighth Edition. Stephen J. Bourke and Graham P. Burns.
 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

asthma accounts for about 10–15% of cases of
asthma in adults. The list of causes of occupational
asthma is long and new agents are being contin-
uously added. Some of the most common causes
are shown in Table 14.1. Occupational asthma is
rare among library, professional and clerical work-
ers but is common among spray painters (isocya-
nates), bakers (ﬂour), hairdressers (persulphates),
cleaners and workers in the plastics and chemical
industries (epoxy resins, azodicarbonamide), for
example.
Diagnosis
To establish a diagnosis of occupational asthma it
is ﬁrst necessary to conﬁrm the presence of asth-
ma and, secondly, to show a causal relationship
between the asthma and the work environment.
Although the suspicion of occupational asthma is
often based upon the patient’s history, the diag-
nosis should be conﬁrmed by objective tests wher-
ever possible because of the importance of the
diagnosis in terms of managing the patient, iden-
tifying the causative agent, reducing the risk to
other workers and addressing the medicolegal and
compensation aspects of the diagnosis. Character-
istically, there is an initial latent interval of
asymptomatic exposure to the agent before symp-
toms develop. This latent interval varies from a
few weeks to several years. Once the worker has
developed sensitisation to the agent further expo-
sure may provoke an early asthmatic response
(reaching a peak within 30 minutes), a late asth-
matic response (occurring 4–12 hours later) or a
dual response. If an early response occurs, the
relationship of symptoms to the work environment
is usually apparent. Late responses typically de-
velop the evening after exposure, disturbing sleep
and causing cough and wheeze the following
morning. Initially, symptoms improve away from
work on holidays or at weekends and deteriorate
on return to work. Once asthma becomes estab-
lished symptoms may persist even when away
from the work environment and are then also
triggered by other factors such as exercise or cold
air. Sometimes the sensitising agent also causes
rhinitis and dermatitis. Occupational asthma may
develop in workers with pre-existing asthma and
this may lead to a delay in diagnosis if the rela-
tionship of symptoms to the work environment is
not recognised. The patient may be exposed to a
known inducer of asthma (e.g. paint sprayers using
isocyanates) but doctors need to be constantly
alert to new causes of occupational asthma. Atopy
increases the risk of developing occupational asth-
ma and smoking increases the risk of occupational
asthma in workers exposed to isocyanates, for
example.
Serial measurement of peak expiratory ﬂow or
spirometry over several days at work and away
from work will usually show evidence of variable
airways obstruction (the hallmark of asthma) and
may demonstrate a relationship between symp-
toms, airways obstruction and the work environ-
ment. Lung function tests may be normal when the
patient is seen away from the work environment.
Assessment and management of occupational
asthma is notoriously difﬁcult as some workers
may be reluctant to admit to symptoms in case
this jeopardises their employment. Conversely,
others may exaggerate symptoms in an attempt to
gain compensation. Patients with suspected occu-
pational asthma should therefore be referred for
specialist assessment. One of the best ways of
showing a relationship between asthma and the
work environment is to perform a carefully super-
vised workplace challenge study. In this the pa-
tient is removed from the work environment for
about 2 weeks and then returned to work under
supervision. Serial measurements of spirometry or
Table 14.1 Common causes of occupational
asthma
Agent
Occupational exposure
Isocyanates
Spray paints, varnishes,
adhesives,polyurethane
foam manufacture
Flour
Bakers
Colophony
Electronic soldering ﬂux
Epoxy resins
Hardening agents,
adhesives
Animals (rats, mice)
Laboratory workers
Wood dusts
Sawmill workers, joiners
Azodicarbonamide
Polyvinyl plastics
manufacture
Persulphate salts
Hairdressers
Latex
Healthcare workers
Drugs
(penicillin,
cephalosporins)
Pharmaceutical industry
Grain dust
(mites, moulds)
Farmers, millers, bakers
152
Respiratory diseases

peak expiratory ﬂow are performed on control days
away from work and then over about 3 days on
return to the patient’s normal work environment.
Serial measurements of airway responsiveness to
methacholine or histamine (see Chapter 10) typi-
cally show sequential improvement away from
work and rapid deterioration on return to work.
Fig. 14.1 shows a typical late asthmatic reaction
occurring during a workplace challenge study in a
worker in a biocide manufacturing plant. The
agent inducing the patient’s asthma can often be
identiﬁed with reasonable conﬁdence by a visit to
the workplace and an assessment of the materials
used. However, workers may be exposed to many
agents and it may be difﬁcult to know which agent
is causing asthma. Laboratory challenge studies
involve the patient inhaling the speciﬁc suspect
agent under double-blind, carefully controlled cir-
cumstances with serial measurements of spirom-
etry and airway responsiveness. These studies are
particularly useful in identifying previously unrec-
ognised causes of occupational asthma but they
should only be undertaken in specialist units, as
they are potentially hazardous. In some cases of
occupational asthma it is possible to demonstrate
a positive skin prick test or circulating antibodies to
the agent but such immunological reactions are
often present in asymptomatic workers also.
Management
Treatment of occupational asthma involves man-
agement of both the affected individual and the
affected industry. Early cessation of exposure to
the inducing agent may result in complete resolu-
tion of the patient’s asthma. The key factor in the
patient’s treatment is therefore not the institution
of bronchodilator and steroid treatments as in
conventional asthma but the avoidance of expo-
sure to the inducing agent. This may be achieved in
a number of ways but often involves moving the
patient to a different job within the factory. Where
there has been a delay in recognising the nature of
the patient’s asthma and in ceasing exposure
chronic asthma may develop that persists even
after cessation of contact with the inducing agent,
and long-term inhaled steroid and bronchodilator
drugs are then required.
Substitution of an alternative non-asthmagenic
substance in the industrial process is the ideal
solution as this also removes the risk to other
workers. Where this is not possible, enclosure of
5.0
4.0
3.0
2.0
1.0
0
07.00
09.00
11.00
13.00
15.00
17.00
19.00
21.00
23.00
Time
Mean of control days
Work day 1
Work day 2
Work day 3
FEV1
Figure 14.1 Workplace challenge
study showing the mean forced
expiratory volume in 1 second
(FEV1) on control days away from
the workplace and progressive
falls in FEV1 over 3 days at
work indicating late asthmatic re-
actions of increasing severity oc-
curring in relation to exposure to a
biocide in the workplace.
Occupational lung disease 153

the process in a conﬁned booth with exhaust
ventilation may be possible. Segregation of the
hazardous process may be useful in limiting the
exposure to a small group of workers who are then
provided with appropriate personal protective de-
vices such as respirator masks. Surveillance of
other workers should be undertaken where a work
environment has been shown to cause asthma.
This typically involves a pre-employment medical
examination combined with periodic assessment
of asthma symptoms, spirometry and, ideally, se-
rial measurements of airway responsiveness. In-
stitution of these measures in the workplace re-
quires the cooperation of the factory safety ofﬁcer,
management, occupational health department
and industrial hygienist. Hazards within the work-
place fall within the remit of governmental agen-
cies such as the Employment Medical Advisory
Service (EMAS) of the Health and Safety Executive
in the UK. Workers suffering disability as a result of
their employment are entitled to compensation
from the Department of Social Security in the UK,
and may also wish to pursue legal action against
their employer where there has been negligence in
causing the disease.
Byssinosis
Byssinosis is a particular type of occupational
asthma caused by the inhalation of cotton or ﬂax
dust. Symptoms typically arise after several years
of working in the industry and show a character-
istic pattern different from that seen in typical
occupational asthma. Characteristically, workers
complain of chest tightness, cough and dyspnoea
on Mondays (or the ﬁrst shift of the week) and,
peculiarly, symptoms improve throughout the
working week. There is sometimes a fall in forced
expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) during the
working day but there is often a poor correlation
between symptoms and FEV1. Chronic productive
cough and irreversible airways obstruction some-
times develop. It is difﬁcult to understand what
mechanisms give rise to the pattern of symptoms
being worse at the start of the week and improving
thereafter. It has been suggested that cotton
particles may cause direct release of histamine and
that symptoms resolve as histamine stores are
depleted. However, the pathogenesis of byssinosis
is uncertain, and alternative theories suggest
that symptoms may be related to contamination
of cotton by Gram-negative bacteria and endotox-
ins, or that immunological mechanisms may be
important.
Popcorn worker's lung
Recently cases of severe obliterative bronchiolitis
have been reported in workers in popcorn produc-
tion plants due to inhalation of diacetyl, a ketone
with butter-ﬂavour characteristics. The patients
developed
progressive
cough,
breathlessness
and
wheeze
with
ﬁxed
airways
obstruction.
Computed tomography (CT) scans showed bron-
chial wall thickening and air trapping, and lung
biopsies showed inﬂammation and occlusion of
the small airways in the form of obliterative bron-
chiolitis. Further cases of ‘food ﬂavourer’s lung’
have been identiﬁed in other areas of the food
industry. Doctors need to be vigilant in order to
detect new causes of occupational lung disease.
Pneumoconiosis
Pneumoconiosis is a general term used to describe
lung ﬁbrosis resulting from inhalation of dusts
such as coal, silica or asbestos.
Coalworker's pneumoconiosis
The development of pneumoconiosis is directly
related to the total exposure to coal dust. Dust
exposure varies in different parts of the coalmine
and is heaviest at the coalface. Improvements in
ventilation and working conditions have consid-
erably reduced the level of dust in modern coal-
mines. In many countries there has been a decline
in the coal industry with increased use of alterna-
tive sources of energy. Coal dust inhaled into the
alveoli is taken up by macrophages that are then
cleared via the lymphatic drainage system or via
the mucociliary escalator of the bronchial tree. If
there is heavy prolonged exposure to dust the
clearance mechanisms are overwhelmed and dust
macules arise particularly in the region of the
respiratory bronchioles. Release of dust from dying
macrophages induces ﬁbroblast proliferation and
ﬁbrosis. There is an important distinction to be
154
Respiratory diseases

made
between
the
two
major
categories
of
coalworker’s pneumoconiosis.
. Simple coalworker’s pneumoconiosis: it consists
of the accumulation, within the lung tissue, of
small ( < 5 mm) aggregations of coal particles
that are uniformly dispersed and evident on
chest X-ray as a delicate micronodular mottling.
Simple pneumoconiosis is not associated with
any signiﬁcant symptoms, signs, impairment of
lung function or alteration to prognosis, for
example life expectancy. The size and extent of
the nodules can be categorised for research and
classiﬁcation purposes by comparing the pa-
tient’s X-ray with standard ﬁlms published by
the International Labour Ofﬁce. The benign na-
ture of simple pneumoconiosis is sometimes not
appreciated and there is often a tendency to
attribute any respiratory symptoms to the pneu-
moconiosis, whereas alternative explanations
such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD), asthma or heart disease are more likely
to account for the patient’s symptoms.
. Complicated coalworker’s pneumoconiosis (pro-
gressive massive ﬁbrosis): it is characterised by
the occurrence of large black ﬁbrotic masses in
the lung parenchyma, consisting of coal dust and
bundles of collagen. These are typically situated
in the upper zones and appear as rather bizarre
opacities on chest X-ray against the background
of simple pneumoconiosis (Fig. 14.2). Cavitation
of these lesions may occur and may result in the
expectoration of black sputum (melanoptysis).
Complicated pneumoconiosis often results in
dyspnoea, a restrictive ventilatory defect (re-
duced lung volumes) and impaired gas diffusion
(reduced transfer factor for carbon monoxide),
and reduced life expectancy.
Caplan's syndrome (rheumatoid
pneumoconiosis)
Coalworkers with rheumatoid arthritis may de-
velop multiple nodules of about 0.5–2 cm in di-
ameter in the lungs. These lung nodules are often
accompanied by the occurrence of subcutaneous
rheumatoid nodules.
Coalworker's bronchitis and
emphysema
Coalminers have a high prevalence of bronchitis,
airways obstruction and emphysema and since
1993 they have been eligible for compensation
from the Department of Social Security in the UK
if they have worked underground in coal mines for
at least 20 years and have reduced FEV1.
Silicosis
This is a form of pneumoconiosis resulting from
the inhalation of free silica (silicon dioxide). It is
now less common in developed countries because
of widespread recognition and control of the ha-
zards of respirable silica dust in the mining and
quarrying industries. There is a risk of silicosis in
workers involved in: quarrying, grinding and
dressing of sandstone, granite and slate; develop-
ing tunnels and sinking shafts (e.g. coalmines);
boiler scaling; sandblasting of castings in iron and
steel foundries; and the pottery industry where
silica may be used in the lining of kilns and the
dry-grinding of ceramic products. The use of hand-
held, high-speed tools on construction sites has
also given rise to silicosis.
Simplenodularsilicosis,likesimplecoalworker’s
pneumoconiosis, causes no symptoms and is an
X-ray phenomenon. Complicated silicosis, howev-
er, results in progressive ﬁbrosis, loss of lung
function and breathlessness. The silicotic nodule
Figure 14.2 This 78-year-old man, who had been a
faceworker in a coalmine for 40 years, presented with
progressive breathlessness. Chest X-ray shows irreg-
ular opacities of progressive massive ﬁbrosis in both
upper lobes with extensive background nodular sha-
dowing of coalworker’s pneumoconiosis.
Occupational lung disease 155

consists of concentric layers of collagen surround-
ing a central area of dust including quartz crystals
and dying macrophages. There is a signiﬁcantly
increased risk of tuberculosis in patients with
silicosis as silica interferes with the ability of
macrophages to kill tubercle bacilli. Patients with
silicosis are also at increased risk of developing
lung cancer.
A chest X-ray typically shows nodular opacities
particularly affecting the upper lobes. The nodules
are usually denser and larger than those seen in
simple coalworker’s pneumoconiosis. Eggshell
calciﬁcation of hilar lymph nodes is a particularly
characteristic feature (Fig. 14.3). Pleural thicken-
ing may also occur.
Siderosis
Dust containing iron and its oxides is encountered
at various stages in the iron and steel industry and
in welding. It gives rise to asimple pneumoconiosis
(siderosis) that produces a striking mottled ap-
pearance on the chest X-ray because of the high
radiodensity of iron, but which is not accompanied
by symptoms, signs or any physiological defect.
Other metals such as antimony and tin may pro-
duce a similar picture.
Asbestos-related lung
disease
Asbestos is a collective term for a number of nat-
urally occurring ﬁbrous mineral silicates that are
widely used because of their ﬁre-resistant and
insulation properties. Asbestos ﬁbres are of two
main types that have different physical and chem-
ical properties: serpentine asbestos ﬁbres (chryso-
tile–white asbestos) are wispy, ﬂexible and rela-
tively long, such that they are less easily inhaled to
the periphery of the lung; amphibole asbestos ﬁbres
(e.g. crocidolite–blue asbestos, amosite–brown
asbestos, tremolite) are straighter, stiffer and
more brittle, and penetrate more deeply into the
lung. They are also more resistant to breakdown
within the lung.
Workers may be exposed to asbestos in many
different settings so that it is important to take a
detailed history of all the patient’s occupations
over the years and of the tasks undertaken. Pipe
laggers and industrial plumbers often have had
heavy exposure to asbestos because it is widely
used for thermal insulation in ships, power sta-
tions and factories. Many workers in the ship-
building industry were heavily exposed to asbestos
when they worked alongside pipe laggers in con-
ﬁned spaces such as the engine rooms of ships.
Sometimes housewives washing their husbands’
work overalls inhaled signiﬁcant amounts of as-
bestos. Workers in the insulation industry and
those producing asbestos products may have been
heavily exposed. Chrysotile asbestos is used in
brake-pad linings, in cement products, in pipes,
tiles and rooﬁng materials. In many circum-
stances the asbestos is safely bound within com-
posite materials but respirable dust may be pro-
duced by the cutting of asbestos sheets, or in
demolition work involving the removal, or strip-
ping-off, of asbestos insulation from pipes or
boilers.
Strict precautions were eventually widely intro-
duced in the 1970s to restrict exposure to asbestos
with the use of protective respirators and exhaust
ventilation, and the substitution of other materials
where possible. However, the long lag interval
between the inhalation of asbestos and the
Figure 14.3 This 65-year-old man had had extensive
exposureto silica when working in a stone quarry.Chest
X-ray shows eggshell calciﬁcation (a rim of calciﬁcation
around the outer margin) of the hilar lymph nodes with
upper lobe ﬁbrosis. Tests for
tuberculosis were
negative.
156
Respiratory diseases

development of disease means that asbestos-relat-
ed lung disease is still all too common. There are
several different diseases related to asbestos expo-
sure (Fig. 14.4) and they each have very different
manifestations and prognosis.
. Asbestosis:
asbestosis is a pneumoconiosis in
which diffuse parenchymal lung ﬁbrosis devel-
ops as a result of heavy prolonged exposure to
asbestos. The lag interval between exposure and
the onset of the disease is typically 10–25 years,
and is shorter the more intense the exposure. The
clinical features are similar to those of other
interstitial lung diseases such as idiopathic pul-
monary ﬁbrosis, with cough, progressive dys-
pnoea, bibasal crackles, frequently clubbing and
a restrictive ventilatory defect (reduced lung
volumes) with impaired gas diffusion (reduced
transfer factor for carbon monoxide). Chest X-ray
shows bilateral reticulonodular shadowing. CT
is more sensitive in detecting early changes.
Fibrosis is usually ﬁrst evident around the respi-
ratory bronchioles at the lung bases, becoming
more diffuse as the disease progresses. Asbestos
bodies, consisting of an asbestos ﬁbre coated
with an iron-containing protein, are usually seen
within areas of ﬁbrosis on light or electron mi-
croscopy. The disease is usually slowly progres-
sive even after exposure has ceased, and is not
usually responsive to corticosteroids. Patients
with asbestosis are at substantial risk of devel-
oping lung cancer. It seems likely that some
individuals have an increased susceptibility to
developing asbestosis, although the nature of
this susceptibility is unknown.
. Pleural plaques:
pleural plaques are often vis-
ible as an incidental ﬁnding on chest X-rays of
workers who have been exposed to asbestos.
Light
exposure
Heavy
exposure
Pleural thickening
5–20 years
5–20 years
Pleural
calcification
20–40 years
20–40 years
Mesothelioma
Bronchial
carcinoma
?
1 Cigarettes
Asbestosis
1
Carcinoma
Asbestosis
ASBESTOS
Figure 14.4 Pulmonary diseases
relating to exposure to asbestos.
Occupational lung disease 157

They are often calciﬁed and appear as dense
white lines on the pleura of the chest wall, dia-
phragm, pericardium and mediastinum. When
seen face-on they form an irregular ‘holly leaf’
pattern (Fig. 14.5). They consist of white ﬁbrous
tissue usually situated on the parietal pleura.
They do not give rise to any impairment of lung
function or disability.
. Asbestos pleurisy and pleural effusions:
many
years after ﬁrst exposure to asbestos, patients
may develop episodes of pleurisy with pleuritic
pain and pleural effusions. The pleural ﬂuid is
an exudate that is often bloodstained even in the
absence of malignancy. There is sometimes as-
sociated elevation of erythrocyte sedimentation
rate (ESR). Other causes of pleural effusion need
to be excluded. Pleural biopsy shows evidence of
inﬂammation and ﬁbrosis without any speciﬁc
diagnostic features. There is usually spontane-
ous resolution but recurrent episodes affecting
both sides may occur and may lead to pleural
thickening.
. Pleural thickening:
localised or diffuse thicken-
ing and ﬁbrosis of the pleura may develop as a
result of asbestos exposure. There may be a
history of recurrent episodes of acute pleurisy
although these are often subclinical. The pleural
thickening is usually most marked at the lung
bases with obliteration of the costophrenic an-
gles. It may initially be unilateral but often be-
comes bilateral. Areas of ﬁbrous strands extend-
ing from the thickened pleura may give the ap-
pearance of ‘crow’s feet’ on X-ray and rolled
atelectasis may appear as a rounded opacity
caused by puckering of the lung by the thickened
pleura. When the pleural thickening is extensive
it causes dyspnoea and a restrictive ventilatory
defect.
. Asbestos-related
lung
cancer:
epidemiology
studies show an increased risk of lung cancer in
workers in the asbestos industry with an ap-
proximately linear relationship between the
dose of asbestos and the occurrence of lung
cancer. The interaction between asbestos and
smoking is multiplicative. The clinical features,
distribution of cell type, investigation and treat-
ment of asbestos-related lung cancers are the
same as for those not associated with asbestos
exposure (see Chapter 12) but impairment of
lung function as a result of asbestosis may pre-
clude surgery. In the UK, workers are entitled to
compensation from the Department of Social
Security for asbestos-related lung cancer if
it occurs in association with asbestosis or if
they have had at least 1 year of heavy exposure
or 5 years of moderate exposure to asbestos in
certain occupations.
. Mesothelioma:
it is a malignant tumour of the
pleura that is associated with a history of as-
bestos exposure in at least 90% of cases. The
risk is greatest in those exposed to crocidolite
(blue asbestos). Sometimes the period of ex-
posure to asbestos may have been as short as a
few months. At present there are about 2000
deaths each year in the UK from mesothelioma
and the incidence is expected to continue to
rise until about the year 2020 because effective
controls on asbestos exposure were only widely
introduced in the 1970s and there is an average
lag interval of 20–40 years between exposure
to asbestos and the development of mesothe-
lioma. It usually presents with pain, dyspnoea,
weight loss and lethargy, and features of a
pleural effusion sometimes associated with a
lobulated pleural mass on X-ray (Fig. 14.6). CT
scan typically shows nodular pleural thickening
encasing the lung and involving the mediastinal
pleura. Video-assisted thoracoscopic pleural
biopsy may be needed for deﬁnitive histopath-
ological
diagnosis
and
pleurodesis
can
be
Figure 14.5 This 70-year-old man had had extensive
exposure to asbestos when he worked as a pipe lagger
in shipyards. His chest X-ray shows extensive calciﬁed
pleural plaques seen as dense white lines over the
diaphragm and pericardium, and demonstrating a
‘holly leaf’ pattern when seen face-on over the mid
zones of the lungs. There is pleural thickening in both
mid zones with some blunting of the costophrenic
angles.
158
Respiratory diseases

performed at the same time for control of a
pleural effusion. As the tumour progresses it
encases the lung and may involve the pericar-
dium and peritoneum, and give rise to blood-
borne metastases. Radical surgery in the form
of extrapleural pneumonectomy can be at-
tempted in only a small percentage of patients
and has a poor success rate. Radiotherapy can
reduce the risk of spread of the tumour through
biopsy tracks and may relieve pain. Chemo-
therapy, using drugs such as pemetrexed and
cisplatin, results in tumour shrinkage in about
40% of patients, with a small improvement in
survival rates. Unfortunately prognosis is poor,
with most patients dying within 2 years of
diagnosis.
Patients who have suffered disability as a result of
occupational lung disease have a statutory right to
receive compensation from governmental agen-
cies such as the Department of Social Security in
the UK. In some cases they may wish to pursue
litigation against their employer. The death of a
patient with a suspected occupational lung disease
should be reported to the relevant authority, such
as the coroner, who may wish to undertake a post-
mortem examination.
KEY POINTS
. Asthma is the commonest type of occupational
lung disease.
. Occupational asthma accounts for 10–15% of
all cases of asthma in adults.
. Avoidance of exposure to the inducing agent is
the main treatment of occupational asthma.
. Pneumoconiosis is a form of lung ﬁbrosis due to
inhalation of dusts such as asbestos, coal and
silica.
. Mesothelioma is a malignant tumour of the
pleura due to inhalation of asbestos 20–40
years previously.
FURTHER READING
British Lung Foundation: Information on Asbestos
and Mesothelioma: www.lunguk.org.
British Thoracic Society. Statement on malignant
mesothelioma in the United Kingdom. Thorax
2007; 62 (suppl II): 1–19.
Edwards PR, Van Tongeren M, Watson A, Gee I,
Edwards RE. Environmental tobacco smoke. Oc-
cup Environ Med 2004; 61: 385–6.
Fishwick D, Barber CM, Bradshaw LM, et al. Stan-
dards of care for occupational asthma. Thorax
2008; 63: 240–50.
Hendrick DJ. Popcorn worker’s lung in Britain in a
man making potato crisp ﬂavouring. Thorax
2008; 63: 267–8.
McDonald JC, Chen Y, Zekveld C, Cherry NM.
Incidence by occupation and industry of acute
work related respiratory diseases in the UK,
1992–2001. Occup Environ Med 2005; 62: 836–42.
Nicholson PJ, Cullinan P, Newman Taylor AJ,
Burge PS, Boyle C. Evidence based guidelines
for the prevention, identiﬁcation, and manage-
ment of occupational asthma. Occup Environ
Med 2005; 62: 290–9.
OASYS.Occupationalasthmacausativeagents/sensi-
tizers: www.occupationalasthma.com/causative_
agents.aspx.
Sigsgaard T, Nowak D, Annesi-Maesano I, et al.
European Respiratory Society position paper:
work-related respiratory diseases in the EU. Eur
Resp J 2010; 35: 234–8.
Figure 14.6 This 74-year-old man presented with right-
sided chest pain and progressive breathlessness. He
had been exposed to asbestos 40 years previously in
his job as a plumber. His chest X-ray shows extensive
lobulated pleural masses encasing the right lung.
Percutaneous
pleural
biopsy
showed
malignant
mesothelioma.
Occupational lung disease 159

15
Pulmonary vascular
disease
Pulmonary embolism
It is estimated that pulmonary emboli occur in
about 1% of patients admitted to hospital and are
directly responsible for about 5% of all deaths in
hospital. The thrombus typically develops in the
deep veins of the legs and then travels to the lungs
causing obstruction of the pulmonary vasculature.
Patients who are immobilised in the community or
in hospital are particularly vulnerable to develop-
ing deep vein thrombosis (DVT) and then pulmo-
nary embolism. It is the commonest cause of death
after elective surgery and is one of the leading
causes of maternal death in the UK. Strategies to
defend against this killer rely on widespread use of
subcutaneous heparin prophylaxis against DVT
and rapid resort to full anti-coagulation pending
deﬁnitive investigations in patients showing fea-
tures suggesting DVT or pulmonary embolism.
Deep vein thrombosis
Factors predisposing to venous thrombosis were
described by Virchow as a triad of venous stasis,
damage to the wall of the vein and hypercoagulable
states:
. Venous stasis occurs as a result of immobility
(e.g. bed-bound patients on medical, surgical or
obstetric wards, airplane ﬂights), local pressure
(e.g. tight plaster of Paris), venous obstruction
(e.g. pressure of a pelvic tumour, pregnancy,
obesity,
varicose
veins),
congestive
cardiac
failure and dehydration.
. Damage to a vein occurs from local trauma to the
vein, previous thrombosis and inﬂammation
(phlebitis).
. Hypercoagulable states arise as part of the body’s
response to surgery, trauma and childbirth,
and are found in association with malignancy
and use of oral oestrogen contraceptives.
Recurrent thrombosis is particularly likely to
occur where there are speciﬁc inherited abnor-
malities of the clotting system such as factor
V Leiden gene mutation, anti-thrombin III,
protein S or protein C deﬁciencies and in
anti-cardiolipin
antibody
disease.
Patients
with recurrent or unexplained thromboembolic
disease should have speciﬁc tests for these con-
ditions because long-term anti-coagulation is
advisable.
Pulmonary embolism is particularly common
when thrombosis occurs in the proximal femoral
or iliac veins and is less likely to occur when
thrombosis is conﬁned to the calf veins. Most
pulmonary emboli arise in the deep veins of the
legs but they may occasionally arise from throm-
bus in the inferior vena cava, the right side of the
Respiratory Medicine Lecture Notes, Eighth Edition. Stephen J. Bourke and Graham P. Burns.
 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

heart or from indwelling catheters in the subcla-
vian or jugular veins. DVT may cause permanent
damage to the vein with impairment of venous
drainage, oedema, pigmentation, ulceration and
an increased risk of further thrombosis.
The classic signs of DVT are oedema of the leg
with tenderness, erythema and pain on ﬂexing
the ankle (Homan’s sign). However, thrombosis in
the deep veins of the leg, pelvis or abdomen may be
completely silent. DVT must be distinguished from
other conditions such as cellulitis, muscle injury or
ruptured cysts of the knee and compression ultra-
soundofthelegveinsistheusualinvestigationused
to conﬁrm or exclude the diagnosis. Other investi-
gations for detecting DVT include venography
whereby injection of radiocontrast material out-
lines thrombus and 125I-ﬁbrinogen isotope scan
that demonstrates incorporation of radiolabelled
ﬁbrinogen into the thrombus.
Clinical features
The clinical features of pulmonary embolism de-
pend upon the size and severity of the embolism, as
summarised in Fig. 15.1, although there is overlap
between the different presentations. In acute
massive pulmonary embolism the picture is often
that of a patient recovering from recent surgery
who collapses. Attempts at resuscitation are often
unsuccessful and there is a rapid high mortality,
with very limited opportunity for intervention.
Occlusion of a large part of the pulmonary circu-
lation produces a catastrophic drop in cardiac
output and the patient collapses with hypotension,
cyanosis, tachypnoea and engorged neck veins.
Sometimes the presentation is more subacute, as
a series of emboli progressively occlude the pul-
monary circulation over a longer period of time,
with the patient developing progressive dyspnoea,
tachypnoea and hypoxaemia. Acute minor pul-
monary embolism presents as dyspnoea, typically
accompanied by pleuritic pain, haemoptysis and
fever if there is associated pulmonary infarction.
Prompt recognition and treatment of an acute
minor embolism may prevent the occurrence of
a massive embolism. Chronic thromboembolic
pulmonary
hypertension
is
a
condition
in
which recurrent emboli progressively occlude the
pulmonary circulation giving rise to progressive
dyspnoea, pulmonary hypertension and right
heart failure.
Pulmonary
embolism
is
both
under-
and
overdiagnosed in clinical practice leading to some
patients failing to receive treatment for a poten-
tially life-threatening condition and others being
subjected to the risks of anti-coagulant therapy
unnecessarily. Although it is crucial to conﬁrm
a clinical suspicion of pulmonary embolism by
a deﬁnitive test, it is also important to avoid sub-
jecting large numbers of patients to unnecessary
and
expensive
investigations.
Dyspnoea,
tachypnoea (respiratory rate >20/min) and pleu-
ritic pain are the three cardinal features of pulmo-
nary embolism. If none of these features is present
a diagnosis of pulmonary embolism is very
unlikely.
Investigations
General investigations
General investigations may yield clues that point
towards a diagnosis of pulmonary embolism and
are particularly useful in excluding alternative
diagnoses:
. Chest X-ray is often normal but elevation of
a hemidiaphragm and areas of linear atelectasis
are suggestive of pulmonary emboli. A small
pleural effusion with wedge-shaped peripheral
opacities may occur in association with pulmo-
nary infarction, and rarely an area of lung infarc-
tion undergoes cavitation. In massive embolism
an area of underperfusion with few vascular
markings may be apparent. Enlarged pulmo-
nary arteries are a feature of pulmonary hyper-
tension in chronic thromboembolic disease. The
chest X-ray helps exclude alternative diagnoses
such as pneumothorax, pneumonia and pulmo-
nary oedema.
. Electrocardiogram (ECG) is often normal apart
from showing a sinus tachycardia. In major
pulmonary embolism there may be features of
right heart strain with depression of the ST
segment and T wave in leads V1–V3, and evidence
of right axis deviation with an S1 Q3 T3 pattern.
The ECG helps exclude myocardial infarction
and cardiac arrhythmias.
. Arterial blood gases: characteristically pulmo-
nary embolism is associated with ventilation of
underperfused areas of lung resulting in hypox-
aemia and hyperventilation so that arterial blood
gases show a reduced Po2 and Pco2.
. Lung function tests are not usually helpful in the
acute situation but in patients with dyspnoea
caused by chronic or subacute pulmonary
emboli there is reduced gas diffusion with
Pulmonary vascular disease 161

(c)
(b)
(a)
Massive pulmonary embolism
Acute
>50% occlusion of circulation
Sudden circulatory collapse. Cyanosis
Central chest pain
Hyperventilation. Engorged neck veins
ECG: sometimes S1, Q3, T3 pattern
CXR: usually unhelpful
CTPA shows occlusion of central pulmonary arteries
Subacute
>50% occlusion of circulation
Progressive severe dyspnoea over few weeks without 
   obvious cause. Dyspnoea even at rest
Raised jugular vein pulse, sometimes loud P2
ECG: may show right ventricular hypertrophy (RVH)
CXR: may show infarcts
CTPA shows a high burden of clot
Acute minor pulmonary embolism
With infarction
Pleural pain haemoptysis, effusion, fever, hyperventilation
CXR: segmental collapse/consolidation
Without infarction
May be 'silent'
? Dyspnoea, hyperventilation
? Fever
CXR: may be normal
ECG: unhelpful
CTPA shows thrombus peripherally with a lower burden
   of clot
Chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension
(repeated small emboli)
Progressive breathlessness, hyperventilation
? Effort syncope
Clinical features of pulmonary hypertension
ECG: right ventricular hypertrophy and axis deviation
CXR: prominent pulmonary artery
CTPA shows large pulmonary arteries and right 
   ventricular hypertrophy with organised clot 
   and mosaic perfusion of the lungs
Figure 15.1 Synopsis of pulmonary embolism. CTPA, Computed tomography pulmonary angiography; CXR, chest
X-ray; ECG, electrocardiogram.
162
Respiratory diseases

a reduction in the transfer factor for carbon
monoxide.
Lung
function
tests
may
also
help identify other lung diseases (e.g. chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and
emphysema).
. Blood tests: There may be evidence of intravas-
cular thrombosis (thrombin–anti-thrombin III
complex assay) and ﬁbrinolysis (ﬁbrin degrada-
tion products). D-dimer is a breakdown product
of cross-linked ﬁbrin and levels are elevated in
patients
with
thromboembolism.
However,
levels are also often elevated in other hospitalised
patients so that D-dimer assays can be used to
exclude, but not to conﬁrm venous thrombo-
embolism. A normal D-dimer level can be par-
ticularly useful in certain clinical settings. For
example, a young woman on oral contraception
who presents with isolated pleuritic pain is very
unlikely to have pulmonary embolism if the
respiratory rate is below 20/min and chest X-ray,
arterial blood gases and D-dimer are normal. She
can be reassured without the need for admission
to hospital or further investigation.
Speciﬁc investigations
. Pulmonary angiography is the deﬁnitive test for
diagnosing pulmonary embolism but it is an
invasive test requiring specialist expertise and
equipment that are not widely available, and it is
associated with a small risk, particularly in
critically ill patients. A catheter is passed from
a peripheral vein (e.g. femoral vein), through the
right side of the heart into the pulmonary arter-
ies, and radiocontrast material is injected and a
rapid sequence of X-rays is taken. The angio-
graphic features of embolism are intraluminal
ﬁlling defects, abrupt cut-off of vessels, periph-
eral pruning of vessels and areas of reduced
perfusion.
. Computed tomography pulmonary angiography
(CTPA) (Fig. 15.2) is increasingly being used as
the deﬁnitive initial non-invasive imaging mo-
dality for pulmonary embolism. Very rapid spiral
images are obtained during the injection of io-
dinated contrast medium into a peripheral vein.
It has better speciﬁcity than ventilation–perfu-
sion isotope scanning in the diagnosis of pulmo-
nary embolism although it does involve a higher
radiation dose. It also provides information on a
potential alternative diagnosis when pulmonary
embolism is excluded.
. Ventilation/perfusion (V/Q) lung scan: macroag-
gregated particles or microspheres of human
albumin, labelled with a gamma-emitting radio-
isotope, technetium-99m, are injected intrave-
nously. These particles impact in the pulmonary
capillaries and the radioactivity emitted from the
lung ﬁelds is detected by a gamma camera, thus
outlining the distribution of pulmonary perfu-
sion. The distribution of ventilation in the lungs
is similarly outlined after the patient has inhaled
radiolabelled xenon. A completely normal pat-
tern of pulmonary perfusion is strong evidence
against pulmonary embolism. ‘Cold areas’ are
evident on the scan where there is defective
blood ﬂow and these may occur in association
with localised abnormalities apparent on a chest
X-ray (e.g. pleural effusion, carcinoma, bulla). In
these circumstances ventilation is usually de-
creased in the same areas resulting in ‘matched
defects’ in ventilation and perfusion scans. The
classic pattern seen in pulmonary embolism
consists of multiple areas of perfusion defects
that are not matched with defects in ventilation.
A V/Q scan may therefore show: normal perfu-
sion, in which case pulmonary embolism is
unlikely (‘low probability’); areas of perfusion
defects not matched with ventilation defects in
the presence of a normal chest X-ray that
indicates a ‘high probability’ of pulmonary
embolism; or it may show matched ventilation
and perfusion defects in which case interpreta-
tion is difﬁcult and the scan is regarded as
‘indeterminate’.
Patients
with
a
suspected
Figure 15.2 Computed tomography pulmonary angio-
gram showing clot in the main pulmonary artery of the
right lung (upper arrow) and the lower lobe pulmonary
artery of the left lung (lower arrow).
Pulmonary vascular disease 163

pulmonary embolism but an indeterminate scan
require further imaging, such as CTPA.
. Imaging of peripheral veins: demonstration of
thrombus in the peripheral veins by venography,
Doppler ultrasound or 125I-ﬁbrinogen isotope
scan provides support for the decision to anti-
coagulate a patient who has clinical features
of pulmonary embolism but an ‘indeterminate’
V/Q scan.
Diagnosing pulmonary embolism
The British Thoracic Society recommends a step-
wise approach and use of a probability scoring
system in diagnosing pulmonary embolism.
. Assess the probability of pulmonary embolism.
The main clinical features are breathlessness,
increased respiratory rate (>20/min), pleuritic
pain, haemoptysis or sudden collapse.
. Are other diagnoses unlikely? (e.g. pneumotho-
rax, COPD, pneumonia etc): if Yes, score þ 1
. Is a major risk factor for venous thrombosis
present?
(e.g.
surgery,
pregnancy,
previous
venous thrombosis, immobility, major medical
illness): if Yes, score þ 1
. Patients scoring 2 have a high probability of
pulmonary embolism. Heparin should be started
immediately and CTPA should be organised to
conﬁrm the diagnosis. Patients scoring 1 have an
intermediate probability of pulmonary embo-
lism. Measurement of D-dimer is then useful as
a negative D-dimer in this situation makes pul-
monary embolism unlikely. If D-dimer is positive
then heparin should be started and CTPA should
be arranged. Patients scoring 0 may have an
alternative diagnosis accounting for their symp-
toms. A negative D-dimer in these circumstances
would make pulmonary embolism unlikely.
However if D-dimer is positive then further in-
vestigations by CTPA may be needed. D-dimer
assays can be used to exclude but not to conﬁrm
venous thromboembolism and can reduce the
need for CTPA in some circumstances.
Pregnancy
The diagnosis of pulmonary embolism in a woman
who is pregnant requires particular consideration.
Pulmonary embolism is a leading cause of mater-
nal death and accurate diagnosis is essential. CTPA
exposes the foetus to less radiation than an isotope
perfusion scan but exposes the mother’s breasts to
a signiﬁcant dose of radiation at a time when they
are particularly vulnerable, increasing the risk of
future breast cancer. Ultrasound of the legs for
DVT is a useful initial investigation. If this is
negative and chest x-ray is normal a half-dose
perfusion scan is recommended, and CTPA is
reserved for patients with indeterminate initial
investigations.
Treatment
Anti-coagulant therapy
When a clinical diagnosis of suspected pulmonary
embolism or DVT has been made, anti-coagulants
should be started at once unless there is a strong
contraindication (e.g. active haemorrhage). The
decision as to whether anti-coagulants should be
continued in the long term is made later based
upon the results of subsequent investigations.
Low-molecular weight heparin (e.g. tinzaparin
175units/kg subcutaneously once daily) is now
the standard initial treatment for patients with
pulmonary embolism. The dose is determined by
the patient’s weight and anti-coagulant monitor-
ing is not needed. An alternative is unfractionated
heparin (e.g. heparin given asan initial intravenous
bolus followed by an infusion), and this requires
monitoring of the activated partial thromboplastin
time (APTT) with adjustment of the dose to main-
tain the APTT at 1.5–2.5 times the control value.
Intravenous heparin may be preferred to subcuta-
neous
heparin
in
patients
with
a
massive
pulmonary embolism or where rapid reversal of
anti-coagulation may be needed (e.g. in patients at
risk of haemorrhage). Adverse effects of heparin
include haemorrhage, bruising and thrombocyto-
penia. Once the clinical suspicion of pulmonary
embolism or DVT has been supported by subse-
quent investigations oral anti-coagulation is com-
menced using warfarin. Usually 10 mg is given on
the ﬁrst day as a loading dose, and then the inter-
national normalised ratio (INR) is measured and
the dosage adjusted to maintain a ratio of about
2–3. Since warfarin takes at least 48–72 hours to
establish its anti-coagulant effect heparin needs to
be continued for this period. The optimal duration
of warfarin treatment is uncertain but it is usually
continued for 3–6 months after a ﬁrst episode of
idiopathic venous thromboembolism. Patients
with recurrent or unexplained thromboembolic
disease should have investigations for hypercoag-
ulable states (e.g. anti-thrombin III, protein S or C
164
Respiratory diseases

deﬁciencies; anti-cardiolipin antibody disease)
and may require long-term anti-coagulation.
The patient should be given an anti-coagulant
information booklet that explains the nature and
side-effects of treatment, states the indication for
and proposed duration of treatment, provides con-
tact numbers for obtaining advice and instructions
on avoiding medications that interfere with ther-
apy. Many drugs enhance the effect of warfarin
(e.g. non-steroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs, aspi-
rin, ciproﬂoxacin, erythromycin, etc.) and others
reduce the effect (e.g. carbamazepine, barbitu-
rates, rifampicin, etc.). Warfarin is teratogenic and
women of child-bearing age should be warned of
this danger, and may require specialist contracep-
tive advice. Precise details of INR, warfarin dosage
and clinic appointments are included in the book-
let and this provides a useful method of commu-
nication with the patient and with all involved in
the care of the patient (e.g. general practitioner,
dentist, nurses etc.).
Thrombolytic therapy
The aim of thrombolytic therapy is to actively dis-
solve clots, but its use is reserved for those patients
with acute massive pulmonary embolism who
remain in severe haemodynamic collapse (e.g. hy-
potensive, poorly perfused, hypoxaemic). These
patients have survived the immediate impact of the
pulmonary embolism but remain critically ill. If all
the clinical features and bedside tests (e.g. ECG,
chest X-ray) suggest a massive pulmonary embo-
lism and exclude alternative diagnoses (pneumo-
thorax, post-operative haemorrhage, myocardial
infarction, aortic dissection etc.), a decision may
have to be taken that the circumstances justify the
use of thrombolytic therapy. Contraindications to
thrombolytic therapy include active haemorrhage,
recent major surgery or trauma. Typically alteplase
50 mg is given as a bolus via a peripheral vein.
Thereafterheparinanti-coagulationiscommenced.
Patients with acute pulmonary embolism re-
quire high-ﬂow oxygen to correct hypoxaemia,
and analgesia (e.g. diamorphine) to relieve pain
and distress. In patients with active haemorrhage
contraindicating the use of anti-coagulant, or
recurrent pulmonary emboli despite adequate
anti-coagulation, a venous ﬁlter procedure may
be useful. This involves the passing of a specially
designed ﬁlter into the inferior vena cava to pre-
vent further emboli from reaching the lungs from
DVT in the pelvis or lower limbs (Fig. 15.3).
Figure 15.3 Inferior vena caval ﬁlter. Most pulmonary
emboli arise from thrombi in the deep veins of the leg.
An inferior vena caval ﬁlter can be used to prevent
emboli from reaching the lungs. They are used in
patients who have suffered recurrent pulmonary emboli
despite adequate anti-coagulation and in those in
whom anti-coagulant therapy is contraindicated. This
64-year-old woman had had major pulmonary emboli
from a deep vein thrombosis in her right femoral vein.
She then suffered major haemorrhage from a gastric
ulcerwhileonheparintherapy,whichwasdiscontinued.
A ﬁlter device was passed through the venous system
from the internal jugular vein to be placed in the inferior
vena cava.
Pulmonary vascular disease 165

DVT Prophylaxis
A
variety
of
measures
are
directed
against
Virchow’s triad of factors predisposing to DVT.
Early ambulation, use of graded elastic compres-
sion stockings and leg exercises reduce venous
stasis. Prophylactic low-dose heparin is now wide-
ly used to reduce the risk for patients on surgical,
obstetric and medical wards. Typically, tinzaparin
3500 units/day is given subcutaneously. For pa-
tients undergoing surgery with a higher risk of DVT
(e.g. hip replacement) the dosage may be increased
to 4500 units given 12 hours before surgery and
then daily until the patient is mobile again.
Other materials that may occasionally embolise
to the lungs include fat (after fracture of long
bones), amniotic ﬂuid (post-partum), air (e.g.
from disconnected central venous lines), tumour
(from tumour invasion of venous system), infected
vegetations (from tricuspid endocarditis) and
foreign materials (from contamination of drugs
injected by drug misusers).
Pulmonary hypertension
In normal lungs the pulmonary arterial pressure is
about 20/8 mmHg (compared with typical system-
ic
artery
systolic/diastolic
pressures
of
120/
80 mmHg) and the mean pulmonary artery pres-
sure is 12–15 mmHg. Pulmonary hypertension is
deﬁned as a mean pulmonary artery pressure >25
mmHg at rest. It may occur as a result of hypox-
aemia and chronic lung disease, when it is often
referred to as cor pulmonale, but in some cases
there is no demonstrable cause and this is termed
idiopathic pulmonary hypertension.
Cor pulmonale
Some confusion arises from the differing ways in
which this term is used but it essentially refers to
the development of pulmonary hypertension and
right ventricular hypertrophy secondary to disease
of the lungs. Hypoxaemia is a powerful stimulus
for pulmonary vasoconstriction and this is the
most common mechanism giving rise to cor
pulmonale (e.g. chronic hypercapnic respiratory
failure in COPD). Other mechanisms giving rise
to
pulmonary
hypertension
include
vascular
obstruction (e.g. chronic pulmonary emboli, pul-
monary artery stenosis), increased blood ﬂow (e.g.
left-to-right
intracardiac
shunts
–
atrial
and
ventricular septal defects) and loss of pulmonary
vascular
bed
(e.g.
ﬁbrotic
lung
disease,
emphysema).
The clinical features of cor pulmonale are ele-
vation of jugular venous pressure, hepatomegaly
(as a result of congestion), peripheral oedema,
a prominent left parasternal heave, a loud pul-
monary secondary sound and a systolic murmur
of tricuspid regurgitation. A chest X-ray may show
large pulmonary arteries with pruning of the
vessels in the lung ﬁelds. ECG typically shows
p pulmonale (tall p wave in leads II III AVF) with
a tall R wave in V1 and ST segment depression
with T-wave inversion in V1–V3. Echocardiography
can assess the structure and dimension of the right
heart chambers and the pulmonary artery pressure
can be estimated from the velocity of the tricuspid
regurgitation jet.
Idiopathic pulmonary
hypertension
This is a rare disease, affecting about two per
million of the population per annum, in which
pulmonary hypertension occurs without a de-
monstrable cause. It particularly affects young
women. Some cases of familial pulmonary hyper-
tension are inherited as an autosomal dominant
trait due to mutations in the bone morphogenetic
protein receptor 2 gene. Some cases are associated
with human immunodeﬁciency virus (HIV) infec-
tion or with use of appetite-suppressant drugs
(e.g. aminorex, fenﬂuramine) but in most cases no
cause is apparent. Pulmonary hypertension also
occurs as a complication of collagen vascular
diseases such as systemic sclerosis (scleroderma),
mixed connective tissue disease and systemic
lupus erythematosus (SLE). Some patients with
generalised
systemic sclerosis develop severe
pulmonary ﬁbrosis (see Chapter 13) but there is
also a limited cutaneous variant of systemic scle-
rosis characterised by subcutaneous calcinosis,
Raynaud’s phenomenon, oesophageal involve-
ment, sclerodactyly and telangiectasia (CREST
syndrome). Patients with the CREST syndrome
usually have anti-centromere antibodies and may
develop pulmonary hypertension as a primary
vascular phenomenon, often in the absence of
signiﬁcant pulmonary ﬁbrosis. Patients present
with dyspnoea, fatigue, angina and syncope on
exertion. Investigations (e.g. echocardiography,
V/Q scans, pulmonary artery catheterisation) are
166
Respiratory diseases

particularly
directed
towards
excluding
other
causes of pulmonary hypertension such as left-
to-right cardiac shunts and chronic thromboem-
bolic disease. The pathophysiology of the disease
involves pulmonary artery vasoconstriction, vas-
cular wall remodelling and thrombosis in situ.
Treatment of patients with pulmonary hyperten-
sion is complex and is delivered from specialist
centres. Supportive treatments include warfarin,
diuretics and oxygen therapy. Pulmonary endar-
terectomy is a surgical procedure in which orga-
nised thrombi are removed from the proximal
pulmonary arteries in appropriate patients with
chronic thromboembolic disease. Calcium-chan-
nel blocker drugs (e.g. nifedipine) produce useful
vasodilatation in a small number of these patients.
Prostacycline drugs produce vascular smooth
muscle relaxation and inhibit vascular smooth
muscle growth, and include: epoprostenol given
as a continuous intravenous infusion via an
indwelling central venous catheter; iloprost that
is given by inhalation; and treprostinil given as
a subcutaneous infusion. Endothelial receptor
antagonists (e.g. bosentan) reduce vascular tone
and proliferation in pulmonary hypertension.
Selective
phosphodiesterase-5-inhibitors
(e.g.
sildenaﬁl) also reduce pulmonary artery pressure.
Atrial septostomy involves the creation of a right-
to-left interatrial shunt and can be used to decom-
press the failing right heart. Heart–lung or lung
transplantation also needs to be considered as the
disease is usually progressive.
Pulmonary vasculitis
When pulmonary vasculitis occurs it is usually as
part of a more widespread systemic vasculitis
such as Wegener’s granulomatosis, polyarteritis
nodosa, Churg–Strauss syndrome, Goodpasture’s
disease or collagen vascular diseases (e.g. sclero-
derma, SLE; see also Chapter 13).
Wegener's granulomatosis
This is characterised by necrotising granuloma-
tous inﬂammation and vasculitis affecting in
particular the upper airways (rhinitis, sinusitis,
bloodstained nasal discharge), the lungs (cavitat-
ing
nodules,
endobronchial
disease)
and
kidneys
(glomerulonephritis).
Anti-neutrophil
cytoplasmic
antibodies
(ANCA)
are
usually
present in the serum. It is treated with a combi-
nation of corticosteroids and cyclophosphamide.
Churg–Strauss syndrome
This is an unusual disease consisting of allergic
granulomatosis and angiitis. It consists of an initial
phase of asthma followed by marked peripheral
blood eosinophilia and eosinophilic vasculitis
giving rise to pulmonary inﬁltrates, myocarditis,
myositis, neuritis, rashes and glomerulonephritis.
It usually responds rapidly to corticosteroids.
Polyarteritis nodosa
This consists of a vasculitis of medium and small
arteries resulting in aneurysm formation, glomer-
ulonephritis and vasculitic lesions in various
organs. Pulmonary involvement is unusual but
may result in haemoptysis, pulmonary haemor-
rhage,
ﬁbrosis
and
pleurisy.
There
is
often
considerable overlap in the clinical features of the
various vasculitic syndromes.
Goodpasture's syndrome
This consists of a combination of glomerulone-
phritis and alveolar haemorrhage in association
with
circulating
anti-basement
membrane
antibody that binds to lung and renal tissue. Pul-
monary involvement is more common in smokers
and may cause severe pulmonary haemorrhage
resulting in haemoptysis, inﬁltrates on chest X-ray,
hypoxaemia and anaemia. Transfer factor may be
elevated because of binding of the inhaled carbon
monoxide to haemoglobin in the alveoli. Treat-
ment consists of corticosteroids and cyclophos-
phamide, with plasmapheresis to remove circulat-
ing antibodies.
Respiratory emergencies Pulmonary
embolism
. Consider the diagnosis of pulmonary embolism
in all patients with unexplained breathlessness,
pleuritic pain, haemoptysis or sudden collapse.
. Chest X-ray, electrocardiogram, arterial gases
are the key initial tests.
. Assess the probability of pulmonary embolism
– are other diagnoses unlikely?
– is a major risk factor present?
Pulmonary vascular disease 167

. D-dimer is useful in excluding the diagnosis but
not in conﬁrming it as it is often elevated in
patients with infection, systemic illness and after
surgery.
. CT pulmonary angiography is the deﬁnitive
test to conﬁrm or exclude pulmonary embolism.
. Tinzaparin 175 units/kg subcutaneously
once daily should be started immediately when
pulmonary embolism is suspected.
. Warfarin should be started when the diagnosis
is conﬁrmed, and continued for 3–6 months after
a ﬁrst episode.
. High-ﬂow oxygen and analgesia (e.g.
diamorphine) are given as needed.
. Thrombolysis (e.g. alteplase 50 mg) intrave-
nous bolus should be considered for patients
with acute massive pulmonary embolism who
have severe haemodynamic compromise.
KEY POINTS
. Most pulmonary emboli arise from thrombosis
in the deep veins of the legs, which is common
in immobilised patients in the community and in
hospital on medical, surgical and obstetric
wards.
. Assessing patients with suspected pulmonary
emboli involves an appraisal of compatible
clinical features and risk factors, exclusion
of alternative diagnoses and measurement
of D-dimer levels.
. CTPA is increasingly being used as the main
imaging modality to conﬁrm or exclude the
diagnosis of pulmonary embolism.
. Heparin is used to achieve rapid
anti-coagulation, followed by warfarin.
Thrombolytic therapy is only given to patients
with circulatory compromise from a massive
pulmonary embolism.
. Pulmonary hypertension (mean pressure >25
mmHg) may arise from chronic thromboem-
bolic disease, as a result of chronic hypoxic
lung disease, or in the form of idiopathic pul-
monary hypertension.
FURTHER READING
Blann AD, Lip GYH. Venous thromboembolism.
BMJ 2006; 332: 215–19.
British
Thoracic
Society
Standards
of
Care
Committee Pulmonary Embolism Guideline
Development Group. British Thoracic Society
guidelines for the management of suspected
acute pulmonary embolism. Thorax 2003; 58:
470–84 ( www.brit-thoracic.org.uk).
Ghuysen A, Ghaye B, Willems V. Computed tomo-
graphic pulmonary angiography and prognostic
signiﬁcance in patients with acute pulmonary
embolism. Thorax 2005; 60: 956–61.
National Pulmonary Hypertension Centres of
the UK and Ireland. Consensus statement on
the management of pulmonary hypertension
in clinical practice. Thorax 2008; 63 (suppl II):
1–41.
Pulmonary
Hypertension
Asociation:
www.
phassociation.uk.com/.
Rubin LJ. Pulmonary arterial hypertension. Proc
Am Thorac Soc 2006; 3: 111–15.
Sanchez O, Planquette B, Meyer G. Update on
acute pulmonary embolism. Eur Respir Rev
2009; 18: 137–47.
168
Respiratory diseases

16
Pneumothorax and pleural
effusion
Pneumothorax
Pneumothorax is the presence of air in the pleural
space. Usually the air enters the pleural space as
the result of a leak from a hole in the underlying
lung, but rarely it enters from outside as a result of a
penetrating chest injury. Pneumothoraces may be
classiﬁed as spontaneous or traumatic, and spon-
taneous pneumothoraces may be primary, with-
out evidence of other lung disease, or occur sec-
ondary to underlying lung disease (e.g. chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), cystic
ﬁbrosis).
Pathogenesis
Spontaneous primary pneumothorax typically oc-
curs in a previously healthy young adult and is
most common in tall thin men. Most seem to arise
from the rupture of subpleural blebs or bullae at
the apex of an otherwise normal lung. The aetiol-
ogy of these blebs is uncertain but they may rep-
resent congenital lesions aggravated by the more
negative pleural space pressure at the apex of the
lung. Smoking is associated with a greatly in-
creased risk of pneumothorax. The intrapleural
pressure is normally negative because of the re-
tractive force of lung elastic recoil so that when a
communication is established between the atmo-
sphere and the pleural space air is sucked in and
the lung deﬂates. A small hole in the lung often
closes off as the lung deﬂates. Sometimes the hole
remains open and the air leak will then continue
until the pressure equalises. Occasionally, the
opening from the lung to the pleural space func-
tions as a valve allowing air to leak into the pleural
space during inspiration but not to re-enter the
lung on expiration. This is a potentially lethal
situation as the air accumulates in the pleural
space under increasing pressure giving a tension
pneumothorax in which the lung is pushed down,
the mediastinum is shifted to the opposite side and
the venous return to the heart and cardiac output
are impaired.
There is an increased risk of pneumothorax in
association with virtually all lung diseases. These
spontaneous secondary pneumothoraces are par-
ticularly common in patients with COPD and bul-
lous emphysema. A pneumothorax resulting from
rupture of a bulla may render an already disabled
patient critically ill. Pneumothorax is a well-recog-
nised complication of positive pressure endotra-
cheal ventilation in patients on intensive therapy
units (ITUs) with underlying lung disease. Trau-
matic pneumothorax usually arises from puncture
of the lung by a fractured rib but air may enter the
pleural space from outside via a penetrating injury
Respiratory Medicine Lecture Notes, Eighth Edition. Stephen J. Bourke and Graham P. Burns.
 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

or from rupture of alveoli, oesophagus, trachea or
bronchi. Iatrogenic (‘doctor-induced’) pneumo-
thorax may arise as a complication of invasive
chest procedures such as the insertion of a catheter
into the subclavian vein, percutaneous needle
aspiration of a lung lesion or transbronchial lung
biopsy.
Clinical features
Pneumothorax typically presents with acute pleu-
ritic pain
and
breathlessness. An
otherwise
healthy young adult may tolerate a pneumothorax
quite well but older patients with underlying lung
disease often develop severe respiratory distress
with cyanosis. The clinical signs of pneumothorax
are reduced breath sounds and hyper-resonance
on the side of the pneumothorax, but these may be
difﬁcult to detect. Sometimes a left-sided pneu-
mothorax is associated with a clicking noise if the
cardiac beat produces friction on movement of the
layers of the pleura. Signs of mediastinal shift such
as displacement of the trachea and apex beat to the
opposite side may be detectable in a tension
pneumothorax.
The chest X-ray shows a black gas space, con-
taining no lung markings, between the margin of
the collapsed lung and the chest wall (Fig. 16.1).
Typically the visceral pleural of the margin of the
lung isvisible as a laterally convex ‘pleural line’ that
runs parallel to the chest wall and the pulmonary
vascular markings are absent lateral to this line.
Identiﬁcation of a convex pleural line helps to
differentiate a pneumothorax from a large bulla
(see Chapter 11, Fig. 11.5). A chest X-ray taken after
expiration may accentuate the radiological fea-
tures and may help to detect a small pneumotho-
rax but expiratory X-rays are not needed routinely.
It is often difﬁcult to detect a pneumothorax if the
chest X-ray is performed with the patient lying
supine (e.g. on ventilation in the ITU) because the
air in the pleural space, in this position, rises
anteriorly giving an appearance of hyperlucency
of the lower chest, such that the mediastinal con-
tours and costophrenic angle are outlined with
increased clarity (Fig. 16.2). If the patient cannot
be imaged in an upright position, a lateral decu-
bitus ﬁlm should be performed. The size of a
pneumothorax can be quantiﬁed arbitrarily as be-
ing ‘small’ if the rim of air between the margin of
the collapsed lung and chest wall is, < 2 cm, or
‘large’ if it is >2 cm. The volume of a 2-cm rim of air
is approximately a 50% pneumothorax.
Treatment
. No intervention:
a small (rim of air < 2 cm)
pneumothorax that is not causing respiratory
distress may not require any intervention be-
cause it will resolve spontaneously at a rate of
about 1–2% per day. Such patients may be al-
lowed home with advice to return to hospital
immediately
if
symptoms
deteriorate.
They
should not undertake an airplane ﬂight until
1 week after the chest X-ray shows complete
resolution of the pneumothorax because the
reduced barometric pressure at altitude causes
expansion of enclosed thoracic air pockets. A
follow-up appointment should be arranged for
clinical assessment and chest X-ray to ensure
resolution of the pneumothorax and to exclude
underlying lung disease. If a patient with a pneu-
mothorax is admitted to hospital for observation
high-ﬂow oxygen (e.g. 10 L/min) should be ad-
ministered, with appropriate caution in patients
with COPD who may be sensitive to higher con-
centrations of oxygen. Inhalation of oxygen re-
duces the total pressure of gases in the pleural
capillaries by reducing the partial pressure of
Figure 16.1 This 75-year-old woman presented with
sudden onset of breathlessness and right pleuritic pain.
Examination showed diminished breath sounds and
hyper-resonance over the right lung. Chest X-ray shows
a right pneumothorax with a large gas-ﬁlled pleural
space without lung markings in the right hemithorax,
deﬂation of the right lung and a clear ‘pleural line’
running parallel to the chest wall at the margin of the
collapsed lung. She was given oxygen and analgesia,
and an intercostal chest tube was inserted into the right
pleural space, with successful re-expansion of the lung
(see Fig. 16.3a).
170
Respiratory diseases

nitrogen. This increases the pressure gradient
between the pleural capillaries and the pleural
cavity and increases absorption of air from the
pneumothorax.
. Aspiration:
air may be aspirated from the pleu-
ral space by inserting a French gauge 16 cannula
(such as an intravenous cannula) through the
second intercostal space in the mid-clavicular
line after injection of local anaesthetic. Once the
pleural cavity is entered, the needle is removed
and the cannula is connected via a three-way tap
to a syringe, and air is aspirated. Aspiration
should be abandoned if 2.5 L of air have been
aspirated as this indicates a persistent air leak
from the lung. A chest X-ray is performed to
assess the success of the procedure. This tech-
nique is simple, less distressing to the patient
than insertion of a chest tube, and very effective
for primary pneumothoraces. Even large primary
pneumothoraces can be aspirated but chest tube
insertion is needed if aspiration is unsuccessful.
. Intercostal tube drainage (Fig. 16.3): intercostal
tube drainage is needed for most secondary
pneumothoraces (i.e. in patients with underlying
Figure 16.2 Chest X-ray of a pneumothorax in a patient
lying ﬂat. This patient was in the intensive care unit
receiving endotracheal ventilation. His condition dete-
riorated with hypoxia, tachycardia and hypotension.
The chest X-ray shows an endotracheal tube in satis-
factory position, a cannula in the right internal jugular
vein, left lower lobe consolidation and evidence of a
right pneumothorax. When a patient with a pneumotho-
raxis lying ﬂattheairinthe pleuralspacetendstocollect
anteriorly and inferiorly giving the appearance of hy-
perlucency with unusual clarity of the mediastinal con-
tour and the costophrenic angle, and the typical ‘pleural
line’ at the margin of the lung, which is characteristic of a
pneumothorax in an upright patient, is often not present.
Figure 16.3
(a) Chest X-ray showing a small calibre
tube that was inserted using a Seldinger technique
(tube passed over a guide wire) into the pleural space
of a 75-year-old woman who had presented with a
pneumothorax (see Fig. 16.1). (b) Chest X-ray showing
two large calibre tubes that were inserted by blunt
dissection, in a patient with COPD who had suffered
a secondary pneumothorax with a large air leak. Air has
tracked into the tissues of the right chest wall causing
‘subcutaneous emphysema’.
Pneumothorax and pleural effusion 171

lung disease e.g. COPD) or where simple aspira-
tion has failed.
. Small
calibre
(e.g.
size
8–14F)
tubes
(Fig. 16.3a) can be passed into the pleural space
to drain air or ﬂuid using a Seldinger tech-
nique whereby, after injection of local anaes-
thetic (e.g. 10 mls of 1% lidocaine (lignocaine)),
a guide wire is inserted via a specially designed
cannula and then the tube is passed over the
guide wire into the pleural space. The tube is
sutured in place and attached to an underwater
seal. These small calibre tubes are very effec-
tive at draining air and ﬂuid from the pleural
space and they cause less pain and discomfort
to the patient than large calibre tubes. When-
ever possible chest tubes should be inserted in
the ‘triangle of safety’, which is bordered ante-
riorly by the lateral edge of pectoralis major,
laterally by the lateral edge of latissimus dorsi,
inferiorly by the line of the ﬁfth intercostal
space (level of nipple) and by the base of the
axilla. This position minimises the risk of dam-
age to underlying structures (e.g. internal
mammary artery) and avoids damage to mus-
cle and breast tissue resulting in unsightly
scarring.
. Large
calibre
(e.g.
size
24–32F)
tubes
(Fig. 16.3b) are needed if there is a very large
air leak from the lung that exceeds the capacity
of the smaller tubes. The insertion of a large
calibre chest tube is a frightening procedure for
the patient, who needs adequate explanation
and reassurance. Pre-medication with atro-
pine (300–600 mg intravenously) prevents va-
sovagal reactions, and a small dose of a seda-
tive (e.g. midazolam 1–2 mg intravenously)
may be considered for anxious patients. Chest
tubes should be inserted in a clean environ-
ment using full aseptic technique including
sterile gloves, gowns, drapes and skin cleans-
ing. The skin, subcutaneous tissues, intercostal
muscles and parietal pleura are anaesthetised
by injection of 10–20 ml of 1% lidocaine (lig-
nocaine). Aspiration of air into the syringe
conﬁrms that the pleural space has been en-
tered. The skin is incised and blunt dissection
with a forceps is used to make a track through
the intercostal muscles into the pleural space,
taking care to avoid the neurovascular bundle,
usually situated in the groove on the lower
surface of each rib. The chest tube may then
be inserted through the track, and directed
towards the apex. The track made by blunt
dissection should be sufﬁciently wide to allow
the drain to slide in easily without force, and
care must be taken to avoid causing damage to
the underlying lung or other structures. The
tube is securely anchored in place with a
suture and connected to an underwater seal.
The end of the tube should be 2–3 cm below the
level of the water in the bottle. Oscillation of
the meniscus of the water in the tube indicates
that the tube is patent and in the pleural space.
Bubbling on respiration or coughing indicates
continued drainage of air. Breathing with a
chest tube in place is painful and adequate
analgesia should be prescribed. The position
of the tube and the degree of re-expansion of
the lung should be checked by chest X-ray.
Low-pressure (  10 to  20 cmH2O) suction
applied to the tube may expedite the removal
of air.
. Surgical intervention:
surgical treatment is re-
quired
for
persistent
or
recurrent
pneu-
mothoraces. Failure of re-expansion of the lung
with profuse bubbling of air through the under-
water drain suggests a bronchopleural ﬁstula (i.e.
a persistent communication between the lung
and pleural space). Surgical closure of the hole
with pleurodesis is usually necessary and may be
performed via a thoracotomy or via thoraco-
scopy. The hole is oversewn and blebs on the
surface of the lung are excised. Pleurodesis in-
volves the obliteration of the pleural space and
can be achieved by instilling tetracycline or talc,
which provokes adhesions between the visceral
and parietal pleura. Pleurectomy involves the
removal of the parietal pleura. Usually, an api-
colateral pleurectomy (leaving the posterobasal
pleura
intact)
prevents
recurrence
without
compromising lung function. There is quite a
high risk of recurrence after a ﬁrst spontaneous
primary pneumothorax, with about 50% of pa-
tients suffering a second pneumothorax within 4
years. Surgical intervention is usually recom-
mended after a second pneumothorax. This is
also the case if the patient has suffered a pneu-
mothorax on both sides, because of the risk of
catastrophic
simultaneous
bilateral
pneu-
mothoraces. Particular thought must be given to
the best procedure for patients with complicated
pneumothoraces secondary to diseases such as
cystic ﬁbrosis so as not to compromise potential
future lung transplantation. A limited apicolat-
eral surgical abrasion pleurodesis may be the
best option in these circumstances.
172
Respiratory diseases

Pleural effusion
A pleural effusion is a collection of ﬂuid in the
pleural space.
Pleural ﬂuid dynamics
The parietal and visceral pleural surfaces are nor-
mally in close contact and the potential space
between them contains only a very thin layer of
ﬂuid. Pleural ﬂuid dynamics are complex and in-
completely understood but Fig. 16.4 shows, in a
simpliﬁed form, some of the main factors govern-
ing ﬂuid ﬁltration and absorption. The parietal
pleura is perfused by the systemic circulation, and
the high systemic capillary pressure, negative in-
trapleural pressure and pleural oncotic pressure
overcome the plasma oncotic pressure resulting in
ﬂuid ﬁltration into the pleural space. The visceral
pleura is mainly perfused by the pulmonary circu-
lation with its low pulmonary capillary pressure so
that the balance of forces results in movement of
ﬂuid outward from the pleural space to the veins
and lymphatics. The balance between ﬂuid ﬁltra-
tion by the parietal pleura and ﬂuid absorption by
the visceral pleura is such that ﬂuid does not
normally collect in the pleural space. Pleural effu-
sions may develop from increased capillary pres-
sure (e.g. left ventricular failure), reduced plasma
oncotic
pressure
(e.g.
hypoalbuminaemia),
increased capillary permeability (e.g. disease of
pleura) or obstruction of lymphatic drainage (e.g.
carcinoma of lymphatics).
Clinical features
Patients with pleural effusions typically present
with dyspnoea, sometimes with pleuritic pain, and
often with features of associated diseases (e.g.
cardiac failure, carcinoma etc.). The signs of pleu-
ral effusion are decreased expansion on the side of
the effusion, stony dullness, diminished breath
sounds and reduced tactile vocal fremitus. Some-
times bronchial breathing is heard at the upper
level of the ﬂuid. In taking the patient’s history it is
important to enquire about clues to possible
causes of pleural effusion such as asbestos expo-
sure, contact with tuberculosis, smoking, drugs
(e.g. dantrolene, bromocriptine) or systemic dis-
ease. A full careful physical examination is essential
to detect signs of underlying disease (e.g. cardiac
failure, breast lump, lymphadenopathy etc.).
Investigations (Fig. 16.5)
. Radiology: chest X-ray characteristically shows a
dense white shadow with a concave upper edge
(Fig. 16.6). Small effusions cause no more than
blunting of a costophrenic angle whereas very
large effusions cause ‘white out’ of an entire
hemithorax with shift of the mediastinum to the
Net gradient 
+9
–10
cmH2O
+11
+5
+8
–34
–34
+8
+5
+30
Mechanical
Osmotic
Pulmonary
capillary
Pleural
space
Systemic
capillary
Plasma oncotic
Pleural oncotic
Lung recoil
Capillary
Lymphatics
Figure 16.4 Pleural ﬂuid dyna-
mics. In the normal pleural space
the
mechanical
and
oncotic
pressures are in equilibrium
such that net ﬁltration of ﬂuid by
the parietal pleura is balanced by
net absorption of ﬂuid by the
visceral pleura. Pleural effusion
may arise from changes in the
mechanical and oncotic
pressures (transudates) or from
increased capillary permeability
brought about by disease of the
pleura (exudates).
Pneumothorax and pleural effusion 173

opposite side. Pleural ﬂuid can be difﬁcult to
detect if the chest X-ray is performed with the
patient lying supine, and may only be suspected
by haziness on the affected side. A lateral decu-
bitus ﬁlm may be useful in demonstrating mo-
bility of the ﬂuid, distinguishing the features
from pleural thickening. Ultrasound imaging is
helpful in localising loculated effusions and in
positioning chest tubes (Fig. 16.7). Computed
tomography(CT) may be helpful in detecting
pleural tumours (e.g. mesothelioma) and in as-
sessing the underlying lung and mediastinum.
. Pleural ﬂuid aspiration (thoracocentesis) is the
key initial investigation. A protein level >30 g/L
Clinical features
Dyspnoea
Dull to percussion
  Breath sounds
  Tactile fremitus
Pleural fluid aspiration
   APPEARANCE
    Straw coloured
    Bloodstained
    Pus (empyema)
    Blood (haemothorax)
     BIOCHEMISTRY
      Protein >30g/L (exudate)
      LDH >200 iu/L (exudate)
        Amylase (pancreatitis)
        Glucose (infection)
     CYTOLOGY
     Lymphocytes (TB, tumour)
     Neutrophils (infection,
     inflammation)
    Malignant cells
    MICROBIOLOGY
    TB, bacteria
Pleural biopsy
(Abram's needle; thoracoscopy)
   HISTOLOGY
   Carcinoma, mesothelioma,
   TB
     MICROBIOLOGY
     TB
ABRAM'S NEEDLE BIOPSY
PLEURAL FLUID ASPIRATION
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
CAUSES
Transudates
(protein <30g/L, LDH <200 iu/L)
Cardiac failure
Renal failure
Hepatic cirrhosis
Ascites
Hypoproteinaemia
Myxoedema
Exudates
(protein >30g/L, LDH >200 iu/L)
   MALIGNANCY
   Metastatic carcinoma
   Mesothelioma
    INFECTION
    TB
    Parapneumonic
    Empyema (pus)
     INFLAMMATION
     SLE
     Rheumatoid arthritis
     Dressler's syndrome
     Benign asbestos effusion
     Drugs (e.g. dantrolene)
   SUBDIAPHRAGMATIC DISEASE
   Subphrenic abscess
   Ascites
   Pancreatitis
INVESTIGATION
Figure 16.5 Summary of the causes and investigation of pleural effusions. LDH, lactate dehydrogenase; SLE,
systemic lupus erythematosus; TB, tuberculosis.
174
Respiratory diseases

and
lactate
dehydrogenase(LDH)
level>200
units/L indicate that the effusion is an exudate
and that further investigations for pleural disease
are indicated. Both transudates and exudates are
typically a yellow, straw colour. Bloodstained
ﬂuid points towards malignancy, pulmonary in-
farction or severe inﬂammation. Pus indicates an
empyema, milky white ﬂuid suggests a chy-
lothorax and frank blood suggests a haemothor-
ax (e.g. as a result of trauma). A low glucose
content points towards infection or a connective
tissue disease as a cause of the effusion. A high
amylase content is characteristic of pleural ef-
fusion associated with pancreatitis but also
sometimes occurs with adenocarcinoma. Neu-
trophils are the predominant cells in acute in-
ﬂammation or infection and lymphocytes in
chronic effusions particularly caused by tuber-
culosis or malignancy. Cytology may show ma-
lignant cells (e.g. mesothelioma or metastatic
carcinoma).Microbiology examination of the
ﬂuid may identify tuberculosis or bacterial in-
fection, for example.
. Pleural biopsy may be performed using a spe-
cially designed needle such as the Abram’s nee-
dle. After injection of local anaesthetic, incision
of the skin and blunt dissection of the intercostal
muscles, the needle is passed into the pleural
space. The Abram’s needle is in two parts which
can be rotated on each other; pleural ﬂuid can be
aspirated when the window of the needle is
rotated to the open position. The needle is then
pulled back until some parietal pleural tissue is
caught in the notch of the needle. The inner
cylinder of the needle has a sharp cutting edge
that when rotated cuts off pleural tissue caught in
the notch (Fig. 16.5). This ‘blind’ biopsy tech-
nique has a low diagnostic yield such that CT-
guided biopsy or biopsy under direct thraco-
scopic vision is often preferred. Radiologically
guided biopsy is particularly useful in diagnos-
ing malignant disease of the pleura when CT has
shown a focal area of pleural thickening. Histol-
ogy of pleural biopsy samples is particularly
useful in diagnosing malignant effusions or tu-
berculosis(e.g. caseating granuloma). A sample
of the biopsy should also be sent for culture for
Mycobacterium
tuberculosis.
Video-assisted
thoracoscopy allows direct inspection of the
pleural surfaces with direct biopsy of abnormal
tissue.
Further investigations (e.g. bronchoscopy for sus-
pected lung carcinoma or ultrasound of abdomen
for suspected subphrenic disease) may be required
depending on the clues to diagnosis elicited on
initial assessment.
Figure 16.6 This 68-year-old man presented with a 6-
week history of progressive breathlessness and left
pleuritic pain. On examination there was stony dullness
and diminished breath sounds over the left hemithorax.
The chest X-ray shows features of a large pleural effu-
sion with a dense white shadow with a concave upper
border over the left side of the chest. The pleural ﬂuid
was bloodstained and showed metastatic adenocarci-
noma on cytology. Bronchoscopy showed the primary
tumour partly occluding the left lower lobe bronchus.An
intercostal drain was inserted to evacuate the ﬂuid and
tetracycline was instilled to achieve pleurodesis.
Figure 16.7 Ultrasound is useful in assessing pleural
effusions and in guiding the insertion of chest drains.
This 40-year-old man had an exudative pleural effusion
secondary to a pneumonia. The pleural ﬂuid appears
black on ultrasound with no loculations within the ﬂuid.
The curvilinear white line to the right of the image is the
diaphragm above the liver.
Pneumothorax and pleural effusion 175

Causes
Pleural effusions are classiﬁed as transudates or
exudates. Transudates are characterised by a low
protein content ( < 30 g/L) and a low LDH level
( < 200 units/L). They arise as a result of changes in
hydrostatic or osmotic pressures across the pleural
membrane rather than from disease of the pleura.
Exudates are characterised by a high protein (>30
g/L) and LDH (>200 units/L) content, and result
from increased permeability associated with dis-
ease of the pleura. Sometimes, in patients with
borderline protein and LDH levels, there is difﬁ-
culty in distinguishing between transudates and
exudates, and comparison of pleural to serum
ratios may be helpful: exudates have a pleural
ﬂuid/serum protein ratio >0.5 and an LDH ratio
>0.6.
Transudates
The main causes of transudative pleural effusions
are cardiac failure, renal failure, hepatic cirrhosis
and hypoproteinaemia caused by malnutrition or
nephrotic syndrome, for example. In most cases
transudative effusions are bilateral, although they
may be asymmetrical and initially unilateral. Ascit-
ic ﬂuid may pass through pleuroperitoneal com-
munications, which are more common in the right
hemidiaphragm. Similarly, peritoneal dialysis ﬂu-
id may give rise to a right pleural effusion. Rare
causes of transudates are myxoedema and Meigs’
syndrome (benign ovarian ﬁbroma, ascites and
pleural effusion, which may be a transudate or
exudate). Sometimes, treatment of cardiac failure
with diuretics results in an increase in ﬂuid protein
content so that the effusion appears to be an
exudate. Treatment of transudates involves cor-
rection of the underlying hydrostatic or osmotic
mechanisms (e.g. treatment of cardiac failure or
hypoproteinaemia), and further investigation of
the pleura is not usually necessary.
Exudates
A variety of diseases that affect the pleura are
associated with increased capillary permeability
or reduced lymphatic drainage. Exudates are often
unilateral and investigations are directed towards
identifying the cause because this determines
treatment.
. Malignancy:
metastases to the pleura most
commonly arise from lung, breast, ovarian or
gastrointestinal cancers and from lymphoma.
Mesothelioma is a primary tumour of the pleura
related to asbestos exposure (see Chapter 14). In
malignant effusions the ﬂuid is often blood-
stained with a high lymphocyte count, and cy-
tology often shows malignant cells. If cytology of
a pleural aspirate is negative, pleural biopsy may
be diagnostic. Sometimes, conﬁrmation of the
diagnosis is difﬁcult and thoracoscopy with bi-
opsy of lesions under direct vision may be nec-
essary. Malignancy may give rise to pleural effu-
sions by means other than direct involvement of
the pleura. Lymphatic involvement by tumours
may obstruct drainage and cause pleural effu-
sions with negative cytology. Chylous effusions,
caused by malignancy in the thoracic duct, are
characterised by a milky cloudy appearance of
the pleural ﬂuid. Superior vena caval obstruc-
tion may give rise to pleural effusions as a result
of elevation of systemic venous pressure. Treat-
ment of a pleural effusion associated with ma-
lignancy is directed against the underlying tu-
mour (e.g. chemotherapy). Drainage of the ﬂuid
by needle aspiration or intercostal chest tube
relieves dyspnoea. It is usually advisable to re-
move the ﬂuid slowly at no more than 1–1.5 L at a
time as too rapid removal may provoke re-ex-
pansion pulmonary oedema, although the risk is
small. The risk of recurrence of the effusion may
be reduced by the instillation of a sclerosing
agent
(e.g.
tetracycline
1–1.5 g,
doxycycline
500 mg or sterile talc 2–5 g in 50 mL saline) into
the pleural space to provoke chemical pleurod-
esis. Lidocaine (lignocaine) 3 mg/kg, maximum
250 mg may be instilled intrapleurally before the
sclerosing agent to provide local anaesthesia. It is
important that the effusion has been drained to
dryness before insertion of the sclerosing agent
so that the two pleural surfaces can be apposed
so as to promote adhesions. If chemical pleur-
odesis is not successful, surgical pleurodesis or
pleurectomy via thoracoscopy may be helpful.
. Infection: pneumonia may be complicated by an
inﬂammatory reaction in the pleura resulting in a
parapneumonic effusion. Secondary infection
of this effusion with multiplication of bacteria
in the pleural space produces an empyema,
which is the presence of pus in the pleural cavity.
If a parapneumonic effusion has a low pH ( < 7.2)
there is a high risk of an empyema developing
and early tube drainage is indicated. Various
organisms may give rise to an empyema includ-
ing Streptococcus pneumoniae, Staphylococcus
176
Respiratory diseases

aureus, Streptococcus milleri and anaerobic or-
ganisms (e.g. Bacteroides). Empyema is particu-
larly associated with aspiration pneumonia (e.g.
related to unconsciousness, alcohol, vomiting,
dysphagia etc.). Actinomycosis is an unusual
infection that spreads from the lung to the pleura
and chest wall with a tendency to form sinus
tracts. Tuberculosis must always be borne in
mind as a cause of pleural effusion or empyema
(see Chapter 7). Initial antibiotic treatment is
often with co-amoxiclav and metronidazole, ad-
justed in accordance with results of microbiology
tests. The key treatment of empyema, however, is
drainage of the pus. Placement of the drainage
tube is best guided by ultrasound imaging as the
effusion is often loculated as a result of ﬁbrin
deposition and adhesions. Instillation of a ﬁbri-
nolytic agent (e.g. streptokinase 250000 units or
urokinase 100000 units in 20 mL of saline, left in
situ for 2 hours, daily for 3–5 days) through the
chest tube into the pleural space has been used in
an attempt to improve drainage by promoting
lysis of ﬁbrin adhesions. It may be effective in
selected patients with empyema but clinical
trials have not conﬁrmed overall beneﬁt and it
is not recommended routinely. More recently
combinations of ﬁbrinolytics and deoxyribonu-
clease (DNAse) are being studied in trials. Sur-
gical intervention is necessary if these measures
fail and a variety of approaches may be used
including rib resection with open drainage, or
thoracotomy with removal of infected debris and
decortication (stripping of the pleura and em-
pyematous sac).
. Inﬂammatory diseases:
various inﬂammatory
diseases may involve the pleura. Effusions asso-
ciated with connective tissue diseases (e.g. rheu-
matoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus)
characteristically have a low glucose content.
Drug reactions involving the pleura have been
described with dantrolene, bromocriptine, nitro-
furantoin and methysergide, for example. Asbes-
tos may give rise to benign asbestos-related
pleural effusions that may recur producing dif-
fuse pleural thickening (see Chapter 14). Small
pleural effusions may complicate pulmonary
embolism and infarction (see Chapter 15).
Dressler’s syndrome consists of inﬂammatory
pericarditis and pleurisy of uncertain aetiology
following a myocardial infarction or cardiac
surgery.
. Subdiaphragmatic disease: pancreatitis may be
associated with pleural effusions probably as a
result of diaphragmatic inﬂammation. Such ef-
fusions are usually left sided and characterised
by a high amylase content. Ascites may traverse
the diaphragm through pleuroperitoneal com-
munications causing a pleural effusion. Spread
of infection or inﬂammation from a subphrenic
abscess or intrahepatic abscess may also cause a
pleural effusion.
Oesophageal rupture
Oesophageal rupture may give rise to a pyopneu-
mothorax (air and pus in the pleural cavity). This
may result from external trauma or be iatrogenic
(e.g. perforation during endoscopy). Spontaneous
rupture of the oesophagus (Boerhaave’s syn-
drome) is a rare but catastrophic condition that
typically occurs when the patient attempts to sup-
press vomiting by closure of the pharyngeal
sphincter. Intraoesophageal pressure rises steeply
and rupture typically occurs in the lowest third of
the oesophagus. It is a more severe form of the
Mallory–Weiss syndrome of haematemesis caused
by mucosal tears from protracted vomiting. Char-
acteristically, vomiting is followed by chest pain
and subcutaneous emphysema (palpable air in
skin) as air and gastric contents leak into the
mediastinum. A few hours later the pleural mem-
brane gives way and air and food debris pass into
the pleural cavity producing pleuritic pain, pleural
effusion and empyema. Chest X-ray typically
shows an initial pneumomediastinum (a rim of air
around mediastinal structures) followed by a hy-
dropneumothorax. The diagnosis is notoriously
difﬁcult to make and a radiocontrast oesophago-
gram is the key investigation. Thoracotomy with
repair of the oesophagus is usually the best
treatment.
Respiratory emergencies
Pneumothorax
. Acute pleuritic pain and breathlessness with
diminished breath sounds are the typical fea-
tures of a pneumothorax. Severe distress with
cardiorespiratory compromise suggests a ten-
sion pneumothorax.
Pneumothorax and pleural effusion 177

. Chest X-ray shows a convex 'pleural line' at the
margin of the collapsed lung with a black gas
space containing no lung markings between
the collapsed lung and chest wall. If a distinct
pleural line innot visiblethe appearances maybe
as a resultofa bullaand CTscan maybeneeded
to clarify. A 2 cm rim of air approximately equates
to a 50% pneumothorax.
. Conservative management: a small pneumo-
thorax not causing distress may not require
intervention. It is likely to resolve spontaneously
at a rate of 1–2% per day.
. Aspiration is recommended for a spontaneous
primary pneumothorax (no underlying lung dis-
ease) using a 16 G cannula inserted via the
second intercostal space anteriorly.
. A chest tube is needed for a symptomatic
secondary pneumothorax (underlying lung dis-
ease e.g. COPD) and for primary pneu-
mothoraces where aspiration has failed. A small
calibre (8–14F) tube is inserted using a
Seldinger technique over a guide wire in the
'triangle of safety' and connected to an un-
derwater seal.
. Careofa chestdrain:checkthetubepositionon
X-ray. Examine the drain frequently to ensure
that it is securely anchored in place and not
kinked or blocked. Oscillation of the meniscus
of water in the tube indicates that the tube is
patent. Bubbling indicates on-going drainage of
air. Ensure adequate pain control (e.g. ibuprofen
and morphine). The drain is removed when
bubbling has stopped and X-ray conﬁrms re-
expansion of the lung.
. Persistent bubbling indicates an on-going air
leak. Low pressure suction (  10 to  20
cmH2O) may be applied. If the air leak persists
thoracic surgical assessment is needed for
thoracoscopic closure of the hole and pleurod-
esis or pleurectomy.
. At discharge advise the patient not to smoke
and to avoid air travel for at least 7 days.
KEY POINTS
. Pneumothorax is the presence of air in the
pleural space and this usually occurs from
rupture of subpleural cysts in the underlying
lung.
. A small pneumothorax ( < 2 cm rim of air) may
not require intervention. A larger pneumothorax
(>2 cm rim of air) is treated by simple aspiration
or insertion of an intercostal tube.
. A pleural effusion is a collection of ﬂuid in the
pleural space.
. Transudative effusions result from changes in
hydrostatic pressure (e.g. cardiac failure).
Exudative effusions result from diseases of the
pleura (e.g. malignancy, infection,
inﬂammation).
. Investigation of an exudative effusion involves
clinical assessment, imaging (e.g. CT), pleural
ﬂuid aspiration (for biochemistry, cytology and
microbiology) and pleural biopsy.
FURTHER READING
Bouros D, Antoniou KM, Light RW. Intrapleural
streptokinase for pleural infection. BMJ 2006;
332: 133–4.
British Thoracic Society Pleural Disease Guideline
Group. British Thoracic Society pleural disease
guideline. Thorax 2010; 65: (suppl II): 1–76
(www.brit-thoracic.org.uk/).
Curtis HJ, Bourke SJ, Dark JH, et al. Lung trans-
plantation outcome in cystic ﬁbrosis patients
with previous pneumothorax. J Heart Lung
Transplant 2005; 24: 865–9.
Henry MT. Simple sequential treatment for prima-
ry spontaneous pneumothorax: one step closer.
Eur Resp J 2006; 27: 448–50.
Light RW. Parapneumonic effusions and empy-
ema. Proc Am Thorac Soc 2005; 3: 75–80.
Maskell NA, Davies CW, Nunn AJ, et al. UK con-
trolled trial of intrapleural streptokinase for
pleural infection. N Engl J Med 2005; 352: 865–74.
178
Respiratory diseases

17
Acute respiratory
distress syndrome
Introduction
The acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS)
is a form of acute respiratory failure caused by
permeability
pulmonary
oedema
resulting
from endothelial damage due to a cascade of
inﬂammatory events developing in response to
an initiating injury or illness.
It had long been recognised that soldiers wound-
ed in battle often died of respiratory failure some
days later. During World Wars I and II it was
thought that this was because of lung infection or
excessive ﬂuid administration. Further experience
of the condition during the Vietnam War showed
that despite successful surgical management of
wounds and optimal ﬂuid replacement, soldiers
were still dying of pulmonary dysfunction some
days later and that the lungs showed features such
as oedema, atelectasis, haemorrhage and hyaline
membrane formation. It was not until 1967 that
this condition was recognised as a speciﬁc clinical
entity separate from the precipitating injury, and
that it could also arise from civilian injuries and
illnesses. The term adult respiratory distress
syndrome was sometimes used because of the
superﬁcial similarity of the pathology of the
disease, showing hyaline membranes, to the infant
respiratory
distress
syndrome
(caused
by
surfactant
deﬁciency
in
premature
babies),
although
the
term
acute
respiratory
distress
syndrome is more appropriate.
Pathogenesis
In most situations pulmonary oedema arises as
a
result
of
increased
pulmonary
capillary
pressure (e.g. left ventricular failure) but in ARDS
it arises because of increased alveolar capillary
permeability.
Pressure pulmonary oedema
(Fig. 17.1)
In the normal situation the hydrostatic pressure
and the osmotic pressure exerted by the plasma
proteins are in a state of equilibrium between
the pulmonary capillaries and lung alveoli. An
increase in hydrostatic pressure is the most com-
mon cause of pulmonary oedema and this typically
occurs secondary to elevated left atrial pressure
from left ventricular failure (e.g. after myocardial
infarction) or from mitral valve disease (e.g. mitral
stenosis). Volume overload may also increase pul-
monary capillary pressure and this may arise from
excessive intravenous ﬂuid administration or ﬂuid
Respiratory Medicine Lecture Notes, Eighth Edition. Stephen J. Bourke and Graham P. Burns.
 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

retention (e.g. renal failure). Reduced osmotic
pressure may contribute to pulmonary oedema
and this occurs in hypoproteinaemic states (e.g.
severely ill, malnourished patients; nephrotic syn-
drome with renal protein loss). In the early stages
of pulmonary oedema there is an increase in the
ﬂuid content of the interstitial space between the
capillaries and alveoli but as the condition dete-
riorates ﬂooding of the alveoli occurs.
Permeability pulmonary oedema
In ARDS a cascade of inﬂammatory events arises
over a period of hours from a focus of tissue
damage. In particular, activated neutrophils aggre-
gate and adhere to endothelial cells, releasing
various toxins, oxygen radicals and mediators
(e.g. arachidonic acid, histamine, kinins). This sys-
temic inﬂammatory response may be initiated by
a variety of injuries or illnesses and gives rise to
acute lung injury as one of its earliest manifesta-
tions, with the development of endothelial dam-
age and increased alveolar capillarypermeability.
The alveoli become ﬁlled with a protein-rich exu-
date containing abundant neutrophils and other
inﬂammatory cells and the airspaces show a rim of
proteinaceous material – the hyaline membrane.
The characteristic feature of permeability pulmo-
nary oedema in ARDS is that the pulmonary cap-
illary wedge pressure is not elevated. This may be
measured by passing a special balloon-tipped pul-
monary artery catheter (e.g. Swan–Ganz catheter)
via a central vein through the right side of the heart
to the pulmonary artery. The balloon of the cath-
eter is then inﬂated and is carried forward in the
blood ﬂow until it wedges in a pulmonary capillary.
The measurement of pulmonary capillary wedge
pressure reﬂects left atrial pressure and in ARDS it
is typically 18 mHg, whereas in cardiogenic pul-
monary oedema it is elevated.
Clinical features
ARDS develops in response to a variety of injuries
or illnesses that affect the lungs either directly (e.g.
aspiration of gastric contents, severe pneumonia,
lung contusion) or indirectly (e.g. systemic sepsis,
major trauma, pancreatitis). About 12–48 hours
after an initiating event the patient develops re-
spiratory distress with increasing dyspnoea and
tachypnoea. Arterial blood gases show deteriorat-
ing hypoxaemia that responds poorly to oxygen
therapy. Diffuse bilateral inﬁltrates develop on
chest X-ray in the absence of evidence of cardio-
genic pulmonary oedema. ARDS is the most severe
end of the spectrum of acute lung injury and is
characterised by the following features:
. a history of an initiating injury or illness
(Table 17.1);
. hypoxaemia refractory to oxygen therapy(e.g.
Po2, 8.0 kPa (60 mmHg) on 40% oxygen). The
degree of hypoxaemia may be expressed as
the ratio of arterial oxygen tension (Po2) to the
Alveolus
(–21)
Capillary
Hydrostatic pressure
Colloid pressure
–15
(–21)
–6
+7
(–21)
–28
–15
–15
Lymphatic
channels
S
u
rf
a
c
e
 t
e
n
s
i
o
n
 
Figure 17.1 Diagram illustrating
approximate values for hydro-
static and colloid pressures in
millimetres of mercury (mmHg)
between the pulmonary capillary
and alveolus. Pulmonary oedema
may arise from increased
hydrostatic pressure (e.g.
cardiogenic pulmonary oedema),
from reduced colloid pressure (e.g.
hypoalbuminaemia) or from
increased capillary permeability
(e.g.
acute
respiratory
distress
syndrome).
180
Respiratory diseases

fractional inspired oxygen concentration (Fio2/
100% oxygen ¼ Fio2 of 1). In ARDS Po2/Fio2 is
< 26 kPa (200 mmHg);
. bilateral
diffuse
inﬁltrates
on
chest
X-ray
(Fig. 17.2);
. no evidence of cardiogenic pulmonary oedema
(e.g.
pulmonary
capillary
wedge
pressure
< 18 mmHg).
Recognition of critically ill
patients
Patients who subsequently develop ARDS may
appear deceptively well in the initial stages of their
illness. Early recognition and careful observation
of at-risk patients is of crucial importance in de-
tecting the signs of deterioration and in identifying
the need for intensive therapy unit (ITU) care.
Certain warning signs are applicable in a wide
variety of clinical circumstances because there is
often a common physiological pathway of deteri-
oration in the severely ill that can be detected by
simple observations of the pulse rate, respiratory
rate, blood pressure, temperature, urine output
and level of consciousness (Table 17.2). Arterial
blood gas measurements provide useful additional
information about gas exchange and the metabolic
state of the patient.
Treatment
The treatment of ARDS consists of optimal man-
agement of the initiating illness or injury combined
with
supportive
care
directed
at
preserving
Table 17.1 Acute respiratory distress syn-
drome: initiating injuries and illnesses
Direct
Indirect
Aspiration of gastric
contents
Sepsis
Severe pneumonia
Major trauma
Smoke inhalation
Multiple blood
transfusions
Lung contusion
Pancreatitis
Fat embolism
Extensive burns
Amniotic ﬂuid embolism
Anaphylaxis
Chemical inhalation
(e.g. silo ﬁller’s lung)
Hypotensive shock
Oxygen toxicity/
ventilator lung
Disseminated
intravascular
coagulation
Various illnesses and injuries, which affect the lungs directly
or indirectly, initiate a cascade of inﬂammatory responses
resulting in endothelial damage and the characteristic per-
meability pulmonary oedema of ARDS.
Figure 17.2 This 21-year-old diabetic patient was ad-
mitted to the intensive therapy unit (ITU) having vomited
and inhaled gastric contents while unconscious with
severe ketoacidosis. Despite antibiotics and treatment
of ketoacidosis she developed acute respiratory dis-
tress syndrome (ARDS) with progressive respiratory
distress and severe hypoxaemia refractory to oxygen
therapy. The chest X-ray shows diffuse bilateral sha-
dowing with air bronchograms (black tubes of air
against the white background of consolidated lung).
An endotracheal tube is in place and the patient is being
mechanically ventilated, with a positive end-expiratory
pressure (PEEP) of 7.5 cmH2O. Electrocardiogram
monitor leads are visible and a central venous line has
been inserted via the right internal jugular vein. A
Swan–Ganz catheter has been passed from the right
subclavian vein and can be seen, looped around
through the right side of the heart into the pulmonary
artery. Pulmonary capillary wedge pressure was low at
8 mmHg indicating that the lung shadowing was not
caused by cardiogenic pulmonary oedema, but by
increased capillary permeability of ARDS. Despite re-
quiring prolonged ventilation and support on ITU the
patient made a full recovery.
Acute respiratory distress syndrome 181

adequate
oxygenation,
maintaining
optimal
haemodynamic function and compensating for
multiorgan failure; which often supervenes.
Treatment of initiating illness
Prompt and complete treatment of the initiating
injury or illness is essential. This includes rapid
resuscitation with correction of hypotension in
patients with multiple trauma for example, and
eradication of any source of sepsis (e.g. intra-ab-
dominal abscess or ischaemic bowel post-surgery).
Respiratory support
Characteristically, the hypoxaemia of ARDS is re-
fractory to oxygen therapy because of shunting of
blood through areas of lung that are not being
ventilated as a result of the alveoli being ﬁlled with
a proteinaceous exudate and undergoing atelecta-
sis. Continuous positive airway pressure(CPAP)
can be applied via a tight-ﬁtting nasal mask to
prevent alveolar atelectasis and thereby reduce
ventilation/perfusion mismatch and the work of
breathing. However, endotracheal intubation and
mechanical ventilation rapidly become necessary
and the patient may need to be transferred to
a specialist ITU with expertise and facilities for
treating ARDS. Intermittent positive pressure ven-
tilation mechanically inﬂates the lungs, delivering
oxygen-enriched air at a set tidal volume and rate.
Adjustments in the volume, inﬂation pressure, rate
and percentage oxygen are made to achieve
adequate ventilation. A positive end-expiratory
pressure(PEEP) of 5–15 cmH2O is usually applied
at the end of the expiratory cycle to prevent col-
lapse of the alveoli. High airway pressures may be
generated in ventilating the non-compliant stiff
lungs in ARDS and this can reduce cardiac output
and carries the risk of barotrauma (e.g. pneumo-
thorax). High ventilation pressures combined with
high oxygen concentrations may themselves result
in microvascular damage that perpetuates the
problem
of
permeability
pulmonary
oedema
(‘ventilator lung/oxygen toxicity’). A variety of
lung-protective ventilatory techniques have been
developed to overcome these problems. Permis-
sive hypercapnia is a technique that allows the
patient to have a high Paco2 level (e.g. 10 kPa;
75 mmHg) in order to reduce the alveolar ventila-
tion and to avoid excessive airway pressure. In-
verse ratio ventilation prolongs the inspiratory
phase of ventilation such that it is longer than the
expiratory phase allowing the tidal volume to be
delivered over a longer time at a lower pressure.
However, this may cause progressive air trapping.
High-frequency jet ventilation is a technique
whereby small volumes are delivered as an injected
jet of gas at high frequencies (e.g. 100–300/min).
Ventilation of the patient in the prone posture may
be beneﬁcial as it reduces gravity-dependent ﬂuid
deposition and atelectasis. Extra corporeal mem-
brane oxygenation (ECMO) involves the diversion
of the patient’s circulation through an artiﬁcial
external membrane to provide oxygen and remove
carbon dioxide. None of these ventilatory strate-
gies has yet achieved a major improvement in the
overall prognosis of ARDS but each may be useful
in individual circumstances. Nursing patients in
a semi-recumbent position at 45 degrees reduces
the incidence of ventilator-associated pneumonia.
Optimising haemodynamic
function
Reducing the pulmonary artery pressure may help
to reduce the degree of pulmonary capillary leak.
This is achieved by avoiding excessive ﬂuid admin-
istration, by judicious use of diuretics and by use of
drugs that act as vasodilators of the pulmonary
arteries. Treatment is sometimes guided by use of
a
balloon-tipped
pulmonary
artery
catheter
(Swan–Ganz) that measures pulmonary artery
pressures, pulmonary capillary wedge pressure
(reﬂecting left atrial pressure) and cardiac output
(using
a
thermal
dilution
technique).
Table 17.2 Features indicating a critically ill
patient. A patient demonstrating any of these
warning signs needs urgent attention and
consideration for intensive therapy unit care
Respiratory rate
< 8 or >30/min
Pulse rate
< 40 or >130/min
Blood pressure
< 90 mmHg
Temperature
Hyperthermia (>38 C, 100.4 F)
Hypothermia ( < 36 C, 96.8 F)
Urine output
< 30 mL/hour for 3 hours
Level of
consciousness
Not responding to commands
Oxygenation
O2 saturation < 90% or
Pao2 < 8 kPa (60 mmHg)
despite 60% inspired oxygen
Acidosis
pH < 7.2; bicarbonate
< 20 mmol/L
182
Respiratory diseases

Haemodynamic management essentially consists
of achieving an optimal balance between a low
pulmonary artery pressure to reduce ﬂuid leak to
the alveoli, an adequate systemic blood pressure
to maintain perfusion of tissues and organs (e.g.
kidneys) with a satisfactory cardiac output and
optimal oxygen delivery to tissues (oxygen deliv-
ery is a function of the haemoglobin level, oxygen
saturation of blood and cardiac output). Most
drugs used to vasodilate the pulmonary arteries,
such as nitrates or calcium antagonists, also cause
systemic vasodilatation with hypotension and im-
paired organ perfusion. Inotropes and vasopressor
agents, such as dobutamine or norepinephrine
(noradrenaline) may be needed to maintain sys-
temic blood pressure and cardiac output particu-
larly in patients with the sepsis syndrome (caused
by septicaemia or peritonitis, for example) in
which sepsis is associated with systemic vasodila-
tation. Inhaled nitric oxide (NO) may be used as a
selective pulmonary artery vasodilator. Because it
is given by inhalation it is selectively distributed to
ventilated regions of the lung where it produces
vasodilatation. This vasodilatation to ventilated
alveoli may signiﬁcantly improve ventilation/per-
fusion matching with improved gas exchange. NO
is rapidly inactivated by haemoglobin preventing a
systemic action. It is necessary to monitor the level
of inspired gas, nitrogen dioxide (NO2) and
methaemoglobin
to
avoid toxicity.
Nebulised
prostacyclin is a vasodilator with similar effects
to NO but less risk of toxicity. Unfortunately these
selective pulmonary vasodilator agents have not
been shown to reduce mortality.
General management
Correction of anaemia by blood transfusions
improves oxygen carriage in the blood and oxy-
gen delivery to the tissues. Nutritional support
(e.g. by enteral feeding via a jejunostomy) is
crucial in maintaining the patient’s overall ﬁtness
in the face of critical illness, and correction of
hypoalbuminaemia improves the osmotic pres-
sure of the plasma reducing ﬂuid leak from the
circulation. The ventilated patient with ARDS is
particularly
vulnerable
to
hospital-acquired
pneumonia and bronchoalveolar lavage may be
helpful
in
identifying
pathogens.
Multiorgan
failure often complicates ARDS requiring further
speciﬁc
interventions
(e.g.
dialysis
for
renal
failure).
Anti-inﬂammatory therapies
A key target for potential treatment is the cascade
of inﬂammatory events arising from the tissue
damage resulting from the initiating illness. Un-
fortunately, these events are poorly understood
and no anti-inﬂammatory drug has yet achieved
an established role in treating ARDS. Corticoster-
oids have not been beneﬁcial. Ibuprofen has been
used in an attempt to reduce neutrophil activation
and pentoxifylline has been used because of its
action in reducing the production of interleukin-1.
Haemoﬁltration is a procedure primarily used to
control ﬂuid balance but it may have an additional
beneﬁcial effect in patients with sepsis by removal
of endotoxins. Recently it has been recognised that
there is a link between the coagulation system and
the immune response to sepsis with activation of
cytokines, neutrophils, monocytes, complement,
coagulation and ﬁbrinolytic systems as part of the
systemic inﬂammatory response to infection.
Recombinant human activated protein C has an
anti-inﬂammatory
effect
by
blocking
the
production of cytokines and cell adhesion and by
inhibiting thrombin production. This drug has
been shown to reduce mortality when used early
in the treatment of patients with severe sepsis and
multiple organ failure.
Prognosis
Despite intensive research into the inﬂammatory
mechanisms giving rise to ARDS and major ad-
vances in ventilatory techniques and haemody-
namic control, the mortality of patients with ARDS
remains very high at >50%. Patients who survive
may be left with lung ﬁbrosis and impaired gas
diffusion but some patients make a remarkably
full recovery despite having been critically ill with
gross lung injury requiring prolonged treatment in
ITU.
Acute respiratory distress syndrome 183

KEY POINTS
. ARDS is a form of acute pulmonary oedema
due to increased endothelial permeability
caused by an inﬂammatory response to illness
or injury.
. Precipitating factors include systemic sepsis,
trauma, burns, pancreatitis and aspiration of
gastric contents.
. Patients are severely hypoxic with diffuse in-
ﬁltrates on chest X-ray with no evidence of
cardiac failure.
. Treatment involves correction of the initiating
illness and supportive care using lung-protec-
tive ventilation with PEEP.
FURTHER READING
Adhikari NK, Burns KE, Friedrich JO, et al. Effect of
nitric oxide on oxygenation and mortality in
acute lung injury: systematic review and meta-
analysis. BMJ 2007; 334: 779–82.
Ashbaugh DG, Bigelow DB, Petty TL, Levine BE.
Acute respiratory distress in adults. Lancet 1967;
ii: 319–23.
Baudouin SV. Manipulation of inﬂammation in
ARDS: achievable goal or distant Target? Thorax
2006; 61: 464–5.
Baudouin S, Evans T. Improving outcomes for se-
verely ill medical patients. Clin Med 2002; 2: 92–4.
Bernard GR. Acute respiratory distress syndrome:
a historical perspective. Am J Resp Crit Care Med
2005; 172: 798–806.
Bernard GR, Artigas A, Brigham KL, et al. Report of
the American–European Consensus Conference
on ARDS. Intens Care Med 1994; 20: 225–32.
MacIntyre NR. Current issues in mechanical ven-
tilation for respiratory failure. Chest 2005; 128
(suppl): 561–7.
Matthay MA, Zimmerman GA. Acute lung injury
and acute respiratory distress syndrome. Am J
Resp Cell Mol Biol 2005; 33: 319–27.
Peter JV, John P, Graham PL, et al. Corticosteroids
in the prevention and treatment of acute
respiratory distress syndrome in adults: meta-
analysis. BMJ 2008; 336: 1006–9.
184
Respiratory diseases

18
Sleep-related breathing
disorders
Introduction
People spend almost one-third of their lives asleep
but it is only relatively recently that we have be-
come aware of the important effects of sleep on
respiratory physiology, and of speciﬁc breathing
disorders occurring during sleep, such as the ob-
structive sleepapnoea syndrome (OSAS). The sleep
disruption that results from OSAS has important
consequences for the patient’s quality of life in
terms of daytime sleepiness, poor concentration
and decreased cognitive function. It is now be-
coming clear that the diagnosis and treatment of
OSAS also has major public health implications as
OSAS is being increasingly recognised as a risk
factor for
cardiovascular
disease,
stroke
and
hypertension and a signiﬁcant cause of accidents
at home, at work and on the road.
Sleep physiology
Although familiar to everyone as a state in which
the eyes are closed, postural muscles relaxed and
consciousness suspended, sleep is an enigmatic
condition
that
has
essential
refreshing
and
restorative effects on the mind and body. Electro-
encephalogram (EEG) studies show that sleep may
bedividedintoﬁvestagesandtwomajorcategories.
Stages 1–4 are characterised by loss of alpha wave
activity and progressive slowing in the frequency
with increase in the amplitude of the EEG wave
form,andduringthesestagesrapideyemovements
areabsent:non-REMsleep.Stage5ischaracterised
by rapid eye movement: REM sleep. Typically, a
persondriftsfromanawakerelaxedstateintosleep,
progressing serially through EEG stages 1–4, be-
cominglessresponsivetostimuliandlessrousable.
After about 70 minutes of non-REM sleep the per-
son usually enters a period of deep sleep associated
with rapid eye movements. This usually lasts about
30 minutes and is often followed by a brief awak-
ening and a return to stage 1 sleep. Cycles of REM
and non-REM sleep continue throughout the night
with the period spent in REM sleep becoming lon-
ger, such that it occupies about 25% of total sleep
time. During REM sleep the person is difﬁcult to
rouse and has reduced muscle tone. This stage of
sleep is associated with dreaming and a variety of
autonomic changes including penile erection and
changes in respiration, blood pressure, pulse rate
and pupil diameter. Irregularity of respiration and
heart rate are common in this stage of sleep and
apnoeic episodes lasting 15–20 seconds are com-
mon in normal individuals. The exact sleep
Respiratory Medicine Lecture Notes, Eighth Edition. Stephen J. Bourke and Graham P. Burns.
 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

‘architecture’(depth,characterandchanges)varies
with age and circumstances (e.g. unfamiliar envi-
ronment, disruption of regular routine), so that it
can be difﬁcult to deﬁne precisely normal and
abnormal patterns by arbitrary cut-off points. Al-
though sleep has major beneﬁcial effects on the
mind and body, the physiological changes during
sleep may aggravate pre-existing respiratory dis-
ease, and speciﬁc breathing disorders may arise
during sleep.
Oxygen desaturation
during sleep in respiratory
disease
During sleep the respiratory centre in the medulla
receives less stimulation from higher cortical cen-
tres and becomes less responsive to chemical (e.g.
hypercapnia) and mechanical (e.g. from chest wall
and airway receptors) stimuli. Minute ventilation
(tidal volume and respiratory rate), falls, Pco2 rises,
functional residual capacity decreases and there is
diminished activity of the intercostal and accesso-
ry respiratory muscles. These changes are most
marked during REM sleep. Although they are not
associated with any adverse effects in normal in-
dividuals they may produce profound nocturnal
hypoxaemia and hypercapnia in patients with un-
derlying respiratory disease, who are dependent on
accessory respiratory muscle activity and who are
already hypoxic when awake and on the steep part
of the oxyhaemoglobin dissociation curve. Sleep-
related oxygen desaturation is most important in
diseases associated with hypercapnic (type 2) re-
spiratory failure such as chronic obstructive pul-
monary disease(COPD), neuromuscular disease
(e.g. muscular dystrophy, motor neurone disease)
and thoracic cage disorders (e.g. kyphoscoliosis).
The nocturnal oxygen desaturation in these dis-
orders results from the deleterious effect of sleep
physiology on pre-existing respiratory insufﬁcien-
cy and is quite distinct from OSAS (see below).
Treatment
Optimising the management of the underlying
respiratory disease is the ﬁrst priority (e.g.
bronchodilators in COPD). Avoidance of aggravat-
ing factors, such as use of alcohol or sedative
medication is important. Supplemental oxygen
may alleviate oxygen desaturation but may pro-
voke further hypoventilation and carbon dioxide
retention because in many of these patients respi-
ratory drive is partly dependent on the stimulant
effect of hypoxaemia. Some non-sedative tricyclic
and serotonin-reuptake inhibitor antidepressants
reduce the time spent in REM sleep, but they are
not an effective treatment for nocturnal oxygen
desaturation.
There are very few drugs that have respiratory
stimulant effects but an intravenous infusion of
doxapram may occasionally be useful for a short
period during a crisis. Ventilatory support can be
delivered in the short term by endotracheal venti-
lation in an intensive therapy unit (ITU) to tide the
patient over a crisis. However, long-term ventila-
tory support is often required and this is nowadays
usually
given
as
domiciliary
nocturnal
non-
invasive positive pressure ventilation (NIPPV).
A tight-ﬁtting mask is strapped in place over the
nose and connected to a speciﬁcally designed
ventilating machine. The spontaneous respiratory
efforts of the patient trigger the ventilator to deliver
additional tidal volume under positive pressure.
Despite the cumbersome nature of this form of
ventilatory support it is very well tolerated by
patients who usually can manage to sleep while
receiving nasal ventilation after a few nights of
acclimatisation. Control of nocturnal desaturation
by NIPPV not only improves the quality of their
sleep and nocturnal symptoms but also improves
daytime symptoms and gas exchange. It seems that
improvement of arterial blood gas levels during
ventilation, resting fatigued respiratory muscles,
recruiting atelectatic alveoli, relief of sleep depri-
vation and control of nocturnal hypoventilation by
NIPPV all result in some recalibration of ventila-
tory responses with sustained improvement that
ameliorates daytime arterial blood gas levels also.
NIPPV represents an important advance in the
treatment of patients with ventilatory failure
caused by kyphoscoliosis, for example (Fig. 18.1).
Obstructive sleep apnoea
syndrome (Fig. 18.2)
OSAS is a condition of sleep-related pharyngeal
collapse, in which recurrent episodes of upper
airway occlusion occur during sleep causing dim-
inution
(hypopnoea)
or
cessation
of
airﬂow
186
Respiratory diseases

(apnoea) in the pharynx provoking arousals and
sleep
fragmentation,
resulting
in
daytime
sleepiness.
Pathogenesis
The oropharyngeal dilator muscles play an impor-
tant part in maintaining patency of the upper
airway. During deep sleep there is reduced muscle
tone so that the pharyngeal airway is most
vulnerable to collapse during REM sleep. Use of
sedatives or alcohol may cause a further loss of
muscle tone. Narrowing of the upper airway pre-
disposes to occlusion and this is usually a result of
fat deposition in the neck from obesity, but other
factors such as bone morphology (e.g. micro-
gnathia), soft tissue deposition (e.g. hypothyroid-
ism, acromegaly) or enlargement of tonsils or ade-
noids in children may be important. Contraction of
the diaphragm and intercostal muscles during in-
spiration creates a negative pressure in the airways
drawing air into the lungs. The negative pressure in
the airway, however, also acts as a force sucking in
or collapsing the upper airway. An increase in
upper airway resistance such as occurs in nasal
obstruction (e.g. deviated nasal septum, polyps) or
in enlargement of tonsils and adenoids, requires a
greater inspiratory effort to overcome it, and thus
increases the forces sucking in the pharyngeal
airway. Although upper airway reﬂexes and neu-
romuscular control of respiration may also be
important, the main factors involved in upper
airway patency are the calibre of the pharyngeal
airway, the action of oropharyngeal dilator mus-
cles and the inspiratory effort needed to overcome
upper airway resistance.
OSAS is characterised by recurrent episodes of
pharyngeal airway obstruction during sleep with
apnoea, arousal and sleep fragmentation. As
the patient with a compromised pharyngeal airway
(e.g. narrowed by obesity) enters deep sleep the
reduction in oropharyngeal dilator muscle tone
results in collapse of the airway causing apnoea
(cessation of airﬂow) or hypopnoea (reduction of
airﬂow) with a fall in oxygen saturation. Inspiratory
effort increases as the diaphragm and intercostal
muscles try to overcome the closed upper airway.
The apnoea is terminated by a brief arousal from
sleep and this is associated with a burst of sympa-
thetic nerve activity, release of catecholamines and
ﬂuctuations in pulse rate and blood pressure. Re-
sumption of pharyngeal airﬂow is accompanied by
loud snoring, which is an inspiratory noise arising
from vibration of the soft tissues of the oropharynx.
Arousals are often associated with generalised
body movement. Hundreds of episodes of apnoea
and arousal throughout the night disrupt sleep,
resulting in daytime sleepiness.
Clinical features
Patients with OSAS may have no detectable respi-
ratory abnormality when awake but daytime
Figure 18.1 This 39-year-old woman with severe ky-
phoscoliosis developed sleep disturbance, tiredness,
headaches and oedema. She was erroneously treated
with sedatives for insomnia. Spirometry showed a se-
vere restrictive defect with forced expiratory volume in 1
second(FEV1) of0.4 Land forcedvital capacity(FVC)of
0.5 L. Po2 was 5.6 kPa (42 mmHg) and Pco2 10.2 kPa
(76 mmHg). Her sleep was fragmented with multiple
arousals and profound oxygen desaturation. She was
unable to tolerate oxygen because of deteriorating
hypercapnia. Nocturnal ventilatory support was com-
menced using NIPPV delivered via a tight nasal
mask. She has now been using NIPPV for about 8 hours
at night at home for 2 years. She works as a secretary
and can do housework but is breathless on walking
150 metres. NIPPV is an effective form of ventilatory
support for patients with hypercapnic respiratory failure
caused by thoracic cage disorders or neuromuscular
disease.
Sleep-related breathing disorders 187

symptoms include excessive sleepiness, poor con-
centration, irritability, morning headaches and
loss of libido. Sleepiness is usually a prominent
feature and may result in the patient falling asleep
inappropriately when reading, watching televi-
sion, listening to a lecture, travelling on a bus or
driving a car, for example. It is important to rec-
ognise the importance of such symptoms and their
relationship to sleep-disordered breathing as such
symptoms may be erroneously dismissed as lazi-
ness. The Epworth sleepiness scale is a useful
method of assessing the likelihood of falling asleep
in various situations and a score of ten or more
suggests the need for evaluation for an underlying
sleep disorder (Table 18.1). Patients with OSAS
have a high rate of accidents at home, at work and
when driving. It is estimated that about 5% of
commercial drivers have OSAS and that sleep-
related road trafﬁc accidents comprise 15–20% of
all crashes, resulting in many serious injuries and
deaths. Patients with OSAS should be advised to
notify their driving licence authority of their
condition and to avoid driving until their sleepi-
ness has been controlled by treatment. The patient
may be unaware of night-time symptoms but the
bed partner may report loud snoring, witnessed
apnoeas and restless sleep. It is important to
enquire about use of sedatives or alcohol that may
aggravate OSAS. Examination focuses on risk fac-
tors for OSAS such as obesity, increased neck
circumference, anatomical abnormalities reduc-
ing pharyngeal calibre (e.g. micrognathia, en-
larged tonsils), and nasal obstruction (e.g. polyps,
deviated septum).
Cardiovascular complications associated with
OSAS include hypertension, myocardial infarction,
stroke, cardiac arrhythmias, structural cardiac
changes and cardiac failure. Although some of
these associations may be explained by confound-
ing variables such as obesity, evidence is accumu-
lating
of
an
independent
direct
relationship
between OSAS and hypertension, stroke and car-
diovascular disease that may be caused by a com-
bination of factors such as hypoxaemia, changes in
PATHOGENESIS
  (1)  Reduced calibre of
        pharyngeal airway
        Obesity
        Micrognathia
        Acromegaly
        Hypothyroidism
        Large tonsils
        Large adenoids
  
  (2)  Reduced pharyngeal
        dilator muscle tone
        REM sleep
        Sedatives
        Alcohol
  (3)  Inspiratory effort in
        increased upper airway
        resistance
        Nasal polyps
        Deviated nasal septum
        Large tonsils
        Large adenoids
TREATMENT
  General measures
  Weight loss
  Avoid alcohol
  Avoid sedatives
1
2
2
OROPHARYNGEAL
AIRWAY
  Surgery
  Tonsillectomy
  Nasal septum surgery
  Uvulopalatopharyngoplasty
  Tracheostomy
  Nasal CPAP
  Mandibular advancement devices
  Drugs
  Protriptylline
  Acetazolamide
  Progesterone
  Modafinil
3
Figure 18.2 Apnoea results from occlusion of the pharyngeal airway in patients with narrowed airways when there is
loss of pharyngeal dilator muscle tone in sleep. Increased inspiratory effort, when there is increased upper airway
resistance, ‘sucks in’ the pharyngeal airway. Nasal continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) acts as a splint
preventing collapse of the airway and is the main treatment used for sleep apnoea.
188
Respiratory diseases

blood pressure and sympathetic nervous system
activation during apnoeas and arousals. There is
an association between OSAS and the metabolic
syndrome (visceral obesity, insulin resistance, hy-
pertension, dyslipidaemia). Recurrent apnoeas
and arousals with deoxygenation and reoxygena-
tion increase the formation of reactive oxygen
species that are damaging to the vasculature. Re-
active oxygen species also provoke inﬂammatory
responses with activation of cytokines, adhesion
molecules, endothelial cells, circulating leucocytes
and platelets. It is important to reduce cardiovas-
cular risk factors in these patients by checking
smoking history, blood pressure, and lipid and
glucose levels, and intervening as appropriate. In
addition to catecholamine release, OSAS is asso-
ciated with other hormonal changes including
reduced testosterone and growth hormone levels.
Although hypoxaemia, hypercapnia and elevation
of pulmonary artery pressure occur during ap-
noeas, cor pulmonale is unusual unless there is
concomitant lung disease (e.g. COPD). The long-
term prognosis of OSAS is not fully understood but
some studies have shown a signiﬁcantly higher
mortality in patients who refused treatment than
in those whose sleep apnoea was controlled by
continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP).
Polysomnography
Although OSAS may be diagnosed on the basis of
clinical features and a limited sleep study with
overnight oximetry, deﬁnitive assessment requires
polysomnography. This involves the recording of
signals relating to oxygenation, airﬂow, chest wall
movement and stage of sleep. An EEG records
the stage of sleep. An electrooculogram(EOG)
detects rapid eye movement. A thermistor detects
airﬂow at the nose and mouth, and ribcage and
abdominal movements are measured using mag-
netometers
or
impedance
plethysmography.
Oximetry detects oxygen desaturation and an
electrocardiogram(ECG) records heart rate. These
tracings are often combined with a video recording
of the patient during sleep that permits observa-
tion of the patient’s position and movement in
relation to apnoeas and arousals.
The number of apnoeas increases with age and
there is a continuum from normality to full-blown
OSAS, so that it is difﬁcult to deﬁne precise diag-
nostic criteria. However, OSAS is usually diagnosed
when there are more than 15 apnoeas or hypop-
noeas per hour, each lasting 10 seconds: apnoea/
hypopnoea index >15. These are usually associ-
ated with oxygen desaturation of >4%. For OSAS
to be regarded as clinically signiﬁcant, requiring
treatment, the patient should have typical symp-
toms (e.g. daytime sleepiness) combined with an
apnoea/hypopnoea index>15. Using these criteria
about 4% of middle-aged men and 2% of women
have OSAS.
Treatment
. General measures: weight loss is an important
treatment for patients who are overweight, al-
though it is difﬁcult to achieve. Even a small loss
in weight can result in a signiﬁcant improvement
with a 10% reduction in weight typically resulting
in an improvement in the apnoea/hypopnoea
index. Dietary advice, increased exercise and
behavioural modiﬁcation are crucial in achieving
and maintaining weight reduction. Aggravating
factors should be removed by avoidance of al-
cohol and sedatives before sleep. Snoring and
OSAS are more common when the patient sleeps
lying on his or her back so that sometimes mea-
sures such as sewing a tennis ball onto the back of
the pyjamas discourages sleeping on the back.
Tonsillectomy, excision of nasal polyps or cor-
rection of a deviated nasal septum may be
Table 18.1 The Epworth sleepiness score is
useful in screening patients for excessive
sleepiness. How likely are you to doze off or fall
asleep in these situations?
Situation
Score (0–3)
1 Sitting and reading
2 Watching television
3 Sitting inactive in a public
place (e.g. theatre)
4 As a passenger in a car for
an hour without a break
5 Lying down to rest in the afternoon
6 Sitting and talking to someone
7 Sitting quietly after lunch
(when you’ve had no alcohol)
8 In a car, while stopped in trafﬁc
Patients rate their sleepiness using the following scale:
0, would never doze; 1, slight chance of dozing; 2,
moderate chance of dozing; 3, high chance of dozing.
A total score of 10 or more suggests the need for
further evaluation for an underlying sleep disorder.
Sleep-related breathing disorders 189

appropriate in some cases. Attention should also
be directed towards eliminating any concomi-
tant risk factors for cardiovascular disease. Any
underlying lung disease (e.g. COPD) should be
treated
appropriately.
One
unusual
study
showed that training of the upper airway muscles
by didgeridoo playing reduced the collapsibility
of the upper airways and improved sleepiness
and the apnoea/hypopnoea index.
. Nasal CPAP (e.g. 5–15 cmH2O) applied via a
tight-ﬁtting nasal mask has become the stan-
dard ﬁrst choice treatment for OSAS. It is very
effective and acts by splinting the pharyngeal
airway open, counteracting the tendency to air-
way collapse. However, it is a cumbersome treat-
ment and some patients have difﬁculty in adher-
ing to this treatment in the long term. The at-
tention of a trained CPAP nurse or technician is
helpful in overcoming any practical difﬁculties
and in adjusting the level of CPAP required.
. Pharmacological treatments: a number of drugs
havebeen tried in the treatment of OSAS but their
effectiveness is disappointing and none has an
established role in clinical practice. Modaﬁnil, a
stimulant alerting drug, may improve alertness
in some patients who remain sleepy despite
CPAP. Protriptylline is a non-sedative antide-
pressant that reduces the time spent in REM
sleep. Progesterone has some effect in stimulat-
ing respiratory drive. Acetazolamide enhances
ventilatory drive by producing a metabolic aci-
dosis through inhibition of renal tubular secre-
tion of hydrogen ion.
. Surgery: uvulopalatopharyngoplasty
(UPPP)
involves the surgical excision of redundant tissue
of the soft palate, uvula and pharyngeal walls in
order to increase the calibre of the pharyngeal
airway. It is effective in stopping snoring but its
effect on sleep apnoea is unpredictable and
where beneﬁcial the effect is often short lived.
Side-effects
include
post-operative
pain,
changes in the quality of the voice and some-
times nasal regurgitation during swallowing.
Tracheostomy is effective but is a treatment of
last resort. Surgical correction of bone abnor-
malities, such as mandibular advancement for
micrognathia, can be effective in appropriate
cases. The lower jaw may be held in an open,
slightly advanced position by the use of specif-
ically designed mandibular advancement de-
vices that are worn over the teeth. The forward
movement of the mandible increases the cross-
sectional area of the oropharynx.
Patients with obstructive sleep apnoea are at high
risk for developing complications when having any
surgery under general anaesthesia and require
careful assessment and monitoring in the periop-
erative period.
Central sleep apnoea
Central sleep apnoea is a relatively uncommon
condition in which cessation of airﬂow at the nose
and mouth is associated with a lack of respiratory
muscle activity. It is associated with an unstable
ventilatory control system that may arise in a
variety of different circumstances. For example
Cheyne–Stokes respiration is a pattern of irregular
breathing with periods of apnoea followed by hy-
perventilation, seen in patients with cardiac failure
when the carotid body is slow in responding to
changes in ventilation because of a prolonged cir-
culation time. Periodic breathing develops in most
people at high altitude, when hypoxia results in
hyperventilation, hypocapnia and ventilatory in-
stability. Sometimes obstructive sleep apnoea
seems to provoke reﬂex inhibition of inspiratory
drivesothatcentralapnoeasfollowclassicobstruc-
tive apnoeas. Patients with this reﬂex central ap-
noea respond to nasal CPAP. Primary central sleep
apnoea is rare but may result from instability of
respiratory drive because of damage to the respi-
ratory centres by brain stem infarcts or syringobul-
bia, for example. Most of these patients also have
hypercapnic respiratory failure when awake, and
NIPPV is the main form of treatment used.
KEY POINTS
. Obstructive sleep apnoea is due to pharyngeal
collapse during sleep, resulting in apnoea,
arousal, sleep fragmentation and daytime
sleepiness.
. It is a serious condition causing daytime
sleepiness, poor quality of life and road
accidents.
. It is associated with an increased risk of hy-
pertension, strokes and myocardial infarctions.
. CPAP is the main treatment and acts by
splinting the pharyngeal airway open during
sleep.
190
Respiratory diseases

FURTHER READING
American Sleep Apnoea Association: http://www
.sleepapnea.org/.
Johansson K, Neovius M, Lagerros YT, et al.
Effect of a very low energy diet on moderate and
severe obstructive sleep apnoea in obese men: a
randomised controlled trial. BMJ 2009; 339:
1365.
John MW. A new method for measuring daytime
sleepiness: the Epworth sleepiness scale. Sleep
1991; 14: 540–5.
McNicholas WT. Diagnosis of obstructive sleep
apnoea in adults. Proc Am Thorac Soc 2008; 5:
154–60.
Ozsancak A, D’Ambrosio C, Hill NS. Nocturnal
non-invasive
ventilation.
Chest
2008;
133:
1275–86.
Peters RW. Obstructive sleep apnoea and cardio-
vascular disease. Chest 2005; 127: 1–3.
Puhan MA, Suarez A, Cascio CL, Zahn A, Heitz M,
Braendli O. Didgeridoo playing as alternative
treatment for obstructive sleep apnoea syn-
drome: a randomised controlled trial. BMJ
2006; 332: 266–8.
Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network. Man-
agement of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea/Hypopnoea
Syndrome in Adults. Edinburgh: Scottish Inter-
collegiate Guidelines Network, 2003 ( www.sign
.ac.uk).
Sleep Apnoea Trust: www.sleep-apnoea-trust.org.
Suratt PM, Findley LJ. Serious motor vehicle
crashes: the cost of untreated sleep apnoea.
Thorax 2001; 56: 505.
Tasali E,IpMS. Obstructive sleep apnoea and met-
abolic syndrome: alterations in glucose metab-
olism and inﬂammation. Proc Am Thorac Soc
2008; 5: 207–17.
West SD, McBeath HA, Stradling JR. Obstructive
sleep apnoea in adults. BMJ 2009; 338: 1165–7.
Sleep-related breathing disorders 191

19
Lung transplantation
Introduction
Lung transplantation is now an established treat-
ment option for selected patients with end-stage
lung disease who have failed to respond to
maximum medical
treatment.
However, lung
transplantation is a major surgical procedure with
a substantial mortality and a limited long-term
prognosis. The critical shortage of donor organs
severely restricts the application of the procedure.
The ﬁrst heart transplantation was performed in
1967 in Groote Schuur hospital, South Africa, when
a man in end-stage cardiac failure received the
heart of a young woman killed in a road trafﬁc
accident. Initial attempts at lung transplantation
were unsuccessful but surgical advances, better
selection of suitable patients and the introduction
of ciclosporin immunosuppression introduced
a new era, with the ﬁrst successful heart–lung
transplantation performed in 1981 in Stanford,
USA, for a patient with primary pulmonary
hypertension.
Types of operation
Surgical techniques have been developed to trans-
plant a single lung, both lungs or the heart and
lungs. Approximately 2700 procedures are now
performed every year worldwide.
Heart–lung transplant
The recipient’s diseased lungs and heart are
removed through a median sternotomy and the
donor lungs and heart are implanted as a block. If
the recipient’s heart is normal it may be donated to
another patient (domino procedure).
Single-lung transplant
A diseased lung is removed through a thoracotomy
incision, leaving the heart and contralateral lung
intact. The donor lung is then implanted using
a bronchial anastomosis. The residual native lung
must be free of infection or it will be a source of
sepsis in the post-operative period when the pa-
tient is immunosuppressed, so that this procedure
is not suitable for patients with cystic ﬁbrosis, for
example. The donor’s heart and other lung are
available to transplant to other patients.
Bilateral-lung transplant
. Double-lung transplant: the diseased lungs are
removed through a median sternotomy, leaving
the heart intact. The donor lungs are implanted
as a block using a tracheal anastomosis.
. Bilateral sequential single-lung transplant: a
transverse bilateral thoracotomy is performed
dividing the sternum horizontally (clamshell
incision). The diseased lungs are removed and
two separated lungs are implanted with separate
bronchial anastomoses.
Respiratory Medicine Lecture Notes, Eighth Edition. Stephen J. Bourke and Graham P. Burns.
 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Donor organs are most commonly procured from
patients who are less than 55 years of age who have
suffered a catastrophic spontaneous intracranial
haemorrhage or a major head injury who have
been ventilated on an intensive therapy unit (ITU)
and who are then diagnosed as having suffered
brain stem death. There are strict criteria for the
diagnosis of brain stem death and the process of
organ donation. Because of the vulnerability of the
lungs to injury and infection only about 20% of
suitable heart donors will also be potential lung
donors. Ideally there should be no history of
signiﬁcant
respiratory
disease and
no major
chest trauma. The chest X-ray should be clear
and
gas
exchange
adequate
(Po2
>12 kPa
(90 mmHg) on < 35% inspired oxygen). The short-
age of donor organs has led to some relaxation of
these criteria without any detrimental effects on
outcomes. Techniques have been developed to
preserve the donor lungs for up to 6–8 hours allow-
ing emergency transport (e.g. by plane) of donor
organs to the recipient. The donor and recipient
are matched for ABO blood group, cytomegalovi-
rus status and chest size.
Living lobar transplantation
This is a less common procedure whereby a child
or small young adult receives two lower lobes from
two living donors, but this technique involves
signiﬁcant risks to the living donors, and the tech-
nique is not suitable for the majority of patients on
a lung transplant waiting list.
Indications for
transplantation
Although in theory many types of end-stage lung
disease would be amenable to transplantation, in
practice the lack of donor organs severely restricts
the procedure. The median waiting time to trans-
plantation is about 18 months and unfortunately
up to 40–50% of patients identiﬁed as suitable
candidates to undergo lung transplantation die of
their underlying lung disease before an organ be-
comes available. Lung transplantation has proved
a successful treatment for patients with cystic
ﬁbrosis,
idiopathic
pulmonary
hypertension,
emphysema caused by a1-anti-trypsin deﬁciency,
idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis and a variety of rare
diseases
such
as
lymphangioleiomyomatosis.
There is a window of opportunity in which the
patient is ill enough to need a lung transplant
but not so ill as to be unable to withstand the
surgery. Furthermore, the patient must be aware of
the limitations, risks and beneﬁts of transplanta-
tion and must actively want to undergo the oper-
ation. In patients with cystic ﬁbrosis, for example,
a forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1), 30%
predicted, a Po2 < 7.5 kPa (55 mmHg) and a Pco2
>6.5 kPa (50 mmHg) are associated with a 50%
mortality within 2 years, and it is at this stage that
lung transplantation may be the best treatment
option. (Fig. 19.1). The patient needs time to un-
derstand the severity of the disease, the predicted
prognosis and what is involved in lung transplan-
tation. Addressing these issues is traumatic for the
patient and his or her family. Some patients with
advanced lung disease want to try all available
treatment options, whereas other patients fear
high-intensity
unpleasant
interventions
and
would prefer to take a palliative approach to the
terminal stages of their disease. Contraindications
to lung transplantation include the presence of
other major organ dysfunction such as hepatic or
renal disease, uncontrolled infection, malignan-
cy, inability to adhere to a complex treatment
regimen, the presence of an aspergilloma and
poor nutritional status. In patients with cystic
ﬁbrosis poor outcomes have been reported in pa-
tients with Burkholderia cenocepacia such that
infection with this organism is now considered a
contraindication to transplantation. The success of
lung transplantation programmes is based upon
careful selection of the small number of patients
who can beneﬁt from the procedure and who can
be supported long enough to have a realistic
chance of getting a donor organ.
Post-transplantation
complications and
treatment
In the ﬁrst few days post-transplantation re-
implantation injury may occur with inﬁltrates
developing
in
the
donor
lung
because
of
increased capillary permeability as a result of
surgical
trauma,
ischaemia,
denervation
and
lymphatic
interruption.
Early
post-operative
Lung transplantation 193

surgical complications include haemorrhage and
dehiscence
of
the
anastomosis.
Prophylactic
antibiotics are given to counter ‘donor-acquired’
infection because the donor lungs are often con-
taminated by bacteria. Lavage of the donor organ is
performed
before
implantation
to
identify
infection.
Intense
immunosuppression,
using
a combination of ciclosporin, azathioprine and
corticosteroids, is needed to prevent rejection of
the donor lungs. Anti-thymocyte globulin may be
given for the ﬁrst few days to suppress T-cell
function. Patients remain on ciclosporin, prednis-
olone and azathioprine indeﬁnitely and are at on-
going risk from two particular hazards: rejection
and infection. Both may present with similar clin-
ical features of malaise, pyrexia, inﬁltrates on chest
X-ray, impaired oxygenation and reduced lung
function. Bronchoscopy, with bronchoalveolar
lavage and transbronchial biopsy are the key in-
vestigations in identifying rejection of the donor
lung and infection. Episodes of acute rejection are
treated by intensiﬁcation of immunosuppression
(e.g.
intravenous
methylprednisolone).
The
treatment of infection is crucially dependent
upon identiﬁcation of the causative organism
because the patient is at risk from both bacterial
and opportunistic infections (e.g. Pneumocystis
pneumonia, cytomegalovirus or fungi (see Chapter
6)). Pneumocystis pneumonia prophylaxis (e.g. co-
trimoxazole) is given routinely. Lymphoprolifera-
tive disorders such as Epstein–Barr-virus-related
B-cell lymphoma may develop as a result of im-
munosuppression. Treatment consists of aciclovir
with a reduction in immunosuppression. Bronchi-
olitis obliterans syndrome is the most important
complication threatening the long-term survival of
patients after lung transplantation. It results from
chronic rejection of the donor lungs and is char-
acterised by progressive airways obstruction as
a result of obliteration of the bronchioles by orga-
nising ﬁbrosis. It may be treated by intensifying or
changing the immunosuppressive regimen (e.g.
use of tacrolimus, sirolimus, mycophenolate mo-
fetil), and azithromycin has a beneﬁcial effect in
stabilising lung function. Lung transplant patients
are also vulnerable to gastroesophageal reﬂux and
gastric aspiration; which is damaging to the lungs.
Drug toxicity is important and levels of drugs such
as ciclosporin must be monitored to ensure ade-
quate immunosuppression and to avoid toxicity
such as hypertension, neurotoxicity and renal fail-
ure. Care must be taken when prescribing other
drugs that may interfere with ciclosporin levels.
Recurrence of the primary disease in the donor
Figure 19.1 This 29-year-old woman developed respiratory failure (Po2 6 kPa (45 mmHg), Pco2 8 kPa (60 mmHg))
as a result of advanced cystic ﬁbrosis lung disease (FEV1 0.5 L). (a) Her chest X-ray shows hyperinﬂated lungs with
diffuse bronchiectasis and peribronchial ﬁbrosis. She was accepted onto a lung transplantation waiting list and
supported by oxygen therapy, antibiotics, physiotherapy and nutritional supplements while awaiting donor lungs.
Her hypercapnic respiratory failure deteriorated and she was ‘bridged’ to transplantation by domiciliary intermittent
positive pressure ventilation delivered via a tight-ﬁtting nasal mask. (b) Bilateral sequential single-lung transplanta-
tions were performed 14 months after being accepted onto the waiting list. She subsequently died 5 years post-
transplantation of obliterative bronchiolitis.
194
Respiratory diseases

lungs has been documented in recipients with
sarcoidosis but the outcome has not been affected
by this in most cases.
Prognosis
Overall survival rates post-lung transplantation are
approximately 80% at 1 year, and 55% at 5 years
and 30% at 10 years. The quality of life of patients is
dramatically improved by a successful lung trans-
plantation but the long-term prognosis is limited
particularly by the occurrence of bronchiolitis
obliterans syndrome.
Future prospects
The shortage of donor organs and the occurrence
of obliterative bronchiolitis are the two main
problems to be overcome in lung transplantation.
The general public are encouraged to carry donor
cards in order to raise the general awareness of
organ donation issues. However, less than 20% of
cadaveric donors have lungs suitable for donation
because the lungs of a ventilated brain-dead pa-
tient are very vulnerable to infection, aspiration
and lung injury. Management aimed at optimising
donor lung function prior to retrieval and better
identiﬁcation of the criteria that make a lung un-
suitable for donation might increase the number of
useable organs. Xenotransplantation (the use of
animal organs for transplantation in humans) has
not been successful because of hyperacute rejec-
tion, and there are also concerns about the po-
tential for the spread of animal viruses to humans.
There are attempts to increase the number of
donor organs that can be used by a process of
‘re-conditioning’,
whereby
explanted
donor
lungs are placed in a chamber connected to a
heart bypass machine, and then treated with
nutrient-rich solution to allow damaged cells to
repair. This allows some donor organs that ini-
tially appear unsuitable, to be used. It is hoped
that
developments
in
immunosuppressive
therapies will reduce the occurrence of oblitera-
tive bronchiolitis. These include total lymphoid
irradiation and drugs such as tacrolimus, siroli-
mus, mycophenolate mofetil and ciclosporin
microemulsion formulations.
KEY POINTS
. Lung transplantation is now an established
option for some patients with end-stage lung
disease.
. There is a critical shortage of donor organs.
. The transplanted lungs are very vulnerable to
infection and rejection.
. Bronchiolitis obliterans syndrome is a form of
chronic rejection that limits long-term survival.
. Survival rates post-lung transplantation are
80% at 1 year and 55% at 5 years.
FURTHER READING
Fisher AJ, Donnelly SC, Pritchard G, Dark JH, Corris
PA. Objective assessment of criteria for selection
of donor lungs suitable for transplantation.
Thorax 2004; 59: 434–7.
Iversen
M,
Corris
PA.
Lung
transplantation:
immunosuppression. Eur Respir Monog 2009;
45: 147–68.
Meachery G, DeSoyza A, Nicholson A, et al. Out-
come of lung transplantation for cystic ﬁbrosis
in a large UK cohort. Thorax 2008; 63: 725–31.
National Institute for Health and Clinical Excel-
lence. Living-Donor Lung Transplantation for
End-Stage Lung Disease. Interventional Proce-
dure
Guidance
170.
London:
NICE,
2006
(www.nice.org.uk).
Verleden GM, Fisher AJ. Indication, patient selec-
tion and timing of referral for lung transplanta-
tion. Eur Respir Mon 2009; 45: 1–5.
Yates B, Murphy DM, Forrest IA, et al. Azithromy-
cin reverses airﬂow obstruction in established
bronchiolitis obliterans syndrome. Am J Respir
Crit Care Med 2005; 172: 772–5.
Lung transplantation 195


Multiple choice questions
Chapter 1: Anatomy and physiology
of the lungs
1.1 The principal muscle(s) involved in forced
expirations is (are):
A
the diaphragm
B
rectus abdominus
C
the scalene muscles
D
sternocleidomastoids
E
the intercostals
1.2 Lung compliance:
A
increases as lung volume increases
B
is reduced in emphysema
C
is reduced in lung ﬁbrosis
D
is the change in pleural pressure per unit
change in lung volume
E
is
the
principal
factor
determining
forced expiratory ﬂow
1.3 In relation to airways resistance:
A
overall airways resistance increases as
lung volume increases
B
in health the greater part of airways re-
sistanceissituatedinthesmallairwaysat
high lung volume.
C
airways resistance is reduced in emphy-
sema due to diminished retractive force
on the airway
D
is proportional to the cubed power of the
radius of the airway (r3)
E
in asthma the greater part of airways
resistance is situated in the small airways
1.4 In relation to ventilation (V) and perfusion
(Q):
A
the upper zones of the lungs are venti-
lated more than the lower zones
B
theupperzonesofthelungsreceivemore
perfusion than the lower zones
C
V/Q is greater in the lower zones
D
poor VQ matching leads to a rise in PCO2
E
reduced overall ventilation leads to a fall
in PO2
1.5 In a patient breathing room air at sea level
the arterial blood gases were: pH 7.36, PCO2
4.0, PO2 10.5, aHCO3 19 base excess  5.
What is the alveolar–arterial gradient?
Chapter 2: History taking and
examination
2.1 A 72-year-old man presents with breath-
lessness, clubbing and prominent bibasal
crackles on auscultation of his chest. The
most likely diagnosis is:
A
pulmonary oedema
B
idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis
C
bronchiectasis
D
emphysema
E
lung cancer
2.2 A 76-year-old man presents with breath-
lessness. On examination there is dimin-
ished expansion of the left hemithorax,
dullness
to
percussion
and
decreased
breath sounds with reduced tactile vocal
fremitus
at
the
left
base
posteriorly.
These features suggest:
A
a pleural effusion
B
pneumonic consolidation
C
a pneumothorax
D
atelectasis
E
bronchiectasis
2.3 A 45-year-old woman is admitted to hospi-
tal with a 3-day history of cough, breath-
lessness and right pleuritic pain. She has
smoked 20 cigarettes/day for 25 years. On
examination chest expansion is equal on
both sides. There is dullness over the right
lung base with increased tactile vocal frem-
itus, bronchial breathing and crackles.
These features suggest:
A
atelectasis due to a bronchial carcinoma
B
pneumonic consolidation
Respiratory Medicine Lecture Notes, Eighth Edition. Stephen J. Bourke and Graham P. Burns.
 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

C
pneumothorax
D
emphysema
E
a pleural effusion
2.4 A 25-year-old man presents with a sudden
onset of right pleuritic pain while playing
rugby. He has smoked 10 cigarettes/day for
8 years. On examination there are de-
creased breath sounds over the right hemi-
thorax with hyper-resonance on percus-
sion. The trachea is central, jugular venous
pressure is normal, heart sounds are nor-
malandthereisnotendernessonpalpation
of the chest. These features suggest:
A
a pulmonary embolism
B
pleurisy with a pleural effusion
C
a traumatic rib fracture
D
pneumonic consolidation with pleurisy
E
a pneumothorax
2.5 An 80-year-old man presents with pro-
gressive
breathlessness.
He
stopped
smoking 10 years ago having previously
smoked 20 cigarettes/day for 50 years.
He had worked as a coalminer for 30
years.
On
examination
he
was
not
clubbed. Respiratory rate was 22/min. He
was cyanosed. His chest was hyperinﬂat-
ed with decreased cricosternal distance.
The costal margins moved inwards dur-
ing inspiration. The chest was hyper-res-
onant to percussion on both sides. There
was bilateral wheeze but no crackles.
These features suggest a diagnosis of:
A
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
B
asthma
C
coalminer’s pneumoconiosis
D
pneumothorax
E
pulmonary oedema
Chapter 3: Pulmonary function tests
3.1 The volume of gas in the lungs after a
normal tidal inspiration is:
A
residual volume
B
total
lung
capacity
minus
residual
volume
C
functional residual capacity
D
tidal volume plus functional residual
capacity
E
vital capacity minus residual volume
3.2 The lung function test results: FEV1 re-
duced, FEV1/VC normal, TLCO normal, KCO
increased would be most in keeping with:
A
kyphoscoliosis
B
idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis
C
pulmonary hypertension
D
asthma
E
COPD
3.3 The arterial blood gases: pH 7.33, PCO2
8.4 kPa, PO2 12.6 kPa, sHCO3 28 mmol/L,
O2 saturation 97% is most in keeping
with:
A
a chronic metabolic acidosis
B
an acute on chronic metabolic acidosis.
C
anovercompensated metabolicalkalosis
D
an acute on chronic respiratory acidosis
E
a chronic respiratory acidosis
3.4 Given the arterial blood gases: pH 7.33, PCO2
8.4, kPa PO2 12.6 kPa, sHCO3 28 mmol/L,
O2 saturation 97%, one could conﬁdently
conclude that:
A
the patient is breathing supplemental
oxygen
B
the patient has COPD
C
thepatientneedstobetransferred toITU
D
the condition is chronic and stable
E
the lungs are normal
3.5 A 24-year-old woman presents to hospital as
an emergency with breathlessness. Her arte-
rial blood gases while breathing room air
were: pH 7.49, Pco2 3.3kPa, Po2 11.9kPa,
sHCO3 24mmol/L, O2 saturation 97%. This
presentation is most in keeping with:
A
pulmonary embolism
B
anxiety
C
opiate overdose
D
excess vomiting
E
pneumonia
Chapter 4: Radiology of the chest
4.1 Cavitation is a characteristic feature of:
A
a hamartoma
B
ﬁbrotic lung disease
C
Haemophilus inﬂuenzae pneumonia
D
dermoid cysts
E
squamous carcinoma
4.2 An air bronchogram in an area of consoli-
dation suggests:
A
bronchial obstruction due to carcinoma
B
infarction secondary to a pulmonary
embolism
C
an arteriovenous malformation
D
pneumonia
E
sarcoidosis
198
Self-assessment

4.3 A 1-cm peripheral lung nodule with avid
uptake of FDG on PET–CT scan is most likely
to be a:
A
tuberculous granuloma
B
hamartoma
C
carcinoma
D
neuroﬁbroma
E
rheumatoid nodule
4.4 A 65-year-old smoker presents with cough,
purulent sputum and left chest pain. Chest
X-ray shows features of left lower lobe col-
lapse. The most likely diagnosis is:
A
pneumonia
B
pneumonia
with
a
parapneumonic
effusion
C
mucus plugging of the left lower lobe
bronchus
D
bronchial carcinoma
E
an inhaled foreign body in the left lower
lobe bronchus
4.5 A 60-year-old woman is found to have an
anterior mediastinal mass on chest X-ray
and CT. The most likely cause is a:
A
hiatus hernia
B
thymoma
C
oesophageal cyst
D
pericardial cyst
E
neuroﬁbroma
Chapter 5: Upper respiratory tract
infections and inﬂuenza
5.1 Acute epiglottitis is usually caused by:
A
Streptococcus pneumoniae
B
Mycoplasma pneumoniae
C
infectious mononucleosis
D
Haemophilus inﬂuenzae type B
E
Staphylococcus aureus
5.2 Contact with birds is a risk factor for infec-
tion with:
A
Chlamydophila pneumoniae
B
Mycoplasma pneumoniae
C
Coxiella burnetti
D
Legionella pneumophila
E
Chlamydophila psittaci
5.3 Severe seasonal inﬂuenza is usually caused
by:
A
inﬂuenza virus type A
B
Haemophilus inﬂuenzae
C
inﬂuenza virus type B
D
inﬂuenza virus type C
E
Staphylococcus aureus
5.4 Recurrent sinusitis is a characteristic fea-
ture of:
A
cystic ﬁbrosis
B
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
C
atopic asthma
D
chronic bronchitis
E
obstructive sleep apnoea syndrome
5.5 Inﬂuenza pandemics occur because of:
A
emergence of new coronaviruses
B
antigenic
shift
in
inﬂuenza
viral
antigens
C
overuse of antibiotics
D
lack of uptake of inﬂuenza vaccination
E
antigenic drift in inﬂuenza viral antigens
Chapter 6: Pneumonia
6.1 The commonest cause of community-ac-
quired pneumonia is:
A
Mycoplasma pneumoniae
B
Haemophilus inﬂuenzae
C
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
D
Streptococcus pneumoniae
E
Staphylococcus aureus
6.2 Chlamydophila psittaci:
A
is associated with contaminated water
B
is associated with foreign travel
C
is a zoonosis
D
is
associated
with
recent
inﬂuenza
infection
E
is a common cause of hospital-acquired
pneumonia
6.3 A 40-year-old man presents with cough,
fever and purulent sputum. Chest X-ray
shows consolidation in the right lower
lobe. He is alert with respiratory rate of
22/min, blood pressure of 122/78 mmHg,
urea
of
5.6 mmol/L,
white
cell
count
18.4  109/L. His CURB-65 score is:
A
0
B
1
C
2
D
4
E
5
6.4 Severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS)
is caused by:
A
Legionella pneumophila
B
a coronavirus
C
methicillin-resistant staphylococcus au-
reus (MRSA)
D
a retrovirus
E
Chlamydophila pneumoniae
Multiple choice questions 199

6.5 A 28-year-old man is admitted to hospital
with severe respiratory failure (PO2 7.5
kPa), and diffuse bilateral consolidation in
the peirhilar areas on chest X-ray. HIV test
is positive and CD4 count is 100/mm3. The
most likely cause of his lung consolidation
is:
A
pneumocystis pneumonia
B
Kaposi’s sarcoma
C
Mycobacterium
avium
intracellulare
infection
D
HIV pneumonitis
E
Streptococcus pneumoniae
Chapter 7: Tuberculosis
7.1 A 70-year-old man who lives in a hostel for
homeless men and who has a history of
alcohol excess presents with a chronic
cough. Chest X-ray shows diffuse consoli-
dationintheleftupperlobewithcavitation.
Tuberculosis is suspected but initial spu-
tum AAFB stains are negative. The next
deﬁnitive investigation to conﬁrm the di-
agnosis is:
A
interferon gamma release assay
B
Mantoux test
C
Heaf test
D
bronchoscopy
and
bronchoalveolar
lavage
E
gastric washings
7.2 The main usefulness of interferon gamma
release assays for tuberculosis is in:
A
detecting active tuberculosis
B
detecting latent tuberculosis
C
conﬁrming
immunity
after
BCG
vaccination
D
detecting non-tuberculosis mycobater-
ial infection
E
monitoring aresponse todrug treatment
7.3 The lifetime risk of latent tuberculosis
becoming active is approximately:
A
1%
B
10%
C
40%
D
60%
E
90%
7.4 The most important adverse effect of
ethambutol is:
A
renal toxicity
B
hepatitis
C
rashes
D
peripheral neuropathy
E
optic neuritis
7.5 A 65-year-old woman who has recently
arrived in the UK from India presents with
cough. Chest X-ray shows bilateral upper
zone consolidation. Sputum AAFB stains
are positive. Standard treatment consists
of:
A
isoniazid, rifampicin, ethambutol and
pyrazinamide for 6 months
B
isoniazid for 6 months
C
isoniazid and rifampicin for 3 months
D
isoniazid and rifampicin for 6 months
with ethambutol and pyrazinamide for
the initial 2 months
E
isoniazid and rifampicin for 9 months
with ethambutol and pyrazinamide for
the initial 2 months
Chapter 8: Bronchiectasis and lung
abscess
8.1 A 32-year-old man has diffuse bronchiec-
tasis, Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection,
nasal polyps and infertility due to obstruc-
tive azospermia. The main diagnosis to
consider is:
A
HIV infection
B
cystic ﬁbrosis
C
allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis
D
hypogammaglobulinaemia
E
Kartagener’s syndrome
8.2 Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis is
characterised by:
A
the halo sign on chest X-ray
B
low IgG levels
C
non-tuberculous mycobaterial infection
D
reduced speciﬁc antibodies to polysac-
cahride antigens
E
proximal bronchiectasis on CT scans
8.3 Deﬁnitive diagnosis of bronchiectasis is
made by:
A
high-resolution CT scanning
B
sputum microbiology
C
bronchoscopy
D
clinical history
E
lung function tests
8.4 In bronchiectasis, due to previous pneu-
monia, sputum clearance is facilitated by:
A
nebulised colistin
B
oral ciproﬂoxacin
C
nebulised hypertonic saline
200
Self-assessment

D
nebulised DNAse
E
azithromycin
8.5 A 55-year-old woman has bilateral basal
bronchiectasis that is thought to have aris-
en from childhood pneumonia. She has
chronic lung infection with Pseudomonas
aeruginosa. Her symptoms are trouble-
some
despite
intermittent
courses
of
antibiotics and regular chest clearance
physiotherapy. The most appropriate ad-
ditional treatment to recommend is:
A
long-term oral doxycycline
B
nebulised colistin or tobramycin
C
intravenous immunoglobulin therapy
D
long-term prednisolone
E
surgery
with
resection
of
areas
of
bronchiectasis
Chapter 9: Cystic ﬁbrosis
9.1 A newborn baby is diagnosed as having
cystic ﬁbrosis. His parents ask about the
risk of future children of theirs having
cystic ﬁbrosis. The risk of a further child
of these parents having cystic ﬁbrosis is
approximately:
A
10%
B
25%
C
50%
D
75%
E
90%
9.2 The most common bacterium causing lung
infection in an adult with cystic ﬁbrosis is:
A
Burkhoderia cepacia complex
B
Methicillin
resistant
Staphylococcus
aureus
C
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
D
Achromobacter xylosoxidans
E
Mycobacterium abscessus
9.3 A 16-year-old boy with cystic ﬁbrosis and
chronic Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection
attends the clinic because of an increase in
his cough and sputum. There is a mild
reduction in his FEV1. He is undertaking
exams and it is decided that he should have
a course of tablet antibiotics at home. The
most appropriate choice of antibiotic is:
A
co-amoxiclav
B
colistin
C
ciproﬂoxacin
D
tobramycin
E
amoxicillin
9.4 Men with cystic ﬁbrosis usually:
A
have normal fertility
B
are infertile due to absence of the vas
deferens
C
are infertile because of failure to produce
sperm in the testes
D
have reduced fertility due to ciliary
dysfunction
E
have reduced fertility because of testos-
terone deﬁciency
9.5 In a child with cystic ﬁbrosis diarrhoea and
failure to thrive typically occurs because of:
A
diabetes
B
antibiotic-associated diarrhoea
C
liver disease
D
pancreatic dysfunction
E
deﬁciency of Vitamins A, D and E
Chapter 10: Asthma
10.1 Most patients with asthma:
A
are overoptimistic in their expectations
of what can be achieved with treatment
B
are fastidious about treatment com-
pliance
C
can manage simple inhalers well
D
need more that just the basics (inhaled
corticosteroids and short-acting bron-
chodilators) to maintain good control
E
are capable of managing the disease
themselves
10.2 In a patient presenting with breathless-
ness which of the following most strongly
supports a diagnosis of asthma:
A
breathlessness on exertion
B
a family history of hay fever
C
FEV1/VC < 0.7 at the time of clinic visit
D
nocturnal wakening due to cough
E
asymmetry
of
chest
expansion
on
examination
10.3 Which of the following are features of a life
threatening attack of asthma:
A
PEF 33–50% of best or predicted
B
respiratory rate 25 /min
C
O2 saturation < 92%
D
respiratory rate 25 /min
E
heart rate 110 bpm
10.4 In chronic asthma management which of
the following most accurately reﬂects cur-
rent protocols and treatment:
A
use of reliever medication only once per
day suggests good control
Multiple choice questions 201

B
inhaled corticosteroids do not improve
symptoms
C
long-acting
bronchodilators
should
never
be
used
without
inhaled
corticosteroids
D
omalizumab is a new effective oral
medication for severe disease.
E
leukotriene receptor antagonists are
effective in most patients
10.5 Which of the following is NOT a common
trigger for asthma:
A
cigarette smoke
B
inﬂuenza vaccine
C
beta-blockers
D
aspirin
E
cold air
Chapter 11: Chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease
11.1 Which of the following statements best
describes
the
physiological
changes
typically seen in COPD:
A
FEV1 reduced, TLCO normal, KCO reduced
B
FEV1/FVC reduced, FEV1 normal, FVC
normal
C
FVC reduced, total lung capacity in-
creased, residual volume increased.
D
FEV1/FVC reduced, total lung capacity
reduced, residual volume reduced
E
FEV1/FVC reduced, FEV1 reduced, TLCO
normal
11.2 Which statement best describes the path-
ological changes typically seen in COPD:
A
chronic bronchitis principally affects
the distal airways
B
emphysema results in increased elastic
recoil of the lung
C
airway inﬂammation causes airway
obstruction
D
emphysema can show some recovery
with smoking cessation
E
emphysema is independent of airways
obstruction
11.3 In relation to oxygen therapy in COPD
A
long-term oxygen therapy can extend
life
B
long-term oxygen therapy can slow the
progression of COPD
C
most patients experiencing limiting
dyspnoea will beneﬁt from ambulatory
oxygen
D
short-burst oxygen therapy is only used
in the terminal stages of the disease
E
in an acute exacerbation oxygen should
be delivered to achieve a saturation
>94%
11.4 In the management of COPD, which one
of the following CANNOT be achieved
by some intervention:
A
improved spirometry (FEV1/VC ratio)
B
improved mortality (extension of life)
C
disease modiﬁcation (slowing of the
decline in FEV1)
D
reduced frequency of exacerbations
E
improved exercise tolerance
11.5 In relation to epidemiology which of the
following best reﬂects current evidence:
A
COPD was a disease of the twentieth
century
and
as
smoking
patterns
change the global prevalence is now
falling
B
COPD affects all socioeconomic groups
equally
C
most COPD in the industrial world is
caused by occupational exposures and
air pollution
D
in the UK, COPD affects urban more
than rural populations
E
most smokers develop COPD
Chapter 12: Carcinoma of the lung
12.1 The most common type of bronchial car-
cinoma is:
A
squamous cell carcinoma
B
small-cell carcinoma
C
carcinoid tumour
D
adenocarcinoma
E
large-cell undifferentiated carcinoma
12.2 A 71-year-old man, who is usually ﬁt and
well, is coincidentally found to have a 2-
cm mass in the periphery of the right
upper lobe on a chest X-ray that was per-
formed when he underwent cholecystec-
tomy. He is a smoker. PET/CT scan con-
ﬁrms avid uptake of FDG in a 2-cm mass in
the right upper lobe with no other abnor-
mality. The features suggest a bronchial
carcinoma.Conﬁrmationofthecelltypeis
best sought by:
A
bronchoscopy
B
endobronchial ultrasound guided nee-
dle aspiration
202
Self-assessment

C
video-assisted thoracoscopic biopsy
D
percutaneous
CT-guided
needle
aspirate
E
mediastinoscopy
12.3 A60-year-oldwomanwhohassmokedand
has mild COPD presents with swelling of
her face and arms, with dilated veins over
her chest wall. Chest X-ray shows a wid-
ened bulky mediastinal shadow with a 2-
cm opacity in the left upper lobe. The
clinical features suggest:
A
dissection of the thoracic aorta
B
nephrotic syndrome
C
central venous thrombosis
D
superior vena caval obstruction
E
thymoma
12.4 A72-year-oldmanisdiagnosedashavinga
T1N0M0 adenocarcinoma of the left upper
lobe of lung. PET/CT conﬁrms avid uptake
of FDG within the tumour, without any
other abnormality. He is otherwise ﬁt and
well with an FEV1 of 3.2 L (98% predicted)
and a WHO performance status of zero.
The best treatment option is:
A
left pneumonectomy
B
radical radiotherapy
C
chemotherapy
D
left upper lobectomy
E
monitoring of the tumour by serial CT
scans until symptoms arise
12.5 A 65-year-old woman is diagnosed as hav-
ing an extensive stage small-cell carcino-
ma of lung with bone metastases. After
discussionshedecidestohavechemother-
apy as the initial treatment option. In
advising her about her prognosis, her 5-
year survival is likely to be approximately:
A
80%
B
60%
C
40%
D
20%
E
0%
Chapter 13: Interstitial lung disease
13.1 Bilateal hilar lymphadenopathy and ery-
thema nodosum suggest a diagnosis of:
A
extrinsic allergic alveolitis
B
sarcoidosis
C
lymphoid interstitial pneumonia
D
systemic sclerosis
E
systemic lupus erythematosis
13.2 A 70-year-old man, who has smoked
heavily, presents with progressive breat-
hlessness, clubbing, bibasal crackles and
reticular shadowing on chest X-ray. The
most likely diagnosis is:
A
cryptogenic organising pneumonia
B
lympoid interstitial pneumonia
C
desquamative interstitial pneumonia
D
idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis
E
respiratory
bronchiolitis-interstitial
lung disease
13.3 In sarcoidosis bronchoalveolar lavage
typically shows a high count of:
A
lymphocytes
B
eosinophils
C
neutrophils
D
macrophages
E
histiocytes
13.4 Ground-glass shadowing with areas of
decreased attenuation and air trapping
on
high-resolution
CT
scanning
are
characteristic features of:
A
sarcoidosis
B
lymphocytic interstitial pneumonia
C
non-speciﬁc interstitial pneumonia
D
extrinsic allergic alveolitis
E
idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis
13.5 The worst prognosis is associated with a
diagnosis of:
A
non-speciﬁc interstitial pneumonia
B
cryptogenic organising pneumonia
C
idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis
D
sarcoidosis
E
extrinsic allergic alveolitis
Chapter 14: Occupational lung
disease
14.1 The most common work-related lung dis-
ease in the UK is:
A
coalminer’s pneumoconiosis
B
asbestosis
C
extrinsic allergic alveolitis
D
asthma
E
silicosis
14.2 Isocyanate induced occupational asthma
is a substantial hazard for:
A
healthcare workers
B
cleaners
C
paint sprayers
D
hairdressers
E
coalminers
Multiple choice questions 203

14.3 A 70-year-old man who has smoked 20
cigarettes daily for 50 years and who has
worked for 10 years as a pipe lagger in
shipyards presents with right chest pain
and breathlessness. Chest X-ray shows a
right pleural effusion. CT shows nodular
pleural thickening extending onto the
mediastinal pleura. The most likely diag-
nosis is:
A
mesothelioma
B
benign asbestos pleurisy
C
lung carcinoma
D
diffuse pleural thickening
E
pleural plaques
14.4 Eggshellcalciﬁcationofmediastinalnodes
onchestX-rayisacharacteristicfeatureof:
A
simple coalworker’s pneumoconiosis
B
coalworker’s
progressive
massive
ﬁbrosis
C
silicosis
D
asbestos pleural plaques
E
Caplan’s syndrome
14.5 There is an increased risk of tuberculosis
in patients with:
A
asbestosis
B
coalminer’s pneumoconiosis
C
siderosis
D
byssinosis
E
silicosis
Chapter 15: Pulmonary vascular
disease
15.1 A 24-year-old woman using a combined
oestrogenprogesteronecontraceptivepill
complains of pleuritic pain. Her pulse is
90/min,bloodpressure 120/70 mmHg, re-
spiratory rate 16/min. Chest X-ray is nor-
mal. D-dimer level is normal. The next
most appropriate course of action is:
A
proceed to CT pulmonary angiography
B
reassure her that no further tests are
needed
C
proceed to ultrasound of legs
D
commence heparin
E
commence warfarin
15.2 A 26-year-old woman who is 32-weeks’
pregnant presents with pleuritic pain and
breathlessness. Pulmonary embolism is
suspected.ChestX-rayisnormal.Thebest
next investigation is:
A
ultrasound of legs
B
D-dimer
C
isotope perfusion scan
D
CT pulmonary angiography
E
pulmonary angiography
15.3 A 60-year-old man presents with a 6-
month history of bloodstained nasal dis-
charge, arthralgia and general malaise.
He is admitted to hospital with renal
failure. Chest X-ray shows cavitating
nodules.
Anti-neutrophil
cytoplasmic
antibodies are present in the serum. The
most likely diagnosis is:
A
pulmonary embolism with infarction
B
Wegener’s granulomatosis
C
Churg–Strauss syndrome
D
metastataic lung cancer
E
systemic lupus erythematosis
15.4 A 70-year-old man has conﬁrmed deep
vein thrombosis with pulmonary emboli
and he has been started on warfarin.
Seven days later he develops haemete-
mesis with haemoglobin falling to 5 g/dl.
Endoscopy conﬁrms a bleeding duodenal
ulcer. His thromboembolic disease is best
managed by:
A
subcutaneous tinzaparin
B
intravenous heparin
C
aspirin
D
insertion of an inferior vena caval ﬁlter
E
warfarin
15.5 A 50-year-old woman presents with
breathlessness. Investigations conﬁrm
pulmonary arterial hypertension. She
has Raynaud’s phenomenon, facial tel-
angiectasia and scerodactyly, with posi-
tive anti-centromere antibodies. The
most likely cause of her pulmonary hy-
pertension is:
A
mitral stenosis
B
chronic thromboembolic disease
C
CREST syndrome
D
Wegener’s granulomatosis
E
HIV infection
Chapter 16: Pneumothorax and pleural
effusion
16.1 The characteristic features of a pneumo-
thorax are:
A
dullness to percussion
B
bronchial breathing
C
tenderness on palpation of the chest wall
204
Self-assessment

D
decreased breath sounds
E
crackles
16.2 An 18-year-old man who is usually ﬁt and
well presented with left pleuritic pain. A
chest X-ray showed a small left apical
pneumothorax. He is now asymptomatic.
The most appropriate management of
his pneumothorax is:
A
no intervention
B
aspiration
C
chest drain insertion
D
thoracoscopy with pleurodesis
E
limited apicolateral surgical
pleurectomy
16.3 A 50-year-old man is admitted to hospital
with a left lower lobe pneumonia. Chest
X-ray shows a small left pleural effusion.
Pleural aspiration under ultrasound guid-
ance yields straw-coloured ﬂuid with a
protein of 40 g/L, LDH of 300 units/L,
ph of 7.5. These features indicate:
A
an empyema requiring insertion of a
chest drain
B
an exudative parapneumonic effusion
not requiring insertion of a chest drain
C
a transudative effusion not requiring
intervention
D
an exudative parapneumonic effusion
requiring insertion of a chest drain
E
probable tuberculosis
16.4 A transudative pleural effusion in a 70-
year-old man is most likely to be because
of:
A
lung carcinoma
B
mesothelioma
C
left ventricular failure
D
pneumonia
E
rheumatoid arthritis
16.5 A 75-year-old man presented acutely un-
well with a 16-hour history of left chest
pain, breathlessness and fever, following
an episode of vomiting the previous night.
There was dullness on percussion of the
left side of the chest with diminished
breath sounds. Subcutaneous emphyse-
ma was palpable in the neck. Chest X-ray
showed a left hydropneumothorax. The
most likely diagnosis is:
A
oesophageal rupture
B
perforated duodenal ulcer
C
aspiration pneumonia and empyema
D
pneumothorax
with
bronchopleural
ﬁstula
E
aspiration pneumonia and parapneu-
monic effusion
Chapter 17: Acute respiratory
distress syndrome
17.1 Pulmonary oedema in the acute respira-
tory distress syndrome is characterised
by:
A
an elevated pulmonary artery pressure
B
volume overload
C
increased hydrostatic pressure
D
decreased colloid pressure
E
increased
alveolar
capillary
perme-
ability
17.2 A 40-year-old man is admitted to hospital
with severe pancreatitis. Three days later
he develops progressive breathlessness,
severe hypoxia and diffuse bilateral sha-
dowing on chest X-ray. The most likely
diagnosis is:
A
pulmonary embolism
B
left ventricular failure
C
acute respiratory distress syndrome
D
hospital acquired pneumonia
E
fat embolism
17.3 The mortality rate of patients requir-
ing endotracheal ventilation for acute
respiratory
distress
syndrome
is
approximately:
A
10%
B
20%
C
30%
D
50%
E
80%
17.4 With regard to the acute respiratory dis-
tress syndrome:
A
the pulmonary capillary wedge pres-
sure is typically less than 18 mmHg
B
pulmonary
oedema
usually
results
from excessive ﬂuid administration
C
left ventricular failure is usually a major
factorinthedevelopmentofpulmonary
oedema
D
lung inﬁltrates on chest X-ray usually
indicate pneumonia
E
lymphatic obstruction gives rise to pul-
monary congestion
17.5 The most common precipitating factor
for the acute respiratory distress syn-
drome is:
A
acute pulmonary embolism
Multiple choice questions 205

B
myocardial infarction with cardiogenic
shock
C
systemic sepsis
D
an acute exacerbation of chronic ob-
structive pulmonary disease
E
multiple blood transfusions
Chapter 18: Sleep-related breathing
disorders
18.1 The most effective treatment of obstruc-
tive sleep apnoea is:
A
oxygen
B
nitrazepam night sedation
C
continuous positive airway pressure
D
uvulopalatopharyngoplasty
E
mandibular advancement devices
18.2 The
prevalence
of
obstructive
sleep
apnoea
in
middle-aged
men
is
approximately:
A
4%
B
10%
C
20%
D
30%
E
40%
18.3 The main treatment for oxygen desatura-
tion during sleep in patients with neuro-
muscular disease is:
A
oxygen
B
continuous positive airway pressure
C
weight reduction
D
mandibular advancement devices
E
non-invasive
positive
pressure
ventilation
18.4 Obstructive sleep apnoea:
A
particularly occurs during non-REM
sleep
B
is less common in men than women
C
does not occur in children
D
is more common when lying supine
E
only occurs in overweight people
18.5 Obstructive sleep apnoea results from:
A
weakness of the respiratory muscles
B
episodes of upper airways obstruction
C
loss of ventilatory drive from the respi-
ratory centre in the brain stem
D
nocturnal bronchospasm
E
pulmonary oedema and paroxysmal
nocturnal dyspnoea
Chapter 19: Lung transplantation
19.1 Patients with cystic ﬁbrosis are not suit-
able for:
A
single-lung transplantation
B
bilateral lung transplantation
C
living lobar transplantation
D
heart–lung transplantation
E
double-lung transplantation
19.2 Patients with cystic ﬁbrosis are not suit-
able for lung transplantation if they have:
A
Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection
B
respiratory failure
C
Burkholderia cenocepacia infection
D
diabetes
E
previous pneumothorax
19.3 The 5-year survival post lung transplan-
tation is approximately:
A
80%
B
70%
C
50%
D
30%
E
10%
19.4 A major late complication, occurring 5–10
years post transplantation is:
A
reimplantation injury
B
lung cancer
C
donor-acquired infection
D
dehiscence of the anastomosis
E
bronchiolitis obliterans syndrome
19.5 Lung transplantation is not a suitable
option for patients with:
A
idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis
B
lung cancer
C
idiopathic pulmonary hypertension
D
emphysema
E
cystic ﬁbrosis
206
Self-assessment

Answers to multiple
choice questions
Chapter 1: Anatomy and physiology
of the lungs
1.1 B
The diaphragm is the main muscle of inspira-
tion; quiet expiration is a rather passive pro-
cess. Forced expiration requires positive pres-
sure to be generated in the thorax quickly, to
achieve this, the abdominal musculature con-
tracts quickly, which increases the intra-ab-
dominal pressure, forcing the diaphragm up
into the thorax.
1.2 C
Lungcompliance isthe change in lung volume
brought about by a unit change in transpul-
monary (intrapleural) pressure. The ﬁbrotic
lung is less compliant.
1.3 E
Airway resistance in health resides principally
in the central (large) airways at high lung vol-
ume. As lung volume decreases it moves pe-
ripherallytothesmallerairways.Itisincreased
in emphysema and is proportional to r4.
1.4 E
Most of the ventilation goes to the bases, but
an even greater proportion of the perfusion
goes to the bases. Poor V/Q leads to a fall in
Po2 but does not affect Pco2. Reduced overall
ventilation causes a rise in Pco2 and a fall
in Po2.
1.5 5.5 kPa
PAo2 ¼ PIo2  Paco2
0:8
PAo2 ¼ 21  4:0
0:8 ¼ 16
PAo2Pao2¼1610:5¼5:5kPa
This is elevated, implying a problem with VQ
matching within the lung.
Chapter 2: History taking and
examination
2.1 B
Bilateral crackles and clubbing are character-
istic features of pulmonary ﬁbrosis.
2.2 A
Dullness to percussion suggests a pleural ef-
fusion, pleural thickening or pneumonic con-
solidation. In consolidation tactile vocal frem-
itus is often increased whereas in a pleural
effusion it is characteristically reduced.
2.3 B
Pneumonic consolidation is characterised by
dullness to percussion, increased tactile vocal
fremitus, bronchial breathing and crackles.
Pneumonia is sometimes associated with in-
ﬂammation of the overlying pleura causing
pleuritic pain.
2.4 E
Pneumothoraxtypicallycausesacutepleuritic
pain and is characterised by reduced breath
soundsandhyper-resonanceonthesideofthe
pneumothorax.
2.5 A
He has been a smoker and shows features of
airways obstruction with paradoxical inward
movement of the costal margins on inspira-
tion (in a normal person they move outwards)
with a hyperinﬂated chest (reduced cricoster-
nal distance) and wheeze. The presence of
cyanosis indicates hypoxia and respiratory
failure.
Respiratory Medicine Lecture Notes, Eighth Edition. Stephen J. Bourke and Graham P. Burns.
 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Chapter 3: Pulmonary function tests
3.1 D
See Figure 3.1.
3.2 A
The
normal
FEV/VC
and
reduced
FEV1
implies restriction. The elevated Kco suggests
the cause is extrapulmonary.
3.3 D
The pH is low so this is an acidosis; the Pco2 is
high so this is a respiratory acidosis. The bi-
carbonate is high suggesting there has been
time to attempt to compensate (chronic).
However,thepHwouldbeinthenormalrange
hadthisbeenachronicstablestate;theremust
be an acute component. Remember too that
physiological compensatory mechanisms do
not over compensate.
3.4 A
If you assume the patient is breathing room
air (PIo2 ¼ 21 kPa), then the alveolar– arterial
gradient would be negative, suggesting that
the patient was a net contributor of oxygen to
the environment! This seems unlikely. The
inspired Po2 therefore must be greater than
21 kPa. The condition is clearly not stable as
the pH is outside the normal range. As we are
not given the PIo2 we cannot conclude the
lungs are normal. The A–a gradient may be
very high.
3.5 A
This is a primary respiratory alkalosis so
the answer must be either anxiety-driven
hyperventilation or pulmonary embolism.
The alveolar arterial gradient is increased
implying
a
problem
within
the
lungs
(affecting V/Q matching), which anxiety
cannot explain.
Chapter 4: Radiology of the chest
4.1 E
Cavitation is the presence of an area of radio-
lucency within a mass lesion. It is a feature of
bronchial carcinoma (particularly squamous
carcinoma), tuberculosis, lung abscess, pul-
monary infarcts, Wegener’s granulomatosis
and some pneumonias (e.g. Staphylococcus
aureus, Klebsiella pneumoniae).
4.2 D
An air bronchogram is visible as a black tube
of air
against
the
white
background
of
consolidated lung. It indicates that the bron-
chus is patent, and not occluded. It is a feature
of pneumonic consolidation.
4.3 C
Avid uptake of FDG on PET scanning is a
feature of bronchial carcinoma, but can also
occur in inﬂammatory conditions such as tu-
berculosis, sarcoidosis, histoplasmosis and
coccidioidomycosis.
4.4 D
Collapse of a lobe is a sinister feature suggest-
ing occlusion of the bronchus by a mass lesion
such as a carcinoma.
4.5 B
Thymictumours,thyroidmassesanddermoid
cysts are most commonly situated in the an-
terior mediastinum, whereas neuroﬁbromas
and oesophageal cysts are often situated
posteriorly.
Chapter 5: Upper respiratory tract
infections and inﬂuenza
5.1 D
Acute epiglottitis is a serious illness that is
usually caused by virulent strains of H. inﬂu-
enzae type B. It typically affects young chil-
dren, may cause occlusion of the airway and is
often accompanied by septicaemia.
5.2 E
Chlamydophila psittaci is primarily a disease
of birds that is transmitted to humans as a
zoonosis. Chlamydophila pneumoniae typi-
cally causes mild upper respiratory tract in-
fections, and is spread from person to person.
5.3 A
Inﬂuenza A is the main cause of seasonal
inﬂuenza, which is characterised by systemic
symptoms of headache, malaise, myalgia and
prostration in addition to upper respiratory
tract symptoms.
5.4 A
Recurrentsinusitisisafeatureofcysticﬁbrosis,
hypogammaglobulinaemia and ciliary dyski-
nesia, all of which also cause bronchiectasis.
5.5 B
Inﬂuenza A undergoes frequent changes in its
surface antigens. Minor changes referred to as
‘antigenic drift’ result in outbreaks of seasonal
inﬂuenza, but major changes, referred to as
‘antigenic shift’ result in epidemics and
pandemics.
208
Self-assessment

Chapter 6: Pneumonia
6.1 D
Streptococcus
pneumoniae
is
the
most
common
cause
of
community-acquired
pneumonia.
6.2 C
Chlamydophila psittaci is primarily an infec-
tion of birds that can be transmitted to hu-
mans as a zoonosis.
6.3 A
This patient’s CURB-65 score is zero. He is not
Confused, his Urea is normal at 5.6 mmol/L,
his Respiratory rate is not elevated above 30/
min, his Blood pressure is normal, and he is
not over 65 years of age. This indicates a low
risk for developing complications and he is
likely to be suitable for treatment at home
rather than in hospital.
6.4 B
SARS was a very severe pneumonic illness
caused by a newly identiﬁed coronavirus, that
caused a global pandemic in 2003. The pan-
demic was brought to an end by public health
measures including rapid case detection, case
isolation, contact tracing and strict infection
control procedures.
6.5 A
Pneumocystis pneumonia is likely to occur in
patientswithHIVinfectionwhoseCD4countis
<200/mm3. The diagnosis may be conﬁrmed
by detecting Pneumocystis jirovecii in induced
sputum or in bronchoalveolar lavage ﬂuid. He
requires treatment with high-dose intravenous
co-trimoxazole, prednisolone and oxygen.
Chapter 7: Tuberculosis
7.1 D
Obtaining bronchoalveolar lavage ﬂuid will
allow rapid diagnosis of active tuberculosis by
AAFB staining, and culture will allow tests of
sensitivity to drugs.
7.2 B
Interferon gamma release assays are useful in
diagnosing latent tuberculosis but are not re-
commended as a routine test for active
tuberculosis.
7.3 B
The term ‘latent tuberculosis’ refers to the
situation where a person has been infected
with TB at some time but does not currently
have active disease. There is an approximately
10% risk of the TB becoming active at some
stage. This risk may be reduced by prophylac-
tic treatment with isoniazid and rifampicin for
3 months.
7.4 E
Because of the risk of optic neuritis visual
acuity should be tested before starting treat-
ment and patients should be advised to report
visual changes. The dose should be reduced in
renal impairment (creatinine clearance <30
mls/minute).
7.5 D
Standard treatment consists of isoniazid and
rifampicin for 6 months with ethambutol and
pyrazinamide for the initial 2 months.
Chapter 8: Bronchiectasis and lung
abscess
8.1 B
Bronchiectasis, pseudomonas infection, nasal
polyps and infertility due to obstructive azos-
permia (no sperm in ejaculate) are all charac-
teristic
features
of
cystic
ﬁbrosis.
It
is recommended that all children and adults
up to the age of 40 years with bronchiectasis
should have sweat tests and DNA analysis for
cystic ﬁbrosis. About 6–10% of patients with
cystic ﬁbrosis are diagnosed in adulthood.
8.2 E
Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis is
characterised by severe bronchial inﬂamma-
tion with mucus plugging and bronchiectasis
that is typically proximal in location. The halo
sign is a feature of an aspergilloma (a fungal
ball within a cavity) rather than allergic
bronchopulmonary aspergillosis.
8.3 A
High-resolution CT scanning is the key inves-
tigation in diagnosing bronchiectasis. Chest
X-ray is not sufﬁciently sensitive.
8.4 C
Nebulised hypertonic saline improves spu-
tum clearance in patients with bronchiectasis.
Nebulised DNase is a treatment for patients
with cystic ﬁbrosis but is not effective in other
forms of bronchiectasis.
8.5 B
This patient has chronic Pseudomonas aeru-
ginosa lung infection and is therefore likely to
beneﬁt from nebulised anti-pseudomonas
Answers to multiple choice questions 209

antibiotics e.g. colistin or tobramycin. Doxy-
cycline is not effective against Pseudomonas
aeruginosa.
Chapter 9: Cystic ﬁbrosis
9.1 B
Cystic ﬁbrosis is an autosomal recessive dis-
ease. The child with cystic ﬁbrosis has two
mutations of the cystic ﬁbrosis gene, having
inherited one abnormal gene from each of his
parents.Eachofhisparentsisacarrierofcystic
ﬁbrosis. The risk of a child of carrier parents
having the disease is 1:4 (25%).
9.2 C
Patients with cystic ﬁbrosis are particularly
vulnerable to Pseudomonas aeruginosa infec-
tion, and this is the most common infection in
adults.
9.3 C
The only oral antibiotic with activity against
Pseudomonas aeruginosa is ciproﬂoxacin. Co-
amoxiclav and amoxicillin are not active
againstPseudomonasaeruginosa.Colistinand
tobramycin can be given intravenously or by
nebulisation, but are not available in an oral
formulation.
9.4 B
Nearly all men with cystic ﬁbrosis are infertile
because of congenital bilateral absence of the
vas deferens resulting in azospermia (no
sperm in the ejaculate). However, normal
sperm are usually produced by the testes such
that these men can achieve biological father-
hood by assisted reproduction techniques in-
volving aspiration of sperm from the testes
and in vitro fertilisation. Women with cystic
ﬁbrosis have essentially normal fertility.
9.5 D
Approximately 85% of children with cystic
ﬁbrosis have pancreatic insufﬁciency such
that there is a lack of pancreatic enzymes
resulting in malabsorption of fat; which
causes diarrhoea and failure to thrive.
Chapter 10: Asthma
10.1 E
Patients often have inappropriately low ex-
pectations of what can be achieved with
treatment. Adherence to treatment is a major
issue in any chronic disease, the additional
complexity of inhaled medication (as op-
posed to oral) only adds to this. Inhaler tech-
nique is generally very poor. This is usually
the prescribing clinician’s fault, not the pa-
tient’s. Most people can be managed perfect-
ly well at step two of the BTS guidelines
provided attention is paid to the detail.
Self-monitoring and management is key to
good control in this variable condition. Edu-
cation is crucial.
10.2 D
Anycauseof breathlessness tendstobeworse
onexertion. Althoughhay fevermay belinked
with asthma, the associating of a family his-
tory and a personal diagnosis of asthma is a
little weak. FEV1/VC <0.7 conﬁrms airway
obstruction, variability is required for a diag-
nosis of asthma. Nocturnal symptoms of
cough or breathlessness suggest diurnal var-
iabilityconsistentwithasthma.Asymmetryof
chest expansion on examination suggests the
diagnosis is something else.
10.3 C
All are features of acute severe asthma, only
(C) is a feature of a life-threatening attack.
10.4 C
The need for reliever medication more than
three times per week implies inadequate
control. Of course corticosteroids improve
symptoms; they just do not do it instantly.
Omalizumab is given by injection. Leukotri-
enereceptorantagonistscanbeveryeffective
in a minority of patients.
10.5 B
Inﬂuenza is a common trigger of asthma,
such that inﬂuenza vaccine is recommended.
Chapter 11: Chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease
11.1 C
TLCO is reduced, FEV1 is reduced, FVC is
usually also reduced (although not as much
as FEV1).
11.2 C
Chronic bronchitis principally affects the
larger airways. Emphysema results in re-
duced elastic recoil. Airway inﬂammation, in
conjunction with emphysema and chronic
bronchitis all contribute to airway obstruc-
tion. Emphysema is permanent.
210
Self-assessment

11.3 A
Long-term oxygen therapy can extend life
in severe disease associated with hypoxia
by slowing the progression of cor pulmo-
nale, it has no effect on the progression of
COPD (FEV1 decline). Many breathless pa-
tients are not hypoxic, supplemental oxy-
gen is of no beneﬁt to them. Short-burst
oxygen is often used as a ‘palliative’ mea-
sure but is not conﬁned to the terminal
stages of the disease. Emergency oxygen
should be delivered to achieve a saturation
of
88–92%
pending
arterial
blood
gas
assessment.
11.4 They are all achievable!
Bronchodilators work in COPD (just not as
dramatically as in asthma). Long-term oxy-
gentherapyextendslife.Therateofdeclineof
FEV1 will be slowed by smoking cessation.
Combination inhalers and tiotropium re-
duce exacerbation frequency. Many inter-
ventions including pulmonary rehabilitation
improve exercise tolerance.
11.5 D
Global prevalence of COPD is increasing,
COPD affects lower socioeconomic groups
more – largely because of smoking preva-
lence. Smoking is the main cause of COPD
in the developed world, although only
about 15% of smokers will develop the
condition.
Chapter 12: Carcinoma of the lung
12.1 A
Squamous carcinoma is the most common
form of lung cancer. Small-cell carcinoma
accounts for approximately 20%, and non-
small-carcinoma
80%,
comprising
squa-
mous
carcinoma
45%,
adenocarcinoma
20% and undifferentiated carcinoma 15%.
12.2 D
The nodule is peripherally located such that
it is not likely to be amenable to biopsy at
bronchoscopy or by endobronchial ultra-
sound. Percutaneous ﬁne needle aspirate of
the nodule under CT scan guidance provides
the best method of seeking cytological diag-
nosis and is less invasive than video-assisted
thoracoscopic
biopsy.
Mediastinoscopy
gives access to the mediastinal nodes but not
to nodules in the lung.
12.3 D
Obstruction of the superior vena cava causes
oedema of the face, neck and arms, with
dilatation of collateral veins, often visible on
the chest wall.
12.4 D
This patient has astage I adenocarcinomathat
is best treated by surgical resection in the form
of a left upper lobectomy. He has adequate
lung function and general ﬁtness for lobecto-
my. Pneumonectomy is not required to resect
the tumour. Radiotherapy or chemotherapy
are not appropriate as they offer a much lower
chance of cure for stage I carcinoma.
12.5 E
Small-cell carcinoma is a highly malignant
cancer. She has extensive stage disease at
presentation. Average survival without treat-
ment is approximately 6 weeks, improving to
8 months with chemotherapy, but long-term
survival is extremely unlikely.
Chapter 13: Interstitial lung disease
13.1 B
Bilateral hilar lymphadenopathy (BHL) on
chest X-ray is a characteristic feature of sar-
coidosis.Itmayalsobecausedbylymphoma,
metastatic carcinoma, tuberculosis, and fun-
gal infections such as histoplasmosis. Ery-
thema nodosum consists of round, red raised
nodules, often on the shins. It is a feature of
hypersensitivity and is also found in strepto-
coccalinfections,tuberculosis,ulcerativeco-
litis, Crohn’s disease and with drugs (e.g.
contraceptive pill). The combination of BHL
and erythema nodosum is highly suggestive
of sarcoidosis, and this form of the disease
has an excellent prognosis, often resolving
spontaneously.
13.2 D
Idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis is the most
common form of interstitial lung disease.
The ﬁbrosis is predominantly basal and sub-
pleural, giving rise to crackles on ausculta-
tion and reticular shadowing on X-ray.
Approximately 60–70% have clubbing.
13.3 A
Both
sarcoidosis
and
extrinsic
allergic
alveolitis
are
characterised
by
high
lymphocyte
counts
in
bronchoalveolar
lavage ﬂuid. Bronchoalveolar lavage is also
Answers to multiple choice questions 211

useful in excluding infection in patients
presenting with diffuse shadowing on chest
X-ray.
13.4 D
High-resolution CT is a key investigation in
interstitial lung disease. Diagnosis is based
upon the integration of clinical, radiological
and histopathology features in a multidisci-
plinary meeting. Extrinsic allergic alveolitis
has a characteristic CT pattern of ground-
glass shadowing with areas of decreased at-
tenuation and air trapping, best seen on
expiratory views.
13.5 C
Idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis is a serious
disease that usually progresses relentlessly
and responds poorly to treatment. In con-
trast diseases such as cryptogenic organising
pneumonia
and
non-speciﬁc
interstitial
pneumonia have a greater inﬂammatory
component
that
usually
responds
to
prednisolone.
Chapter 14: Occupational lung
disease
14.1 D
Occupational asthma is now the most com-
montypeof occupational lungdisease. Inthe
UK about 3000 new cases are diagnosed each
year.
14.2 C
Isocyanates are a potent cause of occupa-
tional asthma. They are used in spray paints,
varnishes, adhesives and polyurethane foams.
14.3 A
The CT scan features of nodular pleural
thickening extending onto the mediastinal
pleura is a characteristic feature of mesothe-
lioma.Hehashadheavyexposuretoasbestos
that was used for pipe lagging in shipyards.
14.4 C
Eggshell calciﬁcation of mediastinal nodes is
a characteristic feature of silicosis. It may
also occur in long-standing sarcoidosis. As-
bestos causes calciﬁed pleural plaques (but
not calciﬁcation of mediastinal nodes).
14.5 E
Silica interferes with the ability of macro-
phages to kill tubercle bacilli. There is a
signiﬁcantly increased risk of tuberculosis in
patients with silicosis.
Chapter 15: Pulmonary vascular
disease
15.1 B
The combined low-dose oestrogen con-
traceptive pill is associated with only a mildly
increased risk of venous thrombosis. This
patient does not have breathlessness and
has a normal respiratory rate. The negative
D-dimer
provides
strong
evidence
in
excluding pulmonary embolism in these cir-
cumstances. She should be reassured and
does not need further imaging or anti-
coagulation.
15.2 A
There is a high probability of pulmonary
embolism here as the patient has a major
risk factor (pregnancy) and has typical symp-
toms. CTPA exposes the mother’s breasts to
radiation with an increased risk of future
breast cancer. Isotope perfusion scan ex-
poses the foetus and mother to a small radi-
ation dose. Ultrasound of legs may be useful
if it conﬁrms DVT, thereby avoiding the need
for CTPA or perfusion scanning.
15.3 B
Wegener’s granulomatosis characteristically
involvesthenose,lungsandkidneysandisan
ANCA-associated vasculitis.
15.4 D
This patient has conﬂicting problems of hae-
morrhage and thrombosis. Anti-coagulation
posesamajorriskofprovokingfurtherbleed-
ing from his duodenal ulcer. Insertion of an
inferior vena caval ﬁlter prevents major em-
boli from reaching the lungs, and is indicated
in these circumstances.
15.5 C
This patient has some clinical features of
CREST syndrome(calcinosis,Raynaud’sphe-
nomenon, oesophageal dysmotility and tel-
angiectasia), which is a particular, limited
form of systemic sclerosis. It is a recognised
causeofpulmonaryhypertensionandisoften
associated with anti-centromere antibodies.
Chapter 16: Pneumothorax and
pleural effusion
16.1 D
The typical signs of a pneumothorax are
diminished
breath
sounds,
decreased
212
Self-assessment

expansion and hyper-resonance on the side
of the pneumothorax, although these signs
are often difﬁcult to detect. Shift of the tra-
chea and apex beat to the opposite side with
severe distress and cardiorespiratory com-
promise indicates a tension pneumothorax.
16.2 A
Conservative management of small, asymp-
tomatic
primary
spontaneous
pneumo-
thoraces hasbeen shown tobesafe. Thisman
is
ﬁt
and
well
with
no
known
pre-
existing lung disease (primary pneumotho-
rax) and is asymptomatic. No intervention is
needed.Hemaybeallowedtogohomewitha
follow-up appointment arranged. He should
be advised to return to the accident and
emergency department in the unlikely event
that he deteriorates.
16.3 B
The elevated protein and LDH indicate an
exudate. The ﬂuid is straw-coloured with a
normal pH so that the small pleural effusion
is likely to resolve with antibiotics and does
not need drainage. A pH of <7.2 indicates
that a parapneumonic effusion requires
drainage.
16.4 C
Transudativepleuraleffusionshaveaprotein
contentof<30 g/LandanLDH<200 units/L.
They arise as a result of changes in hydro-
static or osmotic pressures across the pleural
membrane rather than by disease of the
pleura. The main causes of transudative ef-
fusions are cardiac failure, renal failure, he-
patic cirrhosis and hypoproteinaemia.
16.5 A
Spontaneous rupture of the oesophagus
(Boerhaave’s syndrome) occurs when the
patient attempts to suppress vomiting by
closure of the pharyngeal sphincter. Air and
ﬂuid leak from the ruptured oesophagus into
the pleural space causing a hydropneu-
mothorax. Air can leak into the tissues giving
palpable subcutaneous emphysema.
Chapter 17: Acute respiratory
distress syndrome
17.1 E
ARDS
is
characterised
by
permeability
pulmonary oedema. The systemic inﬂam-
matory
response
results
in
endothelial
damage with leakage of a protein-rich exu-
date into the alveoli.
17.2 C
Severe pancreatitis is a typical initiating ill-
ness that gives rise to the inﬂammatory pro-
cesses and endothelial damage resulting in
ARDS.
17.3 D
ARDS is a very serious disease with a high
mortality of approximately 50%.
17.4 A
In cardiogenic pulmonary oedema (e.g.
caused by left ventricular failure) pulmonary
artery pressure is typically elevated whereas
in ARDS the pulmonary oedema results from
an increase permeability of the endothelium
rather than ‘pressure pulmonary oedema’
and the pulmonary artery pressure is typi-
cally <18 mmHg.
17.5 C
Severe systemic sepsis is the most common
cause of ARDS in most circumstances.
Chapter 18: Sleep-related breathing
disorders
18.1 C
CPAP is very effective and has become the
standard treatment of obstructive sleep ap-
noea. Uvulopalatopharyngoplasty is primar-
ily used to reduce snoring but its effect on
sleep apnoea is unpredictable.
18.2 A
About 4% of middle-aged men and 2% of
women have obstructive sleep apnoea.
18.3 E
Patients with neuromuscular weakness who
hypoventilate during sleep require non-in-
vasive ventilation rather than CPAP.
18.4 D
Apnoeas are more common when patients
aresupine, lyingontheir backs.Sleepapnoea
is more common during REM sleep. It is not
conﬁned to people who are overweight.
It also occurs in children when it may be
related to enlarged tonsils and adenoids.
18.5 B
Obstructive sleep apnoea results from recur-
rent episodes of upper airways occlusion
during sleep. Sleep disturbance from noctur-
nal wheeze in patients with asthma and from
pulmonary
oedema
in
patients
with
Answers to multiple choice questions 213

paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnoea due to car-
diac failure, is not due to obstructive sleep
apnoea.
Chapter 19: Lung transplantation
19.1 A
Patients with cystic ﬁbrosis are not suitable
for single lung transplantation as the residual
native lung contains infection which would
act as a source of sepsis in the post-operative
period.
19.2 C
Unfortunately the results of transplanting
patients with cystic ﬁbrosis who had Burkho-
deria cenocepacia infection were so poor
that transplant centres now regard this
infection as a major contraindication to
transplantation. Previous pneumothorax is
not a contraindication to transplantation.
19.3 C
Survival
rates
post-lung
transplantation
are approximately 80% at 1 year, 50–55% at
5 years and 30% at 10 years.
19.4 E
Re-implantation injury, dehiscence of the
anastomosis and donor-acquired infection
are risks early after transplantation. The
bronchiolitis obliterans syndrome is the
most important complication threatening
the long-term survival of patients with trans-
planted lungs.
19.5 B
Lung transplantation is a potential treatment
for many forms of advanced lung disease,
but is not suitable for patients with lung
cancer.
214
Self-assessment

Index
Page numbers in italics denote ﬁgures, those in bold denote tables.
abdominal paradox
18
Abram’s needle
175
abscess
lung
39, 84–5, 84
accessory muscles of respiration
16
acetazolamide, obstructive sleep
apnoea
190
acid-base balance
32, 33
disturbances of
33–4, 33, 34
acquired immunodeﬁciency
syndrome see HIV/AIDS
actinomycosis
177
acute respiratory distress syndrome
see ARDS
adenovirus, HIV/AIDS
65
aegophony
20
aeroallergens
99
air bronchogram
38
air pollution
117
air travel, COPD
125–6
airway inﬂammation
98
treatment
108
airway obstruction
116, 116, 117
reversibility
103
variability
103
airway remodelling
101
airway resistance
5–7, 5, 6
disease effects
6–7
ﬂow-limiting mechanism
6
and lung volume
7
maximal, site of
5–6, 5, 6
lung volume
7
airway responsiveness
103
alteplase
165
alveolar cell carcinoma
140
alveolar gas equation
11–12
alveolar-arterial gradient
11
alveoli
1–2, 2, 3
aminoglycosides, pneumonia
58
aminophylline
123
amiodarone, lung ﬁbrosis
142
amoxicillin
bronchiectasis
84
COPD
126
cystic ﬁbrosis
94
pneumonia
58, 59
amylase, pleural effusion
175
amyloidosis, cystic ﬁbrosis
92
anaemia
16
anti-cardiolipin antibody
disease
160
anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic
antibodies (ANCA)
167
anti-thrombin III
160
anti-thymocyte globulin
194
antibiotics
bronchiectasis
83–4
COPD
126
cystic ﬁbrosis
94
lung abscess
85
pneumonia
58
see also individual drugs
anticoagulants, pulmonary
embolism
164–5
antigens
environmental
142
extrinsic allergic alveolitis
146–7,
147
apex beat
18
ARDS
179–84
clinical features
180–1, 181, 181
diagnosis
181, 182
initiating injuries
181
pathogenesis
179–80, 180
permeability pulmonary
oedema
180
pressure pulmonary
oedema
179–80, 180
prognosis
183
treatment
181–3
arterial blood gases
32–6, 32
acid-base balance
32, 33
acid-base disturbances
33–4, 33,
34
arterial oxygenation
35–6
bicarbonate concentration
32–3,
33
arterial oxygen tension
35
arthropathy, cystic ﬁbrosis
92
asbestos
amosite (brown)
156
chrysotile (white)
156
crocidolite (blue)
156, 158
tremolite
156
asbestos bodies
157
asbestos-related lung cancer
132,
158
asbestos-related lung
disease
156–9, 157–9
asbestosis
157
aspergilloma
3, 193
aspergillosis
80, 81, 82
Aspergillus fumigatus
61, 65,
80, 81
in asthma
104
aspiration pneumonia
55, 146
asterixis
16
asthma
98–114
acute severe
112–14
immediate management
113
investigations
113
treatment monitoring
113–14
aetiology
98–100
environmental factors
99
indoor environment
99
occupational environment
100
outdoor environment
99–100
clinical features
101–2
morning dipping
101, 103
cough variant
101
deﬁnition
98
diagnosis
102, 113
exercise-induced
101, 106–7
genetic susceptibility
99
investigations
102–4
hypersensitivity tests
103–4,
104
lung function tests
102–3
management
104–12, 105
anti-inﬂammatory
drugs
108–9
bronchodilators
107–8
inhalers
110–12, 110–12
patient education
104–6
SMART regimen
107
occupational
151–4
causes
152
diagnosis
152–3, 153
Respiratory Medicine Lecture Notes, Eighth Edition. Stephen J. Bourke and Graham P. Burns.
 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

asthma (Continued )
management
153–4
pathogenesis and
pathology
100–1, 100
prevalence
98
atelectasis
21
chest X-ray
37–8, 40, 41
rolled
158
atopy
99
auscultation
20
azathioprine
194
azodicarbonamide
152
Bactec radiometric system
72
Bacteroides spp.
177
base excess
32
BCG vaccination
76
beclometasone
108
b2-agonists
asthma
107
intravenous
113
bicarbonate
32–3, 32, 33
actual
32
standard
33
biliary cirrhosis, cystic ﬁbrosis
89
biopsy
percutaneous needle
134, 135
pleural
175
radiologically guided
175
transbronchial
142, 143
bird fancier’s lung
146
bleomycin, lung ﬁbrosis
142
blue bloaters
118, 119
BODE index
120
Boerhaave’s syndrome
177
bone cysts, sarcoidosis
149
breath sounds
20
breathing
bronchial
20
character of
16
Cheyne-Stokes
190
control of
12
breathlessness see dyspnoea
bronchial arteries
3
bronchial breathing
20
bronchial carcinoma, cavitation
39
bronchial obstruction
79, 85
bronchial thermoplasty
109
bronchial tree
1–2, 2
bronchiectasis
3, 78–84
aetiology
79–82, 80, 81, 82
clinical features
82–3
investigations
83, 83
pathogenesis
78–9, 79
treatment
83–4
bronchioles
1
respiratory
1
terminal
1
bronchiolitis, obliterative
145, 154
bronchiolitis obliterans
syndrome
194
bronchitis
chronic
115–16
coalworker’s
155
eosinophilic
101
bronchoalveolar lavage
142–3
sarcoidosis
149
bronchodilators
asthma
107–8
bronchiectasis
84
COPD
121–2
cystic ﬁbrosis
94
intravenous
113
bronchopneumonia
54, 59, 118
bronchopulmonary
sequestration
85
bronchorrhoea
14
bronchoscopy
104
lung cancer
135
budesonide
108
bullectomy
126
bupropion
121
Burkholderia cenocepacia
193
Burkholderia cepacia
89
cepacia syndrome
89, 91
Burkholderia pseudomallei
55
byssinosis
154
Candida albicans
61, 65
Caplan’s syndrome
146, 155
carbon dioxide
8
arterial content
11
carriage by blood
9, 9
partial pressure see PCO2
carbon monoxide transfer
factor
28, 31–2, 31
single-breath method
31, 31
transfer coefﬁcient
31–2
carcinoid tumour
140
cardiac output, ARDS
183
caseating granuloma
72
cavitation
39, 41
cefuroxime, pneumonia
58
central sleep apnoea
190
cepacia syndrome
89, 91
cephalosporins, pneumonia
58
chemotherapy, lung cancer
139
chest
movements
18
shape
16, 18
chest examination
18–20, 19
auscultation
20
inspection
18, 19
palpation
18–19, 19
percussion
20
chest pain
15
chest X-ray
37, 38, 39
abnormal features
37–42,
40–2
antero-posterior view
37
bronchiectasis
83, 83
COPD
119
pleural effusion
173–4, 174
pneumonia
56, 57
pneumothorax
170, 170, 171
postero-anterior view
37
pulmonary embolism
161
tuberculosis
71, 71
Cheyne-Stokes respiration
190
Chlamydia trachomatis
54, 60
Chlamydophila pneumoniae
54, 60
Chlamydophila psittaci
52, 55, 58,
60, 151
chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease see COPD
Churg-Strauss syndrome
167
chylothorax
175
chylous effusions
176
ciclesonide
108
ciclosporin
194
ciliary dyskinesia
80–2, 82
ciproﬂoxacin
bronchiectasis
84
COPD
126
cystic ﬁbrosis
94
clarithromycin
COPD
126
pneumonia
58
clindamycin, Pneumocystis
jirovecii
64
Clostridium difﬁcile
58
clubbing
16–17, 17, 18, 83
co-amoxiclav
bronchiectasis
84
COPD
126
pleural effusion
177
pneumonia
58
co-trimoxazole, Pneumocystis
jirovecii
64
coalworker’s bronchitis/
emphysema
155
coalworker’s pneumoconiosis
154–5, 155
colistin, cystic ﬁbrosis
94
collagen vascular disease
166
colloid pressure
180
colophony
152
community-acquired pneumonia
54
pneumococcal
58–9, 59
compression stockings
166
computed tomography see CT
connective tissue diseases
145–6,
146
216
Index

consolidation
21
chest X-ray
38
continuous positive airway
pressure
182
obstructive sleep apnoea
190
COPD
115–29
admission avoidance
128
aetiology
117
blue bloaters
118, 119
clinical features and
progression
117–18, 118
deﬁnition
115
early supported discharge
128
emergency treatment
126–8
antibiotics
126
oxygen
127, 127
ventilatory support
127–8
investigations
118–20
lung function tests
118–19
radiology
119, 119
management
120–6
bronchodilators
121–2
corticosteroids
122
hypoxia during air travel
125–6
oxygen therapy
124–5
pulmonary
rehabilitation
123–4
smoking cessation
120–1
tiotropium
122
pink puffers
118, 119
COPD Assessment Test
120
cor pulmonale
120, 124, 166
corticosteroids
asthma
108
COPD
122
sarcoidosis
150
costal margin paradox
18, 19
cotton/ﬂax dust
154
cough
14, 16
COPD
118
cough fracture
14
cough syncope
14
cough variant asthma
101
Coxiella burnetti
55
crackles
20, 56, 83, 142
crepitations see crackles
CREST syndrome
166
crico-arytenoid joint, involvement
of
145
crico-sternal distance
18
‘crow’s feet’
158
cryptogenic organising
pneumonia
144
CT
42–3, 42, 43
bronchiectasis
83
lung cancer
134
CT pulmonary angiography,
pulmonary embolism
163, 163
CURB-65 score
55, 56
cyanosis
16, 17
cystic ﬁbrosis
87–97
basic defect
87–9, 88
gastrointestinal tract
88–9
lungs
88
bronchiectasis
82, 89
clinical features
89–92, 90–2
diagnosis
92–3
atypical cystic ﬁbrosis
93
DNA analysis
92–3
newborn screening
93
sweat testing
92
prognosis
95–6
treatment
93–5
antibiotics
94
chest physiotherapy
93–4
mucolytic medication
94
nutrition
95
cystic ﬁbrosis transmembrane
conductance regulator
87
cytomegalovirus
HIV/AIDS
65
immunocompromised
patients
61
D-dimer, pulmonary embolism
163
deep vein thrombosis
160–1
denufosol
96
Dermatophagoides
pteronyssinus
99
diabetes mellitus, cystic ﬁbrosis
89,
90
diaphragm, actions of
3–4, 4
diffusing capacity
28
distal intestinal obstruction
syndrome
90–1, 92
DNA ﬁngerprinting,
tuberculosis
72
DNAse, cystic ﬁbrosis
94
Dressler’s syndrome
177
dust mites
99, 106
dusts
142, 151
cotton/ﬂax
154
grain
152
wood
152
dyspnoea
13–14, 55, 142
Medical Research Council
Dyspnoea Scale
120
paroxysmal nocturnal
14
pleural effusion
173
pneumothorax
170
ECG, pulmonary embolism
161
effusion
chylous
176
parapneumonic
176
electrocardiogram see ECG
electrooculogram
189
emphysema
116–17
centriacinar
116
coalworker’s
155
panacinar
116
empyema
175
endobronchial ultrasound
135
endotracheal intubation
182
eosinophilia, asthma
104
eosinophilic bronchitis
101
epiglottitis
59
epoxy resins
152
Epstein-Barr virus, HIV/AIDS
65
Epworth sleepiness score
188, 189
erythema nodosum
148
Escherichia coli
54
ethambutol, tuberculosis
72, 73
examination
16–20, 16
exercise testing
103
exercise-induced asthma
101,
106–7
extracorporeal membrane
oxygenation
182
extrinsic allergic alveolitis
146–7,
147
exudates
176–7
factor V Leiden gene mutation
160
farmer’s lung
146
FEV1
7, 24
workplace challenge
153
FEV1/FVC ratio
24
airway obstruction
116
COPD
118–19
ﬁbrosis
39
ﬂour, and asthma
152
ﬂow-volume loop
26–7, 27–30
ﬂucloxacillin, cystic ﬁbrosis
94
ﬂuticasone
108
food ﬂavourer’s lung
154
forced expiratory volume see FEV
forced vital capacity (FVC)
24
foreign body, inhaled
79, 85
formoterol
107, 121
functional residual capacity
23
fungal infections, HIV/AIDS
65
Fusobacterium spp.
85
Fusobacterium necrophorum
85
FVC see forced vital capacity
gas exchange
7–12
air distribution
7
alveolar gas equation
11–12
arterial CO2 content
11
arterial O2 content
11
blood gas transport
9, 9
PCO2
8
PO2
8–9, 8
Index 217

gas exchange (Continued )
respiratory quotient
8
V/Q local differences
9–10, 9, 10
gastroesophageal reﬂux
194
Goodpasture’s syndrome
167
grain dusts
152
ground glass appearance
42, 143,
145, 147
Haemophilus inﬂuenzae
54, 89,
118, 126
pneumonia
59
haemoptysis
14, 15, 82, 89
haemothorax
175
halitosis
83
Heaf test
74
heart-lung transplant
192
helium dilution
27
herpes simplex virus, HIV/AIDS
65
high-frequency jet ventilation
182
hilar lymphadenopathy
148, 149
history
15–16
family
15
general medical
15
occupational
16
social
15
history taking
13
HIV/AIDS
Kaposi’s sarcoma
65
lymphoma
65
pulmonary complications
62–6, 63
bacterial infections
63
fungal infections
65
interstitial pneumonitis
65
Mycobacterium avium-
intracellulare complex
65
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
64
pneumocystis
pneumonia
63–4
pulmonary hypertension
65
viral infections
65
hoarseness
15
holly-leaf pattern
158, 158
Homan’s sign
161
Hooke’s law
4
Horner’s syndrome
16
hospital-acquired pneumonia
54–5
Hospital Anxiety and Depression
questionnaire
120
human immunodeﬁciency virus see
HIV/AIDS
hygiene hypothesis
101
hyper-resonance
20
hypercalcaemia
lung cancer
133
sarcoidosis
149
hypercapnia
28, 182
hyperinﬂation
103
hypoxaemia
166
hypoxia
103
hypoxic drive
12
ibuprofen, cystic ﬁbrosis
95
IgE
antagonists
109
asthma
104
immune reconstitution
syndromes
65–6
immunodeﬁciency states
bronchiectasis
79–80
pneumonia
61–2, 62
see also HIV/AIDS
immunosuppression
194
infertility, cystic ﬁbrosis
91
inﬁltrates
142, 143, 145
inﬂuenza
55
HIV/AIDS
65
inhalers
110–12, 110–12
breath-actuated
110
correct technique
122–3
dry-powder
111, 111
metered-dose
110, 110
nebulisers
111–12, 112
spacer devices
110, 111
intercostal recession
4
intercostal tube drainage
171–2,
171
interferon-g release assays
75–6
interstitial lung disease
142–50
clinical presentation
142
connective tissue diseases
145–6,
146
differential diagnosis
142,
144
extrinsic allergic alveolitis
146–7,
147
idiopathic pulmonary
ﬁbrosis
143
investigations
142–3
sarcoidosis
147–50, 148, 149
interstitial pneumonia see
pneumonia, interstitial
interstitial pneumonitis
65
ipratropium
107, 113, 121, 126
isocyanates
152
isoniazid
adverse reactions
74
tuberculosis
72, 73
jugular venous pressure
16, 17
Kaposi’s sarcoma
65
Kartagener’s syndrome
81, 82
Klebsiella pneumoniae
59–60, 79,
85
kyphoscoliosis
186, 187
lactate dehydrogenase, pleural
effusion
175
latex
152
Legionella pneumophila
52, 54, 55,
60–1
Legionnaires’ disease
60
Lemiere’s disease
85
leukotriene receptor
antagonists
109
lobar pneumonia
54
lower respiratory tract
infections
52, 54
see also pneumonia
lungs
1–12
air movement
3
airway resistance
5–7, 5, 6
bronchial tree and alveoli
1–2,
2, 3
collapse see atelectasis
elastic properties
4, 5
gas exchange
7–12
perfusion
2–3
physiology
3–7, 4–6
lung abscess
84–5, 84
lung cancer
130–41
aetiology
130–2, 131, 131
asbestosis-related
132, 157, 158
diagnosis
132–5, 133–5
communication of
135–6
growth rates
132
mortality
131
non-small-cell
136, 138–9, 138
palliative care
139–40
pathology
132, 132
scar carcinoma
131
small-cell carcinoma
136
treatment
136–40, 137
lung compliance
4, 5
lung function tests
23–36
arterial blood gases
32–6, 32
carbon monoxide transfer
factor
28, 31
COPD
118–19
lung volumes
23–4, 24
ventilatory function
23–8
lung transplantation
192–5
COPD
126
indications
193, 194
prognosis
195
types of operation
192–3
bilateral lung transplant
192–3
heart-lung transplant
192
living lobar
transplantation
193
single-lung transplant
192
lung volume
23–4, 24
and airway resistance
7
218
Index

and site of maximal airway
resistance
7
lung volume reduction surgery
126
lymph nodes, enlargement
16
lymphoid interstitial
pneumonitis
65
lymphoma
65, 176
magnesium sulphate
108, 113
Mallory-Weiss syndrome
177
mannitol, cystic ﬁbrosis
94
Mantoux test
74
maximal mid-expiratory ﬂow
24–5
measles
79
meconium ileus
89
mediastinal masses
41–2, 42
mediastinal shift
170
mediastinoscopy
149
Medical Research Council Dyspnoea
Scale
120
Meigs’ syndrome
176
melanoptysis
14
mesothelioma
158–9, 159, 176
metabolic acidosis
34
metabolic alkalosis
34–5
methacholine/histamine
provocation tests
103
methylxanthines
123
metronidazole
lung abscess
85
pleural effusion
177
miliary tuberculosis
71–2
modaﬁnil, obstructive sleep
apnoea
190
mometasone
108
montelukast
109
Moraxella catarrhalis
84, 126
mucociliary escalator
80
mucolytics
123
muscles of respiration
3–4, 4
function tests
28
Mycobacterium abscessus
77, 89
Mycobacterium avium-intracellulare
complex
65, 77
Mycobacterium chelonae
77
Mycobacterium kansasii
77
Mycobacterium malmoense
77
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
68, 151
see also tuberculosis
Mycobacterium xenopi
77
Mycoplasma pneumoniae
54, 55,
58, 60
nasal polyps, cystic ﬁbrosis
92
nebulisers
111–12, 112
necrobacillosis
85
nedocromil
109
nicotine patches
121
nitric oxide
ARDS
183
exhaled
104
nitrofurantoin, lung ﬁbrosis
142
non-invasive ventilation
128
positive pressure
186
norepinephrine, ARDS
183
obliterative bronchiolitis
145, 154
obstructive sleep apnoea
15,
186–90, 188
clinical features
187–9, 189
pathogenesis
187
polysomnography
189
treatment
189–90
obstructive ventilatory defect
24, 25
occupational history
16
occupational lung disease
151–9
asbestos-related
156–9, 157–9
asthma
151–4
byssinosis
154
pneumoconiosis
154–5
popcorn worker’s lung
154
siderosis
156
silicosis
155–6, 156
oesophageal rupture
177
omalizumab
109
ornithosis
60
oxygen
arterial content
11
carriage by blood
9, 9
partial pressure see PO2
oxygen concentrator
125
oxygen desaturation
186, 187
oxygen saturation
32, 35
ARDS
182
oxygen therapy
ambulatory
125
asthma
113
COPD
124–5
emergency
127, 127
long-term
124–5
oxygen-carbon dioxide diagram
8
oxyhaemoglobin dissociation
curve
35
palpation
18–19, 19
Pancoast tumour
133, 134
pancreatic insufﬁciency, cystic
ﬁbrosis
89–90
pancreatitis, pulmonary
effusion
177
Panton-Valentine leukocidin
59
para-amino salicylic acid,
tuberculosis
73
parapneumonic effusion
176
paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnoea
14
PCO2
8, 32
PDE-4 inhibitors
123
peak expiratory ﬂow rate
6, 24,
26, 26
asthma
103
peak ﬂow diary
103
penicillins, pneumonia
58
pentamidine, Pneumocystis
jirovecii
64
percussion
20
percutaneous needle biopsy, lung
cancer
134, 135
pertussis
79
pet-derived allergens
99, 106
pH
32
physiological shunt
3
physiotherapy
cystic ﬁbrosis
93–4
pneumonia
83
pilocarpine iontophoresis
92
pink puffers
118, 119
plethysmography
27
pleural biopsy
175
pleural effusion
21, 173–7
asbestos-related
158
causes
176
clinical features
173
exudates
176–7
investigations
173–4, 174
pleural ﬂuid dynamics
173, 173
rheumatoid disease
145
transudates
176
pleural empyema
85
pleural ﬂuid aspiration
174
pneumonia
57
pleural plaques
157–8
pleural rubs
20
pleural thickening
158
pleurectomy
172
pleurisy, asbestos-related
158
pleuritic pain
15, 55, 83
pneumothorax
170
pleurodesis
172, 176
pneumococcal pneumonia
58–9,
59
pneumoconiosis
154–5
coalworker’s
154–5, 155
Pneumocystis jirovecii
62, 63–4, 65
pneumocystis pneumonia
61, 194
pneumonia
52–67
aspiration
55, 146
atypical pathogens
60
classiﬁcation
52–4, 53
clinical features
55–6
community-acquired
54, 58
cryptogenic organising
144
Haemophilus inﬂuenzae
59
hospital-acquired
54–5
Index 219

pneumonia (Continued )
immunocompromised
patients
61–2, 62
interstitial
acute
145
desquamative
145
idiopathic
143–5
lymphoid
145
usual
143
investigation
56–7, 57
Klebsiella
59–60
Legionella
52, 54, 55, 60–1
lobar
54
Mycoplasma
54, 55, 58, 60
pneumococcal
58–9, 59
Pneumocystis jirovecii
62, 63–4,
65
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
60
severity of
55, 56
site of infection
54
staphylococcal
59
treatment
57–8
pneumonitis
52
pneumothorax
4, 169–72
clinical features
170, 170, 171
cystic ﬁbrosis
89
pathogenesis
169–70
tension
21, 169
treatment
170–1
PO2
8–9, 8, 32
polyarteritis nodosa
167
polycythaemia
120
polysomnography
189
popcorn worker’s lung
154
positive end-expiratory
pressure
182
positron emission tomography
44
prednisolone
126
lung transplantation
194
pregnancy, pulmonary
embolism
164
Prevotella spp.
85
primaquine, Pneumocystis
jirovecii
64
progesterone, obstructive sleep
apnoea
190
protein C deﬁciency
160
protein S deﬁciency
160
protriptylline, obstructive sleep
apnoea
190
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
54, 84, 89
pneumonia
60
psittacosis
60
pulmonary angiography, pulmonary
embolism
163
pulmonary artery
2
pulmonary embolism
160–6
clinical features
161, 162
deep vein thrombosis
160–1
diagnosis
164
investigations
161, 163–4, 163
pregnancy
164
treatment
164–6
anticoagulant therapy
164–5
prophylaxis
165
thrombolytic therapy
164, 164
pulmonary ﬁbrosis
151
idiopathic
143
pulmonary hypertension
146,
166–7
cor pulmonale
120, 124, 166
HIV/AIDS
65
idiopathic
166–7
pulmonary infarcts, cavitation
39
pulmonary masses
38–9, 41
causes
41
pulmonary oedema
permeability
180
pressure
179–80, 180
pulmonary rehabilitation
123–4
pulmonary vascular disease
160–8
pulmonary vasculitis
167
pulse oximetry
35
COPD
119
obstructive sleep apnoea
189
pyrazinamide
adverse reactions
74
tuberculosis
72, 73
radioallergosorbent testing
(RAST)
104
radiotherapy, lung cancer
139
residual volume
24
asthma
103
respiration see breathing
respiratory acidosis
34
ARDS
182
respiratory alkalosis
34
respiratory bronchiolitis-interstitial
lung disease
145
respiratory failure
35–6
type 1
11, 35
type 2
11, 35
see also ARDS
respiratory quotient
8
respiratory rate
16
restrictive ventilatory defect
4, 24,
25, 28
reticular honeycomb pattern
42,
143, 145
rheumatoid disease
145–6, 146
rheumatoid nodules
145–6
rheumatoid pneumoconiosis see
Caplan’s syndrome
rhonchi see wheeze
rifampicin
adverse reactions
74
tuberculosis
72, 73
roﬂumilast
123
Saccharopolyspora rectivirgula
146
salbutamol
107, 113, 121, 126
salmeterol
107, 121
sarcoidosis
147–50, 148, 149
acute
148
bilateral hilar
lymphadenopathy
148, 149
erythema nodosum
148
chronic
148–50
extrapulmonary
149
pulmonary
148–9, 149
diagnosis
149–50
ocular
149
treatment
150
SARS
61
scalene muscles
4
severe acute respiratory syndrome
see SARS
shrinking lungs
146
siderosis
156
signs
13, 20, 21
silhouette sign
38
silicosis
155–6, 156
sinusitis, cystic ﬁbrosis
92
skin prick tests
103–4, 104
sleep-related breathing
disorders
185–91
central sleep apnoea
190
obstructive sleep apnoea
syndrome
186–90, 188
oxygen desaturation
186, 187
smoking
and COPD
117
and lung cancer
130
smoking cessation
120–1, 123
pharmacotherapy
121
snoring
15
social history
15
sodium cromoglycate
108–9
spacer devices
110, 111
spirometry
24, 25–6
asthma
102–3
COPD
118
sputum production, COPD
118
staphylococcal pneumonia
59
Staphylococcus aureus
54, 79, 85,
89, 176–7
Streptococcus milleri
177
Streptococcus pneumonia
54, 55,
58, 61, 79, 89, 126, 176
streptokinase, pleural effusion
177
streptomycin, tuberculosis
73
stridor
14, 16
subphrenic abscess
177
220
Index

sweat testing
92
Symbicort
107
symptoms
13–15, 14
see also individual symptoms
syndrome of inappropriate
anti-diuretic hormone
secretion
132
systemic lupus erythematosus
146
systemic sclerosis
(scleroderma)
146
tactile fremitus
18
tension pneumothorax
21, 169
terbutaline
107, 113, 121
tetracycline, COPD
126
theophylline
108, 123
Thermoactinomyces vulgaris
146
thoracic cage disorders
186
thoracocentesis see pleural ﬂuid
aspiration
thoracoplasty
73
thoracoscopy, video-assisted
142,
175
thrombolytics, pulmonary
embolism
165, 165
tidal volume
23
tinzaparin
164, 166
tiotropium
107, 122
tobacco smoke, exposure to
151
tobramycin
cystic ﬁbrosis
94
pneumonia
58
total lung capacity
23, 27–8
asthma
103
trachea
1
position of
18
tracheostomy
190
transbronchial biopsy
142, 143
transfer factor
28
transudates
176
trimethoprim, COPD
126
tuberculin testing
74–6, 75
tuberculosis
68–77
clinical course
68–70, 70
pleural effusion
177
post-primary tuberculosis
70
primary tuberculosis
69
control
76
BCG vaccination
76
contact tracing
76
immigrant screening
76
diagnosis
70–2, 71
drug-resistant
73–4
epidemiology
68, 69
HIV/AIDS
64
immunocompromised
patients
61
latent
74
miliary
71–2
treatment
72–4, 72
adverse reactions
74
ultrasound
42
endobronchial
135
pleural effusion
174, 175
upper respiratory tract
infections
54
uvulopalatopharyngoplasty
190
V/Q see ventilation/perfusion
matching
varenicline
121
ventilation
high-frequency jet
182
inverse ratio
182
non-invasive
128, 186
positive pressure
186
ventilation/perfusion lung scan,
pulmonary embolism
163–4
ventilation/perfusion
matching
8
local differences
9–10, 9, 10
ventilatory function
23–8
ventilatory support, COPD
127–8
vital capacity
24
supine
28
vocal resonance
20
Wegener’s granulomatosis
167
cavitation
39
wheeze
14, 16, 20
whispering pectoriloquy
20
whooping cough see pertussis
wood dusts
152
xenotransplantation
195
zaﬁrlukast
109
Ziehl-Neelsen stain
72
Index 221
UPLOADED BY [STORMRG]

