Introductory Human Physiology 
 
         ©copyright Jennifer Carbrey & Emma Jakoi 
 
                                                                                            
 
6. CO2 transport and V/Q mismatch 
 
CARBON DIOXIDE TRANSPORT 
Carbon dioxide is a product of oxidative metabolism. Unlike O2, CO2 is very soluble in 
water and does not need a carrier for transport in the blood. Most (60%) of the carbon 
dioxide in blood is transported as bicarbonate (HCO3
-). The conversion of CO2 to 
bicarbonate is catalyzed by the enzyme carbonic anhydrase located inside red blood 
cells.  
 
 
CO2 + H2O = H2CO3 = HCO3
- + H+ 
 
Once formed, the HCO3
- is transported out of the RBC into the plasma in exchange for 
Cl-. 
 
About 10% of the total CO2 in blood is transported as dissolved CO2. The amount 
dissolved is proportional to the PCO2, and to the solubility coefficient for CO2. At PaCO2 
= 40 mm Hg, there would be approximately 26.8 ml CO2/L of plasma.  
 
The remaining 30% of the CO2 combines with Hb to form carbamino-hemoglobin 
compounds. 
 
Because CO2 diffuses 20X more rapidly than O2, a rise in blood CO2 can be 
compensated by an increase in ventilatory rate. Hyperventilation increases the 
amount of CO2 removed from the body and increases the unloading of CO2 from 
the blood in the lung.     
 
Ventilation & Perfusion 
Ventilation is the process of bringing air in and out of the lungs. Perfusion is the process 
of bringing blood in and out of the lung capillary bed to allow for gas exchange. The 
right ventricle delivers blood to the lungs at relatively low pressures (mean pressure of 
15 mmHg). However, lung perfusion pressure can increase for multiple reasons 
including obstruction of vessels (i.e., embolism) or increased resistance to flow (i.e., 
fibrosis). The lung will compensate for lowered blood flow (1) by recruiting other 
capillary beds within the lung and (2) by distention of small vessels. If these responses 
are inadequate, then pressure within the pulmonary artery will rise causing a rise in right 
ventricular pressure. This is called pulmonary hypertension.  
 
Under normal conditions, regulatory mechanisms within the lung match ventilation (V) 
to perfusion (Q) to optimize the oxygenation of the blood. V/Q mismatch can occur 
when ventilated alveoli are not perfused giving a V/Q ratio of infinity and conversely, 
when unventilated alveoli are perfused, giving a V/Q ratio of zero. This latter condition is 
equivalent to shunting venous blood from the right to the left side of the heart bypassing 
the lungs. Usually lung disease is progressive. It leads to a gradual worsening of either 
ventilation or perfusion and therefore the V/Q mismatch is intermediate between zero 
and infinity. Many believe that V/Q mismatching is the most common cause of low 
PaO2. 
 

Introductory Human Physiology 
 
         ©copyright Jennifer Carbrey & Emma Jakoi 
 
                                                                                            
 
In a normal individual at the level of the lung, alveolar ventilation is about 4.0 
L/min and pulmonary blood flow is about 5.0 L/min. This gives a V/Q = 0.8 overall.   
Note that V/Q mismatch can occur within the normal lung because blood flow is never 
perfectly uniform in this organ. In a normal person while standing, gravitational pull 
causes the apex of the lung to be more expanded than within the base thereby 
compressing the capillaries and reducing perfusion; V/Q ratios are greater than 1 in the 
apex. In contrast, perfusion is greater than ventilation at the base of the lung in an 
upright individual; V/Q ratios are less than 1.  
One mechanism that compensates for V/Q mismatch is the vasoconstriction of the 
lung vasculature in response to hypoxia (low O2). [Note that this is in contrast to the 
smooth muscle of the systemic vasculature which dilates in response to low O2 
conditions.] Vasoconstriction of the lung vasculature to hypoxia enables the blood 
to be shunted away from poorly ventilated areas. This occurs without an increase in 
pulmonary artery perfusion pressure because of the large capacity of the pulmonary 
capillaries.  
 
 
A second compensation that compensates for V/Q mismatch occurs when PACO2 falls 
(e.g. when V/Q ratio increases). In this instance, the concentration of hydrogen ions 
(H+) in and around the smooth muscle of the airways (bronchioles) decreases. This 
reduction in H+ results in airway constriction and a shift of ventilation away from the 
areas which are over ventilated (i.e., not perfused). 

