HAEMATOLOGY
Lecture Notes
Chris S. R. Hatton
Nevin C. Hughes-Jones
Deborah Hay
David Keeling
9th Edition
LN
 


Haematology
Lecture Notes

Companion website
Th is book is accompanied by a companion website:
www.lecturenoteseries.com/haematology
Th e website includes:
• Key revision points for each chapter in both PowerPoint and PDF format
• Interactive multiple choice questions for each chapter
• Figures from the book in PowerPoint format
Th is new edition is also available as an e-book.
For more details, please see
www.wiley.com/buy/9780470673591
or scan this QR code:

Haematology
Lecture Notes
Chris S.R. Hatton
FRCP, FRCPath
Consultant Haematologist
Department of Haematology
The John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford
Nevin C. Hughes-Jones
DM, PhD, MA, FRCP, FRS
Former Member of the Scientifi c Staff
Medical Research Council’s Molecular Immunopathology Unit, and of the 
Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge
Deborah Hay
MRCP, FRCPath
Wellcome Trust Clinical Training Fellow
MRC Molecular Haematology Unit
Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, Oxford
David Keeling
MD, FRCP, FRCPath
Consultant Haematologist
Oxford Haemophilia and Thrombosis Centre, Oxford
Ninth Edition
A John Wiley & Sons, Ltd., Publication

Th is edition fi rst published 2013 © 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd
Wiley-Blackwell is an imprint of John Wiley & Sons, formed by the merger of Wiley’s global 
Scientifi c, Technical and Medical business with Blackwell Publishing. 
Registered offi  ce:   John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, Th e Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, 
PO19 8SQ, UK
Editorial offi  ces:  9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 2DQ, UK
Th e Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK
111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030-5774, USA
For details of our global editorial offi  ces, for customer services and for information about how 
to apply for permission to reuse the copyright material in this book please see our website at 
www.wiley.com/wiley-blackwell.
Th e right of the author to be identifi ed as the author of this work has been asserted in accordance 
with the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, 
or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or 
otherwise, except as permitted by the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, without the prior 
permission of the publisher.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. All 
brand names and product names used in this book are trade names, service marks, trademarks or 
registered trademarks of their respective owners. Th e publisher is not associated with any product or 
vendor mentioned in this book. Th is publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative 
information in regard to the subject matter covered. It is sold on the understanding that the 
publisher is not engaged in rendering professional services. If professional advice or other expert 
assistance is required, the services of a competent professional should be sought.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Lecture notes. Haematology / Nevin C. Hughes-Jones ... [et al.]. — 9th ed.
  p. ; cm.
 Haematology
 Rev. ed. of: Lecture notes. Haematology / N.C. Hughes-Jones, S.N. Wickramasinghe, C.S.R. 
Hatton. 8th ed. 2009.
 Includes bibliographical references and index.
 ISBN 978-0-470-67359-1 (pbk. : alk. paper)
 I. Hughes-Jones, N. C. (Nevin Campbell) II. Title: Haematology. 
 [DNLM: 1. Hematologic Diseases. 2. Blood Physiological Processes. WH 120]
 616.1’5—dc23
  2012031978
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print 
may not be available in electronic books.
Cover image: iStock © Activ Design
Cover design by Grounded Design
Set in 8.5/11pt Utopia Std by Aptara®
 Inc., New Delhi, India 
1 2013

Contents
Preface to the fi rst edition vi
Preface to the ninth edition vii
 1 An introduction to haematopoiesis, 1
 2 Anaemia: General principles, 10 
 3 Haemolytic anaemias, 26 
 4 Disorders of globin synthesis, 39 
 5 Conditions associated with white cell abnormalities, 51 
 6 Structure and function of lymphoid tissue, 59 
 7 Lymphomas: General principles, 65 
 8 Classifi cation of lymphoma, 73 
 9 Neoplastic disorders of lymphoid cells, 76 
10 Myeloma and other paraproteinaemias, 87 
11 Neoplastic disorders of myeloid cells, 93 
12 Bone marrow transplantation, 104 
13 Aplastic anaemia and pure red cell aplasia, 110 
14 Haemostasis, abnormal bleeding and anticoagulant therapy, 114 
15 Blood groups and blood transfusion, 132
16 Further reading, 143
Index, 147
Companion website
Th is book is accompanied by a companion website:
www.lecturenoteseries.com/haematology
Th e website includes:
• Key revision points for each chapter in both PowerPoint and PDF format
• Interactive multiple choice questions for each chapter
• Figures from the book in PowerPoint format

Preface to the  fi rst edition
Th ese lecture notes are designed to supply the basic 
knowledge of both the clinical and laboratory aspects 
of haematological diseases and blood transfusion. 
Th e content is broadly similar to that of the course 
given to medical students by the Department of Hae-
matology at St. Mary’s Hospital Medical School. Ref-
erences have been cited so that those who need to 
extend their knowledge in any particular fi eld can do 
so. Most of the journals and books that are mentioned 
are those commonly found in every library.
At the end of each chapter I have supplied learn-
ing objectives in studying each disease. Th ere are two 
main purposes in these objectives. First, they facili-
tate the learning process, since the process of acquisi-
tion, retention, and recall of data is greatly helped if 
the facts and concepts are centred around a particular 
objective. Secondly, many objectives are closely related 
to the practical problems encountered in the diagnosis 
and treatment of patients. For instance, the following 
objectives: “to understand the method of diff eren-
tiation of megaloblastic anaemia due to vitamin B12 
defi ciency from that due to folate defi ciency” and “to 
understand the basis for the diff erentiation of leu-
kaemia into acute and chronic forms based on the 
clinical picture and on the peripheral blood fi ndings” 
are practical problems encountered frequently in the 
haematology laboratory. A point of more immediate 
interest to the undergraduate is that examiners set-
ting either multiple choice or essay questions will be 
searching for the same knowledge that is required in 
answering the objectives.
I should like to thank Prof. P.L. Mollison, Dr. P. 
Barkhan, Dr. I. Chanarin, Dr. G.J. Jenkins, and Dr. M.S. 
Rose for their criticism and helpful suggestions dur-
ing the preparation of the manuscript and Mrs. Inge 
Barnett for typing the several drafts and fi nal type-
script.
N.C. Hughes-Jones

Preface to the ninth edition
Th e science and practice of haematology continue to 
advance at an extraordinary rate. At the same time, 
the volume of data that medical students are required 
to assimilate across all disciplines continues to ex-
pand. Th erefore, our aim in revising the text of Lec-
ture Notes in Haematology was to provide a compre-
hensive overview of this diverse subject in a way that 
promotes understanding of pathophysiological con-
cepts, while highlighting the most up-to-date aspects 
of clinical practice. Further, to enhance active learn-
ing, we have also provided a companion website with 
self-test multiple-choice questions and explanations.
Dr Sunil Wickramasinghe was actively involved in 
Lecture Notes from its inception in the 1970s until the 
eighth edition. His tragically premature death in 2009 
deprives us of a senior author and highly valued col-
league. His contribution has been greatly missed.
We have been fortunate in having the help of many 
of our clinical colleagues for this edition: special 
thanks are due to Dr Karthik Ramasamy and Dr Adam 
Mead, both of Oxford University Hospitals, for kindly 
reviewing the chapters on myeloma and myeloid ma-
lignancies respectively. As in previous editions, we 
also express our thanks to Professor Kevin Gatter of 
the Nuffi  eld Department of Clinical and Laboratory 
Sciences, University of Oxford, for generously provid-
ing many of the photomicrographs used in this text.
As ever, we are grateful to readers who have taken 
the time to give us valuable feedback on earlier edi-
tions. We hope that the ninth edition of Haematology 
Lecture Notes provides a useful introduction to this 
fascinating area of medicine.
Chris S. R. Hatton
Nevin C. Hughes-Jones
Deborah Hay
David Keeling


Haematology Lecture Notes, Ninth edition. C.S.R. Hatton, N.C. Hughes-Jones, D. Hay and D. Keeling. © 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
myeloproliferative disorders), haemopoietic tissue 
will expand and may extend into marrow cavities 
that do not normally support haemopoiesis in the 
adult. Foci of haemopoietic tissue may also appear in 
the adult liver and spleen (known as extramedullary 
haemopoiesis).
Haemopoietic stem cells
Th e process of haemopoiesis involves both the speci-
fi cation of individual blood cell lineages and cellular 
proliferation to maintain adequate circulating num-
bers of cells throughout life. Th is is accomplished us-
ing the unique properties of haemopoietic stem cells.
Long-term haemopoietic stem cells (HSCs) in the 
bone marrow are capable of both self-renewal and 
diff erentiation into the progenitors of individual 
blood cell lineages. Th e progenitor cells of individual 
lineages then undergo many rounds of division and 
further diff erentiation in order to yield populations of 
mature blood cells. Th is process can be represented as 
a hierarchy of cells, with HSCs giving rise to popula-
tions of precursor cells, which in turn give rise to cells 
increasingly committed to producing a single type of 
mature blood cell (Figure 1.1). Th us, the immediate 
progeny of HSCs are the multipotent progenitor cells, 
which have limited self-renewal capacity but retain 
Where is blood formed?
Blood is normally formed early in the process of 
embryogenesis, with haemopoietic stem cells origi-
nating in the para-aortic mesoderm of the embryo. 
Primitive red blood cells, platelet precursors and 
macrophages are initially formed in the vasculature 
of the extra-embryonic yolk sac, before the principal 
site of haemopoiesis shifts to the fetal liver at around 
fi ve to eight weeks’ gestation. Th e liver remains the 
main source of blood in the fetus until shortly before 
birth, although the bone marrow starts to develop 
haemopoietic activity from as early as 10 weeks’ 
gestation. 
After birth, the marrow is the sole site of haemo-
poiesis in healthy individuals. During the fi rst few 
years of life, nearly all the marrow cavities contain 
red haemopoietic marrow, but this recedes such that 
by adulthood haemopoiesis is limited to marrow in 
the vertebrae, pelvis, sternum and the proximal ends 
of the femora and humeri, with minor contributions 
from the skull bones, ribs and scapulae. 
Although the sites of haemopoiesis in the adult are 
therefore relatively limited, other sites retain their ca-
pacity to produce blood cells if needed. In conditions 
in which there is an increased haemopoietic drive 
(such as chronic haemolytic anaemias and chronic 
An introduction to 
haematopoiesis 
Learning objectives
✓ To understand the process of formation of blood cells
✓ To understand the concept of a stem cell
✓ To appreciate the process of lineage specifi cation of blood cells
✓ To recognize the diff erent types of mature blood cell
✓ To understand the normal role of each mature cell type in the blood
1

2 
An introduction to haematopoiesis
the ability to diff erentiate into all blood cell lineages. 
Although there is still debate about exactly how line-
age restricted subsequent precursors are, the concept 
of sequential and irreversible diff erentiation is widely 
accepted. In Figure 1.1, the HSC is seen giving rise to 
two major lineages: the lymphoid lineage, in which a 
common lymphoid progenitor gives rise to B and T 
cells; and a myeloid lineage, with a common myeloid 
progenitor giving rise to red cells, granulocytes and 
platelets. Th e division of haemopoiesis into myeloid 
and lymphoid compartments is fundamental to an 
understanding of haematological disease.
Th e process of haemopoiesis outlined above 
has several advantages. First, it permits the massive 
Common myeloid
progenitor
Long-term HSC
d
i
o
h
p
m
yl 
n
o
m
m
o
C
C
S
H
 
m
r
e
t-tr
o
h
S
progenitor
MEP
GMP
Erythroid
progenitor
Megakaryocyte
Erythrocytes
Platelets
Precursor
B cell
Precursor
T cell
NK cell
precursors
B cells,
plasma
cells
T helper
cells,
cytotoxic
T cells
NK cell
Neutrophil
and monocyte
precursor
Neutrophil
Monocyte
Macrophage
Eosinophil
precursor
Eosinophil
Basophil
Basophil
precursor
Figure 1.1 A schematic representation of the process of haemopoiesis. Multipotent stem cells give rise to lymphoid 
(pink) and myeloid (blue) lineages. The myeloid lineage further divides into granulocytic, erythroid and megakaryocytic 
(platelet) lineages. As cells progress through this process of differentiation, they accrue more functional specialization 
and lose their multipotency.
Abbreviations: HSC – haemopoietic stem cell; MEP – megakaryocyte/erythroid progenitor; GMP – granulocyte 
macrophage progenitor; NK – natural killer

An introduction to haematopoiesis 3
expansion of cell numbers needed to maintain an ad-
equate population of mature blood cells. It also means 
that the production of each type of mature blood cell 
can be controlled individually, tailoring production to 
specifi c physiological requirements. Finally it requires 
relatively little proliferative activity on the part of the 
long-term HSCs themselves, thereby minimizing the 
risk of developing mutations in these crucial cells 
during DNA replication and cell division.
HSCs were fi rst detected and defi ned function-
ally through experiments in which a subset of cells 
from the bone marrow were shown to produce blood 
cells of all lineages when transplanted into lethally 
irradiated mice, which have no haemopoietic po-
tential of their own. Subsequent work has used cell 
surface markers and fl ow cytometric techniques (see 
Chapter 5) to defi ne this population: positivity for the 
cell surface marker CD34 combined with negativity 
for CD38 describes a population of cells that is also 
capable of regenerating all cell lineages from the bone 
marrow. Th e cell surface marker CD34 is also used to 
isolate cells with multipotency and self-renewal ca-
pacity for stem cell transplantation. 
Differentiating blood cells
Precisely how the ultimate lineage choice of diff erenti-
ating progenitor cells is determined remains a subject of 
research. It has been argued that factors intrinsic to the 
HSC itself, such as stochastic fl uctuations in transcrip-
tion factors, may direct lineage specifi cation. However, 
it is also known that proper regulation of HSCs and 
progenitor cells requires their interaction with extrin-
sic factors, such as non-haemopoietic cells in the bone 
marrow niche (e.g. endothelial cells and osteoblastic 
progenitors). HSCs and progenitor cells are not ran-
domly distributed in the marrow, but exist in ordered 
proximity relative to mesenchymal cells, endothelial 
cells and the vasculature. Signalling from these non-
haemopoietic cells, plus physiochemical cues such as 
hypoxia and blood fl ow, are therefore likely to infl uence 
the transcriptional activity and fate of HSCs.
Myelopoiesis
Signalling through myeloid growth factors such as 
granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating factor 
(GM-CSF) is essential for the survival and proliferation 
of myeloid cells. Th e specifi cation of the myeloid line-
age is also known to require the interaction of a series 
of specifi c transcription factors, including C/EBPα, Core 
Binding Factor and c-Myb. As well as being essential for 
the normal formation of myeloid cells, it is becoming 
clear that an appreciation of these factors and others like 
them is critical for an understanding of myeloid diseas-
es such as acute myeloid leukaemia (see Chapter 11). 
Th e separation of the erythroid and megakaryo-
cytic components of myelopoiesis requires the action 
of transcription factors GATA1, NF-E2 and SCL, and 
signalling through the growth factors thrombopoietin 
and erythropoietin. 
Granulocytes and their function
Morphologically, myeloblasts are the earliest recog-
nizable granulocytic cells. Th ey are large cells, with 
open nuclear chromatin (Figure 1.2(a)). Th e succes-
sive stages through which a myeloblast matures into 
circulating neutrophil granulocytes are termed pro-
myelocytes (Figure 1.2(b)), neutrophil myelocytes 
(Figure 1.2(c)), neutrophil metamyelocytes and neu-
trophil band cells. Cell division occurs in myeloblasts, 
promyelocytes and myelocytes, but not normally in 
metamyelocytes and band cells.
Th e maturation process of the neutrophil lineage is 
characterized by a reduction in size of the cell, along 
with the acquisition of granules containing agents es-
sential for their microbicidal function. Th e nucleus 
also gradually begins to adopt its characteristic seg-
mented shape (Figure 1.3).
Mature neutrophils have the ability to migrate 
to areas of infl ammation (chemotaxis), where they 
become marginated in the vessel lumen and pass 
into the tissues through interaction with selectins, 
integrins and other cell adhesion molecules. Once 
primed by cytokines such as TNFα and IFNγ, neu-
trophils are able to phagocytose opsonized microbes, 
and destroy them by deploying their toxic intracel-
lular contents. Th is release of reactive oxygen species 
(the ‘respiratory burst’) provides a substrate for the 
enzyme myeloperoxidase (MPO), which then gener-
ates hypochlorous acid with direct cytotoxic eff ects. 
Th e granules of neutrophils also contain an array of 
antimicrobial agents, including defensins, chymot-
rypsin and gelatinases.
Eosinophils (a subset of granulocytes with bright 
pink granules on haematoxylin and eosin-stained 
blood fi lms) have a similar ability to phagocytose and 
destroy micro-organisms, but are classically associ-
ated with the immune response to parasitic infection. 
Th ey are often found in high numbers in patients with 
allergy and atopy. IL-5 signalling appears to be critical 
for their diff erentiation from granulocyte precursors.
Basophils are the least common of the granulo-
cytes. Th ey contain very prominent cytoplasmic 

4 
An introduction to haematopoiesis
(a)
(c)
(b)
Figure 1.2 Neutrophil precursors from normal bone marrow. (a) Myeloblast (arrowed); the other nucleated cells near 
the myeloblast are an eosinophil granulocyte (centre) and two polychromatic erythroblasts. (b) Promyelocyte (arrowed); 
the other n ucleated cells are two polychromatic erythroblasts and a neutrophil metamyelocyte. (c) Neutrophil 
myelocyte (arrowed); there are two neutrophil band cells adjacent to the myelocyte.

An introduction to haematopoiesis 5
granules on H&E staining, which have stores of his-
tamine and heparin as well as proteolytic enzymes. 
Th ey are involved in a variety of immune and infl am-
matory responses, but it is unusual to see a marked 
elevation or depression in their numbers in specifi c 
reactive conditions.
Monocytopoiesis and monocyte 
function
Th e cell classes belonging to the monocyte–
macrophage lineage are, in increasing order of matu-
rity, monoblasts, promonocytes, marrow monocytes, 
blood monocytes and tissue macrophages. Th eir 
synthesis is controlled in part by the activity of GM-
CSF. Functionally, monocytes have a variety of im-
mune roles: as the precursors of tissue macrophages 
and dendritic cells, their roles include phagocytosis, 
antibody presentation to other immune cells, and a 
contribution to the cytokine milieu. Phagocytosis of 
micro-organisms and cells coated with antibody (with 
their exposed Fc fragments) and complement occurs 
via binding to Fc and C3b receptors on the surface of 
monocytes and macrophages. Bacteria and fungi that 
are not antibody coated are phagocytosed after bind-
ing to mannose receptors on the phagocyte surface. As 
with neutrophils, the killing of phagocytosed micro-
organisms by monocytes/macrophages involves super-
oxide dependent and O2- independent mechanisms.
Megakaryocytes and platelet 
function
Megakaryocytes are the cells which give rise to plate-
lets. During megakaryocyte formation, driven by the 
action of the growth factor thrombopoietin (TPO), 
there is replication of DNA without cell division. Th is 
leads to the generation of very large mononucleate cells 
that are markedly polyploid. A mature megakaryocyte 
is illustrated in Figure 1.4. Large numbers of platelets 
are formed from the cytoplasm of each mature meg-
akaryocyte; these are rapidly discharged directly into 
the marrow sinusoids. Th e residual ‘bare’ megakaryo-
cyte nucleus is then phagocytosed by macrophages.
TPO is the key regulator of normal platelet produc-
tion. Th is protein, which is produced by the liver, binds 
to TPO receptors on the megakaryocyte membrane. 
Downstream signalling through mechanisms includ-
ing the JAK/STAT pathway allows an increase in meg-
akaryocyte ploidy, and also cytoplasmic maturation 
such that increased numbers of platelets are released. 
TPO is also able to bind to the surface of platelets them-
selves; thus when platelet numbers are high, TPO is 
sequestered on the platelet membranes, leaving less 
available to act on the megakaryocytes to promote fur-
ther platelet production. In this way, a negative feed-
back loop is created, maintaining platelet numbers 
within stable limits.
Th e fundamental role of platelets is in primary 
haemostasis, through their interactions with von 
Willebrand factor and the exposed collagen of dam-
aged endothelial surfaces (see Chapter 14).
Figure 1.3 Monocyte and two neutrophil granulocytes – 
the monocyte has a pale, greyish-blue vacuolated 
cytoplasm.
Figure 1.4 Mature megakaryocyte (centre). This is a 
very large cell with a single lobulated nucleus. Compare 
the size of the megakaryocyte with that of the other 
nucleated marrow cells in this fi gure.

6 
An introduction to haematopoiesis
Erythropoiesis and red cell 
function
Th e specifi cation of the erythroid lineage requires a 
balanced interaction between transcription factors 
GATA1 and other haemopoietic transcription factors, 
including PU.1 and FOG1. Once committed to an 
erythroid fate, the expansion of erythroid precursors 
takes place, driven largely by signalling through the 
erythropoietin receptor.
Th e hormone erythropoietin is expressed prin-
cipally in the cortical interstitial cells of the kidney, 
where its transcription is modulated in response 
to hypoxaemia. Th e transcription factor hypoxia in-
ducible factor (HIF-1) is induced in cells exposed to 
hypoxaemic conditions enhances expression of the 
erythropoietin gene. Increased levels of erythropoi-
etin are therefore available to interact with the Epo 
receptor on red cell progenitor membranes, activat-
ing an erythroid-specifi c signal transduction cascade, 
and leading to enhanced proliferation and terminal 
diff erentiation of erythroid cells.
Morphologically, the diff erentiation and matura-
tion of erythroid cells are shown in Figure 1.5. Pro-
erythroblasts are early erythroid progenitors in the 
bone marrow recognizable by their large size, their 
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 1.5 (a) Proerythroblast, (b) basophilic normoblast, (c) two early polychromatic normoblasts, (d) two late 
polychromatic normoblasts and (e) two more mature late polychromatic normoblasts. The condensed chromatin in the 
basophilic normoblast is slightly coarser than in the proerythroblast. The nuclei of the late polychromatic normoblasts 
contain large masses of condensed chromatin.

An introduction to haematopoiesis 7
dark blue cytoplasm, their dispersed nuclear chro-
matin and nucleoli. As the cells mature, they become 
smaller with less basophilic cytoplasm (see Fig-
ure 1.5). Cell division continues until the cells reach 
the late polychromatic normoblast stage, when cells 
extrude their nucleus. At this point the cell is termed 
a reticulocyte (Figure 1.6) and is released from the 
marrow into the peripheral blood. Reticulocytes are 
characterized by their slightly larger size and bluish 
staining contrasted with mature red cells. After one 
to two days in circulation, reticulocytes lose their re-
maining ribosomes and become mature red cells.
Th e red cell function is to carry oxygen, bound to 
the haem moiety of haemoglobin, from the lungs 
to the peripheral tissues. Th e details of haemoglob-
in structure and function (and diseases resulting 
from perturbation of these) are discussed further in 
Chapter 4.
Lymphopoiesis
Th e structure and function of lymphoid tissue are 
the focus of Chapter 6. Lymphoid cells are thought 
to arise from multilymphoid progenitor cells in the 
fetal marrow. Although incompletely character-
ized, these progenitors are known to feature CD45 
and CD7 cell surface markers. Th e transcription 
factor Ikaros has been shown to be critical for lym-
phopoiesis in mouse models; Pax5 is among several 
transcription factors needed for B cell development, 
while GATA3 and Notch signalling are essential for T 
cell maturation. 
Th e development of B lymphocytes commences 
in the fetal liver and fetal marrow. Here, progeni-
tor B cells develop into pre-B cells (defi ned by the 
presence of the cytoplasmic μ chain of the B-cell 
receptor) and then into mature B cells. During this 
time, the genes for the immunoglobulin light and 
heavy chains are rearranged, allowing the produc-
tion of immunoglobulins with a wide array of an-
tigenic specifi cities. Subsequent B cell maturation 
requires antigen exposure in the lymph nodes and 
other secondary lymphoid tissues, with the mature 
B cell having the capacity to recognize non-self 
antigens and produce large quantities of specifi c 
immunoglobulin.
T cells, by contrast, are formed in the thymus, where 
lymphocyte progenitors from the fetal liver migrate in 
early gestation. Th ese earliest immature T cells express 
neither CD4 nor CD8 and undergo rearrangement of 
the T cell receptor genes to permit cell surface expres-
sion of the T cell receptor (TCR). As with the surface 
immunoglobulin or B cell receptor, the process of re-
arrangement yields a vast collection of potential T cell 
receptors, with the ability to recognize a wide range of 
diff erent antigens. During the process of maturation, 
T cells acquire both CD4 and CD8 cell surface markers 
(double positive thymocytes) and undergo a process 
of positive selection to ensure that the survival only of 
those that are able to interact adequately with MHC 
molecules on antigen-presenting cells. T cells that 
interact with MHC Class I become CD8 positive only, 
while those that interact with MHC class II down-reg-
ulate their CD8 expression and become CD4 T cells. A 
further phase of negative selection ensures that T cells 
that interact very strongly with ‘self-antigens’ in the 
thymus undergo apoptosis. 
CD4+ lymphocytes are known as T ‘helper’ cells, 
and they form the majority of the circulating T cell 
population. Their roles include the production of 
cytokines to promote an inflammatory response 
in presence of the appropriate antigen. Such cy-
tokines include interferon γ (from the Th1 class of 
CD4+ cells) and interleukins 4, 5 and 13 (from the 
Th2 subset of CD4+ cells). The effects of cytokine 
production include activation of the monocyte/
macrophage system, the promotion of granulocyte 
maturation and the induction of antibody synthesis 
by B cells. 
CD8+ lymphocytes are T suppressor/cytotoxic 
cells, comprising approximately one quarter of the T 
cells in the peripheral blood. Th eir function is to de-
stroy any cells expressing a peptide to which their T 
cell receptor can bind (e.g. virally infected cells).
A small minority of mature lymphocytes are distinct 
from both B and T cell lineages. Th ese are the natural 
Figure 1.6 Reticulocytes in peripheral blood stained 
supravitally with brilliant cresyl blue. Note the reticulum of 
precipitated ribosomes.

8 
An introduction to haematopoiesis
killer (NK) cells, which have a role in the innate im-
mune system, through cell-mediated cytotoxicity.
All these stages of both B and T cell develop-
ment have the morphological features of either 
lymphoblasts or lymphocytes. Th e identifi cation of 
diff erent lymphocyte precursors is therefore based 
not on morphology but on properties including re-
activity with certain monoclonal antibodies, their 
Table 1.1 The sequence of events during B-cell differentiation.
Characteristic
Pre-pre-B cell
Pre-B cell
Immature B cell
Mature B cell
Plasma cell
Heavy-chain genes 
rearranged
+
+
+
+
+
Light-chain genes 
rearranged
−/+
+
+
+
+
Terminal 
deoxynucleotidyl-
transferase
+
+/−
−
−
−
Cytoplasmic μ-chains 
expressed
−
+
−
−
−
Surface IgM (but not 
IgD) expressed
−
−
+
−
−
Surface IgM and IgD 
expressed
−
−
−
+
−
Cytoplasmic Ig 
expressed
−
−
−
−
+
CD10
+
+
−
−
−
CD19 and CD20
+
+
+
+
+
Table 1.2 The sequence of events during T-cell differentiation.
Characteristic
Pre-T cell
Early 
thymocyte
Intermediate 
thymocyte
Late thymocyte
Mature T 
cell
CD7
+
+
+
+
+
Terminal deoxynucleotidyl-
transferase
−/+
+
+
−
−
TCR γ genes rearranged/
deleted
−
+
+
+
+
TCR β genes rearranged
−
−
+
+
+
TCR α genes rearranged
−
−
−/+
+
+
CD2
−
+
+
+
+
CD3
−
+
+
+
+
CD4 and CD8
−
−
−/+
−
−
CD4 or CD8
−
−
−
+
+
Note: TCR — T-cell receptor.
immunoglobulin gene or TCR gene rearrangement 
status, and the presence of immunoglobulin or TCR 
on the surface membrane (Tables 1.1 and 1.2). In 
the peripheral blood, lymphocytes may be small 
and compact (Figure 1.7) or may appear large with 
azurophilic cytoplasmic granules (Figure 1.8). Such 
large granular lymphocytes include cytotoxic T cells 
and NK cells. 

An introduction to haematopoiesis 9
Summary
Table 1.3 summarizes the role of each mature cell 
type in the peripheral blood. It is the abnormal 
Figure 1.7 A small lymphocyte in a normal blood smear.
Figure 1.8 A large lymphocyte with several azurophilic 
cytoplasmic granules. Large granular lymphocytes 
include cytotoxic T cells and natural killer (NK) cells. 
Source: Courtesy of Dr Barbara Bain.
production, function or destruction of these cells that 
constitutes the study of clinical haematology, and 
that forms the basis of the rest of this text.
Table 1.3 The main functions of blood cells.
Type of cell
Main functions
Red blood cells (erythrocytes)
Transport O2 from lungs to tissues (see Chapters 2 and 4)
Neutrophil granulocytes
Chemotaxis, phagocytosis, killing of phagocytosed bacteria
Eosinophil granulocytes
All neutrophil functions listed above, effector cells for antibody-dependent 
damage to metazoal parasites, regulate immediate-type hypersensitivity 
reactions (inactivate histamine and leukotrienes released by basophils and 
mast cells)
Basophil granulocytes
Mediate immediate-type hypersensitivity (IgE-coated basophils react 
with specifi c antigen and release histamine and leukotrienes), modulate 
infl ammatory responses by releasing heparin and proteases
Monocytes and macrophages
Chemotaxis, phagocytosis, killing of some micro-organisms, antigen 
presentation, release of IL-1 and TNF that stimulate bone marrow stromal 
cells to produce GM-CSF, G-CSF, M-CSF and IL-6
Platelets
Adhere to subendothelial connective tissue, participate in primary 
haemostasis
Lymphocytes
Critical for immune responses and production of haemopoietic growth 
factors

Haematology Lecture Notes, Ninth edition. C.S.R. Hatton, N.C. Hughes-Jones, D. Hay and D. Keeling. © 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
such as pregnancy will also have a predictable eff ect 
on haemoglobin concentration and should be taken 
into account when interpreting the full blood count. 
Symptoms and signs 
of anaemia
When anaemia develops slowly, the associated 
symptoms are often very mild, since the body has 
time to adapt to the fall in haemoglobin. Th is in-
volves mechanisms such as an increase in red cell 
2,3-diphosphoglycerate (2,3-DPG), which shifts 
Anaemia
Anaemia is defi ned as a haemoglobin (Hb) concentra-
tion below the reference range for the age and sex of 
an individual. It is important to recognize that a ‘nor-
mal’ haemoglobin level will be diff erent in individu-
als of diff erent ages and sexes (Table 2.1). Newborns 
will have an average Hb of around 17g/dl, which rises 
over the 24 hours following birth; children tend to 
have lower normal haemoglobin levels than adults; 
and women usually have a lower average haemoglob-
in than men – an eff ect attributable to the eff ect of an-
drogens in males. In addition, physiological changes 
Anaemia: General 
principles
Learning objectives
✓ To understand the normal control of red cell production
✓ To understand the mechanisms by which anaemia may arise
✓ To appreciate the signs and symptoms of anaemia
✓ To understand how anaemia can be classifi ed by reticulocyte response 
and/or by red cell size
✓ To be able to suggest causes of microcytic, normocytic and macrocytic 
anaemia
✓ To understand normal iron metabolism, how iron defi ciency may arise 
and how to investigate it
✓ To be able to describe how iron overload occurs
✓ To understand the pathophysiology and typical laboratory features of 
the anaemia of chronic disease
✓ To understand the normal metabolism of vitamin B12 and folic acid, 
and to appreciate how megaloblastic anaemia may arise
✓ To suggest some normoblastic causes of macrocytosis
✓ To appreciate that failure of the normal control of red cell production 
can lead to polycythaemia 
2

Anaemia: General principles 11
the oxygen dissociation curve to the right and per-
mits enhanced delivery of O2 in the tissues (see 
Chapter 4). Cardiovascular adaptive mechanisms 
are also deployed, in the form of increased stroke 
volume and heart rate. Th is situation contrasts with 
that seen in acute-onset anaemia, where the lack 
of physiological adaptation leads to more marked 
symptoms and signs at a given haemoglobin level. 
Signifi cant symptoms may also develop at higher Hb 
levels in older patients with impaired cardiovascular 
reserves.
Symptoms of anaemia include lassitude, fatigue, 
dyspnoea on exertion, palpitations and headache; 
older patients with impaired cardiovascular reserve 
may also develop angina and intermittent claudica-
tion. Physical signs include pallor, tachycardia, a wide 
pulse pressure, fl ow murmurs and, in severe cases, 
congestive cardiac failure.
Th e underlying cause of anaemia should always 
be sought: anaemia is not a fi nal diagnosis in itself, 
but rather a potential manifestation of a multiplicity 
of disease states. Th e physical signs and symptoms 
of anaemia must therefore be carefully reviewed for 
clues to its underlying aetiology.
The normal control of red 
cell production
In healthy adults, there is a steady-state equilibrium 
between the rate of release of new red cells from the 
bone marrow into the circulation and the removal of 
senescent red cells from the circulation by macro-
phages. Th e renally secreted hormone erythropoietin 
(epo) is the main agent responsible for translating 
tissue hypoxia into increased red cell production to 
maintain this balance (see also Chapter 1). 
For anaemia to arise, there must be either a 
failure of adequate production of red cells (e.g. 
insufficient erythroid tissue in the marrow or poor-
quality erythroid maturation – see Table 2.2) or an 
increased rate of red cell loss (perhaps through 
blood loss or haemolysis). The reticulocyte count 
is a useful marker to enable differentiation of anae-
mia due to failure of production from that due to 
accelerated red cell destruction. Where there is 
sufficient bone marrow reserve to mount a good 
response to anaemia, the reticulocyte count will 
be high. Bone marrow failure syndromes, by con-
trast, will have a low reticulocyte count. However, 
in many cases of anaemia, both mechanisms have 
a role to play: in anaemia due to chronic bleeding 
from the gastrointestinal tract, for example, red 
cells are lost from the circulation, while the devel-
opment of iron deficiency prevents an adequate 
bone marrow response. Similarly, chronic haemo-
lytic conditions, which are typically associated 
with a reticulocytosis, may be complicated by the 
development of folate deficiency; this will impede 
the bone marrow response and thus limit any re-
ticulocytosis. Thus, although the reticulocyte count 
is an important part of the assessment of any pa-
tient with anaemia, it may not be straightforward 
to interpret.
Morphological 
classifi cation of anaemias
An alternative and very widely used strategy for think-
ing about anaemia is to classify it in terms of red cell 
size. Characteristic changes in the size of red cells, 
Tabl e 2.1 Reference ranges for Hb values.
Hb concentration 
(g/dL)
Cord blood
13.5–20.5
First day of life
15.0–23.5
Children, 6 months–6 years
11.0–14.5
Children, 6–14 years
12.0–15.5
Adult males
13.0–17.0
Adult females (non-
pregnant)
12.0–15.5
Pregnant females
11.0–14.0
Table 2.2 Various mechanisms leading to 
anaemia.
Blood loss
Decreased red cell lifespan (haemolytic anaemia)
   Congenital defect (e.g. sickle cell disease, 
hereditary spherocytosis)
   Acquired defect (e.g. malaria, some drugs)
Impairment of red cell formation
   Insuffi cient erythropoiesis
   Ineffective erythropoiesis
Pooling and destruction of red cells in an enlarged 
spleen
Increased plasma volume (splenomegaly, pregnancy)

12 
Anaemia: General principles
and their degree of haemoglobinization, accompany 
the development of anaemia of diff erent aetiologies, 
and can be used to divided anaemia into three main 
groups:
1 Microcytic hypochromic (low mean cell volume 
and low mean cell haemoglobin).
2 Macrocytic (high mean cell volume).
3 Normocytic (normal mean cell volume).
Th us anaemia due to iron defi ciency is typically 
microcytic and hypochromic, due the failure of ad-
equate haemoglobin production by the red cell. 
Th e thalassaemias are also typically microcytic, hy-
pochromic anaemias. By contrast, anaemia due to 
vitamin B12 or folate defi ciency, in which there is a 
failure of nuclear maturation, is classically macro-
cytic. Haemolytic anaemias characterized by a brisk 
reticulocytosis may also have a slightly higher mean 
cell volume, since reticulocytes tend to be larger than 
mature red cells. Normocytic anaemias include those 
due to acute blood loss, where there has not been 
time to produce a signifi cant marrow response. 
Th e morphological classifi cation of anaemia is not 
perfect. Some conditions can straddle two categories: 
the anaemia of chronic disease, which is typically 
normocytic, but may be slightly microcytic, is a good 
example. Similarly, anaemia with two contributing 
mechanisms may produce results that are harder to 
interpret: in coeliac disease, for instance, there may 
be a combined defi ciency of iron and folic acid, with 
each blunting the other’s eff ect on the mean cell vol-
ume to produce a normocytic anaemia. Nevertheless, 
the classifi cation of anaemia by mean cell volume 
does have the merit of highlighting the most fre-
quently seen and readily treated causes of anaemia: 
namely, haematinic defi ciency.
Table 2.3 summarizes the classifi cation of anaemia 
by mean cell volume and mean cell haemoglobin, 
and Table 2.4 shows the normal ranges for these in-
dices. A more detailed discussion of the commonest 
causes is found in the following sections, and 
Figure 2.1 shows the classical appearances of red 
cells in cases of anaemia.
Microcytic anaemia: 
Iron handling and iron 
defi ciency anaemia
Iron defi ciency anaemia is thought to be the com-
monest cause of anaemia worldwide. An understand-
ing of how it arises and how it can be diagnosed and 
best treated requires some appreciation of normal 
iron metabolism, which is outlined below. Th e conse-
quences of deranged iron absorption and iron over-
load are also described (see Box 2.1).
Iron absorption 
Excess iron is potentially toxic. Th erefore, since 
the body has no physiological mechanism for up-
regulating iron excretion, very tight controls exist 
over its absorption from the gut. Th is permits iron 
absorption to be maximized when stores are low or 
when there is a need to increase erythropoiesis, but 
Table 2.3 Morphological classifi cation of anaemia.
Type
MCV
Causes
Microcytic and hypochromic, or 
microcytic
Low
Iron defi ciency, thalassaemia syndromes, some cases of anaemia of 
chronic disorders
Normocytic and normochromic
Normal
Acute blood loss, some cases of anaemia of chronic disorders, chronic 
renal failure, some haemolytic anaemias, leucoerythroblastic anaemias
Macrocytic
High
Alcoholism, folate defi ciency, vitamin B12 defi ciency
Notes: MCV — mean cell volume.
Table 2.4 Reference ranges for red cell 
indices in adults.
Index
Normal range
Mean cell volume* (MCV)
82–99 fL
Mean cell Hb (MCH)
27–33 pg
Mean cell Hb concentration 
(MCHC)
32–36 g/dL 
Note: *Lower limit may be as low as 70–74 fL between 1 
and 8 years of age, in the absence of iron defi ciency.

Anaemia: General principles 13
 
(d)
(e)
(f)
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 2.1 Normal and abnormal red cells: (a) Normochromic, normocytic cells. (b) Hypochromic, microcytic cells. (c) Oval macrocytes and a poikilocyte. (d) Target cells, 
spherocytes and acanthocytes in a blood fi lm from a splenectomized patient. Acanthocytes are red cells with up to about 10 spicules of varying length irregularly distributed 
over their surface. They are found not only post splenectomy but also in other conditions such as hypothyroidism and advanced alcohol-related cirrhosis of the liver. (e) Target 
cells from a patient with obstructive jaundice. (f) Howell–Jolly bodies within red cells, found typically in patients post splenectomy. Figures (a)–(c) are at similar magnifi cation; 
(d)–(f) are at a lower magnifi cation.

14 
Anaemia: General principles
Box 2.1: Iron overload
Iron absorption from a normal diet is inappropriately 
increased in hereditary haemochromatosis, a 
collection of conditions in which there are defects 
in the key proteins responsible for iron regulation. 
In each case, there is a failure of adequate down-
regulation of ferroportin by hepcidin, leading to 
uncontrolled iron transition from the enterocyte to 
the circulation. If transferrin’s ability to bind iron is 
saturated, non-transferrin-bound iron is found in the 
circulation; this form may be taken up by many cell 
types, including hepatocytes and cardiac myocytes, 
where it has a damaging oxidant effect.
The commonest form is HFE haemochromatosis, 
an autosomal recessive condition with an incidence 
of 5 per 1000 in northern European populations. 
Most patients have a point mutation leading to the 
amino substitution C282Y; others have compound 
heterozygosity for C282Y and the H63D mutation. The 
HFE gene is thought to have a key role in the control 
of hepatic synthesis of hepcidin, and homozygotes 
usually develop symptoms from tissue damage 
due to severe iron overload between the ages of 
40 and 60 years. Iron deposition occurs in a variety 
of organs, leading to cardiac dysfunction, cirrhosis, 
diabetes mellitus, testicular atrophy and ‘bronze’ 
skin pigmentation. Women typically have a rather 
later age onset of symptoms, due to the protective 
effect of menstrual iron loss. Other forms of hereditary 
haemochromatosis exist, due to mutations affecting 
the ferroportin gene and the transferrin receptor gene, 
but are much less common.
Iron loading will also occur when there are 
confl icting signals regarding the body’s iron 
requirements. Consider patients with thalassaemia 
(see Chapter 4) in whom iron stores are not reduced, 
but in whom ineffective erythropoiesis leads to a 
persistent erythroid signal to increase iron absorption. 
Excess iron absorption from the GI tract in these 
patients is compounded by iron entering the body 
through transfusions, and severe iron loading can 
result. 
Whatever the cause, estimations of the extent of 
iron loading can be made from the serum ferritin, 
though liver biopsy may be needed to quantify 
iron levels accurately and assess the extent of 
hepatic damage. T2* MRI is an excellent method for 
assessing cardiac iron loading.
Where possible, treatment is by venesection. 
However, venesection is clearly inappropriate in 
patients who develop iron overload due to ineffective 
erythropoiesis and chronic transfusion programmes. 
Here the use of iron chelators is needed (see also 
Chapter 4).
ensures that there is no excess iron absorbed when 
stores are good.
Th e normal Western diet contains 10–20mg of 
iron per day and typically 5–10% of this is absorbed. 
Normally, iron in the duodenum is reduced to its fer-
rous (Fe2+) form by duodenal cytochrome b, before 
binding the divalent metal transporter DMT1 on the 
apical (luminal) membrane of the duodenal entero-
cyte. Iron thus taken up into the cell is either stored 
directly as ferritin (which may be lost with desqua-
mation of the enterocyte from the lumen of the gut) 
or oxidized to the ferric form by the transmembrane 
protein hephaestin and transported to the plasma via 
the molecule ferroportin on the basolateral mem-
brane of the enterocyte. Iron in the plasma is bound 
to the transport protein transferrin, which delivers 
iron to the bone marrow for erythropoiesis. Here 
it enters the erythroid cells by interacting with the 
surface transferrin receptor 1. Red cells at the end of 
their lifespan are removed from the circulation by re-
ticuloendothelial macrophages and have their haem 
moiety recycled. Th e iron is released from the haem 
ring and bound to transferrin to be redelivered to the 
bone marrow, or stored as ferritin. Th is process is 
summarized in Figure 2.2.
Several checkpoints operate during this process. Th e 
uptake of iron into the duodenal enterocyte may be af-
fected by the local oxygen tension – mediated by the 
eff ect of the transcription factor hypoxia inducible fac-
tor (HIF) on the expression of DMT1. Th e production 
of DMT1 is also infl uenced directly by iron: iron aff ects 
the binding of iron-response proteins to iron-response 
elements in the 5’ untranslated region of the mRNA for 
this gene, determining the rate of its translation.
Once iron is inside the enterocyte, its transfer to 
the circulation is controlled by the hormone hep-
cidin. Th is protein, produced by the liver, binds to 
ferroportin and induces its internalisation. Th is pre-
vents the effl  ux of iron from the enterocyte, such that 
it will be lost when the cell is desquamated into the 
lumen of the gut. 
Hepcidin expression is itself regulated directly 
by several mechanisms relevant to the assessment 
of iron stores. When carrying iron, transferrin is in-
volved in a signalling pathway that enhances hepci-
din expression, thus reducing iron absorption from 

Anaemia: General principles 15
the gut. By contrast, the hypoxia inducible factor is 
able to contribute to a decrease in hepcidin expres-
sion, as can enhanced erythropoietic activity. In these 
two circumstances, a reduction in hepcidin will result 
in increased iron absorption in settings in which ad-
ditional iron absorption is likely to be benefi cial.
In short, although adults who have normal iron stores 
absorb approximately 5–10% of their total intake (0.5–
2 mg/day), this is subject to great variation in response 
to physiological demand. Hepcidin is the master regu-
lator of this process. In the setting of iron loading, hep-
cidin expression is up-regulated and iron absorption 
is limited; where there is a requirement for increased 
erythroid activity, hepcidin levels fall and more iron 
absorption is permitted. Clearly, there are situations 
in which these signals confl ict with each other – for 
example in the thalassaemias, when anaemia and iron 
loading coexist (see Box 2.1 and Chapter 4). Here, phar-
macological means of iron control must be employed.
How does iron defi ciency arise?
Iron defi ciency will arise in any of three settings:
1 A diet containing too little iron to meet physiologi-
cal needs.
2 Malabsorption of iron from the duodenum.
3 Increased loss of iron, e.g. through haemorrhage.
Iron defi ciency is not uncommon in infants who are 
given unsupplemented milk or who are exclusively 
breast fed for more than six months. Similarly, the 
increased iron requirements of growing children 
and menstruating women can also put them at risk 
of dietary iron defi ciency. As the physiological re-
quirements for iron rise substantially during preg-
nancy, iron defi ciency is common here, even in the 
context of a good diet. Iron is most readily absorbed 
in its haem form, as non-haem iron may be bound by 
phytates and phosphates also found in food. Vegan 
Dietary intake
of iron:
10–20mg
5–10% absorption from
duodenal enterocyte
DMT1
Luminal
Fe2+
Ferritin
Ferritin
Ferroportin
Circulating
transferrin-
bound
iron bound
iron
Ferritin
lost by
desquamation
of enterocytes
Red cell
synthesis
Iron recycled from
haem of senescent
red cells
Iron stored as ferritin
(e.g. in hepatic
Kupffer cells)
Figure 2.2 A summary of iron handling. Note that there is no physiological mechanism to enhance iron loss after it is 
absorbed from the duodenal enterocytes. Hepcidin, produced by the liver when iron replete, infl uences the production 
and/or function of key molecules in iron absorption, including ferroportin, DMT1 and transferrin.

16 
Anaemia: General principles
diets, containing principally non-haem iron, may 
therefore also predispose to dietary iron defi ciency.
Gastric HCl is needed to reduce ferric to ferrous 
iron for efficient absorption. Therefore partial or 
complete gastrectomy may cause iron deficiency 
through lack of HCl (achlorhydria). Certain ant-
acid compounds have been described as having 
a similar effect, though long-term treatment with 
proton-pump inhibitors such as omeprazole ap-
pears to be implicated in iron deficiency only very 
rarely. Duodenal pathology such as coeliac disease 
may also inhibit the absorption of iron from an 
adequate diet.
However, blood loss remains the most frequent 
cause of iron defi ciency. In women of childbearing 
age, menorrhagia must be considered; in postmeno-
pausal women and in men, gastrointestinal bleeding 
is the most likely explanation, and an unexplained 
fi nding of iron defi ciency should prompt a careful 
evaluation for gastric and colonic pathology, includ-
ing malignancies.
Th ese causes are summarized in Table 2.5.
The manifestations of iron 
defi ciency
Although iron is found in every cell (as part of co-
factors for the enzymes of the respiratory chain, for 
instance), at any time the bulk of iron in a healthy 
individual is found in red cells. Haematological 
manifestations are among the fi rst seen in iron 
defi ciency.
If iron defi ciency is mild, there will simply be a 
depletion of iron stores in the reticuloendothelial 
system. Th is may be entirely without clinical conse-
quence. However, as the supply of iron to the tissues 
is hampered, the red cells will develop hypochromic 
microcytic features. As defi ciency progresses, the 
haemoglobin falls, giving a hypochromic, microcytic 
anaemia. Other tissues are also aff ected in severe iron 
defi ciency: there may be angular stomatitis, brittle and 
misshapen nails (including the classic spoon-shaped 
nails, koilonychia) and dysphagia in some cases as-
sociated with a pharyngeal stricture or web. Some pa-
tients also manifest bizarre dietary cravings, known as 
pica. With earlier diagnosis, these ‘textbook’ signs and 
symptoms are now much less frequently seen. 
Th e blood fi lm will show characteristic features: 
in addition to the hypochromic, microcytic red cells, 
there may be misshapen red cells (poikilocytes), in-
cluding pencil cells and target cells. Th ese are shown 
in Figure 2.3. Th e inability of the bone marrow to re-
spond adequately will result in a reticulocyte count 
lower than expected for the degree of anaemia.
Confi rming a diagnosis of iron 
defi ciency
While the combination of a microcytic hypochromic 
anaemia with a likely history may strongly suggest 
iron defi ciency, confi rmation is still required. Th e key 
laboratory parameters of iron status are the serum 
ferritin, transferrin and serum iron levels. While none 
is a perfect indicator of iron status, all three together 
permit the best estimation of iron status short of inva-
sive tests like bone marrow biopsy. 
Ferritin is the main storage protein for iron and for 
concentrations <4000μg/L it roughly correlates with 
Figure 2.3 Peripheral blood fi lm from a patient with 
untreated iron defi ciency anaemia. Hypochromic 
microcytes and elongated (‘pencil-shaped’) poikilocytes 
are present.
Table 2.5 Causes of iron defi ciency.
Reduced iron stores at birth due to prematurity
Inadequate intake (prolonged breast or bottle feeding 
without iron supplementation, vegetarian diets, 
poverty)
Increased requirement (pregnancy and lactation)
Chronic haemorrhage
 Uterine (menorrhagia)
  Gastrointestinal (e.g. peptic ulceration; Meckel’s 
diverticulum; colonic diverticulosis, ulcerative 
colitis, carcinoma of the stomach, colon or rectum, 
haemorrhoids, hookworm infestation*)
 Others (e.g. self-infl icted, recurrent haematuria)
Malabsorption (coeliac disease, partial gastrectomy, 
atrophic gastritis)
Chronic intravascular haemolysis leading to 
haemoglobinuria and haemosiderinuria (rare)
Note: * This is a very common cause of iron defi ciency in 
tropical countries.

Anaemia: General principles 17
Table 2.6 Measurements of iron status in people with normal iron stores, individuals with iron 
depletion without anaemia, and in iron defi ciency anaemia.
Depleted iron stores
Normal iron stores
Without reduction 
of iron supply to 
tissues
Reduced iron 
supply to 
tissues, no 
anaemia
Iron 
defi ciency 
anaemia
Serum ferritin (μg/L)
20–300
Usually <20
<20
<20
Transferrin (g/L)
1.7–3.4
Sometimes >3.4
>3.4
>3.4
Serum iron (μmol/L)
10–30
Normal
<10
<10
Transferrin saturation (%)
>16
>16
<16
<16
Hb concentration
Normal
Normal
Within 
reference range
Below 
reference range
the amount of tissue-storage iron. As might be pre-
dicted, ferritin levels are low in iron defi ciency (see 
Table 2.6). However, there is no single value for fer-
ritin concentration that clearly separates individuals 
with good iron stores from those without, and there is 
a considerable overlap in ferritin levels between these 
two groups. In the study illustrated in Figure 2.4, all 
women with ferritin levels below 14 μg/L were iron 
defi cient; but 25% of the iron-defi cient women had 
ferritin levels above this value. Th is discrepancy arises 
because ferritin is also an acute phase reactant, which 
is typically raised in infection and infl ammation. 
Th us normal serum ferritin levels may be found in the 
presence of reduced iron stores in acute and chronic 
infections and in malignancy. 
Serum iron also falls in the context of iron defi cien-
cy, but there are often marked diurnal and day-to-day 
changes in serum iron concentration. Th is, plus recog-
nized reductions in the serum iron concentration in 
the context of infection and infl ammation, make it an 
unreliable indictor of iron status when assayed alone.
Serum iron can, however, be interpreted in the con-
text of the transferrin concentration, to give a meas-
ure of transferrin saturation (iron/transferrin × 100). 
Transferrin, synthesized in the liver, is generally 
increased in states of iron defi ciency; along with 
the reduced serum iron, this leads to a reduction in 
transferrin saturation. A transferrin saturation of 
<20% generally represents iron depletion, while levels 
>45% suggest iron loading. However, as with ferritin, 
Figure 2.4 The distribution of the 
serum ferritin concentration in 105 
women with stainable iron in the bone 
marrow (●) and in 69 women with 
no stainable iron (●). Source: From 
Hallberg et al. (1993) Br. J. Haematol. 
85, 787–98.
0
25
20
15
0
10
Serum ferritin (µg/L)
Sample in interval (%)
300
10
5
100
Iron deficient women
Iron replete women
16µg

18 
Anaemia: General principles
factors other than iron status can have an impact on 
transferrin levels. Chronic liver disease and chronic 
infl ammatory states will cause the transferrin level to 
fall, while its production is often increased in women 
taking the oral contraceptive pill.
A less frequently requested test is estimation of the 
soluble transferrin receptor concentration. Th e ex-
pression of the transferrin receptor on cells’ plasma 
membranes is regulated by iron availability. Both the 
transmembrane form and a cleaved soluble form are 
increased in iron defi ciency and in other conditions 
that give rise to erythroid hyperplasia, but they are 
not aff ected in the anaemia of chronic disease.
Th e gold standard test, undertaken when uncer-
tainty still exists despite testing each of the above, is 
to stain a bone marrow aspirate with Perls’ Prussian 
Blue stain. Th is will highlight insoluble iron stores 
that would be absent in iron defi ciency anaemia 
(compare fi gures 2.5 and 2.6).
Treating iron defi ciency
It is important to address the underlying cause of 
iron defi ciency. If there is gastrointestinal bleeding, 
its source should be found and treated; malabsorp-
tion due to coeliac or Crohn’s disease should be con-
trolled. Oral iron supplementation should then be 
eff ective, with ferrous sulphate 200mg three times 
per day being a standard regimen. Continuing this 
for three months after the normalization of haemo-
globin levels will allow replenishment of iron stores. A 
reticulocytosis is expected in response to treatment, 
with a rise in the haemoglobin level of 2g/dl over 
three weeks. For patients who cannot tolerate any 
form of iron orally, those in whom substantial blood 
loss continues and those with a severe malabsorp-
tion syndrome, parenteral iron preparations exist. 
Iron sucrose (Venofer) and low molecular weight 
iron dextran (CosmoFer) are both administered in-
travenously, and the latter may be given as a single 
total replacement dose by infusion. Adverse eff ects of 
intravenous iron therapy include anaphylaxis, fever 
and arthropathy.
Other causes of microcytic 
hypochromic anaemia
Th ese are shown in Table 2.2. Th alassaemia is the 
main diff erential diagnosis of iron defi ciency anae-
mia. It is discussed in more detail in Chapter 4. 
Other causes of microcytic hypochromic anaemia 
are rare, but include sideroblastic anaemia. Sideroblasts 
are red cell precursors with a perinuclear ring of coarse 
iron-containing mitochondria (Figures 2.7 and 2.8). 
Figure 2.5 Marrow fragment containing normal 
quantities of storage iron. The haemosiderin stains blue 
(Perls’ acid ferrocyanide stain).
Figure 2.6 Marrow fragment from a patient with iron 
defi ciency anaemia showing an absence of storage iron 
(Perls’ acid ferrocyanide stain). Contrast with Figure 2.5
Figure 2.7 Marrow smear from a patient with primary 
acquired sideroblastic anaemia, stained by the Perls’ 
acid ferrocyanide method (Prussian blue reaction). 
The erythroblasts contain several coarse blue–black 
iron-containing granules, which are often arranged 
around the nucleus.

Anaemia: General principles 19
Th is condition may be found either as an inherited 
(usually X-linked) or an acquired form. Th e common 
form of X-linked sideroblastic anaemia is caused by 
mutations in the erythroid-specifi c δ-aminolaevulinate 
synthase (ALAS2) gene. ALAS is the enzyme catalysing 
the fi rst step in haem synthesis. Pyridoxal phosphate is 
required both for enzyme activity and enzyme stability 
and some patients with sideroblastic anaemia respond 
to high doses of pyridoxine given orally. Th e acquired 
condition is seen in some cases of myelodysplasia 
(p. 97) and may also be secondary to excessive alcohol 
consumption, certain drugs (e.g. isoniazid or chloram-
phenicol) and lead poisoning. 
Normocytic anaemia
The anaemia of chronic disease
Th e anaemia of chronic disease (ACD) is among the 
commonest causes of normocytic anaemia. It is as-
sociated with chronic infl ammatory conditions (e.g. 
rheumatoid arthritis), chronic infections (e.g. tubercu-
losis) and malignancies, and its pathogenesis is com-
plex. Th e activation of macrophages in the underlying 
chronic condition results in a reduced red cell lifespan, 
and this is compounded by an insuffi  cient response 
from the marrow in terms of enhanced erythropoiesis. 
Th e signalling through the erythropoietin receptor ap-
pears blunted when contrasted to anaemia of other 
aetiologies, and the response to exogenous erythro-
poietin is also limited. Furthermore, links between the 
control of iron handling and infl ammatory states are 
evident from the eff ect of cytokines such as IL-6 and 
TNF-α in increasing hepcidin synthesis. As well as lim-
iting iron absorption, the increased hepcidin levels will 
also reduce the amount of stored iron released from 
macrophages and made available for erythropoiesis, 
since the release of iron from these cells requires fer-
roportin (the same mechanism needed for the export 
of iron from enterocytes). 
While the red cells in the anaemia of chronic dis-
ease are most often normocytic and normochromic, 
in 30–35% of patients they are hypochromic and mi-
crocytic. However, diff erences in the pattern of iron 
handling usually help in the distinction between 
anaemia of chronic disease and iron defi ciency. In 
both conditions, the serum iron concentration is low, 
but while iron defi ciency is characterized by a low se-
rum ferritin and high transferrin, ACD tends to have a 
normal to high ferritin and low transferrin. If the diag-
nosis from the peripheral blood tests is still in doubt, 
the presence or absence of storage iron in the marrow 
can be determined. Characteristically, iron stores are 
normal or increased in the anaemia of chronic disor-
ders and absent in iron defi ciency anaemia. 
Other causes of normocytic 
anaemia
As shown in Table 2.3, these include acute blood loss; 
marrow infi ltration, for example by malignancy; and 
the anaemia associated with renal disease, which 
is due to a reduction in erythropoietin secretion in 
response to hypoxaemia.
It is important to recognize that many patients will 
have anaemia with contributions from more than 
one of these mechanisms. Dissecting the principal 
reasons for a patient’s anaemia may therefore be far 
from straightforward, and empirical approaches to 
treatment are sometimes needed.
Macrocytic anaemia
Macrocytic anaemias can be divided into those 
showing megaloblastic erythropoiesis and those 
with normoblastic erythropoiesis. Megaloblastic 
erythropoiesis describes abnormal red cell develop-
ment characterized by a lack of synchrony between 
the maturation of the red cell nucleus and its cyto-
plasm. It arises as a consequence of disordered DNA 
synthesis and results in a macrocytic anaemia, often 
with disordered granulocyte and platelet production 
in addition. Normoblastic erythropoiesis describes 
the normal appearance of red cell maturation – but 
may still be associated with a macrocytosis in the pe-
ripheral blood. Key causes in both categories are dis-
cussed below.
Figure 2.8 Electron micrograph of part of a ring 
sideroblast showing very electron-dense material 
between the cristae of enlarged mitochondria.

20 
Anaemia: General principles
Causes of megaloblastic 
anaemia: vitamin B12 and folate 
defi ciency
Folic acid is required for several enzymatic reactions 
in the body, but among the most important is the 
conversion of deoxyuridylate (dUMP) to deoxythymi-
dylate (dTTP). Th is is essential for synthesis of thymi-
dine, one of the pyrimidine bases in DNA. Without 
folic acid, DNA synthesis is hampered (Figure 2.9).
Vitamin B12 (cobalamin) is required for only 
two enzymatic reactions in the body. In the fi rst, 
cobalamin is a cofactor for the conversion of meth-
ylmalonyl CoA into succinyl CoA, thus allowing the 
breakdown products of certain amino acids to enter 
the Krebs cycle. Th e second reaction is a methyltrans-
ferase reaction, which converts homocysteine to me-
thionine (by adding a methyl group) and 5-methyl 
tetrahydrofolate to tetrahydrofolate (by removing a 
methyl group). Again, cobalamin is a cofactor. One of 
dATP
2
3
1
dGTP
dUTP
dCTP
dTTP
dTDP
dTMP
dUMP
5,10-Methylene THF
polyglutamate
THF
polyglutamate
Methyl
cobalamin
DHF
polyglutamate
Formyl THF
polyglutamate
Active
formate
S-Adenosyl
methionine
Methionine
Homocysteine
dUDP
DNA
THF
Methyl THF
Figure 2.9 Biochemical pathways affected in vitamin B12 and folate defi ciency. Notes: dTMP – deoxythymidine 
monophosphate; dTTP – deoxythymidine triphosphate; dUMP – deoxyuridine monophosphate; dUTP – deoxyuridine 
triphosphate; THF – tetrahydrofolate. Enzymes: 1, thymidylate synthase; 2, homocysteine methyltransferase 
(methionine synthase); 3, dihydrofolate reductase.

Anaemia: General principles 21
the consequences of vitamin B12 defi ciency is a fail-
ure to regenerate tetrahydrofolate – and it is this form 
of folate that is critical for the pyrimidine synthesis 
step described above.
Th e consequences of B12 and folate defi ciency can 
therefore be seen to overlap. Both will have a detri-
mental impact on DNA synthesis, and manifestations 
of defi ciency are seen in the blood where ongoing red 
cell production is essential.
How do B12 and folate defi ciency 
arise?
Folate is derived from many food sources, both animal 
and vegetable, with green leafy vegetables providing 
some of the richest sources (Table 2.7). Th e Western 
diet usually contains adequate quantities of folate, 
though defi ciency due to poor intake can be seen 
especially in frail elderly people and in the context 
of alcoholism. In some physiological circumstances 
such as pregnancy and lactation, requirements mark-
edly increase and can result in defi ciency; similarly, 
some disease states can have a similar eff ect (through 
an increase in red cell production in chronic haemo-
lytic states, or increased desquamation in psoriasis, 
for example). Absorption is principally from the duo-
denum and jejunum; coeliac disease may therefore 
signifi cantly impair absorption. However, there are 
usually suffi  cient hepatic stores of folate to last for fi ve 
or six months if folate intake ceased (Table 2.8).
Vitamin B12 is found exclusively in food of animal 
origin (Table 2.7). On reaching the stomach, B12 is 
cleaved from food proteins by HCl and then bound 
to proteins similar to those that are responsible for 
its binding in the plasma – known as haptocorrins 
(and previously termed ‘R-binders’). Th us bound, 
B12 passes to the duodenum, where it is cleaved from 
the haptocorrin and binds to the glycoprotein Intrin-
sic Factor (IF). IF is essential for B12 absorption. It is 
highly resistant to enzymatic digestion and is able to 
transport B12 to the ileum, where the B12/IF complex 
binds its receptor, cubilin, and is endocytosed. Once 
passed into the circulation, B12 is bound to the trans-
port protein transcobalamin.
From the outline above it is evident that vitamin 
B12 defi ciency might arise from several mecha-
nisms. First, vegan diets are likely to be lacking 
in B12. Any condition that results in achlorhydria 
(e.g. partial gastrectomy) will limit the cleavage of 
B12 from food-associated peptides and will also 
limit B12’s availability for absorption. Disease in the 
terminal ileum may prevent the ability of the B12/
IF complex to be taken up into enterocytes, while 
Table 2.8 Causes of folate defi ciency.
Inadequate dietary intake
Malabsorption
Coeliac disease, jejunal resection, tropical sprue
Increased requirement
Pregnancy, premature infants, chronic haemolytic 
anaemias, myelofi brosis, various malignant diseases
Increased loss
Long-term dialysis, congestive heart failure, acute liver 
disease
Complex mechanism
Anticonvulsant therapy,* ethanol abuse*
Note: * Only some cases with macrocytosis are folate 
defi cient.
Table 2.7 Key features of vitamin B12 and folate nutrition and absorption.
Vitamin B12
Folate
Dietary sources
Only foods of animal origin, 
especially liver
Most foods, especially liver, green vegetables 
and yeast; destroyed by cooking
Average daily intakea
5 μg
400 μg
Minimum daily requirementa
1–3 μg
100–200 μgb
Body storesa
3–5 mg, mainly in the liver
8–20 mg, mainly in the liver
Time to develop defi ciency in the 
absence of intake or absorptiona
Anaemia in 2–10 years
Macrocytosis in 5 months
Requirements for absorption
Intrinsic factor secreted by 
gastric parietal cells
Conversion of polyglutamates to 
monoglutamates by intestinal folate conjugase
Site of absorption
Terminal ileum
Duodenum and jejunum
Notes: a In adults. b Higher during pregnancy and lactation.

22 
Anaemia: General principles
overgrowth of gut bacteria (or the presence of the 
fi sh tapeworm, Diphyllobothrium latum) can ‘com-
pete’ for B12 in the gut and minimize the vitamin 
available for absorption. 
However, perhaps the best known of the conditions 
leading to failure of B12 absorption is pernicious 
anaemia. Th is condition arises when auto-antibodies 
interfere with the production or function of intrinsic 
factor – with anti-parietal cell antibodies being asso-
ciated with gastric atrophy and failure of IF secretion, 
or anti-intrinsic factors preventing the formation of 
the B12/IF complex or interfering with its ability to 
bind to cubilin. Th e causes of B12 defi ciency are sum-
marized in Table 2.9.
The clinical manifestations 
of B12 and folate defi ciency
As well as the clinical eff ects of a macrocytic anaemia, 
with possible neutropenia and thrombocytopenia if 
severe, defi ciencies of B12 and folate will occasion-
ally produce a mild jaundice as destruction of poorly 
matured erythroid precursors releases the haem 
breakdown product bilirubin (see also Chapter 3 on 
haemolysis).
In addition, B12 defi ciency is well known to pro-
duce a range of neurological symptoms, with a pe-
ripheral neuropathy (particularly aff ecting prop-
rioception and vibration sense) being followed by 
demyelination of the dorsal and lateral columns of 
the spinal cord. Th is produces a pyramidal picture, 
Figure 2.10 Glossitis in a woman with severe pernicious 
anaemia.
Figure 2.11 Blood fi lm from a patient with pernicious 
anaemia showing oval macrocytes, other poikilocytes 
and a hypersegmented neutrophil.
Table 2.9 Mechanisms and causes of vitamin 
B12 defi ciency.
Inadequate intake
Veganism
Inadequate secretion of intrinsic factor
Pernicious anaemia
Total or partial gastrectomy
Congenital intrinsic factor defi ciency (rare)
Inadequate release of B12 from food
Partial gastrectomy, vagotomy, gastritis, 
acid-suppressing drugs, alcohol abuse
Diversion of dietary B12
Abnormal intestinal bacterial fl ora multiple jejunal 
diverticula, small intestinal strictures, stagnant 
intestinal loops
Diphyllobothrium latum
Malabsorption
Crohn’s disease, ileal resection, chronic tropical sprue
with increased tone, extensor plantars and sensory 
ataxia. Th is picture is termed subacute combined de-
generation of the cord and its eff ects may be irrevers-
ible. Th e precise pathophysiology has not been estab-
lished, but methionine is thought to have a role in the 
production and maintenance of myelin.
Additional tissues that may be aff ected include the 
gastrointestinal tract (from the mouth to the colon: 
Figure 2.10) and the skin.
Confi rming a diagnosis of B12 or 
folate defi ciency
Both B12 and folate defi ciency will cause a macrocytic 
anaemia with megaloblastic erythropoiesis. Th e blood 
fi lm will show oval macrocytes and hypersegmented 
neutrophils (again a consequence of delayed nuclear 
maturation – see Figure 2.11). Th e reticulocyte count 
is likely to be low for the degree of anaemia. A bone 

Anaemia: General principles 23
marrow aspirate, if performed, will show nuclear-
cytoplasmic dyssynchrony and giant metamyelocytes 
(Figures 2.12, 2.13 and 2.14). Th e destruction of defec-
tive erythroid cells in the marrow will result in a mild in-
crease in bilirubin and LDH levels (see also Chapter 3).
Folic acid levels may be assayed in the serum and 
in the red cells themselves. Serum folate tends to 
fl uctuate rather more markedly in response to folate 
intake, so red cell folate levels are generally consid-
ered to be a better guide to functional folate status. 
However, the critical role of vitamin B12 in regener-
ating functional tetrahydrofolate means that low red 
cell folic acid levels may also be seen as a secondary 
eff ect in B12 defi ciency. Moreover, although treating 
with folate supplementation when the primary de-
fect is actually with B12 can temporarily ameliorate 
the haematological symptoms and signs, it will per-
mit worsening of any B12-associated neurological 
pathology. B12 levels should therefore be routinely 
tested alongside folic acid levels. 
Testing for B12 defi ciency may not be as straightfor-
ward as a simple serum vitamin B12 assay. Th e great 
majority of assayed B12 in the serum is protein bound 
as part of ‘haptocorrin’ – a form that is not functional-
ly active; only B12 bound to the protein transcobala-
min is physiologically available. Th us any condition 
that aff ects the distribution of B12-binding proteins 
in the serum can aff ect the result of B12 assays. Preg-
nancy and the oral contraceptive pill, for example, 
can give falsely low B12 results, while some myelo-
proliferative disorders (which increase haptocorrin 
Figure 2.14 Electron micrograph of a bone marrow 
macrophage from a patient with severe pernicious 
anaemia. The cytoplasm of the macrophage contains 
two ingested megaloblasts (arrowed) at various stages of 
degradation.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.12 (a) Early polychromatic normoblast from 
the marrow of a healthy subject. (b) Early polychromatic 
megaloblasts from a patient with severe pernicious 
anaemia. These cells are larger and have a more 
delicate, sieve-like nucleus containing smaller particles 
of condensed chromatin than the early polychromatic 
normoblast.
Figure 2.13 Two giant metamyelocytes near a 
normal-sized metamyelocyte in a marrow smear from 
a patient with untreated pernicious anaemia. There is 
also a megaloblast containing Howell–Jolly bodies (i.e. 
micronuclei).

24 
Anaemia: General principles
production) give falsely high readings. If in doubt, the 
substrates of the cobalamin-requiring enzymes can 
be assayed: both homocysteine and methylmalonic 
acid levels will be high in true B12 defi ciency.
Finding the cause of defi ciency is also important. A 
clear dietary history, consideration of tests for malab-
sorption, endomyseal antibodies (if coeliac disease is 
suspected) and anti-intrinsic factor/antiparietal cell 
antibodies (to look for pernicious anaemia as a cause 
of B12 defi ciency) should all be considered.
Treatment
In all cases, the underlying cause must be treated 
where possible. Folic acid supplementation orally 
is generally suffi  cient to treat folic acid defi ciency, 
though care must be taken to ensure that coincident 
B12 defi ciency is not missed. Oral B12 supplements 
may help where there is simple dietary defi ciency of 
B12, but clearly in pernicious anaemia parenteral vi-
tamin B12 administration by intramuscular injection 
is required.
Other causes of megaloblastosis
Conditions other than B12 and folate defi ciency can 
cause megaloblastic erythropoiesis. Frequently, ab-
errations in the metabolism of B12 and folate are at 
the root of the megaloblastosis (consider the eff ects 
of methotrexate, which inhibits an enzyme critical 
for tetrahydrofolate production; or chronic nitrous 
oxide exposure, which can combine with the cobalt 
of cobalamin to inhibit its ability to function as an en-
zymatic cofactor); but any other drug or clinical con-
dition that inhibits DNA synthesis will have a similar 
eff ect – as summarized in Table 2.10.
Normoblastic macrocytosis
Not all cases of macrocytic anaemia will be caused 
by megaloblastic changes in the marrow. Condi-
tions in which macrocytosis is seen in the context of 
normo blastic erythropoiesis include alcohol excess 
(probably the commonest cause of macrocytosis in 
the UK), liver dysfunction and hypothyroidism. Th e 
mechanisms underlying the macrocytosis in these 
cases are not always fully defi ned. It is also possible 
for a marked expansion in erythroid output to pro-
duce a mild macrocytosis, since reticulocytes are 
slightly larger than more mature red cells. A summary 
of the causes of normoblastic macrocytosis is given in 
Table 2.11. 
Spurious elevations in the mean cell volume may 
be seen in hyperglycaemia, thought to be a conse-
quence of osmotic dysequilibrium between the red 
cells and the diluent used in preparing the cells for 
analysis.
Polycythaemia 
(erythrocytosis)
Just as perturbation of mechanisms controlling nor-
mal red cell production may result in anaemia, so 
dysregulation of these mechanisms may also result in 
too many red cells being produced. Th e term ‘poly-
cythaemia’ refers to an excess of red cells, such that 
the packed cell volume (also known as the haema-
tocrit) of peripheral blood is consistently elevated 
(>0.52 in adult males and >0.48 in adult females). 
Table 2.11 Causes of vitamin B12- and folate-
independent macrocytosis with normoblastic 
erythropoiesis.
Normal neonates (physiological)
Chronic alcoholism*
Myelodysplastic syndromes*
Chronic liver disease*
Hypothyroidism
Normal pregnancy
Therapy with anticonvulsant drugs*
Haemolytic anaemia
Hypoplastic and aplastic anaemia
Myeloma
Note: * Some patients show B12- and folate-independent 
megaloblastic erythropoiesis.
Table 2.10 Vitamin B12-independent and 
folate-independent causes of macrocytosis 
with megaloblastic haemopoiesis.
Abnormalities of nucleic acid synthesis
Drug therapy
 Antipurines (mercaptopurine, azathioprine)
 Antipyrimidines (fl uorouracil, zidovudine (AZT))
 Others (hydroxycarbamide)
Orotic aciduria
Uncertain aetiology
Myelodysplastic syndromes,* erythroleukaemia
Some congenital dyserythropoietic anaemias
Note: * Some patients show normoblastic erythropoiesis.

Anaemia: General principles 25
Polycythaemia may result either from an increase in 
the total volume of red cells in the circulation (true 
polycythaemia) or from a decrease in the total plasma 
volume (apparent or relative polycythaemia). Th ese 
are discussed in more detail in Chapter 11, but a brief 
overview of true polycythaemia is given below.
True polycythaemia
An absolute increase in circulating red cells may 
arise from dysregulation of any of the mechanisms 
controlling normal red cell production. Th us, hy-
poxia secondary to chronic pulmonary disease or 
cyanotic heart disease will increase erythropoietin 
production, with a resultant stimulation of erythroid 
drive in the bone marrow. High affi  nity haemoglob-
ins, which fail to yield oxygen appropriately in the 
peripheral tissues, may also be responsible for an 
increased hypoxic signal and thus increased eryth-
ropoiesis. In normoxaemic conditions, inappropri-
ate release of erythropoietin can occur in the context 
of renal tumours or polycystic kidney disease. Each 
of these cases will cause a true polycythaemia, but 
the ultimate cause in each case is extrinsic to the 
bone marrow: they are therefore termed ‘secondary 
polycythaemias’.
Primary polycythaemia, also known as polycythae-
mia vera, arises from a defect in the haemopoietic 
system itself. It is characterized by the autonomous, 
epo-independent proliferation of erythroid precur-
sors in the marrow. In the overwhelming majority 
of cases, this is due to the acquisition of a mutation 
in the gene for JAK2, a protein tyrosine kinase that 
is critical for the downstream signalling through the 
epo receptor. Over 95% of patients with polycythae-
mia vera have the JAK2 V617F mutation, which re-
sults in epo-independent red cell proliferation. A 
further mutation in exon 12 of the JAK2 gene has also 
been described, with similar eff ects.
Th e diff erential diagnosis of polycythaemia, and 
an approach to its management, are described in 
Chapter 11.

Haematology Lecture Notes, Ninth edition. C.S.R. Hatton, N.C. Hughes-Jones, D. Hay and D. Keeling. © 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
suboptimal marrow response is seen when there 
are insufficient haematinics, when the red cell 
precursors are damaged, when the marrow is 
infiltrated by malignant cells and when there is in-
effective erythropoiesis, as in thalassaemia. In each 
of these conditions, haemolysis will result in anae-
mia more readily. 
In the majority of haemolytic anaemias, the 
macrophages in the spleen, liver and bone marrow 
remove red cells from the circulation by phago-
cytosis. This is termed extravascular haemolysis. 
By contrast, in intravascular haemoysis, the red 
cells are caused to rupture and release their hae-
moglobin (Hb) directly into the circulation. The 
Haemolysis describes the shortening of the lifespan 
of a mature red blood cell. Small or moderate re-
ductions in red cell survival need not produce an 
obvious clinical eff ect: increased red cell output 
from the marrow, stimulated by erythropoietin, will 
be suffi  cient to compensate for the increased red 
cell destruction. However, more marked reductions 
in red cell lifespan – say to 5–10 days from the usual 
120 days – will overwhelm the capacity of the mar-
row to expand erythroid output and will result in 
haemolytic anaemia. 
This compensatory increase in erythroid out-
put requires an adequately functioning bone 
marrow and effective erythropoiesis. However, a 
Haemolytic anaemias
Learning objectives
✓ To be able to defi ne haemolysis and haemolytic anaemia
✓ To know the tests for recognizing:
 
✓ that red cells are being destroyed at an excessive rate, and
 
✓ that the marrow is producing cells at a rate in excess of normal
✓ To be able to classify haemolytic anaemias into congenital and 
acquired types, and to know the aetiological factors in each division
✓ To understand the diff erence between intravascular and extravascular 
haemolysis, and to recognise the laboratory features of each
✓ To understand the mode of inheritance, biochemical basis and clinical 
and laboratory features of hereditary spherocytosis (HS)
✓ To understand the normal role of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase 
(G6PD) and the pathogenesis and clinical characteristics of the 
haemolytic syndromes associated with its defi ciency
✓ To appreciate that disorders of globin function such as sickle cell 
disease are subtypes of haemolytic anaemia
✓ To understand the role of autoantibodies in the production of 
haemolytic anaemias and to know the types of disease with which they 
are associated
✓ To understand some causes of non-immune acquired haemolytic 
anaemias
3

Haemolytic anaemias 27
intra/extravascular site of red cell destruction 
may give clues to the underlying aetiology of the 
haemolysis.
Laboratory evidence of 
haemolysis
Both biochemical and haematological laboratory 
investigations can provide evidence of haemolysis. 
When red cells are destroyed, either in the circulation 
or by the reticuloendothelial system, their haem group 
is converted fi rst to biliverdin and then to bilirubin. 
Unconjugated bilirubin is insoluble and is transport-
ed to the liver bound to albumin; here it undergoes 
glucuronidation to facilitate its excretion. However, 
with increased red cell destruction the glucuroni-
dase can become saturated, such that unconjugated 
bilirubin accumulates. Th us, haemolysis, whether in-
travascular or extravascular, will result in a rise in the 
unconjugated bilirubin concentration in the plasma.
Lactate dehydrogenase, an enzyme present in red 
cells, is also released from red cells as they are lysed. 
Breakdown of red cells intravascularly can result 
in very marked elevation of the serum LDH, while 
breaches in the red cell membrane caused by partial 
phagocytosis in extravascular haemolysis may also 
cause the serum LDH level to climb.
Specifi c biochemical markers of intravascular 
haemolysis include a reduction of serum haptoglobin. 
When red cells are lysed intravascularly, free hae-
moglobin is released; haptoglobin binds to this free 
haemoglobin, thereby limiting its potentially harm-
ful oxidative eff ects. Th e haemoglobin–haptoglobin 
complex is scavenged by macrophages of the liver and 
spleen, resulting in a low or even absent plasma hap-
toglobin level. When the haptoglobin is saturated, free 
haem can bind to albumin to form methaemalbumin. 
Th is is also detectable biochemically. Unbound free 
haemoglobin can be detected in the plasma as well 
and may pass through the renal glomeruli to give free 
haemoglobin in the urine – haemoglobinuria (note 
the diff erence from haematuria, which describes the 
presence of intact red cells in the urine). Haemoglob-
in may also be taken up by the renal tubular cells and 
converted to the storage complex haemosiderin. Th is 
can be detected with Perls’ stain of spun deposits of 
urine, both in shed tubular cells and extracellularly. 
Haematologically, haemolysis is characterized 
by evidence of increased erythroid drive, manifest 
through an increased reticulocyte count. Th e number 
of reticulocytes in the blood is expressed either as a 
percentage of the total number of red cells or as an 
absolute number per litre of blood; in normal adults, 
the percentage is in the range of 0.5–3.0% and the ab-
solute count is 20–100 × 109/L. An increase in the ab-
solute reticulocyte count is an indication of increased 
erythropoietic activity and, in general, the higher the 
count, the greater the rate of delivery of viable red 
cells to the circulation. Th e reticulocyte percentage 
may increase up to 50% or more when erythropoietic 
activity is intense, as in brisk haemolysis – though it 
should be noted that reticulocytosis is not a feature 
specifi c to haemolysis; it will be observed whenever 
there is increased erythroid drive, such as during the 
response to acute blood loss, or following the replace-
ment of B12, folic acid or iron in a setting of anaemia 
secondary to haematinic defi ciency. 
Th e slightly larger size of reticulocytes relative to ma-
ture red cells will lead to a small increase in the mean cell 
volume. As haemolysis will also increase the marrow’s 
demand for folic acid, macrocytosis may also develop 
secondary to folate defi ciency if this increased demand 
is not met by adequate intake (see also Chapter 2).
Aside from polychromasia due to reticulocytosis, 
the peripheral blood fi lm in haemolysis will vary ac-
cording to the underlying cause – specifi c morpho-
logical features of diff erent haemolytic anaemias are 
described in more detail in the following sections.
However, generally extravascular haemolysis is as-
sociated with spherocytosis on the peripheral blood 
fi lm, due to the partial phagocytosis of red cells by the 
spleen, while intravascular haemolysis is character-
ized by red cell fragmentation (schistocytes). 
In cases where examination of the bone marrow is 
undertaken, there will be evidence of increased erythro-
poiesis. A semiquantitative assessment of the degree of 
erythroid hyperplasia can be obtained by determining 
the myeloid/erythroid (M/E) ratio in the bone marrow. 
Th is is defi ned as the ratio between the number of cells 
of the neutrophil series (including mature granulocytes) 
and the number of erythroblasts in bone marrow, with 
a normal ratio being approximately 3:1. Marrows show-
ing erythroid hyperplasia are also hypercellular, due to 
the replacement of fat cells by erythroblasts (Figure 3.1). 
In chronic haemolysis, haemopoietic tissue may extend 
into marrow cavities that usually contain only fat, and 
extramedullary haemopoiesis may develop in the liver, 
and spleen.
Again, these haematological features are not specifi c 
to haemolysis. Erythroid hyperplasia will also be seen 
after haemorrhage, in megaloblastic and sideroblastic 
anaemias (where erythropoiesis is markedly ineff ec-
tive, see p. 11), as well as in neoplastic conditions such 
as polycythaemia and erythroleukaemia.
Th e laboratory features of haemolysis are summa-
rized in Table 3.1.

28 
Haemolytic anaemias
Clinical features of 
haemolysis
Th e haemolytic anaemias vary greatly in their clini-
cal presentations. Some produce a mild, chronic, 
well-compensated haemolytic picture, while others 
manifest acutely with brisk haemolysis and a rapid 
drop in haemoglobin. Th e diff erent clinical presen-
tations seen with diff erent causes of haemolysis are 
discussed further in the following sections, but com-
mon features include pallor, and jaundice secondary 
to the elevated bilirubin levels. Splenomegaly may 
be seen: in chronic haemolysis this may refl ect the 
spleen’s role in extramedullary erythropoiesis when 
the capacity of the normal marrow cavities to sup-
port red cell production is exceeded, while in fl orid 
acute haemolytic anaemias it may refl ect the vol-
ume of red cells being phagocytosed in the spleen. 
Long-term complications of chronic haemolysis 
may include expansion of erythropoiesis in the 
marrow cavities, thinning of cortical bone, bone de-
formities (e.g. frontal and parietal bossing) and, very 
 occasionally, pathological fractures. Pigment gall-
stones are seen commonly. 
Patients with haemolytic conditions are also at risk 
of episodes of pure red cell aplasia. In this condition, 
which is typically the result of infection with parvovi-
rus B19, there is a complete or near complete failure 
of erythroid maturation. Parvovirus binds to the car-
bohydrate P-antigen on erythroid progenitor cell sur-
faces and exerts a directly cytotoxic eff ect. In patients 
with a normal red cell lifespan, the temporary cessa-
tion of erythroid maturation it causes may produce a 
dip in the haemoglobin level, but it is usually clini-
cally insignifi cant from a haematological perspective. 
However, in haemolytic states, the combination of 
reticulocytopenia and a pre-existing shortened red 
cell lifespan may have a catastrophic eff ect on the Hb 
level. Aff ected patients may require urgent red cell 
transfusion. 
Figure 3.1 (a) A normocellular marrow fragment: about half its volume consists of haemopoietic cells (staining blue) 
and the remainder of unstained rounded fat cells. (b) A markedly hypercellular marrow fragment, as might be seen in 
the response to haemolysis: virtually all the fat cells are replaced by haemopoietic cells.
(a)
(b)
Table 3.1 Laboratory fi ndings indicative of haemoysis.
Extravascular haemolysis
Intravascular haemolysis
Hyperbilirubinaemia (unconjugated)
Hyperbilirubinaemia (unconjugated)
Reduced or absent serum haptoglobin
Haemoglobinaemia, haemoglobinuria, haemosiderinuria
Methaemalbuminaemia*
Increased serum lactate dehydrogenase (LDH)
Markedly increased serum LDH
Reticulocytosis
Reticulocytosis
Spherocytes
Red cell fragments (schistocytes)
Note: * Now rarely used in investigating a patient.

Haemolytic anaemias 29
Classifying haemolytic 
anaemias and 
establishing a diagnosis
Th e laboratory and clinical features above describe 
general aspects of haemolytic states, but are not able to 
defi ne the underlying cause of haemolysis. Many condi-
tions are associated with a reduction in red cell survival, 
but these may be classifi ed simply as either congenital 
or acquired. With the congenital causes, the underlying 
defect is typically intrinsic to the red cell itself, aff ecting 
the red cell membrane, its enzymes or its haemoglobin. 
Acquired causes, by contrast, are typically (but not ex-
clusively) due to defects outside the red cell, and can 
be divided into those with an immune basis and those 
without. Th is overview is summarized in Figure 3.2 and 
the individual conditions are outlined below.
Congenital haemolytic 
anaemias
Haemolysis due to defects 
of the red cell membrane
Since the diameter of a normal red cell is similar to that 
of the smallest capillary lumen, it is essential for the 
red cell to be able to undergo signifi cant deformations 
while traversing the circulation, while at the same 
time maintaining its structural integrity and avoiding 
fragmentation. Th ese contrasting requirements are 
accomplished through a fl exible red cell cytoskeleton, 
which interacts with red cell phospholipid mem-
brane. Key components of the cytoskeleton include 
α and β spectrin, actin and protein 4.1, while connec-
tions linking the cytoskeleton to the overlying red cell 
phospholipid bilayer include band 3, Rh-associated 
glycoprotein and glycophorin C (see Figure 3.3). De-
fects in any of these proteins can jeopardize the integ-
rity of the red cell and shorten its lifespan.
Hereditary spherocytosis (HS)
Th e most common haemolytic anaemia due to a 
membrane defect is hereditary spherocytosis (HS), 
with 1 in 3000 people of Northern European ancestry 
being aff ected. About 60% of patients have mutations 
aff ecting the ankyrin gene, a critical linker between 
the phospholipid bilayer and the fi lamentous spec-
trin heterodimers of the red cell cytoskeleton. Loss 
of ankyrin then leads to secondary reductions in 
spectrin and protein 4.1. However, defects in other 
membrane-associated proteins may have similar ef-
fects, and the molecular nature of HS is consequently 
very heterogeneous. Defects in spectrin itself, band 3, 
protein 4.2 and the Rh complex have also been de-
scribed, with a variety of diff erent mutations defi ned. 
In a minority of cases no molecular cause can be 
identifi ed. Although the bulk of kindreds show au-
tosomal dominant inheritance, autosomal recessive 
patterns have also been identifi ed in some families.
Th e consequence of uncoupling the connec-
tions between the membrane and the cytoskeleton 
is a tendency to release bilayer lipids in the form 
Figure 3.2 A classifi cation of haemolytic anaemia by aetiology. Abbreviations: G6PD, glucose-6-phosphate 
dehydrogenase; MAHA, microangiopathic haemolytic anaemia.
Membrane
defects
e.g. Hereditary
spherocytosis 
Enzyme
defects 
e.g.
G6PD
deficiency
Globin
defects
e.g Sickle cell
anaemia 
Autoimmune
Alloimmune
Non-immune
e.g.        
Mechanical
MAHA        
Infection
Immune
Congenital
Acquired
Aetiological classification of haemolysis

30 
Haemolytic anaemias
of cytoskeleton-free vesicles. Th is leads to a loss of 
membrane surface area, with cells adopting a sphe-
roid rather than biconcave shape. Repeated pas-
sage through the spleen aggravates this spherocytic 
change. Being less deformable than normal red cells, 
the passage of spherocytes through the splenic cords 
is hampered: the trapped cells are engulfed and de-
stroyed by splenic macrophages, leading to a reduc-
tion in red cell survival by extravascular haemolysis.
As might be expected from a condition so heteroge-
neous at the molecular level, HS is highly variable in 
its clinical presentation. Around 20% of all HS patients 
have mild disease with well-compensated haemo-
lysis. Th ese patients will have a near normal haemo-
globin maintained by a higher than normal reticulo-
cyte count, and will have only mild spherocytosis and 
mild splenomegaly. Indeed, such patients may not 
even present to medical attention until they develop 
complications of chronic haemolysis in adulthood 
(e.g. gallstones). Th e majority of patients have mod-
erate disease characterized by a Hb concentration of 
8–11g/dl, while a small percentage have severe disease 
requiring intermittent or even regular  transfusions.
Complications of the chronic haemolysis in HS 
include the development of pigment gallstones (and 
possibly associated biliary obstruction). Aplastic cri-
ses may occur secondary to parvovirus B19 infection, 
and it should be noted than many otherwise trivial in-
tercurrent infections can lead to episodes of increased 
haemolysis, sometimes requiring transfusion. Mega-
loblastic anaemia due to folate defi ciency is also oc-
casionally found, as in other chronic haemolytic dis-
orders. Th is results from an increased  requirement 
for folate by the hyperactive bone marrow, and is es-
pecially found when the diet is inadequate.
Diagnosis and management
Th e cardinal clinical features are a family history, mild 
jaundice, pallor and splenomegaly; but clearly these 
will not distinguish between HS and other forms of 
inherited haemolytic anaemia. Laboratory fi ndings 
include the general features of haemolysis (anae-
mia, reticulocytosis and elevated plasma bilirubin, as 
above), but also the presence of spherocytes on the 
peripheral blood fi lm (Figure 3.4). While spherocytes 
are also typically seen in patients with autoimmune 
haemolytic anaemia (see below), their presence in 
the context of a positive family history and a nega-
tive direct antiglobulin test will strongly suggest HS – 
and, indeed, no further diagnostic testing would be 
 required in such patients.
Where more defi nitive evidence for the diagnosis is 
needed, the eosin-5-maleamide (EMA) binding test 
Figure 3.3 Schematic diagram of the red cell membrane cytoskeleton.
Band 3
4.2
Ankyrin
β spectrin
α
α
α spectrin
β
β
Lipid bilayer
Actin
4.1
Glycophorin C
Figure 3.4 A blood fi lm from a patient with HS showing 
many spherocytes.

Haemolytic anaemias 31
may be used. EMA is a fl uorescent dye that binds the 
transmembrane protein band 3 on the red cell sur-
face. Th e extent of binding can be gauged by a fl ow cy-
tometric analysis of a fl uorescent signal from the cell 
surface (see Chapter 5 for further discussion of fl ow 
cytometry). HS, and other membrane disorders that 
result in disruption of the red cell cytoskeleton and its 
linkage to the phospholipid bilayer, will result in de-
creased EMA binding and a reduced fl uorescent sig-
nal. An appreciation of which protein is aff ected may 
not be required for the clinical care of the patient; but 
if it is, or if other tests have yielded borderline results, 
the red cell membrane proteins may also be subject to 
electrophoresis on a denaturing polyacrylamide gel.
Th e treatment of HS should be tailored to the se-
verity of the individual case. All patients should re-
ceive folic acid supplementation, in the light of their 
increased rate of erythropoiesis. Children with severe 
disease are likely to require splenectomy; this should 
also be considered for those with moderately severe 
disease. As well as markedly reducing haemolysis 
and lengthening the red cell lifespan, this will reduce 
the likelihood of developing long-term complica-
tions. Splenectomy will, however, increase the risk of 
signifi cant infection, particularly from encapsulated 
organisms. Th is risk is especially marked in children 
under the age of 5, and splenectomy is therefore 
typically delayed until age 5–10 years. Preoperative 
preparation should include the administration of 
pneumococcal and meningococcal vaccine and Hae-
mophilus infl uenzae type b vaccine, and prophylac-
tic penicillin V is advised lifelong post splenectomy, 
in an attempt to prevent the development of serious 
infection from Neisseria meningitidis, Streptococcus 
pneumoniae and other encapsulated organisms.
Hereditary elliptocytosis and 
hereditary pyropoikilocytosis
Hereditary eliptocytosis (HE) is also a relatively com-
mon condition, especially in regions where malaria 
is endemic. As with HS, it is heterogeneous at both 
a molecular and clinical level. Th e majority of kin-
dreds have defects in α spectrin, though other com-
ponents of the red cell cytoskeleton may be aff ected. 
While most patients are clinically asymptomatic, 
some will have a chronic symptomatic haemolytic 
anaemia. All show the very characteristic red cell 
shape on peripheral blood fi lms (Figure 3.5).
Where there is severe disturbance of the mul-
timerization of spectrin, patients usually have a 
severe haemolytic anaemia from infancy, with bi-
zarre peripheral blood morphology, including mi-
crospherocytes and poikilocytes. Such patients are 
described as having hereditary pyropoikilocytosis, al-
though molecular analysis shows that this is in fact a 
homozygous or compound heterozygous state for the 
mutations that cause HE.
Haemolysis due to abnormalities 
of red cell enzymes
Haemolytic anaemias may also result from congeni-
tal abnormalities of the enzymes required for energy 
transfer in glucose metabolism. Th e red cell needs a 
continuous supply of energy for the maintenance of 
membrane fl exibility and cell shape, the regulation of 
sodium and potassium pumps, and the maintenance 
of Hb in the reduced ferrous form. Since mature red 
cells lack mitochondria, there is a reliance princi-
pally on the anaerobic glycolytic pathway for glucose 
metabolism and ATP generation. 
Th ere is also an alternative direct oxidative path-
way for glucose metabolism, the pentose-phosphate 
shunt, in which glucose-6-phosphate is directly oxi-
dized, eventually leading to the production of me-
tabolites that can rejoin the anaerobic glycolytic 
pathway. Although this shunt does not yield ATP di-
rectly, it is capable of reducing NADP+ to NADPH, 
which in turn can be oxidized to maintain reduced 
glutathione (GSH). Th e signifi cance of the pentose-
phosphate shunt is therefore its ability to provide a 
pool of ‘reducing activity’ that can be used to keep the 
sulphydryl groups of haemoglobin, red cell enzymes 
and membrane proteins in their functional reduced 
forms (see Figure 3.6).
Glucose-6-phosphate 
dehydrogenase defi ciency
Defi ciency of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase 
(G6PD), the fi rst enzyme of the pentose-phosphate 
Figure 3.5 A blood fi lm from a patient with hereditary 
elliptocytosis showing a high proportion of elliptical red 
cells.

32 
Haemolytic anaemias
shunt, will prevent the normal generation of NADPH, 
with subsequent erythrocyte sensitivity to oxidative 
stress. Th e molecular basis of G6PD defi ciency is 
highly variable, with various point mutations in the 
G6PD gene on the X chromosome resulting in en-
zymes with altered activity, kinetics and interactions. 
Th e normal G6PD enzyme is designated type B and is 
the prevalent form worldwide; G6PD type A is a nor-
mal variant found in approximately 20% of healthy 
individuals of African ancestry. Defective forms of 
G6PD include the A– African variant in which the en-
zyme activity is reduced to approximately one tenth 
of its normal function, and the Mediterranean vari-
ant in which the enzyme activity is even more mark-
edly limited, at 1–3% of normal. Together, these two 
mutations account for >95% of all cases of G6PD 
 defi ciency.
Since the gene for G6PD is found on the X chromo-
some, aff ected individuals are male (homozygous 
women are aff ected as well, but are unusual; skewed 
lionization may also give reduced enzyme activity in 
some heterozygous women). It has been estimated 
that as many as 400 million people worldwide are 
aff ected, with the prevalence being high in areas 
where malaria is endemic. It has been shown that the 
defi ciency aff ords some protection against plasmo-
dium falciparum malaria, with heterozygous females 
infected with malaria having lower parasite counts in 
their red cells than women without G6PD defi ciency. 
Defi ciency of the enzyme is found in about 20% of 
individuals of west and central African origin and is 
also found to a varying extent in southern Europe, the 
Middle East, India, Th ailand and southern China. It is 
very rare in people of northern European origin. 
Since G6PD has a critical role in maintaining the 
pool of reducing power in the erythrocyte, patients 
with low levels of the enzyme are poorly protected 
against oxidative challenge – with some medications 
and even foods resulting in marked oxidative dam-
age to the red cell. When the red cell is exposed to 
oxidants, haemoglobin is converted to methaemo-
globin and denatured. Denatured haemoglobin then 
precipitates forming inclusions in the red cell (termed 
Heinz bodies and detected by supravital staining, as 
in Figure 3.7). Heinz bodies, and the portion of the red 
cell membrane to which they become attached, are 
removed by splenic macrophages as the red cells pass 
through the spleen; the resulting inclusion-free cells 
display unstained areas at their periphery (‘bite’ cells, 
seen in Figure 3.8). Red cells with oxidative mem-
brane damage will be removed extravascularly by the 
spleen, though acute responses to a severe oxidative 
challenge may also provoke intravascular haemolysis.
Oxidant drugs that may bring about this type of 
haemolytic anaemia include antimalarial drugs (e.g. 
primaquine and chloroquine), sulphonamides, nitro-
furantoin, chloramphenicol, aspirin (in high doses), 
dapsone, phenacetin and vitamin K analogues.
Figure 3.6 A schematic diagram of the pathway 
of glucose metabolism in the red cell, to show the 
important role of G6PD. A decreased activity of 
the enzyme leads to a defi ciency of the reducing 
compounds NADPH and GSH.
Glucose
G6PO4 dehydrogenase
O2
G6PO4
Pentose-PO4
NADPH
GSSG
NADP
GSH
ADP
NAD
ATP
NADH
PO4
intermediaries
Pyruvic acid
NADH
NAD
Lactic acid
Figure 3.7 Membrane-bound Heinz bodies consisting 
of denatured haemoglobin (supravital staining with 
methyl violet). 

Haemolytic anaemias 33
A number of screening tests and assays for detect-
ing G6PD defi ciency are available. Th ese are based on 
assessing the production of NADPH by red cells in the 
presence of an excess of glucose-6-phosphate. Th e 
NADPH is detected spectrophotometrically, by its 
ability to reduce nitroblue tetrazolium (NBT) in the 
presence of an electron transfer agent, or by its ability 
to fl uoresce in ultraviolet light. 
A variety of clinical syndromes may be associ-
ated with G6PD variants that have reduced enzyme 
activity. The commonest of these is episodic acute 
haemolysis. For most of the time, patients with the 
two common G6PD variants (A– and Mediterranean 
types) are well and have normal Hb concentrations 
with only a slight shortening of the red cell lifespan. 
Episodes of haemolytic anaemia develop during 
infections or following exposure to oxidant drugs 
and chemicals. Haemolysis typically begins 1–3 
days following exposure to the oxidative stressor, 
with anaemia being maximal about 7–10 days after 
exposure. The extent of the fall in Hb concentration 
is partly dependent on the amount and nature of 
the drug being given, and partly on the extent of the 
reduction of enzyme activity. During this time, the 
patient may report dark urine due to haemoglob-
inuria. A subtype of acute haemolysis is favism, a 
syndrome in which an acute haemolytic anaemia 
occurs after the ingestion of the broad bean (Vi-
cia fava) in individuals with a deficiency of G6PD 
(commonly of the Mediterranean type). Favism 
usually affects children; severe anaemia develops 
rapidly and is often accompanied by haemoglob-
inuria. Fava beans contain two β-glycosides, vicine 
and convicine, which generate free radicals and 
consequently oxidize GSH and other red cell con-
stituents.
Although the majority of patients with G6PD de-
fi ciency have episodic haemolytic episodes, some 
patients with severe enzyme defects have a more 
chronic haemolytic picture, with oxidative exacer-
bations. In these patients, the chronic haemolysis is 
principally extravascular.
A further possible presentation of G6PD defi ciency 
is in infancy, with hyperbilirubinaemia. A combina-
tion of oxidative damage to red cells alongside im-
maturity of the bilirubin-conjugating system can lead 
to hyperbilirubinaemia, sometimes necessitating 
exchange transfusion. Aff ected individuals recover 
completely after the neonatal period, but may devel-
op episodic acute haemolysis during later life.
Treatment of G6PD defi ciency
Treatment generally focuses on the avoidance of 
oxidative precipitants to haemolysis. In many cas-
es, haemolysis is self limiting: in patients with the 
A–  variant, for example, after about 10 days the Hb 
concentration starts to climb and may reach normal 
levels, even with continuation of the off ending oxi-
dant drug. Th is is because in these patients only the 
older red cells have suffi  ciently low G6PD levels to be 
aff ected. As the reticulocyte count rises, so the eff ect 
of exposure to the oxidant is diminished. For patients 
with the Mediterranean variant, in whom the average 
enzyme activity is lower haemolytic episodes may not 
be self-limiting, and packed red cell transfusion may 
be required in cases of severe haemolysis.
Other red cell enzyme defi ciencies 
causing haemolysis
G6PD is not the only enzyme defi ciency that can result 
in haemolysis. Pyruvate kinase defi ciency is another 
relatively common example, aff ecting individuals of all 
ethnic origins. As with G6PD defi ciency, it is thought to 
have a protective role in plasmodium falciparum infec-
tion, explaining its relatively high prevalence. At a mo-
lecular level it is a highly heterogeneous condition, with 
most aff ected patients being compound heterozygotes. 
Th is heterogeneity is refl ected in the clinical presenta-
tion, but there is usually a chronic haemolytic anaemia 
and some patients may benefi t from splenectomy.
Haemolysis due to haemoglobin 
defects
Th e third category of congenital haemolytic anaemi-
as relates to defects in the structure of haemoglobin. 
Th ese conditions are summarized as part of the clas-
sifi cation of haemolytic anaemias, but are discussed 
Figure 3.8 ‘Bite’ cells in the blood fi lm of a patient with 
G6PD defi ciency who had received primaquine. These 
red cells are irregular in shape, are abnormally dense and 
show a poorly staining area just beneath part of the cell 
membrane (MGG stain).

34 
Haemolytic anaemias
Table 3.2 Classifi cation of AIHAs.
Caused by warm-reactive antibodies
Idiopathic
Secondary (chronic lymphocytic leukaemia, 
lymphoma, systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), 
some drugs)
Caused by cold-reactive antibodies
Cold haemagglutinin disease
Idiopathic
Secondary (Mycoplasma pneumoniae infection, 
infectious mononucleosis, lymphomas)
Paroxysmal cold haemoglobinuria
Idiopathic
Secondary (some viral infections, congenital and 
tertiary syphilis)
in more detail in Chapter 4. Briefl y, structural variants 
of the globin chains may aff ect the lifespan of the red 
cell, with sickle cell anaemia being the best-described 
example. A tendency of the HbS variant to polymer-
ize under conditions of low oxygen tension leads to 
distortion of the erythrocyte into the well-recognized 
sickle shape. Th e distorted cells are subject to both 
intra- and extravascular haemolysis.
Acquired haemolytic 
anaemias
In the acquired haemolytic anaemias, red cells may 
be destroyed either by immunological or by non-im-
munological mechanisms.
Immune haemolytic anaemias
In these conditions, antigens on the surface of red 
cells react with antibodies sometimes with comple-
ment activation. IgG-coated red cells interact with 
the Fc receptors on macrophages in the spleen, and 
are then either completely or partially phagocytosed. 
When the phagocytosis is partial, the damaged cell 
will return to the circulation as a spherocyte. Red 
cells that are also coated with the activated comple-
ment component C3 may interact with C3 receptors 
on macrophages and are usually completely phago-
cytosed. In most instances where complement is ac-
tivated, the cascade sequence only proceeds as far as 
C3 deposition on the cell surface. In a few instances, 
activation of complement proceeds further and per-
mits deposition of the membrane attack complex 
(C5–C9) with resultant intravascular haemolysis. 
Th e immune haemolytic anaemias may be due to 
autoantibodies; that is, antibodies formed against 
one or more antigenic constituents of the individual’s 
own tissues. Th ese include autoimmune haemolytic 
anaemia (AIHA) and some drug-related haemolytic 
anaemias. However, it is also possible to develop 
alloimmune haemolytic anaemia, consequent on 
the production of antibodies against red cells from 
another individual, as in haemolytic transfusion 
reactions and haemolytic disease of the newborn 
( Chapter 15). A further mechanism by which immune 
dysregulation can result in haemolysis is found in the 
rare condition paroxysmal nocturnal haemoglobinu-
ria (PNH), which arises when an acquired defect in 
the red cell membrane leads to complement-mediat-
ed haemolysis (see Box 3.1). Each of these subtypes 
of immune haemolysis is discussed in further detail 
 below.
Autoimmune haemolytic anaemias
A classifi cation of the autoimmune haemolytic anae-
mias is given in Table 3.2. Th e temperature depend-
ence of the autoantibody’s binding affi  nity for its red 
cell surface antigen will determine the clinical pic-
ture. ‘Warm’ autoantibodies react best with the red 
cell antigen at 37°C and are usually of IgG subtype. 
‘Cold’ antibodies react best at temperatures below 
32°C (usually below 15°C) and, since they are usually 
of IgM subtype, are capable of agglutinating red cells. 
Warm AIHA
In idiopathic warm AIHA, haemolysis dominates the 
clinical picture and no evidence can be found of any 
other disease. In secondary AIHA, the haemolysis is 
associated with a primary disease such as chronic 
lymphocytic leukaemia or systemic lupus erythema-
tosus (SLE). Some 50–70% of ‘warm’ autoantibodies 
show specifi city for the Rh antigen system (see Chap-
ter 15) and some of the remainder for other blood 
group antigen systems. Th e pathological mechanism 
by which these antibodies arise is unclear.
Th e antibody-coated red cells undergo partial 
or complete phagocytosis in the spleen and by the 
Kupff er cells of the liver. Th ere may be partial activa-
tion of the complement cascade in addition, although 
completion to the membrane attack complex of com-
plement is rare – a likely consequence of the activity of 
the complement regulatory proteins, factors I and H.
Th e clinical presentation of warm AIHA is highly 
variable but, unlike cold AIHA, it is unrelated to am-
bient temperature. Patients are usually over the age 
of 50. Some patients with fl orid haemolysis are very 
ill with an acute onset of severe anaemia; others have 

Haemolytic anaemias 35
AIHA, as even transfused cells may become coated 
with antibody and will have a relatively short half-life.
Cold haemagglutinin disease (CHAD)
Since cold antibodies react with red cells only at 
temperatures below about 32°C, they typically bind 
to the red cell surface in the cooler superfi cial blood 
vessels of the peripheries. Here, the presence of the 
antibody permits complement fi xation. Red cells 
bearing complement will be susceptible to partial 
or complete phagocytosis in the spleen, but comple-
tion of the complement cascade may also be seen, 
with the insertion of the membrane attack complex 
and consequent intravascular haemolysis. Since 
the cold antibodies are typically of the IgM subtype, 
their pentameric structure permits direct aggluti-
nation of red cells coated with antibody; they are 
therefore sometimes termed cold agglutinins. Th is is 
readily seen in blood fi lms made at room tempera-
ture ( Figure 3.10).
Symptoms due to cold AIHA are worse during cold 
weather. Exposure to cold provokes acrocyanosis 
(coldness, purplish discolouration and numbness of 
fi ngers, toes, ear lobes and the nose), due to the for-
mation of agglutinates of red cells in the vessels of the 
skin. Th e direct activation of the complement system 
leads to red cell lysis and, consequently, to haemo-
globinaemia and haemoglobinuria. 
A direct antiglobulin test will reveal that com-
plement proteins are bound to the red cell surface, 
though the cold antibody itself frequently dissoci-
ates from the red cells during the washing phase of 
the test and may not be detected. Th e cold agglutinin 
in chronic idiopathic CHAD is usually a monoclonal 
lgM antibody, normally with anti-I specifi city (I and 
i are the names given to carbohydrate antigens on 
the surface of red cells; adult red cells contain more 
few or no symptoms and a mild chronic anaemia or 
even a compensated haemolytic state. Mild jaundice 
is common and splenomegaly may be found.
Haematological fi ndings include anaemia, sphero-
cytosis (Figure 3.9), reticulocytosis, occasional nucle-
ated red cells in the peripheral blood and sometimes 
a neutrophil leucocytosis. However, the critical diag-
nostic investigation is the direct antiglobulin test (also 
known as the direct Coombs’ test). In this test, washed 
red cells from the patient are incubated with an anti-
human globulin, which is able to bind to antibodies 
on the red cell surface. Being divalent, the antihuman 
globulin can bind IgG from two red cells, and is thus 
able to agglutinate cells that are coated with antibody. 
Such agglutination of red cells constitutes a positive di-
rect antiglobulin test. Cells that are not coated with IgG 
will remain unagglutinated. Th e test can also be made 
specifi c for individual subtypes of IgG and for comple-
ment components that may be found on the red cell 
surface in AIHA. It should be noted, however, that a 
positive direct antiglobulin test does not always imply 
active haemolysis: studies of healthy blood donors sug-
gest that up to 1 in 10,000 of the population will have 
a positive test without haematological consequences.
In most patients, the haemolysis can be limited by 
treatment with prednisolone, which is initially given in 
high doses. If there is no response to steroids, or if the 
reduction in haemolysis is not maintained when the 
dose of steroids is lowered, splenectomy or alternative 
immunosuppressive therapy should be considered. 
Th e anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody rituximab, as 
well as immunosuppressants such as azathioprine 
or cyclophosphamide, may be benefi cial in reducing 
autoantibody production. In patients with severe anae-
mia and circulatory compromise, the least incompati-
ble ABO- and Rh-matched blood should be transfused. 
However, transfusion is avoided wherever possible in 
Figure 3.9 Blood fi lm from a patient with idiopathic 
AIHA (warm-reactive antibody) showing prominent 
spherocytosis and polychromasia.
Figure 3.10 Numerous red cell agglutinates on a blood 
fi lm from a patient with idiopathic CHAD.

36 
Haemolytic anaemias
I than i determinants). Th e anti-I titre at 4°C may be 
as high as 1:2000 to 1:500,000 (normal, 1:10–40). It 
should also be noted that a monoclonal cold aggluti-
nin may also be seen with several B cell lymphomas.
Rarely, patients with Mycoplasma pneumonia or 
infectious mononucleosis may develop acute self-
limiting cold agglutinin-induced haemolytic anaemia, 
due to the production of polyclonal lgM antibodies 
with anti-I or anti-i specifi city, respectively.
Chronic idiopathic CHAD is managed initially sim-
ply by keeping the patient warm. However, some pa-
tients remain symptomatic and treatment is required. 
Unlike warm AIHA, glucocorticoids and splenectomy 
tend to be of limited use. Treatment with rituximab 
may be eff ective.
Other causes of haemolytic anaemia with an im-
mune element to their pathogenesis include parox-
ysmal nocturnal haemoglobinuria, paroxysmal cold 
haemoglobinuria and some drug-related haemolytic 
anaemias (see Box 3.1).
Box 3.1 
Paroxysmal nocturnal haemoglobinuria (PNH)
This rare, clonal disorder arises as a consequence 
of somatic mutation of the PIG-A gene in a 
multipotent haemopoietic stem cell. The product of 
the PIG-A gene is critical for forming the glycosyl-
phosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchor, which links many 
membrane proteins to the phospholipid bilayer. 
Among the many GPI-anchored proteins are CD55 
and CD59, also known as decay-accelerating factor 
and the membrane inhibitor of reactive lysis. These 
proteins are critical regulators of the complement 
pathway. Consequently, cells that lack the GPI 
anchor have reduced or absent CD55 and CD59 on 
their cell membranes, and are extremely sensitive to 
complement-mediated intravascular haemolysis.
 The haemolysis of PNH is generally chronic, 
although there may be acute exacerbations. 
Thrombosis is another clinical feature of PNH; while 
the mechanisms underlying it are not fully understood, 
it is known that some components of the fi brinolytic 
pathway are GPI linked, and free haemoglobin 
released in intravascular haemolysis may also have an 
activating effect on vascular endothelial cells.
 The diagnosis is usually based on fl ow cytometry 
for key GPI-anchored proteins CD55 and CD59. 
Newer techniques to diagnose PNH include FLAER 
(fl uorescent labelled aerolysin), in which a bacterially 
derived aeolysin binds to the GPI anchor itself; thus 
the absence of fl uorescence due to FLAER in a 
population of myeloid cells will indicate the presence 
of a PNH clone. Treatment may be supportive (folic
acid and iron supplementation, anticoagulation where 
needed), although newer treatments targeting the 
underlying pathophysiology include Eculizumab, a 
monoclonal antibody against the C5 component of 
complement.
Paroxysmal cold haemoglobinuria
This rare disease is caused by an IgG antibody with 
anti-P specifi city (P is a glycolipid red cell antigen). 
The antibody, called the Donath–Landsteiner 
antibody, is capable of binding complement and has 
a particular thermal profi le of activity. The antibody 
and early complement components bind to red 
cells at 4°C but lysis occurs only on warming to 
37°C. A rapid screening test therefore consists 
of incubating the patient’s red cells and serum at 
4°C and then warming the mixture to 37°C (the 
Donath–Landsteiner test). As might be predicted, 
patients suffer from acute episodes of marked 
haemoglobinuria due to severe intravascular 
haemolysis when exposed to the cold. An acute 
transient form associated with a viral infection 
(e.g. infl uenza, mumps, Epstein–Barr virus) affects 
children. The chronic form is usually seen in adults 
and is associated with syphilis. Idiopathic chronic 
PCH is rare.
Drug-induced haemolytic anaemia
There are several mechanisms by which drugs 
can induce a haemolytic anaemia. In some cases, 
the drug may act as a hapten and bind to red cell 
membrane proteins, inducing antibody formation. 
Penicillins, especially in high doses, have been 
implicated in this form of haemolytic anaemia. 
Alpha methyldopa is another drug well known to 
produce haemolytic anaemia in some patients, 
through the interaction of autoantibodies with 
the red cell surface, even in the absence of the 
drug – a mechanism clearly distinct from the 
hapten mechanism or immune complex effect. 
Treatment in each case focuses on the withdrawal 
of the offending drug; as with other causes of 
immune haemolysis, transfusion is avoided where 
possible.
Non-immune haemolytic 
anaemias
Mechanical damage to red cells
Several of the mechanical causes of acquired non-
immune haemolytic anaemia are summarized in 
Table 3.3. Red cells are mechanically damaged when 

Haemolytic anaemias 37
they impact upon abnormal surfaces. Th ese may in-
clude cardiac valve prostheses in valve-associated 
haemolysis, or activated vascular endothelium in the 
microangiopathic haemolytic anaemias. In dissemi-
nated intravascular coagulation (see Chapter 14) in-
appropriate activation of the coagulation cascade 
produces fi brin strands which are thought to cause 
mechanical destruction of red cells. Such damage 
usually results in the presence of red cell fragments 
in the blood fi lm and, since the red cells are damaged 
intravascularly, there may also be haemoglobinae-
mia, haemoglobinuria and an undetectable plasma 
haptoglobin.
Non-immune haemolytic anaemia 
due to drugs
While immune mechanisms of drug-induced haemo-
lysis are well described, there are also non-immune 
mechanisms by which the red cell lifespan may be 
shortened. Chemicals, such as benzene, toluene and 
saponin, which are fat solvents, act on the red cell 
membrane directly and disrupt its lipid components, 
inducing haemolysis. In addition, certain drugs, such 
as primaquine, the sulphonamides and phenacetin, 
which oxidize and denature Hb and other cell com-
ponents in people with a defi ciency of G6PD, can, if 
Table 3.3 Causes of acquired non-immune 
haemolytic anaemias.
Mechanical trauma to red cells
Abnormalities in the heart and large blood vessels
Aortic valve prostheses (Figure 3.11), severe aortic 
valve disease
Microangiopathic haemolytic anaemia
Haemolytic uraemic syndrome, thrombotic 
thrombocytopenic purpura, metastatic malignancy, 
malignant hypertension, disseminated intravascular 
coagulation
March haemoglobinuria
Burns
Infections
Clostridium perfringens (welchii), malaria 
(Figures 3.12 and 3.13), bartonellosis
Drugs,* chemicals and venoms
Oxidant drugs and chemicals, arsine, acute lead 
poisoning, copper toxicity, venoms of certain spiders 
and snakes
Hypersplenism
Note: * Some drugs cause haemolysis by immune 
mechanisms.
Figure 3.11 Fragmented red cells (schistocytes) in the 
blood fi lm of a patient with a malfunctioning aortic valve 
prosthesis.
Figure 3.12 Blood fi lm from a patient with Plasmodium 
falciparum malaria showing several parasitized red cells. 
Red cells heavily parasitized with malaria may be subject 
to intravascular lysis.
Figure 3.13 Blood fi lm from a patient with Plasmodium 
vivax malaria showing two parasitized red cells, each 
containing a single parasite (ring form or early trophozoite 
and an ameboid late trophozoite). Another red cell 
contains a schizont. Some of the parasitized cells are 
slightly enlarged.

38 
Haemolytic anaemias
given in a large enough dose, also aff ect normal red 
cells. When given in conventional doses, the two 
oxidant drugs dapsone and sulphasalazine will also 
cause haemolysis in most patients.
Hypersplenism
Hypersplenism describes the reduction in the 
lifespan of red cells, granulocytes and platelets that 
may be found in patients with splenomegaly due 
to any cause. Th e cytopenias found in patients with 
enlarged spleens are also partly caused by increased 
pooling of blood cells within the spleen and an in-
creased plasma volume; the magnitude of both these 
eff ects is proportioned to spleen size. In some hae-
matological diseases in which anaemia is caused by 
a congenital or acquired defect of the red cell or im-
paired red cell formation, hypersplenism may have a 
role in worsening the anaemia, and splenectomy may 
be needed to address the eff ect. 

Haematology Lecture Notes, Ninth edition. C.S.R. Hatton, N.C. Hughes-Jones, D. Hay and D. Keeling. © 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
conformational change, which enhances its affi  nity 
for the binding of subsequent molecules of oxygen. 
Th e physiological consequence of this is haemoglob-
in’s sigmoidal oxygen binding curve, which enables it 
to load oxygen eff ectively in situations of high oxygen 
tension, yet also to release it eff ectively in the low oxy-
gen tension of the peripheral tissues.
In addition, several other ligands can allosterically 
infl uence the binding of oxygen to the haem groups. 
2,3-diphosphoglycerate (2,3-DPG), a by-product of 
glucose metabolism in the cell, can bind to the β globin 
chains and allosterically decrease the affi  nity of haemo-
globin for oxygen, thus shifting the oxygen dissociation 
curve to the right and encouraging the release of oxygen 
to the tissues. A fall in the pH in the peripheral tissues or 
an increase in the CO2 concentration (the Bohr eff ect) 
Normal structure and 
function of haemoglobin
Haemoglobin is critical to the normal function of the 
red cell, the fundamental role of which is the transport 
of oxygen from the lungs to the tissues. Th e normal 
haemoglobin molecule comprises two ‘alpha-like’ 
globin polypeptide chains and two ‘beta-like’ globin 
chains; each globin molecule is associated with a 
haem group, which comprises a porphyrin ring with 
iron in its ferrous form at the centre. It is to the iron in 
this haem group that oxygen binds.
In shifting between the oxygen-unbound and 
bound states, the haemoglobin molecule undergoes 
Disorders of globin 
synthesis
Learning objectives
✓ To understand the normal structure and function of haemoglobin
✓ To understand how the globin components of haemoglobin change 
during development, and postnatally
✓ To understand the mechanisms by which the thalassaemias arise
✓ To appreciate the clinical presentations and complications of 
thalassaemia
✓ To appreciate the contribution of haemolysis and ineff ective 
erythropoiesis to the pathophysiology of thalassaemia
✓ To understand the pathophysiology of sickle cell anaemia
✓ To be able to describe the clinical presentation and complications 
of sickle cell anaemia
✓ To understand the role of haemoglobin electrophoresis and high 
performance liquid chromatography in the investigation of globin 
disorders
✓ To appreciate the many other haemoglobin variants associated 
with disease
4 

40 
Disorders of globin synthesis
both have similar consequences, such that the release 
of oxygen from the haemoglobin molecule to the tissues 
can be enhanced in the setting of increased metabolic 
demand (Figure 4.1).
Th e globin chain composition of haemoglobin can 
also infl uence its oxygen affi  nity. Although all normal 
haemoglobins consist of two pairs of distinct globin 
polypeptides, the precise nature of these globin 
chains changes during intrauterine and postnatal 
life. Th e α chains are encoded on chromosome 16 
and are arranged in the order in which they are ex-
pressed during development: the embryonic ζ globin 
chain fi rst, followed by the adult α globin chain. Th e 
β-like globins are encoded on chromosome 11 and 
again are found in the order of their expression: the 
embryonic ε chain, followed by the fetal γ globin and 
the adult β globin. Th us, the complete haemoglobin 
molecule varies in its composition during develop-
ment: Hb Gower (ζ2ε2 and α2ε2) and Hb Portland 
(ζ2γ2) are the earliest forms seen, followed by the 
predominant fetal haemoglobin HbF (α2γ2), which 
persists for several months postnatally, but contrib-
utes barely any of the normal adult complement of 
haemoglobins. Th e major adult haemoglobin is HbA 
(α2β2), with a much smaller contribution from HbA2 
(α2δ2 – usually 1.5–3.5% of adult haemoglobins). Th e 
fetal haemoglobin HbF has a higher oxygen affi  nity 
than the adult haemoglobins, facilitating transfer of 
oxygen from the maternal to the fetal circulation.
Normally, the synthesis of α-like and β-like chains 
is balanced, although the mechanisms permitting 
this balance remain incompletely understood. An 
imbalance between the production of α and β chains 
is the pathophysiological basis of the thalassaemias. 
Disorders of haemoglobin structure may also arise in 
the absence of imbalance between the α and β globin 
chains, with sickle cell anaemia being the principal 
example discussed in this chapter.
Thalassaemia
Th e thalassaemias are among the commonest genetic 
disorders in the world and are also among the most 
intensively studied from a molecular perspective. 
Notwithstanding this, their treatment is frequently 
only supportive and they are responsible for a huge 
burden of morbidity and mortality worldwide – most 
especially in countries that are economically least 
able to meet this challenge (Figure 4.2).
Figure 4.1 Oxygen dissociation curves of human blood.
100
75
50
25
0
20
40
60
80
100
PO2 (mmHg)
O2 saturation of Hb (%)
CO2
Arterial PO2
H
H
2, 3-DPG
2, 3-DPG
HbS
HbF
Left shift
Normal
Right shift
P50O2
20 26 34
O2 affinity
O2 affinity
Venous PO2
Figure 4.2 Distribution of the genes for 
the major Hb variants (S, E, C, D) and 
thalassaemia.
Thalassaemia
HbC
HbE
HbS
HbD

Disorders of globin synthesis 41
Th e thalassaemias are divided into two main groups, 
the α-thalassaemias and the β-thalassaemias, de-
pending on whether the defect lies in the synthesis of 
α- or β-globin chains respectively. Th e pathophysiol-
ogy refl ects the impact of an imbalance in the expres-
sion of α and β globin chains. Th e chains which are 
present in excess will precipitate in the precursor red 
cells, leading to their premature death prior to release 
from the bone marrow (ineff ective erythropoiesis); in 
those cells that do mature suffi  ciently to reach the cir-
culation, precipitated globin chains result in oxidative 
damage to the red cell membrane, with a consequent 
shortening of the red cell lifespan (haemolysis). 
Th e resulting anaemia leads to an increased eryth-
roid drive; as this manifests in further ineff ective 
erythropoiesis, there is further expansion of the mar-
row into bones not typically used for haemopoiesis, 
and into the spleen. Th e long-term consequences of 
thalassaemia therefore include splenomegaly, bony 
deformities and iron excess (see Chapter 2 for details 
of the impact of chronic anaemia on iron absorption), 
as well as chronic anaemia.
Th e severity of the disease will vary greatly ac-
cording to the degree of globin chain imbalance. Th e 
clinical phenotypes of patients with thalassaemia are 
discussed in more detail below.
α-Thalassaemia
α-thalassaemia is seen with the greatest frequency in 
south-east Asia (Th ailand, the Malay Peninsula and 
Indonesia) and west Africa. Th e prevalence in these 
countries is in the region of 20–30%. It is also prevalent 
in southern Europe and the Middle East, but sporadic 
cases have been reported in most racial groups. Each 
chromosome 16 has an α-globin locus consisting of 
two α-globin genes plus the regulatory sequences es-
sential for their normal expression. In most patients 
with α-thalassaemia, there is a deletion of one or 
more of the α-globin genes; there are occasional cases 
that are the consequence of non-deletional defects.
Deletion of one or two genes causes an asympto-
matic condition with minor haematological features; 
deletion of three of the four α-globin genes causes a 
more severe imbalance of α:β-globin chains and re-
sults in haemoglobin H disease; and loss of all four 
α-globin genes causes Hb Bart’s hydrops fetalis syn-
drome. Deletions may encompass both α genes on the 
same chromosome (termed α0, as no α-globin will be 
transcribed from the aff ected chromosome) or may 
involve only a single α gene (called α+, as the residual 
α gene on the aff ected chromosome may still be ex-
pressed) (Figure 4.3). Both the α0-thalassaemia and 
the α+-thalassaemia alleles are found in south-east 
Asia and the Mediterranean region. Th e main type of 
α-thalassaemia found in west Africa, the Middle East, 
India and the Pacifi c Islands is α+; α0 is very rare here. 
As might be predicted, in populations in which the 
α0-thalassaemia determinant is rare, HbH disease is 
also rare and Hb Bart’s hydrops fetalis syndrome is 
not found. In northern Th ailand, where both α+- and 
α0-thalassaemia traits are particularly common, 0.4% 
of deliveries are stillbirths due to Hb Bart’s hydrops 
 fetalis syndrome and HbH disease is found in about 
1% of the population.
α+ -Thalassaemia trait (deletion of 
one α globin gene)
Th is is seen when an individual inherits the α+-
thalassaemia allele from one parent and a normal chro-
mosome 16 from the other parent (i.e. heterozygotes for 
the α+ determinant). Aff ected individuals are asympto-
matic, although they have minor haematological chang-
es such as slight reductions in mean cell volume (MCV) 
and mean cell haemoglobin (MCH).
α0-Thalassaemia trait (deletion 
of both α-globin genes on one 
chromosome 16)
Th is is seen in heterozygotes for an α0-thalassaemia 
allele. Th e Hb is either normal or slightly reduced 
and the MCV and MCH are low. (Similar haemato-
logical changes are seen in homozygotes for the α+-
thalassaemia determinant who also have a total of 
two α-globin genes deleted.)
Haemoglobin H disease (deletion of 
three α-globin genes)
Th is chronic haemolytic anaemia results from the in-
heritance of both the α+- and α0-thalassaemia alleles, 
leaving one functioning α-globin gene per cell. α-globin 
chains are produced at very low rates, leaving a con-
siderable excess of β-chains, which combine to form 
tetramers (β4). Th is tetramer is known as HbH. HbH is 
unstable and precipitates as the erythrocytes age, form-
ing rigid membrane-bound inclusions that are removed 
during the passage of aff ected red cells through the 
spleen. Th e damage to the membrane brought about 
by this removal results in a shortened red cell lifespan. 
Th e clinical picture of HbH disease is very variable. 
Most patients are moderately aff ected, with a mild 
anaemia of 7–11g/dl and markedly hypochromic, mi-
crocytic indices (Figure 4.4). Supravital staining of the 
blood fi lm demonstrates cells with many HbH inclu-
sions, giving a characteristic ‘golf-ball’ appearance. 

42 
Disorders of globin synthesis
Most patients will be transfusion independent, 
or require transfusions only at times of intercurrent 
 infection. Splenomegaly is seen in most patients. (Th e 
clinical picture is therefore one of thalassaemia inter-
media – see below).
Hb Bart’s hydrops fetalis syndrome 
(deletion of all four α-globin genes)
Th is occurs when there is homozygosity for an α0-
thalassaemia allele. No α-chains can be formed, and 
the fetal β-like chain γ-globin forms tetramers known 
as Hb Bart’s. Th is haemoglobin is not useful for oxy-
gen transport and, despite the persistence of the 
embryonic haemoglobin Hb Portland (ζ2γ2), there is 
intrauterine or neonatal death due to hydrops.
β-Thalassaemia
Th e World Health Organization estimates that 1.5% of 
the world’s population are carriers of β-thalassaemia. 
Th e prevalence of the β-thalassaemia trait is particularly 
Normal
Chromosome 16
Normal
Homozygous
α-thalassaemia
Heterozygous
α-thalassaemia
α
 Deleted gene
Heterozygous
α0-thalassaemia
Homozygous
α0-thalassaemia
(hydrops fetalis)
HbH disease
α0
α
α
α
α
α
α
α
α
α
α
α
α
α
α
α
Figure 4.3 A diagram to show how the two forms of abnormal chromosome 16 (α+ and α0) are arranged to give the 
different forms of α-thalassaemia. Homozygotes for α0-thalassaemia die from Hb Bart’s hydrops fetalis syndrome.

Disorders of globin synthesis 43
high in southern Europe (10–30%) and south-east Asia 
(5%), but it is also common in Africa, the Middle East, 
India, Pakistan and southern China. It has been sug-
gested that the high prevalence of β-thalassaemia in 
these regions results from its protective eff ect against 
Plasmodium falciparum in heterozygotes.
While α-thalassaemia typically arises from gene 
deletions, β-thalassaemia usually results from a mul-
tiplicity of diff erent single nucleotide substitutions, 
insertions or small deletions aff ecting the β-gene it-
self, its promoter or its upstream regulatory sequenc-
es. Th e prevalence of particular abnormalities varies 
between diff erent ethnic groups. Analagous to the 
α-thalassaemias, β 0-thalassaemia describes a muta-
tion that abolishes β-chain production from a given 
chromosome, while β +-thalassaemia alleles allow 
some β-chain production, albeit at a reduced level. Th e 
β 0 type predominates in India and Pakistan and β+ mu-
tations predominate in Sardinia and Cyprus; both types 
are found in Greece, the Middle East and Th ailand.
Heterozygous β-thalassaemia 
(Beta-thalassaemia trait)
Most aff ected subjects with beta thalassaemia trait 
are asymptomatic. Th e Hb concentration is either 
normal or slightly reduced, and hypochromic and 
microcytic red cell indices are seen. Examination of 
the peripheral blood fi lm may also show character-
istic red cell abnormalities such as target cells and 
poikilocytes. A further major clue to the diagnosis is 
the up-regulation of δ-globin expression. Th is occurs, 
by mechanisms yet to be fully understood, from alle-
les in which β-globin expression is reduced or absent. 
Th e increased δ-chains will join the normally pro-
duced α-globin chains to form HbA2 (α2δ2). Typically 
in heterozygous β-thalassaemia HbA2 levels will be 
raised above the normal range to 3.5–7.0%. Some 
cases also show slightly increased HbF levels, in the 
range of 1–5%. 
Homozygous β-thalassaemia
Th e exact nature of the mutations aff ecting the 
β-globin cluster plus the impact of various genetic 
modifi ers will determine the phenotype of patients 
with defects of β-globin on both copies of chromo-
some 11. In the more severe cases, marked anaemia 
develops between the second and twelfth months 
of life and patients become transfusion dependent. 
In other cases a more moderate anaemia is seen, 
presenting after the age of 1–2 years and requiring 
transfusion only intermittently or in the context of 
 intercurrent infection.
Clinical classifi cation of the 
thalassaemias
Th e molecular basis for the thalassaemias is very di-
verse, and even in cases where the precise molecular 
defect is known the impact of genetic modifi ers may 
make it diffi  cult to predict the exact clinical phenotype. 
Th erefore, a clinical classifi cation of the thalassaemias 
allows a description of the patient’s phenotype irre-
spective of the exact molecular details of their underly-
ing condition.
Th alassaemia minima describes the presence 
of a thalassaemic mutation that is without clinical 
consequences. 
Th alassaemia minor describes patients with micro-
cytosis and hypochromic red cells secondary to tha-
lassaemia mutations, but with only mild anaemia or 
a normal haemoglobin. Patients who inherit a single 
aff ected allele are usually in this category.
Th alassaemia intermedia patients will also have 
a microcytic hypochromic anaemia, but usually of 
moderate degree. Th ey will have an increased eryth-
roid drive to maintain their haemoglobin, and will 
therefore have a packed bone marrow with a de-
creased myeloid:erythoid ratio, and extramedullary 
haematopoiesis, giving splenomegaly. Transfusion 
may be required to maintain the haemoglobin at 
times of additional physiological stress (e.g. dur-
ing intercurrent infection), but, critically, they are 
normally transfusion independent. Patients in this 
category include some patients homozygous for mu-
tations that reduce but do not completely obliterate 
β-globin expression and those with HbH disease.
Patients with thalassaemia major have severe anae-
mia and are transfusion dependent. Th eir increased 
erythroid drive leads to a packed erythroid marrow 
Figure 4.4 Blood fi lm from a patient with HbH disease 
showing microcytosis, hypochromia, anisocytosis and 
poikilocytosis.

44 
Disorders of globin synthesis
and splenomegaly. Th e transfusion programme is es-
sential to avoid growth retardation and the develop-
ment of bony abnormalities secondary to unchecked 
marrow expansion. Patients in this category are those 
with complete loss of β-globin expression from both 
copies of chromosome 11. Th e ongoing production 
of fetal haemoglobin into infancy permits these pa-
tients to survive, unlike those with complete loss of 
α-globin expression; but with the progressive loss of 
fetal haemoglobin in the fi rst few months of life, the 
infant becomes profoundly anaemic and would die 
without transfusional support.
The clinical course and 
complications of thalassaemia 
major
While anaemia is the principal feature of thalas-
saemia major, the massive expansion of erythroid 
activity results in several complications. Th e devel-
opment of splenomegaly and bony deformities has 
already been discussed, but there are also typically 
the general features of hypermetabolic states, such 
as growth retardation. Iron absorption from the gut 
is increased (see Chapter 2) and, in conjunction 
with iron loading from red cell transfusions, this 
contributes to marked iron overload. Iron deposi-
tion occurs in the myocardium, which can cause 
congestive cardiac failure and potentially fatal ar-
rhythmias; in the liver, leading to cirrhosis; in the 
pancreas, causing diabetes mellitus; and in other 
endocrine organs, leading to delayed puberty and 
delay or failure in the development of secondary 
sexual characteristics. While untransfused patients 
are likely to succumb to their anaemia in the fi rst 
decade of life, transfused patients have their life ex-
pectancy reduced by the development of iron over-
load, and controlling iron loading is therefore a key 
goal in the treatment of patients with thalassaemia 
major.
Treatment of β-thalassaemia major
Transfusions are planned to maintain the pre- 
transfusion Hb concentration at 9–10g/dL or above, 
with a post-transfusion Hb concentration of 13–
14 g/dL. With this treatment, thalassaemic children 
are able to grow and mature normally. If the spleen 
is considerably enlarged with evidence that it is also 
trapping transfused red cells and increasing transfu-
sion requirements, splenectomy can be performed.
Splenectomy may also be considered if there is 
thrombocytopenia or leucopenia secondary to pool-
ing of the blood volume in the enlarged spleen.
As mentioned above, an important aspect of treat-
ment is the reduction of tissue damage due to second-
ary iron overload. Until recently, this required the use 
of desferrioxamine, an iron chelator that could be ad-
ministered only parenterally and required subcutane-
ous infusion treatment over several hours on fi ve days 
of the week. Unsurprisingly for such a burdensome 
treatment, compliance can be problematic. Oral iron 
chelators have been made available more recently 
and include deferasirox (Exjade). Eff ective iron chela-
tion is critical to the long-term health of patients with 
thalassaemia major, and may also be needed in pa-
tients with thalassaemia intermedia, due to the eff ects 
of increased iron absorption from the gut. 
More radical and curative approaches have also 
been taken in thalassaemia major. Haemopoietic 
stem cell transplantation has been performed in 
many patients with thalassaemia major, although the 
limiting factor is frequently the availability of HLA-
matched donors. Although the morbidity and mortal-
ity of the procedure in young patients (treated before 
the development of end-organ damage by iron depo-
sition) are small, they are not negligible; the risks of 
the procedure therefore have to be weighed against 
the prospect of decades of treatment by blood trans-
fusion and iron chelation, and a personalized treat-
ment plan must be created for each patient. In older 
patients transplantation has proved less attractive an 
option, largely due to the higher procedure-related 
morbidity and mortality.
More experimental treatments include gene ther-
apy. At least one patient with β-thalassaemia major 
has become transfusion independent following infu-
sion of his own genetically modifi ed haemopoietic 
stem cells, in which a functioning β-globin gene was 
incorporated using a lentiviral vector. While prob-
lems remain with this highly experimental technique, 
gene therapy remains a possible long-term goal for 
patients with thalassaemia major.
Genetic counselling and antenatal 
diagnosis of β-thalassaemia major
When a pregnant woman is found to have an abnor-
mality in the synthesis or structure of Hb, her partner 
must also be investigated. If there is a risk of a seri-
ous clinical disease in the fetus, antenatal diagnosis 
should be off ered. Antenatal diagnosis can be made 
early during pregnancy from an analysis of chori-
onic villous DNA (at 9–12 weeks) or amniocyte DNA 
(at 13–16 weeks), or later using DNA from blood ob-
tained from an 18–20-week-old fetus. Newer tech-
niques focus on the non-invasive analysis of fetal 
DNA in the maternal circulation. 

Disorders of globin synthesis 45
Structural haemoglobin 
variants
Over 1000 abnormal haemoglobin variants have been 
reported, but most are rare and only a few lead to clini-
cal or haematological manifestations. Th e majority of 
structural Hb variants are the consequence of a single-
point mutation with a single amino acid substitution 
in the aff ected globin chain (e.g. HbS, HbE, HbC and 
HbD).
Th e spectrum of clinical and haematological 
abnormalities that may be caused by abnormal 
haemoglobins is summarized in Table 4.1. When the 
amino acid substitution results in an overall change 
in the charge of the haemoglobin molecule, its mi-
gration in a voltage gradient is altered and this can 
be demonstrated by standard electrophoretic tech-
niques. Th e speed of migration is characteristic for 
each abnormal haemoglobin (Figure 4.5). Abnormal 
haemoglobin variants are now usually detected by 
high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC).
Th e most common structural Hb variant is haemo-
globin S (HbS). Th is globin variant, and the important 
clinical entity of sickle cell anaemia, are discussed in 
the following section.
Haemoglobin S
Sickle cell anaemia has been described as the fi rst 
‘molecular disease’: it was the fi rst condition in which 
a defect in a specifi c protein was determined to be 
causative (by Linus Pauling and colleagues in 1948), 
with the specifi c amino acid change being defi ned in 
1956. A mutation in the β-globin gene results in the 
charged glutamic acid residue in position 6 of the nor-
Table 4.1 Different clinical and haematological abnormalities associated with some structural 
haemoglobin variants.
Variant
Clinical and haematological abnormalities
HbS
Recurrent painful crises (in adults) and chronic haemolytic anaemia, both 
related to sickling of red cells on deoxygenation
HbC
Chronic haemolytic anaemia due to reduced red cell deformability on 
deoxygenation; deoxygenated HbC is less soluble than deoxygenated HbA
Hb Köln, Hb Hammersmith
Spontaneous or drug-induced haemolytic anaemia due to instability of the 
Hb and consequent intracellular precipitation
HbM Boston, HbM Saskatoon
Cyanosis due to congenital methaemoglobinaemia as a consequence of a 
substitution near or in the haem pocket
Hb Chesapeake, Hb Radcliffe
Hereditary polycythaemia due to increased O2 affi nity
Hb Kansas
Anaemia and cyanosis due to decreased O2 affi nity
Hb Constant Spring, Hb Lepore, HbE
Thalassaemia-like syndrome due to decreased rate of synthesis of 
abnormal globin chain
Hb Indianapolis
Thalassaemia-like syndrome due to marked instability of Hb
Figure 4.5 Electrophoresis of haemolysates on cellulose 
acetate (pH 8.5). The arrow marks the site of application 
of the haemolysate. (1) Normal adult. (2) Individual with 
sickle-cell trait; 35% of the Hb consists of HbS and 
most of the remainder is HbA. (3) Patient with sickle 
cell anaemia; most of the Hb is S and there is no A. 
(4) Double heterozygote for HbS and HbC. This results in 
a disease that is usually milder than that in homozygotes 
for HbS.
1
2
3
4


C
S
A

46 
Disorders of globin synthesis
mal β-chain being replaced by an uncharged valine 
molecule. Th e interaction of sickle β-globin chains 
with normal α-globin chains forms HbS. When de-
oxygenated, HbS is much less soluble than deoxygen-
ated HbA, and HbS molecules polymerize, eventually 
forming long fi bres (tactoids — see Figure 4.6). Th ese 
result in the deformation of the cell into the well-
recognized sickle shape (Figure 4.7). Red cells from 
heterozygotes for HbS sickle at much lower pO2 val-
ues than those from homozygotes, and do not  usually 
sickle in vivo. 
Th e gene for βs occurs particularly in a wide area 
across tropical Africa, as well as in parts of the Middle 
East and southern India (see Figure 4.2). Its prevalence 
in these areas varies from very low values up to 40% of 
the population. In black Americans, the prevalence is 
8%. Th e distribution of the βs gene corresponds to ar-
eas in which falciparum malaria has been endemic; its 
persistence at high frequency in these areas refl ects 
the relative resistance of heterozygotes to severe falci-
parum malaria during early childhood.
Sickle cell trait
Heterozygotes (one gene for normal β-globin and 
one for βS) are described as having sickle cell trait. 
Th eir red cells contain between 20% and 45% HbS, 
the rest being mainly HbA. Heterozygotes do not 
have 50% HbS, mainly because mutant β-chains (βS) 
have a lower affi  nity than normal β-chains to asso-
ciate with α-chains. Individuals with sickle cell trait 
are usually asymptomatic. However, spontaneous 
haematuria may occur occasionally due to microvas-
cular infarctions in the renal medulla. Renal papil-
lary necrosis may rarely occur and there is often an 
impaired ability to concentrate urine in older indi-
viduals. Th e red cells do not sickle until the O2 satura-
tion falls below 40%, a level that is rarely reached in 
venous blood.
Sickle cell anaemia
Homozygotes for sickle β-globin are described as 
having sickle-cell anaemia. Th eir red cells contain al-
most exclusively HbS and no HbA; there is a small but 
variable percentage of fetal haemoglobin. 
Th e cells may sickle at the O2 tension normally 
found in venous blood. Sickled red cells then occlude 
the microvasculature, with poor downstream per-
fusion and oxygenation. Th ey may be lysed directly in 
the circulation, where the resulting free haemoglobin 
scavenges nitric oxide; this in turn promotes vascular 
endothelial dysfunction and further vaso-occlusion. 
Sickled cells have also been shown to have abnormal 
interaction with endothelial cells, promoting an in-
fl ammatory reaction and inappropriate activation of 
the coagulation cascade. Th us, although sickling of 
red cells due the poor solubility of deoxygenated HbS 
is the ultimate basis of sickle cell anaemia, the disease 
is now recognized to be much more complex than the 
simple obstruction of the microvasculature by sickled 
cells. Our understanding of the pathophysiology of 
this condition remains far from complete.
Initially, there are cycles of sickling and reversal of 
sickling as the red cells are repeatedly deoxygenated 
Figure 4.6 Electron micrograph of a sickled red 
cell from a homozygote for HbS showing fi bres of 
polymerized deoxygenated HbS running along the long 
axis of the cell.
Figure 4.7 Two s ickle-shaped red cells with pointed 
ends and some partially sickled red cells from the blood 
fi lm of a patient with sickle cell anaemia (homozygote for 
HbS).

Disorders of globin synthesis 47
and reoxygenated within the circulation. Eventu-
ally, as membrane damage accumulates, irreversibly 
sickled cells are formed. Both unsickled and sickled 
red cells containing deoxygenated HbS are less de-
formable than normal red cells and this results in a 
chronic, principally extravascular, haemolytic anae-
mia. Th e Hb usually varies between 6 and 9 g/dL, 
but the symptoms referable to the anaemia itself are 
milder than expected from the Hb levels, as HbS has 
a reduced affi  nity for O2 (i.e. the O2 dissociation curve 
is shifted to the right). 
Diagnosis
Sickled cells are invariably present on the blood fi lms 
of patients with HbSS (Figure 4.7). Th e diagnosis of 
HbSS is made by fi nding (i) a positive result with a 
screening test for HbS; and (ii) a peak at an appropri-
ate position on an HPLC trace, confi rmed by isoelec-
tric focusing or haemoglobin electrophoresis. Th e 
screening tests for HbS-containing red cells are based 
on the decreased solubility of deoxygenated HbS; they 
involve the development of turbidity after addition to 
a lysis buff er containing a reducing agent such as so-
dium dithionite (sickle solubility test). Heterozygotes 
for HbS also give a positive result with these screening 
tests, but would be expected to show both HbA and 
HbS on HPLC/haemoglobin electrophoresis.
Th e clinical picture in sickle cell anaemia is highly 
variable (Table 4.2), refl ecting the impact of genetic 
modifi ers. Patients with hereditary persistence of 
fetal haemoglobin, for example, have a much mild-
er phenotype than those patients in whom HbF is 
appropriately silenced. Th e co-inheritance of the 
α-thalassaemia trait, which will reduce the mean cell 
haemoglobin concentration, can also ameliorate the 
symptoms of sickle cell anaemia.
Typically, individuals with sickle cell anaemia have 
crises superimposed on their chronic haemolytic 
state, sometimes precipitated by infection, cold or de-
hydration, but sometimes with no obvious precipitant 
at all. Crises frequently take the form of acute vaso-
occlusive painful episodes, which can aff ect any part 
of the body. In young children, a classic acute painful 
presentation is with dactylitis, or the ‘hand–foot syn-
drome’, in which there is occlusion of the nutrient ar-
teries to the metacarpals and metatarsals (Figure 4.8) 
and painful swelling of the hands and feet.
Aside from painful crises, sickle cell anaemia also has 
wide-ranging complications that may aff ect any organ 
of the body. In the central nervous system, cerebral inf-
arction occurs in approximately 10% of patients under 
the age of 20, and is a cause of signifi cant morbidity 
in sickle cell patients. It has been found that children 
with an increased velocity of blood fl ow in the major 
cerebral vessels are at particular risk of stroke, and 
transcranial Doppler studies now constitute an im-
portant part of the screening of paediatric patients 
with sickle cell anaemia. Children with high-risk 
transcranial Doppler readings receive prophylactic 
treatment to minimize their risk of stroke (see below). 
Table 4.2 Clinical manifestations of sickle-cell 
anaemia.
Chronic haemolytic anaemia and consequent 
cholelithiasis
Splenic sequestration syndrome; rarely, hepatic 
sequestration
Acute chest syndrome
Cerebral infarction, TIA, intracranial haemorrhage
Widespread painful vaso-occlusive crises
Bone infarction (osteonecrosis)
Osteomyelitis (Salmonella, Staphylococcus)
Chronic leg ulcers
Priapism
Chronic pulmonary disease and pulmonary 
hypertension
Haematuria, proteinuria, chronic renal failure
Pregnancy: increased peripartum fetal loss, preterm 
births, babies small for gestational age
Aplastic crises due to parvovirus infection
Proliferative sickle retinopathy (more common in HbSC 
disease)
Figure 4.8 An X-ray of the feet of a child with sickle 
cell anaemia two weeks after the onset of hand–foot 
syndrome, showing necrosis of the right fourth metatarsal.

48 
Disorders of globin synthesis
Haemorrhagic stroke may also be seen, but is com-
moner in older patients. 
Cardio-respiratory presentations include the acute 
sickle chest syndrome (typically a febrile illness with 
dyspnoea, chest pain and radiological changes), 
which is the most common cause of death in adults 
with sickle cell anaemia. Th is syndrome results from 
a combination of pulmonary infection, infarction 
and sequestration and, while the clinical course is 
highly variable, some patients deteriorate rapidly 
and require intubation and ventilatory support. More 
chronic  cardio-respiratory complications include the 
development of pulmonary hypertension and right 
heart failure, with a number of contributory factors 
including thromboembolism, multiple episodes of 
acute chest syndrome, and endothelial dysfunction 
from nitric oxide scavenging.
As with all chronic haemolytic anaemias, there is an 
increase in the incidence of pigment gallstones. Addi-
tional hepatic complications can include vaso-occlusion 
of the hepatic sinusoids, which can result in marked 
cholestasis. Renal complications include renal papillary 
necrosis as a result of infarction. Renal failure is thought 
to develop in up to a quarter of patients with HbSS and is 
caused by a combination of cortical and medullary inf-
arction, glomerular sclerosis, tubular damage and infec-
tion. Priapism is another common problem.
Young children can develop potentially life- 
threatening acute splenic sequestration – a crisis 
caused by the rapid and extensive trapping of red cells 
in the spleen, leading to profound anaemia, massive 
splenomegaly, reduced blood volume and hypovol-
aemic shock. Repeated splenic infarcts lead to func-
tional hyposplenism, with an increased risk of infec-
tion, particularly due to encapsulated organisms. 
Infection is the biggest cause of mortality in paediat-
ric sickle cell patients, particularly as a consequence 
of fulminant bacterial infections, but an increased 
risk of infection remains problematic throughout life.
In terms of musculoskeletal and skin complica-
tions, patients may suff er from larger infarcts aff ect-
ing the bones, with avascular necrosis of the femoral 
head being a potential complication. Osteomyelitis 
is another recognized complication and is classi-
cally found to be due to Salmonella Typhi. Chronic 
leg ulcers are often seen (Figure 4.9) and can be very 
 diffi  cult to treat.
A proliferative sickle retinopathy may develop and 
can lead to blindness from vitreous haemorrhage and 
retinal detachment; retinopathy is more common in 
compound heterozygotes for HbS and HbC (i.e. in 
HbSC disease) than in sickle cell anaemia, and results 
from hypoxaemic conditions downstream of occluded 
 vessels.
Aplastic crises due to parvovirus infection may 
occur (p. 28), as may an exacerbation of the anaemia 
due to secondary folic acid defi ciency (p. 20).
Treatment
Th e principles of the management of sickle cell anae-
mia include:
• Management of the increased infection risk by 
immunization with pneumococcal, Haemophilus 
infl uenzae type b (Hib) and meningococcal vac-
cine, plus treatment with prophylactic penicillin. 
Th is is particularly critical for children, but con-
tinues lifelong. Non-immune patients should also 
receive hepatitis B vaccine in case multiple trans-
fusions are required.
• Administration of folic acid daily to prevent sec-
ondary folate defi ciency.
• Avoidance of factors precipitating painful crises 
such as dehydration, hypoxia, circulatory stasis.
• Active treatment for bacterial infections that may 
precipitate or have precipitated crises.
• Treatment of painful crises with oral or intra-
venous fl uids and analgesics, including opiates 
when necessary.
• Early detection of the acute chest syndrome 
(blood gas measurements and chest X-ray), with 
the administration of oxygen and respiratory sup-
port where appropriate. Exchange transfusions 
are often needed to lower the patient’s HbS levels 
and limit ongoing sickling.
• Blood transfusion when necessary. Careful top-
up transfusion may be indicated for sequestration 
and aplastic crises, and exchange transfusions are 
useful in certain situations – particularly in severe 
acute chest syndrome, in priapism and in cases 
where there is evidence of neurological damage. 
Figure 4.9 A chronic leg ulcer with increased 
pigmentation of the surrounding skin in a woman with 
sickle cell anaemia.

Disorders of globin synthesis 49
Exchange transfusion followed by a chronic trans-
fusion programme may also be initiated in children 
considered to be at highest risk of stroke. When 
transcranial Doppler studies suggest a high risk of 
stroke, a regular transfusion programme that sup-
presses the patient’s own erythroid drive will reduce 
the HbS content of blood, and this has been shown 
in clinical trials to have a major impact on reducing 
the incidence of stroke. A similar programme may 
also be initiated in patients of any age who suff er 
particularly frequent crises. As in the case of thalas-
saemia major, patients who are regularly transfused 
for prolonged periods (>1–2 years) must receive 
iron chelators to prevent iron overload. Transfusion 
may also be required during pregnancy in patients 
with frequent crises or a poor obstetric history.
In patients having frequent severe crises (three or 
more per year), strategies other than transfusion plus 
iron chelation include agents to reinduce the expres-
sion of fetal haemoglobin. Th e fetal γ-globin chains 
cannot be incorporated into the polymerized sickle 
haemoglobin, such that the presence of haemoglob-
in F is able to inhibit the sickling process. Sickle cell 
patients with co-inherited inappropriate expression 
of γ-globin after infancy (known as hereditary per-
sistence of fetal haemoglobin, HPFH) have a much 
milder phenotype than those in whom fetal globin is 
silenced normally. Much research eff ort has therefore 
gone into understanding the mechanisms by which 
fetal globin is silenced (see Box 4.1), with a view to 
its therapeutic reactivation. Th e current pharmaco-
logical intervention to try to elevate HbF expression 
is long-term therapy with the ribonucleotide reduct-
ase inhibitor hydroxycarbamide; this increases the 
synthesis of HbF to a limited extent by means that are 
incompletely understood, and indeed modes of ac-
tion other than HbF induction have been proposed 
to explain its therapeutic benefi ts. Whatever the true 
basis of its eff ect, it can yield a signifi cant reduction in 
the frequency of crises, and also signifi cantly reduces 
mortality in patients with more than three vaso-oc-
clusive crises per year.
Curative strategies do exist. As with thalassaemia 
major, bone marrow transplantation is currently the 
only curative treatment, though it is relatively rarely 
performed. Patients with a suitably severe phenotype 
must be identifi ed prior to the onset of organ dam-
age; consequently most transplants have been under-
taken in children, with the best results seen in those 
with matched sibling donors. Typical overall survival 
rates are 90–97%, with event-free survival being near 
85%. Th e potential risks of the procedure need to be 
weighed  carefully against the implications of chronic 
disease for each young patient when deciding on an 
appropriate treatment strategy. 
Prognosis
Th ere is a high infant mortality rate, especially when 
the quality of health care or compliance with advice is 
poor. With the use of prophylactic penicillin V (from 
two months old), childhood deaths due to pneumo-
coccal sepsis have been substantially reduced. In 
adults, the acute chest syndrome is a common cause 
of death, with mortality rates between 5% and 10%. 
Even with optimal current treatment, the life ex-
pectancy for patients with sickle cell anaemia is still 
 reduced to approximately 50 years.
Haemoglobins E and C
Th ere are many haemoglobin variants other than HbS 
with clinical consequences. Among the commonest 
are HbE and HbC, both of which result from single 
amino acid substitutions in the β-chains.
Box 4.1: Reactivating silenced fetal 
haemoglobin
The β-globinopathies present a major burden of 
morbidity and mortality worldwide. All present 
clinically as the normal haemoglobin ‘switch’ from 
HbF to HbA takes place in the fi rst few months after 
birth; patients with hereditary persistence of fetal 
haemoglobin are therefore largely protected from the 
most severe clinical manifestations.
 The possibility of reactivating the normal γ-globin 
gene alongside the defective β-globin gene has 
long been considered an attractive therapeutic 
option. Yet, as with all genes, the details of 
how its expression is activated and silenced in 
a developmental stage-specifi c manner remain 
poorly understood.
 A signifi cant step forward was made in 2008 with 
the discovery of the role of BCL11a, a DNA-binding 
protein. Sequence variants in the gene for BCL11a 
were found to be frequently implicated in patients 
with hereditary persistence of fetal hemoglobin, 
and subsequent work demonstrated that high 
levels of BCL11a were found only in mature red 
cells. Moreover, the experimental down-regulation 
of BCL11a is able to reinstate high levels of HbF 
production, with clinically relevant amelioration of the 
haematological phenotype in animal models of sickle 
cell anaemia. Work is underway to fi nd a method of 
exploiting this fi nding for clinical benefi t. Meanwhile, 
agents such as hydroxycarbamide, which can 
achieve modest elevations of HbF synthesis, are 
widely used in the treatment of sickle cell anaemia.

50 
Disorders of globin synthesis
HbE is a structural variant of β-globin in which a 
missense mutation creates a new splice site at the 
end of the fi rst intron/exon boundary. Patients with 
HbE therefore have a reduction in normally spliced 
β-globin mRNA, with subsequent reduction in the 
amount of β-globin produced from the aff ected allele 
– rather like a form of β-thalassaemia. Heterozygotes 
have about 20–30% HbE, are asymptomatic and are 
usually not anaemic, although they do have a low 
MCV consistent with the thalassaemia-like patho-
physiology. Homozygotes are characterized by mild 
anaemia, a low MCV and many circulating target cells. 
Th e main clinical signifi cance of this globin variant, 
however, is its co-inheritance with β-thalassaemia. As 
HbE is very common in south-east Asia (being found 
in about 50% of the population in some parts of Th ai-
land), compound heterozygosity for Eβ-thalassaemia 
is not unusual. Such patients have highly variable 
clinical presentations, but the more severely aff ected 
have a thalassaemia major phenotype and need long-
term transfusion programmes. 
HbC is the consequence of a glutamine to lysine 
substitution in the β-globin chain, producing a posi-
tively charged haemoglobin molecule. When co-
inherited with a sickle allele, the resulting HbSC gives 
a sickling phenotype, although with some specifi c 
features (such as a more marked propensity to pro-
liferative retinopathy). HbC is also seen in homozy-
gosity; here the haemoglobin does not polymerize as 
with HbSS, but can crystallize, with a resulting reduc-
tion in the fl exibility of the red cell and a reduction 
in its survival. Abnormalities of potassium handling 
within HbCC red cells also contribute to the pheno-
type. Homozygotes have a mild anaemia, low MCV, 
splenomegaly and many target cells in their blood 
fi lm (Figure 4.10), while heterozygotes tend to be 
clinically asymptomatic. HbC is found in patients of 
West African origin, where the incidence may be as 
high as 7% of the population in Nigeria and 22% in 
northern Ghana.
While HbS, HbE and HbC are among the common-
est structural defects in the globins, many others ex-
ist, each with its own impact on the normal structure 
and function of haemoglobin. An understanding 
of the molecular nature of these disorders has been 
crucial to appreciating their pathophysiology and is 
likely to be of benefi t in developing eff ective therapies 
in the future.
Figure 4.10 Target cells and irregularly contracted cells 
in the blood fi lm of a homozygote for HbC.

Haematology Lecture Notes, Ninth edition. C.S.R. Hatton, N.C. Hughes-Jones, D. Hay and D. Keeling. © 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
programme of planned progressive therapy is used 
(Figure 5.1). Patients with prolonged neutropenia 
are particularly prone to develop fungal infections, 
notably Candida and Aspergillus. Candida species 
usually aff ect the mouth and other mucosal surfaces, 
whereas Aspergillus species tend to cause invasive 
pulmonary disease.
Selective neutropenia (neutropenia without 
other cytopenias) may occur in a large number 
of conditions (Table 5.1). Cytotoxic drugs and ra-
diotherapy cause a predictable neutropenia. Some 
combination chemotherapy regimens can lead 
to predictable neutropenia lasting days to weeks. 
Patients undergoing such treatment who become 
febrile require  support with broad spectrum intra-
venous antibiotics and antifungal agents based on 
planned progressive therapy, outlined above. Other 
drugs (Table 5.1), for example carbimazole, used to 
treat hyperthyroidism, and some antimalarial drugs 
are associated with idiosyncratic neutropenia. Pa-
tients taking these drugs should be warned about 
the remote but possible risk of neutropenia and ad-
vised to stop the drug should they develop a sore 
throat or fever.
Leucopenia
Th e terms ‘leucopenia’ and ‘neutropenia’ are used to 
describe a reduction in the total white cell count and 
neutrophil count, respectively, to values below their 
normal ranges. Th e term ‘lymphopenia’ is used when 
the lymphocyte count is subnormal.
Neutropenia
Neutrophils are highly motile cells that are required 
to maintain the integrity of mucosal surfaces and 
prevent overwhelming bacterial infection (see Chap-
ter 1). Th ere is a substantial risk of serious infection 
when the neutrophil count falls below 0.5 × 109/L. 
Th e fi rst symptom of neutropenia is sore throat 
( mucositis) and fever. Breakdown of the gastrointes-
tinal mucosa may lead to Gram-negative septicae-
mia, hypotension and death (neutropenic sepsis). Th e 
management of neutropenic sepsis requires rapid 
assessment: urgent investigations including blood 
cultures and immediate use of intravenous antibi-
otics and adequate hydration. If the fever persists, a 
Conditions associated 
with white cell 
abnormalities
Learning objectives
✓ To understand the meaning of the terms leucopenia, neutropenia, 
leucocytosis, lymphopenia and lymphocytosis
✓ To understand the signifi cance of neutropenic sepsis and the 
importance of early identifi cation and treatment
✓ To know the common disorders associated with atypical lymphocytes 
in the blood, particularly Epstein–Barr virus (EBV) infection
5

52 
Conditions associated with white cell abnormalities
Leucocytosis
An increase in the total white cell count is described 
as a leucocytosis. Th e term ‘neutrophil leucocytosis’ 
is used to describe an absolute increase in the total 
number of neutrophils in the peripheral blood (also 
known as neutrophilia). Eosinophilia is the term used 
to describe an absolute increase in the number of 
eosinophils. Similarly, basophilia is the term used to 
describe an absolute increase in the basophil count. 
Monocytosis describes an increase in the absolute 
monocyte count.
Neutrophil leucocytosis
Th e causes of neutrophil leucocytosis are shown in 
Table 5.2. Bacterial infection is an important cause, 
but many varied insults will elevate the neutrophil 
count. In addition, metamyelocytes and small num-
bers of myelocytes may be present in severe infection 
– ‘shift to the left’. Neutrophils may show toxic gran-
ulation (Figure 5.2), or Döhle bodies (Figure 5.3) or 
both. Toxic granules are abnormally coarse, reddish 
violet (azurophilic) granules, which are diff usely 
distributed throughout the cytoplasm. Döhle bod-
ies are 1–2 μm long, pale greyish blue cytoplasmic 
 inclusions ( Romanowsky stain). A ‘shift to the left’, 
Figure 5.1 Planned progressive therapy for febrile 
patients with neutropenia (<0.5 × 109 L).
Temperature  37.5°C
After 48 h if still febrile
and central line in situ
add vancomycin
If patient remains febrile
add amphotericin to
cover fungal infection
Start i.v. gentamicin 
tazocin
Table 5.1 The causes of selective 
neutropenia.
Physiological
Neutropenia in people of Afro-Caribbean ancestry
Certain drugs
Anti-infl ammatory drugs: indomethacin, 
oxyphenbutazone, phenylbutazone, sodium 
aurothiomalate
Antibacterial drugs: chloramphenicol, co-trimoxazole 
(sulphamethoxazole–trimethoprim), other 
sulphonamides
Some anticonvulsants, oral hypoglycaemic agents, 
antithyroid drugs, antimalarial drugs, tranquillizers, 
antidepressants and antihistamines
Infections
Bacterial: overwhelming pyogenic infections, 
brucellosis, typhoid, miliary tuberculosis
Some viral, protozoal and fungal infections
Immune neutropenia
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), Felty’s syndrome, 
autoimmune neutropenia, neonatal alloimmune 
neutropenia, aminopyrine-induced agranulocytosis
Miscellaneous
Hypothyroidism, hypopituitarism, cyclical neutropenia, 
familial benign chronic neutropenia
Table 5.2 The causes of neutrophil 
leucocytosis.
Physiological
Neonates, exercise, pregnancy, parturition, lactation
Pathological
Acute infections: especially by pyogenic bacteria
Acute infl ammation not caused by infections: surgery, 
burns, infarcts, crush injuries, rheumatoid arthritis, 
myositis, vasculitis
Acute haemorrhage and acute haemolysis
Metabolic: uraemia, diabetic ketoacidosis, gout, acute 
thyrotoxicosis
Non-haematological malignancies: carcinoma, 
melanoma
Lymphoma
Chronic myeloproliferative disorders: chronic myeloid 
leukaemia, polycythaemia vera, myelofi brosis
Drugs: adrenaline, corticosteroids, G-CSF and 
GM-CSF
Miscellaneous: convulsions, paroxysmal tachycardia, 
electric shock, postneutropenic rebound neutrophilia, 
postsplenectomy

Conditions associated with white cell abnormalities 53
toxic  granulation and Döhle bodies refl ect acceler-
ated neutrophil production and may be seen not only 
in acute infection but also in non-infective infl amma-
tory states (e.g. severe burns), in normal pregnancy 
and in  patients with various malignant neoplasms.
Th e neutrophil leucocytosis seen with steroid 
 administration and after exercise is caused by a 
rapid shift of neutrophils from the marginated to the 
 circulating granulocyte pool.
Abnormalities of granulocyte 
morphology and function
Th ere are a number of inherited conditions causing 
abnormalities in granulocyte morphology or function 
or both. Th e essential features of some of these are 
summarized in Table 5.3. Th e most common acquired 
abnormalities of neutrophil morphology include ‘shift 
to the left’, hypersegmentation of the nucleus (p. 22), 
toxic granulation, Döhle bodies, hypogranularity and 
Figure 5.2 Toxic granulation in two neutrophils from a 
patient with an infection.
Figure 5.3 Round, pale blue Döhle body near the 
nucleus of a neutrophil from a patient with extensive 
burns. Döhle bodies may also be oval or rod shaped 
and are more frequently seen at the periphery than at the 
centre of the cell.
Table 5.3 Some inherited abnormalities of neutrophil morphology or function or both.
Condition
Inheritance, prevalence
Characteristics
Pelger–Huët anomaly
Autosomal dominant 
1:1000–10,000
Heterozygotes have bilobed spectacle-like neutrophil 
nuclei, homozygotes have round or oval neutrophil 
nuclei; asymptomatic
Neutrophil myeloperoxidase 
defi ciency
Autosomal recessive 
1:2000
Detected during automated differential counting based 
on cytochemistry; usually asymptomatic
Chediak–Higashi syndrome
Autosomal recessive
Giant granules in leucocytes, neutropenia, 
thrombocytopenia, partial albinism, 
hepatosplenomegaly, death in infancy or early childhood 
from infection and haemorrhage
Chronic granulomatous 
disease
Majority X linked, some 
autosomal recessive
Normal neutrophil morphology, inability to kill ingested 
micro-organisms due to absence of cytochrome 
b558 or other components of the respiratory chain 
leading to impaired superoxide generation, recurrent 
granulomatous lesions from early childhood
the acquired Pelger–Huët anomaly (see myelodyspla-
sia, Chapter 11).
Eosinophilia
Eosinophilia is usually caused by allergic disorders or 
parasitic infestation. Asthma, eczema and drugs are 
the commonest causes, but there are many others, 
some of which are listed in Table 5.4.
Basophilia
Basophilia is an uncommon fi nding and should raise 
the possibility of a myeloid haematological malig-
nancy such as chronic myeloid leukaemia or my-
elodysplasia. Other causes include myxoedema and 
 hypersensitivity reactions.

54 
Conditions associated with white cell abnormalities
Monocytosis
A high monocyte count is seen in many infl amma-
tory disorders and malignant states. A high mono-
cyte count is also found in chronic myelomonocytic 
leukaemia, one of the myelodysplastic disorders (see 
Chapter 11).
Lymphocytosis and 
lymphopenia
An increase in the blood lymphocyte count is called 
a lymphocytosis. Th is is defi ned as a lymphocyte 
count greater than 4.0 × 109/L. Lymphopenia refers to 
a decrease in the number of circulating lymphocytes 
and is defi ned as a total lymphocyte count below 
1 × 109/L. In normal blood most lymphocytes are 
CD4+ T cells. Important causes of lymphocytopenia 
include acquired immune defi ciency syndrome 
(AIDS), radiotherapy, chemotherapy and steroid 
therapy. A transient low lymphocyte count is often 
found in patients with severe infection.
Transient lymphocytosis
Th e morphological features of lymphocytes en-
able the distinction between reactive and malignant 
causes. Th e most common cause of reactive lym-
phocytosis is infectious mononucleosis (see below). 
Lymphocytosis may be associated with other viral 
infections such as cytomegalovirus (CMV), hepati-
tis and human immunodefi ciency virus (HIV; early 
stages). Whooping cough (Bordetella pertussis) is an 
important cause of lymphocytosis in children.
Persistent lymphocytosis
Persistent lymphocytosis is suggestive of an underly-
ing lymphoproliferative disorder and requires further 
characterization. Th ere are benign causes, but in old-
er persons the most common cause is B-cell chronic 
lymphocytic leukaemia. Th e profi le of antigens ex-
pressed by cells can be determined by the technique 
of fl ow cytometry. Th e antigen profi le of lymphocytes 
allows diff erentiation between malignant and benign 
conditions and also allows characterization of indi-
vidual cells into B- and T-cell subtypes.
Flow cytometry: A 
technique for 
identifi cation of cells in 
suspension
Flow cytometry is a technique used to characterize 
cells, usually in the peripheral blood or in bone mar-
row aspirate samples. It is a method that allows the 
detection of specifi c antigens on the cell surface or, 
if the cell is made permeable, in its cytoplasm and 
nucleus. Th is is achieved by measuring fl uorescence 
and light scatter of cells as they fl ow in a coaxial 
stream through a beam of intense light. Th e fl uores-
cence generated may be ‘self-generated’ autofl uo-
rescence, due to cytochromes and other intracellu-
lar components, or may arise because the cells have 
been prelabelled with fl uorochromes conjugated to 
antigen-binding antibodies. It is this latter technique 
that permits the detection of specifi c cell surface an-
tigens. Most fl ow cytometers use an argon laser to 
excite fl uorochromes such as fl uorescein isothiocy-
anate (FITC, green), phycoerythrin (PE, orange) and 
peridinin chlorophyll protein (PerCP, red), which are 
bound to cell surface antigens. Th e diff erent emission 
spectra of the fl uorochromes allow cells labelled with 
FITC to be distinguished from cells labelled with PE 
or PerCP (Figure 5.4) and this in turn enables cells 
carrying specifi c antigens to be defi ned.
Th e defl ection of the laser beam by the cell also 
gives information about the size and granularity of 
the cell. Forward scatter of light relates to the size 
of a cell, whereas side scatter (SSC) relates to the 
Table 5.4 The causes of eosinophilia.
Parasitic infestations: fi lariasis, hookworm, ascariasis, 
strongyloidiasis, schistosomiasis, toxocariasis, 
trichinosis, hydatid cyst, scabies
Allergic disorders: bronchial asthma, hayfever, 
allergic vasculitis, Stevens–Johnson syndrome, 
drug sensitivity (e.g. chlorpromazine, penicillin, 
sulphonamides)
Recovery from acute infection
Skin diseases: eczema, psoriasis, pemphigus, 
dermatitis herpetiformis
Pulmonary eosinophilia: Loeffl er’s syndrome 
(pulmonary infi ltration with eosinophilia)
Polyarteritis nodosa
Chronic myeloid leukaemia, eosinophilic leukaemia 
(rare)
Other malignant diseases: Hodgkin lymphoma, 
angioimmunoblastic lymphoma, carcinoma (usually 
with metastases)
Idiopathic hypereosinophilic syndrome

Conditions associated with white cell abnormalities 55
granularity of the cell. Figure 5.5 shows fl ow cytom-
etry performed on a normal bone marrow incubated 
with anti-CD45 antibody labelled with the fl uoro-
chromes PerCP (CD45 is an antigen present on most 
haemopoietic cells apart from nucleated red cells, 
some blasts cells and plasma cells). It demonstrates 
the ability to separate diff erent populations of cells 
within the bone marrow sample.
Infectious mononucleosis
Th is is a syndrome characterized by the appearance of 
reactive lymphocytes in the peripheral blood caused 
by infection (Figure 5.6). Th e commonest causative 
agent is the EBV. Other agents include Toxoplasma 
gondii, CMV and HIV.
EBV infection
EBV infection is caused by close mucosal contact 
(e.g. kissing a carrier). Th e virus infects the respira-
tory epithelium causing pharyngitis, often with a 
signifi cant exudate on the tonsillar bed. Th e virus 
enters the blood leading to lymphadenopathy, fever 
and hepatosplenomegaly. Liver function tests may be 
abnormal. Th e illness is usually self-limiting, but can 
lead to persistent lassitude and fatigue. Patients given 
amoxycillin may develop a fl orid rash that is almost 
diagnostic in this clinical setting.
A characteristic feature of this illness is the de-
velopment of antibodies capable of agglutinating 
red cells of other species – horse red cells or sheep 
red cells. Non-specifi c antibodies can be absorbed 
out using guinea-pig kidney cells, allowing the 
Figure 5.4 (a) Schematic diagram 
to illustrate general principles of fl ow 
cytometry. (b) Schematic diagram 
showing how cells are presented to 
a laser light beam by hydrodynamic 
focusing.
Detector of
orange light
Detector of
green light
Cell
Incident
light from
laser
Fluorochrome
linked to
antibody
Forward
scatter
detector
(a)
Detector
No
cell
Small
cell
Large
cell
Light source
Hydraulic
sheath
Sample
(b)

56 
Conditions associated with white cell abnormalities
specifi c antibodies to be titrated against sheep red 
cells; this is the basis of the Paul–Bunnell test. Th e 
monospot test uses a similar agglutination reaction 
for the detection of heterophile antibodies against 
horse red blood cells. When positive, the monospot 
test is highly suggestive of infectious mononucle-
osis caused by EBV. It is also well known that some 
patients develop autoimmune complications such 
as autoimmune haemolytic anaemia and immune 
thrombocytopenia.
Th e EBV virus, having been shed from the pha-
ryngeal mucosa, infects B-lymphocytes, causing 
them to proliferate. Th is is followed by activation of 
T cells, mainly CD8+ cytotoxic T cells, which control 
the B-cell proliferation. Th e ‘reactive’ or atypical 
lymphocytes characteristic of this condition consist 
mainly of these T cells. Infected B cells harbouring 
EBV persist throughout life. Asymptomatic carriers 
periodically shed virus from the pharynx, thereby 
ensuring that the virus is passed on to non-immune 
persons. Patients who receive immunosuppressive 
therapy following renal, heart/lung or bone marrow 
transplantation may lose the T-cell control neces-
sary to control the EBV-infected B cells. Th e result-
ing B-cell lymphoproliferation may involve lymph 
nodes or extranodal sites, resulting in a condition 
known as a post-transplant lymphoproliferative dis-
order or PTLD.
Infection and immunity
Virus infection
EBV is transmitted via saliva and establishes replica-
tive infection within cells of the oropharynx, where it 
expresses lytic cycle proteins. It goes on to establish 
100
101
102
103
104
CD45 perCP
Normal bone marrow
1000
800
600
400
200
0
SSC-height
Nucleated red cells
(low granularity and low CD45)
Lymphocytes
(low granularity)
Neutrophils (granulated cells with high ssc)
Monocytes
Early myeloid cells
Figure 5.5 Flow cytometry of normal 
bone marrow after incubating normal 
bone marrow cells with PerCP-labelled 
anti-CD45 antibody.
Figure 5.6 Two atypical mononuclear cells (reactive 
lymphocytes) and a neutrophil from a patient with 
glandular fever. Although the atypical mononuclear cells 
are similar in size to the monocyte in Figure 1.3, their 
cytoplasm is much more basophilic and not vacuolated.

Conditions associated with white cell abnormalities 57
latent infection within B cells (Figure 5.7). During the 
primary phase of infection all the EBV latent proteins 
are expressed within B cells (latency III programme 
of gene transcription). Following primary infection 
the number of infected B cells falls and expression of 
the viral latent proteins is down-regulated (latency I 
programme of gene transcription). In this form the 
virus can evade the host’s immune response and the 
infection is therefore persistent. Periodic reactiva-
tion of EBV may occur, resulting in low-level  virus 
Figure 5.7 Features of EBV infection 
and the resulting immune response. 
IgM antibody to VCA is diagnostic 
of a recent or continuing infection. 
Notes: VCA – viral capsid antigen; 
EBNA – Epstein–Barr nuclear antigen; 
MA – membrane antigen.
Primary
Persistent
Latency III
CD8
T cell
CD4
T cell
B cell
Latency I
Transmission in saliva
Lytic infection
in oropharynx
Latent infection
in B cells
Killing
Cytokine production
Response
Response
Help for CD8+ T cells
Help for B cells
Cytokine production
Antibody production
IgM VCA
IgG EBNA2
IgG VCA
IgG MA
IgG EBNA1
Time
Time
(a)
(b)
 replication in the oropharynx, virus shedding in 
 saliva and transmission to other hosts.
Immune response
Primary infection stimulates a vigorous immune re-
sponse with the expansion of CD8+ T cells specifi c for 
the EBV lytic cycle and latent proteins, and a smaller 
expansion of CD4+ T cells. As primary infection is 
controlled, the number of EBV-specifi c T cells falls, 
although a signifi cant proportion of the T-cell pool 

58 
Conditions associated with white cell abnormalities
remains committed to recognition of EBV. During 
primary infection the humoral response includes 
IgM antibodies specifi c for the viral capsid antigens 
(VCA) and IgG antibodies specifi c for the nuclear an-
tigen, EBNA2. Neutralizing IgG antibodies, specifi c for 
a membrane antigen (MA), gp350 and IgG antibodies 
specifi c for a diff erent nuclear antigen, EBNA1, arise 
later in the course of infection.
CMV infection
CMV infection usually causes a milder pharyngitis, 
but with a higher fever and greater splenomegaly 
than is found in EBV mononucleosis. Th e importance 
of CMV is in immunocompromised persons, most 
notably in the post-transplant setting where an ab-
sence of controlling T cells can lead to life-threaten-
ing complications such as CMV pneumonitis.
Toxoplasmosis
Toxoplasmosis often produces prominent lymphad-
enopathy. Fever in this condition may be absent. Th e 
fi nding of IgM toxoplasma antibodies is diagnostic.
HIV
HIV can present with very many diff erent haemato-
logical manifestations, but among these is a ‘mono-
nucleosis-like’ syndrome. Autoimmune haemolytic 
anaemia, immune thrombocytopenia and throm-
botic thrombocytopenic purpura may also occur in 
patients with HIV.
Leucoerythroblastic 
reaction
Th e characteristic feature is the presence of nucleat-
ed red cells as well as immature white cells (mainly 
myelocytes) in the peripheral blood fi lm. Th e fi nd-
ing is important, as it may be seen when the bone 
marrow is infi ltrated with malignant cells, either 
haematological or non-haematological. A bone 
marrow aspirate and trephine biopsy may establish 
the diagnosis. Other causes include hypoxia and 
sepsis.

Haematology Lecture Notes, Ninth edition. C.S.R. Hatton, N.C. Hughes-Jones, D. Hay and D. Keeling. © 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
and having small granules in their cytoplasm (‘large 
granular lymphocytes’) (Figure 1.8).
Lymph node structure
Lymph nodes contain densely packed T- and B-
lymphocytes, organized in a manner that allows the 
presentation of antigen to produce an eff ective im-
mune response. In addition to having a blood supply, 
lymph nodes receive ‘aff erent’ lymphatic vessels, 
which drain antigen-rich lymph from the tissues. 
Within the unstimulated lymph node, resting B cells 
are organized into structures called primary follicles 
(Figure 6.2). When exposed to antigen (e.g. from 
micro-organisms), these structures enlarge and ger-
minal centres develop, comprising proliferating B 
cells lying within a meshwork of ‘follicular dendritic 
cells’. Surrounding the follicles there are sheets of lym-
phocytes, which become increasingly rich in T cells 
towards the lymph node medulla. Th e medulla 
contains diff erent types of lymphocytes, including 
plasma cells.
Lymphocytes can be divided into three main classes 
of eff ector cell: B-lymphocytes, T-lymphocytes and 
natural killer (NK) cells, all of which derive from pre-
cursor cells in the bone marrow (Figure 6.1).
B cells are the eff ector cells of humoral immunity 
(antibody production) and are thought to arise in the 
bone marrow, where they begin life as a blast cell and 
mature in peripheral lymphoid tissue (e.g. lymph 
nodes, gut and bone marrow), to become antibody-
producing plasma cells. Th is maturation involves re-
arrangement and mutation of their immunoglobulin 
genes, allowing expression of surface and secreted 
immunoglobulin with a wide range of antigen- 
binding specifi cities.
T cells are the eff ector cells of cell-mediated im-
munity. Precursors of T cells migrate to the thymus, 
where they develop into CD4 (helper) and CD8 
(suppressor/cytotoxic) cells, before migrating to oth-
er lymphoid organs, including the spleen and bone 
marrow.
NK cells mediate natural killer cell function. Th ese 
cells lack B- or T-cell markers and were previously re-
ferred to as null cells. Th ey have a characteristic mor-
phology, being generally larger than other  lymphocytes 
Structure and function 
of lymphoid tissue
Learning objectives
✓ To understand the components of the immune system
✓ To have a basic understanding of the structure of lymph nodes
✓ To know that it is immunoglobulin gene rearrangement that defi nes a 
B cell
✓ To know that it is T-cell receptor (TCR) gene rearrangement that 
defi nes a T cell
✓ To understand that malignant disorders derive from their recognizable 
normal counterparts
6

60 
Structure and function of lymphoid tissue
Other lymphoid tissue
Lymphoid tissue is found in many sites other than 
lymph nodes. Th ese sites include tissues directly ex-
posed to external pathogens (e.g. the respiratory and 
gastrointestinal tracts) and also ‘central sites’ such as 
the bone marrow and spleen. Plasma cells are found 
in many lymphoid tissues, particularly at sites where 
they can secrete immunoglobulin into the circulation 
or mucous secretions (e.g. into the respiratory or gas-
trointestinal tracts).
Immunoglobulin 
structure and gene 
rearrangement
Th e defi ning feature of B-cell development is the pro-
duction of immunoglobulin with a wide range of anti-
body specifi cities. Immunoglobulins are made up of two 
identical heavy chains and two identical light chains (ei-
ther κ or λ) (Figure 6.3). Th e fi ve major classes of immu-
noglobulin – IgA, IgG, IgM, IgD and IgE – are defi ned by 
their heavy chains (α, γ, μ, δ and ε). Th e two heavy chains 
and two light chains are held together in a Y-shaped 
structure. Th e amino terminal portions of the heavy and 
light chains are known as ‘variable’ regions (VH or VL), 
since diff erences in their amino acid sequence create 
unique antigen-binding sites, each of which can recog-
nize a diff erent epitope. In contrast, the carboxy termi-
nal regions are the ‘constant’ regions (CH or CL), because 
their structure is similar for all immunoglobulins of 
the same class. Th e enzyme papain cleaves the immu-
noglobulin molecule into an Fc fragment consisting of 
the carboxy terminal regions of the heavy chain and two 
Fab fragments containing the antigen-binding site. A 
number of cell types possess Fc receptors that can bind 
the Fc portion of immunoglobulin molecules.
Human plasma contains all types of immunoglobu-
lin, but IgG is present at the highest concentration. IgA 
is the second commonest type of immunoglobulin 
and is found at mucosal surfaces in the gut and the 
respiratory system. IgM represents only 6% of the im-
munoglobulin found in plasma and is the antibody 
most commonly produced during a primary immune 
response. IgM has a very large molecular weight 
(ca. 900,000 kDa) and is pentameric in structure. Th e 
high molecular weight of IgM can be very relevant in 
disorders such as Waldenstrom’s macroglobulinaemia, 
where large amounts of secreted monoclonal protein 
can cause a considerable increase in blood viscosity.
Light chains
Th ese are low molecular weight proteins (23 kDa) and 
are present in a κ:λ ratio of 2:1. Th e κ gene is  situated 
Figure 6.1 The derivation of B cells, T cells and NK cells from stem cells.
Lymphoid
stem cell
Stem
cell
B cell
Myeloid stem cell
NK cell
T cell
T-cell receptor
gene
rearrangement
Ig gene
rearrangement
Myeloid cell — red cells, neutrophils,
monocytes, eosinophils, basophils
and platelets

Structure and function of lymphoid tissue 61
on chromosome 2, while the λ gene is located on 
chromosome 22.
Heavy chains
Th e immunoglobulin heavy chain gene complex is lo-
cated on chromosome 14. It consists of 100–200 heavy 
chain variable genes (VH), at least 24 diversity genes, 
6 junctional minigenes and exons that encode the 
heavy chain constant regions characteristic of each 
class (Figure 6.4).
Antibody diversity
Immunoglobulin gene rearrangement is the mecha-
nism by which a single variable gene (VH or VL) in ei-
ther a heavy or light chain gene complex is juxtaposed 
to genes encoding the constant region (CH or CL), 
generating diff erences from one immunoglobulin 
molecule to another in antigen-binding specifi cities 
(Figure 6.4). Diversity is increased by the introduction 
of randomly generated sequences, as well as by mu-
tations within the variable regions. In consequence, 
Figure 6.2 (a) Histological section 
through a lymph node and (b) drawing 
of a stylized lymph node.
Primary follicle
Secondary follicle
(a)
B-cell rich cortex
Afferent
lymphatic
Cortex
Primary
follicle
Medulla
Efferent lymphatic
Plasma cells
(b)
T-cell rich
paracortex
Germinal
center
Mantle
zone
Secondary
follicle

62 
Structure and function of lymphoid tissue
a B-cell clone can synthesize immunoglobulin mol-
ecules with unique antigen-binding sites. It may be 
added that at diff erent stages of diff erentiation, a sin-
gle B cell can synthesize heavy chains with diff erent 
constant regions but with the same variable regions 
and thus antigen specifi city. Th us a B cell can start 
by expressing IgM but following antigen binding can 
produce IgG, IgA or IgE.
B-cell selection and maturation
B cells arising from progenitor cells in the bone 
marrow make their way to the germinal centre of 
lymphoid tissue, where they encounter antigen al-
ready bound to dendritic cells. If the surface immu-
noglobulin (sIg) on the B cells binds this antigen, the 
cross-linking provides a survival signal. Otherwise 
the B cells undergo apoptosis, a process that ensures 
Figure 6.3 Schematic model of an IgG 
molecule.
Antigen
binding
site
FC fragment
containing receptor binding
site
VL
VH
VH
VL
CL
CL
CH
CH
Figure 6.4 A diagram illustrating gene rearrangement enabling antigen-binding diversity. During differentiation, a 
single B cell can synthesize heavy chains with different constant regions coupled to the same variable region. The 
T-cell receptor (TCR) undergoes gene rearrangement in a very similar way in T cells. Notes: C – constant region gene; 
D – diversity gene; JH – joining sequence; VH – variable gene.
Schematic
diagram
showing Ig
gene
rearrangement
for the heavy
chain
VH2
Cμ
Gene splicing
rearranges genes
for transcription
and translation
VH1
VH2
VH3
D
JH
Cμ
Cδ

Structure and function of lymphoid tissue 63
selection of ‘useful’ B cells, which become memory B 
cells and plasma cells.
T-lymphocyte antigen receptors
Th e antigen receptor on T cells (T-cell receptor or 
TCR) is formed from two polypeptide chains, usually 
α and β and less commonly γ and δ. TCR molecules 
are very comparable in structure to immunoglobu-
lin molecules and the diversity in their binding sites 
results from a similar process (i.e. the rearrangement 
of variable and constant region genes). Interaction of 
the TCR and a binding ligand results in T-cell activa-
tion and proliferation.
During diff erentiation, T cells migrate from the 
bone marrow to the thymus, where they encounter 
major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I mol-
ecules on the thymic epithelium. Any T cells that fail 
to recognize these molecules will die by apoptosis 
and the same fate awaits cells that bind with very high 
affi  nity. As a consequence, the T cells that emerge 
from the thymus all carry TCRs with an intermedi-
ate affi  nity for ‘self’ MHC molecules. Th is ensures 
that they will subsequently continuously bind to (and 
disengage from) self-MHC molecules. However, if 
alteration of the MHC molecule by the presence of 
a peptide (e.g. from a virus) increases the affi  nity of 
TCR binding, the cell presenting the peptide with the 
MHC molecule will become the target for specifi c 
recognition and killing.
Natural killer cells
NK cells diff er from T cells in that they do not express 
TCRs, but they are nevertheless capable of mediating 
cell lysis. Th is is achieved through surface receptors 
that suppress NK activity when they engage MHC 
molecules on a cell. However, the absence of MHC 
molecules on a cell removes this inhibition and the 
NK cells then initiate cytotoxic destruction of the 
 target cell.
NK cells express FcγRIIIA (CD16) – a receptor that 
recognizes antibody on the surface of a cell – and 
thereby induce antibody-dependent cell-mediated 
cytotoxicity (ADCC). Furthermore, NK cell activa-
tion leads to the production of cytokines, including 
interferon γ (IFN-γ), macrophage and granulocyte– 
macrophage colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF, GM-
CSF), interleukin-3 (IL-3) and tumour necrosis factor 
α (TNF-α). Th ese cytokines eff ect neutrophil recruit-
ment and function, in addition to helping to activate 
the monocyte/macrophage system. NK cells can lyse 
virus-infected cells and may be able to lyse tumour 
cells.
Figure 6.5 Lymphomas arise from ‘normal cellular components’ of the immune system. Pregerminal centre cells may 
give rise to CLL or mantle cell lymphoma. The majority of other lymphomas arise from mutations in cells derived from 
the germinal centre or the postgerminal centre. Source: Courtesy of Professor David Mason.
Bone
marrow
Acute
lymphoblastic
leukaemia
Chronic
lymphocytic
leukaemia
Mantle
cell
lymphoma
Post-germinal
centre cells/
memory
B-cells
Peripheral
lymphoid tissues
Spleen
Splenic
marginal
zone
lymphoma
MALT
lymphoma
Classical
Hodgkin
lymphoma
Diffuse large
B cell
lymphoma
Plasma cell
differentiation
Burkitt’s
Follicular
lymphoma
Diffuse large
B cell
lymphoma
Myeloma
Bowel
Lymph
node
Lymphoid
follicles
Precursor
B cells

64 
Structure and function of lymphoid tissue
Cellular origin of 
lymphomas
Th e vast majority of lymphomas are of B-cell origin; 
T-cell lymphoma only accounts for approximately 
10% of all lymphomas. Lymphomas may arise from 
any of the stages of T-cell or B-cell maturation. Lym-
phoma cells have the distinctive morphology and im-
munophenotype of normal stages of diff erentiation, 
which allows them to be classifi ed according to their 
postulated cell of origin. Figure 6.5 shows how the 
malignant B-cell disorders relate to the stages of mat-
uration as B cells journey through the lymph nodes 
and other lymphoid structures.

Haematology Lecture Notes, Ninth edition. C.S.R. Hatton, N.C. Hughes-Jones, D. Hay and D. Keeling. © 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
haematological malignancies as leukaemias or lym-
phomas, it is more logical and much simpler to clas-
sify them as lymphoid or myeloid in their origin. By 
way of example, small lymphocytic lymphoma and 
chronic lymphocytic leukaemia arise from the same 
cell of origin; their biology is identical and their 
treatment is also equivalent. Classifying one as a 
leukaemia and one as a lymphoma is a biologically 
irrelevant distinction; classifying both by their cell 
of origin enhances the understanding of their un-
derlying disease.
Lymphomas are clonal malignant disorders that de-
rive from lymphoid cells, either precursor or mature 
T cells or B cells. Th ey are divided into two broad 
categories: Hodgkin lymphoma and non-Hodgkin 
lymphoma. Hodgkin lymphoma is diagnosed his-
tologically by the presence of Reed–Sternberg cells 
( Figure 7.1) within the appropriate cellular back-
ground (p. 76).
Lymphomas versus 
leukaemias
Th ere is often confusion regarding the diff erence 
between leukaemias and lymphomas. When clas-
sifying malignancies, the important question is al-
ways to determine the cell of origin. Th is is exactly 
how lymphomas are defi ned: all arise from lym-
phocytes or their precursors. However, the term 
leukaemia is not restricted to any cell of origin: it 
simply implies the presence of abnormal white cells 
in the blood. It follows therefore that some condi-
tions (e.g. chronic lymphocytic leukaemia) can 
fi t into both groups. Rather than trying to classify 
Lymphomas: General 
principles
Learning objectives
✓ To understand the term ‘lymphoma’ and the diff erence between 
Hodgkin lymphoma and non-Hodgkin lymphoma
✓ To understand the diff erence between high- and low-grade lymphoma
✓ To be familiar with the principles of staging and to have an awareness 
of diagnostic techniques used in lymphoma
✓ To have a broad understanding of treatment approaches 
7
Figure 7.1 Two Reed–Sternberg cells: their presence 
defi nes Hodgkin lymphoma.

66 
Lymphomas: General principles
Lymphomas
Aetiology and epidemiology
Lymphomas are more common in males and in older 
people. Marked variations in racial incidence, histol-
ogy and immunological subtypes occur around the 
world. Th e aetiology of lymphomas is generally un-
known, although certain types are associated with 
specifi c infectious agents and chronic antigen stimu-
lation. Epstein–Barr virus (EBV) is present in over 
90% of cases of endemic Burkitt lymphoma and hu-
man T-cell leukaemia virus 1 (HTLV-1) is associated 
with a very aggressive form of T-cell lymphoma found 
in Japan and Caribbean countries (ATLL). Some cas-
es of gastric lymphoma are known to be triggered by 
infection with the bacterium Helicobacter pylori. Au-
toimmune disorders such rheumatoid arthritis and 
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis are associated with a higher 
incidence of lymphoma.
Cytogenetics and molecular 
considerations
Cytogenetic analysis has identifi ed a number of spe-
cifi c recurring abnormalities that are associated with 
certain lymphomas. Th e alteration of expression of 
genes involved in cell proliferation, cell diff erentia-
tion and apoptosis results from these specifi c genetic 
alterations.
In 75% of Burkitt lymphomas, translocation of the 
c-MYC gene on chromosome 8 to a site close to the 
enhancer of the immunoglobulin heavy chain gene 
locus on chromosome 14 leads to up-regulation and 
expression of the c-MYC protein, causing cell prolif-
eration and a failure of apoptosis (Figure 7.2). Th e re-
maining 25% of Burkitt lymphomas involve translo-
cations of c-MYC to the proximity of the genes coding 
the κ and λ light chains – t(2;8) and t(8;22). Identifi -
cation of these genetic and molecular abnormalities 
not only sheds light on the mechanisms of disease, 
but provides valuable diagnostic  information.
Such molecular subclassifi cation allows the identi-
fi cation of lymphomas that have diff erent clinical out-
comes with treatment and therefore may help defi ne 
treatment strategies. Th ey may also identify specifi c 
molecular targets for treatment. Gene expression pro-
fi ling (a technique capable of determining the expres-
sion of thousands of genes and allowing comparison 
of the gene expression of one malignant disorder to 
another using a microarray) is helping to identify 
subsets of lymphomas within the main categories. 
Diff use large cell lymphoma is generally thought to be 
a heterogeneous collection of lymphomas and gene 
expression studies using microarrays have identifi ed 
three distinctive patterns of gene expression. Ap-
proximately half the patients aff ected with DLBCL are 
found to have an activated B-cell phenotype (ABC), 
whereas the majority of the others have phenotypes 
that suggest they are derived from the germinal cen-
tre (GC type). It is now know that the ABC type has a 
worse outcome than the GC type (see Figure 7.3). 
Clinicians often divide lymphoid disorders into low 
and high grade (Table 7.1). High-grade lymphomas 
are those that are rapidly fatal if left untreated but can 
sometimes be cured with multiagent chemotherapy. 
Low-grade lymphomas generally have a low prolif-
eration rate and can be controlled with mild chemo-
therapy, but are incurable (Fig. 7.4).
Figure 7.2 Upregulation of c-MYC in Burkitt lymphoma. A translocation between chromosome 14 and chromosome 
8 juxtaposes the c-MYC oncogene with the immunoglobulin heavy chain gene promoter, thereby up-regulating 
the oncogene c-MYC and driving the cell into cycle. The translocation of an oncogene to the vicinity of the Ig gene 
promoter is a common feature in B-cell lymphomas.
Chromosome 8
Chromosome 14
Up-regulation
of c-MYC
Hybrid chromosome
8/14
Ig promoter
Ig heavy chain gene
Resulting translocation
giving rise to Burkitt’s
lymphoma
c-MYC

Lymphomas: General principles 67
Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukaemia
(a)
(b)
Germinal-centre 
B-cell–like
Type 3
Probability
1.0
0.5
0
Overall survival (yr)
10
8
6
4
2
0
Germinal-centre 
B-cell–like
Type 3
Activated 
B-cell–like
Genes
High
Low
Level of gene 
expression
Probability
1.0
0.5
0
Time to treatment (yr)
16
8
12
4
0
Mutant 
immunoglobulin
Mutant 
immuno- 
globulin
Wild-type 
immunoglobulin
Wild-type 
immunoglobulin
Genes
Activated 
B-cell–like
Figure 7.3 cDNA microarray containing 10,000 spots showing differential gene expression. Notes: Red – high gene 
expression; green – low gene expression.
Box 7.1 Gene expression profi ling
The division of DLBCL into ABC and GC types was 
accomplished using gene expression profi ling by 
microarray technology. This technology allows the 
simultaneous analysis of the expression levels of 
thousands of genes in cells or tissues of interest.
 The study of gene expression by DNA microarray 
technology is based on the hybridization of 
messenger RNA (mRNA) to a high-density array of 
immobilized target sequences, each corresponding 
to a specifi c gene. Sample mRNAs are labelled 
as a complex mixture, usually by incorporation 
of a fl uorescent nucleotide. The labelled pool of 
sample mRNA is subsequently hybridized to the 
array, where each messenger will quantitatively 
hybridize to its complementary sequence. After 
washing, the fl uorescence at each spot on the 
array is a quantitative measure corresponding to 
the expression level of the particular gene. The use 
of two differently labelled mRNA samples allows a 
quantitative comparison of gene expression in both 
samples (Figure 7.3). More recently, the technology 
of RNA sequencing has expanded, with a view to 
further investigating the gene expression changes 
in disease: this method uses high throughput next 
generation sequencing technology to assess the 
entire transcriptome of a sample, and can detect 
changes in expression across the whole genome.
 Gene expression profi ling can be used to compare 
gene expression in different cell types or tissue 
types, for example cancer versus normal cells, and 
to examine changes in gene expression at different 
stages in the cell cycle or during development. The 
identifi cation of new target genes and pathways 
should allow the development of specifi c molecular-
based anticancer drugs. In addition, expression 
profi les will permit tumour classifi cation into more 
homogeneous groups and will help identify prognostic 
groups, as well as the identifi cation of new clinically 
and biologically relevant tumour entities.

68 
Lymphomas: General principles
Low-grade lymphomas—accumulation
of non-proliferating lymphocytes caused
by anti-apoptotic mechanisms
BCL-2
c-MYC
High-grade lymphomas—
activation of proliferation
enhancing oncogenes
such as c-MYC
Figure 7.4 Schematic diagram to 
illustrate the molecular difference 
between ‘low’- and ‘high’-grade 
lymphomas.
Table 7.1 Examples of high- and low-grade 
lymphoid neoplasms.
Waldenstrom’s macroglobulinaemia
Low grade
Follicular lymphoma
Low grade
Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia
Low grade
Mantle cell lymphoma
Low grade
Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
High grade
Acute lymphoblastic leukaemia/
lymphoblastic lymphoma
High grade
Burkitt lymphoma
High grade
Th e division of lymphomas into high or low grade is 
too imprecise to use as a defi nitive method for classi-
fying lymphomas or directing treatment. Mantle cell 
lymphoma is an example of a low-grade lymphoma 
in terms of its low proliferation rate and incurability, 
but has the worst prognosis of any lymphoma. Low-
grade lymphomas may transform into high-grade 
tumours that require treatment with combination 
 chemotherapy (Figure 7.5).
Clinical manifestations
Many lymphomas will present as a lump, in which 
case reaching the diagnosis is generally straightfor-
ward. However, some cases may present diagnos-
tic diffi  culties. Lymphomas are great mimickers of 
other diseases. Th ey present with weight loss, fever 
or sweats and are a serious consideration in a patient 
with pyrexia of unknown origin. Pruritus is another 
symptom that should off er an alert for the diagnosis 
of lymphoma. Lymphomas may cause obstruction of 
the bile duct (nodes in the porta hepatis) or block the 
renal outfl ow tract.
Nodal and extranodal lymphomas
About 60% of lymphomas involve the lymph nodes; 
the remaining 40% may involve almost any organ of 
the body.
Diagnosis is made by biopsy
Th e diagnosis is based on the histological appearanc-
es of an enlarged lymph node or other aff ected tissue 
or the cytology of blood or cerebrospinal fl uid (CSF), 
usually backed up by immunophenotyping and other 
techniques (outlined below).

Lymphomas: General principles 69
Immunophenotyping
Th e identifi cation of cell-type-specifi c proteins using 
labelled antibodies can be very helpful for diagno-
sis. Th e process of categorizing the antigenic mol-
ecules and epitopes associated with human white 
cells began in the 1980s. Following a series of work-
shops, there is now an internationally agreed basis 
for the nomenclature of leucocyte molecules, the CD 
scheme.
For example, B cells express an array of diff erent 
proteins not normally expressed by T cells and oth-
er haemopoietic cells. CD20 is one such molecule, 
almost exclusively expressed on B cells during the 
middle stage of their development. Th e anti-CD20 
antibody will bind to cells expressing CD20, thereby 
identifying the cell as being of B-cell origin. Th e func-
tion of CD20 is not fully known. CD19, CD22 and 
CD79 are other examples of B-cell-expressed mol-
ecules identifi ed by antibody binding. Th e use of la-
belled antibodies against cells in suspension or on 
paraffi  n sections allows identifi cation of expressed 
antigens (see also the section on fl ow cytometry’ in 
Chapter 5, Figure 7.6).
Staging
Once the diagnosis of lymphoma has been made by bi-
opsy or examination of blood, pleural fl uid or perhaps 
CSF, staging should be undertaken (Table 7.2). PET/CT 
or CT scanning is the mainstay of staging (Figure 7.7). 
Imaging will demonstrate the extent of enlarged lymph 
nodes, whether the liver and spleen are enlarged and 
whether other organs are involved. Bone marrow bi-
opsy is important in non-Hodgkin lymphoma due to 
the high frequency of bone marrow involvement in 
this disorder. Hodgkin lymphoma rarely aff ects the 
bone marrow, as its principal mode of spread is lym-
phatic rather than haematogenous. Measurement of 
serum lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) is important, as 
the presence of a raised level is known to confer a poor 
prognosis in some types of lymphoma. Immunoglob-
ulins should be measured and monoclonal proteins 
sought by immunoelectrophoresis.
Prognosis
Th e prognosis of non-Hodgkin lymphoma depends 
on the clinical entity; that is, whether it is follicular, 
diff use large B-cell lymphoma, Burkitt and so on. 
However, for any of these lymphoma types there are 
a number of independent prognostic markers, which 
can be put together to provide a disease specifi c prog-
nostic index. (Table 7.3 and Figure 7.8).
Treatment and management
A number of diff erent modalities are used in the treat-
ment of lymphoma. Chemotherapy, radiotherapy, 
antibody treatment and bone marrow transplantation 
are all used, either alone or in combination. Localized 
Hodgkin lymphoma and indolent lymphomas can be 
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
2
4
6
8
Survival (years)
12
14
10
% of patients
High grade
Low grade
Figure 7.5 Schematic diagram 
showing outcome for low- and high-
grade lymphomas.

70 
Lymphomas: General principles
Table 7.2 Staging of lymphomas.
Stage I
Involvement of a single lymph node group
Stage II
Involvement of two or more lymph node groups on one side of the diaphragm
Stage III
Involvement of lymph node groups on both sides of the diaphragm
Stage IV
Involvement of extralymphatic sites (e.g. bone marrow or liver)
Note: Patients are said to be symptom stage (A) if they have no systemic symptoms, or symptom stage (B) in the presence of any 
one of night sweats, fever or weight loss (10% loss in past six months).
Figure 7.6 Typical immunophenotype of follicular lymphoma (paraffi n section): (a) H&E, (b) CD20, (c) bcl-2, (d) CD3, 
(e) Ki67 and (f) CD10. Source: Courtesy of Professor Kevin Gatter.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)

Lymphomas: General principles 71
Figure 7.7 CT image of a lymphoma: (a) right axillary, anterior mediastinal nodal disease and bilateral pleural effusions; 
and (b) bulky retroperitoneal lymphadenopathy (i.v. and bowel contrast help defi ne the lymphomatous masses).
(a)
(b)
Table 7.3 The international prognostic index: 
Features conferring a worse prognosis in 
patients with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.
Presence of extranodal disease: Disease outside 
lymphatic sites confers a poor prognosis
Advanced stage disease: Worse prognosis
Elevated LDH: Worse prognosis
Performance status: Patients who are unable to care 
for themselves or are confi ned to bed have a worse 
prognosis
Age: Increasing age is associated with a poor 
prognosis
Figure 7.8 The overall survival of 
patients with follicular lymphoma 
subdivided by the IPI score p < 0.001 
for differences between the curves.
2
4
6
8
Years
Survival (%)
IPI 4/5
IPI 2/3
IPI 0/1
100
80
60
40
20
0
very eff ectively treated by radiotherapy. Widespread 
lymphomas require chemotherapy, either single or 
multiagent. Recently, a number of diff erent antibod-
ies against leucocyte-specifi c molecules have been 
developed for therapy. One such antibody (rituxi-
mab) targets CD20 and has been found to have good 
activity in follicular and other lymphomas expressing 
this molecule (Figure 7.9) . Coupling these antibodies 
to radioactive isotopes appears to lead to improved 
response rates (e.g. 90Y-labelled anti-CD20 anti-
bodies). Restaging during treatment may guide the 
number of courses of chemotherapy. Staging PET/CT 
scans are usually performed at the end of treatment 
to document the response: either complete remission 
(CR), partial remission (PR) >50% reduction in the 
size of the mass, stable disease (SD) or progressive 
disease (PD).

72 
Lymphomas: General principles
Stem 
cell
Pre-pre-  
B cell
Pre- 
B cell
Immature 
B cell
Mature 
B cell
Activated 
B cell
Plasma 
cell
HCR
HCR 
μ
HCR
HCR
slg 
M
κR/D 
D
λR/D 
D
D
slg 
M
M
slg 
G 
slg 
A
IgM 
IgG 
IgA
Antigen independent
Antigen dependent
CD20 expression
Neoplasias: precursor 
B cell leukemias
B cell 
lymphomas/CLL
Waldenstrom's/ 
myeloma
(a)
Human  constant 
regions
Human IgG1 Fc 
domain
Murine variable regions bind 
specifically to CD20 on B cells
(b)
Figure 7.9 (a) The diagram shows the changes that 
occur during the maturation of a stem cell into plasma 
cells. Note that immature B cells and plasma cells do 
not express CD20. Notes: CLL – chronic lymphocytic 
leukaemia; HCR – heavy chain rearrangement; μ – mu 
heavy chain synthesis; κ R/D – kappa chain rearrangement 
or deletion; λ R/D – lambda chain rearrangement or 
deletion; sIgM, sIgG, sIgA – surface immunoglobulins M, G 
and A, respectively. (b) A schematic diagram of rituximab, 
a chimeric monoclonal antibody designed to bind to CD20 
antigen on B cells inducing apoptosis and cell death.

Haematology Lecture Notes, Ninth edition. C.S.R. Hatton, N.C. Hughes-Jones, D. Hay and D. Keeling. © 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
will be additional entities not yet identifi ed, which 
will be realized through a combination of immu-
nophenotyping, cytogenetics and molecular analysis. 
Th e ability to look at diff erential gene expression pro-
fi les may be helpful in this respect.
Classifi cation of lymphomas has been perceived as 
being complex and diffi  cult. Th e WHO 2001 classi-
fi cation (Table 8.1) aims to classify lymphomas ac-
cording to morphological, genetic, molecular, im-
munophenotypic and clinical features into specifi c 
entities. Th e classifi cation uses the cell of origin as its 
basis – T, B or NK cells. Th e lymphomas are divided 
into those that are derived from precursor lymphoid 
cells and those derived from more mature cells 
(Tables 8.2 and 8.3; Figures 8.1 and 8.2). Hodgkin 
lymphoma is defi ned by the presence of the Reed–
Sternberg cell and is divided into two types, classical 
Hodgkin lymphoma and lymphocyte-predominant 
Hodgkin Lymphoma.
Unlike many of the former classifi cations, the WHO 
classifi cation is useful to clinicians because it recog-
nizes distinct lymphoma entities that may require 
specifi c treatment and management programmes. 
It is likely that within the current classifi cation there 
Classifi cation of 
lymphoma
Learning objectives
✓ To understand the basis for the classifi cation of lymphoma
✓ To appreciate that lymphoma is fi rst divided into Hodgkin and 
non-Hodgkin subtypes
✓ To understand that the cell of origin is important in classifi cation
8
Table 8.1 Hodgkin lymphomas.
Classical
Nodular sclerosing
The commonest type in young 
patients
Mixed cellularity
Second most common, may 
have worse prognosis
Lymphocyte deplete
Lymphocyte rich
Non-classical
Lymphocyte 
predominant
Behaves more like a low-grade 
non-Hodgkin lymphoma

74 
Classifi cation of lymphoma
Table 8.3 Non-Hodgkin T-cell lymphomas.
Precursor T-cell neoplasm
Precursor T-lymphoblastic leukaemia/
lymphoma
T cell ALL – for clinical picture, see B cell ALL above
Peripheral T-cell and NK-cell neoplasms
T-cell prolymphocytic leukaemia
Rare, aggressive leukaemia responds poorly to chemotherapy. Better 
response rates to antibody therapy – Alemtuzumab
Large granular lymphocyte leukaemia (LGL)
Rare CD8+ve indolent lymphoma associated with neutropenia
Mycosis fungoides, Sezary syndrome
Rare CD4+ve lymphomas affecting the skin. MF is often indolent in 
the early stages
Peripheral T-cell lymphomas, unspecifi ed 
(PTC)
Widespread nodal disease associated with systemic symptoms –
progress despite chemotherapy
Angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma 
(AILD)
Rare aggressive lymphoma associated with fever, lymphadenopathy, 
skin rashes and Coombs positive haemolytic anaemia. Poor prognosis
Enteropathy-associated T-cell lymphoma 
(EATL)
Aggressive lymphoma associated with adult-onset coeliac disease
Adult T-cell lymphoma/leukaemia (ATL/L)
HTLV-1-associated lymphoma found with high prevalence in Japan, 
Caribbean and south-eastern USA. Usually very aggressive clinical 
course, often complicated by hypercalcaemia. Many patients relapse 
in the CNS
Anaplastic large-cell lymphoma (ALCL)
Occurs in childhood and young adults. Aggressive, but many cases 
do well with combination chemotherapy
Table 8.2 Non-Hodgkin B-cell lymphomas.
Precursor B-cell neoplasms
Precursor B-lymphoblastic 
leukaemia/lymphoma (ALL)
ALL is the commonest type of leukaemia found in children. Fatal if left untreated; 
needs multiagent chemotherapy with prophylactic CNS treatment to prevent CNS 
relapse
Peripheral B-cell neoplasms
B-cell chronic lymphocytic 
leukaemia/small lymphocytic 
lymphoma (CLL/SLL)
CLL is the commonest type of leukaemia found in adults over 50 years. Presents 
with lymphocytosis, progresses to lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly and 
bone marrow failure. Treatment is usually with oral chemotherapy
Lymphoplasmacytic/
Waldenstrom’s 
macroglobulinaemia (WM)
Indolent lymphoma presenting with bone marrow involvement, lymphadenopathy 
and hepatosplenomegaly. Typically has IgM paraprotein, which may cause 
hyperviscosity or coagulation problems (WM type)
Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL)
MCL presents with widespread lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, bone 
marrow and extranodal (especially GI tract) involvement. Very poor prognosis
Follicular lymphoma (FL)
Indolent lymphoma presenting with lymphadenopathy, bone marrow involvement 
and hepatosplenomegaly. 30% rate of transformation to large-cell lymphoma. 
Treatment with a combination of chemotherapy plus rituximab imparts the best 
outcome. Maintenance rituximab recently shown to be of benefi t
Marginal zone B-cell 
lymphoma (includes MALT 
lymphomas and splenic 
lymphoma)
Usually extranodal lymphomas. The commonest mucosa-associated lymphoma 
affects the stomach. Often associated with Helicobacter pylori infection. May be 
widespread
Hairy cell leukaemia (HCL)
Presents with pancytopenia, circulating hairy cells and splenomegaly. Treatment with 
chemotherapy leads to sustained remissions
Plasmacytoma/myeloma
See Chapter 10
Diffuse large B-cell 
lymphoma (DLBCL)
Aggressive and common lymphoma. Frequently presents with weight loss, fever, 
sweats and lymphadenopathy. Good response rates to a combination of rituximab 
and CHOP chemotherapy. Curable in >50% of cases
Burkitt lymphoma (BL)
Highly aggressive. Frequent extranodal involvement. Needs sequential multiagent 
chemotherapy

Classifi cation of lymphoma 75
FCL
DLBC
SLL
PTC
ALCL
WM
AILD
MCL
Burkitt’s
Others
Figure 8.1 Pie chart showing the relative incidence of 
different non-Hodgkin lymphomas. For abbreviations see 
Tables 8.2 and 8.3.
2
4
6
8
100
80
60
40
20
Years
Overall survival (%)
MALT
0
Follicular
Anaplastic large cell
(a)
2
4
6
8
Years
Overall survival (%)
Small lymphocytic
100
80
60
40
20
0
(b)
Lymphoplasmacytic
lymphoma
Nodal marginal zone
2
4
6
8
Years
Overall survival (%)
100
80
60
40
20
0
(c)
Mediastinal B cell
Large B cell
Burkitt like
Burkitt’s
2
4
6
8
100
80
60
40
20
Years
Overall survival (%)
0
T lymphoblastic
Mantle cell
Peripheral T cell
(d)
Figure 8.2 Survival curves for patients with different types of lymphoma. (a, b) Good prognosis lymphomas. (c, d) 
Poor prognosis lymphomas (note that mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) has the worst prognosis of any lymphoma).

Haematology Lecture Notes, Ninth edition. C.S.R. Hatton, N.C. Hughes-Jones, D. Hay and D. Keeling. © 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
of fi brosis that enclose nodules of lymphoid tissue 
containing variable numbers of Hodgkin’s cells 
(Figure 9.1). Mixed cellularity Hodgkin lymphoma 
is characterized by the presence of a heterogeneous 
mixture of lymphocytes, eosinophils, neutrophils, 
plasma cells, epithelial cells and Hodgkin’s cells. In 
general, the more lymphocytes present, the fewer the 
number of Hodgkin’s cells and the better the prog-
nosis. Lymphocyte-depleted Hodgkin lymphoma is 
a rare form and is characterized by a low number of 
lymphocytes, by the absence of fi brous bands and by 
numerous, sometimes anaplastic, Hodgkin’s/Reed–
Sternberg cells. LPHL has a chronic relapsing course 
and often behaves more like follicular non-Hodgkin 
lymphoma (see below).
Whereas the B-cell nature of the tumour cells (called 
‘popcorn’ cells or lymphocytic and histiocytic cells) of 
LPHL has been widely accepted, the cellular origin of 
the Reed–Sternberg cells of classic Hodgkin lymphoma 
has been the subject of debate for many years. Th is was 
due to fact that although Reed–Sternberg cells express 
the lymphocyte-associated marker CD30, they do not 
consistently stain with markers for B or T cells. Howev-
er, molecular techniques using single Reed–Sternberg 
cells microdissected from tissue sections have dem-
onstrated that cells harbour clonal immunoglobulin 
Hodgkin lymphoma
Th e fi rst description of this disorder has been accred-
ited to Dr Th omas Hodgkin of Guy’s Hospital, follow-
ing his account in 1832 of aff ected lymph glands in 
postmortem cases.
Hodgkin lymphoma is one of the commoner lym-
phomas seen in Western countries  and is character-
ized by the presence of a low number of tumour cells, 
designated Hodgkin’s/Reed–Sternberg cells. Th e 
Reed–Sternberg cells are bi- or multinucleate, with 
each nucleus containing one prominent nucleolus. 
Other Hodgkin’s cells are mononucleate. Th e histo-
logical fi ndings in a lymph node aff ected by Hodgkin 
lymphoma are scattered tumour cells admixed with 
reactive lymphocytes, plasma cells, macrophages, 
neutrophils, eosinophils and a variable amount of 
fi brosis. Under the term ‘Hodgkin lymphoma’ are 
recognized two clinically and biologically diff er-
ent entities: classic Hodgkin lymphoma, of which 
there are four histological types (Table 9.1); and 
non-classic Hodgkin lymphoma, which includes the 
entity of lymphocyte-predominant Hodgkin lym-
phoma (LPHL). Nodular sclerosis is the commonest 
histological subtype and is characterized by bands 
Neoplastic disorders of 
lymphoid cells
Learning objectives
✓ To know the pathological changes, clinical presentation, investigation 
and principles of management of Hodgkin lymphoma
✓ To know the pathological changes, clinical manifestations and 
the basic principles of treatment of the commoner non-Hodgkin 
lymphomas, including acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL), chronic 
lymphocytic leukaemia (CLL), diff use large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) 
and follicular lymphoma (FL).
9

Neoplastic disorders of lymphoid cells 77
gene rearrangements, thereby demonstrating Reed–
Sternberg cells to be of B-cell origin.
Incidence and aetiology
Whereas the incidence of non-Hodgkin lymphoma 
increased in the 1980s and 1990s, the incidence of 
Hodgkin lymphoma has remained stable at about 
3 per 100,000 population; it is higher in men than in 
women. Hodgkin lymphoma increases in incidence 
with age, peaking in the third decade, followed by a 
decline. It used to be thought that there was a second 
peak in later life, but this has not been verifi ed in re-
cent studies. Th e nodular sclerosis type tends to occur 
in young adults.
Th e aetiology of Hodgkin lymphoma is unknown. 
Th e apparent geographical clustering of cases that 
has been reported has suggested an infectious aeti-
ology and many eff orts have been made to identify 
likely culprits. However, it seems that such clustering 
may have occurred by chance alone. Epstein–Barr 
virus (EBV) has long remained a favoured possible 
cause, because similar age groups are aff ected by 
both Hodgkin lymphoma and glandular fever. In-
deed, there is some evidence that EBV might have 
a part to play in the aetiology of Hodgkin lympho-
ma, supported by the fi nding of clonal EBV DNA in 
30–40% of cases.
Clinical features
Th e clinical features resemble those found in non-
Hodgkin lymphoma. Lymph node enlargement is the 
commonest presentation, usually aff ecting the neck 
and mediastinum (Figure 9.2). Spread is mainly along 
the lymph vessels; hence lymph node involvement 
tends to be contiguous. Sweats, fever, weight loss and 
pruritus may occur. Alcohol-induced pain in aff ected 
lymph nodes is thought to be virtually diagnostic. A 
not-infrequent presen tation of Hodgkin lymphoma 
in young patients is cough, chest pain or dyspnoea as 
Table 9.1 Rye classifi cation of the histological appearances of lymph nodes in classical Hodgkin 
lymphoma.
Subgroup
Characteristics
Cases (%)
Surviving 
5 years (%)
Lymphocyte 
rich
Infi ltrate consists largely of small lymphocytes. There are only a few 
eosinophils, Reed–Sternberg cells and mononuclear Hodgkin’s cells
15
70
Nodular 
sclerosing
The node is divided by broad bands of connective tissue into 
nodules containing a mixture of Reed–Sternberg cells, mononuclear 
Hodgkin’s cells, lymphocytes, plasma cells, macrophages and 
eosinophils
40
60
Mixed 
cellularity
There are no broad bands of connective tissue. The node is diffusely 
infi ltrated with the same mixture of cell types as above. Reed–
Sternberg cells are readily seen. Fibrosis and focal necrosis are 
common
30
30
Lymphocyte 
depleted
Mononuclear Hodgkin’s cells and Reed–Sternberg cells are present 
in large numbers. Relatively few lymphocytes are seen and there 
may be diffuse fi brosis
15
20
Figure 9.1 Photomicrograph showing Reed–Sternberg 
cells from a case of Hodgkin lymphoma.

78 
Neoplastic disorders of lymphoid cells
a result of extensive intrathoracic disease. Dia gnosis 
is made by lymph node biopsy. Th e staging system 
using CT scanning is the same as that used for non-
Hodgkin lymphoma (Table 9.2), except that the bone 
marrow is very rarely involved. A full blood count, 
erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), liver function 
tests, renal and bone profi le and lactate dehydroge-
nase (LDH) are all necessary and may confer prog-
nostic information.
Prognosis
A number of attempts have been made to predict out-
come in patients treated for Hodgkin lymphoma. Th e 
prognosis is worse for males, older patients, patients 
with advanced disease and those with a low serum 
albumin concentration, anaemia and leucocytosis. 
Understanding prognostic factors may enable more 
intensive treatment to be given to patients with a pre-
dicted worse outcome, while those patients with a 
good prognosis could be spared unnecessary toxicity 
and adverse late eff ects.
Treatment
Th e goal of treatment for Hodgkin lymphoma is cure, 
while minimizing complications. Early-stage dis-
ease (stages IA–IIA) can be eff ectively treated with 
abbreviated chemotherapy together with localized 
radiotherapy. Patients who relapse can often be sal-
vaged using combination chemotherapy or high-
dose chemotherapy with peripheral blood stem-cell 
rescue.
Advanced disease (stages IIB–IV) is treated with 
six to eight courses of combination chemotherapy; 
radiotherapy is reserved to treat residual masses 
or given after completion of chemotherapy to areas 
previously involved by bulky disease. Modern treat-
ment is based on a number of considerations, most 
notably the need to attain a high cure rate, the need 
to minimize the toxicity of treatment and the need 
to preserve fertility. Th e high ‘cure’ rate in Hodgkin 
lymphoma may be at the price of a higher death rate 
from second malignancies and other toxicities. Use 
of alkylating agents and radiotherapy is likely to con-
tribute to this excess risk. Th is increase in death rate 
from ‘non-Hodgkin’ causes is graphically illustrated 
in Figure 9.3. After 15 years from the diagnosis, the 
mortality from causes other than Hodgkin lymphoma 
is greater than deaths due to the lymphoma itself, al-
though this trend may change as patients are treated 
with modern chemotherapy regimens that aim to re-
duce long-term toxicity. Irradiation of peripubertal 
breast tissue is thought to put patients at particularly 
high risk of breast cancer.
While early-stage Hodgkin lymphoma can be 
cured with radiotherapy, it was not until cycli-
cal four-drug chemotherapy regimens such as 
MOPP were used in the late 1960s that advanced-
stage disease could be cured. MOPP (mustine 
Table 9.2 Basic features of the Ann Arbor 
staging system.
Stages
Characteristics
I
Involvement of one lymph node area
II
Involvement of two or more lymph node 
areas on the same side of the diaphragm
III
Involvement of lymph nodes on both 
sides of the diaphragm with or without 
involvement of the spleen
IV
Involvement of one or more extranodal 
sites (e.g. liver, marrow, lung)
Notes: A – without systemic symptoms; B – with systemic 
symptoms (night sweats, fever, weight loss).
Figure 9.2 Massive cervical lymphadenopathy in a 
young boy with Hodgkin lymphoma.

Neoplastic disorders of lymphoid cells 79
(alkylating agent), vincristine (Oncovin), pred-
nisolone and procarbazine), although very effec-
tive in at least half of all cases, has been found to 
be associated with secondary leukaemia (myelod-
ysplasia and acute myeloblastic leukaemia) and a 
high incidence of infertility. Regimens containing 
Doxorubicin (Adriamycin; e.g. ABVD: Adriamycin, 
Bleomycin, Vinblastine, Dacarbazine) are favoured 
for initial treatment because of the low incidence 
of secondary leukaemia and the fact that most pa-
tients, both male and female, remain fertile. ABVD 
has been shown to be equally effective to MOPP-
like regimens. ABVD is myelosuppressive and two 
drugs of this four-drug regimen are associated 
with serious side effects: the use of bleomycin can 
cause significant pulmonary toxicity and exposure 
to high doses of anthracyclines is known to cause 
cardiomyopathy. The latter two problems can be 
avoided by close monitoring and discontinuation 
of the drug that is responsible.
Patients who fail to respond to initial therapy, or 
who relapse, can be considered for high-dose therapy 
with peripheral blood stem-cell rescue. Approxi-
mately 40% of such patients respond well to this ap-
proach (see Chapter 12).
Positron emission tomography 
scanning
Positron emission tomography (PET scanning) may 
be useful to determine whether there is active dis-
ease in residual masses after the completion of ther-
apy. Th e uptake of a radioactive fl uorinated glucose 
molecule in active tumours may dictate whether 
further treatment such as radiotherapy is necessary. 
Recent evidence suggests that PET negativity fol-
lowing therapy carries a much improved prognosis 
when cases are compared with those that are PET 
positive.
Non-Hodgkin lymphomas
Acute lymphoblastic leukaemia 
(ALL)
Pathology
Precursor lymphoblastic neoplasms of B-cell or T-cell 
type usually present as a leukaemia with circulating 
blast cells (acute lymphoblastic leukaemia, ALL); 
however, they may also present as a mediastinal 
mass with few circulating blast cells (the lymphoblas-
tic lymphomas). In the leukaemic form, the marrow 
is heavily infi ltrated with blast cells, which are also 
present in the peripheral blood (Figure 9.4).
Th e disorder results from a clonal proliferation of 
cells from the earliest stages of lymphoid maturation 
(i.e. B or T blast cells). B-cell leukaemia blast cells 
have a phenotype defi ned by the presence of CD19, 
CD79a, CD10, CD34 and terminal deoxynucleotidyl 
transferase (TdT). T-cell markers such as CD7 and 
CD3 will defi ne the cells as being of T-cell origin.
Cytogenetics
Cytogenetic analysis provides important prognostic 
information. Treatment regimens are increasingly 
based on risk stratifi cation and therefore cytoge-
netics is an important part of the investigations at 
presentation. Hyperdiploidy (increased numbers of 
chromosomes beyond the diploid state) generally 
carries a good prognosis, whereas certain structural 
variants such as the presence of a Philadelphia chro-
mosome t(9;22) are found in about 5% of children 
with ALL and this confers a very poor prognosis. Oth-
er poor prognostic fi ndings include rearrangements 
of the MLL (mixed lineage leukaemia/lymphoma) 
gene and hypodiploidy.
5
10
15
20
25
30
Time (years)
Probability (%)
A
B
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
Figure 9.3 Actuarial risk of death 
from Hodgkin lymphoma (B) or other 
causes (A) in patients treated for 
Hodgkin lymphoma.

80 
Neoplastic disorders of lymphoid cells
Clinical and laboratory features
ALL is the commonest childhood cancer, but may 
present at any age. In children, the peak incidence is 
between the ages of 2 and 4 years. Th e clinical mani-
festations are listed in Box 9.1, as are the laboratory 
fi ndings. Most of the clinical manifestations can be 
explained in terms of bone marrow failure secondary 
to bone marrow infi ltration.
Treatment
Treatment of childhood acute leukaemia has improved 
greatly, due largely to the results of cli nical trials that 
have been conducted over the last 20–30 years. Risk 
stratifi cation based on prognostic factors including 
minimal residual disease is used to determine the pro-
tocols on which children and adults with ALL are treat-
ed, though the general schema is outlined below. Th e 
treatment is by chemotherapy, given in four phases:
1 Induction: Th e aim of induction chemotherapy is 
to clear the bone marrow of leukaemia blast cells 
and replace them with normal haemopoietic cells.
2 Consolidation: Consolidation therapy reduces the 
leukaemia cell burden further and uses a com-
bination of moderately intensive treatment after 
normal haemopoiesis has been restored with in-
duction chemotherapy.
3 CNS prophylaxis: A phase of prophylactic treat-
ment to prevent central nervous system involve-
ment is always given. Th is can be achieved by the 
administration of high-dose chemotherapy drugs 
such as methotrexate, which cross the blood–
brain barrier, or by direct administration of drugs 
into the cerebrospinal fl uid (intrathecal), or by 
giving external beam radiotherapy.
4 Maintenance therapy: Th e fi nal treatment phase is 
that of maintenance therapy. Continuous oral and 
intermittent intravenous chemotherapy is given 
over 2–3 years.
Figure 9.4  Bone marrow smear from a case of ALL. 
The blasts are small or medium-sized and have scanty 
cytoplasm. The nuclei have fi ne but densely packed, 
homogeneous-appearing chromatin and the nucleoli are 
small.
Box 9.1
Clinical features of ALL
Symptoms and their pathological basis
• Weakness, tiredness, malaise, lassitude
• Bruising and bleeding secondary to 
thrombocytopenia
• Otitis media, pharyngitis, pneumonia or fever 
due to bacterial infection caused by profound 
neutropenia
• Bone pain
• Enlarged lymph nodes
• Headache and vomiting resulting from CNS 
involvement leading to increased intracranial 
pressure
Physical fi ndings
• Pallor
• Petechial haemorrhages, purpura and bruising
• Lymphadenopathy
• Hepatosplenomegaly
• Bone tenderness
• Fever
Laboratory features of ALL
• Anaemia
• Leucopenia
• Thrombocytopenia
• Blood fi lm may show circulating blast cells
• Bone marrow usually heavily infi ltrated with blast 
cells (>20%)

Neoplastic disorders of lymphoid cells 81
Prognosis
A number of prognostic factors determine outcome 
in ALL. Boys do worse than girls and a high white cell 
count at presentation and an age over 10 years also 
confer a poor prognosis. Low-risk childhood ALL can 
be cured in a high percentage of cases. Patients who 
relapse or who present in the poorest-risk categories 
should be considered for allogeneic bone marrow 
transplantation (Chapter 12). Adults with ALL do 
not have such a good prognosis and may be off ered 
allogeneic bone marrow transplantation in the fi rst 
remission.
Lymphoblastic lymphoma
Th is represents the lymphomatous equivalent of ALL 
(i.e. there is little peripheral blood or bone marrow 
involvement). It has very similar features to ALL but 
there are a number of characteristic clinical features: 
it is commoner in adolescent males and it frequently 
presents with a mediastinal mass. Patients must have 
less than 20% blasts in their bone marrow, otherwise 
they are classifi ed as having ALL. Lymphoblastic lym-
phoma is treated using the same protocols as for ALL.
B-cell chronic lymphocytic 
leukaemia
Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (CLL) is a neoplastic 
disorder characterized by the accumulation of small 
mature lymphocytes in the blood (Figure 9.5), bone 
marrow and lymphoid tissues. Th is is the common-
est leukaemia seen in the Western world and tends 
to aff ect almost exclusively adults over the age of 50 
years. Th e disorder is much less common in China, 
Japan and south-east Asia. Th e cells that give rise to 
the disorder express the B-cell markers CD19 and 
CD20. Th ey also express CD23, are negative for CD10, 
but express the T-cell marker CD5 and weakly express 
surface IgM. Cytogenetic studies confer some prog-
nostic information: for example, deletions involving 
chromosome 17 (p53 deletions) confer a very poor 
prognosis. Th e clinical and laboratory features of CLL 
are summarized in Box 9.2.
Autoimmune phenomena may occur in patients 
with CLL. Th e most common manifestations are au-
toimmune haemolytic anaemia (AIHA) and autoim-
mune thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP). Patients may 
rarely develop pure red cell aplasia or neutropenia. 
Figure 9.5  Blood fi lm in a patient with B-cell CLL. Note 
the presence of increased numbers of small lymphocytes 
and some smear cells.
Box 9.2
Clinical features of CLL
Symptoms and their pathological basis
• Most patients are over 60 years of age
• Many patients are asymptomatic at diagnosis
• Patients may present with symptoms attributable 
to anaemia – tiredness and fatigue
• Bruising and bleeding secondary to 
thrombocytopenia
• Sinusitis, bacterial pneumonia, secondary to 
hypogam ma globulinaemia
• Night sweats, fever and weight loss are uncommon 
but may occur
Physical fi ndings
• Lymphadenopathy
• Hepatosplenomegaly
Laboratory features of CLL
• Monoclonal lymphocytosis is greater than 5 × 109/L
• In the more advanced stages of the disease there 
may be anaemia and thrombocytopenia
• The direct antiglobulin (Coombs) test may be 
positive
• Bone marrow aspirate and trephine biopsy 
demonstrate the extent of bone marrow infi ltration
• Hypogammaglobulinaemia is a common fi nding – a 
small proportion of patients will have a monoclonal 
band on immunoelectrophoresis
• Immunophenotyping of the malignant lymphocytes 
shows expression of CD5, CD19, CD20, CD23 
and CD79a and surface IgM (weakly positive); 
CD10 is negative

82 
Neoplastic disorders of lymphoid cells
Acquired angioneurotic oedema may also result 
from autoimmune antibodies against the C1 esterase 
inhibitor. Th e antibodies are not thought to be pro-
duced by the malignant B cells, but rather by bystand-
er populations of normal B cells.
CLL has a predictable natural history. Most pa-
tients have only a lymphocytosis at the beginning of 
their illness and progress to develop lymphadenopa-
thy, hepatosplenomegaly and fi nally bone marrow 
failure. It is the presence or absence of these features 
that determines the prognosis. In about 3% of CLL 
cases, transformation to a large cell lymphoma may 
occur. Richter’s transformation, named after Maurice 
Richter who originally described this entity in 1928,  
carries a poor prognosis. 
Hypogammaglobulinaemia
Patients with CLL commonly have an associated 
hypogammaglobulinaemia. Reductions in the se-
rum levels of IgM, IgG and IgA may all occur and 
these predispose to infections, particularly of the 
respiratory tract, by capsulated organisms such as 
Steptococcus pneumoniae and Haemophilus infl uen-
zae. Replacement therapy with intravenous pooled 
human immunoglobulin can reduce the frequency of 
respiratory tract infections in such patients.
Small lymphocytic B-cell lymphoma
Small lymphocytic lymphoma (SLL) is the lymphom-
atous equivalent of CLL without abnormal cells in the 
peripheral blood, and has the same biology and clini-
cal features. Th e disease is characterized by lymph 
node involvement and bone marrow infi ltration.
Treatment of CLL/SLL
Patients with CLL/SLL who are asymptomatic of-
ten do not require treatment; simple monitoring 
in the clinic is suffi  cient. Indications for treatment 
include systemic symptoms such as sweats, fever, 
weight loss or cytopenias such as anaemia. Many 
frail, usually older patients with progressive dis-
ease can be safely treated with a simple regimen of 
oral chlorambucil or, more recently, bendamustine. 
For younger, fi t patients,  fl udarabine in combina-
tion with cyclophosphamide together with rituxi-
mab is the treatment of choice (Flu/Cy-R). Th is 
combination therapy results in very high response 
rates (80%), with an average time to progression of 
approximately three years. Patients with chromo-
some 17p deletions are refractory to chemothera-
py and have a dismal prognosis. Such patients are 
best treated with a combination of steroids plus 
alemtuzumab (Campath-1H). Campath is an an-
tibody that targets CD52, an antigen expressed on 
B and T cells; it has been shown to have activity in 
CLL, but appears to have particular value in treat-
ing cases where p53 on chromosome 17p is deleted. 
Th e median survival of all patients with B-cell CLL 
is 10–12 years. More intensive treatment includ-
ing bone marrow transplantation is sometimes at-
tempted in younger patients with poor prognostic 
disease. 
Lymphoplasmacytic 
lymphoma/Waldenström’s 
macroglobulinaemia
Th is disorder usually behaves in a low-grade fashion. 
Like CLL, this is a disease found in patients who are 
in their sixth or seventh decade. Th e malignant cells 
are mature B cells capable of secreting IgM. Th e bone 
marrow is typically involved, as are the liver and 
spleen. Lymphadenopathy is also a common feature. 
Th e disorder can be dominated by clinical manifesta-
tions consequent on high levels of monoclonal IgM; 
the condition is then known as Waldenström’s mac-
roglobulinaemia.
High concentrations of IgM and the accompany-
ing hyperviscosity cause headaches, visual distur-
bances (fundoscopic examination may reveal dilated 
veins, papilloedema and retinal haemorrhage) and 
altered consciousness. Th ere may also be bleeding or 
thrombosis.
Th e IgM paraprotein may have unusual physi-
cal properties such as causing red cell agglutination 
(cold agglutinins) or precipitating in cold tempera-
tures (cryoglobulin).
Patients are frequently anaemic and experience 
symptoms of tiredness and fatigue. Th e fatigue is 
often out of proportion to the level of haemoglobin. 
Systemic symptoms such as fever, weight loss and 
night sweats may occur, particularly if the lymphoma 
undergoes high-grade transformation.
Laboratory fi ndings are summarized in Table 9.3.
Table 9.3 Laboratory fi ndings in 
Waldenström’s macroglobulinaemia.
Anaemia
Leucopenia
Thrombocytopenia
Lymphocytosis may occur
IgM monoclonal protein
Bone marrow infi ltration with lymphoid cells

Neoplastic disorders of lymphoid cells 83
Treatment
A combination of an alkylating agent such as cyclo-
phosphamide and prednisolone together with the 
monoclonal antibody rituximab is a favoured fi rst-line 
therapy. Patients who fail to respond or later progress 
can be treated with a fl udarabine-containing regimen 
or the more aggressive R-CHOP combination used 
to treat large-cell lymphoma. Combination chemo-
therapy such as CHOP can be useful, particularly if 
there is high-grade transformation, which occurs in a 
small percentage of cases. Hyperviscosity syndrome 
requires urgent plasma exchange.
Th e immunophenotype is CD20+ve, CD19+ve, 
CD5-ve, sIg+ve and CD10-ve.
Follicular lymphoma (FL)
Follicular lymphoma is relatively easy for the pa-
thologist to identify because of its follicular growth 
pattern (see Figure 7.6). Th e disorder typifi es the so-
called low-grade lymphomas, being indolent in its 
clinical course but remaining incurable. Follicular 
lymphoma is associated with a translocation between 
chromosome 14 and 18, t(14;18), which leads to the 
up-regulation of the anti-apoptotic protein BCL-2. 
Th e t(14;18) BCL-2 positive B cells are thought to arise 
in early B cells, which then move into the germinal 
centre of the lymph node follicle where they acquire 
additional mutations, causing FL. Th e presence of the 
t(14;18) translocation is insuffi  cient to cause follicu-
lar lymphoma on its own. In a proportion of cases fur-
ther additional mutations may cause the lymphoma 
to transform to a DLBCL type, so-called high grade 
transformation.
FL is one of the commonest types of lymphoma. 
Most patients present with widespread lymphad-
enopathy, bone marrow infi ltration and hepat-
osplenomegaly. Occasionally this lymphoma may 
present in an extranodal fashion, the gastrointestinal 
tract and the skin being among the more unusual 
sites of involvement.
Th e clinical course alternates between stable pe-
riods when patients remain well and periods of 
progressive disease requiring therapy. High-grade 
transformation in which there is development of 
large-cell lymphoma (see below) occurs in 30% of pa-
tients and confers a poor prognosis.
Th ere is no evidence that early or intensive treat-
ment of follicular lymphoma at presentation im-
proves outcome. Th erapy is required, however, in 
patients with systemic symptoms, critical organ fail-
ure or bulky disease. Randomized controlled trials 
have shown a survival advantage for the addition of 
the anti-CD20 antibody rituximab (R) to commonly 
used fi rst-line chemotherapy regimens such as cyclo-
phosphamide, vincristine and prednisolone (CVP). 
Patients who relapse after fi rst-line chemotherapy 
can often be eff ectively treated with regimens such 
as R-CHOP or regimens containing fl udarabine. Fur-
thermore, there is evidence that maintenance rituxi-
mab (given every two or three months over a period 
of two years) benefi ts patients who have achieved at 
least a partial response to either fi rst- or second-line 
therapy by roughly doubling the time to progression. 
Patients who respond well to second-line treatment 
and who are otherwise fi t can be considered for more 
intensive, perhaps even curative, strategies such as 
high-dose therapy and stem-cell rescue or reduced-
intensity conditioning (RIC) allografting. Frail, usu-
ally older patients can be treated with the single 
oral alkylating agent chlorambucil, with or without 
rituximab.
Low-grade lymphomas are often extremely radio-
sensitive and radiotherapy can be useful for treating 
localized or bulky disease. An alternative approach 
involves conjugating a β-emitting radioisotope to an 
anti-CD20 antibody. Th is allows the delivery of radia-
tion directly to the site of disease. Th is strategy has 
been shown to be an eff ective therapy for patients 
with follicular lymphoma and may be incorporated 
into future treatment strategies. In addition, other 
radioisotopes, including γ-emitters, have been linked 
with anti-CD20 antibodies with the same aim.
Th e prognosis of follicular lymphoma is variable 
and is anything from 2 to 20 years. Th e median sur-
vival is about 10–12 years from diagnosis.
Th e immunophenotype is CD19+ve, CD20+ve, 
CD10+ve, BCL-2+ve and BCL-6+ve.
Mantle cell lymphoma
Mantle cell lymphoma is an aggressive low-grade lym-
phoma. Th is lymphoma entity is commoner in males 
and generally presents in older patients with a me-
dian age of 60 years. Th e malignant cells are thought 
to derive from cells of the mantle zone of the lymph 
node follicle (Figure 9.6(a)). Th e lymphoma cells are 
small to medium-sized and in common with CLL ex-
press CD5. In contrast to CLL, mantle cell lymphoma 
does not express CD23 and there is a characteristic 
cytogenetic abnormality that is found in nearly all 
cases. A translocation between chromosome 11 and 
chromosome 14, t(11;14), leads to the up-regulation 
of the protein cyclin D1, which is known to play a key 
role in cell-cycle regulation (Figure 9.6(b)).
Th e disorder presents with widespread lymphad-
enopathy, hepatosplenomegaly and bone marrow 

84 
Neoplastic disorders of lymphoid cells
involvement and often abnormal lymphocytes can 
be seen in the peripheral blood. Some series have 
reported a very high incidence of gastrointestinal in-
volvement (80%). Systemic symptoms are unusual, 
most patients feeling reasonably well at the time of 
presentation. Th e disease runs an aggressive course, 
with a mean survival of 2–4 years. Th e disorder is 
not curable and, although intensive chemotherapy 
is often given, there is no very eff ective therapy. For 
younger, fi t patients with aggressive disease who have 
responded to chemotherapy, high-dose therapy or 
RIC allograft should be considered.
Th e immunophenotype is CD19+ve, CD20+ve, 
CD5+ve, CD23+ve, IgM+ve and cyclin D1+ve.
Hairy cell leukaemia
Th is uncommon disorder frequently aff ects middle-
aged males. It typically presents with pancytopenia 
and splenomegaly. Characteristic hairy cells are usu-
ally found on examination of a peripheral blood fi lm 
(Figure 9.7). Th e disorder is diagnosed by microscopy 
of the blood and bone marrow examination. Immu-
nophenotyping and cytochemistry help to defi ne the 
disorder.
Hairy cell leukaemia behaves in an indolent man-
ner and responds well to treatment with single-agent 
drugs such as 2-chlorodeoxyadenosine (cladribine) 
or pentostatin. Splenectomy and α-interferon are 
also eff ective treatment strategies.
Th e immunophenotype is CD20+ve, CD5-ve, 
sIg+ve, CD25+ve and CD11c+ve.
Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
Diff use large B-cell lymphoma (DLBC) is the com-
monest high-grade lymphoma. It typifi es an ag-
gressive but potentially curable lymphoma, and 
represents approximately one third of all lympho-
mas. Histologically, the disorder is characterized by 
the presence of sheets of large cells of B-cell origin. 
Th e disorder probably includes a variety of diff erent 
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 9.6 (a) The non-specifi c histological appearance seen in the biopsy of a patient with mantle cell lymphoma; 
(b) staining using an antibody against cyclin D1, which is overexpressed in mantle cell lymphoma; (c) minimal disease 
after treatment identifi ed by cyclin D1 staining; and (d) high-power view.

Neoplastic disorders of lymphoid cells 85
lymphoma types and in this sense is a ‘dustbin’ for 
those lymphomas that do not obviously fi t into other 
categories. At least two diff erent types (ABC and GC 
types, see Chapter 8) of DLBCL have been identifi ed 
based on gene expression profi ling.
Th e disorder occurs at all ages, but becomes com-
moner in later life. Patients may present with night 
sweats, fever, weight loss and lymphadenopathy or 
with extranodal lymphoma involving sites such as 
the gastrointestinal tract, the testis, brain or bone. 
Treatment is with combination chemotherapy, which 
can induce remission in approximately 80% of cases, 
and as many as 60% of patients will attain a sustained 
remission beyond three years. Th e combination of 
cyclophosphamide, 
doxorubicin 
(hydroxydauno-
rubicin), vincristine (Oncovin) and prednisolone 
(CHOP) has been the gold standard against which 
other treatments are judged. Th e treatment is ad-
ministered every three weeks for a total of six or eight 
courses on an outpatient basis. Th e addition of the 
anti-CD20 antibody rituximab to CHOP chemother-
apy has improved survival rates so that the combina-
tion of rituximab and CHOP (R-CHOP) has become 
the standard of care for patients with DLBC lympho-
ma. Th is fi nding is particularly signifi cant for those 
patients with low-risk disease (Figure 9.8).
Relapsed patients can be off ered high-dose chem-
otherapy and peripheral blood stem-cell rescue 
(Chapter 12). Patients who have chemosensitive dis-
ease may benefi t from this approach. Radiotherapy is 
often given to sites of bulky disease or residual mass-
es after the completion of chemotherapy.
Th e immunophenotype is CD20+ve, CD79+ve, 
CD5-ve, CD23-ve, CD10-ve and sIgM+ve. Th e immu-
nophenotype may also refl ect the cell of origin, e.g. 
GC or ABC type.
Burkitt Lymphoma (BL)
Burkitt lymphoma presents as three main forms: en-
demic, sporadic and a type associated with immu-
nodefi ciency states. Th e endemic form mainly aff ects 
children in east Africa, presents with a jaw or a facial 
bone tumour and is nearly always positive for the 
Epstein–Barr virus (EBV). Infection with malaria is 
thought to play an important part in the pathogenesis 
of this form of BL, probably by chronic antigen stimula-
tion. Sporadic BL occurs in the West, is only sometimes 
EBV positive and tends to present with extranodal dis-
ease, most commonly an abdominal mass but breast, 
gonadal, CNS and bone marrow are other commonly 
aff ected sites. BL also occurs in HIV-positive patients.
Th e unifying feature of all three of these types of 
Burkitt lymphoma is activation of the MYC oncogene, 
as described in Chapter 8. All cases have a transloca-
tion of the MYC gene on chromosome 8 to one of the 
immunoglobulin genes on chromosome 14, 22 or 2 – 
t(8;14), t(2;8) and t(8;22). Th e translocation brings the 
MYC gene under the control of the immunoglobulin 
enhancer.
Th e pathology is characteristic, with diff use infi l-
tration by small to medium B lymphoma cells, a very 
high proliferation rate ∼100% and a high rate of ap-
optosis, which leads to the characteristic ‘starry sky’ 
appearance. 
(a)
(c)
(b)
Figure 9.7 (a) Photomicrograph showing hairy cells in 
peripheral blood; (b) low-power view of trephine biopsy 
showing infi ltration and hemorrhage; and (c) high-power 
view of trephine biopsy. The hairy cells have bean-
shaped nuclei and abundant empty-looking cytoplasm 
(appearing like a halo around the nucleus).

86 
Neoplastic disorders of lymphoid cells
Th e treatment of Burkitt lymphoma is generally a suc-
cess story. Treatment with standard chemotherapy regi-
mens such as CHOP leads to a poor prognosis, but since 
the introduction of multiagent sequential chemother-
apy the outcome has been considerably improved. Pa-
tients with limited-stage disease have a >90% cure rate, 
while patients with more advanced disease can also be 
cured using this approach. CNS prophylactic treatment 
is necessary in all cases. Th e addition of rituximab has 
also been found to improve outcome.
Th e immunophenotype of Burkitt Lymphoma is of 
germinal centre type, CD19+ve, CD20+ve, BCL2-ve 
and CD10+ve.
Mucosa-associated lymphoid 
tissue lymphomas
Th e so-called mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue 
(MALT) lymphomas are typically extranodal, as their 
name suggests. Th is type of lymphoma belongs to 
the group of marginal zone lymphomas, as the ma-
lignant cells are thought to derive from the marginal 
zone of the lymphoid follicle. Th e commonest type 
is gastric MALT lymphoma. Patients usually present 
with a long history of indigestion and are found to 
have MALT lymphoma on gastric biopsy. Some, but 
by no means all, are associated with the presence 
of Helicobacter pylori. Eradication of the bacterium 
using combination antibiotic therapy often leads 
to eradication of the lymphoma. In those cases that 
cannot be treated successfully with antibiotics, gentle 
oral chemotherapy or involved fi eld radiotherapy will 
usually control the disease. High-grade transforma-
tion may occur and is treated in the usual way with 
combination chemotherapy. Other common sites to 
be involved with this lymphoma include the thyroid 
gland, salivary glands, the lungs and the spleen.
Th e immunophenotype is CD20+ve, CD79+ve, 
CD5-ve, CD23-ve, CD10-ve and sIgM+ve.
AIDS-related lymphoma
Lymphoma is an AIDS-defi ning illness. Patients in-
fected with HIV have a substantially increased risk of 
having lymphoma compared to the general popula-
tion. Th e use of antiretroviral therapy has led to a de-
cline in the incidence of AIDS-related non-Hodgkin 
lymphoma.
AIDS lymphoma is nearly always a B-cell neo-
plasm, most commonly of Burkitt’s or diff use large 
B-cell type. Th ere is a propensity for involvement of 
extranodal sites, such as the gastrointestinal tract or 
the brain. Primary CNS lymphoma is a very rare fi nd-
ing in non-HIV-infected persons and HIV infection 
should be suspected in all such cases. AIDS-related 
lymphoma is a very aggressive disorder and the 
prognosis is generally poor. Th e use of antiretroviral 
therapy and combination chemotherapy has been re-
ported to improve the prognosis.
Mycosis fungoides and Sezary 
syndrome
These disorders are T-cell cutaneous lymphomas. 
Mycosis fungoides is an indolent disorder charac-
terized by plaques or nodules affecting the skin. 
The disorder can be controlled with PUVA and 
often waxes and wanes over many years. The dis-
order may eventually become systemic, and when 
this happens the prognosis is very poor. Sezary syn-
drome is characterized by generalized erythroder-
ma and circulating abnormal lymphoid cells with 
cerebriform nuclei (Sezary cells) in the peripheral 
blood.
0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Years
Cumulative proportion surviving
R-CHOP
CHOP
R-CHOP
CHOP
Low
risk
High
risk
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Figure 9.8 The survival of patients 
with DLBC lymphoma following 
treatment with CHOP alone, 
compared with CHOP plus rituximab 
(R-CHOP). Note that the survival 
difference is more pronounced for 
patients with low-risk disease.

Haematology Lecture Notes, Ninth edition. C.S.R. Hatton, N.C. Hughes-Jones, D. Hay and D. Keeling. © 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
sues. Levels of normal immunoglobulin are reduced 
and in advanced disease there is a reduction in circu-
lating T cells. Extramedullary tumour deposits develop 
frequently.
Clinical features
Th e age-standardized incidence of myeloma is about 
40 per million of the population per year. With an 
ageing population, approximately 4500 new cases 
are diagnosed each year. Most patients are between 
the ages of 50 and 80 years. In all cases there is a 
prolonged asymptomatic phase that may last for a 
number of years – so-called monoclonal gammopa-
thy of undetermined signifi cance (MGUS). As the 
Multiple myeloma
Multiple myeloma is a disease arising from the malig-
nant transformation of a terminally diff erentiated B 
cell (plasma cell). Th e diff erentiating cells of the ma-
lignant clone have the morphology of plasma cells or 
plasmacytoid lymphocytes, have clonally rearranged 
immunoglobulin genes (see pp. 60–62) and usually 
secrete a monoclonal immunoglobulin, IgG or IgA, 
a monoclonal light chain or both. Such monoclonal 
proteins are called paraproteins; they consist of struc-
turally identical molecules and therefore produce a 
discrete monoclonal band (M band) on electrophore-
sis. Th e primary site of proliferation of the malignant 
plasma cells is the bone marrow (Figure 10.1). Activa-
tion of osteoclasts by molecules secreted from stromal 
cells, and the myeloma cells themselves, causes bone 
destruction that leads to multiple well-defi ned osteo-
lytic lesions, radiological changes resembling those of 
generalized osteoporosis and hypercalcaemia. Mar-
row infi ltration also causes impairment of haemopoi-
esis. Some patients with IgA paraproteins (which tend 
to dimerize) and a few patients with high levels of IgG3 
paraproteins have a substantially raised plasma vis-
cosity and may suff er from hyperviscosity syndrome. 
Light chains are fi ltered through the glomeruli and are 
found in the urine; they may damage the renal tubules. 
In 10% of patients, the abnormally folded paraprotein 
is converted into deposits of amyloid in various tis-
Myeloma and other 
paraproteinaemias
Learning objectives
✓ To understand the meaning of the term ‘paraprotein’ and to know the 
various clinical situations in which a paraprotein may be found
✓ To have a moderately detailed knowledge of the pathology, clinical 
features and diagnosis of myeloma and to understand the principles of 
treatment of this disorder
10
Figure 10.1 A marrow smear from a patient with 
multiple myeloma (May–Grünwald–Giemsa (MGG) stain).

88 
Myeloma and other paraproteinaemias
disease advances and the bone marrow becomes 
infi ltrated with malignant plasma cells secreting 
monoclonal immunoglobulin, a number of second-
ary changes may be found.
Bone destruction
Th e most common presenting symptom is bone pain, 
usually over the lumbar spine. Pathological fractures 
are frequent and often aff ect the lower thoracic and 
upper lumbar vertebrae and the ribs (Figure 10.2). 
Compression fractures of the vertebrae may damage 
the spinal cord or spinal roots and cause neurological 
symptoms. Large tumours may form in relation to any 
bone and cause pressure symptoms.
Renal failure
Renal failure may be found at presentation or develop 
during the course of the disease. Chronic renal failure 
commonly results from the obstruction of distal renal 
tubules by proteinaceous casts, leading to tubular at-
rophy and interstitial fi brosis (myeloma kidney). Renal 
dysfunction may also result from the toxic eff ects of light 
chains on tubule cells, the deposition of light chains in 
glomeruli and amyloidosis. Acute renal failure may be 
precipitated by dehydration or use of analgesics, or be 
caused by hypercalcaemia or hyperuricaemia.
Bone marrow failure
Anaemia, neutropenia and thrombocytopenia may oc-
cur. Th e anaemia is usually normocytic or macrocytic. 
Mucosal bleeding is a common symptom and is due 
to interference with fi brin polymerization and platelet 
function. Platelet counts may be low in advanced cases.
Bacterial infections
Respiratory tract infections are common in pa-
tients with myeloma. Th e lack of normal antibodies 
(acquired hypogammaglobulinaemia) results in in-
fections caused by capsulated organisms, commonly 
pneumococcus and haemophilus. Th us, pneumonia 
and sinusitis are common presentations.
Hypercalcaemia
Hypercalcaemia causes symptoms such as anorexia, 
vomiting, lethargy, stupor or coma. Patients may 
present more acutely with polyuria and polydipsia.
Amyloidosis
Peripheral neuropathy, macroglossia, cardiomegaly, 
diarrhoea and carpal tunnel syndrome suggest amy-
loidosis. Peripheral neuropathy may also be caused 
by infi ltration of nerves by plasma cells or by a direct 
toxic eff ect of the paraprotein.
Hyperviscosity syndrome
Th is is characterized by neurological disturbances 
(dizziness, somnolence and coma), cardiac failure 
and haemorrhagic manifestations (Figure 10.3). IgA 
myeloma is more likely to cause hyperviscosity, as 
IgA has a tendency to form dimers.
Laboratory fi ndings
A normochromic, normocytic or macrocytic anae-
mia is common. When the disease is advanced, 
Figure 10.2 MRI of the spine showing spinal-cord 
compression secondary to myeloma.

Myeloma and other paraproteinaemias 89
thrombocytopenia and neutropenia may also be 
found. Th e blood fi lm may show a leucoerythrob-
lastic picture (refl ecting marrow infi ltration) and, in 
occasional patients, plasma cells; red cells may show 
an increased tendency to form rouleaux (Figure 10.4) 
and the paraprotein may cause an increased ba-
sophilic staining of the background between the red 
cells. Th e erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) is of-
ten raised, frequently to more than 100 mm/hr. Th e 
serum uric acid is raised in about half of cases (and 
may contribute to the renal damage).
Bone marrow aspirates usually contain a greatly 
increased proportion of plasma cells (Figures 10.1 
and 10.5(a). Some aspirates may show only a slight 
increase in plasma cells (5–10% of nucleated marrow 
(a)
(b)
Figure 10.3 Fundi of the eyes in the hyperviscosity syndrome showing retinal haemorrhages (a) and papilloedema (b).
Figure 10.4 Blood fi lm from a patient with multiple 
myeloma showing marked red cell rouleau formation 
(MGG stain).
(b)
(a)
Figure 10.5 (a) Marrow smear showing myeloma cells reacting with antibody against λ-chains; the reaction was 
demonstrated using an immunoalkaline phosphatase method. The cells did not react with antibody against κ-chains 
and were therefore monoclonal in origin. The serum contained an IgD λ paraprotein. (b) Radiograph of the skull of a 
patient with multiple myeloma showing multiple discrete osteolytic lesions with no sclerosis at the margin. 

90 
Myeloma and other paraproteinaemias
cells, as compared with 0.1–2% in normal marrow) 
and others may show no increase. Th e latter results 
from the multifocal nature of the plasma cell infi ltrate.
Electrophoresis of serum usually demonstrates the 
monoclonal Ig as a discrete band (M band; Figure 10.6) 
and the nature of the paraprotein can be determined 
by immunofi xation. Light chains (also called Bence-
Jones proteins) can be detected in the serum and the 
urine using the sensitive ‘free lite assay’. In 50% of pa-
tients with myeloma, the paraprotein is IgG, in 25% it is 
IgA, in 20% it is light chain only, and in 1–2% it is IgD or 
IgE. IgM-producing myelomas are extremely rare. Over 
half of patients with an IgG- or IgA-secreting myeloma 
have monoclonal light chains in their urine; in two-
thirds of these patients the light chain is κ and in the 
remainder it is λ. In 1–2% of patients with myeloma, 
a paraprotein cannot be detected in either serum or 
concentrated urine (non-secretory myeloma).
Serum levels of β2-microglobulin (the light chain of 
the HLA class 1 glycoproteins) correlates with tumour 
mass and, together with the serum albumin, is a very 
important prognostic marker (see below). 
Diagnosis
Th is is often based on the fi nding of at least two of the 
following three features:
1 A monoclonal Ig in the serum or monoclonal light 
chains in the urine or both.
2 An increased proportion of plasma cells (often 
with atypical features) in marrow aspirates.
3 Discrete osteolytic lesions on X-ray studies 
(Figure 10.5(b)).
Th e diff erential diagnosis is from a benign parapro-
teinaemia (p. 91).
Treatment
Treatment should be reserved for patients in whom 
there is evidence of organ damage, for instance bone 
marrow infi ltration, lytic or other bone lesions or renal 
dysfunction. Some patients may fulfi l the diagnostic 
criteria of myeloma but have indolent or smouldering 
disease with stable paraproteins, and in the absence of 
lytic bone lesions or other end-organ damage no treat-
ment is required. Treatment requires a multidiscipli-
nary approach involving haematologists/oncologists 
and an extensive multidisciplinary team.
Supportive care measures are very important. Anae-
mia is a common fi nding at presentation or at progres-
sion or may be secondary to treatment, and patients 
who require frequent transfusion may benefi t from 
subcutaneous erythropoietin. Adequate hydration and 
a good urine fl ow must be maintained in an attempt to 
reduce the risk of paraprotein precipitation in the renal 
tubules and consequent renal damage; haemodialysis 
may be required in the event of renal failure. Patients 
with high paraprotein levels may also develop hyper-
viscosity syndrome and plasma exchange can be used 
to reduce rapidly the eff ect of this problem. Bacterial 
infections, due to the associated acquired hypogam-
maglobulinaemia, require prompt treatment with an-
tibiotics. Bone pain and fractures and hypercalcaemia 
cause signifi cant morbidity and mortality in patients 
with myeloma. Long-term therapy with bisphospho-
nates has been shown to reduce bone pain and pro-
gression of skeletal lesions.
Chemotherapy
Cytotoxic drugs are reserved for patients with bone 
lesions, hypercalcaemia, bone marrow failure or re-
nal dysfunction. Patients unable to receive high-dose 
therapy because of co-morbidities are usually treated 
with the alkylating drugs melphalan or cyclophos-
phamide, which can be given orally with or without 
prednisolone, either intermittently (for 4–5 days 
every 4 weeks) or in smaller doses, continuously. Re-
cently, the addition of thalidomide has been shown 
to increase the response rate and the combination 
of melphalan, prednisolone and thalidomide (MPT) 
has become the standard of care for less fi t, usu-
ally older patients who are not eligible for high-dose 
therapy and stem-cell rescue. Th e mechanism of ac-
tion of thalidomide is unknown, but there is evidence 
alb α1 α2
γ
β
Figure 10.6 Illustration of serum electrophoresis 
demonstrating a monoclonal band and reduced normal 
immunoglobulins. Source: Courtesy of Professor 
Hoffbrand.

Myeloma and other paraproteinaemias 91
to suggest that it may have antiangiogenic eff ects in 
myeloma. However, it has a number of troublesome 
side eff ects, including drowsiness, constipation, risk 
of thrombosis and peripheral neuropathy, in addition 
to its well-known teratogenicity.
Approximately 75–80% of patients respond to MPT, 
with an improvement in symptoms, a rise in haemo-
globin and a reduction in the paraprotein level. Th e 
response is gradual and may take many months. Treat-
ment reduces the tumour mass and is usually stopped 
when the paraprotein level ceases to fall (plateau phase).
In patients with a good performance status and 
minimal co-morbidities, chemotherapy programmes 
are undergoing a period of revision. Th e goals of treat-
ment are changing from merely reducing the tumour 
burden to achieving a complete response and long-
term remission, as determined by the disappearance 
of paraprotein levels and a complete reversal of end-
organ damage. Newer drugs such as proteosome in-
hibitors (e.g. bortezomib) and thalidomide analogues 
such as lenalidomide are being added to convention-
al chemotherapy agents to reduce the tumour burden 
before consolidating with high-dose melphalan and 
stem cell rescue (Chapter 13). Response rates have 
been found to be very high and some patients are 
achieving durable remissions. Th is treatment is not 
curative, with over 90% of patients relapsing, but for 
patients able to tolerate this intensity of therapy there 
is evidence that it improves overall survival.
Radiotherapy
Radiotherapy is a very eff ective treatment for bone 
pain in myeloma. Spinal cord compression due to a 
vertebral or a paravertebral mass requires urgent as-
sessment, and decompression laminectomy followed 
by radiotherapy is usually the treatment of choice. 
Bone fractures, which are a common complication, 
are best treated by orthopaedic fi xation followed by 
radiotherapy.
Relapsed and refractory disease
Nearly all patients with myeloma will relapse after the 
initial therapy. Occasional patients have been cured 
with allogeneic bone marrow transplantation, but 
the technique is only suitable for patients under 45 
years and carries a high mortality (Chapter 12). New 
agents continue to be developed for the treatment of 
relapsed myeloma. Bortezomib is a novel drug that 
inhibits the activity of the proteasome, the organelle 
responsible for regulated intracellular proteolysis. 
Th is agent has shown responses in 30–40% of patients 
with relapsed myeloma, probably by preventing the 
degradation of IkB by the proteasome. IkB neutralizes 
NFkB, a molecule that drives cell proliferation.
Other treatment options available for relapsed my-
eloma include the use of the thalidomide analogue 
lenalidomide, or the oral alkylating agent melphalan. 
Second-generation proteasome inhibitor carfi lzomib 
and pomalidomide, another thalidomide analogue, 
show promise in clinical trials and may be available 
for relapsed patients in the future. Palliative care 
services need to be involved for expert advice on pain 
control and management of specifi c symptoms.
Prognosis
Th e median survival from diagnosis is 4–5 years. Pa-
tients presenting with renal failure have a worse prog-
nosis. Patients can be stratifi ed according to the levels 
of serum β2-microglobulin (a refl ection of tumour bur-
den and renal function) and albumin levels. High levels 
of β2-microglobulin and low levels of albumin confer a 
poor prognosis. Certain cytogenetic abnormalities also 
provide prognostic information. Patients with high-risk 
cytogenetic features including deletion 17p and trans-
locations t(14;16) or t(4;14) have a worse outcome.
Solitary plasmacytoma
Solitary tumours consisting of malignant plasma cells 
may be found in the bone marrow or in extramed-
ullary sites such as the upper respiratory tract. It is 
common to fi nd a monoclonal Ig in the serum or mon-
oclonal light chains in the urine, or both. In the case 
of extramedullary plasmacytomas, there is often no 
evidence of tumour elsewhere and the prognosis after 
excision followed by local radiotherapy is very good.
Other paraproteinaemias 
and related disorders
Benign paraproteinaemia (benign 
monoclonal gammopathy or 
monoclonal gammopathy of 
undetermined signifi cance, MGUS)
A paraprotein is found in the serum in 0.1–1.0% of 
normal adults and in up to 10% of elderly subjects. A 
high proportion of such individuals have a condition 
termed ‘benign paraproteinaemia’ that does not re-
quire treatment. Th e most important diff erence be-
tween MGUS and myeloma is the absence of end-organ 
damage in the former. However, MGUS will transform 

92 
Myeloma and other paraproteinaemias
to myeloma at the rate of 1% per year, emphasizing the 
importance of monitoring patients with an apparently 
benign paraproteinaemia. Th e diff erences between 
myeloma and MGUS are illustrated in Table 10.1.
Amyloidosis
Amyloidosis is a disorder of protein folding whereby 
normally soluble proteins are deposited as β-pleated 
sheets. Infi ltration of organs with amyloid leads to 
dysfunction and eventual organ failure. Amyloid may 
be demonstrated in rectal, gingival or renal biopsies; 
it stains positively with Congo red and shows an ap-
ple green birefringence in polarized light. Amyloid 
may be one of three principal types:
1 AA amyloid: Seen in patients with long-term 
chronic infections or infl ammatory disorders. Th e 
amyloid protein is derived from serum amyloid A-
related protein. Th is protein is synthesized in in-
fl ammatory states and, if present for long enough 
at a high enough level, becomes deposited in vari-
ous organs.
2 AL amyloid: Th ese proteins consist of part or 
whole of the immunoglobulin light chain. Th e 
classical features include macroglossia, carpal 
tunnel syndrome, peripheral neuropathy and 
purpura, but more important clinically are mal-
absorption, nephrotic syndrome and cardiomy-
opathy. Patients are found to have monoclonal 
light chain excretion. Th ey may have an increased 
number of plasma cells in the bone marrow but 
do not have bone lesions. Few eff ective treatment 
modalities exist and prognosis is therefore poor 
(especially in patients with cardiac infi ltration). 
Where treatment is given it is usually derived from 
the protocols used for patients with myeloma.
Table 10.1 The differences between myeloma and MGUS.
Myeloma
MGUS
Bone marrow plasma cells
>10% on bone marrow aspirate
<10% on bone marrow aspirate
Serum paraprotein 
Usually high and rising
Usually low and stable
Bence–Jones proteinuria
>50% of cases
Rare
Immune paresis
Very common
Rare
Lytic bone lesions
Common
Absent
Hypercalcaemia
Common
Absent
Anaemia
Frequent
Absent
Impaired renal function
May be present
Absent
Note: Treatment is not indicated for patients with MGUS. Randomized trials have thus far demonstrated no benefi t from early 
intervention and simple monitoring of the paraprotein with clinical review is all that is required.
3 Familial forms: Th is is a diverse group of diseases, 
often presenting as neuropathy but frequently in-
volving other organs.
Waldenström’s 
macroglobulinaemia 
(see Chapter 9, p. 82)
Waldenström’s macroglobulinaemia (or lympho-
plasmacytic lymphoma) is also characterized by the 
presence of a paraprotein, although, in contrast to 
myeloma, in this condition it is nearly always IgM. 
Th e IgM paraprotein is secreted by a clonal popula-
tion of pleomorphic lymphocytes and plasma cells 
that infi ltrate the bone marrow, lymph nodes and 
spleen. Symptoms result both from tissue infi ltration 
and from hyperviscosity of the blood caused by high 
levels of IgM. Osteolytic lesions are rare. It is a rela-
tively uncommon condition, being found at approxi-
mately 10% of the incidence of myeloma.
Heavy chain diseases
In these rare paraproteinaemias, the B lineage-
derived malignant clone secretes γ, α or μ heavy 
chains rather than complete Ig molecules. Th e 
clinical picture is that of a lymphoma; α-chain dis-
ease is characterized by severe malabsorption due to 
infi ltration of the small intestine by lymphoma cells.
Other lymphoproliferative 
disorders
A paraprotein may also be found in chronic cold hae-
magglutinin disease, and in some patients with malig-
nant lymphoma or chronic lymphocytic leukaemia.

Haematology Lecture Notes, Ninth edition. C.S.R. Hatton, N.C. Hughes-Jones, D. Hay and D. Keeling. © 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
A neoplastic clone can emerge from any of these 
stages, although the more mature cells are less 
 often involved in the neoplastic process. Th e malig-
nant process may be obvious, with large numbers of 
blast cells – acute myeloid leukaemia (AML). Other 
disorders can be divided, with some overlap, into 
myelo dysplastic and myeloproliferative conditions. 
Th e myelodysplastic disorders are characterized 
by abnormal morphology (dysplasia) with altered 
function; there is often an excess of blast cells, the 
 abnormalities terminating as a fl orid leukaemia. 
Th e myeloproliferative disorders are characterized 
by  increased numbers of cells with relatively normal 
morphology and function. Th e myeloproliferative 
disorders may also transform to acute leukaemia, but 
this is an uncommon event.
Acute myeloid leukaemia
AML is a clonal disorder of myeloid progenitor cells 
that may occur at any age, but becomes increasingly 
common in older people. It is the most common form 
of acute leukaemia in adults. Th e disorder leads to 
an infi ltration of the bone marrow, with immature 
cells resulting in impaired production of neutrophils, 
Myeloid cells include granulocytic-neutrophil, eosi-
nophil, monocyte and basophil precursors, eryth-
roid and megakaryocytic cell lineages, all of which 
are thought to arise from a single multipotent com-
mon stem cell. Th e earliest morphologically recog-
nizable cell in the granulocytic lineage is called the 
myeloblast. Th e myeloblast diff erentiates to become 
a promyelocyte with the appearance of azurophilic 
granules. Further maturation sees the appearance 
of specifi c granules and the disappearance of blast-
like features. Th e cells at this stage are known as my-
elocytes, eosinophil myelocytes, basophil myelocytes 
and neutrophil myelocytes. Th e neutrophil myelo-
cyte divides and the progeny develop into metamy-
elocytes and fi nally mature neutrophils, as outlined 
on pp. 3, 4. Th ese later stages are characterized by the 
involution of the nucleus as it becomes less spheri-
cal and more band-like. Monocytes are derived from 
promonocytes that are recognizable morphologi-
cally. Th e earliest erythroid cell that can be identi-
fi ed morphologically within the bone marrow is the 
proerythroblast. Th ese large cells with dark blue cy-
toplasm mature and divide to become normoblasts, 
reticulocytes and fi nally mature red cells. Megakaryo-
cytes are large, multinucleated cells that derive from 
megakaryoblasts, which give rise to platelets by cyto-
plasmic shedding (Chapter 1).
Neoplastic disorders 
of myeloid cells
Learning objectives
✓ To understand the presentation, natural history and diagnosis of acute 
myeloblastic leukaemia
✓ To have an understanding of the myelodysplastic disorders
✓ To be familiar with the term myeloproliferative disorder and the 
four main types – chronic myeloid leukaemia, polycythaemia vera, 
myelofi brosis and essential thrombocythaemia
✓ To appreciate the expanding scientifi c understanding of these conditions
11

94 
Neoplastic disorders of myeloid cells
platelets and red cells. Blast cells frequently appear 
in the peripheral blood and may derive from any of 
the lineages described above. Th e classifi cation of the 
disorder is based on morphology, cytogenetics, im-
munophenotyping and clinical behaviour, reminis-
cent of the classifi cation of lymphoid disorders.
Aetiology
Th e vast majority of cases have no identifi able aetiolo-
gy, although a number of cases may evolve from other 
clonal myeloid disorders such as the myelodysplastic 
disorders and the myeloproliferative conditions. Ra-
diation and benzene exposure are also known to lead 
to AML. Th ere are rare incidences when individuals 
have a predisposition to AML. Children aff ected with 
Down’s syndrome have a 400 times higher incidence 
of acute megakaryocytic leukaemia (M7) compared 
with unaff ected children. In addition, there are fami-
lies that have inherited mutations of critical haemat-
opoietic transcription factors (e.g. AML-1) that may 
give rise to AML.
Classifi cation
Th e malignant cells are thought to represent neoplas-
tic equivalents of normal maturation stages and eight 
types are covered by the well-recognized FAB classi-
fi cation:
1 Undiff erentiated blasts: M0
2 Lightly granulated blasts: M1
3 Granulated blasts often with Auer rods: M2
4 Promyelocytic leukaemia: M3
5 Myelomonocytic leukaemia: M4
6 Monocytic leukaemia: M5
7 Erythroleukaemia: M6
8 Megakaryocytic leukaemia: M7
Previous attempts at classifying AML have been based 
on the morphological features described above. 
However, as the underlying molecular abnormalities 
that give rise to AML become better understood, at-
tempts are being made to produce a more scientifi -
cally coherent classifi cation. Th e WHO classifi cation 
therefore attempts to classify AML by its underlying 
molecular abnormalities (e.g. recurrent cytogenetic 
changes). Th e complexities of this new classifi cation, 
given in Table 11.1, refl ect our incomplete knowledge 
of the molecular basis in many cases of AML.
Symptoms and signs
Th e clinical features refl ect the consequences of 
bone marrow failure. Th us, anaemia causes pallor, 
tiredness and exertional dyspnoea; leucopenia leads 
to infection; and thrombocytopenia causes bleed-
ing, bruising and purpura. Blast cells may infi ltrate 
other organs such as the skin or gums (particularly in 
monocytic leukaemia), and there may be lymph ad-
enopathy and splenomegaly. Massive splenomegaly 
is unusual in this disorder. Blast cells can invade the 
CNS, although this is commoner at relapse.
Laboratory fi ndings
Laboratory fi ndings, like the clinical fi ndings, refl ect 
bone marrow failure. Anaemia results from inad-
equate red cell production. Th rombocytopenia is 
nearly always present and results both from a fail-
ure of production and from increased consumption. 
Some cases of AML are associated with disseminated 
intravascular coagulation (DIC). Th e white cell count 
may be very high, refl ecting the high circulating blast-
cell count, but in about half of patients the total white 
cell count is low. In almost all cases the total number 
of normal circulating neutrophils is reduced.
Th e bone marrow always contains blast cells, 
sometimes accounting for more than 90% of the nu-
cleated cells (Figure 11.1).
AML must be distinguished from acute lymphob-
lastic leukaemia (ALL), because their treatment and 
management diff er. Th e morphological features may 
be diagnostic, but in cases where the blast cells are 
not well diff erentiated and lack granules, the cyto-
chemical demonstration of certain intracellular en-
zymes or expression of a typical antigen profi le by 
immunophenotyping may be required. Auer rods are 
needle-shaped or rod-shaped cytoplasmic inclusions 
Table 11.1 WHO 2001 classifi cation of AML.
Acute myeloblastic 
leukaemia with recurrent 
cytogenetic changes
AML with t(8;21); inv16 
t(15;17); all mostly 
occurring in young patients
AML with multilineage 
dysplasia
Evolving from a 
myelodysplastic disorder; 
mostly occurring in older 
patients
AML and MDS, 
therapy related
Alkylating agent related, 
topoisomerase II inhibitor 
related
AML not otherwise 
categorized
Morphologically classifi ed 
M0–M7 as previously 
according to cell of origin
Notes: AML – acute myeloid leukaemia; MDS – 
myelodysplastic syndromes.

Neoplastic disorders of myeloid cells 95
(formed by fusion of granules) within blast cells and 
are virtually diagnostic of AML (Figure 11.2).
Immunophenotyping using fl ow cytometry is a 
method whereby the antigen profi le of the leukaemic 
cells can be identifi ed (see Chapter 5 and Figure 11.3). 
Myeloid antigens such as CD13, CD15, CD33, the 
stem cell marker CD34 and stem cell factor receptor 
c-kit (CD117) help to identify blast cells as myeloid 
rather than lymphoid. Th e lymphoblasts in ALL will 
express B- or T-cell markers. In rare cases, leukaemi-
as express both myeloid and lymphoid antigens and 
these are classifi ed as biphenotypic leukaemias.
AML with recurrent genetic 
abnormalities
A number of characteristic cytogenetic abnormalities 
occur in AML. Th eir importance in terms of causation 
is becoming increasingly clear, and it is also now well 
established that certain abnormalities are associated 
with useful prognostic information (Table 11.2). For 
example, AML with t(8;21) or inv16 is associated with 
a more favourable prognosis.
In addition to these ‘classic’ cytogenetic abnor-
malities, research is uncovering additional mutations 
of prognostic signifi cance. Mutations of a cytokine 
receptor (FLT-3) are thought to impart an adverse 
prognosis in some subtypes of AML. In some series 
up to 30% of cases carry such mutations. Abnormal 
localization of mutated nucleophosmin (NPM1) is 
present in half of cytogenetically normal AML and is 
associated with a better prognosis. Current research 
has uncovered point mutations in critical haemopoi-
etic transcription factors (CEBPA and core binding 
factor, CBF). Th e prevalence and clinical signifi cance 
of these mutations are still a matter of research, but 
it is hoped that some mutations will be predictive of 
prognosis and will infl uence management. 
Th erapy-related AML has been recognized as a 
late complication of chemotherapy. In these patients 
there is a recurring abnormality of chromosome 5 
and/or 7 (25/del(5q) or 27/del(7q)). Patients who 
have received topoisomerase II inhibitors (etoposide) 
have a high incidence of balanced translocations in-
volving 11q23 and 21q22. Th erapy-related AML has a 
very poor prognosis.
Figure 11.1 AML (FAB category M1). The three 
leukaemic myeloblasts are considerably larger than 
adjacent red cells, have fi nely stippled nuclear chromatin 
and show prominent nucleoli (MGG (May–Grünwald–
Giemsa) stain).
Figure 11.2 Myeloblasts of AML showing several Auer 
rods (MGG stain). These are azurophilic rod-shaped 
cytoplasmic inclusions that are exclusively found in some 
of the leukaemic myeloblasts of a small proportion of 
patients with AML, or CML in blast-cell transformation.

96 
Neoplastic disorders of myeloid cells
Acute promyelocytic leukaemia 
(M3)
Th is variant deserves special mention, not only be-
cause it has specifi c clinical manifestations but also 
because of the molecular understanding of the dis-
order. Th e malignant cells in acute promyelocytic 
leukaemia (APML) are promyelocytes that contain 
abundant granules and numerous Auer rods. Release 
of the promyelocytes’ granules, which may occur 
spontaneously or at the initiation of cytotoxic ther-
apy, is known to produce uncontrolled activation of 
the fi brinolytic system. Th e result is DIC and poten-
tially life-threatening bleeding.
Treatment with all-trans-retinoic acid (ATRA) al-
lows diff erentiation of the abnormal promyelocytes 
and limits the threat of DIC. Th is diff erentiating agent 
alone allows some patients to reach remission, al-
though most will subsequently relapse. Th e combi-
nation of ATRA with conventional chemotherapy has 
made APML the most curable subtype of AML.
Th e molecular basis of APML and the sensitivity of 
the disorder to ATRA are of considerable interest. Th e 
disorder is characterized by a translocation between 
chromosome 15 and chromosome 17. Th e breakpoint 
on chromosome 17 falls within the gene for the retin-
oic acid receptor (RARα), which is normally needed 
for appropriate diff erentiation of the cell. Th e break-
point on chromosome 15 falls within the gene known 
as PML, a nuclear regulatory factor needed to control 
the induction of apoptosis of the cell. As a result of the 
translocation, a new fusion gene called PML-RAR–α 
is produced, which encodes a DNA-binding protein, 
causing a maturation block. Th is can be overcome by 
pharmacological doses of ATRA. Patients with APML 
can therefore be very eff ectively treated with ATRA 
(diff erentiating agent), together with chemotherapy. 
Th e prognosis for this rare subtype has improved dra-
matically with the use of this approach. 
Treatment of AML
Th e treatment of AML can be divided into four main 
components: intensive chemotherapy, supportive 
care, diff erentiation agents and bone marrow trans-
plantation (BMT).
Intensive chemotherapy
Th e use of anthracycline drugs together with cyto-
sine arabinoside leads to remissions in up to 80% 
100
102
102
101
100
(a)
101
103
103
104
104
CD117PE
Myeloid blast population (CD117)
Normal
neutrophils
CD15FITC
Blasts are CD13 pos (in this case CD15)
100
102
102
101
100
101
103
103
104
104
CD13PE
CD15FITC
(b)
Figure 11.3 Flow cytometry demonstrating myeloid 
antigen expression in a case of AML. The blasts are 
CD117+ and CD13+.
Table 11.2 Cytogenetic abnormalities that 
have been found to be associated with better 
prognosis in AML.
Translocation 
t(8;21)
Found in granulocytic variant of AML; 
the blast cells have obvious granules 
and Auer rods are frequently present
Translocation 
t(15;17)
Defi nes acute promyelocytic 
leukaemia (APML). The leukaemic 
promyelocytes are heavily granulated 
with prominent Auer rods. This type is 
associated with a severe coagulopathy
Inversion 
Inv(16)
Occurs in myelomonocytic leukaemia 
with an excess of eosinophils in the 
bone marrow

Neoplastic disorders of myeloid cells 97
of younger patients. Following administration of 
chemotherapy, there is a disappearance of circulating 
blast cells and a temporary worsening of the cytope-
nias, leading to severe neutropenia and thrombocyto-
penia. Elderly patients have lower rates of remission 
and generally have a poor prognosis: patients over 70 
years of age rarely survive beyond one year due to re-
sistant disease or to complications of therapy.
Supportive care
Following chemotherapy, there is an inevitable pe-
riod of neutropenia associated with a breakdown of 
mucosal surfaces; patients commonly complain of a 
sore throat and dysphagia and may develop abdomi-
nal pain as a result of infl ammation of the bowel mu-
cosa. Th is is the period when the patient is susceptible 
to overwhelming septicaemia (neutropenic sepsis); 
the infection most often arises from damaged mucosal 
surfaces of the gut, in particular the large bowel, allow-
ing the passage of Gram-negative organisms into the 
bloodstream. Th e presence of fever or other features 
of infection should lead to prompt administration of 
intravenous antibiotics aimed at Gram-negative or-
ganisms. Th e intensity of the chemotherapy used to 
treat AML may lead to periods of neutropenia continu-
ing for as long as three to four weeks. Such extended 
periods of neutropenia are associated with fungal 
infection, notably invasive Aspergillus and Candida 
species. Prophylactic antifungal treatment helps re-
duce Candida infection. Platelet and red cell trans-
fusions are necessary until normal haematopoiesis 
is restored. Additional courses of chemotherapy will 
reduce the blast count still further and can lead to dur-
able remissions in a signifi cant number of cases.
Bone marrow transplantation 
(see Chapter 12)
For patients with features indicating poor-risk dis-
ease or who have relapsed, BMT may be curative. Al-
logeneic BMT relies on using myeloablative therapy 
(which may involve treatment with either drugs alone 
or a combination of drugs and radiotherapy); it aims 
to destroy the patient’s bone marrow and consider-
ably reduce the number of malignant blast cells. Im-
munosuppression allows the HLA-matched donor 
bone marrow to engraft, usually in two to three weeks. 
Th e donor marrow can then induce a ‘graft versus 
leukaemia eff ect’, an immunological eff ect that eradi-
cates chemoresistant disease. Historically, the use of 
myeloablative allogeneic BMT has been restricted 
to younger patients (aged <45 years) because of the 
severe toxicity associated with the procedure. More 
recently, reduced intensity (non-myeloablative) 
protocols for allogeneic BMT have been developed 
allowing the graft versus leukaemia eff ect to be har-
nessed for older patients (45–70 years).
The myelodysplastic 
syndromes
Th e myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) are serious, 
relatively common disorders in which the bone mar-
row is populated by a clone of abnormal haemopoi-
etic cells. Th ese cells are dysplastic and are unable 
to mature normally. Th e maturation block tends to 
worsen over time, leading to an accumulation of blast 
cells and ultimately the disorder may lead to bone 
marrow failure, either as a result of a transformation 
to acute leukaemia or because of stem cell failure. Th e 
marrow blast-cell count is the single most important 
factor in determining prognosis, with a higher blast 
count conferring a poorer prognosis. Th e disease is 
most common in the elderly and is rare before the 
age of 50 years. MDS presents most commonly with 
symptoms of anaemia, but infection, bruising or 
bleeding may also occur. MDS has been subdivided 
into a number of categories depending on the pres-
ence of underlying cytogenetic abnormalities and 
morphological features such as ring sideroblasts.
Laboratory features
Typically, there is reduction in at least two cell lines (e.g. 
anaemia and leucopenia, or anaemia and thrombocy-
topenia). Th e anaemia is frequently macrocytic (not 
due to vitamin B12 or folate defi ciency) and the neu-
trophils are ‘dysplastic’ – they look bizarre, often with 
reduced granulation and abnormal nuclear matura-
tion, including the characteristic bilobed spectacle-like 
nuclei (Figure 11.4). Blasts cells may be found in the pe-
ripheral blood. An increase in peripheral blood mono-
cytes (>1 × 109/L) in some cases defi nes these patients 
as having chronic myelomonocytic leukaemia (CMML).
Th e bone marrow has variable cellularity, although 
there is always abnormal maturation recognized by 
microscopy. Th e blast count may vary from less than 
5% in refractory anaemia (RA) to more than 5% blasts 
in refractory anaemia with excess blasts (RAEB). A 
blast-cell count greater than 20% in the bone mar-
row defi nes the condition as acute leukaemia. Th e 
presence of iron granules in the mitochondria of 
erythroid precursors (nucleated red cells), forming 
a ring of iron-positive granules around the nucleus, 
defi nes the condition known as primary acquired 

98 
Neoplastic disorders of myeloid cells
sideroblastic anaemia or refractory anaemia with ring 
sideroblasts (RARS). Cytogenetic abnormalities occur 
in about 50% of MDS cases.
Treatment
Treatment is usually supportive only, as this condi-
tion responds poorly to chemotherapy. Many pa-
tients are transfusion dependent. In younger patients, 
chemotherapy and BMT may be the treatment of 
choice. Trials have shown that certain growth factors 
such as erythropoietin and granulocyte stimulatory 
agents (G-CSF) can alleviate the associated cytope-
nias in certain subgroups of patients with MDS. Other 
subgroups of MDS have been shown to respond to 
the immunomodulatory agent lenalidamide, al-
though the mechanism is not understood. Th e DNA 
hypomethylating agent azacitidine has also been 
shown to confer a modest survival benefi t in patients 
with RAEB.
Myeloproliferative 
disorders
Th e myeloproliferative disorders are a group of dis-
eases in which there is increased proliferative activity 
with fairly normal maturation, unlike MDS. Function-
al abnormalities of the blood cells are usually mild, 
but there may be an increase in the numbers of neu-
trophils, erythrocytes or platelets.
Th e myeloproliferative disorders are chronic my-
eloid leukaemia (CML), polycythaemia vera, myelofi -
brosis and essential thrombocythaemia.
Chronic myeloid leukaemia
CML is very rare in children, but increases in inci-
dence with age. Th e most frequent symptoms are 
fatigue, weight loss, sweats and anorexia. Th e com-
monest signs are pallor and sometimes massive 
splenomegaly. Very occasionally CML may present 
with symptoms of hyperviscosity due to a very high 
white cell count. Priapism, tinnitus and stupor are 
among the commoner symptoms of this presentation.
Laboratory features
Th e peripheral blood abnormalities are character-
istic. Patients are almost always anaemic and have 
elevated white cell counts (usually between 50 and 
400 × 109/L), with excess neutrophils, myelocytes, 
metamyelocytes and basophils present in the periph-
eral blood (Figure 11.5); blast cells are also present in 
small numbers (usually <10%). Th e bone marrow is 
very hypercellular, with greatly increased white cell 
production.
Clinical course
Th e disorder runs a predictable course. In the fi rst 
phase (the ‘chronic phase’), normal blood counts are 
achieved with therapy and the patient is generally 
well. Th is phase may continue for many years. Inevi-
tably the disease then transforms through an acceler-
ated phase (blood counts become diffi  cult to control) 
into blast crisis. Th is latter phase is defi ned by an in-
creasing number of blasts in the bone marrow, and in 
terms of its natural history is akin to acute leukaemia. 
Symptomatically, patients describe weight loss, night 
sweats and fevers. Some patients in blast crisis may 
(a)
(b)
Figure 11.4 (a) Hypogranular neutrophil from a patient with MDS. (b) Neutrophil granulocyte from a heterozygote for 
the inherited Pelger–Huët anomaly. The nucleus is bilobed (spectacle-like) and has markedly condensed chromatin. In 
heterozygotes for this asymptomatic condition, 50–70% of neutrophils show these changes. Similar abnormalities may 
be found in some neutrophils, as an acquired condition in MDS.

Neoplastic disorders of myeloid cells 99
be rescued with conventional chemotherapy and en-
ter a second chronic phase.
Philadelphia chromosome
CML is associated with a pathognomonic chromo-
somal rearrangement in which there is a reciprocal 
translocation between chromosome 22 and chromo-
some 9. Th is leads to the formation of a novel gene 
that is transcribed into a novel oncoprotein with ty-
rosine kinase activity (BCR–ABL; Figure 11.6(a)). Th is 
protein leads to increased cell cycling and a failure of 
apoptosis. Th e fusion chromosome 22q– (with addi-
tional material from chromosome 9) is known as the 
Philadelphia chromosome. In 1990, two experimental 
approaches demonstrated the ability of the BCR–ABL 
fusion gene (as the sole abnormality) to cause leukae-
mia. First, transgenic mice that express the BCR–ABL 
gene have been shown to develop a rapidly fatal acute 
leukaemia; second, when murine bone marrow cells 
transfected with a BCR–ABL expressing retrovirus 
Figure 11.5 Blood fi lm from a patient with CML 
showing an increased number of white cells, mainly 
neutrophils, band cells and metamyelocytes. Note the 
presence of some myelocytes and basophils.
Chromosome 22
Chromosome 9
1
2
3
1
1
2
3
4
5
c-BCR
c-ABL
2–11
(a)
2–11
p210 BCR–ABL
p185 BCR–ABL
Exons
Introns
2–11
1
CML breakpoints
ALL breakpoints
(b)
ATP
ATP
ADP
PO4
TYR
TYR
Substrate
Substrate
BCR–ABL
tyrosine
kinase
Imatinib
CML
CML
CML
X
X
BCR–ABL
tyrosine
kinase
Inhibits the aberrant
protein that drives proliferation
Figure 11.6 (a) Illustration of the 
translocation between chromosomes 
22 and 9 leading to the formation of a 
novel oncogene BCR–ABL. Note that 
a variation of the same translocation 
occurs in some patients with ALL. The 
novel oncogene produces a tyrosine 
kinase, leading to cell proliferation. 
(b) Diagram showing the mechanism 
of action of imatinib. This drug inhibits 
the phosphorylation by BCR–ABL 
of tyrosine in protein (shown in 
green) and thereby interferes with its 
leukaemogenic effects.

100 
Neoplastic disorders of myeloid cells
were used to repopulate the bone marrow of irradi-
ated mice, the mice developed various myeloprolif-
erative disorders, including CML.
Th ese observations have led to the concept that the 
tyrosine kinase (TK) BCR–ABL is a target for therapy. 
Inhibitors of the ATP-binding site on this tyrosine 
kinase have therefore been developed to treat CML. 
Th e fi rst such compound that emerged as a specifi c 
inhibitor of BCR–ABL was imatinib, a generally well 
tolerated oral agent that when taken daily can control 
the disease eff ectively for years (Figure 11.6(b)). Pa-
tients intolerant of imatinib can be treated with one 
of the newer tyrosine kinase inhibitors such as dasat-
inib or nilotinib. By blocking the inactive conforma-
tion of the BCR–ABL oncoprotein, TK inhibitors allow 
inhibition of its oncogenetic activity and thereby treat 
CML at the molecular level.
Treatment
Th e majority of patients with CML will respond to im-
atinib therapy with normalization of their blood counts 
and reduction of their enlarged spleens. Hydroxycar-
bamide is often used in the fi rst few days to help re-
duce very high white cell counts, which are a common 
feature at presentation. Th e majority of patients will 
achieve a cytogenetic remission when treated with a 
TK inhibitor and many patients will remain in remis-
sion for many years. Imatinib is relatively well toler-
ated and only a handful of patients are resistant. Th ose 
patients who are resistant to imatinib can be treated 
with second-line tyrosine kinase inhibitors such as 
dasatinib, which targets the active conformation of the 
tyrosine kinase. TK inhibitors have successfully man-
aged to delay the onset of blast transformation. CML 
provides an outstanding example of the eff ectiveness 
of targeted therapy, in which the understanding of mo-
lecular mechanisms has enabled the development of 
specifi c drugs to block off ending oncogenic proteins.
While imatinib will provide control of CML in many 
cases, it cannot cure the disease. Allogeneic BMT is 
the only known curative therapy for this disorder and 
is most successfully carried out in the chronic phase. 
Th is procedure is not available to patients over the 
age of 45–50 years and relies on being able to identify 
a tissue-matched donor, either a sibling or an unrelat-
ed matched donor. Th e majority of patients with CML 
will not be found to have a suitable matched donor or 
will be too old for allogeneic BMT.
Polycythaemia vera
Th is chronic clonal disorder is characterized by ex-
cessive proliferation of a multipotent haemopoietic 
stem cell, resulting in an increased number of red 
cells, often accompanied by an increase in white cell 
and platelet counts. Th e primary clinical manifesta-
tion is markedly elevated haemoglobin and haema-
tocrit. Th e clonal nature of the abnormal cells has 
been known for some time, but now a defi ning muta-
tion in the erythropoietin signalling pathway (JAK2) 
has been identifi ed. Th is mutation has been found 
in over 95% of cases of polycythaemia vera and JAK2 
mutational analysis has become an important diag-
nostic test in this disorder.
Clinical features
Polycythaemia vera has an insidious onset, usually 
presenting late in life (rarely before 40 years). Th e 
main presenting symptoms relate to the considerable 
rise in red cell count and resulting increase in blood 
viscosity and include headache, dizziness and some-
times stroke. Pruritus, particularly after a hot bath, 
is a characteristic symptom. Th ere is a marked ten-
dency for patients to develop thrombosis, although 
there may also be an increased likelihood of bleeding. 
Mesenteric, portal or splenic vein thrombosis should 
alert the clinician to the possibility of polycythaemia 
vera. Th e principal signs are plethora (fl orid, dusky 
red colour of the face), splenomegaly and hepatome-
galy. Erythromelalgia (increased skin temperature, 
burning sensation and redness) may occur in the 
extremities.
Laboratory fi ndings and natural 
history
Th e red cell count and haemoglobin concentration 
are increased; haemoglobin values of 18–24 g/dL are 
common and the packed cell volume (PCV) is usu-
ally over 0.48 in females and 0.52 in males; the red 
cell mass (measured using 51Cr-labelled red cells) is 
increased by over 25%. An increase in the white cell 
count occurs in many patients and about 50% of pa-
tients have an elevated platelet count.
Most patients with polycythaemia vera will remain 
well in the so-called plethoric phase, provided that 
the haematocrit is controlled to <45% by venesec-
tion. Furthermore, many patients can expect to have 
a normal life expectancy. Eventually the marrow may 
become increasingly fi brotic (myelofi brosis), leading 
to a fall in the haematocrit, increasing splenomegaly 
and often a requirement for blood transfusion in the 
later stages.
Th ere are various cytogenetic abnormalities in the 
bone marrow cells of some cases, but no consistent 
abnormality has been detected.

Neoplastic disorders of myeloid cells 101
Differential diagnosis
Secondary polycythaemia is the main diff erential 
diagnosis for polycythaemia vera. Longstanding hy-
poxia caused by cardiopulmonary disease or living at 
high altitudes will lead to an increased red cell mass 
and therefore a high haemoglobin and haematocrit 
(see Chapter 2). However, the elevated haematocrit 
and haemoglobin are usually the only haematologi-
cal abnormality; where leucocytosis, thrombocyto-
sis and splenomegaly are also found, polycythaemia 
vera is more likely. Some patients may have a high 
haematocrit as a result of a reduction in the plasma 
volume (e.g. due to diuretics). So-called apparent 
polycythaemia can be diff erentiated from polycythae-
mia vera and secondary polycythaemia by measure-
ment of the red cell mass and the plasma volume. Th e 
JAK2 mutation, which characterizes nearly all cases 
of polycythaemia vera, is not present in secondary or 
apparent polycythaemia.
Treatment
Th e mainstay of treatment is venesection, aiming 
to lower the haematocrit below 0.50, and preferably 
below 0.45, thus preventing thrombotic episodes. 
In the early stages this may have to be performed at 
least twice weekly. Low-dose aspirin is also frequent-
ly used to minimize the risk of stroke. Patients with 
signifi cant leucocytosis or thrombocytosis can be 
treated with cytoreductive therapy using oral chemo-
therapy agents such as hydroxycarbamide or busul-
phan. A single injection of radioactive phosphorus 
(32P) can be very eff ective in controlling the red cell 
counts, but the signifi cant risk of inducing secondary 
leukaemia has made this agent unpopular.
Primary myelofi brosis
Th is is a clonal disorder of the haematopoietic stem 
cell, which typically occurs after the age of 50 years. 
It is characterized by splenomegaly (which may be 
massive), immature circulating cells in the blood 
(nucleated red cells and myelocytes) and distorted 
red cells (so-called teardrop cells). Th ese fi ndings 
are due to the defi ning feature of myelofi brosis, bone 
marrow fi brosis. Th e marrow fi brosis is reactive and 
non-clonal and is thought to be secondary to the 
abnormal haemopoiesis, particularly of the meg-
akaryocytic lineage. At the molecular level, approxi-
mately 50% of patients with primary myelofi brosis 
harbor the JAK2 mutation that has been identifi ed 
in patients with primary polycythaemia. In other 
patients, mutations aff ecting the thrombopoietin 
receptor have been described. Many patients with 
an identical phenotype and with clonal haemat-
opoiesis do not have either of these mutations and it 
is therefore impossible to know the full relevance of 
these fi ndings to date.
Th e disorder may transform to acute leukaemia. 
Although the principal site of extramedullary haemo-
poiesis is the spleen or liver, other sites such as the 
lymph nodes, adrenal or dura may be involved.
Clinical features
Th is disorder usually presents in patients over the age 
of 50 years, but can occasionally occur in children. 
Patients may present with constitutional symptoms 
such as weight loss, night sweats or fever. Other pre-
senting symptoms include splenic pain or symptoms 
due to anaemia such as fatigue, shortness of breath 
and palpitations. Occasional patients may present 
with gout as a consequence of hyperuricaemia result-
ing from the high cell turnover. Presenting signs in-
clude hepatomegaly, splenomegaly (nearly all cases) 
and pallor.
Laboratory fi ndings
Normochromic normocytic anaemia is found in most 
patients with myelofi brosis. Leucocytosis and throm-
bocytosis are common fi ndings, although the total 
white cell count is not usually as high as that found 
in CML and is rarely over 40 × 109/L. Inspection of the 
blood fi lm is often diagnostic. Th e blood fi lm typically 
shows the presence of normoblasts and myelocytes 
(i.e. a leucoerythroblastic picture, with the presence 
of teardrop poikilocytes; Figure 11.7). Bone mar-
row aspiration is often unsuccessful because of the 
Figure 11.7 Blood fi lm of a patient with idiopathic 
myelofi brosis showing several teardrop-shaped 
poikilocytes and an abnormally large platelet (MGG 
stain).

102 
Neoplastic disorders of myeloid cells
fi brosis, resulting in a dry tap. Th e bone marrow bi-
opsy shows myeloproliferation with granulocytic and 
megakaryocytic hyperplasia together with fi brosis, 
which may be dense (Figure 11.8).
Treatment
Many patients need no specifi c treatment, but pa-
tients with a more proliferative marrow may require 
cytoreductive treatment with a gentle chemo-
therapy drug such as oral daily hydroxycarbamide. 
Monitoring of the patient’s blood count is necessary 
in all cases. Most patients will become transfusion 
dependent and, as in the case of any patient requir-
ing regular transfusion, iron loading of tissues may 
occur. Massive splenic enlargement can give rise to 
pain, which may necessitate splenectomy. Removal 
of the spleen may reduce transfusion requirements. 
Th e median survival of patients with myelofi brosis is 
in the order of fi ve years from the time of diagnosis, 
but some patients may survive for many years. Th e 
only curative therapy for primary myelofi brosis is 
allogeneic stem-cell transplantation. A number of 
series have demonstrated the feasibility of reduced 
intensity conditioned allografting in high-risk pa-
tients. Clearly, many patients with this disorder will 
either be too old for stem-cell transplant or will have 
low-risk indolent disease. Causes of death in pa-
tients with primary myelofi brosis include infection, 
haemorrhage or transformation to acute leukaemia. 
More recently, JAK2 inhibitors such as ruxolitinib 
have been developed, which are eff ective at reduc-
ing the spleen size and improving constitutional 
symptoms in patients with myelofi brosis. While 
these molecularly targeted agents are eff ective at 
improving symptoms, similarly to imatinib in CML 
they are not curative.
Essential thrombocythaemia
Th is is a clonal myeloproliferative disorder that 
chiefl y involves the megakaryocyte cell line. Th e dis-
order is classically associated with a marked rise in 
the platelet count, the haemoglobin concentration 
and the white cell count usually being unaff ected. 
Many patients are diagnosed by the incidental fi nd-
ing of thrombocytosis during the course of a routine 
blood count. Th e diffi  culty arises in diff erentiating 
this condition from reactive causes of thrombocytosis 
(Table 11.3), as there is no specifi c diagnostic test for 
essential thrombocythaemia (Table 11.4). Approxi-
mately 50% of patients with ET have the common 
JAK2 mutation that has been identifi ed in patients 
with primary polycythaemia and primary myelofi -
brosis. It is not yet clear how this single mutation can 
give rise to these three distinct disease entities.
(a)
(b)
Figure 11.8 (a) Trephine biopsy of the bone marrow of a patient with idiopathic myelofi brosis showing fi broblasts and 
collagen fi brosis (haematoxylin and eosin). (b) Section of the same trephine biopsy showing increased reticulin fi bres 
(silver impregnation of reticulin).
Table 11.3 Causes of thrombocytosis.
Reactive
•  Haemorrhage, haemolysis, trauma, surgery, 
postpartum, recovery from thrombocytopenia
• Acute and chronic infections
•  Chronic infl ammatory disease (e.g. ulcerative colitis, 
rheumatoid arthritis)
•  Malignant disease (e.g. carcinoma, Hodgkin 
lymphoma, MDS)
• Splenectomy and splenic atrophy
• Iron-defi ciency anaemia
Chronic myeloproliferative disorders
•  Essential thrombocythaemia, polycythaemia vera, 
chronic myeloid leukaemia, idiopathic myelofi brosis

Neoplastic disorders of myeloid cells 103
Clinical features
Th is is a disorder that aff ects older patients, usually 
presenting with thrombotic or bleeding complica-
tions. Many patients are asymptomatic at presen-
tation. Older patients seem to be at greater risk of 
thrombosis, particularly arterial. Th e main thrombot-
ic complications are:
• Erythromelalgia and digital ischaemia. Eryth-
romelalgia is characterized by intense burning and 
pain in the extremities. Th e pain is increased by ex-
ercise, warmth or dependency. Th e extremities are 
warm with mottled erythema. Digital ischaemia 
mainly aff ects the toes. Such vascular insuffi  ciency 
sometimes leads to gangrene and loss of function.
• Stroke.
• Recurrent abortions and fetal growth retardation.
• Hepatic and portal vein thrombosis. Th e myelopro-
liferative disorders are the most common causes of 
hepatic vein thrombosis (Budd–Chiari syndrome).
In addition to thrombotic complications, paradoxi-
cally patients with ET, particularly those with a dra-
matically raised platelet count (over 1500 × 109/L), are 
at considerably increased risk of bleeding.
Laboratory fi ndings
A raised platelet count, often over 1000 × 109/L, is 
characteristic of the disorder. Th e bone marrow 
shows increased cellularity and plentiful megakaryo-
cytes, but the changes are not specifi c to the disor-
der and may occur in reactive states. Th e diagnosis 
remains one of exclusion. Certain criteria must be 
satisfi ed before the diagnosis can be entertained and 
these are listed in Table 11.4.
Treatment
Treatment of essential thrombocythaemia is ill de-
fi ned. Th ere may not be any necessity to treat a young 
asymptomatic patient and most authorities suggest a 
risk-based approach. Patients over the age of 60 years, 
with a platelet count greater than 1500 × 109/L or with 
a history of thrombosis should be considered for ac-
tive treatment. Th e following agents have been used:
• Simple oral chemotherapy with hydroxycar-
bamide or busulphan for elderly patients.
• α-interferon, which reduces platelet counts but 
may cause unacceptable side eff ects such as fa-
tigue, fever, pyrexia and depression. It is the treat-
ment of choice in women of childbearing age due 
its relative safety in pregnancy.
• Anagrelide, an agent that inhibits megakaryo-
cyte maturation and does not aff ect the white cell 
count. It is the preferred treatment in some cen-
tres, but can cause vasodilatation, cardiac dys-
rhythmias and fl uid retention.
Antiplatelet drugs such as aspirin can be highly eff ec-
tive in patients at risk of thrombotic episodes. Th ey 
may be associated with haemorrhage and should not 
be used in patients with a bleeding tendency.
Th e survival of patients with essential throm-
bocythaemia is similar to that of an age-matched 
population.
Table 11.4 Diagnostic criteria for essential 
thrombocythaemia.
• Platelet count over 500 × 109/L (sustained)
•  ET bone marrow changes – proliferation of 
megakaryocytes
•  Does not meet criteria for diagnosis of 
polycythaemia vera, myelofi brosis, CML or MDS
•  Presence of JAK2 mutation or other clonal marker
•  In the absence of a clonal marker, no known cause 
for reactive thrombocytosis

Haematology Lecture Notes, Ninth edition. C.S.R. Hatton, N.C. Hughes-Jones, D. Hay and D. Keeling. © 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
‘graft-versus-leukaemia’ (GVL) eff ect, whereby T cells 
infused as part of the BMT exert a direct antitumour 
eff ect. Where there is no immunological diff erence 
of donor and recipient, as in identical twin-sibling 
transplants, there is a higher relapse rate than when 
a non-twin-sibling matched donor is used; this 
highlights the importance of the GVL eff ect in the 
success of allogeneic transplantation. Indeed, there 
is increasing reliance on the GVL eff ect in allogeneic 
Th e idea of rescuing patients by infusing bone mar-
row after myeloablative chemotherapy or radiothera-
py is not a new concept. Animal experiments carried 
out in the 1950s demonstrated that intravenous infu-
sion of marrow cells could protect against lethal ir-
radiation. Subsequently, successful engraftment was 
demonstrated in humans.
Bone marrow transplantation may be autologous 
or allogeneic. In autologous transplantation, the pa-
tient’s own stem cells are collected following stand-
ard chemotherapy treatment. Doses of cytotoxic 
treatment that ablate the bone marrow are then ad-
ministered, followed by reinfusion of the collected 
stem cells. Th ese stem cells repopulate the bone mar-
row and allow recovery from otherwise supra-lethal 
doses of chemotherapy or radiotherapy (Table 12.1).
Th e understanding of the human leucocyte anti-
gen system (HLA) meant that tissue matching be-
tween donor and patient was possible and success-
ful bone marrow transplants (BMTs) using matched 
donors (allogeneic BMT) followed in increasing 
numbers (Figure 12.1). Allogeneic transplantation 
was initially assumed to be benefi cial, because it al-
lowed the administration of doses of cytotoxic treat-
ments that would otherwise have been lethal, totally 
ablating the native bone marrow, as in autologous 
transplantation. However, it has since emerged that 
a critical component of the eff ectiveness of allogeneic 
transplantation is the immunologically mediated 
Bone marrow 
transplantation
Learning objectives
✓ To understand the use of stem cell infusion following high-dose or 
myeloablative chemotherapy
✓ To understand the concept of the graft versus leukaemia/lymphoma 
eff ect
✓ To understand the nature of graft versus host disease
12
Table 12.1 Diseases for which allogeneic and 
autologous BMT may be considered.
Indications for BMT
Allogeneic 
BMT
Autologous 
BMT
Malignant
Acute leukaemia
+
(+)
Chronic myeloid leukaemia
+
−
Lymphoma (relapsed)
+
+
Myeloma
−
+
Non-malignant
Aplastic anaemia
+
−
Thalassaemia
+
−
Sickle cell anaemia
+
−

Bone marrow transplantation 105
transplantation as reduced-intensity conditioning 
(RIC) regimens become more widely used, with lower 
doses of cytotoxic treatment.
Allogeneic bone marrow 
transplantation
Th e necessary elements for a successful allogeneic 
BMT include:
• A source of HLA-matched stem cells. Stem cells 
can be collected from an HLA-matched sibling, 
a matched unrelated donor or in some cases 
matched umbilical cord blood. Th e chance of 
any sibling being a match is one in four, whereas 
the chance of a volunteer being a match is closer 
to one in 100 000. Most developed countries have 
registers of donors against which a patient’s HLA 
type can be matched (Figure 12.2).
• Immunosuppression (chemotherapy and radiother-
apy) prior to marrow infusion to allow engraftment.
• Continuing immunosuppression after infusion to 
prevent graft-versus-host disease (GVHD).
Th e process of allogeneic bone marrow transplanta-
tion involves:
• High-dose chemotherapy either with or without to-
tal body radiotherapy: Th is is used to eradicate the 
neoplastic cells and to allow engraftment of the do-
nor marrow.
• Infusion of bone marrow or peripheral blood stem 
cells: Th ese are collected directly from the bone 
marrow of the donor, or by leucopheresis of a 
donor who has been primed by growth factors such 
as granulocyte or granulocyte macrophage colony-
stimulating factor (G-CSF, GM-CSF).
• Supportive care: Following high-dose therapy there 
is inevitably a period of profound marrow suppres-
sion, which typically lasts two to three weeks un-
til the newly infused marrow engrafts. Red cells, 
platelets and antibiotics are essential to supportive 
care. Severe mucositis and gastroenteritis often 
develop and, consequently, many patients require 
parenteral nutrition during this time.
• Prevention of GVHD: A number of immunosup-
pressive drugs are used to control the immune 
component (mainly T cells) of the donor-derived 
engrafted marrow. Ciclosporin is the mainstay of 
this treatment, but other drugs such as methotrex-
ate and prednisolone are frequently used.
Complications of allogeneic BMT
Th e principal complication of allogeneic BMT is in-
fection. Th e severe neutropenia that follows high-
dose chemotherapy is frequently complicated by 
Gram-negative infection. Fungal (Aspergillus and 
Candida species) and viral (herpes viruses) infec-
tions are also found after allogeneic BMT. Th e use of 
steroids to control GVHD further increases the risk of 
fungal infection.
Cytomegalovirus
Cytomegalovirus (CMV) is a cause of morbidity and 
mortality in BMT patients. Patients may acquire ac-
tive CMV infection due to the use of seropositive 
Figure 12.1 The graph shows the 
number and percentage of allogeneic 
and autologous stem cell transplants 
reported in Europe in 2006. The 
majority of allogeneic stem cell 
transplants are performed for AML, 
while the majority of autologous 
transplants are performed for 
lymphoma.
7963
Leukaemia
Allo
Auto
14,169
Lymphoma
1564
Solid
tumours
1242
Non-
malignant
Percent
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

106 
Bone marrow transplantation
marrow donors, seropositive blood products or the 
reactivation of latent CMV infection in seropositive 
patients.
Infection and organ damage are related to vi-
ral load, which can be detected in the blood by the 
polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Interstitial pneu-
monitis is a serious complication of CMV infection, 
but other organs may be aff ected, notably the gas-
trointestinal tract. Th e use of CMV seronegative blood 
products in patients who are not already infected 
helps to reduce the chance of infection. Prophylactic 
aciclovir and the use of ganciclovir for treatment have 
reduced the morbidity and mortality from CMV.
Graft-versus-host disease
GVHD results from the reaction of donor T cells 
against the recipient’s tissues; the disorder may be 
acute or chronic. Prophylactic ciclosporin, a T-cell 
inhibitor, considerably reduces the incidence and se-
verity of GVHD and is given continuously throughout 
the immediate post-transplant period. Other drugs 
such as methotrexate and mycophenolate may be 
used as alternatives, or in addition to ciclosporin, to 
prevent GVHD.
Acute GVHD
Th is may occur during the fi rst 100 days after BMT 
and chiefl y aff ects the skin, gastrointestinal tract and 
liver. Skin involvement varies from a mild maculopa-
pular rash to severe desquamation. Gastrointestinal 
involvement may involve the upper or lower tract. 
Symptoms include nausea, vomiting or severe watery 
diarrhoea. Biopsy is usually required to confi rm the 
diagnosis.
T-cell depletion of the donor marrow reduces the 
risk of GVHD, and some centres routinely deplete 
donor marrow this way. T-cell depletion is, how-
ever, associated with a higher risk of relapse due to a 
reduction in the graft-versus-leukaemia eff ect (GVL; 
see below). Once established, acute GVHD is a seri-
ous disorder with a high mortality. Treatment with 
high-dose steroids can help, but many patients with 
severe GVHD die of infection.
Chronic GVHD
Chronic GVHD is a serious complication of BMT oc-
curring after 100 days in approximately 30–40% of 
patients. Th e main manifestations are dry eyes, skin 
changes, chronic liver disease, weight loss and in-
creased risk of infection. Th e prognosis is poor.
Graft-versus-leukaemia/
lymphoma effect
In addition to producing GVHD, the lymphocytes 
from the graft are also thought to exert an immune 
eff ect against the recipient’s tumour cells. Th is is 
the graft-versus-leukaemia/lymphoma eff ect (GVL). 
Patients receiving a BMT for chronic myeloid leu-
kaemia (CML) often have molecular evidence of per-
sistent leukaemia (the presence of the Philadelphia 
Infection
(5%)
Infection
(19%)
GVHD
(15%)
Organ toxicity
(7%)
Organ toxicity
(7%)
(a)
(b)
Other
(7%)
Other
(7%)
IPn
(3%)
IPn
(3%)
Auto
Allo
Relapse
(78%)
Relapse
(30%)
Figure 12.2 Causes of death after transplants done in 1996–2000. Notes: GVHD – graft versus host disease; Ipn – 
interstitial pneumonitis.

Bone marrow transplantation 107
chromosome) in the immediate post-transplant pe-
riod, although this disappears later, but T-cell deple-
tion of the donor marrow is associated with a higher 
risk of relapse. Th is implies that the T cells infused 
with the donor stem cells are active in eradicating the 
underlying disease over a period of time. In the event 
of relapse, the infusion of lymphocytes from the origi-
nal graft donor (donor lymphocyte infusion, or DLI) 
has been shown to have a powerful antitumour eff ect 
and may induce a further remission, at the cost of in-
creased GVHD.
While the phenomena of GVHD and GVL appear to 
be intimately related, the exact nature of the underly-
ing molecular targets remains unknown. It may be that 
minor histocompatibility antigens are important, but 
evidence suggests that the explanation is more complex 
than this. GVHD and GVL are not necessarily produced 
by the same mechanisms: it is one of the key aims of re-
search in this fi eld to try to separate them, to harness the 
benefi ts of GVL, while avoiding the severe morbidity of 
GVHD. Th e understanding of the process of GVL should 
provide a powerful tool to eradicate malignant disease.
PBSC collected in bags
Collection
Return
MNCs
out
RBC
plasma
out
Whole
blood
in
Centrifugal
separation
(a)
Whole blood into machine
RBC plasma returns to patient
(b)
Figure 12.3 Diagram showing the collection of peripheral blood stem cells using a COBE spectra apheresis machine. 
Notes: MNC – mononuclear cell; PBSC – peripheral blood stem cell; RBC – red blood cell.

108 
Bone marrow transplantation
Figure 12.4  The probability of 
survival after autotransplants for 
Hodgkin lymphoma. 
Note: CR – complete remission.
Years
100
80
60
40
20
0
2
1
3
4
5
6
Probability (%)
CR1 (n  184)
CR2 (n  734)
Relapse (n   1806)
Never in remission (n  632)
p  0.0001
Mini-allograft or RIC 
transplant
Reduced intensity conditioning (RIC) allogeneic 
transplant relies almost entirely on engrafted donor 
immune cells to eradicate disease – graft-versus-
leukaemia/lymphoma eff ect (GVL; see above). Th e 
technique is not dependent on high-dose chemo-
therapy or total body irradiation to ablate malignant 
cells, but, rather, uses lower doses of ‘conditioning’ 
therapy suffi  cient to allow the tissue-compatible do-
nor stem cells to engraft. Th e patient is then given 
ciclosporin or an equivalent T-cell suppressant drug to 
limit the development of GVHD following donor cell 
engraftment. Th ere is a balance to be struck between 
the benefi ts of GVL and the harmful eff ects of GVHD.
Th e lower dose of chemotherapy or radiotherapy 
reduces the toxicity and therefore the mortality of 
the procedure. Th e mini-allogeneic transplant or RIC 
transplant has particular relevance to an older age 
group, since full allogeneic transplantation is limited 
to patients under 45–50 years of age, whereas the RIC 
transplant may be tolerated by patients up to the age 
of 65 years of age.
Extremely encouraging results for RIC allografting 
are emerging for low-grade lymphoproliferative and 
myeloproliferative disorders, and there is evidence 
to suggest that the immune response is capable of 
controlling and destroying more aggressive disorders 
such as acute leukaemia.
Although more readily tolerated than full allograft-
ing, the mortality of this procedure is still in the order 
of between 10% and 20% in most of the reported se-
ries; the morbidity and mortality of GVHD remain a 
signifi cant problem.
Autologous bone marrow 
transplantation (high-
dose therapy)
In autologous BMT, the patient’s own marrow stem 
cells are used to reconstitute the bone marrow af-
ter intensive chemotherapy with or without radio-
therapy. Th ere is therefore no requirement for tissue 
matching and the risk of GVHD is eliminated.
Chemotherapy or radiotherapy acts by killing a 
fraction of the tumour. Dose is, however, limited by 
the myeloablative eff ects of very high-dose treatment. 
Th is can be overcome by collecting stem cells before 
high-dose therapy and infusing them into the patient 
after intensive conditioning therapy.
Th ere are four phases of high-dose therapy:
1 Marrow harvest/peripheral blood stem cell har-
vest (Figure 12.3).
2 Conditioning therapy.
3 Reinfusion of the stem cells.
4 Supportive therapy.
Stem cells can be collected either directly by marrow 
puncture under general anaesthesia or by apher-
esis. In both cases patients need to be primed with 
chemotherapy and granulocyte-stimulating factor 
(G-CSF).

Bone marrow transplantation 109
A serious disadvantage of autologous BMT is the 
potential for reinfusing malignant cells. Various purg-
ing strategies have been tried in an eff ort to reduce 
this risk, but none has so far been shown to aff ect out-
come positively.
Supportive therapy is very similar to the care 
given after any intensive chemotherapy. Blood 
products – red cells and platelet concentrates – together 
with antibiotics and nutritional support are the funda-
mentals of therapy at this stage. Most patients will en-
graft after two to three weeks, and some centres use 
G-CSF or GM-CSF to limit the duration of neutropenia.
Th e principal indications for this type of proce-
dure include relapsed Hodgkin lymphoma (Fig-
ure 12.4) and non-Hodgkin lymphoma and myeloma 
in younger patients.

Haematology Lecture Notes, Ninth edition. C.S.R. Hatton, N.C. Hughes-Jones, D. Hay and D. Keeling. © 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
matic drugs (e.g. phenylbutazone, indomethacin, ibu-
profen or sodium aurothiomalate), chloramphenicol, 
trimethoprim-sulphamethoxazole 
(cotrimoxazole) 
or organic arsenicals. Many other drugs have been 
less commonly implicated and these include anti-
convulsants (phenytoin, carbamazepine), antithyroid 
drugs (carbimazole, propylthiouracil), mepacrine and 
chlorpromazine. Some drugs regularly cause aplastic 
anaemia if given in suffi  ciently large doses: these in-
clude alkylating agents (e.g. busulphan, melphalan 
Aplastic anaemia
Aplastic anaemia is a disorder characterized by pan-
cytopenia (i.e. a reduction in the number of red cells, 
neutrophils and platelets in the peripheral blood), a 
marked decrease in the amount of haemopoietic tis-
sue in the bone marrow (i.e. marrow aplasia or hypo-
plasia) and the absence of evidence of involvement of 
the marrow by diseases such as leukaemia, myeloma 
or carcinoma. Th e causes of aplastic anaemia are 
summarized in Table 13.1.
Acquired aplastic anaemia
Th is is an uncommon disease, the prevalence in Europe 
being between 1 and 3 per 100 000 people. It aff ects all 
ages with two peaks, one in adolescents and young 
adults and the other in people over the age of 60 years.
Aetiology
In about half of cases no aetiological factors can be 
identifi ed; such patients are described as having idi-
opathic acquired aplastic anaemia. In the others, the 
aplasia is associated with exposure to certain drugs or 
chemicals, ionizing radiation or certain viruses.
Most cases of secondary aplastic anaemia result 
from an idiosyncratic reaction to the use of antirheu-
Aplastic anaemia and 
pure red cell aplasia
Learning objectives
✓ To know the aetiology of acquired aplastic anaemia, including the 
drugs that have been most commonly reported to cause this syndrome
✓ To know the clinical and laboratory features, the natural history and 
the principles of treatment of acquired aplastic anaemia
✓ To understand the diff erence between aplastic anaemia and pure red 
cell aplasia
13
Table 13.1 Causes of aplastic anaemia.
Congenital
Fanconi anaemia
Acquired
Idiopathic
Drugs and chemicals
 Dose-dependent: Cytotoxic drugs, benzene
  Idiosyncratic: Chloramphenicol, non-steroidal anti-
infl ammatory drugs
Radiation
Viruses: Hepatitis non-A, non-B, non-C, Epstein–Barr 
virus
Paroxysmal nocturnal haemoglobinuria

Aplastic anaemia and pure red cell aplasia 111
Box 13.1 Fanconi anaemia
The features of this rare disorder are:
•  Inheritance as an autosomal recessive character. 
At least 13 different disease genes identifi ed.
•  Onset of pancytopenia between the ages of 5 and 
10 years.
•  Frequent association with other congenital 
abnormalities (e.g. skin pigmentation, short stature, 
microcephaly, skeletal defects, genital hypoplasia 
and renal abnormalities).
•  Various chromosomal abnormalities 
(breaks, rearrangements, exchanges and 
endoreduplications) in cultured lymphocytes 
exposed to diepoxybutane (DEB). This is used as a 
diagnostic test.
•  Increased number of chromosome breaks per cell 
after culture with alkylating agents.
•  Increased incidence of acute leukaemia and solid 
tumours.
There is usually some response to treatment with 
androgens and corticosteroids. Allogeneic bone 
marrow transplantation may cure the aplastic 
anaemia, but does not prevent the appearance of 
solid tumours.
and cyclophosphamide), antipurines, antipyrimi-
dines and antifolates. Benzene is an example of an 
industrial chemical that often produces aplastic anae-
mia if inhaled in a suffi  cient dose; kerosene, carbon 
tetrachloride and certain insecticides, such as DDT 
and chlordane, can also cause aplasia of the marrow.
Aplastic anaemia may develop after a single large 
dose of whole-body irradiation (e.g. during atomic 
bomb explosions or radiation accidents). It was also 
seen in the past following repeated radiotherapy to 
the spine in patients with ankylosing spondylitis.
Severe aplastic anaemia, usually with a poor prog-
nosis, may rarely develop in children and young 
adults about 10 weeks after an episode of acute non-
A, non-B and non-C hepatitis. Marrow aplasia is also 
a rare complication of Epstein–Barr virus infection.
Th e T-lymphocytes of some patients with ac-
quired aplastic anaemia inhibit the in vitro growth 
of haemopoietic colonies from autologous and allo-
geneic bone marrow. Th is fi nding, together with the 
response of about 50% of patients to antilymphocyte 
globulin, indicates that autoimmune mechanisms 
are involved in at least the persistence of the aplasia, 
if not its initiation, in a number of cases.
Pathophysiology
Th e pancytopenia and marrow aplasia appear to 
be the consequence of damage to the multipotent 
haemopoietic stem cells, which impairs their self-
renewal (pp. 1–2) and causes stem cell depletion. Th is 
damage may be caused by some drugs or viruses or 
by cell-mediated immunological mechanisms. Th e 
possibility that stromal (microenvironmental) cell 
damage may be the primary defect has also been con-
sidered, but this is unlikely to be true in most cases 
because of the success of stem cell transplantation.
Clinical features
Both idiopathic and secondary aplastic anaemia oc-
cur at all ages. Th e onset is often insidious but may be 
acute. Symptoms include:
• lassitude, weakness and shortness of breath due to 
anaemia
• haemorrhagic manifestations resulting from the 
thrombocytopenia
• fever and recurrent infections as a consequence of 
neutropenia.
Haemorrhagic manifestations include epistaxis, 
bleeding from the gums, menorrhagia, bleeding 
into the gastrointestinal and urinary tracts, and ec-
chymoses and petechiae. Th e severity of the symp-
toms is variable and depends on the severity of the 
cytopenias. In patients with severe neutropenia and 
thrombocytopenia, fulminating infections (e.g. pneu-
monia) and cerebral haemorrhage are common caus-
es of death. In secondary aplastic anaemia, symptoms 
may appear several weeks or months, or occasionally 
one or more years, after discontinuation of exposure 
to the causative drug or chemical. Splenomegaly is 
rare in aplastic anaemia, and if the spleen is palpable 
alternative diagnoses should be explored.
Haematological fi ndings
Th ere is a normochromic or macrocytic anaemia as-
sociated with a low absolute reticulocyte count. Th e 
platelet count is often below 100 × 109/L, and may be 
very low. Neutropenia and monocytopenia are usu-
ally found at some stage of the disease. Some patients 
also have a reduced absolute lymphocyte count. 
Th ere is a marked increase in serum and urinary 
erythropoietin levels.
Markedly hypocellular marrow fragments are 
usually found in marrow smears, most of the volume 
of the marrow fragments being made up of fat cells 
(Figure 13.1). Haemopoietic cells of all types, includ-
ing megakaryocytes, are decreased or absent, and in 

112 
Aplastic anaemia and pure red cell aplasia
severe aplastic anaemia the majority of the cells seen 
are plasma cells, lymphocytes and macrophages. 
Residual erythropoietic cells are morphologically 
abnormal. Although the marrow is generally hypocel-
lular, it contains some foci of normal or even in-
creased cellularity. Th us, even in patients with severe 
aplastic anaemia, marrow aspiration may occasion-
ally yield normocellular or hypercellular fragments. 
In order to obtain a reliable estimate of marrow cel-
lularity, it is essential to examine histological sections 
of a trephine biopsy of the iliac crest (Figure 13.2). 
Th is not only provides a larger volume of marrow for 
study than a single marrow aspirate, but also permits 
the detection of foci of leukaemia cells, myeloma cells 
or carcinoma cells, if present.
Some patients with acquired aplastic anaemia de-
velop the red cell defect seen in paroxysmal nocturnal 
haemoglobinuria (p. 34), without or with haemo-
globinuria. Occasionally patients develop a terminal 
acute leukaemia.
Diagnosis
Other causes of pancytopenia (particularly leukae-
mia) should be considered and excluded before a 
diagnosis of aplastic anaemia is made. Th e causes of 
pancytopenia are summarized in Table 13.2.
Prognosis
Patients with both idiopathic and secondary ac-
quired aplastic anaemia show a highly variable clini-
cal course. About 15% of patients have a severe illness 
from the outset and die within 3 months of diagnosis. 
Overall, as many as 50% of cases die within 15 months 
of diagnosis and 70% within 5 years. Only about 10% 
make a complete haematological recovery. If a patient 
survives for longer than 18 months, there is a reason-
able chance of prolonged survival and complete re-
covery. Poor prognostic features include a platelet 
count less than 20 × 109/L, a neutrophil count below 
0.2 × 109/L, a reticulocyte count under 10 × 109/L and 
marked hypocellularity of the marrow.
Treatment
If a causative drug or chemical is identifi ed, exposure 
to this agent should be immediately stopped. Sup-
portive therapy including red cell transfusions and 
Table 13.2 Causes of pancytopenia.
Mainly due to a failure of production of cells
Bone marrow infi ltration: leukaemia, myeloma, 
carcinoma, myelofi brosis, lipid storage disorders, 
marble bone disease
Severe vitamin B12 or folate defi ciency
Myelodysplastic syndromes
HIV infection
Aplastic or hypoplastic anaemia
Mainly due to an increased peripheral destruction of 
cells
Splenomegaly
Overwhelming infection
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)
Paroxysmal nocturnal haemoglobinuria*
Note: * In some cases, there is also impaired production of 
cells due to hypoplasia of the marrow.
Figure 13.1 Markedly hypocellular marrow fragment 
from a case of aplastic anaemia. There are only a few 
residual haemopoietic cells, most of the fragments 
consisting of fat cells.
Figure 13.2 Section of a trephine biopsy of the bone 
marrow from a patient with aplastic anaemia showing 
marked hypocellularity (haemotoxylin and eosin).

Aplastic anaemia and pure red cell aplasia 113
antibiotics should be administered when necessary; 
the extent of supportive therapy required depends 
on the degree of cytopenia. Platelet transfusions are 
only indicated if haemorrhage becomes a serious 
problem, as repeated platelet transfusions lead to 
alloimmunization and a reduction of the effi  cacy of 
subsequent platelet transfusions.
Bone marrow transplantation is indicated at diag-
nosis for patients under 40 years with severe aplastic 
anaemia (i.e. showing the poor prognostic features 
mentioned above), particularly if an HLA-compatible 
sibling donor is available. Long-term survival is seen 
in 60–80% of cases; graft rejection is more of a prob-
lem in aplastic anaemia than in other conditions. 
Patients who are not transplanted may benefi t from 
treatment with antithymocyte globulin (ATG), cy-
closporin A, methylprednisolone, androgens or the 
anabolic steroid oxymetholone (which causes less vi-
rilization of females than androgens). Combined im-
munosuppressive regimens have been shown to be 
more eff ective than single-agent therapy. Th e addi-
tion of granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) 
has also produced encouraging results. Th e overall 
survival for patients with severe aplastic anaemia has 
improved considerably and is now greater than 70% 
at fi ve years.
Pure red cell aplasia
Rarely, aplasia or severe hypoplasia aff ects only the 
erythropoietic cells. Patients with this abnormality 
have anaemia and reticulocytopenia together with 
normal white cell and platelet counts.
Th e causes of pure red cell aplasia are listed in 
Table 13.3. In the rare congenital form – Diamond 
Blackfan anaemia – anaemia usually develops in infan-
cy and is associated with various congenital malforma-
tions, including craniofacial abnormalities and those of 
the thumb and upper limbs. About a quarter of cases 
have a mutation in the ribosome protein S19 gene.
Acquired pure red cell aplasia may present as an 
acute self-limiting condition (e.g. when it follows a 
parvovirus B19 infection) or as a chronic disorder. 
Th e reticulocytopenia that follows parvovirus B19 
infection in normal individuals does not signifi cantly 
lower the haemoglobin level because red cells sur-
vive for such a long time. In patients with haemolytic 
anaemia when red cell survival is reduced (e.g. sickle 
cell anaemia), parvovirus infection leads to severe 
anaemia, which may be life threatening. Patients with 
this complication present with severe pallor, white 
sclera (normally yellow in chronic haemolysis) and 
other symptoms of severe anaemia.
Immunological mechanisms, both cellular and hu-
moral, may underlie the aplasia in some patients with 
chronic pure red cell aplasia (e.g. those with thymo-
ma, chronic lymphocytic leukaemia or autoimmune 
disorders). A small number of patients with renal fail-
ure who have been given subcutaneous recombinant 
human erythropoietin have developed red cell apla-
sia. Th e mechanism is thought to refl ect the develop-
ment of neutralizing anti-erythropoietin antibodies.
Some patients with chronic pure red cell aplasia 
respond to immunosuppressive drugs such as cor-
ticosteroids, azathioprine, cyclophosphamide, cy-
closporin A or antithymocyte globulin. Patients with 
persistent parvovirus infection respond to intrave-
nous injections of immunoglobulin.
Table 13.3 Causes of pure red cell aplasia.
Congenital
Diamond–Blackfan syndrome (congenital 
erythroblastopenia or erythrogenesis imperfecta)
Acquired
Idiopathic
Viral infections: Parvovirus B19 (p. 28), Epstein–Barr 
virus, hepatitis
Drugs and chemicals: Phenytoin sodium, azathioprine, 
erythropoietin, benzene
Thymic tumours
Lymphoid malignancies: Chronic lymphocytic 
leukaemia, lymphoma
Other malignant diseases: Carcinoma of the bronchus, 
breast, stomach and thyroid
Autoimmune disorders: SLE, rheumatoid arthritis
Box 13.2 Parvovirus B19
The parvovirus B19 enters erythroid progenitor 
cells (by binding to the P blood group antigen), 
replicates within these cells and damages them. In 
most patients the infection and erythroblastopenia 
are transient, but in patients with certain congenital 
or acquired immunological disorders, there is 
persistence of the infection and of the red cell 
aplasia.

Haematology Lecture Notes, Ninth edition. C.S.R. Hatton, N.C. Hughes-Jones, D. Hay and D. Keeling. © 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Haemostasis, 
abnormal bleeding and 
anticoagulant therapy
Learning objectives
✓ To know the function of platelets and the relationship between the 
platelet count in peripheral blood and the extent of abnormal bleeding
✓ To know about the diseases associated with (i) a failure of platelet 
production and (ii) a shortened platelet lifespan, especially immune 
thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP)
✓ To know the main sequence of events in the coagulation pathways
✓ To understand normal fi brinolysis and the principles of fi brinolytic 
therapy
✓ To know the principles underlying the prothrombin time (PT), 
activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) and thrombin time (TT)
✓ To know the principles of investigation of a patient suspected of having 
a haemostatic defect
✓ To know the mode of inheritance, clinical presentation, method of 
diagnosis and principles of treatment of haemophilia A (factor FVIII 
defi ciency), haemophilia B (factor IX defi ciency) and von Willebrand 
disease (VWD)
✓ To know the eff ects of vitamin K defi ciency and liver disease on the 
clotting mechanisms
✓ To know the alterations in the haemostatic and fi brinolytic 
mechanisms associated with disseminated intravascular coagulation 
(DIC) and the causes of DIC
✓ To understand the principles of anticoagulant therapy with 
unfractionated heparin, low molecular weight heparin and warfarin 
and to know about the laboratory control of such therapy
✓ To be aware of the natural anticoagulant mechanisms in blood and 
some of the prothrombotic states (thrombophilia)
14

Haemostasis, abnormal bleeding and anticoagulant therapy 115
Normal haemostasis
Th e cessation of bleeding following trauma to blood 
vessels results from three processes: (i) the contrac-
tion of vessel walls; (ii) the formation of a platelet 
plug at the site of the break in the vessel wall; and (iii) 
the formation of a fi brin clot. Th e clot forms within 
and around the platelet aggregates and results in a 
fi rm haemostatic plug. Th e relative importance of 
these three processes probably varies according to 
the size of the vessels involved. Th us, in bleeding from 
a minor wound, the formation of a haemostatic plug 
is probably suffi  cient in itself, whereas in larger ves-
sels, contraction of the vessel walls also plays a part in 
haemostasis. Th e initial plug is formed almost entire-
ly of platelets, but this is friable and is subsequently 
stabilized by fi brin formation.
Classifi cation of 
haemostatic defects
Th e action of platelets and the clotting mechanism 
are closely intertwined in the prevention of bleeding. 
However, it is convenient to consider that abnormali-
ties in haemostasis resulting in bleeding arise from 
defects in one of three processes:
1 Th rombocytopenia (a low platelet count) (the 
commonest cause).
2 Abnormal platelet function.
3 A defect in the clotting mechanism (the second 
commonest cause).
A clinical distinction can frequently be made between 
bleeding due to clotting defects and bleeding due to 
a diminished number of platelets. Patients with clot-
ting defects usually present with bleeding into deep 
tissues; that is, muscles or joints. Patients with a de-
fi ciency of platelets usually present with mucocuta-
neous bleeding; that is, bleeding into the skin and 
from the epithelial surfaces of the nose, uterus and 
other organs. Haemorrhages into the skin include 
petechiae, which are less than 1 mm in diameter 
(Figure 14.1), and ecchymoses, which are larger than 
petechiae and vary considerably in size ( Figure 14.2). 
A further useful clinical distinction is that bleeding 
usually persists from the time of injury in the case of 
platelet defi ciency, since platelet numbers are inad-
equate to form a good platelet plug, whereas in clot-
ting defects the initial bleeding may cease in normal 
time as platelet plugs are readily formed, but as a 
consequence of the failure to form an adequate clot 
the platelet plug is not stabilized by fi brin formation 
and subsequently disintegrates, resulting in a delayed 
onset of prolonged bleeding. Th e clinical distinction 
is by no means complete, as deep-seated haemor-
rhage is sometimes found in platelet defi ciency and, 
on the other hand, superfi cial bleeding may occur in 
clotting defects.
Petechial haemorrhages and ecchymoses and 
bleeding from other sites may occur when the 
number of platelets falls below 50 × 109/L. At levels 
between 20 and 50 × 109/L, petechiae, ecchymoses 
and nose bleeds are the commonest symptoms, but 
below 20 × 109/L, gross haemorrhage (melaena, hae-
matemesis, haematuria) becomes increasingly com-
mon. However, there is a great deal of variation in the 
relationship between the platelet count and haemor-
rhage in individual patients.
Figure 14.1 Multiple pin-point haemorrhages 
(petechiae) on the legs of a patient with idiopathic 
thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP).
Figure 14.2 Large ecchymoses on both the upper arms 
of a woman with ITP.

116 
Haemostasis, abnormal bleeding and anticoagulant therapy
Platelets
Morphology and lifespan
Platelets are discoid, non-nucleated, granule-
containing cells (2–3 μm in diameter) that are formed 
in the bone marrow by the fragmentation of meg-
akaryocyte cytoplasm. Th eir concentration in normal 
blood is 150–450 × 109/L.
Th e plasma membrane of a platelet contains glyco-
proteins (GPs) that are important in the interaction of 
platelets with subendothelial connective tissue and 
other platelets. Th ese include GP Ia and VI, which 
bind to collagen; GP Ib, which binds to von Wil-
lebrand factor (VWF); and GP IIb/IIIa, which binds 
to fi brinogen. Th e platelet membrane is extensively 
invaginated to form a surface-connected canalicular 
system through which the contents of platelet gran-
ules are released. Another intracellular membrane 
system known as the dense tubular system is rich 
in calcium, phospholipid-bound arachidonic acid, 
phospholipase A2 (which mobilizes arachidonic 
acid), cyclo-oxygenase and thromboxane synthase, 
and is the main site of prostaglandin and thrombox-
ane synthesis. Th e platelet also contains contractile 
microfi laments, an equatorial band of microtubules 
involved in maintaining its normal discoid shape 
and two main types of ultrastructurally identifi able 
granules. Th e α-granules, which are the most numer-
ous, contain platelet factor 4 (heparin-neutralizing 
factor), platelet-derived growth factor (which stimu-
lates mitosis in vascular smooth muscle cells), VWF 
and fi brinogen. Th e contents of the dense granules 
(δ-granules) include adenosine triphosphate (ATP), 
 adenosine disphosphate (ADP), 5-hydroxytryp-
tamine (which causes vasoconstriction) and calcium.
Th e lifespan of the platelet has been determined by 
labelling platelets in vitro with radioactive chromium 
(51Cr) and studying their fate after reinjection into the 
circulation; it is of the order of 10 days.
Physiology
Th e main function of platelets is the formation of a 
haemostatic plug at sites of damage to vascular en-
dothelium. First the platelets adhere to exposed sub-
endothelial collagen (via GP Ia and VI) and VWF (via 
GpIb). Within 1–2 s of adhesion, platelets change 
their shape from a disc to a more rounded form with 
spicules that encourage platelet–platelet interaction. 
and they also release the contents of their granules 
(platelet release reaction), the most important con-
tent of which is ADP. Th e platelets are also stimulated 
to produce the prostaglandin, thromboxane A2 from 
arachidonic acid derived from the cell membrane. 
Th e release of ADP and thromboxane A2 causes an 
interaction of other platelets with the adherent plate-
lets and with each other (secondary platelet aggrega-
tion), thus leading to the formation of a platelet plug 
(primary haemostasis). On the surface of activated 
platelets, GP IIb/IIIa undergoes a conformational 
change to provide binding sites for fi brinogen, which 
plays a role in linking platelets together to form aggre-
gates. Anionic platelet membrane phospholipids are 
also exteriorized, providing a procoagulant surface on 
which important reactions of the coagulation path-
way take place. Prostacyclin released by endothelial 
and vascular smooth muscle cells inhibits platelet ag-
gregation and may thus limit the extent of the platelet 
plug. Whereas thromboxane A2 is a potent vasocon-
strictor, prostacyclin is a powerful vasodilator.
At the site of injury, tissue factor (TF) is expressed 
and the TF–VIIa complex initiates the formation of a 
fi brin clot within and around the platelet plug (second-
ary haemostasis). Th e anionic phospholipids exposed 
on the surface of aggregated platelets allow binding of 
the vitamin K-dependent proteins (factors II, IX and X) 
and the cofactors V and VIII, thus considerably enhanc-
ing the speed of the clotting reaction on and around the 
platelet surface. Platelets are also responsible for the 
contraction of the fi brin clot once it has been formed.
Tests of platelet function
Bleeding time
Th is used to be a commonly performed test. Th e 
bleeding time is estimated by making small wounds 
in the skin of the forearm after applying a blood pres-
sure cuff  to the upper arm and infl ating it to 40mmHg; 
the average time that elapses until bleeding ceases is 
then measured. Th e test has poor sensitivity and poor 
specifi city for detecting abnormalities of platelet func-
tion, is a poor predictor of bleeding from surgery and 
invasive procedures and has largely been abandoned. 
PFA-100
Th e bleeding time has largely been replaced by an in 
vitro estimation of primary haemostasis using a ma-
chine called a PFA-100. Platelets are passed through 
a membrane coated with collagen and either ADP 
or epinephrine, and the time taken for fl ow to cease 
measured. Some use this test to rule out a platelet de-
fect when the pre-test probability is low, but it can be 
normal in some platelet disorders and platelet aggre-
gation studies are required if a platelet defect is a like-
ly possibility, even if PFA closure times are normal.

Haemostasis, abnormal bleeding and anticoagulant therapy 117
Platelet aggregation studies
A large number of in vitro tests of platelet function 
have been described, but the most common is light 
transmission aggregometry, whereby the aggrega-
tion of platelets is studied following the addition of 
substances such as ADP, epinephrine, arachidonate, 
collagen and ristocetin to platelet-rich plasma. Ag-
gregation causes an increase in the light transmitted 
through the sample and the test is performed using 
special equipment capable of continuously recording 
light transmission.
Thrombocytopenic and 
non-thrombocytopenic 
purpura
‘Purpura’ is the collective term for bleeding into 
the skin or mucous membranes. Patients with pur-
pura can be separated into those with low platelet 
counts (thrombocytopenic) and those with normal 
platelet counts (non-thrombocytopenic). Th e non-
thrombocytopenic group can be subdivided into 
those patients who have qualitative platelet defects 
and a group who have vascular abnormalities. Th e 
latter is a miscellaneous group and contains con-
genital disorders such as hereditary haemorrhagic 
telangiectasia (Figure 14.3) and the Ehlers–Danlos 
syndrome, and acquired diseases such as Henoch–
Schönlein purpura (a vasculitis) and scurvy.
Causes of 
thrombocytopenia
Th e mechanisms leading to thrombocytopenia are:
• A failure of platelet production by the megakaryo-
cytes.
• A shortened lifespan of the platelets.
• Increased pooling of platelets in an enlarged 
spleen.
Th e distinction between the fi rst two of these poss-
ibilities can be made by assessing the number of meg-
akaryocytes in a marrow aspirate or trephine biopsy 
of the marrow.
Th e causes of thrombocytopenia are given in 
 Table 14.1.
Figure 14.3 Vascular malformations (reddish purple) 
on the lips of a patient with hereditary haemorrhagic 
telangiectasia; such lesions are found throughout the 
body and increase in number with advancing age. This 
rare condition is inherited as an autosomal dominant 
characteristic and may lead to recurrent gastrointestinal 
haemorrhage and chronic iron defi ciency anaemia.
Table 14.1 Some causes of 
thrombocytopenia.
Failure of platelet production
 Aplastic anaemia
 Drugs
 Viruses
 Myelodysplasia
 Paroxysmal nocturnal haemoglobinuria
  Bone marrow infi ltration (carcinoma, leukaemia, 
lymphoma, myeloma, myelofi brosis, storage 
diseases including Gaucher’s disease, osteopetrosis)
  Megaloblastic anaemia due to B12 or folate 
defi ciency
  Hereditary thrombocytopenia (e.g. thrombocytopenia 
with absent radii, grey platelet syndrome, Bernard–
Soulier syndrome, Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome)
Shortened platelet survival
Immune
 Autoimmune (idiopathic) thrombocytopenic purpura
  Secondary autoimmune thrombocytopenic purpura 
(SLE and other collagen diseases, lymphoma, 
chronic lymphocytic leukaemia, HIV infection)
 Drugs
 Post-transfusion purpura
 Neonatal alloimmune thrombocytopenia
 Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (most cases) 
Non-immune
 Disseminated intravascular coagulation (p. 127)
Increased splenic pooling

118 
Haemostasis, abnormal bleeding and anticoagulant therapy
Failure of platelet production
If megakaryocytes are few or absent, it may be assumed 
that platelet production is at fault. Th e bone marrow 
smears may also reveal other features that indicate the 
nature of the disease if evidence has not already been 
obtained from the peripheral blood. Th us, there may 
be a generalized aplasia of the bone marrow (aplas-
tic anaemia) or a selective decrease in megakaryo-
cytes caused by certain drugs (e.g. chlorothiazides, 
tolbutamide), alcoholism and certain viruses (e.g. 
Epstein–Barr virus, measles, varicella, cytomegalovi-
rus). Another cause of reduced platelet production is 
marked infi ltration of the marrow by malignant cells 
(e.g. in leukaemia, lymphoma, myeloma and carcino-
ma) or by fi brous tissue. Reduced platelet production 
may also occur in patients with normal or increased 
numbers of megakaryocytes when there is ineff ective 
megakaryocytopoiesis, as in severe vitamin B12 or 
folate defi ciency or in myelodysplastic syndromes.
Shortened platelet survival
If the megakaryocytes in the marrow are numer-
ous, then the thrombocytopenia is usually due to 
an excessive rate of removal of platelets from the 
peripheral circulation. In most cases the destruction 
results from autoantibodies attached to the plate-
let surface and the disease is termed (auto)immune 
thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP). Occasionally it 
is due to intravascular platelet consumption due to 
DIC or microangiopathic haemolytic anaemia (e.g. 
thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP) or the 
haemolytic uraemic syndrome).
Immune thrombocytopenic purpura 
(ITP)
ITP is characterized by petechiae (Figure 14.1), bruis-
ing (Figure 14.2), spontaneous bleeding from mucous 
membranes and a reduction in the platelet count 
(without neutropenia or, usually, anaemia). Th e dis-
ease presents in both an acute and a chronic form. 
Th e pathogenic mechanism was previously thought 
to be due to IgG autoantibodies that result in a short-
ened platelet lifespan due to premature destruction 
in the spleen. It is now accepted that more complex 
mechanisms in which both impaired platelet produc-
tion and T cell-mediated eff ects play a role.
Clinical features
Acute ITP
Th is is seen at all ages but is most common before the 
age of 10 years. Two-thirds of patients give a  history 
of a common childhood viral infection (e.g. upper 
respiratory tract infection, chicken pox, measles) 2–3 
weeks preceding the purpura. Platelet counts are of-
ten less than 20 × 109/L. In most patients the disease 
runs a self-limiting course of 2–4 weeks, but in ap-
proximately 20% it becomes chronic; that is, it lasts 
more than 6 months. Th e disease is almost always 
self-limiting when there is a history of preceding in-
fection. Th e mortality is low, the main danger being 
intracranial bleeding.
Chronic ITP
Th is occurs mainly in the age period 15–50 years; 
it has a higher incidence in women than in men. 
Th e chronic form is usually not severe and mortal-
ity is low; platelet counts are usually between 20 
and 80 × 109/L. Spontaneous cures are rare and the 
disease is characterized by relapses and remissions. 
About one third of patients with chronic ITP have pe-
techiae and ecchymoses as the only presenting signs. 
Th e remainder also have bleeding from the following 
sites in decreasing order of frequency: nose, gums, 
vagina (menorrhagia) and gastrointestinal and renal 
tracts. Cerebral haemorrhage occurs in about 3%. As 
a general rule the spleen is not palpable.
Diagnosis
Children with the appropriate clinical features, 
acute thrombocytopenia and an otherwise normal 
blood count (i.e. no evidence of acute leukaemia) 
may be diagnosed as having acute ITP without bone 
marrow aspiration. Th e diagnosis of chronic ITP is 
also based on clinical features and the exclusion 
of other causes of thrombocytopenia and may not 
require marrow aspiration. In ITP, bone marrow 
megakaryocytes are normal or increased in number 
(up to four- or eightfold) and increased in size. An 
absence or reduction of megakaryocytes rules out 
the disease. A marrow aspiration also serves to ex-
clude other causes of thrombocytopenia, such as 
aplastic anaemia, leukaemia or marrow infi ltration 
by carcinoma cells, lymphoma cells or myeloma 
cells. Th rombocytopenia due to drugs must also be 
excluded.
Treatment
Acute ITP
Over 80% of patients recover without any treatment. 
Corticosteroids are widely used: they increase the 
platelet count and so reduce the duration of throm-
bocytopenia. High doses of intravenous immu-
noglobulin (Ig) cause a rapid increase in the platelet 
count and are administered, with or without corticos-
teroids, to children with severe thrombocytopenia or 
life-threatening haemorrhage.

Haemostasis, abnormal bleeding and anticoagulant therapy 119
Chronic ITP
Treatment is usually not needed in patients with 
platelet counts above 30–50 × 109/L who have no sig-
nifi cant spontaneous bleeding. High-dose corticos-
teroid therapy increases the platelet count to more 
than 50 × 109/L and, usually, more than 100 × 109/L in 
two-thirds of patients with chronic ITP. Adults are of-
ten started on prednisolone 60 mg/day and the dos-
age reduced gradually after a remission is achieved, 
or after 4 weeks. However, in only a third of patients 
who initially have a complete remission is the remis-
sion long lived.
Splenectomy and a large number of drugs have 
been used as second-line treatment. About 75% of 
the patients respond fully to splenectomy, usually 
within 1 week. However, 10–15% of complete re-
sponders will relapse after an interval.
Azathioprine, cyclophosphamide, danazol, dap-
sone, cyclosporine A, mycophenolate mofetil and 
rituximab have all been used, particularly in patients 
who fail to respond to splenectomy.
High dose of intravenous Ig (e.g. 1 g/kg/day for 2 
days) has also been found to increase the platelet 
count to greater than 50 × 109/L in 80% of patients 
with chronic ITP and to normal values in more than 
50%. However, the increase is usually transient; 
the platelet count returns to pretreatment levels in 
2–6 weeks. Ig probably acts by interfering with plate-
let destruction by inhibiting the binding of the Fc por-
tion of the IgG antibodies on the platelet surface to Fc 
receptors on macrophages. Anti-D Ig (in patients who 
are Rhesus D+) is thought to work in the same way.
Most recently, thrombopoietin-receptor agonists 
(romiplostin and eltrombopag) have been shown to 
be eff ective in clinical trials.
Secondary autoimmune 
thrombocytopenic purpura
An autoimmune thrombocytopenia may precede 
other manifestations of SLE by several years and 
may complicate the course of SLE, other autoim-
mune disorders, lymphoma and chronic lymphocytic 
leukaemia. Patients infected with the human im-
munodefi ciency virus (HIV) may develop either 
autoimmune thrombocytopenia or immune throm-
bocytopenia (caused by immune complexes) long 
before developing other characteristic features.
Drug-induced immune 
thrombocytopenia
Certain drugs such as heparin, gold salts, quinine, 
quinidine, sulphonamides or penicillin cause a short-
ening of platelet lifespan in a small proportion of re-
cipients by an immunological mechanism. Heparin 
induced thrombocytopenia (HIT) is particularly im-
portant. Antibodies form against the heparin:platelet 
factor 4 (PF4) complex and then bind to the platelet 
FcγR, causing platelet activation, thrombocytope-
nia and in some instances seemingly paradoxical 
 thrombosis. 
Other immune thrombocytopenias
In the rare condition known as post-transfusion pur-
pura, severe thrombocytopenia develops 5–8 days af-
ter a transfusion, as a result of the destruction of the 
recipient’s platelets. Platelet-specifi c alloantibodies 
are present in the serum, but the explanation for the 
destruction of the patient’s own platelets is unclear.
Transient but potentially serious neonatal alloim-
mune thrombocytopenia may occur in babies of 
healthy mothers. Th e mother forms IgG alloantibod-
ies against a fetal platelet-specifi c antigen lacking in 
the mother’s platelets and inherited from the father; 
these antibodies cross the placenta and damage fe-
tal platelets (analogous to haemolytic disease of the 
newborn).
Thrombotic thrombocytopenic 
purpura (TTP)
In healthy individuals a VWF-cleaving protease 
(ADAMTS 13) cleaves the Tyr 842-Met 843 peptide 
bond in VWF to produce the characteristic multimer 
profi le. In the absence of the protease, ultra-large 
VWF multimers are released that lead to platelet 
aggregation and the disease known as ‘thrombotic 
thrombocytopenic purpura’ (TTP). Familial relaps-
ing TTP is due to the autosomal recessive inheritance 
of a defi ciency of the protease. Sporadic TTP is due 
to an IgG autoantibody against the protease. Th is is a 
serious illness characterized by widespread arteriolar 
platelet thrombi leading to fragmentation of red cells, 
thrombocytopenia, neurological symptoms and renal 
impairment. It is an important diagnosis to make be-
cause the untreated mortality is 90%, which can be re-
duced with the prompt delivery of plasma exchange. 
Th e haemolytic uraemic syndrome is an apparently 
similar disorder aff ecting infants, young children 
and the elderly in which the arteriolar thrombi are 
predominantly formed in the kidneys; in some pa-
tients, the disease follows a bout of diarrhoea caused 
by verotoxin-producing Escherichia coli or shiga 
toxin-producing Shigella dysenteriae. It is not due to 
a defi ciency of ADAMTS 13 and does not respond to 
plasma exchange.

120 
Haemostasis, abnormal bleeding and anticoagulant therapy
Increased splenic pooling
A normal spleen contains within its microcirculation 
about 30% of all the blood platelets; the platelets in 
the splenic pool exchange freely with those in the 
general circulation. Th e splenic platelet pool increas-
es with increasing splenic size, so that in patients 
with moderate to massive splenomegaly it may ac-
count for 50–90% of all blood platelets, thus causing 
thrombocytopenia. Another factor contributing to 
the thrombocytopenia in patients with splenomegaly 
is an increase in plasma volume.
Abnormalities of platelet 
function
Acquired
An acquired defect of platelet function is found after 
ingestion of aspirin and other antiplatelet drugs. As-
pirin acts by irreversibly acetylating cyclo-oxygenase 
and this inhibits thromboxane A2 synthesis, with a sub-
sequent reduction in platelet aggregation. Th e eff ect of 
a single dose of aspirin can be detected for 1 week (i.e. 
until most of the platelets present at the time of taking 
the aspirin have been replaced by newly formed plate-
lets). Clopidogrel acts by irreversibly blocking the ADP 
receptor (P2Y12) on the platelet cell membrane.
Other causes of an acquired abnormality of platelet 
function include chronic myeloproliferative disor-
ders, myelodysplastic syndromes, paraproteinaemias 
(e.g. myeloma or Waldenström’s macroglobulinae-
mia) and uraemia.
Inherited
Glanzmann’s disease
Th is is a rare but severe platelet disorder caused by a 
lack of glycoprotein IIb/IIIa receptors. Inheritance is 
autosomal recessive and platelets are normal in mor-
phology and number.
Bernard-Soulier disease 
Th is is a platelet disorder caused by a lack of glyco-
protein Ib receptors. Inheritance is autosomal reces-
sive. Platelets are larger than normal and usually the 
platelet count is reduced. 
Storage pool diseases
Th ese are inherited conditions resulting in defective 
platelet granules. In the more common δ-storage 
pool disease there is a defi ciency of dense granules. 
It can occur alone or in the patients with Hermansky-
Pudlak syndrome, when it is combined with albinism 
and ocular defects. 
Platelet transfusions
It is often possible to raise the platelet count tempo-
rarily by platelet transfusions. Th e main indication 
for platelet transfusion is severe haemorrhage caused 
by (i) thrombocytopenia due to diminished platelet 
production or DIC; or (ii) abnormal platelet func-
tion. Transfusion may also be indicated in a patient 
with thrombocytopenia or defective platelet function 
prior to surgery. Another indication for platelet trans-
fusion is thrombocytopenia (platelets <50 × 109/L) in 
patients receiving massive blood transfusions; blood 
stored for 48 hours has virtually no viable platelets. 
When thrombocytopenia results from excess destruc-
tion caused by platelet antibodies, the response to 
transfusion is poor. Platelets are transfused as platelet 
concentrates and should be given within fi ve days of 
withdrawal from the donor. In order to prevent spon-
taneous haemorrhage, platelet counts need only be 
maintained above 10–20 × 109/L, since severe bleed-
ing is rare above this level.
Normal coagulation 
mechanism
Th e mechanisms involved in the clotting cascade 
were elucidated in the period 1950–70, largely by 
the work of R.G. MacFarlane and his colleagues. Th e 
essential feature of the cascade is the presence of a 
number of steps activated in sequence. Each step 
is characterized by the conversion of a zymogen 
(proenzyme) into an enzyme by the splitting of one or 
more peptide bonds, which brings about a conforma-
tional change in the molecule and reveals the active 
enzyme site.
Th e clotting sequence is initiated in vivo by tissue 
factor (TF) exposed on the surface of activated en-
dothelial cells and leucocytes and on most extravas-
cular cells in an area of tissue damage (Figure 14.4). 
TF binds to activated factor VII, forming TF–VIIa 
complexes; the mechanism of activation of factor VII 
is unclear. Th e TF–VIIa complexes bind and activate 
factors IX to IXa and X to Xa. Factor IXa activates fac-
tor X. Factor Xa then attaches to the platelet surface 
and acts on prothrombin (factor II) to generate small 

Haemostasis, abnormal bleeding and anticoagulant therapy 121
amounts of thrombin (factor IIa). Th is pathway of 
thrombin generation is rapidly suppressed by tissue 
factor pathway inhibitor (TFPI). Th e small amount 
of thrombin generated activates the cofactors VIII, V 
and the zymogen factor XI as well as platelets. Fac-
tor XIa converts more factor IX to IXa. Factor VIIIa 
enhances the activity of factor IXa formed by the ac-
tion of TF–VIIa complexes and factor XIa on factor IX, 
and markedly amplifi es the conversion of factor X to 
Xa and, consequently, the generation of thrombin 
from prothrombin, which is augmented by factor Va. 
Th rombin splits two small negatively charged peptide 
fragments (fi brinopeptides A and B) from fi brinogen 
(factor I), thus removing repulsive forces from the 
molecule and allowing the remainder to polymerize 
and form the fi brin fi bre. Finally, factor XIIIa, gen-
erated by the activation of factor XIII by thrombin, 
stabilizes and strengthens the fi brin polymers by 
forming covalent bonds between the fi brin chains 
(glutamine–lysine bridges). Calcium is required at 
several stages in the coagulation sequence. Th e re-
actions involving factors IXa, VIIIa and X to form Xa 
(tenase reaction) and factors Xa, Va and II to form IIa 
(prothrombinase reaction) take place mainly on the 
exposed phospholipids on the surface of platelets; the 
rate of reaction at the surface is considerably higher 
than that in solution. Hence bleeding in thrombocy-
topenia results from a failure of the clotting cascade 
as well as the lack of a platelet plug.
Th e extent of thrombin generation is limited 
by a number of natural anticoagulant mechan-
isms. Th rombin binds to thrombomodulin on the 
endothelial cell surface and the resulting complex 
activates protein C (PC) to activated protein C (APC), 
which inactivates factors Va and VIIIa in the presence 
of a cofactor protein S (Figure 14.8). In addition, free 
thrombin is directly inactivated by the circulating in-
hibitor antithrombin (AT), after the latter binds to 
heparans on endothelial cells.
Previous in vitro studies identifi ed two pathways 
or systems within the coagulation cascade: a so-
called intrinsic system, all the components of which 
are in the plasma, and a so-called extrinsic system 
consisting of TF, factor VII, factor X (with V as the 
cofactor), factor II and factor I. Th e sequence of ac-
tion of factors in the intrinsic system was considered 
to be XII, XI, IX (with VIII as the cofactor), X (with V 
as the cofactor), II and I, as illustrated in Figure 14.5. 
Th e clotting sequence was initiated in vitro by activa-
tion of factor XII. Following limited activation, fac-
tor XII converts the plasma protein prekallikrein to 
kallikrein, which in turn activates factor XII fully to 
XIIa. Another plasma protein, high molecular weight 
kininogen, is a non-enzymatic accelerator of these 
interactions. Factor XIIa then acts on XI to form the 
active enzyme XIa. Th is is not the physiological path-
way for the initiation of coagulation in vivo as shown 
by the absence of a bleeding tendency in people with 
an inherited defi ciency of factor XII. However, the 
intrinsic/extrinsic system model remains valuable in 
understanding laboratory tests for blood coagulation 
(Figure 14.5).
Six of the synonyms for the factors are still in general 
use and should be known. Th ey are antihaemophilic 
Figure 14.4 Pathways involved in 
fi brin generation after the activation of 
coagulation in vivo by TF. The suffi x ‘a’ 
denotes the active form of each coagulation 
factor. Notes: Green arrows – actions of 
thrombin; red arrows – actions of other 
active enzymes; dashed blue arrows – 
inhibition.
TF-VIIa
X
Xa
IX
IXa
XIIIa
II
IIa
Va
cross-linked 
fibrin
XI
XIa
fibrinogen
VIII
V
fibrin
XIII
VII
?
VIIIa

122 
Haemostasis, abnormal bleeding and anticoagulant therapy
globulin (factor VIII), Christmas factor (factor IX), 
prothrombin and thrombin (factor II and IIa) and fi -
brinogen (now rarely referred to as factor I).
The fi brinolytic 
mechanism
After haemostasis has been achieved, the body 
has a mechanism for the enzymatic lysis of clots 
( Figure 14.6). Th e dissolution of the fi brin into fi -
brin-degradation products (FDPs) is carried out by 
the proteolytic plasma enzyme plasmin. Plasmin is 
present in the plasma in an inactive form, plasmino-
gen, which is synthesized in the liver; plasminogen 
binds to fi brin and is converted to plasmin mainly 
by fi brin-bound tissue plasminogen activator (t-PA), 
which is synthesized and released by the injured 
vascular endothelium. Small amounts of plasmin 
are also generated from plasminogen by urokinase, 
which is produced mainly by renal cells but also other 
cell types such as endothelial cells. Bradykinin, which 
is released from high molecular weight kininogen by 
the action of kallikrein, is a powerful stimulator of 
t-PA release. Th e plasma contains an inhibitor of t-PA 
known as plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1). 
Plasmin is not specifi c for fi brin, but can also break 
down other protein components of plasma, including 
fi brinogen and the clotting factors Va and VIIIa, and 
thus the following mechanism is present to confi ne the 
activities of plasmin to fi brin. When fi brin is formed, 
t-PA and plasminogen are specifi cally adsorbed onto 
fi brin; the t-PA–fi brin complex has a high affi  nity for 
plasminogen and converts it to plasmin, which digests 
the fi brin to which it is adsorbed. Under normal condi-
tions, any plasmin released from the fi brin into the cir-
culation is immediately inactivated by combining with 
the liver-derived plasma inhibitors, α2-antiplasmin 
and α2-macroglobulin. In this way, generalized break-
down of fi brinogen and other proteins does not occur.
Available thrombolytic drugs include urokinase 
and recombinant t-PAs as well as non-physiological 
activators, such as streptokinase, derived from cer-
tain streptococci and anisoylated plasminogen–
streptokinase activator complex (APSAC). Recom-
binant t-PAs (alteplase, reteplase and tenecteplase) 
IXa
X
Xa
II
IIa
VIIIa
Va
contact activation (PK, HMWK, XII)
XIa
TF/VIIa
fibrinogen
fibrin
IX
APTT
XI
XIIa
PT
Figure 14.5 The 
sequence of coagulation 
in vitro brought about 
by by either contact 
activation of factor XII 
or by addition of tissue 
factor. The suffi x ‘a’ 
denotes the active form of 
each coagulation factor. 
The former is the basis 
of the activated partial 
thromboplastin time 
(APTT) and the latter the 
prothrombin time (PT).
plasminogen
plasmin
fibrin
FDPs
tPA
uPA
SK:Plgn
PAI-1
α2-antiplasmin
α2-macroglobulin
Figure 14.6 The fi brinolytic mechanism. 

Haemostasis, abnormal bleeding and anticoagulant therapy 123
and streptokinase are the most frequently used drugs 
and are administered intravenously for the treatment 
of early acute myocardial infarction. Th rombolytic 
drugs may also be useful in other types of thrombosis.
Tests for clotting defects
Th ere are three basic tests that are widely used, all 
performed on platelet-poor plasma obtained by 
 centrifugation:
1 Th e activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT), 
which estimates the activity of factors XII, XI, IX, 
VIII, X, V, II and fi brinogen (the ‘intrinsic system’; 
Figure 14.5).
2 Th e prothrombin time (PT), which estimates the 
activity of factors VII, X, V, II and fi brinogen (the 
‘extrinsic system’; Figure 14.5).
3 Th e thrombin time, adding thrombin to plasma 
and measuring the time taken to clot, which is pro-
longed when there is an inherited or acquired de-
fi ciency of fi brinogen, or an inherited or acquired 
abnormal fi brinogen molecule (dysfi brinogenae-
mia) or in the presence of heparin or raised levels 
of FDPs.
It is evident from Figure 14.5 that defi ciencies of factors 
X, V, prothrombin (factor II) or fi brinogen will cause 
prolongations of both the APTT and PT. Patients with 
liver disease or DIC who have acquired defi ciencies 
of several factors show prolongation of both the APTT 
and PT. Patients with acquired defi ciencies of factors II, 
VII, IX and X (vitamin K-dependent factors), resulting 
from treatment with coumarin drugs or from vitamin 
K defi ciency (p. 129), also have a prolonged APTT and 
PT. Th e PT is more sensitive than the APTT in detecting 
these defi ciencies because of the short half-life of fac-
tor VII. In the small group of patients with congenital 
defects of one of the clotting factors, 80–90% have hae-
mophilia (factor VIII defi ciency), about 10–20% have 
factor IX defi ciency, and only about 1% have defi cien-
cies of one of the other eight factors. In haemophilia A 
and B the APTT is prolonged and the PT is normal. By 
determining both the APTT and the PT it is possible to 
obtain information as to where the defect lies.
Activated partial thromboplastin 
time
Th ere is a wide range in the time taken for venous 
blood to clot in a glass tube at 37°C. Th is wide range 
in the whole blood clotting time is due to two varia-
bles. First, activation of factor XII by the glass surface 
is variable and depends on such factors as the type 
of glass. Second, there is a variation in the coagula-
tion-potentiating activities supplied by the platelets, 
as platelet numbers vary considerably between in-
dividuals. In the APPT addition of a phospholipid 
(partial thromboplastin) replaces the platelets and 
the variation in contact activation is substantially 
abolished by the addition of a contact activator 
(such as kaolin or micronized silica). Th e test is 
simple to carry out. Citrated plasma (which does not 
clot because of a lack of calcium) is obtained and 
to this is added a mixture of contact activator and 
phospholipid followed by calcium, and the time tak-
en for the mixture to clot is measured. Prolongation 
of the clotting time is often due to a defi ciency of fac-
tors VIII and IX (provided that a defi ciency of factor 
X onwards has been excluded by a normal PT) and 
the test is suffi  ciently sensitive to detect defi ciencies 
of both these factors when their concentration is re-
duced to 30% or less of the normal value; that is, it 
will detect the patients with mild haemophilia who 
only have severe bleeding after minor surgical pro-
cedures. An isolated prolonged APTT may also be 
due to factor XI defi ciency, a contact factor (factor 
XII, pre-kallikrein, high molecular weight kinino-
gen) defi ciency, or a lupus anticoagulant (p. 131). 
Contact factor defi ciency and lupus anticoagulants 
do not cause bleeding
Prothrombin time
Th e test used to measure the integrity of the extrinsic 
system is the one-stage PT. Th is test is carried out by 
adding tissue thromboplastin (TF and phospholipid) 
together with calcium to citrated plasma. Reference 
to Figure 14.5 shows that TF and factor VII (actually 
the TF–VIIa complex) initiate coagulation by acti-
vating factor X to Xa and hence prolongation of the 
PT results from defi ciencies of I, II, V, VII and X. Th e 
PT is thus a misnomer, as defi ciency of at least fi ve 
factors aff ects the test and prothrombin defi ciency 
alone must be gross before the PT is prolonged. Th e 
test is chiefl y sensitive to defi ciencies of factors V, VII 
and X. 
When the PT is used for the control of oral anti-
coagulant therapy, the results are expressed as the 
international normalized ratio (INR). Th is is derived 
from the PT ratio (i.e. the patient’s PT:mean normal 
PT) and a factor determined for each thromboplastin 
reagent by comparing its activity against an interna-
tional reference preparation. Th e value of using the 
INR is that for patients taking vitamin K antagonists, 
the same therapeutic ranges apply irrespective of the 
source of thromboplastin.

124 
Haemostasis, abnormal bleeding and anticoagulant therapy
Congenital coagulation 
disorders
Blood clotting abnormalities can be conveniently di-
vided into two categories, congenital defects and ac-
quired defects. Th is section deals with those that are 
present from birth.
Th ere is a group of patients who complain of exces-
sive bleeding, either spontaneous or following trau-
ma, usually starting early in life, and who frequently 
have a family history of a similar condition. Th ese 
patients usually have one of three diseases: haemo-
philia A, haemophilia B or VWD.
Haemophilia A (factor VIII 
defi ciency)
Th e term ‘haemophilia’, fi rst used by Schönlein in 
1839, was applied to a lifelong tendency to prolonged 
haemorrhage found in males and dependent on the 
transmission of a sex-linked abnormal gene. During 
the decade 1950–60, it was found that there are in 
fact two diseases within the group of patients who, 
on clinical and genetic grounds, had been diagnosed 
as having haemophilia: patients with factor VIII defi -
ciency and those with factor IX defi ciency. 
Genetics, prevalence and 
biochemistry
Defi ciency of factor VIII results from an abnormal-
ity in the factor VIII gene, which is very large (186 
kilobases, 26 exons) and lies at the tip of the long 
arm of the X-chromosome. Various abnormalities 
in the nucleotide sequence of this gene have been 
identifi ed in about half the cases of haemophilia, 
ranging from single-point mutations to large dele-
tions. Half of all severe cases are due to an inversion 
involving intron 22. Th e disease is almost entirely 
confi ned to hemizygous males, since the normal X-
chromosome in heterozygous females is almost al-
ways capable of bringing about adequate factor VIII 
production. Th e prevalence of this disorder is about 
one per 10  000 males. Females with haemophilia 
have been observed extremely rarely and these are 
either homozygotes for the abnormal gene or are 
heterozygotes in whom the normal X-chromosome 
has not produced suffi  cient quantities of factor VIII 
due to lyonization. Daughters of males with haemo-
philia are obligatory carriers of the gene, since they 
must inherit the abnormal X-chromosome. Sons, on 
the other hand, are always normal, since they inherit 
the Y-chromosome. A female with a genetic defect on 
one X-chromosome will transmit the disease to half 
her sons, and half her daughters will become carriers. 
Patients suspected of having haemophilia should be 
carefully questioned for a history of a bleeding disor-
der occurring in the relations on the maternal side as 
opposed to the paternal side. Th ere is a steady spon-
taneous mutation rate of the gene responsible for fac-
tor VIII production, since approximately one third of 
all people with haemophilia have no family history of 
the disease; this has been corroborated by studies on 
the genomic DNA.
Th e factor VIII molecule is a protein with a molec-
ular weight of 8 × 104 daltons. In the plasma, factor 
VIII is only found complexed with VWF, which acts 
as a carrier and prolongs its plasma half-life. Th e fac-
tor VIII coagulant activity can be measured biologi-
cally by its ability to act as a cofactor to factor IXa (see 
Figure 14.4). Although factor VIII coagulant activity 
is greatly depressed in haemophilia, the amount of 
VWF is within normal limits.
Detection of carriers and antenatal 
diagnosis
Female carriers on average have half the clotting ac-
tivity per unit of VWF compared to normal, however 
discrimination between cariers and non-carriers is 
often not possible based on factor assays alone. Ge-
netic mutational analysis allows carriers to be identi-
fi ed with accuracy and is the method of choice.
Prenatal diagnosis of haemophilia can be made by 
analysis of fetal DNA, which can be obtained either by 
chorionic villus sampling between 11½ and 14 weeks 
of gestation or by amniocentesis after 16 weeks. 
Clinical features
Th e characteristic clinical feature of severe haemophil-
ia is the occurrence of spontaneous bleeding into the 
joints (Figure 14.7) and less frequently into the mus-
cles; these two sites account for about 95% of all bleeds 
requiring treatment (Table 14.2). Th e presenting symp-
tom is pain in the aff ected area and this can be very 
severe. Haemophiliacs rapidly become expert at diag-
nosing the onset of haemorrhage in its earliest stages, 
allowing treatment to be initiated at a time when it can 
be most eff ective. If not properly treated, bleeding into 
joints results in crippling deformity. Th e knees, elbows 
and ankles are most commonly aff ected. Haematuria, 
epistaxis and gastrointestinal bleeding are less com-
mon. Intracranial bleeding is the most common cause 
of death from the disease itself (i.e. discounting deaths 
from HIV infection — see below), accounting for 

Haemostasis, abnormal bleeding and anticoagulant therapy 125
25–30% of all such deaths; only about one-half of the 
aff ected patients have a history of trauma.
Th e severity of bleeding and mode of presentation 
are related to the level of plasma factor VIII; this re-
lationship is shown in Table 14.3. Th e severity of the 
disease often remains constant throughout a family.
Because of treatment with HIV-contaminated fac-
tor VIII concentrates between about 1978 and 1985, 
over 50% of patients with severe haemophilia in the 
USA and Europe became HIV positive; many of these 
have died of the acquired immune defi ciency syn-
drome (AIDS). In addition, virtually all people treated 
for severe haemophilia before 1985 were infected 
with hepatitis C virus due to the use of non-virally in-
activated factor concentrates.
(a)
(b)
Figure 14.7 Haemarthrosis of the shoulder joint in a patient with haemophilia A.
Table 14.3 The relation between plasma 
factor VIII levels and severity of bleeding.
Factor VIII level 
(units/100 mL)
Bleeding symptoms
50
None
25–50
Excessive bleeding after major 
surgery or serious accident (often 
not diagnosed until incident occurs)
5–25
Excessive bleeding after minor 
surgery and injuries
1–5
Severe bleeding after minor 
surgery (sometimes spontaneous 
haemorrhage)
0
Spontaneous bleeding into 
muscles and joints
Source: From Rizza (1977) Br. Med. Bull. 33, 225–30.
Table 14.2 The frequency of bleeding sites in 
207 haemophiliacs.
Lesion or operation
Percentage
Haemarthroses
79
Muscle haematomas
15
Haematuria
Epistaxes
Gastrointestinal bleeding
Dental extraction
Major surgery
Each about 1–2
Total 6
Source: From Rizza (1977) Br. Med. Bull. 33, 225–30.
}

126 
Haemostasis, abnormal bleeding and anticoagulant therapy
Diagnosis
Th e possibility of haemophilia is suggested by the 
fi nding of a normal PT and a prolonged APTT. Con-
fi rmation is by a specifi c assay of factor VIII coagulant 
activity with normal VWF. Th e combination of a nor-
mal PT and a prolonged APTT is most often caused by 
lupus anticoagulant (see p. 131).
Treatment
Treatment should be given at the earliest sign of 
spontaneous or post-traumatic bleeding. It should 
also be given prophylactically if any type of op-
eration is contemplated. Treatment consists of 
intravenous injections of virucidally treated plas-
ma-derived high-purity factor VIII concentrate or 
recombinant factor VIII preparations to maintain 
plasma factor VIII coagulant activity to between 
30% and 100% of normal, depending on the sever-
ity of the injury or extent of the proposed surgi-
cal procedure. In general, the more extensive the 
bleeding or degree of trauma, the larger the dose 
of factor VIII concentrate that is required. HIV has 
been eliminated from currently used plasma-de-
rived factor VIII preparations by using donors who 
do not have HIV antibodies and by employing one 
or more virucidal methods (e.g. heating the lyophi-
lized product at 80°C, heating in solution at 60°C 
or adding a solvent detergent mixture during the 
manufacturing process). Most developed countries 
have switched to recombinant products. Frequent 
assays of factor VIII levels in the plasma may be 
necessary to ensure that the concentration is being 
maintained at the appropriate level.
Approximately 25% of patients with haemophilia, 
usually after treatment with factor VIII on 10–20 oc-
casions, develop antibodies that inhibit its functional 
activity and in 5-10% of patients these are of high titre. 
Haemorrhage in patients with high-titre inhibitors 
may require treatment with ‘bypassing agents’ such 
as recombinant factor VIIa or FEIBA (factor eight in-
hibitor bypassing activity; that is, a plasma-derived 
activated prothrombin complex concentrate), which 
activate the coagulation cascade below the level of 
factor VIII.
Th e administration of factor VIII may be avoided 
in mild to moderate haemophilia by using the va-
sopressin analogue desmopressin (DDAVP), which 
causes a temporary increase in factor VIII and VWF 
by provoking the release of these factors from en-
dothelial cells. DDAVP is used intravenously, sub-
cutaneously or intranasally. Th e antifi brinolytic 
drug tranexamic acid should be administered with 
DDAVP, as the latter also causes release of t-PA from 
the endothelium.
Freeze-dried factor VIII concentrates can be stored 
for prolonged periods and can be injected in ad-
equate amounts in a small volume. Th is has made it 
possible for many patients to be treated at home by 
self-administration, thus allowing factor VIII to be in-
jected as soon as symptoms appear. Such early ther-
apy results in both rapid cessation of bleeding and 
rapid recovery. As an extension to this, many severely 
aff ected patients receive regular prophylactic treat-
ment with factor VIII.
Haemophilia B (Factor IX 
defi ciency, Christmas disease)
Th e diff erentiation of factor IX defi ciency from factor 
VIII defi ciency was fi rst made by Biggs and colleagues 
in 1952. Th e clinical features and inheritance of factor 
IX defi ciency are identical to those in factor VIII de-
fi ciency. Factor IX defi ciency aff ects about 1 in every 
50  000 males (i.e. it is less frequent than factor VIII de-
fi ciency). Th e factor IX gene is located on the long arm 
of the X-chromosome, is much smaller than the factor 
VIII gene (containing eight exons) and has been fully 
sequenced. Mutations in this gene have been found in 
virtually all cases of factor IX defi ciency.
Th e APTT is prolonged and the PT normal. Th e di-
agnosis can be made by assay of the factor IX level. 
Plasma-derived factor IX concentrate or recombinant 
factor IX is available and should be administered in-
travenously as soon as spontaneous or post-traumat-
ic bleeding starts. Factor IX has a longer half-life in 
the plasma (18–24 hours) than factor VIII and hence 
can be given at less frequent intervals. 
Von Willebrand disease
Th is is the most common inherited bleeding disor-
der, with a prevalence of up to 1%, although most 
mild cases are undiagnosed. It was described by 
von Willebrand in 1926 as occurring in several fami-
lies on islands in the Baltic (Åland Islands). It is an 
autosomal disoder characterized by mild, moder-
ate or severe bleeding. Th e bleeding results from 
either a qualitative abnormality or a defi ciency of 
VWF. Th is factor is a protein with a molecular weight 
of 2.7 × 105 daltons and exists in the plasma as a 
variable-sized polymer, ranging from a dimer to a 
molecule containing 50–100 subunits. It has a dual 
function: fi rst, it is an adhesive molecule that binds 
platelets to subendothelial tissues; second, it acts as 
a carrier for factor VIII. Th e reduction in VWF results 
in a reduction in factor VIII concentration (usually 

Haemostasis, abnormal bleeding and anticoagulant therapy 127
measured as clotting activity), which may be as low 
as 5–30% of normal, similar to that found in mild 
haemophilia. Th e excessive bleeding in the disease 
is mainly due to the failure of the platelets to adhere 
rather than the concominant factor VIII defi ciency. 
An additional fi nding is that, whereas the antibiotic 
ristocetin induces platelet aggregation in platelet-
rich plasma from normal subjects, it fails to do so in 
platelet-rich plasma from people with severe VWD. 
Th is observation is the basis of a useful laboratory 
test for the diagnosis of this disease.
Th e gene for VWF is present on chromosome 12 
and analysis of the gene has shown that there is con-
siderable heterogeneity in the genetic defects found 
in VWD. Some defects result in a reduction in the 
plasma concentration of structurally normal VWF 
molecules, but others cause diff erent qualitative 
abnormalities in the VWF molecule. VWD has been 
divided into three types: in types 1 (most frequent) 
and 3 there is a partial reduction or nearly complete 
absence of VWF molecules, respectively, and in type 
2 there are qualitative abnormalities.
Most patients have type 1 VWD, inherited as an au-
tosomal dominant trait with variable penetrance, and 
are mildly aff ected. Spontaneous bleeding is usually 
confi ned to mucous membranes and skin and takes 
the form of epistaxes and ecchymoses, bleeding after 
dental extraction and menorrhagia. Severe haem-
orrhage may occur following surgical procedures. 
Bleeding into joints and muscles is rare except in type 
3 disease. 
Th e laboratory fi ndings include a prolonged PFA 
closure time (if done), usually a prolonged APTT and 
reduced factor VIII clotting activity, reduced levels of 
VWF and impaired ristocetin-induced platelet aggre-
gation; however, it is important to remember that the 
PFA and APTT may be within normal limits. 
For mildly or moderately aff ected patients with 
type 1 disease, desmopressin (DDAVP), which in-
creases plasma levels of both VWF and factor VIII, 
should be tried before using blood products. In un-
responsive patients, intermediate purity factor VIII 
concentrates that contain VWF and factor VIII are 
eff ective in stopping haemorrhage, mainly by cor-
recting the bleeding time but also by increasing factor 
VIII clotting activity, which continues to increase for 
many hours after treatment. Alternatively, very high-
purity VWF concentrate may be used. High-purity 
factor VIII concentrates are unsuitable for the treat-
ment of VWD since they contain very little VWF. Th e 
antifi brinolytic drug tranexamic acid may be used for 
treating epistaxis or menorrhagia and in combina-
tion with DDAVP or VWF-containing concentrates to 
manage dental extractions.
Defi ciency of other clotting 
factors
Single defi ciencies of factors other than VIII and IX 
are very rare, but all possible defi ciencies have been 
found and all except contact factor (e.g. factor XII) de-
fi ciency give rise to bleeding disorders of varying de-
grees of severity. Th e explanation for the absence of 
excessive haemorrhage in factor XII defi ciency is that 
the physiological activator of factor IX is thrombin, 
not factor XII (see Figure 14.4).
Acquired coagulation 
disorders
Th e hepatocytes are the major cell type involved in 
the synthesis of all the coagulation factors. Hence, se-
vere liver disease may result in bleeding, due both to a 
defi ciency of several coagulation factors and to an ab-
normality in the structure and function of fi brinogen, 
as well as thrombocytopenia due to hypersplenism.
Th e fi nal stages in the synthesis of factors II, VII, IX 
and X (collectively known as the prothrombin group 
or complex) involve a vitamin K-dependent carboxy-
lase, which adds carboxyl (–COOH) groups to the 
proteins; these groups are necessary for the effi  cient 
functioning of the molecules.
Th e coumarin drugs are vitamin K antagonists and 
their administration results in only partial carboxyla-
tion of the prothrombin group of coagulation factors, 
which are consequently considerably less active than 
normal in the clotting cascade. Similar abnormalities 
are seen in vitamin K defi ciency, which may be found 
in the newborn (haemorrhagic disease of the new-
born), in patients with intestinal malabsorption and, 
since bile salts are required for vitamin K absorption, 
also in patients with biliary obstruction or biliary fi s-
tulae. Examination of Figure 14.5 shows that except 
for factor IX, the clotting factors involved in these ac-
quired defi ciencies are detected by the PT and that 
apart from factor VII, they are also detected by the 
APTT. However, as mentioned earlier, the PT is the 
more sensitive test due to the short half-life of  factor 
VII and, consequently, it is the test employed for 
monitoring oral anticoagulant therapy and  detecting 
the abnormalities in vitamin K defi ciency.
Disseminated intravascular 
coagulation (DIC)
DIC describes a process in which there is a general-
ized activation of the clotting system followed by 

128 
Haemostasis, abnormal bleeding and anticoagulant therapy
marked activation of the fi brinolytic system. Acute 
DIC may be associated with premature separation of 
the placenta (abruptio placentae), amniotic fl uid em-
bolism or shock, and may also be seen in certain bac-
terial infections such as meningococcal septicaemia, 
where the endotoxin causes damage to monocytes 
and vascular endothelium. It is a common complica-
tion following intravascular haemolysis of red cells 
after a mismatched transfusion. Th e syndrome also 
occurs occasionally after extensive accidental or sur-
gical trauma, particularly following thoracic opera-
tions. Chronic DIC is seen when there is retention of 
a dead fetus as well as in patients with disseminated 
carcinoma, lymphoma and leukaemia (especially 
acute promyelocytic leukaemia). Other clinical asso-
ciations of DIC include purpura fulminans (following 
scarlet fever, chickenpox or rubella), brain injuries, 
extensive burns, liver disease and snake bites.
In those diseases that are associated with DIC, the 
clotting cascade may be activated in various ways; 
namely, by the release of TF from damaged tissues, 
monocytes or red cells; by damage to endothelial 
cells; and by abnormal activators of coagulation. Ac-
tivation of the cascade leads to the generation and 
dissemination of large amounts of thrombin in the 
circulation, the activation of platelets and the forma-
tion of intravascular microthrombi. If this is suffi  cient-
ly extensive, there is a reduction of the concentration 
of fi brinogen and other clotting factors in the plasma, 
which impairs haemostatic activity. As a consequence 
of the fi brin formation, the fi brinolytic mechanism is 
activated (p. 122), resulting in high concentrations of 
FDPs, including D-dimers. Th is leads to further hae-
mostatic impairment, since FDPs inhibit fi brin clot 
formation by interfering with the polymerization of 
the fi brin monomer. FDPs also interfere with the ag-
gregation of platelets. With continued intravascular 
coagulation, there is increased expression of throm-
bomodulin on endothelial cells and the thrombin–
thrombomodulin complexes activate protein C; APC 
inactivates factors Va and VIIIa, further aggravating 
the haemostatic defect, and also inhibits PAI-1, which 
stimulates fi brinolysis. Th e end result is generalized 
haemorrhage due to failure of haemostasis.
Th e haemorrhagic manifestations may be so se-
vere in acute DIC as to lead to death. Th ey include 
petechiae, ecchymoses and bleeding from the nose, 
mouth, urinary and gastrointestinal tracts and va-
gina. Haemorrhage may also occur into the pituitary 
gland, liver, adrenals and brain. Although the usual 
clinical manifestation of acute DIC is haemorrhage, 
occasionally the clinical picture is dominated by 
signs and symptoms of widespread thrombosis and 
infarction; thrombi are most frequently found in the 
microvasculature. Th ere may be digital gangrene, 
adult respiratory distress syndrome, neurological 
signs and renal failure. Mild hypotension is common-
ly present in acute DIC and may progress to become 
more severe and irreversible if not treated in time.
In chronic DIC, the haemorrhagic tendency may 
be mild or moderate. However, some patients with 
chronic DIC are asymptomatic because the activa-
tion of the clotting and fi brinolytic systems is fi nely 
balanced and the production of clotting factors and 
platelets is suffi  ciently increased to compensate for 
their increased consumption.
Diagnosis
Th is is partly dependent on being aware of the condi-
tions with which DIC is associated. Th e investigations 
of value in the diagnosis of acute or chronic DIC are 
as follows:
• Th e platelet count: Platelets become enmeshed in 
the fi brin clots on the vascular endothelium and 
thrombocytopenia is an early and common sign.
• Th e APTT and the PT: Th ese are usually prolonged, 
due to the depletion of clotting factors, especially 
in acute DIC.
• Th e fi brinogen concentration: Th is is reduced. Th e 
best method for the estimation of fi brinogen is 
based on the time taken for a diluted sample of 
plasma to clot in the presence of high concentra-
tions of thrombin (the Clauss method).
• Th e thrombin time: Th is may be prolonged due to 
a combination of a low fi brinogen and excessive 
amounts of FDPs (which inhibit fi brin polymeriza-
tion). Th e thrombin time is determined by adding 
low concentrations of thrombin to citrated plasma 
and measuring the time for the appearance of 
a clot. 
• Estimation of FDPs using the D-dimer assay: FDPs 
including D-dimers are increased. D-dimers can 
be detected by rapid immunological tests in which 
latex particles coated with monoclonal antibody 
directed against D-dimer are agglutinated by D-
dimers present in plasma. 
Treatment
Since the activation of the clotting system is the pri-
mary initiating stimulus and fi brinolysis is mainly a 
secondary phenomenon, treatment is aimed at pre-
venting further coagulation by removal of the initiating 
cause (e.g. when it occurs in obstetric practice, rapid 
and non-traumatic vaginal delivery stops the clotting 
process). While the initiating cause is being dealt with, 
patients with acute DIC should be supported with 

Haemostasis, abnormal bleeding and anticoagulant therapy 129
transfusions of blood, fresh-frozen plasma and plate-
let concentrates in order to restore blood volume and 
replace clotting factors and platelets.
Acquired haemophilia
A rare but devastating acquired bleeding disorder is 
due to autoantibody-mediated factor VIII defi ciency. 
It can occur in either sex, is more common in the 
elderly and has a high mortality. It is treated with ‘by-
passing agents’ such as recombinant factor VIIa or 
FEIBA (see above) and immune suppression.
Anticoagulant drugs
Th e two most frequently used anticoagulant drugs are 
heparin and vitamin K antagonists such as warfarin. 
Parenteral heparin is used in patients with deep vein 
thrombosis (DVT) or pulmonary embolism (PE) and 
is followed by oral warfarin therapy. Subcutaneous 
heparin is used to reduce the risk of DVT and PE in 
hospitalized patients, including those undergoing 
surgery (especially hip surgery). Heparin does not 
cross the placenta and is therefore the preferred drug 
when anticoagulation is required during pregnancy. 
Th e oral anticoagulant warfarin is administered ini-
tially for three months to patients with DVT or PE 
and may be indicated long term to prevent recurrent 
venous thrombosis. Long-term warfarin is also used 
after the insertion of mechanical heart valves and in 
patients with atrial fi brillation.
Heparin
Standard unfractionated heparin is an acidic muco-
polysaccharide (average molecular weight 1.5 × 104 
daltons) that has to be administered intravenously or 
subcutaneously. When administered intravenously, 
its biological half-life is 1 h. Heparin potentiates the 
action of AT, a molecule that inactivates the activated 
serine protease coagulation factors thrombin (IIa) 
and Xa. Heparin chains longer than 18 saccharides in 
length can link AT and IIa molecules leading to pow-
erful inhibition; shorter chains act predominantly by 
potentiating the action against Xa. Low molecular 
weight heparin (average molecular weight 4–5 × 103 
daltons) is used subcutaneously, it inactivates Xa to 
a greater extent than IIa and has a longer biological 
half-life. Examples of low molecular weight heparins 
currently in use are dalteparin, enoxaparin and tin-
zaparin. Fondaparinux is a synthetic pentasaccharide 
that induces AT specifi cally to inhibit Xa.
For the treatment of thrombosis or embolism, 
standard heparin may be administered as a bolus of 
5000 units (70 units/kg) intravenously, followed by a 
continuous intravenous infusion of 15–25 units/kg/h. 
Treatment is monitored by performing the APTT, the 
heparin dosage being altered so as to maintain the 
APTT at 1.5–2.5 times the normal value, although 
these fi gures may vary with diff erent APTT reagents. 
However, the treatment of choice is now low molecu-
lar weight heparin given subcutaneously once a day 
with no monitoring (because of the high predictabil-
ity of eff ect when given according to body weight). 
When a patient with venous thromboembolism un-
dergoing treatment with heparin is started on war-
farin, the heparin should be given for at least 5 days 
or until the INR has been therapeutic for at least 24 
hours, whichever is the longer.
Either standard or, more usually, low molecu-
lar weight heparin is administered subcutaneously 
to prevent venous thrombosis in hospitalized pa-
tients at risk of thrombosis. Th e dosage of standard 
heparin for prevention of postoperative thrombosis is 
5000 units subcutaneously preoperatively, followed 
by 5000 units subcutaneously 8–12 hourly; low mo-
lecular weight heparin is administered once daily.
Haemorrhage due to overdosage is managed by 
stopping the heparin and, if necessary, by giving 
protamine sulphate intravenously. Side eff ects of 
heparin include heparin-induced thrombocytopenia 
(HIT) via an antibody-based mechanism (see p. 119), 
osteoporosis (following long-term use), alopecia and 
hypersensitivity reactions.
Warfarin sodium
Th is is a coumarin derivative that is administered 
orally once a day. As has already been mentioned, it 
is a vitamin K antagonist and interferes with the car-
boxylation and hence with the functional activity of 
factors II, VII, IX and X, protein C and protein S. After 
the fi rst dose, clotting factor activity is reduced in the 
order VII, IX, X and II (i.e. the factor with the  shortest 
half-life is reduced fastest and the longest half-life 
most slowly).
It is customary to prescribe 5 or 10 mg warfarin 
on the fi rst day and subsequent doses are based on 
the INR. Th e therapeutic range for the INR is usually 
2–3. A higher range of 3–4 is used for recurrent DVT 
or PE, despite an INR >2 and for patients with certain 
 prosthetic heart valves.
Th ere are many possible causes for loss of  control of 
warfarin therapy, including the simultaneous use of 
drugs that aff ect warfarin metabolism by cytochrome 
P450 and changes in dietary vitamin K. Bleeding is 

130 
Haemostasis, abnormal bleeding and anticoagulant therapy
controlled by stopping the warfarin by administer-
ing vitamin K and, if necessary, administering pro-
thrombin complex concentrates.
Warfarin crosses the placenta and may cause 
 developmental abnormalities such as chondrodys-
plasia, microcephaly and blindness. It is therefore 
contraindicated in the fi rst trimester of pregnancy. It 
should also not be administered during the last few 
weeks of pregnancy because of its anticoagulant ef-
fect on the fetus and the consequent risk of fetal or 
placental haemorrhage.
Direct oral thrombin inhibitors 
and direct oral Xa inhibitors
Drugs that directly inhibit thrombin (e.g. dabiagtran 
etexilate) or Xa (e.g. rivaroxaban, apixaban, edoxa-
ban) have been developed as oral anticoagulants 
that off er an alternative to warfarin in the treatment 
of  venous thromboembolism and atrial fi brillation. 
Th ey can be given in fi xed dose without monitoring; 
they have relatively short half-lives (in the order of 
9–17 hours) but no antidote.
Investigation of a patient 
with abnormal bleeding
A most important step in the diagnostic process is 
taking a good history from the patient. Th e physician 
should ask, among others, the following questions: 
Has the patient ever bled excessively in the past and 
have any relatives bled excessively? More specifi cally, 
has the patient had tonsillectomy, major abdominal 
or orthopaedic surgery or dental extractions in the 
past, and if so, was there any abnormal bleeding? Th e 
relationship between the type of bleeding and the 
nature of the haemostatic defect has been discussed 
earlier (p. 115).
Th e screening tests that are useful in investigating a 
patient who gives a history of excessive bleeding are 
the following:
• A blood count, including a platelet count, and ex-
amination of a blood fi lm.
• Th e prothrombin time and the activated partial 
thromboplastin time.
• Th e thrombin time or fi brinogen assay.
Th e PFA 100 can be used as a screening test for abnor-
mal platelet function, but if diagnostic suspicion is 
high, platelet aggregation studies must be performed. 
If any of these tests is found to be abnormal, further 
specialized tests may be necessary. Th e screening 
tests do not reliably exclude VWD and, if suspected, 
specifi c tests should be done.
Natural anticoagulant 
mechanisms and the 
prothrombotic state 
(thrombophilia)
Th ere are natural anticoagulant mechanisms in the 
plasma that prevent localized fi brin formation from 
becoming widespread. Th e most important mol-
ecules involved in these mechanisms are AT, protein 
C and protein S, all of which are produced in the liver. 
Inherited or acquired abnormalities of these inhibi-
tors of coagulation may lead to a prothrombotic state 
(thrombophilia). Th is section summarizes the es-
sential information relating to (i) the congenital defi -
ciency of these factors; (ii) prothrombotic states due 
to the presence of a specifi c polymorphism in factor V 
(factor V Leiden) or prothrombin (G20210A polymor-
phism); and (iii) one acquired prothrombotic state 
known as the antiphospholipid syndrome.
Antithrombin
Th is is mainly an inhibitor of thrombin and factor 
Xa (Figure 14.8), but it also inhibits factors IXa and 
XIa and the TF–VIIa complex; its action is markedly 
potentiated by heparin. Normally some AT becomes 
activated by binding to endothelial cell-associated 
heparin sulphate and thus prevents thrombus for-
mation on the endothelium. Congenital AT de-
fi ciency is inherited as an autosomal dominant char-
IXa
X
Xa
II
IIa
VIIIa
Va
APC
PC
AT
PS
PS
TM
Figure  14.8 The natural anticoagulants.

Haemostasis, abnormal bleeding and anticoagulant therapy 131
acter; its prevalence is about 1 in 3000. Th ere are a 
number of molecular variants of AT, with diff erent 
degrees of risk of thrombosis. Heterozygotes (whose 
AT concentrations are 40–50% of normal) may suff er 
from recurrent DVT, mesenteric vein thrombosis and 
PE; the fi rst thrombotic event usually occurs between 
the ages of 15 and 50 years. Homozygotes are rarely 
seen, presumably due to fetal wastage.
Protein C and protein S
Two other inhibitors of coagulation are the vita-
min K-dependent substances protein C and protein 
S. Protein C becomes activated when it reacts with 
thrombin bound to thrombomodulin, a protein of 
the endothelial cell membrane. Activated protein C 
(APC) is a serine protease and degrades factors Va 
and VIIIa, in a reaction potentiated by its cofactor, 
protein S (Figure 14.8).
Some individuals have a hereditary defi ciency of 
protein C, with about 50% of normal levels; these are 
heterozygotes for a mutation aff ecting the protein C 
gene and in one study were found with a prevalence 
of about 1 per 300. A proportion of such heterozy-
gotes displays the clinical picture seen in inherited AT 
defi ciency, but in addition are particularly prone to 
develop superfi cial thrombophlebitis, cerebral vein 
thrombosis and coumarin-induced skin necrosis. 
Homozygotes for the mutant gene are rare, and those 
who have virtually no protein C present with purpura 
fulminans or extensive thrombosis of visceral veins in 
the neonatal period.
Th e incidence of protein C defi ciency in children 
and adults below the age of 45 years with recurrent 
venous thrombosis is about 5% and the incidence of 
protein S defi ciency in this group is similar.
Factor V Leiden and APC 
resistance
A polymorphism in factor V at the APC cleavage site 
(Arg506 → Gln) results in a FVa molecule resistance to 
degradation by APC. In white Caucasian populations, 
about 5% are heterozygous for this polymorphism, 
which is known as factor V Leiden (after its place of 
discovery). It is found in about 20% of cases of venous 
thrombosis. Heterozygotes have a fi ve- to sevenfold 
increase in the risk of thrombosis and homozygotes a 
ten- to fi ftyfold increase. 
Prothrombin allele G20210A
Between 1% and 2% of the population have a 
G20210A polymorphism in the 3′ untranslated region 
of the prothrombin gene that increases prothrombin 
levels. Th is increases the risk for venous thrombosis 
two- to fourfold.
The antiphospholipid syndrome
Th e antiphospholipid antibody syndrome is defi ned 
by the presence of antiphospholipid antibodies (ei-
ther anticardiolipin antibodies, antibeta-2 glycopro-
tein I antibodies or lupus anticoagulant) associated 
with thrombosis or certain problems in pregnancy. 
Lupus anticoagulant prolongs the results of coagu-
lation tests that depend on phospholipid (e.g. the 
APTT). Although these antibodies have an anti-
coagulant eff ect in vitro, they are associated with 
thromboses in vivo. Features of the antiphospholipid 
syndrome may include recurrent venous thromboses 
(most commonly DVT of the lower limbs), recurrent 
arterial thrombosis (most commonly stroke) and 
recurrent miscarriage (due to placental thrombosis 
and infarction). Th rombocytopenia is common. An-
tiphospholipid antibodies are found in some patients 
with SLE or other autoimmune disorders as well as 
in individuals with no other evidence of an immuno-
logical abnormality. Recent work on the mechanisms 
underlying the thrombotic tendency suggests that 
the relevant antibodies are those directed against β2 
glycoprotein I, these antibodies also being detected 
in the anticardiolipin ELISA (β2 glycoprotein I, binds 
to negatively charged phospholipids) and in the lu-
pus anticoagulant assay. 

Haematology Lecture Notes, Ninth edition. C.S.R. Hatton, N.C. Hughes-Jones, D. Hay and D. Keeling. © 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
constituents of the red cells. Th ese alterations in the 
surface structures have not usually aff ected the func-
tion of the red cell, but when the red cells of a donor 
are transfused into a recipient who lacks these anti-
gens, they may induce an immunological response. 
Th ere are 30 major blood group systems (e.g. the ABO 
group, Rh group), together giving hundreds of pos-
sible red cell phenotypes. Although all the systems 
Blood groups
One of the main problems in the transfusion of blood 
is the avoidance of immunological reactions resulting 
from the diff erences between donor and recipient red 
cells. Blood groups have arisen because mutations 
have occurred in the genes controlling the surface 
Blood groups and 
blood transfusion
Learning objectives
✓ To understand the inheritance and signifi cance of the ABO system
✓ To understand the nature and signifi cance of the Rh blood group 
system including RhD
✓ To know the principles involved in the selection of donor blood of 
suitable ABO and Rh groups for a recipient, and the principles of the 
cross-match, including the antiglobulin test
✓ To understand the hazards of blood transfusion (incompatible blood, 
allergic reactions, bacterial infection, citrate toxicity and transmission 
of disease) and of massive blood transfusion
✓ To know how to investigate a patient suspected of receiving an 
incompatible transfusion
✓ To know the basis of blood fractionation and the rationale for the use 
of specifi c blood products, including red cells, platelet concentrates, 
fresh-frozen plasma (FFP) and cryoprecipitate
✓ To know the pathogenesis, clinical features and the principles 
underlying the treatment and prevention of haemolytic disease of the 
newborn (HDN) due to anti-D
✓ To know the principles of antenatal care concerned with predicting 
both the presence and severity of HDN due to anti-D
✓ To know the diff erences between HDN due to anti-D and that due to 
anti-A and anti-B
15

Blood groups and blood transfusion 133
have given rise to transfusion diffi  culties (and in fact 
this is how they have been recognized), this chapter 
focuses on the two of greatest importance, the ABO 
and Rh systems.
ABO system
Practically all red cells have the H antigen, a car-
bohydrate group attached mainly to proteins on 
the cell membrane. This antigen is the basis for the 
ABO blood groups. The ABO locus is encoded on 
chromosome 9q, where one of three possible alle-
les may be found. The A allele encodes for a gly-
cosyltransferase, which modifies the H antigen by 
adding N-acetylgalactosamine to it (thus forming 
the A antigen). The B allele of the ABO locus en-
codes an alternative glycosyltransferase that links 
galactose to the H antigen (thus converting it to the 
B antigen). The O allele, by contrast, encodes no 
functional enzyme at all, such that the H antigen 
remains unmodified. Since each patient inherits 
an allele of the ABO locus on each chromosome 9, 
there are six possible genotypes, namely AA, AO, 
BB, BO, AB and OO, and four possible phenotypes: 
A, AB, B and O. The frequency of these ABO group 
phenotypes differs in different populations; in the 
UK it is approximately group O, 46%; A, 42%; B, 9%; 
and AB, 3%.
Patients with group O blood (genotype O/O) 
will have only unmodifi ed H antigen on their red 
cells, but will have circulating IgM antibodies to 
the A and B antigens. Th ese antibodies exist even if 
the patient has never been exposed to blood of an-
other group; they are thought to arise due to cross-
reactivity between the ABO antigens and commonly 
seen epitopes in bacteria and/or food products, since 
they are produced universally in the fi rst year of life. 
Transfusion of blood of group A or B to patients who 
have group O blood would therefore result in intra-
vascular haemolysis of the transfused cells. Trans-
fusion of group B blood to a patient of group A would 
have a similar eff ect; but group O blood, featuring 
only the universal H- antigen, should not produce a 
haemolytic response in patients of any ABO group. As 
such, it has been termed the ‘universal donor’ group. 
While the ‘universal donor’ label is true to some ex-
tent, it is also subject to caveats: group O blood may 
not contain an ABO antigen that will cause haemoly-
sis, but in rare group O donors there may be the pres-
ence of high-titre antibodies against groups A and B, 
which themselves might induce passive haemolysis 
of the recipient’s own red cells. Th is must be borne in 
mind when determining safe donor blood groups for 
specifi c recipients (see Table 15.1).
It is the naturally occurring presence of anti-A and/
or anti-B antibodies that makes ABO typing so critical 
to blood transfusion practice. Haemolytic reactions 
will occur immediately in the event of incompatible 
transfusion, and may be fatal (see complications of 
transfusion, below).
Rh system
Th e Rh system is also of great importance in transfu-
sion medicine. It is frequently responsible for immu-
nizing patients without the relevant antigen, and can 
cause problems with both transfusion and pregnancy.
Th e inheritance of the Rh blood group system is 
slightly more complex than that of the ABO system. 
Two separate genetic loci on chromosome 1 encode 
for a total of fi ve antigens. Th e fi rst locus, RHD, has 
alleles D or d; D encodes a transmembrane protein 
featuring the D antigen, while the allele d encodes 
a variant that does not bear this antigen. RHCE is 
an adjacent locus that encodes a transmembrane 
ion channel bearing the antigens C (or its variant, c) 
and E (or its variant, e). Alleles at this locus may be 
described as CE, Ce, cE and ce, denoting the set of 
antigens they encode. A complete description of the 
Rh haplotype for a patient will include alleles at both 
RHD and RHCE loci – for example, if a patient’s full 
Rh genotype is DCe/DCE, they will have the RhD al-
lele on both copies of chromosome 1, but Ce and CE 
alleles at the adjacent RHCE locus. Th ey will therefore 
have the antigens D, C, E and e on their red cells. Th e 
commonest haplotypes are DCe, dce and DcE. Th e 
proximity of the two loci to each other means that 
meiotic crossing over is not seen, and the two loci are 
always inherited as a unit.
Th e D antigen is the most clinically important of the 
Rh group antigens, due to its high immunogenicity. 
Table 15.1 Appropriate blood groups for 
transfusion.
Recipient blood 
group
Donor red 
cells
Donor plasma 
A
A or O
A or AB
AB
A, B or O
AB only
B
B or O
B or AB
O
O only
A, B or O
Note: This table does not take account of other blood 
group antigens, and assumes that high-titre/atypical 
antibodies have been excluded from the donor unit.

134 
Blood groups and blood transfusion
An RhD-negative person (e.g. dce/dce) has over a 
50% chance of developing anti-D antibodies after 
the transfusion of one unit of RhD-positive blood: it 
is therefore important that RhD-negative patients re-
ceive RhD-negative blood. Exposure to the ‘c’ antigen 
will provoke anti-c production in only 2% of people 
lacking this antigen, such that the risk of immuniza-
tion after giving blood of type dce/dce to an individ-
ual who lacks the ‘c’ antigen (for instance genotype 
DCe/DCe) is very small.
Note that unlike the ABO system, Rh antibodies 
are not naturally occurring; they must be raised by 
exposure of an antigen-negative individual to the 
appropriate antigen, either through transfusion of 
incompatible blood or through pregnancy. After the 
exposure, IgG antibodies come to predominate, and 
haemolysis is generally extravascular.
Other blood group systems
Other blood group antibodies, which are sometimes 
a problem during blood transfusion, include the fol-
lowing: anti-K (Kell system), anti-Fya (Duff y system), 
anti-Jka (Kidd system) and anti-S (part of the MNSs 
blood group system). Th ese antigens are relatively 
poorly immunogenic. Th eir potency in stimulat-
ing antibody production is 10–1000 times less than 
that of RhD. Consequently, these antigens need not 
be routinely assessed prior to transfusion, although 
more care is required in patients who are on a chronic 
transfusion programme (e.g. in thalassaemia major), 
as the lifetime likelihood of immunization by these 
antigens is higher in heavily transfused patients.
Compatibility
Th e purpose of cross-matching blood before transfu-
sion is to ensure that there is no antibody present in 
the recipient’s plasma that will react with any antigen 
on the donor’s cells. Th e basic technique for detecting 
such antibodies relies on their ability to agglutinate 
red cells that bear the appropriate antigen.
Unfortunately, many red cell antibodies are unable 
to bring about agglutination on their own; many re-
quire additional proteolytic treatment of the red cells 
or the use of an antiglobulin reagent (see below). 
Th e ability of antibodies to agglutinate untreated 
red cells depends partly on the molecular structure 
of the antibody. Pentameric IgM antibodies, which 
readily span adjacent red cells, can bring about ag-
glutination without the addition of any other rea-
gents. By contrast, the smaller IgG antibodies, which 
are far more common than IgM, do not usually cause 
 agglutination.
Antiglobulin test
Th e antiglobulin test was fi rst discovered by C. More-
schi in 1908, and its relevance to clinical practice was 
highlighted by R.R.A. Coombs, A.E. Mourant and R.R. 
Race in 1945. Its purpose is to detect antibodies to red 
cell surface constituents, either bound to the red cell 
surface or free in the serum.
Th e basic constituent of an antiglobulin serum is 
anti-human IgG, which is obtained by injecting hu-
man IgG into animals. Being bivalent, the antiglobu-
lin is able to bring about agglutination of IgG-coated 
red cells by linking IgG molecules on one red cell with 
those on an adjacent red cell, thus holding the cells 
together as agglutinates.
Th e antiglobulin test can be used in two ways. First, 
it can be used to detect antibody already on the pa-
tient’s cells in vivo. Red cells are washed to remove 
the free IgG in the plasma, which would otherwise 
react with and neutralize the antiglobulin. After 
washing, anti-human globin is added and, if the red 
cells are coated with antibody, agglutination takes 
place. Th is is the direct antiglobulin test, used in the 
diagnosis of autoimmune haemolytic anaemia and 
described in Chapter 3. Alternatively, the test can be 
used to detect the presence of antibody in serum, as 
in the cross-matching of blood for transfusion. In this 
case, serum from the patient who requires transfu-
sion is incubated with donor red cells. Any antibody 
present in the recipient’s serum that has specifi city 
for antigens on the donor’s cells will interact with 
those cells. After washing, addition of anti-human 
globulin will bring about red cell agglutination. Th is 
is the indirect antiglobulin test.
Procedure for obtaining compatible 
blood
Th e ABO and RhD group of the recipient must fi rst be 
determined by the addition of agglutinating anti-A 
and anti-B to the red cells. Th e result is checked by 
determining whether anti-A or anti-B is present in 
the recipient’s serum; this is done by adding known 
group A and B cells. Group A blood always contains 
anti-B in the plasma, group B blood has anti-A, and 
group O has anti-A and anti-B. Th e RhD group is also 
determined using an agglutinating IgM anti-D or by 
using IgG anti-D combined with the antiglobulin test.
Donor blood of the appropriate ABO and RhD 
group is then selected. Before this can be transfused, 
cross-matching must be carried out, partly to ensure 
that there have been no errors in the determination of 
the ABO group of the donor and recipient, and partly 
to ensure that no other antibodies are present in the 

Blood groups and blood transfusion 135
recipient that react with the donor’s red cells. A search 
is made for both agglutinating and non-agglutinating 
antibodies, the latter with the antiglobulin test.
Th e sera of all recipients will also be screened for 
the presence of antibodies such as anti-K (Kell), anti-
Fya (Duff y) and anti-Jka (Kidd), using a panel of red 
cells of known phenotype. If screening is not carried 
out, these antibodies will be discovered in the fi nal 
stages of a cross-matching procedure, using the an-
tiglobulin test.
If RhD-negative donor blood is not available for 
RhD-negative recipients, the question arises whether 
it is safe to give RhD-positive blood. RhD-negative 
males, especially elderly males, may receive RhD-
positive blood provided that care is taken to search 
for anti-RhD antibodies before any subsequent trans-
fusions of RhD-positive blood are given. RhD-positive 
blood must never be given to RhD-negative girls or 
RhD-negative women of child-bearing potential, to 
avoid stimulating anti-D production with the risk of 
haemolytic disease of the newborn in subsequent 
pregnancies.
Haemolytic disease of 
the newborn
Haemolytic disease of the newborn (HDN) is a major 
example of the clinical signifi cance of blood groups, 
and arises as a consequence of fetus and mother 
having diff erent blood group antigens. Following the 
passage of fetal red cells across the placenta, there is 
immunization of the mother to fetal blood group an-
tigens that she does not possess. Th e IgG antibodies 
produced are subsequently transferred back across 
the placenta, and react with the fetal red cells causing 
their destruction. Before the advent of prophylactic 
therapy, the overwhelming majority of cases were 
due to antibodies against the Rh-D antigen, with only 
6% due to other antibodies within the Rh system and 
1% due to antibodies in other blood group systems. 
Without treatment, the mortality rate of aff ected in-
fants is about 20%, but antenatal prophylaxis together 
with the introduction of treatment by exchange trans-
fusion, has considerably reduced this value. Approxi-
mately 60% of aff ected infants require an exchange 
transfusion and effi  cient treatment results in the 
survival of about 95% of all aff ected infants. During 
the decade 1958–68, the disease resulted in about 
300–400 neonatal deaths each year in the United 
Kingdom, and an approximately equal number were 
stillborn. During the 1960s prophylactic anti-D im-
munoglobulin injections were routinely introduced 
for RhD-negative mothers in the hours immediately 
following labour, to prevent active immunization due 
to fetal RhD exposure. Since then, the incidence of 
haemolytic disease of the newborn has been greatly 
reduced, and by the year 2000 only about 10–20 
deaths occurred annually in the United Kingdom due 
to anti Rh-D HDN.
Haemolytic disease due to anti-D
Th e aetiology of HDN was fi rst elucidated by Levine 
and colleagues in 1941. A mother who had given 
birth to an aff ected infant was transfused with her 
husband’s blood and suff ered a transfusion reaction. 
It was correctly surmised that the mother had been 
immunized by a fetal antigen that had been derived 
from the father. Th e Rh blood group system was also 
discovered during this period, and it was soon ascer-
tained that the maternal antibody in this mother was 
anti-Rh, now known as anti-RhD.
Small numbers of fetal cells can occasionally be 
found in the maternal circulation throughout preg-
nancy, especially during the third trimester, but the 
main transplacental passage occurs at the time of la-
bour. Th e volume of the haemorrhage is usually less 
than 5 mL, but occasionally may exceed 50 mL; there 
is evidence that the greater the number of fetal cells 
in the circulation, the greater the chance of develop-
ing antibodies. Th e relationship between the total 
amount of fetal red cells in the maternal circulation 
immediately after labour and the incidence of im-
munization of mothers six months later is shown in 
Table 15.2.
Table 15.2 The relationship between the 
number of fetal red cells in the maternal 
circulation after labour and the subsequent 
immunization of the mother.
Estimated number of fetal 
red cells (mL)
Incidence of 
immunization (%)
0
3.7
0.02
4.5
0.04
10.3
0.06–0.08
14.6
0.1–0.2
18.7
0.22–0.78
21.1
.0.8
23.5
Source: From Clarke (1968) Lancet ii, 1–7.

136 
Blood groups and blood transfusion
In the UK population, about 17% of women are RhD 
negative but, before the advent of preventive therapy, 
only about 6% of all D-negative women became immu-
nized to the D antigen. Th is may be explained by the 
observation that not all fathers carry the D antigen; a 
substantial number of those who do are heterozygous, 
hence having only a 50% chance of transmitting the 
D allele. Furthermore, the amount of fetal red cells 
crossing the placenta is often insuffi  cient to initiate 
immunization, and only about 60–70% of Rh-negative 
mothers are able to respond to the D-antigen by pro-
ducing signifi cant amounts of anti-D.
It is very unusual for the fi rst-born child to be af-
fected with HDN, the incidence being slightly less 
than 1% of all Rh-negative mothers who have no his-
tory of transfusion or abortion. Th e reason for this is 
that it is only occasionally that signifi cant numbers of 
fetal red cells cross the placenta suffi  ciently early in 
pregnancy to stimulate anti-D production before the 
child is born.
If the fetal red cells in the mother after labour 
bring about a primary immunization, antibody may 
be found within the following six months. In about 
half of cases, however, antibody concentrations do 
not rise suffi  ciently high for anti-D to be detected at 
this time. During a subsequent pregnancy with an 
Rh-positive fetus, it only requires a few fetal red cells 
crossing the placenta early in pregnancy in order to 
provide a secondary stimulus to anti-D production. 
Th is can usually be detected by the 28th week but 
sometimes may not appear until the last few weeks 
of pregnancy.
Clinical features
Th ere is a very great variation in the severity of the 
disease in an aff ected child. At one end of the scale 
there are infants who are not anaemic at birth and 
who never become jaundiced. However, the Hb con-
centration of these infants may fall abnormally rap-
idly after birth and values as low as 6 g/dL may be 
found up to 30 days later. All neonates with maternal 
antibodies on their red cells (positive direct antiglob-
ulin test) should therefore be followed up for a short 
period after birth.
Moderately severely aff ected babies may or may 
not be anaemic at birth, but the rate of red cell de-
struction is such that jaundice develops within a 
few hours. Jaundice is not seen at the time of birth, 
since prior to this bilirubin is excreted by placental 
transfer. Within 48–72 hours of birth, the plasma bi-
lirubin may rise to 350–700 μmol/L. Th e rate of rise of 
plasma bilirubin is governed partly by the rate of red 
cell destruction and partly by the degree of maturity 
of the bilirubin excretory mechanism. As a result of 
the poor development of the excretory mechanism 
for bilirubin in many infants, it is quite common for a 
child with a cord Hb within the normal range (lower 
limit 13.5g/dL) to become severely jaundiced. Th e 
danger associated with a high bilirubin level is ker-
nicterus resulting from damage to the basal ganglia 
of the brain, with a clinical picture characterized by 
spasticity and death from respiratory failure. 
In the past, severely aff ected babies could become 
so anaemic that cardiac failure with hydrops, or even 
stillbirth would ensue. With modern management, 
such a severe clinical picture is rarely seen.
Management of mother and child
When a pregnant woman attends her fi rst booking 
appointment with the antenatal service, she should 
have blood taken to check her ABO and RhD status, 
as well as to examine for any other red cell antibodies 
that might react with paternally derived antigens. 
Women who are negative for RhD are given routine 
antenatal anti-D prophylaxis at 28 weeks, 34 weeks 
and within 72 hours of delivery. Th is involves an intra-
muscular injection of anti-D immunoglobulin, which 
prevents active immunization in the case of red cell 
transfer across the placenta. In addition, any poten-
tially sensitizing event is also treated with additional 
anti-D administration: such events include abdomi-
nal trauma, threatened abortion, or any spontaneous 
abortion after 12 weeks. An estimate of the size of 
any feto-maternal haemorrhage is permitted using 
the Kleihauer-Betke technique. Th is test exploits the 
diff erential sensitivity to acid of cells containing fetal 
haemoglobin and those containing adult globins. 
Treatment of a blood smear, taken from the mother’s 
blood, with an acid preparation will leach only adult 
globin from the cells. Th e cells derived from the fetal 
circulation can then be counted, and the size of the 
feto-maternal haemorrhage defi ned. Appropriate ti-
tration of the correct dose of anti-D immunoglobulin 
can then be performed.
In pregnancies that are likely to be aff ected, ultra-
sound examination is useful to detect fetal hydrops 
and Doppler ultrasound of the middle cerebral ar-
tery can be used to assess fetal anaemia. If anaemia 
is confi rmed by ultrasound-guided fetal blood sam-
pling, intrauterine transfusion may be commenced. 
Since about half the total numbers of stillbirths oc-
cur after the 36th week of pregnancy, induction at 36 
weeks reduces the incidence of stillbirth.
When anti-D is present in the mother’s plasma, 
cord blood is obtained at delivery and the presence of 
antibody on the infant’s red cells is confi rmed by the 

Blood groups and blood transfusion 137
direct antiglobulin test. Additional essential investi-
gations include a full blood count and examination 
of the blood fi lm for evidence of haemolysis, plus as-
sessment of bilirubin levels.
Th e usual treatment of HDN involves exchange 
transfusion for neonates with severe anaemia and/
or severe hyperbilirubinaemia (>350micromol/l) 
or rapidly increasing hyperbilirubinaemia. For less 
severe hyperbilirubinaemia, phototherapy can be 
eff ective in reducing the bilirubin by inducing pho-
toisomerization to forms more readily excreted with-
out the need for conjugation.
Haemolytic disease due to anti-A 
and anti-B
Haemolytic disease due to anti-A or anti-B is almost 
entirely confi ned to group A and B infants born to 
group O mothers: it is mainly group O mothers who 
have anti-A and anti-B of the IgG class, which can 
cross the placenta. ABO HDN (of all grades of sever-
ity) aff ects about 1 in 150 births. With the advent of 
successful anti-D prophylaxis, clinically signifi cant 
disease is now more frequently due to anti-A or anti-
B or to antibodies other than anti-D within the Rh 
system, or rarely to the involvement of other blood 
group systems. Unlike HDN due to anti-D, ABO HDN 
may be seen in the fi rst pregnancy, since ABO anti-
bodies are naturally present. ABO HDN is usually 
very mild; stillbirths do not occur, severe anaemia is 
uncommon and the child rarely requires treatment 
by exchange transfusion. Phototherapy is usually suf-
fi cient to reduce bilirubin levels. A consistent fi nding 
is the presence of spherocytes on inspection of cord 
blood smears. In certain parts of the world, ABO HDN 
is even more common than in the United Kingdom. 
Th is may in part result from the high concentrations 
of IgG anti-A and anti-B in such  populations.
Blood donation and 
blood components
Volunteer blood donors provide red cells, platelets, 
plasma products and granulocytes for transfusion. 
Th is section reviews the types and uses of blood 
products, and the potential problems associated with 
transfusion.
Packed red cells are the most widely used blood 
product. Th ey are given in a volume of approxi-
mately 300 ml. Th e great bulk of plasma is reduced, 
leaving approximately 20 ml; a solution of saline with 
adenine, glucose and mannitol (SAG-M) is used to 
replace the rest of the plasma, and maintains the 
health of the red cells in storage. A unit of packed red 
cells will last for 35 days at 4°C, though stored blood 
tends to have reduced levels of 2,3-DPG. White cells 
are also routinely removed from the red cell compo-
nents (leucodepleted blood).
Fresh frozen plasma (FFP) may also be prepared 
from whole blood donations or from apheresis collec-
tion. Blood is centrifuged to separate out the plasma 
and cellular phases, and the fresh plasma is frozen 
for up to one year. FFP is typically used to replace 
coagulation factor defi ciencies in cases where multi-
ple factors are lost (e.g. in disseminated intravascu-
lar coagulation with haemorrhagic symptoms, or as 
part of a massive transfusion protocol – see below). 
A slightly diff erent product, cryoprecipitate, is rich in 
fi brinogen, and is prepared by thawing frozen plasma 
in a controlled fashion. As well as fi brinogen, other 
high molecular weight components are also concen-
trated in cryoprecipitate, including von Willebrand 
factor. Cryoprecipitate is an excellent product for the 
replacement of fi brinogen in DIC.
Platelets for transfusion may be derived from 
whole blood donations, again by centrifugation. A 
single adult dose of platelets will require the platelet 
component of several donors’ whole blood. Platelets 
may also be collected by apheresis; this more effi  -
cient method allows the production of a platelet dose 
from a single volunteer, thus exposing the recipient to 
the blood of fewer individual donors. Platelets need 
to be stored at 22°C with constant shaking; this has 
been shown as the best method for maintaining their 
function, but increases the risk of bacterial contami-
nation. Th us they have a relatively short shelf life of 
fi ve days, and supplies need to be carefully managed.
Components more rarely used include granu-
locytes. Th e evidence for the use of granulocyte 
transfusions is very limited, but they are sometimes 
employed in severely neutropenic patients who are 
critically ill with sepsis, and in whom standard thera-
pies for sepsis have failed to achieve a response. As 
with platelets, granulocytes may be obtained through 
centrifugation of whole blood or through apheresis; 
however, with granulocyte collections, donors must 
be primed with G-CSF prior to collection, to ensure 
that adequate numbers of cells are obtained.
Hazards of blood transfusion: The 
SHOT report
As with all medical interventions, the benefi ts of 
transfusion must be weighed against the associated 
risks. A legal framework exists to ensure the best 

138 
Blood groups and blood transfusion
possible safety standards for transfusion, with regula-
tions to monitor all aspects of collection, storage and 
administration. In the United Kingdom, all adverse 
incidents following blood transfusion are reported to 
the Serious Hazards of Transfusion (SHOT) Commit-
tee. Th e nature of the incidents and the relative fre-
quency reported between 1996 and 2010 are given in 
Figure 15.1.
Th e commonest error reported to the SHOT Com-
mittee over this period is the transfusion of an incor-
rect blood product – usually a component intended 
for another patient. Th e main reasons for this are 
administrative – for example errors in the labelling of 
blood samples taken for cross-matching and the fail-
ure to match the name on the blood pack with that 
of the recipient. Since this raises the possibility of 
potentially fatal ABO-incompatible transfusions be-
ing given, strategies for reducing the risk are crucial. 
Some hospitals have instituted a barcoding system for 
blood transfusion, in which the patient’s wristband 
and the sample taken for cross-matching are labelled 
with matching barcodes at the time of venepuncture. 
When the blood product for transfusion is chosen in 
the transfusion laboratory, this too is marked with 
the same barcode. In order for the transfusion to 
take place, a barcode scanner must be used to con-
fi rm that the correct product is being delivered to the 
correct patient – with a reduction in the likelihood of 
the wrong unit being administered. Simple processes 
such as this can signifi cantly reduce the possibility of 
transfusing blood matched for another patient.
Haemolytic reactions due to 
incompatible red cells
Th e symptoms and signs that are found after a trans-
fusion of incompatible blood depend on whether the 
transfused cells undergo intravascular or extravascu-
lar haemolysis. Intravascular lysis leads to haemoglo-
binaemia and haemoglobinuria and is almost always 
due to the action of anti-A or anti-B – both being strong 
activators of the complement system. Symptoms may 
appear from a few minutes to several hours after be-
ginning to transfuse ABO-incompatible blood and 
may include restlessness, anxiety, fever, chills, fl ush-
ing of the face, pain in the lumbar region and chest, 
vomiting and diarrhoea. If the reaction is severe, there 
is circulatory collapse and the development of acute 
renal failure. Sometimes, haemorrhage may occur 
due to disseminated intravascular coagulation. 
It is not only the administration of red cells that can 
cause ABO incompatibility reactions. Th e adminis-
tration of FFP or platelets with plasma that contains 
donor anti-A or anti-B antibodies may also lyse the 
recipient’s own red cells if the wrong product is given 
to the wrong patient. 
Th e immediate management of a mismatched 
transfusion is to stop the transfusion, keeping the bag 
and giving set so that the transfusion laboratory can 
check the grouping of the blood product. Circulatory 
support is essential and inotropes may even be need-
ed. Sometimes furosemide may be required to try to 
maintain urinary output. DIC, if it develops, should 
be treated with standard management. When deaths 
do occur, they are usually the result either of severe 
DIC or of renal failure. Th e overall mortality following 
ABO incompatibility is probably of the order of 10%.
By contrast, when blood transfusion is followed by 
extravascular destruction of red cells, there are usu-
ally only chills and fever occurring one or more hours 
after the start of the transfusion. Th e most common 
antibody causing extravascular destruction is anti-D. 
Th is type of incompatibility is almost never followed 
by renal failure.
IBCT 485
TTI 3
TRALI 23
PTP 2
DTR 28
ATR 68
Figure 15.1 Pie chart showing hazards of 
transfusion in the UK from 1996–2010 as 
reported to the SHOT Committee. Notes: 
TRALI – transfusion-associated acute lung 
injury; TTI – transfusion-transmitted infection; 
ATR – acute transfusion reaction; DTR – 
delayed transfusion reaction; PTP – post-
transfusion purpura; IBCT – incorrect blood 
component transfused
Source: UK SHOT Committee report 2010.

Blood groups and blood transfusion 139
Another type of haemolytic complication is the 
delayed haemolytic transfusion reaction (DTR). Th is 
occurs in a recipient who has been previously im-
munized by transfusion or pregnancy, but in whom 
the plasma antibody titre has become too weak to be 
identifi ed. Following the transfusion, a secondary im-
munological response takes place and the antibody 
titre rapidly rises, bringing about haemolysis, usually 
about seven days later. Typically, the patient develops 
anaemia, fever, jaundice and sometimes haemoglob-
inuria. Antibodies to red cell antigens Kidd (Jk) and 
the Rh system are the most common cause of these 
reactions.
Transfusion-transmitted 
infections
Th e risk of transfusion-transmitted infections (TTIs) 
has declined over the last decade due to the adop-
tion of a number of safety strategies. Over the period 
1996 to 2010, only 69 TTIs were reported to SHOT. 
Th e majority of TTIs are due to bacterial contamina-
tion, which is commoner in platelet components due 
to their storage conditions. Other theoretical TTIs 
include hepatitis B (HBV), human T-cell leukaemia 
virus (HTLV), human immunodefi ciency virus (HIV) 
infection and hepatitis C (HCV). As would be expect-
ed, highly rigorous screening programmes are used 
to ensure that infected components do not enter the 
blood supply.
Various tiers of safety procedures have been put 
in place. ‘Self-exclusion’ is an important contributor 
to blood safety. Th ose donors who are in ‘high-risk’ 
categories are asked not to donate – for instance those 
who have recently travelled to a tropical country (risk 
of malarial transmission), and those with a history of 
intravenous drug abuse. Following this, testing is per-
formed on every component donated. For hepatitis 
C, for example, a combination of serological tests and 
nucleic acid amplifi cation tests to detect viral RNA 
has reduced the risk of contracting HCV from a trans-
fusion to an estimated 1 in 22 million. A combination 
of serological and molecular testing is also employed 
to screen all samples for HBV, HIV, HTLV and syph-
ilis, among others. Th e estimated chance that a blood 
unit infected with HIV might enter the UK supply is 
around 1 in 5 million, and for hepatitis B the chance 
is around 1 in 500 000. 
A further safety procedure is the use of patho-
gen inactivation technology to inactivate viruses, 
bacteria, fungi and protozoa. Th e addition of sol-
vent/detergent will inactivate the lipid envelope 
of viruses such as HBV, HCV, HIV and HTLV, and 
others such as Epstein–Barr virus (EBV) and cy-
tomegalovirus (CMV). Th is process is only suitable 
for non-cellular components (e.g. intravenous im-
mune globulin). Other methods for inactivation 
of pathogens include the use of photochemical 
systems such as psoralen-S59 compounds where, 
after the addition of the psoralen, the blood product 
is exposed to high-intensity ultraviolet A light. Th is 
technology is in use in several countries, where it 
has the additional advantage of prolonging the shelf 
life of some blood products (e.g. platelets). Bacterial 
infection may also be detected prior to the admin-
istration of the component through the use of tech-
nologies like Bact/Alert. Th is uses a gas permeable 
colorimetric sensor and refl ected light to measure 
the production of CO2 by bacterial metabolism in a 
blood component product. As CO2 levels climb, the 
colour of the BactAlert vial turns yellow, increasing 
refl ectance, and allowing detection of the earliest 
stages of bacterial infection. Frequent monitoring 
using this system will limit the number of potentially 
infected units that enter the supply.
Variant Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease
CJD is one of a group of transmissible spongiform 
encephalopathy disorders, and it exists in familial, 
sporadic and variant types. Th e pathogenic agent 
is believed to be a prion protein, which causes dis-
ease by aff ecting the normal conformation of other 
proteins. Th ere is a long incubation period and so 
far there is no treatment for the progressive, central 
nervous system degeneration that this condition 
produces. Rapidly progressive dementia is followed 
by early death. Particular concern arose regarding 
the variant form of CJD during the outbreak of bo-
vine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) in cattle in 
the United Kingdom in the 1980s. Th is sparked con-
siderable concern about the possibility of transmis-
sion of the responsible prion through the food chain, 
with the development of the disease after consuming 
beef from aff ected cattle. Th e long incubation period 
raised the spectre of many potentially infected yet 
asymptomatic people.
It was also reported that v-CJD can be transmitted 
by blood transfusion. As a precaution, UK blood serv-
ices exclude any potential blood donors who received 
blood products from or gave blood to individuals who 
subsequently developed v-CJD, or who have received 
a blood transfusion since 1980. In addition, all units 
of blood are leuco depleted to reduce potentially 
infected white cells from donors transmitting the 
 disease. Th ere is currently no screening test for v-CJD.

140 
Blood groups and blood transfusion
Cytomegalovirus
CMV is a DNA herpes virus associated with leuco-
cytes, and may be transmitted via respiratory secre-
tions, sexually and during childbirth. Th e incidence 
of CMV antibodies varies in diff erent parts of the 
world, from 30% to 80% or more. As with most herpes 
viruses, the virus persists latently after infection. 
In immunocompetent people, the disease caused 
by CMV varies from a subclinical infection to the ap-
pearance of lymphadenopathy and a mild hepatitis. 
Th e main danger of CMV infection is in infants and 
immunocompromised patients and thus prevention 
of CMV infection through blood transfusion is target-
ed to defi ned patient groups. Premature neonates of 
low birth weight born to mothers without anti-CMV 
antibody are especially at risk. Patients receiving 
bone marrow and solid organ transplants are also at 
risk (see Chapter 12). Th us CMV-antibody negative 
blood is generally made available for these patients, 
although leucodepletion (which is now standard) 
may off er a similar degree of protection against trans-
fusion-transmitted CMV infection.
Other infections
Other infections known to be transmitted by trans-
fusion include syphilis and malaria. Th e prevention 
of transmission of syphilis is by serological testing of 
donors. Another factor of importance is the storage 
of blood at 4°C, since spirochaetes do not survive for 
more than a few days under these conditions. With re-
gard to malaria, individuals who have returned from 
an area where malaria is endemic are not accepted as 
donors for six months. Anyone with a positive malaria 
antibody test (MAT) is routinely debarred from dona-
tion. Brucellosis, babesiosis, Chagas’ disease (caused 
by Trypanosoma cruzi), West Nile virus (prevalent in 
the USA and Canada) and parvovirus B19, which is 
not inactivated by detergent methods, have also been 
transmitted by transfusion.
As new diseases emerge from time to time, the risk 
of TTI always remains. It is therefore important that 
transfusion is only given when essential for survival 
or quality of life, so that the benefi ts clearly outweigh 
the uncertain risks of TTI.
Transfusion-associated graft 
versus host disease
Transfusion of viable white cells in blood products 
can in very rare circumstances lead to transfusion-
associated graft versus host disease (TA-GVHD). 
Th is typically fatal disorder is seen in patients with 
compromised immune function, but may also occur 
when a patient receives a blood component from a 
donor who shares an HLA haplotype. Either of these 
situtations mean that the transfused lymphocytes 
are not cleared in the normal way, but can engraft 
and function in the recipient, leading to a clinical 
picture that usually includes a rash and marrow 
failure. It can be eliminated by irradiating the blood 
products (red cells, platelets or plasma) before ad-
ministration. Patients undergoing bone marrow 
transplantation, those with Hodgkin lymphoma 
and patients who have received purine analogue 
chemotherapy (e.g. fl udarabine) are among those 
who should receive only irradiated blood products 
to avoid this complication.
Immediate-type hypersensitivity
Hypersensitivity reactions may occur soon after the 
transfusion of blood or plasma. Th e antibodies in-
volved are often unknown, but some severe reactions 
are caused by anti-IgA antibodies. IgA defi ciency is 
uncommon, but patients who lack IgA, and who have 
previously been sensitized to this immunoglobulin, 
may manifest allergic reactions if IgA-containing 
blood products are administered. In mild cases, fea-
tures may be limited to urticaria, erythema, macu-
lopapular rash or periorbital oedema. In the more 
severe reactions, hypotension may occur; bronchos-
pasm and laryngeal oedema are rare. 
Mild hypersensitivity reactions of any cause prob-
ably occur in about 1–3% of transfusions and can be 
treated with antihistamines. Severe reactions are very 
infrequent (1:20 000) and these may require the ad-
ministration of hydrocortisone and adrenaline.
Transfusion-related acute lung 
injury (TRALI)
Th is complication typically arises after the transfusion 
of plasma-rich blood components, and is thought 
to be due to the interaction of donor anti-leucocyte 
antibodies in the transfused blood component in-
teracting with the recipient’s leucocytes. However, a 
comprehensive understanding of the pathogenesis of 
TRALI has not yet been established. Additional ‘hits’ 
are thought to be needed in order for the clinical pic-
ture to emerge, since TRALI is most often seen in pa-
tients already ill with pulmonary pathology.
Th e symptoms and signs of TRALI typically arise 
within six hours of transfusion, with dyspnoea and 
hypotension being accompanied by bilateral infi l-
trates on the chest x-ray. Th e diff erential diagnosis 

Blood groups and blood transfusion 141
of pulmonary oedema is best excluded by examining 
the central venous pressure: while in fl uid overload 
it is high, in TRALI it would be expected to be low. 
Management is supportive, and donors from whom 
implicated blood products were prepared are exclud-
ed from donating further components.
Circulatory overload
Circulatory overload with consequent cardiac failure 
can easily be brought about by the too-rapid transfu-
sion of blood, especially in the elderly and in those who 
have been severely anaemic for some time. Th e fi rst 
signs are dyspnoea, crepitations at the lung bases and 
a rise in jugular venous pressure. Stopping the transfu-
sion is the fi rst therapeutic manoeuvre, followed by di-
uresis if needed. Th e rate at which blood is transfused 
must be tailored to the urgency of the clinical situation 
and the cardiovascular fi tness of the patient. 
Citrate toxicity
Citrate toxicity is due to the reduction in ionized calci-
um in the patient’s plasma, and may cause signifi cant 
problems if large volumes of stored blood need to be 
given rapidly. Th e typical signs are tremors and prolon-
gation of the QT interval in the electrocardiogram. Very 
high rates of transfusion may warrant consideration of 
calcium gluconate administration to avoid this compli-
cation.
Other hazards
Prior to the universal leucodepletion of blood products, 
febrile reactions occurred in 0.5–1% of transfusions. 
Reactions were due to the presence of pyrogens (e.g. 
soluble bacterial polysaccharides) in the anticoagu-
lant, or to the presence in the recipient of anti-HLA 
antibodies or granulocyte-specifi c antibodies, result-
ing from immunization during pregnancy or previous 
transfusions. Both are now uncommon. 
Management of 
transfusion reactions
Th e fi rst diagnosis to exclude is an acute haemo-
lytic transfusion reaction. Th us, in any patient with 
fever, tachycardia hypotension, dyspnoea or chest/
abdominal pain, the fi rst action is always to stop 
the transfusion and clarify that the correct pa-
tient’s details are on the component being trans-
fused. Any suspicion of ABO incompatibility should 
lead to the institution of circulatory support with 
IV fl uids,  careful monitoring of pulse, blood pres-
sure and urine output, and supportive manage-
ment of any developing DIC. Th e component bag 
should be returned to the transfusion laboratory 
with a fresh cross-match sample from the patient; 
if incompatible cells have been transfused, they 
may still be detectable in the patient’s blood. Sam-
ples should also be sent to assess for intravascular 
haemolysis – including a full blood count, serum 
haptoglobin, and haemoglobinuria. 
Other haemolytic reactions, although unlikely to 
be as severe, should be managed in similar fashion. It 
is important to ensure that the possibility of bacteri-
ally contaminated units has been addressed through 
taking blood cultures. If necessary, broad-spectrum 
antibiotics may be commenced empirically after cul-
tures have been drawn.
Severe allergic reaction should be treated initially 
by stopping the transfusion and returning the unit 
to the laboratory, as above. Chlorpheniramine may 
help, but severe reactions are likely to require oxygen 
and nebulized salbutamol, plus intramuscular adren-
aline in the case of circulatory collapse.
In addition to the reactions described above, acute 
dyspnoea can occur due to circulatory overload (with 
an elevated venous pressure being a key physical 
sign) and in TRALI. Diuresis is clearly indicated in the 
former, while the latter is treated supportively, with 
ventilatory support where needed. 
With mild fevers only, simple interventions may 
suffi  ce (e.g. giving an antipyretic and slowing the 
transfusion); similarly, if a mild allergic reaction is ev-
ident (e.g. urticaria), chlorpheniramine followed by 
a slower reinstatement of the transfusion may help.
Delayed transfusion reactions may be harder to 
diagnose and investigate, since the temporal asso-
ciation with the transfusion is lost. However, it is still 
important to establish the nature of the reaction so 
that future transfusions may be managed eff ectively. 
Appropriate investigations include a full blood count, 
a direct antiglobulin test, serum bilirubin and assess-
ment of renal function. Treatment is rarely needed, 
but the expected rise in haemoglobin after transfu-
sion may not be seen.
Massive transfusion
Patients with acute haemorrhage (i.e. loss of red cells 
and plasma) may need to be transfused with large 
quantities of packed red cells. Massive transfusion 
has been defi ned as the replacement of one blood 

142 
Blood groups and blood transfusion
volume over 24 hours, or as the replacement of 50% 
of circulating volume in 3 hours. In such emergen-
cies, it is critical that there is good communication 
between the clinicians responsible for the patient and 
the staff  of the blood transfusion laboratory. Group 
compatible blood can usually be available within 
15 minutes of a cross-match sample arriving in the 
laboratory, obviating the need for ‘universal donor’ 
group O RhD-negative blood. With the transfusion 
of many units of packed red cells, the patient may 
become defi cient in key plasma components such as 
clotting factors and may also become thrombocyto-
penic (even in the absence of DIC). Th ere is limited 
evidence to guide transfusion practice in this fi eld, 
but the administration of one unit of FFP per unit of 
red cells may be eff ective in replacing clotting factors. 
Fibrinogen and platelets should also be replaced, 
with 2 pools of cryoprecipitate and 1 adult dose of 
platelets per 6–8 units of packed red cells. Wherever 
possible, this general approach should be personal-
ized by laboratory testing of the full blood count and 
coagulation profi le.

Haematology Lecture Notes, Ninth edition. C.S.R. Hatton, N.C. Hughes-Jones, D. Hay and D. Keeling. © 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
General reference books
Bain, B.J. (2006) Blood Cells: A Practical Guide. 
 Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell.
Bain, B.J., Bates, I., Laff an, M.A. & Lewis, S.M. (2012) 
Dacie and Lewis Practical Haematology, 11th edn. 
Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Hoff brand, V., Pettit, J.E. & Vyas, P. (2009) Color Atlas 
of Clinical Hematology, 4th edn. Amsterdam: Elsevier 
Health.
Kaushansky, K., Lichtman, M.A., Beutler, E., Kipps, 
T.J., Prchal, J. & Seligsohn, U. (2010) Williams 
Hematology, 8th edn. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Orkin, S.H., Nathan, D.G., Ginsburg, D., Look, A.T., 
Fisher, D.E. & Lux IV, S. (2008) Nathan and Oski’s 
Hematology of Infancy and Childhood: Expert 
Consult: Online and Print, 7th edn. Philadelphia: 
Saunders Publishing.
Swerdlow, S.H., Campo, E., Harris, N.L., Jaff e, E.S., 
Pileri, S.A., Stein, H., Th iele, J. & Vardiman, J.W. 
(2008) WHO Classifi cation of Tumours of Haemat-
opoietic and Lymphoid Tissue, 4th edn. Geneva: 
WHO Press.
Chapter 1 An 
introduction to 
haematopoiesis
Kaushansky, K.N. (2006) Mechanisms of disease: 
Lineage-specifi c hematopoietic growth factors, New 
England Journal of Medicine, May 11; 354: 2034–2045.
Orkin, S.H. & Zon, L.I. (2008) Hematopoiesis: An 
evolving paradigm for stem cell biology, Cell, Febru-
ary 22; 132(4): 631–644.
Osawa, M., Hanada, J., Hamada, H., & Nakauchi, H. 
(1996) Long-term lymphohematopoietic reconstitu-
tion by a single CD34-low/negative hematopoietic 
stem cell, Science, July 12; 273(5272): 242–245.
Further reading 
16
Palis, J. (2008) Ontogeny of erythropoiesis, Current 
Opinion in Hematology, May; 15(3): 155–161. 
Zhu, J. & Emerson, G. (2002) Hematopoietic 
 cytokines, transcription factors and lineage commit-
ment, Oncogene, 21(21): 3295–3313.
Chapter 2 Anaemia: 
General principles
Fleming, R.E. & Ponka, P.N. (2012) Iron overload in 
human disease, New England Journal of Medicine, 
January 26; 366(4): 348–359. 
Ganz, T. & Nemeth, E. (2011) Th e hepcidin-ferroportin 
system as a therapeutic target in anemias and iron 
overload disorders, Hematology: American Society of 
Hematology Education Program, 2011: 538–542. 
Goonewardene, M., Shehata, M. & Hamad, A. (2012) 
Best Practice and Research: Clinical Obstetrics and 
Gynaecology, February; 26(1): 3–24. 
Kaferle, J. & Strzoda, C.E. (2009) Evaluation of mac-
rocytosis, American Family Physician, Feb 1; 79(3): 
203–208. 
Lankhorst, C.E. & Wish, J.B. (2010) Anemia in renal 
disease: Diagnosis and management, Blood Reviews, 
Jan; 24(1): 39–47. 
Liu, K. & Kaff es, A.J. (2012) Iron defi ciency anaemia: 
A review of diagnosis, investigation and manage-
ment, European Journal of Gastroenterology and 
Hepatology, February; 24(2): 109–116.
Roy, C.N. (2010) Anemia of infl ammation, Hematol-
ogy: American Society for Hematology Education Pro-
gram, 2010: 276–280.
Solomon, L.R. (2007) Disorders of cobalamin (vita-
min B12) metabolism: Emerging concepts in patho-
physiology, diagnosis and treatment, Blood Reviews, 
May; 21(3): 113–130. 
Weiss, G. & Goodnough, L.T. (2005) Medical progress: 
Anemia of chronic disease, New England Journal of 
Medicine, 352: 1011–1023.

144 
Further reading
Chapter 3 Haemolytic 
anaemias
An, X. & Mohandas, N. (2008) Disorders of red cell 
membrane. British Journal of Haematology, May; 
141(3): 367–375.
Barcellini, W., Bianchi, P., Fermo, E., Imperiali, F.G., 
Marcello, A.P., Vercellati, C., Zaninoni, A. & Zanella, 
A. (2011) Hereditary red cell membrane defects: 
Diagnostic and clinical aspects, Blood Transfusion, 
July; 9(3): 274 –277. 
Bruce, L.J. (2008) Red cell membrane transport abnor-
malities, Current Opinion in Hematology, May; 15(3): 
184–190. 
Fibach, E. & Rachmilewitz, E. (2008) Th e role of oxi-
dative stress in hemolytic anemia, Current Molecular 
Medicine, Nov; 8(7): 609–619.
Garratty, G. (2009) Drug-induced immune hemolytic 
anemia, Hematology: American Society for Hematol-
ogy Education Program, 2009: 73–79. 
Hoff man, P.C. (2009) Immune hemolytic anemia: Se-
lected topics, Hematology: American Society for He-
matology Education Program, 2009: 80–86.
Parker, C.J. (2008) Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglob-
inuria: An historical overview, Hematology: American 
Society for Hematology Education Program, 2008: 
93–103.
Petz, L.D. (2008) Cold antibody autoimmune hemo-
lytic anemias, Blood Review, Jan; 22(1): 1–15.
Tavazzi, D., Taher, A. & Cappellini, M.D. (2008) Red 
blood cell enzyme disorders: An overview, Pediatric 
Annals, May; 37(5): 303–310. 
Chapter 4 Disorders of 
globin synthesis
Bauer, D.E. & Orkin, S.H. (2011) Update on fetal he-
moglobin gene regulation in hemoglobinopathies, 
Current Opinion in Pediatrics, Feb; 23(1): 1–8.
Bunn, H.F., Nathan, D.G., Dover, G.J., Hebbel, R.P., 
Platt, O.S., Rosse, W.F. & Ware, R.E. (2010) Pulmonary 
hypertension and nitric oxide depletion in sickle cell 
disease, Blood, August 5; 116(5): 687–692.
Higgs, D.R., Engel, J.D. & Stamatoyannopoulos, G. 
(2012) Th alassaemia, Lancet, January 28; 379(9813): 
373–383. 
Paul, R.N., Castro, O.L., Aggarwal, A. & Oneal, P.A. 
(2011) Acute chest syndrome: Sickle cell disease, Eu-
ropean Journal of Haematology, September; 87(3): 
191–207. 
Rees, D.C., Williams, T.N. & Gladwin, M.T. (2010) 
Sickle-cell disease, Lancet, December 11; 376(9757): 
2018–2031. 
Verduzco, L.A. & Nathan, D.G. (2009) Sickle cell dis-
ease and stroke, Blood, December 10; 114(25): 5117–
5125. 
Chapters 5 to 13 
Malignant haematology, 
aplastic anaemia and 
pure red cell aplasia
Swerdlow et al. (2008), detailed in General reference 
books above, provides a very clear, concise reference 
for all the haematological malignancies and related 
disorders, and is highly recommended to those stu-
dents of haematology who require greater detail, 
particularly with regard to the pathology and ge-
netics of the disorders. For students requiring more 
information with regard to management and treat-
ment, the following references are recommended.
Campbell, P.J., Maclean, C., Beer, P.A., Buck, G., 
Wheatley, K., Kiladjian, J.J. et al. (2012) Correlation of 
blood counts with vascular complications in essential 
thrombocythemia: Analysis of the prospective PT1 
cohort, Blood, August 16; 120(7): 1409–1411.
Cavalli, F., Isaacson, P.G., Gascoyne, R.D. & Zucca, 
E. (2001) MALT lymphomas, Hematology: American 
Society of Hematology Education Program, 2001: 
241–258.
Cervantes, F., Dupriez, B., Passamonti, F., Vannucchi, 
A.M., Morra, E., Reilly, J.T. et al. (2012) Improving 
survival trends in primary myelofi brosis: An interna-
tional study, Journal of Clinical Oncology, August 20, 
30: 2981–2987.
Chakraverty, R. & Mackinnion, S. (2011) Allogeneic 
transplantation for lymphoma, Journal of Clinical 
Oncology, May 10; 29(14): 1855–1863.
Coiffi  er, B., Lepage, E., Briere, J., Herbrecht, R., Tilly, 
H., Bouabdallah, R. et al. (2002) CHOP chemotherapy 
plus rituximab compared with CHOP alone in elderly 
patients with diff use large-B-cell lymphoma, New 
England Journal of Medicine, 346(4): 235–242.
Craddock, C. (2000) Haemopoietic stem-cell trans-
plantation: Recent progress and future promise, Lan-
cet Oncology, December; 1: 227–234.
Deng, C., Lee, S. & O’Connor, O.A. (2012) New strate-
gies in the treatment of mantle cell lymphoma, Clini-
cal Cancer Research, 18(13): 3499–3508. 

Further reading 145
Eich, H.T., Diehl, V., Görgen, H., Pabst, T., Markova, 
J., Debus, J. et al. (2010) Intensifi ed chemotherapy 
and dose-reduced involved-fi eld radiotherapy in 
patients with early unfavorable Hodgkin’s lympho-
ma: Final analysis of the German Hodgkin Study 
Group HD11 trial, Journal of Clinical Oncology, 28: 
4199–4206. 
Evens, A.M., Hutchings, M. & Diehl, V. (2008) Treat-
ment of Hodgkin lymphoma: Th e past, present, and 
future, National Clinical Practice Oncology, 5: 543–
556.
Fields, P.A. & Linch, D.C. (2012) Treatment of the eld-
erly patient with diff use large B-cell lymphoma, Brit-
ish Journal of Haematology, 157: 159–170. 
Harrison, C.N. & Green, A.R. (2006) Essential throm-
bocythaemia, Best Practice and Research: Clinical 
Haematology, 19: 439–453.
Jaff e, E.S. & Pittaluga, S. (2011) Aggressive B-cell lym-
phomas: A review of new and old entities in the WHO 
classifi cation, Hematology: American Society for He-
matology Education Program, 2011: 506–514. 
Li, L., Bierman, P., Vose, J., Loberiza, F., Armitage, J.O. & 
Bociek, R.G. (2011) High-dose therapy/autologous he-
matopoietic stem cell transplantation in relapsed or re-
fractory marginal zone non-Hodgkin lymphoma, Clini-
cal Lymphoma, Myeloma and Leukemia, 11: 253–256.
Linch, D.C. (2011) Burkitt lymphoma in adults, Brit-
ish Journal of Haematology, 156: 693–703.
Mahindra, A., Laubach, L., Raje, N., Munshi, N., Rich-
ardson, P.G. & Anderson, K. (2012) Latest advances and 
current challenges in the treatment of multiple myelo-
ma, Nature Reviews: Clinical Oncology, 9: 135–143.
Marcus, R., Imrie, K., Solal-Celigny, P., Catalano, J.V., 
Dmoszunska, A., Raposo, J.C. et al. (2008) Phase III 
study of R-CVP compared with cyclophosphamide, 
vincristine, and prednisone alone in patients with 
previously untreated advanced follicular lympho-
ma, Journal of Clinical Oncology, 26: 4579–4586. 
Michallet, A.-S., Coiffi  er, B. & Salles, G. (2011) Mainte-
nance therapy in follicular lymphoma, Current Opin-
ion in Oncology, 23(5): 449–454. 
Moreau, P., Richardson, P.G., Cavo, M., Orlowski, 
R.Z., San Miguel, J.F., Palumbo, A. & Harousseau, J.L. 
(2012) Proteasome inhibitors in multiple myeloma: 
10 years later, Blood, 120: 947–959.
Moskowitz, C. (2012) Diff use large B Cell lymphoma: 
How can we cure more patients in 2012? Best Practice 
and Research in Clinical Haematology, 25(1): 41–47. 
Passamonti, F. (2012) How I treat polycythemia vera, 
Blood, 120: 275–284.
Tang, T., Tay, K., Quek, R., Tao, M., Tan, S.Y., Tan, L., & 
Lim, S.T. (2010) Peripheral T-cell lymphoma: Review 
and updates of current management strategies, Ad-
vances in Hematology, 2010: 1–8. 
Teff eri, A. (2011) Primary myelofi brosis: 2012 update 
on diagnosis, risk stratifi cation, and management, 
American Journal of Hematology, 86: 1017–1026.
Weisenburger, D.D., Savage, K.J., Harris, N.L., Gas-
coyne, R.D., Jaff e, E.S., MacLennan, K.A. et al. (2011) 
Peripheral T-cell lymphoma, not otherwise specifi ed: 
A report of 340 cases from the International Peripheral 
T-cell Lymphoma Project, Blood, 117(12): 3402–3408. 
Wündisch, T., Th iede, C., Morgner, A., Dempfl e, A., 
Günther, A., Liu, H. et al. (2005) Long-term follow-up of 
gastric MALT lymphoma after Helicobacter pylori eradi-
cation, Journal of Clinical Oncology, 23(31): 8018–8024. 
Chapter 14 Haemostasis, 
abnormal bleeding and 
anticoagulant therapy
Bag lin, T., Gray, E., Greaves, M., Hunt, B.J., Keeling, 
D., Machin, S. et al. (2010) Clinical guidelines for test-
ing for heritable thrombophilia, British Journal of 
Haematology, 149: 209–220.
Cu ker, A. & Cines, D.B. (2012) How I treat heparin-
induced thrombocytopenia, Blood, 119: 2209–2218.
Ge orge, J.N. (2010) How I treat patients with throm-
botic thrombocytopenic purpura: 2010, Blood, 116: 
4060–4069.
Gu yatt, G.H., Akl, E.A., Crowther, M., Schunemann, 
H.J., Gutterman, D.D., Zelman Lewis, S. & American 
College of Chest, P. (2012) Introduction to the ninth 
edition: Antithrombotic Th erapy and Prevention of 
Th rombosis, 9th ed: American College of Chest Phy-
sicians Evidence-Based Clinical Practice Guidelines, 
Chest, 141: 48S–52S.
Ha y, C.R., Brown, S., Collins, P.W., Keeling, D.M. & 
Liesner, R. (2006) Th e diagnosis and management 
of factor VIII and IX inhibitors: A guideline from 
the United Kingdom Haemophilia Centre Doctors 
Organisation, British Journal of Haematology, 133: 
591–605.
Ke eling, D., Baglin, T., Tait, C., Watson, H., Perry, D., 
Baglin, C., Kitchen, S. & Makris, M. (2011) Guidelines 
on oral anticoagulation with warfarin, fourth edition, 
British Journal of Haematology, 154: 311–324.
Ke eling, D., Mackie, I., Moore, G.W., Greer, I.A., 
Greaves, M. & British Committee for Standards in, 
H. (2012) Guidelines on the investigation and man-
agement of antiphospholipid syndrome, British 
Journal of Haematology, Feb 8, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-
2141.2012.09037.x.
Le vi, M., Toh, C.H., Th achil, J. & Watson, H.G. (2009) 
Guidelines for the diagnosis and management of 

146 
Further reading
disseminated intravascular coagulation. British Com-
mittee for Standards in Haematology, British Journal 
of Haematology, 145: 24 –33.
Pr ovan, D., Stasi, R., Newland, A.C., Blanchette, V.S., 
Bolton-Maggs, P., Bussel, J.B. et al. (2010) Internation-
al consensus report on the investigation and manage-
ment of primary immune thrombocytopenia, Blood, 
115: 168–186.
Ro deghiero, F., Castaman, G. & Tosetto, A. (2009) 
How I treat von Willebrand disease, Blood, 114: 
1158–1165.
Chapter 15 Blood groups 
and blood transfusion
Alter, H.J. & Klein, H.G. (2008) Th e hazards of blood 
transfusion in historical perspective, Blood, October 
1; 112(7): 2617–2626. 
Anstee, D.J. (2009) Red cell genotyping and the future 
of pretransfusion testing, Blood, July 9; 114(2): 248–256. 
Brinc, D. & Lazarus, A.H. (2009) Mechanisms of anti-
D action in the prevention of hemolytic disease of the 
fetus and newborn, Hematology: American Society for 
Hematology Education Program, 2009: 185–191. 
Egbor, M., Knott, P. & Bhide, A. (2012) Red-cell and 
platelet alloimmunisation in pregnancy, Best Prac-
tice and Research in Clinical Obstetric Gynaecology, 
Febuary; 26(1): 119–132. 
Isbister, J.P., Shander, A., Spahn, D.R., Erhard, J., 
Farmer, S.L. & Hofmann, A. (2011) Adverse blood 
transfusion outcomes: Establishing causation, Trans-
fusion Medicine Reviews, April; 25(2): 89–101. 
Kim, Y.A. & Makar, R.S. (2012) Detection of fetoma-
ternal hemorrhage, American Journal of Hematology, 
April; 87(4): 417–423. 
Klein, H.G. & Anstee, D.J. (2007) Mollison’s Blood 
Tranfusion in Clinical Medicine, 11th edn, Oxford: 
Wiley-Blackwell.
McClelland, D.B.L. (2007) Handbook of Transfusion 
Medicine, 4th edn, Norwich: United Kingdom Blood 
Services, available at http://www.transfusionguide-
lines.org.uk/index.aspx?publication=htm, accessed 
11 September 2011.
Sachs, U.J. (2011) Recent insights into the mecha-
nism of transfusion-related acute lung injury, Current 
Opinion in Hematology, November; 18(6): 436–442. 
SHOT, http://www.shotuk.org/home/, the Serious 
Hazards of Transfusion Scheme of the NHS blood 
and transplant service, accessed 11 September 2011.

Index
A
α-thalassaemias 41–2
abnormal bleeding
acquired coagulation disorders 127–9
anticoagulant therapy 114, 129–30
congenital coagulation disorders 124–7
disseminated intravascular coagulation 114, 127–9
fi brinolysis 114, 122–3, 128–9
further reading 145–6
haemophilias 114, 124–6, 129
natural anticoagulant mechanisms 130–1
normal coagulation mechanism 114, 120–2
patient investigation 130
tests for clotting defects 123
von Willebrand disease 114, 126–7
ABO system 133, 134–5, 138
acanthocytes 13
acquired aplastic anaemia 110
acquired coagulation disorders 127–9
acquired haemolytic anaemias 29, 34–8
acquired haemophilia 129
acquired immune defi ciency syndrome see HIV/AIDS
acquired platelet defects 120
activated B-cell phenotype (ABC) 66–7
activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) 114, 121–2, 
123, 126, 128–30
activated protein C (APC) 121, 128, 130, 131
acute blood loss 12, 19
acute graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) 106
acute immune thrombocytopenic purpura 118
acute leukaemia 104
acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL) 74, 79–81, 94–5
acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) 93–7
acute promyelocytic leukaemia (APML) 96
AIDS see HIV/AIDS
ALAS2 gene 19
alcoholism 12
allergic reactions 140, 141
allogeneic bone marrow transplantation 104, 105–6
amyloidosis 88, 92
anaemia 10–25
aplastic anaemia 104, 110–13
blood transfusion 137
bone marrow transplantation 104
causes of B12 and folate defi ciency 20–1
diagnosis and measurements 16–17, 22–4
further reading 143
iron absorption and overload 12–15
macrocytic anaemia 12, 19–24
manifestations of B12 and folate defi ciency 22
manifestations of iron defi ciency 16
mechanisms of B12 and folate defi ciency 21–2
mechanisms of iron defi ciency 15–16
megaloblastic anaemia 20–4
microcytic and hypochromic anaemia 12–19
morphological classifi cation 11–12
neoplastic disorders of myeloid cells 97–8, 101
normal control of red cell production 11
normocytic anaemia 12, 19
polycythaemia 24–5
reference ranges for red cell indices 12
references ranges for hemoglobin values 10–11
sickle cell anaemia 45–9
symptoms and signs 10–11
treatment 18, 24
see also haemolytic anaemias
anaemia of chronic disease (ACD) 19
anisoylated plasminogen–streptokinase activator complex 
(APSAC) 122–3
Ann Arbor staging system 78
antenatal diagnosis 44
antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC) 63
anticoagulant therapy 114, 129–30, 145–6
antiglobulin tests 36, 134
antiphospholipid syndrome 131
antithrombin (AT) 121, 130–1
aplastic anaemia 110–13
aetiology 110–11
bone marrow transplantation 104
clinical features 111
diagnosis 112
further reading 144–5
haematological fi ndings 111–12
pathophysiology 111
prognosis 112
treatment 112–13
apparent polycythaemia 101
Auer rods 94–5
autoimmune haemolytic anaemia (AIHA) 30, 34–6, 81
autoimmune thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) 81
autologous bone marrow transplantation 104, 108–9
B
β-globinopathies 49–50
β-thalassaemias 42–3
Haematology Lecture Notes, Ninth edition. C.S.R. Hatton, N.C. Hughes-Jones, D. Hay and D. Keeling. © 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

148 
Index
B cells
haematopoiesis 7–8
lymphoid tissue 59–60, 62–4
lymphomas 66–9, 72, 74–5
neoplastic disorders of lymphoid cells 76, 79
selection and maturation 62–3
white blood cells 56
basophilia 53
basophils 3–5, 9
BCL11a gene 49
BCR–ABL oncogene 99–100
benign monoclonal gammopathy 91–2
benign paraproteinaemia 91–2
Bernard-Soulier disease 120
bilirubin 27, 28, 30, 33
biopsies
aplastic anaemia 112
lymphomas 68
neoplastic disorders of lymphoid cells 84
neoplastic disorders of myeloid cells 102
bite cells 32–3
blast cells 79–82, 94, 97
bleeding see abnormal bleeding; haemorrhage; 
haemostasis
bleeding time tests 116
blood transfusion 132–42
ABO system 133, 134–5, 138
antiglobulin tests 134
blood donation and components 137
circulatory overload 141
citrate toxicity 141
compatibility 134, 138–9
cytomegalovirus 139, 140
disease due to anti-A and anti-B 137
disease due to anti-D 135–6
further reading 146
haemoglobin 48–9
haemolytic disease of the newborn 135–7
haemolytic reactions due to incompatibility 138–9
immediate-type hypersensitivity 140
management of mother and child in HDN 136–7
management of transfusion reactions 141–2
massive transfusion 141–2
neoplastic disorders of myeloid cells 100
other blood group systems 134, 135
procedure for obtaining compatible blood 134–5
Rh system 133–5
SHOT report 137–8
transfusion-associated graft-versus-host 
disease 140
transfusion-related acute lung injury 140–1
transfusion-transmitted infections 139–40
variant Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease 139–40
Bohr eff ect 39
bone destruction 88
bone marrow
anaemia 11, 17–18, 22–3
haematopoiesis 1
multiple myeloma 88–90
myeloma 87
neoplastic disorders of myeloid cells 94, 100–2
white blood cells 58
bone marrow transplantation (BMT) 104–9
allogeneic BMT 104, 105–6
aplastic anaemia 113
autologous BMT 104, 108–9
complications 105
further reading 144–5
graft-versus-host disease 105, 106–8
graft-versus-leukaemia/lymphoma eff ect 104–5, 106–8
neoplastic disorders of myeloid cells 96, 97
reduced-intensity conditioning 105, 108
supportive care 105, 109
Budd–Chiari syndrome 103
Burkitt lymphoma (BL) 66–7, 74–5, 85–6
C
c-MYC gene 66–7
CD4+/CD8+ see T cells
CD34/CD38 3
central nervous system (CNS) prophylaxis 80
cervical lymphadenopathy 78
Chediak–Higashi syndrome 53
chemotherapy
bone marrow transplantation 105, 108–9
lymphomas 69, 71
multiple myeloma 90–1
neoplastic disorders of lymphoid cells 78–9, 80, 83, 85–6
neoplastic disorders of myeloid cells 96–7, 101, 103
Christmas disease 126
chronic blood loss 16
chronic graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) 106
chronic granulomatous disease 53
chronic immune thrombocytopenic purpura 118–19
chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (CLL) 35, 67, 74, 81–2
chronic myeloid leukaemia (CML) 98–100, 104, 106–7
chronic myelomonocytic leukaemia (CMML) 97
chronic myeloproliferative disorders 102–3
circulatory overload 141
citrate toxicity 141
clinical features of HDN 136
coeliac disease 18
cold haemagglutinin disease (CHAD) 36
combination chemotherapy 82–3, 85–6
congenital coagulation disorders 124–7
congenital haemolytic anaemias 29–34
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase 31–3
haemoglobin defects 33–4
hereditary elliptocytosis and pyropoikilocytosis 31
hereditary spherocytosis 29–31
consolidation therapy 80
Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease (CJD) 139–40
Crohn’s disease 18
cytogenetic analysis 79
cytomegalovirus (CMV)
blood transfusion 139, 140
bone marrow transplantation 105–6
white blood cells 58

Index 149
D
D-dimer assays 128
deep vein thrombosis (DVT) 129
delayed haemolytic transfusion reaction (DTR) 139
Diamond–Blackfan syndrome 113
diff use large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) 66, 67, 74–5, 84–5
digital ischaemia 103
2,3-diphosphoglycerate (2,3-DPG) 10–11, 39–40
disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) 94, 114, 
127–9, 141–2
divalent metal transporter (DMT1) 14–15
DNA microarrays 66–7
Döhle bodies 52–3
Donath–Landsteiner antibody 34
drug-induced haemolytic anaemias 35, 37–8
drug-induced immune thrombocytopenia 119
E
ecchymoses 115
electrophoresis 90
eosin-5-maleaminde (EMA) binding tests 30–1
eosinophilia 52, 53–4
eosinophils 3, 9
Epstein–Barr virus (EBV)
blood transfusion 139
neoplastic disorders of lymphoid cells 77, 85
white blood cells 55–8
erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 89
erythrocytosis 24–5
erythroid hyperplasia 27
erythroid tissue 11
erythromelalgia 103
erythropoiesis
anaemia 19, 22–4
haematopoiesis 6–7
haemolytic anaemias 27
erythropoietin (EPO) 11, 26
essential thrombocythaemia (ET) 102–3
extranodal lymphomas 68
extravascular haemolysis 28
F
factor V Leiden 131
factor VIII defi ciency 124–6
factor IX defi ciency 126
factor Xa inhibitors 130
Fanconi anaemia 111
favism 33
ferritin 15–18
ferroportin 15
fi brinolysis 114, 122–3, 128–9
fl ow cytometry 54–6, 95–6
folate defi ciency 20–4, 48
follicular lymphoma (FL) 70, 74–5, 83
fresh frozen plasma (FFP) 137
fungal infections 97, 105
G
G20210A allele 131
gene expression profi ling 66–7
gene rearrangement 60–3
genetic counselling 44
Glanzmann’s disease 120
glossitis 22
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) 31–3
glutathione (GSH) 32
glycoproteins (GP) 116
glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchor 34
graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) 105, 106–8, 140
graft-versus-leukaemia/lymphoma (GVL) eff ect 104–5, 106–8
granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) 105, 108–9, 
113, 137
granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor 
(GM-CSF) 3, 5, 105, 109
granulocyte macrophage progenitor (GMP) 2
granulocytes
haematopoiesis 3–5, 9
transfusion 137
white blood cells 53
H
haematopoiesis 1–9
erythropoiesis and red cell function 6–7
further reading 143
granulocytes 3–5
location of blood formation 1
lymphocytopoiesis 7–9
main functions of blood cells 9
megakaryocytes and platelet formation 5
monocytopoiesis and monocyte formation 5
myeloma 87
myelopoiesis 3–7
stem cell diff erentiation and specialization 1–3
haematopoietic stem cells (HSC) 1–3
haemoglobin H disease 41–2, 43
haemoglobin (Hb) 10–11
anaemia 18
clinical and haematological abnormalities 45
disorders of globin synthesis 39–50
further reading 144
haemoglobin S 45–9
haemoglobins E and C 49–50
haemolytic anaemias 26–7, 32–4
normal structure and function 39–40
reactivating silenced fetal haemoglobin 49
sickle cell anaemia 45–9
structural variants 33–4, 45–50
thalassaemias 40–4
haemoglobinuria 27, 33, 112
haemolytic anaemias 26–38
acquired haemolytic anaemias 29, 34–8
classifi cation and diagnosis 29
clinical features of haemolysis 28
congenital haemolytic anaemias 29–34

150 
Index
haemolytic anaemias (continued)
further reading 144
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase 31–3
haemoglobin defects 33–4
hereditary elliptocytosis and pyropoikilocytosis 31
hereditary spherocytosis 29–31
immune/autoimmune haemolytic anaemias 30, 34–6
laboratory evidence of haemolysis 27–8
non-immune haemolytic anaemias 36–8
treatment 30–1, 33
haemolytic disease of the newborn (HDN) 135–7, 146
haemolytic uraemic syndrome 119
haemophilias 114, 124–6, 129
haemorrhage
anticoagulant therapy 129–30
aplastic anaemia 111
haemostasis 115
haemostasis
abnormalities of platelet function 120
causes of thrombocytopenia 117–18
classifi cation of defects 115
clinical features of ITP 118
diagnosis of ITP 118
failure of platelet production 117–18
further reading 145–6
immune thrombocytopenic purpura 114, 115, 118–19
normal 115
normal coagulation mechanism 114, 120–2
platelet transfusions 120
platelets 114, 116–18
shortened platelet survival 117–18
splenic pooling 120
thrombocytopenic and non-thrombocytopenic 
purpura 117
treatment of ITP 118–19
see also abnormal bleeding
hairy cell leukaemia 74, 84
haptocorrin 23–4
Hb Bart’s hydrops fetalis syndrome 42
heavy chains 61, 92
Heinz bodies 32
Helicobacter pylori 66, 86
heparin 129
heparin induced thrombocytopenia (HIT) 119, 129
hepatic vein thrombosis 103
hepatitis 125
hepcidin 14–15
hereditary elliptocytosis (HE) 31
hereditary haemochromatosis 14
hereditary persistence of fetal hemaglobin (HPFH) 49
hereditary pyropoikilocytosis 31
hereditary spherocytosis (HS) 29–31
heterozygous β-thalassaemias 43
HFE gene 14
high-dose therapy 104, 108–9
HIV/AIDS
abnormal bleeding 124–5
blood transfusion 139
haemostasis 119
neoplastic disorders of lymphoid cells 86
white blood cells 54, 58
Hodgkin lymphomas 65, 73–4, 76–9, 108
homozygous β-thalassaemias 43
Howell–Jolly bodies 13, 23
human immunodefi ciency virus see HIV/AIDS
human leucocyte antigen system (HLA) 104, 105
human T-cell leukaemia virus 1 (HTLV-1) 66
hyperbilirubinaemia 33, 137
hypercalcaemia 88, 92
hyperdiploidy 79
hypersensitivity reactions 140, 141
hypersplenism 38
hyperviscosity syndrome 88–9
hypogammaglobulinaemia 82
hypoxia inducible factor (HIF-1) 6, 14
I
immediate-type hypersensitivity 140
immune thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) 81, 114, 115, 118–19
immunoglobulin (Ig)
blood transfusion 134, 140
haemostasis 118–19
lymphoid tissue 60–3
myeloma 87, 90
neoplastic disorders of lymphoid cells 82
white blood cells 58
immunophenotyping 69–70
immunosuppression 35–6, 105
induction chemotherapy 80
infections
abnormal bleeding 125
blood transfusion 139–40
bone marrow transplantation 105–6
haemoglobin 43
haemolytic anaemias 28, 30, 33, 37
lymphomas 66
multiple myeloma 88
neoplastic disorders of lymphoid cells 86
neoplastic disorders of myeloid cells 97
pure red cell aplasia 113
white blood cells 51–2, 55–8
infectious mononucleosis 55–8
infl ammatory cytokines 19, 63
inherited platelet defects 120
intensive chemotherapy 96–7
international normalized ratio (INR) 123, 129
international prognostic index (IPI) 69, 71
interstitial pneumonitis (IPN) 106
intravascular haemolysis 28
iron defi ciency
anaemia 12–19
diagnosis and measurements 16–17
iron absorption and overload 12–15
manifestations 16
mechanisms 15–16
treatment 18

Index 151
J
JAK/STAT pathway 5, 100–2
JAK2 gene 25
L
lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) 27, 69
leucocytosis 52–4, 101
leucopenia 51–2
leukaemias
bone marrow transplantation 104–5
lymphomas 65, 67
neoplastic disorders of lymphoid 
cells 79–82, 84
neoplastic disorders of myeloid cells 93–7
leukoerythroblastic reaction 58
light chains 60–1, 87
liver disease 114
lymph nodes
lymphoid tissue 59, 61
lymphomas 68
neoplastic disorders of lymphoid cells 77
lymphaplasmacytic lymphoma 82
lymphoblastic lymphoma 81
lymphocyte depletion 76–7
lymphocyte-predominant Hodgkin lymphoma 
(LPHL) 76–7
lymphocytes 7–9
lymphocytopoiesis 7–9
lymphocytosis 54
lymphoid tissue 59–64
antibody diversity 61–2
B cell selection and maturation 62–3
cellular origin of lymphomas 63–4
further reading 144–5
heavy chains 61
immunoglobulin structure and gene 
rearrangement 60–3
light chains 60–1
lymph node structure 59, 61
natural killer cells 59–60, 63
neoplastic disorders of lymphoid cells 76–86
structure and function 59–64
T-cell receptors 62, 63
lymphomas 65–72
aetiology and epidemiology 66
bone marrow transplantation 104–5, 108
cellular origin 63–4
classifi cation 65, 73–5
clinical features 77–8
clinical manifestations 68
cytogenetics and molecular considerations 66–8
diagnosis by biopsy 68
further reading 144–5
high- and low-grade 67–9
immunophenotyping 69–70
incidence and aetiology 77
neoplastic disorders of lymphoid cells 76–86
nodal and extranodal lymphomas 68
positron emission tomography 79
prognosis 69, 71, 75, 78, 81, 83
staging 69–71, 78
treatment 78–9, 80, 82–3, 85–6
treatment and management 69–72
versus leukaemias 65
lymphopenia 54
lymphoproliferative disorders 92
M
macrocytic anaemia 12, 19–24
macrophages 9, 19, 23
maintenance therapy 80
major histocompatibility complex (MHC) 7, 63
malignancies
anaemia 19
bone marrow transplantation 104–9
haemolytic anaemias 26
lymphoid tissue 63–4
neoplastic disorders of lymphoid cells 76–86
neoplastic disorders of myeloid cells 93–103
paraproteinaemias 87–92, 104
pure red cell aplasia 113
see also lymphomas
mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) 74–5, 83–4
massive transfusion 141–2
mean cell haemoglobin (MCH) 41
mean cell volume (MCV) 41
megakaryocyte/erythroid progenitor (MEP) 2
megakaryocytes 5, 111–12
megaloblastic anaemia 20–4
metamyelocytes 3–4, 23
microarrays 66–7
microcytic and hypochromic anaemia 12–19
mini-allografts 108
mixed cellularity 76–7
monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined signifi cance 
(MGUS) 87–8, 91–2
monocytes 5, 9
monocytopenia 111
monocytopoiesis 5
monocytosis 54
mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) 74–5, 86
multiple myeloma 87–92, 104
clinical features 87–90
diagnosis 90
laboratory fi ndings 88–90
prognosis 91
relapse and refractory disease 91
treatment 90–1
mycosis fungoides 86
myeloblasts 3–4
myelocytes 3–4
myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) 97–8
myelofi brosis 101–2

152 
Index
myeloid cells see neoplastic disorders of myeloid cells
myeloid/erythroid (M/E) ratio 27
myeloma see multiple myeloma
myeloperoxidase (MPO) 3
myelopoiesis 3–7
erythropoiesis and red cell function 6–7
granulocytes 3–5
megakaryocytes and platelet formation 5
monocytopoiesis and monocyte formation 5
myeloproliferative disorders 98–103
N
NADP+/NADPH 31–3
natural anticoagulant mechanisms 130–1
natural killer (NK) cells
haematopoiesis 2, 7–8
lymphoid tissue 59–60, 63
neoplastic disorders of lymphoid cells 76–86
clinical and laboratory features 77–8, 80, 81
cytogenetic analysis 79
further reading 144–5
Hodgkin lymphomas 76–9
incidence and aetiology 77
non-Hodgkin lymphomas 79–86
pathology of ALL 79–80
positron emission tomography 79
prognosis 78, 81, 83
staging 78
treatment 78–9, 80, 82–3, 85–6
neoplastic disorders of myeloid cells 93–103
acute myeloid leukaemia 93–7
acute promyelocytic leukaemia 96
aetiology of AML 94
bone marrow transplantation 96, 97
chronic myeloid leukaemia 98–100
classifi cation of AML 94
clinical course/features 98–9, 100–1, 103
diff erential diagnosis 101
essential thrombocythaemia 102–3
laboratory fi ndings 94–5, 97–8, 100–3
myelodysplastic syndromes 97–8
myeloproliferative disorders 98–103
Philadelphia chromosome 99–100
polycythaemia vera 100–1
primary myelofi brosis 101–2
recurrent genetic abnormalities in 
AML 95–6
supportive care 97
symptoms and signs 94
treatment 96–7, 98, 100–3
neutropenia 51–2, 111
neutrophil leucocytosis 52–4
neutrophil myeloperoxidase defi ciency 53
neutrophils 3–5, 9
nodal lymphomas 68
nodular sclerosis 76–7
non-Hodgkin lymphomas 65, 73–5, 79–86
normoblastic macrocytosis 24
normoblasts 6–7, 23
normocytic anaemia 12, 19, 101
O
oxygen supply/demand 11, 39–40
P
pancytopenia 112
paraproteinaemias
amyloidosis 88, 92
benign paraproteinaemia 91–2
heavy chain diseases 92
lymphoproliferative disorders 92
multiple myeloma 87–92, 104
solitary plasmacytoma 91
Waldenström’s macroglobulinaemia 92
paroxysmal nocturnal haemoglobinuria (PNH) 34–5
parvovirus B19 28, 30, 113
Pelger–Huët anomaly 53
pernicious anaemia 23
persistent lymphocytosis 54
petechial haemorrhages 115
PFA-100 tests 116, 130
Philadelphia chromosome 99–100, 106–7
PIG-A gene 34
pin-point haemorrhages 115
plasma cells 72, 87, 89–90
plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) 122
Plasmodium falciparum 33, 37, 43
platelet aggregation studies 117
platelet transfusions 113, 120, 137
platelets
abnormalities of platelet function 120
haematopoiesis 5, 9
haemostasis 114, 116–18
morphology and lifespan 116
physiology 116
tests of platelet function 116–17
polychromasia 27
polycythaemia 24–5
polycythaemia vera 100–1
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) 106
popcorn cells 76
portal vein thrombosis 103
positron emission tomography (PET) 79
post-transplant lymphoproliferative disorder 
(PTLD) 56
primary acquired sideroblastic anaemia 97–8
primary myelofi brosis 101–2
progenitor cells 1–3, 7, 113
proliferative sickle retinopathy (PSR) 48, 50
promyelocytes 3–4
pronormoblasts 6–7
protein C 121, 131
protein S 131
prothrombin time (PT) 114, 121–2, 123, 126, 128–30

Index 153
prothrombotic state 130–1
pulmonary embolism (PE) 129
pure red cell aplasia 113, 144–5
pyuvate kinase defi ciency 33
R
radiotherapy
bone marrow transplantation 108–9
lymphomas 69, 71
multiple myeloma 91
neoplastic disorders of lymphoid cells 78–9
red blood cells (RBC)
anaemia 11, 12–14
blood transfusion 132–41
enzyme abnormalities 31–3
haematopoiesis 6–7
haemolytic anaemias 29–33, 36–7
mechanical damage 36–7
membrane defects 29–31
reduced-intensity conditioning (RIC) 105, 108
Reed–Sternberg cells 65, 76–7
refractory anaemia (RA/RAEB/RARS) 97–8
renal failure 88, 113
reticulocytes 7, 11, 22–3, 27
Rh system 133–5
Rye classifi cation 77
S
secondary autoimmune thrombocytopenic purpura 119
secondary polycythaemia 101
selective neutropenia 51–2
septicaemia 97
Serious Hazards of Transfusion (SHOT) report 137–8
Sezary syndrome 86
sickle cell anaemia
bone marrow transplantation 104
clinical manifestations 48
diagnosis 47–8
haemoglobin 45–9
prognosis 49
treatment 48–9
sideroblasts 18–19
silenced fetal haemoglobin 49
small lymphocytic lymphoma (SLL) 74, 82
solid tumours 105
solitary plasmacytoma 91
splenectomy 119
splenic pooling 120
splenomegaly 28, 111
stem cells 72
storage pool diseases 120
supportive therapy
aplastic anaemia 112–13
bone marrow transplantation 105, 109
neoplastic disorders of myeloid cells 97
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) 35, 119
T
T cell receptors (TCR) 7–8, 62, 63
T cells
aplastic anaemia 111
bone marrow transplantation 106–7
haematopoiesis 7–8
lymphoid tissue 59–60, 64
lymphomas 74–5
neoplastic disorders of lymphoid cells 76, 79
white blood cells 56–8
teardrop cells 101–2
thalassaemias
anaemia 12, 15, 18–19
bone marrow transplantation 104
clinical classifi cation 43–4
clinical course and complications 44
genetic counselling and antenatal diagnosis 44
haemoglobin 40–4
treatment 44
therapy-related acute myeloid leukaemia 95
thrombin inhibitors 130
thrombin time (TT) 114, 121, 123, 128, 130
thrombocythaemia 102–3
thrombocytopenia 94, 114–15, 117–20
thrombocytosis 101, 102
thrombophilia 130–1
thrombopoietin (TPO) 5
thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP) 119
tissue factor (TF) 120–1, 128
tissue plasminogen activator (t-PA) 122–3
toxic granulation 52–3
toxoplasmosis 58
transcription factors 3, 6
transferrin 15–19
transfusion-associated graft-versus-host disease 
(TA-GVHD) 140
transfusion-related acute lung injury (TRALI) 140–1
transfusion-transmitted infections (TTI) 139–40
true polycythaemia 25
V
vaccination 48
variant Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease (v-CJD) 139–40
viral capsid antigens (VCA) 57–8
vitamin B12 defi ciency 12, 19–24
vitamin K defi ciency 114, 127, 129–30
von Willebrand disease (VWD) 114, 126–7
von Willebrand factor (VWF) 5, 124, 125–7
W
Waldenström’s macroglobulinaemia (WM) 74, 82, 92
warfarin sodium 129–30
warm autoimmune haemolytic anaemias (AIHA) 35–6
white blood cells (WBC) 51–8
fl ow cytometry 54–6

154 
Index
white blood cells (continued)
infectious mononucleosis 55–8
leucocytosis 52–4
leucopenia 51–2
leukoerythroblastic reaction 58
lymphocytosis and lymphopenia 54
X
Xa inhibitors 130
UPLOADED BY [STORMRG]

