PSYCHIATRY
Lecture Notes
Gautam Gulati
Mary-Ellen Lynall
Kate Saunders
11th Edition
LN


Psychiatry
Lecture Notes


Psychiatry
Lecture Notes
Gautam Gulati
MBBS, MRCPsych, PGDipLATHE(Oxon), FHEA
Honorary Senior Clinical Lecturer in Forensic Psychiatry, 
University of Oxford & Consultant Forensic Psychiatrist, 
Oxford Health NHS Foundation Trust, UK
Mary-Ellen Lynall
MA (Cantab.)
Graduate-entry medical student, Magdalen College, University of Oxford, UK
Retained Lecturer in Neuroscience, Somerville College, University of 
Oxford, UK
Kate Saunders
BM, BCh, MA, MRCPsych, PGDipLATHE, FHEA
University of Oxford Department of Psychiatry, Warneford Hospital, UK
Eleventh Edition

Th is edition fi rst published 2014 © 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd
Previous editions 1964, 1968, 1972, 1974, 1979, 1984, 1989, 1998, 2005, 2010
Registered offi  ce:  John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, Th e Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK
Editorial offi  ces:  9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 2DQ, UK 
Th e Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK
350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148-5020, USA 
For details of our global editorial offi  ces, for customer services and for information about how to apply for 
permission to reuse the copyright material in this book please see our website at www.wiley.com/wiley-blackwell
Th e right of the author to be identifi ed as the author of this work has been asserted in accordance with the UK 
Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in 
any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, except as permitted by 
the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, without the prior permission of the publisher.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. All brand names 
and product names used in this book are trade names, service marks, trademarks or registered trademarks of their 
respective owners. Th e publisher is not associated with any product or vendor mentioned in this book. It is sold on 
the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering professional services. If professional advice or 
other expert assistance is required, the services of a competent professional should be sought.
Th e contents of this work are intended to further general scientifi c research, understanding, and discussion only 
and are not intended and should not be relied upon as recommending or promoting a specifi c method, diagnosis, 
or treatment by health science practitioners for any particular patient. Th e publisher and the author make no 
representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this work and 
specifi cally disclaim all warranties, including without limitation any implied warranties of fi tness for a particular 
purpose. In view of ongoing research, equipment modifi cations, changes in governmental regulations, and the 
constant fl ow of information relating to the use of medicines, equipment, and devices, the reader is urged to review 
and evaluate the information provided in the package insert or instructions for each medicine, equipment, or 
device for, among other things, any changes in the instructions or indication of usage and for added warnings and 
precautions. Readers should consult with a specialist where appropriate. Th e fact that an organization or Website 
is referred to in this work as a citation and/or a potential source of further information does not mean that the 
author or the publisher endorses the information the organization or Website may provide or recommendations 
it may make. Further, readers should be aware that Internet Websites listed in this work may have changed or 
disappeared between when this work was written and when it is read. No warranty may be created or extended 
by any promotional statements for this work. Neither the publisher nor the author shall be liable for any damages 
arising herefrom.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Gulati, Gautam, 1979- author.
 Lecture notes. Psychiatry / Gautam Gulati, Mary-Ellen Lynall, Kate Saunders. — Eleventh edition.
  p. ; cm.
 Psychiatry
 Preceded by: Lecture notes. Psychiatry. 10th ed. / Paul Harrison, John Geddes, Michael Sharpe. 2010.
 Includes bibliographical references and index.
 ISBN 978-1-118-37820-5 (pbk.)
 I. Lynall, Mary-Ellen, 1986- author. II. Saunders, Kate, 1978- author. III. Harrison, P. J. (Paul J.), 1960- Lecture 
notes. Psychiatry. Preceded by (work): IV. Title. V. Title: Psychiatry. 
 [DNLM: 1. Mental Disorders–Handbooks. 2. Psychiatry–Handbooks. WM 34]
 RC457.2
 616.89–dc23
 
2013023531
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print may not be 
available in electronic books.
Cover image: iStockphoto.com/geopaul
Cover design by Grounded Design Ltd
Set in 8.5/11pt Utopia Std by Aptara®
 Inc., New Delhi, India 
1 2014

Contents
Foreword by Professor John Geddes, vi
Preface, vii
Acknowledgements, viii
Quick guides, 1
History-taking checklist, 1
Mental State Examination checklist, 2
Structure of a psychiatric case presentation, 3
 1 Getting started, 5
 2 The basic psychiatric assessment, 9
 3 Diagnosis-specifi c assessments, 19
 4 Risk: harm, self-harm and suicide, 40
 5 Completing and communicating the assessment, 47
 6 What causes mental health problems?, 55
 7 Treatment, 63
 8 Psychiatric services and specialties, 82
 9 Mood disorders, 92
 10 Neurotic, stress-related and somatoform disorders, 103
 11 Eating, sleep and sexual disorders, 115
 12 Schizophrenia, 124
 13 Dementia, delirium and neuropsychiatry, 138
 14 Substance misuse, 154
 15 Personality disorders, 165
 16 Childhood disorders, 172
 17 Learning disability (mental retardation), 185
 18 Psychiatry in other settings, 193
 19 Mental health and the law, 200
Self-assessment answers, 205
Appendix 1: ICD-10 classifi cation of psychiatric disorders, 209
Appendix 2: Keeping up to date and evidence-based, 210
Index, 211

Foreword
When Paul Harrison, Mike Sharpe and I were off ered 
the chance to take over the eighth edition of Lecture 
Notes in Psychiatry in 1997, we spent a great deal of 
time together thinking through the structure of a book 
that would portray psychiatry as the evidence-based, 
patient-oriented branch of medicine that we knew it 
could be. Our thinking was inspired by the advances in 
evidence-based medicine led in Oxford by David Sack-
ett, Muir Gray and Iain Chalmers and the Cochrane 
Collaboration. We wanted to apply the principles of 
clinical epidemiology – not just in our recommen-
dations around use of treatments but also to challenge 
traditional approaches to history and examination 
taking in psychiatry. For decades, students had been 
taught that the only way to do a proper psychiatric as-
sessment was to do a ‘full’ history and examination – 
an approach that is both ineffi  cient and incompatible 
with real-world clinical practice. 
Th e Oxford University Department of Psychiatry 
is proud of its heritage of producing and updating 
its suite of textbooks, a process initiated by Michael 
Gelder when he was the fi rst Head of Department. 
We are therefore delighted that Gautam Gulati, Mary-
Ellen Lynall and Kate Saunders have taken on the task 
of updating and revising Lecture Notes in Psychiatry. 
To an extent, all textbooks are out of date as soon as 
they are published but even with the developments 
in information technology, a concise, portable, pa-
per textbook containing an up-to date synthesis of 
current knowledge occupies its own niche and still 
has a major role in training. Frequent revisions and 
updating are, however, critical to keep them accurate 
and useful. Th is is hard work of course and after three 
editions, Paul, Mike and I felt that we could not face 
revising the book again! It is marvellous to see that 
Gautam, Mary-Ellen and Kate have done so with such 
aplomb,  keeping what remains useful from earlier 
editions but updating it with great skill.
John Geddes

Preface
Th e skills, attitudes and knowledge inherent in learn-
ing psychiatry are relevant to all doctors – and to all 
other health professionals. We have written this book 
with medical students and psychiatric trainees in 
mind, but anticipate it being a useful resource for any 
health professional interested in the subject.
We describe a practical approach towards psy-
chiatry. Chapter 1 outlines the principles behind 
the practice of modern psychiatry and introduces 
the psychiatric assessment. Our guide to assessment 
comprises a basic psychiatric assessment (Chapter 2), 
followed by diagnosis-specifi c assessments (Chapter 3) 
and a guide to risk assessment (Chapter 4). Chapter 5 
describes how to draw everything together and com-
municate the information to others. Th e recommen-
dations in these chapters are summarized in a set of 
‘quick guides’, included at the front of the book for 
easy reference.
Th e middle chapters cover the principles of aetiol-
ogy (Chapter 6), treatment (Chapter 7) and psychiat-
ric services (Chapter 8). Th e main psychiatric disor-
ders of adults are covered in Chapters 9–15, followed 
by childhood disorders (Chapter 16) and learning 
disability (Chapter 17). Chapter 18 discusses psychia-
try in non-psychiatric medical settings – the place 
where most psychiatry actually happens. Chapter 19 
(Mental health and the law) is a new addition to the 
book and one you are likely to fi nd useful in which-
ever setting you work.
Given our illustrious predecessors, we were hum-
bled to be asked to write the 11th edition of Lecture 
Notes. Indeed we aimed to build upon the last edition 
of the book written so eloquently by Paul Harrison, 
John Geddes and Michael Sharpe. 
To facilitate learning, we have added learning ob-
jectives at the start of each chapter and highlighted 
key points towards the end. Multiple-choice ques-
tions have been added, along with detailed explana-
tions of the answers, to allow the reader to consoli-
date key points. Links to key papers and guidelines 
have been added for readers keen to know more 
about a particular disorder.
We hope we have done justice to the work started 
by Paul, John and Michael in keeping this Lecture Se-
ries book both informative and enjoyable.
We thank Jonathan Price, who was instrumental in 
drawing our team together and in setting the direc-
tion in the early days of our writing. We are grateful to 
colleagues who have generously shared their exper-
tise with us.
Th e book is dedicated to Annette Lynall, John Con-
way, Catherine Sage, and the memory of Graham 
(Matthew) Jay and Colonel S. Gulati.
Gautam Gulati
Mary-Ellen Lynall
Kate Saunders

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank the following people for their 
contribution to this book.
Professor Paul Harrison (University of Oxford), 
Professor John Geddes (University of Oxford) and 
Professor Michael Sharpe (University of Edinburgh) 
who edited the 10th edition of this book.
Dr Jonathan Price (University of Oxford) for bring-
ing the author team together, and for helping set the 
direction in the early days of our work on this edition 
of the book.
Dr Ruth Reed (Oxford Health NHS Foundation 
Trust) for her contribution to the chapter on Child-
hood disorders.
Dr Valerie Elizabeth Murphy (Southern Health 
NHS Foundation Trust and University of Oxford) 
for her contribution to the chapter on Learning 
disabilities.
Dr Robert Cornish (Oxford Health NHS Foundation 
Trust) for his contribution to the chapter on Psychi-
atric specialties.
Dr Borys Borvin (Oxford Health NHS Foundation 
Trust) for his contribution to the chapter on Sub-
stance misuse.
Dr Suzanne Coghlan (Oxford Health NHS Foun-
dation Trust) for her contribution to the chapter on 
Neuroses.
Dr Elizabeth Naomi Smith (Oxford Health NHS 
Foundation Trust) for her contribution to the chapter 
on Psychiatry in other settings.
Dr Charlotte Allan (Oxford Health NHS Foundation 
Trust) for her contribution to the chapter on Demen-
tia, delirium and neuropsychiatry.
Karen Moore (Senior Development Editor at Wiley) 
for her help and advice with editorial aspects.

Psychiatry Lecture Notes, Eleventh Edition. Gautam Gulati, Mary-Ellen Lynall and Kate Saunders. © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 
2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Quick guides
History-taking checklist
Before you begin: 
• Information (referral letters, notes), location, safety 
• Introduction, consent, establish expectations
Basic details: 
• Method of referral, status under the Mental Health Act (where appropriate)
• Age, marital status, occupation, current living arrangements
Presenting complaint(s): 
• Main symptom: ‘NOTEPAD’: Nature, Onset, Triggers, Exacerbating/relieving, Progression, Associated 
symptoms, Disability
• Other symptoms or problems, important negatives
• Impact of symptoms (biological, psychological, social)
• How others perceived symptoms/state 
• Treatment received to date
Past psychiatric history:
• Formal care: community psychiatric care? In-patient treatment? Detention?
• Treatments and response
• Self-harm or harm to others
Treatment/drug history:
• Prescribed biological and psychological treatments
• Non-prescribed treatments
• Adherence, side effects
• Any recent changes?
• Allergies
Family history:
• Parents, siblings and children: age, occupation, health and quality of relationship with patient
• For children: name, DOB, school, any other professional involvement
• Family history of mental illness, suicide, self-harm or substance misuse
• Any recent family events
Personal history and premorbid personality:
• Pregnancy, birth and developmental milestones normal?
• Childhood: emotional problems, serious illnesses, parental separation
• Education: enjoyed school, bullying, fi nished school, special education classes?
• Occupational history: job changes, military service
• Intimate relationships (psychosexual history): partners, quality of relationships, sexual problems, abuse
• Traumatic events including exposure to self-harm/suicide
• Premorbid personality: character, interests, beliefs, habits
(continued)

2 
Quick guides
Social history (current circumstances):
• Self-care
• Family and social support
• Caring responsibilities
• Living arrangements
• Finances: problems? benefi ts?
• Description of a typical day
Substance use: smoking, alcohol, illicit drugs:
• Which substances, quantity, how and when?
• Evidence of dependence? Periods of abstinence?
• Impact on life, esp. related offences
Forensic history:
• Contact with police, charges, convictions, imprisonment
• How do these relate to episodes of illness?
Past medical history:
• Current and past illnesses, surgery, admissions
• (Menstrual and obstetric history)
Risk assessment:
• Risks to self (self-harm, self-neglect…)
• Risks to others (staff, family, work…)
• Driving
• Child protection considerations
Corroborative history if appropriate
Proceed to Mental State Examination
Mental State Examination checklist
Appearance and behaviour
• Appearance
• Body language/abnormal movements
• Eye contact/rapport 
Speech
• Quantity and spontaneity
• Volume and rate
• Tone, prosody
• Articulation and intelligibility
Mood
• Subjective
• Objective: mood, constancy, congruity
Thoughts
• Form/fl ow: any classic patterns? (formal thought disorder, fl ight of ideas)
• Content: 
 abnormal beliefs: delusions and over-valued ideas
 preoccupations and obsessions
 phobias
 morbid thoughts: harm to self or others

Quick guides 3
Perceptions
• Illusions and hallucinations (esp. visual, auditory)
• Derealization and depersonalization
Cognition
• Orientation (time, place, person)
• Conscious level
• Specifi c domains: attention, memory, language, visuo-spatial
Insight
• That they are unwell
• That they recognize their symptoms to be those of illness
• That the illness needs treatment
• Willingness to comply with treatment plan
• Capacity to consent to treatment plan
Structure of a psychiatric case presentation
For an example of a case presented in both oral and written form, see pages 51–52.
Demographic details:
• Name, age, sex, occupation
• Dates of referral, assessment, admission, detention, discharge
• Current Mental Health Act status
Presenting complaint(s):
• Nature, onset, progression, treatments to date
• Mental state at presentation
Background history:
• Past psychiatric history and past medical history: diagnoses, admission and treatments
• Family history
• Personal and social history including job record, relationships, children, premorbid personality
• Use of alcohol and drugs
• Forensic history
Mental State Examination:
• Appearance and behaviour
• Speech
• Mood
• Thoughts
• Perceptions
• Cognition
• Insight
Risk assessment:
• Risks to self
• Risks to others 
Physical examination
Investigations
Differential diagnosis: List the possible diagnoses, giving the most likely diagnosis fi rst and citing evidence for 
and against the top differentials
(continued)

4 
Quick guides
Aetiology, divided into either or both of:
• Predisposing, precipitating, perpetuating and protective factors
• Biological, psychological and social factors
Management and progress:
• General aspects of management including setting of care
• Acute management: biological, psychological and social aspects 
• Maintenance (long-term) management
• Current symptoms and problems
Prognosis:
• Short-term
• Long-term

Psychiatry Lecture Notes, Eleventh Edition. Gautam Gulati, Mary-Ellen Lynall and Kate Saunders. © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 
2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Similarly, conditions such as dementia may move be-
tween psychiatry and neurology.
Th e conditions in which psychiatrists have devel-
oped expertise have tended to be those that either 
manifest with disordered psychological function-
ing (emotion, perception, thinking and memory) or 
those that have no clearly established biological ba-
sis. However, scientifi c developments are showing 
us that these so-called psychological disorders are 
associated with abnormalities of the brain, just as 
so-called medical disorders are profoundly aff ected 
by psychological factors. Consequently, the delinea-
tion between psychiatry and the rest of medicine can 
increasingly be seen as only a matter of convenience 
and convention.
Traditional assumptions, however, continue to in-
fl uence both service organization (with psychiatric 
services usually being planned and often situated 
separate from other medical services) and terminol-
ogy (see below).
Where is psychiatry 
going?
Psychiatry is evolving rapidly, and three themes per-
meate this book:
• Psychiatry, like the rest of medicine, is becoming 
less hospital based. Most psychiatric problems are 
seen and treated in primary care, with many oth-
ers handled in the general hospital. Only a minor-
ity are managed by specialist psychiatric services. 
So psychiatry should be learned and practised in 
these other settings too.
• Psychiatry is becoming more evidence-based. Diag-
nostic, prognostic and therapeutic decisions should, 
of course, be based on the best available evidence. It 
may come as a surprise to discover that current psy-
chiatric interventions are as evidence-based (and 
sometimes more so) as in other specialties.
Psychiatry can seem disconcertingly diff erent from 
other specialties, especially if your fi rst experience is 
on a psychiatric in-patient unit. How do I approach 
a patient? What am I trying to achieve? Is he or she 
dangerous? How does psychiatry relate to the rest 
of medicine? Th is chapter is meant to help orientate 
anyone facing this situation. Like the rest of the book, 
it is based on three principles:
• Psychiatry is part of medicine.
• Psychiatric knowledge, skills and attitudes are rel-
evant to all doctors.
• Psychiatry should be as eff ective, pragmatic and 
evidence-based as every other medical specialty.
What is psychiatry?
‘Psychiatry is … weird doctors in Victorian asylums 
using bizarre therapies on people who are either un-
treatably mad or who are not really ill at all.’ Although 
remnants of such ill-informed stereotypes persist, 
the reality of modern psychiatry is very diff erent and 
rather more mundane! Psychiatry is, in fact, funda-
mentally similar to the rest of medicine: the treat-
ments used are primarily evidence-based, with suc-
cess rates comparable with those in other specialties. 
Psychiatric patients are not a breed apart – psychiatric 
diagnoses are common in medical patients, and most 
patients with psychiatric disorders are treated in pri-
mary care. And psychiatrists are no stranger than 
other doctors, probably.
Psychiatric disorders may be defi ned as illnesses 
that are conventionally treated with treatments used 
by psychiatrists, just as surgical conditions are those 
thought best treated by surgery. Th e specialty desig-
nation does not indicate a profound diff erence in the 
illness or type of patient. In fact it can change as new 
treatments are developed; peptic ulcer moved from 
being a predominantly surgical to a medical condi-
tion once eff ective drug treatments were developed. 
Getting started
1

6 
Getting started
• Psychiatry is becoming more neuroscience based. 
Developments in brain imaging and molecular 
genetics are beginning to make real progress in 
the neurobiological understanding of psychiat-
ric disorders. These developments are expand-
ing the knowledge base and range of skills that 
the next generation of doctors will need. These 
developments do not, however, make the other 
elements of psychiatry – psychology and sociol-
ogy, for example – any less important, as we will 
see later.
Why study psychiatry?
Studying psychiatry is worthwhile for all trainee 
doctors, and other health practitioners, because the 
knowledge, skills and attitudes acquired are applica-
ble to every branch of medicine. Specifi cally, study-
ing psychiatry will give you:
• A basic knowledge of the common and the ‘classic’ 
psychiatric disorders.
• A working knowledge of psychiatric problems 
encountered in all medical settings.
• Th e ability to eff ectively assess someone with a 
‘psychiatric problem’.
• Skills in the assessment of psychological aspects of 
medical conditions.
• A holistic or ‘biopsychosocial’ perspective from 
which to understand all illness.
Useful knowledge
Formerly, patients with severe psychiatric disor-
ders were often institutionalized and their manage-
ment was exclusively the domain of psychiatrists. 
The advent of community care means that other 
doctors, especially GPs, encounter and participate 
in the management of such patients, so all doctors 
need basic information about these ‘specialist’ 
psychiatric disorders. Equally, all doctors need to 
recognize and treat the more common psychiatric 
illnesses, such as anxiety and depressive disor-
ders. These are extremely prevalent in all medical 
settings, yet they are all too often overlooked and 
ineffectively treated.
Useful skills
Most psychiatric disorders are diagnosed from the 
history, and many treatments are based on listening 
and talking. So, psychiatrists have had to acquire par-
ticular expertise in interviewing patients, in assessing 
their state of mind and in establishing a therapeutic 
doctor–patient relationship – with patients who may 
pose challenges in this respect because of the nature 
of their problems. Th ese skills remain important in all 
medical practice. For example, all doctors should be 
able to:
• Make the patient feel comfortable enough to 
express their symptoms and feelings clearly.
• Use basic psychotherapeutic skills – for example, 
knowing how to help a distressed patient and how 
best to communicate bad news.
• Discuss and prescribe antidepressants and other 
common psychotropic drugs with confi dence.
Without these ‘soft’ skills, the ‘hard’ skills of tech-
nological, evidence-based medicine cannot be fully 
eff ective. An impatient, non-empathic doctor is less 
likely to elicit the symptoms needed to make the cor-
rect diagnosis, and their patient is less likely to adhere 
to the treatment plan they prescribe.
Useful attitudes
Psychiatric diagnoses are still associated with 
stigma and misunderstanding. These stem largely 
from the misconception that illnesses that do not 
have established ‘physical’ (or ‘organic’) pathol-
ogy are ‘mental’, and that such ‘mental’ illness is 
not real, represents inadequacies of character, or 
is the person’s own fault. Studying psychiatry will 
help you to challenge these attitudes. You will see 
many patients with severe symptoms in whom no 
‘organic’ pathology has been established, but who 
have real symptoms and disability. You will be re-
peatedly reminded of the stigma that patients with 
psychiatric problems experience from the pub-
lic, and sometimes from their relatives and even, 
sadly, from health professionals. Finally, you will 
be confronted with the reality of human frailty. 
Recognizing these issues and dealing with them 
appropriately – by developing positive, educat-
ed and effective attitudes – is another important 
consequence of studying psychiatry. You might 
conclude, as we have done that:
• Suff ering is real even when there is no ‘test’ to 
prove it.
• Psychological and social factors are relevant to all 
illnesses and can be scientifi cally studied.
• Much harm is done by negative attitudes towards 
patients with psychiatric diagnoses.
Your own experience and personality will influ-
ence your relationship with patients – your posi-
tive attributes as well as your vulnerabilities and 
prejudices.

Getting started 7
How to start psychiatry
The psychiatric interview
Th e fi rst, key skill to learn is how to listen and talk to 
patients, in that order. Th e psychiatric interview has 
two functions:
• It forms the main part of the psychiatric assess-
ment by which diagnoses are made.
• It can be used therapeutically – in the psychothera-
pies, the communication between patient and 
therapist is the currency of treatment (Chapter 7).
Psychiatric assessment
Because of its central importance, the principles of 
psychiatric assessment are outlined here. Th e practi-
calities are described in the next two chapters. Psy-
chiatric assessment has three goals:
1 To elicit the information needed to make a diag-
nosis, since a diagnosis provides the best available 
framework for making clinical decisions. Th is may 
seem obvious, but it hasn’t always been so in psy-
chiatry.
2 To understand the causes and context of the disorder.
3 To form a therapeutic relationship with the patient.
Th ough these goals are the same in all of medi-
cine, the balance of psychiatric assessment diff ers in 
several ways. Firstly, the interview provides a greater 
proportion of diagnostic information. Physical exami-
nation and laboratory investigations usually play a less-
er, though occasionally crucial, role. Secondly, the in-
terview includes a detailed examination of the patient’s 
current thoughts, feelings, experiences and behaviour 
(the mental state examination), in addition to the stand-
ard questioning about the presenting complaint and 
past history (the psychiatric history). Th irdly, a greater 
wealth of background information about the person is 
collected than in other specialties (the context).
Psychiatric assessments have a reputation for be-
ing excessively long. We take a pragmatic approach 
to the process of assessment. A basic psychiatric as-
sessment is used to collect the essential diagnostic 
and contextual information (Chapter 2). Th en, more 
detailed diagnosis-specifi c assessments are used if 
anything has led you to hypothesize that the patient 
has a particular disorder (Chapter 3). Th is two-stage 
basic and diagnosis-specifi c approach considerably 
shortens most assessments – to 45 minutes or less. It 
also happens to be what psychiatrists actually do – as 
opposed to what they tell their students to do.
Diagnostic categories
Solving a problem is always easier when you know 
the range of possible answers. Similarly, before em-
barking on your fi rst assessment, it helps to know 
the major psychiatric diagnoses and their cardi-
nal features. Table 1.1 is a simplifi ed guide. As you 
gain experience, aim for more specifi c diagnoses 
that correspond to those listed in the International 
Table 1.1 A basic guide to psychiatric classifi cation
Category
Examples of disorders
Basic characteristics
Common presentations
Organic disorder
Dementia, delirium
Defi ned by ‘organic’ cause
Forgetfulness, confusion
Psychosis
Schizophrenia
Delusions, hallucinations
Bizarre ideas, odd 
behaviour
Mood disorders
Depression
Low mood
Tearful, fed up, somatic 
complaints
Neurosis
Anxiety disorders
Emotional disturbance
Worried, tired, stressed
Somatoform disorders
Somatization disorder
Unexplained physical 
symptoms
Chronic pain, fear of 
disease
Substance misuse
Opiate dependence
Effects of the drug
Addiction, withdrawal, 
depression
Personality disorder
Dissocial, histrionic
Dysfunctional personality traits
Exacerbation of traits when 
stressed
Learning disability
Down’s syndrome, autism
Congenitally low IQ
Developmental delay, 
physical appearance

8 
Getting started
Classifi cation of Diseases, 10th revision (ICD-10), 
which are used in this book (see Appendix 1). Th ere is 
an alternative to ICD-10, published by the American 
Psychiatric Association, called the Diagnostic and 
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders. It is widely 
used in research, and the controversial 5th edition 
(DSM-5) was published in 2013. Th e two systems are 
broadly similar. Whatever the classifi cation, remem-
ber the underused category of ‘no psychiatric dis-
order’. A term such as ‘nervous breakdown’ has no 
useful psychiatric meaning – it may describe almost 
any of the categories in Table 1.1.
Psychiatric classifi cation
Th e classifi cation of psychiatric disorders has sever-
al problems that you should be aware of before you 
start:
• Most diagnoses are syndromes, defi ned by combi-
nations of symptoms, but some are based on aeti-
ology or pathology. For example, depression can 
be caused by a brain tumour (diagnosis: organic 
mood disorder), or after bereavement (diagnosis: 
abnormal grief reaction) or without clear cause 
(diagnosis: depressive disorder). Th is combination 
of diff erent sorts of category leads to some concep-
tual and practical diffi  culties, which will become 
apparent later.
• Comorbidity: many patients suff er from more than 
one psychiatric disorder (or a psychiatric disorder 
and a medical disorder). Th e comorbid disorders 
may or may not be causally related, and may or may 
not both require treatment. As a rule, comorbidity 
complicates management and worsens prognosis.
• Hierarchy: not all diagnoses carry equal weight. 
Traditionally, organic disorder trumps everything 
(i.e. if it is present, coexisting disorders are not 
diagnosed), and psychosis trumps neurosis. Th is 
principle is no longer applied consistently, partly 
because it is hard to reconcile with the frequency 
and clinical importance of comorbidity.
• Categories versus dimensions. Th e current sys-
tem assumes there are distinctions between one 
disorder and another, and between disorder and 
health. However, such cut-off s are notoriously dif-
fi cult to demonstrate, either aetiologically or clini-
cally, whereas there is good evidence that there are 
continuums – for example, between bipolar disor-
der and schizophrenia, and for the occurrence of 
psychotic symptoms in ‘normal’ people. However, 
clinical practice requires ‘yes/no’ decisions to be 
made (e.g. as to what treatment to recommend) 
and so a categorical approach persists.
• Psychiatric classifi cation is not an exact science. 
All classifi cations have drawbacks, and psychiatry 
has more than its share, as illustrated by the above 
points. Nevertheless, despite the imperfections, 
rational clinical practice requires a degree of order 
to be created, and most of the current diagnostic 
categories at least have good reliability, and utility 
in predicting treatment response and prognosis.
After the assessment: 
summarizing and communicating 
the information
Completion of the psychiatric assessment is followed 
by several steps:
• Make a (diff erential) diagnosis, according to ICD-
10 categories (Appendix 1), using your knowledge 
of the key features of each psychiatric disorder.
• Attempt to understand how and why the disorder 
has arisen (Chapter 6).
• Develop a management plan, based on an aware-
ness of the best available treatment (Chapter 7), 
how psychiatric services are organized (Chapter 8) 
and the patient’s characteristics, including their 
risk of harm to self or others (Chapter 4).
• Communicate your understanding of the case 
(Chapter 5).
 KEYPOINTS
• Psychiatry is a medical specialty. It mostly 
deals with conditions in which the symptoms 
and signs predominantly relate to emotions, 
perception, thinking or memory. It also 
encompasses learning disability and the 
psychological aspects of the rest of medicine.
• Knowledge, skills and attitudes learned in 
psychiatry are relevant and valuable in all 
medical specialties.
• Be alert to the possibility of psychiatric disorder 
in all patients, and be able to recognize and 
elicit the key features.
• The major diagnostic categories are: neurosis, 
mood disorder, psychosis, organic disorder, 
substance misuse and personality disorder.

Psychiatry Lecture Notes, Eleventh Edition. Gautam Gulati, Mary-Ellen Lynall and Kate Saunders. © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 
2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
function, psychosis, mood disorders, anxiety disorders, 
eating disorders, substance misuse, somatic symptoms 
and the unresponsive patient. Each assessment guide 
is designed to determine whether a disorder in that 
category is present and, if so, to establish the specifi c 
diagnosis and elicit the appropriate contextual infor-
mation. Box 2.1 gives examples of how an assessment 
might proceed. Assessment of childhood disorders, 
learning disability, sleep and sexual functioning are 
covered in their respective chapters. Risk assessment 
is described in Chapter 4. 
 Box 2.1 Using the basic assessment 
and diagnosis-specifi c assessments
Three examples show how an assessment may 
develop:
1 A woman complains of tiredness and feeling 
fed up. The basic assessment described in this 
chapter reveals evidence of depression and a 
recent increase in alcohol intake, but not of suicidal 
intent, psychosis or cognitive impairment. You 
proceed to the diagnosis-specifi c assessments for 
mood and substance misuse (Chapter 3). These 
assessments confi rm the presence of a depressive 
disorder, but no signifi cant alcohol problem.
Approaching a psychiatric 
assessment
Th e principles and goals of psychiatric assessment 
were outlined in Chapter 1. A ‘traditional’ fi rst as-
sessment interview includes an extensive search 
for symptoms and detailed, wide-ranging questions 
about the patient’s life history. Th ough comprehen-
sive, this approach can take over an hour, which in 
many situations is unrealistic. We suggest a more 
fl exible approach to assessment in which screening 
questions and other basic information (the basic psy-
chiatric assessment; this chapter) are used to iden-
tify possible diagnoses, which are then confi rmed 
or excluded by more focused assessment (diagnosis-
specifi c assessments; Chapter 3). For a checklist of the 
areas to cover in a fuller psychiatric assessment, see 
Quick Guides. 
Th e basic assessment described in this chapter is 
designed to obtain a clear account of the patient’s 
main problem(s) and screen rapidly but systemati-
cally for evidence of common psychiatric disorders. 
If your basic assessment or other sources of infor-
mation make you suspect a particular diagnosis, 
you should use the appropriate diagnosis-specifi c 
assessment(s) from Chapter 3, which cover cognitive 
The basic psychiatric 
assessment
Learning objectives
✓ To understand the structure of a typical psychiatric assessment, 
including the history and mental state examination
✓ To develop a practical approach to the initial assessment of patients 
who present to psychiatric services, and to patients in other settings in 
whom you suspect a psychiatric problem
✓ To learn basic psychiatric terminology
2

10 
The basic psychiatric assessment
2 A wife reports her 70-year-old husband is getting 
confused. Your initial suspicions are of dementia, 
so you do a diagnosis-specifi c assessment of 
his cognitive function. However, although his 
concentration is poor, he does not have typical 
memory loss or other symptoms of dementia. 
You decide to do a basic psychiatric assessment 
and you fi nd evidence of depression, so you 
assess his mood, which leads you to a diagnosis 
of major depressive disorder.
3 A man is brought in having been found standing 
in the road naked, screaming at passers-by 
to stop irradiating him. You do not elicit any 
psychotic symptoms on the basic psychiatric 
assessment. Nonetheless, his presenting 
behaviour prompts you to do a diagnosis-specifi c 
assessment for psychosis. He may initially deny 
symptoms in case you are part of a conspiracy! 
Given that illicit drugs can produce this kind of 
behaviour, you also assess for substance misuse.
What is the mental state 
examination (MSE)?
All psychiatric assessments include a mental state 
examination (MSE) as well as the history. Th e scope 
of the MSE is a source of some confusion. Classically, 
the MSE is limited to those features present at the 
time of the interview, with everything else being in 
the history. Put another way, the MSE represents an 
objective cross-sectional description of the patient’s 
presentation. Is the MSE the psychiatric equivalent of 
the physical examination? Th is is partly true: the MSE 
is the occasion for the interviewer to note any signs of 
psychiatric disorder: for example, ‘Th e patient keeps 
looking anxiously around’. However, the MSE also 
includes formal descriptions of symptoms reported 
by the patient, for example, ‘he described third party 
auditory hallucinations which were command in na-
ture’, and in this respect it overlaps with the history 
(Figure 2.1).
Components of the basic 
psychiatric assessment
Th e basic psychiatric assessment covers the areas 
shown in Table 2.1 and is outlined below. It consists 
of some pre-interview preparation, a history, a men-
tal state examination, and possibly a physical exami-
nation. Variations on the structure presented here are 
common and often desirable: by responding fl exibly 
to the direction the patient takes, rather than slavishly 
following a preconceived order of topics, you are like-
ly to improve the history you obtain.
Before the interview
• Location: You will be discussing intimate, and 
sometimes distressing, topics. Th e room should be 
comfortable, and as soundproof as possible. Th is 
can be challenging, especially on medical wards.
• Safety: Occasionally patients may become dis-
turbed or violent. Discuss with a senior member of 
staff  – should you have a chaperone? Check local 
procedures – for example, are there panic buttons? 
History
Physical
examination
General
medical
assessment
Psychiatric
assessment
History
Mental
state
examination
Physical
examination
Figure 2.1 A comparison 
of medical and psychiatric 
assessments, showing the 
relationship of history, functional 
enquiry, mental state examination 
(MSE) and physical examination. 
Note the overlap between the 
components of the psychiatric 
assessment. For example, 
recent suicidal thoughts might be 
detected in the history or MSE; 
akathisia (restlessness) may be 
elicited as a symptom in the 
history or MSE or as a sign in the 
physical examination.

The basic psychiatric assessment 11
Arrange seating so you are closer to the door than 
the patient. Safety is a particular issue for home 
visits.
• Setting: Chairs are best arranged at ninety degrees 
to each other. If a desk is required for making notes, 
this should not be directly between the patient and 
the interviewer. Sit in a relaxed and slightly forward 
posture. Arrange not to be interrupted – turn off  
mobile phones and pagers whenever possible.
• Information: Read any referral letter and previous 
notes. Th ese may provide a preliminary diagnostic 
hypothesis, clarify the reason for the referral and 
suggest lines of questioning. Th e notes can also 
help you to identify a possible ‘informant’ from 
whom to gain a corroborative history.
• Approach the patient:
• Introduce yourself, check the identity of the pa-
tient, describe what you are suggesting and ob-
tain consent. For example: ‘Hello, I’m a medical 
student and my name is X. Can I check that you 
are Y? … Th ank you. Would you mind if I ask you 
some questions about what has happened to you? 
… Th ank you. If it’s okay with you, we’ll go into 
an interview room to talk. Th is shouldn’t take 
more than 20 minutes, and if you want to stop at 
any point, you can just say.’
• Emphasize confi dentiality. If notes are to be tak-
en, explain why.
• Establish the patient’s expectations for the 
interview.
The basic history
As in the rest of medicine, the history focuses on 
the problems the patient complains of. However, 
in the psychiatric history, there is a greater emphasis 
on the person’s personality, life experiences, current 
circumstances and other contextual information. Th is 
‘background history’ is a crucial part of the psychiatric 
assessment. It can enhance the therapeutic relation-
ship by demonstrating an interest in the patient as a 
person. It can help to identify causes or precipitants for 
Table 2.1 The basic psychiatric assessment. See Appendices 1 and 
2 for a fuller checklist of points to cover during the history and MSE
Before you begin
• Information (referral letters, notes), location, safety
• Introduction, consent, establish expectations
Basic details
• Method of referral
• Age, marital status, occupation, current living arrangements
Basic history: current problems and background history
• Presenting complaint(s), and their history
• Past psychiatric history 
• Family history
• Personal history and premorbid personality
• Social history (current circumstances)
• Substance use: smoking, alcohol and illicit drugs
• Forensic history
• Past medical history and drug history
Basic mental state examination
• Appearance and behaviour
• Speech
• Mood
• Thoughts
• Perceptions
• Cognition
• Insight
Risk assessment
Physical examination if necessary
Corroborative history if possible
Investigations as necessary

12 
The basic psychiatric assessment
mental health problems such as bereavement, child-
hood abuse or fi nancial worries. It may also reveal per-
sonal factors that aff ect management, such as the pres-
ence of a supportive partner to supervise medication. 
How much background information you should seek 
depends on the nature of the patient’s problems, and 
what is already known. For example, in general prac-
tice the patient’s circumstances may be well known; 
for a woman newly referred to your out-patient clinic, 
more detailed questioning might be needed.
Some of the questions may feel invasive, to you or 
to the patient. Some tips …
• Signpost: ‘I’d like to ask about topics which are a bit 
more personal. Is that okay?’
• Acknowledge embarrassment: ‘I know these things 
are diffi  cult to talk about …’
• Normalize: ‘You’ve told me how …, some people 
when they feel like that can … Is that something 
you’ve felt?/Have you had any problems like that?’
• Are you the right person at the right time to be ask-
ing these questions?
It can be hard to strike a balance between keeping 
control of the interview and allowing the patient suf-
fi cient time to answer questions fully and in their own 
way. As well as responding to what the patient says, 
be sensitive to non-verbal clues such as facial ex-
pression, posture and tone of voice.
Basic details
• Clarify the method of referral, if unclear from the 
notes.
• Clarify the patient’s age, marital status, occupation 
and living arrangements.
Presenting complaint(s) and their history
• Start with open questions: ‘What do you think is the 
main problem? How have you been feeling?’
• Closed (but not leading) questions are used to 
clarify the responses: ‘You say you’re not sleeping 
well: can you tell me a bit more about that? What 
time do you wake? ’ 
• Encourage the patient to list their main problems 
and describe each in their own words. ‘Do you 
have any other problems?’
• Assess the nature, duration and progression of 
each of the symptom(s).
• Are there any precipitating and relieving factors?
• Assess the degree of functional impairment: eff ect 
on relationships, work, sleep, etc.
• How have others perceived the problems: ‘What 
did your friends say about you when you were feel-
ing like that?’
• Treatments tried for the current problem.
 Box 2.2 Screening for alcohol 
problems
The FAST questions
1 How often do you have eight or more drinks on 
one occasion?
2 How often during the past year have you failed to 
do what was normally expected of you because 
of drinking?
3 How often during the past year have you been 
unable to remember what happened the night 
before because you had been drinking?
[For these questions, score 0 for never, 1 for less 
than monthly, 2 for monthly, 3 for weekly and 4 
for daily or almost daily.]
4 Has a relative, friend, doctor or other health 
worker been concerned about your drinking or 
suggested you cut down?
[For this question, score 0 for never, 2 for yes but 
not in past year, 4 for yes, in the past year.]
The maximum score is 16, and a score of 3 or 
more indicates hazardous drinking. You may not 
need to ask all four questions: if you fi nd out on 
Q1 that the patient drinks eight or more drinks at 
least weekly, she or he has already reached the 
threshold for hazardous drinking, so move straight 
to a full assessment of substance misuse (p. 35) 
and consider administering the AUDIT questionnaire 
(p. 36). Note that the FAST questions do not screen 
for alcohol dependency, which is better picked up 
by the CAGE questions.
The CAGE questions
The CAGE is an alternative and widely used alcohol 
screening tool. Its four questions are: 
1 Have you ever felt you ought to Cut down on 
your drinking? 
2 Have people Annoyed you by criticizing your 
drinking? 
3 Have you ever felt Guilty about your drinking? 
4 Have you ever had a drink fi rst thing in the 
morning (an ‘Eye-opener’)? 
If three or more yes answers are given, the likelihood 
ratio for problem drinking is 250.
Getting a list of the patient’s problems allows you 
to start generating diagnostic hypotheses. Some 
problems will be symptoms (e.g. agitation); others 
will represent the patient’s predicament (e.g. home-
lessness). Th e diagnostic importance of a particular 
symptom is aff ected by its characteristics (intensity, 
fl uctuation, duration, etc.), associated features and 

The basic psychiatric assessment 13
functional impact. Knowing the relevant information 
to elicit comes rapidly with increasing knowledge and 
experience. A useful acronym is ‘NOTEPAD’: Nature, 
Onset, Triggers, Exacerbating/relieving, Progression, 
Associated symptoms, Disability. Get answers that 
are as precise as possible – for example, estimates of 
symptom duration. Finally, don’t ignore ‘medical’ 
symptoms. A brief functional enquiry to elicit these 
should be included. 
Past psychiatric history 
• Nature of any previous psychiatric contact: ‘Have 
you ever been an inpatient in a psychiatric hospital? 
Have you ever been in contact with the community 
mental health team? Were you given a diagnosis?’
• Treatments used for previous episodes of psychiat-
ric illness and their eff ects.
• Self-harm and harm to others: ‘Have you ever 
harmed yourself or tried to kill yourself? Have you 
ever hurt anyone else?’
About 50% of psychiatry referrals have had prior 
psychiatric contact. A previous diagnosis is best seen 
as a strong hypothesis to be tested. Keep an open 
mind – the new problem may be diff erent, or the pre-
vious diagnosis might be wrong. Past history may also 
provide useful information about prognosis and the 
patient’s attitude to their disorder and its manage-
ment. 
Family history
• Family tree – ask the ages, occupations and health 
of, at a minimum, parents, siblings and children. 
Draw out the tree.
• Quality of the family relationships: ‘How do you get 
on with your family?’ Problems in family relation-
ships are commonly associated with psychiatric 
disorder.
• Family psychiatric history: ‘Has anyone in your 
family had problems like you’re having now?’ Also 
ask about suicide, self-harm or substance misuse. 
A positive family psychiatric history is a risk factor 
for most psychiatric disorders, for both genetic and 
environmental reasons.
• Brief family medical history.
• Any recent events in the family.
Personal history and premorbid 
personality
• Pregnancy, birth and childhood – ‘Are you aware 
of any problems around your birth or during your 
mother’s pregnancy with you? Did you walk and 
talk at the right age, as far as you know?’, childhood 
health problems, maltreatment. 
• Education – did the patient enjoy school? bully-
ing? fi nish school? special education classes?
• Occupations and reasons for changes, military ser-
vice, job satisfaction. 
• Relationships – number, duration, type, gender.
• Traumatic events – ‘In your life, have you ever had 
a particularly horrible or frightening experience?’. 
Exposure to suicide or self-harm is worth exploring 
specifi cally as it is a risk factor for those behaviours 
in the patient.
• ‘Premorbid personality’ – the patient’s usual 
character, interests, belief and habits. ‘How would 
your friends describe you? How do you cope in a dif-
fi cult situation? Would you describe yourself as a 
loner or very sociable?’ (off ering alternatives can be 
helpful) ‘Do you believe there is something beyond 
us, like God? Is religion important to you?’
Aspects of childhood can be associated with sub-
sequent psychiatric disorder; for example, conduct 
disorder is associated with dissocial personality dis-
order, and childhood abuse is associated with all 
psychiatric disorders. Th e pattern of past relation-
ships can give diagnostic clues, such as an absence 
of close relationships in schizoid personality disor-
der, or many turbulent ones in borderline personality 
disorder. Th e nature of employment may give clues 
to the patient’s level of functioning. A deteriorating 
or disrupted work record may refl ect a psychiatric 
disorder or a personality trait, respectively. Th e pre-
morbid personality shapes the risk, type and progno-
sis of psychiatric disorder. Note that a patient’s view 
of their personality and life may be distorted during 
psychiatric illness; for example, a depressed person 
will report themselves in an unduly negative light. 
Th ird party information may be useful in such cases. 
Questions on sexual history and functioning may be 
necessary at this stage, but detailed or especially sen-
sitive discussion on this topic may better be deferred 
until a later stage. 
Social history (current circumstances)
• Current relationships: ‘Do you have a partner at 
the moment? Are they a man or a woman?’ (never 
assume gender).
• Self-care and support: ‘Do you feel able to look 
after yourself at the moment?’ Who is there to sup-
port the patient, and who is dependent on the 
patient? 
• Current employment.
• Current worries – fi nances, housing, relationship, 
etc.
• It can be helpful to ask the patient to describe a 
typical day.

14 
The basic psychiatric assessment
Current relationships are important: they may con-
tribute to the present disorder or have been damaged 
by it. Having a supportive partner improves outcome 
and assists management. Ongoing worries and stress-
es can perpetuate psychiatric disorder; their resolution 
is often part of management – for example, helping the 
patient sort out a housing problem. All patients with 
severe psychiatric disorder should have an assessment 
of needs (p. 84). Detailed information about the cur-
rent circumstances is an essential component of this. 
Alcohol and drug use
• ‘Do you drink alcohol?’ Record the amount per 
week in units. If the patient drinks alcohol regular-
ly, ask the four FAST or CAGE questions (Box 2.2). 
Th ey take about 20 seconds.
• ‘Have you ever used recreational drugs?’ If so, quan-
tify the amount used: ‘How much do you spend on 
X per week?’ can give a good guide and is often 
more accurate than asking the patient to estimate 
weights consumed. You can ask the CAGE ques-
tions for each recreational drug used.
• Impact on the patient’s life: ‘Has your drinking/
drug use ever got you into trouble in your relation-
ships? At work? With the law?’
Alcohol and other drugs may be a cause, a compo-
nent or a consequence of many psychiatric disorders, 
so should always be asked about. Th e recommended 
limits for alcohol intake are 21 units per week for men 
and 14 for women. One unit is half a pint of beer, a 
single measure of spirits, or a small glass of wine. Try 
out the NHS Choices Drinks Tracker free desktop and 
mobile app to calculate units per week.
Forensic history 
• ‘Have you ever had contact with the police? Were 
you charged? What happened?’ 
• If there were incidents, did these relate to previous 
episodes of mental illness?
Having a ‘forensic history’ (i.e. a criminal record) 
may be directly related to a psychiatric disorder or be 
a coincidence. A history of violence will aff ect man-
agement regardless. 
Past medical history and drug history
• ‘Have you had any medical illnesses or operations?’
• Current medication and adherence: ‘Which ones do 
you usually take? Do they give you any side eff ects?’
• Complementary therapies used.
• Allergies (important for the management plan).
Th e medical history is important because of the 
overlap between psychiatric and medical disorders. 
Medical disorders can cause and be caused by psy-
chiatric disorder, and the drugs used to treat psychi-
atric disorder may also cause medical problems. Th is 
co-dependence of mental and physical morbidity 
means that physical illness is common in people with 
psychiatric disorders, but it is often undiagnosed. 
Some patients forget that they have depot medication 
as it is administered by a nurse every few weeks. It is 
always worth asking specifi cally about injections. 
The basic mental state 
examination (MSE)
Th e basic MSE described here concentrates on aspects 
of the recent mental state that are commonly aff ected 
by psychiatric disorder and that have diagnostic weight. 
Much of the MSE will have been covered in the history or 
from observations made in passing. However, the MSE 
is still useful to ensure (and to document) that you have 
checked for all important recent phenomena and pro-
vides a point of comparison over time. When you present 
your fi ndings, you should clearly separate the history 
from the MSE. Th e headings of the basic MSE are:
1 Appearance and behaviour – an underestimated 
source of diagnostic information.
2 Speech – abnormal speech may be present in neu-
rological, psychotic and mood disorders.
3 Mood – subjective and objective accounts of mood 
and its reactivity and congruency (terms explained 
below). 
4 Th oughts – thought content, and the way thoughts 
fl ow, are aff ected in many psychiatric disorders. 
Th e nature of the abnormalities gives important 
diagnostic clues.
5 Perceptions – mainly aff ected in psychotic and or-
ganic disorders. Less fl orid alterations in sensory 
experiences also occur in anxiety disorders.
6 Cognition – cognitive impairment is character-
istic of dementia and delirium, but can also occur 
in other disorders such as depression. If severe, it 
may make history-taking very diffi  cult.
7 Insight – lack of awareness of illness is classically 
a sign of psychosis or ‘organic’ disorder. In all dis-
orders, the patient’s views as to the nature and sig-
nifi cance of their problems are important, not least 
since they may aff ect their views about the need for 
(and choice of) treatment.
1) Appearance and behaviour
1 Level of consciousness: alert/hypervigilant/sleepy.
2 Appearance: dress, posture, self-care, apparent 
body mass index (BMI), self-harm/intravenous 
drug use, smell.

The basic psychiatric assessment 15
3 Body language and movement: overactivity, ab-
normal movements or gait, responding to halluci-
nations or talking to someone.
4 Eye contact and rapport with the interviewer: de-
fensive, evasive, co-operative?
Many psychiatric disorders are accompanied by 
characteristic changes in manner, emotional expres-
sion or physical appearance. Th ese often provide the 
fi rst diagnostic clue. So, from the moment you meet, 
observe closely … (see Box 2.3).
2) Speech
1 Quantity and spontaneity: does the patient speak 
spontaneously, or very little and only in response 
to questioning (poverty of speech)?
2 Volume and rate: pressure of speech (fast and dif-
fi cult to interrupt)? slowed speech?
3 Tone: the emotional quality of speech – e.g. angry, 
sarcastic.
4 Articulation/intelligibility: is the patient’s speech 
hard to understand? If so, is it because of articula-
tion (dysarthria) or content (dysphasia)?
Quiet speech that tails off  or is monosyllabic is 
typical of depression; the opposite occurs in mania. 
Dysarthria means a problem with articulation. It 
can manifest as slurred, strangled, staccato or nasal 
speech and suggests a neurological disorder (the 
diff erential is wide), intoxication or a side eff ect of 
antipsychotic drugs. Dysphasia, in which there is a 
problem understanding or communicating mean-
ing, suggests a neurological disorder or thought 
disorder. Th e division between speech and thoughts 
is somewhat artifi cial, but abnormalities in the con-
tent or fl ow of what is said are usually recorded un-
der ‘thoughts’.
 Box 2.3 The waiting room
You look into the waiting room and see a garishly 
dressed patient, pacing around and enthusiastically 
trying to engage other patients in conversation. Is 
he manic? Intoxicated? Disinhibited due to a frontal 
lobe tumour? The older patient in the corner is 
avoiding eye contact and with little facial expression 
– is he depressed? Is he parkinsonian? You notice 
he also has a tremor – that seems to support 
Parkinson’s disease. Or could it be due to taking 
antipsychotic drugs or lithium? You call another 
patient in, and she starts talking to you, but keeps 
breaking off in mid-sentence and looking over her 
shoulder. Is she hearing voices? Does she think 
the room is bugged? Both could indicate paranoid 
schizophrenia.
3) Mood
Disturbances of mood are usually in the depressive 
direction (low mood), but can also be manic (elevated 
mood). Th e direction of any alteration will usually be 
obvious, and questions can be focused accordingly.
1 Subjective mood (self-reported mood): ‘How have 
you been feeling in yourself recently? How would 
you describe your mood just now? On a scale of 1 to 
10? Have you been low in spirits or depressed? Can 
you still enjoy the things that you normally enjoy? 
Is life particularly good or more enjoyable at the 
moment? Have you been feeling more irritable than 
usual?’
2 Objective mood: Record how the patient’s mood 
appears to you – this may be diff erent from subjec-
tive mood. You can describe:
• the mood itself (elevated, depressed or unre-
markable);
• its constancy (fl at, labile, reactive);
• its congruity (congruous or incongruous).
Th e best screening questions for depression ask 
about persistent low mood and the loss of pleasure 
(anhedonia). Constancy describes how the mood 
shifts over the conversation: it is abnormal for mood 
not to shift at all. A labile mood showed marked fl uc-
tuation. Congruity describes how well the patient’s 
mood fi ts with what they are thinking or perceiving. 
Incongruity of mood, for example no change in mood 
when describing a distressing experience, is a feature 
of schizophrenia. You should always screen for mood 
disorders. Th ere is no evidence that asking about sui-
cide increases the risk of it – probably the opposite. 
Th e mood section of the MSE can also reveal anxiety 
symptoms, although these are usually obvious from 
the patient’s appearance, behaviour or thoughts.
 Box 2.4 Abnormal thoughts
Delusion: A false belief fi rmly held despite 
contrary evidence and out of keeping with the 
patient’s cultural or religious background. For 
example, a patient is absolutely convinced that 
he is an assassin’s target and so has locked 
himself in his fl at and adopted a disguise. There 
may be one delusion or many, and they may be 
persistent or fl eeting. Delusions carry special 
weight in the diagnosis of psychosis, so their 
recognition is an important skill. 
An overvalued idea is a belief not held quite 
as strongly as a delusion, and is typically more 
‘understandable’. It is typifi ed by the belief of a 
malnourished girl with anorexia nervosa that she 
is fat. There is a spectrum between delusions 

16 
The basic psychiatric assessment
and over-valued ideas: thoughts which seem to 
fall near the boundary line (‘partial delusions’) are 
common during the development and treatment 
of psychosis.
Obsession: A recurrent thought, impulse or 
image that enters the subject’s mind despite 
resistance. The patient realizes that it originates 
from their own mind and may not be true, but 
they cannot resist thinking it and often have to act 
upon it (a compulsion). For example, obsessional 
thoughts about having dirty hands may lead to the 
compulsion to wash repeatedly. These symptoms 
characterize obsessive-compulsive disorder and 
also occur in depression.
Formal thought disorder: Literally, this simply 
means disorder of the form of thought (rather 
than its content), and many conditions are 
associated with disordered thought. However, 
this term is often used to imply the disordered 
thought associated with psychosis.
Flight of ideas: Thoughts move rapidly from one 
idea to the next and are diffi cult to follow, but the 
links between the thoughts are understandable, if 
unusual (unlike in formal thought disorder).
4) Thoughts
1 Form (or fl ow): Is the patient’s train of thought dif-
fi cult to follow? Try to describe how. Is there formal 
thought disorder or fl ight of ideas?
2 Content:
• Over-valued ideas and delusions: ‘Do you feel 
that something strange is going on? Do you have 
any ideas your friends and family don’t share? Is 
someone or something trying to control you? Is 
someone trying to interfere with your thoughts? 
Do you feel that people are against you or trying 
to harm you in some way?’
• Worries and obsessions: ‘Do you have particular 
things on your mind at the moment? Do you keep 
having the same thought going round and round 
in your mind? Do certain things keep coming into 
your mind, even though you try hard to keep them 
out? Do you worry about your health a lot?’ 
• Compulsions (not strictly a thought, but useful 
to ask about this at the same time as obsessions): 
‘Do you ever fi nd yourself doing the same thing 
over and over again, even though you’ve already 
done it well enough?’
• Phobias: ‘Do you have any special fears, like some 
people are afraid of spiders or mirrors?’
• Suicidal ideation: Use cues from the patient to 
broach the subject. For example: ‘It sounds as if 
life’s a bit of a struggle at the moment. Do you feel 
like life isn’t worth living? Do you have any plans 
to end your life?’ 
• Morbid thoughts: thoughts of harm to self or 
others: ‘Have you thought of harming yourself in 
any way?’
It is important to assess both the form and con-
tent of the thoughts. Giving the patient time to reply 
at length to an open question can highlight a prob-
lem with the form of thoughts – if you are fi nding the 
patient diffi  cult to follow, this is a good indicator of 
thought disorder (or that they are brighter than you!). 
Write down a sample of what is said. 
Abnormalities of thoughts and thought processes 
occur in many psychiatric disorders, and the pre-
cise form of the abnormality can be diagnostically 
important. See Box 2.4 for some important defi ni-
tions. Th ere are classic patterns of abnormal thought 
associated with schizophrenia (e.g. formal thought 
disorder, delusions, thought echo) and bipolar dis-
order (fl ight of ideas, grandiose delusions), which 
are discussed in more detail in other chapters. How-
ever, this section of the MSE could also pick up (for 
example) recurrent worries about physical health in 
hypochondriasis; a general theme of persecution in 
a delusional disorder; or a preoccupation with weight 
in an eating disorder.
5) Perceptions
• Illusions and hallucinations: ‘Do you see or hear 
things that other people can’t? Have you ever heard 
voices speaking when there was nobody there? Do 
things or people seem diff erent from normal? When 
does this happen?’
• Derealization and depersonalization: ‘Do you 
ever feel detached from yourself, or from the rest of 
the world?’
See Box 2.5 for some important symptom defi ni-
tions and their signifi cance.
 Box 2.5 Abnormal perceptions
A hallucination is a perception experienced as real 
in the absence of a stimulus. For example, hearing 
a voice in the corner of the room when no one is 
there. Like a delusion, the person is absolutely 
convinced (at the time) that the experience is 
real. They can occur in any sensory modality 
and are pathognomonic of psychosis. Auditory 
hallucinations are the most common and usually 
suggest an affective disorder, schizophrenia or 
acute drug intoxication. Visual hallucinations 
suggest an organic psychosis such as Lewy 

The basic psychiatric assessment 17
body dementia. Olfactory hallucinations occur in 
temporal lobe epilepsy. Hallucinations are common 
whilst falling asleep (hypnogogic) or waking up 
(hypnopompic), and are not abnormal. 
An illusion is a misperception or misinterpretation 
of an external stimulus. For example, mistaking a 
shadow in the corner for a person when there is 
no one there. They have an ‘as if’ quality. They are 
common in the general population and in isolation 
have no diagnostic signifi cance (and so must be 
distinguished clearly from hallucinations).
Depersonalization is a feeling of detachment 
from the normal sense of self – ‘as if I am acting’. 
Derealization is a feeling of detachment from 
the external world. Both are a feature of anxiety 
disorders but can be mistaken for psychosis.
6) Cognition
• Orientation: Is the patient orientated in time, per-
son and place? 
• Level of consciousness: Is there ‘clouding of con-
sciousness’ or is the patient alert?
• Subjective report: ‘Are you having any problems 
thinking clearly?’
• Memory: Show the patient three items (e.g. watch, 
pen, shoe) and ensure they have registered them; 
test for recall 2 minutes later.
Cognitive impairment is the hallmark of demen-
tia and delirium. It can also occur as a feature of de-
pression, especially in the elderly (sometimes called 
pseudodementia), and in schizophrenia (hence its 
former name of dementia praecox). In delirium there 
is clouding of consciousness (usually manifested as 
decreased responsiveness to, or awareness of, sur-
roundings); in dementia there isn’t. If signifi cant cog-
nitive abnormalities are detected, diagnosis-specifi c 
assessment of cognition (p. 19), physical examination 
and relevant investigations are essential.
7) Insight
• Th at they are ill: ‘Do you think anything is wrong 
with you? What do you think is wrong?’
• Th at their symptoms can be attributed to their ill-
ness: e.g. ‘Do you think that your voices are real, or 
are they to do with your illness?’
• Th at they need treatment: ‘Do you need any treat-
ment? What sort of treatment do you think you 
need?’
Insight is not all or nothing, but a matter of degree, 
and it fl uctuates according to the mental state. More-
over, insight is defi ned with respect to something else. 
It includes the person’s ability to recognize abnormal 
mental experiences as abnormal; insight that they 
are suff ering from a psychiatric disorder; insight into 
the relationship between their symptoms and their 
illness; and insight into the need for and benefi ts of 
treatment. Th is last aspect has particular implications 
when considering compulsory treatment under the 
Mental Health Act. It is also very important to assess 
the capacity of the patient to accept or refuse treat-
ment (see Chapter 19). 
Ending the interview
As you come to the end of your interview:
1 Summarize what you have been told back to the 
patient. Th is helps ensure you have gained an ac-
curate picture, and reinforces to the patient that 
you have been listening carefully.
2 ‘Is there anything else that I haven’t asked you, that 
you think I should know?’
3 Give the patient an opportunity to ask questions.
4 Explain what you plan to do next.
When is a physical examination 
necessary?
Th e physical health of a psychiatric patient is impor-
tant because:
• Medical conditions can present with psychological 
symptoms. For example, lethargy and low mood 
may signify anaemia, hypothyroidism or malig-
nancy.
• Patients with psychiatric disorders have increased 
rates of medical illness for a number of reasons: 
there may be a common aetiology; the psychiatric 
disorder may have led them to neglect their health; 
or they may have medical side eff ects of the treat-
ments used for psychiatric disorders.
So, in every assessment take account of the pa-
tient’s physical appearance, as well as their age, 
symptoms, medical history, etc., and always consider 
what examination is required. Th is may include a 
brief examination of all systems. However, there is no 
pre-specifi ed physical examination in the psychiatric 
assessment since it depends upon the setting, the pa-
tient, the disorder and the treatment.
• Th e setting: A full examination is performed on 
every psychiatric hospital admission because the 
psychiatrist takes medical responsibility whilst the 
patient is in hospital. A full examination should 
also be performed in any emergency assessment.
• Th e patient: A full examination should be per-
formed if the patient has not been seen by a doctor 
recently, or if they are homeless, and hence at risk 

18 
The basic psychiatric assessment
of tuberculosis, malnutrition, etc. Relevant systems 
examinations should be performed if there is a 
known history of a medical disorder, or if func-
tional enquiry reveals signifi cant symptoms.
• Th e disorder and its treatment: For example, 
if alcohol misuse is suspected, examine for the 
physical signs that accompany it. Patients on long-
term antipsychotic drugs should be examined for 
tardive dyskinesia.
For patients receiving psychiatric care in the com-
munity, the responsibility for the patient’s physical 
health should be agreed between the psychiatrist and 
GP; usually it resides with the latter. Th is will include 
things such as monitoring of lithium levels, renal 
function and cardiovascular risk.
Basic investigations
Investigations should be used selectively to ensure 
that there is no underlying medical condition ac-
counting for, or contributing to, the patient’s psy-
chiatric disorder, as well as baseline tests prior to 
commencing medication. For example:
• A urine drug screen in suspected drug-induced 
psychosis.
• Extensive biochemical, imaging and genetic inves-
tigations in a 30-year-old with dementia.
• A brain scan in someone with delirium and a his-
tory of a fall.
• Th yroid function tests in a patient with anxiety, 
palpitations and weight loss.
• Renal function prior to commencing lithium.
 Box 2.6 A ‘one minute screen’ for 
psychiatric disorder
There are occasions when only a moment can 
be spent on psychiatric assessment. Even this is 
worthwhile. The seven questions below screen 
rapidly for psychiatric disorders common in general 
practice and non-psychiatric inpatients. A positive 
response to any question should lead you to 
perform a fuller psychiatric assessment.
During the past month:
1 Have you felt low in spirits? (depression)
2 Do you enjoy things less than you usually do? 
(depression)
3 Have you been feeling generally anxious? 
(anxiety)
4 Are you worried about your health or other 
specifi c things? (health anxiety)
5 Has your eating felt out of control? (eating 
disorder)
6 Do you drink alcohol? If so, ask FAST or CAGE 
questions (Box 2.2)
7 Present three items and ask the patient to recall 
them after 2 minutes (dementia/delirium)
 FURTHER READING
Oyebode F, Sims ACP (2008) Sims’ Symptoms in the 
Mind: An Introduction to Descriptive Psychopathol-
ogy, 4th edn. Saunders/Elsevier, Edinburgh. 
 KEYPOINTS
• The aim of psychiatric assessment is to gather 
suffi cient information to make a diagnosis and 
set it in context.
• Most information comes from the history and 
mental state examination, although physical 
examination and investigations are sometimes 
important too.
• Diagnostic hypotheses should be made early 
in the assessment and then tested using more 
specifi c questioning.
• A fl exible approach can be achieved by 
combining a basic assessment with diagnosis-
specifi c assessments (Chapter 3), which are 
only used when the likelihood of a specifi c 
diagnosis is raised.
• Psychiatric disorder can and should be rapidly 
screened for in all medical settings (see Box 2.6).
• Interviewing skills allow you to gather 
information effi ciently and form an effective 
alliance with the patient.
 SELF-ASSESSMENT
1 Which of the following is true?
a The mental state examination is limited to 
features that the interviewer notices.
b The ‘FAST’ questions serve as a screen for 
alcohol dependency.
c Congruity describes how well the patient’s 
mood fi ts with what they are thinking or 
perceiving.
d Derealization is a feeling of detachment from 
the normal sense of self.
e Delusions are disorders associated with 
schizophrenia.

Psychiatry Lecture Notes, Eleventh Edition. Gautam Gulati, Mary-Ellen Lynall and Kate Saunders. © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 
2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Th e clinical features of psychiatric disorders are 
covered in later chapters, which you can refer to in 
conjunction with this chapter. Note that an adequate 
assessment often requires assessing more than one of 
the domains described below. Th e assessment of risk, 
sexual functioning, learning disability and children’s 
problems are covered in other chapters. 
How to assess cognitive 
function
‘Cognitive function’ is multi-faceted and includes do-
mains such as attention, memory and language. We 
describe the approach to cognitive impairment fi rst 
because it interferes with the psychiatric assessment, 
occasionally to the point that no useful history can be 
obtained from the patient. If the patient can’t or won’t 
engage in the assessment, see the section ‘How to as-
sess an unresponsive patient’ (p. 37). If the impair-
ment is life-long, consider learning disability. 
When to use this chapter
Th e previous chapter described how to perform 
a basic assessment to screen for features suggesting 
a psychiatric disorder. In this chapter, we describe a 
number of in-depth assessments that help you come 
to a particular diagnosis. Th e assessments cover the 
commonest presentations and groups of diagnoses 
in psychiatry (listed above). Each section contains 
general advice about the areas to cover in your his-
tory and mental state examination (MSE), specifi c 
suggestions for questions to use, and defi nitions of 
key terms. You can think of these assessments as the 
‘extra bits’ you need to do on top of the basic assess-
ment if you suspect one of the associated diagnoses. 
Alternatively, possible diagnoses may occur to you 
at a later stage in the patient’s care, leading you to 
assess for them more specifi cally. We do not suggest 
reading this chapter in one go. Instead, read through a 
section as you come across a clinical problem requir-
ing its use.
Diagnosis-specifi c 
assessments
Learning objectives: how to assess …
✓ cognitive function
✓ psychosis
✓ depression and mania
✓ anxiety disorders and somatoform disorders
✓ eating disorders
✓ sleep disorders
✓ alcohol and other substance misuse
✓ an unresponsive (or uncooperative) patient
3

20 
Diagnosis-specifi c assessments
What do you need to fi nd out?
1 Does the patient have signifi cant cognitive im-
pairment? 
2 Is there a ‘medical’ cause? E.g. intracranial tu-
mour or other space-occupying lesion, meningitis, 
encephalitis …
3 If there is no obvious direct cause, is this demen-
tia, delirium or depression? Dementia and delirium 
are the two major causes of cognitive impairment, 
each with a range of specifi c causes that need to be 
investigated (see Chapter 13). In dementia, con-
sciousness is unimpaired whereas the hallmark of 
delirium is ‘clouding of consciousness’ – drowsiness, 
distractibility, fl eeting delusions, and visual halluci-
nations. Dementia is chronic and progressive, while 
in delirium there is an acute onset and fl uctuating 
course (Boxes 3.1 and 3.2). However, distinguishing 
between these diff erentials is often challenging in the 
acute setting, where you may have little information 
about the patient’s usual level of cognitive function.
When do you need to assess 
cognition?
Th ere are multiple reasons for assessing cognition, 
including:
• Th e patient has scored poorly on cognitive screen-
ing questions in the basic psychiatric assessment.
• Th e patient seems muddled (‘query confused’ on 
the triage slip in accident and emergency).
• The patient, often encouraged by their family, 
has come seeking help because of perceived for-
getfulness.
• Th e patient is old (20% of the population over 
80 years old have dementia).
 Box 3.1 The differential diagnosis of 
confusion or memory loss
• Deafness or dysphasia can be misinterpreted as 
confusion – check that the person can hear; that 
any hearing aids used are working correctly; that 
they can understand; and that they can speak.
• Dementia: Alzheimer’s disease, vascular dementia 
and Lewy body dementia are the most common 
forms.
• Depression, including pseudodementia.
• Delirium – this is a clinical picture rather than 
a diagnosis and has multiple causes including 
CNS infection, sepsis, hypoxia, brain injury, 
drug toxicity, drug withdrawal syndromes and 
metabolic disturbance, to name but a few.
• Other psychiatric disorder, especially late-onset 
schizophrenia (paraphrenia), psychosis, mania, 
functional disorder.
• Transient global amnesia.
• Seizures – post-ictal state or temporal lobe 
epilepsy (i.e. complex partial seizure).
• Drugs, especially those with anticholinergic 
effects, can exacerbate any cognitive impairment.
Cognitive impairment: history 
and MSE
We will focus on an assessment of a stable patient in 
whom an acute medical cause such as hypoglycaemia 
has already been ruled out. In addition to the basic psy-
chiatric assessment described in the previous chapter, 
you should focus on the aspects outlined below.
Check that the patient can hear and 
understand you
Talk to the informant fi rst if the impairment is severe. 
Make it as easy as possible for the patient to hear and 
understand you: ‘Do you have a good side?’. Deafness 
is a classic, but hopefully rare, cause of a misdiagnosis 
of dementia.
 Box 3.2 ‘Confusing’ terminology
Delirium, acute confusional state and 
encephalopathy are all terms that refer to an acute 
or subacute change in cognition and the level of 
consciousness. They are often used synonymously, 
and while delirium is defi ned in DSM-IV, there is no 
widely accepted consensus about the distinction 
between these three terms.
Is there a perceived memory problem?
Ask whether the patient (or their informant) has no-
ticed a problem with memory, and characterize this. 
While doing so, note the patient’s understanding 
and use of language, and their ability to attend to the 
questions.
• ‘Do you fi nd yourself forgetting things? Can you give 
me some examples?’
• ‘When did it begin? Any idea what might have hap-
pened?’
• ‘What aspects of your life are aff ected?’ (e.g. work, 
cooking, shopping).
• ‘Do you have any problems fi nding words, or under-
standing what people say to you?’
Sometimes it is useful to ask the patient to describe 
the main events and chronology of their day (espe-
cially if you can corroborate the history). If they give 

Diagnosis-specifi c assessments 21
an implausible story, consider confabulation (the 
fabrication of recent events to cover gaps in memory), 
which occurs in dementia and Wernicke–Korsakoff  
syndrome. Note that unawareness of self-identity is 
rare, even in severe dementia, and raises the possibil-
ity of a dissociative disorder (Chapter 10).
Look for features of delirium
• Is the person drowsy? Are they fully aware of their 
surroundings?
• Are they distractible? Irritable?
• Do they seem to be hallucinating?
• When did the problems start? (acute-onset sup-
ports delirium).
• Any obvious cause? (e.g. post-ictal, septic).
Memory tests
‘I’m going to ask you some questions to test your mem-
ory.’ Th is makes people anxious, so emphasize that 
it’s not a pass or fail kind of test. Questions should test 
a range of memory domains. Note that none of the 
questions or tasks suggested below are wholly spe-
cifi c – they all rely on multiple cognitive domains, to 
diff ering degrees:
• Orientation: ‘What day of the week is it? Which 
town are we in? What kind of place is this?’
• General knowledge: e.g. ‘Who is the Prime Minister?’
• Semantic knowledge: e.g. point to objects and ask 
the patient to name them.
• Working memory and attention: ask the patient 
to spell a fi ve-letter word backwards, or ‘serial sev-
ens’ – take 7 from 100 and keep taking 7 away.
• Comprehension: can the patient respond to prac-
tical instructions? E.g. ‘Pick up the pencil from the 
table and put it on the fl oor’. If two-stage instruc-
tions are too diffi  cult, try a simpler task: ‘Close your 
eyes’.
• Recall can be tested by asking the patient to recall 
the objects named, or the word spelt backwards, a 
few minutes later.
• Executive function: e.g. draw a circle and ask the 
patient to imagine it’s a clock, and to put the num-
bers in and draw the hands pointing to a particular 
time (e.g. 9.30).
• Ask the patient to write a simple sentence of their 
own choice. Th is tests the ability both to generate 
and to write a sentence, so if this is diffi  cult, you 
could dictate a sentence for the patient to write.
• Abstract reasoning: e.g. ‘What’s similar between a 
dog and a cat?’ or ‘What does “a rolling stone gath-
ers no moss” mean to you?’
Ensure the patient has registered each question – 
don’t be misled by sensory problems, and try to note 
any lack of attention or motivation. Memory can be 
tested more formally using various scales and screen-
ing tools, which comprise questions such as those 
listed here. Th e choice of scales and screens varies 
between clinicians and settings, but the most widely 
used scale (including by non-specialists) is the Mini-
Mental State Examination (MMSE) – see Box 3.3.
 Box 3.3 The Mini-Mental State 
Examination (MMSE)
The MMSE is a test of cognitive function (not to be 
confused with the mental state examination!). It is 
used as a (fairly poor) screening test for dementia and 
to monitor changes in cognitive function over time. It 
is also used to determine which patients are eligible 
for cholinesterase inhibitor drugs for Alzheimer’s 
disease, and to monitor the response to such 
treatment. The MMSE tests spatial and temporal 
orientation, short- and long-term memory, attention, 
language, calculation and visuo-spatial ability. It 
consists of 12 questions and is scored out of 30:
• 26–30 is a normal score
• 21–25 suggests dementia 
• 20 or less is highly suggestive of dementia
Assess for depression
Depression can cause cognitive impairment, but may 
also be a consequence of it. Confusion has a wide dif-
ferential (Box 3.1), but if neither delirium nor depres-
sion is present, the most likely diagnosis is dementia.
Appropriate ‘medical’ assessment
Do a careful physical examination. Look for evidence 
of vascular disease, thyroid status, alcohol abuse or 
infection. Th e neurological examination should in-
clude testing of cranial nerves and evaluation of cor-
tical functions (e.g. apraxias, hemineglect, primitive 
refl exes).
What next?
If dementia is diagnosed, proceed to assess its likely 
cause, its eff ect on daily living and any associated 
problems. Delirium is due to a variety of medical con-
ditions, many of which need urgent treatment. 
How to assess psychosis
Th e cardinal features of psychosis (delusions, halluci-
nations and lack of insight) were defi ned in the basic 
assessment (Chapter 2) and relate mostly to the dis-
orders covered in Chapter 12.

22 
Diagnosis-specifi c assessments
 What do you need to fi nd out?
1 Is the person suff ering from a psychosis? Some 
people with strange ideas or strange behaviour 
may turn out to have an anxiety disorder, a per-
sonality disorder or no diagnosis at all. Similarly, 
some people can appear and behave entirely nor-
mally despite having a psychosis. Detection of a 
psychosis is therefore sometimes diffi  cult, not least 
because people may be frightened of their experi-
ences, or what will happen to them if they tell you.
2 If so, what is the cause of the psychosis? See 
Box 3.4 for the main diff erentials of psychotic 
symptoms.
 Box 3.4 The differential diagnosis of 
psychotic symptoms
Psychiatric disorders
• Schizophrenia
• Delusional disorders
• Psychotic depression
• Manic episode
• Schizoaffective disorder
• Schizotypal disorder
• Puerperal psychosis
‘Organic’ disorders
• Drug-induced psychosis
• Iatrogenic: L-dopa, methyldopa, steroids, 
antimalarials
• Complex partial epilepsy
• Delirium
• Dementia
• Huntington’s disease
• Systemic lupus erythematosus
• Syphilis
An assessment of psychosis usually necessitates an 
in-depth assessment of mood and substance misuse 
(see the relevant sections of this chapter) because of 
the considerable overlap of these conditions. A risk 
assessment is needed as psychosis is associated with 
a risk of harm to self and, much less often, to others.
When do you need to assess 
for psychosis?
Psychosis may be suspected for diverse reasons, 
such as:
• Possible delusions elicited in the basic assessment.
• Bizarre or inexplicable behaviour.
• History of amphetamine use.
• A young adult found in a neglected state.
• A man heard talking to himself in a police cell.
Psychosis: history
You should start with the basic assessment as de-
scribed in Chapter 2. Th e following have particular 
relevance:
• Ask about their current problems. 
• Ask about complications of pregnancy or delivery, 
place of upbringing, academic achievements and 
social interests.
• Ask about family history of psychosis.
• Ask about past or current substance abuse. Alcohol 
and illicit drugs can induce psychosis. 
• Ask about premorbid personality and level of func-
tioning.
• Corroborate the history from an informant.
• Carry out a physical examination, concentrating 
on the neurological system.
• Consider laboratory investigations and magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI) scan.
Family history, obstetric complications, an urban 
upbringing and problems at school are all associated 
with schizophrenia. A decline in level of functioning 
(intellectually and socially) is common before and 
during the onset of schizophrenia.
Psychosis: MSE 
Th e diagnosis of schizophrenia and other psychoses 
relies on detailed evaluation of a number of symp-
toms and signs, especially concerning abnormali-
ties of thought content and form, so the assessment 
is quite long. A set of symptoms called fi rst-rank 
symptoms (Table 3.1) are accorded considerable sig-
nifi cance in the diagnosis of schizophrenia, and it is 
Table 3.1 First-rank symptoms of 
schizophrenia (for defi nitions, see Box 3.4)
Delusions
Delusional perception
Hallucinations
Thought echo
Third person auditory hallucinations
Running commentary
Thought fl ow and possession
Thought withdrawal
Thought insertion
Thought broadcasting
Passivity
Passivity of thought, feelings or actions

Diagnosis-specifi c assessments 23
important to elicit them during the MSE, if possible. 
Th ey are sometimes called Schneiderian symptoms 
after Kurt Schneider, the psychiatrist who described 
them. Listing and defi ning fi rst-rank symptoms is a 
favourite exam question! However, there is little evi-
dence of their diagnostic specifi city or sensitivity 
fi rst-rank symptoms occur in other psychoses, and 
not all people with schizophrenia have had one. 
Th e vocabulary used in psychiatry to describe the 
features of mental illness (‘descriptive psychopa-
thology’) is particularly rich when it comes to de-
scribing psychosis – some key terms are defi ned in 
Box 3.5.
 Box 3.5 Describing psychosis
A mannerism is a repetitive movement or gesture 
that is complex and seemingly purposeful. 
A repeated simple and purposeless one is a 
stereotypy. Both occur in schizophrenia.
Catatonia describes a group of motor signs that 
are rare but characteristic of catatonic schizophrenia 
(a subtype of schizophrenia), although they can 
also occur in organic disorders or as an isolated 
‘catatonia syndrome’:
• Echopraxia/echolalia – the patient imitates the 
interviewer’s every action or word.
• Automatic obedience – compliance with all 
instructions regardless of consequence.
• Ambitendency – tentative movements back and 
forth, as if unsure what to do.
• Posturing (catalepsy) – the maintenance of 
inappropriate or bizarre postures.
• Waxy fl exibility – limbs held in externally imposed 
positions, muscle tone is increased.
• Negativism – seemingly motiveless resistance to 
all instructions or attempts to be moved.
Flattened affect is a decrease in emotional 
responsivity and expression, even when emotionally 
charged topics are discussed. It is a negative 
symptom of schizophrenia, but needs to be 
distinguished from depression and parkinsonism. 
Incongruous affect is emotion not in keeping with 
the topic being talked about.
A neologism is a made-up word, usually invested 
with a personal meaning. Be sure the patient 
doesn’t just have a larger vocabulary than you …
A delusion is a false belief. It is fi rmly held despite 
contrary evidence and is out of keeping with the 
patient’s cultural or religious background. Different 
sorts of delusions are recognized:
• A delusional perception is a delusional 
interpretation of a normal perception. For 
example, a man saw a woman sneeze and knew 
this meant he must leave town. It is sometimes 
preceded by a sense of unease or perplexity that 
something strange is going on (delusional mood).
• In a delusion of reference, an event or message 
(often on TV) has a unique meaning for the 
person. An idea of reference is similar, but 
not delusional in intensity (and thus not a true 
psychotic symptom); it may occur in paranoid 
personality disorder.
• A secondary delusion is one that arises 
understandably from another mental state 
abnormality (e.g. delusions of guilt in depression); 
a primary delusion doesn’t.
• Delusions may be classifi ed by content. The most 
common are persecutory delusions (sometimes 
incorrectly called paranoid delusions), in which the 
person believes they are the victim of perceived 
injustice or conspiracy. Grandiose delusions are 
seen in mania, nihilistic ones in depression. 
Thought disorder (also called formal thought 
disorder) occurs in schizophrenia. The connections 
between thoughts and ideas are obscure and there 
is a rambling quality. Descriptive terms include 
knight’s move thinking and loosening of associations 
and, in rare severe cases, word salad. For example, 
in response to a question about what the person 
had been up to before the appointment: ‘I got on 
the bus when I saw the man from the hostel, in the 
next street where I was. Like it was that dog again, 
you know? Still, doctor, what do you think? …’. A 
different type of thought disorder occurs in mania 
(fl ight of ideas).
In schizophrenia, abnormalities also occur in the 
perceived source, ownership and fate of thoughts and 
actions:
• Th ought insertion: thoughts originate elsewhere 
and are put into the patient’s head.
• Th ought withdrawal: the experience of thoughts 
being removed from one’s mind.
• Th ought broadcast: the subject experiences his or 
her thoughts being available to and heard by others.
• Th ought block: the fl ow of thoughts abruptly ends. 
Distinguish from thought withdrawal and from 
simple loss of concentration.
• Passivity: thoughts, feelings or actions are experi-
enced as being under external control. For exam-
ple, a person with schizophrenia who killed her 
son described being unable to resist carrying out 
this act because of the ‘force’ controlling her. Pas-
sivity phenomena are important in risk assessment 
(and in how resulting crimes are dealt with).

24 
Diagnosis-specifi c assessments
A hallucination is a perception experienced as real 
in the absence of a stimulus. Th e characteristic hallu-
cinations of schizophrenia are third person auditory 
hallucinations (i.e. hearing the voice talking about 
you). Sometimes these take the form of a running 
commentary by two or more voices. Auditory hallu-
cinations do occur in psychotic mood disorders, but 
are mood congruent – that is, critical and derogatory 
in severe depression; grandiose in mania. In schizo-
phrenia, the hallucinations are usually incongruent. 
Appearance and behaviour
• Note the patient’s manner.
• Movement: are there mannerisms or stereotypies? 
Is the patient restless? Is there catatonia?
• Dress: is the patient dressed unusually? Is there 
evidence of self-neglect?
Th e patient may have a suspicious manner (you may 
be part of their conspiracy theory), be distracted (by 
hallucinations) or be distant and uninterested (nega-
tive symptoms of schizophrenia). Some people with 
schizophrenia may dress idiosyncratically. For exam-
ple, a man wore a silver foil hat to prevent his thoughts 
being extracted. Motor abnormalities can occur as 
part of psychosis, but also as common side eff ects 
of antipsychotic drugs, especially the older ‘typical’ 
ones. Th e side-eff ects include dystonia, parkinson-
ism, akathisia and tardive dyskinesia (Chapter 7).
Mood
• Does the overall mood seem normal? Is it respon-
sive? (fl attened aff ect).
• Is the emotional expression appropriate to the top-
ic being discussed? (incongruous aff ect).
Psychosis can occur as part of severe depression 
and in mania. In these cases, a mood abnormality is 
usually readily apparent.
Speech
Are made-up words (neologisms) used, or words and 
language used idiosyncratically? If the patient’s sen-
tences, or overall answers, don’t quite make sense or 
seem puzzling or unexpected, it may signify thought 
disorder.
Thought content
• Is there any evidence of delusions?
• ‘Is anything bothering you at the moment? Do you 
understand things diff erently from other people?’
• ‘Do people have a special interest in you? Are peo-
ple against you? How do you know?’ (persecutory 
delusions).
• ‘Is anything on the TV referring to you particularly?’ 
(delusions of reference).
• ‘When did you fi rst realize this (delusional belief) 
was true? How?’
Because, by defi nition, a delusion is believed to be 
true, its detection requires you to be receptive to clues 
and sometimes to ‘go along’ with implausible state-
ments in order to elicit more details. For example, a 
man matter-of-factly asks how you are aff ected by the 
Bulgarian mafi a — the fi rst hint of his psychosis. A 
non-committal reply leads him to elaborate and re-
veal his persecutory delusional system.
Flow and possession of thought
• Do the person’s thoughts seem to fl ow normally? Is 
it diffi  cult to follow the meaning of what the patient 
is saying? Write down a representative sample. Is 
there (formal) thought disorder?
• ‘Do your thoughts sometimes stop suddenly?’ 
(thought block). 
• ‘Are your thoughts sometimes removed from your 
head?’ (thought withdrawal). 
• Does the person feel in control of their thoughts 
and actions? ‘Do your thoughts get put into your 
head from outside?’ (thought insertion). ‘Can other 
people directly infl uence your thoughts or actions?’ 
(passivity; thought control). ‘Are other people aware 
of your thoughts?’ (thought broadcasting).
• ‘Do any of your thoughts get repeated in your mind 
like an echo?’ (thought echo).
Perceptions
• Does the person seem to be hearing things that are 
not there? ‘Do you hear voices when there doesn’t 
seem to be anyone present?’ (auditory hallucina-
tions). ‘Are the voices inside or outside your head?’
• Content: ‘What are they talking about? Do they 
comment on what you’re doing?’ (running com-
mentary). ‘Do they want you to harm yourself or 
other people?’ 
• ‘Do they talk directly to you or about you?’ (second 
and third person hallucinations, respectively).
• Repeat similar questions for hallucinations in oth-
er modalities.
Cognition
• Is the patient disorientated? 
• Is there cognitive impairment?
An acutely psychotic patient may be distracted by 
their experiences, or be worried that your questions 
are trying to trick or harm them, and therefore she or 
he may perform poorly on cognitive testing. Try and 

Diagnosis-specifi c assessments 25
distinguish this from the perplexity of delirium. Al-
though many people with schizophrenia are highly 
intelligent, the importance of cognitive impairment 
as an intrinsic part of schizophrenia is increasingly 
recognized. People with schizophrenia characteris-
tically underestimate their age by several years, and 
perform worse than expected on most psychometric 
tests. Th is can be exacerbated by lack of motivation, 
and by some forms of medication.
Insight
• Insight about illness: ‘Do you think you are ill in any 
way? Do others? Are the voices part of your illness?’
• Insight about need for treatment: ‘Do you need 
help? What sort?’
Insight is characteristically lost in psychosis, but 
in practice it is aff ected to varying degrees (see 
Chapter 2). Distorted awareness of reality is a related 
term that conveys what is often apparent to the inter-
viewer.
How to assess 
depression
Th ere are separate assessments for lowered mood (de-
pression) and for elevated mood (mania), described 
here in turn. However, in a patient presenting with 
depression, you must ask about past episodes of ma-
nia. Depression overlaps and coexists with so many 
diagnoses that many of the other assessments may 
also be necessary. Th e presence of mood disturbance 
requires risk assessment (mainly for suicide) as well.
What do you need to fi nd out?
1 Is the person depressed? Depression must be dis-
tinguished from normal sadness or emotional dis-
tress (Box 3.6).
2 If so, is the diagnosis a depressive disorder, or 
are the depressive symptoms part of another 
disorder? 
3 If the diagnosis is a depressive disorder, what 
type is it? Depression can be a single episode, 
recurrent or part of bipolar disorder. It may be 
classifi ed as mild, moderate or severe, and it may 
include psychotic symptoms. At its most severe, 
patients may stop eating, drinking and even mov-
ing. Depressive stupor is life threatening and an in-
dication for emergency electroconvulsive therapy 
(ECT). Depression is linked to many medical dis-
orders and to drugs, both prescribed and illicit.
 Box 3.6 The differential diagnosis of 
depressive symptoms
• Normal low mood
• Disorder of low mood:
 
o Current depressive episode
 
o Recurrent depressive disorder, currently 
depressive episode
 
o Persistent mood disorder, e.g. dysthymia
 
o Seasonal affective disorder
• Bipolar disorder, currently depressive episode
• Depression secondary to another psychiatric 
disorder:
 
o Anxiety disorder
 
o Eating disorder
 
o Schizophrenia, especially post-schizophrenic 
depression
• Reactive:
 
o Acute stress reaction
 
o Adjustment disorder (adaptation to a signifi cant 
life change or stressful event)
 
o Normal or abnormal bereavement reaction
• Substance misuse, especially harmful use of 
alcohol
• Depression associated with another medical 
condition:
 
o Intracranial: any intracranial pathology including 
dementia, stroke, Parkinson’s disease, multiple 
sclerosis, variant Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease 
(vCJD), head injury
 
o Extracranial: hypothyroidism, hyperthyroidism, 
hyperparathyroidism, Addison’s, Cushing’s, 
hypercalcaemia, hypomagnesaemia, iron/B12/
folate defi ciency, glandular fever, hepatitis, HIV/
AIDS
• Medications: antihypertensives, corticosteroids, 
H2R blockers, non-steroidal anti-infl ammatory 
drugs (NSAIDs), anticonvulsants, combined oral 
contraceptive pill (OCP), chemotherapy agents, 
Roaccutane, benzodiazepines …
When do you need to assess 
for depression?
Th e following should alert you to possible depression: 
• Detection of a depressive symptom or suicidal 
thought in the basic psychiatric assessment.
• Unexplained fatigue.
• Any chronic general medical condition, but 
especially neurological disease and chronic 
pain.

26 
Diagnosis-specifi c assessments
Depression: history
You should use the basic assessment as described in 
Chapter 2, but the following features have particular 
relevance if you suspect depression:
• Does the patient think they are depressed?
• Identify past and current stressors – marital strife, 
unemployment, etc.
• How has the patient tried to cope with the prob-
lems?
• Is there a past history of mood disorder? What has 
its course been? What treatment worked?
• Could this be bipolar disorder? ‘In the past, have you 
had periods of better than usual mood, or boundless 
energy, or where you have behaved out of character?’ 
• Does the person have depressive or anxious traits 
in their personality?
• Is there a family history of psychiatric disorder or 
suicide?
Severely depressed patients may deny that their 
mood is abnormal and decline treatment. Stressors 
(life events) can precipitate depression; identifying 
them helps make sense of the depression, and can 
be therapeutic. Many patients have had previous epi-
sodes of mood disorder: ask about their nature, treat-
ment and outcome. It is important to identify a pa-
tient’s usual coping strategies – these can be protective 
factors (e.g. seeking help from a supportive family), or 
they may lead to additional problems (e.g. use of alco-
hol). Depressive personality traits may aff ect the risk 
and outcome of depressive disorders: an informant 
is best placed to provide the personality information, 
untainted by the negative colouring of the patient’s 
current low mood. A family history of depression is 
also a risk factor for depressive disorder and suicide.
Depression: MSE
Appearance and behaviour
• Does the patient look depressed? Does he or she 
exude a sense of gloom? Is he or she crying or agi-
tated?
• Is there good eye contact?
• Is there a normal range of emotional expression?
In depression there is often decreased eye contact 
and a lack of expression and movement. Th is is called 
psychomotor retardation. Other depressed people are 
agitated, pacing to and fro or wringing their hands.
Speech
• Is the speech normal in speed, volume and 
amount?
In severe depression, speech is slow, quiet and sparse. 
Sentences tail off , as though the patient cannot sum-
mon the energy or concentration to continue.
Mood, including biological symptoms of 
depression
Questions here will cover many of the diagnostic cri-
teria for depression:
• Mood, interest and energy levels: ‘How have you 
been feeling in your spirits? Do you still enjoy the 
things that you usually do? … Can you give some 
examples? How is your energy level? Do you feel 
more tired or fatigued than usual? Do you easily get 
irritable?’
• Onset: ‘How long have you felt this way? Did any-
thing seem to trigger it off ?’
• Diurnal (daily) variation: ‘Is your mood lower at a 
particular time of day? How do you feel fi rst thing? 
Do you often feel like crying?’
• Sleep: ‘How are you sleeping at the moment?’ If 
there is a problem: ‘Do you have problems getting 
to sleep? Are you having diffi  culty sleeping through 
the night or do you wake early then can’t get back to 
sleep? Or are you sleeping more than usual?’
• Appetite: ‘What is your appetite like? Do you enjoy 
your food? Have you lost weight?’
• Other somatic symptoms: ‘Are you constipated? 
Are your periods regular? Has your interest in sex 
changed recently?’
Th e predominant subjective feeling in depression 
may be sadness, irritability, fatigue, lethargy or lack 
of energy. Anhedonia, the lack of pleasure from nor-
mally enjoyed activities, is a key symptom of moder-
ate and severe depression. In severe depression, the 
normal reactivity of mood to circumstances is lost. 
Biological rhythms and drives are frequently im-
paired in depression. Th e presence of ‘biological’ or 
‘somatic’ symptoms (relating to sleep, appetite, sex, 
gut function, etc.) is one way to defi ne the bound-
ary between mild depression and more severe cases. 
Sleep is aff ected in several ways. Onset insomnia (dif-
fi culty getting to sleep) is common when there is ac-
companying anxiety. Sleep is generally shallow and 
unrefreshing. Early morning waking is the most char-
acteristic change, often occurring with diurnal varia-
tion of mood, so the patient is awake and at their most 
desperate when the rest of the world is asleep. Some-
what confusingly, increased sleep and sluggishness 
can also occur. Appetite tends to be reduced, contrib-
uting to constipation and weight loss. Irregular peri-
ods or amenorrhoea occur in women and there is a 
general loss of energy and libido.

Diagnosis-specifi c assessments 27
Thoughts
• ‘What things are on your mind at the moment? Any-
thing particular bothering you?’
• ‘Do you see things getting better? What might 
improve things?’
• ‘Do you feel guilty about anything you have done?’
• ‘Do you feel that you are of value?’
• ‘Do you feel that people are getting at you? … Is it 
justifi ed?’
• ‘Do you have worries about your physical health?’
• Make sure to ask in detail about suicidal thoughts 
and intent (Chapter 4).
• Are any of the thoughts obsessional in nature? ‘Do 
you fi nd yourself checking things repeatedly? Do you 
like things especially clean and tidy?’
• Are any of the thoughts delusional?
In depression, prevailing thoughts (or ‘cognitions’) 
have a negative colouring (cognitive bias), centring 
upon perceived failures, worthlessness, low self-
esteem, and so on. Hopelessness and guilt feelings 
are important, not only because they are distressing 
but also because they may lead to suicidal thoughts 
and intentions. Anxiety, health worries and physical 
symptoms are common in depression, as are obses-
sional thoughts and ruminations. However, if these 
are prominent, assess for anxiety and somatoform 
disorders … and don’t forget medical causes for phys-
ical symptoms! Delusions are rare in depression as a 
whole, but characterize psychotic depression. Th ey 
tend to be mood congruent and nihilistic.
Perceptions
• Are there hallucinations? What are they like?
Hallucinations sometimes occur in psychotic depres-
sion. Th ey are usually second person voices saying 
derogatory things, such as ‘You are a horrible person’. 
Depressed people may also describe that sensations 
are less intense than usual and they feel isolated from 
the normal emotions and activities of the outside 
world.
Cognition
• Is concentration impaired? ‘What is your concen-
tration like? Can you read a paper or follow a TV 
programme?’
• Is there objective evidence of cognitive impair-
ment?
Depression, especially in older adults, can produce ap-
parent cognitive impairment, sometimes called pseud-
odementia. Th is is a mixture of lack of motivation and 
poor concentration. It must be distinguished from de-
mentia, as it responds to treatment of the depression.
How to assess mania
What do you need to fi nd out?
1 Is the person manic? Mania is a pathological el-
evation of mood that causes substantial impair-
ment in occupational and/or social functioning. 
Mania is the key syndrome in bipolar disorder but 
there are other diff erentials (Box 3.7). Milder man-
ic symptoms do not necessarily cause impairment 
and are called hypomania. In hypomania, func-
tioning may be improved but it can also precede a 
manic relapse. 
2 Has the person been manic in the past? Even 
if the patient is currently depressed or euthymic 
(normal mood), a history of mania is important 
because of its diagnostic and therapeutic implica-
tions.
3 Assess for depressive symptoms. Most patients 
with an episode of mania will have had a history 
of depression, and some have current depressive 
symptoms (a mixed aff ective state). 
4 Assess for substance misuse. Substance misuse 
is increasingly seen as a key component of bipolar 
disorder – its prevalence in patients with bipolar 
disorder is estimated at 35–60%.
A manic person may be unable to concentrate enough 
to give useful or consistent answers. If so, focus on 
observing and eliciting current symptoms and signs 
(but see Box 3.8). Take the rest of the history later, 
or from an informant. An informant usually paints a 
more dramatic picture of recent behaviour than does 
the patient. Gather evidence of specifi c dangerous or 
out-of-keeping behaviours, since they aff ect manage-
ment – for example, whether the patient should be 
detained, or needs a pregnancy test.
 Box 3.7 The differential diagnosis of 
manic symptoms
• Mood disorder:
 
o Manic episode (with or without psychotic 
symptoms)
 
o Bipolar disorder, currently manic/hypomanic/
mixed episode
 
o Depressive episode (irritability mistaken for 
mania)
• Schizophrenia
• Anxiety/attention-defi cit hyperactivity disorder 
(ADHD)
• Substance misuse: alcohol, amphetamines, 
cocaine, hallucinogens, opiates

28 
Diagnosis-specifi c assessments
• ‘Organic’: 
 
o Multiple sclerosis, frontal lobe tumour, 
hyperthyroidism
• Drugs: corticosteroids, withdrawal from 
benzodiazepines
When do you need to assess 
for mania?
Th is assessment may be triggered by:
• A hint of manic symptoms in the basic assessment 
or during assessment of depression.
• Recent grandiose, disinhibited or disorganized 
behaviour.
• A past history of bipolar disorder.
• A family history of bipolar disorder.
Mania: history
You should proceed with the basic assessment as de-
scribed in Chapter 2, but the following points have 
particular relevance:
• Does the patient think they are unwell or need 
treatment?
• Corroborate recent history, especially with regard 
to unusual and inappropriate beliefs and actions.
• Assess the degree of dysfunction being caused by 
the symptoms. ‘Are you having any problems in 
your job? And what about your relationships?’
• Check recent use of illicit drugs or alcohol.
• Ask about sexual activity, particularly in a wom-
an, due to the risk of unwanted pregnancy. E.g. 
‘Have you recently had a new sexual partner? 
Are you using any contraception? Could you be 
pregnant?’
• Ask about past history of mania or depression.
• Has the patient ever been prescribed lithium or 
other mood stabilizer? Are they supposed to be 
taking it now? Have they been adherent?
• Ask about family history of mood disorders (bipo-
lar disorder is strongly familial).
• Do a physical examination.
It is important to look for possible triggers of a 
manic episode, which can include amphetamines, 
steroids, alcohol and discontinuation of lithium 
therapy (lithium is a common long-term treatment 
for relapse prevention in bipolar disorder). Physical 
examination is indicated as mania can (rarely) be due 
to a medical disorder such as a frontal lobe tumour. A 
fi rst episode of mania occurring above the age of 40 
should prompt a thorough search for an underlying 
cause.
Mania: MSE
Appearance and behaviour
• Manner: is the patient elated, distractible, irrita-
ble?
• Dress: clothes and make-up may be bright and 
garish or dishevelled.
• Movements: look out for fl amboyant or disinhibit-
ed gestures. Th e patient may try to hug you, snatch 
your notes or challenge your qualifi cations. Is the 
patient overactive?
Speech
• Is the speech fast? Excessive in amount? Loud? 
Hard to interrupt?
Speech in mania is fast, loud, expansive and hard to 
interrupt (pressure of speech). It refl ects the underly-
ing pressure of thoughts and the person’s attempts to 
share their many wonderful ideas (Box 3.8).
 Box 3.8 ‘Sorry, I’m lost …’
It can be diffi cult to interview someone who is 
manic. If, reluctant to interrupt, you wait for a 
natural pause in the patient’s fl ow before asking 
a further question, you may fi nd it diffi cult to 
elicit the information you need. And you may fi nd 
yourself tangled or lost in the many fast-thrown 
threads of their speech. One coping strategy is to 
interrupt each time you start to lose the thread to 
ask for clarifi cation: ‘Hang on a moment, I want to 
understand what you mean by …’ or ‘Sorry, I know 
I’m being slow, but can you tell me again about …’ 
You may feel rude interrupting the patient frequently, 
but if it helps you to understand more of what they 
are trying to communicate, it is probably worthwhile.
Mood
• ‘Have you noticed a change in your mood or energy 
level recently? Can you describe it? Do you feel hap-
pier or more confi dent than usual?’
• ‘Are you feeling full of energy?’
• ‘Have you been very irritable or impatient?’
• ‘How long has this been the case?’
• ‘How are you sleeping? More or less than usual?’
• ‘How is your appetite?’
• ‘Has your interest in sex, or other activities, 
changed?’
An increase in energy level and drive to do things al-
most always occurs. However, the predominant emo-
tion is not consistent – this can be euphoria and infec-
tious gaiety, or sudden and extreme irritability. Some 
people with mania deny their mood is elevated, or are 

Diagnosis-specifi c assessments 29
too busy to think about it. Mood can also be labile or 
mixed – simultaneous depressive and manic features. 
Th e duration of symptoms of elevated mood is impor-
tant in making the diagnosis, and in the distinction 
of mania from hypomania (see Chapter 9). In mania, 
tiredness and the drive for sleep are decreased. A 
manic patient may stay up all night working or play-
ing. Appetite may be increased, or the patient may 
be too busy to eat. Libido tends to be enhanced and 
sexual activity uninhibited.
Thought 
• Form: Does the train of thought jump from one 
topic to another? (fl ight of ideas).
• Content: ‘What’s on your mind at the moment?’ 
• Are there grandiose delusions? Don’t shy away 
from asking about this directly if you suspect 
mania: ‘Do you have special powers or abilities? 
Can you do things which most people might fi nd 
diffi  cult or even impossible?’ 
• Is there any evidence of reckless or dangerous 
ideas? ‘Have you got plans to buy anything? … or 
any plans to travel?’
Flight of ideas is a type of thought disorder character-
istic of mania. Th oughts jump rapidly from one thing 
to another, with understandable, if unusual, connec-
tions between them. Th e links are often based on 
puns, rhymes and other associations – for example: 
‘I’m fi ne, a fi ne wine, whining and moaning like Jonah 
… Jonah the whale … in Wales …’ . Write down a snip-
pet. Th e content of the thoughts is expansive and gran-
diose. Th ere may be a single, preoccupying scheme 
(e.g. to build a football stadium in their garden), but 
usually there is a kaleidoscope of incomplete, jumbled 
ideas. In mania, the grandiose ideas may become de-
lusional. Religious themes are common – for example, 
the patient knows he is the Messiah. Sometimes de-
lusions are dangerous – the belief that one can drive 
excessively fast, or fl y or borrow unrealistic amounts 
of money. Take these risks seriously: mania is unpre-
dictable and these ideas may suddenly be acted upon. 
Perceptions
• Is there any evidence of hallucinations?
Mood-congruent auditory and occasionally visual 
hallucinations occur. For example, voices telling the 
person what special powers they have and how they 
can save humanity.
Insight
Insight fl uctuates in mania. A person may seem aware 
of their condition and agree the need for treatment 
one moment but not the next.
How to assess anxiety 
and stress-related 
disorders
Anxiety disorders, or ‘neuroses’ (see Box 3.9), are 
emotional disorders in which some form of anxiety 
is the central feature, manifesting as psychological, 
cognitive and physical (somatic) complaints. For 
various reasons, the anxiety disorders are classifi ed 
together with stress-related disorders (where anxiety 
is attributed to a particular stressor) and somato-
form disorders (where medically unexplained physi-
cal symptoms predominate). However, it is easier to 
divide them up here, so we start by covering anxiety 
and stress-related disorders. Somatoform disorders 
are covered in the next section. Th is is a notoriously 
confusing area, diagnostically speaking, and we sug-
gest you read Chapter 10 in conjunction with these 
sections.
 Box 3.9 Neuroses, neurotics and 
neuroticism
The anxiety disorders are sometimes referred to 
as neuroses. Strictly speaking, neurotic symptoms 
encompass psychological symptoms that are not 
classifi ed as psychotic. However, in everyday use, 
‘neurotic’ denotes a person who is excessively 
anxious, sensitive, tense or obsessive. Neurotic 
was also used in the Victorian and Edwardian eras 
to describe women who did not meet culturally 
imposed feminine standards. The folk memory of 
this derogatory usage and the discrepancy between 
the medical and lay interpretations of ‘neurotic’ 
mean that the term is perhaps best avoided. The 
term no longer exists in the DSM classifi cation, but 
remains in ICD-10, so we have used it in this edition. 
The term neuroticism, on the other hand, has a 
different and well-characterized modern meaning: 
it is used in psychology to describe an individual’s 
tendency to experience negative emotional states, 
and is a factor in personality assessment scales.
What do you need to fi nd out?
1 Does the person have pathological anxiety or 
anxiety-related symptoms? A distinction must 
be made between pathological anxiety and wor-
ries and emotional distress that are within nor-
mal limits or are part of the person’s personality. 
Th e presence of dysfunction is one criterion used 
in diagnosing an anxiety disorder, so assess the 

30 
Diagnosis-specifi c assessments
symptoms’ eff ects on, for example, relationships 
and work performance.
2 Might the primary diagnosis be depression or a 
somatoform disorder? Anxiety and related symp-
toms are common in other diagnostic categories. 
Anxiety often coexists with depression, so it will 
nearly always be necessary to assess depression at 
the same time. Substance misuse can be a cause of, 
or response to the symptoms, so this may need to 
be assessed. If the presentation is predominantly 
with somatic concerns (e.g. pain, fatigue), assess 
for a somatoform disorder.
3 If an anxiety disorder is present, which one? 
Th e diff erential diagnosis of anxiety is wide (see 
Box 3.10). Occasionally, but importantly, anxiety 
disorders can be due to a general medical condi-
tion such as hyperthyroidism.
 Box 3.10 The differential diagnosis 
of anxiety
• Normal anxiety
• Generalized anxiety disorder
• Obsessive compulsive disorder
• Panic disorder
• Stress reactions and adjustment disorders:
 
o acute stress reaction
 
o post-traumatic stress disorder
 
o adjustment disorder
• Phobic anxiety disorders: 
 
o specifi c phobias (objects, animals, situations)
 
o social phobia
 
o agorophobia
• Hypochondriacal disorder
• Other psychiatric disorder: depressive disorders, 
eating disorders, dementia, delirium, psychosis
• Substance misuse
• Withdrawal from psychoactive medicines
• General medical conditions: hyperthyroidism, 
phaeochromocytoma, any cause of 
breathlessness (chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD)/asthma) or palpitations 
(arrhythmias), poor pain control
When do you need to assess 
for anxiety disorders?
An assessment of anxiety might be triggered by:
• Someone who is preoccupied or clearly worried 
about something.
• A person distressed by a recent trauma.
• A patient who presents with depression.
• Someone who comes for help because anxiety 
prevents them from doing something they want or 
need to do – ‘avoidance behaviour’.
Anxiety: history and MSE
In addition to the basic psychiatric assessment, you 
should focus on the aspects outlined below. 
Characterizing the anxiety
Start with open questions:
• Psychological symptoms: ‘Have you been worry-
ing a lot about things recently? What about? Do you 
feel wound up or tense?’
• Timing, triggers and bodily symptoms: ‘Are the 
feelings there most of the time, or only in specifi c 
situations? … What things or situations make you 
anxious? Do you get sudden ‘attacks’ of anxiety? … 
How does your body feel then? Do you suff er from 
aches and pains?’
• Functional impact: ‘Can you put your worries out 
of your mind? Do you avoid doing things because of 
your worries? How do the symptoms interfere with 
your daily life?’
Anxiety consists of psychological symptoms (e.g. 
tension, fear) and bodily symptoms (e.g. palpitations, 
sweating). Either can predominate. Anxiety is a state 
of arousal and may be apparent from the person’s ap-
pearance and behaviour on MSE. With practice, it is 
usually possible to distinguish this from the agitation 
of depression. Anxiety has many forms: it is usually 
situational (phobic), occurring in response to a spe-
cifi c stimulus, but it can generalized or free-fl oating. 
Anxiety can also be paroxysmal – a panic attack. A 
panic attack is a discrete episode of severe anxiety 
that builds rapidly then gradually subsides over about 
an hour. People rapidly learn to avoid situations in 
which they feel anxious or uncomfortable. Th ey may 
fi rst present for help because of the practical prob-
lems that avoidance produces. 
Obsessions and compulsions
• ‘Do you get repeated unpleasant images or thoughts 
coming into your mind?’
• ‘Do you have to keep checking things, or keep things 
very clean and tidy? What do you do? How often?’
• ‘Do you try to resist the thoughts or the urge to 
respond to them? If you do, what happens?’
Obsessions and compulsions are characteristic of 
obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) but also oc-
cur in depression, anankastic personality disorder, 
and as a rare side eff ect of treatment with dopamine 

Diagnosis-specifi c assessments 31
agonists (e.g. in Parkinson’s disease). Severe obses-
sions can, in practice, be diffi  cult to distinguish from 
delusions. 
Somatic symptoms
Enquire about somatic symptoms:
• ‘How is your health generally?’
• ‘Do you suff er from severe tiredness or exhaustion?’
• ‘Have you ever lost your memory, sight or the use of 
part of your body?’
• ‘Have you felt detached or distant from yourself 
(depersonalization) or your surroundings (dereali-
zation)?’
Unexplained physical symptoms are common in 
anxiety disorders, and in depression. If they are prom-
inent and do not correspond to the ‘biological’ symp-
toms of depression, consider a somatoform disorder. 
Medically unexplained fatigue is the main feature of 
chronic fatigue syndrome (myalgic encephalopathy), 
but fatigue and lethargy also occur in depression. 
Dissociative disorders are rare psychiatric conditions 
in which there is loss of function (e.g. amnesia, pa-
ralysis, blindness). Th ey are usually encountered in 
medical settings (e.g. after admission for neurological 
investigation). Feelings of detachment from self (dep-
ersonalization) or surroundings (derealization) are 
common symptoms of anxiety disorders, may occur 
in healthy people when tired, and are occasionally a 
diagnosis in their own right. Such feelings are hard to 
describe (e.g. ‘It’s as if there is glass between me and 
the world’) and must be distinguished from psychotic 
symptoms.
Other important questions
• ‘When did the symptoms start?’
• ‘Did they seem related to recent events? Have there 
been major events or diffi  culties in your life recently? 
Have you ever had a particularly horrible or fright-
ening experience? How has it aff ected you?’
• How has the person coped with their symptoms? 
(alcohol, drugs, family support) Have they had any 
treatment?
• Is there a family history of anxiety?
Many people have had anxiety symptoms for years 
before seeking help. If similar symptoms have been 
present since adolescence, consider personal-
ity disorder. Whilst all anxiety disorders are made 
worse by stress, sometimes the symptoms are best 
understood as a response to a major stress or life 
change – a stress-related disorder. If the stress was 
within the past few days, then consider an acute 
stress reaction. If the stressor was weeks or months 
ago, the category is adjustment reaction. Post-
traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is a form of stress-
related disorder in which a significant event (e.g. 
rape, serious accident) is followed by reliving of the 
trauma in flashbacks or nightmares, and avoidance 
of similar situations. In many anxiety disorders, 
substance misuse can be a prominent feature – 
people turn to alcohol and other maladaptive strat-
egies (e.g. avoidance) to cope with their symptoms. 
These responses may exacerbate the situation and 
should be dealt with as part of the treatment. It is 
also important to elicit the family history: while 
the genetic contribution to anxiety is modest, there 
may also be relevant learned behaviours from anx-
ious relatives.
How to assess somatic 
symptoms and 
somatoform disorders
Somatic (bodily) symptoms and concerns about 
health can of course be a presentation of a medical 
condition and should be assessed accordingly. Th ey 
may also occur in any psychiatric disorder, particu-
larly anxiety disorders, depression and eating disor-
ders. Somatoform disorders really apply to patients 
where the somatic symptoms are most prominent, 
and none of these other categories seems applica-
ble. See Chapter 10 for more detail on somatoform 
disorders.
What do you need to fi nd out?
1 Are the patient’s somatic symptoms medically 
unexplained?
2 If so, is the diagnosis a somatoform disorder, or 
are the symptoms part of another disorder? 
3 If the diagnosis is a somatoform disorder, what 
type is it? (Box 3.11) Somatoform disorders can 
manifest predominantly with somatic symptoms, 
or predominantly with concerns about health or 
appearance.
4 What does the patient want done? A frequent 
medical attender and ‘thick notes’ suggest a 
chronic somatization disorder. Many patients want 
medical rather than psychiatric treatment. Th ey 
may want treatment that you consider inappro-
priate (e.g. a further surgical referral) and decline 
treatment you do recommend (e.g. psychological 
therapy). Th ey may also minimize their distress to 
lessen the probability of a psychiatric diagnosis. 

32 
Diagnosis-specifi c assessments
Th e assessment usually proceeds more smoothly 
if you pay due attention to and make it clear that 
you accept their somatic symptoms before ask-
ing about psychological ones. For some patients, 
treatment isn’t their priority: they may seek valida-
tion that they are ill; others want you to complete 
insurance claims. Th e potential for confl ict can be 
reduced if you ask what they want, without neces-
sarily acquiescing to it.
 Box 3.11 The differential diagnosis of 
somatic symptoms
• General medical problem
• Associated with another psychiatric disorder, 
especially depression or anxiety
• Hypochondriacal disorder
• Body dysmorphic disorder
• Somatization disorder
• Persistent somatoform pain disorder
• Somatoform autonomic dysfunction
When do you need to assess for a 
somatoform disorder?
An assessment for a somatoform disorder might be 
triggered by:
• Detection of somatic symptoms that appear unex-
plained by a medical condition.
• Preoccupation with health or disease.
• Repeated and excessive seeking of medical assess-
ment or treatment.
Somatoform disorders: history 
and MSE
In addition to the basic psychiatric assessment, the 
following features have particular relevance if you 
suspect a somatoform disorder:
• Are they unduly preoccupied with their health?
• Are they repeatedly seeking reassurance from you 
that they do not have a particular disease? (sug-
gests hypochondriasis)
• Is there evidence of depressed or anxious mood? 
• ‘How is your health?’
• Does the patient emphasize somatic com-
plaints?
• ‘Do you have many aches and pains, or other 
bodily symptoms?’
• ‘Do you take regular painkillers?’
• ‘Do you have medical problems your doctor can’t 
explain?’
• ‘What do you think causes your symptoms? Are 
you fearful that you have a particular medical 
condition?’
• ‘What do you think about your appearance?’
• Do they hide aspects of their body or appear-
ance? (suggests body dysmorphic disorder or an 
eating disorder).
• What is the nature and quantity of the medical his-
tory?
• Do they have evidence of many previous opera-
tions?
• Is there evidence that they have deliberately 
made themselves ill (e.g. omitting their insulin)?
• Will the patient cooperate with a psychiatric 
assessment?
• ‘What do you think should be done about your 
symptoms?’
Patients with somatoform disorder typically per-
ceive their health as poor even when it is objectively 
good. Th ey will often want extensive investigation, 
and may not be reassured by negative results. Many 
bodily concerns and symptoms may be reported. 
Th e more somatic symptoms they have, the less likely 
they are to have a medical condition: the presence of 
many chronic symptoms suggests somatization dis-
order. Depressed mood or anxiety are often apparent 
or suspected, but may be denied by the patient. If you 
conclude either is present and signifi cant, then the so-
matic symptoms will usually be viewed as symptoms 
of a depressive or anxiety disorder, and treated as such.
A strong fear of a particular medical condition is 
typical of hypochondriasis. Patients may have unlike-
ly theories about what causes their symptoms, but 
these should not be delusional – if so, the patient has 
a psychosis of some kind. 
Chronic pain (including persistent somatoform 
pain disorder) is not simply either ‘medical’ or ‘psy-
chological’. All pain is a subjective experience, with a 
complex relationship to inciting sensory stimuli, in-
fl uenced by both peripheral and central nervous sys-
tem (including psychological) mechanisms. Chronic 
pain seems to be due to rewiring of the circuits used 
to process sensory stimuli, and is refl ected by chang-
es in the structure and function of these circuits, as 
detected by neuroimaging. It can be diffi  cult to man-
age: analgesia may not bring much relief, and long-
term analgesia use can itself be harmful. 
Rarely, patients deliberately make themselves ill 
(or apparently so). Th is may be for unconscious gain, 
such as a need to take on the sick role i.e. a factitious 
disorder, or it may be in order to gain some more un-
derstandable advantage (e.g. money) – this is malin-
gering.

Diagnosis-specifi c assessments 33
How to assess eating 
disorders
What do you need to fi nd out?
1 Does the patient have an eating disorder? Th e 
core feature is an over-evaluation of shape and 
weight. Th e disorders must be distinguished from 
problems of weight, shape or diet occurring in oth-
er psychiatric disorders or secondary to a medical 
disorder (Box 3.12).
2 If so, is it anorexia nervosa or bulimia nervosa? 
Th e former is characterized by low body weight, 
the latter by repeated binges which punctuate the 
purgative behaviours such as dietary restriction. 
However, many patients with an eating disorder do 
not fi t into either of these classic categories, or shift 
between them.
3 Is their physical health in danger? Physical com-
plications of anorexia nervosa are serious and can 
be life-threatening.
4 Is there evidence of depression or anxiety disor-
der? Depression and anxiety are often comorbid 
with eating disorders. Risk assessment is important 
since deliberate and accidental self-harm can occur.
5 A corroborative history: People with eating dis-
orders can be diffi  cult to engage and tend to mini-
mize their problems, so take the opportunity (and 
the time) to form a good relationship, and plan to 
corroborate the history.
 Box 3.12 The differential diagnosis of 
eating disorders
• Anorexia nervosa
• Bulimia nervosa
• Other eating disorder
• Depression
• Body dysmorphic disorder
• Rarely, a general medical condition: 
 
o infl ammatory bowel disease
 
o hypopituitarism
 
o malignancy
When do you need to assess for 
an eating disorder?
Assessment for an eating disorder may be triggered by:
• A patient saying she has problems controlling her 
eating.
• Medically unexplained weight loss.
• A teenage girl with fatigue or amenorrhoea 
(but remember that these disorders do occur in 
men).
• A patient who looks thin or is wearing several lay-
ers of clothes on a hot day.
Eating disorders: history
In addition to the basic psychiatric assessment de-
scribed in the previous chapter, you should focus on 
the aspects outlined below. 
Methods of weight control: eating and 
purging behaviour 
• Diet: ‘Describe a typical day’s food intake. Are you 
on a diet? If so, what sort? How strict?’
• Binges: ‘Do you ever feel out of control and eat a 
large amount of food rapidly? If so, what do you eat 
in a binge? Afterwards, how do you feel? What do 
you do?’
• Vomiting: ‘Do you ever make yourself sick?’
• Exercise: ‘What exercise do you do? How often?’
• Purgatives and appetite suppressants: ‘Do you 
use laxatives, diuretics or slimming pills? Do you 
drink large amounts of coff ee? Have you tried any 
other ways of losing weight?’
• ‘Have you been overweight in the past?’ 
A description of a typical day’s intake is an informa-
tive way of discovering the patient’s eating patterns 
and the quantity and type of food being consumed. 
But, as with alcohol histories, interpret with caution. 
A person’s response to being asked about their diet or 
current weight can itself give clues. Bingeing followed 
by induced vomiting is the main feature of bulimia 
nervosa. Note that misuse of diuretics increases the 
risk of hypokalaemia, which is one of the causes of 
death in eating disorders.
Body image disturbance: attitude to 
weight and shape
• ‘What is your current weight? How often do you 
weigh yourself?’
• ‘Have you ever been very overweight or under-
weight?’ (a past history of obesity is common).
• ‘Do you think you are fat? How much would you like 
to weigh?’
• ‘How do you feel about your body? How would you 
like it to be?’
• ‘Do other people say you’re too thin? Do you believe 
them?’
• ‘How would you feel if you were a size bigger?’

34 
Diagnosis-specifi c assessments
Preoccupation with weight and diet and distortion of 
body image are key diagnostic features, so explore 
fully the patient’s views on the subject. A patient 
may be convinced she is overweight despite being 
demonstrably underweight (an overvalued idea, or 
delusion). A low body weight is seen as an accom-
plishment, not a problem, to a person with anorexia 
nervosa. 
Physical symptoms of weight loss
• ‘Are you taking the oral contraceptive, or any other 
hormonal contraceptive? Do you get periods?’
• ‘Are your periods regular? When was your last peri-
od? When did your periods begin?’
• ‘Have you been more tired or weaker than usual?’
Amenorrhoea (or scanty, irregular periods) is a 
feature of anorexia nervosa. If the disorder began in 
the patient’s early teens, menarche may never have 
occurred. Fatigue, lethargy and weakness are conse-
quences of starvation and should alert the doctor to 
the need for physical examination and investigation.
Psychosocial risk factors
• What is the attitude of other family members and 
friends to food?
• Perfectionism (a common personality trait, 
especially in anorexia nervosa): ask about aca-
demic and other achievements and intentions.
• Activities: ballet dancing, modelling, athletics and 
other activities where thinness and fi tness are val-
ued are risk factors.
Physical examination and investigations
• Weigh the patient and measure them, in their 
underwear if possible – a patient may use heavy 
clothing to mask their weight. 
• Calculate the body mass index (BMI), which is 
weight (kg)/[height (m)]2. BMI should be 18–25. 
In anorexia nervosa, the BMI is below 17.5 – some-
times well below. 
• Are they wearing baggy clothes?
• Is there lanugo hair (fi ne, downy hair on the arms, 
back and face)? 
• Are there scars suggestive of self-cutting? 
• Are there calluses on the hands? Poor state of 
teeth? (from self-induced vomiting)
• Cardiovascular exam: bradycardia and peripheral 
oedema are common in anorexia nervosa, and 
hypokalaemia can give rise to arrhythmias.
• Note secondary sexual characteristics.
• Perform relevant investigations to rule out other 
causes of anorexia and weight loss and to check for 
complications of weight loss.
How to assess sleep
Key components of a sleep assessment include:
1 How is their sleep and sleep hygiene? Th e mne-
monic ‘BEARS’ (outlined below) ensures you cover 
the important aspects of sleep-wake cycles.
2 Could medications or another psychiatric disor-
der underlie their problems?
3 Corroborative history from a bed partner, if pos-
sible.
4 Physical exam and investigations, including rating 
scales, sleep diary, electroencephalography (EEG).
When do you need to assess 
sleep? (Box 3.13)
Clues to disordered sleep include:
• Sleeping <5 or >10 hours per night.
• Weekend ‘catch-up’ sleep, although common, 
indicates sleep curtailment.
• Multiple jobs or children.
• Shift work.
• High alcohol or caff eine intake.
• Psychiatric or neurological illness.
 Box 3.13 The differential diagnosis of 
sleep disorder
• Poor sleep hygiene
• Substance-related: alcohol, caffeine and medication
• As part of or secondary to psychiatric disorder, 
especially mood disorder
• Neurological: restless leg syndrome, periodic limb 
movement disorder, dementia
• General medical condition: obstructive sleep 
apnoea, refl ux, asthma, chronic pain
• Circadian: shift-work, jet-lag
Sleep history
Start with ‘BEARS’:
1 Bedtime and sleep hygiene
• ‘How long does it take you to fall asleep? What 
stops you falling asleep?’ 
• ‘What do you do just before you go to bed? Do you 
use a computer just before you go to bed?’
• Alcohol/smoking/caff eine before bed? (caff eine 
half-life is approx. 6 h).
• ‘Do you have a bed partner? Do they stop you get-
ting to sleep?’

Diagnosis-specifi c assessments 35
2 Excessive daytime sleepiness
• ‘Do you fall asleep when you don’t want to?’
• ‘Do you fall asleep when watching TV? During 
conversations? While driving?’ (subsequent ques-
tions indicate progressively worse sleepiness).
3 Awakening 
• At night: ‘Are you having diffi  culty sleeping 
through the night? What awakens you? How long 
are you awake for? What keeps you from falling 
back asleep?’
• Early-morning wakening: ‘Are you having any 
diffi  culty sleeping until the morning? What is your 
mood like in the morning?’
4 Regularity and duration
• ‘Do you usually go to sleep at the same time? What 
time do you typically fall asleep? And what time 
do you wake? What’s the earliest you go to sleep? 
And the latest?’
• ‘Do you work odd hours or shifts?’
• ‘Do you give yourself restrictions on how much 
you let yourself sleep?’
5 Snoring: ‘Have you or anyone else noticed you 
snore loudly/stop breathing in your sleep?’
Other important questions:
• Quantify and discuss their caff eine and alcohol 
intake. Many patients do not appreciate the extent 
to which coff ee and stimulant drinks can aff ect 
sleep quality.
• Prescribed and over-the-counter medications.
• Past psychiatric history and a psychiatric screening 
assessment. 
• Medical conditions.
• Corroborative history from a bed partner, if pos-
sible.
Further assessment
Th e physical exam should include BMI, blood pres-
sure, neck circumference, examination of the oral cav-
ity, pupils (for stimulant use), assessment of thyroid 
status and a neurological exam (if suspicious of restless 
leg syndrome or periodic limb movement disorder).
Questionnaires used to assess sleepiness include 
the Epworth Sleepiness Scale and the Stanford Sleepi-
ness Scale. Typical questions present everyday sce-
narios; for example, having a conversation, and ask-
ing respondents to rate their likelihood of dozing. 
Sleep quality can be assessed using tools such as the 
Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index.
More complex tests are available, although these are 
rarely used outside of the research context or specialist 
sleep clinics. In actigraphy, the patient wears a watch-
like accelerometer device on their wrist. Th e gold 
standard test is monitored polysomnography, which in-
cludes EEG, electro-oculography (EOG), chin and neck 
electromyography, oximetry and ECG. In the multiple 
sleep latency test, patients are given opportunities to 
nap at 2-hourly intervals, and the time from the lights 
going out until sleep onset is recorded. A healthy sleep-
er would take 5–15 minutes to fall asleep and wouldn’t 
go into REM sleep during the 20-minute nap period.
How to assess alcohol 
and other substance 
misuse
Use of alcohol and illicit drugs is common. Substance 
misuse can be a diagnosis and a problem in its own 
right, as well as contributing to the cause and persis-
tence of many other psychiatric disorders. Note that 
where an intoxicated person lacks capacity, you may 
treat them without their consent under the Mental 
Capacity Act. However, intoxication with alcohol or 
any other substance is not grounds for detention un-
der the Mental Health Act. 
What do you need to fi nd out?
• Which substance(s) are misused and in what 
way? Th is includes establishing the duration, 
quantity and pattern of use.
• Is the person dependent on the drug? Physical 
dependence is the most serious form of substance 
misuse.
• What are the complications of the misuse? Sub-
stance misuse produces diverse medical, psychi-
atric and social harms.
• Is there any psychiatric comorbidity? Given the 
diagnoses that arise from or coexist with substance 
misuse, it is also important to assess for psychosis, 
mood disorder and cognitive function. A full psy-
chiatric assessment is best deferred until the per-
son is sober.
• Risk assessment is also necessary as substance 
users have high rates of deliberate and accidental 
self-harm.
When do you need to assess for 
substance misuse?
Clues that could prompt an assessment include:
• Identifi cation of signifi cant alcohol intake during a 
psychiatric screening assessment.
• Insomnia in a stressed and depressed executive.

36 
Diagnosis-specifi c assessments
• Acute psychotic symptoms in a young person.
• Unexplained recurrent episodes of irritability or 
low mood.
• Perinasal infl ammation. 
• Needle marks.
Assessment of alcohol misuse
In addition to the basic psychiatric assessment de-
scribed in the previous chapter, you should focus on 
the aspects outlined below. 
The quantity and the pattern of 
consumption
• ‘Can you describe what drinks you have in a typical 
day?’ 
• ‘Do you drink every day?’
• ‘Do you sometimes drink much more than that?/Do 
you binge?’
• ‘How long have you been drinking at this level?’ 
(Regular drinking that began in early adolescence 
is common amongst alcohol misusers).
Self-reports of consumption are underestimates (by 
half, as an unproven rule of thumb). Th e description of 
a typical day can be more revealing and accurate than 
asking about weekly intake. Check the type of drink: a 
pint of standard beer/lager/cider is 2 units, but stronger 
versions are 3 units. Also ask about the associated be-
haviours and feelings. Use the AUDIT screening ques-
tionnaire (Box 3.14). It takes about 2 minutes. Note 
that the FAST questions asked in the basic assessment 
(Chapter 2) are modifi ed and extracted from the AUDIT.
 Box 3.14 Alcohol Use Disorders 
Identifi cation Test (AUDIT)
1 How often do you have a drink containing alcohol?
 
(0) never. (1) monthly or less. (2) 2–4 times a 
month. (3) 2–3 times a week. (4) 4 or more times 
a week.
2 How many drinks containing alcohol do you have 
on a typical day when you are drinking?
 
(0) 1 or 2. (1) 3 or 4. (2) 5 or 6. (3) 7–9. (4) 10 or 
more.
3 How often do you have six or more drinks on one 
occasion?
 
(0) never. (1) less than monthly. (2) monthly. 
(3) weekly. (4) daily or almost daily.
4 How often during the past year have you found 
that you were not able to stop drinking once you 
had started?
 
(0) never. (1) less than monthly. (2) monthly. 
(3) weekly. (4) daily or almost daily.
 5 How often during the past year have you failed 
to do what was normally expected of you 
because of drinking?
 
(0) never. (1) less than monthly. (2) monthly. 
(3) weekly. (4) daily or almost daily.
 6 How often during the past year have you needed 
a fi rst drink in the morning to get yourself going 
after a heavy drinking session?
 
(0) never. (1) less than monthly. (2) monthly. 
(3) weekly. (4) daily or almost daily.
 7 How often during the past year have you had a 
feeling of guilt or remorse after drinking?
 
(0) never. (1) less than monthly. (2) monthly. 
(3) weekly. (4) daily or almost daily.
 8 How often during the past year have you been 
unable to remember what happened the night 
before because you had been drinking?
 
(0) never. (1) less than monthly. (2) monthly. 
(3) weekly. (4) daily or almost daily.
 9 Have you or has someone else been injured as a 
result of your drinking?
 
(0) no. (2) yes, but not in the past year. (4) yes, 
during the last year.
10 Has a relative, friend, doctor or other health 
worker been concerned about your drinking or 
suggested that you cut down?
 
(0) no. (2) yes, but not in the past year. (4) yes, 
during the last year.
AUDIT scoring and interpretation: numbers in 
parentheses are scores for each question, so 
maximum score is 40. A score of 8 or more 
indicates a strong likelihood of hazardous or 
harmful alcohol consumption; 20 or more suggests 
dependence.
Dependence and withdrawal
• ‘Do you have to drink more than you used to in 
order to get the same eff ect?’
• ‘Have you tried to cut down the amount you drink? 
What happened?’
• ‘Do you feel that you have lost control over your 
drinking?’
• ‘Do you drink more than you intend to?’
• ‘Do you ever have a drink in the morning to get you 
going?’
• Ask the patient to rate the importance of drinking 
compared with other activities.
• Identify if the patient continues to drink despite 
awareness that it is harmful.
Dependence describes a cluster of physiological, 
behavioural and cognitive features arising from 

Diagnosis-specifi c assessments 37
sustained use of alcohol, opioids, amphetamines and 
some other drugs. Its features include a compulsion to 
take the substance, tolerance (the need for increasing 
doses of the substance to achieve the same subjec-
tive eff ect) and withdrawal symptoms. Dependence 
is associated with serious medical and psychiatric 
complications. Withdrawal symptoms are a physio-
logical reaction to a lack of the dependent substance. 
Th ey can arise from some prescribed drugs, includ-
ing benzodiazepines and some antidepressants. Th e 
features of alcohol withdrawal include tremor, retch-
ing, sweating and muscle cramps. If severe, it is called 
delirium tremens.
Psychosocial complications
Ask whether drinking has caused any psychological 
or social problems.
• ‘Have you ever got into trouble due to your drink-
ing?’
• ‘Have you got into fi nancial problems due to your 
drinking?’
• ‘Have you ever missed work or lost a job due to your 
drinking?’
• ‘Has drinking interfered with your relationships?’
• ‘Have you ever been in trouble with the police (e.g. 
drink driving) due to your drinking?’
Psychiatric and medical complications
• ‘Has drinking aff ected your physical health? For 
example, jaundice, shakes, hepatitis?’
• ‘Have you ever had blackouts while drinking?’
• Ask about the patient’s medical and psychiatric 
history. Psychiatric disorders associated with alco-
hol misuse include depression, psychosis, delir-
ium and dementia, as well as suicide and sexual 
dysfunction.
Physical examination
Examine the patient for the stigmata of alcohol de-
pendence (Chapter 14). A physical examination, fo-
cusing on liver disease and neurological signs, is es-
sential because of the many eff ects of alcohol on the 
body. Medical problems suggested by the history or 
physical examination need investigation and may re-
quire liaison with the GP or a physician.
Investigations
Many may be indicated – for example, breath or 
blood alcohol, full blood count (FBC), liver function 
tests (LFTs), urine or hair analyses. Th e mean corpus-
cular volume (MCV) and hepatic γ-glutamyl trans-
peptidase (GGT) are raised in 60–70% of patients with 
alcohol misuse. If other causes of their elevation are 
excluded, they are useful markers of alcohol misuse 
and for monitoring progress.
Use of other substances
Th e same sort of questions should be repeated for 
each class of misused drug as for alcohol (above). 
Many people who misuse one drug misuse at least 
one other. Patients may need reassurance about 
confi dentiality when discussing illegal drug use. But 
remember that not all misused drugs are illegal – 
for example, analgesics. For illegal drugs, estimates 
of money spent are usually the best guide to intake: 
‘How much do you spend a week on heroin/crack?’ 
Remember to ask about the route of administration: 
‘Have you ever used needles? Have you ever shared? 
Have you been tested for hepatitis or HIV?’ Urine 
screens pick up some drugs or their metabolites, for 
varying lengths of time after use. Hair analyses are 
more sensitive (and cover a longer time frame) but 
are not widely available. In intravenous drug users 
(IVDU), consider testing for hepatitis B and C, and 
human immunodefi ciency virus (HIV).
How to assess an 
unresponsive patient
By unresponsive, we mean a person who does not 
participate in the assessment, rather than an uncon-
scious patient. Such people may be seen in a psychi-
atric clinic or ward, or when a psychiatric consult is 
requested in a general hospital or other medical set-
ting. Th is could be a patient found standing rigidly in 
the street staring at the sky; a patient who does not 
speak; or an aggressive patient who does not reply to 
any questions and demands to leave.
What do you need to fi nd out?
Why is the person unresponsive? Lack of coopera-
tion with the assessment, due to inability or unwill-
ingness, is uncommon but causes obvious problems. 
When communication is limited, you will need to 
focus on clues from the patient’s appearance, behav-
iour and physical examination, and any corroborative 
history.
Th e main diagnostic questions are:
1 Is there clouding of consciousness? If so, consid-
er delirium, stupor and their various causes.
2 If not, is there evidence of psychosis, severe 
mood disorder or dissociative disorder? 

38 
Diagnosis-specifi c assessments
These disorders can all present with unrespon-
siveness.
3 Is the person intentionally uncooperative? Th is 
may be a sign of malingering or simply a belief that 
they are better off  keeping quiet.
Complete the basic psychiatric assessment when 
the patient becomes responsive. An assessment of 
cognitive function and psychosis will almost certainly 
be needed.
 Box 3.15 The differential diagnosis of 
unresponsiveness
Stupor describes a condition in which the patient 
does not speak, move or respond, but appears fully 
conscious. Amongst psychiatric in patients, the 
main causes of stupor are:
• Catatonic schizophrenia
• Severe depression
• Psychomotor slowing in advanced dementia
• Drug-induced states, e.g. sedatives, neuroleptic-
malignant syndrome
• Akinetic mutism
• Dissociative disorder
• Feigned unresponsiveness
• Hypoactive delirium
• Rarely: parkinsonism (decompensated due to 
e.g. an infection, missed medication), locked-in 
syndrome, epilepsy, encephalitis
In other populations (e.g. neurology wards, 
hospital inpatients) the proportions are different.
The unresponsive patient: history 
and MSE (Box 3.15)
Background information
Is there an informant? Your problems are largely 
solved by a good informant or past records. For 
example, the patient may be known to have cata-
tonic schizophrenia, a recent head injury, or be 
wanted by the police. Get as many details as pos-
sible, covering:
• Onset, 
course 
and 
duration 
of 
current 
episode.
• Past medical and psychiatric history.
• Medication, drug and alcohol history.
• Check the person’s pockets and possessions for 
other clues.
• Check hospital and GP records in case there is a 
past history.
Level of consciousness
• Is the patient responsive to her surroundings? Is 
she paying attention to what is going on?
• Ask her to nod or open her eyes.
• Does she move? Do her eyes follow a moving 
object?
Establishing if there is clouding of consciousness is 
crucial since it indicates delirium and the need for 
urgent medical treatment.
Facial expression and communication
• Does his expression change?
• Does he seem afraid, depressed, preoccupied or 
hostile?
• Does he speak spontaneously or in response to 
questions?
• Can he communicate in other ways – for example, 
by writing or hand signals?
Facial expression and behavioural responses give 
diagnostic clues. For example, the characteristic ap-
pearance of a severely depressed patient; perplexity 
and fear in someone with psychosis or delirium; the 
hostility of someone with a personality disorder who 
does not want to be interviewed. In elective mutism, 
usually seen in children, the unresponsiveness is lim-
ited to speaking: other forms of communication are 
intact.
Physical examination
Unresponsive patients can be aggressive, and any 
physical examination will be without their consent. 
So, ensure the environment is safe and be accompa-
nied – you may need a witness to confi rm what took 
place.
• What is the patient’s attitude to being examined?
• Is posture abnormal? Is it awkward or bizarre?
• Are there spontaneous movements, including ste-
reotyped movements or mannerisms?
• Is muscle tone normal? Is there resistance when 
you try to make a movement?
• Examine the neurological system in as much detail 
as possible (cranial nerves, refl exes). Consider ask-
ing for an urgent neurological or general medical 
consultation if no clear psychiatric cause for the 
unresponsiveness is found.
• Do a general physical examination for signs of 
recent hygiene, trauma, intoxication, etc.
Th e motor exam is mainly aimed at detecting cat-
atonia (see Box 3.5), which usually occurs in cata-
tonic schizophrenia but is also caused by some rare 
neurological syndromes. Th e classic combination of 

Diagnosis-specifi c assessments 39
increased muscle tone, decreased consciousness and 
hyperthermia suggests neuroleptic malignant syn-
drome. Surreptitious observation may reveal that pa-
tients behave diff erently when unaware they are be-
ing observed, indicating feigned unresponsiveness.
 FURTHER READING
Cowen P, Harrison P, Burns T (eds) (2012) Shorter 
Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry, 6th edn. Oxford Uni-
versity Press, New York.
 KEYPOINTS
• Thorough assessment allows the suspicion 
of a psychiatric disorder to be confi rmed or 
dispelled. 
• Relevant contextual information is also needed 
to help explain the causes and correlates of the 
disorder. 
• Many patients will need assessment of several 
different domains.
 SELF-ASSESSMENT
1 Which of the following is not a fi rst-rank symptom of 
schizophrenia?
a Thought disorder
b Thought insertion
c Thought echo
d Thought withdrawal
e Thought broadcasting
2 Which of the following is true of obsessions?
a They are not always perceived as intrusive.
b They are diagnostic of obsessive-compulsive 
disorder.
c They are also known as overvalued ideas.
d They are often secondary to compulsive 
behaviours.
e They may be a medication side effect.
3 Which of the following is true of hallucinations?
a They can occur in severe depression.
b They are misperceptions of external 
stimuli.
c If they are visual, this suggests schizophrenia.
d Voices talking to the person are characteristic of 
schizophrenia.
e Hallucinations that occur on falling asleep are 
called ‘hypnopompic’.

Psychiatry Lecture Notes, Eleventh Edition. Gautam Gulati, Mary-Ellen Lynall and Kate Saunders. © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 
2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
4
Risk: harm, self-harm 
and suicide
Learning objectives
✓ To understand the relevance of risk assessment in psychiatry
✓ To develop a framework for the clinical assessment and management 
of the risk of suicide and self-harm 
✓ To be able to describe the relevance and key issues in the management 
of the risk that individuals with a mental disorder may pose to others
Risk in psychiatry
In psychiatry, risk refers to the probability that an ad-
verse event such as self-harm, suicide or harm to oth-
ers will occur. Public and professional concern about 
such events makes risk assessment and risk manage-
ment an important part of psychiatric practice. A brief 
evaluation of risk, especially of suicide, is always part 
of the core assessment, but often a more detailed risk 
assessment is required. For example, in someone with:
• current suicidal intent;
• a history of mood disorder, psychosis or substance 
abuse;
• a history of self-harm or violence to others.
Th is chapter covers the assessment and manage-
ment of risk in general, and self-harm, suicide and 
danger to others in particular. Harmful outcomes can 
never be eliminated. However, competent risk assess-
ment and management can decrease their likelihood.
Risk assessment
When assessing the risk of harm to self or others, look 
for features associated with an increased risk. Try to 
gather the information from diff erent sources – patient, 
informants, medical records, social services, police, etc.
In the history:
• Previous harm to self or others – the past is the best 
predictor of the future.
• Recent actions suggestive of impending harm (e.g. 
buying a rope, stockpiling medications, making a 
will).
• Recent major stresses or losses.
• Depressive disorder, psychosis, substance abuse or 
personality disorder.
In the mental state:
• Suicidal or violent thoughts.
• Signifi cant mood disturbance.
• Psychotic symptoms, especially passivity or perse-
cutory delusions.
In the context:
• Demographic factors (Table 4.1).
• Abuse of drugs or alcohol.
• Social restlessness – for example, few relationships, 
frequent changes of address.
• Exposure to suicide or self-harm among friends or 
family.
• Easy access to potential weapons or victims.

Risk: harm, self-harm and suicide 41
Formulation of risk
After completing the risk assessment, document the 
fi ndings:
• What potential harmful outcome, if any, has been 
identifi ed?
• How immediate and long lasting is the risk?
• What factors may increase or decrease the risk? 
Th ese can be thought of as static (e.g. male gender) 
or dynamic (e.g. mental state, alcohol use).
• What can be done to reduce the risk?
Formal quantifi cation of risk is not advised as there 
are no validated assessment tools, and given the indi-
vidual nature of any particular patient such approach-
es can both amplify and downplay the actual risk.
 Clinical scenario
Mr J is referred for a psychiatric opinion because 
he has threatened to kill his wife and himself. 
He has convictions for grievous bodily harm 
and theft. You fi nd no evidence of depressive 
disorder, psychosis or violent thoughts. 
However, he admits to drinking heavily at 
weekends, whereupon he becomes threatening 
and low in mood. His wife and the police (with 
his permission) corroborate the history. Your 
preliminary conclusion is of an alcohol-related 
problem and possibly personality disorder. His 
risk of harm or self-harm is low when sober but 
quite high when intoxicated or stressed. This 
fl uctuating pattern of risk will continue as long 
as his drinking problem does. Marital strife is the 
other factor increasing risk.
Risk management
Risk management aims to:
• Reduce the level of immediate risk.
• Maintain it at the lowest level that is achievable.
• Set up a process for ongoing review of risk.
Table 4.1 Risk factors for suicide
Factor
Comment
Demographic factors
Male
Increasing age
Living alone
Unemployed
Recent life crisis
Previous self-harm
Occupation
Exposure to suicide
There are exceptions, such as in China where rates are higher in 
women 
Increases suicide rates 60-fold
High rate in vets, doctors, nurses, pharmacists, farmers – this may 
refl ect access to means
Suicide in the family or among friends. Also exposure in the media 
or on social media
Illness-related factors
Chronic medical problems
Psychiatric disorder:
 Depressive disorder
 Schizophrenia
 Substance misuse
 Personality disorder
 Being in psychiatric care
 In-patient
 Recent discharge from psychiatric hospital
Present in 90% of those who die by suicide, usually depression
15% suicide rate in severe depression
>10% commit suicide
Especially alcohol and opioid dependence
Higher suicide rate, especially cluster B
75% of suicides have been in psychiatric treatment
5% of suicides
Mental state factors
Depressed mood
Expressed wish to be dead
Detailed suicide plans
Hopelessness
Lack of reason to go on living
e.g. bereavement

42 
Risk: harm, self-harm and suicide
Risk management strategies can be divided into 
immediate and longer term interventions. Immediate 
interventions may include:
• Psychiatric admission, if necessary under the Men-
tal Health Act.
• Acute sedation.
• Ensuring adequate community support.
• Lowering of tension and the provision of reassur-
ance as a result of the assessment.
• Making the family and signifi cant others aware of 
the risk.
• Removing access to means (e.g. disposing of stock-
piled medication).
• Notifying the police.
Longer term interventions include:
• Eff ectively treating psychiatric disorder.
• Implementing the Care Programme Approach.
• Alleviating social stresses.
• Enhancing positive coping strategies.
In all cases, ensure that:
• Th e management plan is documented and com-
municated to all others involved in managing the 
case.
• A date is set for reviewing the case and the plan 
– this may be within hours for an acutely suicidal 
in-patient, or every year for a stable patient in the 
community.
 Clinical scenario (continued)
You discuss Mr J with your colleagues and draw 
up a risk management plan. A copy is also given 
to Mr J, his wife and his GP. Mr J is given advice 
to help him cut down his drinking. The couple refer 
themselves to Relate to try to reduce confl icts 
between them. It is made clear to Mr J that he will 
be held responsible should he harm his wife. He 
agrees to record his alcohol intake and to return in 
6 weeks.
Suicide and self-harm
Defi nitions
Suicide is a deliberate act performed in the expecta-
tion of death, where the outcome is fatal. Although 
suicide is clearly defi ned by death, establishing intent 
retrospectively is often diffi  cult – some suicides are 
acts of self-harm in association with distress, which 
go tragically wrong.
Th ere is no international consensus regarding the 
nomenclature for acts that do not result in death, 
which can lead to some confusion. Common terms 
include:
• Self-harm (SH) is the umbrella term for self-infl ict-
ed non-fatal harm regardless of whether the per-
son expressed a wish to die. Self-cutting is the most 
common in the community, though self-poisoning 
accounts for 90% of medical presentations of SH.
• Attempted suicide is a term that may be used where 
there was a defi nite attempt by the individual to 
take his or her life; and parasuicide can be used 
when the degree of suicidal intent associated with 
the act is not clear, although this term is not fre-
quently used.
Non suicidal self-injury (NSSI) is a relatively new 
term that is used extensively in the United States. It 
is used to describe self-injurious behaviour that is not 
suicidal in nature. However, it is not clear who de-
termines intent (patient or clinician) and given that 
intent varies as well as the elevated risk of suicide as-
sociated with NSSI many clinicians believe the term 
to be unhelpful.
Self-harm
Self-harm is important because:
• It is common. Th ere are about 150 000 presenta-
tions to general hospitals in the United Kingdom 
with SH each year. SH accounts for 10% of all acute 
medical admissions. It is the most common reason 
for acute admission of women, and the second 
most common for men. It is particularly common 
in young women, and rates among adolescents of 
both genders have been increasing.
• It is a risk factor for further acts of SH and for sui-
cide. About 20% present with further acts of SH, 
and 1–2% will die by suicide in the following year.
• It can be the presenting feature of serious psychiatric 
disorder. Depression, anxiety disorders, substance 
misuse disorders and/or a cluster B personality 
disorder are common.
Motivations for SH are various and mixed. Only 
a minority have clear and sustained suicidal intent. 
Many acts are an impulsive response to what is per-
ceived as an intolerable situation, or an attempt to 
infl uence the behaviour of others. SH often occurs 
under the infl uence of alcohol.
• SH can also represent a failed outcome of a deter-
mined attempt at suicide. Th ough rare, recognition 
of this small group is important.

Risk: harm, self-harm and suicide 43
Suicide
Th ough not a common cause of death, suicide is the 
third biggest cause of lost years of life because it of-
ten aff ects young adults. It is also the most common 
cause of death in girls aged 15–19 years worldwide. 
People who commit suicide are often depressed, and 
perceive the future as both intolerable and hopeless. 
Occasionally, this perception may be shared by oth-
ers (e.g. in cases of terminal cancer), but usually it is 
strongly biased by depressed mood. Suicides are of-
ten planned. Th e risk factors for suicide are shown in 
Table 4.1.
• Th ere is an increased risk of suicide in the weeks 
after discharge from a psychiatric hospital. Th is 
should be taken into account when planning man-
agement over this period.
• Suicide rates in young men increased in the United 
Kingdom in the 1980s and 1990s, before plateau-
ing. Th e reason is unknown.
• In depressed patients, suicide may occur during 
the initial recovery phase – some people are so 
depressed that, until then, they lack the motiv-
ation to kill themselves despite a wish to be dead. 
In schizophrenia suicide tends to occur early in 
the illness. Th erefore, suicide risk assessments and 
interventions to reduce risk should not stop when 
clinical improvement has begun.
Assessment of suicide risk
Assessing suicide risk is part of the core psychiat-
ric assessment. If present, a full assessment is then 
essential. This follows the general principles of 
risk assessment, taking into account the risk fac-
tors for suicide (Table 4.1). Particular attention is 
paid to:
• Th e person’s expressed intent.
• Th eir mental state.
• Recent acts of SH.
• Access to lethal means.
Never omit to assess suicide risk because you 
think (a) it might precipitate suicide or (b) some-
one really planning to kill themselves will deny it. 
Neither is true – the evidence is that recognition 
and active management may prevent suicide. Many 
people who kill themselves have been in contact 
with a doctor in the days before the fatal act. This 
is particularly relevant for primary care as only 25% 
of those who die by suicide in the United Kingdom 
are known to psychiatric services at the time of 
their death. 
Assessment following SH
All patients who have self-harmed should have a psy-
chosocial assessment, even if only briefl y, to deter-
mine their risk of a repeat attempt and to identify the 
presence of a signifi cant psychiatric disorder. Rating 
scales have limited utility and are not recommend-
ed. Certain characteristics of the act of SH predict a 
higher suicidal intent, and a higher risk of subsequent 
suicide:
• Th e attempt was planned.
• Aff airs were put in order beforehand.
• Th e person took precautions to avoid discovery.
• Th ey did not seek help afterwards.
• Th ey used a method that they believed to be dan-
gerous.
• Th ey left a suicide note.
• Th ey have an active mental illness.
Management after SH
General management
Th e number of patients seen because of an act of SH 
is large, and their management presents a challenge 
to medical and psychiatric services, especially if these 
are not well integrated (Chapter 18).
• For many cases, no specialist care is indicated, and 
the patient is discharged to their GP. It is there-
fore important to ensure the GP receives clear and 
prompt communication about the outcome of the 
assessment (Chapter 5).
 Clinical scenario
Ms S was seen in A&E having taken 20 paracetamol 
tablets earlier that night. She had been drinking 
and had taken them after a row with her boyfriend. 
She had not planned to kill herself and now felt 
foolish about her behaviour. She was unaware 
that paracetamol could be lethal. She was offered 
an appointment for out-patient counselling but 
declined, preferring to see her GP.
• A minority of patients are found to be at acute 
risk of suicide and require immediate and inten-
sive management. Th e priority is to keep the 
person safe. Th is may be achieved by psychi-
atric admission, sometimes under the Mental 
Health Act. Serious suicidal intent may be suf-
fi cient grounds for admission under the Act, even 
if the presence of a psychiatric disorder has yet 
to be established. If admission is not used, it is 
important to ensure that relatives are aware of the 

44 
Risk: harm, self-harm and suicide
severity of the situation and know how to contact 
services urgently if necessary.
 Clinical scenario
Mr P was found in his fume-fi lled car in an isolated 
fi eld. After being resuscitated he expressed anger 
at being saved and said that he still wanted to 
die. He was found to be suffering from psychotic 
depression and had previously taken a serious 
overdose. He was admitted to hospital under the 
Mental Health Act and treated with ECT.
• Recognizing and treating depression eff ectively is 
a priority, given the importance of depression as a 
factor in suicide.
• Many SH patients have personal, relationship or 
social problems for which they may be off ered 
help – for example, by counselling or problem-
solving therapy, or by referral to community men-
tal health psychology services.
Management of patients who 
repeatedly self-harm
A small number of people, mostly young women, 
present repeatedly with SH by taking overdoses or 
cutting. A diagnosis of personality disorder (dramatic 
cluster; see Table 15.1) is often made, and a history of 
childhood sexual abuse or other trauma may emerge. 
Management includes:
• Providing psychological support that is not contin-
gent on acts of SH.
• Checking for emergent depressive disorder.
• Dialectical behaviour therapy (DBT; see Chapter 7) 
has been found to be eff ective in reducing frequen-
cy of self-harm.
Suicide as a public health problem
Prevention of suicide in the population has been a 
priority for health policy, but it is diffi  cult to achieve, 
in part because social and political factors, and not 
just medical ones, are important (Table 4.2).
Clusters and contagion
• Clusters are groups of suicides that occur more 
closely in time or place than might be expected.
• Th ese are a true phenomenon.
• Adolescents are particularly vulnerable.
• Exposure to real or fi ctionalized accounts (e.g. TV) 
of suicide increase risk.
• Celebrity status increases the risk.
Psychopharmacology and suicidal 
behaviour
No psychotropic drugs are licensed for the preven-
tion of suicidal behaviour; however, a number are as-
sociated with reduction in suicide risk, and in recent 
years there has been concern that certain drugs may 
increase individual risk.
• Antidepressants – while antidepressant prescrib-
ing reduces suicide at a population level there have 
been some reports of increases in suicidal ideation 
and behaviour in the fi rst 10–14 days of treatment. 
Th is is particularly true in those under the age of 
25. Th is is not a reason to avoid prescribing but 
patients and relatives should be advised of this and 
patients should be more closely monitored during 
this period.
• Lithium is the drug with the most evidence in 
reducing completed suicide and suicide attempts, 
independent of its eff ect on mood symptoms. 
However, concerns regarding its lethality in over-
dose mean that this is not used in clinical practice 
solely for suicide reduction. 
• Clozapine is also associated with a reduction in 
suicidal behaviour, which is likely to be secondary 
to its greater eff ectiveness as an antipsychotic drug.
• Tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) and monoamine 
oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) should always be pre-
scribed cautiously in those with suicidal ideation 
because of their toxicity in overdose.
Table 4.2 Prevention of suicide
Individual interventions
Better detection and management of:
 suicidal intent in patients attending medical services
 depressive disorder
 substance misuse
Population interventions
Public education and discussion
Education of doctors and others (e.g. teachers)
Easy, rapid access to psychiatric care or support 
groups (e.g. Samaritans)
Make it harder to attempt suicide, e.g. by:
 limiting access to paracetamol – smaller bottles, 
blister packs
 withdrawal of the analgesic coproxamol – especially 
dangerous in overdose
 make it harder to fi x a hose over exhaust pipes
 safety nets around high buildings and bridges
Decreasing societal stressors – unemployment, 
domestic violence, etc.
Reducing substance misuse

Risk: harm, self-harm and suicide 45
Risks to others
Despite the public perception, psychiatric patients 
are more likely to be victims than perpetrators of 
violence, and the vast majority of aggressive acts are 
committed by people in the absence of a psychiatric 
disorder. Nevertheless, knowing when and how to as-
sess and manage potential harm to others is an im-
portant aspect of psychiatric practice.
Assessment of risk to others
Th e psychiatric disorders most associated with in-
creased risk of violence are substance abuse and per-
sonality disorders (especially dissocial personality 
disorder). Schizophrenia and mania have also been 
linked to an increased risk. Th ese disorders act cumu-
latively – so the risk is greater in a person with more 
than one of these diagnoses.
• Harmful acts are occasionally directly due to the 
disorder. For example, passivity experiences or 
persecutory delusions in schizophrenia, or nihilis-
tic delusions in psychotic depression, may lead to 
harm to others. More commonly, violence results 
indirectly from the same combination of frustra-
tions and personality that determine such acts 
in anybody. Th e disorder merely decreases the 
threshold (and perhaps increases the chances that 
the aggressor is caught).
• As with most behaviour, the strongest predictor of 
future violent behaviour is previous violent behav-
iour.
Management of risk to others
After identifying a risk to others, the clinician should 
do all they reasonably can to prevent the harmful out-
come.
• Check access to weapons and whether there are 
specifi c plans or identifi ed victims.
• Warn a potential target – the risk to others can 
override patient confi dentiality – for example, in 
cases of morbid jealousy.
• Discuss the risk with a forensic psychiatrist.
• If there is known or suspected psychiatric 
disorder, consider admission, if necessary to a 
secure unit.
• Conversely, if psychiatric assessment reveals no 
evidence of psychiatric disorder, this conclusion 
should be clearly recorded.
Clear documentation and effective communi-
cation of the risk assessment and management 
plan are crucial. In the United Kingdom, there are 
Multi Agency Public Protection Panels (MAPPPs) 
where statutory agencies can refer and discuss 
individuals who are concerning in terms of their 
risk to others. For example, it may be necessary 
to involve social services where there is a concern 
about a child being at risk, or liaise with police or 
probation services as individuals may already be 
known to them, if there is concern about a serious 
risk to others.
 FURTHER READING
NICE (2004) CG16: Th e short-term physical and psy-
chological management and secondary prevention 
of self-harm in primary and secondary care. Access 
at: http://www.nice.org.uk/CG16
NICE (2011) CG133: Th e longer term treatment of 
self-harm. Access at: http://guidance.nice.org.uk/
CG133
Davison SE (2005) Th e management of violence in 
general psychiatry. Advances in Psychiatric Treat-
ment, 11, 362–370. Access at: http://apt.rcpsych.org/
content/11/5/362.full
 KEYPOINTS
• Risk in psychiatry refers to the risk of self-
harm, suicide and the risk of harm by the 
patient to others.
• Assessment of suicide risk should be included 
in every psychiatric assessment.
• Detection of risk should lead to active 
management of the risk.
• Self-harm is very common. All patients who 
have recently self-harmed should be screened 
for suicidal risk and for psychiatric disorder.
• The majority of people committing suicide 
have depressive disorder or other chronic 
psychiatric disorder. However, suicide also 
occurs in people with no known psychiatric 
history, especially in young men.
• Most psychiatric patients are not violent. Most 
violent crimes is not perpetrated by psychiatric 
patients.
• Substance misuse, personality disorder, 
schizophrenia and mania are all associated 
with increased risk of harm to others, especially 
if they coexist.

46 
Risk: harm, self-harm and suicide
 SELF-ASSESSMENT
1 A 15-year-old girl attends A&E with multiple 
lacerations to her arms. Staff notice that she has 
multiple healed wounds on her arms and legs. How 
would you classify her risk?
a At risk of subsequent suicide.
b At risk of further self-harm.
c At no increased risk as she will ‘grow out’ of this 
behaviour.
d At increased risk of further self-harm and 
subsequent suicide.
2 A 26-year-old man has become manic and is being 
commenced on an antipsychotic medication and a 
mood stabilizer. He works as a delivery van driver. 
What should you advise him?
a Not to drive until the medication regimen is 
settled.
b To contact the Driver and Vehicle Licensing 
Agency (DVLA) and inform them about what has 
happened.
c He can continue driving as long as he doesn’t feel 
too drowsy.
d You are going to contact his insurer and
 the DVLA to inform them he should not be 
driving.

Psychiatry Lecture Notes, Eleventh Edition. Gautam Gulati, Mary-Ellen Lynall and Kate Saunders. © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 
2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
favour of, and against, each plausible diagnostic pos-
sibility. Weighing the diagnostic evidence helps clarify 
your own thoughts about the case. It is also useful to 
others who may refer back to your assessment if there 
is a subsequent review of the diagnosis. Remember 
that making a psychiatric diagnosis is an important 
step with consequences – it has drawbacks (e.g. stig-
matization) as well as benefi ts (e.g. eff ective treat-
ment). Diff erential diagnoses for common presenting 
symptoms are covered in the boxes in Chapter 3.
 Box 5.1 Mr K – a case of attempted 
suicide
Mr K, 55, was referred after a suicide attempt. You 
have elicited many depressive symptoms, some 
anxiety symptoms and an alcohol intake of 40 units/
week. There are no features suggestive of psychosis 
or personality disorder, nor of imminent suicide risk. 
Your provisional diagnosis is a depressive disorder 
(moderate severity), plus alcohol misuse.
How to use this chapter
Th e process of psychiatric assessment described in 
Chapters 2–4 provides diagnostic information and 
an understanding of the patient in their context. Th is 
evidence is now combined to allow you to make a 
diagnosis, identify the causative factors, plan your 
management and consider the patient’s prognosis. 
Th is chapter covers these points in turn, and an over-
view of this process is given in Figure 5.1. Th rough the 
chapter, we follow a single clinical case, which pro-
vides concrete examples of the approach described. 
To read the start of the case, turn to Box 5.1.
Diagnosis
Your history and mental state examination will suggest 
a number of possible diagnoses and rule out others. 
Sometimes, the diagnosis will be clear-cut, but usually 
there is a diff erential that requires further investiga-
tion. Either way, draw up a list of the key features in 
Completing and 
communicating the 
assessment
Learning objectives
✓ How to make a diff erential diagnosis
✓ How to identify causative (aetiological) factors that have contributed 
to the disorder
✓ How to plan your initial management, and think about the longer 
term management
✓ How to think about the prognosis
✓ How to summarize and present the case, in a variety of formats
5

48 
Completing and communicating the assessment
Aetiology (see Chapter 6)
Having made a provisional diagnosis, you should 
consider the contextual information collected during 
your assessment, particularly those factors that ap-
pear to help explain the origins and evolution of the 
disorder. When considering causative factors in psy-
chiatry, the two key variables are:
1 Th e type of factor – usually divided into biological, 
psychological and social.
2 Th e time at which the factor operates. A useful 
mnemonic for this is ‘the four Ps’: predisposing, 
precipitating, perpetuating and protective.
Types of causes: biological, 
psychological and social
Th e development of psychiatric disorders is infl u-
enced by biological (genetic and environmental), 
psychological and social factors. Sometimes one pre-
dominates; sometimes another, but all three always 
contribute something. Hence the biopsychosocial 
model of psychiatry, which requires that due atten-
tion is paid to all three areas, and which encourages 
an equally eclectic approach to treatment. Th e bi-
opsychosocial model may seem obvious. However, 
psychiatry has at times been guilty of focusing too 
closely on one or other of its components. 
Timing of causes: predisposing, 
precipitating, perpetuating and protective 
(the four ‘P’s)
In terms of timing, causal factors can be:
1 Predisposing: factors that exert a long-term or dis-
tant causal eff ect, such as family history and early 
childhood experiences.
2 Precipitating: factors that explain why the dis-
order has occurred now. Th ey include recent life 
events, injuries, new medical conditions, and dis-
continuation of medication.
3 Perpetuating (or maintaining): factors aff ecting 
the course of a disorder. Common ones include on-
going marital problems, social problems, and non-
adherence with treatment. Th e nature of the disor-
der itself is also relevant: for example, Alzheimer’s 
disease, being a progressive condition, requires no 
external perpetuating factors.
4 Protective: factors that protect against the devel-
opment of psychiatric disease, or aid its resolution, 
e.g. strong social support networks.
A strength of the four ‘P’s approach is that it helps 
you to organize your thoughts in a way that relates 
not only to your management, but also to com-
mon patient questions: ‘Why has this happened to 
me?’ (predisposing factors); ‘Why has this happened 
now?’ (precipitating factors); and ‘How can I get bet-
ter?’ (in part, by tackling maintaining factors, and 
by drawing on strengths). In practice, a useful tip 
is to combine the ‘type’ and ‘timing’ approaches to 
causative factors in a 3 × 4 table, as in Box 5.2. Th is 
provides a template that can be fi lled in as details of 
the case emerge. 
Another way to clarify the role of causal factors and 
the interplay between them is to create a life chart. 
Th is is most useful when the history is long and com-
plex, to show whether illness episodes, or recovery 
from them, are related to specifi c factors, and wheth-
er there is any pattern of treatment response. A life 
chart can be time consuming to compile, but is usu-
ally worthwhile. Table 5.1 shows a life chart for Mr K.
Management 
Having made a diagnosis and investigated the causa-
tive factors, move on to consider the management 
and the prognosis. Th ese will follow directly from 
your current understanding of the case, and will need 
to be mentioned in the summary, letter or phone 
call that will follow the assessment. Management in 
Aetiological
factors
Investigations
Communicate information
History MSE
•  case summary
•  case notes
•  letter
•  verbally
Current
circumstances
Management plan
Prognosis
Understanding
of case
Context of
diagnosis
Make
diagnosis
Physical
exam
Risk
assessment
Figure 5.1 Overview of assessment and management. 
MSE, mental state examination.

Completing and communicating the assessment 49
 Box 5.2 Causative factors in Mr K
Clinical scenario
Mr K was made redundant 6 months ago. He is 
gay and his long-term partner left him around the 
same time, after which he had several casual sexual 
encounters. He has no close friends or relatives. 
Mr K had a stroke 2 years ago, which left him with a 
mild hemiparesis. He has had two past depressive 
episodes. His father committed suicide when Mr K 
was 5.
Based on our knowledge of the origins of mood 
disorders (see Chapters 6 and 9), several causative 
factors can be proposed. Not all factors may be 
relevant, and some may be not be ‘provable’ facts, 
but all merit consideration. Note that the same 
factor (in this case alcohol) can fi t into multiple 
boxes.
Having hypothesized the causal factors, try 
to substantiate them. In this case, you should 
fi nd out more about his alcohol misuse, discover 
his views on his sexuality and investigate 
how he feels about the redundancy, and its 
fi nancial consequences. You should examine for 
neurological defi cits and consider an HIV test. 
You fi nd that Mr K has only minimal physical 
impairment from his stroke, but does have 
mild hypertension and a carotid bruit. He has 
misused alcohol intermittently for many years; the 
recent increase in consumption seems to have 
been a response to his low mood. His sexuality 
confl icts with his religious beliefs. He feels he 
was made redundant unfairly because he had 
taken sick leave, and has been left with serious 
fi nancial problems. He is HIV negative. His notes 
reveal a similar clinical picture during previous 
depressive episodes, with a good response 
to antidepressants. In one episode, he also 
developed psychotic symptoms (delusions of 
guilt) and had a course of ECT. You conclude that 
he has a recurrent moderate to severe depressive 
disorder.
Predisposing
Precipitating
Perpetuating
Protective
Biological
Genetic predisposition
Cerebrovascular 
disease
Alcohol misuse
Recent increase in 
alcohol consumption
Alcohol misuse
Psychological
Psychological effects 
of father’s suicide
Stress related to sexual 
issues (diffi culties 
arising from secrecy 
about orientation?)
Past history of 
depression
Recent breakdown in 
a serious relationship
Stressors continue
Good insight  
into need for 
treatment
Social
Social isolation (has 
his stroke stopped him 
from driving?)
Being made redundant
Social isolation 
continues
Unemployment affecting 
his self-esteem or 
causing fi nancial worries
psychiatry involves making a number of decisions, 
which may need to be made rapidly:
• Is treatment indicated? Some assessments pro-
duce no evidence of psychiatric disorder, or no 
indication for treatment, other than reassurance 
and a clear statement of your conclusions.
• How urgent is the problem? Acute psychosis and 
severe mood disorders generally need immedi-
ate treatment. Serious risk of self-harm or harm 
to others is a major determinant of urgency. Is the 
patient suffi  ciently ill or at risk to need compulsory 
treatment?
• Where should treatment take place, and who 
should give it? Most psychiatric disorders are 
treated by GPs; some will be referred to psychia-
trists; a very few need admission. Th e role of each 
party in implementing a management plan should 
be clear. 

50 
Completing and communicating the assessment
Treatment decisions depend primarily on the di-
agnosis. However, they are also aff ected by the con-
text – another reason why contextual information 
was collected in the assessment. For example, is the 
patient motivated enough for a psychological treat-
ment? Does their job mean that sedative antidepres-
sants should be avoided? What drug did they respond 
to last time?
Prognosis
Once you have a diagnosis and a reasonable under-
standing of the context, a provisional judgement 
about prognosis should be possible. Together with 
the diagnosis, it is the prognosis that is of most con-
cern to the patient, their relatives and the referrer. 
Short-term prognosis depends mainly on the natural 
history of the disorder and, particularly, the treatment 
response. It is usually possible to give a rough esti-
mate of the likelihood of improvement and its timing. 
Long-term prognosis is much more diffi  cult to predict, 
and opinion on this issue may be deferred. It may be 
easier to estimate after an initial response to treat-
ment has been observed. While each condition has 
its own prognostic indicators, some indicators of poor 
prognosis are common to all psychiatric conditions: 
• Insidious onset.
• Longer duration of disorder prior to treatment.
• Comorbid personality disorder.
• Comorbid substance misuse.
• Lack of close relationships.
• History of non-adherence to treatment.
Summarizing and 
communicating cases
If it is to be useful, the understanding of the case that 
you have obtained must be communicated eff ectively 
to others. Below, we outline four diff erent types of 
communication – an oral presentation of a case, a 
written case summary, a problem list and a GP letter. 
When planning this communication, ask yourself:
• What does the recipient want and need to 
know? Th is can vary from a detailed discharge 
summary for the psychiatric case notes, to a brief 
letter informing a GP that the dose of a drug has 
been changed. Avoid unnecessary information – 
it obscures the important messages. On the other 
hand, always include important negatives (e.g. ‘He 
is not suicidal’, ‘She is not psychotic’, ‘Medication is 
not indicated’), and it is usually helpful to state the 
diagnosis and the current treatment in any letter. 
Similar rules apply to oral presentations.
Table 5.1 A life chart for Mr K
Age
Events
Psychiatric disorder
Treatments
0
Complicated delivery
5
Father commits suicide
10
Mother remarries
17
Turbulent home life
Depression, moderate
Amitriptyline 150 mg, 6 months
20
Joined navy; binge drinking
25
‘Came out’; left navy
30
Met current partner
35
Became storeman
Depression, severe
ECT × 6; fl uoxetine 20 mg, 12 months
40
Mother dies
45
Intermittent heavy drinking
Counselling
50
Hypertension
Beta-blocker started, use continues
53
Mild stroke
Physiotherapy
54
Made redundant
55
Relationship ends
Current depressive episode

Completing and communicating the assessment 51
• What does the recipient know already? If you are 
summarizing a person’s tenth admission, informa-
tion about the previous nine is likely to be avail-
able to and known by everyone, and may not need 
to be repeated. Conversely, a psychiatric court 
report should be written assuming that the recipi-
ent knows nothing about the person and nothing 
about psychiatry (or psychiatric terminology).
• What does the patient need to know? Inform-
ing the patient (and family) of the outcome of the 
assessment is the beginning of eff ective manage-
ment. Patients are entitled to know what is written 
about them; indeed, as a rule, consider copying 
all correspondence to the patient unless you have 
clinical reasons not to do so. Th is has many poten-
tial benefi ts, but may be particularly challenging 
in psychiatry because of the nature of the patient’s 
illness or the content of the letter (e.g. in an acute 
psychosis, or if there is a potential risk to others). In 
such circumstances, and when there is an urgent 
issue, you may prefer to convey the information to 
others by phone.
Written and oral case summaries
A case summary or ‘formulation’ is a concise, inform-
ative way of summarizing a psychiatric assessment. 
It is also educational for the creator since it involves 
weighing up the evidence and showing how you 
came to your conclusions. Example case presenta-
tions for Mr K are given – the presentation can either 
be oral (as in Box 5.3) or written (as in Box 5.4). Th e 
areas that should be covered are provided as a check-
list in Quick Guide 1.
 Box 5.3 An oral case presentation 
of Mr K
Mr K is a 55-year-old unemployed storeman, seen in 
clinic last week following an overdose and admitted 
voluntarily because of suicidal intent and many 
depressive symptoms. Relevant factors included 
recent redundancy, relationship break-up and 
alcohol abuse.
On the history, Mr K complained of 6 months 
of low mood with poor sleep and loss of appetite. 
Over the last 2 months, he has engaged in self-
harm, culminating in a suicide attempt last week. 
He had intended to kill himself and was found 
by chance. He now states that he does not wish 
to die. Mr K also describes anxiety symptoms 
including worrying about his health, feeling tense, 
socially phobic and that he lies awake worrying. 
He has a past psychiatric history of two depressive 
episodes when aged 17 and 35, one of which 
required ECT. He suffered a mild hemiparetic 
stroke 2 years ago. 
There is a family history of depressive disorder, 
and Mr K’s father committed suicide when Mr K was 
5 years old. Mr K’s partner left him 3 months ago 
and at present he has no close friends or family. He 
was made redundant 6 months ago. He currently 
drinks over 40 units per week on a background of a 
long history of harmful intake.
On mental state examination (MSE), Mr K was 
visibly upset and made little eye contact. His speech 
was slow and quiet. His mood was subjectively 
and objectively low and he described feelings of 
worthlessness and guilt. He did not report any 
current suicidal thoughts. There were no abnormal 
perceptions and he had good insight into his illness 
and need for treatment, both psychological and 
pharmacological. There were no features suggestive 
of psychosis, personality disorder or previous manic 
episodes on the history or MSE, nor of imminent 
suicide risk.
My differential diagnosis comprises a depressive 
disorder, an anxiety disorder, alcohol misuse, 
and mood disorder associated with his stroke. 
A depressive disorder seems the most likely 
diagnosis, given the prominence and severity of 
the depressive symptoms, including biological 
symptoms of depression. Moreover, his depression 
predated the anxiety symptoms, the recent increase 
in alcohol consumption and the stroke. The 
severity of the stroke seems insuffi cient to explain 
his symptoms. My provisional diagnosis is thus 
of recurrent depressive disorder, current episode 
severe.
Turning to the aetiology, Mr K has a number 
of predisposing factors for a depressive disorder 
including his father’s suicide, alcohol misuse, 
guilt about his sexuality, a stroke 2 years ago and 
two prior depressive episodes. The factors that 
may have precipitated the current episode are 
his redundancy 6 months ago, the breakup of his 
long-term relationship 3 months ago, and his recent 
increased alcohol intake. Perpetuating factors 
include his current social isolation, feelings of guilt 
about recent casual homosexual affairs, continued 
alcohol intake and fi nancial worries. A key protective 
factor is his good insight into his illness and need for 
treatment.
As for the management, I plan to treat Mr K 
as a voluntary inpatient. In the short term, I will 
repeat the LFTs, suggest an HIV test, review his 
old notes and phone the GP for background, as 
well as seeking an opinion regarding treatment of 

52 
Completing and communicating the assessment
his hypertension. I suggest that his mental state 
is monitored at least daily, with close nursing 
observations while he remains actively suicidal. 
He should also be monitored for signs of alcohol 
withdrawal. As for drug treatment, I suggest starting 
an SSRI antidepressant, with benzodiazepine as 
required for sleep or sedation. When his mental 
state settles, I will perform a further assessment 
of his current stressors. Longer term, he will need 
continuing support, so I suggest that we begin the 
Care Programme Approach assessment.
Regarding the prognosis, his history predicts 
a good response to antidepressants. However, if 
stressors continue, recovery will be compromised 
and he will be vulnerable to relapse.
 Box 5.4 A written case summary 
for Mr K
Opening statement
Mr K is a 55-year-old unemployed storeman, seen in 
clinic last week following an overdose and admitted 
voluntarily because of suicidal intent and many 
depressive symptoms. Relevant factors included 
recent redundancy, relationship break-up and 
alcohol abuse.
Differential diagnosis:
1 Depressive disorder
 
For: subjectively and objectively low mood, 
suicidal ideation, recent self-harm, poor 
sleep, loss of appetite, feelings of guilt and 
worthlessness; two prior depressive episodes.
 
Against: his depressive symptoms could be 
secondary to diagnoses 2–4.
2 Anxiety disorder
 
For: worrying about his health, feeling tense, 
socially phobic and lies awake worrying.
 
Against: the depressive symptoms began fi rst, 
and are clearly more prominent.
3 Alcohol misuse
 
For: drinking 40 plus units/week; long history of 
harmful intake; describes withdrawal symptoms 
when in the navy (30 years ago).
 
Against: intake over past few years has averaged 
25 units/week; recent increase postdated onset 
of symptoms; normal LFTs and MCV.
4 Mood disorder associated with stroke
 
For: stroke 2 years ago.
 
Against: fi rst episode preceded the stroke; 
severity of stroke seems insuffi cient to explain his 
symptoms.
Diagnosis
Recurrent depressive disorder, current episode 
severe.
Context and cause
• Predisposing: father committed suicide when 
Mr K was aged 5 years. Alcohol misuse. Guilt 
about his sexuality. Stroke 2 years ago. Two other 
depressive episodes (at age 17 and 35), one 
requiring ECT.
• Precipitating: partner left him 3 months ago 
after 25 years. Increased alcohol intake. Made 
redundant 6 months ago.
• Perpetuating: social isolation – no close friends 
or family. Feeling guilty about recent casual 
homosexual affairs. Continuing high alcohol 
intake. Financial worries.
• Protective: good insight into his illness and 
need for psychological or pharmacological 
treatment.
Management plan
1 Further investigations: repeat LFTs and HIV 
test (last done 10 years ago); get old notes; 
phone GP for background. Needs a medical 
opinion regarding hypertension and its 
treatment.
2 Monitor mental state daily. Continue nursing 
observations whilst actively suicidal.
3 Observe for signs of alcohol withdrawal.
4 Start antidepressant (citalopram 20 mg). 
Benzodiazepine if required for sleep or 
sedation.
5 As mental state settles, assess further the 
current stressors – employment, fi nance, 
sexuality.
6 Longer term will need continuing support – begin 
Care Programme Approach assessment.
Prognosis
His history predicts a good response to 
antidepressants. However, if stressors continue, 
recovery will be compromised and he will be 
vulnerable to relapse.
Prob lem lists
Once the background to a case is familiar, the em-
phasis usually switches to current problems and their 
solution. Problem lists ensure that the key issues are 
identifi ed and dealt with. A problem list for Mr K is 
shown in Table 5.2.

Completing and communicating the assessment 53
Letters between psychiatrists 
and GPs
Letters from psychiatrists to GPs should be as con-
cise as possible. Remember you are usually off er-
ing the GP advice, not giving instructions. Also bear 
in mind that the GP will often know more than you 
about the person’s history and circumstances. Take 
into account the purpose of the referral: was it for an 
opinion or for continuing care? Has the GP asked a 
specifi c question or requested a particular interven-
tion? Generally the GP is most interested in:
• Th e diagnosis.
• A specifi c management plan, including the date of 
review and what he or she is expected to do.
• What the patient/relative has been told, and 
whether they have been copied into the corre-
spondence, as mentioned above.
• What the patient and GP should do if matters unex-
pectedly deteriorate (or improve).
As a fi nal visit to Mr K’s case, Box 5.5 is a letter to his 
GP, a year later.
 Box 5.5 Psychiatric discharge letter 
to GP
Dear Dr Hall,
Re: Mr J.K., d.o.b 1.1.58, 24 Easy Street, Anytown
Diagnosis: recurrent depressive disorder, currently 
in remission
Course and current situation
Mr K has made a good recovery from his illness 
as detailed in the summary sent to you on his 
discharge from the ward 6 months ago, although as 
you know, he required augmentation with lithium for 
full recovery. At review in clinic today he was entirely 
free of symptoms.
Management and prognosis
Thank you for prescribing his medication (citalopram 
60 mg o.d.; lithium carbonate 800 mg nocte), 
which he has taken as prescribed. His lithium level 
should continue to be checked every 6 weeks 
and maintained at 0.5–0.8 mmol/L; it was stable 
at 0.72 mmol/L last week. He should continue on 
the medication for at least another 6 months. At 
that time he intends to stop it, but he is aware that 
his risk of relapse will be lower if he remains on 
citalopram. When he does decide to stop, it should 
be tailed off gradually, over several weeks.
Mr K is fully aware of the diagnosis and our 
analysis of its causes (especially the relationship 
break-up, and his alcohol intake). We have 
addressed these issues, and they appear largely 
resolved. His drinking is now within normal limits, 
and he has begun a new relationship, which is going 
well. His fi nancial worries have evaporated having 
been left money in an aunt’s will.
We have not arranged to see him again. Please 
get in touch if you wish to discuss his case further, 
or if problems recur.
Yours etc.
cc Mr J.K.
Letters from GPs to psychiatrists should follow the 
same principles. Th e psychiatrist wants to know:
• Th e presenting complaint(s), the chronology and 
the GP’s provisional diagnosis.
• What is the reason for the referral: for a diagnostic 
opinion, treatment advice or ongoing care?
• Is there an acute crisis? If not, why refer now?
Table 5.2 A problem list for Mr K
Problem
Action
Agent
Review
Suicide risk
Close observation
Nursing staff
Daily
Depression
Start citalopram 20 mg once daily
Psychiatrist
One week–plan 
to increase dose
Insomnia
Sleep hygiene; hypnotics
Psychiatrist
One week
Social isolation
Investigate supports
Social worker
One week
Sexual guilt
Get contact number of local gay 
groups
Social worker
One week
HIV status
Consider HIV test
GUM clinic for advice
Two weeks
Alcohol misuse
Counselling
Specialist nurse
Unspecifi ed

54 
Completing and communicating the assessment
• Past psychiatric and medical history.
• Key personal and social details (e.g. recent stress-
ors, drug misuse).
• Any specifi c issues to be aware of (e.g. language 
diffi  culties, history of violence, vulnerable depend-
ants).
 KEYPOINTS
• Completing the psychiatric assessment 
involves using the information you have 
collected to make a diagnosis, understand its 
likely causes, plan management and estimate 
prognosis.
• When thinking about why the disorder 
has arisen, divide the factors according to 
type (biological, psychological and social) 
and timing (predisposing, precipitating, 
perpetuating and protective).
• A written case summary comprises an 
introductory statement, the diagnoses and 
evidence for and against each differential 
diagnosis, the causative factors, the 
management plan and the prognosis. As well 
as communicating information to colleagues, 
it is also a good intellectual exercise 
when developing skills or practising for an 
examination.
• Tailor the content and format of any 
communication to the needs of the recipient. 
Be concise, structured and emphasize the 
points relevant to diagnostic and management 
decisions.

Psychiatry Lecture Notes, Eleventh Edition. Gautam Gulati, Mary-Ellen Lynall and Kate Saunders. © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 
2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
elucidate the causes of psychiatric disorder are cor-
respondingly varied (Table 6.1). In this chapter, we 
describe how different methods can and have been 
used to tease apart the causes of mental health 
problems.
Epidemiology
Epidemiological methods can be applied to social, 
psychological or biological studies. Th ey have con-
tributed in two main ways to psychiatry. Firstly, 
population surveys have provided good informa-
tion about the prevalence and incidence of the major 
psychiatric disorders, their sex and age distribution, 
and so on. Th is basic demographic information un-
derpins most other kinds of aetiological research. 
Secondly, cohort and case-control studies have 
identifi ed risk factors for psychiatric disorders, rang-
ing from urban birth to autoimmune diseases to vi-
ral infection and drug side eff ects. An example is the 
fi nding that head injury increases the risk of demen-
tia. Sometimes, as in this example, the causality of 
an epidemiological fi nding is fairly clear, but often 
it is not (e.g. the association of unemployment with 
depression), and further studies must be carried out 
to see which way the causal arrows point. Longitu-
dinal, prospective studies, starting with healthy but 
‘at-risk’ individuals and following them up until ill-
ness develops in some, are a powerful design, where 
feasible. Crucially, they help distinguish ‘state’ 
Thinking about aetiology in 
psychiatry
Psychiatric disorders, like all illnesses, are caused 
by multiple and diverse influences – some known, 
many unknown. A corollary of this is that very few 
‘causes’ are either necessary or sufficient; rather, 
each factor acts to alter the risk of disorder. The 
contribution of specific ‘causes’ differs from patient 
to patient, but as a rule each of the major psychiat-
ric disorders is characterized by a well-established 
set of risk factors. For example, we might hypoth-
esize that a teenager’s eating disorder arises from 
any or all of:
• Inheritance of a genetic predisposition.
• Childhood obesity.
• Wanting to be a ballerina.
• Peer and media pressure to be thin.
• Disturbed 5-HT (5-hydroxytryptamine) neuro-
transmission.
• A hypothalamic tumour.
Aetiological conclusions should be just as evi-
dence based as therapeutic and diagnostic ones, 
but the complex aetiology of psychiatric disorders 
can frustrate efforts to elucidate their pathophysi-
ology. Rare familial single-gene dementias aside, 
almost all psychiatric disorders have multiple 
causes, and a given causal factor often contributes 
to several different disorders. The methods used to 
What causes mental 
health problems?
Learning objectives
✓ How to conceptualize aetiology in psychiatry
✓ To be able to think through epidemiological, psychological, social and 
biological aspects around causation in psychiatric disorders
6

56 
What causes mental health problems?
abnormalities (associated with the ‘state’ of having 
the disorder) from ‘trait’ abnormalities (a perma-
nent individual characteristic, which may be a risk 
factor for development of the disorder)
Sociology
Social factors are important in both the cause and 
shaping of psychiatric disorder. Th ey can operate at 
diff erent levels:
• Th e immediate environment. One’s surroundings 
act as non-specifi c risk factors for illness. For exam-
ple, psychiatric disorders are twice as common in 
those living in deprived conditions as in those liv-
ing in affl  uent conditions. Many mechanisms are 
probably involved, including social confl ict, sub-
stance misuse, noise and overcrowding; there may 
also be underlying factors that contribute inde-
pendently to poverty and psychiatric disorder. In 
addition, having a psychiatric disorder may make 
it harder for the person to improve their circum-
stances and make continuing poverty more likely.
• Life events (specifi c external stressors). Th ese 
include marriage, bereavement, unemployment 
and moving house. Life events, especially negative 
ones, lead to an increased risk of psychiatric dis-
order, notably depression, in succeeding months. 
Th e hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis 
is often implicated to explain this relationship, 
since the HPA axis, including cortisol production, 
is integral to the stress response, both normal and 
abnormal. If a recent life event is the predominant, 
understandable trigger for a psychiatric disorder, 
the diagnostic category of stress reaction or adjust-
ment reaction may be appropriate.
• Th e social and family group. Parents, siblings and 
others close to us are important infl uences on 
our development and functioning – for better and 
worse. For example, childhood emotional depri-
vation predisposes to later depression, whereas 
being in a close relationship protects against the 
eff ect of stressors.
• Th e wider environment. Environment in a broader 
sense is also relevant. For example, societal atti-
tudes contribute to the prevalence of eating dis-
orders, whilst political decisions aff ect the types 
and quantities of substances misused. Sociologists 
have also investigated transcultural diff erences in 
the occurrence of psychiatric disorders – many are 
universal, but some are much more common in 
particular populations.
• Some of these apparently ‘social’ infl uences actu-
ally involve genes too, because genes and environ-
ment interact. In other words, it is ‘nature plus nur-
ture’, not ‘nature versus nurture’.
Sociological research by Brown and Harris, work-
ing in London in the 1970s, had an enormous impact 
on our understanding of depression. Th ey asked why 
depression was particularly common in women of 
low socio-economic status, and why some women 
did not get depressed despite similar circumstances. 
Th ey identifi ed several factors (examples of the ‘four 
Ps’ approach to causation introduced in Chapter 5):
• Women who as children had suff ered a life stressor 
such as emotional deprivation or death of a par-
ent were at greater risk of depression (predisposing 
factor). 
• In the women who had one or more of the predis-
posing factors, depressive disorder was precipitated 
by a single major life event or by an accumulation 
of minor stressors.
• Women who had a protective factor such as social 
support from an intimate relationship in their life 
were less likely to become depressed after a major 
adverse life event.
• Continuing stress and lack of support acted as per-
petuating factors.
Family theories
Family theories view psychiatric disorder in one 
member as refl ecting an abnormality in the whole 
Table 6.1 Methodologies used to study the 
causes of psychiatric disorders
Field
Approaches
Epidemiology
Prevalence and incidence studies
Risk factor studies
Sociology
Life events
Family infl uences
Cultural factors
Illness behaviour
Psychology
Behavioural theories
Cognitive theories
Psychodynamic theories
Personality theories
Neuropsychology
Biology
Genetics
Biochemistry, pharmacology and 
immunology
Brain imaging
Neuropathology
Animal models

What causes mental health problems? 57
family. Th ey are applied particularly to childhood 
psychiatric disorders, where the theories have in-
spired a treatment approach – family therapy. 
However, it has been hard to confi rm the aetiological 
role of the family. Recent research shows that resem-
blances between family members are infl uenced by 
genes at least as much as by the family environment. 
An example where family factors (in a sociological 
sense) were wrongly invoked is autism, which was at-
tributed to parents being aloof or obsessional (‘refrig-
erator mothers’), whereas in fact it is highly genetic. 
In the 1950s, schizophrenia was explained in terms 
of parenting styles (the ‘schizophrenogenic mother’) 
and patterns of family communication (‘double bind’, 
‘schism and skew’). Such abnormalities, if they oc-
cur, seem more likely to be the result, not the cause, 
of having a son or daughter with schizophrenia in the 
house.
The sick role and illness behaviour
Th e sick role describes four processes that occur when 
someone is ill:
• Exemption from normal obligations (such as earn-
ing a living).
• A right to receive care.
• An obligation to cooperate with care.
• A desire to recover.
Illness behaviour refers to the behaviour of the 
person in the sick role. Both the sick role and illness 
behaviour are sociological concepts that describe 
normal processes. Th ey can also be excessive or 
maladaptive, and then are relevant to understanding 
the presentation and persistence of psychiatric (and 
medical) disorders. People diff er markedly in their 
response to symptoms – that is, they vary in their ill-
ness behaviour and readiness to adopt the sick role. 
Some are stoical and are reluctant to complain, while 
others dramatize symptoms and have a low thresh-
old for medical consultation. Th ese individual dif-
ferences are compounded by society’s views about 
psychiatric disorder – including stigma and igno-
rance about their nature and treatability. As a result, 
psychiatric patients may have more diffi  culty than 
medical patients in negotiating a sick role. A patient’s 
relationship to the sick role can be pathological: pa-
tients with medical complaints who appear to adopt 
the sick role unnecessarily or excessively (i.e. have 
abnormal illness behaviour) may have depression or 
a somatoform disorder. Th e benefi ts of the sick role 
(sometimes called secondary gain) play an especially 
important role in dissociative and somatoform disor-
ders (Chapter 10).
Antipsychiatry
Some sociologists, and some psychiatrists, have ar-
gued that psychiatric disorders are not medical ill-
nesses, but merely social constructs to label and deal 
with deviant behaviour. Th is thesis – antipsychiatry 
– was particularly infl uential in the counter-culture 
environment of the 1960s, with Th omas Szasz, an 
American psychotherapist, being a leading fi gure. A 
related stance (‘critical psychiatry’) is currently advo-
cated in some quarters. Antipsychiatry sees psychi-
atric disorders as predominantly social in origin and 
requiring psychosocial interventions. It is infl uenced 
by particular philosophical beliefs, and marked by 
scepticism as to the importance of medical and neu-
roscientifi c aspects of causation and management. 
Many current and ex-service users are also critical 
of psychiatric interventions, as implied by the name 
of the ‘Psychiatric Survivors Movement’. As medical 
practitioners, we should engage with concerns about 
patient rights and the patient experience. However, 
whilst antipsychiatry was and is important in drawing 
attention to the limitations of psychiatric knowledge 
and the dangers of stigmatization and institutionali-
zation, there is little evidence to support its tenets re-
garding the causes of mental distress. A denial of the 
biological component of psychiatric disorders is not 
helpful to ill patients.
Psychological factors
Th ere are various psychological models of psychiat-
ric disorder, diff ering in their theoretical background 
and experimental support, but sharing two features:
• Th ey are extensions of theories of normal psycho-
logical processes.
• Th e theory is complemented by a psychological 
treatment that arises from it.
Behavioural theories
Many of our actions are explicable in terms of learned 
behaviours or conditioning. Th ere are two types of 
conditioning, classical and operant. Th ese underlie 
contemporary behavioural theories of normal and 
abnormal behaviours. Behavioural theories gave rise 
to behavioural therapy, which is an eff ective interven-
tion in its own right for several childhood disorders 
and anxiety disorders.
In classical conditioning, we unconsciously as-
sociate two stimuli that regularly occur together. In 
Pavlov’s classic experiments, dogs were given food 
when a bell was rung. After a while the dogs began 
to salivate when the bell rang, even if no food was 

58 
What causes mental health problems?
there. Th is conditioning gradually wears off  (extinc-
tion). People are classically conditioned in many 
ways – for example, a person may become aroused 
at the sight of lingerie if they have come to associate 
it with impending sexual gratifi cation. Conditioning 
is important in the development of some psychiatric 
disorders. For example, agoraphobia developing in 
a person who was assaulted twice in the street; she 
associates leaving the house with the fear of attack, 
which she avoids by staying at home.
Operant conditioning describes how a behaviour 
will occur more frequently if it is rewarded (positive 
reinforcement), and decreases if it is not (negative 
reinforcement) or if it has unpleasant consequences 
(punishment). Rats learn to press a lever if it gives 
them food but not to press it if it doesn’t, or if they 
receive a painful shock. Children will shout and 
scream if they learn that this behaviour gets them an 
ice cream; on the other hand they learn to be polite 
if that is eff ective in obtaining one. Adults, though 
they may not like to admit it, are equally susceptible 
to conditioning. Learned helplessness is an example of 
operant conditioning. Animals subjected to a period 
of inescapable stresses (electric shocks) eventually 
give up trying to avoid them because such behaviour 
is never rewarded. A similar mechanism is proposed 
to explain why childhood adversity predisposes to 
depression in adulthood.
Cognitive theories
Th e core assumption of cognitive theories is that cog-
nitions (thoughts, patterns of thinking and ways of pro-
cessing information) infl uence our mood, behaviour 
and physiology, and that inaccurate or distorted cog-
nitions can lead to inappropriate or abnormal mood 
and behaviour. Cognitive theories of behaviour devel-
oped partly in reaction to the behaviourist approach 
that predominated in the early twentieth century, 
which placed little value on internal representations 
or psychological mental states. Cognitive theories of 
depression and anxiety disorders are especially well 
developed. A cognitive model explaining how panic 
disorder develops is summarized in Box 6.1. Cognitive 
theories are well validated and are clinically important 
because they have led to an eff ective and widely used 
form of psychotherapy – cognitive therapy.
 Box 6.1 A cognitive model of a panic 
attack
A woman gets a twinge of chest pain whilst 
reaching for a tin of beans in the supermarket. She 
has the thought that it might be a heart attack, even 
though in fact it’s a muscle strain from overdoing it 
at the gym that morning. Having had the thought, 
she becomes more anxious about the possibility 
of a heart attack, and all that entails, and beings to 
experience the physiological changes associated 
with anxiety – such as palpitations, sweating … and 
chest tightness. She interprets these sensations 
as confi rming that she is having a heart attack, 
the anxiety increases and she has a panic attack. 
Although it passes, the next time she is in the 
supermarket she recalls the episode, becomes 
hypervigilant for bodily sensations and a second 
panic attack occurs more readily than before. As the 
cycle continues, her cognitions and the associated 
symptoms are repeated until she has established 
panic disorder.
Triggering event
(e.g. twinge of chest pain)
Risk factors
predisposing
to panic
Interpretation
of symptoms
confirms impending
catastrophe
Worry about
consequences
Bodily
sensations
Perceived threat
(e.g. heart attack)
Cognitive distortions can arise for diff erent rea-
sons. For example, the woman in Box 6.1 may be con-
cerned about a heart attack because of an episode of 
childhood myocarditis, the recent death of a relative 
from a heart attack or from watching an item on the 
news on heart disease in women.
Psychodynamic theories
Psychoanalysis, associated with Sigmund Freud 
and his followers, is a complex theory of psycho-
logical processes and the origins of psychiatric dis-
orders, especially anxiety disorders. It also refers 
to the therapy inextricably linked to the theory. 
Psychoanalysis has changed a lot since the time 
of Freud, and the generic term psychodynamic is 
usually used to describe theories that combine 
Freudian elements with later ideas. Psychoanalytic 
theory holds that the mind is partitioned; some is 
conscious but much is unconscious. In Freud’s final 
model, the components of the mind were the ego, 
superego and id: the ego is the part of us in contact 
with reality; the superego is like our conscience; 

What causes mental health problems? 59
and the id is our instinctive drives and desires. The 
energy of the id is called libido, which is primarily 
sexual in nature. Feelings and memories of which 
we are unaware, especially those arising from very 
early in life, shape our current thoughts, feelings 
and actions. We use unconscious defence mecha-
nisms to reduce tensions that exist between our 
conflicting desires (Table 6.2). These mechanisms 
may be healthy or dysfunctional. Anxiety disorders 
(neuroses) result from a failure to progress through 
normal stages of mental development and develop 
adaptive defence mechanisms.
Psychodynamic theories have been infl uential but 
are much less prominent or important in modern 
psychiatry. Th is is partly because they are not true 
scientifi c theories, in the sense of being empirically 
testable or refutable. When elements of the theories 
have been tested, they have not been well supported 
by evidence. Moreover, psychodynamic psychother-
apies are still of unproven effi  cacy. Th ey are now of 
very limited availability in most healthcare systems, 
but are still available as NHS treatments for some pa-
tients in some regions.
Nevertheless, psychodynamic insights are clini-
cally useful in emphasizing that early experiences, 
and unconscious processes, can aff ect our feelings 
and actions, whatever the mechanisms involved. Th e 
defence mechanisms described have intuitive valid-
ity and the associated vocabulary permeates present-
day descriptions and conceptualization of mental 
processing. Moreover, identifi cation of the transfer-
ence and counter-transference inherent to the doc-
tor-patient relationship can improve our practice, 
both in psychiatry and in general medicine.
The role of personality
Personality describes our persistent pattern of 
thoughts, attitudes and behaviours. As such, it is criti-
cal to psychiatric disorder, but the very fact that the 
two are so intertwined makes it hard to identify the 
specifi c aetiological relationships between them. It is 
clear, though, that:
• Diff erent personality types predispose to diff erent 
psychiatric disorders.
• Personality aff ects the clinical picture of psychiat-
ric disorder.
• Personality aff ects the prognosis of psychiatric dis-
orders.
Personality can itself be abnormal (personality dis-
order), and interact with and coexist with psychiatric 
disorders. Th ese issues are discussed in Chapter 15.
Biological models
Genetics
Evidence from various sources can suggest a genetic 
basis for a given psychiatric disorder:
1 Familial clustering and twin studies: Familial ag-
gregation can be shown to refl ect shared genes not 
shared environment if twin studies show a higher 
concordance rate in monozygotic (MZ; identical) 
than dizygotic (DZ; non-identical) twin pairs, be-
cause MZ twins have essentially identical genom-
es, but DZ twins share only 50% of genes. Th ese 
studies establish the heritability of a disorder (or 
trait) – see below.
Table 6.2 Defence mechanisms
Defence mechanism
Defi nition
Repression
Suppressing desires and memories from consciousness
Denial
Behaving as though genuinely unaware of external reality
Projection
Attributing your own feelings to someone else
Displacement
Shifting emotions from the appropriate object or person to a more acceptable target, 
e.g. kicking the dog rather than your father
Reaction formation
Behaving in a way opposite to your (unacceptable) instincts
Regression
Returning to an earlier pattern of behaviour, e.g. to become more dependent on others
Sublimation
Finding a socially acceptable alternative outlet for emotions
Intellectualization
Thinking about your emotions rather than feeling them

60 
What causes mental health problems?
2 Adoption studies: Th e incidence of the disor-
der remains increased in adopted-away children 
(though this doesn’t control for prenatal environ-
ment – which is relevant for some disorders, in-
cluding schizophrenia).
3 Associated genetic abnormality: E.g. a known 
chromosomal (cytogenetic) aberration – for ex-
ample, Down’s syndrome or fragile X syndrome. 
Where the genetic changes are more subtle, or pre-
sent to a degree in healthy individuals – e.g. DNA 
copy number variation (CNV) – the role of these 
genetic diff erences is less clear.
4 A known pathological or biochemical abnormal-
ity: Th e underlying gene is a candidate gene for the 
disorder. For example, in Alzheimer’s disease, the 
β-amyloid protein in senile plaques led to the dis-
covery of amyloid gene mutations. Th e lack of de-
fi nitive lesions in most psychiatric disorders means 
there are few convincing candidate genes.
Apart from a few dementias (e.g. Huntington’s 
disease) and developmental disorders (e.g. tuber-
ous sclerosis), psychiatric disorders are not caused 
by gene mutations following mendelian inheritance 
patterns. Instead, there are genetic variants (poly-
morphisms) that act as risk factors, signifi cantly but 
slightly increasing susceptibility to the disorder.
Heritability refers to the size of the genetic predis-
position; it describes the proportion of the disorder 
in the population that is attributable to genes. It is 
best measured in large-scale twin studies. Note that 
heritability is a population average fi gure: any given 
individual’s disorder may be much more or less ‘ge-
netic’. Heritability estimates for psychiatric disor-
ders (for which good data are available) are shown 
in Table 6.3. Th e rest of the 100% not explained by 
heritability denotes the environmental contribution, 
including individual-specifi c and shared environ-
mental factors.
Although there is a substantial heritability for many 
psychiatric disorders, it is proving diffi  cult to locate 
the chromosomal loci and susceptibility genes driv-
ing this heritability (the next step in Figure 6.1). Th ere 
are several possible reasons for this:
• Th ere are many genes, each conferring individu-
ally only a small amount of the risk for a psychiatric 
disorder.
• Th e genes interact with each other (epistasis), and 
with environmental factors (gene × environment, 
or GE), in ways that are very hard to detect and 
measure.
• Th e disorder may be caused in diff erent people by 
diff erent genes (genetic heterogeneity) or diff erent 
variants of the same gene (allelic heterogeneity).
• Th e causative genes may not map onto the current-
ly defi ned clinical syndromes – that is, the wrong 
patients, genetically speaking, are being grouped 
together.
Establish there is a genetic contribution
to the disorder
•  Higher incidence in relatives
•  Twin studies
•  Adoption studies
•  Candidate gene
•  Cytogenetic abnormality
Identify the chromosomal
loci where the genes are
(Linkage analysis)
Identify the genes, and the variants
associated with the disorder
(Genetic association)
Study the biology of the gene
•  What does it do?
•  What is different in the disorder?
•  Does it define a subgroup?
•  Is the alteration a treatment target?
Figure 6.1 Finding genes for psychiatric disorders.
Table 6.3 Recent heritability estimates for 
psychiatric disorders
Disorder
Heritability (%)
Bipolar disorder
85
Schizophrenia
81
Alzheimer’s disease
75
Anorexia nervosa
60
Alcohol dependence
56
Major depressive disorder
37
Autism
37
Generalized anxiety disorder
28

What causes mental health problems? 61
Nevertheless, the search is worth pursuing since 
identifi cation of genes gives clues as to the core bio-
logical basis for an illness, and potentially for its ef-
fective treatment (e.g. several current treatment trials 
to correct the β-amyloid abnormality of Alzheimer’s 
disease).
Biochemistry and pharmacology
Biochemical theories propose that psychiatric disor-
ders are caused by a biochemical abnormality, usu-
ally aff ecting the level or activity of a neurotransmit-
ter, or the enzymes that metabolize it, or the receptors 
to which it binds, or the transporters that regulate its 
levels in the synapse. For example, the 5-HT (seroto-
nin) theory of depression variously implicates 5-HT1A 
receptors, 5-HT transporters and tryptophan hydrox-
ylase. Many of these theories were based originally on 
the mechanisms by which psychotropic drugs work. 
For example, antipsychotics treat schizophrenia and 
were found to block dopamine receptors; this obser-
vation led to the dopamine hypothesis of schizophre-
nia. Forty years later, there is now evidence it is true, 
to some degree, but the line of reasoning (from treat-
ment target to pathophysiology) is fl awed: diuretics 
treat heart failure, but heart failure is not usually due 
to renal disease.
Peripheral markers
Th e brain is relatively inaccessible, so many biochem-
ical measurements have been made in cerebrospinal 
fl uid (CSF), blood or urine. A robust fi nding is that 
people who are impulsive and aggressive have low 
CSF levels of the metabolite of 5-HT, suggesting im-
paired functioning of the central 5-HT system. How-
ever, it is often unclear whether peripheral markers 
refl ect the situation in the brain.
In a neuroendocrine challenge test, a substance 
known to produce a change in the plasma level of a 
hormone is administered. Th e size of the change re-
fl ects the sensitivity of the neural control system that 
mediates the response. For example, in the dexa-
methasone suppression test, plasma cortisol is meas-
ured after a dose of dexamethasone, to assess HPA 
axis function. Many people with severe depression 
fail to suppress cortisol, which led to the ‘steroid hy-
pothesis’ of depression.
Th e study of body fl uids in psychiatry is of renewed 
interest in the current search for biomarkers: that is, 
biological indices (such as levels of gene expression, 
or of metabolites) that can help predict the onset, 
progression or treatment response of a disorder, or 
help in its diff erential diagnosis.
Neuropathology
Biochemical studies of the brain after death were 
crucial in the understanding of Alzheimer’s disease; 
in particular, the discovery of cholinergic defi cits 
and the β-amyloid protein. Similar approaches have 
revealed abnormalities in other psychiatric disor-
ders, including schizophrenia, mood disorders and 
autism, though no comparably clear picture has 
emerged. Part of the problem is that studies of post-
mortem brains have many limitations, such as the 
eff ects of dying, death and a bias towards old, medi-
cated and chronically ill cases. Th is makes it diffi  cult 
to establish whether alterations occurred early or late 
in the disease, and fi ndings may simply refl ect the ef-
fects of treatment, or the eff ects on the brain of the 
consequences of psychiatric disorders, such as insti-
tutionalization, interpersonal diffi  culties, unemploy-
ment or substance misuse.
Structural and functional 
neuroimaging
A range of neuroimaging techniques are now avail-
able that allow the living brain to be studied. By us-
ing fi rst-episode and unmedicated subjects, the con-
founders mentioned above can be avoided. 
Computed tomography (CT) and structural mag-
netic resonance imaging (MRI) allow brain structure 
to be investigated in vivo. For example, they show 
that patients with schizophrenia have enlarged lat-
eral ventricles, and that the hippocampus is smaller 
in those with recurrent depressive disorder. Longitu-
dinal MRI studies are increasingly used. For example, 
they show that some diff erences in brain structure 
long precede the onset of symptoms in schizophre-
nia, whilst others develop as the illness does. Struc-
tural MRI methods such as diff usion tensor imaging 
(DTI) can now also identify the white matter path-
ways that connect one part of the brain with another 
– many people think the anatomical basis of psychi-
atric disorders is not to be found in any one place, but 
in how the brain is wired up, in both a structural and 
a functional sense.
A variety of neuroimaging techniques can also be 
used to obtain information that refl ects real-time 
neuronal activity. Functional MRI (fMRI) measures 
regional brain metabolism; electroencephalography 
(EEG) measures electrical activity; and magnetoen-
cephalography (MEG) measures the weak magnetic 
fi elds produced by neuronal currents. Positron emis-
sion tomography (PET) and single photon emission 
computed tomography (SPECT) use radioactive li-
gands to measure brain receptors or metabolites. 

62 
What causes mental health problems?
Th ey have shown, for example, that people with 
schizophrenia do not have elevated dopamine D2 re-
ceptors (as one version of the dopamine hypothesis 
had proposed). Th e methods are limited by the ra-
dioactivity involved, and a lack of suitable ligands for 
many molecules of interest (e.g. glutamate receptors). 
Information from neuroimaging techniques points 
to the specifi c brain regions and receptors that may 
be involved in the pathophysiology of a disorder, or 
in its response to treatment. Imaging phenotypes, like 
peripheral blood measurements, could also serve as 
biomarkers. While neuroimaging currently remains 
a research tool in psychiatry, it could soon provide 
meaningful information to clinicians at the level of 
individual patients, allowing more tailored treatment 
decisions, or providing better information on progno-
sis, for example following a fi rst episode of psychosis. 
Animal models
No one would suggest that a rat can get schizophrenia 
– and how would we know if it did? However, animal 
studies have contributed to psychiatric research in 
various ways and they continue to be of use:
• To assess the eff ects of an experimental interven-
tion (e.g. in utero infl ammation, maternal separa-
tion, neonatal hippocampal damage) upon rele-
vant behaviours (e.g. cognitive performance, social 
interactions) and biology (e.g. receptor sensitivity).
• Transgenic animals (with DNA from another spe-
cies artifi cially inserted) allow the role of spe-
cifi c genes in brain function and dysfunction to 
be investigated. For example, mice containing a 
mutated human amyloid precursor protein gene 
develop cognitive impairment and histological fea-
tures of Alzheimer’s disease; mice without a prion 
protein gene are resistant to prion disease.
• Animals, usually rats, are still widely used to test 
potential psychotropic drugs.
 KEYPOINTS
• The cause of most psychiatric disorders 
is multifactorial, involving biological, 
psychological and social contributors.
• There is a genetic predisposition to most 
disorders, and sometimes a large genetic 
contribution. However, the number and identity 
of the genes involved in most disorders remain 
unknown.
• Other biological aetiological factors are diverse 
and include head injury, infections, and drug 
side effects.
• Important psychological factors are early 
experience, cognitive style and conditioning.
• Social infl uences include childhood 
deprivation, relationship problems, family 
structure and unemployment.
 FURTHER READING
Cowen P, Harrison P, Burns T (eds) (2012) Shorter 
Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry, 6th edn. Oxford Uni-
versity Press, New York.
 SELF-ASSESSMENT
1 Which of the following is true, concerning the 
heritability of psychiatric disorders:
a Heritability refers to the penetrance of a gene.
b Heritability is measured using genome-wide 
association studies.
c The heritability of schizophrenia is about 40%.
d The heritability of depression is about 40%.
e The heritability of anxiety disorders is less than 
10%.
2 Which of the following is true, concerning research 
tools in psychiatry:
a Functional MRI (fMRI) is a non-invasive imaging 
technique that measures neuronal activity.
b Positron emission tomography (PET) uses 
radioactive ligands to measure brain receptors or 
metabolites.
c Biomarkers are molecules that can help predict 
the onset, progression or treatment response of a 
disorder, or help in its differential diagnosis.
d In adoption studies, an increased incidence of the 
disorder in adopted-away children proves that 
there is a genetic component to the disorder.

Psychiatry Lecture Notes, Eleventh Edition. Gautam Gulati, Mary-Ellen Lynall and Kate Saunders. © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 
2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Bear these in mind as you read on, and try to put 
them into practice.
• Many patients – maybe even the majority – do 
not take their drugs regularly. This is by no 
means unique to psychiatric patients but is 
complicated in psychiatry by the fact that many 
patients will refuse medication because of the 
nature of their illness: for example, a psychotic 
patient who refuses medication because he 
believes you are trying to poison him. This issue 
is variously called compliance, adherence or con-
cordance, and the lack of it is a major reason for 
apparent non-response to medication. Box 7.2 
lists the main reasons for the problem and how 
to minimize it.
 Box 7.1 Principles of psychiatric 
prescribing
• Choose the right drug. This requires an 
adequate assessment, accurate diagnosis 
and consideration of other factors such as 
comorbid medical conditions and suicidal 
ideation.
• Give the right dose. Antidepressant doses 
are often inadequate, antipsychotic 
doses excessive. Each poses risks: lack 
of effi cacy and unnecessary side effects, 
respectively.
Psychiatric treatments may be categorized as 
biological – drugs and electroconvulsive therapy 
(ECT); psychological – the psychotherapies; and so-
cial. A combination of approaches is usually used. 
Sometimes compulsory treatment is given. Chapter 
8 considers how treatments are delivered and ser-
vices organized.
Drug treatments
Th e study of psychiatric drugs – their mechanisms, 
uses, eff ects and side eff ects – constitutes psychop-
harmacology.
Principles and practice of 
prescribing
Drugs used in psychiatry can be grouped into eight 
main categories (Table 7.1).
• Consult a more detailed text for complete infor-
mation about individual drugs, doses, side eff ects, 
drug interactions and contraindications.
• Always check the British National Formulary or 
similar before prescribing any drug with which you 
are not wholly familiar.
• Box 7.1 summarizes the important principles that 
govern the prescription of all psychiatric drugs. 
Treatment
Learning objectives
✓ To be able to demonstrate a working knowledge of the uses, side 
eff ects and mechanisms of action of commonly prescribed psychiatric 
drugs and of electroconvulsive therapy
✓ To be able to describe common modalities of psychotherapy
✓ To understand the relevance of social interventions in psychiatry
7

64 
Treatment
• Give the drug for the right duration. 
Antidepressants tend to be given for too short 
a period and anxiolytics for too long. Again, 
the trade-off is between incomplete response 
and adverse effects, including the potential for 
dependence.
• The effi cacy and side effects of drugs within 
a class may differ. The choice of drug is 
determined largely by previous experience in 
any specifi c patient, side effects (e.g. sedative 
profi le), strength of evidence. Drugs with solid 
evidence of effi cacy and known safety should 
be used preferentially. A family history of drug 
response can be informative, particularly in 
bipolar disorder.
• Avoid combinations of drugs from the same class. 
There is no evidence for greater effi cacy, and 
often more side effects.
• Psychiatric drugs are better than placebo … 
but not always by much. Due humility is 
essential, along with a clear grasp of how 
and when to prescribe appropriately – and 
an awareness of, and willingness to use, 
alternative strategies.
 Box 7.2 Non-compliance in psychiatry
Major causes are:
• Reluctance to accept the need for treatment.
• Lack of belief in drug effi cacy.
• Concern about drug side effects, including worry 
about becoming ‘addicted’.
• Stigma.
• Forgetfulness.
• Expense.
Table 7.1 Drug treatments in psychiatry
Type
Example
Main indications
Antidepressants
Depression, anxiety disorders
SSRIs
Fluoxetine, sertraline
TCAs
Amitriptyline
MAOIs
Phenelzine
SNRIs
Venlafaxine
Other
Mirtazapine
Mood stabilizers
Bipolar disorder
Lithium
Valproate
Lamotrigine
Carbamazepine
Hypnotics and anxiolytics
Anxiety, insomnia
Benzodiazepines
Diazepam
Antipsychotics
Schizophrenia, other psychoses
First-generation (‘typical’) antipsychotics
Haloperidol
Second-generation (‘atypical’) antipsychotics
Clozapine, olanzapine
Anticholinergics
Procyclidine
Extrapyramidal side effects of 
antipsychotics
Stimulants
Methylphenidate
Attention defi cit disorder
Drugs for dementia
Alzheimer’s disease (moderate 
to severe)
Cholinesterase inhibitors
Donepezil
NMDA receptor antagonist
Memantine
Drugs used in substance dependence
Detoxifi cation, abstinence
Alcohol
Disulfi ram, acamprosate
Smoking
Bupropion
Opiates
Methadone, buprenorphine
SSRIs: selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors; TCAs: tricyclic antidepressants; MAOIs: monoamine oxidase inhibitors, SNRIs: 
selective serotonin and noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors; NMDA: N-methyl-d-aspartate.

Treatment 65
• As an effect of the disorder being treated – for 
example, a severely depressed person may feel 
they do not deserve to recover.
Improve compliance with medication by:
• Establishing a good therapeutic relationship.
• Explore the patient’s views about their illness and 
its treatment. Correct any misapprehensions, but 
respect their views if they disagree with yours.
• Sharing of information about the evidence for (and 
against) the drug. Give simple, clear advice and 
fi gures – for example, ‘You have a 60% chance of 
being a lot better after a month’. Give the patient a 
chance to ask questions or dispute the evidence. 
And ensure you discuss the risks and benefi ts 
of not taking the treatment. Written information 
about their treatment should routinely be offered 
to patients.
Antidepressants
Antidepressants are eff ective, readily available and a 
fi rst-line treatment for depressive disorders. Some are 
also used to treat other disorders such as obsessive-
compulsive disorder (OCD). Th e major classes are 
shown in Table 7.1. Selective serotonin reuptake in-
hibitors (SSRIs) and tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) 
have similar effi  cacy, with about 60% of patients 
responding after 6 weeks. Over the same period, 
30–40% respond to placebo.
• Patients often want to stop antidepressants too soon. 
Antidepressants usually produce some reduction 
in symptoms by 4–6 weeks, but it may take many 
months for the patient to recover fully. Continued 
treatment maintains the improvement in the medi-
um term (6–9 months after getting better). Prolonged 
use halves the chances of relapse in those at risk.
• All antidepressants are thought to work by enhanc-
ing activity of the monoamine neurotransmit-
ters noradrenaline (NA) and/or serotonin (5-HT; 
Figure 7.1a,b).
• Th e focus here is on the drugs; see other chapters for 
discussion about their use in management. Chapter 
9 discusses the treatment of depression, including 
combination therapies and treatment resistance.
Selective serotonin reuptake 
inhibitors (SSRIs)
SSRIs are the usual fi rst-line antidepressant.
• Mode of action. Selectively inhibit synaptic 5-HT 
reuptake transporters, thereby increasing synaptic 
5-HT concentration (Figure 7.1a).
• Practical usage. Start at full dosage, once daily 
with breakfast. Onset of antidepressant action 
becomes evident in 7–14 days. However, side 
eff ects (see below) occur in the fi rst few days – 
remember to warn the patient of this. Consider 
giving a hypnotic for the fi rst few weeks to aid 
sleep. Always withdraw an SSRI slowly at the end 
of treatment.
• Individual SSRIs. Th ere are some modest diff er-
ences in properties between SSRIs. A good fi rst 
choice is sertraline (50–100  mg/day), which is 
eff ective, well tolerated, has few interactions with 
other drugs, and maybe is associated with a lower 
incidence of sexual dysfunction. Escitalopram 
(10  mg/day) is also well tolerated although not 
available generically and therefore more expen-
sive. Fluoxetine (20–40 mg/day) has a long half-
life, so is useful if compliance is poor, and with-
drawal reactions are rare (but drug interactions 
persist longer).
• Side effects. Usually well tolerated, though 15% 
have nausea, abdominal discomfort, diarrhoea, 
insomnia and agitation, mainly in the early 
stages. Sexual dysfunction (lack of libido, anor-
gasmia) is common in women and also occurs in 
men. SSRIs may increase the risk of upper gas-
trointestinal bleeding and hyponatraemia. Some 
people experience discontinuation symptoms 
(insomnia, nausea, dizziness, agitation) when 
stopping the drug; hence withdraw over a few 
weeks.
• SSRIs and suicide. There have been concerns 
that SSRIs are associated with an increase in sui-
cidal thoughts and behaviour in the early stages 
of treatment, particularly in younger adults and 
children. Patients should always be monitored 
for suicide risk carefully at this time. However, 
this must be set against the reduction in suicide 
risk associated with the effective treatment of 
depression.
• Overdose. Few eff ects; rarely if ever fatal. Citalo-
pram is signifi cantly more toxic in overdose than 
other SSRIs.
• Cautions and contraindications. Few. May 
increase seizures in epilepsy. Coadminis-
tration with serotonergic drugs (including 
monoamine 
oxidase 
inhibitors 
(MAOIs), 
l-tryptophan, lithium and St John’s wort) may 
lead to serotonin syndrome, a potentially life-
threatening condition that includes tachycar-
dia, shivering, sweating, hyperthermia and 
hyperreflexia, progressing to shock and renal 
failure.

66 
Treatment
Selective serotonin and 
noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors 
(SNRIs)
Venlafaxine 
(75–375 
mg/day) 
and 
duloxetine 
(60 mg/day) are the only members of this group.
• Mode of action. SNRIs potently block 5-HT and NA 
reuptake but do not block cholinergic receptors.
• Practical usage. Venlafaxine (but not duloxetine) 
is slightly more eff ective than SSRIs. Its main indi-
cation is for SSRI non-response. Give twice daily, 
though a long-acting (once daily) form is available. 
• Side effects. Resemble those of SSRIs, but may 
be worse. At high doses, hypertension may occur 
and should be monitored. Not sedative. Avoid 
MAOIs.
Depression 
+SSRI  
Impaired signalling 
Normal signalling
(a)
5-HT
5-HT transporter 
5-HT receptor
SSRI 
MOCLOBEMIDE
PHENELZINE
Monamine oxidase inhibitor
A
B
VENLAFAXINE/TCA
SSRI
REBOXETINE
Monoamine reuptake inhibition
5HT
NA
Monoamine receptor
Antagonist
Agonist
MIRTAZIPINE
TRAZADONE
BUSPIRONE
5HT2
5HT1a
α2
(b)
Figure 7.1 (a) A highly simplifi ed schema for the proposed mechanism of action of selective serotonin reuptake 
inhibitors (SSRIs). In depression, there is thought to be a relative 5-HT defi ciency, and upregulation of 5-HT receptors. 
The net effect is abnormal signalling and functioning of the postsynaptic neuron. SSRIs block the 5-HT transporter, 
and increase 5-HT in the synapse. The antidepressant effect takes several days to occur, because other adaptive 
changes also have to occur (to restore normal fi ring of the neuron, downregulate receptors, and other secondary 
effects). Tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) work similarly, but act upon presynaptic receptors and noradrenergic 
synapses too. (b) An aide-memoire for the mechanism of action of various antidepressants. The receptors on which 
the antidepressants work often also give an indication of what side effects to expect.

Treatment 67
Noradrenaline and serotonin 
specifi c antidepressant (NASSA)
Mirtazapine (15–45 mg nocte).
• Mode of action. Increases activity in the NA and 
5-HT systems by blocking the negative feedback 
of NA on presynaptic alpha-2 receptors. Alpha-2 
blockade also enhances 5-HT release.
• Practical usage. Often used as a second-line treat-
ment, and in combination with SSRIs as a third-
line treatment. 
• Side eff ects. Relatively sedating although this is 
not dose dependent. Less sexual dysfunction or 
nausea than SSRIs. Associated with weight gain.
Tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs)
TCAs are predominantly used for people who are in-
tolerant of, or unresponsive to, SSRIs. Th ey may also 
have slightly greater effi  cacy in severe depression and 
in chronic pain.
• Mode of action. Inhibit presynaptic NA and 5-HT 
transporters. Some TCAs are more selective for 
one monoamine than another – e.g. clomipramine 
mainly acts on 5-HT; desipramine on NA. Unlike 
SSRIs, TCAs block various receptors, contributing 
to their side-eff ect profi le (Table 7.2).
• Practical usage. Usually given at night (due to 
their sedative action) or in divided doses. Delayed 
onset of action as for SSRIs. Reduction in anxiety 
(anxiolysis) and sedation occur rapidly. To mini-
mize initial side eff ects, start at a low dose and 
increase over 10 days.
• Side eff ects. See Tables 7.2 and 7.3. Th e ability to 
drive and use machinery may be impaired due to 
drowsiness.
Table 7.2 Receptor blockade by tricyclic 
antidepressants (TCAs) and their associated 
side effects
Receptor blocked
Side effect produced
Muscarinic cholinergic
Dry mouth, urinary retention, 
constipation, blurred vision, 
glaucoma, tachycardia, 
delirium, sexual dysfunction
Alpha-1 adrenergic
Postural hypotension, 
drowsiness, sexual 
dysfunction
Histamine H1
Drowsiness, weight gain
Other or unknown
Arrhythmias, seizures
Table 7.3 Side effects of conventional antipsychotics
Side effects
Comments
Common
Extrapyramidal (EPS)
 Acute dystonia
 Parkinsonism
 Akathisia
 Tardive dyskinesias
Hyperprolactinaemia
 Galactorrhoea
 Amenorrhoea
 Sexual dysfunction
Anticholinergic
Anti-adrenergic
Weight gain
See text. Related to dopamine D2 receptor blockade in basal ganglia
Due to D2 receptor blockade in the pituitary. May lead to osteoporosis 
in women
As for TCAs, see Table 7.2
As for TCAs, see Table 7.2
Due to histamine H1 or 5-HT2C receptor antagonism
Rare or idiosyncratic, but severe
Neuroleptic malignant syndrome
Photosensitivity
Cholestatic jaundice
Retinal pigmentation
Blood dyscrasias
Seizures
Tachyarrhythmias
Hypothermia
Dangerous, see text
Especially chlorpromazine
Especially chlorpromazine

68 
Treatment
• Individual TCAs. Lofepramine is an eff ective TCA 
and generally well tolerated. Amitriptyline is very 
sedating and anxiolytic and is used at low doses for 
analgesia and insomnia.
• Overdose. Dangerous in overdose, causing tach-
yarrhythmias, seizures, coma and death.
• Cautions and contraindications. Avoid in glau-
coma, prostatism, recent myocardial infarction, 
cardiac failure, and porphyria. Increase seizure 
frequency, so caution in epilepsy. Avoid combin-
ing with MAOIs.
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors 
(MAOIs)
MAOIs (e.g. phenelzine (15–90  mg/day), tranylcy-
promine (10–30 mg/day)) are third-line antidepres-
sants; their use is limited by toxicity and inferior ef-
fi cacy compared with TCAs and SSRIs.
• Mode of action. Prevent breakdown of monoam-
ines in presynaptic terminals by the enzyme MAO, 
thereby increasing transmitter availability.
• Uses of MAOIs. Th e main indication is atypical 
depression (Chapter 9). Also used in treatment-
resistant depression, either alone or in combina-
tion.
• Practical usage. Ensure the patient is aware of the 
necessary dietary restrictions and drug interactions 
(see below). Wait 2 weeks after stopping a TCA and 
up to 5 weeks after an SSRI  (depending on the half 
life of the SSRI). Prescribe in divided doses.
• Side eff ects. Postural hypotension, insomnia, 
ankle oedema, dry mouth, dizziness, agitation and 
headache.
• Overdose. Hypertension, delirium, coma and 
death.
• Cautions and contraindications. Prescribe with 
caution. MAO also metabolizes tyramine, so eating 
tyramine-containing foods (e.g. cheese, red wine, 
broad beans, pickled herrings, game and Marmite) 
whilst on MAOIs can cause a hypertensive crisis 
(‘the cheese reaction’) – headache, palpitations, 
fever, convulsions and coma. Such foods should 
be avoided. Th ere are also dangerous interactions 
with many drugs, including opiates, insulin, cold 
remedies, antiepileptics, SSRIs and some TCAs. 
Avoid MAOIs in cardiac or hepatic failure or por-
phyria.
• Reversible MAOIs. Unlike classical MAOIs, 
moclobemide (300–900  mg/day) is virtually free 
from the cheese reaction and associated risks 
(because it only inhibits one form of MAO-A, and 
does so reversibly). It is sometimes known as a 
RIMA – reversible inhibitor of MAO-A.
Other antidepressants
Other antidepressants are available that do not fall 
readily into a specifi c class. None is more eff ective 
than SSRIs or TCAs, and none is widely used.
• Low-dose trazodone (50–100 mg at night) is a use-
ful (non-addictive) hypnotic. 
• Reboxetine is a selective NA reuptake inhibitor. It is 
non-sedating and may improve social functioning. 
It appears to be less eff ective and less well tolerated 
than SSRIs. It is often experienced as quite activating.
• Agomelatine is a new antidepressant: a melatonin 
MT1 and MT2 receptor agonist and 5-HT2C recep-
tor antagonist. Initial effi  cacy and tolerability data 
are encouraging, but its position in clinical practice 
remains unclear.
• St John’s wort is an extract of the plant Hypericum 
perforatum, available without prescription and 
tried by many patients. It is an eff ective but weak 
antidepressant. Th ough a ‘natural’ remedy, it has 
side eff ects and drug interactions, and there are 
reports of toxicity. It is also an enzyme inducer and 
can interfere with the metabolism of other medica-
tions, e.g. the oral contraceptive pill.
Mood stabilizers
Not a pharmacological class, mood stabilizer is a term 
describing a drug used to prevent relapse in bipolar 
disorder. Some are also useful in the treatment of 
acute mood episodes. Lithium was the fi rst and re-
mains the standard therapy. Other mood stabilizers 
include antiepileptic drugs (e.g. valproate, carbamaz-
epine and lamotrigine) and antipsychotics (e.g. olan-
zapine and quetiapine).
Lithium
• Mode of action. Uncertain, but probably acts on 
second messenger systems via the phosphatidylin-
ositol and glycogen synthetase kinase 3 (GSK3) 
pathways.
• Uses. Usually given as lithium carbonate. Primary 
indication is relapse prevention in bipolar disorder; 
eff ective against both manic and depressive relaps-
es; reduces risk of relapse by about 40%. Needs to 
be given for at least 18 months for the benefi t to be 
clear. Also eff ective in acute mania (though antip-
sychotics work faster) and as an adjunctive treat-
ment for depression (Chapter 9). Family history of 
bipolar disorder responsive to lithium predicts a 
good response. It is also associated with reductions 
in suicidal behaviour but is not indicated for spe-
cifi c use in this way due to its toxicity in overdose.

Treatment 69
• Side eff ects. At therapeutic levels (0.5–1.0 mmol/L): 
fi ne tremor, metallic taste, dry mouth, thirst, mild 
polyuria, nausea and weight gain. Hypothyroidism 
occurs in 20% of women (although thyroid prob-
lems are associated with bipolar disorder inde-
pendent of treatment); rarer in men. Renal impair-
ment occasionally occurs following prolonged use.
• Overdose. 
Toxic 
symptoms 
occur 
above 
1.5  mmol/L: coarse tremor, agitation, twitching, 
thirst and polyuria. Above 2.5  mmol/L: polyuric 
renal failure, seizures, coma and death. Toxic levels 
can result from mild dehydration, or with low-salt 
diets. Fatalities after overdose are not uncommon; 
survivors may be left with renal failure or brain 
damage.
• Practical usage. Before prescribing, a detailed 
discussion about the commitment and potential 
dangers is necessary. Do a physical examination, 
measure electrolytes, creatinine clearance, thyroid 
function and also perform an ECG if indicated. 
During treatment measure lithium levels regu-
larly (weekly at fi rst, then 3-monthly once stable). 
Titrate dose (usually 400–1200 mg/day) to keep the 
plasma level at 0.5–1.0 mmol/L. Test thyroid and 
renal function every 6 months. Withdraw gradu-
ally, in order to avoid rebound mania.
• Cautions and contraindications. Many. Avoid 
if adherence is likely to be variable or short lived. 
Avoid in renal failure and pregnancy. Do not 
combine with diuretics, angiotensin-converting 
enzyme (ACE) inhibitors or high-dose antipsy-
chotics. Use cautiously with NSAIDs (non-steroi-
dal anti-infl ammatory drugs).
Valproic acid
Valproic acid (prescribed as sodium valproate or val-
proate semisodium) is commonly used but is less ef-
fective, and has a weaker evidence base, than lithium. 
It has a place when lithium is not tolerated, contrain-
dicated or ineff ective. Th e combination of lithium 
plus valproate is more eff ective than valproate mono-
therapy and, possibly, than lithium monotherapy.
• Mode of action. In epilepsy, works by block-
ing sodium channels and increasing GABA 
(γ-aminobutyric acid) turnover.
• Practical usage. Dose depends on the drug for-
mulation. Valproate semisodium is started at 
250–500  mg/day and titrated upwards every few 
days, depending on adverse eff ects. Th e usual 
maintenance dose is 750–1250  mg/day. Plasma 
levels can be measured, but no therapeutic range 
for mood stabilization has been established.
• Side eff ects. Sedation, tiredness, tremor and 
gastrointestinal disturbance may occur. Revers-
ible hair loss occurs in 10% of patients. May cause 
thrombocytopenia.
• Cautions and contraindications. May increase 
plasma levels of other protein-bound drugs (e.g. 
other antiepileptics). Associated with neural tube 
defects – avoid in pregnancy, and use with caution 
in women of childbearing potential.
Carbamazepine
Carbamazepine is probably less eff ective than lithi-
um or valproic acid, but may be used when these are 
contraindicated, ineff ective or not tolerated.
• Mode of action. In epilepsy, works by blocking 
sodium channels.
• Practical usage. Start at low dose (200 mg twice 
daily (b.d.)) and build up to 600 mg b.d. Measure 
plasma levels if signs of toxicity (ataxia, confusion, 
blurred vision) emerge. Check white cell count 
after a week.
• Side eff ects. If erythematous rash or leucopenia 
occur, stop the drug. Other side eff ects are nausea, 
dizziness, drowsiness and hyponatraemia.
• Cautions and contraindications. Carbamazepine 
is a potent enzyme inducer, so other drugs will be 
metabolized faster – for example, the contraceptive 
pill. Avoid MAOIs or if there is evidence of hepatic 
failure, arrhythmias or pregnancy.
Lamotrigine
Lamotrigine is also an antiepileptic drug. It prevents 
depressive episodes. It is also probably eff ective in 
acute depressive episodes in bipolar disorder, al-
though its use as monotherapy is limited because of 
the slow titration required.
• Mode of action. In epilepsy, blocks sodium and 
calcium channels, and decreases glutamate 
release.
• Practical usage. Start very gradually, initially 
25 mg daily for 2 weeks then 50 g daily for 2 weeks. 
Th e usual dose in bipolar disorder is 100–300 mg 
daily.
• Side eff ects. A rash occurs in 3–5% of patients, 
requiring that the drug be stopped. Th e risk is 
reduced by a gradual increase in dose. Other side 
eff ects include nausea, headache, tremor and diz-
ziness.
• Cautions and contraindications. Plasma levels 
are increased by valproate (so use 50% of dose). A 
combination of lamotrigine and carbamazepine 
may cause neurotoxicity.

70 
Treatment
Anxiolytics
Th ese drugs are also known as hypnotics and seda-
tives if being used to help sleep. Benzodiazepines 
are the main class, and in the 1960s and 1970s were 
very widely prescribed. With increased awareness 
of their potential for dependency and withdrawal 
problems (Chapter 14), benzodiazepines have been 
replaced by SSRIs or TCAs as the usual drugs for anxi-
ety. However, anxiolytics are still used as a short-term 
treatment.
Benzodiazepines
Th e former popularity of benzodiazepines is under-
standable: they are highly eff ective and relatively free 
of unpleasant side eff ects.
• Mode of action. Potentiate inhibitory transmission 
via the benzodiazepine-binding site of the GABAA 
receptor.
• Uses in psychiatry. Relief of acute anxiety and treat-
ment of panic disorder, phobic anxiety and insom-
nia. Also used for delirium tremens, and to augment 
antipsychotics for sedation in acute psychosis.
• Practical usage. Diazepam (2–5 mg once or twice 
daily) is the standard anxiolytic. For intramuscu-
lar or intravenous administration use lorazepam 
(1–4 mg 4 hourly). Temazepam (20 mg) is shorter 
acting and used for insomnia. In the USA, alpra-
zolam (250 μg three times a day) is widely used for 
panic disorder.
• Side eff ects. Drowsiness, ‘hangover eff ects’, head-
ache, nausea, ataxia, dysarthria and delirium. 
Occasionally, disinhibition or aggression. Should 
not normally be prescribed for longer than 4 
weeks, to prevent dependency. Withdrawal symp-
toms include rebound anxiety, insomnia, visual 
and auditory hallucinations and seizures. Th is is 
managed by switching from short-acting benzo-
diazepines to diazepam, and by tapering the dose 
over several weeks or longer.
• Overdose. Very rarely fatal in healthy people. 
Flumazenil can be used acutely to reverse the 
eff ects.
• Cautions and contraindications. Th e sedative 
eff ect may interfere with driving ability, especially 
if combined with alcohol.
Other anxiolytics
• Propranolol reduces the somatic symptoms of anx-
iety (tachycardia, tremor) but its role is limited to 
use in performance anxiety. Avoid in asthmatics as 
it can cause bronchospasm.
• Buspirone is a non-sedating anxiolytic, used in 
generalized anxiety disorder. It is said not to be 
addictive, and takes several days to work.
• Th e ‘z-drugs’ (zolpidem, zopiclone and zaleplon) 
enhance GABA transmission and are used mainly 
as hypnotics, claimed to produce fewer hangover 
eff ects and less tolerance than benzodiazepines, 
although the evidence that there are any worth-
while clinical benefi ts is limited. Zaleplon has a 
particularly short half-life.
• Low-dose TCAs also have anxiolytic and hypnotic 
eff ects – for example, amitriptyline (25 mg) or tra-
zodone (50 mg) – and are not addictive.
Antipsychotics
Antipsychotics (also called neuroleptics or major 
tranquillizers) are the mainstay of treatment for 
schizophrenia and other psychoses.
A more important classifi cation is into two main 
groups: the older, conventional (typical) antipsychot-
ics, and the newer second generation (atypical) ones 
(Box 7.3). Th ere are diff erences between them (see 
below) but the fundamental properties are the same 
for all antipsychotics:
• All antipsychotics work primarily by blocking 
D2 dopamine receptors. Th is reverses the exces-
sive dopamine activity in the mesolimbic system 
thought to cause the symptoms of psychosis. D2 
receptor blockade also contributes, along with 
antagonism at other receptors, to their side eff ects.
• Antipsychotics are eff ective against positive psy-
chotic symptoms regardless of diagnosis, in about 
70% of patients within 6 weeks. Clozapine is the only 
antipsychotic with a greater effi  cacy (see below). 
Onset of action is gradual, over 1–2 weeks. Antip-
sychotics are also used in prevention of relapse of 
psychosis, in delirium and in severe depression.
• Th ere are several serious side eff ects (see below). 
Knowing how and when to explain the potential side 
eff ects is diffi  cult if a patient is acutely psychotic. It 
should be done as soon as the mental state permits.
• Avoid prescribing above recommended limits, 
either for non-response or to produce sedation. 
Th ere is no evidence of greater effi  cacy, no phar-
macological rationale and good evidence of harm.
 Box 7.3 Typical and atypical 
antipsychotics
The term ‘atypical’ was applied to clozapine (see 
below), the fi rst antipsychotic that did not produce 
extrapyramidal side effects (EPS). This is the correct 
usage of the term: an antipsychotic that does not 

Treatment 71
produce EPS at clinical doses. Since clozapine, 
many other antipsychotics have been marketed 
as atypical. However, the terminology is confusing 
because:
• Atypical is sometimes wrongly thought to imply 
greater effi cacy, because clozapine also proved 
to be more effective than other antipsychotics. 
This property is not shared by other atypical 
antipsychotics.
• Alternative terms – which are also unsatisfactory – 
include ‘second generation’ and ‘novel’.
• Several mechanisms have been proposed to 
explain ‘atypicality’. One is that the drugs block 
D2 receptors transiently and are sensitive to 
endogenous dopamine levels; another is that they 
also block 5-HT2A receptors.
Side effects of conventional 
antipsychotics
Th ese are many and serious (Table 7.3). Th eir preva-
lence and severity vary from one drug to another, de-
pending on their pharmacological profi le. Th e main 
features of two widely used typical antipsychotics, 
haloperidol and chlorpromazine, are summarized in 
Table 7.4.
Extrapyramidal side eff ects (EPS) are a major prob-
lem. EPS are motor abnormalities related to the do-
paminergic receptor blockade in the basal ganglia. 
Th ere are four types:
1 Acute dystonia – painful contractions of muscles in 
the neck, jaw or eyes. Young men given high doses 
are particularly vulnerable. Onset is within hours 
or days. Th ey are treated with intramuscular or 
intravenous anticholinergic agents.
2 Parkinsonism – decreased facial movements, shuf-
fl ing gait, stiff ness and sometimes tremor. Com-
mon in early weeks of treatment. Managed by 
reducing the dose or temporarily adding an anti-
cholinergic. Easily mistaken for depression or neg-
ative symptoms in schizophrenia.
3 Akathisia – a feeling of restlessness and a need to 
walk around. It is very unpleasant and occurs in 
the fi rst months of treatment. May be mistaken for 
psychotic behaviour. Treat by lowering the dose or 
temporarily giving propranolol.
4 Tardive dyskinesia (TD) – uncontrollable grimac-
ing movements of face, tongue or upper body. 
Th is is both distressing and disabling. TD occurs in 
about 5% of patients taking long-term antipsychot-
ics every year. Th ere is no way of predicting who 
will develop it. Neither is there any reliable treat-
ment, and it can be irreversible. 
Two other rare but life-threatening adverse eff ects 
to note are:
• Neuroleptic malignant syndrome (NMS). Th e 
features are pyrexia, stiff ness, autonomic instability 
(e.g. tachycardia, fl uctuating blood pressure) and 
seizures, leading to coma. Raised serum creatine 
kinase, metabolic acidosis and leucocytosis are char-
acteristic. Th e incidence is about 1 in 500. It is fatal 
in about 10% of cases and requires urgent medical 
care. If a patient on an antipsychotic develops a fever 
without a clear cause, stop the drug temporarily and 
monitor. NMS can occur with any antipsychotic, 
especially the high-potency ones (e.g. haloperidol), 
and following a dose increase. After an episode of 
NMS, restart treatment gradually, using an atypical 
antipsychotic, and with careful monitoring.
• Prolongation of the QTc interval on the ECG, which 
predisposes to a serious arrhythmia called torsade 
de pointes, has been associated with some antip-
sychotics, probably related to inhibition of specifi c 
cardiac potassium channels. It may explain the low 
but increased incidence of sudden death report-
edly associated with antipsychotics.
Table 7.4 Side-effect profi le of selected antipsychotics
Typical dose 
(mg/day)
EPS
Prolactin 
elevation
Anticholinergic 
side effects
Sedation
Weight gain
Conventional
Haloperidol
2–12
+++
+++
+
+
−
Chlorpromazine
50–400
++
++
++
++
++
Atypical
Risperidone
2–8
+
++
−
−
++
Olanzapine
5–20
−
−
−
+++
+++
Clozapine
300–900
−
−
+
+++
+++
EPS, extrapyramidal side effects.

72 
Treatment
Atypical antipsychotics
Atypical antipsychotics are widely used as first-
line agents instead of the conventional drugs (Ta-
ble 7.5) compares to two classes of antipsychot-
ics. Side-effect profiles that differentiate three 
widely used atypical antipsychotics are shown in 
Table 7.4.
• Th ere is no good evidence that, as a group, atypical 
antipsychotics are more eff ective than convention-
al antipsychotics. 
• Risperidone has the best long-term evidence for 
effi  cacy and, unlike other atypical antipsychotics, 
is available as a depot injection.
• Olanzapine has the next largest body of evidence 
for its eff ectiveness and may be slightly more eff ec-
tive than atypical agents other than clozapine; its 
sedative eff ects can be useful. Equally, it probably 
has a greater propensity to cause metabolic syn-
drome (see below).
• Amisulpride may have some effi  cacy against nega-
tive symptoms.
• Quetiapine is very sedating and has an increasing 
evidence base in the treatment of bipolar depres-
sion.
• Aripiprazole has a diff erent mode of action, it is a 
dopamine partial agonist. Th is means it ‘stabilizes’ 
dopamine – antagonizing it when levels are high 
and mimicking it when dopamine is low.
However, atypical antipsychotics also have po-
tential disadvantages (Table 7.5):
• Weight gain. Th is varies between drugs, and also 
occurs with some typical antipsychotics. Clozapine 
and olanzapine are the worst, with mean weight 
gains of about 5 kg over 6 months. A genetic poly-
morphism in the 5-HT2C receptor may contribute 
to individual vulnerability to weight gain.
• Hyperglycaemia and type 2 diabetes. Th ere is an 
increased incidence of type 2 diabetes in patients 
with schizophrenia, their relatives, and in people 
taking antipsychotics. It is now known that atypical 
drugs (particularly olanzapine and clozapine) can 
induce hyperglycaemia and insulin resistance.
• Th e above two elements are part of metabolic 
syndrome, which also comprises dyslipidaemia 
and hypertension. It markedly increases risk of 
death from cardiovascular disease, and should be 
screened for before and during treatment with any 
antipsychotic. Various monitoring guidelines have 
been produced; one is summarized in Table 7.6, 
along with the principles of management.
• Stroke. Atypical antipsychotics should not be 
used routinely in dementia because of some 
Table 7.5 Atypical compared with 
conventional antipsychotics
Advantages of atypical antipsychotics
Fewer EPS (defi nite)
Greater overall tolerability (probable)
Lower risk of tardive dyskinesia (probable)
Greater overall effi cacy (unlikely)
More effi cacy against cognitive symptoms (possible)
More effi cacy against depressive symptoms (possible)
More effi cacy against negative symptoms (unlikely)
Disadvantages of atypical antipsychotics
Metabolic syndrome more likely (probable)
Weight gain more likely (probable)
Type 2 diabetes mellitus more likely (possible)
Stroke more likely in the elderly (possible)
Specifi c advantages of clozapine
Effi cacy in treatment-resistant schizophrenia (defi nite)
Reduced risk of suicide in schizophrenia (probable)
Specifi c disadvantages of clozapine
Risk of agranulocytosis
Need for regular blood tests
EPS, extrapyramidal side effects.
Table 7.6 Metabolic syndrome: monitoring 
and management in patients taking 
antipsychotics
Before treatment
History of hypertension, cardiovascular disease, 
diabetes, obesity
Blood pressure and pulse
Weight and height (to calculate BMI)
Waist and hip circumference (and the ratio)
Glucose and lipid levels (do not need to be fasting)
Glycosylated haemoglobin
Agree responsibilities with GP (who will monitor, who 
will treat)
Every clinic appointment
Weight (calculate BMI)
Waist and hip circumference (and the ratio)
Blood pressure and pulse
Every 3 months for fi rst year, then annually
Glucose and lipid profi le
Annually
Glycosylated haemoglobin
Management of abnormalities
Advice and information, e.g. on dieting, exercise
Switch to antipsychotic with less propensity to 
metabolic syndrome
Treat diabetes, hypertension, hyperlipidaemias in usual 
way

Treatment 73
evidence that they increase the risk of stroke 
(Chapter 13). Caution should also be applied in all 
elderly patients.
Clozapine
Clozapine is a unique antipsychotic, being effective 
in 30% of patients with schizophrenia resistant to, 
or intolerant of, all other antipsychotics. Unlike in 
depression, treatment resistance in schizophrenia 
is clearly defined: it is a failure to respond to two 
6-week treatment trials of antipsychotic medi-
cation (at least one of which is an atypical antipsy-
chotic). Clozapine may also reduce suicide risk in 
schizophrenia.
• It is not clear how clozapine achieves its greater 
effi  cacy. It may block dopamine receptors in a dif-
ferent way, or it may be the particular combination 
of additional receptors that it blocks.
• Clozapine does not have clearly greater effi  cacy 
against negative or cognitive symptoms.
Unfortunately, clozapine causes agranulocytosis. 
Although rare (1–2%), it means that:
• Clozapine is reserved for patients with schizophre-
nia who have not responded to, or are intolerant of, 
at least two other antipsychotics.
• Regular (weekly) blood tests are mandatory to 
monitor the white cell count, and patients must 
be registered with a monitoring service. This 
means the drug often needs to be stopped if 
the white cell count falls; it also makes the drug 
expensive.
• Other important side eff ects of clozapine are 
weight gain, metabolic syndrome, hypersaliva-
tion and sedation. Seizures can occur at high dose. 
Plasma levels can be monitored.
Anticholinergics
Th ese drugs (e.g. procyclidine, benztropine) are 
used to counteract EPS resulting from the use of an-
tipsychotics. Th ey have no therapeutic role in them-
selves.
• Mode of action. Th ey block muscarinic receptors. 
Th eir use may seem paradoxical given that other 
side eff ects of antipsychotics are attributed to the 
same action (Table 7.3). Th e rationale is that they 
restore a dopaminergic–cholinergic balance in the 
basal ganglia.
• Practical usage. Procyclidine can also be given 
parenterally to reverse acute dystonias.
• Side eff ects. Can exacerbate psychosis and cause 
delirium, memory impairment and euphoria. Th e 
anticholinergic side eff ects of the antipsychotic 
may be worsened.
• Cautions and contraindications. Prophylactic 
and long-term use, though widespread, should 
be avoided for three reasons: (1) the effi  cacy of 
antipsychotics is maximal at a dose below that at 
which EPS occur, so reducing the dose is the logi-
cal response to these side eff ects; (2) the long-term 
use of anticholinergics may increase the risk of 
tardive dyskinesia; and (3) anticholinergics may 
be misused because of the euphoric eff ect so it is 
important to establish the objective presence of 
EPS rather than rely on patient self-report. 
Drugs for dementia
Several drugs are now licensed to treat Alzheimer’s 
disease (Chapter 13). Th ey have a small, benefi cial ef-
fect on cognition in the short to medium term, but do 
not modify the course of the disease.
Cholinesterase inhibitors
Acetylcholinesterase inhibitors (e.g. donepezil, riv-
astigmine, galantamine) are used in the treatment of 
mild to moderate Alzheimer’s disease.
• Mode of action. Inhibit the synaptic breakdown of 
acetylcholine, which is decreased in Alzheimer’s 
disease and is necessary for memory and cognitive 
functioning. Galantamine also stimulates nicotinic 
cholinergic receptors.
• Uses. Modestly improve cognitive function. Do not 
modify the disease process.
• Practical usage. Limited to specialist clinics and 
require formal assessments before and during 
treatment, including tests of cognitive, global and 
behavioural functioning, and activities of daily 
living.
• Side eff ects. Anorexia, nausea, vomiting and diar-
rhoea can occur.
N-Methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) 
receptor antagonists
Memantine is licensed for moderate and severe Alz-
heimer’s disease.
• Mode of action. Memantine blocks the eff ects of 
glutamate at the NMDA receptor, decreasing the 
potential neurotoxic eff ects of increased glutamate 
that may occur in Alzheimer’s disease.
• Practical usage. As for cholinesterase inhibitors.
• Side eff ects. Usually well tolerated but may cause 
dizziness, headache and hallucinations.

74 
Treatment
Drugs for substance dependence
Drugs are available to help withdrawal, maintain ab-
stinence or control intake of various substances. Th e 
benefi cial eff ect of these drugs is relatively modest.
Alcohol dependence
Disulfi ram (Antabuse)
• Mode of action. Interferes with alcohol metabo-
lism by blocking one of the enzymes involved. If 
alcohol is consumed, acetaldehyde accumulates, 
leading to fl ushing, headache, choking sensations, 
tachycardia and anxiety.
• Uses. As a deterrent to drinking alcohol in people 
motivated to use the drug.
• Practical usage. Usually employed in specialist 
practice in combination with non-drug treatments.
• Side eff ects. Sedation and nausea.
• Cautions and contraindications. Avoid in heart dis-
ease, suicide risk, psychosis or severe liver disease.
Acamprosate
• Mode of action. Unknown, probably acts via GABA 
and glutamate receptors.
• Uses. Used to reduce craving in abstinent patients.
• Practical usage. Used in specialist practice, in 
combination with other non-drug treatments.
• Side eff ects. Diarrhoea, nausea.
Opiate dependence 
Opiate agonists
• Mode of action. Methadone is an opiate agonist 
with a half-life of around 24 hours. It is an eff ec-
tive substitute for other opiates such as heroin. 
Buprenorphine is a partial agonist, eff ective in 
patients with moderate dependence, but which 
may precipitate withdrawal in patients with severe 
dependence.
• Uses. To reduce craving and withdrawal symp-
toms.
• Practical usage. Used by specialists in combination 
with other medical and psychological treatments.
• Side eff ects. Drowsiness, nausea and vomiting, 
constipation, respiratory depression.
• Cautions and contraindications. Acute respira-
tory depression or raised intracranial pressure.
Opiate antagonists
• Mode of action. Naltrexone blocks the eff ects of 
opiates and precipitates withdrawal symptoms.
• Uses. To block the eff ect of opiates in patients after 
withdrawal.
• Practical usage. Used only in specialist clinics at a 
usual dose of 50 mg daily.
• Side eff ects. Nausea and vomiting.
• Cautions and contraindications. Do not use in 
patients currently dependent on opiates or with 
acute hepatitis or liver failure.
Prescribing in specifi c groups
Special care is needed when prescribing for patients 
who are pregnant or breastfeeding, and in children or 
the elderly. Many drugs are not approved for use in 
these groups, but nevertheless are widely used. As a 
rule:
• Choose a well-established drug, and the lowest 
possible dose.
• Consult the British National Formulary or other 
expert source fi rst.
• Review the need for, and contraindications to, 
every drug.
• Ensure the patient (or carer) is aware of possible 
side eff ects.
• Monitor closely. If in doubt, stop drug and review.
Pregnancy
Strike a balance between the wish to avoid all drugs 
for the sake of the foetus, and the potential adverse 
eff ects on mother (and foetus) of leaving the psychi-
atric disorder untreated. Few drugs are established as 
completely safe in pregnancy (or when breastfeed-
ing), so use all drugs cautiously and ensure that the 
mother is fully aware of the known risks and benefi ts, 
and also the uncertainties.
• Antidepressants. TCAs and SSRIs (and ECT) are 
not contraindicated. Th ere is some evidence of 
an increase in the risk of congenital malforma-
tions and persistent pulmonary hypertension with 
SSRIs, and the use of TCAs near term may result in 
a ‘twitchy’ baby. Th e dose requirement increases in 
the third trimester. 
• Mood stabilizers. As a rule, avoid lithium and val-
proic acid, especially around conception and fi rst 
trimester, due to a small but clear teratogenicity 
risk. Use of lithium near term may result in neona-
tal hypothyroidism.
• Anxiolytics and hypnotics. Th ese are best avoided.
• Antipsychotics. EPS may occur in the baby if these 
are taken near term.
Breastfeeding
Most drugs are excreted into the breast milk. Th ere-
fore, weigh up the need for medication against the 

Treatment 75
mother’s wish to breastfeed and the risks of doing so. 
As in pregnancy, always proceed with caution and 
seek expert advice.
• Antidepressants. TCAs (especially amitriptyline, 
imipramine) and SSRIs are probably safe. MAOIs 
are not recommended.
• Mood stabilizers. If lithium is used, the baby should 
be monitored. Carbamazepine, valproate and lam-
otrigine are probably safe.
• Anxiolytics and hypnotics. Avoid benzodiazepines 
as they can make the baby lethargic and cause fail-
ure to thrive.
• Antipsychotics. Th ese can sedate the baby and are 
not recommended.
Children
Th e prescribing of psychotropic drugs for children is 
best left to child psychiatrists. See Chapter 16.
The elderly
In general, prescribe at lower doses or increased in-
tervals to compensate for the slower metabolism and 
excretion in the elderly. Always consider medication 
as a cause of delirium (Chapter 13).
• Antidepressants. TCAs may cause delirium (due to 
their anticholinergic eff ects) and falls (due to pos-
tural hypotension). SSRIs are therefore preferable 
if sedation is not needed.
• Mood stabilizers. Th ese are not contraindicated.
• Antipsychotics. Best avoided in dementia (see above).
• Anxiolytics and hypnotics. Notorious for causing 
delirium and falls. Avoid.
Other biological 
treatments
Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT)
ECT is an eff ective and safe treatment for severe de-
pression although it can have some negative eff ects 
on cognitive function, especially memory. Its bad 
press refl ects understandable fears, misinformation 
and its past misuse. Current guidelines are intended 
to ensure its use is limited, and made as safe, eff ective 
and acceptable as possible.
• Mode of action. Unknown. ECT has many eff ects 
in the brain. It may act on monoamines, producing 
the same result as antidepressants.
• Clinical indications. ECT has the best evidence 
of effectiveness in severe depression including 
depressive stupor and depressive psychosis. The 
response is often better than drug therapy and 
may be dramatic. It is also used for puerperal 
psychosis and treatment-resistant depression 
and mania.
• Practical usage. Obtain informed consent, or use 
the Mental Health Act (MHA). Always do a physi-
cal examination, and obtain an ECG and routine 
blood tests fi rst in addition to testing cognitive 
function. During a brief general anaesthetic with 
muscle relaxant, an electric charge (∼300  mC) is 
passed across the head to produce a generalized 
seizure of 30–60 seconds. Treatment can be bilater-
al, with one electrode on each temple, or unilateral 
into the non-dominant hemisphere. Bilateral ECT 
is slightly more eff ective but causes more short-
term memory impairment. ECT is usually given 
twice a week for 6–12 treatments. A good response 
is predicted by a greater severity of depression, and 
a past response to ECT.
• Side eff ects. Anaesthetic eff ects – nausea, dry 
mouth and headache. Memory loss occurs for 
the hours surrounding the seizure. Signifi cant 
long-term memory loss is sometimes reported by 
patients although overall memory often improves 
with the remission of depressive symptoms; objec-
tively, subtle defi cits in recall of personal memo-
ries may occur (but it is unclear if this is due to 
ECT or to the depressive disorder). Nonetheless, it 
should be discussed when obtaining consent. No 
neuropathological eff ects of ECT have been found, 
even following multiple treatments.
• Cautions and contraindications. Few, and mainly 
related to anaesthetic risk. Avoid if the patient has a 
suspected intracranial lesion (as intracranial pres-
sure rises during seizure). ECT can be given in con-
junction with antidepressants and antipsychotics. 
ECT is extremely safe, with a mortality rate of 5 per 
100 000 treatments.
Psychosurgery
In the 1940s and 1950s – prior to the introduction of 
antidepressants and antipsychotics – thousands of 
patients each year were operated on to sever path-
ways between frontal lobes and limbic structures. 
Psychosurgery is still used very occasionally for in-
tractable OCD and depressive disorder, but only after 
wide consultations under the MHA and never with-
out informed consent. Modern stereotactic proce-
dures avoid most of the earlier complications (haem-
orrhage, seizures and death).

76 
Treatment
• Recent case series suggest worthwhile improve-
ment in one-third of patients – at the expense of 
some frontal lobe impairment, and with continu-
ing ethical concerns about the principle.
Psychological treatments 
(the psychotherapies)
All medical treatments require an interaction be-
tween doctor and patient. Th is interaction is a major 
determinant both of the patient’s satisfaction with 
the consultation and of their subsequent adherence 
to the recommended treatment. ‘Psychotherapy’ in 
the sense of a helpful relationship is consequently a 
part of all medical practice, whether the doctor real-
izes it or not. However, the term is normally applied 
to specifi c psychological treatments, the main ones 
being psychodynamic psychotherapy, behavioural 
therapy, cognitive therapy and cognitive behavioural 
therapy (CBT). We fi rst consider non-specifi c factors 
common to all psychotherapies, and then the specifi c 
characteristics of each one.
Factors common to all 
psychotherapies
All psychotherapy is based on general or non-specifi c 
therapeutic factors. Th e therapist:
• Is credible and has a plausible rationale for what 
they do.
• Behaves in an empathic and interested fashion.
• Instils hope of improvement in the patient.
Similarly, to be successful, all forms of psychother-
apy need attention to several practical issues:
• Select the right therapy for the right patient. Take 
account of factors predictive of good outcome to 
psychotherapy in general (e.g. motivation) as well 
as pros and cons of a specifi c therapy.
• Prepare the patient for therapy. Many people have 
either no idea, or the wrong idea, of what psycho-
therapy is and what it involves.
• Ensure the therapy is available. Many treatments 
are not widely available, or have long waiting lists.
The evidence base for 
psychotherapy
Psychotherapies have been less well evaluated 
than drugs, partly due to the practical diffi  culties 
of doing so and partly because of the absence of 
pharmaceutical industry funding for trials. However, 
there have now been many good randomized trials 
and systematic reviews, and there is good quality evi-
dence for specifi c psychotherapies, especially cogni-
tive and behavioural therapies, in several disorders, 
as outlined below.
Adverse effects of psychotherapy
Like all medical treatments, psychotherapy can have 
adverse as well as benefi cial eff ects. Th ese are more 
likely with poorly trained and unsupervised thera-
pists and with therapists who are in a position to ex-
ploit the patient.
• Even well-delivered therapy can be ineff ective or 
harmful. For example, it is harmful for patients 
who have suff ered a trauma to be required to talk 
about it in great detail to a therapist (so-called 
debriefi ng).
Simple forms of psychotherapy
Simple psychotherapies are formalized versions of 
the therapeutic component of all doctor–patient 
relationships, as mentioned in Chapter 1 and at the 
start of this section.
• Psychoeducation is the provision of information 
to people to help them to understand and cope 
with the illness. Psychoeducation may take place 
individually or in groups, and will usually take the 
person’s own strengths and coping strategies into 
account.
• Counselling is a loosely defi ned activity whereby 
people are helped to overcome or cope with life’s 
problems. Th e counsellor serves as a support, a 
facilitator of emotional expression, a source of 
information and as someone off  whom ideas can 
be bounced. Counselling is provided in many set-
tings, mostly non-psychiatric. Th ere is evidence for 
its short-term eff ectiveness in mild neuroses and 
stress-related disorders.
• Supportive psychotherapy is a formalized version of 
what a good friend might provide: listening, accept-
ing and encouraging. All health professionals – as 
well as relatives and friends – provide supportive 
psychotherapy whether they realize it or not. It 
does not aim to produce change, but rather to help 
people cope with adversity or insoluble problems 
over a sustained period.
• Problem-solving therapy is a structured mix of 
counselling and CBT. It helps the patient learn to 
deal actively with life’s problems – by specifying 
them, selecting an option for tackling each one, 

Treatment 77
trying out solutions and reviewing the eff ect. It is 
eff ective in mild neurotic and depressive disorders 
and can be given eff ectively by GPs and nurses.
The major types of specifi c 
psychotherapy
Th e major psychotherapies can be divided into two 
classes: those that are descendants of psychoanalysis 
(i.e. psychodynamic psychotherapy) and those that 
are based upon behavioural and cognitive theories. 
Th e key diff erences are highlighted in Table 7.7.
Psychodynamic psychotherapy
Psychodynamic therapy is usually a time-intensive 
and lengthy process that may go on for months or even 
years. With the arrival of the more evidence-based, 
briefer (and more widely available) psychotherapies 
outlined below, psychodynamic psychotherapy now 
has a lesser role, and its provision on the NHS is very 
limited. Nevertheless it remains important to know 
about its principles and its contemporary indications. 
Several psychodynamic concepts also remain useful 
throughout medicine (Box 7.4).
 Box 7.4 Psychodynamic concepts of 
continuing value
• Transference. The feelings and attitudes a 
patient develops toward their therapist. They 
are considered to have been transferred onto 
the therapist from another relationship, usually 
that with a parent. It is important to consider 
transference during any doctor–patient 
relationship, especially if a patient starts to 
behave in an unexpected or unusual way (e.g. 
inappropriate signs of affection, or threatening 
self-harm if an extra appointment is not given).
• Counter-transference. The feelings the 
therapist may develop toward the patient (e.g. 
excessive involvement, attraction or dislike). 
Counter-transference is a response to the 
patient’s transference but is also infl uenced 
by the therapist’s own past experiences and 
relationships. It is important for all doctors to 
be aware of the emotions invoked in them by 
patients, to try to understand their origins and 
ensure they do not affect their ability to treat the 
patient effectively.
• Psychological defence mechanisms (see 
Table 6.2).
Th e principles of psychodynamic psychotherapy 
are:
• Emotional and interpersonal problems result from 
unconscious processes, driven by psychological 
mechanisms and internal representations (of peo-
ple and things) developed early in life.
• Th e therapist is particularly interested in the 
patient’s pattern of previous relationships, evi-
denced most directly by the way the patient inter-
acts with the therapist (transference; Box 7.5).
Table 7.7 Comparison of the two major classes of psychotherapy
Psychodynamic psychotherapy
Other psychotherapies
Examples
Psychoanalysis
Psychodynamic therapy
Behaviour therapy
Cognitive behavioural therapy
Focus
Unconscious phenomena
Observable phenomena and behaviour
Time focus
The past (as evidenced in the present)
The present
Aim
Insight and self-understanding, thence altered 
interpersonal behaviour
Direct, practice-driven change in 
behaviour and/or cognitions
Practical issues
Therapist listens and interprets
Sessions unstructured
Therapist explains
Sessions highly structured
Therapist
Extensive training (years)
Key is therapist’s skills and attributes
Briefer training (months)
Key is adherence to treatment manual
Duration
Unspecifi ed, can be prolonged (years)
Agreed number of sessions (e.g. 8)
Effi cacy
Largely unknown
Proven in trials
Main indications
Diffi culties with relationships
Some personality disorders
Depressive disorders
Neuroses and somatoform disorders
Eating disorders

78 
Treatment
• Th e therapist makes interpretations about what 
the patient says, and draws connections between 
events and feelings, which he or she conveys to the 
patient.
• During therapy, the patient is expected to gain 
insight into their emotions and behaviour as a 
result of the interpretations.
• Th e therapeutic eff ect may emerge directly from 
greater self-understanding, and be promoted 
(reinforced) by new patterns of behaviour that 
arise from it.
Psychodynamic therapy is now used mainly for 
people with ‘personality diffi  culties’, especially re-
current problems with relationships. It also has a 
role in chronic neuroses and depressive disorders 
resistant to other drug and psychological treat-
ments. It should be avoided in people with paranoid 
or antisocial personality disorder, and in those with 
psychosis.
• Brief psychodynamic psychotherapy compresses 
psychodynamically oriented therapy into a more 
feasible 10–20-session course. Th e therapist takes a 
more active role than in traditional psychoanalysis 
and focuses on particular issues. Th ere is evidence 
for its effi  cacy in depression.
Behaviour therapy
Behaviour therapy arose from the behavioural 
theories of experimental psychology. The central 
idea is that adaptive behaviours can be learned and 
maladaptive behaviours unlearned. It is effective 
in anxiety disorders (especially phobias and OCD) 
and in behavioural problems in people with learn-
ing disability. 
Exposure is a key component of behavioural treat-
ment. Either the patient is reintroduced (re-exposed) 
to a situation or behaviour they have come to avoid 
(e.g. an agoraphobic leaving the house), or they learn 
to stop an inappropriate, excessive response (e.g. re-
current hand washing in OCD). Exposure is usually 
graded (graded exposure).
• Sudden and prolonged exposure (fl ooding) – such 
as shutting a claustrophobic in a lift until the panic 
subsides – also works, but is too unpleasant for 
routine use.
Th e elements of graded exposure are:
• Th e therapist assesses the problem behaviour, its 
antecedents and consequences. She or he explains 
the nature of the treatment and its rationale to the 
patient.
• A step-by-step programme is developed jointly 
with the patient. Homework tasks are set which re-
expose the patient to the situation to a degree that 
produces a tolerable level of anxiety. Th e patient 
fi nds that each extra exposure increases anxiety, 
but that it then subsides. In this way the patient is 
desensitized to the stimulus.
• Subsequent sessions review progress and prob-
lems, and set the next series of tasks.
 Clinical scenario
Mr Q had not been out of his house for 2 years, 
fearful he might faint in the street. His therapist 
elicited a detailed account of the problem, how 
it started and its effect on Mr Q. She explained 
what behavioural treatment was and how it 
worked. She agreed a plan with Mr Q to do a 
task he felt he could just manage: to walk to his 
front gate and stand there for 20 minutes. He felt 
anxious doing so, but achieved this goal several 
times in homework sessions. He found that as he 
stood there the anxiety subsided. He was then 
encouraged to move to the next steps by walking 
increasing distances from his house. He was able 
to do the shopping again, which reinforced his 
feeling of success. During the agreed 12 sessions 
he made steady progress that was maintained 
thereafter.
Many other treatments and techniques are based 
on the premise that changing behaviour and other 
bodily functions, such as muscular tone and pos-
ture, helps mental well-being. They include relaxa-
tion training, assertiveness training, biofeedback 
and social skills training. They are available in 
occupational therapy and physiotherapy depart-
ments, from private therapists and by using self-
help manuals.
Cognitive therapy
Th e aim of cognitive therapy is to correct inaccurate 
or unhelpful ways of thinking, with the aim of improv-
ing mood, reducing anxiety and allowing return to 
normal behaviour. Th e main components are:
• Th e therapist obtains a detailed description of 
the problem, paying particular attention to the 
thoughts (cognitions) the patient has when expe-
riencing the problem.
• Th e therapist provides an explanation (formula-
tion) of the role of cognitions in perpetuating the 
problem to the patient.
• Th e patient is then taught how to become aware 
of and to challenge the negative and inaccurate 

Treatment 79
cognitions and to practise thinking in more accu-
rate and helpful ways.
• Th e therapeutic techniques include education 
about the role of cognitions and their consequenc-
es on emotion and behaviour; becoming more 
aware of the occurrence of particular thoughts and 
inferences using diaries; and doing ‘experiments’ 
to test cognitions against alternatives.
 Clinical scenario
Ms R had a depressive disorder. Her therapist 
helped her identify a number of negative 
cognitions that made her feel depressed (including 
‘nobody likes me’ and ‘there’s no point trying to 
change anything, it won’t help’). The therapist 
formulated the depression as being maintained 
by the effect of these cognitions on her mood and 
behaviour. He helped Ms R become aware of the 
distorted and negative slant to her cognitions. Ms 
R was helped to make alternative cognitions (‘not 
everybody likes me but I have evidence that some 
people do’ and ‘some things probably will help 
and if I don’t try I won’t fi nd out’) and practised 
challenging the thoughts and replacing them 
with more positive ones. She became skilled at 
doing this and her mood and activity improved. At 
follow-up a year later she remained well, and was 
using the techniques she had learned whenever 
she felt negative cognitions or low mood creeping 
back.
Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT)
In practice, cognitive and behavioural treatments are 
usually combined as CBT. In phobic anxiety, for ex-
ample, this would involve working both on cognitions 
and on graded exposure. Th ere is good evidence for 
the effi  cacy of CBT (with varying proportions of C and 
B) in many disorders:
• In mild to moderate depressive disorder, CBT is at 
least as eff ective as antidepressant drugs.
• In panic disorder and phobic anxiety, CBT is prob-
ably the most eff ective treatment; the benefi ts are 
more persistent than with anxiolytics, and avoid 
the problems of the latter.
• Th ere is good evidence of effi  cacy in other neuro-
ses, including somatoform disorders and OCD.
• A modifi ed form of CBT is the most eff ective treat-
ment in bulimia nervosa.
• CBT has some eff ect against psychotic symptoms 
in schizophrenia.
• Th ere is inconsistent evidence that CBT prevents 
relapse in bipolar disorder.
Other psychotherapies
Hybrid therapies
Th e distinction between the two major types of thera-
py in Table 7.7 is oversimplifi ed and there are several 
hybrid therapies (Figure 7.2), and other therapies that 
have additional components. None is widely avail-
able in the UK.
• Cognitive analytical therapy (CAT) combines a 
cognitive approach and psychoanalytic concepts. 
It is used in depression and other conditions.
• Interpersonal therapy (IPT) uses cognitive, behav-
ioural and psychodynamic concepts and tech-
niques to focus on the patient’s relationships and 
the problems arising from them. Limited evidence 
suggests similar effi  cacy to CBT in depression and 
bulimia nervosa.
• Dialectical behavioural therapy (DBT) was devel-
oped specifi cally for people with borderline per-
sonality disorder. It combines psychoeducation 
with behavioural skills training, creating a strong 
therapeutic relationship.
• Eye movement desensitization and reprocessing 
(EMDR) is used in people with post-traumatic 
stress disorder. Mentalisation based therapy is 
used for people with borderline personality dis-
order. It helps people to understand that thoughts 
and feelings relate to mental states not just in 
themselves but also in others.
Group therapy
Many of the psychotherapies have been adapted to 
treat several people at once. Group therapy originat-
ed from the view that it is therapeutic to share experi-
ences and feelings, and to examine the relationships 
that form in a group.
• Most therapies including CBT can be given eff ec-
tively in a group format for the same indications as 
individual therapy. Some patients like groups but 
others don’t.
Figure 7.2 Links between the psychotherapies.
Brief
psychodynamic
therapy
Cognitive
behavioural
therapy
Cognitive
analytical therapy
Interpersonal therapy
Psychodynamic
psychotherapy
Cognitive
therapy
Experimental psychology
Psychoanalysis
Behavioural
therapy

80 
Treatment
• A therapeutic community is a form of psycho-
dynamic group therapy where the participants 
are resident for 6–12 months. It is mainly used in 
attempts to treat personality disorder.
Family therapy
Family therapy is based upon the theory that the prob-
lem is located in the family rather than in the (child) 
patient. Th e family ‘system’ is therefore the therapeutic 
target. Psychodynamic, behavioural and other con-
cepts are used. Th ere is some evidence for its effi  cacy 
in children with conduct disorder, substance misuse, 
eating disorders, schizophrenia and bipolar disorder.
Social treatments
Social factors have major roles in the aetiology and 
maintenance of many psychiatric disorders. Social 
factors also determine the environment in which 
therapy is given and aff ect its outcome. Equally, so-
cial treatments – intervening to change some aspect 
of the person’s circumstances – are themselves im-
portant therapeutic interventions.
Acute social interventions
• Psychiatric admission is a major social intervention. 
In general admission is reserved for those for whom 
community treatment is no longer feasible because 
the risk to themselves or others is too great or if there 
is a risk of ongoing deterioration in their health. 
Admission can be traumatic for patients particularly 
if it involves detention under the Mental Health Act 
(see Chapter 19). In all instances the least restrictive 
means of providing treatment should be sought.
• Crisis intervention is provided by specialist teams 
who provide home treatment and support in 
order to prevent admission to hospital. Th ey pro-
vide intensive input to patients in the community, 
including brief psychological interventions, medi-
cation, home visits and telephone support.
Social interventions during 
psychiatric care
Practical social interventions are needed at some 
stage in most patients’ care.
• Accommodation and fi nancial problems are com-
mon. Help with practical matters such as hous-
ing, rescheduling debts, etc. can be therapeutic 
by reducing the stressors that are maintaining the 
disorder. Increasingly this form of support is pro-
vided by voluntary organizations such as the Citi-
zens’ Advice Bureau.
• Family support and education can be an important 
part of care, even if specifi c family therapy is not 
being carried out.
• Social isolation is often a problem for people with 
psychiatric illness. Th is can be addressed by home 
visits, attendance at day centres, putting the person 
in touch with self-help groups, etc.
• In chronic psychiatric disorder, social and occu-
pational skills and self-confi dence are often dam-
aged. Rehabilitation involves continuing support 
of the kinds outlined above, as well as more exten-
sive interventions such as sheltered accommoda-
tion and supported employment.
The wider social environment
Preventing domestic violence, child abuse and un-
employment would no doubt improve the psycho-
logical well-being of the population. Whilst such 
utopian (‘primary prevention’) goals are not relevant 
for the management of individual patients, there are 
measures that can aff ect their prevalence or impact:
• Public education. To increase awareness of psychi-
atric disorders, and decrease the stigma attached 
to them and to their treatment.
• Social policy. Political decisions alter the social fabric 
and infl uence behaviours associated with psychi-
atric disorder. For example, taxation aff ects alcohol 
consumption, and legislation determines the extent 
of compulsory treatment. Some events are, however, 
beyond control – for example, the eff ect of national 
football results on rates of self-harm.
 KEYPOINTS
• Psychiatric disorders are treated with drugs 
(psychopharmacology) and/or psychological 
methods (psychotherapy). Social interventions 
are also important.
• The choice of treatment depends upon the 
diagnosis and on other contextual factors, 
including the patient’s preference and history, 
and treatment availability.
• There is good evidence for the effi cacy of 
most commonly used drugs, but all also have 
limitations and side effects. CBT is of proven 
benefi t for several disorders but has limited 
availability.
• Involve patients fully in treatment decisions.

Treatment 81
 FURTHER READING
Anderson I, Reid IC (2006) Fundamentals of Clinical 
Psychopharmacology. Informa Healthcare.
Stahl SM (2011) Th e Prescriber’s Guide (Stahl’s Essen-
tial Psychopharmacology), 4th edn. Cambridge 
University Press.
Taylor D, Paton C, Kapur S (2011) Th e Maudsley Pre-
scribing Guidelines in Psychiatry, 11th edn. Wiley-
Blackwell.
 SELF-ASSESSMENT
1 An 18-year-old boy presents with auditory 
hallucinations and believes there is a conspiracy 
to have him murdered. He is, however, eating 
and drinking suffi ciently and feels safe with his 
parents. You diagnose a fi rst episode of psychosis 
(schizophrenia). What would be your fi rst line of 
treatment?
a Olanzapine 
b Clozapine
c ECT
d Referral for CBT
e Lithium
2 A 72-year-old lady has become severely depressed 
after the death of her husband. She believes her 
body is rotting away. She has stopped eating and 
drinking and is becoming very frail. What would be 
your preferred treatment modality?
a Olanzapine 
b Clozapine
c ECT
d Referral for CBT
e an SSRI antidepressant
3 A 28-year-old offi ce-based secretary fi nds herself 
becoming increasingly anxious about leaving home. 
She worries about fainting and ‘making a fool’ of 
herself in crowds. She has panic attacks when 
she tries to leave the house. What would be the 
preferred treatment?
a Benzodiazepines
b Olanzapine
c Referral for CBT
d ECT
e an SSRI antidepressant

Psychiatry Lecture Notes, Eleventh Edition. Gautam Gulati, Mary-Ellen Lynall and Kate Saunders. © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 
2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
8
Psychiatric services and 
specialties
Learning objectives
✓ To be able to describe the various psychiatric subspecialties and 
services available to patients and the roles of individuals within the 
patient’s care team
Th is chapter covers how psychiatric services are or-
ganized in the NHS. It is via these services that the 
treatments discussed in this book are delivered. It 
then describes the main features of the various psy-
chiatric specialties.
• Psychiatrists see only a small (and rather unrepre-
sentative) fraction of all people suff ering from psy-
chiatric disorders, and the services provided are 
‘biased’ accordingly. In particular, the perspective 
from general practice – where most patients with 
psychiatric needs are managed – is very diff erent. 
Th is issue is covered in Chapter 18.
• Service organization and service delivery in psy-
chiatry vary markedly from one healthcare system 
to another. As with mental health legislation, there 
are also some diff erences within the NHS between 
England and Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland.
Organization of 
psychiatric services
Trends in service delivery and 
organization
Over the past 30 years, psychiatric services have pro-
gressively moved out of psychiatric hospitals (asy-
lums) to the other settings shown in Figure 8.1. Th e 
shift of psychiatry to the community has occurred for 
several reasons:
• Th e community is where psychiatric disorders pre-
sent, and provides their context.
• Public preference and social attitudes.
• In-patient care is sometimes unnecessary and may 
sometimes be harmful.
• Economic and political pressures.
Despite these trends, in-patient care remains 
an important component of psychiatry for several 
groups:
• Assessment of suspected severe psychiatric 
disorder.
• Th ose at signifi cant risk of suicide.
• ‘Asylum’ for those in crisis.
• Th ose who may be dangerous to others as a result 
of psychiatric disorder.
• Treatment of acute schizophrenia, mania and 
severe depression.
• Longer term care of some patients with 
dementia, chronic schizophrenia and learning 
disability.
As the number of psychiatric hospital beds has 
fallen, the threshold for admission has risen and an 
increasing percentage of in-patients are psychotic, 
disturbed and detained compulsorily. This is espe-
cially true in inner cities, and has stimulated efforts 

Psychiatric services and specialties 83
to ease the pressure on in-patient facilities. Re-
search suggests that admission can be avoided in 
approximately 40% of cases by using day hospitals 
or ‘crisis teams’. Crisis teams are generally available 
24 hours a day, 7 days a week. They comprise a va-
riety of mental health professionals (psychiatrists, 
community psychiatric nurses, social workers, etc.) 
and provide short-term, intensive packages of care 
to patients in the community, avoiding the need for 
admission.
Making the move from hospital to community-
based care has posed problems and has led to a gap 
between the intention and reality of community 
care:
• Hospital services have been removed before com-
munity services are fully in place.
• Community care is not in fact a cheap option, and 
has been under-resourced.
• A considerable burden is placed upon relatives and 
carers.
• It is diffi  cult to provide care for some groups of 
people – the homeless, those with complex psychi-
atric and social problems, and those whose illness 
interferes with adherence to treatment.
Psychiatric
subspecialties
- Forensic
- Learning disability
 - Child and adolescent
- Speciality community
addictions service
- Old age psychiatry
Community mental
health team
- Psychiatrist
- Psychiatric nurse
 - Clinical psychologist
- Social worker
- Occupational
therapist
Psychiatric hospital
- Day hospital
- Inpatient
Local authority
services
- Benefits
- Housing
Criminal justice
system
- Probation services
- Court diversion
schemes
- Prison mental health
services
Self-help
- Manuals
- Internet
Voluntary sector
- Drop in centres
- Help lines
- Advocacy
General hospital
- A&E department
- Outpatient clinic
- Liaison psychiatry
Primary care
- General practitioner
- Practice nurse
- Improving access to
psychological therapies
Private health care
Family and friends
Crisis intervention
services
Patient
Figure 8.1 Psychiatric services.

84 
Psychiatric services and specialties
Community care
Logically, this term should refer to the management 
of all psychiatric problems outside a hospital setting; 
numerically this would mainly comprise common 
psychiatric conditions (depression, anxiety, etc.) 
managed by GPs. Usually, however, community care 
means care within psychiatric services – patients who 
tend to be more severely and chronically ill, espe-
cially with schizophrenia, severe mood disorder and 
comorbid conditions.
Th e main features of contemporary community 
care in psychiatry are:
• Psychiatric problems are managed at the patient’s 
home, in GP surgeries or in local mental health 
centres. To facilitate this, the psychiatrists usu-
ally divide their responsibility into geographical 
sectors.
• Care is usually provided by a community mental 
health team (CMHT; see below).
• Management includes social interventions as well 
as drug and psychological treatments.
• Admission is reserved for severe episodes of illness 
and crises.
• Most patients are treated with their consent. A few 
need some form of legal coercion, under the Men-
tal Health Act (or similar legislation in other juris-
dictions, see Chapter 19).
Multidisciplinary teams
As psychiatry has moved into the community, there is 
a trend towards the specialty becoming less ‘medical-
ly dominated’. Some psychiatrists now work as mem-
bers of multidisciplinary CMHTs, as one of many 
‘mental health professionals’. However, it remains 
the role of the psychiatrist to provide leadership to 
the clinical team. Th e psychiatrist’s particular roles 
in the team generally centre on making diagnoses, 
prescribing medication, the use of the Mental Health 
Act (although psychiatrists are no longer necessarily 
the ‘Responsible Clinician’), taking medico-legal re-
sponsibility and acting in a supervisory role to other 
members of the clinical team.
Th e other members of multidisciplinary teams 
usually comprise:
• Community psychiatric nurses (CPNs). CPNs per-
form much of the day-to-day psychiatric work 
of the CMHT. CPNs are often the designated key 
worker (see below); they do many of the initial and 
follow-up assessments and they give medication. 
Some have additional therapeutic skills (e.g. in 
CBT) and are called nurse practitioners.
• Social services departments have statutory respon-
sibilities aff ecting psychiatric patients, which social 
workers attached to the team fulfi l. For example, 
the social worker takes the lead role in assessing 
social circumstances and arranging accommoda-
tion, helping with benefi ts, etc. Some social work-
ers are Approved Mental Health Professionals, with 
particular roles under the Mental Health Act.
• Secretary/administrator. Teams generate a lot of 
paperwork and its members are often out and 
about. A central person who handles the admin-
istration, takes messages and arranges meetings is 
therefore a key fi gure.
• Clinical psychologist. Many teams have a clinical 
psychologist, who helps in assessments and in pro-
viding psychological treatments.
• Other team members may include occupational 
therapists, support workers, accommodation offi  c-
ers, befrienders, etc.
• Voluntary organizations and self-help groups, 
though not formally part of the CMHT, provide 
important additional sources of support and 
help for many people – including those with 
needs but who are not receiving formal psychi-
atric care.
The key worker
Every patient under the care of more than one mem-
ber of a multidisciplinary team has a key worker (the 
actual term used may vary) who:
• is usually a CPN or social worker;
• coordinates and administers treatment;
• knows about local resources and how to access 
them;
• liaises with the GP and other agencies;
• assists in planning and monitoring of the care 
package, usually as part of the care programme 
approach (CPA; see below);
• informs others of changes in the patient’s mental 
state or needs.
The Care Programme 
Approach (CPA)
Th e way in which adult mental health services are 
delivered in the community varies markedly be-
tween countries, due to diff erences in the structure of 
health and social care services, and the relationship 
between them. It is also subject to rapid changes in 
policy, emphasis and terminology.
Since 1991 the specified model for community 
psychiatric care in the United Kingdom has been 
the CPA. The aim of the CPA was to improve and 

Psychiatric services and specialties 85
standardize the planning and provision of care for 
psychiatric patients. The key aspects of CPA are 
that:
• It starts with a detailed assessment. Th is covers 
psychiatric, medical and social needs, and assess-
ment of risk to self and others.
• A key worker is assigned.
• A care plan records the identifi ed needs, how 
they will be tackled and by whom. Th e care plan 
is drawn up in consultation with the patient and 
nearest relative. Both get a copy, as do all the pro-
fessionals involved.
• Progress of the case is monitored by the key worker, 
who reports regularly back to the CMHT.
• Formal ‘CPA meetings’ are held to review and plan 
care, usually 6-monthly. Th e meetings involve all 
people/agencies involved in the case, together 
with the patient, and carers or signifi cant others 
who the patient wishes to be present. Th e record 
of the meeting, and decisions made is then sent to 
all parties.
• All patients have a right to refuse CPA, unless 
detained under the Mental Health Act.
Until 2008, CPA applied to all patients. Now it 
has been restricted to those with a wide range of 
needs from a number of services, or who are at 
most risk. Ultimately this has made little difference 
in practice.
• Regardless of whether the CPA ‘badge’ is in use, 
the principles of good communication within the 
CMHT, inclusion of the patient and their signifi -
cant others in care decisions, and careful assess-
ment of the patient’s medical and social needs, 
should always be applied.
Other services
Assertive outreach is another form of community care 
‘package’, with smaller caseloads per staff  member 
and more intensive support than the usual CMHT. 
According to research Assertive Outreach Teams have 
little eff ect on in-patient admissions but are signifi -
cantly better than CMHT care in maintaining engage-
ment with diffi  cult-to-reach patients.
Early Intervention is a service designed for pa-
tients in the fi rst episode of a psychotic illness, or 
those at high risk of developing psychosis. Th ese 
services normally work with patients for a fi xed pe-
riod of time (e.g. 3 years) before handing care over 
to another agency (e.g. CMHT or GP). Th ere is some 
evidence that Early Intervention Services can re-
duce length of admission, number of relapses and 
suicide.
Psychiatric specialties
Psychiatric subspecialties are delineated by the pa-
tients’ age and/or the type of disorder:
• General adult psychiatry
• Psychiatry of old age (psychogeriatrics)
• Child and adolescent psychiatry
• Liaison psychiatry (psychological medicine)
• Substance abuse
• Forensic psychiatry
• Learning disability
Th e main elements and distinguishing features of 
each specialty are now described. Most of the main 
features of service organization noted above (e.g. 
move to community care, CMHTs, etc.) are common 
across the various specialties.
General adult psychiatry
Adults with psychiatric disorders are looked after 
by general adult psychiatrists unless their problems 
come into the domain of another subspecialty, and 
their care is transferred to it. Th e precise boundaries 
of general psychiatry will depend on the availability 
of specialist services. Schizophrenia and other psy-
choses have traditionally been the focus of most gen-
eral psychiatry services. Although this remains the 
case, general adult psychiatrists increasingly work in 
partnership with primary care, and assist GPs in the 
management of patients with the more common psy-
chiatric disorders.
 Clinical scenario
Ms D is 27 and has been admitted informally with 
schizophrenia. At the ward round, Rob, a CPN 
from the CMHT, agrees to be her key worker. Ms 
D has been made homeless and unemployed 
and remains vulnerable to abuse and neglect. 
Rob liaises with the social worker and sorts out 
fi nancial arrangements and accommodation in 
a group home, and, with her consent, contacts 
Ms D’s parents with whom she had lost touch. 
A pre-discharge CPA meeting is held, at which 
all professionals, Ms D, and her parents are 
present. After discharge, Rob visits weekly, giving 
Ms D her depot medication and monitoring her 
mental state. The psychiatrist sees Ms D every 
3 months or whenever there is cause for concern. 
An exacerbation of her illness is managed at 
home with support and increased medication. 
Rob begins therapy with Ms D’s family, who 

86 
Psychiatric services and specialties
are supportive but have become over-involved. 
However, Ms D relapses and is found wandering 
the street in a state of neglect. She is detained 
under Section 3 of the Mental Health Act. When 
almost ready for discharge, a CPA meeting plans 
her future care.
Psychiatry of old age 
(psychogeriatrics)
Most old-age psychiatrists deal with the whole range 
of psychiatric disorder in the elderly and not just de-
mentia.
• Concurrent medical problems and medications 
aff ect the presentation and management of psychi-
atric disorders. For example, constipation is com-
mon in the elderly and is therefore a less useful 
diagnostic sign for depression; it may also produce 
delirium and may limit the dose of antidepressant 
that can be given.
• Psychiatrists in old-age CMHTs have close ties 
with both geriatric medicine and social services. 
Th is is necessary given the prevalence and nature 
of dementia and the frequency of associated 
physical and social problems of the elderly men-
tally ill.
 Clinical scenario
Mr A is 75 and has become forgetful. He lives 
with his healthy wife. A domiciliary visit revealed 
cognitive impairment and depressive symptoms. 
A trial of antidepressants did not help, and his 
cognitive impairment has got worse. Routine 
investigations were negative and you diagnose 
probable Alzheimer’s disease. An occupational 
therapist visits to assess his daily living skills. 
His wife can care for him with help from ‘meals 
on wheels’ and visits from a CPN. You liaise with 
the GP regarding Mr A’s leg ulcers (which make 
him delirious when infected); the GP prescribes 
antibiotics and contacts a district nurse. Two years 
later Mr A has become severely demented and 
aggressive, seemingly in response to hallucinations. 
His wife is not coping. The psychologist gives 
advice about managing his behaviour, which settles 
with this. You help his wife by organizing day care 
and a 2-week respite admission for him. The next 
year she dies. Mr A is admitted to a nursing home. 
A social worker sorts out the fi nances. Six months 
later Mr A breaks his hip. After discussion with his 
son, conservative management is agreed on. Mr A 
is kept comfortable in the nursing home and dies 
the next day.
Child and adolescent psychiatry
Children’s psychiatric problems diff er in important 
respects from those of adults, and the approach to 
their assessment and management is also diff erent 
(Chapter 16).
• A child psychiatrist requires a detailed under-
standing of physical and psychological develop-
ment. Some are also trained in paediatrics.
• Th e fi rst referral to child psychiatric services may 
come from the GP, paediatrician or school educa-
tional psychologist.
• A child psychiatry team includes specialized social 
workers, nurses and psychologists. Some of the 
team may concentrate upon family therapy.
• On the rare occasions when in-patient care is need-
ed, other members of the family may be admitted 
too, to help in evaluation. Th e in-patient team 
includes teachers who assess the child’s problems 
in an educational setting, as well as continuing the 
child’s education whilst in hospital.
 Clinical scenario
L is a 15-year-old girl who has previously been 
known to community child and adolescent mental 
health services. She has a 2-year history of an 
eating disorder, and has lost a lot of weight in the 
last 3 months. She has a long history of self-
harm and has taken six non-lethal overdoses of 
paracetamol in the last few months. In addition she 
reports the development of depressive symptoms. 
She was subject to sexual abuse at the hands of a 
teacher at primary school. She lives with her parents 
and younger sister, who report that they are fi nding 
it hard to cope at home and fear for L’s safety. After 
discussion with her family, CPN and other members 
of the clinical team it is agreed to admit L informally 
to the adolescent unit for further assessment and 
treatment. She attempts to abscond on the second 
day of her admission and is found to have made 
a noose from her bedding. A Mental Health Act 
assessment is arranged and she is subsequently 
detained in hospital under Section 2. She undergoes 
some family therapy sessions with her parents 
and sister and an experienced psychologist and 
is treated with antidepressant medication. There 
is also input from a dietician. Her Section 2 is 
converted to a Section 3 (for treatment) after 3 
weeks. Her weight returns to the normal range and 
her depressive symptoms gradually remit, as do her 
self-harming and suicidal ideation. She is eventually 
discharged back to her family home after a 3-month 
admission.

Psychiatric services and specialties 87
Liaison psychiatry (psychological 
medicine)
Liaison means link, and liaison psychiatrists provide 
an important link between psychiatric services and 
medical and surgical services. Such linking services 
are often referred to as departments of psychological 
medicine. Th ey are usually based in general hospi-
tals and are principally concerned with three patient 
groups:
• People who present to A&E having self-harmed. 
Some hospitals have trained counsellors to carry 
out screening of all self-harm patients; elsewhere it 
is left to the medical or nursing staff  to decide when 
to refer to a psychiatrist.
• Patients whose doctors suspect they have a psy-
chiatric problem (such as delirium, depression or 
substance misuse) contributing to, arising from or 
complicating their medical disorder.
• Patients whose somatic symptoms are unexplained 
by demonstrable medical disease.
Liaison psychiatrists off er specialist opinions on 
these patient groups; they may then off er treatment 
themselves, or refer on to other local psychiatric ser-
vices.
 Clinical scenario
You are asked to see Mr B in A&E. He is 49 and has 
taken an overdose. He is not suicidal but does have 
depressive and anxiety symptoms. You suspect 
he has an adjustment reaction after recent life 
events. You offer him an appointment next week, 
give him a number to call if he feels the urge to 
self-harm again, and phone his GP. On review, the 
severity of depression becomes clearer. He starts 
antidepressants. You discuss the case with the local 
CMHT who take over his care. Six months later 
you are called to see him on a surgical ward where 
he is awaiting a cholecystectomy. The houseman 
discovers his psychiatric history and wants your 
opinion on his mental state. Mr B is fi ne, but you 
note that his antidepressant (a monoamine oxidase 
inhibitor) may interact with analgesics. You alert the 
anaesthetist.
Substance abuse psychiatry
Abuse of alcohol and drugs leads to a wide range 
of psychiatric disorders and related problems 
(Chapter 14), which are dealt with by this subspe-
cialty (also known as specialist community addictions 
service). Increasingly they work in conjunction with 
CMHTs (e.g. in patients with dual diagnoses of mental 
illness and substance abuse) and other organizations 
(e.g. charities off ering psychosocial interventions). 
Th e workload comprises:
• Management of psychiatric disorder resulting from 
alcohol or drug abuse.
• Management of the psychological and social con-
sequences of substance misuse. Many people have 
complex and multiple needs that both cause and 
result from their substance abuse.
• In-patient care for detoxifi cation (in some units).
• Outpatient maintenance and detoxification pre-
scribing (e.g. methadone) and prescription of 
other medications linked to substance abuse 
(e.g. disulfiram and acamprosate in alcohol 
abusers).
• Advice and support for people wanting to stop 
abusing drugs or alcohol.
• Advice to other doctors managing patients in 
whom substance abuse may be a factor.
• Public education and local health initiatives about 
the dangers of drug and alcohol abuse.
Counsellors and outreach workers play important 
roles in this specialty in addition to the CPNs and so-
cial workers. Considerable eff orts are made to make 
contact with people with drug or alcohol problems 
who are unwilling to attend a medical setting. Coop-
eration with physicians is important because of the 
medical problems that often coexist.
 Clinical scenario
Mr C presented to the emergency department 
having suffered a seizure. While in hospital, 
he became agitated and confused and was 
diagnosed with delirium tremens (due to 
alcohol withdrawal). After his recovery, a liaison 
psychiatrist referred him to the drug and alcohol 
clinic. You take a history and discuss his medical 
condition with his GP. He is given information 
about alcohol and introduced to a CPN who 
will visit regularly to review progress and give 
support. A social worker investigates his benefi t 
problems and contacts his ex-wife about access 
to his children. Mr C does not want medication 
to help him abstain. Things go well until he loses 
his job. He starts to drink heavily and drops out 
of care. He turns up later wanting admission 
for detoxifi cation. Needle marks are noticed. 
He admits to injecting heroin and is found to 
be hepatitis B positive. He again cuts down his 
alcohol and denies taking other drugs thereafter. 
He gets a new job and his wife returns to him. He 
has had no relapse when seen a year later.

88 
Psychiatric services and specialties
Forensic psychiatry
Forensic means ‘of the courts’. All psychiatrists 
become involved in forensic issues for various 
reasons:
• Writing psychiatric court reports or attending court 
on behalf of a patient.
• Assessment of local off enders/prisoners with 
suspected psychiatric disorder. Court diversion 
schemes are being developed to reduce the delay 
such people experience before receiving psychiat-
ric help.
• A forensic history (e.g. of assault) may aff ect man-
agement decisions even if not directly related to 
current psychiatric problems.
Forensic psychiatrists concentrate on work in three 
areas:
• Psychiatric assessment of persons charged with 
serious crimes.
• Providing treatment for convicted prisoners with a 
psychiatric disorder. Th is includes running psychi-
atric care in Regional Secure Units and the Special 
Hospitals (e.g. Broadmoor).
• Giving advice to other psychiatrists encountering 
forensic issues – for example, when assessing dan-
gerousness.
In practice, the decision as to when a patient with a 
‘forensic history’ should be transferred to the forensic 
psychiatric services depends on the crime, the likeli-
hood of recidivism, the nature of mental disorder and 
the availability of resources.
 Clinical scenario
Mr R is a 30-year-old gentleman. He has a history 
of paranoid schizophrenia and substance misuse 
and has been under the care of local CHMT and 
community addictions service. He has been 
remanded into custody on suspicion of attempted 
murder having stabbed a fellow resident at his 
shared accommodation. You have been asked to 
see him by a CPN from the Prison Mental Health 
Inreach team, who has concerns about Mr R’s 
mental state. Mr R reports that he stopped taking 
his oral antipsychotic medication 2 weeks prior 
to the stabbing. In prison he presents as fl oridly 
psychotic and has refused all oral medication in 
prison as he believes staff are trying to poison him. 
He is aggressive towards prison staff. You decide to 
transfer him urgently to his local medium secure unit 
under the Mental Health Act for further assessment. 
Given the severe nature of Mr R’s mental illness he 
is felt suitable for a Hospital Order with Restrictions 
at time of sentencing. He spends 3 years in a secure 
hospital and undergoes psychological intervention 
targeted at previous violence, substance abuse and 
relapse prevention alongside holistic rehabilitation. 
He is prescribed a depot antipsychotic and 
is eventually discharged to semi-supported 
accommodation under the care of the community 
forensic mental health team.
Learning (intellectual) disability 
psychiatry
Th e defi nition of a learning (or intellectual) disability 
is an IQ below 70 with diffi  culties in adaptive func-
tioning. Th e diffi  culties must have occurred before 
the age of 18. 
Learning Disability (LD) services have a range of 
patients with a variety of IQs from mild (IQ 55–70) to 
profound (IQ less than 20). Th ere is usually a sepa-
rate team that cares for those up to 18 years of age fol-
lowed by ‘transition’ into adult services. LD services 
tend to be ‘lifelong’ services caring for those with LD 
into old age. 
Specialist services are required due to:
• Diff erences in presentation of psychiatric condi-
tions, especially in those with lower IQs.
• Th e high rates of sensitivities those with LD have to 
psychiatric medications and the high rate of polyp-
harmacy for a variety of conditions.
• Th e high incidences of those with autistic spec-
trum disorders.
• Th e high incidence of epilepsy. 
• Physical conditions that can occur with certain 
genetic syndromes as well as ‘behavioural pheno-
types’.
• Safeguarding issues around vulnerable patients.
• Th e close relationship necessary between social 
services and psychiatric services.
Part of the role of the LD team is to advocate and 
educate in the area of LD. It is often necessary to liaise 
with other health teams when, for example, the pa-
tient is admitted as an in-patient to a general hospital. 
Th e Mental Capacity Act is used on a daily basis, and 
LD psychiatrists are often asked to assist in complet-
ing assessments for everything from capacity to con-
sent to complicated medical procedures to capacity 
to consent to marriage.
 Clinical scenario
Mr C is a 30-year-old man with a moderate LD 
(IQ of 50) who communicates using makaton. 
He lives in a supported living house with three 

Psychiatric services and specialties 89
other residents. He has no psychiatric history. 
Carers who have known him for 10 years report 
occasional episodes where Mr C becomes agitated 
and aggressive. He hits anyone who comes 
close to him during these episodes but does not 
target anyone in particular. After a period of about 
30 minutes, this behaviour resolves. Mr C is seen 
by a psychiatrist from the Learning Disabilities 
team, who requests an EEG, which shows epileptic 
activity. He is treated with sodium valproate and 
the episodes do not recur.
Groups with special 
psychiatric needs
Because of their circumstances, several groups have 
particular psychiatric needs, or are more likely to 
have needs unmet by the services.
The homeless
Diffi culties
• Multiple social and medical needs
• High prevalence of psychiatric disorder, especially 
schizophrenia and substance misuse
• Lack of a supportive network – family, friends, 
GP
• Hard to engage in treatment and follow-up
Solutions
• Flexible CMHT care packages
• Outreach workers
• Realistic goals
Ethnic minorities
Diffi culties
• Psychiatric disorder harder to diagnose because of 
cultural diff erences in presentation
• Language barrier
• Concerns about racial prejudice and stigmatiza-
tion
• Increased rates of some psychiatric disorders
Solutions
• Awareness of cultural diff erences in how psychi-
atric disorders present, and of their social signifi -
cance in diff erent cultural groups
• Trained interpreters
• Staff  refl ect the ethnic make-up of the community
People with psychiatric 
comorbidity (multiple psychiatric 
diagnoses)
Diffi culties
• Worsens prognosis
• Hampers management
• Increases risk of violence (especially the combina-
tion of psychosis, substance misuse and personal-
ity disorder)
Solutions
• Recognition
• Extra resources
• Prioritize management plans – target major and 
solvable problems
Healthcare workers
Diffi culties
• Reluctance to admit to psychiatric problems
• May knowingly mislead or conceal symptoms
• Increased risk of alcohol abuse and suicide
• Hard to maintain confi dentiality
• Blurring of boundaries between being a colleague 
and being a patient
Solutions
• Confi dential, publicized, accessible local arrange-
ments
• For UK doctors, the National Counselling Service 
for Sick Doctors (0870 241 0535)
Prisoners
Th e prison as an alternative setting bears specifi c 
mention due to a high degree of psychiatric morbid-
ity. Th ere are an estimated 80–85 000 prisoners in 
the United Kingdom. When compared to the general 
population, the prison population is signifi cantly 
more likely to have psychosis, major depression, 
and is approximately ten times more likely to have 
antisocial personality disorder. Despite the high 
incidence and prevalence of psychiatric disorders 
within the prison population, management of these 
disorders has been a cause for concern, with many 
cases of mental ill health going undetected and un-
treated. Prison Mental Health Inreach teams were 
established about 9 years ago with the aim of improv-
ing prisoners’ health. Th ese Inreach teams work with 
prisoners, prison offi  cers and prison GPs to diag-
nose and treat mental disorders in the prison popu-
lation. Th eir core functions also involve linking with 

90 
Psychiatric services and specialties
agencies leading up to the prisoner’s release so as to 
ensure continuity of care. Th e Mental Health Act is 
not applicable within the prison setting in England 
and Wales, and prisoners therefore need to be trans-
ferred to hospital if they are ill and in need of compul-
sory treatment.
 KEYPOINTS
• Most psychiatric patients are treated in the 
community. Care is delivered by a community 
mental health team (CMHT).
• In a CMHT, the psychiatrist works with 
psychiatric nurses, social workers and other 
disciplines.
• Psychiatric admission is reserved for cases 
where there is known or suspected severe 
psychiatric disorder coupled with a signifi cant 
risk of harm to self or others.
• A variety of subspecialty services address 
specifi c aspects of psychiatric need.
• Most psychiatric disorders are managed not in 
specialist care, but in general practice.
 FURTHER READING
A useful web-based resource by for psychiatric sub-
specialties can be accessed at the website of the 
Royal College of Psychiatrists: www.rcpsych.ac.uk
 SELF-ASSESSMENT
1 Which of the following services (a–e) would be most 
appropriate for the three cases (i–iii) detailed below?
a Standard Community Mental Health Team
b Assertive Outreach Team
c Primary Care Psychological Intervention
d Forensic Psychiatry
e Specialized Community Addictions Service
i Mr D is a 19-year-old university student. He 
presents with a 6-month history of increasing 
social withdrawal and self-neglect. His tutors 
have become increasingly concerned with his 
academic performance. During the university 
holidays his parents have brought him to see 
his GP due to his odd behaviour. He reports 
that the television has been talking about him 
and believes that his bedroom may have been 
bugged. He describes recently beginning to hear 
voices. He is subjectively distressed by these 
experiences and wishes to seek help. He drinks 
a moderate amount of alcohol and has smoked 
cannabis once or twice in the last year, but not 
for the last 3 months. He denies any other drug 
use and does not report any suicidal thoughts or 
thoughts of violence.
ii Mrs F is a 33-year-old housewife. She has 
presented to her GP with a 5-week history of 
low mood and reduced energy, and reports 
that she does not fi nd anything enjoyable. She 
has a disturbed sleep pattern but her appetite 
is normal. She denies other symptoms or any 
thoughts of suicide. There is no history of drug 
misuse and she drinks alcohol rarely. Mrs F was 
divorced 2 years ago, and continues to work 
as a secretary for a local solicitors’ fi rm. She 
is otherwise fi t and well and reports that she 
is not keen on taking medication. She reports 
that she has accessed self-help resources on 
the internet, which she has found useful in the 
past.
iii Mr G is a 45-year-old gentleman with a diagnosis 
of paranoid schizophrenia. He has had four 
admissions to psychiatric hospital in the last 
2 years, all of them under the Mental Health Act. 
He responds to oral antipsychotic medication 
but has a history of poor compliance in the 
community and limited insight into his illness. He 
lives in a shared house in the city centre and has a 
history of not attending out-patient appointments 
with his psychiatrist and of limited engagement 
with his Community Psychiatric Nurse. When 
unwell he becomes fl oridly psychotic and has 
attempted to end his life on several occasions by 
taking overdoses during relapses. He does not 
have a history of interpersonal violence. He has 
used crack cocaine in the past, although reports 
that this has not been the case for the last few 
months. During his most recent admission to 
hospital he was started on a long-acting depot 
antipsychotic injection.
2 Which of the following CMHT professionals 
(a–f) would be most appropriately involved for the 
interventions below (i–iv)?
a Psychiatrist
b Clinical Psychologist
c Community Psychiatric Nurse
d Social Worker
e Occupational Therapist
f Support Worker

Psychiatric services and specialties 91
i Mr C is a 25-year-old gentleman who is 
under the care of the local Community 
Mental Health Team. He has been taking 
oral olanzapine (an antipsychotic) medication 
for the last 3 months after being admitted 
to hospital for the fi rst time 4 months ago 
for a 5-week admission. He has a diagnosis 
of paranoid schizophrenia. He reports that 
he is no longer happy to continue taking 
his medication as he is suffering unpleasant 
side effects including excessive sedation 
and signifi cant weight gain (15 kg in the last 
3 months). He wishes to discuss alternative 
pharmacological therapies.
ii Mrs E is a 30-year-old lady with a history of 
bipolar affective disorder. She has taken lithium 
for several years and has responded well. She 
has not been admitted to hospital for the last 3 
years and lives with her husband and 8-year-
old daughter. She has recently disclosed that 
she was subject to physical and emotional 
abuse at the hands of her father during her 
teenage years. Her father died the previous 
year. She reports that she is fi nding herself 
recalling the abuse frequently and fi nds the 
thoughts extremely distressing. She has had 
thoughts of harming herself by cutting her 
wrists superfi cially to relieve emotional tension 
but has not done so. She denies any thoughts 
of suicide.
iii Mr F is a 44-year-old gentleman with a history of 
schizoaffective disorder and infrequent substance 
abuse. During a recent manic phase he spent 
signifi cant amounts of money on credit cards 
buying a new car and a motorbike. He has 
recently left his job in a local supermarket and 
has lost his tenancy on his latest accommodation 
having damaged some property during his recent 
relapse. He is currently staying with his elderly 
parents who are supportive, but there have been 
some diffi culties as they live in a small, one-
bedroom fl at.
iv Mr P is a 20-year-old student who is recovering 
from a recent episode of depression. He is 
taking antidepressants and has completed some 
cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT). He has a 
long-standing interest in athletics but struggles 
to attend his local club alone due to a high level 
of anxiety. He would like someone to accompany 
him during his fi rst few visits there.

Psychiatry Lecture Notes, Eleventh Edition. Gautam Gulati, Mary-Ellen Lynall and Kate Saunders. © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 
2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
9
Mood disorders
Learning objectives
✓ To be able to describe the presentation, aetiology, assessment and 
management of mood disorders with an emphasis on depressive 
disorder and bipolar aff ective disorder
Variation in mood is part of normal human experi-
ence. It is only when a disturbance of mood is suffi  -
ciently severe to cause impairment in the activities of 
daily living that we think of it as disordered. Th e two 
major diagnostic categories are depressive disorder 
and bipolar disorder; however, other diagnoses such 
as abnormal grief reaction and perinatal mood disor-
ders are also covered in this chapter.
Depressive disorder
Th e term ‘depression’ is widely used to describe low 
mood, but in order for a diagnosis of depressive dis-
order to be made there are a number of key features 
that must be present for at least 2 weeks (see Box 9.1). 
Low mood may be diurnal in nature (worse in the 
morning). 
 Box 9.1 ICD-10 criteria for depressive 
disorder
A
Persistent low mood; and/or
Loss of interest or pleasure (anhedonia)
Fatigue or low energy (anergia)
B
Reduced concentration and attention
Reduced self-esteem and self-confi dence
Ideas of guilt and worthlessness
Hopelessness about the future
Suicidal thoughts
Disturbed sleep
Diminished appetite
The severity of the episode is determined by how 
many of these features are present
Mild: 2 or more from A + 2 from B
Moderate: 2 or more from A + 3 from B
Severe: All 3 from A + 4 or more from B
If there has been more than one discrete episode 
this is termed recurrent depressive disorder.
Depressive disorder is also associated with a num-
ber of other symptoms that relate to these core diag-
nostic features. Th ese include psychomotor retarda-
tion (slowed movements and thinking) or agitation, 
loss of libido, constipation and amenorrhoea. Th is 
group of symptoms are sometimes referred to as 
somatic syndrome.
 Clinical scenario
Mrs J has a 6-week history of low mood, 
anhedonia, tearfulness and early morning waking. 
She is off her food and has lost weight. Every day 
is a struggle and she fi nds it hard to concentrate 
or motivate herself to go to work or look after her 
children. However, she is just about coping and 
has no suicidal ideation. She had a similar episode 
3 years ago. There is no evidence of an organic 
mood disorder. Your provisional diagnosis is that 
she has a recurrent depressive disorder and is 
currently in a depressive episode of moderate 
severity.

Mood disorders 93
Dysthymia
Th is term is used to describe longstanding mild de-
pressive symptoms. Dysthymia is often associated 
with other psychiatric or physical illness and can also 
co-occur with depression – a condition sometimes 
termed ‘double depression’.
Psychotic depression
Depression at its most severe becomes psychotic de-
pression (also called depressive psychosis). Worries 
and perceived misdemeanours become delusional 
in intensity. Th e patient may believe that they, or a 
part of them, is dead (Cotard’s syndrome); they may 
experience auditory hallucinations, which are often 
derogatory in nature. Suicide risk is high.
Psychomotor retardation can increase to the 
point where the person sits motionless and mute – 
depressive stupor. Th is often used to be fatal (from 
dehydration); it now calls for emergency electrocon-
vulsive therapy (ECT).
Psychotic depression must be distinguished from 
other psychoses (Chapter 12). Th is is based on the 
presence of other depressive symptoms, and the 
mood congruity of the delusions and hallucinations.
Atypical depression
For some individuals depression is associated with 
increased sleep, increased appetite and phobic anxi-
ety. Th is is often termed atypical depression and 
tends to respond better to monoamine oxidase inhib-
itors (MAOIs) rather than selective serotonin reup-
take inhibitors (SSRIs). 
Reactive and endogenous 
depression
Th is dated classifi cation divided depression into ‘re-
active depression’, brought on by a stressful life event, 
and ‘endogenous’ depression, supposedly occurring 
from within the patient, with no clear external cause. 
Endogenous depression was thought to be more her-
itable and more responsive to antidepressant treat-
ment. Research into depression has shown that such 
a division does not exist, and these terms are rarely 
used now.
Mixed anxiety and depressive 
disorder
Anxiety symptoms are common in depressive dis-
order and when symptoms of both disorders are 
present but not individually suffi  cient enough to 
meet criteria for a diagnosis of a mood disorder or an 
anxiety disorder this is described as a mixed anxiety 
and depressive disorder. 
Epidemiology of depressive 
disorder (Table 9.1)
Depressive disorder is common. Th e risk is greatest 
in women and in those with a positive family history. 
Th e reason for higher rates is women is unclear but 
may be related to:
• Genetic predisposition.
• Sex hormone infl uences.
• Social pressures.
• Greater willingness to acknowledge the presence 
of depressive symptoms.
• Comorbid conditions: for example, men are more 
likely to develop alcohol abuse than women.
For all other mood disorders, a mixture of genetic, 
biological, psychological and social factors contrib-
ute to varying degrees (as in the rolling vignette in 
Chapter 6). Th ere is a moderate genetic predisposi-
tion to depression (heritability ~40%), more so in ear-
ly-onset cases. Th e predisposition is shared between 
the various types of depressive disorder and overlaps 
with those associated with anxiety disorders, but not 
bipolar disorder. Th e number and identity of genes 
are unknown.
Environmental infl uences contribute substantially 
to depressive disorders (Table 9.2).
• Hypofunction of monoamine neurotransmitter 
systems – 5-HT (serotonin) and NA (noradrena-
line) – in conjunction with altered hypothalamic-
pituitary-adrenal (HPA) regulation is implicated. 
However, though these systems are all altered in 
Table 9.1 The epidemiology of depressive 
disorders
Lifetime risk
15%
1-month prevalence
5%
Sex ratio (M:F)
1:2
Mean age of onset
Late 20s
Risk to fi rst-degree relatives of a patient 
with a depressive disorder:
 of bipolar disorder
2%
 of depressive disorder
15%

94 
Mood disorders
depression, their causal role and interrelationships 
remain unclear.
• Psychological models have centred on the role 
of abnormal ways of thinking, with a tendency to 
think negatively about the self, the future and the 
world (the cognitive theory of depression). Th e 
personality attributes of ‘neuroticism’ (anxiety, 
obsessionality, poor coping with stress) and low 
self-esteem are also associated with depressive 
disorder.
• Current approaches to understanding mood dis-
orders integrate fi ndings from neuropsychology, 
psychopharmacology and neuroimaging. People 
who become depressed have negative biases in 
emotional processing, which may involve a failure 
in the frontoparietal regulation of processes in the 
amygdala. Th ese biases can be reversed by antide-
pressant drugs.
• Adverse experiences in childhood, recent life 
events and lack of social support are major risk fac-
tors.
• Focal lesions of the subcortical white mat-
ter, visible on magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI) scans, are a risk factor for late-onset 
depressive disorder and are associated with a 
poor prognosis.
• Other structural brain changes reported in depres-
sive disorder include a reduction of glial cells in 
the prefrontal cortex, and hippocampal atrophy. 
It is not known if these changes are cause, conse-
quence or coincidence.
Management of 
depressive disorders
Th e fi rst requirement is an ability to recognize de-
pression in all its guises. Depression frequently goes 
undiagnosed and untreated. Psychiatrists only see a 
small percentage of people with depressive disorder, 
so all doctors need to be confi dent about its diagnosis 
and fi rst-line treatment. Treatment depends largely 
on severity. In the absence of previous episodes, 
mild depressive episodes are often self-limiting and 
antidepressant drug treatment may not be indicated. 
Information, advice and simple measures such as 
self-help guides to problem-solving may be adequate. 
Th ere is evidence that increased physical exercise and 
activity helps. On the other hand, if there have been 
previous episodes of at least moderate severity that 
have responded to treatment, then treatment should 
be started while symptoms are still mild.
Drug treatment
Th e fi rst-line treatment for a depressive episode of at 
least moderate severity is usually an antidepressant 
drug. However, before prescribing, consider several 
factors (Table 9.3). Over 70% of depressive episodes 
respond to an antidepressant, either an SSRI or a tri-
cyclic antidepressant (TCA), although only as few as 
one-third of patients may respond to fi rst-line therapy 
(Chapter 7). Th e chances of successful treatment can 
be increased if simple measures are taken (Table 9.4).
• In practice, SSRIs are now prescribed much more 
commonly than TCAs, based mainly on tolerability 
and safety.
• Th ere are small diff erences in effi  cacy and toler-
ability between SSRIs and, while the likelihood of 
specifi c adverse events should be discussed with 
the patient, a good fi rst-line choice is sertraline.
• It is important to monitor for emergent suicidal idea-
tion as this may occur as the patient improves, and 
may actually be increased by SSRIs, especially in 
younger people. However, there is no evidence that 
SSRIs are associated with an increase in suicidal acts.
 Clinical scenario
Mr S has a moderate depressive episode. He is 
married and unemployed. He initially doesn’t accept 
he’s depressed and blames his problems on what 
he feels are his own inadequacies. You explain that 
he has a depressive disorder that would benefi t 
from treatment. You summarize what depression 
Table 9.2 Aetiological factors in depressive 
disorders
Biological
Genes
Medical conditions (organic mood disorder)
Neurochemical changes:
 Monoamine abnormalities
 Altered HPA axis function
Psychological
Childhood environment:
 Emotional deprivation
 Parental loss
Abnormal cognitions
Learned helplessness
Personality factors – neuroticism
Social
Life events
Unemployment
HPA, hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal.

Mood disorders 95
is and how antidepressants work, including their 
possible side effects and delayed onset of action, 
but also emphasize that they will help him sleep 
and reduce his anxiety. You recommend he takes 
50 mg sertraline. His wife is present and agrees to 
supervise his tablets. You will see him in a week to 
review progress. You gradually increase the dose of 
sertraline to 150 mg.
• After recovery, continue treatment at the same 
dose for at least 6 months. Th e dose is then tapered 
off  over several weeks. Continuing treatment in this 
way reduces the high risk of relapse in the months 
after a depressive episode, and tapering off  reduces 
the risk of ‘withdrawal’ symptoms.
• Th ere is no good evidence that long-term use of 
antidepressants is harmful.
 Clinical scenario (continued)
Mr S took his tablets as prescribed. His sleep 
and agitation improved rapidly. The depressive 
symptoms responded over the next few weeks, 
though it was necessary to increase the sertraline 
to 200 mg/day for a full response. He subsequently 
accepted that he had been ill, and conceptualized 
the sertraline as correcting a chemical imbalance, 
which helped him solve life’s problems more 
effectively. He no longer blamed himself for 
his redundancy and found a new job. His wife 
confi rmed the improvement. On your advice, he 
remained on medication for a further 9 months.
Psychological treatment
Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT), interpersonal 
therapy (IPT) and probably other psychological treat-
ments, such as problem-solving therapy (Chapter 7) 
or brief psychodynamic therapy, are eff ective alter-
natives to antidepressants in mild and moderate de-
pressive disorder, especially for patients who prefer 
psychological therapies to drug treatment.
• CBT is much the most widely available psycho-
logical treatment, but is nevertheless of restricted 
availability due to a shortage of trained therapists. 
New NHS initiatives using internet- and phone-
based CBT appear promising and mean that the 
treatments can be provided to more patients.
• Combining an antidepressant with CBT is a bit 
more eff ective than either alone and should be 
considered when CBT is available.
Table 9.3 Factors affecting management decisions in depression
Question
Implication
Is there a serious suicide risk?
May need admission. Use SSRI not TCA as less toxic in overdose
Are there psychotic symptoms?
Add an antipsychotic to the antidepressant, or use ECT
What are the main symptoms?
Affects choice of drug, e.g. use sedative antidepressant if insomnia
Is there a past history of response?
Use the treatment that worked last time
Is there a past history of mania?
Caution with antidepressants; consider mood stabilizer
Are there medical problems?
Avoid TCAs after recent myocardial infarction
What does the patient want?
May have a preference for drug or psychological therapy
ECT, electroconvulsive therapy; SSRI, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor; TCA, tricyclic antidepressant.
Table 9.4 Prescribing antidepressants effectively
Principle
Examples
Educate patient
About effi cacy, onset of effects and side effects, and non-addictiveness
Attend to the psychosocial aspects
Restore hope; education about depression; give practical advice
Give an adequate dose
Know dose ranges for specifi c SSRIs and TCAs
Check drug being taken
Non-adherence is common reason for non-response
Give the drug for long enough
Therapeutic trial should be 6–8 weeks, at adequate dose
SSRI, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor; TCA, tricyclic antidepressant.

96 
Mood disorders
Th ere are no established predictors of who will 
benefi t from psychological rather than pharmacolog-
ical treatment of depression. A few pointers suggest-
ing good psychotherapeutic response are:
• Depression not severe (as defi ned in Table 9.1).
• ‘Psychological mindedness’ (the ability and will-
ingness to think about psychological matters).
• Willingness to engage in therapy and carry out 
homework tasks.
• Preference for psychological treatment or reluc-
tance to take medication.
Non-response to fi rst-line 
treatment
In up to two-thirds of cases, a depressive episode 
does not respond to a fi rst-line antidepressant (or to a 
psychological treatment). If so:
• Check the antidepressant has been taken as pre-
scribed. 
• Increase to the maximum tolerated and recom-
mended dose.
• Review the case. Is the diagnosis right? Could there 
be powerful perpetuating factors, such as an endo-
crine disorder, marital strife or alcohol misuse? 
Can their impact be reduced?
If the patient has still not improved, there are 
various options to consider. Th e most common op-
tion is to switch from one class of antidepressant 
to another – e.g. SSRI to SNRI (selective serotonin 
and noradrenaline reuptake inhibitor) – or to try 
a second drug from the same class (SSRI to SSRI). 
Th ere is limited evidence in favour of either strategy. 
Alternative options, with at least some evidence of 
effi  cacy, are:
• Add lithium, if depression is severe. Th is has a good 
evidence base but the risks and drawbacks of lithi-
um limit its popularity.
• Add mirtazapine to an SSRI; the sedative eff ect of 
mirtazapine is useful if insomnia or agitation is a 
problem.
• Add a second-generation antipsychotic, such as 
olanzapine or quetiapine, especially if there are 
psychotic symptoms, or agitation and insomnia.
• Add CBT or other psychological treatment.
• Switch to an MAOI, especially in atypical depres-
sion. Remember MAOI cautions (Chapter 7).
• Psychiatric referral, if this has not already occurred 
(see below).
• Consider ECT for severe and drug-resistant 
depression.
Psychiatric referral for depression
Referral for psychiatric assessment or ongoing care of 
depressive disorder is appropriate when:
• Th e patient has not responded to treatment.
• Th ere is a substantial risk of harm to self or others.
• A second opinion on diagnosis or treatment is 
required.
• Combinations of drugs or rarely used agents are 
being considered.
• To access specialized psychological treatments, 
occupational therapy, etc.
• Th e patient is severely unwell and hospital admis-
sion or ECT may be required.
Prevention of relapse
Following an initial depressive episode patients 
should be advised to continue antidepressant treat-
ment at the same dose for at least 9 months from 
when they recovered. Continuation of an anti-
depressant after recovery cuts relapse rates by at least 
50% in patients with recurrent depressive disorder 
and should be recommended to all appropriate pa-
tients. Psychological treatments such as CBT may 
also be eff ective, by reducing negative cognitions or 
by teaching strategies for recognizing and treating re-
emergent symptoms.
• In people who do relapse, reinstitute the treatment 
that worked the fi rst time but continue it for longer. 
Some patients appear to benefi t from prolonged 
antidepressant treatment.
Prognosis
Over 50% of people who have had one depressive epi-
sode will have another. Th e more severe the depres-
sion, the worse the prognosis; most people with psy-
chotic depression suff er multiple episodes, and 10% 
never recover fully.
• Th e proportion with severe, recurrent and chronic 
illness is higher in psychiatric care than in general 
practice.
• The risk of suicide is increased at least 10-fold 
in people with depressive disorder. About 
4% of patients who have had depression will 
die by suicide, rising to 15% in those ill enough 
to have required psychiatric admission at some 
stage.
• Mortality is also increased from natural causes, 
notably cardiovascular disease, accidents and sub-
stance misuse.

Mood disorders 97
Bipolar disorder
Bipolar disorder is a relapsing and remitting condi-
tion that is characterized by the presence of periods 
of elated mood (mania/hypomania) and depressed 
mood, although the presence of elated mood alone is 
suffi  cient for the diagnosis to be made. 
 Box 9.2 Symptoms of mania
A.  Mood that is predominantly elevated, expansive 
or irritable and defi nitely abnormal for the 
individual concerned.
B.  At least three of the following must be present 
(four if the mood is merely irritable):
1 Increased activity or physical restlessness. 
2 Increased talkativeness (‘pressure of speech’). 
3 Flight of ideas or the subjective experience of 
thoughts racing. 
4 Loss of normal social inhibitions resulting in 
behaviour inappropriate to the circumstances. 
5 Decreased need for sleep. 
6 Infl ated self-esteem or grandiosity. 
7 Distractibility or constant changes in activity 
or plans. 
8 Behaviour that is ill advised or reckless and 
whose risks the subject does not recognize, 
e.g. spending sprees, foolish enterprises, 
reckless driving. 
9 Marked sexual energy or sexual indiscretions.
Hypomania
Hypomania is a happiness and zest for life in excess 
of that which is normal. Th e degree of functional im-
pairment is variable. A daily routine may be just about 
maintained, though with less need for sleep and 
more nocturnal activities (e.g. spring cleaning, writ-
ing a novel). Th ough subjectively productivity may be 
increased, tasks are rarely done well or completed. 
Concentration is impaired and distractibility is usual. 
Th e infectious gaiety easily switches to irritability.
• Hypomania may progress to a full manic episode, 
especially in those with a past history of mania.
• Note that there is no satisfactory category or 
term for manic symptoms lasting less than 4 days 
(Table 9.5).
• People whose elated mood never goes beyond 
hypomania are described as having bipolar-2 dis-
order (see Table 9.5).
Mania
In moderate and severe mania the symptoms cause 
substantial impairment of occupational and social 
functioning (Box 9.2). Th ought processes become 
disordered and jumpy (fl ight of ideas), accompanied 
by pressure of speech (p. 28). Psychotic symptoms may 
emerge. Th ese are mood congruent and grandiose: a 
patient may believe themselves blessed with special 
powers (e.g. that they can fl y or have been sent to save 
the world). Th ey may hear voices supporting these 
beliefs. Unfortunately, reality or gravity supervene, 
and people with mania do things they later regret. For 
example, they may suff er consequences of promiscu-
ity or generate huge debts.
Mixed affective states
In mixed aff ective states, manic and depressive symp-
toms coexist within the course of a day. Th e disorder 
is not rare, but it is diffi  cult to diagnose. It may be trig-
gered by antidepressant treatment in a patient with a 
tendency to bipolar disorder. Th e treatment of mixed 
states usually focuses initially on the manic symp-
toms.
Cyclothymia
Cyclothymia is a mild, chronic bipolar variation of 
mood. Like dysthymia, it is sometimes viewed as a 
personality trait. Psychiatric help is rarely sought 
since the mild mood elevations are pleasant and as-
sociated with a sense of productivity and creativity.
• A history of cyclothymia or a family history of 
bipolar disorder are signifi cant in someone 
Table 9.5 Distinguishing hypomania and 
mania
Features of hypomania
Features of mania
Present for at least 4 days
Present for at least 7 
days or needing hospital 
admission
Core features mild or 
moderate
Core features marked
Mild or moderate 
dysfunction
Substantial dysfunction
Partial insight preserved
Minimal or absent insight
No psychotic features
Psychotic symptoms 
may occur

98 
Mood disorders
presenting with a depressive episode; they 
increase the chances that the patient will actually 
turn out to have bipolar disorder. Th ey may also 
increase the risk that antidepressants induce a 
manic episode.
 Clinical scenario
Mrs J presents with depressive symptoms, but 
informs you that she recalls two periods several 
years ago when she felt elated, slept little, 
became unusually gregarious and spent money 
uncharacteristically. After each episode she was 
embarrassed and distressed by her actions, but 
she had not sought treatment. You diagnose bipolar 
(II) disorder, currently in a moderate depressive 
episode.
Bipolar disorder is strongly heritable (80%). 
The monozygotic (MZ):dizygotic (DZ) twin con-
cordance is 75:25%. Relatives of someone with 
bipolar disorder have an increased incidence of 
both bipolar and unipolar depressive disorder 
(Table 9.6).
• Many chromosomal loci and genes are impli-
cated, and overlap with those for schizophrenia 
(Chapter 13). Current leading bipolar disorder 
candidate genes include the HLA (human leu-
cocyte antigen) complex, ANK3 and CACN1C. 
There is some evidence for inheritance down the 
maternal line.
• No childhood risk factors are known. Life events 
can precipitate the initial episodes; once the dis-
order is established, its course is increasingly 
immune to environmental circumstances.
• Most 
of 
the 
neurobiological 
abnormalities 
described for depressive disorder are also impli-
cated in bipolar disorder, although there may be 
diff erences in the abnormalities in emotional pro-
cessing.
• Always consider drug-induced mania (an example 
of organic mood disorder) in young people with 
no family history of bipolar disorder. In someone 
fi rst presenting in middle age, exclude cerebrovas-
cular disease, tumours and medication side eff ects 
(Table 9.7).
Management of bipolar 
disorder
Treatment of mania and mixed 
episodes
Patients with mild manic symptoms can be success-
fully treated as out-patients, if the patient has insight 
that they need treatment. More severe mania, espe-
cially if psychotic, usually requires admission, often 
compulsorily.
• Antipsychotics (e.g. risperidone, olanzapine) or 
valproate and lithium are eff ective antimanics. 
Antipsychotics are probably slightly more eff ective, 
but cause more sedation and weight gain. Benzodi-
azepines are used, as required, for sedation.
Table 9.6 The epidemiology of bipolar 
disorder
Lifetime risk
1%
1-month prevalence
0.4%
Sex ratio (M:F)
1:1
Mean age of onset
Early 20s
Risk to fi rst-degree relatives of a patient 
with bipolar disorder:
 of bipolar disorder
10%
 of depressive disorder
15%
Table 9.7 Causes of organic mood disorder
Usually depression
Cushing’s disease
Addison’s disease
Hypothyroidism
Hypercalcaemia
Diabetes mellitus
Carcinomas
β-Blockers
Digoxin
Amphetamine (chronic)
Usually mania
Hyperthyroidism
Steroids
Amphetamine (acute)
L-DOPA
Antidepressants
Bromocriptine
Isoniazid
Either depression or mania
Multiple sclerosis
Cerebrovascular disease
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Epilepsy
Brain tumours

Mood disorders 99
• Th e choice of drug is infl uenced by the patient’s 
existing medication – they may already be on a 
mood stabilizer. If they are on an antidepressant, 
stop it. If the patient is on lithium, check the blood 
level to assess recent adherence.
• Some patients learn to recognize prodromal symp-
toms of mania (e.g. initial insomnia, increased 
energy). If so, a short course of antipsychotic or 
valproate may successfully treat the episode.
• ECT can be highly eff ective in patients with severe 
mania that does not respond to drug treatment.
Mania can last for months if untreated. Death from 
‘manic exhaustion’ was well recognized before treat-
ments became available.
Treatment of depressive 
episodes
Depressive episodes and symptoms in bipolar disor-
der (‘bipolar depression’) can cause severe dysfunc-
tion and can be diffi  cult to treat. Th ere is increasing 
evidence that optimal drug treatment of bipolar de-
pression is quite diff erent from that described for uni-
polar depression.
• Quetiapine, an atypical antipsychotic, is the 
treatment with the best evidence and can be 
highly effective, with a rapid onset of action. 
Sedation and weight gain may limit longer term 
acceptability.
• Antidepressants may be less effective than in 
unipolar depression and they should be used 
in combination with an effective antimanic 
drug (see above) because antidepressants used 
alone can precipitate mood destabilization or 
mania.
• Lamotrigine, an antiepileptic drug, is probably 
also eff ective, although it needs to be started 
slowly.
• For severe depression, antipsychotics, ECT and 
psychiatric admission may all be necessary.
Prevention of relapse
• Th e guiding principle should be that the patient 
needs to understand their own illness and learn to 
recognize signs of mood instability.
• Long-term mood monitoring by the patient can be 
extremely helpful.
• Relapses in bipolar disorder are often heralded by 
non-specifi c symptoms (e.g. deteriorating sleep), 
as mentioned above. Some patients become adept 
at recognizing and responding to these warning 
signs.
• Conventionally, long-term drug treatment is not 
off ered until a patient has had at least two manic 
episodes, or one manic and one depressive epi-
sode. However, the eff ective early treatment of 
bipolar disorder may improve its long-term out-
come, and increasingly the trend is to start long-
term treatment after one serious episode, especial-
ly when there is a family history of bipolar disorder. 
Th e decision is an important one and the patient 
should be given suffi  cient information and time to 
make a properly informed choice.
• Long-term lithium treatment is the standard 
prophylaxis for bipolar disorder and is sup-
ported by the most robust evidence. Lithium 
reduces the risk of both manic and depressive 
relapse by 40–50%. Long-term lithium treatment 
should not be initiated unless both patient and 
doctor intend to continue it for at least 2 years. 
Valproate and olanzapine also reduce the risk 
of manic relapse. Lamotrigine reduces the risk 
of depressive relapse. Other drugs such as car-
bamazepine may also be used, although the evi-
dence is limited.
• Psychological approaches such as CBT or family 
therapy may also help in preventing relapses.
Organic mood disorders
Mood disorders that have a known physical cause are 
termed organic mood disorders. Recognized causes 
of organic mood disorder are summarized in Table 
9.7. See also Chapter 13.
• Even when an organic diagnosis is made, psycho-
logical and social factors may still be relevant to 
course and treatment.
 Clinical scenario
A 65-year-old man presented with insomnia, 
anorexia, back pain and weight loss. He also felt 
fed up and irritable. The provisional diagnosis was 
depression with somatic symptoms. However, 
physical examination revealed bony tenderness 
over his lumbar spine and a hard nodular 
prostate. Blood tests showed hypercalcaemia 
and anaemia. He had metastatic carcinoma of 
the prostate. His depressive symptoms resolved 
as the hypercalcaemia was treated, along with an 
antidepressant.

100 
Mood disorders
Other aspects of mood 
disorders
Puerperal (postpartum) disorders
Th e postnatal period (puerperium) is a hormonally, 
and often psychologically, turbulent time. It is tradi-
tional to group psychiatric disorders that occur at this 
time together as puerperal disorders, partly because 
their clinical picture and management diff er some-
what from similar disorders occurring at other times.
Maternity blues
Th e ‘blues’ refer to a tearful, irritable, labile mood 
that aff ects over 50% of mothers on the third or fourth 
postnatal day. Symptoms resolve within days without 
treatment, though explanation and reassurance are 
appropriate. Th ere is no association of the blues with 
mood disorder.
• Maternity blues may be due to the precipitous 
fall in sex steroids after delivery, as well as to 
the impact of childbirth and concerns about 
mothering.
Postnatal depression
Postnatal depression tends to start within a month 
of delivery; one in seven mothers are aff ected. Th e 
symptoms are unremarkable, with the negative 
thoughts tending to focus on the woman’s perceived 
failings as a mother or on her baby’s well-being. Phys-
ical exhaustion exacerbates matters.
• As well as the standard mood and risk assess-
ments, remember to consider the mother–baby 
relationship. Postnatal depression may put the 
baby at short-term risk and, if untreated, may 
lead to problems with bonding and child devel-
opment.
• Most cases are managed at home. Use supportive 
measures, including explanation and reassurance. 
Mobilize resources (e.g. the local mothers’ group), 
and liaise with the GP, midwife and health visitor. 
Many cases resolve within a few weeks, but anti-
depressants or psychological treatment should be 
considered if the disorder is moderate or severe. 
If admission is necessary, it should ideally be to a 
mother-and-baby unit, to maintain and observe 
their relationship.
• Before prescribing antidepressants, check whether 
the mother is breastfeeding (Chapter 7).
• Postnatal depression is more common in women 
with a history of psychiatric disorder and in those 
lacking support. A postnatal change in sensitivity 
of the dopaminergic system is implicated.
Puerperal psychosis
Puerperal psychosis is a rare condition, which occurs 
in 1–2 per 1000 births. Th e disorder can be severe. 
Perplexity and a delirium-like state are characteristic. 
Onset is usually in the second postnatal week. 
• Risk factors include a past or family history of puer-
peral psychosis, a diagnosis of bipolar disorder and 
being a primigravida.
• Th e baby is at potential risk because of the moth-
er’s delusions, or because she is so preoccupied by 
her symptoms that baby is neglected. Th e assess-
ment should specifi cally address these issues.
• Admission to hospital is usually necessary. Treat-
ment is with antipsychotics and antidepressants, 
and with a low threshold for ECT – which often 
produces a dramatic response. Full recovery is 
usual, but there is a 25% relapse rate after the next 
delivery and a 50% lifetime risk.
Premenstrual syndrome
Up to 80% of women suff er from symptoms in the 
days before their period: irritability, depression, ab-
dominal bloating and breast tenderness. However, a 
specifi c premenstrual syndrome has proved diffi  cult 
to validate (and is not included in ICD-10). Th e term 
premenstrual dysphoric disorder is sometimes used 
for women with prominent psychological premen-
strual symptoms.
• If a woman complains of premenstrual syndrome, 
establish the symptoms and their relationship with 
the menstrual cycle. Ask her to keep a diary – it may 
transpire that the symptoms are present at other 
times too.
• Th ere is limited evidence that drug treatments are 
successful and the placebo response is very high. 
However, the eff ectiveness of SSRI treatment dur-
ing the premenstrual period is gaining an evidence 
base.
Other psychiatric issues specifi c 
to women
Abortion, sterilization, hysterectomy and the meno-
pause have all been said to cause psychiatric distress, 
especially mood and anxiety disorders. Th ere is no 
good evidence for any of these claims. Each of these 

Mood disorders 101
events may, however, act as stressors that are relevant 
to the understanding, presentation or treatment of a 
disorder occurring soon afterwards.
Grief
Many of the features of grief overlap with those of de-
pression. Psychiatrists and other doctors are asked to 
assess or support people during these times, so it is 
necessary to know:
• Th e characteristic psychological reactions to 
impending death and to bereavement.
• Th e features that distinguish these from depressive 
disorder.
Normal grief
People may grieve a death (bereavement) or other 
major loss, or may grieve an impending event (an-
ticipatory grief). Th e responses are forms of adjust-
ment reaction (Chapter 10). Th ree stages have been 
described:
• Shock and disbelief. On being informed of the event 
there is an initial numbness that usually lasts a day 
or two. Behaviour may be acutely disturbed.
• Preoccupation. This central phase involves a pre-
occupation with the deceased. In the early stages 
anger is common, and may be directed at doc-
tors, God or other targets of blame. Uncontrol-
lable crying, low mood, social withdrawal and 
somatic symptoms akin to those of depression 
may be pronounced. The voice or image of the 
deceased may be vividly perceived, though usu-
ally with an ‘as if’ quality rather than being truly 
hallucinatory.
• Acceptance and resolution. With time, the person 
comes to terms with the event, symptoms subside 
and life begins to return to normal. Th is phase may 
take several months to start, and several more to be 
completed. Recurrence of grief is common around 
anniversaries.
In uncomplicated grief, bereavement counselling 
and support (e.g. from Cruse) may be useful. Such 
grief should not be labelled as a disorder but viewed 
as a natural, if painful, process. Th e therapist should, 
however, be vigilant for signs of abnormal grief or de-
pressive disorder.
Abnormal (pathological) grief
Grief can be abnormal in three ways:
• Absent or delayed grief. Th ere may appear to be 
no outward signs of grief despite an event of grief-
inducing proportions (absent grief). Grief usually 
begins a few weeks later (delayed grief).
• Prolonged grief. A term used if there are prominent 
symptoms more than 6–12 months later. At this 
time, actively consider a developing depressive 
disorder and the need for treatment.
• Excessive grief. Th e intensity of grief is unusually 
great – this may refl ect the person’s closeness to 
the deceased, their personality or a depressive 
disorder.
Grief and depression
A depressive disorder occurs in one in three griev-
ing people, and is severe in one in five. It is not al-
ways easy to decide when the threshold from grief 
to depression is crossed. The distinction is made 
largely on the basis of excessive intensity or dur-
ation of symptoms, but other features may also 
help (Table 9.8). The person may need persuading 
that their suffering is no longer just the pain of nor-
mal grief but is now a depressive disorder meriting 
treatment.
Table 9.8 A comparison of depression and grief
Depression
Grief
Suicidal thoughts
Common, driven by low mood
Transient, driven by wish to be with the 
deceased
Blame for situation
Self
Other people or fate
Psychomotor retardation
Yes
No
Psychotic features
If severe; mood congruent
No, but may ‘see’ or ‘hear’ the deceased
Symptom course
Pervasive
Fluctuating

102 
Mood disorders
 KEYPOINTS
• Mood disorders involve excessive deviations 
or fl uctuations of mood. They affect 1 in 6 
people at some stage in their lives. Unipolar 
depressive disorders are much more common 
than bipolar disorder.
• The core features of depression are low mood, 
lack of energy, and anhedonia. Many other 
psychological and somatic symptoms also 
occur.
• Depression may present with somatic 
symptoms such as fatigue and weight loss, and 
should always be considered in the differential 
diagnosis of these symptoms.
• Suicidal risk needs detailed and regular 
assessment in everyone with mood disorder.
• Antidepressants are the usual fi rst-line 
treatment for depressive disorder. Give an 
adequate dose and continue for at least 9 
months after recovery. CBT is as effective 
as antidepressants for mild and moderate 
depression: availability is increasing but there 
can still be long waits. ECT is reserved for 
severe cases.
• Mania is treated with antipsychotics and/or 
mood stabilizers. Long-term treatment with the 
latter reduces the risk of relapse.
 FURTHER READING
Anderson I, Ferrier IN, Baldwin RC, et al. (2008) 
Evidence-based guidelines for treating depressive 
disorders with antidepressants: A revision of the 
2000 British Association for Psychopharmacology 
guidelines. Journal of Psychopharmacology 22(4): 
343–396.
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence 
(NICE) (2006) Clinical guideline 38. Bipolar disor-
der: Th e management of bipolar disorder in adults, 
children and adolescents, in primary and second-
ary care. NICE.
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence 
(NICE) (2009) Clinical guideline 90. Depression in 
adults (CG90). NICE.
Saunders KEA, Goodwin GM (2010) Th e course of bi-
polar disorder. Advances in Psychiatric Treatment 
16: 318–328.
 SELF-ASSESSMENT
1 Marion complains of a low mood and low energy 
which have been present for the past 6 weeks. 
She has lost approximately a stone in weight. 
She says she had a similar episode 4 years ago 
following the birth of her fi rst child. What is the 
most likely diagnosis?
a Postnatal depression
b Bipolar 2 disorder
c Dysthymia
d Depressive episode
e Recurrent depressive disorder
2 Brian is described by his wife as someone who is 
‘glass half empty’. He rarely gets enjoyment out 
of activities and expresses a generally negative 
outlook on life. However, up until the last 3 
weeks he has functioned well both at work and 
home. At present he is preoccupied with the 
fact that his bowels are rotting away and that he 
is undeserving of food. He says very little in the 
assessment and appears psychomotor retarded. 
Which is the most likely diagnosis?
a Schizophrenia
b Psychotic depression and dysthymia
c Bipolar depression
d Drug-induced psychosis
e Bowel cancer
3 Which of the following statements is true about 
bipolar disorder?
a Antidepressants are the mainstay of treatment.
b Bipolar 2 disorder is associated with the need 
for hospital admission when mood is elated.
c Bipolar disorder can be limited to episodes of 
mania.
d Bipolar disorder is more common in women.
e Puerperal psychosis is less common in women 
who have a history of bipolar disorder.

Psychiatry Lecture Notes, Eleventh Edition. Gautam Gulati, Mary-Ellen Lynall and Kate Saunders. © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 
2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
• Behaviours include avoidance and other strate-
gies intended to reduce anxiety, such as repeated 
checking.
• Somatic (‘physical’) symptoms, not explained by a 
medical disease but associated with tension, auto-
nomic arousal and hyperventilation (such as aches 
and pains, bowel disturbance and breathlessness), 
are common.
Neurotic disorders may present with the emotion 
of anxiety (e.g. attacks of panic) but may also present 
with one of the other symptoms such as cognitions 
(e.g. recurrent worries about having a serious medi-
cal condition), behaviour (e.g. the agoraphobic un-
able to leave her house) or somatic symptoms (e.g. 
palpitations).
• Neuroses are common in primary care and also in 
medical clinics where the diagnosis is easily missed 
• Neuroses are not necessarily ‘minor’ illnesses; they 
can be chronic and disabling.
Th e individual neurotic disorders are listed in 
 Table 10.1. Mild cases sometimes cannot be placed 
into any one of these specifi c categories and are best 
General characteristics 
of neurosis
Neurotic symptoms and 
syndromes
We all experience anxiety and worries. Sometimes 
these become so persistent and inappropriate that 
they can be regarded as an illness. Neurosis (‘to do 
with the nerves’) or neurotic disorders are the tradi-
tional terms for those symptoms when they are not 
due to an organic brain disease, psychosis or person-
ality disorder. Th e symptoms of neurosis are emo-
tional, cognitive, behavioural and somatic. Neuroses 
are often but not always associated with an external 
stressor.
• Anxiety is the primary emotion in all these disor-
ders, although depressed mood is often present.
• Th e cognitions are worries, fears and concerns that 
are inappropriate or excessive but (by defi nition) 
not delusional.
Neurotic, stress-related 
and somatoform 
disorders
Learning objectives
✓ To be able to describe the presentation, aetiology and assessment of 
common neuroses
✓ To be able to describe the general principles relating to the 
management of common neuroses
10

104 
Neurotic, stress-related and somatoform disorders
described as undiff erentiated neurosis or minor emo-
tional disorder.
• Depressive symptoms are common in patients with 
neurosis, and neurotic symptoms are very com-
mon in patients with depressive disorders. Indeed, 
in many patients seen in primary care, anxiety and 
depressive symptoms coexist in similar propor-
tions. A diagnosis of mixed anxiety-depression is 
appropriate for such cases.
• Culture-specifi c variants of neurosis occur. Th ese 
include amok (dissociative disorder in Indone-
sia), koro (severe anxiety about penis shrinkage 
in Chinese men) and dhat (semen-loss anxiety in 
Asian men).
Stress-related and somatoform 
disorders
The term ‘neurosis’ has been used to describe 
patients with predominantly somatic symptoms 
and also for symptoms clearly caused by stress. In 
the current classification (Table 10.1) these types 
of neurosis have each been given their own cat-
egory: somatoform and stress-related disorders, 
 respectively.
• If somatic symptoms (e.g. palpitations, pain) are 
unexplained by a medical disease or other psychi-
atric diagnosis the diagnosis is somatoform dis-
order. Th is diagnosis is controversial because of 
its assumption that such medically unexplained 
symptoms are better regarded as a psychiatric than 
as a medical condition.
• If there is a major external stressor that appears to 
explain the symptoms, a stress-related disorder may 
be diagnosed.
Diagnosing neuroses
If a patient presents with symptoms suggestive of a 
neurotic disorder, ask two questions:
1 Do the patient’s symptoms warrant any diagnosis?
• Gauge whether the symptoms are diagnostically 
signifi cant from their intensity, number and per-
vasiveness, and from the resulting dysfunction – 
are they interfering with the person’s life? – and 
do they need treatment (e.g. see social phobia)?
2 Is an alternative diagnosis more appropriate?
• Neurotic symptoms can occur as part of another 
psychiatric or medical condition, especially de-
pression, but also substance misuse, psychosis, 
eating disorders and certain organic conditions 
(e.g. anxiety due to thyrotoxicosis). Life-long 
symptoms could be indicative of an underlying 
personality disorder.
Epidemiology of neurosis
Neurosis is very common indeed, affl  icting about 15% 
of the population at any one time. Most neurotic disor-
ders are signifi cantly more prevalent in women, save for 
OCD and panic disorder. Th e onset is generally between 
early adulthood and middle age, though children may 
have neuroses. Prevalence increases with low house-
hold income. Comorbidity with depression is common.
Management of neurosis
Management should consider biological, psychologi-
cal and social factors. Neuroses all respond to certain 
drugs and psychological treatments. However, some 
neurotic disorders respond better to certain types of 
treatment than others:
• Antidepressants and anxiolytic drugs are both 
eff ective, though anxiolytics are less commonly 
used because of concerns about dependence. Anti-
depressants are eff ective even when there are few, 
if any, depressive symptoms.
• Simple psychological interventions such as reas-
surance and explanation are important. Specifi c 
psychological therapies, especially cognitive behav-
ioural therapy (CBT), are at least as eff ective as med-
ication for most neuroses and especially eff ective for 
some (e.g. panic disorder). Th e specifi c type of CBT 
used diff ers between neurotic disorders.
Table 10.1 Classifi cation of neurotic, stress-
related and somatoform disorders
Neurotic disorders (neuroses)
Anxiety disorders:
 Phobic anxiety
 Panic disorder
 Generalized anxiety
Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD)
Dissociative disorders
Neurasthenia (chronic fatigue syndrome)
Depersonalization-derealization syndrome
Stress-related disorders
Acute stress reaction
Adjustment disorders
Post-traumatic stress disorder
Somatoform disorders
Hypochondriasis
Dysmorphophobia
Somatization disorder
Other somatoform disorders

Neurotic, stress-related and somatoform disorders 105
• Social interventions such as removal of stressors 
and improvement of social support where possible 
can also be helpful.
Prognosis of neurosis
Th e majority of cases of neuroses in primary care 
are acute and transient. Psychiatrists tend to see the 
small proportion of cases that are severe, chronic or 
disabling. Th e prognosis is better when there is no 
personality disorder, the patient is strongly motivated 
to get better and the duration of the illness is short.
Aetiology of neurosis
Neuroses have a multifactorial aetiology that is best 
considered from a combination of biological, psycho-
logical and social perspectives:
• Biologically, neuroses are moderately heritable, are 
associated with alterations in the 5-HT, noradren-
ergic and associated brain systems. Neuroimaging 
studies have demonstrated altered brain function 
and even altered brain structure (e.g. hippocampal 
atrophy in post-traumatic stress disorder).
• Psychologically, cognitive factors and behavioural 
conditioning are important, especially in phobias 
and panic disorder.
• Socially, relevant factors include life stressors, 
unhelpful responses by the medical system and 
lack of social support.
Th e precise combination of these factors in an in-
dividual patient in predisposing, precipitating and 
perpetuating a neurosis can be described in an aetio-
logical formulation.
The specifi c disorders
So far, this chapter has considered the factors com-
mon to neurotic syndromes. Th e rest of the chapter 
considers factors specifi c to the individual disorders 
listed in Table 10.1.
Anxiety disorders
Th ese disorders are dominated by the emotion of 
anxiety together with the anxious thoughts, avoid-
ance behaviour and the somatic symptoms of sym-
pathetic arousal that accompany it (Table 10.2). 
Anxiety disorders are divided into three main sub-
types: phobic, paroxysmal (panic) and generalized 
(Table 10.3).
• Somatic symptoms of anxiety (e.g. chest pain) may 
cause the patient to present initially to general 
medical services.
Phobic anxiety
Phobic anxiety is said to be situational, and is largely 
restricted to the experience or anticipation of a partic-
ular situation. Th is situation may be a specifi c  concern 
(e.g. heights, spiders) or a more general one (e.g. ago-
raphobia). As a result of this anxiety the person tends 
to avoid these situations (e.g. a severe mouse phobic 
may avoid old houses or nature programmes). Al-
though avoidance produces immediate relief from 
anxiety, it is ultimately counter-productive because 
it reinforces the fear. Overcoming avoidance is there-
fore a key part of psychological treatment for phobias.
• Th e main diff erential diagnosis is from the other 
anxiety disorders. Occasionally, phobic anxiety 
may arise secondary to delusions (e.g. fear of oth-
ers because they are believed to be aliens). A pho-
bia of having a serious disease is classifi ed sepa-
rately, as hypochondriasis (see below).
• Behavioural therapy for phobia is based on graded 
exposure to the situation (either in reality or in 
imagination). In CBT, a cognitive component is 
added to help the patient more accurately evalu-
ate the dangerousness of the stimulus (e.g. a fl ight 
phobic may be encouraged to fi nd out the actual 
statistical risk of dying in a plane crash).
• Antidepressants and anxiolytic drugs have a role.
Table 10.2 Common symptoms of anxiety
Component
Prominent features
Emotion/mood
Anxiety, irritability
Cognitions
Exaggerated worries and fears
Behaviour
Avoidance of feared situations
Checking
Seeking reassurance
Somatic 
symptoms
Chest tightness
Shortness of breath
Palpitations
‘Butterfl ies’
Tremor
Tingling of fi ngers (due to 
hyperventilation)
Aches and pains
Poor sleep
Frequent desire to pass urine and 
defecate

106 
Neurotic, stress-related and somatoform disorders
Agoraphobia
One of the most common phobias is agoraphobia (lit-
erally ‘fear of the market place’) (Table 10.4). Intense 
anxiety is provoked either by open, or large, spaces 
that are crowded and diffi  cult to escape from (e.g. 
supermarket queues). Panic attacks are commonly 
associated, and having a panic attack may itself be-
come the feared situation. Th e appropriate diagnosis 
is then panic disorder with agoraphobia.
• Th e associated cognitions commonly concern 
fainting, dying or another catastrophe, rather than 
a fear of shops or spaces per se.
• Th e condition can be severe, and the avoidance 
can lead the person to become housebound.
• On average, symptoms have been present for over 
2 years before help is sought. It is most common in 
young women.
Social phobia
Social phobia is a fear of other people associated 
with anticipation of negative evaluation by them 
( Table  10.5). It must be distinguished from normal 
shyness, and from social withdrawal due to depres-
sion. In social phobia there is often a history of low 
self-esteem and a triggering incident when the person 
feels they made a fool of themselves. Th e anxiety may 
lead to shaking or blushing, which becomes a focus 
for further anxiety.
• Treatment is with CBT and antidepressant drugs, 
particularly SSRIs.
• Alcohol misuse may develop as a result of self-
medication.
 Clinical scenario
Paul is a 30-year-old man who recently presented 
to his GP complaining of anxiety symptoms. Of 
note, Paul is due to be married in 6 months’ time. 
He described how he wanted to marry his fi ancée, 
but that he feared being humiliated on the day as he 
walked down the aisle in front of a large congregation 
of people. He stated that he usually avoided large 
family gatherings or work parties, and described 
how he usually consumes alcohol to help him cope 
with these situations. Paul’s doctor diagnoses him 
with social phobia. He refers Paul for a course of 
cognitive behavioural therapy. The option of adding 
an antidepressant such as paroxetine was discussed 
but Paul is not keen on medication.
Panic disorder
Panic attacks are episodes of severe paroxysmal anxi-
ety. Th ey are associated with somatic symptoms and 
Table 10.4 Symptoms of agoraphobia
Component
Prominent features
Emotion
Situational anxiety – in shops, 
crowded large places
Cognition
Thoughts of collapsing and 
being left helpless in public
Behaviour
Avoidance of panic-provoking 
situations
Somatic symptoms
Physical sensations of panic
Associations
Strong association with panic 
disorder
Table 10.5 Symptoms of social phobia
Component
Prominent features
Emotion
Situational anxiety in social gatherings
Cognition
Being judged negatively by others
Behaviour
Avoidance of social occasions
Somatic 
symptoms
Blushing, trembling
Associations
Secondary alcohol misuse
Table 10.3 Features distinguishing the three types of anxiety disorder
Phobic anxiety
Panic disorder
Generalized anxiety
Occurrence of anxiety
Situational
Paroxysmal
Persistent
Associated behaviour
Avoidance
Escape
Agitation
Associated cognitions
Fear of situation
Fear of symptoms
Worry
Somatic symptoms
With exposure
Episodic
Persistent

Neurotic, stress-related and somatoform disorders 107
unpleasant feelings of depersonalization or dereali-
zation (Table 10.6). In panic disorder, the attacks are 
recurrent over a period of at least 1 month. Th e so-
matic symptoms may be severe and lead to a misdiag-
nosis of angina, epilepsy or other medical disorders.
• Th e diff erential diagnosis is from panic attacks 
occurring only as part of a phobia or occasional 
panic occurring as part of other neuroses and 
depressive disorder. Also certain medical conditions 
can occasionally be a cause of paroxysmal anxiety.
• CBT is very eff ective for panic. It is aimed at help-
ing the patient to see their symptoms as the result 
of anxiety and not as indicators of an impending 
catastrophe (such as a heart attack). Antidepres-
sants are also eff ective, although patients with 
panic disorder may fi nd them hard to tolerate as 
they may exacerbate panic before reducing it.
• Aetiologically, patients with panic disorder appear to 
have a low biological threshold for anxiety. Cognitive 
factors such as a tendency to catastrophically misin-
terpret somatic symptoms (e.g. ‘the chest pain means 
that I am having a heart attack’) are also important. 
Panic attacks may start during a period of stress.
Generalized anxiety disorder
Generalized anxiety is persistent anxiety associated 
with chronic uncontrollable and excessive worry 
( Table 10.7). It may fl uctuate in severity but is not par-
oxysmal (as with panic), situational (as with phobia), 
life-long (as with a personality disorder) or clearly 
stress related (as with a stress-related  disorder).
• Chronic somatic symptoms such as aches and 
pains and bowel symptoms may lead to medical 
presentations.
• Treatment is based on the same pharmacological, 
psychological and stress-reducing methods used 
in other anxiety disorders, but their effi  cacy may 
be lower.
Obsessive-compulsive 
disorder (OCD)
In OCD, obsessions and compulsions are the most 
prominent and persistent symptoms (Table 10.8), but 
one does not require both symptoms for a diagnosis. 
Th e main diff erential diagnoses are depressive disor-
der (in which obsessional symptoms are common), 
psychotic disorder (obsessions are usually regarded 
as untrue and are uncomfortable for the suff erer, un-
like delusions where beliefs are seen as a reality) and 
obsessional (anankastic) personality disorder.
• 5-HT-predominant antidepressants (SSRIs, clomi-
pramine) are eff ective, as is behavioural therapy. A 
higher dose of antidepressant than in depression is 
often required.
• If untreated, the prognosis is poor. Th e disorder is 
prone to chronicity.
• Aetiological factors include genetic vulnerabil-
ity, an anankastic personality and social stressors. 
Th e condition is perpetuated by the avoidance of 
Table 10.7 Symptoms of generalized anxiety 
disorder
Component
Prominent features
Emotion
Anxiety
Cognition
Excessive, disproportionate, 
uncontrollable worry
Behaviour
Easily startled, on edge
Somatic 
symptoms
Multiple chronic aches, headache, 
tension, sweating
Associations
Depression
Table 10.8 Symptoms of obsessive-
compulsive disorder (OCD)
Component
Predominant features
Emotion
Anxiety about the topic of the 
obsessional thought
Cognition
Preoccupation with obsession(s)
Behaviour
Compulsions
Somatic 
symptoms
Tension, especially if prevented from 
doing compulsive act
Associations
Depression, anankastic personality 
disorder, Tourette’s syndrome
Table 10.6 Symptoms of a panic attack
Component
Prominent features
Emotion
Severe, incapacitating anxiety
Cognition
Of dying, going mad or otherwise 
losing control
Behaviour
Escape
Somatic 
symptoms
Prominent symptoms of sympathetic 
arousal (Table 10.2)
Associations
Agoraphobia, depression

108 
Neurotic, stress-related and somatoform disorders
situations that trigger the obsessions, and by the 
performance of the compulsions; both of which 
stop the anxiety habituating.
• OCD is unusual amongst neuroses in being equally 
common in men and women.
 Clinical scenario
June is a 25-year-old woman who recently 
presented to her GP with a history of compulsions. 
She has fears of contamination, and washes 
her hands excessively, to the extent where the 
skin on her hand has been sore and damaged. 
She recognizes that her fear of contamination is 
excessive and unreasonable, and has attempted 
to resist carrying out her compulsive behavior, 
but to no avail. June has a history of hoarding, 
and often doubts that she has carried out routine 
actions, like turning off the cooker or locking her 
door, and this has resulted in checking behaviour, 
which has become excessive in recent years. 
She is diagnosed with obsessive-compulsive 
disorder, and offered a prescription of fl uoxetine 
as, although June is willing to participate in 
cognitive behavioural therapy, she is keen to get on 
with treatment whilst awaiting a place with a CBT 
practitioner.
Dissociative and conversion 
disorders
In dissociative disorders, also called conversion dis-
order, there is a loss of function, either psychological 
or physical, that is not explained by organic disease 
(Table 10.9).
• Th ese disorders were called dissociative because 
they were thought to represent a loss of the normal 
association between diff erent mental processes 
such as personal identity and memories, sensory 
and motor function.
• Th e term conversion was used for loss of physical 
function because of the unsubstantiated theory 
that psychological confl icts got converted into 
physical symptoms, thereby resolving the mental 
confl ict (so-called primary gain) and often provid-
ing practical benefi ts such as the attention of oth-
ers (so-called secondary gain).
• Dissociative disorders were previously known as 
hysterical; this archaic term (suggesting causation 
by a wandering uterus) has now been abandoned.
Presentations include loss of psychological func-
tion such as memory (psychogenic amnesia), wan-
dering in a trance (fugue), loss of motor function 
( paralysis, pseudoseizures) or loss of sensory func-
tion (glove and stocking anaesthesia).
• When the possibility of a dissociative disorder is 
raised, organic causes for the loss of function must 
be excluded. Th is may require extensive medical 
investigation.
• Dissociative disorders (which are regarded as origi-
nating in unconscious processes) must be distin-
guished from consciously motivated symptoms. 
Th e latter in turn are divided into factitious disor-
der, in which symptoms are produced deliberately 
to obtain medical care, and malingering, which is 
behaviour that is designed to achieve personal gain 
(see towards the end of this chapter). Deciding if 
someone is feigning illness is diffi  cult and requires 
evidence of marked inconsistency (e.g. limping into 
the consulting room and then running for a bus).
• Th e current diagnostic criteria require that there 
should be a plausible ‘psychogenic’ explanation 
for the symptoms, in terms of severe internal con-
fl icts or a traumatic life event; this is, however, 
often diffi  cult to establish in  practice.
• Th ere have been very few randomized treatment 
trials. Clinical experience suggests that important 
components of management are: (a) to accept the 
reality of the patient’s symptoms but to explain that 
they are potentially reversible; (b) to encourage a 
gradual return to normal function; (c) to treat coexist-
ing depression; (d) to refer for psychotherapy in some 
cases; and (e) to refer for physical rehabilitation for 
chronic disorders that impair motor  function.
Neurasthenia (chronic fatigue 
syndrome, or CFS)
Th e term neurasthenia is now rarely used in the 
United Kingdom or the United States but remains in 
common usage in China and some other countries. 
Table 10.9 Symptoms of dissociative disorder
Component
Prominent features
Emotion
May be suppressed, with denial 
of anxiety
Cognition
Denial of psychological impact 
of stressors
Behaviour
Loss of function
Somatic 
symptoms
Loss of function, e.g. paralysis
Associations
Acute stressors, depression

Neurotic, stress-related and somatoform disorders 109
Th ere is substantial overlap with the functional syn-
drome of chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS). Although 
classifi ed separately, neurasthenia has much in 
common with somatoform disorders, in that physi-
cal complaints predominate, no defi nite medical 
disease has been identifi ed and the presentation is 
usually to non-psychiatric services. Th e main fea-
ture is persistent, disabling mental and physical fa-
tigue, often accompanied by pain and other symp-
toms (Table 10.10).
Th e diff erential diagnosis is from fatigue associ-
ated with medical conditions and from depressive 
and anxiety disorders. A simple explanation that the 
symptoms are real and not imagined but reversible 
rather than fi xed can be helpful.
• Th ere is good evidence for the effi  cacy of CBT 
and graded increases in activity, but less for 
 antidepressants.
• Th e prognosis is often poor, with a tendency to 
chronicity. Avoidance of physical activity and 
belief in a physical cause are associated with a 
worse outcome.
• The aetiology is very controversial. Biological, 
psychological and social factors are involved. 
Biologically, there is evidence for disturbed 
cerebral 5-HT function and reduced cortisol. 
Although many patients report onset after a 
viral infection, and patients with documented 
Epstein–Barr virus (EBV) infection can develop 
a fatigue syndrome, the aetiological role of ret-
roviruses overall remains uncertain. Psychologi-
cally, depression, anxiety and excessive concern 
with symptoms leading to inactivity is common. 
Socially, a fear of a stigmatizing psychiatric diag-
nosis and widely available misinformation may 
shape patients’ illness beliefs and help-seeking 
behaviour.
• A similar constellation of symptoms is also referred 
to as myalgic encephalomyelitis (ME). Th is condi-
tion is thought by some to be better regarded as 
a neurological disorder and distinct from CFS, 
although this is also controversial.
Depersonalization-derealization 
syndrome
Depersonalization and derealization are symptoms 
that can occur in all neuroses. Occasionally they are 
the predominant feature, in which case this rarely 
used diagnostic category applies. Th e diff erential di-
agnoses include a depressive or anxiety disorder, psy-
chosis, or organic causes, especially complex partial 
epilepsy. Th e usual guidelines for managing neurosis 
apply. Antidepressants may help, but the prognosis 
for established cases is poor.
Stress-related disorders
In some cases presenting with neurotic symptoms, 
the stressor appears to be of such overwhelming 
importance in causing the symptoms that they are 
classifi ed as ‘reactions to stress’. Th e whole range of 
neurotic symptoms may occur, commonly in a diff use 
picture of distress, anxiety and depression. Th e sub-
types of stress-related disorders are:
• Acute stress reaction – beginning and ending within 
hours or days of the stressor.
• Adjustment disorder – beginning less acutely and 
lasting several months.
• Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) – a delayed 
response to an extreme stress associated with par-
ticular symptoms and especially the re-experienc-
ing of the trauma in dreams or imagination.
Acute stress reactions
Th ese are transient, but severe, emotional reactions 
immediately following an exceptional stressor (e.g. 
rape) and are colloquially referred to as ‘nervous 
shock’ (Table 10.11). Th e diff erential diagnosis in-
cludes the initial stages of other neuroses, acute psy-
chosis (behaviour can be very odd and out of charac-
ter) and delirium. Management is by removal of the 
stressor (if possible), reassurance and the provision 
of support. A short course of benzodiazepines may 
sometimes be used to reduce arousal.
• Trials show that early ‘debriefi ng’ (requiring that 
the patient tells a therapist about the stressful 
incident in detail soon after it has occurred) is 
Table 10.10 Symptoms of neurasthenia 
(chronic fatigue syndrome)
Component Prominent features
Emotion
Exhaustion, tiredness, irritability
Cognitions
Concern about fatigue and its causes, 
poor concentration
Behaviour
Avoids physical exertion
Bodily 
symptoms
Physical and/or mental fatigue after 
minor exertion, muscular pain (myalgia), 
headache, patchy sleep
Associations
Depression

110 
Neurotic, stress-related and somatoform disorders
unhelpful and may even worsen outcome for some 
patients.
Adjustment disorders
Also called adjustment reactions, these are reactions 
to stress that are more prolonged than acute stress 
reactions. Th e symptoms typically begin within a 
month of the stress and do not last longer than 6 
months (Table 10.12).
• Grief reactions and psychological reactions to 
medical conditions are types of adjustment 
 reaction.
Management includes helping the patient to ad-
dress a continuing stressor more eff ectively (perhaps 
by problem-solving therapy), discouraging unhelpful 
coping strategies such as substance misuse, and treat-
ing depressive or anxiety symptoms as necessary.
Post-traumatic stress disorder 
(PTSD)
PTSD is a delayed response to an exceptionally se-
vere traumatic event (e.g. serious road accident, major 
disaster, severe assault). It was initially described in 
 Vietnam War veterans and, more recently, it has been 
recognized in UK law as a basis for personal compensa-
tion claims. 
Th e onset may be months or years after the original 
trauma. A central feature is an involuntary re-experi-
encing of the traumatic event in nocturnal dreams or 
as intrusive ‘fl ashbacks’ often triggered by reminders 
of the trauma (Table 10.13).
Management includes treating any comorbid psy-
chiatric disorder or substance misuse, and encourag-
ing a return to normal activities. Antidepressant drugs 
are modestly eff ective. Th ere is also an evidence base 
for the eff ectiveness of trauma-focused CBT.
• A treatment called eye movement desensitization 
and reprocessing (EMDR), in which the patient 
is asked to think about an image of the traumatic 
event whilst moving their eyes from side to side, is 
also eff ective, although controversy remains about 
how it works.
• Th e prognosis for PTSD is generally good, with 
a gradual resolution in most cases. However, a 
minority of cases become chronic. Associated 
alcohol misuse and depression are common.
Somatoform disorders
Th e somatoform disorders category was created to ac-
commodate those patients who present with predom-
inantly somatic complaints where neither  depression 
and anxiety nor a medical condition  provides a better 
explanation (Table 10.14). It includes many subcat-
egories. Th ere are two main groups:
• Conditions in which the main feature is concern 
about having disease (hypochondriasis) or deform-
ity (dysmorphophobia).
Table 10.11 Symptoms of acute stress 
reaction
Component
Predominant features
Emotion
‘Dazed’
Cognition
Amnesia or denial of event
Behaviour
Overactivity or withdrawal
Somatic symptoms
Many autonomic symptoms
Association
Acute stressor
Table 10.12 Symptoms of adjustment 
disorders
Component
Prominent features
Emotion
Depression, anxiety, poor 
concentration, irritability
Cognition
Preoccupation with event
Behaviour
Angry outbursts
Somatic 
symptoms
Moderate autonomic symptoms
Associations
Chronic stressor
Table 10.13 Symptoms of post-traumatic 
stress disorder (PTSD)
Component
Prominent features
Emotion
Anxiety and irritability, numbness and 
detachment
Cognition
Repeated reliving of the event in 
images (‘fl ashbacks’) and nightmares
Behaviour
Avoidance of situations associated 
with the trauma
Somatic 
symptoms
Exaggerated startle response
Associations
Substance misuse, depression, 
severe previous stressor

Neurotic, stress-related and somatoform disorders 111
• Conditions in which the main feature is concern 
about somatic symptoms (somatization disorder, 
persistent autonomic dysfunction, persistent soma-
toform pain disorder and undiff erentiated somato-
form disorder).
To make the diagnosis of a somatoform disorder:
• Th e concerns and/or symptoms must be unex-
plained by or disproportionate to any organic 
disease, severe enough to cause distress and have 
persisted for at least 6 months.
• Depressive and anxiety symptoms are insuffi  -
cient to justify a diagnosis of depressive or anxiety 
 disorder.
• Th e symptoms are not delusional (e.g. distin-
guish from a psychotic disorder with somatic 
 hallucinations).
• Th e symptoms are not deliberately manufactured 
(cf. factitious disorder, malingering), nor is there 
prominent loss of a specifi c function (cf. dissocia-
tive and conversion disorder).
• Aetiologically, childhood deprivation and abuse 
are risk factors. A predisposition to health anxiety 
and serious (and perhaps mismanaged) illness in a 
relative are also common.
Assessment and management of 
somatoform disorders
Th e principles of managing neuroses also apply to 
somatoform disorders. However, since such patients 
(and sometimes their doctors) often believe these so-
matic symptoms indicate medical disease rather than 
a psychiatric condition, the patients may seek and 
receive medical rather than psychiatric care. Patients 
are often hostile to the idea that their symptoms are 
‘psychogenic’ or that they will benefi t from psychiatric 
treatment. Th e eff ective management of somatoform 
disorder therefore requires a close liaison between GP, 
physician and psychiatrist. Th e principles are:
• Take the patient’s somatic concerns seriously. 
Neither dismiss them as ‘just psychological’, nor 
collude with unfounded beliefs about unproven 
medical causes.
• Medical investigations should be determined by 
the doctor’s interpretation of the symptoms, not 
by the patient’s demands. People with somato-
form disorder are no more likely to die of undiag-
nosed organic disease than the general population, 
although they are at risk of harm from unnecessary 
medical tests and treatments. It is worth remem-
bering that (perhaps counterintuitively) the more 
somatic symptoms a patient has, the less likely they 
are to have a medical disease.
• Ensure a clear and consistent explanation for the 
symptoms is given that, if possible, is agreed on by 
all doctors involved.
• Treat coexisting depression and anxiety in the 
usual way.
• Antidepressants are benefi cial in most somato-
form disorders, even when there is no good evi-
dence of depression. However, their use needs 
careful explanation if they are not to be rejected as 
inappropriately ‘psychiatric’.
• CBT is of proven value but must be adapted to 
be consistent with the patient’s predominantly 
somatic concerns.
• Encourage a return to normal functioning and a 
decrease in illness behaviour.
Hypochondriasis and 
dysmorphophobia
Th e characteristic feature of these somatoform disor-
ders is a preoccupation with the possibility of having 
a serious physical disease or deformity.
• Th e main diff erential diagnoses are depressive 
disorder (in which hypochondriacal worries and 
concerns about appearance are common) and psy-
chotic disorders (with hypochondriacal delusions 
or somatic hallucinations).
Hypochondriasis
Patients with hypochondriasis are preoccupied with the 
idea that they have a serious medical condition when 
they do not. Patients repeatedly seek medical reassur-
ance and investigation, but are not reassured by either.
• Repeated requests for investigation to exclude a 
serious disease may be the presenting feature.
Table 10.14 Symptoms of somatoform 
disorders
Component
Prominent features
Emotion
Anxiety and depression usually 
present (but not predominant)
Cognition
Concern with physical symptoms, 
disease or deformity
Behaviour
Medical help seeking
Bodily symptoms Prominent, defi ning
Associations
Depressive and anxiety disorders, 
iatrogenic harm from inappropriate 
medical care (e.g. surgery)

112 
Neurotic, stress-related and somatoform disorders
• Both antidepressants and CBT can be eff ective. It 
may be necessary to help the patients to restrict 
their tendency to seek reassurance or check their 
bodies as these behaviours tend to perpetuate the 
condition.
• The prognosis is variable: transient hypo-
chondriasis is common (e.g. in medical stu-
dents), but once established the condition can 
last many years and lead to extensive medical 
 investigations.
Dysmorphophobia
This disorder, also called body dysmorphic disor-
der, is characterized by a preoccupation with a sub-
jectively abnormal physical appearance (e.g.  per-
ceived ugliness or deformity) that is not objectively 
present and often associated with avoidance of so-
cial interaction.
• Management follows the principles described for 
somatoform disorders in general. Patients often 
request cosmetic surgery, which may sometimes 
be helpful but which can also lead to further dissat-
isfaction. Specialist assessment is advisable before 
surgery is performed.
Somatic symptom disorders 
(somatization disorder and 
associated diagnoses)
Somatic symptoms, such as fatigue and pain, that are 
not adequately explained by medical disease are very 
common. When these are persistent and associated 
with disability and or distress they may appropriately 
be regarded as illnesses and consequently require a 
diagnosis. Such patients comprise about one-third of 
all attenders in medical out-patient clinics, and so are 
clinically important.
• Confusingly, medicine and psychiatry have devel-
oped parallel diagnostic systems for these prob-
lems. Medicine uses diagnoses of so-called ‘func-
tional disorders’ describing the symptoms in terms 
of the bodily system they relate to (see Table 10.15). 
Psychiatry uses somatoform diagnoses based 
mainly on the number of symptoms and their dur-
ation. Th e current psychiatric classifi cation is as 
given below.
Somatization disorder (Briquet’s 
syndrome)
These patients, almost always women, present with 
multiple different medically unexplained symp-
toms that have occurred over many years. They 
have often had normal abdominal organs  surgically 
removed, an observation that highlights the risk 
of iatrogenic harm. They have been described as 
adopting ‘illness as a way of life’. Recurrent major 
depression and personality disorder are common 
associations – indeed, some regard the condition 
as a personality disorder.
• Management is based on ‘damage limitation’ and 
containment by long-term follow-up. Th ere is no 
specifi c treatment, but active treatment of asso-
ciated recurrent depression and anxiety may be 
helpful.
• Th e prognosis is very poor. Iatrogenic problems, 
such as drug reactions and abdominal adhesions, 
may result from unnecessary medical and surgical 
interventions.
Undifferentiated somatoform 
disorder
Th is is the diagnosis used instead of somatization dis-
order when the patient has few symptoms.
Persistent somatoform pain disorder
Th is diagnosis is used when the main symptom is 
pain that is inadequately explained by a medical dis-
ease. Antidepressants are useful; tricyclic antidepres-
sants (TCAs) and selective serotonin and noradrena-
line reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) are more eff ective 
than selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs). 
CBT may be helpful.
Somatoform autonomic dysfunction
Th is is a rarely used diagnosis for cases where the 
symptoms are thought to be clearly explicable in 
terms of autonomic arousal and associated over-
breathing (e.g. breathlessness, chest pain, fl ushing, 
diarrhoea and tremor).
Functional somatic syndromes 
and their relationship to 
somatoform disorders
Th e medical classifi cation of functional somatic 
symptoms (Table 10.15) is a parallel one to the 
psychiatric classifi cation of somatoform disorders. 
Functional somatic syndrome diagnoses are com-
monly made in most medical specialties and ac-
count for a very substantial number of the patients 
seen. For example, irritable bowel syndrome is the 
most common diagnosis made in many gastroenter-
ological clinics; the majority of cases of acute chest 
pain are ‘non-cardiac’, and often associated with 
panic disorder. Similarly, numbness, weakness and 

Neurotic, stress-related and somatoform disorders 113
tingling are frequent symptoms in neurology clin-
ics, yet are often ‘functional’. It should also be noted 
that more than one-half of patients with a functional 
somatic syndrome satisfy criteria for depressive or 
anxiety disorder rather than a somatoform disor-
der. Th is is important for treatment. Because the 
diagnostic systems overlap, but emphasize diff er-
ent aspects of the presentation, a combined medi-
cal and psychiatric diagnosis may be preferred – for 
example, irritable bowel syndrome and generalized 
anxiety disorder or chronic fatigue syndrome and 
somatization disorder.
Factitious disorders and 
malingering
Th e relationship between bodily symptoms and psy-
chiatric disorder is complicated further by patients 
who consciously elaborate or even deliberately make 
up symptoms. Th ese are not neuroses but are in-
cluded here because of their importance in the diff er-
ential diagnosis of patients presenting with somatic 
symptoms.
• If the behaviour appears to be aimed at receiving 
medical treatment it is called factitious disorder. 
People with persistent, severe factitious disorder 
who travel from one hospital to another have been 
described as having Munchausen’s syndrome (after 
Baron von Munchausen, who told stories of fantas-
tic exploits). Th e degree of conscious manipulation 
is often unclear.
• If the behaviour is for fraudulent purposes (e.g. to 
avoid legal proceedings or military conscription) it 
is referred to as malingering. Factitious disorder is 
a psychiatric disorder; malingering is not.
If there is suspicion that symptoms are being manu-
factured, discrete but determined eff orts to verify the 
person’s details and history should be made. Once 
a factitious disorder has been confi rmed, the pa-
tient should be gently confronted with the evidence. 
However sympathetically handled, self-discharge 
commonly results. People with factitious disorder 
can sometimes make doctors feel angry and manip-
ulated. It is important to take care not to generalize 
these negative feelings to the larger group of patients 
who have medical problems you cannot explain by a 
disease diagnosis.
 KEYPOINTS
• Neuroses are syndromes of emotional, 
cognitive, behavioural and somatic symptoms 
that are not secondary to another disorder. 
Neurotic symptoms occur commonly in other 
psychiatric disorders.
• Neuroses affl ict 15% of the population, women 
more than men. They may become chronic 
and disabling. The main subtypes are anxiety 
disorders and somatoform disorders.
• Stress-related disorders are neuroses in 
which there is a clear relationship to a major 
psychological stressor.
• Somatoform disorders encompass medically 
unexplained symptoms (somatization) 
and fears about having physical disease 
(hypochondriasis), and are closely related to 
other neuroses. They are usually seen in non-
psychiatric medical settings.
• Neuroses, stress-related disorders, and 
somatoform disorders can all be treated 
psychologically (especially with CBT) or with 
antidepressants. Anxiolytics can also be useful 
in the short term.
 FURTHER READING
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence 
(NICE) (2005) CG31 Obsessive-compulsive disor-
der: Core Interventions in the treatment of obses-
sive compulsive disorder and body dysmorphic 
disorder. NICE.
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence 
(NICE) (2006) CG26 Th e management of PTSD in 
adults and children in primary and secondary care. 
NICE.
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence 
(NICE) (2011) CG113 Generalised anxiety disorder 
and panic disorder in adults. NICE.
Table 10.15 Common functional somatic 
syndrome diagnoses
Medically unexplained pain syndromes
Non-cardiac chest pain
Facial pain
Pelvic pain
Back pain
Irritable bowel syndrome
Muscular pain and fi bromyalgia
Medically unexplained chronic fatigue
Chronic fatigue syndrome

114 
Neurotic, stress-related and somatoform disorders
 SELF-ASSESSMENT
1 Charles is a 24-year-old man who presents with 
thoughts of shouting obscenities in a church setting. 
His psychiatrist thinks that these are ‘obsessional’ 
in nature. Which of the following is true about 
obsessional thoughts?
a They are egosyntonic.
b They are necessary to make a diagnosis of OCD.
c They can take the form of vivid imagery.
d They do not respond to pharmacotherapy with 
SSRIs.
e They are commonly associated with antisocial 
personality disorder.
2 A 32-year-old sergeant returned from an advanced 
military post in a confl ict zone 6 months ago and 
is being assessed for the development of post-
traumatic stress disorder. Which of the following 
would you consider not to be a recognized feature 
of PTSD?
a Flashbacks
b Nightmares
c Disinhibited behaviour
d Exaggerated startle response
e Anxiety
3 Which of the following statements about anxiety 
disorders is true?
a Agoraphobia is more common in men.
b Primary and secondary gain are associated with 
somatoform disorders.
c Glove and stocking anaesthesia is a recognized 
feature of dissociative disorders.
d Malingering is a psychiatric disorder.
e Somatization disorder only occurs in females.

Psychiatry Lecture Notes, Eleventh Edition. Gautam Gulati, Mary-Ellen Lynall and Kate Saunders. © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 
2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Eating disorders are conventionally separated into 
anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa, as described 
below. Anorexia has been recognized for a number of 
centuries but bulimia was only fi rst described in 1979. 
However, bear two clinical realities in mind:
• Many patients – around 50% – do not meet all the 
criteria for either disorder, or have some features 
of both. Th ey are labelled atypical eating disorder – 
or eating disorder not otherwise specifi ed (EDNOS). 
Th is does not mean their disorder is any less severe.
• Many patients move from one category to another 
over time.
 Box 11.1 Eating disorders in men
• Males represent around 1 in 6 cases of eating 
disorder in community settings.
• Dieting is often for specifi c goals, e.g. athletic 
performance, to avoid teasing.
• Males are more sensitive about shape from the 
waist up (women are the opposite).
• Males start dieting from a higher weight and feel fat 
at relatively higher weights compared to women.
• Men are less likely to seek diagnostic evaluation 
perhaps because of perceived stigma.
Disorders of eating, sleeping and sex are grouped 
together in the diagnostic manual ICD-10 because 
they are syndromes associated with a disturbance in 
‘basic’ desires and behaviours. Here, we describe the 
features, assessment and management of these disor-
ders, although the assessment of eating disorders is 
covered in Chapter 3.
Eating disorders
Eating disorders can present in many different 
ways to in all branches of medicine. To a great ex-
tent they are culturally bound, predominating in 
industrialized countries where thinness is valued 
and where easy access to food means obesity is a 
real possibility. Most eating disorders begin be-
tween the ages of 7 and 13 and are characterized 
by a preoccupation with weight and the develop-
ment of anxieties about weight gain, changing body 
shape and unrealistic goals of an idealized clothing 
size. Around 40% of children in this age group are 
worried about becoming fat. Dieting behaviours 
often emerge at puberty when body shape changes 
considerably. 
Eating, sleep and sexual 
disorders
Learning objectives
✓ To understand the diagnostic diff erences between diff erent eating 
disorders
✓ To be able to describe key aspects in the management of eating 
disorders
✓ To develop an understanding of common sleep disorders
✓ To develop a framework for the assessment of sexual dysfunction
11

116 
Eating, sleep and sexual disorders
Anorexia nervosa
Clinical features
As well as the core features above, the key elements of 
anorexia nervosa are:
• Self-induced weight loss, induced primarily by 
restriction of food intake.
• Weight ≥15% below normal (BMI <17.5).
• Irrational fear of fatness/intense drive for thinness.
• Body image distortion and excessive reliance on 
weight or shape for self-esteem.
• Amenorrhoea (if post-menarche and not using 
hormonal contraceptive). Part of a wider endo-
crine disturbance that includes elevated cortisol 
and growth hormone levels.
• Two subtypes are defi ned: (i) restrictive (ANR), and 
(ii) binge-purge (ANBP).
Additional features include:
• A range of bodily symptoms and signs, which 
become more pronounced as weight loss progresses 
(Table 11.1). Th e medical complications can be seri-
ous and life-threatening, especially if the eff ects of 
starvation are exacerbated by the metabolic conse-
quences of vomiting, or diuretic or laxative abuse.
• Th e core psychological features (e.g. ‘fear of fatness’) 
become paradoxically worse as weight is lost (may-
be because it increases the 5-HT dysfunction, which 
is thought to contribute to the disturbance). Th e dis-
order thus tends to be self-perpetuating – reinforced 
by the fact that achieving a lower weight has certain 
rewards: it may enhance feelings of self-control, 
result in perceived approval from peers, avoid sexu-
al development or gain parental attention.
• Depressive and obsessional symptoms.
• If the onset is before puberty, secondary sexual 
development is delayed.
• Depression, fatigue and irritability, especially as 
weight loss becomes pronounced.
• Social withdrawal and narrowing of interests.
• Use of diuretics, laxatives, excess exercise or self-
induced vomiting to enhance weight loss.
 Clinical scenario
Miss T, 14, was noticed to be losing weight although 
this was partially disguised by baggy clothing. She 
enjoyed cooking for the family and took up regular 
aerobics. She became vegetarian and avoided all 
fattening foods. When the issue of her weight was 
raised, Miss T became upset, insisting that she 
was fat. She had a history of obesity. The GP found 
she was underweight (BMI = 15) and suspected 
anorexia nervosa.
Epidemiology and aetiology
Anorexia mainly affects females (sex ratio 10:1) al-
though it is an increasing and overlooked problem 
in men (see Box 11.1). The average age of onset is 
15–16 years. The prevalence in Western societies, 
including the United Kingdom, is about 1% in fe-
males aged 12–18. Social pressure to be thin has 
been blamed. The other risk factors are summa-
rized in Table 11.2.
• Note that most risk factors are shared with bulimia 
nervosa.
• Th e familial risk of anorexia nervosa does not seem 
to be genetic in origin (in contrast to most other 
psychiatric disorders).
Differential diagnosis
Th e classic picture of anorexia nervosa is unmis-
takable. In the early stages it must be distinguished 
from other causes of weight loss. Th e psychiatric 
Table 11.1 Physical features and medical 
complications of anorexia nervosa
Physical symptoms
Sensitivity to cold
Gastrointestinal symptoms – constipation, bloating
Dizziness
Amenorrhoea
Poor sleep
Physical signs
Emaciation
Cold extremities
Dry skin, sometimes orange (hypercarotinaemia)
Downy hair (‘lanugo’) on back, forearms and cheeks
Poorly developed or atrophic secondary sexual 
characteristics
Bradycardia, postural hypotension, arrhythmias
Peripheral oedema
Proximal myopathy
Abnormalities on investigation
Low LH, FSH, oestradiol, T3
Increased cortisol, growth hormone
Hypoglycaemia
Hypokalaemia, hyponatraemia, metabolic alkalosis
ECG: prolonged QT interval (serious)
Hypercholesterolaemia
Osteopenia and osteoporosis
Low WBC and platelets
Delayed gastric emptying
Acute gastric dilatation (due to over-rapid refeeding)
ECG, electrocardiogram; FSH, follicle-stimulating 
hormone; LH, luteinizing hormone; T3, triiodothyronine; 
WBC, white blood cells.

Eating, sleep and sexual disorders 117
diff erential diagnosis includes depressive disorder, 
substance misuse, obsessive-compulsive disorder 
(OCD) and body dysmorphic disorder. Th e medi-
cal disorders include diabetes, infl ammatory bowel 
disease, malabsorption syndromes, hypopituitarism 
and cancer. Th e distinction is made by:
• Detecting the core psychological symptoms of 
anorexia nervosa.
• Excluding physical and other psychiatric causes of 
weight loss.
Management
Th e objectives of treatment of anorexia nervosa are:
• Altering the person’s attitude to weight and body 
shape via psychological treatments.
• Helping them increase weight.
• Detecting and treating medical complications.
Th e second and third components can be achieved 
reasonably successfully, at least in the short term; 
the fi rst component is diffi  cult as the core beliefs are 
often resistant to treatment. Some principles of man-
agement are:
• Establish a good therapeutic relationship – many 
patients are reluctant to accept treatment. Help 
them to see they need help, and maintain motiva-
tion thereafter. Agree some goals: what weight is 
the person prepared to work towards? At what rate? 
How much exercise is appropriate?
• Encourage early weight gain to break the cycle and 
to overcome the problem that starvation interferes 
with psychological treatments. Weight gain is pro-
moted by behavioural strategies – for example, 
contingent rewards.
• Th e key element of therapy is to change attitudes 
towards weight and shape, and the person’s preoc-
cupation with them. A modifi ed type of cognitive 
behavioural therapy (CBT) (‘transdiagnostic CBT’) 
is commonly used while most adolescent patients 
respond well to a specifi c form of family therapy.
• Drugs (antidepressants or antipsychotics) do not 
have an established role in management, though 
they are sometimes used to treat comorbid disor-
ders such as depression.
• Monitor physical condition. Serum potassium 
should be checked regularly. Multivitamins and 
supplements may be used.
In-patient treatment
In-patient care is indicated if weight loss is intractable 
and severe (e.g. BMI <14), or if there is a serious risk of 
death from suicide or medical complications. Admis-
sion is preferably to a specialist unit. It usually lasts 
8–12 weeks. Th e purposes are to:
• Manage medical complications.
• Actively encourage refeeding but avoid refeeding 
syndrome (see Box 11.2).
• Allow intensive psychological treatments.
• Compulsory admission is rarely used, and con-
sidered only if life is in immediate danger. Forced 
refeeding is also used occasionally and controver-
sially.
 Clinical scenario (continued)
Miss T is now 15 and has collapsed. For the past 
year, despite denials to her parents, she had dieted 
and exercised excessively. She weighed 29 kg 
(BMI = 12.5), was hypothermic and had a low blood 
potassium. After medical stabilization she passively 
accepted admission to an eating disorder unit. She 
began a behavioural programme with a target to 
gain 0.5 kg/week for 2 months. A psychiatrist and 
Table 11.2 Risk factors for eating disorders
General factors
Female (sex ratio ∼10:1 in clinical sample, 6:1 in 
community)
Adolescence and early adulthood
Living in a Western society
Family history
Eating disorder
Depression
Substance misuse (bulimia nervosa)
Obesity (bulimia nervosa)
Premorbid experiences
Adverse parenting – low contact, high expectations, 
arguments
Sexual abuse
Family dieting
Critical comments about eating, weight or shape
Pressure to be slim
Premorbid characteristics
Low self-esteem
Perfectionism (anorexia nervosa)
Impulsivity (bulimia nervosa)
Anxiety
Obesity (bulimia nervosa)
Early menarche (bulimia nervosa)
Specifi c groups
Ballet dancers
Models
Jockeys
Gymnasts

118 
Eating, sleep and sexual disorders
nurse therapist explored eating and weight issues in 
individual and family sessions. Her potassium was 
monitored regularly. Ten weeks later her BMI was 15 
and she became an out-patient.
 Box 11.2 Refeeding syndrome
This is a potentially catastrophic syndrome that 
arises as the result of the depletion of cardiac 
muscle secondary to starvation. This may be 
amplifi ed by changes in serum phosphorus, 
magnesium and potassium that occur with insulin 
release when food intake increases. The resulting 
low phosphate may further amplify cardiac 
problems leading to heart failure.
Refeeding can be avoided if the following 
principles are followed:
• Measure all serum electrolytes prior to refeeding 
and monitor every 5–7 days.
• Start at 1200 kcal/day and gradually increase 
every 5 days.
• Monitor for tachycardia and oedema.
Prognosis
Th e outcome of anorexia nervosa is variable. About 
20% have a good outcome, with a short-lived disorder 
and full recovery. Another 10–20% develop a chronic 
and intractable disorder. Th e rest progress to another 
eating disorder, have a relapsing illness or have re-
sidual features.
• Th e mortality rate is increased 10-fold in the fi rst 
10 years of illness, with a 10–20% death rate in 
long-term follow-up studies. Compared to the 
general population the mortality rate in ano-
rexia is 12 times higher and more than twice that 
of psychiatric in-patients. Death is usually from 
complications of starvation (approximately 60% 
as a direct eff ect of the illness), sometimes from 
suicide (27%).
• Poor outcome is associated with: long duration 
prior to presentation; onset in adulthood; severe 
weight loss; vomiting.
 Clinical scenario (continued)
Miss T is now 27 and a beautician. She has a 
BMI of 16 and has occasional scanty menstrual 
periods. She continues to be preoccupied with 
her appearance, and gains self-esteem from 
her control over eating and weight. She diets 
continually and works out twice a day. Now and 
then she has a large binge followed by self-
induced vomiting and extra gym sessions. She 
avoids doctors.
Bulimia nervosa
Bulimia refers to uncontrolled eating binges. Many 
people binge and feel bad about it, but in bulimia ner-
vosa it is excessive, repetitive and associated with self-
induced vomiting and other means to negate the cal-
orifi c eff ect of the binges. It punctuates an otherwise 
anorexia nervosa-like pattern of dietary restriction.
Clinical features
In addition to the core features of eating disorders, 
bulimia nervosa is characterized by:
• Recurrent binge eating (more than twice a week); 
1000–4000 kcal (4–8 MJ) are typically consumed in 
a binge.
• ‘Loss of control’ during binges.
• Compensation after bingeing by purging (vomit-
ing, diuretics or laxatives), excessive exercise or 
restriction.
• Regret or shame after bingeing. 
• Irrational fear of fatness/distortion of body image.
• Does not meet diagnostic criteria for anorexia ner-
vosa.
• Two subtypes: (i) purging (80%); and (ii) compen-
sation, e.g. exercising or restricting (20%).
Th e combination of dieting and bingeing means 
body weight is usually unremarkable – the most ob-
vious diff erence from anorexia nervosa. Th e fi rst 
binge is often triggered by diet-induced hunger and 
followed by compensatory purging. However, this 
behaviour often generalizes over time to become a 
means with which to deal with diffi  cult emotional 
states. A small proportion of bulimia nervosa cases 
occur in women with borderline personality disorder 
who self-harm (often by cutting) and misuse alco-
hol or drugs. Th is is a much rarer combination than 
sometimes believed.
If body weight is decreased, some of the physical 
features and complications of anorexia nervosa may 
be present (Table 11.1). Otherwise, fewer abnormali-
ties are seen in bulimia nervosa. Th ose that are pre-
sent refl ect the self-induced vomiting, or abuse of 
laxatives or diuretics:
• Repeated vomiting may produce pitted teeth 
(eroded by gastric acid), calluses on the knuckles 
(‘Russell’s sign’, from putting fi ngers down throat), 
hoarse voice, salivary gland enlargement, and met-
abolic disturbances (Table 11.1).
• Diuretic use: electrolyte disturbances and renal 
dysfunction.
• Laxatives: electrolyte disturbances and colonic 
motility problems.

Eating, sleep and sexual disorders 119
Epidemiology and aetiology
Bulimia nervosa occurs in 2% of women aged 16–35 
years. Based on community surveys, only 10% of cas-
es ever present for help. Many of the risk factors are 
shared with anorexia nervosa (Table 11.2). Th ere is a 
genetic predisposition, which overlaps with that for 
anxiety disorders.
• Th e genetic contribution to bulimia nervosa is 
controversial. Some studies suggest a surprisingly 
large heritability – over 80%.
 Clinical scenario
Miss V is 23. She has several episodes of bingeing 
and vomiting each week. In an hour she can eat 10 
packets of crisps, 10 chocolate bars and a couple of 
loaves of bread washed down with a bottle of wine. 
She then makes herself sick. She is preoccupied 
with her weight and shape and feels fat (though 
her BMI is normal). She has a history of taking 
overdoses when particularly distressed. She was 
obese as a child, and sexually abused by an uncle. 
There is a family history of obesity and depression.
Differential diagnosis
• Anorexia nervosa with bulimic features (anorexia 
trumps bulimia, diagnostically, although in real-
ity a better term would be ‘eating disorder NOS’, as 
explained above).
• Sporadic bingeing in other psychiatric disorders 
(e.g. atypical depression).
• Medical causes of vomiting.
• Binge eating disorder – recurrent binges occur 
but without extreme weight control behaviour. 
Th is is a recent entity but one that contributes to 
25% of medical obesity. Unlike bulimia nervosa 
it is characterized by bingeing only and often 
relentless grazing. Its presentation is often grad-
ual and it most commonly aff ects people in their 
30s and 40s.
Management
Treatments are markedly more eff ective (and better 
evaluated) than in anorexia nervosa. Take a ‘stepped 
care’ approach, depending on the severity of the 
problem and the patient’s wishes.
Self-help manuals are a cost-eff ective and increas-
ingly used fi rst-line treatment.
• A modifi ed form of CBT is eff ective in 60–70% of 
patients, with the majority remaining well 5 years 
later. CBT aims to help the patient: (a) understand 
the links between bingeing, vomiting and dieting; 
(b) regulate their diet and break the vicious cycle 
between the three behaviours; and (c) decrease 
their preoccupation with body shape.
• Interpersonal therapy (IPT) also works, but takes 
longer. IPT emphasizes the role of relationship 
problems in the disorder.
• Antidepressants reduce the frequency of bingeing 
and vomiting. Th e best evidence is for fl uoxetine. 
High doses (60–80 mg/day) may be required, and 
the disorder often relapses on stopping.
Prognosis
Th e prognosis of bulimia nervosa is probably better 
than that of anorexia nervosa (the mortality rate is 
certainly lower), though there are few good data.
• People have had bulimia nervosa for an average of 
5 years at presentation; 30–50% still have an eating 
disorder (bulimia nervosa or atypical eating disor-
der) 5–10 years later.
• Poor prognostic factors include: premorbid child-
hood obesity, low self-esteem and personality dis-
turbance.
Sleep disorders
Sleep problems are usually secondary to a psychiat-
ric or medical disorder, but sometimes a sleep disor-
der is the primary diagnosis. ICD-10 records over 80 
sleep disorders, but essentially, there are three types 
of problem:
1 Too little sleep (insomnias).
2 Too much sleep (hypersomnias).
3 Unusual sleep behaviours (parasomnias), e.g. 
sleep-walking, sleep-talking.
Th e assessment of sleep disorders is covered in 
Chapter 3.
Insomnia
Insomnia is a disturbance of normal sleep patterns, 
commonly diffi  culty in initiating sleep. One-third of 
adults complain of it but it is highly subjective and al-
though a typical adult sleeps 7–9 hours per night this 
varies widely from night to night as well as varying 
greatly between diff erent people. It causes much dis-
tress and is a risk factor for premature death; 80% of 
cases of insomnia are related to anxiety and depres-
sive disorders. Most of the rest are secondary to medi-
cal disease (e.g. it is common in Parkinson’s disease), 
chronic pain and substance misuse. Th e remaining 
fraction (<10%) is primary insomnia. To distinguish 
these cases, exclude the presence of an underlying 

120 
Eating, sleep and sexual disorders
psychiatric or medical disorder (e.g. restless legs syn-
drome, lymphoma). Ask about other factors that af-
fect sleep such as shift working, medication, alcohol, 
caff eine, etc. A sleep diary and corroboration from 
the sleeping partner are helpful. Whilst 30–48% of 
people report insomnia symptoms, only 6% meet cri-
teria for a diagnosis of insomnia.
Treatment of insomnia
Treat any associated disorder (e.g. use a sedative an-
tidepressant if insomnia is due to depression). Inter-
ventions for insomnia include:
• Stimulus control. An eff ective method to restore a 
good sleep routine. Th e person should go to bed 
only when sleepy, put the light out straight away, 
get up if awake for more than 20 minutes, get up at 
a regular time and avoid daytime naps.
• Sleep hygiene – this approach pays attention to 
health practices (e.g. use of caff eine and alcohol) 
and stimuli (e.g. noise, light) that aff ect sleep.
• Relaxation therapy – behavioural, cognitive and 
biofeedback routines to reduce arousal. Th e per-
son should wind down 90 minutes before bedtime 
and practise relaxation when in bed.
• Hypnotics – short-acting benzodiazepines and 
related drugs. Eff ective in the short term and 
widely used, but may cause daytime drowsiness, 
and long-term use should be avoided because of 
dependence.
• Melatonin – a naturally occurring hormone that 
regulates circadian rhythm. At present it is licensed 
only for short-term treatment of insomnia in those 
over the age of 55. It should not be taken for more 
than 3 weeks.
Excessive daytime sleepiness
Excessive daytime sleepiness can be caused by:
1 insuffi  cient sleep;
2 fragmented sleep;
3 primary disorder of excessive daytime sleepiness – 
the hypersomnias (see Table 11.3).
Th e diagnosis of hypersomnia can only be made if the 
excessive daytime sleepiness is not due to other sleep 
disorders.
In narcolepsy there are repeated attacks of daytime 
somnolence usually leading irresistibly to sleep. It 
usually begins in the second decade and is associated 
with cataplexy (abrupt loss of muscle tone), hypnagog-
ic hallucinations (on falling asleep) and sleep paraly-
sis (the patient wakes but is unable to move). An au-
toimmune origin is suspected as 98% have the DR15 
variant of HLA-DR2. Pathologically, there is a loss of 
hypothalamic hypocretin-producing neurons. Stimu-
lants (amphetamines or modafi nil) are the main treat-
ment; clomipramine is also used for the cataplexy.
Parasomnias
Parasomnias are abnormal episodic events during 
sleep – sleepwalking, nightmares, etc. Th ey are part of 
normal development in children; in adults they usu-
ally refl ect emotional stress.
• Distinguish parasomnias from other causes of odd 
nocturnal behaviour, such as epilepsy.
Sexual problems
Psychiatrists are sometimes portrayed as being ob-
sessed with sex – a relic of Freudian theories, not 
helped by media portrayals of psychiatrists. Th e real-
ity is rather diff erent and more mundane. Neverthe-
less, an understanding of sexual problems and how to 
assess them is important in psychiatry because:
• Sexual dysfunction is a common consequence 
of psychiatric disorders or their treatment. For 
example, loss of libido in depression and ejacula-
tory failure due to antipsychotics.
• Sexual dysfunction may contribute to psychiatric 
disorder. For example, an anxiety disorder may be 
exacerbated by a man worrying about his impotence.
• Disorders of sexual function, preference and iden-
tity are specifi c mental disorders.
Sexual dysfunction
Each of the components of sex – desire, physiological 
arousal and orgasm – can go awry (Table 11.4). Each 
Table 11.3 Causes of hypersomnia
Psychiatric disorders
Depressive disorder
Neurasthenia (chronic fatigue syndrome)
Medical disorders
Narcolepsy
Klein–Levin syndrome
Sleep apnoea syndrome
Chronic physical disease
Other
Side effects of drugs (prescribed or illicit)

Eating, sleep and sexual disorders 121
type of dysfunction may be due to psychological or 
medical causes, or both.
• Painful intercourse, loss of sexual desire and 
impaired orgasm are more common in women; the 
main problems for men are impotence and prema-
ture ejaculation.
• Sexual dysfunction is associated with sexual inex-
perience, anxiety and relationship problems.
Assessment of sexual dysfunction
Asking about sex is the topic, along with suicide, that 
most health professionals feel least confi dent and 
most embarrassed about. Th is is unnecessary. Many 
patients are glad to be asked, since sexual problems 
are common and it may be their fi rst opportunity to 
seek reassurance or treatment.
• Know when to introduce the subject – try to res-
pond to cues. For example, if a depressed patient 
tells you he gets no pleasure from life, it is a good 
moment to ask whether this has also aff ected his 
interest in sex. If no cue presents itself, preface the 
assessment with a comment such as: ‘I need to ask 
you some questions about your sex life, to help me 
understand your problem. Is this alright?’.
• Use terminology appropriate to the person’s age 
and culture.
Assessment of sexual function covers several areas 
(Table 11.5). Some of the questions will be used regu-
larly, others rarely. Below are further details of two com-
mon sexual disorders to illustrate the general approach-
es to assessment and treatment of sexual dysfunction.
Erectile dysfunction
Erectile dysfunction is the inability to reach erection 
or to sustain an erection long enough for intercourse. 
Most erectile dysfunction is secondary – that is, full 
erection was possible at one time, but is now diffi  cult 
to achieve. Primary erectile dysfunction is rare and 
usually has a neurological or circulatory basis.
Common causes of impotence include:
• Anxiety about sexual performance.
• Alcohol.
• Unwanted eff ects of prescription medicines.
• Diabetes.
• Vascular disease.
Treatment is usually with combined psychologi-
cal and physical approaches. Underlying disorders 
should be treated. Psychological treatment is out-
lined below. Drug treatment with phosphodiester-
ase type V inhibitors (e.g. sildenafi l) is now wide-
spread and has largely replaced injections and 
devices.
• Prescribing of sildenafi l for ‘psychological’ impo-
tence is possible on the NHS, but restricted to spe-
cialist centres and for those ‘suff ering severe dis-
tress as a result of impotence’.
Dyspareunia
Dyspareunia is pain on intercourse. It may result from 
impaired lubrication with vaginal secretions (due to 
anxiety or inadequate arousal) or from physical scar-
ring (e.g. after childbirth). Pain on penetration may 
be due to pelvic pathology.
• When dyspareunia is secondary to psychological 
factors, sexual therapy techniques can be used (see 
below).
Psychological treatment of sexual 
dysfunction
Sexual problems may respond to reassurance 
or use of self-help manuals. Others require sex 
therapy, which is provided by some psychiatrists 
and by private therapists. Sex therapy uses be-
havioural methods, and is effective (assuming no 
underlying medical cause for the dysfunction). The 
principles are:
• Treat the couple together.
• Educate about sex and the factors aff ecting it.
• Encourage open discussion of feelings and 
decrease anxiety and embarrassment.
• Use graded exposure (Chapter 7). Th e couple grad-
ually rebuild their sexual relationship, setting aside 
time and commitment to follow a series of steps – 
starting with non-genital ‘sensate focus’, then mov-
ing on via genital focus before fi nally returning to 
full intercourse. Additional methods are used for 
Table 11.4 Types of sexual dysfunction
Sexual desire disorders
Lack of
Excess
Failure of genital response
Erectile dysfunction (impotence)
Vaginal dryness
Orgasmic dysfunction
Premature ejaculation
Anorgasmia
Other
Vaginismus (involuntary spasm of vaginal musculature)
Dyspareunia

122 
Eating, sleep and sexual disorders
specifi c forms of dysfunction. For example, dilators 
for vaginismus or the squeeze technique for pre-
mature ejaculation.
• Lack of sexual desire has the worst prognosis.
Other sexual disorders
In these disorders the problem is not sex itself but 
the object of sexual desire or sexual identity. Th e 
person may or may not agree with this view. In 
ICD-10, these disorders are grouped with person-
ality disorders.
• Forensic psychiatrists may be asked to report on 
the psychiatric status of sex off enders.
• Homosexuality used to be classifi ed as a psychiat-
ric disorder.
Gender identity disorders
• In gender dysphoric disorder (commonly known as 
transexualism) the person, usually male, wishes to 
Table 11.5 Assessment of sexual function
Questions
Comments
Current sexual functioning
What is the nature and frequency of sex?
Is there a particular problem?
How much interest do you have in sex? Has this 
changed recently?
Get a history of each diffi culty
Increased libido is rarely complained of. A feature of mania
In men
Erectile function:
Any problems getting or keeping an erection?
Do you get erections in the morning?
Do you worry about your sexual performance?
Loss of morning erections or when masturbating suggests 
organic cause
Impotence related to performance anxiety
Ejaculatory function:
Do you come too quickly?
How long after penetration?
Do you feel anxious about this?
Common in inexperienced, anxious men
In women
Do you have pain on intercourse? When? Where?
Do you feel anxious or tense about sex?
Dyspareunia and vaginal dryness have psychological and 
gynaecological causes
Extreme anxiety can lead to vaginismus
Sexual development
Estimate age of puberty
When did your voice break? Periods start?
When did you fi rst masturbate? First intercourse?
Problems or delays in sexual development may lead to 
psychological effects or indicate an abnormality (e.g. 
Turner’s syndrome)
Affected by cultural and individual differences
Sexual orientation and preferences
What is their sexual orientation?
Any particular sexual preferences or fetishes?
If so, what?
Have they ever got you into trouble?
Detailed questioning indicates if the patient views it as a 
problem, or in a forensic context
Other issues
Current psychiatric disorder?
General health?
Current medication?
Most psychiatric disorders, especially depression, are 
associated with sexual dysfunction
Medical disorders (e.g. diabetes, vascular disease) affect 
sexual functioning; do a physical examination
Many drugs have sexual side effects (e.g. thiazide 
diuretics, H2 antagonists, antihypertensives–as well as 
antidepressants and antipsychotics)

Eating, sleep and sexual disorders 123
live as a member of the opposite sex. Th ey seek hor-
monal or surgical treatment to match their body to 
their subjective gender. Sexual orientation is vari-
able and sexual desire often low. Transsexuals may 
suff er great distress, and depression is common.
• Transvestism is the urge to dress in clothes of the 
opposite sex. If accompanied by sexual arousal it 
is called fetishistic transvestism. Th ere is no desire 
to change sex. Transvestites are often married and 
cross-dress secretly. Th ere is no specifi c treatment.
Disorders of sexual preference 
(paraphilias)
Sexual desire can centre on a wide range of animate 
and inanimate objects. Such pleasures only constitute 
a disorder if the activity is illegal (e.g. paedophilia) or 
if sex becomes dysfunctional and over-dependent on 
an object such as shoes (e.g. fetishism). Paraphilia is 
usually but not always a male disorder.
• In paedophilia, sexual interest or activity centres 
on prepubescent children. Psychological treat-
ments have been used to reduce reoff ending rates. 
Antiandrogens such as cyproterone acetate and 
goserelin have been used to suppress libido. Th ere 
is some evidence of effi  cacy but the evidence base 
is limited. Th ose who are found off ending are man-
aged primarily by the criminal justice system with 
the use of specifi c legislation.
• Exhibitionism is the exposing of the genitals to 
strangers. Two groups are recognized: (1) inhibited 
men who struggle against the urge, feel guilty and 
expose a fl accid penis (type 1); (2) aggressive men 
who expose an erect penis and masturbate then or 
later (type 2). Th e latter shows an association with 
actual sexual assaults. Behavioural treatments may 
be benefi cial. SSRIs have a limited evidence base.
 KEYPOINTS
• The core psychopathology of all eating 
disorders is a preoccupation with body shape 
and weight, with extreme methods to control 
weight – notably dietary restriction. They occur 
mainly but not exclusively in young women.
• Anorexia nervosa is characterized additionally 
by a low body weight (BMI < 17.5), extreme 
dietary restriction, and amenorrhoea in women.
• Bulimia nervosa is distinguished by recurrent 
binge eating and self-induced vomiting.
• Half of patients with an eating disorder do not 
meet criteria for anorexia or bulimia nervosa.
• Bulimia nervosa responds well to CBT. No 
effective treatments are proven for anorexia 
nervosa.
• Sleep disorders comprise insomnia, 
hypersomnia and parasomnias (disturbances 
during sleep). Many are secondary to other 
psychiatric or medical disorders. They may be 
treated psychologically or pharmacologically.
• Sexual dysfunction is common and can affect 
the desire, the mechanics or the orgasm. 
Assessment of sexual function is important. 
Sex therapy is effective for many of the 
problems.
 FURTHER READING
Treasure J, Claudino AM, Zucker N (2010) Eat-
ing disorders. Lancet 375, 583–593. doi: 10.1016/
S0140-6736(09)61748-7. Access at http://www.
thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-
6736(09)61748-7
 SELF-ASSESSMENT
1 Preoccupation with weight:
a Is absent in bulimia nervosa.
b Emerges in girls from the age of 7 onwards.
c Is never seen in males.
d Is unusual in EDNOS.
2 Which of the following should be monitored during 
refeeding?
a Weight
b Phosphate
c Ankle swelling
d Potasssium
e Heart rate

Psychiatry Lecture Notes, Eleventh Edition. Gautam Gulati, Mary-Ellen Lynall and Kate Saunders. © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 
2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Clinical features of acute 
schizophrenia
Th e diagnostic features are shown in Table 12.1. Par-
ticular weight is placed on the presence of the ‘fi rst-
rank symptoms’. A clinical diagnosis does not require 
a certain number of features being present, but the 
more there are, the more likely schizophrenia be-
comes.
• Th e predominant features vary from case to case. 
At one extreme, a person may present with bizarre 
behaviour, a full set of fi rst-rank symptoms and 
fl orid thought disorder. At the other, the most nota-
ble symptoms may be insidious social withdrawal 
and academic decline, with psychotic symptoms 
only becoming apparent after direct questioning 
or observation.
• Th e duration criterion is to exclude transient 
schizophrenia-like syndromes, which have a bet-
ter prognosis, and maybe a diff erent aetiology. If 
the features of schizophrenia are present but for 
less than a month, the (temporary) label is schizo-
phreniform disorder.
• Schizophrenia beginning after age 45 used to be 
considered a separate disorder, paraphrenia.
• Delusions, hallucinations and thought disorder 
in schizophrenia are grouped together as posi-
tive symptoms (in contrast to negative symptoms, 
described below).
• Many patients have non-localizing (‘soft’) signs on 
neurological examination.
Schizophrenia is at the heart of psychiatry and is clos-
est to the public conception of madness. Although 
not the most common disorder, it accounts for a sig-
nifi cant proportion of psychiatric morbidity and the 
workload of psychiatric services.
• In 2008/09 patients with schizophrenia occupied 
2.85 million NHS bed days; higher than for any 
other condition in any medical specialty.
• Th e economic burden of the disorder in England 
runs into several billions of pounds annually.
Clinical features
Schizophrenia is a psychosis, typically presenting in 
young adults. It is distinguished from other psychoses 
by:
• the presence of specifi c types of delusions, halluci-
nations and thought disorder;
• the primary disorder is not one of aff ective (mood) 
or organic aetiology;
• the clinical course.
Th e clinical picture of schizophrenia is complex. 
Here, the acute and the chronic stages of the disor-
ders are described in turn – though in practice there 
is a continuum of features.
• Before proceeding, review the basic assessment 
(Chapter 2) and the diagnosis-focused assessment 
for psychosis (p. 22). Th ese earlier sections include 
defi nitions of the cardinal symptoms of schizo-
phrenia.
Schizophrenia
Learning objectives
✓ To be able to describe the presentation, aetiology, assessment and 
management of schizophrenia
12

Schizophrenia 125
Clinical subtypes of schizophrenia
Because of the clinical heterogeneity, schizophre-
nia has classically been divided into several sub-
syndromes, based upon the pattern of symptoms 
(Table 12.2).
• Th e catatonic subtype is much rarer than it used 
to be. Th is could refl ect a change in the nature or 
treatment of the disease, or the past occurrence of 
organic disorders mistaken for schizophrenia (par-
ticularly a postviral condition called encephalitis 
lethargica).
• Th e disorganized subtype is also called hebephren-
ic schizophrenia.
 Clinical scenario
Jules is a 20-year-old student who was observed by 
housemates having a conversation with imaginary 
demons. His room was covered in black paper to 
stop them interfering with his thoughts. His work 
had deteriorated markedly in the past term, and he 
had isolated himself. He was convinced he was part 
of a sinister plot and was being told what to do by 
unknown people whom he could hear talking about 
him. There was no evidence of substance misuse or 
mood disorder. A provisional diagnosis of paranoid 
schizophrenia was made.
Clinical features of chronic 
schizophrenia
In patients who progress to chronic schizophrenia, 
the acute symptoms have often largely resolved (with 
or without treatment). Th e characteristic picture be-
comes one of a ‘burnt out’ disease (Table 12.3). Th ese 
features are called negative symptoms.
• Th e positive–acute/negative–chronic distinction is 
not absolute. Positive symptoms regularly persist 
or re-emerge in chronic cases, and some patients 
have negative symptoms in their fi rst episode.
• Prominent, enduring negative symptoms are 
sometimes called defi cit syndrome.
• Residual schizophrenia is a transitional state between 
acute and chronic schizophrenia. It describes 
patients with positive symptoms within the past year 
who have also developed negative symptoms.
• Research has shown that the symptoms of chronic 
schizophrenia fall more clearly into three clus-
ters, rather than the two implied by the positive–
negative distinction. Th e three are reality distortion 
(delusions and hallucinations), disorganization 
(thought disorder) and psychomotor poverty (simi-
lar to negative symptoms).
Table 12.1 Clinical features of acute 
schizophrenia
Characteristic symptoms
First-rank symptoms:
 Thought insertion, echo, withdrawal or broadcasting
 Third person auditory hallucinations
 Running commentary
 Passivity of thought, feelings or action
 Delusional perception
Bizarre delusions
Odd behaviour
Thought disorder
Lack of insight (reality distortion)
Prodromal period of decline in performance and social 
withdrawal
Duration criterion
Symptoms present for at least 1 month
Major exclusion criteria
Not secondary to mood disorder
No demonstrable organic cause (e.g. amphetamines, 
temporal lobe epilepsy)
Table 12.2 Subtypes of acute schizophrenia
Subtype
Predominant symptoms
Other features
Paranoid
Persecutory, systematized delusions
Hallucinations, usually auditory
Most common form
Personality relatively preserved
Disorganized
Thought disorder
Odd behaviour
Fleeting, bizarre delusions
Labile or inappropriate mood
Early onset
Poor prognosis
Premorbid schizoid or schizotypal personality
Catatonic
Motor signs
Now rare
Undifferentiated
A mixture of the above

126 
Schizophrenia
 Clinical scenario (continued)
Jules is now 45. He has had multiple admissions. 
Between episodes, he never regained his previous 
level of functioning; by 35 he was living in a group 
home. He spends most of his time in his room or 
walking the streets, often mumbling to himself. 
He has no specifi c complaints or desires. His last 
admission was a year ago when hallucinations 
worsened following a fellow resident’s suicide.
Cognitive impairment in 
schizophrenia
Problems with memory and attention are a neglected 
aspect of schizophrenia. Th eir profi le is complex.
• Th e most aff ected domains are attention, work-
ing memory and semantic memory. Th ese defi cits 
are superimposed on some degree of generalized 
intellectual defi cit – though there is a wide range, 
and many patients score above normal.
• Th e impairments are, like the negative symptoms, 
stable and independent of the positive symptoms. 
Some decline probably occurs well before the 
onset of illness, with a further decline around the 
fi rst episode. Th ere is then a long period of sta-
bility, before deterioration in later life such that a 
signifi cant minority of elderly patients with schizo-
phrenia have moderate to severe dementia (which 
is not explained by any known neuropathological 
process).
Th e neuropsychological defi cits of schizophrenia 
are thought to be central to the syndrome, and im-
portant for three reasons:
• Th ey are the major determinant of poor functional 
outcome, along with negative symptoms.
• Th ey may underlie the psychotic symptoms. By this 
view, psychosis is the ‘fever’ of schizophrenia – a 
problem that requires treatment, but that is non-
specifi c and downstream of the disease process.
• Th ey are potential targets for treatment, separate 
from the psychotic symptoms.
Differential diagnosis
Acute schizophrenia
Acute schizophrenia must be distinguished from oth-
er psychotic disorders (Table 12.4).
Table 12.3 Features of chronic schizophrenia
Negative symptoms
Flattened (blunted) mood
Apathy and loss of drive (avolition)
Social isolation
Poverty of speech
Poor self-care
Other features
Positive symptoms persist or recur at times of stress
Mild cognitive impairment is common
Table 12.4 Differential diagnosis of acute schizophrenia
Category of disorder
Distinguishing features/examples
Other non-organic disorders
Delusional disorders
Psychotic depression
Manic episode
Schizoaffective disorder
Schizotypal disorder
Puerperal psychosis
Absence of specifi c features of schizophrenia; preserved personality
Prominent depressive symptoms
Prominent manic symptoms
Mood and schizophrenia symptoms both prominent
Nature of symptoms; chronic history
Acute onset after childbirth
Organic disorders
Drug-induced psychosis
Iatrogenic
Complex partial epilepsy
Delirium
Dementia
Huntington’s disease
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Syphilis
History of drug or alcohol misuse
Levodopa, methyldopa, steroids, antimalarials
Other evidence of seizures
Acute onset; clouding of consciousness
Age; established cognitive impairment
Family history; choreiform movements; dementia
Skin and renal involvement
Other evidence of infection

Schizophrenia 127
• Drug-induced psychoses (Chapter 14) pose a par-
ticular problem. At least one-third of people with 
schizophrenia misuse alcohol or drugs, and it can 
be diffi  cult, and sometimes arbitrary, deciding 
whether these constitute the ‘cause’ of their symp-
toms. Judgement is based on the timing, quantity 
and type of substances taken.
• Th e organic disorders that can produce an acute 
schizophrenic picture (sometimes called symptomat-
ic schizophrenia) are collectively common enough – 
about 1 in 20 cases – to require a high index of suspi-
cion, especially if aspects of the case are atypical.
Chronic schizophrenia
In chronic schizophrenia the diagnosis itself is rarely 
in doubt, though occasionally neurological syndromes 
(e.g. a leukodystrophy) can mimic the clinical picture.
• A more common problem is to distinguish negative 
symptoms from depression or from the sedative 
and parkinsonian eff ects of antipsychotics.
Investigations
Schizophrenia is a clinical diagnosis. Physical inves-
tigations are mainly used to rule out the organic dis-
orders in Table 12.4, and are chosen according to the 
features elicited in the history and examination.
• Brain imaging is not part of the routine assessment. 
It should be considered if there are neurological 
symptoms or signs.
Management
Th e management of schizophrenia is considered ac-
cording to the stage of the illness (acute vs chronic) 
and then by the intervention (physical, psychological, 
social).
Management of acute 
schizophrenia
Th e key elements are summarized in Table 12.5.
• Admission for assessment is usual but not invari-
able. Compulsory admission may be needed, 
since patients are at risk from neglect or danger-
ous acts. Ideally, there should be several days of 
drug-free observation; this is rarely feasible due 
to shortage of beds or because the behaviour is 
too disturbed.
• Antipsychotics are eff ective against positive symp-
toms in a majority of patients over 2–3 weeks. Th eir 
onset is gradual; in the early stages, if behaviour is 
diffi  cult to manage or the patient is very distressed, 
add a benzodiazepine.
• Investigate the context of the disorder, as it may 
give clues as to its development and prognosis. 
For example, comorbid substance misuse worsens 
outcome and may require intervention.
• Involve the family. Relatives need support and 
explanation, and they may be directly involved in 
therapy.
• First admissions can last many weeks depend-
ing on progress and external factors (e.g. fi nding 
accommodation). Future management is planned 
at pre-discharge Care Programme Approach meet-
ings.
• Following an acute episode, post-schizophrenic 
depression is common, and may require treatment 
with antidepressants.
Early intervention
Th ere is a trend to try to intervene earlier in schizo-
phrenia – before symptoms become established, and 
even during the prodrome before unequivocal psy-
chotic symptoms have emerged. Early intervention 
services have been set up to identify, engage and treat 
these individuals.
• Th e rationale is that longer duration of untreated 
psychosis predicts poor outcome, and thus earlier 
intervention may improve it.
Table 12.5 Components in the management 
of acute schizophrenia
Intervention
Rationale
Admission
For diagnosis, investigation 
and starting treatment
Antipsychotic drugs
Treatment of positive 
symptoms
Benzodiazepines
For sedation
Establish context of 
disorder
Evaluate current 
personal 
circumstances
To guide management – 
accommodation, work, etc.
Assessment of needs 
and of risk
Education of patient 
and family
Improve understanding and 
treatment adherence

128 
Schizophrenia
• Th ough preliminary, there is some evidence that 
early intervention, with either cognitive therapy, 
antipsychotics or antidepressants, may delay, if not 
prevent, the transition to ‘full’ psychosis.
• Early intervention has its risks. Some prodromes 
recover spontaneously, whereas labelling and 
treating it may produce side eff ects and stigma.
Management of chronic 
schizophrenia
After a fi rst episode of schizophrenia, the aims 
are to prevent relapse, and to optimize the level of 
functioning. To do this, a combination of pharma-
cological, psychological and social methods is used 
(Table 12.6).
• Th e amount of support and treatments needed var-
ies markedly depending on the course and severity of 
the disorder – and, in practice, whether the interven-
tion is available. Th e emphasis here is on cases where 
full recovery has not occurred after the fi rst episode.
• Th e most important specifi c intervention is antip-
sychotic medication, which signifi cantly reduces 
the rate of relapse in the 2 years after an episode. 
Even the benefi ts of psychological and family inter-
ventions operate partly by improving treatment 
adherence. Equally, however, a sustained relation-
ship must be established with the patient and due 
attention paid to their ‘problems of living’. Without 
this commitment, the patient is unlikely to adhere 
to the management plan – bear in mind that over 
50% of patients do not take their antipsychotics 
regularly.
• Th e value of a multidisciplinary approach is appar-
ent from the range of patients’ needs – benefi ts, 
accommodation, employment, physical health, 
etc. Th e nature of the disorder, especially the eff ect 
of negative symptoms, makes people with chronic 
schizophrenia vulnerable in all these areas.
• Some patients with schizophrenia remain under 
the Mental Health Act (in hospital or in the com-
munity) for many years.
• Patients with schizophrenia have high risks of 
type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular disease, con-
tributing to their excess mortality. Some of this 
is attributable to side eff ects of antipsychotic 
medication. Th e other reasons are unclear, but 
probably include genetic predisposition, poor 
diet and lack of exercise. Regular medical review 
and investigations (e.g. for diabetes, lipids, 
blood pressure) should be an integral part of 
management.
Modes of treatment
Antipsychotic drugs
After a single episode of schizophrenia, antipsy-
chotic medication is continued for 12–24 months. 
If the person remains well it should then be tailed 
off because there is little evidence that further 
medication is beneficial and because of the risk of 
tardive dyskinesia and other long-term side effects. 
Patients who have had multiple episodes or per-
sistent symptoms usually remain on medication 
for many years, though the need for it (and the ef-
fect of cautious reductions in dose) should remain 
under regular review. Medication is often given in 
depot form if there are concerns around poor ad-
herence.
• Antipsychotics have been described earlier in 
this book. Some antipsychotics, such as risperi-
done, olanzapine, clozapine and amisulpride, 
have shown greater efficacy than others in meta-
analytic studies. The choice of antipsychotic 
Table 12.6 Components in the management 
of chronic schizophrenia
Intervention
Rationale
Coordinated community 
care
Ensure medical and social 
needs are met
Continue antipsychotic 
drug
Prevent relapse
Readmission during 
relapse
Stabilize mental state and 
review management
Family therapy
Lower expressed emotion 
and prevent relapse
Social skills training
Improve social functioning
Cognitive behavioural 
therapy (CBT)
Reduce residual 
symptoms
Compliance therapy
Improve medication 
adherence
Cognitive remediation
Improve cognitive 
functioning
Supported employment
Financial, social and self-
esteem benefi ts
Deal with drug or alcohol 
use
Improve outcome
Illness management 
skills training
Help coping with chronic 
illness
General medical care
High risk of poor physical 
health

Schizophrenia 129
is informed by the presentation of the patient, 
the patient’s choice, the drug’s side-effect pro-
file and the patient’s treatment history amongst 
other factors. A trial of 6 weeks at an adequate 
dosage is considered necessary when assessing 
treatment response, although some response is 
often seen earlier.
• Clozapine has an important role in patients who 
are poorly responsive to, or intolerant of, other 
antipsychotics. It also decreases the risk of sui-
cide and can reduce aggression. It is the treat-
ment of choice where there has been insufficient 
or no response after two 6-week antipsychotic 
trials including at least one with an atypical 
antipsychotic. 
• Avoid routine co-administration of anticholinergic 
agents, or of combinations of antipsychotics.
• Persistent negative symptoms are not improved by 
antipsychotics, even clozapine. Conversely, it is a 
myth that the drugs cause them. Similarly, medica-
tion has little overall eff ect, for better or worse, on 
the cognitive symptoms, although atypical antipsy-
chotics may produce small improvements.
Other physical treatments
• Benzodiazepines are useful for short-term seda-
tion.
• Antidepressants should be used in the normal 
fashion for depression occurring in schizophrenia.
• Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) is not eff ective, 
except for catatonic stupor.
Psychological treatments
Table 12.6 includes a range of psychological treat-
ments. Th e two most widely used specifi c interven-
tions are a form of family therapy, and CBT for residual 
symptoms. In addition to these specifi c interventions, 
remember that a supportive psychotherapeutic rela-
tionship is an integral part of management (as with 
every chronic illness).
Th e family approach arose from the fi nding that pa-
tients living with families who have high expressed emo-
tion (EE) had a much higher chance of relapse than 
those exposed to low EE. EE is the intensity and amount 
of emotional involvement by the family with the pa-
tient. It was then found that high EE families could be 
taught to lower EE, and relapse rates fell. Family thera-
py focuses on education about the illness and changing 
the behaviour of the family. A recent systematic review 
confi rms its (modest) eff ectiveness, but it has been dif-
fi cult to implement widely because of practical and fi -
nancial constraints (e.g. relatives are often out at work).
• Th e converse of high EE – a lack of stimulation – 
is also harmful as it exacerbates the apathy and 
withdrawal of chronic schizophrenia. Th is was 
fi rst documented in institutionalized patients (and 
contributed to the drive to close the asylums).
CBT has some effi  cacy against auditory halluci-
nations and delusions, and is being adopted as an 
integral component of schizophrenia management, 
especially for the treatment of residual symptoms. 
However, its eff ect is rather small, the proven benefi ts 
are only short-term, and not all patients are able or 
willing to engage in treatment.
• Hallucinations can also benefi t from simple practi-
cal manoeuvres – for example, use of ear plugs or 
personal stereos.
In a further recent development, cognitive reme-
diation therapy and related psychological treatments, 
are showing some promise to improve the memory 
defi cits of schizophrenia.
Social interventions
Th e nature of chronic schizophrenia means that 
many patients have problems with daily living. Th ese 
needs should be identifi ed and met by the multidis-
ciplinary team working through the care programme 
approach (Table 12.6). Assertive outreach teams may 
be helpful in maintaining close contact with some 
patients who may have very chaotic lifestyles. Most 
patients are supported in the community by CMHTs 
(Community Mental Health Teams).
• Some patients cannot live alone or with their fam-
ily. Group homes are houses where several patients 
live together, supported by their key worker and 
the group homes organization.
 Clinical scenario
Charlene is a 28-year-old factory worker who 
has had one episode of schizophrenia. She was 
discharged home under the care of her CMHT on 
a depot antipsychotic. A Community Psychiatric 
Nurse visited to monitor progress, give medication 
and advise the parents about how best to 
interact with the patient. After discussion with her 
employers, the patient returned to work part-time 
but 3 months later she refused medication and 
began smoking cannabis. She was readmitted 
briefl y to recommence medication. This, however, 
became a pattern where she relapsed frequently, 
and eventually she lost her job. Her behaviour at 
home was becoming increasingly unmanageable. 

130 
Schizophrenia
She was readmitted and once her condition had 
settled, a meeting was held between the patient, 
her parents and the CMHT. She was offered 
a place in a group home. She agreed to take 
medication regularly. She was found sheltered 
employment in a charity shop. The CMHT social 
worker helped with fi nancial issues and ensured 
that the patient received social benefi ts that she 
was entitled to. The patient remained relatively 
stable thereafter.
Prognosis
Accurate estimates for the long-term outcome of 
schizophrenia are surprisingly hard to obtain, be-
cause the diagnostic criteria have changed over time 
and because they depend on how recovery is defi ned. 
For example, some patients have persistent symp-
toms but live a reasonably normal life; others are 
functionally impaired despite minimal symptoms. 
Taking both symptoms and functioning into account, 
only about one-third of cases have the stereotyped 
chronic, deteriorating course; one-quarter have a 
very good outcome; and the remainder have a relaps-
ing, remitting illness (Figure 12.1).
• At least 1 in 20 commit suicide. Previous esti-
mates were higher. The risk is higher after an 
acute episode, when the patient may have real-
ized the nature of their disorder and its impli-
cations, and may have developed a depressive 
disorder.
• Th ere is an increased mortality from natural causes 
too, especially cardiovascular disease, though rates 
of some cancers are lower than expected.
• Th ere is an increased risk of violence (odds ratio for 
violence in schizophrenia and psychoses is around 
4 for males and 8 for females) but recent studies 
show that a large proportion of increased risk to 
others is attributable to comorbid substance mis-
use rather than the disorder itself. Th e proportion 
of violence in society attributable to schizophrenia 
is around 5%.
Poor outcome factors are shown in Table 12.7. 
However, they are only weak predictors and it is im-
possible to foresee which category in Figure 12.1 
someone presenting with schizophrenia will end up 
in.
• First-rank symptoms have no prognostic signifi -
cance.
• Th e outcome of schizophrenia is better in develop-
ing than developed countries. Th e explanation is 
unknown, but probably refl ects the importance of 
the social environment.
Epidemiology
The lifetime risk for schizophrenia is about 0.8%, 
with an annual incidence of 0.3 per 1000 and 
a point prevalence of about 5–7 per 1000 (for all 
psychotic disorders, the prevalence in adults is 
about 0.4%). The onset peaks in early adulthood, 
Good outcome:
One or two
episodes with
full recovery
Poor outcome:
Chronic schizophrenia
with persistent
functional disability
Fatal outcome:
Suicide
Moderate outcome:
Undulating course with some
persistent deficits
Figure 12.1 Outcomes of schizophrenia.
Table 12.7 Factors associated with poor 
outcome in schizophrenia
Demographic characteristics
Young age at onset (e.g. under 25)
Male
Isolated, unmarried
Poor work record
Premorbid personality disorder
Substance misuse
Illness characteristics
Insidious onset
Prolonged untreated psychosis
Disorganized subtype
No mood disturbance
Early negative symptoms
Non-compliance with medication

Schizophrenia 131
though the prodromal symptoms are often in ado-
lescence.
• Men have a slightly higher incidence, and women 
also have a later and diff erent age-of-onset pro-
fi le, with a second peak around the menopause 
(Figure 12.2). Men tend to have a more severe ill-
ness and worse prognosis. Oestrogen’s regulation 
of dopamine receptor sensitivity may explain these 
gender diff erences.
• Suggestions of a fall in incidence of schizophre-
nia over the past 30 years are probably the result 
of changing diagnostic practice and service provi-
sion, not a true decline.
• Some cases of schizophrenia begin later in life. 
Late-onset schizophrenia refers to subjects with 
onset over age 60. Very little is known about this 
subtype.
Aetiology
Th ere have been many and diverse views of schizo-
phrenia: as a brain disease, as a psychological dis-
order with no organic basis, and as a myth. Over the 
past 20 years, its original conception as a genetically 
infl uenced neurodevelopmental disorder again pre-
vails.
Genetic factors
Th ere is an increased risk of schizophrenia in people 
with a family history of the condition (Figure 12.3). 
Twin studies show that this is due almost entirely to 
genetic factors and that the heritability is about 80%. 
Adoption studies support this conclusion, in that 
children of a schizophrenic parent who are adopted 
by parents without schizophrenia retain their in-
creased (10–12%) risk of illness.
• Th ese studies also show that the genetic predispo-
sition to schizophrenia overlaps with schizotypal 
disorder and perhaps delusional disorder. Th ese 
Females
Males
2
1
10
20
30
40
50
Incidence (cases per 10 000)
Age (years)
Figure 12.2 Schizophrenia: age at onset.
40%
48%
One parent affected
General population
0.8%
2%
5%
9%
12%
17%
First cousin affected
Grandparent affected
Sibling affected
Non-identical co-twin
affected
Both parents affected
Identical co-twin
affected
Risk of developing schizophrenia (%)
10
20
30
40
50
Figure 12.3 Familial risk of 
schizophrenia.

132 
Schizophrenia
conditions are therefore sometimes grouped 
together as schizophrenia spectrum disorders. 
Th ere are also genetic overlaps with bipolar disor-
der, and with autism.
• Several schizophrenia susceptibility genes have 
now been identifi ed such as neuregulin and dys-
bindin. One common mode of action may be an 
infl uence on neurodevelopment and synaptic 
functioning. Th e mode of inheritance is not clear, 
but probably involves these and many other sus-
ceptibility genes, each of small eff ect. Th e genes 
probably interact with each other (epistasis) and 
aff ect a person’s vulnerability to the environmental 
risk factors mentioned below. 
• About one-quarter of people with velo-cardio-
facial syndrome (VCFS), caused by a deletion of 
one copy of chromosome 22q11, develop schizo-
phrenia.
Environmental factors
Although quantitatively the most important fac-
tor, genes are not the sole cause of schizophrenia. 
There are many known and suspected environ-
mental risk factors, both biological and social (risk 
factors for schizophrenia are listed in Table 12.8). 
However, the interpretation of many of the factors 
is unclear. Taken together this information sup-
ports the view that schizophrenia has its roots in 
early development.
• Obstetric complications. Th e risk of developing 
schizophrenia in people with a history of obstetric 
complications is increased about four-fold. Com-
plications associated with foetal hypoxia are par-
ticularly implicated. However, it is not known if the 
relationship is causal.
• Excess of winter births (February and March). Th is 
is a true seasonal eff ect, being reversed in Australia 
(and absent near the Equator). It may be a cor-
relate of viral infections during pregnancy being 
more common in early winter.
• Urban birth and upbringing. Th is is a dose-
dependent relationship (risk increased more than 
three-fold for a large town compared with a rural 
area). Its cause is unknown.
• Migration. There is an increased frequency (rela-
tive risk about 4) of schizophrenia in the chil-
dren of Afro-Caribbeans who came to Britain in 
the 1950s, and in many other migrant groups in 
other populations. The risk is particularly high in 
those immigrants living in areas where they are 
a ‘rare’ ethnic group. Its explanation is contro-
versial, with biological (genetic, viral) and socio-
logical (racial prejudice, social deprivation) 
theories.
• Early cannabis use (pre-teens) is a risk factor, but 
studies have not fully controlled for use of other 
drugs.
• Advancing paternal age is thought to be a risk fac-
tor due to accumulating germ cell mutations. Th e 
risk increases with increasing paternal age.
The brain in schizophrenia
The dopamine hypothesis
Th e dopamine hypothesis has been the leading bio-
chemical explanation for schizophrenia for over 
30 years. It proposes that there is an excess of dopa-
mine transmission (‘hyperdopaminergia’) in schizo-
phrenia (whether due to too much dopamine, too 
many receptors, etc.). It was based on three main 
lines of evidence:
• Antipsychotic drugs are, without exception, dopa-
mine D2 receptor antagonists.
• Dopamine agonists (e.g. amphetamines, l-DOPA) 
can produce a paranoid psychosis.
• Some cerebrospinal fl uid (CSF) and brain studies 
of schizophrenia indicate abnormal levels of dopa-
mine, its metabolites, enzymes or receptors.
Advancing or refuting the dopamine hypothesis 
has proved diffi  cult. However, the past few years have 
seen considerable progress, mostly through positron 
emission tomography (PET) and single-photon emis-
sion computed tomography (SPECT) brain imaging 
studies with dopamine radioligands. Dopamine does 
indeed appear to be closely linked to the symptoms 
Table 12.8 Risk factors for schizophrenia
Biological
Family history
Obstetric complication
Season of birth
Advancing paternal age
Early cannabis use may be precipitating but 
psychoactive substance use is a strong maintaining 
factor
Psychological
Life stressors (precipitating and/or maintaining))
High expressed emotion in the family (maintaining)
Social
Poverty
Urban birth and upbringing
Migration (fi rst- and second-generation migrants)

Schizophrenia 133
of schizophrenia, but in a much more subtle way than 
originally proposed:
• Th ere is good evidence that hyperdopaminergia 
occurs during acute schizophrenia, in the basal 
ganglia (striatum). 
• As well as the hyperdopaminergia during acute 
schizophrenia in the striatum, there is probably 
insuffi  cient dopaminergic activity in the prefron-
tal cortex in patients with chronic schizophrenia, 
which contributes to the cognitive and negative 
symptoms.
• Th e dopamine system is unlikely to be the prima-
ry abnormality. Much evidence suggests that the 
dopamine changes are downstream of alterations 
in glutamate transmission. Notably, signalling via 
the NMDA (N-methyl d-aspartate) subtype of glu-
tamate receptor is implicated both by the genetic 
discoveries and the fact that NMDA receptor 
antagonists (ketamine, phencyclidine) produce a 
schizophrenia-like syndrome.
Functional imaging studies
Abnormalities in regional cerebral blood fl ow and 
metabolism occur in schizophrenia, related to par-
ticular situations and neuropsychological tests. Such 
diff erences support the idea that particular neuronal 
circuits are impaired in schizophrenia, especially 
those involving the frontal cortex, hippocampus, 
thalamus and cerebellum. 
Structural brain changes
Th e most robust fi nding is enlargement of the lateral 
ventricles and a slight decrease in size of the brain. 
Th ere may be a preferential involvement of the 
temporal lobe and a loss of normal cerebral asym-
metries.
• Th e structural brain changes are statistically 
robust, but not diagnostically useful since there is 
much overlap with controls, and the same fi ndings 
can also occur in other disorders.
• Some of the abnormalities are present in people 
before they get ill; the other changes develop when 
the person develops psychosis. Th ereafter, the 
progression of brain alterations with the course of 
the illness remains unclear (and is confounded by 
medication eff ects).
• Th e histological basis of schizophrenia is 
unknown, though the cytoarchitecture of the cer-
ebral cortex – its neuronal and synaptic organi-
zation – appears altered. Th e white matter and 
its myelination may also be aff ected. Th ere is no 
gliosis (proliferation and activation of glial cells), 
suggesting the absence of a neurodegenerative 
processes.
Psychological and social theories
The earlier psychological and social theories of 
the causation of schizophrenia lack convincing 
supporting evidence. However, psychological and 
social factors are clearly important in its outcome, 
exemplified by the effect on the patient of the emo-
tion expressed by family members. These factors 
may also precipitate schizophrenia, since there is 
an excess of life events in the months preceding the 
first episode.
• Psychological interest is now directed mainly at 
the neuropsychological mechanisms. For example, 
one theory views schizophrenia as aff ecting the 
ability to distinguish actions generated by internal 
events (thoughts, feelings) and external stimuli 
(sensations).
• Schizophrenia is also being viewed as a salience 
syndrome – that is, an inability to decide which 
stimuli are important (salient) and to respond 
accordingly. Th is theory fi ts in well with the hyper-
dopaminergia mentioned earlier, since dopamine 
is a key determinant of how we decide what to 
respond to and what to ignore.
The neurodevelopmental model
Putting the various fi ndings together, most research-
ers now view schizophrenia as a neurodevelopmental 
disorder. Th at is, it is caused by abnormalities of brain 
development, largely driven by genetic predisposi-
tion and early environmental factors (Figure 12.4).
• Diff erent versions of the model emphasize the 
prenatal environment (‘doomed from the womb’), 
adolescence or a combination of both.
• Ongoing factors throughout life may well 
contribute as well, since a pure developmental 
model does not explain well the age of onset, 
the fluctuating clinical course or cases begin-
ning later in life. One notion is that the devel-
opmental abnormalities render the brain less 
able to undergo ‘plasticity’ – its normal adaptive 
response to changing environmental demands 
and stressors.
• Th ough psychosocial and family factors are 
neglected in the model, their infl uence should not 
be ignored, as mentioned above. Th ese are likely 
to be mediated via stress and its eff ects upon the 
brain.

134 
Schizophrenia
 Th e evidence in favour of the neurodevelopmental 
model includes:
• Th e fact that the neuropathological fi ndings (e.g. 
ventricular enlargement) are present before the 
onset of symptoms.
• Th e histological abnormalities suggest a prenatal 
origin.
• Most of the robust environmental risk factors act in 
utero or early childhood.
• Children destined as adults to get schizophre-
nia have impaired behavioural, intellectual and 
motor development, demonstrable from infancy 
onwards.
• People with schizophrenia have increased rates of 
minor physical anomalies and abnormal dermato-
glyphics, both of which point to prenatal develop-
mental disturbance.
Disorders related to 
schizophrenia
Several other disorders are grouped together with 
schizophrenia, because:
• they are also psychoses that are not secondary to a 
mood disorder or organic disorder (in the case of 
schizoaff ective disorder and delusional disorders); 
or
• they are thought to be causally related (in the case 
of schizotypal disorder); and
• they do not meet the criteria for diagnosis of schiz-
ophrenia (Table 12.1).
Schizoaffective disorder
Clinical features
Th e distinction of schizophrenia from bipolar dis-
order originated in the belief that these were two 
discrete disorders. It is refl ected in the classifi ca-
tion of bipolar disorder as a mood disorder separate 
from schizophrenia. However, this view is almost 
certainly wrong (based on epidemiological and ge-
netic considerations). Certainly, many patients have 
features of both conditions, hence schizoaff ective 
disorder.
• Use the diagnosis only for patients who satisfy cri-
teria for schizophrenia and mood disorder during 
the same episode. Otherwise, diagnose the pre-
dominant syndrome (or neither). For example, one 
fi rst-rank symptom in mania does not warrant a 
label of schizoaff ective disorder (let alone schizo-
phrenia). Similarly, labile mood is common in 
acute schizophrenia.
Aberrant prenatal brain
development
birth
early adulthood
adolescence
Early environmental
factors
•  Obstetric
    complications
•  Urbanicity
Precipitants
•  Stress/life events
•  Psychoactive drugs
Disease progression
•  Aberrant plasticity
•  ‘Kindling’
Subsequent brain maturation
(normal or abnormal)
•  Synaptic pruning
•  Myelination
•  Apoptosis
Childhood (premorbid)
impairments
•  Intellectual
•  Motor
•  Social
Prodrome
SCHIZOPHRENIA
Genes
Figure 12.4 The 
neurodevelopmental model 
of schizophrenia.

Schizophrenia 135
Management and prognosis
Mood symptoms and schizophrenic symptoms are 
treated on their merits. Mood stabilizers and antipsy-
chotics are often used in combination.
• Th e prognosis is intermediate between schizo-
phrenia and mood disorder. It is better in those 
whose predominant mood disturbance is manic 
rather than depressive.
Delusional disorders (paranoid 
psychoses)
Many patients have a psychosis without an underly-
ing mood disturbance or organic disorder but do not 
satisfy the criteria for schizophrenia. Persecutory de-
lusions are the main feature. Hallucinations are rare. 
Personality remains intact. Th ese disorders are divid-
ed into acute and chronic types.
• The disorders in this ‘residual’ category of psy-
chosis have had a variety of names. The pre-
ferred collective term is now delusional disorder, 
though paranoid psychosis is still commonly 
used.
Acute delusional disorder
Th ese conditions are characterized by their acute on-
set, clinical features and rapid resolution.
• Th ere are multiple, transient persecutory delu-
sions, a sense of perplexity or suspicion, and a 
labile mood.
• Th ey may be caused by drugs (in which case they 
are diagnosed as such) or follow extreme stresses, 
hence the older terms psychogenic psychosis and 
brief reactive psychosis. Th ere is also an evocative 
French term, bouff ée delirante (a ‘puff  of mad-
ness’).
• Some cases will, of course, turn out to be more per-
sistent psychotic disorders.
Persistent delusional disorder
A persistent delusional disorder is one lasting more 
than 3 months. Chronic paranoid psychosis and para-
noia describe similar disorders.
• Th e delusions are usually systematized (i.e. stable 
and combined into a complex system). Th ey often 
centre upon alleged (and plausible) injustices. Th e 
person may embark on litigation, or occasionally 
retribution, so it is important to ask about thoughts 
of aggression and hostility.
• Th e delusions are often encapsulated. Th e rest of 
the mental state can be unremarkable to the point 
that, if the delusional system is not detected, no 
abnormal features are elicited. Because of this, the 
disorder can go unrecognized for years, becoming 
hard to distinguish from paranoid personality dis-
order; though in the latter the paranoid ideas are 
not truly delusional.
• Th e appropriate diagnosis may change to one of 
mood disorder or schizophrenia.
• Onset is usually in middle age. Social isolation, 
deafness and paranoid personality traits are risk 
factors.
 Clinical scenario
A 50-year-old librarian, Mr Y, was arrested for 
threatening his boss, having been made redundant 
after 30 years. He had no psychiatric history. Mr Y 
was convinced that the boss had plotted against 
him. His diary revealed an increasing preoccupation 
with these ideas and included allegations and 
events known to be false. Hallucinations, thought 
disorder, mood disorder and substance misuse were 
excluded. Mr Y was single, without close friends, 
and had a lifelong interest in spying. He reluctantly 
agreed to take haloperidol, which gradually resolved 
the delusions and he stopped pestering his ex-boss. 
However, the beliefs remained in attenuated form, 
and he continued to suspect various conspiracies 
were going on.
Specifi c variants of persistent 
delusional disorders
Th e following variants of persistent delusional disor-
der are mentioned either because of their clinical im-
portance or because they have a memorable eponym 
and are beloved by examiners.
• Morbid (pathological) jealousy is not uncommon, 
and is potentially dangerous. Th e patient, usually 
male, has the delusional belief that his partner is 
unfaithful. He may go to elaborate lengths to prove 
this and remains unconvinced by evidence to the 
contrary. He may threaten and fi nally attack his 
partner or the alleged third party. Usually morbid 
jealousy is a symptom of psychotic depression, 
schizophrenia, alcoholic psychosis or dementia, 
but it can be seen in isolation. Th e risks posed by 
morbid jealousy (and other psychoses with per-
secutory delusions with potential for violent acts) 
sometimes overrule patient confi dentiality so the 
intended victim can be warned. A full risk assess-
ment is mandatory.

136 
Schizophrenia
• Monosymptomatic 
hypochondriacal 
psychosis 
(somatic delusional disorder) is the delusional 
belief that the person has an illness or deform-
ity. It can lead to a prolonged search for inappro-
priate medical or surgical treatments. It must be 
distinguished from hypochondriasis and dysmor-
phophobia.
• In de Clérambault’s syndrome (erotomania), the 
patient, usually female, has a delusion that a man 
of high standing (a pop star, even a psychiatrist) is 
in love with her. Some stalkers have this disorder.
• In folie à deux, two people, often isolated sisters, 
share the same delusions. One is genuinely psy-
chotic, the other is ‘induced’ to become so and is 
said to recover spontaneously when they are sepa-
rated.
• Capgras’ delusion (illusion des soisies) is the belief 
that someone close by has been replaced by an 
impostor or double. Fregoli’s delusion is the belief 
that someone close to them is impersonating other 
people. Both have been called syndromes, but they 
are really symptoms (delusional misinterpreta-
tions). Both are very rare. Th ey occur in schizo-
phrenia, dementia and after right hemisphere 
damage.
Management and prognosis of 
delusional disorders
Delusional disorders, like all psychoses, can respond 
to antipsychotic drugs.
• Acute delusional disorders often resolve within 
days, especially if the triggering stressor is removed. 
Full recovery is the rule, although relapses may 
occur. Continue medication for a few months.
• Persistent delusional disorders can be resistant to 
treatment (or go untreated) and continue for years. 
Unlike schizophrenia, negative symptoms rarely 
occur. It has been claimed that pimozide is more 
eff ective than other antipsychotics, but without 
good evidence. SSRIs can also be useful.
Schizotypal disorder
Schizotypal disorder is like a chronic, attenuated 
form of schizophrenia, in which the beliefs stop short 
of being delusional, and the sensory experiences are 
not quite hallucinatory. Th e key features are:
• An aloof and suspicious manner.
• Eccentric behaviour.
• Avoidance of social contact.
• Odd beliefs and magical thinking.
• Vague, rambling or metaphorical speech.
• Tendency to odd ideas and sensory experiences.
• At least three of the above present for more than 
2 years.
Schizotypal disorder is diagnosed infrequently, 
partly because people rarely come into psychiatric 
contact, and partly because it overlaps with paranoid 
and schizoid personality disorders.
• Schizotypal disorder appears to have a similar 
genetic background to schizophrenia.
• Th ere are no specifi c treatments.
 KEYPOINTS
• Schizophrenia is a psychosis characterized by 
specifi c types of delusions, hallucinations and 
thought disorder, called fi rst-rank symptoms. 
By defi nition, schizophrenia is not secondary to 
a mood or organic disorder, and the symptoms 
must have lasted more than a month.
• Some patients progress to a chronic state 
where social isolation, apathy and poverty 
of speech predominate. These are called 
negative symptoms, in contrast to the positive 
symptoms that characterize the acute 
episodes. Cognitive defi cits also occur and 
contribute to poor functional outcome.
• Antipsychotic drugs are effective for positive 
symptoms but they do not prevent or treat 
negative symptoms. Clozapine is an atypical 
antipsychotic effective in some otherwise 
treatment-resistant cases.
• Most patients with schizophrenia need long-
term, multidisciplinary support. Psychological 
and social interventions are an integral part of 
management.
• Schizophrenia is a neurodevelopmental 
disorder that has high heritability but is best 
conceptualized as arising from a gene–
environment interaction.
 FURTHER READING
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence 
(NICE) (2009) CG82 Core interventions in the 
treatment and management of schizophrenia in 
primary and secondary care. Access at 
 http://www.nice.org.uk/CG82
Th e Schizophrenia Commission (2012) Th e aban-
doned illness. Access at
 http://www.schizophreniacommission.org.uk/
the-report/

Schizophrenia 137
 SELF-ASSESSMENT
1 A 22-year-old man presents with his mother. She 
has noted that over the last few days, he has 
been keeping to himself, appears perplexed and 
frightened, believing that a secret spy agency has 
conspired to murder him. He has slept with a large 
kitchen knife under his pillow so as to tackle any 
assailants. Prior to this he was attending university 
but his academic performance has been falling for 
the last few months. She is worried he may run 
away from home fearing for his own safety.
 
 Which line of management would you follow?
a ‘Wait and watch’ – advise coming back in 
2 weeks to see if this resolves spontaneously.
b Refer for psychological assessment to clarify and 
challenge beliefs.
c Admit for assessment and treatment.
d Prescribe an antipsychotic and suggest taking 
time off university.
e Prescribe a benzodiazepine and refer as an out-
patient to the Early Intervention Service.
2 An 82-year-old nursing home resident with no 
previous psychiatric contact has been increasingly 
agitated over the last few days. She is brought 
to hospital where she describes seeing ghosts at 
the end of her bed and is frightened by them. She 
remains awake at night but sleeps during the day. 
The nursing team on the medical assessment unit 
feel that she is psychiatrically unwell in light of her 
reports and ask for a psychiatric opinion. What 
would you do next?
a Suggest commencing a benzodiazepine to 
reduce agitation and help sleep.
b Suggest commencing an antipsychotic drug to 
help hallucinations.
c Ask for an ophthalmology opinion.
d Ask for a urine dipstick, blood tests and a 
Temperature, Pulse and Respiration (TPR) chart.
e Suggest urgent transfer to a psychiatric in-patient 
unit.
3 You are approached by a local citizens’ group 
who are considering whether they should support 
or oppose the development of a new psychiatric 
unit in the neighbourhood. They have facts and 
statistics about schizophrenia, which they put to 
you. You advise them that one of the facts they 
have is incorrect (and talk to them about the others). 
Which one of their facts is incorrect and needs to be 
challenged?
a The vast majority of individuals with schizophrenia 
are extremely dangerous.
b People with schizophrenia are more likely to get 
into trouble with the law than someone without 
the illness.
c People with schizophrenia are more likely to use 
illicit drugs than someone without the illness.
d Some people with schizophrenia may need help 
and support for several years.
e People with schizophrenia can make active 
contributions to society and their local 
neighbourhood.

Psychiatry Lecture Notes, Eleventh Edition. Gautam Gulati, Mary-Ellen Lynall and Kate Saunders. © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 
2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
for diagnosis remains neuropathological examination. 
Other organic disorders are simply psychiatric dis-
orders that appear, in a particular case, to be caused 
by an identifi able medical condition. Sometimes it is 
the psychiatric symptoms that fi rst bring the person 
to medical attention. Substance misuse disorders are 
organic, in that there is a specifi c pharmacological 
cause, but by convention they are classifi ed separately. 
Where the psychiatric disorder is considered a psycho-
logical reaction to medical illness, such as becoming 
depressed after being told you have cancer, this is not 
classifi ed as an organic disorder (see Box 13.1).
Dementia
Clinical features of dementia
Dementia is an acquired, progressive impairment 
of cognition that interferes with social functioning, 
but without clouding of consciousness. Th e cardinal 
 Box 13.1 What does ‘organic’ mean?
Psychiatric disorders labelled ‘organic’ are those 
with demonstrable pathology or aetiology, or that 
arise directly from a medical disorder. They are 
contrasted with all other psychiatric disorders, 
which are traditionally called ‘functional’. This 
distinction is conceptually fl awed as all disorders 
have biological, psychological and social 
contributions. The term causes both practical and 
semantic problems, but remains in widespread use, 
and so is used here.
Th e major organic disorders are dementia and de-
lirium. Like other psychiatric syndromes they are de-
fi ned by their clinical features. However, unlike other 
syndromes, they are known to arise from diff erent 
diseases with various aetiologies and pathologies. A 
complete diagnosis requires the disease as well as the 
syndrome to be identifi ed. In the case of dementia, 
diagnosis can often be made based on clinical history, 
examination and neuroimaging, but the gold standard 
Dementia, delirium and 
neuropsychiatry
Learning objectives
✓ To recognize dementia and delirium, and how to distinguish them 
clinically 
✓ To describe the causes of dementia, the features that distinguish the 
diff erent types, and an approach to the management of dementia
✓ To learn about the assessment and management of delirium
✓ To understand key aspects of other ‘organic’ psychiatric disorders 
including head injury and amnesic syndrome
✓ To think about the psychiatric manifestations of epilepsy and other 
disorders often considered ‘medical’
13

Dementia, delirium and neuropsychiatry 139
 feature is memory impairment (short-term worse 
than long-term), but the clinical profi le diff ers de-
pending on the specifi c type of dementia. Common 
features of dementia are:
• Symptoms present for 6 months, of suffi  cient 
severity to impair functioning.
• Personality and behavioural change, for example, 
wandering, aggression or disinhibition.
• Dysphasias, dyspraxias and focal neurological 
signs may be present.
• Psychotic symptoms in half of cases at some stage.
• Lack of insight into defi cits (except early on).
• Nearly always progressive (though this is not a 
diagnostic criterion).
The prevalence of dementia rises rapidly with 
age (see Figure 13.1). While specific risk factors for 
different dementias have been identified, and are 
discussed later in this chapter, none is as potent 
as age.
Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) describes people 
who do not meet the criteria for dementia but who 
have evidence of a decline in cognitive function. It 
progresses to dementia within a year in about 30% of 
cases. Th ere is much interest in this group with a view 
to early intervention.
Differential diagnosis of dementia
When diagnosing dementia, there are several condi-
tions that should be considered as diff erentials, and 
which may complicate the presentation of someone 
with an established diagnosis of dementia (Box 13.2). 
For example, the symptoms of poor concentration 
and impaired memory may be due to depression, 
rather than a degenerative brain disorder. Th is pres-
entation of depression is called pseudodementia (see 
Clinical scenario). Two factors that help distinguish 
depression from dementia are:
• Did low mood or poor memory come fi rst?
• Is the failure to answer questions due to lack of 
ability or lack of motivation?
In older adults with depression, apathy, anxi-
ety, irritability and forgetfulness are often more 
prominent than low mood. Depression is common 
and treatable, making it an important differential 
 diagnosis.
 Box 13.2 The differential diagnosis of 
confusion or memory loss
• Deafness or dysphasia can be misinterpreted as 
confusion – check that the person can hear; that 
any hearing aids used are working correctly; that 
they can understand; and that they can speak.
• Dementia – Alzheimer’s disease, vascular 
dementia and Lewy body dementia are the most 
common forms.
• Depression, including pseudodementia.
• Delirium – this is a clinical picture rather than 
a diagnosis and has multiple causes including 
CNS infection, sepsis, hypoxia, brain injury, 
drug toxicity, drug withdrawal syndromes and 
metabolic disturbance, to name a few.
• Other psychiatric disorder, especially late-onset 
schizophrenia (paraphrenia), psychosis, mania, 
functional disorder.
• Transient global amnesia.
• Epilepsy – post-ictal state or ongoing temporal 
lobe epilepsy (i.e. complex partial seizure).
• Drugs, especially those with anticholinergic 
effects, can exacerbate any cognitive impairment.
60-64 65-69 70-74 75-79
Age
Prevalence of dementia
80-84 85-89 94-94
>95
0
10
Population prevalence (%)
20
30
40
50
60
Males
Female
Figure 13.1 The prevalence of dementia with ageing. 
Data from Reynish E, Bickel H, Fratiglioni L, Kiejna A, 
Prince M, Georges J. (2009) Systematic review and 
collaborative analysis of the prevalence of dementia in 
Europe. Alzheimer’s and Dementia 5(4) (Suppl.), P393.

140 
Dementia, delirium and neuropsychiatry
 Clinical scenario: poor memory
Mrs Jones is a retired librarian, age 68, who 
lives alone in a village. She does not drive and 
fi nds it diffi cult to get out and meet people. She 
presented to the GP with complaints of poor 
memory, headache and lack of energy. She had a 
physical examination, bloods (FBC, UE, TFT, LFT, 
B12, folate, CRP) to exclude treatable organic 
causes for her symptoms, e.g. hypothyroidism 
or B12 defi ciency. Due to her age and subjective 
memory problems, she was referred to the memory 
clinic. At assessment she showed some evidence 
of cognitive impairment, scoring 24/30 on the 
MMSE. This assessment allowed a more detailed 
conversation with her and revealed that she had 
low mood, poor sleep, reduced appetite and a 
sense of isolation and loneliness. She was started 
on mirtazapine and over 2–3 months showed 
an improvement in her mood, energy levels and 
cognition. She was encouraged to engage with 
community activities and this social rehabilitation 
was an important part of her recovery. Late-life 
depression can present with a pseudodementia and 
it is important to exclude this differential, particularly 
in someone with an atypical presentation.
The causes of dementia
Th e common dementias are listed in Table 13.1. 
 Alzheimer’s disease accounts for over half of all cases, 
with most of the rest explained by vascular demen-
tia and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB). Th e syn-
dromes are not mutually exclusive, and the common 
ones often coexist. Dementia in the under 65s is 
termed early-onset (or presenile) dementia. In early-
onset dementia, a much higher percentage of cases 
are due to rare genetic disorders, or are the conse-
quence of severe head injury.
Careful clinical evaluation identifi es the specifi c 
dementia (as determined by diagnostic neuropatho-
logical examination) in more than 80% of cases. Clini-
cal features that can help to distinguish between the 
dementias are outlined in Tables 13.2 and 13.3. Th ese 
diagnostic pointers are often more specifi c in early 
dementia, as most late-stage dementias can produce 
a wide variety of symptoms.
A distinction is sometimes made clinically be-
tween cortical dementias (e.g. Alzheimer’s disease, 
Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease (CJD)), which predomi-
nantly aff ect the cortex, and subcortical dementias 
(e.g. Huntington’s disease), which mainly aff ect the 
basal ganglia, thalamus and deep white matter (see 
Table 13.4 for the associated clinical features of each). 
However, most dementias aff ect both regions of the 
brain, so the terms are misleading. It is better to try to 
make a specifi c diagnosis. 
Assessment of dementia
In the history and examination (see Chapter 3), close 
attention to medical history is important, in order to 
distinguish between the diff erent types of dementia, 
and their diff erential diagnoses. Clues could come 
from a history of a fall (?subdural haematoma), re-
peated falls (?dementia with Lewy bodies), new- onset 
incontinence (?normal pressure hydrocephalus, in-
fection leading to delirium) or rapid fl uctuations (?de-
mentia with Lewy bodies). On examination you might 
fi nd hypertension and a carotid bruit (?vascular de-
mentia) or primitive refl exes (?frontotemporal degen-
eration). Table 13.5 shows the baseline and specialized 
tests that are used in the investigation of dementia. 
Cognitive testing is an essential part of the routine 
assessment of suspected dementia, with the Mini-
Mental State Examination (MMSE) most widely 
used as a screening tool. Used in conjunction with 
other measures (e.g. Hopkins verbal learning test 
and CLOX – a clock drawing task to test executive 
function), the MMSE can lead to a more informed 
Table 13.1 Causes of dementia
Common causes
Alzheimer’s disease (50–60% of cases)
Vascular dementia (20–25%)
Dementia with Lewy bodies (10–15%)
Other causes account for ~10% of dementias
Degenerative disorders
Frontotemporal lobar degeneration 
Huntington’s disease
Prion disease
Parkinson’s plus syndromes
Metabolic disorders
Alcohol-associated dementia
Vitamin B12 defi ciency
Hypercalcaemia
Hypothyroidism
Hyperparathyroidism
Infections
HIV-associated dementia
Syphilis
Other causes
Normal pressure hydrocephalus
Intracranial tumours
Subdural haematoma
Head injury

Dementia, delirium and neuropsychiatry 141
Table 13.2 Diagnostic pointers in dementia (modifi ed from Kester & Scheltens, 2009 – see 
‘Further reading’)
Feature
Suggestive of …
Prominent behavioural change or 
profound apathy early in the illness
Vascular dementia or frontotemporal degeneration
Prominent aphasia
Vascular dementia or frontotemporal degeneration (semantic dementia or 
progressive non-fl uent aphasia)
Progressive gait disorder
Parkinson’s disease (PD)-associated dementia, normal pressure 
hydrocephalus or vascular dementia
Frequent falls
Progressive supranuclear palsy or dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB)
Prominent fl uctuations
Delirium, medication side effects, DLB, temporal lobe epilepsy, 
obstructive sleep apnoea syndrome or metabolic disturbance
Hallucinations or delusions
Delirium, medication side effects, late paraphrenia or DLB
Eye movement abnormalities
PD-associated dementia or Wernicke’s encephalopathy
Table 13.3 Clinical features distinguishing the dementias
Prominent symptoms and signs
Other clinical features
Alzheimer’s disease
Memory loss, especially short term
Dysphasia and dyspraxia
Behavioural changes, e.g. wandering
Psychotic symptoms at some stage
Apathy
Progressive
Survival 5–8 years
Vascular dementia
Early gait disturbance (small-step gait or 
parkinsonian gait)
Personality change, labile mood
Early urinary symptoms (frequency, 
urgency)
Preserved insight
Stepwise progression
History or signs of vascular disease elsewhere 
(peripheral vascular disease, ischaemic 
heart disease, renovascular disease, 
hypertension, retinopathy)
Presence of risk factors for vascular disease
Dementia with 
Lewy bodies and 
Parkinson’s disease 
dementia
Fluctuating dementia
Delirium-like phases
Parkinsonism
Visual hallucinations
REM sleep behaviour disorder
Antipsychotics worsen condition
Frontotemporal 
degeneration
Stereotyped behaviours
Personality change
Early loss of insight
Expressive dysphasia
Memory relatively preserved
Early primitive refl exes
Slowly progressive
Family history common
More common in women
Onset usually before age 70
Imaging shows selective atrophy of frontal 
and/or temporal lobes
Features depend on the subtype 
Huntington’s disease
Schizophrenia-like psychosis
Choreiform movements
Depression and irritability
Dementia occurs later
Presents in the 20s–40s
Affected parent and other relatives
Normal pressure 
hydrocephalus
Mental slowing, apathy, inattention
Urinary incontinence
Problems walking (gait apraxia)
Most common in 50–70-year-olds
Most common reversible dementia
Prion disease
Myoclonic jerks
Seizures
Cerebellar ataxia
Often starts at age <50
Rapid onset and progression
Death within a year

142 
Dementia, delirium and neuropsychiatry
Table 13.4 Typical clinical features of 
subcortical versus cortical dementias
Subcortical 
dementia
Cortical dementia
Memory loss
Moderate
Severe, early
Language
Normal
Affected (dysphasia)
Personality
Apathetic, inert
Indifferent
Mood
Flat, depressed
Normal
Coordination
Impaired
Normal
Motor speed
Slowed
Normal
Table 13.5 Investigations that may be informative in the assessment of dementia. All patients 
should have those tests shown in bold
Test
What the test may show
Blood tests
Full blood count
Electrolytes including calcium
Liver function tests
Thyroid function
Vitamin B12 and folate levels
ESR, ANA
Syphilis serology
HIV test
Macrocytosis (B12 defi ciency), anaemia, intercurrent infection
Hypercalcaemia, hyponatraemia, renal disease
Alcoholic liver disease
Hypothyroidism
Defi ciencies can produce cognitive changes
Test if suspicion of vasculitis
Now rare, but overlooked
Dementia is common in AIDS
Radiography
Chest X-ray
Bronchial carcinoma with ?cerebral metastases
Brain imaging (CT or MRI)
Tumour; infarcts; haematoma; temporal lobe atrophy suggests Alzheimer’s; 
pulvinar hyperintensity on MRI (new variant CJD); cortical ribbon on diffusion-
weighted MRI (sporadic CJD)
EEG
Characteristic periodic bi- or tri-phasic sharp wave complexes at 1–2 Hz in 
prion disease
Other tests
Lumbar puncture
Cerebral blood fl ow studies
Neuropsychological testing
Genetic testing
Brain biopsy
Normal pressure hydrocephalus; herpes encephalitis
Parietal hypometabolism suggests Alzheimer’s
Assess severity; profi le of defi cits may point to brain region most affected
Available for some familial dementias
Very rarely done; mainly for suspected prion disease
ANA, anti-nuclear antibodies; CJD, Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease; CT, computed tomography; EEG, electroencephalogram; ESR, 
erythrocyte sedimentation rate; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging.
dary care memory clinics should also have a struc-
tural brain scan (usually a CT scan) to identify any 
other treatable causes, e.g. subdural haematoma or 
normal pressure hydrocephalus. Unless there are 
indications of a more unusual cause of dementia, 
further tests (e.g. MRI brain, lumbar puncture) rare-
ly change the diagnosis, let alone reveal a reversible 
cause, beyond that provided by a careful history and 
examination. 
In those presenting with cognitive impairment 
under the age of 65, further investigations may be 
necessary (e.g. MRI brain, lumbar puncture) in order 
to accurately diagnose the aetiology, to inform prog-
nosis, and to allow appropriate genetic counselling 
for the individual and their family if necessary. Such 
patients may benefi t from a neurology referral.
Th ere is much interest in biomarkers to diag-
nose early dementia, or predict its onset, especially 
Alzheimer’s disease. Levels of various proteins in 
the cerebrospinal fl uid (CSF) show promise, as do 
some MRI measures, and some genetic tests. As yet 
none has the necessary sensitivity or specifi city for 
routine use.
 diagnosis, or it can suggest a need for more in-depth 
testing, for example using the Addenbrooke’s Cog-
nitive Examination.
Baseline blood tests are routinely performed in 
primary care, to investigate any treatable causes of 
cognitive impairment. All patients referred to secon-

Dementia, delirium and neuropsychiatry 143
Management of dementia
It is important to identify and treat reversible causes 
of dementia (e.g. space-occupying lesion, vitamin B12 
defi ciency); however, the majority of presentations 
are irreversible, and treatment is aimed at  reducing 
the speed of progression, and treating symptoms to 
optimize quality of life for patients and carers. Spe-
cifi c pharmacological treatments are now available, 
particularly for Alzheimer’s disease, and these are 
discussed below. 
Regardless of the cause of dementia, the following 
principles and strategies are important:
• Non-pharmacological methods should always be 
employed fi rst.
• Simple interventions are eff ective in improving 
problems such as wandering (e.g. by regular exer-
cise, or raising the door handle) and incontinence 
(e.g. by a toileting routine). 
• Avoid antipsychotic medication due to the 
increased risk of stroke and association with more 
rapid cognitive decline and with sudden death 
(this is particularly important in dementia with 
Lewy bodies). Antipsychotics should not be used 
long term, nor for sedation, nor for behavioural 
problems without evidence of a psychotic basis. 
For psychotic symptoms that have not responded 
to other pharmacological and non-pharmacologi-
cal measures, use antipsychotics sparingly and for 
brief periods only (reviewed at least every 6 weeks).
Components of treatment
 1 Treat any reversible cause.
 2 A multidisciplinary approach and formal care 
plan.
 3 Social support services:
 
a  Discuss available support services and ben-
efi ts, for both patients and carers.
 
b  Social interventions such as meals-on-wheels, 
day care and respite admissions help carers cope.
 4 Environment: familiar, calm, adequately lit, vis-
ible clocks, minimize environmental change, 
 follow routines, familiar carers.
 5 Psychological treatments include aromatherapy, 
massage, reality orientation, reminiscence thera-
py, music therapy, art therapy, memory training.
 6 Prevent deterioration: pay particular attention to 
management of cardiovascular risk factors.
 7 Treat any exacerbating factors: 
 
a  Pain, constipation, infection and dehydration 
all worsen cognitive function. Patients may 
be unable to express these symptoms, so you 
should examine for them.
 
b  Investigate any sudden deterioration. It 
may be due to a treatable cause, e.g. su-
perimposed  delirium due to a urinary tract 
 infection.
 8 Pharmacological treatments for dementia.
 9 Identify and treat any complications:
 
a  Depression: SSRIs are better tolerated than 
 tricyclics.
 
b  Disturbed sleep.
 
c  Aggression.
10 Medico-legal considerations: 
 
a  Patients with dementia should be cautioned 
about the risks of driving. Th e Driver and Vehi-
cle Licensing Agency (DVLA) or other relevant 
authority should be informed when the diag-
nosis is made.
 
b  Capacity to make specifi c decisions may vary 
depending on the severity of illness, and 
the nature of the decision. Th e 2005 Mental 
 Capacity Act should always be taken into ac-
count – for example, regarding advance direc-
tives and deprivation of liberty safeguards.
 
c  In advanced dementia, palliative rather than 
active treatment may be indicated. Next of kin 
should be fully involved in these decisions.
Prognosis of dementia
Most dementias are progressive and average life ex-
pectancy is 5–8 years after diagnosis of onset, with 
some dementias, notably prion disease, progress-
ing much more rapidly. Younger cases and those 
with focal neurological signs or psychotic symptoms 
have a worse prognosis. Severe dementia has a mean 
 survival of 18 months, with death often associated 
with pneumonia and other febrile episodes. People 
with dementia should not be blood or tissue donors 
in view of the risk of transmission of prion disease.
Alzheimer’s disease
Alzheimer’s disease is the most common demen-
tia, and there have been substantial advancements 
in understanding the pathology, and developing 
 treatments.
Th e cardinal features of Alzheimer’s dementia are 
neurofi brillary tangles and amyloid plaques in the 
hippocampus and cerebral cortex, with loss of syn-
apses. Neuropathological diagnosis is therefore the 
most accurate. Neurochemically, the main abnor-
mality is a loss of acetylcholine due to degeneration 
of the cholinergic neurons of the basal forebrain. Th e 
cholinergic defi cits and synaptic loss are proportional 
to the severity of the dementia.

144 
Dementia, delirium and neuropsychiatry
A considerable amount is now known about the 
causes of the disease (Table 13.6). Th e major risk 
factor, apart from age, is the E4 (epsilon4) variant 
of the apolipoprotein E (apoE) gene. Th ree poly-
morphisms exist: apoE2, apoE3 and apoE4. Ap-
proximately 20% of the population carry one copy 
of apoE4 and have twice the risk of Alzheimer’s dis-
ease; the 3% who are apoE4 homozygotes (i.e. two 
copies of apoE4) are at several-fold increased risk. 
Conversely, the risk is about 40% lower in people 
without an apoE4 allele, and those with apoE2 al-
leles may be at lower risk still. Th e eff ect of apoE4 
is probably that it brings forward the age of onset of 
dementia, by about a decade (note that apoE4 is nei-
ther necessary nor suffi  cient for Alzheimer’s disease 
– it is a risk factor). Many other genes of small eff ect 
probably also contribute.
Early-onset Alzheimer’s disease is often familial 
and (unlike most cases) may be due to an autosomal 
dominant mutation. So far, three genes have been im-
plicated, with several diff erent causative mutations in 
each: amyloid precursor protein (APP), and the prese-
nilin genes PSEN1 and PSEN2. Th ough extremely rare, 
these cases helped identify the pathways involved in 
Alzheimer’s more disease generally (see below).
Treatment with non-steroidal anti-infl ammatory 
drugs (NSAIDs), hormone replacement therapy 
(HRT) or statins may be associated with a lower risk of 
developing dementia and Alzheimer’s disease. While 
plausible mechanisms exists to explain these eff ects, 
the evidence is weak, and the eff ects of  confounding 
factors are likely to be important; for example, wom-
en given HRT tend to be healthier and better edu-
cated. High educational attainment and mental or 
physical exercise are both protective factors, perhaps 
by increasing ‘cognitive reserve’ and supporting a ‘use 
it or lose it’ theory of brain function.
Raised plasma homocysteine is an independent, 
graded risk factor for developing Alzheimer’s disease 
several years later. Th is may be due to its role in ath-
erosclerotic processes, or in neurotoxicity.
Th e key process leading to Alzheimer’s disease 
is abnormal metabolism of beta-amyloid, the main 
constituent of senile plaques, and a fragment of the 
amyloid precursor protein. Th e abnormality results 
in formation of insoluble forms and complexes 
of beta-amyloid, which accumulate and trigger a 
range of harmful biochemical events. Th is ‘amyloid 
cascade’ is promoted in various ways by the causal 
factors mentioned (Figure 13.2). Th e central role of 
beta amyloid is supported by fi ndings in transgenic 
mice with Alzheimer’s disease-causing mutations in 
the APP gene. Th ey develop senile plaques and be-
come cognitively impaired, unlike rodents without 
the gene  mutation.
Abnormalities in microtubule-associated tau pro-
tein, which forms neurofi brillary tangles, may also be 
important, though the connection to beta-amyloid is 
unclear. Oxidative stress and infl ammatory processes 
may also contribute to Alzheimer’s pathology. 
Table 13.6 Risk factors for Alzheimer’s disease
Factor
Comments
Genetic
Apolipoprotein E (chromosome 19)
APP (chromosome 21); PSEN1 and PSEN2 
(chromosomes 14 and 1)
Other genes (chromosomes 6, 10, 11, etc.)
Down’s syndrome (trisomy 21)
ApoE4 allele increases risk and reduces age at onset
Autosomal dominant mutations in these genes cause 
early-onset familial Alzheimer’s disease
Identity and contribution uncertain
Alzheimer’s disease occurs in middle age
Other risk factors
Increasing age
Females
Homocysteinaemia
Obesity or diabetes in middle age
Head injury
Latent herpes simplex infection
History of depression
Aluminium exposure
Predominant risk factor (Figure 13.1)
Slightly higher risk than men (Figure 13.1)
High plasma homocysteine doubles risk
Mechanism unclear
Doubles risk of Alzheimer’s disease
In people with an apoE4 allele
Risk of dementia may be increased
Controversial, probably false
Environmental – protective factors
High educational level
Physically and mentally active lifestyle
‘Cerebral reserve’
‘Use it or lose it’

Dementia, delirium and neuropsychiatry 145
Treatment of Alzheimer’s disease 
Treatment consists of anti-dementia medication, in 
addition to symptomatic treatment for behavioural 
and psychological symptoms (psychological sup-
port, social support and sometimes medication). 
Cholinesterase inhibitors (e.g. donepezil) are licensed 
for mild and moderate Alzheimer’s disease. Th ey 
have modest eff ects on cognitive symptoms, global 
outcome and activities of daily living. Th e eff ect is 
roughly equivalent to a 6-month delay in cognitive 
decline. Th ey may also have benefi t for behavioural 
symptoms. In the United Kingdom, they must be 
 prescribed by a specialist according to specifi ed di-
agnostic and severity criteria. Th e rationale for cho-
linesterase inhibitors is that they ameliorate the 
cholinergic defi cits that occur early in the disease 
process; the fact they have such a modest eff ect prob-
ably refl ects the more widespread, and progressive, 
disease process. 
Memantine is an NMDA (N-methyl d-aspartate) 
glutamate receptor antagonist licensed for use in 
moderate to severe Alzheimer’s disease. It can also be 
used if cholinesterase inhibitors are contraindicated 
or not tolerated. Treatment trials with NSAIDs and 
folic acid (to lower homocysteine) are also underway, 
but so far there has been no substantive evidence to 
support their use. Trials of HRT have been negative. 
Any potential preventive or disease-retarding inter-
vention must take into account the fact that the pa-
thology begins in earnest at least a decade before the 
fi rst symptoms.
Vascular dementia
Vascular dementia is an umbrella term for dementia 
thought to be vascular in origin. One type is caused 
by multiple small infarcts (hence the earlier name of 
multi-infarct dementia). Others include ‘small vessel 
disease’ and Binswanger’s disease (subcortical leu-
koencephalopathy). It is associated with risk factors 
for atherosclerosis and cerebrovascular disease. An 
overt stroke leads to dementia in 10% of cases, and in 
30% after a second stroke. Th ere is no specifi c treat-
ment for vascular dementia, other than to attend to 
the cerebrovascular risk factors (e.g. aspirin, smok-
ing); however, those with mixed vascular and Alz-
heimer’s pathology may benefi t from cholinesterase 
inhibitors. Vascular impairment acts synergistically 
with Alzheimer’s disease to produce dementia.
Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB)
Also called Lewy body disease or Lewy body de-
mentia, this is the third most common form of 
dementia. It has a distinctive clinical appearance 
(Table 13.2) with visual hallucinations, parkin-
sonism and a fluctuating course. The overlap with 
Altered APP metabolism
DEMENTIA
Increased β-amyloid42-43
Tau
hyperphosphorylation
Ageing
Down’s
syndrome
APP and PS
mutations
ApoE4
Other
genes
Head
injury
High
homocysteine
?Inhibited by:
Cognitive activity
NSAIDs, 
HRT, statins
Neurofibrillary
tangles
Senile
plaques
Amyloid
angiopathy
Synaptic
degeneration
Neuronal
loss
Cholinergic
deficits
Figure 13.2 The pathogenesis of 
Alzheimer’s disease. APP, amyloid 
precursor protein; HRT, hormone 
replacement therapy; NSAIDs, 
non-steroidal anti-infl ammatory 
drugs; PS, presenilin.

146 
Dementia, delirium and neuropsychiatry
Parkinson’s disease reflects their common pathol-
ogy – that is, Lewy bodies (intracellular inclusions 
made of alpha-synuclein), but in dementia with 
Lewy bodies these occur predominantly in the 
cerebral cortex. Its aetiology is unknown, and no 
genes have been identified. Cholinesterase inhibi-
tors are valuable (and may be more effective than 
in Alzheimer’s disease). Importantly, antipsychot-
ics should be avoided because of the risk of sensi-
tivity reactions and increased mortality.
Parkinson’s disease dementia
Although the cardinal symptoms of Parkinson’s 
disease are motor, it is increasingly recognized as a 
neuropsychiatric disorder. Behavioural symptoms 
can include sleep disturbances, apathy, depres-
sion, anxiety and dementia – almost any psychiat-
ric disturbance in fact! Dementia with Lewy bodies 
is closely related to Parkinson’s disease dementia. 
The convention is that the latter category is used 
for dementia occurring more than 12 months after 
onset of parkinsonism. By this definition, dementia 
occurs in about one-third of cases of Parkinson’s 
disease. Other cases of Parkinson’s disease have a 
more circumscribed ‘executive dysfunction’ syn-
drome, with failures of attention and short-term 
memory. l-DOPA, which often dramatically im-
proves the motor symptoms of Parkinson’s disease, 
does not improve the dementia, but cholinesterase 
inhibitors may. Antipsychotics should be avoided 
if possible; if other treatment approaches have 
failed they may be used. There is modest evidence 
for use of quetiapine and clozapine for psychotic 
 symptoms.
Frontotemporal lobar 
degeneration (FTLD)
Th is term embraces a spectrum of conditions af-
fecting the frontal and temporal lobes, including 
Pick’s disease (characterized by Pick bodies and Pick 
cells), and dementias associated with motor neuron 
disease. FTLD causes about 5% of dementias, more so 
in younger subjects. Some cases, maybe up to a half, 
are caused by mutations in the microtubule-associat-
ed protein tau (MAPT) or granulin (GRN, also called 
progranulin, PGRN) genes, both on chromosome 17. 
Others are associated with a protein called TDP-43. 
Th ere is no specifi c treatment. Patients are very sen-
sitive to many psychotropic drugs, which should be 
used with caution to treat depressive or psychotic 
symptoms.
Huntington’s disease
Unlike most psychiatric disorders, it is entirely gen-
etic. It is autosomal dominant, caused by a trinucleo-
tide repeat expansion (a ‘molecular stutter’) in the 
huntingtin gene on chromosome 4. Pathologically, 
there is marked atrophy of the caudate nucleus, and 
later in the frontal lobe. Th e abnormal huntingtin 
protein is thought to be neurotoxic, though the mech-
anism is not clear. Predictive genetic testing is avail-
able. Th e psychosis and depression can be treated 
symptomatically, but there is no medication available 
for the cognitive impairment itself.
Normal pressure hydrocephalus
Th is accounts for up to 5% of dementia, and is the 
most common potentially reversible type of demen-
tia. Th e term is a misnomer as CSF pressure is often 
increased. Th e clinical triad of cognitive impairment, 
urinary incontinence and ataxic gait is characteristic 
(Table 13.2), and MRI or CT scanning, showing dis-
proportionate ventricular enlargement, may help 
diagnostically. Th e dementia is usually mild, and the 
other symptoms more prominent. Treatment is by 
ventricular shunting; 50% respond well.
Prion disease
Prion diseases are caused by an abnormal form 
of a protein called prion protein, and include 
Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease (CJD). Th e abnormal-
ity can be inherited or acquired, because abnormal 
prion protein is transmissible, via blood, diet and 
contaminated surgical instruments. Prion disease 
is exceedingly rare but notable, especially in the 
United Kingdom, because of ‘variant CJD’ (vCJD), 
acquired from cows with bovine spongiform en-
cephalopathy (BSE) – prion disease in cattle – dur-
ing the 1980s. One hundred and seventy-six cases of 
death from vCJD have been reported in the United 
Kingdom (August 2013). Th e current predictions are 
for hundreds more, though earlier estimates were 
much higher, but were not realized. Unlike typi-
cal CJD, these have occurred in young adults and 
present with prominent psychiatric symptoms, es-
pecially depression and personality change, which 
may be associated with a rapid deterioration. Th ere 
may be a genetic predisposition to vCJD. Notably, 
the prion protein is thought to be a receptor for APP, 
the protein central to Alzheimer’s disease. Any sus-
pected cases of prion disease should be referred to 
the National Surveillance Unit in Edinburgh. Th ere 
is no disease-modifying treatment for prion disease.

Dementia, delirium and neuropsychiatry 147
Alcohol-induced dementia
True alcohol-induced dementia is rare. Visuo-spatial 
defi cits are often prominent. It is associated with at-
rophy of the white matter and frontal lobes. Dementia 
in those with alcohol dependence is more often due 
to Alzheimer’s disease or vascular dementia rather 
than to the alcohol itself. Alcohol-induced dementia 
does not usually improve with abstinence. Note that 
alcohol dependence also causes amnesic syndrome 
(see below).
Delirium
Also known as acute confusional state or acute brain 
syndrome. It is common on medical and surgical 
wards – one-third of elderly patients in hospital have 
an episode of delirium – so all doctors should be able 
to recognize and manage it. It may be helpful to re-
view the section on the assessment of cognition and 
the unresponsive patient (Chapter 3).
Clinical features of delirium
Clouding of consciousness is an important diagnostic 
sign. It refers to drowsiness, decreased awareness of 
surroundings, disorientation in time and place, and 
distractibility. At its most severe the patient may be 
unresponsive, but more commonly the impaired 
consciousness is quite subtle. Minor degrees of im-
paired consciousness can be detected by problems 
estimating the passage of time (e.g. how long the 
interview has been going on), and with concentra-
tion tasks (e.g. counting from 20 down to 1). Because 
clouding of consciousness may not be apparent, the 
fi rst clue to the presence of delirium is often one of its 
other features:
• Fluctuating course, worse at night.
• Visual hallucinations.
• Transient persecutory delusions.
• Irritability and agitation, or somnolence and 
decreased activity.
• Impaired concentration and memory.
Th e diff erential diagnosis includes dementia, es-
pecially dementia with Lewy bodies (Table 13.7), 
psychosis and depression. Th e clinical picture (espe-
cially the acute onset and rapid fl uctuations), and its 
context, are usually suffi  ciently characteristic to reach 
a rapid diagnosis. However, diff erentiating delirium 
from dementia with Lewy bodies can be diffi  cult in 
the short term, or without a good history. 
Aetiology of delirium
Delirium is due to an underlying medical or pharma-
cological problem, so recognition of it should be fol-
lowed by an urgent search for its cause (see Table 13.8 
and Clinical scenarios). Medication is implicated in 
one-third of cases, mostly drugs with anticholinergic 
eff ects (e.g. tricyclic antidepressants) or sedatives.
Several demographic factors predict those who are 
at high risk of developing delirium (Table 13.9). In 
Table 13.7 Delirium versus dementia
Delirium
Dementia
Onset
Acute
Insidious
Short-term 
course
Fluctuating
Constant
Attention
Poor
Good
Delusions and 
hallucinations
Common, simple, 
fl eeting
Less common, 
more stable
Table 13.8 Common causes of delirium
Prescribed drugs
Tricyclic antidepressants
Benzodiazepines and other sedatives
Digoxin
Diuretics
Lithium
Steroids
Opiates
Other drugs
Alcohol intoxication
Alcohol withdrawal and delirium tremens
Benzodiazepine withdrawal
Medical conditions
Hypoxia, e.g. postoperatively
Infection, particularly urine and chest sepsis
Organ failure (cardiac, renal, hepatic)
Hypoglycaemia
Dehydration
Constipation
Burns
Major trauma
Pain
Neurological conditions
Epilepsy (post-ictal)
Head injury
Space-occupying lesion
Encephalitis

148 
Dementia, delirium and neuropsychiatry
these individuals, delirium can follow relatively triv-
ial precipitants (e.g. constipation).
Management of delirium
Delirium is managed where it occurs – usually in 
general hospitals. Psychiatrists may be asked to as-
sess the patient, make the diagnosis and give ad-
vice. Treatment is directed both at the symptoms 
and at the cause, and includes environmental and 
medical interventions (Table 13.10). In practice, it 
is  important to search for a cause, and to start sup-
portive, environmental interventions (as in Table 
13.10) whilst this is ongoing. The latter may avoid 
the need for medication, which can complicate 
the problem, and which should only be used when 
necessary.
If sedative medication is needed, a benzodiazepine 
(e.g. lorazepam) is the best fi rst-line option. Th is 
should be off ered orally, and used intramuscularly 
(i.m.) only if absolutely necessary. Lorazepam has a 
quick onset of action providing immediate sympto-
matic relief; it is safer in older patients compared with 
antipsychotic medication. Lorazepam should be used 
as fi rst-line treatment for alcohol or seizure-related 
behavioural disturbance. Antipsychotics (e.g. halop-
eridol) can be used as an alternative (again, orally fi rst 
and i.m. only if necessary). Th ey should not be used 
in patients with a diagnosis of, or suspected, demen-
tia with Lewy bodies due to the risk of extrapyramidal 
side eff ects.
Occasionally, patients with delirium pose a risk to 
themselves, other patients or staff . If this is the case, 
ensure that the environment is optimized for safety, 
get advice from a psychiatrist about appropriate use 
of sedative medication and be aware that physical 
restraint may be needed to administer this safely. 
 Patients with delirium may have impaired capacity. 
Th is needs to be assessed for each decision. If de-
lirium impairs their capacity, they may be incapable 
of giving informed consent, and treatment under the 
Mental Capacity Act or common law (the doctrine 
of necessity) may be needed. If continuing interven-
tions without consent are anticipated, the Mental 
Health Act may be required.
 Clinical scenario: new confusion in 
an in-patient
Mrs White is a 78-year-old woman who presented 
to A&E with a fall. She had a history of dysuria and 
increased urinary frequency. Physical examination 
was normal, but bloods showed raised infl ammatory 
markers and mild dehydration. She was admitted 
to hospital for treatment of a presumed urinary tract 
infection. Three days after admission she became 
acutely confused. The treating team reassessed 
her, but found no evidence of new or worsening 
infection. They noted that she had a number of 
risk factors for delirium, including her age, gender, 
current infection and reduced mobility, but realized 
the importance of taking a thorough history 
to investigate her acute confusion. Medicines 
reconciliation revealed that prior to admission she 
had been taking regular diazepam, which had been 
inadvertently stopped on admission. When this was 
restarted, her confusion quickly resolved and she 
was discharged back to the community.
Prognosis of delirium
Prognosis depends on the cause; whilst many people 
will recover in days or weeks, delirium can persist 
for several months. It is associated with signifi cantly 
 increased mortality: meta-analysis shows that in old-
er adults (>65) who experience an episode of deliri-
um, only 45% of individuals are still alive 2 to 4 years 
later. Th ere is no good evidence that delirium pro-
gresses to dementia (although pre-existing dementia 
is a risk factor for delirium).
Table 13.9 Predisposing factors for delirium
Elderly
Male
Dementia
Frailty or immobility
Previous episode of delirium
Sensory impairment
Table 13.10 Management of delirium
Environmental components
Quiet surroundings (side room), constant low lighting, 
clock, calendar
Regular routine
Clear simple communications
Limit numbers of staff (e.g. key nurse)
Involve family
Medical components
Monitor vital signs
Investigate and treat underlying cause (e.g. antibiotics, 
oxygen, stop drug)
Consider use of medication if agitation and behaviour 
places patient or others at risk 

Dementia, delirium and neuropsychiatry 149
 Clinical scenario: ‘collapse 
query cause’
A 75-year-old lady is found lying on the fl oor and 
taken to hospital. She is drowsy, disorientated in 
time and place, distractible and unable to give any 
history. She thinks you are trying to kill her. She is 
febrile and hypotensive, but has no neurological 
signs or injuries. Blood tests and X-rays are 
performed. She is given oxygen, and antibiotics for 
the clinical suspicion of septicaemia. Her agitation 
worsens but settles with lorazepam. The GP tells 
you that there is no past history of note. Blood 
cultures grow an organism sensitive to the antibiotic. 
Her condition improves over 72 hours. The 
lorazepam is tailed off and her cognitive function 
returns to normal.
Other organic disorders
Dementia and delirium have been described in detail 
because they are common. As mentioned at the start 
of the chapter, there are many other ‘organic’ con-
ditions, which can together present with the whole 
range of psychiatric disorders. Th e important prin-
ciples, and some specifi c examples, are summarized 
here.
Organic psychiatric disorders
In classifying these disorders, the rule of thumb is to 
preface the psychiatric label with ‘organic’ and state 
the aetiology (Table 13.11). For example, ‘Organic 
anxiety disorder due to thyrotoxicosis’.
Each organic syndrome is very rare compared 
with its ‘functional’ counterpart, and in areas 
where primary care is well developed, they are fre-
quently diagnosed within the primary care setting. 
However, when an organic syndrome does occur 
it is essential to recognize it. Detecting an organic 
disorder requires that you consider the possibil-
ity in every patient by taking a medical history, 
conducting a relevant physical examination and 
appropriate use of investigations. Be suspicious if 
aspects of the psychiatric presentation are unusual. 
For example, organic syndromes often produce ab-
normalities in unexpected functions, such as anos-
mia in depression due to a frontal meningioma. 
There may or may not be an effective treatment 
for the organic disorder. Regardless, the psychiat-
ric symptoms are still treated with the appropriate 
pharmacological, psychological and social inter-
ventions.
As a rule, treatment response in an organic dis-
order is similar to that of its functional equiva-
lent, subject to the progression of the underlying 
condition. For example, depression responds to 
antidepressants whether it is ‘organic’ or not. The 
presence of the organic disorder may, however, 
affect the choice of drug (e.g. avoid tricyclic anti-
depressants in depression following myocardial 
 infarction).
Amnesic syndrome
Amnesic (or amnestic) syndrome completes the triad 
of conditions (with dementia and delirium) that af-
fect memory and that always have an organic cause. 
Its features are:
• Selective loss of recent memory.
• Confabulation: the unconscious fabrication of 
recent events to cover gaps in memory.
• Time disorientation.
• Attention and immediate recall intact.
• Long-term memory and other intellectual faculties 
intact.
Amnesic syndrome is rare and in practice diffi  -
cult to distinguish from some dementias. It is due 
to damage to the mammillary bodies, hippocampus 
and thalamus. Th e usual cause is alcohol-induced 
thiamine defi ciency (Korsakov’s syndrome), which 
is treated with thiamine and abstinence, and which 
may follow Wernicke’s encephalopathy. Other causes 
include herpes simplex encephalitis, severe hypoxia 
and head injury. Th e memory defi cits are often irre-
versible.
Table 13.11 Organic psychiatric disorders
Syndrome
Example of cause
Organic brain syndromes
Dementia, delirium, 
amnesic syndrome
Organic delusional 
(psychotic) disorders
Systemic lupus 
erythematosus
Organic mood disorders
Multiple sclerosis
Organic anxiety disorders
Thyrotoxicosis
Organic personality 
disorders
Head injury

150 
Dementia, delirium and neuropsychiatry
Table 13.12 The main forms of epilepsy
Type
Comments
Conscious level during 
seizure
Generalized seizures
Tonic–clonic (grand mal)
Absence (petit mal)
No focal onset
The ‘classic’ type of seizure
Subtle and brief
Unconscious
Impaired
Partial seizures
Complex partial (psychomotor)
Simple partial
Focal onset
Of most psychiatric signifi cance
Usually temporal lobe epilepsy
Impaired
Unaffected
Table 13.13 Psychiatric aspects of epilepsy
Category
Example
Psychiatric symptoms related to seizures
Due to shared aetiology
At start of seizure
During seizure
After seizure
Between seizures
Temporal lobe tumour
Hallucinations during aura
Non-convulsive status epilepticus (usually 
temporal lobe epilepsy) presenting as a 
fugue state
Post-ictal delirium
Psychosis of complex partial epilepsy
Psychiatric disorder masquerading 
as epilepsy
Pseudoseizures
Psychiatric disorder associated 
with epilepsy
Depression
Suicide
Common in people with epilepsy
Several times more common
Psychiatric problems of treatment
Side effects of anticonvulsants
Seizures as medication side effect
Depression with barbiturates
Antipsychotics and tricyclic antidepressants
Epilepsy
Th ere are several types of epilepsy (Table 13.12). 
Epilepsy is usually managed by neurologists, but has 
many psychiatric aspects. Only the latter are covered 
here (Table 13.13).
Relationship of psychiatric symptoms 
to seizures
Complex partial epilepsy was called psychomo-
tor epilepsy because of the frequency of psychiat-
ric symptoms during seizures (Table 13.14). It has 
also been referred to as temporal lobe epilepsy, 
though this is not always the site of the seizure fo-
cus. The risk of schizophrenia is several-fold higher 
in people with complex partial epilepsy, more so if 
the focus is in the left temporal lobe, and due to 
an early developmental abnormality. Psychiatric 
presentations can occur with other epilepsies, but 
are much rarer. Absence seizures in children pro-
duce transient lapses in concentration or simple 
automatisms, and can be mistaken for a behav-
ioural disorder. Equally, a generalized seizure dis-
order can present to a psychiatrist if, for example, 
the person was found wandering in a post-ictal 
delirium.

Dementia, delirium and neuropsychiatry 151
Psychiatric disorders masquerading 
as epilepsy
Pseudoseizures (hysterical seizures or non-epileptic 
attack disorder) are a form of dissociative disorder 
(Chapter 10). Th ey can be hard to distinguish clini-
cally from a true seizure. EEG monitoring during at-
tacks may be required to make the diagnosis. Pseudo-
seizures are more common in people who also have 
epilepsy. Other conditions that can be misdiagnosed 
as epilepsy include panic attacks, hypoglycaemia 
and schizophrenia. In children, consider temper tan-
trums and nightmares.
Psychological problems associated with 
having epilepsy
Historically, epilepsy has sometimes been attributed 
to demonic possession and its suff erers seen as irri-
table, self-centred people with criminal tendencies. 
Although entirely false, persisting negative attitudes, 
in addition to the symptoms and limitations that the 
illness places on patients, probably contribute to 
the higher incidence of psychiatric disorders and 
suicide in epilepsy. Th e most common psychiatric 
disorders are anxiety and depressive disorders. Th e 
suicide risk is increased fi ve-fold, and even higher in 
those with complex partial seizures. Anticonvulsant 
treatments can compound the psychiatric prob-
lems – phenobarbitone causes hyperactivity and ir-
ritability in children; phenytoin can produce ataxia 
and delirium.
Head injury
In blunt trauma, the brain suff ers contusions ( bruises) 
at the point of impact; focal damage elsewhere as 
the brain reverberates in the skull; and diff use ax-
onal damage due to the shearing forces, to which the 
white matter is particularly susceptible. People with 
an apoE4 allele are at greater risk of persistent defi cits 
following head injury. 
Th ese injuries are a major cause of organic psy-
chiatric syndromes in young adults. Th ey can be 
diffi  cult to treat and services are greatly under-
resourced. Th e psychiatric consequences of a head 
injury depend partly on the nature and location of 
the injury, and partly on the person’s premorbid 
characteristics. 
A wide range of psychiatric problems can follow a 
head injury. A head injury with loss of  consciousness 
may produce amnesia, either anterograde (post-
traumatic), for events after the injury, or retrograde. 
Anterograde amnesia lasting more than 24 hours 
predicts a poor long-term outcome, including persis-
tent cognitive defi cits. Th e impairment ranges from a 
subtle slowing of thought and distractibility through 
to dementia. It tends to improve in the fi rst year, but 
thereafter defi cits are likely to be permanent. Th ere is 
no specifi c treatment.
Personality changes are frequent following head 
injury. Typically the changes are indicative of frontal 
lobe damage: impaired ability to plan or persevere; 
emotional shallowness and lability; impulsivity; 
and irritability. Altered sexual behaviour (in any 
direction) and speech also occur. Improvement is 
partial and slow. Mood disorder, anxiety disorders 
and schizophrenia are more common than expected 
after head injury. Left- and right-sided frontal lobe 
damage are associated with depression and mania, 
respectively.
Post-concussion syndrome describes emotional, 
cognitive and bodily symptoms occurring after rela-
tively minor head injury. Th e symptoms are some-
times thought to be ‘psychological’ or even feigned, 
related to hopes of compensation, but may refl ect 
subtle brain injury.
Other medical disorders 
associated with psychiatric 
disorders
Table 13.15 lists some medical disorders that often 
have psychiatric manifestations.
Table 13.14 Psychiatric symptoms of complex 
partial seizures
During the seizure (ictal)
Impaired consciousness
Hallucinations and other distorted perceptions: 
olfactory and somatic (especially epigastric)
Sense of déjà vu
Depersonalization and derealization
Impaired speech and memory
Automatisms and stereotyped behaviour
After the seizure (post-ictal, hours to days)
Transient, fl orid psychosis
Between seizures (inter-ictal)
Schizophrenia-like psychosis
Depression
Sexual dysfunction and lack of libido

152 
Dementia, delirium and neuropsychiatry
Table 13.15 Other medical disorders with psychiatric manifestations
Medical disorder
Psychiatric manifestations
Cerebral tumour
Psychiatric symptoms in 50%, more so if tumour is in frontal or temporal lobes
Cerebral abscess
May present with psychiatric symptoms
Multiple sclerosis
Mood disturbance in 25%: bland euphoria or depression
Cognitive defi cits in 25%: can become severe
Personality change: apathy, irritability
Parkinson’s disease
Depression in 50%, dopaminergic therapy may cause psychosis or dopamine 
dysregulation syndrome (e.g. hypersexuality, or obsessive interest in gambling or 
collecting)
Systemic lupus erythematosus 
and related vasculitides
5% at presentation, 50% at some stage: mood disorder, psychosis, delirium and 
seizures
HIV
Dementia in 30% with AIDS; the prevalence of psychosis is uncertain
Cushing’s disease
Severe depression common; occasionally psychosis and cognitive impairment
Addison’s disease
Apathy and fatigue in 80%; depression in 50%; cognitive impairment in 50%; 
psychosis in 5%
Hyperthyroidism
Anxiety (common), depression, mania, delirium
Hypothyroidism
Mental slowing and depressive symptoms very common; rarely ‘myxoedema 
madness’ – delirium, depression, dementia; symptoms may persist despite 
thyroxine replacement
Hypercalcaemia
Psychosis, delirium and mood disorders in 50%; cognitive impairment in 25%
 KEYPOINTS
• ‘Organic’ psychiatric disorders are those due 
to a recognized medical cause or pathology. 
Dementia and delirium are by defi nition organic 
disorders; all other psychiatric disorders can 
be. Hence consider an organic cause for 
every psychiatric presentation – epilepsy and 
endocrine disorders are classic culprits.
• Dementia is characterized by memory loss. It 
is usually progressive, though is sometimes 
reversible. The most common causes are 
Alzheimer’s disease, vascular dementia and 
dementia with Lewy bodies.
• Delirium is an acute, fl uctuating confusional state, 
with clouding of consciousness. It has many 
causes (e.g. drugs, infection) and when these are 
treated symptoms usually resolve rapidly. 
• Treatment of organic disorders is aimed at the 
underlying cause and at the psychiatric symptoms.
 FURTHER READING
Kester MI, Scheltens P. (2009) Neurology in practice: 
Dementia: the bare essentials, Practical Neurology 
9, 241–251.
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence 
(NICE) (2006) CG42 Dementia: a quick reference 
guide. Access at http://guidance.nice.org.uk/
CG42/QuickRefGuide/pdf/English
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence 
(NICE) (2011) TA217 Alzheimer’s disease – 
donepezil, galantamine, rivastigmine and me-
namtine. Access at http://guidance.nice.org.uk/
TA217
O’Brien JT, Burns A. (2010) Clinical practice with 
anti-dementia drugs: a revised (second) consen-
sus statement from the British Association for 
Psychopharmacology. Journal of Psychopharma-
cology. Access at http://www.bap.org.uk/pdfs/
Anti-dementia_2010_BAP.pdf

Dementia, delirium and neuropsychiatry 153
 SELF-ASSESSMENT
1 What is the most common type of dementia?
a Alzheimer’s disease
b Vascular dementia
c Dementia with Lewy bodies
d Frontotemporal dementia
e Metabolic disorders
2 Which dementia most commonly presents with 
a fl uctuating presentation, visual hallucinations, 
parkinsonism and sleep disturbance?
a Alzheimer’s disease
b Vascular dementia
c Dementia with Lewy bodies
d Frontotemporal dementia
e Metabolic disorders
3 What type of drug is memantine?
a Cholinesterase inhibitor
b NMDA receptor antagonist
c NMDA receptor agonist
d Antidepressant
e Anti-infl ammatory
4 What is the fi rst-line treatment for delirium?
a Oral lorazepam 
b Intramuscular lorazepam
c Oral haloperidol
d Intramuscular haloperidol
e Treat underlying organic cause
5 Which psychological problem is not associated with 
epilepsy?
a Increased rates of anxiety disorders
b Ataxia
c Increased rates of depressive disorder
d Delirium
e Reduced rate of suicide

Psychiatry Lecture Notes, Eleventh Edition. Gautam Gulati, Mary-Ellen Lynall and Kate Saunders. © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published
2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
14
Substance misuse
Learning objectives
✓ To be able to describe key features of substance misuse, its 
management and its associated psychiatric disorders
General issues
Many substances are taken for pleasure. A substance 
is regarded as being misused (or abused) if it produces 
physical, psychological or social harm. Commonly 
misused substances are shown in Table 14.1. Th is 
chapter describes:
• Th e features of substance misuse.
• Its psychiatric consequences.
• Th e management of substance misuse and its asso-
ciated psychiatric disorders.
Substance misuse presents in diverse ways; for ex-
ample, as depression or morbid jealousy (both asso-
ciated with alcohol), as an acute psychosis (ampheta-
mines) or as haematemesis (alcoholic cirrhosis). Its 
various presentations, and frequency, mean that 
detection of substance misuse, notably of alcohol, is 
part of every psychiatric assessment.
Prevalence fi gures for misuse of substances other 
than alcohol are likely to be unreliable as use is fre-
quently illegal. 
• In the United States, 1.5% of adults admit to hav-
ing tried heroin, 7% amphetamines, 8% LSD, 12% 
cocaine and 30% cannabis. A quarter of each group 
were regular users. 
• In England and Wales (2009/10), 8.6% of adults 
(and 15% of pupils aged 11–15 years) had used one 
or more illicit drug within the last year, with canna-
bis being the most commonly cited drug. 
• In England and Wales, the number of recorded 
deaths from substance misuse in 2008 was 1738, 
with accidental poisoning being cited as the most 
common cause.
• A common approach to reducing the recreational 
use of drugs is to make them illegal. Most coun-
tries have legal classifi cations based on the harm-
ful potential of the drugs to the user and society. 
Th e classifi cations are not described here as they 
vary between countries and over time. For exam-
ple, cannabis use is legal in Th e Netherlands and 
elsewhere: its legal classifi cation is controversial in 
other countries. Th e use of alcohol, which is prob-
ably the most important cause of harm in many 
societies, is not legally restricted for adults in most 
Western societies.
Types of substance misuse
Th ere are several categories of substance misuse:
• At-risk consumption – (alcohol) intake at a level 
associated with increased risk of harm.
• Harmful use – misuse associated with health and 
social consequences, but without dependence.
• Dependence – prolonged, regular use of some 
substances (especially alcohol, opioids, ampheta-
mines) can lead to dependence (addiction) and 
withdrawal syndromes.
• Intoxication is the acute eff ect of the substance – 
being drunk (alcohol), tripping (LSD) or stoned 
(cannabis). Intoxication with illicit drugs may lead 
to an acute psychiatric presentation.

Substance misuse 155
Assessment of substance misuse
Th e principles of assessment are similar for all sub-
stances:
• Be willing and able to ask screening questions and 
(for alcohol) use screening tools such as the FAST, 
CAGE and AUDIT.
• Know the features of misuse of alcohol and other 
commonly used substances.
• Be aware of the psychiatric and medical conditions 
associated with substance misuse.
• Drug testing can be useful. Alcohol can be meas-
ured in breath or blood; most illicit drugs or their 
metabolites can be detected in the urine – some 
briefl y (e.g. amphetamines), some for weeks after-
wards (cannabis).
Assessment of the motivation of the patient to change 
is also important. Th e stages of change model helps to 
assess (and encourage) motivation (Table 14.2). Peo-
ple may go through many cycles of this process.
Management of 
substance misuse
Management is also based upon a set of uniform 
principles:
• Identify at-risk consumption and harmful use ear-
ly, and give accurate information and advice.
• In dependency, facilitate withdrawal (detoxifi ca-
tion) and abstinence.
• Help maintain abstinence following withdrawal.
• If abstinence is not possible, minimize harm asso-
ciated with continuing use.
• Treat the complications – for example, drug-
induced psychosis.
• Prevention – this largely involves population-level 
interventions such as pricing policies.
• Advise the person about the risks and legal require-
ments about driving (or operating machinery, etc.) 
while under the infl uence of alcohol or drugs.
To achieve these goals, a variety of psychological, phar-
macological and social treatment methods are used.
Aetiology of substance misuse
Substance misuse has a multifactorial aetiology 
( Table 14.3). Together, the factors determine both the 
prevalence and the type of substance misused, and 
the nature of the misuse.
• Aetiology has been studied in most detail for alco-
hol. Similar factors confer vulnerability to misuse 
of substances in general (and perhaps to other 
addictions such as gambling).
Alcohol
Defi nitions and epidemiology 
of alcohol (mis)use
• In England in 2009, 69% of men and 57% of women 
(over the age of 16), and 18% of school pupils aged 
11–15 years reported drinking alcohol on at least 
one day in the week prior to a survey.
Table 14.1 Commonly misused substances
Alcohol
Other legal or prescribed drugs:
 Benzodiazepines
 Nicotine
 Caffeine
 Cannabis
Opioids:
 Heroin
 Morphine
 Methadone
Stimulants:
 Amphetamines
 Cocaine
 Ecstasy
Hallucinogens:
 LSD
 Phencyclidine
 Solvents
Table 14.2 Identifying motivation – the ‘stages 
of change’ model
Stage
Features
Pre-contemplation
Denial of problem
Contemplation
Consider problem and whether 
change needed
Decision
Decide to do (or not to do) 
something about it
Action
Choose strategy and 
implement it
Maintenance
Make progress and sustain it
Relapse
Return to earlier behaviour

156 
Substance misuse
• In the United Kingdom, consumption has doubled 
in the past 40 years – in the rest of Europe it has 
declined.
• Hazardous drinking: 24% of the population drink 
more than the recommended limits (21 units per 
week for men and 14 for women).
• Harmful drinking: defi ned as more than 50 units 
per week for men and more than 35 units per week 
for women.
• Dependent drinking (see below): 9% of men and 4% 
had features of alcohol dependency.
• A low intake of alcohol may be benefi cial: up to 
2 units per day is associated with a moderate 
protective eff ect against heart disease in men 
aged over 40 years. As intake increases, however, 
there is an escalating morbidity and mortality 
(Table 14.4). Th is produces a so-called J-shaped 
curve when mortality is plotted against alcohol 
consumption.
• Alcohol use disorders account for 4% of the global 
burden of disease, and have many other direct and 
indirect health costs; estimated to be £21 billion 
pounds annually in the United Kingdom. In Eng-
land and Wales, there were 6584 deaths related 
directly to alcohol in 2009.
Clinical features of 
alcohol misuse
Dependence
Th e diagnosis of alcohol dependence (alcoholism) is 
made if three or more of the following are present:
• Feeling compelled to drink.
• Primacy of drinking over other activities – for 
example, eating, family life, work, health.
• Increased tolerance to alcohol – being able to drink 
quantities that would incapacitate others.
• Relief drinking – drinking to stop or prevent with-
drawal symptoms.
• Stereotyped pattern of drinking.
• Reinstatement after abstinence – unable to give up 
alcohol for long.
• Drinking despite awareness of harmful conse-
quences.
• Withdrawal symptoms.
Table 14.3 Aetiological and other factors 
associated with substance misuse
Genetic
Heritable component to vulnerability, and to subjective 
experiences of the substance
Genes include those related to targets of substances, 
and their metabolism, and those related to the 
personality traits associated with substance misuse
Neurobiological
Brain activity: trait differences in EEG patterns
Chemicals: abnormalities in dopamine, GABA and 
endogenous opioid systems
Anatomically, key site is nucleus accumbens
Psychological
Personality factors
Learned behaviour
Positive reinforcement – the drugs lead to behaviours 
that increase their use
Socioeconomic
Price and availability
Cultural norms and acceptability
Legal
Restrictions on sale
Penalties for possession or dealing
EEG, electroencephalogram; GABA, gamma-aminobutyric 
acid.
Table 14.4 Harmful effects of alcohol
Medical
Liver damage – hepatitis, cirrhosis
Cardiovascular – cardiomyopathy, hypertension
Gastrointestinal – peptic ulcer, oesophageal varices, 
pancreatitis
Neoplasms – liver, oesophagus
Blood – anaemia, haemochromatosis
Neurological and organic psychiatric
Blackouts
Epilepsy
Neuropathy
Delirium tremens
Wernicke’s syndrome
Korsakoff’s syndrome
Cerebellar degeneration
Central pontine myelinosis
Head injury (from falls)
Psychiatric
Alcoholic hallucinosis
Morbid jealousy
Alcoholic dementia
Depressive disorders
Anxiety disorders
Sexual dysfunction
Suicide
Social
Accidents
Problems with relationships
Domestic violence
Employment diffi culties
Crime

Substance misuse 157
Withdrawal and delirium tremens
Th e main features of alcohol withdrawal are:
• Tremulousness (‘the shakes’).
• Agitation.
• Nausea and retching.
• Sweating.
• Overwhelming desire to drink (craving).
• Withdrawal symptoms are relieved by alcohol. If 
untreated, the symptoms may last for several days. 
Transient misperceptions and hallucinations may 
occur.
• Withdrawal symptoms often occur on waking 
as the blood alcohol concentration falls during 
sleep.
• Th e most severe form of withdrawal (5% of cases) 
is delirium tremens (the ‘DTs’), a potentially fatal 
condition (Table 14.5).
Wernicke’s syndrome
An acute encephalopathy presenting with delirium, 
ataxia, nystagmus and ophthalmoplegia, occurring in 
the severely alcohol dependent, usually in the context 
of withdrawal. It is due to thiamine defi ciency and 
requires urgent treatment. It may progress to Korsa-
koff ’s syndrome, which presents with cognitive defi -
cits and confabulation.
Harmful alcohol use
About 20% of patients attending GPs drink hazard-
ously (i.e. above the recommended limits) – most of 
these are ‘asymptomatic’ and most go undetected. 
Detection can be improved by:
• Asking about alcohol intake during all medi-
cal and psychiatric assessments, including use 
of FAST, CAGE or AUDIT questionnaires. CAGE 
(Cut down, Annoyed, Guilty, Eye Opener) is a 
quick four-question screen. The AUDIT (Alco-
hol Use Disorders Identification Test) has 10 
questions and takes 2 minutes; its strength is 
that it would assess hazardous, harmful and 
dependent drinking. FAST is a four-item test 
and can be completed in as little as 15 seconds, 
thereby making it valuable in areas such as busy 
A&E departments. A printable version can be 
accessed on the NICE website (link included at 
the end of this chapter).
• Following up on comments suggesting that a 
patient thinks he or she drinks too much.
• Unexplained macrocytosis or abnormal liver func-
tion tests.
• Noting the presence of one or more of the psychi-
atric or social consequences of harmful alcohol use 
(Table 14.4).
Associated medical disorders
If alcohol misuse has led to a medical disorder, 
then psychiatric or social impairments (Table 14.4) 
are likely. Assess and take appropriate action. If 
an alcohol-related psychiatric disorder is present, 
check for physical symptoms and signs of alcohol 
dependency.
Associated psychiatric disorders
Alcohol misuse is associated with an increased risk 
of, and worse prognosis for, most psychiatric disor-
ders. Th ese are covered in the respective chapters.
• In alcoholic hallucinosis, a heavy drinker experi-
ences recurrent auditory hallucinations, usually of 
a threatening or derogatory nature. Th e hallucina-
tions occur in clear consciousness (cf. withdrawal 
hallucinations). Th e syndrome is an example of a 
drug-induced psychosis.
• About 10% of people who are alcohol dependent 
commit suicide.
Management of alcohol 
problems
Th e focus in this section is on clinical rather than on 
population-based interventions.
• Figure 14.1 gives an algorithm for management of 
hazardous, harmful, and dependent drinking.
Table 14.5 Features of delirium tremens
Onset 24–48 hours after stopping heavy, prolonged 
drinking
Delirium
Visual hallucinations
Delusions, usually persecutory and transient
Fear and agitation, sometimes aggression
Coarse tremor
Seizures
Autonomic disturbance (sweating, fever, tachycardia, 
hypertension)
Insomnia
Dehydration and electrolyte disturbance
Lasts 3–4 days, followed by exhaustion and patchy 
amnesia for the episode

158 
Substance misuse
Management of hazardous and harmful 
alcohol use
A brief intervention in primary care is usually suf-
ficient if someone is drinking more than the safe 
limits but is not dependent and has no specific 
medical or psychiatric disorder. The components 
are:
• Assess accurately the amount consumed (use dia-
ries, informants).
• Assess the nature and extent of harm (e.g. liver 
function tests, work record).
• Provide brief advice of the hazards of excess 
alcohol intake. Tailor advice to the individ-
ual, and reinforce with written information. 
Advice should be given in a non-judgemental 
manner.
• Review progress. If problem drinking persists, or 
is in the harmful range, consider extended brief 
intervention and/or motivational interviewing.
Th e FRAMES acronym covers the main approach 
to giving advice about drinking:
• Structured Feedback on risk and harm.
• Emphasis on the patient’s Responsibility for 
change.
• Clear Advice to make a change in drinking.
• Discuss a Menu of options for making change.
• Express Empathy and be non-judgmental.
• Reinforce the patient’s Self-effi  cacy.
Treatment of alcohol dependence
The first requirement is detoxification (‘detox’, 
‘drying out’), which is controlled withdrawal, us-
ing a reducing course of a benzodiazepine in place 
of alcohol. This should always be done as part of 
a care plan that includes after-care and relapse 
 prevention.
• Mild dependence – withdraw at home without 
drugs or with small doses of benzodiazepines.
Initial screening shows drinking above safe limits
Harmful drinking
Possibly dependent, or AUDIT>20
•  Extended FRAMES advice
•  Motivational interviewing
•  Establish dependence severity
•  Assess context and needs
Regular monitoring 
•  Mild dependence/
    no complex needs 
•  Moderate or severe dependence/
    complex needs 
Detoxification
Relapse prevention and ongoing
care options, e.g.
•  Disulfiram or acamprosate
•  CBT and other psychotherapies
•  Structured group programmes
•  Alcoholics Anonymous
Hazardous drinking
Brief ‘FRAMES’ advice
Periodic reassessment 
Figure 14.1 Algorithm for treatment of alcohol misuse. Adapted and simplifi ed from Parker et al., 2008. 

Substance misuse 159
• Moderate dependence – can usually facilitate with-
drawal at home with a reducing regimen of chlor-
diazepoxide over 5 days, especially if the patient 
has a supportive network and an absence of physi-
cal complications or proneness to seizures. Advise 
the patient to drink plenty of non-alcoholic liquids. 
Prescribe vitamins (thiamine 300  mg per day) – 
defi ciencies are common and withdrawal may pre-
cipitate Wernicke’s syndrome. Consider parenteral 
thiamine if risk of Wernicke’s syndrome is judged to 
be high as oral thiamine has limited bioavailability.
• Severe dependence, or history of complications such 
as DTs, cognitive impairment, etc. – may need high-
er doses of chlordiazepoxide, and/or in-patient 
treatment. Give parenteral thiamine routinely.
Maintaining abstinence
Various strategies are used to prevent relapse follow-
ing withdrawal from alcohol. None has been shown 
to be very eff ective.
• Aim for abstinence where possible – it has a better 
long-term outcome than controlled drinking.
• Regular liver function tests and breath alcohol 
measurements help monitor progress.
• Encourage attendance at groups run by local com-
munity alcohol services or Alcoholics Anonymous.
• Consider disulfi ram (Antabuse), acamprosate 
or opioid antagonists. Disulfi ram works through 
negative reinforcement as it causes undesirable 
symptoms when alcohol is consumed alongside it; 
acamprosate leads to a reduction of craving, and 
opioid antagonists work via the autonomic nerv-
ous system.
• Psychological interventions include cognitive behav-
ioural therapy (CBT), social skills training, problem 
solving and motivational interviewing (helping them 
make the decision to change their behaviour).
• About 50% of patients will return to drinking again 
within 6 months of abstinence.
Treatment of associated medical disorders
Many of the medical syndromes arising from alcohol 
misuse can present as emergencies (e.g. Wernicke’s 
encephalopathy, bleeding varices), and the admis-
sion provides an opportunity for psychiatric interven-
tion. Look out for withdrawal symptoms occurring 
during hospitalization.
Treatment of associated psychiatric 
disorders
Th e principles are:
• Reduce intake to safe limits, since continuing alco-
hol misuse acts as a perpetuating factor.
• Treat the psychiatric disorder in the standard 
manner. Check for interaction of alcohol with pre-
scribed medication (e.g. antidepressants).
 Clinical scenario
Mr Campbell is 45-year-old gentleman who lives 
alone and is currently unemployed. He recently lost 
his driving licence due to drink-driving. However, 
he continued driving his car and got into a road 
traffi c accident, which has resulted in a fracture 
of the bones of his lower leg. After the accident 
he was admitted to a trauma unit, awaiting 
surgical reduction of the fracture. Twelve hours 
after admission he gradually became anxious, 
intolerant of bright light, restless and tremulous. 
He complained of nausea, visual disturbances, 
headache and sweating. On examination he was 
apyrexial but slightly tachycardic with clammy 
trembling hands. A screening CAGE questionnaire 
noted that he had been drinking alcohol fi rst thing in 
the morning to relieve ‘hangover’ from the previous 
day for some months. He had been drinking over10 
units a day, and on completing an Alcohol Users 
Disorders Identifi cation Test (AUDIT), moderate 
alcohol dependence was noted. He was diagnosed 
with an alcohol withdrawal syndrome and prescribed 
a 5-day reducing regimen of chlordiazepoxide. 
After receiving the fi rst dose of chlordiazepoxide 
his symptoms of anxiety, restlessness and tremor 
signifi cantly subsided and the subsequent doses 
relieved the rest of the symptoms. In view of 
malnourishment, he was also prescribed a course 
of parenteral thiamine therapy for prophylaxis 
of Wernicke’s encephalopathy. Following the 
orthopaedic surgery, on his discharge from hospital 
he was advised to continue with oral vitamins and 
see his GP with a view to receiving psychological 
interventions (motivational interviewing) aimed at 
abstinence from alcohol consumption in the future.
Cannabis
Epidemiology and pharmacology
Cannabis is derived from the hemp plant Can-
nabis sativa. Th e main psychoactive ingredient is 
Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), which acts on en-
dogenous cannabinoid receptors in the brain. Can-
nabis also contains cannabidiol, which to some ex-
tent antagonizes the eff ects of THC.
• Th e THC content of cannabis varies, and is rising over 
time in material supplied to the United Kingdom.

160 
Substance misuse
• Usually smoked.
• Marijuana is the dried fl owers and leaves of the 
cannabis plant; hashish is the dried resin.
• It is the most widely used illicit recreational drug. 
Used for millennia for medical and religious pur-
poses, its use as a recreational drug has increased 
dramatically over the past 40 years particularly in 
adolescents and young adults.
• Used by an estimated 150–200 million adults 
worldwide. In England and Wales, 6.6% of adults 
and 8.9% of pupils aged 11–15 years report use of 
cannabis within the last year.
• 10% of those using the drug become daily users.
Th e eff ects of cannabis are shown in Table 14.6.
Adverse health effects
• Diffi  cult to untangle causality because users of can-
nabis are more likely to smoke and drink alcohol.
• Anxiety and panic – especially in fi rst-time users.
• Paranoid ideation – especially in fi rst-time users – 
and occasionally delirium.
• Increased risk of road traffi  c accidents.
• Increased risk of using other, more harmful, drugs.
• Possible increased risk of respiratory illness.
• Possible mild long-term cognitive impairment in 
heavy and regular users.
• May provoke angina in people with heart disease.
• Cannabis does not cause dependence or with-
drawal, though some tolerance occurs (and use 
may become so ingrained as to warrant the term 
‘psychological dependence’).
• Early and heavy use of cannabis increases risk for 
schizophrenia.
• Continued use in schizophrenia is associated with 
a worse treatment response.
Treatment
Cognitive behavioural therapy may reduce can-
nabis use, but there are high rates of reuse within 
6–12 months.
Opioids
Epidemiology and pharmacology
• Opioids mimic endogenous endorphins and 
enkephalins and activate opioid receptors.
• Th ey include naturally occurring substances (mor-
phine and codeine) and synthetic opioids (heroin 
and methadone).
• Highly addictive.
• Heroin is most commonly misused because it 
causes euphoria – estimated 100 000 regular users 
in the United Kingdom.
• Th ere are several modes of use:
• Intravenous injection (‘mainlining’). It is asso-
ciated with a high risk of infections, thrombosis 
and phlebitis. Hepatitis B and C, and HIV, should 
be suspected and testing performed (with in-
formed consent and appropriate counselling) in 
anyone who has injected drugs.
• Inhalation – ‘chasing the dragon’: the opiate is melt-
ed on metal foil and then inhaled as it vaporizes.
• ‘Snorting’ – the opioid is cut into a fi ne powder 
and then sniff ed.
Th e eff ects of opioids are shown in Table 14.7.
Adverse health and social effects
Opioids have many serious adverse eff ects.
• Th ey cause high levels of morbidity and mortality 
– the mortality rate is 12 times that of the general 
population; most deaths occur in males.
• Diff erent routes have a major infl uence on bioavail-
ability, speed of onset, severity of dependence and 
Table 14.6 Effects of cannabis
Dose-related impairment in reaction time, information 
processing, coordination, motor performance, attention
Exaggeration of pre-existing mood
Mellowness and increased enjoyment of aesthetic 
experience
Distortion of sense of space and time
Reddening of eyes
Table 14.7 Effects of opioids
Euphoria
Analgesia
Drowsiness
Respiratory depression
Cough refl ex suppression
Nausea and vomiting
Bradycardia and hypotension
Lowering of body temperature
Pupillary constriction
Constipation

Substance misuse 161
rates of physical complications. Intravenous injecting 
has the highest risk of overdose and complications.
• Risk of transmission of blood-borne viruses – HIV, 
hepatitis B and C.
• Psychiatric comorbidity, including misuse of other 
substances. Th e suicide rate is increased 14-fold.
• Major negative social eff ects.
Clinical features
Dependence
Tolerance to all opioids rapidly develops. Because of 
this (and because of batch-to-batch variation in pu-
rity), overdose is common and frequently fatal due to 
respiratory depression.
• Tolerance makes pain management in an opioid 
user diffi  cult as higher doses may be required.
• High risk of overdose after detoxifi cation – for 
example, released prisoners.
Withdrawal
Stopping opioids leads to an extremely unpleasant 
withdrawal syndrome called ‘cold turkey’ ( Table 14.8). 
Th e onset is usually within 8–12 hours of the last dose 
(longer after methadone), peaking 24–48 hours later 
and subsiding over 10 days. Th ough severe, opioid 
withdrawal is rarely life threatening.
Management
Rapid detoxifi cation and abstinence
• In-patient detoxifi cation is more eff ective than out-
patient detoxifi cation – probably because many opi-
oid-dependent people live in chaotic environments 
(often with other users). Information is given about 
the nature and course of withdrawal symptoms.
• Prescribe reducing doses of a substitute drug, 
methadone linctus, which reduces the severity of 
the withdrawal symptoms. Clonidine (works on 
the alpha-2 receptor) and naltrexone (an opioid 
antagonist) are also used.
• Post-withdrawal abstinence programmes vary 
from specifi c relapse-prevention therapies to resi-
dential houses where a network of ex-users helps 
the recovering addict overcome the craving.
• Even when withdrawal is achieved, the relapse rate 
is high (40% at 6 months; the majority at 1 year).
Harm reduction and maintenance 
therapy (substitution treatment)
In maintenance therapy for opioid dependence, the 
priority changes from abstinence to reducing the 
harm from ongoing opioid use. Th e fi rst aim is to 
make services acceptable to users in order to engage 
them in treatment. Th en, the aims are to:
• Reduce injecting.
• Stabilize drug use and lifestyle.
• Reduce criminal behaviour by avoiding need to 
obtain expensive drugs.
• Reduce the death rate.
Motivational interviewing and contingency man-
agement may be helpful when combined with phar-
macological management.
Th e harm reduction approach is pragmatic and in-
cludes a range of initiatives such as free needles and 
syringes and public education. A central feature is 
substitute prescribing. Oral methadone is prescribed 
to prevent the need for intravenous injections. Oral 
buprenorphine is an alternative to methadone with a 
less sedating eff ect and a relatively better safety pro-
fi le if taken in overdose. Long-term use of oral substi-
tute drugs is usual.
• Substitute prescribing does not suit all opioid users. It 
is best targeted at those whose social functioning and 
health have already been seriously aff ected by drug 
use, and where abstinence is an unrealistic goal.
Management of overdose
Early recognition and treatment is vital.
• Patient is unconscious, with pinpoint pupils, brad-
ycardia, hypotension and shallow breathing or 
snoring. Check for respiratory arrest.
• Place in recovery position. Naloxone (opioid antago-
nist) can be administered subcutaneously, intra-
venously or intramuscularly – and may need to be 
repeated. Th e endpoint of naloxone therapy should be 
the restoration of adequate spontaneous ventilation.
Table 14.8 Features of opioid withdrawal
Craving
Restlessness and insomnia
Myalgia
Sweating
Abdominal pain, vomiting and diarrhoea
Dilated pupils, running nose and eyes
Tachycardia
Yawning
‘Goose bumps’

162 
Substance misuse
 Clinical scenario
Mr Ryan, a 20-year-old man, was released after 
a 9-month prison sentence for robbery and drug 
dealing. He was well known to the local police as 
an intravenous heroin user. Whilst in prison he did 
not engage with the Addiction Service and did not 
have access to opioids or any illicit substances. 
On release from prison he decided to ‘celebrate’ 
with his brother, also an intravenous drug user, 
by having a drug party at home. Before his last 
imprisonment Mr Ryan had been regularly injecting 
at least 2 grams of heroin a day and felt that was 
just about enough to induce a euphoric state. 
Mr Ryan thought that injecting his usual 2 grams 
of heroin would produce the desired effect. He 
could not wait for the arrival of his brother and 
after drinking some alcohol decided to inject the 
heroin alone. However, after having injected the 
usual 2 grams he slumped into an unconscious 
state with slow shallow breathing. He vomited, 
aspirated his vomit and fi nally stopped breathing. 
When his brother arrived home and found Mr Ryan 
unresponsive he took him in his car to the nearest 
A&E department where he was pronounced 
dead on arrival. His brother when talking to you 
expressed his disbelief and surprise as he knew 
that 2 grams of heroin was Mr Ryan’s ‘usual’ dose. 
You explained to Mr Ryan’s brother that tolerance 
develops rapidly in heroin users but the same 
reverses on prolonged abstinence from opioids 
(such as abstinence in prison) and therefore 
overdose on ‘going back to the usual dose’ was 
common. Death usually occurs due to respiratory 
suppression, particularly when heroin is taken with 
other respiratory depressants such as alcohol. You 
explained that naloxone, if it were administered 
promptly, would have rapidly reversed the CNS 
and respiratory depression and saved Mr Ryan’s 
life. You gave Mr Ryan’s brother advice on safe 
injecting before he left the hospital.
Stimulants
Amphetamines
Amphetamines (‘speed’, ‘whizz’) may be taken orally, 
snorted or injected. Th ey produce symptoms similar 
to those of hypomania: elevated mood, over-talka-
tiveness, increased energy and insomnia. Pulse and 
blood pressure increase, pupils dilate and mucous 
membranes become dry.
• Dependence occurs. Regular users develop depres-
sion and mood swings. Th e withdrawal syndrome 
can be severe (a ‘crash’), with agitated depression, 
lethargy, suicidal thoughts and craving.
• Treat intoxication or psychosis with benzodiaz-
epines and antipsychotics; treat depression with 
tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs).
• Prolonged use can lead to paranoid psychosis, 
which can last for months after use has ceased.
• Amphetamines are used clinically for attention 
defi cit hyperactivity disorder and narcolepsy.
• Amphetamines are potent dopamine enhancers – 
they inhibit its reuptake and stimulate its release. 
Noradrenaline (NA) and serotonin (5-HT) are also 
enhanced.
• ‘Crystal meth’ (d-methamphetamine hydrochlo-
ride) is a particularly addictive form of ampheta-
mine that reaches high brain concentrations when 
smoked. It is associated with frequent and severe 
psychiatric symptoms, and withdrawal reactions.
Cocaine
Cocaine produces similar eff ects to amphetamines, 
but the features tend to be more dramatic.
• Cocaine is either snorted, or smoked in the form of 
‘crack’ or ‘freebase’ (cocaine processed to remove 
the hydrochloride), which increases the intensity 
of the eff ect.
• Cocaine misusers often also misuse opioids and 
alcohol.
• Acute cocaine intoxication can mimic mania or 
psychosis. Cocaine-related violent behaviours can 
occur in over half of those who present with such 
induced psychiatric symptoms.
• ‘Formication’ or ‘cocaine bugs’ refers to delusions of 
infestation, which can lead to numerous scabs from 
picking at the skin. Also seen with crystal meth.
3,4-Methylenedioxymetham-
phetamine (MDMA, ecstasy)
Ecstasy is a synthetic amphetamine analogue with 
mild stimulatory and hallucinogenic eff ects. It is 
widely used in Britain – 30% of teenagers say they’ve 
tried it. Tolerance occurs and the best experience is 
said to be the fi rst. Th ough safer than amphetamines 
or cocaine – probably much safer – there is concern 
about its harmful eff ects:
• Adverse reactions – hyperpyrexia and acute renal 
failure due to dehydration, as well as water intoxi-
cation in users who overcompensate. Th ere are 
very rare, but well-publicized, fatalities.

Substance misuse 163
• Can 
cause 
acute 
psychosis 
– 
prevalence 
unknown.
• The drug is neurotoxic to 5-HT fibres (at least 
in monkeys), and chronic users have lowered 
central 5-HT levels and some cognitive deficits. 
There is, therefore, concern that depression 
and impulsivity may be a long-term conse-
quence, although no good evidence of this has 
emerged.
Management of stimulant misuse has a very lim-
ited evidence base. Use the same approaches as for 
opioids. Antipsychotics and benzodiazepines are 
used to treat acute agitation and psychosis.
Hallucinogens
Hallucinogens alter perception, producing psyche-
delic experiences. Th ey are taken orally. LSD (lyser-
gic acid diethylamide) is the main synthetic halluci-
nogen; similar eff ects can be achieved using magic 
mushrooms. Agonism at 5-HT2 receptors is a likely 
common mechanism.
Lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD)
Th e ‘trip’ starts about 2 hours after consumption, lasts 
8–12 hours and consists of distorted sensory percep-
tion, alteration of the sense of time and scale, and 
changes in body image (e.g. out-of-body experienc-
es). Th e eff ects can be very intense – and occasionally 
terrifying (a ‘bad trip’).
• Hallucinogens rarely cause dependence or with-
drawal. Th ey are associated with fl ashbacks when 
the sensations of a trip are re-experienced long 
afterwards.
• Emergency psychiatric referral may occur because 
of the panic or agitation associated with a bad trip. 
Reassurance, reorientation and ‘talking down’ are 
necessary. Sedation as required with benzodiaz-
epines. Th e person may also come to harm from 
responding to the hallucinations.
Other substances
Phencyclidine
Phencyclidine (PCP, ‘angel dust’) and ketamine (‘spe-
cial K’) are volatile anaesthetics that in smaller doses 
produce a sense of drunkenness, hallucinations, 
disorientation and agitation. Th e picture resembles 
schizophrenia. Complications include nystagmus, 
tachycardia, hypertension and seizures.
• Usage is common in the United States but still rare 
in the United Kingdom.
• Th e drugs are antagonists at NMDA glutamate 
receptors.
• When managing PCP intoxication or psychosis, 
avoid chlorpromazine. Th e medical complications 
may need treatment.
Solvents
Solvent misuse (of glue, aerosols, petrol, etc.) is main-
ly an adolescent male group activity. Th e eff ects are 
rapid in onset and short-lived – euphoria, disinhibi-
tion, blurred vision, ataxia.
• Solvent use comes to medical attention when com-
plications arise – cardiac arrhythmias, inhalation 
of vomit, coma. Chronic damage to the liver and 
brain can occur.
Anabolic steroids
Anabolic steroids are misused mainly by male ath-
letes and bodybuilders. Th ey produce a range of 
psychiatric eff ects that can be severe and persistent 
– euphoria, depression, aggression (‘road rage’) and 
hyperactivity. A form of dependency may result in 
some users. Clinical suspicion may be raised by the 
physical appearance.
Benzodiazepines
Benzodiazepines are taken illicitly, often as part of 
multiple drug misuse and as an opioid substitute. It 
can sometimes be diffi  cult to decide whether symp-
toms and side eff ects are attributable to the benzodi-
azepine or to the other drugs being used. Iatrogenic 
benzodiazepine dependence can be diffi  cult to man-
age but principles of management involve changing 
to a drug with a longer half-life and then reducing 
dosage in small steps.
Nicotine and caffeine
Both nicotine and caff eine are addictive – ask any 
smoker or serious coff ee drinker. Each has its own 
acute actions and side eff ects, but psychiatric prob-
lems are rare.
• Psychiatric patients smoke more than the popula-
tion average – 90% of people with schizophrenia do 
so. For unknown reasons they have a lower inci-
dence of lung cancer than other smokers.

164 
Substance misuse
• Abstinence rates after nicotine dependence (30% 
at 6 months) are worse than for opioids, cocaine 
and alcohol.
‘Legal highs’
A recently growing problem is the availability of de-
signer drugs on the open market; the regulation of 
these is problematic as there is a lack of legislation 
restricting some of these substances. Some may be 
herbal preparations but sprayed with cannabinoids, 
others may mimic ecstasy. Th e use of these drugs 
is not picked up by routine drug testing carried out 
within services either so they are diffi  cult to monitor 
for, but may have serious health consequences. One 
such drug, methoxetamine (or ‘mexxy’), was banned 
in the United Kingdom in 2012.
 KEYPOINTS
• For each substance, consider: What are its 
acute effects? Does it cause dependence 
and withdrawal? What are the associated 
psychiatric, medical and social complications?
• Dependence is a combination of physical 
and psychological effects. It is common in 
people who regularly use alcohol, opioids or 
stimulants. Withdrawal occurs if the substance 
is withheld.
• Substance misuse is widespread. Those in 
treatment are a small and unrepresentative 
fraction.
• Substance misuse is often comorbid with 
psychiatric disorders. Both need to be treated. 
The combination worsens prognosis.
• Alcohol produces a wide range of psychiatric, 
medical and social problems. Enquire about 
alcohol intake and consider a role for alcohol 
misuse in all patients.
• Management of substance misuse includes 
psychological, pharmacological and social 
components. The prognosis for persistent 
abstinence after being dependent on any 
substance is poor.
 FURTHER READING
Health Development Agency (2002) Manual for the 
Fast Alcohol Screening Test (FAST). Access at 
 www.nice.org.uk/nicemedia/documents/manu-
al_fastalcohol.pdf
Parker AJR, Marshall EJ, Ball, DM. (2008) Diagnosis 
and management of alcohol use disorders. Brit-
ish Medical Journal, 336. Access at www.bmj.com/
content/336/7642/496
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence 
(NICE) (2007) CG51 Drug misuse: psychosocial in-
terventions. Access at www.nice.org.uk/cg51
 SELF-ASSESSMENT
1 A 20-year-old man who reports being an opiate user 
is seen in general practice. He complains of feeling 
nauseous, suffering with diarrhoea, watering eyes, a 
runny nose and describes experiencing abdominal 
cramps. You see him constantly yawning. His pupils 
are dilated, his skin is clammy and looks like ‘goose 
fl esh’. Which is the most appropriate fi rst-line 
treatment?
a Lofexidine
b Naloxone
c Naltrexone
d Methadone
e Buprenorphine
2 A 25-year-old female is brought to A&E with 
hyperthermia and tachyarrhythmia after a party. 
She is excited, restless and fi dgety, constantly 
picking at the skin of her arms. Which of the 
following diagnoses is the best explanation for her 
presentation? 
a Heroin intoxication
b Cannabis intoxication
c Ketamine intoxication
d Cocaine intoxication
e Cocaine withdrawal

Psychiatry Lecture Notes, Eleventh Edition. Gautam Gulati, Mary-Ellen Lynall and Kate Saunders. © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 
2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
• A trainee doctor who cannot get on with his team 
and repeatedly appears to ignore feedback regard-
ing his overconfi dence.  
• A man who has lived with his parents throughout 
his adult life who when they die is unable to make 
decisions and wants others to do so for him.
• A young woman who takes impulsive overdoses 
each time a boyfriend leaves her.
 Box 15.1 Defi nitions of personality 
disorder
• ICD-10: ‘… a severe disturbance in the 
characterological constitution and behavioural 
tendencies of the individual, usually involving 
several areas of the personality, and nearly always 
associated with considerable personal and social 
disruption.’
DSM-IV and DSM-5: ‘an enduring pattern of 
inner experience and behaviour that deviates 
markedly from the expectations of the individual’s 
culture, is pervasive and infl exible, has an onset 
in adolescence or early adulthood, and leads to 
distress or impairment.’
A personality disorder may also be detected during 
the assessment or treatment of a psychiatric disor-
der – though it is very important to bear in mind that 
Personality and 
personality disorder
Personality describes the characteristic behavioural, 
emotional and cognitive attributes of an individual. 
Th us we talk about an aggressive man, a nervous 
woman, and so on. Such traits are usually apparent 
by mid-adolescence and once established remain 
fairly stable. However, at times of stress these traits 
can become accentuated (decompensation) and 
it is at these times that they may be encountered 
in psychiatry. Personality is relevant to all areas of 
medicine as it forms a major part of the contextual 
understanding of a case. Psychiatrists are particu-
larly interested in personality as it interacts with 
psychiatric disorders in many ways. It is only when 
certain personality traits are extreme enough to 
cause problems for the person or others that a per-
sonality disorder is defi ned. A formal defi nition is 
given in Box 15.1.
People with personality disorder come into contact 
with medical and psychiatric services either because 
they are concerned about themselves or, more com-
monly, because others are concerned or aff ected by 
their actions. For example:
Personality disorders
Learning objectives
✓ To understand the concept of personality and when it becomes a 
disorder
✓ To be able to describe the relationship between personality disorder 
and other psychiatric disorders
✓ To learn about the classifi cation of personality disorders
✓ To be able to describe broad principles in the management of 
personality disorder
15

166 
Personality disorders
the person’s behaviour and self-description may be 
modifi ed by the illness and consequently give a mis-
leading impression about their ‘normal’ personality. 
Caution should be exercised when diagnosing per-
sonality disorder in this context.
Personality disorder and 
psychiatric disorder
Th e interaction between personality (disorder) and 
psychiatric disorder is important and manifold 
( Figure 15.1):
• Personality disorder can predispose to psychiatric 
disorder.
• Personality disorder can coexist with psychiatric 
disorder (a type of comorbidity). Th is worsens 
prognosis. 
• Personality disorder can be mistaken for psychiatric 
disorder, and vice versa. For example, someone 
with a depressive disorder may give the impression 
that they have a personality disorder; a person with 
borderline personality disorder may be misdiag-
nosed as having a bipolar disorder.
• Personality can be aff ected by psychiatric disorder. 
For example, the deterioration in personality in 
chronic schizophrenia.
• Personality can have a pathoplastic eff ect on psy-
chiatric disorder – that is, it can modify the clinical 
features even if it has no direct causal role.
Key aspects of 
personality disorder
Diagnosis
Diagnosis of personality disorder is based on a 
marked deviation of one or more aspects of personal-
ity. Common to all personality disorders are the fol-
lowing features:
• Th e personality attributes cause distress or dys-
function for the individual or those he or she inter-
acts with.
• Th e dysfunction occurs across a range of situations.
• Th e characteristics are pervasive, stable and recog-
nizable since late adolescence.
It often useful to seek a corroborative informant par-
ticularly if a comorbid mental illness is present.
Th e specifi c personality disorders are diagnosed 
according to the domain(s) of personality that are 
most aff ected, and the most prominent behaviours.
Classifi cation
Personality disorder in ICD-10 is divided into 10 
types. However, the validity and reliability of these 
categories is limited. Most patients seem to fi t several 
descriptions or none of them. A simpler option, from 
DSM-IV and DSM-5, is to use three clusters, which 
encompass the individual categories (Table 15.1). 
Personality
disorder
Psychiatric
disorder
Predisposing factor
Example
Anxious PD and
anxiety disorder
Paranoid PD or
delusional disorder
Cyclothymia,
schizotypal disorder
Borderline PD,
Bipolar disorder
Anankastic traits
exaggerated
by depression
Differential diagnosis
OR
Dimensional
AND
Personality
disorder
Personality
disorder
Personality
disorder
Psychiatric
disorder
Psychiatric
disorder
Comorbidity
Psychiatric
disorder
Pathoplastic
Personality
disorder
Psychiatric
disorder
Figure 15.1 Relationships 
between personality and psychiatric 
disorders.

Personality disorders 167
In practice, both categories and clusters are used by 
clinicians. Th e proposals for DSM-5 had included 
signifi cant changes in the classifi cation scheme, with 
a move towards a ‘prototypic’ model of diagnosis 
based on personality traits and how strongly they are 
expressed, rather than symptom checklists. However, 
lack of agreement within the personality disorders 
working-group meant that the criteria for personality 
disorders were not updated. Instead, a possible alter-
native classifi cation for these disorders was outlined 
Table 15.1 Classifi cation and features of personality disorders
Cluster and subtype
Main features
Cluster A (eccentric)
Aloof or suspicious, solitary
Paranoid
Suspicion and distrust of others
Sensitivity to criticism
Bears grudges
Self-importance
Schizoid
Emotionally cold and detached
Introspective
Social isolation
Lack of joie de vivre
Cluster B (dramatic)
Emotionally labile and intense
Dissocial (= psychopathic, antisocial)
Callous
Unstable, transient relationships
Low frustration threshold
Irritable and impulsive
Failure to learn from experience
Failure to accept responsibility
Lack of guilt
Tend to be young men
Borderline (= emotionally unstable)
Multiple, turbulent relationships
Impulsivity
Recurrent emotional crises
Variable, intense mood
Stress-related psychotic-like symptoms
Tend to be young women
Histrionic
Exaggerated, theatrical displays of emotion Attention seeking
Vain
Suggestible
Shallow, labile mood
Crushes and fads
Narcissistic
Grandiose self-importance
Exaggerates achievements and abilities
Exploits others
Arrogant
Expects special praise and respect
Cluster C (anxious)
Timid, dependent, low self-esteem
Anankastic (= obsessional)
Excessive orderliness
Preoccupation with detail
Infl exible and dogmatic
Humourless
Anxious (= avoidant)
Persistent tense and apprehensive feelings
Avoid personal contact
Fear of criticism or rejection
Dependent
Encourage others to make decisions
Excessive need to be taken care of

168 
Personality disorders
for evaluation and research purposes in Section III of 
DSM-5.
Personality traits and personality disorders are, in 
reality, dimensional – that is, they exist on a continu-
um and merge into each other (and into psychiatric 
disorders). Consequently, any categorical classifi ca-
tion (limiting to either the presence or absence of a 
disorder or trait) can be problematic. Th e two diag-
nostic systems do not always agree as to what should 
be classed as a personality disorder. For example 
schizotypal disorder is classed as axis 1 in ICD and 
axis 2 (personality disorder) in DSM-IV.
Epidemiology
Estimates of the prevalence of personality disorders 
vary widely – for example, from 2% to 15% in the 
general population. A recent large survey of British 
households found:
• A personality disorder was found in 4.4% of peo-
ple. Of these, half met the criteria for two or more 
disorders.
• Th e most common were obsessive-compulsive, 
avoidant, schizoid and borderline. 
• No cases of histrionic or narcissistic personality 
disorder were seen.
• Personality disorders frequently coexist with psy-
chiatric disorders.
Th e prevalence of personality disorder is much 
higher in specifi c populations. For example:
• Prisoners: over 50% of men and 30% of women, 
with most being antisocial personality disorder.
• Psychiatric patients: about 50%.
• Patients with substance misuse or eating disorder: 
70%.
Aetiology
Very little is known about the aetiology of personality 
disorders, partly because so little is understood about 
the determinants of normal personality. Most current 
research focuses on borderline and dissocial person-
ality disorder, largely because they cause the greatest 
clinical and forensic diffi  culties (see below).
• Patterns of childhood behaviour, even as young 
as infancy, predict personality and personal-
ity disorders, albeit only weakly, emphasizing 
the early origins and stability of personality 
 characteristics.
• Upbringing and childhood experiences have major 
infl uences on our personality for better and worse. 
Adverse childhood events, including sexual and 
physical abuse, are important risk factors for per-
sonality disorder.
• Th ere is a moderate genetic contribution to per-
sonality traits (e.g. 35–50% heritability for neu-
roticism and extraversion) and to some personal-
ity disorders, especially anankastic and dissocial 
types.
• Aggressive behaviour may be slightly more com-
mon in men with sex chromosome abnormalities 
(especially XYY), but much less so than sometimes 
portrayed.
Specifi c personality 
disorders
Refer to Table 15.1 for key features of each personal-
ity disorder, and a comparison of clusters and sub-
types.
Cluster A personality disorders 
(‘eccentric’)
People with cluster A personality disorder (especial-
ly schizoid type) by their nature tend to avoid servic-
es, and usually present (as with Dr E in the Clinical 
scenario) when their suspiciousness or persecutory 
beliefs lead them to behave in a way that concerns 
others (e.g. making accusations or threatening retri-
bution for a perceived wrongdoing). Th e key issues 
are:
• To distinguish the personality disorder from a 
psychosis, especially chronic delusional disorder. 
Paranoid personality disorder is a risk factor for 
development of a psychosis.
• To decide if there is a signifi cant risk of harm to the 
person or others.
• To decide what, if any, treatment should be given 
for the personality disorder. Low-dose antipsy-
chotics may be tried, with appropriate consent, 
but compliance is likely to be poor. Similarly, social 
interventions may be off ered, but isolation is rarely 
perceived as a problem. Psychotherapy is said to be 
ineff ective, even harmful, and is contraindicated.
Cluster B personality disorders 
(‘dramatic’)
Th ere is considerable overlap between the individual 
disorders in this cluster. In practice, the only widely 
used categories are borderline (for women) and dis-
social (for men).

Personality disorders 169
Borderline personality disorder
Miss D (see Clinical scenario) fits the typical 
 profile of borderline personality disorder. There 
may be frequent presentations for a variety of 
reasons:
• Following an overdose or self-cutting.
• With depressive or ‘quasi-psychotic’ symptoms 
or suicidal ideation. Th e psychiatric presenta-
tion and subjective description is often dramatic, 
yet somewhat out of keeping with the objective 
impression.
• With a dramatic plea or demand for help of some 
kind (e.g. admission, medication).
• Th e diagnosis of ‘borderline personality disorder’ 
is sometimes applied loosely and pejoratively, 
especially to young women who self-harm, abuse 
alcohol, have eating diffi  culties and have chaotic 
lifestyles. Use the label carefully, sticking to the 
principles outlined here.
Borderline personality disorder is under active re-
search investigation at present.
• Th e key neuropsychological defi cits are thought to 
be aff ective instability and impulsivity.
• Brain imaging suggests frontal lobe dopaminergic 
and serotoninergic function may be important.
• Th ere is an association of borderline personal-
ity disorder with childhood sexual abuse, post-
traumatic stress disorder and bulimia nervosa. 
However, these associations are neither as strong 
nor as specifi c as sometimes claimed.
Dissocial (psychopathic, antisocial) 
disorder
In practice, most general psychiatrists rarely treat 
people with dissocial personality disorder (with 
or without consent) as no interventions have been 
shown to be eff ective. Admission is usually avoided, 
as it is often disruptive for other patients. Th e main 
goal is to exclude other diagnoses that may be more 
treatable. Forensic psychiatrists, on the other hand, 
have some expertise in assessing and managing the 
disorder.
• The Mental Health Act is sometimes used to 
admit people with dissocial personality disorder 
who have committed serious crimes to secure 
psychiatric hospitals either from court or prison. 
This is controversial, affected by societal and 
financial influences. In hospital, prolonged psy-
chotherapy or antipsychotic drugs may be tried 
although the evidence base for the effectiveness 
of treatment is very limited. Treatment pro-
grammes exist within the criminal justice system 
and are increasingly being viewed as the most 
appropriate to offer.
• Th e problems of dissocial personality disorder are 
often worsened by drugs and alcohol.
• Th e whole range of genetic, developmental, psy-
chological and social factors are thought to be 
involved in the origins of dissocial personal-
ity disorder. A few people have temporal lobe EEG 
abnormalities. Minimal brain dysfunction refers to 
the view that the disorder results from minor brain 
injury or delayed maturation.
• As with borderline personality disorder, the core 
neuropsychological defi cits are thought to involve 
impulsivity and decision-making, and relate to 
abnormalities in the regulation of frontal lobe 
activity by dopamine and serotonin (5-HT).
Cluster C personality disorder 
(‘anxious’)
Th is cluster rarely presents clinically, and there is 
little information about how to manage it. If it does, 
set realistic goals for treatment, try to enhance self-
esteem and avoid escalating contact, which simply 
fosters dependency.
• Th e diagnosis is usually made in someone who 
presents with a depressive disorder or anxiety dis-
order. Cluster C personality disorder is a risk factor 
for both.
 Clinical scenario
Miss D is 22 and has taken an impulsive overdose. 
She felt bored and angry with her boyfriend and 
various others. She has repeatedly self-harmed 
since early adolescence in response to minor life 
events – particularly when she feels abandoned. 
She reports having been sexually abused by her 
stepfather. Her lifestyle is chaotic and she misuses 
alcohol. Previous attempts to offer help have been 
thwarted by her failure to keep appointments. Her 
one enduring pleasure in life is looking after horses. 
Two days later she discharges herself; her boyfriend 
sent her some fl owers and she is planning to 
marry him.
Key features: impulsivity, sensitive to rejection, 
emotional instability.
Positive attributes: the care of animals. Has done 
unpaid work for an animal charity.
Cluster: B (dramatic)
Subtype: emotionally unstable (borderline) 
personality disorder.

170 
Personality disorders
• A psychotherapeutic assessment should be con-
sidered.
• Treat any coexisting psychiatric disorder. 
• Treat any coexisting substance misuse.
• For borderline personality disorder a very inten-
sive and specifi c form of psychotherapy, dialectical 
behaviour therapy, is eff ective in decreasing self-
harm. Cognitive analytical therapy is also advocat-
ed. Group therapy in therapeutic communities may 
occasionally be helpful. 
• Th ere are no licensed medications for the treat-
ment of personality disorder although in practice 
patients are often given medication trials on an 
off -licence basis to reduce distress or for help with 
symptoms.
Prognosis
Th e fact that personality disorders are considered to 
be lifelong and stable implies that prognosis is uni-
formly bad. In fact, considerable fl uctuations do oc-
cur, and improvement is often observed by middle 
age. Some clinicians distinguish:
• Mature personality disorders (equating to cluster 
A), which are fi rst recognizable in late adoles-
cence and which remain stable or worsen with 
age.
• Immature personality disorders (clusters B and C), 
which have an onset in childhood and which mel-
low with age.
Personality disorder is associated with an in-
creased mortality rate. It also worsens outcome of co-
morbid psychiatric disorder, and increases the risk of 
violence when comorbid with  psychosis.
Problems with the 
concept of personality 
disorder
Th e concept of personality disorder has been contro-
versial. Arguments include:
• It isn’t a ‘disease’. It medicalizes individual diff er-
ences and implies they can and should be treated 
by doctors.
• Its diagnosis is unreliable.
• One man’s personality disorder is another man’s 
virtue. Many famous people meet the criteria for 
personality disorder, yet the traits are either toler-
ated because of, or are actually the basis of, their 
success.
 Clinical scenario
Dr E is a 60-year-old scientist who has accepted 
psychiatric referral under protest. He is unmarried 
and has had several brief, unsatisfactory 
relationships. He feels strongly that he has been 
denied the acclaim he deserves and is currently 
complaining bitterly to his head of department 
after unsuccessfully applying for promotion. He 
alleges that other workers steal his ideas. He does 
not mix with his colleagues and is uneasy in social 
gatherings.
Key features: socially isolated, suspicious, 
tendency to exaggerate self-importance.
Positive attributes: his research eminence shows a 
high level of functioning.
Cluster: A (eccentric)
Subtype: paranoid personality disorder.
Management
Th e traditional view has always been that personality 
cannot usually be modifi ed to any signifi cant degree 
in adults, but there is an increasing evidence base 
that some treatments are eff ective, particularly for 
cluster B personality disorders. Management can be 
diffi  cult and it is not uncommon for clinicians to os-
cillate between over-reacting and failing to intervene, 
particularly for cluster B disorders. 
Th e broad principles of management are:
• Help the person to avoid situations that cause 
problems such as intoxication or confrontations.
• Help them to fi nd a lifestyle that suits their 
strengths and minimizes the eff ects of their per-
sonality diffi  culties.
• Be consistent in managing crisis presentations. 
Admissions are rarely helpful and may reinforce 
the behaviour. A consistent, limited and communi-
ty-based approach is usually better.
• Careful diff erentiation, as far as is possible, from 
mood disorders and psychosis. Bear in mind the 
symptom profi le and the onset and course.
• A written care plan. Ensure good communication 
between the agencies involved to avoid ‘split-
ting’ (disagreements between staff  induced by 
the patient – people with these personality traits 
induce a range of strong feelings).
• Respond to threats consistently and do not rein-
force manipulative behaviour.
• Clear boundaries should be agreed about unac-
ceptable behaviour and about the nature of care 
that will be provided. For example, recurrent psy-
chiatric admission is probably not helpful.

Personality disorders 171
• Th e term is pejorative: the label is applied to 
patients whom doctors don’t like or fi nd hard to 
manage, or is used as a justifi cation to avoid trying 
to help.
• There is no clear distinction to be made 
between personality disorders and psychiatric 
disorders.
Some of these arguments raise issues that 
go well beyond the boundaries of psychiatry. 
Given the current state of knowledge, psychia-
trists must at least ensure that they use the term 
‘personality disorder’ as reliably and usefully as 
 possible.
 KEYPOINTS
• Personality is the combination of persistent 
and relatively stable emotional, cognitive and 
behavioural traits that characterize each of us. A 
personality is deemed disordered if these traits 
are excessive or defi cient, and cause problems 
for the individual or for those around her or him.
• Personality disorders are classifi ed pragmatically 
into three clusters: eccentric, dramatic and 
anxious. Important specifi c types are paranoid, 
dissocial (psychopathic) and borderline.
• Always be wary of diagnosing personality 
disorder solely on the basis of behaviour during 
an episode of psychiatric illness. Illness can 
affect how personality is expressed.
• Personality disorder interacts with psychiatric 
disorder in several ways: as a predisposing 
factor, a pathoplastic factor, a prognostic factor, a 
comorbid disorder and as a differential diagnosis.
• Focus treatment on helping the person modify 
their circumstances, removing exacerbating 
factors and reinforcing positive behaviours. 
Medication has a very limited role. Specifi c 
psychotherapies may help borderline 
personality disorder.
 FURTHER READING
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence 
(NICE) (2009) CG78 Borderline personality disor-
der: treatment and management. Access at http://
www.nice.org.uk/cg78
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence 
(NICE) (2009) CG77 Antisocial personality disor-
der: treatment, management and prevention. Ac-
cess at http://guidance.nice.org.uk/CG77
 SELF-ASSESSMENT
1 A 23-year-old woman presents with severe mood 
swings, impulsive behaviour and alcohol misuse. She 
has taken four overdoses in the past 2 months, many 
in the context of relationship breakdowns. She has 
ongoing suicidal ideation. You are asked to assess 
her. What else would you need to do to confi rm a 
diagnosis of borderline personality disorder?
a Enquire about dissociative symptoms.
b Explore whether she has had abusive 
experiences in her childhood.
c Establish the presence of a family history of 
bipolar disorder.
d Take a corroborative history from a friend or family 
member to confi rm the pervasive nature of the 
symptoms.
2 A 45-year-old man is referred to you following the 
death of his mother 1 year ago. He feels unable 
to cope. He has never moved out of the family 
home and has never worked. He appears unable 
to make decisions and is requesting that he is 
taken into residential care although he has no 
physical ailments. What is the most likely primary 
diagnosis?
a Delayed grief reaction.
b Adjustment disorder.
c Dependent personality disorder.
d Normal bereavement.

Psychiatry Lecture Notes, Eleventh Edition. Gautam Gulati, Mary-Ellen Lynall and Kate Saunders. © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 
2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
By adopting these strategies, the interviewer aims to 
collect information about the topics in Table 16.1.
In addition a physical health history and neurolog-
ical examination may be indicated. To complete the 
assessment, background information is sought from 
relevant sources, such as teachers, social services, 
general practitioners or community  paediatricians.
• Get parental consent at each stage, unless abuse 
is suspected, in which case the duty of care to the 
child may over-ride this principle.
Classifi cation
Th e major childhood psychiatric disorders are shown 
in Table 16.2. A multiaxial scheme is often used to 
record the diagnostic information because of the im-
portance of developmental stage, overall abilities and 
social circumstances:
Axis I: psychiatric disorder(s) present.
Axis II: developmental stage and delays.
Axis III: intellectual level.
Axis IV: medical problems.
Axis V: abnormal social situations.
Learning disability in children is covered in 
 Chapter 17.
Epidemiology
Transient symptoms and behavioural disturbances 
are common in children of all ages. As in adults, mak-
ing a psychiatric diagnosis requires a persistence and 
Principles of child 
psychiatry
Interviewing children
When interviewing a child, the objectives are the 
same as with adults: to establish rapport, make a di-
agnosis, understand its context and plan treatment. 
However, for several reasons, the nature of the inter-
view diff ers, especially with young children:
• Th e child may not understand the question or be 
unable to express him or her self.
• Th e range of disorders being sought, and hence the 
diagnostic focus, is diff erent.
• Parents determine when and how the child presents.
• Family factors contribute to many disorders – so 
more attention is paid to the family environment.
Child psychiatry interviews have several features:
• Parents are present but child and parents are often 
seen separately for part of the interview once rap-
port has been established.
• Th e interviewer must be able to jump from one 
topic to another as led by the child.
• Assessment may start with play and gentle conver-
sation to gain trust.
• Much information comes from the child’s appear-
ance and behaviour.
• Signifi cant others (e.g. teachers, siblings) provide 
key parts of the history.
• More than one session may be needed to complete 
the interview.
Childhood disorders
Learning objectives
✓ To be able to describe the prevalence and presentations of 
common psychological problems in children and to develop a 
framework for assessing these
16

Childhood disorders 173
pervasiveness of symptoms, and evidence of diffi  cul-
ty in functioning in the home or school environment, 
or both. Th e major epidemiological features of child-
hood psychiatric disorder are:
• Prevalence at age 10 is 7% in rural areas and 13% 
in urban areas. At age 14 the prevalence is higher. 
(Th ese numbers come from a classic, though dat-
ed, UK study.)
• Boys are aff ected more often than girls for many 
diagnoses, such as attention defi cit hyperactivity 
disorder and autistic spectrum disorder.
• Th e most common diagnoses are emotional disor-
ders and conduct disorders.
• Disorders are more common in children with learn-
ing disability, epilepsy and chronic physical illnesses.
Aetiology
Th e same broad range of aetiological factors operate 
in childhood as in adulthood (Table 16.3).
• Th ere is a probable genetic component to most 
 disorders.
• Th e major environmental factors are the family 
and social circumstances.
• Genes and environment are not independent fac-
tors, but interact to determine risk.
Management
Management of children with psychiatric disorders is 
based upon several principles:
• Take the child’s developmental stage and overall 
level of functioning into account.
• Most problems are treated initially with advice, 
support and behavioural interventions.
• Involve the family and school.
• Avoid removal from school or home wherever 
 possible.
• Medication is used less frequently than in adult 
psychiatry, though can be helpful in ADHD, anxi-
ety and depression when other interventions have 
had limited eff ect; adolescents with bipolar disor-
der or psychotic disorders typically require psy-
chopharmacological management with careful 
attention to side eff ects. 
• Further details are discussed in the sections 
describing the specifi c disorders.
Table 16.1 Topics for the child psychiatric 
interview
Presenting problem
Onset, duration, factors affecting it
Associated problems and symptoms
Recent life events
Parents’ and child’s explanation for it
Developmental milestones
Motor, e.g. sitting, walking
Social, e.g. smiling
Emotional, e.g. attachment behaviour
Cognitive, e.g. talking, reading
Other, e.g. toilet training
Emotional profi le
Temperament
Problem behaviours
Likes and dislikes
Family
Relationship with parents and siblings
Problems at home
Separations from parents
Parental and sibling health and personalities
Schooling
Educational record
Attendance
Relationship with peers
General health
Hospital admissions
Previous psychiatric history
Sleep pattern and problems
Observation of child
General appearance
Interactions with interviewer and family members
Attention and concentration
Prevailing mood and range of emotions expressed
Language and motor skills
Table 16.2 Classifi cation of childhood 
psychiatric disorders
Emotional disorders (neuroses)
Anxiety disorders
Somatoform disorder
Behavioural disorders
Conduct disorder
Attention defi cit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)
Depressive disorder
Developmental disorders
Autism and other pervasive developmental disorders
Specifi c (e.g. specifi c reading disorder)
Miscellaneous conditions
Enuresis
Encopresis
Selective mutism
Tics

174 
Childhood disorders
• Psychodynamic approaches continue to have 
an important role in some child and adolescent 
 services.
Prognosis
Childhood psychiatric disorders have a variable out-
come, in part because of the infl uence of the child’s 
ongoing development and experiences. Th e basic 
pattern is summarized in Table 16.4.
Emotional disorders 
Emotional disorders refer to the neuroses as de-
scribed in Chapter 10. In children, the disorders 
are in many ways similar but there are important 
 diff erences too:
• ‘Emotional disorder’, not neurosis, is the usual 
term.
Table 16.3 Causative factors in child psychiatry
Factor
Examples
Genetic
Autism shows high heritability
Environmental
Family factors
 Parenting styles
 Parental confl ict
 Parental psychiatric disorder
Harsh, critical style associated with conduct disorder
Increased risk of emotional or conduct disorder
Increased risk of eating disorder
Social factors
Deprivation
Bullying
Increased risk of conduct disorder
School refusal
Other factors
Prematurity
Medical disorder
Physical abuse
Increased risk of developmental delay and behavioural disorders
Epilepsy increases risk of most disorders
Increased risk of emotional and behavioural disorders
Table 16.4 Prognosis of psychiatric disorders in childhood
Category
Long-term outcome
Emotional disorders
Good, two-thirds resolve in a 4-year period
Mood disorder
Variable, half have depressive disorder in adulthood
Behavioural disorders:
 Conduct disorder
Poor, often leads on to personality disorder or substance misuse
  Attention defi cit hyperactivity 
disorder (ADHD)
Variable, some cases resolve, or young people fi nd a ‘niche’ where symptoms 
are less problematic; others require medication in adulthood
Developmental disorders:
 Autism
Lifelong; severe cases may require intensive support throughout adulthood; 
able individuals may fi nd a career ‘niche’ and succeed, and some may learn 
social skills by technique rather than instinct and function well 
Other conditions:
 Enuresis
Good
 Tics
Usually transient (unless Tourette syndrome)
 Selective mutism
Variable, may have persistent communication problems

Childhood disorders 175
• Some subtypes are diff erent (e.g. separation 
 anxiety).
• Medication is rarely used but may have a role 
where psychological approaches are challenging 
or have not worked.
• Equal male to female ratio (cf. 1:2 in adults) until 
puberty.
• Many aff ected children recover fully.
Anxiety disorders
Crying when mum goes out, or becoming fearful of 
spiders, are normal anxieties that children may ex-
perience at particular developmental stages, espe-
cially at times of stress and transition. Th ey must be 
distinguished from persistent, signifi cant symptoms 
warranting a diagnosis of anxiety disorder. Th e latter 
aff ects 5% of children at some time. As in adults, anxi-
ety manifests with behavioural, psychological and 
physical symptoms (Table 16.5).
Separation anxiety
Among 5–11-year-olds, 3–4% have excessive anxiety 
when faced with separation from parents or others 
they are attached to. Th e child clings to the person 
and tries to avoid being separated from them. Sleep 
disturbance may occur. Older children may describe 
being fearful that the person will be harmed or will 
not return. Separation anxiety often begins at times 
of stress, such as after the death of a loved one or the 
family pet. Some parents are noted to be overprotec-
tive. Management includes:
• Working with the family to explain and reassure.
• Identifi cation and resolution of stressors.
• Ensuring the parents are not reinforcing  the prob-
lem (e.g. by appearing anxious when about to leave 
the child).
• Use of specifi c interventions for secondary prob-
lems that develop, such as school refusal.
Somatoform disorder
Children readily develop somatic symptoms, espe-
cially when under stress. Non-specifi c abdominal 
pain and headaches are the most common and may 
lead to a paediatric referral. As in adults, somatoform 
disorder describes bodily symptoms that are unex-
plained by a medical condition. Th e assessment of 
these requires:
• Exclusion of a medical disorder that fully explains 
the symptoms.
• Exclusion of other diagnosable emotional or 
depressive disorders.
• Identifi cation of likely precipitating and perpetuat-
ing factors. For example, the child may be unhappy 
at home, or worried about a sick sibling.
Management is aimed at avoiding reinforcing the 
symptoms (e.g. by teaching the parents how not to 
do this inadvertently) and at tackling the underlying 
stressors. Th e prognosis is variable. Some children 
proceed to somatoform disorder as adults.
Other emotional disorders
Obsessive-compulsive disorder in children is rare 
clinically, and has a prevalence of 1 in 400 in Brit-
ish 5–15-year-olds. It is sometimes associated with 
Tourette syndrome (see below). A subset of cases 
may result from a streptococcal infection caus-
ing an immune reaction, though this remains 
 controversial.
• Th ere is good evidence that antidepressants (clo-
mipramine, fl uoxetine) and psychological (cog-
nitive behavioural) therapy are eff ective in OCD. 
Nevertheless, the prognosis in severe cases is quite 
poor.
Children also suff er from the other emotional 
disorders seen in adults (Chapter 10). For example, 
they can get specifi c phobias or develop emotional 
disorders following particular stresses (adjustment 
 reactions).
• Chronic fatigue syndrome is also now well recog-
nized in children. As in adults, its aetiology and 
management remain controversial. Pending better 
Table 16.5 Symptoms of anxiety in children
Behavioural
Clinging to parent (or other carer)
Unwilling to leave house
Unwilling to go to bed
Actions designed to avoid feared event (e.g. hiding)
Psychological
Feeling worried
Nightmares
Physical
Abdominal pain
Headaches

176 
Childhood disorders
evidence, treatment is based on the same princi-
ples of graded return to activities and cognitive 
behavioural methods, with the close involvement 
of the family.
School refusal
School refusal is not a psychiatric disorder, but it is a 
common cause of referral to a child psychiatrist and 
is frequently attributable to an emotional disorder. Its 
assessment is summarized in Table 16.6.
• Exclude truancy and parental behaviour as caus-
es for the absence from school. Th e character-
istics of school refusal and truancy are diff erent 
(Table 16.7).
School refusal is usually due to separation anxiety, 
often provoked by recent events at home or at school. 
In older children, school refusal may refl ect bullying; 
it can also herald a more pervasive problem such as 
social phobia or depressive disorder.
Management of school refusal is aimed at a rapid 
return to school before avoidance is too ingrained. 
Sometimes a graded re-exposure is needed. Address 
any specifi c fears or stresses, and treat any associated 
psychiatric disorder.
Th e prognosis in younger children is good. In 
older children, the problem may become prolonged 
and other psychiatric problems emerge. It may recur 
at times of transition (e.g. moving schools). Th ere 
is a slightly increased risk of anxiety disorder in 
adulthood.
Mood disorders
Th e existence of mood disorders in prepubertal chil-
dren used to be disputed. It is now clear that they 
 occur, even in young children.
• Prevalence estimates are variable. Th ey increase 
dramatically after puberty, when the higher rate in 
females fi rst appears.
• Th e occurrence of bipolar mood disorder prepu-
bertally is more controversial; although some Unit-
ed States-based research groups argue for its exist-
ence, other groups counter that diagnostic criteria 
are too loosely applied.
When evaluating mood and mood disorder in a 
child, apply the same principles as in adults:
• Symptoms should be present for at least 2 weeks 
and associated with distress and dysfunction.
• If there are also symptoms of an emotional 
disorder, attempt to distinguish the primary 
 diagnosis.
• Children, especially adolescents, may present in 
crisis or after self-harm, with isolated or transient 
depressive symptoms, which (as in adults) are 
better viewed as an adjustment reaction than as a 
depressive episode.
• Childhood depressive disorders are classifi ed in a 
similar way as adults (Chapter 9).
• As in adults, depression, especially in postpuber-
tal children, carries an increased suicide risk. In 
severe cases, psychotic symptoms may occur.
• Th e main diff erence from adults concerns young 
children, who may not experience depression in 
the same way or be unable to articulate their feel-
ings. Much diagnostic attention must therefore be 
placed on their appearance and behaviour both 
Table 16.6 Assessment of suspected school 
refusal
Why is the child absent from school?
• School refusal
• Truancy
• Parents keeping child at home
• Physical illness
What does the school refusal refl ect?
• Reluctance to leave home (i.e. secondary to 
separation anxiety)
• A specifi c fear relating to the school environment 
(e.g. of getting there, or being bullied)
• A more generalized disorder (e.g. social phobia, 
depressive disorder, undiagnosed autism spectrum 
disorder)
What other factors are relevant?
• Recent life events (e.g. bereavement)
• Recent events at school (e.g. change of class)
• Parental characteristics (e.g. overprotective)
Table 16.7 Distinguishing school refusal 
from truancy
School refusal
Truancy
Younger (<11 years old)
Older (>11 years old)
Underlying emotional 
disorder
Underlying conduct 
disorder
Good school record
Poor school record
Good prognosis
Poor prognosis
Parents overprotective
Poor parental supervision

Childhood disorders 177
been apparent much earlier. Th e term oppositional de-
fi ant disorder may be used for these younger  children.
• A distinction is sometimes made between social-
ized conduct disorder, where the activities occur 
within a peer group, and unsocialized conduct dis-
order, where the child acts in isolation.
In adolescence, conduct disorder has a strong 
relationship with juvenile delinquency and sub-
stance misuse. Th ere is often repeated police con-
tact and convictions for theft, criminal damage or 
assault. Conduct disorder is associated with a va-
riety of indices of social deprivation and poor par-
enting ( Table  16.9). Th ere is also a small genetic 
 contribution.
in the interview and elsewhere (e.g. school work, 
activities, sleep pattern).
Th e aetiology of childhood depressive disorder in-
volves the same mixture of genes, life events and un-
known infl uences as prevail in adult cases.
Management includes support, monitoring and 
 reducing stressors. 
• Psychological approaches including CBT and fam-
ily therapy, rather than medication, are fi rst line; 
occasionally medication is used instead of therapy 
if symptoms are too severe to permit engagement 
with therapy, or if the young person has additional 
complexities such as autism spectrum disorder, 
which limit the ability to engage with psychologi-
cal approaches. Despite a relative lack of evidence, 
various SSRIs were prescribed to children and ado-
lescents, but their use is now very restricted because 
of concern that they may increase suicide risk. Only 
fl uoxetine is currently allowed (in the United King-
dom) for use in under-18s as it appears to have some 
benefi t and a low likelihood of increased suicidality.
• Admission may be needed for severe or psychotic 
depression. ECT is very rarely used.
Th e prognosis of childhood depressive disorder is 
variable. Th e condition may become chronic, and half 
go on to suff er from depressive disorder in adulthood.
Behavioural disorders
Behavioural disorders are diagnosed in children who 
have persistent problematic and antisocial behaviour. 
Th e main distinction is between behavioural prob-
lems that result mainly from hyperactivity (ADHD) 
and those that do not (conduct disorder) – though in 
practice the boundary is often hard to determine.
• Neither label should be applied unless the diag-
nostic criteria are met – all children are ‘naughty’ 
and ‘hyper’ from time to time; children with diag-
nosable diffi  culties show problems persisting 
across time and across contexts.
Conduct disorder
Conduct disorder is the most common psychiatric 
disorder of childhood and adolescence. Prevalence 
estimates range from 1% to 15%. It occurs mainly in 
boys (sex ratio 5:1). Conduct is disturbed and antiso-
cial well beyond the range of misbehaviour normally 
observed for that age group (Table 16.8). Diagnosis is 
usually made after age 7, though problems have often 
Table 16.8 Clinical features of conduct 
disorder
In pre-school children
Aggressive behaviour
Poor concentration
In mid-childhood
Lying
Stealing
Disruptive and oppositional behaviour
Bullying
In adolescence
Stealing
Truancy
Promiscuity
Substance misuse
Vandalism
Reckless behaviour
Table 16.9 Factors associated with conduct 
disorder
Family factors
Parental personality disorder
Paternal alcoholism
Parental disputes and violence
Harsh, inconsistent parenting
Being in care early in life
Large family size
Social factors
Inner cities
Deprivation and overcrowding
Individual factors
Brain damage
Epilepsy
Specifi c reading disorder

178 
Childhood disorders
Th e long-term prognosis is poor; 50% of cases pro-
gress to dissocial personality disorder, and persis-
tent substance misuse and criminality are common. 
Th ose who form stable relationships have a better 
outcome. Th ere is no standard therapeutic approach, 
and a mixture of attempts to shape and reward be-
haviour is used, with varying degrees of evidence:
• Family-focused treatments seek to identify and 
remedy causes for the behaviour, improve the 
home environment, and include teaching parents 
how to cope with the behaviour and reduce con-
fl ict (‘parental training’). 
• Praise and rewards for positive behaviour.
• Setting out clear rules and commands, with con-
sistent and calm responses to unwanted behaviour.
• Anger management.
• ‘Problem-solving skills training’ is a recent approach 
that focuses on the child rather than the parents. It 
is based on evidence that children with ADHD are 
poor at problem-solving and interpersonal skills.
• Structured outlets for energies and behaviours (e.g. 
youth clubs, car workshops).
• Tackle associated problems such as truancy and 
substance misuse.
• Stimulant medication may have good results espe-
cially if there are coexistent ADHD symptoms.
• Residential care is occasionally unavoidable.
Cases of conduct disorder without additional psy-
chiatric disorders are not usually managed by spe-
cialist Child and Adolescent Mental Health Services. 
Attention defi cit hyperactivity 
disorder (ADHD)
Th e clinical features are shown in Table 16.10. As 
with conduct disorder, the diagnosis requires that the 
 problem is both persistent and extreme. In Britain, the 
prevalence is 2%; three-quarters are boys. In the United 
States, where less stringent criteria are used, preva-
lence and treatment rates are correspondingly higher.
• Hyperkinetic disorder is sometimes used inter-
changeably with ADHD. Strictly, it refers to a severe 
subgroup of ADHD in which all three core signs 
(inattention, hyperactivity and impulsiveness) are 
present, pervasive and with onset before age 7.
• ADHD is often comorbid with conduct disorder, 
anxiety, depression, tic disorders and pervasive 
developmental disorders.
Th e aetiology of ADHD is multifactorial:
• Th ere is a signifi cant genetic contribution (heritabil-
ity ~70%), including genes aff ecting dopamine and 
serotonin functioning in the brain. Families also show 
increased rates of depressive disorder, learning diffi  -
culties, alcoholism and dissocial personality disorder.
• A neurodevelopmental abnormality is suspected, 
on the basis of the soft neurological signs and 
learning diffi  culties, and from brain imaging and 
EEG fi ndings.
• Th ere is an association with social deprivation, 
though less striking than for conduct disorder.
• Other risk factors include maternal smoking and 
alcohol intake.
• Many parents blame food allergy, but this is rarely 
substantiated when investigated properly.
Th e management of ADHD involves:
• Support and psychoeducation for the child and 
family.
• Specifi c educational approaches, including atten-
tion to associated learning diffi  culties.
• Firm adherence to behavioural principles (to 
reward good behaviour and discourage hyperac-
tive behaviour).
• Psychostimulants (e.g. methylphenidate, atomoxe-
tine) have an important role and are recommended 
in UK guidelines as part of a comprehensive treat-
ment programme for severe symptoms. Th is seem-
ingly paradoxical treatment originated from the 
(incorrect) belief that there is a failure of cortical 
arousal in ADHD. Th eir main neurochemical eff ect 
is to increase dopamine in the synapse. Side eff ects 
are insomnia, poor appetite and headaches. Con-
cerns about addiction have not been borne out in 
Table 16.10 Features of attention defi cit 
hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)
Core features
Hyperactivity
Poor attention and concentration
Impulsivity
Present for at least 6 months
Evidence of impaired functioning in two or more 
settings
Onset by age 9, usually by 5
Other features
Distractibility
Poor at planning and organizing tasks
Learning diffi culties
Clumsiness
Low self-esteem
Socially disinhibited
Unpopular with other children
Non-localizing neurological signs
Conduct disorder coexists in 50%

Childhood disorders 179
practice. Breaks in treatment can be helpful if there 
are signifi cant concerns about growth or appetite. 
• Dietary restriction (e.g. of food additives or colour-
ings) is not generally recommended.
ADHD has a variable prognosis. Gradual improve-
ment typically occurs in adolescence, and one-third of 
cases resolve. Th e rest have residual hyperkinetic fea-
tures, especially in those with learning diffi  culties or 
conduct disorder. Dissocial personality disorder and 
substance misuse sometimes develop. It is unclear 
how long treatment should continue into  adulthood.
Th ere is increasing interest in ADHD in adulthood, but 
no consensus on its diagnostic status or  management.
 Clinical scenario
Harry is a 7-year-old boy whose head teacher has 
made a referral to Child Mental Health Services. 
He is always moving around the classroom, and 
forgets and loses his possessions very frequently. 
His parents report he is boisterous at home and 
has always been a ‘livewire’. He has injured himself 
on several occasions by climbing and jumping off 
furniture in the home. You use questionnaires with 
his parents and teacher to assess symptoms of 
possible attention defi cit hyperactivity disorder, 
and a colleague spends a morning at school 
without Harry’s knowledge to conduct a ‘school 
observation’. They speak to the Special Educational 
Needs Coordinator (SENCO), class teacher, and 
teaching assistant, who all view Harry as being 
a bright boy whose diffi culties concentrating are 
stopping him from achieving his potential. You make 
an ADHD diagnosis and discuss the possibility of 
stimulant medication (methylphenidate) with his 
parents. They are concerned when you talk about 
possible effects on heart, blood pressure and 
appetite, but when you explain the monitoring plan 
in detail they decide to try the medication. Harry 
starts a low dose of long-acting methylphenidate. 
After 1 month, you meet Harry and his parents and 
notice he is able to sit on the chair to talk to you for 
several minutes before he goes to play with the toys. 
School and parents feel he is focusing much better 
and is less often in trouble. You agree to continue on 
the low dose and meet with Harry regularly to check 
his cardiovascular health and growth.
Developmental disorders
Developmental disorders can be pervasive or specifi c. 
Th e former, typifi ed by autism, aff ect many aspects 
of psychological and neurobiological development; 
in the latter, there is impairment in only one domain 
(e.g. reading) relative to overall  development. 
• Th e abnormality is thought to be directly related to 
aberrant brain development.
• Th eir course lacks the fl uctuations of most psychi-
atric disorders.
Pervasive developmental 
disorders
Current classifi cation divides this category into sev-
eral distinct disorders, as outlined here. However, the 
concept of autistic spectrum disorders is increasingly 
being used, recognizing that all share core impair-
ments in social interactions, language and communi-
cation, and the child’s range of interests and activities.
Autism
Autism is a syndrome characterized by a failure to de-
velop normal communication, especially social and 
emotional communication. Autistic children have a 
delayed, restricted and unusual use of language. Th ey 
seem oblivious to non-verbal cues and emotional ex-
pressions, with diffi  culties interacting with others. 
Th ey demonstrate a limited range of solitary, repetitive 
behaviours and show excessive anxiety when routines 
are changed. Many also have a degree of learning dis-
ability. Th e features are summarized in Table 16.11.
• Very few autistic children (and adults), called savants, 
have remarkable abilities in discrete areas, such as 
complex mental arithmetic (as in the fi lm Rain Man).
Table 16.11 Features of autism
1 in 100 children from surveys
80% are boys
Age of onset <3 years
Core features (the ‘autistic triad’)
Lack social reciprocity(‘aloof’)
Impaired language and communication
Solitary, repetitive behaviours
Associated and comorbid features
Learning disability in 75%
Coordination diffi culties
Sensory hypersensitivity or hyposensitivity
Epilepsy in about 25%
Mannerisms and rituals
Hyperactivity (40%)
Anxiety 
Sleep disturbance
Hypotonia

180 
Childhood disorders
Th e diagnosis is made based on a careful history 
and observations. Various checklists and structured 
interviews are also used.
• Th e diff erential diagnosis of ‘classical’ autism com-
prises other disorders with autistic features such as 
Asperger’s and Rett’s syndromes (see below), and 
fragile X syndrome and tuberous sclerosis com-
plex (Chapter 17). Th ese other disorders account 
for only about 10% of autism-like conditions. Th e 
term autism spectrum disorder is increasingly used 
in healthcare and education. 
• Remember other causes of a failure to develop 
communication that may be mistaken for autism, 
such as specifi c language disorder and deafness.
Th e aetiology of autism is strongly genetic.
• Many known or suspected autism susceptibility 
genes exist, including neuroligins 3 and 4, and 
other genes that probably converge upon syn-
aptic development. There may also be micro-
scopic structural abnormalities of the chromo-
somes, called copy number variation (CNV). 
The genetic basis of autism overlaps with that of 
 schizophrenia.
• No confi rmed environmental risk factors are 
known. 
• Th ough there is clearly now greater awareness 
and/or a loosening of the diagnostic category, it 
remains uncertain whether there has been a genu-
ine rise in the prevalence of autism.
• MRI scans show increased brain size early in life, 
suggestive of an aberrant growth trajectory. Neu-
ropathological studies suggest cellular alterations 
in several brain areas, notably Purkinje cells in the 
cerebellum, also the brainstem and hippocam-
pus. Neurochemically, excess 5-HT (serotonin) 
function aff ecting neurodevelopment has been 
 postulated.
• Psychologically, the main hypothesis is a failure 
to develop a ‘theory of mind’ – that is, the ability to 
attribute mental states and beliefs to others. Th is 
is thought to underlie the behaviour and lack of 
social engagement that characterize autism.
Th e prognosis is poor in classical autism. Speech 
eventually develops in some, but communication re-
mains limited and the core abnormalities rarely im-
prove. Seizures can occur later in childhood. Most au-
tistic children need special schooling and residential 
care, and only a minority are ever able to live inde-
pendently. Th ose with high-functioning autism may 
gradually make some improvements in their social 
interaction skills by diff erent routes, and may fi nd a 
suitable niche that allows them to make the most of 
their strengths. 
Th ere is no specifi c, evidence-based treatment for 
autism. Th e main components of management are:
• Make the diagnosis, and support the family in 
understanding autism and its implications.
• Consider interventions that are aimed to improve 
socialization, communication and behaviour. 
• Provide appropriate education and, if required, 
accommodation.
• Deal with associated medical problems (e.g. epi-
lepsy).
• Treat the anxiety.
• Medication is sometimes used, despite very lim-
ited evidence. For example, SSRIs for repetitive 
behaviours, or atypical antipsychotics for severe 
aggression.
Asperger’s syndrome
Asperger’s syndrome is similar to autism, with abnor-
malities in social communication and repetitive, iso-
lated behaviours. However, language is not delayed. 
Th e child, usually a boy, prefers his own company 
and often has intense interests. Unlike autism, intel-
ligence is normal, and seizures are not a feature. Th e 
prevalence is uncertain, with estimates from 1 to 50 
per 10 000.
• Th e aetiology is unknown. It may or may not be 
causally related to autism.
• Asperger’s syndrome persists into adulthood, and 
sometimes fi rst presents at that time, when it may 
be mistaken for schizotypal or schizoid personality 
disorder, or schizophrenia.
Rett’s syndrome
Rett’s syndrome is a rare, progressive and severe dis-
order occurring almost exclusively in girls. Th e main 
features are autism, learning disability, seizures, 
loss of speech and skilled movements, and irregular 
breathing. It is usually caused by sporadic mutations 
in the MECP2 gene on the X chromosome, and is fatal 
by early adulthood. Unusual hand-wringing move-
ments are a classical feature.
Specifi c developmental disorders
Specifi c developmental disorders are conditions in 
which there is marked delay in one area of develop-
ment relative to the child’s overall IQ. Th e most com-
mon problem is with reading (80% of cases), but also 
disorders selectively aff ecting arithmetic, language 
or motor skills. Th ough the disorders are not really 
‘psychiatric’, they are often referred to (or detected 

Childhood disorders 181
by) child psychiatric services because of associated 
emotional or behavioural diffi  culties.
• Specifi c speech and language disorder is related to 
the FOXP2 gene.
Specifi c reading disorder
In specifi c reading disorder, reading skills are signifi -
cantly (>2 standard deviations) below that predicted 
by the child’s overall performance. Visual impairment 
or lack of education must be excluded as the cause. It 
aff ects 2–10% of 10-year-olds, and is four times more 
common in boys than in girls.
• It is associated with conduct disorder in one-third 
of cases, also with ADHD, low socioeconomic sta-
tus and a disturbed family background. Th e direc-
tion of causality between these factors is unclear.
• Assessment should be by an educational psycholo-
gist using standardized tests.
• Management involves enhancing self-esteem and 
appropriate expert educational help.
• Nutritional supplements (fi sh oils) are being advo-
cated by some researchers and families.
• Prognosis is poor, with reading abilities often 
remaining well below average.
Other conditions
Enuresis
Enuresis is urinary incontinence after the age at 
which bladder control is expected (primary enuresis; 
must be at least 5 years old) or after previous normal 
continence (secondary enuresis). It usually presents 
as bedwetting in the fi rst half of the night (nocturnal 
enuresis). It aff ects 15% of 5-year-olds, 2% of 10-year-
olds and 1% of 14-year-olds. Boys outnumber girls 3:1.
• Enuresis can cause great distress, aff ect self-
esteem, interfere with normal activities (e.g. 
sleepovers) and can lead to bullying or intolerant 
parenting.
In the assessment, exclude urinary tract infec-
tion (UTI), diabetes or neurological disorder. Enure-
sis may be a sign of sleep apnoea. Search for recent 
stressors and symptoms of emotional disorder (twice 
as common as expected in those with enuresis). 
Th ere is often a history of enuresis in male relatives.
Th e management of enuresis includes:
• Reassurance, explanation and limiting fl uid intake 
in the evening.
• Treatment of associated psychiatric or medical dis-
order.
• Behavioural methods are the main treatment. A 
star chart is best for younger children; they are 
rewarded for achieving a realistic target (which 
may not be a ‘dry bed’ initially) with stars or 
other suitable token. An enuresis alarm (‘pad and 
buzzer’) is a moisture-sensitive pad worn by the 
child. When urine is passed, a buzzer goes off , 
which wakes the child in time to go to the toilet to 
fi nish. He or she also participates in changing the 
sheets. An alarm is usually eff ective if persisted 
with for several weeks, especially in children over 
7 years old.
• Pharmacological methods are sometimes used, 
though behavioural methods are preferred. Intra-
nasal desmopressin is the usual fi rst-line drug, with 
moderate success and few side eff ects. Th e tricyclic 
antidepressant (TCA) imipramine is licenced for 
enuresis from the age of 6, but is of limited effi  cacy, 
is potentially dangerous and not usually recom-
mended. Relapse is common with both methods.
Th e prognosis is good, though a few boys remain 
enuretic into adulthood.
Encopresis
Encopresis is the passing of faeces in an inappropri-
ate place after age 4. As with enuresis, it can be pri-
mary or secondary. Children may soil their pants, 
pass faeces in hidden places or occasionally smear 
them. At assessment, exclude physical problems (e.g. 
constipation, Hirschsprung’s disease) and learning 
disability.
• Th ere is often a history of inadequate or harsh 
toilet training combined with recent stresses and 
emotional disorder in the child.
Management is by reassurance, help with associ-
ated problems and ensuring that the parents do not 
become punitive. Th e standard behavioural manoeu-
vre is to toilet the child after each meal, and to reward 
her or him for staying there, for producing a motion 
and for not soiling. Most encopresis cases resolve 
with treatment within a year. Occasionally it persists 
into adolescence.
Tics
Tics are involuntary, rapid, spasmodic movements, 
usually repeated blinking and grimacing. Th ey are 
common, especially in young boys, and may begin 
after an emotional upset. Th ey are generally transient 

182 
Childhood disorders
and need no specifi c treatment. However, some tics 
become severe, prolonged and incapacitating.
Th e main tic disorder is (Gilles de la) Tourette 
syndrome, in which tics are accompanied by vo-
cal grunts and sometimes by stereotyped phrases, 
movements or expletives (coprolalia). Obsessive-
compulsive and ADHD symptoms often occur. Boys 
are aff ected more than girls (3:1). Th e incidence is 
usually considered to be around 1 in 2000, but much 
higher fi gures exist.
Mild cases need no treatment. Troublesome tics 
are controlled by low-dose antipsychotics. Obses-
sional and hyperactivity symptoms can be treated 
as appropriate. Th ough the tics tend to diminish in 
adulthood, some symptoms persist.
• Tourette syndrome has a genetic basis, which 
overlaps with that of OCD. Autoimmune process-
es may also contribute. Abnormalities in basal 
ganglia pathways and the dopamine system are 
 implicated.
Selective mutism
In selective (also called elective) mutism, children 
refuse to speak although able to do so. Speech is 
usually normal in one setting (e.g. at home) but 
absent elsewhere. Non-verbal communication is 
preserved. Onset is from 4 to 8 years old. Aff ected 
children tend to be shy, anxious and isolated in most 
settings, though can sometimes be aggressive and 
disturbed at home. Th e disorder is rare, and unusu-
ally it is more common in girls than boys. It may be 
associated with overprotective parenting and mater-
nal depression.
• Selective mutism is increasingly being viewed as 
an anxiety disorder.
• Th ere is no specifi c treatment; a range of behav-
ioural interventions may be tried.
• Selective mutism can persist for several years, and 
residual social anxiety and communication prob-
lems are common.
Sleep disorders
Children, like adults, can suff er from sleep problems 
secondary to psychiatric disorders, and from sleep 
disorders. Th e sleep disturbance can impair the 
child’s behaviour and development, and aff ect the 
whole family. A sleep history is part of the assessment 
(Table 16.1).
• Childhood sleep disturbance is particularly com-
mon in those with learning disability (Chapter 17) 
and autism.
Psychoses in childhood and 
adolescence
Schizophrenia may begin in adolescence, and oc-
casionally in younger children. Bipolar disorder can 
also start in adolescence.
• Th e disorders are treated in a similar fashion to 
adult-onset cases, and are one of the few clear 
indications for medication in child psychiatry. Th e 
prognosis of childhood-onset psychosis is poor.
Special groups
Toddlers
Toddlers are notorious for temper tantrums. Reassur-
ance that this is normal, and simple advice on setting 
limits, are usually all that is needed. Consistency in 
the parents’ response to the behaviour is crucial. Self-
help books are available.
Sleep disturbances are common, either refusal to 
settle or night-time waking due to night terrors and 
nightmares. Use reassurance and a consistent bed-
time routine. Psychiatric referral is rare, though oc-
casionally the disturbances herald an emotional or 
behavioural disorder.
Teenagers
Contrary to the stereotype, neither emotional tur-
moil nor delinquency is normal for teenagers. Per-
sistently withdrawn, disruptive or bizarre behaviour 
should be assessed to exclude psychiatric disorder. 
Diagnostically, adolescents get the tail end of child-
hood disorders and the early onset of adult disorders 
( Table 16.12), so the clinician must know about both, 
and the continuities between them. Th is has led to 
adolescent psychiatry as a subspecialty.
Table 16.12 Important psychiatric disorders of 
adolescence
Conduct disorder
Eating disorder
Substance misuse disorders
Depressive disorder
Anxiety disorder
Schizophrenia
Bipolar disorder
Deliberate self-harm

Childhood disorders 183
Children in institutions
Children in care, especially in children’s homes, 
have increased rates of psychiatric disorder, notably 
conduct disorder, substance misuse, post-traumatic 
stress disorder (PTSD) and self-harm. Th is may be 
both a cause and a consequence of being in care.
• Teenagers in detention facilities have extremely 
high rates of psychiatric disorder, with conduct 
disorder, substance misuse and self-harm again 
prominent.
Children with physical illness
Children with any chronic illness are at increased risk 
of psychiatric disorder. Th is is especially true for or-
ganic brain syndromes and epilepsy. Th e associations 
may partly refl ect a common aetiology, but also the 
eff ects of physical illness on the child’s intellectual, 
psychological and social development.
• Close cooperation between those involved in the 
psychiatric and medical disorders is essential.
Children with psychiatrically ill 
parents
If a parent has a psychiatric disorder, the child is at 
risk of psychiatric problems via an increased likeli-
hood of inadequate or abnormal parenting, as well as 
from inheritance of a genetic predisposition. Hence 
the mental health (and personality) of parents is part 
of the child psychiatric assessment (Table 16.1). Spe-
cifi c parental problems associated with particular 
outcomes in the child include:
• Maternal substance misuse aff ects foetal develop-
ment.
• Paternal alcoholism and development of conduct 
disorder.
• Maternal depression may impair the formation of 
secure infant attachments.
• Maternal eating disorder and abnormal feeding of 
the child.
• Fabricated and induced illness (sometimes called 
Munchausen syndrome by proxy or Meadows’ syn-
drome) – the parent fabricates symptoms or signs 
in the child. 
Abused children
Children can be abused sexually, physically or emo-
tionally. Th e abuse has psychiatric as well as medical 
and legal repercussions. Key points concerning the 
psychiatric aspects of child abuse are:
• Take specialist advice whenever abuse is suspected. 
Th is may be obtained from paediatricians, child psy-
chiatrists and social services’ child protection teams.
• Your responsibility is fi rst and foremost to protect 
the child. Th is may override the usual duty of con-
fi dentiality.
• Children who are being abused may show physical, 
psychological or behavioural signs.
• Managing abused children is diffi  cult and needs 
multidisciplinary input. Child psychiatrists have 
particular roles in identifying and treating the psy-
chological consequences of the abuse. It is unknown 
whether intervention alters the long-term prognosis.
• Physical abuse (non-accidental injury) causes sig-
nifi cant morbidity and mortality. Either the child 
or the abuser may need to be removed from the 
home. Physical abuse leads to higher rates of emo-
tional and behavioural disorder.
• Children who are emotionally abused or neglected 
have delayed psychological and physical devel-
opment and increased rates of emotional distur-
bance. In extreme cases, they may present with 
failure to thrive (deprivation dwarfi sm).
Th e eff ects of child abuse may continue into adult-
hood:
• Women who were sexually abused have double the 
risk of psychiatric disorder and fi ve times higher 
rates of psychiatric admission. Borderline person-
ality disorder and possibly bulimia nervosa appear 
to be particularly common.
• Th ere are no good data on the outcome of sexu-
ally abused boys, apart from an increased risk of 
becoming abusers and perpetuating the cycle.
• Emotional abuse may lead to persistent low self-
esteem, relationship diffi  culties and personality 
disorder.
 Clinical scenario
Jade is a 15-year-old girl who was taken into foster 
care 2 years ago following allegations of sexual abuse 
by her father. She has moved through eight foster 
placements in 2 years and her current placement is at 
risk of breakdown owing to her challenging behaviour. 
She has started drinking alcohol heavily and smokes 
cannabis at weekends, and has self-harmed on a 
number of occasions. The fi rst two times you meet 
Jade with her foster mother, she swears at you and 
leaves the room when you ‘ask too many questions’. 
Jade agrees to meet you at her school for her next 
appointment. When you see Jade alone, she reveals 
she is very distressed by bad dreams at night and 
‘videotapes’ playing during the day of the abuse by 

184 
Childhood disorders
her father. She feels detached from people she used 
to be close to and avoids going back to her family 
home for contact visits, even though her father is 
no longer living there. You diagnose post-traumatic 
stress disorder, and Jade starts individual sessions 
with the team’s psychologist, who uses trauma-
focused cognitive behavioural therapy to address 
Jade’s symptoms. Jade is sleeping a lot better, 
seems to be focusing better on her school work, and 
is drinking less often. She still has bad dreams and 
self-harms regularly now by cutting, but has had no 
suicidal ideation. You are concerned that in the longer 
term she may have persisting diffi culties with emotion 
regulation as a consequence of the long-term sexual 
abuse, and offer her a place on a group programme 
to address emotional regulation problems. Jade is not 
keen to be involved and says she would rather ‘get 
on with life’. You agree to review her in 2 months and 
explain you would be happy to refer her again if she 
changes her mind.
Refugee children
Children who fi nd themselves in a foreign country, 
with strange customs, a language they may not un-
derstand, and often with major social deprivation 
and other stressors, are a vulnerable and neglected 
group. Th eir psychiatric needs are not well met by 
most services. Depression, PTSD, and anxiety disor-
ders are particularly common. 
 KEYPOINTS
• Conduct disorder and emotional disorder are the 
most common childhood psychiatric diagnoses.
• The principles of child psychiatry and 
psychiatric assessment are similar to the adult 
context. However, more attention must be paid 
to the child’s developmental history, and to the 
home and school environment.
• The risk of child psychiatric disorder is greater 
in urban areas, in boys, in those in care and in 
children with learning disability or chronic illness.
• Most disorders arise from an interaction 
between genetic and environmental factors.
• Treatment is usually behavioural and, given 
the degree of infl uence the parents have on a 
child’s behaviour, must be aimed at the family 
as well as at the child.
• Medication is used far less frequently than in 
adults, but can be effective for a number of 
conditions. Caution is required, especially with 
antidepressants.
 FURTHER READING
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence 
(NICE) (2005) CG28 Depression in children 
and young people. Access at www.nice.org.uk/
CG28
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence 
(NICE) (2008) CG72 Attention defi cit hyperactivity 
disorder: Diagnosis and management of ADHD in 
children, young people and adults. Access at www
.nice.org.uk/cg72
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence 
(NICE) (2009) CG89 When to suspect child mal-
treatment. Access at www.nice.org.uk/cg89
 SELF-ASSESSMENT
1 A 10-year-old is brought to clinic with school 
refusal. His mother reports that the boy has 
never had clear friendships at school, and tends 
to ‘talk over’ other children. He has been bullied 
frequently, but teachers also report that he 
sometimes is aggressive to other children without 
an identifi able reason. Which of the following 
psychiatric diagnoses is the best explanation for 
his diffi culties?
a Schizophrenia
b Social phobia
c Generalized anxiety disorder
d Asperger’s syndrome
e Conduct disorder
2 A 17-year-old girl attends clinic with low mood 
and poor sleep and appetite. She always 
feels tired at school, and no longer enjoys her 
pastimes of netball and dancing. You diagnose 
a moderate depressive episode. She has not 
disclosed to her parents that she is attending 
a mental health service. Which is the most 
appropriate fi rst-line treatment? 
a Family therapy
b Cognitive analytic therapy
c Citalopram
d Cognitive behavioural therapy
e Fluoxetine

Psychiatry Lecture Notes, Eleventh Edition. Gautam Gulati, Mary-Ellen Lynall and Kate Saunders. © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 
2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Mild learning disability represents the tail end of 
the normal population distribution for intelligence 
and, as such, results from an interaction between 
multiple genetic and environmental factors. A spe-
cifi c cause is more often identifi able for severe cases.
Clinical features
Learning disability can be mild, moderate, severe or 
profound depending on IQ (Table 17.2). Its cause, if 
known, is coded separately.
Assessment of learning disability
Th e presence of learning disability may be suspected:
• Before birth – from antenatal tests or pregnancy 
complications.
• At birth – from the physical appearance.
• In infancy or childhood – as a result of develop-
mental delay.
Assessment of a child with suspected learning dis-
ability encompasses:
• Making the diagnosis – establish its presence, 
severity and likely cause. Th is usually involves 
community paediatricians and sometimes paedi-
atric neurologists and clinical geneticists.
• Evaluating the level of adaptive functioning.
Principles
Defi nition and key features
Mental retardation, mental handicap, developmental 
disability, intellectual disability and learning disabil-
ity are all synonyms. Mental retardation is the term 
in ICD-10 and DSM-IV. while DSM-5 uses intellectual 
disability. Learning disability is usually preferred by 
patients and families, and is used here.
Learning disability is defi ned as:
• IQ below 70.
• Impairment across a wide range of functions.
• Onset before 18 years old.
Th e features of learning disability are shown in 
Table 17.1. It must be distinguished from:
• Lower than average intelligence but IQ >70.
• Specifi c developmental disorders (Chapter 16).
• Intellectual impairment secondary to an adult 
organic syndrome (Chapter 13).
Th e incidence of learning disability has declined 
because of medical advances (e.g. immunization) 
and termination of aff ected pregnancies. However, 
the prevalence is increasing because of improved 
survival.
Learning disability (mental 
retardation)
Learning objectives
✓ To understand and be able to describe the defi nition, classifi cation, 
assessment and aetiology of learning disability 
✓ To learn about common psychiatric presentations in individuals with a 
learning disability
17

186 
Learning disability (mental retardation)
• Evaluating comorbid psychiatric problems.
• Evaluating comorbid medical problems.
Th e areas of assessment are listed in Table 17.3. Th e 
procedures necessary depend on the child’s age and 
the circumstances of the assessment. Compared with 
the standard psychiatric assessment there is a special 
emphasis on the obstetric and neurodevelopmental 
history and on the physical examination.
Psychiatric aspects of learning 
disability
Children and adults with learning disability have 
high rates (>40%) of challenging behaviour and 
psychiatric disorder. The risk of these problems 
is higher with coexistent epilepsy, and lower in 
Down’s syndrome (save for depression, rates of 
which are higher in Down’s syndrome partially due 
to hypothyroidism). 
Table 17.2 Comparison of mild, moderate, severe and profound learning disability
Mild
Moderate
Severe/profound
IQ range
69–50
49–35
<35 (profound <20)
Percentage of cases
85%
10%
5%
Ability to self-care
Independent
Need some help
Limited
Communication
Reasonable
Limited
Basic or none
Reading and writing
Basic
Limited
Minimal or none
Ability to work
Semi-skilled
Unskilled, supervised
Supervised basic tasks
Social skills
Normal
Moderate
Few
Physical problems
Rare
Sometimes
Common
Aetiology discovered
Rarely
Often
Usually
Psychiatric disorder in children with 
learning disability
All the main psychiatric disorders are more common 
in children with learning disabilities. Th e assessment 
of these follows the principles of the child psychiatric 
assessment, but modifi ed according to intellectual 
level (Table 17.4).
Psychiatric disorder in learning-disabled 
adults
An adult with learning disability may require psychi-
atric assessment for a number of reasons:
• To assess the level of functioning and nature of cur-
rent problems in order to help plan future manage-
ment (e.g. placement).
• To investigate a suspected psychiatric disorder, 
such as schizophrenia and depression. Th ese 
occur more commonly than in the general popu-
lation. Th eir recognition may be diffi  cult because 
of the learning disability. Various scales have been 
devised to help but sometimes the eff ect of a trial of 
medication may be needed.
• To assess and characterize a behavioural problem 
– called a challenging behaviour – such as shout-
ing or inappropriate sexual activities, and to deter-
mine if it is secondary to a psychiatric diagnosis 
(e.g. depression), a physical illness (e.g. an infec-
tion) or seizure activity, which is especially com-
mon in this population.
• As part of a forensic or risk assessment. 
• To assess a decline in abilities. Th is most common-
ly refl ects a superimposed disorder (e.g. depres-
sion). Dementia is more common than expected in 
learning disability (not just in Down’s syndrome) 
and especially in cases of severe epilepsy that is dif-
fi cult to control.
Table 17.1 Features of learning disability
Mild, moderate, severe and profound forms
Prevalence is approximately 2%, with a male:female 
ratio of 3:2
Usually untreatable
Often accompanied by:
 Psychiatric disorder
 Challenging behaviour
 Medical problems (e.g. epilepsy)
Caused by:
 Chromosomal abnormalities
 Genetic mutations causing single gene disorders
 Environmental factors
  Most common specifi c causes are Down’s 
syndrome and fragile X syndrome

Learning disability (mental retardation) 187
Psychiatric diagnoses in adults with learning disa-
bility follow ICD-10 criteria, in a modifi ed, multiaxial 
approach (Table 17.5).
Management
Some individuals with learning disability do not re-
quire any specifi c service provision. Th is may be true 
for those at the mild end of the spectrum. Th eir psy-
chiatric problems tend to be managed by general psy-
chiatry services. However, the majority are cared for 
by specialist services due to the challenges faced by 
the individual, and this is usually due to a complex 
interplay between physical, social and psychological 
Table 17.3 Assessment of a child with 
learning disability
History
Details of pregnancy:
 Foetal growth
 Infections, trauma, eclampsia
 Alcohol or substance misuse
 Exposure to other drugs, toxins
Delivery:
 Gestational age
 Complications
 Condition of baby
Child’s development:
 Milestones
 Physical diffi culties
Family history:
 Mental retardation
 Physical anomalies
 Consanguinity of parents
Examination
General:
 Overall health
Weight, height, head circumference
Physical anomalies
Skin
Neurological:
 Tone, posture, power, refl exes
 Cranial nerves
 Motor skills
 Comprehension and use of language
Neuropsychological testing
Intelligence quotient
Language development
Assessments for autism spectrum disorder
Laboratory investigations
Karyotyping and genetic testing
Biochemical studies
Brain imaging
EEG
Table 17.4 Psychiatric assessment in learning 
disability
Background
Overall level of functioning
Associated physical disability
Cause of learning disability
Methods of communication
Psychiatric history
Usual behaviours
Recent changes in environment
Recent changes in behaviour
Examination
Interactions
Behaviours
Mood
Usual presentation of emotional expression
Features of autism
Investigations
Behavioural rating scales
Autism rating scales
Physical investigation
Evidence of infection (especially urinary tract infection 
 or lower respiratory tract infection)
Evidence of seizures
Evidence of constipation or gastrointestinal refl ux
Table 17.5 Diagnostic system for 
psychiatric disorders in adults with
learning disabilities
Axis I: severity of learning disability
Axis II: cause of learning disability
Axis III: psychiatric disorders
 Level A: developmental disorders
 Level B: psychiatric illness
 Level C: personality disorders
 Level D: problem behaviours
 Level E: other disorders
factors. Th e nature and amount of intervention 
needed is determined by:
• Overall level of functioning.
• Ability in specifi c domains (e.g. communication, 
socialization, daily living tasks).
• Physical disabilities (including epilepsy) and 
motor skills.
• Coexisting psychiatric disorder, especially autism, 
which is over-represented.
• Personality, behaviour and personal preferences.
• Ability of the family to care for the individual.

188 
Learning disability (mental retardation)
Th e management of learning disability is based on 
the approaches employed elsewhere in psychiatry:
• Th e large majority of children with learning dis-
ability now live at home. Most adults with severe 
learning disability live in well-supported group 
homes. Long-stay institutional care has now virtu-
ally disappeared in the United Kingdom.
• Care is provided by multidisciplinary community 
learning disability teams using a framework similar 
to Community Mental Health Teams (Chapter 8).
• Most local services have some in-patient beds for 
the assessment and treatment of behavioural and 
psychiatric disorders. Forensic services for people 
with learning disability are provided regionally.
• Voluntary agencies play an important role.
Four principles guide the current strategy for care 
of people with learning disability:
• Legal and human rights – to a decent education, to 
marry, to have children, to vote, etc.
• Th e right to independence – independence, not 
dependence, is the default position.
• Th e right to choice – in where to live, what work to 
do, who cares for them.
• Th e right to inclusion – in mainstream services and 
local communities.
‘Essential lifestyle planning’ is one approach by 
which to fi nd out what the person thinks about these 
decisions, and to provide the right package of care 
and support to help them achieve their goals.
 Clinical scenario
Aa 24-year-old man with severe learning disability 
is brought to his GP by his carer from a residential 
placement where he lives with three other residents. 
The carer reports a 6-month history of unpredictable 
aggression, which is always followed by urinary 
incontinence and the patient falling asleep. The 
doctor requests an EEG, which shows seizure 
activity. The incidents of aggression cease after the 
commencement of an antiepileptic.
Specifi c conditions 
associated with learning 
disability
Th e main individual causes of learning disability are 
mentioned here. Chromosomal and genetic factors 
predominate. By and large, the aetiology does not 
markedly aff ect management, but it may have major 
implications for prognosis, and the likelihood of simi-
lar problems arising in other family members, as well 
as secondary prevention.
• A useful concept is behavioural phenotype – that 
is, the association of a certain profi le of behaviours 
with a genetic condition, such that recognition of 
the profi le gives useful clues as to the cause of the 
learning disability. For example, self-injury sug-
gests Lesch–Nyhan syndrome, and overeating sug-
gests Prader–Willi syndrome.
Chromosomal abnormalities
A range of chromosomal microdeletions, transloca-
tions and aneuploidies can cause mental retardation. 
In total they explain 5–35% of cases.
• Many of the abnormalities can be detected by rou-
tine karyotyping. Others require specialist tests, 
such as subtelomeric analyses, which assess the 
ends of chromosomes (telomeres) that are relative-
ly common sites of abnormality (5–10% of severe 
learning disability) and tests targeted at specifi c 
regions of the chromosomes known to be causative 
for a particular syndrome.
• Much smaller chromosomal abnormalities, called 
copy number variants (CNVs), as described for 
autism (Chapter 16), are also common in learning 
disability and may well account for many hitherto 
unexplained cases.
Down’s syndrome
Down’s syndrome (trisomy 21) produces learning 
disability with characteristic physical features (Ta-
ble 17.6). The diagnosis is usually made at, or be-
fore, birth. It is the most common cause of learning 
disability. Its ‘true’ incidence is 1 in 650 live births 
(though this has fallen to 1 in 1000 in the United 
Kingdom due to antenatal testing and pregnancy 
termination). The risk is strongly dependent on 
maternal age, rising from <1/2000 at age 20 to 1/30 
at age 45.
Th e aetiology in 95% of cases is triplication of 
chromosome 21, with the syndrome presumed to 
result from expression of the extra genes on the 
third copy of the chromosome. Th e remainder 
are due to a translocation involving chromosome 
21 or to mosaicism (a mixture of normal and trisomic 
cells).
• Th e prognosis has improved with better medical 
management. Many now survive to middle age, 
when intellectual decline due to Alzheimer’s dis-
ease is common. Th e association between the two 

Learning disability (mental retardation) 189
disorders was crucial in the discovery of the latter’s 
genetic basis.
 Clinical scenario
A 46-year-old man with Down’s syndrome presents 
with his carer. The carer reports a year-long history 
of personality change with increased irritability, 
loss of skills citing inability to use a knife and 
fork, seizures (which have only begun recently) 
and that he is sleeping in the day but not at night. 
Psychological assessment and interviews with staff 
who have known the patient for many years confi rm 
a diagnosis of Alzheimer’s dementia.
Fragile X syndrome
Fragile X syndrome is so called because of a frag-
ile site on the long arm of the X chromosome seen 
when cells are grown in a folate-deficient me-
dium. It occurs in about 1/1500 births and is the 
second most common cause of learning disability 
(about 10% of cases). Its exact prevalence is uncer-
tain because its phenotype (Table 17.7) is variable 
and accurate genetic testing has only recently be-
come possible.
Most cases of fragile X syndrome are due to a tri-
nucleotide (triplet) repeat mutation in the FMR1 
Table 17.6 Features of Down’s syndrome
Moderate or severe learning disability
Placid temperament
Physical features:
  Down-slanting palpebral fi ssures and presence of 
epicanthic folds
 Small mouth with large protruding tongue
 Flat nasal bridge
 Flattened occiput
  Small hands with single transverse palmar (simian) 
crease
 Hypotonia
Associated medical problems:
 Cardiac septal defects
 Gastrointestinal obstruction
 Atlantoaxial instability
 Susceptibility to infection
Increased risk of:
 Leukaemia
 Hypothyroidism
 Autoimmune disorders
 Alzheimer’s disease
Depression
gene, impairing the gene’s normal role in regulat-
ing expression of other genes. Being on the X chro-
mosome, the syndrome is more common in boys 
than in girls. Along with several other X-linked dis-
orders, it explains much of the higher rate of learn-
ing disability in males. However, the unusual na-
ture of the FMR1 mutation means that some males 
who have the mutation are normal, and more fe-
males are affected than would be expected. Female 
carriers also have an increased risk of psychiatric 
disorders.
• Th e disorder gets worse in succeeding generations 
(anticipation).
• Genetic detection of aff ected individuals and car-
riers is feasible.
• There is no specific treatment. Methylpheni-
date and folic acid may improve the attentional 
deficits.
• FMR1 regulates genes involved in the formation of 
synapses and dendrites, and this function is impaired 
in fragile X syndrome because of the mutation.
Other chromosomal abnormalities
Severe learning disability is common with other au-
tosomal abnormalities, but less frequent in sex chro-
mosome aneuploidies.
• Prader–Willi syndrome is learning disability 
together 
with 
compulsive 
eating, 
obesity, 
challenging behaviour, hypogonadism and psycho-
sis. It is due to deletion of part of chromosome 15. 
Table 17.7 Features of fragile X syndrome
More common in males (~2:1)
All features are particularly variable
Learning disability:
 May be mild, moderate, severe or profound
 Deteriorates late in childhood
 Performance IQ affected more than verbal IQ
  Litany speech – repetitive, lacking in themes or 
 content
 Poor attention and concentration
 Autistic features common
Physical features:
 Large, protruding ears
 Long face with high-arched palate
 Flat feet
 Lax joints
 Soft skin
 Large testes (after puberty)
 Mitral valve prolapse

190 
Learning disability (mental retardation)
Angelman syndrome (severe learning disability, 
puppet-like movements) is caused by the same 
abnormality when inherited from the mother rath-
er than from the father (‘imprinting’).
• Williams syndrome, also known as infantile 
hypercalcaemia, affects 1 in 15 000 infants. Most 
cases are sporadic, and due to deletion of part 
of chromosome 7, including the elastin gene. 
Children show an ‘elfin-like’ appearance, and 
a moderate to severe learning disability. Verbal 
abilities are much better preserved – especially 
expressive language – than are visuospatial 
skills.
• Velo-cardio-facial syndrome, or DiGeorge syn-
drome, is due to deletion of part of chromosome 
22q. It is usually sporadic, and is relatively com-
mon (1 in 2000 infants). Th e physical appearance 
is characteristic (prominent nose, small head 
or jaw, short stature, long hyperextensible fi n-
gers, plus cardiac and pulmonary abnormalities. 
Speech and language problems are common and 
90% have learning disability. It is also a risk factor 
for schizophrenia.
Single gene disorders
Th ere are over 1000 diff erent genes known to cause 
learning disability, often via eff ects on metabolism or 
brain development. Most are very rare.
Phenylketonuria
Phenylketonuria (PKU) is the classic inborn er-
ror of metabolism (Table 17.8). Th e amino acid 
phenylalanine cannot be converted into paraty-
rosine because of a defective converting enzyme. It 
is autosomal recessive and aff ects 1 in 10 000 live 
births.
• PKU is one of the few treatable causes of severe 
learning disability. A rigorous low-phenylalanine 
diet must be started in the fi rst months of life 
to prevent deterioration – hence the neonatal 
screening for phenylalanine levels. Carriers can 
be detected.
Other inherited errors of 
metabolism
Learning disability can result from disorders of other 
metabolic pathways (Table 17.9). Th e frequency of 
each is low and varies between ethnic groups. Most 
are associated with failure to thrive, and hepatic and/
or renal dysfunction.
• In Lesch–Nyhan syndrome, self-mutilation by bit-
ing is the behavioural phenotype.
All the examples cited in Table 17.9 are recessive 
and most can be detected prenatally. A few can be 
ameliorated by diet.
Other genetic disorders
Neurofi bromatosis and tuberous sclerosis complex 
are neurocutaneous syndromes. Both are autoso-
mal dominant, but spontaneous mutations are also 
common.
• Neurofi bromatosis (von Recklinghausen’s disease) 
aff ects 1 in 4000 births. Diagnostic features are café 
au lait spots on the skin and multiple neurofi bro-
mas. Mild learning disability occurs in about 50% 
of cases of type 1 neurofi bromatosis, which is due 
to mutations in the NF1 (neurofi bromin) gene on 
chromosome 17.
• Tuberous sclerosis complex occurs in 1 in 6000 
births. Th ere are several characteristic skin lesions 
and multiple tumours (hamartomas) in the brain 
Table 17.8 Features of untreated 
phenylketonuria
Severe learning disability
Unpredictable aggression
Abnormal movements and mannerisms
Fair skinned
Short stature
Associated medical problems:
 Eczema
 Vomiting
 Seizures
Table 17.9 Examples of metabolic disorders 
associated with learning disability
Metabolic category
Example
Amino acids
Homocysteinuria
Lipids
Tay–Sachs disease
Mucopolysaccharides
Hurler’s syndrome
Carbohydrates
Galactosaemia
Purines
Lesch–Nyhan syndrome

Learning disability (mental retardation) 191
and elsewhere. Epilepsy and progressive men-
tal retardation occur in 60%. Autistic features 
are often seen. It is caused by two genes, TSC1 
(hamartin) on chromosome 9 and TSC2 (tuberin) 
on chromosome 16, which aff ect cell growth and 
proliferation.
Environmental factors
Learning disability can be caused by a variety of 
environmental insults. Most act pre- or perinatally 
(Table 17.10) but postnatal factors are also recognized 
(Table 17.11).
Table 17.10 Pre- and perinatal 
environmental causes of learning
disability
Category
Comment
Obstetric complications
In utero infections:
 Rubella
Greatest risk (50%) if 
  infection is in fi rst 
trimester
 HIV
Learning disability 
  in 50% of infected 
children
 Syphilis
 Cytomegalovirus
 Toxoplasmosis
Foetal alcohol 
 syndrome
In some offspring of 
  mothers who drink 
heavily
Other drugs and toxins
For example, 
 methylmercury
Placental insuffi ciency
Placental abruption
Eclampsia/toxaemia
Birth complications
May be a consequence
  of earlier foetal 
abnormality
Ventricular 
 haemorrhage
Perinatal factors
Hypothyroidism 
 (cretinism)
An important cause in 
  areas with low-iodine 
diets
Hyperbilirubinaemia
Other factors
Cerebral palsy
Hydrocephalus
Spina bifi da
Table 17.11 Postnatal causes of learning 
disability
Infections:
 Meningitis
 Encephalitis
Brain tumours
Head injury:
 Accidental
 Non-accidental
Hypoxia (e.g. anaesthetic accident)
Lead poisoning
Rare idiopathic syndromes:
 Disintegrative psychoses
 KEYPOINTS
• Learning disability (mental retardation) is 
defi ned as an IQ below 70, with functional 
impairments in several areas and a childhood 
onset. It affects about 2% of the population, 
boys more commonly than girls.
• Psychiatric and behavioural problems are 
common, especially in those who also have 
epilepsy.
• Severe learning disability is usually caused by 
genetic or chromosomal abnormalities (e.g. 
Down’s syndrome, fragile X). Mild learning 
disability is often idiopathic and multifactorial.
• Learning disability is rarely treatable. 
Management is aimed at maximizing potential 
and quality of life, and at treating concurrent 
psychiatric and behavioural problems.
• Most people with learning disability live in the 
community.
 FURTHER READING
Bhaumik S, Branford D. (2005) Frith Prescribing 
Guidelines for Adults With a Learning Disability. 
Taylor & Francis, Oxford.
Department of Health (2008) Healthcare for all: report 
of the independent enquiry into access to health-
care for people with learning disabilities. Access 
at 
www.dh.gov.uk/en/publicationsandstatistics/
publications/publicationspolicyandguidance/
DH_099255
Royal College of Psychiatrists (2001) OP48. CD-LD: 
Diagnostic Criteria for Psychiatric Disorders for Use 
with Adults with Learning Disabilities/Mental Re-
tardation. RC Psych, London.

192 
Learning disability (mental retardation)
 SELF-ASSESSMENT
1 A 16-year-old boy with learning disability presents 
with ‘hearing voices’ and ‘strange’ behaviour. His 
parents are concerned that he has unusual beliefs. 
They tell you that he was born with a cleft palate 
and has suffered repeatedly from infections since 
he was born. He has a heart murmur. Which of the 
following diagnostic entities would you suspect?
a Fragile X syndrome
b DiGeorge syndrome
c Down’s syndrome
d Neurofi bromatosis
e Williams syndrome
2 A 24-year-old man with severe learning disability 
has become increasingly agitated over the last few 
days. He is intermittently pyrexial. There is no history 
of seizures. There has been no change to his eating 
habits and his carer reports that he is defecating 
regularly. What would you do next?
a Wait and watch.
b Suggest a low-dose antipsychotic to help with 
the agitation.
c Admit the man to a general hospital.
d Ask for a urine dipstick.
e Admit him to a psychiatric in-patient unit.

Psychiatry Lecture Notes, Eleventh Edition. Gautam Gulati, Mary-Ellen Lynall and Kate Saunders. © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published
2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
time. Neuroses and substance misuse account for 
most of this morbidity, and psychosis is relatively rare 
(Table 18.1 summarizes key fi gures from the Adult Psy-
chiatric Morbidity Survey in England). Overall psychi-
atric morbidity is strongly associated with social depri-
vation. Rates are twice as high in areas of deprivation.
Population prevalence is not the same as demand 
on services. Many of the individuals in Table 18.1 will 
never present to any service with their disorder. Th e 
diff erence between the population prevalence and 
the number who seek medical help is the fi rst step on 
the pyramid, the peak of which is the tiny and unrep-
resentative percentage of cases that become psychi-
atric in-patients. Various ‘fi lters’ explain why so few 
make it to the top (Figure 18.1).
General practice
Most psychiatric disorder is seen and managed in 
general practice. Th e most common psychiatric dis-
orders in general practice are the neuroses and soma-
toform disorders, depression and substance misuse. 
Patients with psychosis are rare – most GPs have only 
a few on their books, and these are usually also under 
specialist care.
Psychiatry as seen from general 
practice
Since psychiatrists and GPs see a diff erent profi le of 
psychiatric disorder it is not surprising that they may 
have diff ering views about priorities. For example, 
One of the most important messages of this book is 
that psychiatry is an integral part of medicine – there is 
nothing unique about psychiatric patients or psychi-
atric disorders. Rather it is the traditional separation 
of psychiatric services from the rest of medicine that 
has made this appear to be the case. Th e conventional 
view of psychiatry, often gained from attachments to 
hospital-based psychiatric teams, is potentially mis-
leading: most people with psychiatric disorder pre-
sent to, and are managed by, other doctors in other 
settings. All doctors must therefore have basic skills in 
psychiatric assessment and management. Th is chap-
ter discusses the implications of the following facts:
• Psychiatric disorders are very common in the pop-
ulation, and thus in all areas of medical practice.
• Outside specialist psychiatric services, somatic 
symptoms are often the presenting feature of psy-
chiatric disorder.
• Psychiatric disorders frequently coexist with medi-
cal illnesses.
Epidemiology of 
psychiatric disorder in 
different settings
In the population
Epidemiological surveys show that at least 20% of the 
adult population has a psychiatric disorder at any one 
Psychiatry in other 
settings
Learning objectives
✓ To have a working knowledge of the relevance of psychiatry in settings 
other than secondary care mental health.
18

194 
Psychiatry in other settings
In psychiatric
care
Diagnosed and treated
by GP
Filter 2: Recognition by the GP
Filter 3: Referral to a psychiatrist
Filter 4: Admission to hospital
In-patient care
Filter 1: The decision to consult a doctor
in the population
Attending primary care
Figure 18.1 Psychiatric disorders in different settings 
and the fi lters to psychiatric care. Not everyone with a 
psychiatric disorder presents to a doctor. The decision 
to do so – the fi rst fi lter to psychiatric care – depends 
on several factors; for example, awareness that the 
symptoms may signify psychiatric disorder, their severity, 
choosing to see a practitioner of alternative medicine, 
stigma, etc. Of those who do see a doctor (in the UK, 
usually a GP), the psychiatric disorder is recognized 
and treated in about half. This fi lter is determined by 
the doctor’s diagnostic and treatment decisions. About 
10% of patients are referred to psychiatric services; this 
fi lter depends on the nature of the disorder, the doctor’s 
characteristics and the availability of resources. A tiny 
minority at some stage have a psychiatric admission. 
This last fi lter is based mainly upon the diagnosis, the 
risk of harm, and availability of psychiatric beds and 
alternative treatment options. This fi gure emphasizes 
that one’s perspective on psychiatry depends largely on 
where on the pyramid you are standing.
Table 18.1 Approximate population prevalence of psychiatric disorders
Disorder
Prevalence in Men (%)
Prevalence (%) in Women
Mixed anxiety and depression
7.6
11.8
Alcohol dependence
8.7
3.3
Generalized anxiety disorder
3.6
5.8
Drug dependence
4.5
2.3
Depressive episode
2.2
3.0
Phobia
1.0
2.4
Obsessive-compulsive disorder
1.1
1.5
Panic disorder
1.0
1.4
Dementia (in age group 75–79)
5.04 
6.67
Eating disorder
3.5
9.2
Psychotic disorder
0.3
0.5
a GP may wish to allocate resources to manage neu-
rotic disorders that fi ll her surgeries, whereas her 
local psychiatrist will probably argue that rarer, but 
more severe, disorders – which dominate his caseload 
– take priority. Th is diff erence may cause tensions 
when psychiatrists and GPs are jointly involved in 
planning services in a cash-limited health service.
Integration and coordination between primary and 
secondary psychiatric care can be improved by:
• Regular meetings (e.g. psychiatrists regularly visit-
ing general practices in their sectors).
• Trainee GPs spending time in psychiatry (and vice 
versa).
• Good communication, to ensure consistent man-
agement of cases by GPs and psychiatrists.
• Local guidelines for the management of common 
psychiatric disorders.
A&E departments
Deliberate self-harm is the major psychiatric prob-
lem in A&E departments. Although only a minority 
of these patients have persistent psychiatric disorder, 
many have stress-related disorders and some have de-
pressive disorders. Intoxication and delirium related 
to alcohol and drugs are common, particularly in in-
ner city hospitals and in people involved in accidents.
• Some patients with somatoform disorders and a 
few with factitious disorders are frequent users of 
A&E departments.
Medical and surgical
out-patient clinics
One-third of medical and surgical out-patient clinic 
attendees have a psychiatric disorder. Half of these 

Psychiatry in other settings 195
have depressive and anxiety disorders, and the re-
mainder have somatoform disorders.
• Adequate recognition and treatment of their psychi-
atric disorder should be an integral part of manage-
ment, since this has been shown to improve outcome.
• Depression is a common cause of apparent wors-
ening of a medical condition.
• Panic disorder is an important cause of medically 
unexplained symptoms such as chest pain, dizzi-
ness and tingling.
Medical and surgical wards
About 20% of medical and surgical in-patients have 
a depressive or anxiety disorder coexisting with their 
medical disease; 10% have a signifi cant alcohol mis-
use problem, and up to one-third of elderly in-pa-
tients have an episode of delirium.
• Some patients with severe somatoform disorders 
get admitted and undergo multiple investigations 
and even surgery before the diagnosis is made.
• Remember alcohol withdrawal as a possible cause 
of delirium in in-patients.
Psychiatric and medical 
comorbidity
Many patients with medical disease also have psychi-
atric disorder – the two occur together much more 
often than would be expected by chance. We have 
previously covered the situations where a medical 
condition such as hyperthyroidism or Cushing’s dis-
ease can produce psychiatric symptoms as part of its 
pathophysiology. However, there are several other 
reasons why medical and psychiatric disorders fre-
quently coexist:
• Psychiatric symptoms may be a response to the 
physical disease. For example, depression associ-
ated with cancer; sexual dysfunction after myo-
cardial infarction; a body image disturbance after 
limb amputation.
• Psychiatric disorder may cause medical ill-
ness. For example, anorexia nervosa may cause 
osteoporosis.
• Th ere may be a shared cause, such as a major life 
event precipitating both a stroke and depression.
Th e coexistence of a psychiatric disorder and a 
medical disorder is clinically important because it:
• Magnifi es suff ering and disability.
• Prolongs medical care and increases overall health 
costs.
• Worsens outcome. For example, the mortality of 
heart disease, cancer or stroke is higher in those 
with a comorbid depressive disorder.
Presentations of 
psychiatric disorder 
in a medical setting
Some cases of psychiatric disorders that present in 
medical settings do so with psychological symptoms 
or behavioural disturbance. However, many others 
present in ways that are less obviously ‘psychiatric’, 
with:
• somatic symptoms;
• a medical management problem;
• an apparent exacerbation of an established medi-
cal condition.
Presentation with somatic 
symptoms
Psychiatric disorder and somatic 
symptoms
A signifi cant minority of patients seen in general 
practice and in hospital out-patient clinics have so-
matic symptoms that cannot be explained by medi-
cal disease; many of these have a psychiatric disorder. 
Th e important diagnoses are depressive, anxiety and 
somatoform disorders.
• Figure 18.2 shows a simple diagnostic approach to 
medically unexplained somatic symptoms.
Depression, anxiety and 
somatic symptoms
Depression is associated with somatic symptoms 
such as fatigue, weight loss and pain. Similarly, anxi-
ety produces the bodily symptoms of autonomic 
arousal, which include palpitations, breathlessness 
and sensory symptoms.
For any patient who presents with bodily 
symptoms that are not adequately explicable by 
a medical diagnosis, consider the possibility that 
the patient may have a depressive or anxiety dis-
order. This psychiatric diagnosis may be the only 
diagnosis or it may be complicating a medical 
condition, in which case two diagnoses must be 
made. When assessing a patient with somatic 

196 
Psychiatry in other settings
symptoms it is important not only to carry out 
the appropriate investigations to exclude physical 
disease but also to seek evidence of depression or 
anxiety.
• Th e converse situation – a misdiagnosis of depres-
sion or anxiety in a patient whose symptoms are 
caused by a medical disease – though much rarer, 
must not be overlooked.
 Clinical scenario
Ms M went to her doctor because of abdominal 
pain. She was upset, but both she and the doctor 
saw her distress as being a result of the pain. An 
urgent laparotomy was performed and a normal 
appendix removed. Only after she took an overdose 
the following month was a further history taken, 
which revealed that she had been having problems 
with her relationship with her mother and had 
developed symptoms of depressive disorder (low 
mood, anhedonia and poor sleep) prior to the pain 
starting. She was given an antidepressant drug, 
helped to address the family confl ict and made a full 
recovery.
Somatoform disorders and somatic 
symptoms
Patients with medically unexplained somatic symptoms 
who do not have a depressive or anxiety disorder may be 
regarded as having a somatoform disorder (Chapter 10).
 Clinical scenario
Mr H has attended a gastroenterology clinic 
intermittently for years with abdominal discomfort and 
fl atulence. No signifi cant abnormalities have been 
found despite numerous investigations throughout 
the length of his gastrointestinal tract. Trials of 
antispasmodics, laxatives and antiulcer drugs have 
not produced sustained effects. A new junior doctor 
reviews his case and sees a connection between 
Unexplained medical complaints
(e.g. chronic pain) 
Psychiatric assessment
Yes
Current depressive or 
anxiety disorder? 
Diagnose and treat
accordingly  
Good evidence that
symptoms are deliberately
manufactured
or exaggerated? 
Factitious disorder
Malingering
Somatoform disorder
Hypochondriasis 
Dysmorphophobia
Somatization
disorder
No
No
Yes (rare)
Main feature is fear
of undiagnosed
physical illness
Main problem
is perceived
appearance
Main problem
is symptoms
Figure 18.2 Psychiatric assessment and diagnostic pathways in people with 
unexplained medical complaints.

Psychiatry in other settings 197
stresses at home or work and the exacerbation of 
abdominal as well as anxiety symptoms. Mr H is 
unwilling to countenance a psychological basis for 
his problems but agrees to see a liaison psychiatrist 
who works closely with the clinic. Mr H embarks on 
a course of problem-solving therapy and attends 
a stress management class. His irritable bowel 
syndrome improves markedly and he agrees (for the 
fi rst time) that further medical interventions are not 
necessary.
Presentation with a medical 
management problem
Psychiatric disorders may also present as a problem 
in medical management. For example:
• An old lady repeatedly pulls out her drip in the 
orthopaedic ward.
• A young woman is repeatedly admitted with an 
infected operative wound.
• A woman with diabetes refuses to take adequate 
insulin.
• A young man has assaulted a doctor in surgical out-
patients.
The diagnosis in all these cases proved to be psy-
chiatric. It was, respectively: delirium, factitious 
disorder, depression and personality disorder. 
The cases illustrate that any psychiatric disorder 
can present with a medical management problem, 
and that a psychiatric assessment, even if brief, is 
essential.
Psychiatric disorder presenting 
as an apparent worsening of a 
medical disease
An exacerbation of symptoms or disability in a 
patient with a chronic medical condition may 
erroneously be attributed to a worsening of the 
disease process, when it is in fact due to the de-
velopment of a comorbid psychiatric disorder. For 
example:
• A man with previously stable angina repeatedly 
presents with severe chest pain.
• A woman with previous hypothyroidism suff ers a 
recurrence of severe lethargy.
• A woman with arthritis becomes housebound.
The diagnosis in these cases proved to be, 
respectively: panic disorder, depression and agora-
phobia. The danger is that such patients are given 
unnecessary and potentially hazardous medical 
treatment instead of appropriate psychiatric 
management.
Management of 
psychiatric disorder in 
medicine
Th ere are three main requirements for the eff ective 
management of psychiatric disorder in medical set-
tings. Th ese requirements serve to emphasize the 
knowledge, skills and attitudes that all doctors should 
have (Chapter 1):
• To be able to recognize it.
• To be able to treat it appropriately.
• To know how and when to refer to specialist psy-
chiatric services.
Recognition
Th e diagnosis of psychiatric disorder in non-psychi-
atric settings is often missed. Th is error may be attrib-
utable to the doctor, the patient or the circumstances 
(Table 18.2).
Doctors will be better at the detection and assess-
ment of psychiatric disorder if they:
• Realize that somatic symptoms are not always due 
to medical conditions.
• Always do a brief psychiatric assessment – even if 
just a few questions.
• Ask the patient about their worries and concerns.
• Enable the patient to express emotions.
Table 18.2 Reasons psychiatric diagnoses are 
missed in medical settings
Doctor
Failure to consider the possibility
Failure to ask about psychiatric symptoms – through
 lack of effort or skill
Patient
Reports only their somatic symptoms
Hides emotional distress and psychosocial stresses 
 from the doctor
Circumstances
Lack of time
Lack of privacy
Clinics geared solely towards the detection of physical 
 disease

198 
Psychiatry in other settings
Treatment
Th e treatment of psychiatric disorder in medical set-
tings follows the same principles as treatment in psy-
chiatric settings. It also requires that:
• The psychiatric diagnosis is explained to the 
patient in a way that they can accept. This is 
achieved by emphasizing that it is a real illness, 
that it is an understandable reaction and not 
a sign of weakness, and that it can be treated 
effectively.
• Eff ective evidence-based treatment is available. 
Some doctors will regularly use simple psychologi-
cal therapies themselves. Others will have ensured 
that they have members of the clinical team, such 
as specialist nurses or counsellors, whom they can 
ask for assistance.
• Th e doctor has confi dence in prescribing the main 
psychotropic drugs.
Referral to specialist psychiatric 
services
A small but important minority of patients will re-
quire a referral to specialist psychiatric services. Th e 
main indications for referral are:
• Request for second opinion.
• Failure of fi rst-line management.
• Need for specialist treatment, such as ECT.
• Serious suicide risk.
• Presence of a condition such as psychosis requir-
ing specialist services.
• Severe substance misuse.
• Need for compulsory treatment.
From primary care, referrals will usually be made 
to the local general psychiatric services, unless the 
problem falls into the remit of one of the subspecial-
ties (Chapter 8). For patients in general hospitals 
there may be a hospital liaison psychiatry service that 
will assist both in management and in making appro-
priate referrals.
• Referrals, other than of exceptional emergen-
cies, should only be made after the doctor has: 
(a) completed a basic assessment themselves; 
and (b) explained and agreed the referral with the 
patient.
• Following the referral, good communication 
between all the agencies involved is essential if 
problems are to be avoided.
 FURTHER READING
Gask L, Lester H, Kendrick T, Peveler R (eds) (2009) 
Primary Care Mental Health. Royal College of Psy-
chiatrists, London.
McManus S, Meltzer H, Brugha T, Bebbington P, Jen-
kins R (eds) (2009) Adult psychiatric morbidity 
in England, 2007. National Center for Social Re-
search, London. Access at www.ic.nhs.uk/pubs/
psychiatricmorbidity07
 KEYPOINTS
• Patients with psychiatric disorders are 
encountered in all medical settings. Neurotic, 
somatoform, adjustment, depression and 
anxiety disorders are all common in general 
practice and general hospitals. In these 
settings they often present with somatic 
symptoms.
• Medical disease is frequently accompanied by 
psychiatric disorder. The combination worsens 
disability and prognosis if not effectively 
managed.
• Management of psychiatric disorder is based 
on the general principles described in this 
book, plus: (a) attention to the patient’s medical 
condition and treatment; and (b) necessary 
adaptation to the medical setting.
• Because psychiatric disorders are so common 
in the general population, all doctors must be:
• alert to the possibility of psychiatric disorder 
in all patients;
• aware that psychiatric disorder often 
presents with somatic symptoms;
• aware of the prevalence of psychiatric 
disorder in the physically ill;
• able to screen for psychiatric disorder;
• able to use simple psychological treatments;
• able to use antidepressants;
• aware when and how to refer to psychiatric 
services.

Psychiatry in other settings 199
 SELF-ASSESSMENT
1 Ms A is a 42-year-old lady who works as a 
paramedic. She has presented to four different 
Emergency Departments over the last 3 months 
with abdominal pain. Ms A has been cooperative 
with staff following admission for investigations. 
Following normal results of all investigations, Ms 
A is discharged from hospital on each occasion 
and returns to work. Ms A’s motivation for hospital 
admission is not connected to fi nancial gain. Ms 
A’s most likely psychiatric diagnosis is which of the 
following?
a Hypochondriasis 
b Malingering 
c Factitious disorder
d Somatization disorder
e Conversion disorder
2 Mr B is a 48-year-old gentleman who is 
concerned that he has bowel cancer. He has 
presented to his GP on several occasions and 
complained of intermittent mild abdominal 
pain, ‘stomach rumblings’ and says that he 
can sometimes feel a mass in his abdomen. 
Following appropriate investigations, Mr B is 
reassured by his GP that no evidence of any 
serious physical disease has been found. Mr B 
continues to worry that he has bowel cancer. Mr 
F’s most likely psychiatric diagnosis is which of 
the following?
a Hypochondriasis 
b Malingering 
c Factitious disorder
d Somatization disorder
e Conversion disorder
3 Which of the following statements about the 
epidemiology of psychiatric disorders is incorrect?
a Neuroses are more common in females.
b Substance abuse is commoner in males
c Psychiatric morbidity is associated with social 
deprivation.
d Psychiatric morbidity is uncommon in prisons.
e Psychiatric disorders commonly present in 
medical settings.

Psychiatry Lecture Notes, Eleventh Edition. Gautam Gulati, Mary-Ellen Lynall and Kate Saunders. © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 
2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Wales, by the Mental Capacity Act (2005) and in Scot-
land by the Adults with Incapacity Act (2000).
• Th e Mental Capacity Act (MCA) applies to all of 
medicine, but has particular relevance to psychia-
try because capacity can be aff ected by psychiatric 
disorders, and because psychiatrists may be seen 
as having particular expertise.
• Th e MCA is separate from the Mental Health Act 
(MHA), discussed below, and the two Acts use 
diff erent criteria and standards. People detained 
under the MHA commonly but not always lack 
capacity, and you can enforce treatment in some-
one deemed to have capacity using the MHA.
• Th e MCA does not apply to those under the age of 
16 and there are limits to its application for those 
aged 16 and 17. Treatment of under-16s who lack 
capacity is covered by the Children Act (1989).
Mental Capacity Act (2005) and 
the assessment of capacity
Some people, some of the time, lack the capacity to 
consent to (or refuse) treatment. Th e MCA aims to 
identify and protect these people. It has fi ve key prin-
ciples (Box 19.1). Whether working under the MCA 
jurisdiction or not, it is important to be able to assess 
capacity (see Figure 19.1).
• About 40% of in-patients on acute medical wards, 
and 60% on psychiatric wards, lack capacity.
• Competency is a concept closely related to capac-
ity, and a widely used term (e.g. with regard to 
making a will), but it is not defi ned legally in the 
present context.
Compulsory treatment
Th e nature of psychiatric disorders means that some 
people refuse treatment, even though to do so puts 
their health or the well-being of others at risk. In such 
circumstances psychiatrists may have to treat people 
against their will.
• Th ere is continuing debate about balancing the bene-
fi ts of treatment against infringement of civil liberties.
• Th e laws relating to mental health diff er markedly 
between countries. Th ey even diff er between Eng-
land and Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland.
However, before considering mental health law 
specifi cally, we discuss the broader issue of how 
consent to treatment is determined, and the circum-
stances in which treatment may be given in the ab-
sence of informed consent: the key word is capacity.
• Th is applies to patients, and doctors, in all branch-
es of medicine.
Common law and capacity
Treatment without informed consent is technically an 
assault. However, in an emergency, a doctor may treat 
a patient without consent if rapid action is called for to 
save life – for example, to maintain an airway in a coma-
tose patient, or to sedate an uncontrollably delirious pa-
tient. Such actions were, until recently, carried out un-
der the common law (law arising from court judgments 
as opposed to that enacted by parliament), applying 
the principle that a doctor can and should do what the 
public would consider reasonable in that situation (and 
where failing to act would be considered unreason-
able). Most situations are now covered, in England and 
Mental health and the law
Learning objectives
✓ To understand the scope and purpose of the Mental Capacity Act
✓ To understand the scope and purpose of the Mental Health Act
19

Mental health and the law 201
 Box 9.1 Mental Capacity Act (2005)
Five key principles
1 Capacity is assumed until proven otherwise
2 The person must be helped to make decisions 
before capacity is judged to be absent (e.g. given 
time if capacity fl uctuates; use of interpreters).
3 Patients are entitled to make unwise decisions. It 
is the process by which a decision is made, not 
the decision itself, that determines capacity.
4 Decisions made for people who lack capacity 
must be in their best interests.
5 Decisions must be the least restrictive option, in 
terms of their human rights.
Other elements
• Independent Mental Capacity Advocates – 
someone to advocate for those who lack capacity.
• Lasting power of attorney – a person can 
nominate someone authorized to make decisions 
for them if they ever lose capacity.
• Advance decisions (directives) – to specify 
interventions the person would not want if they 
lost capacity.
• Deprivation of liberty safeguards (‘DOLS’) 
introduced in 2009: designed to ensure that 
patients who lack capacity are not subject to 
undue restraints of their liberty. Particularly applies 
to patients in nursing homes with dementia.
• Expanded court of protection – to arbitrate on a 
wide range of capacity issues.
• Clinicians are expected to respect all the above 
elements.
• Failures to comply with the Act are potentially 
criminal offences.
Mental Health Act (1983, 
amended 2007)
Compulsory psychiatric admission and treatment 
in England and Wales is carried out under Sections 
of the 1983 MHA, amended in 2007 (Box 19.2 and 
Table 19.1).
• Th e 2007 Act is an amendment of the 1983 Act; 
many aspects remain unchanged.
• All doctors need to know about Section 5(2).
• GPs are involved in most Sections.
• Scotland has diff erent regulations, and is covered 
by the Mental Health Care and Treatment Act 
(Scotland) 2003 (Table 19.2).
 Box 9.2 Key aspects of the Mental 
Health Act (1983/2007)
• The behaviour must be the result of a known or 
suspected ‘mental disorder’. Disruptive behaviour, 
intoxication, drug abuse and dependence are not 
of themselves grounds for detention.
• The person must be at acute, signifi cant risk of 
self-harm, self-neglect or harming others.
• The person must have refused voluntary 
treatment.
• Other options have been considered but are not 
appropriate.
• There must be an appropriate treatment available 
to the patient.
• Implementing most Sections involves an 
application from one of two people. (1) An 
Approved Mental Health Professional (AMHP), 
usually a senior social worker. (A nearest 
relative can apply instead of an AMHP, but 
this is very rare.). (2) Based on two medical 
recommendations, one a Responsible Clinician 
(RC), usually a senior psychiatrist, approved under 
Section 12 of the Act; the other doctor is usually 
the GP or another section 12 approved doctor.
• Detained patients can appeal to hospital 
managers or to a Mental Health Review Tribunal 
for the Section to be discharged. A Section is 
discharged by the RC once the patient’s mental 
Reason to suspect mental incapacity
• Delirium
• Abnormal or inappropriate behaviour
• History of cognitive impairment
• Refusing treatment 
Assess capacity.
Incapacity means demonstrating that the
patient has:
• Impairment of reasoning ability
• Inability to retain, understand or apply relevant
 information
• Inability to communicate their decision 
Figure 19.1 Assessing mental capacity. The starting 
assumption should always be that the person has 
capacity. If the assessment is being done under the 
Mental Capacity Act, demonstration of lack of capacity 
is followed by several steps before deciding on actions, 
following the principles of the Act (Box 19.1).

202 
Mental health and the law
state no longer justifi es it, and/or when he or she 
adheres consistently to treatment.
• There is an independent Mental Health Advocate 
scheme.
• There is a legal Code of Practice that all 
professionals must take note of.
• The Act only covers assessment and treatment for 
psychiatric disorder. It cannot be used if a patient 
refuses treatment for a medical problem unless 
it is a direct result of the mental disorder, e.g. 
refeeding in anorexia nervosa.
Section 2: admission for assessment
• Uses: Assessment of a suspected mental dis-
order. Drug treatment can be given without 
consent, but use Section 3 once compulsory 
treatment becomes the primary reason for in-
patient care.
• Applied for by: AMHP (Box 19.2) in consultation 
with the nearest relative. Medical recommenda-
tion from an RC and another doctor (usually the 
GP). Th e AMHP must have seen the person within 
the past 14 days, the doctors within 5 days.
• Duration: 28 days.
• Right of appeal: in fi rst 14 days, to the Mental 
Health Review Tribunal (MHRT).
Section 3: admission for treatment
• Uses. For an established mental disorder where 
admission is intended to alleviate the condition or 
prevent deterioration.
• Applied for by: as for Section 2. Cannot normally 
proceed if the nearest relative objects.
• Duration: 6 months, renewable. Section 3 patients 
can go on leave for up to 6 months in total on a Sec-
tion 17 but are required to be seen by their clinical 
team at fortnightly intervals. Before discharge, a 
Section 117 meeting is held to discuss future man-
agement; there are statutory responsibilities for 
subsequent care.
• Right of appeal: one per 6 months to the MHRT. 
One per 6 months to the hospital managers. 
Reviews are instituted automatically if no appeal is 
made. At 3 months all treatment must be reviewed 
by a Second Opinion Appointed Doctor (SOAD) 
unless the patient consents to ongoing treatment.
Section 4: admission in an emergency
• Uses. For compulsory admission when it is urgent 
and a second medical recommendation cannot be 
obtained. Cannot be used just because it is easier 
to organize than a Section 2.
• Applied for by: AHMP or nearest relative. Medical 
recommendation by any doctor, usually GP.
• Duration: 72 hours, during which a full assessment 
for a Section 2 or 3 is made.
• Right of appeal: none.
Section 5(2): emergency detention of an 
in-patient
• Uses: A ‘5-2’ prevents a patient leaving any hos-
pital where to do so would place themselves or 
others at risk. For example, a voluntary patient 
on a psychiatric ward who is acutely suicidal and 
tries to run off  the ward can be legally detained 
on the ward using Section 5(2). A Section 5(2) 
does not allow treatment to be enforced. [A Sec-
tion 5(4) is used by psychiatric nurses to detain a 
Table 19.1 Key Mental Health Act Sections and their uses
Situation
Section
Duration
Psychiatric admission, for assessment
2
28 days
Psychiatric admission, for treatment
3
6 months
Psychiatric admission, when no second doctor is available
4
72 hours
Leave from hospital while a detained patient
17
Variable
‘Holding powers’ preventing an in-patient leaving a hospital
5(2) doctor
5(4) nurse
72 hours
6 hours
For police to enter a private residence and take person to a safe place 
(requires a  warrant from a magistrate)
135
72 hours
For police to take a person from a public place to an approved place of safety
136
72 hours
Psychiatric assessment or treatment of prisoners and those on remand
35–38, 41
Emergency treatment
62

Mental health and the law 203
psychiatric in-patient for 6 hours if no psychia-
trist is to hand.] Section 5(2) can only be used in 
in-patient environments and cannot be used to 
hold patients in emergency departments or out-
patient departments.
• Applied for by: the doctor in charge of the treat-
ment of the patient, or their nominee (in practice, 
a consultant or junior doctor in the team, but not 
a foundation doctor). In a general hospital, this 
means the physicians managing the patient, ide-
ally in consultation with a liaison psychiatrist.
• Duration: 72 hours, during which a full MHA 
assessment is carried out. Once completed, the 
Section 5 is converted to a Section 2, or a Section 3 
is instituted, or it lapses.
• Right of appeal: none.
Other Sections
• Section 135 allows the police to enter private prop-
erty and take a person to a nominated place of 
safety (e.g. a hospital or police station) for 72 hours. 
It is requested by an AMHP and granted by a mag-
istrate. It can only be used once. If a patient is not 
at home and the police enter a further warrant is 
required. 
• Section 136 empowers the police to take someone 
in a public place whom they suspect has a mental 
disorder (e.g. because of bizarre behaviour) to a 
designated place of safety (police station, hospital). 
Lasts for 72 hours.
• Sections 35–38 are used by a Court to send off end-
ers to hospital for psychiatric assessment or treat-
ment. Sections 47 and 48 allow for transfer of a pris-
oner or other detainees to hospital.
• Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) may not be given 
without consent to detained patients, unless it 
is necessary to prevent death or deterioration. A 
second opinion must be obtained and Section 58 
completed before the course of ECT proceeds. In 
an emergency situation ECT can be given using 
provisions set out in Section 62 providing that the 
treatment is required to save the patient’s life, pre-
vent irreversible deterioration in the patient’s con-
dition or in very rare circumstances where patients 
are at such risk to themselves or others and no 
alternative treatment is available.
Supervised Community Treatment
Th e 2007 MHA amendment introduced Community 
Treatment Orders (CTOs), allowing compulsory treat-
ment in the community as well as in hospital – a con-
troversial change. CTOs apply to a restricted set of 
patients and circumstances:
• Th e patient is currently detained under Section 3. 
Th us they have a severe and chronic psychiatric 
disorder, most commonly schizophrenia, which 
continues to meet the criteria for detention under 
the MHA.
• A CTO is designed for patients with cycles of 
relapse and readmission (‘revolving door patients’) 
associated with treatment non-compliance in the 
community, and for whom the structure and moni-
toring provided by a CTO may be valuable.
• A CTO is necessary for the patient’s health or 
safety, or for the protection of others.
• Th e appropriate treatment does not require the 
patient to remain in hospital.
• A CTO lasts 6 months and is renewable.
Before initiating a CTO, a risk assessment is per-
formed to assess the risk of relapse, and its conse-
quences. Th e application is made by the RC, and an 
AHMP must agree. A CTO means that the patient 
must make themselves available for examination as 
requested by the RC (e.g. to attend clinic for review 
of their mental state, or to receive depot medica-
tion). Th e RC can also recall the person to hospital for 
treatment.
Table 19.2 Key Sections of the Scottish Mental Health (Care and Treatment) Act 2003
Situation
Section
Duration
Applicants
Emergency detention
36(1)
72 hours
Registered doctor,a plus MHOb if available
Nurses’ holding power
299
2 hours
Registered specialist nurse
Short-term detention
44(1)
28 days
Approved doctorc and MHO
Compulsory treatment order
64(4)
6 months
Two doctors, one approved, plus MHO, plus approval 
of mental health review tribunal
aRegistered doctor: any doctor registered with the General Medical Council.
bMHO: Mental Health Offi cer, a specially trained social worker.
cApproved doctor: a psychiatrist approved under the Act.

204 
Mental health and the law
• A CTO does not include physical restraint to 
administer medication in the community without 
consent.
• It is unclear how many patients will be subject to 
CTOs, and their worth and ethics continue to be 
debated. Th eir use in practice is an alternative to 
the option of long-term hospital leave under Sec-
tion 17 (see above).
Other aspects of the law and 
psychiatry
Forensic psychiatrists specialize in the law, but all 
psychiatrists fi nd themselves involved with the law 
from time to time. Not all issues are strictly related to 
treatment, but they are summarized here for conveni-
ence.
• Th e law and child psychiatry. Children under 16 
are subject to diff erent laws and conventions, and 
there are additional safeguards for 16- and 17-year-
olds. Th e main legislation is the Children’s Act 
(1989). Consult a child psychiatric team or social 
services for advice.
• Writing legal reports. Psychiatrists may be asked to 
write a report on a patient who has been charged 
with an off ence, usually to give an opinion as to 
whether psychiatric factors contributed to the 
off ence or infl uence how it should be dealt with. 
Th ey may also be asked to write a report concern-
ing the psychiatric consequences of an accident as 
part of a compensation claim.
• Fitness to enter into contracts. Psychiatric opinion 
may be sought regarding the person’s capacity (or 
competence) to make a will, get married, etc. Th ese 
issues are now covered by the MCA.
• Fitness to drive. Psychiatric disorders and medi-
cations can impair driving by aff ecting judge-
ment or concentration. Psychiatrists should warn 
patients of this and of their duty to inform the 
relevant authority. A person may not drive for 6 
months after a psychotic episode. People with 
dementia (even mild cases) have an excess of acci-
dents and should be discouraged from driving.
• Confi dentiality. Th ere are exceptional circum-
stances that override the principle of medical con-
fi dentiality in psychiatry. For example, if a patient 
tells you he is going to murder his wife (perhaps 
because of morbid jealousy; Chapter 12), or if you 
suspect a colleague is unfi t to practise, you have a 
duty to act. If unsure, always seek advice and keep 
notes.
 KEYPOINTS
• The Mental Capacity Act provides for the 
treatment and safeguarding of incapacitous 
individuals both in medical and psychiatric 
settings. 
• The Mental Health Act allows individuals with 
mental disorders to be detained and treated 
against their will if there is a signifi cant risk to 
their well-being or that of others.
• There are a number of safeguards in the Mental 
Health Act that ensure treatment is regularly 
reviewed, patients have the right to appeal their 
detention and are provided with appropriate 
aftercare. 
• The police and nursing staff have some powers 
to detain under the Mental Health Act although 
the duration of these powers is limited.
 FURTHER READING
Department for Constitutional Aff airs (2007) Mental 
Capacity Act 2005 Code of Practice. Th e Stationery 
Offi  ce, London. 
Department of Health (2008) Code of Practice Mental 
Health Act 1983. Th e Stationery Offi  ce, London.
 SELF-ASSESSMENT
1 A gentleman is brought into A&E having ingested 
antifreeze. He is agitated, confused and resisting 
medical care and making attempts to leave. Staff 
are certain that he needs to be kept in hospital. 
What law would you use to keep him in hospital 
for treatment?
a Section 5.2.
b Mental Capacity Act.
c Section 136 as he is in a public place.
d Common law.
e Request a mental health act assessment.

Self-assessment answers
Chapter 2
1 c  The congruity statement is the only one that is 
true. The mental state examination is limited to 
those features present at the time of the interview, 
but includes both features noted by the patient 
(e.g. current thoughts of self-harm) and features 
noticed by the interviewer (e.g. thought disorder). 
The ‘FAST’ questions help to screen for hazardous 
drinking, but dependency is better identifi ed by 
the ‘CAGE’ questions (p. 157). Derealization is 
a feeling of detachment from the external world, 
while depersonalization is a feeling of detachment 
from the normal sense of self. Both are described 
as ‘dissociative’ symptoms. Delusions are a 
symptom, that is, a phenomenon experienced 
by the patient which is a behavioural pattern 
considered to be a diagnostic entity, for example 
schizophrenia. The lack of consensus within and 
outside of psychiatry about which patterns of 
behaviour should count as ‘disordered’, and how 
to divide such patterns into discrete diagnoses, 
renders this defi nition circular. Thus, a ‘psychiatric 
disorder’ is simply whatever is defi ned as a 
disorder in your legal system or diagnostic manual 
of choice. 
Chapter 3
1 a  Thought disorder may occur in a number of 
psychiatric disorders. Alone, it is not strongly 
suggestive of the specifi c diagnosis of 
schizophrenia and is not considered a fi rst-rank 
symptom. The other options are all fi rst-rank 
symptoms (see Table 3.1).
2 a  In psychiatry, thoughts, impulses or images must 
be intrusive in order to qualify as obsessions. 
They must also cause marked anxiety or 
distress. Obsessions are not diagnostic of 
obsessive-compulsive disorder, as they may 
also occur in other disorders, for example 
depression. Compulsive behaviours are often 
secondary to obsessions, but the reverse is 
not true. Obsessions may be a side effect of 
dopaminergic medication. The predisposing 
factors for this and other psychiatric side effects 
of dopaminergic medication remain unclear, but 
the risk is higher for patients with Parkinson’s 
disease.
3 a  Hallucinations may occur in severe depression. 
Visual hallucinations suggest an organic disorder. 
Voices talking about the person are characteristic 
of schizophrenia. Hypnopompic hallucinations 
are those that occur on waking. Like hypnagogic 
hallucinations (while falling asleep), they are normal. 
The etymology serves as an aide-memoire: waking 
up is like ‘sending sleep away’, which in Greek is 
hypnos (sleep) + pompe (sending away), related to 
ceremonial ‘pomp’, a ‘sending-off’.
Chapter 4
1 d  Individuals who repeatedly self-harm are at 
increased risk of further self-harm and subsequent 
suicide even if their method of harm is limited to 
cutting.
2 b  It is the patient’s responsibility to inform the 
DVLA as you would be breaching confi dentiality 
in doing so. Only in very rare situations would 
this become necessary. Mania is associated with 
driving at high speeds so this advice should not 
be limited simply to situations where medication 
is being prescribed. If unsure, guidance for 
each disorder can be found online at www.
dft.gov.uk/dvla/medical/~/media/pdf/medical/
at_a_glance.ashx
Chapter 6
1 d  Heritability is the proportion of a disorder 
in a population that is attributable to genes. It 
does not capture the effects of specifi c genes. 
It is usually calculated from twin studies. 
The heritability estimates for schizophrenia, 
depression and anxiety disorders are 
approximately 80%, 40% and 30% (see 
Table 6.3).
2 b  Positron emission tomography (PET) does indeed 
use radioactive ligands to measure brain receptors 
or metabolites. fMRI does not directly measure 
neural activity, but rather measures changes 
Psychiatry Lecture Notes, Eleventh Edition. Gautam Gulati, Mary-Ellen Lynall and Kate Saunders. © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 
2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

206 
Self-assessment answers
in blood oxygenation at different locations in 
the brain, from which some information about 
neuronal activity can be inferred. This is because 
oxygen delivery through the capillary beds in the 
brain is regulated to track local metabolic needs 
of neurons and glia. Biomarkers need not be 
molecules. For example, a pattern of neural activity 
detected by fMRI could also act as a biomarker. 
Adoption studies do not control for the prenatal 
environment, which could be driving the increased 
risk in the adopted-away child.
Chapter 7 
1 a  Olanzapine has an evidence base in the 
treatment of psychosis and can be used fi rst line. 
Clozapine is only used in refractory psychosis 
given its side-effect profi le. ECT is reserved for 
emergencies such as catatonia. There is no role 
for a mood stabilizer at this point. CBT is unlikely 
to be helpful in someone who is acutely unwell. 
It may play a role once the patient improves with 
antipsychotics.
2 c  Psychotic depression where a patient has stopped 
eating and drinking is an emergency for which ECT 
is the preferred treatment. It has good effi cacy. 
Drug treatments take weeks to work and are 
therefore unsuitable in this scenario.
3 c   Either an SSRI or a course of CBT or both will 
be appropriate in the treatment of a phobia. 
It depends on the patient’s preference. 
Benzodiazepines should be avoided, save for very 
short periods, as they carry a risk of addiction.
Chapter 8
Question 1:
   i a  Mr D is likely suffering with a schizophrenic illness 
and therefore needs management by a CMHT 
in secondary care. He does not need specialist 
services at this point.
 ii c  Moderate depression without associated risks can 
be managed in primary care in the fi rst instance. 
Psychological resources are available in primary 
care.
iii b  Given that the patient’s lifestyle is chaotic and 
presents with diffi culties in engagement, an 
assertive outreach team would be ideal. These 
teams often support patients with coexisting 
substance misuse issues.
Question 2:
   i a  Decisions around medication are taken by 
psychiatrists. Although non-medical prescribing is 
possible, this is not common.
or 
e
 ii b  The patient and help to think through her past 
experiences. Although this can, to some extent, 
be done by other members of the team, it is best 
done in a psychological setting.
iii d  Social workers integrated within CMHTs are 
invaluable resources when looking at issues 
around fi nances and accommodation. They have 
links to, and are sometimes seconded from, local 
councils.
iv f  Support workers are usually not professionally 
qualifi ed but can provide skilled support 
rehabilitation.
Chapter 9
1 e  This would be described as a recurrent depressive 
disorder as she has had a previous depressive 
episode. The fact that her previous episode related 
to the birth of her child has no bearing on the 
diagnosis in this instance.
2 b  His history is suggestive of dysthymia whereas his 
current presentation is consistent with the presence 
of a psychotic depression. This presentation requires 
urgent treatment and ECT may be indicated.
3 c  A diagnosis of bipolar disorder can apply in the 
absence of depressive episodes. Unopposed 
antidepressant treatment is not recommended. If 
hospital admission is required for mania this would 
suggest a diagnosis of bipolar 1 as the mania is 
clearly severe in nature. Post-puerperal psychosis 
is more common in women with bipolar disorder.
Chapter 10
1 c  Obsessions are egodystonic (i.e. uncomfortable 
for the sufferer). They are repetitive and intrusive 
thoughts or images that are distressing to the patient. 
One only needs evidence of either obsessions or 
compulsions to make a diagnosis of OCD. Some 
patients have both symptoms. SSRIs and CBT are 
the current fi rst-line treatments for OCD. Anankastic 
personality disorder is the personality disorder most 
commonly associated with obsessional thoughts.
2 c  Disinhibition is not a feature of PTSD. The rest are 
typical features.
3 c  Agoraphobia is more common in women. 
Primary and secondary gain are associated 
with dissociative disorders. Malingering is not a 
psychiatric disorder. Somatization disorder is more 
common in females but does also occur in males. 
Chapter 11
1 b  A preoccupation with weight often precedes the 
emergence of eating disorder behaviours, which to 
occur during puberty.

Self-assessment answers 207
2 All of the parameters (a–e) should be monitored, 
particularly in individuals who are at a very low weight 
or have been eating very little in the preceding weeks, 
to reduce the risk of and to diagnose any emerging 
refeeding syndrome.
Chapter 12
1 c  The young man probably has a schizophrenic 
illness which had a prodrome. Given the risks 
involved, i.e. his running away, fearing for his own 
safety or using a weapon to protect himself from 
perceived threat, it would be safest to admit him, 
if necessary using the Mental Health Act. Even a 
short period of observation/assessment without 
medication in hospital is helpful in establishing a 
diagnosis; in practice treatment is started relatively 
quickly in hospital.
2 d  Physical causes such as a urinary tract infection 
(UTI) and other infections can cause new-onset 
confusion, agitation, disturbances in sleep cycle 
and psychotic symptoms in the elderly. This is 
delirium – an organic condition, but patients are 
often referred to psychiatry due to hallucinations 
and other psychotic symptoms that accompany 
the picture. Diagnosing and treating the underlying 
cause will reduce agitation as well as psychotic 
symptoms. In any case, it is worth remembering 
that the elderly are very prone to adverse effects 
from psychotropic medications.
3 a  It is true that as a population, patients with 
schizophrenia are more likely to have a criminal 
or violent conviction than the general population. 
However, on an individual level, the majority are not 
violent. Individuals who commit violent offences 
often have comorbid dissocial personality disorder 
and/or substance misuse.
Chapter 13
1 a Alzheimer’s accounts for 50–60% of all dementias.
2 c  This is a classic description of dementia with Lewy 
bodies. There may also be a history of worsening 
when antipsychotics have been used.
3 b  Memantine is an NMDA glutamate receptor 
antagonist licensed for use in moderate to 
severe Alzheimer’s disease. It can also be used if 
cholinesterase inhibitors are contraindicated or not 
tolerated.
4 e  This is the most important aspect of treatment 
without which the delirium is unlikely to resolve. 
The other aspects are symptomatic measures and 
may not be needed in every case. 
5 e  The rate of suicide is elevated. Depression is 
common alongside epilepsy.
Chapter 14
1 a  Lofexidine is the most appropriate non-opioid (it 
is an alpha-adrenergic agonist) for symptomatic 
relief of opiate withdrawal. Methadone is the 
most common agent used for detoxifi cation and 
maintenance in opioid dependence and can 
only be prescribed in specialist addiction clinics. 
Buprenorphine is a partial opiate agonist licensed, 
like methadone, for treatment of drug dependence. 
Naloxone is used in the treatment of opiate 
overdose. Naltrexone is used in the maintenance 
of abstinence in formerly dependent opiate addicts 
who have been drug free for over 7 days.
2 d  Cocaine intoxication is the most likely diagnosis. 
Tachyarrhythmia and tachycardia are common 
toxic effects of cocaine. Picking at the skin 
may present a typical hallucinatory disorder of 
formication (bugs crawling under the skin) in a 
long-term cocaine user. Cannabis intoxication 
may present as tachycardia but there is also 
dryness of the mouth and reddening of the eyes. 
Heroin intoxication is characterized by constricted 
pupils, and CNS and respiratory depression. 
Cocaine withdrawal is not usually accompanied 
by signifi cant physical symptoms. Ketamine 
intoxication is associated with nausea, ataxia, 
slurred speech, synaesthesia and hallucinations.
Chapter 15
1 d  The pervasive nature of the symptoms is 
important, as there is a signifi cant overlap of 
symptoms between personality disorder and other 
psychiatric disorders.
2 c  The fact that the man has never moved out of 
home and never worked points to a pervasive 
rather than situational problem. There may, of 
course, be a superimposed depressive disorder 
related to an abnormal grief reaction and it would 
be useful to check for depressive symptoms as the 
same could coexist with the underlying personality 
disorder. ‘Normal bereavement’ is unlikely to last 
this long.
Chapter 16
1 d   Asperger’s syndrome fi ts best with the description 
given. Children with Asperger’s are often targeted 
by bullies as they are noticeably ‘different’ in their 
interaction style and confi dence and have few or 
no friends to support them. As in this case, they 
are sometimes involved in physical altercations 
with other children, and it can be hard for them 
to explain what has distressed them and led to 
the incident. Schizophrenia can be a cause of 

208 
Self-assessment answers
school refusal in adolescence but is rare before 
the age of 16. Social phobia is a common cause, 
but affected children would rarely be aggressive 
to others, nor ‘talk over’ children, generally 
preferring to withdraw from situations. Generalized 
anxiety disorder is a cause of school refusal but 
there should be clear manifestations of anxiety 
present much of the time to make the diagnosis. 
Conduct disorder is linked to school truancy 
(which usually occurs without parents’ knowledge) 
rather than school refusal (staying at home with 
parents’ knowledge, though not necessarily their 
agreement). 
2 d  Cognitive behavioural therapy would be the 
recommended fi rst-line treatment in this case. 
Family therapy could have been a valid choice 
if she had been willing to involve her family, as 
would interpersonal therapy if it was available 
locally. Fluoxetine would be an option if she 
declined psychological therapy or was too severely 
depressed to engage with a talking therapy fi rst of 
all. Citalopram would not normally be used unless 
fl uoxetine had been tried and found to be ineffective 
or poorly tolerated; sertraline would be the other 
second-line option if fl uoxetine was unsuitable.
Chapter 17
1 b  Schizophrenia is over-represented in DiGeorge 
syndrome, or velo-cardio-facial syndrome. This is 
thought to be because the COMT gene is present 
on 22q11, which is the site of deletion in this 
syndrome. The recurrent infections are due to an 
absent thymus.
2 d  Physical causes such as a urinary tract infection 
(UTI), constipation and epilepsy must be 
considered when there is new-onset agitation 
in a patient with a learning disability. Diagnosing 
and treating the underlying cause will reduce 
agitation. Unplanned admissions must be avoided 
as patients will often destabilize in unfamiliar 
surroundings.
Chapter 18
1 c  Factitious disorder. In this disorder, the only ‘gain’ 
is the ‘sick-role’, in contrast to malingering, in 
which compensation or other forms of fi nancial 
gain are sought. Patients with factitious disorder 
are cooperative in behaviour and continue to 
function well and maintain jobs following discharge 
from hospital.
2 a  Hypochondriasis. The patient is concerned with 
a particular diagnosis (bowel cancer in this case). 
In somatization disorder, rather than focusing on 
a diagnosis, the preoccupation is with symptoms, 
usually multiple, recurrent and frequently changing 
physical symptoms. In hypochondriasis, normal 
bodily sensations are often interpreted by patients 
as abnormal. 
3 d  There is considerable psychiatric morbidity in 
prisons, with rates of psychoses at approximately 
4%, affective disorders around 10–12% and 
personality disorders as high as 60%.
Chapter 19
1 b  Section 5.2 cannot be used as he is not admitted to 
hospital requesting a mental health act assessment 
will take too long unless staff are already on site 
s136 can only be used by the police and common 
law has largely been replaced by the Mental 
Capacity Act. Best practice would also involve 
requesting an urgent psychiatric assessment

Psychiatry Lecture Notes, Eleventh Edition. Gautam Gulati, Mary-Ellen Lynall and Kate Saunders. © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published
2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Appendix 1
ICD-10 classifi cation of 
psychiatric disorders
Category
Category
Example
F00–09
Organic disorders
F02.2 Huntington’s disease
F10–19
Substance use disorders
F10.2 Alcohol dependence
F20–29
Schizophrenia and other psychoses
F20.0 Paranoid schizophrenia
F30–39
Mood disorders
F32.1 Moderate depressive episode
F40–49
Neurotic and stress-related disorders
F45.2 Hypochondriasis
F50–59
Eating, sleep and related syndromes
F50.2 Bulimia nervosa
F60–69
Disorders of personality and behaviour
F60.2 Dissocial personality disorder
F70–79
Mental retardation (Learning disability)
F72.0 Severe mental retardation
F80–89
Developmental disorders
F84.0 Autism
F90–99
Childhood disorders
F94.0 Elective mutism

Psychiatry Lecture Notes, Eleventh Edition. Gautam Gulati, Mary-Ellen Lynall and Kate Saunders. © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 
2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Appendix 2
Keeping up to date and 
evidence-based
Textbooks and articles can be biased and outdated. 
Th e following are sources of up-to-date, good quality 
evidence in psychiatry.
Finding the evidence
Access to high quality evidence in psychiatry is im-
proving all the time.
• NHS Evidence (www.evidence.nhs.uk) is a website 
maintained by NICE (now renamed the National 
Institute for Health and Care Excellence) that 
brings together many good resources including 
the Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 
the British National Formulary, Clinical Evidence 
and MEDLINE. Access to these resources is free to 
practitioners in the UK.
• Emerging new evidence in psychiatry is summa-
rized in Evidence-based Mental Health – a quar-
terly journal from the BMJ Publishing Group. 
Th e content of the journal is also available online 
(http://ebmh.bmjjournals.com/).
Clinical practice guidelines
Clinical guidelines (CGs) are recommendations on the 
appropriate treatment and care of people with specifi c 
disorders. CGs can be a useful help, but should augment 
rather than replace clinical expertise and experience. 
In the UK, NICE prepares national evidence-
based guidelines. We have referenced guidelines 
relevant to each chapter of the book under ‘Further 
reading’. All NICE clinical guidelines are available at 
www.nice.org.uk.

Psychiatry Lecture Notes, Eleventh Edition. Gautam Gulati, Mary-Ellen Lynall and Kate Saunders. © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 
2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
A
abnormal illness behaviour 57
absence seizures 150
acamprosate 64, 74
actigraphy 35
acute dystonia 71
acute stress reaction 31
adjustment disorders 110
adolescents 86
aetiology of mental disorders 48, 55
biological factors
animal models 61
biochemistry and pharmacology 61
genetics 59–61
neuropathology 61
peripheral markers 61
structural and functional neuroimaging 61
epidemiology 55–6
psychological factors 57
behavioural theories 57–8
cognitive theories 58
personality 59
psychodynamic theories 58–9
sociology 56
antipsychiatry 57
family theories 56–7
sick role and illness behaviour 57
timing of causes 48
types of causes 48
agitation 26
agoraphobia 106
akathisia 71
alcohol abuse/misuse
assessment 35
aims 35
dependence and withdrawal 36–7
investigations 37
need for 35–6
physical examination 37
psychiatric and medical complications 37
psychosocial complications 37
quantity and consumption pattern 36
clinical features
dependence 156
harmful alcohol use 157
Wernicke’s syndrome 157
withdrawal 157
defi nitions 155–6
drug therapy 74
Index
management 157–9
problem screen 12
psychiatric assessment 14
alcohol-induced dementia 147
Alcohol Use Disorders Identifi cation Test (AUDIT) 36
allelic heterogeneity 60
alprazolam 70
Alzheimer’s disease 20, 143–4
risk factors 144
treatment 145
ambitendency 23
amisulpride 72
amitriptyline 64
amnesic syndrome 149–50
amok 104
amphetamines 162
anabolic steroid misuse 163
anankastic personality disorder 167
Angelmann syndrome 190
anhedonia 26
animal models 61
anorexia nervosa 115, 116–18
anticholinergic agents 73
anticipatory grief 101
antidepressants and suicide risk 44
antipsychiatry 57
antipsychotic agents 64, 70–1
atypical 72–3
schizophrenia 128–9
side eff ects 71
antisocial personality disorder 167, 169
anxiety disorders 105
assessment 29
aims 29–30
diff erential diagnosis 30
mental state examination (MSE) 30–1
need for 30
children 175
phobic anxiety 105–6
agoraphobia 106
generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) 107
panic disorder 106–7
social phobia 106
symptoms 105
anxiolytics 70
anxious personality disorder 167
appetite and depression 26
aripiprazole 72
Asperger’s syndrome 180
assertive outreach service 85

212 
Index
assessment, psychiatric 7
attempted suicide 42
attention defi cit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) 178–9
atypical antipsychotics 72–3
atypical depression 93
atypical eating disorder 115
auditory hallucinations 16
autism 179–80
avoidant personality disorder 167
B
BEARS acronym 34–5
behaviour therapy 78
behavioural theories of mental disorder 57–8
benzodiazepines 64, 70, 163
benztropine 73
bereavement 101
biological factors in mental disorders
animal models 61
biochemistry and pharmacology 61
genetics 59–61
neuropathology 61
peripheral markers 61
structural and functional neuroimaging 61
biomarkers 61
bipolar disorder 97
cyclothymia 97–8
epidemiology 98
hypomania 97
management 98–9
mania 97
mixed aff ective states 97
relapse prevention 99
body dysmorphic disorder 112
body image disturbance 33–4
borderline personality disorder 167, 169
bouff ée delirante 135
bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) 146
breastfeeding 74–5
Briquet’s disorder 112
bullimia nervosa 115, 118–19
buprenorphine 64, 74
bupropion 64
buspirone 70
C
caff eine 163–4
CAGE questions 12
cannabis use epidemiology and pharmacology 159–60
capacity 200
Capgras’ delusion 136
carbamazepine 64, 69
Care Programme Approach (CPA) 84–5
catalepsy 23
cataplexy 120
catatonia 23, 38
categories versus dimensions 8
childhood disorders 75, 86
behavioural disorders 177
attention defi cit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) 178–9
conduct disorder 177–8
developmental disorders 179
Asperger’s syndrome 180
autism 179–80
Rett’s syndrome 180
developmental disorders, specifi c 180–1
reading disorder 181
emotional disorders 174–5
anxiety disorders 175
other disorders 175–6
school refusal 176
somatoform disorders 175
mood disorders 176–7
other conditions
encopresis 181
enuresis 181
psychoses 182
sleep disorders 182
tics 181–2
principles
aetiology 173
classifi cation 172
epidemiology 172–3
interviewing children 172
management 173–4
prognosis 174
special groups
abused children 183–4
institution residents 183
physical illnesses 183
psychiatrically ill parents 183
refugee 184
teenagers 182
toddlers 182
chlorpromazine side eff ects 71
cholinesterase inhibitors 64, 73, 145
chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS) 108–9
classical conditioning 57–8
classifi cation of mental disorders 8
clinical psychologists 84
clouding of consciousness 17, 20, 147
clozapine 64, 70, 73
side eff ects 71
suicide risk 44
cocaine 162
cognition
depression 27
psychosis 24–5
cognitive analytical therapy (CAT) 79
cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) 79
cognitive function
assessment 19
aims 20
mental state examination (MSE) 20–1
need for 20

Index 213
cognitive theories of mental disorder 58
cognitive therapy 78–9
communicating assessment fi ndings
aetiology 48
timing of causes 48
types of causes 48
case summary 50–1
written and oral 51–2
diagnosis 47
letter between psychiatrists and GPs 53–4
management 48–50
problem lists 52, 53
prognosis 50
community care 84
community mental health teams (CMHTs) 84
community psychiatric nurses (CPNs) 84
Community Treatment Orders (CTOs) 203–4
comorbidities 8
compulsions 16
anxiety and stress-related disorders 30–1
compulsory treatment 200
conditioning 57–8
conduct disorder 177–8
congruity of mood 15
consciousness level 17
constancy of mood 15
conversion disorders 108
cortical dementias 140
Cotard’s syndrome 93
counselling 76
counter-transference 77
Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease (CJD) 146
critical psychiatry 57
cyclothymia 97–8
D
de Clérambault’s syndrome 136
deafness 20
defence mechanisms 59
defi cit syndrome 125
delirium 20, 147
aetiology 147–8
clinical features 147
features 21
management 148
prognosis 148–9
delirium tremens 157
delusion of reference 23
delusional perception 23
delusions 15, 16, 23
dementia 20
alcohol-induced 147
Alzheimer’s disease 143–4
risk factors 144
treatment 145
assessment 140–2
causes 140
clinical features 138–9
diff erential diagnosis 139–40
frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) 146
Huntingdon’s disease 146
management 143
normal pressure hydrocephalus 146
Parkinson’s disease 146
prion disease 146
prognosis 143
treatment components 143
vascular dementia 145
dementia drugs 73
dementia with Lewey bodies (DLB) 140, 145–6
denial 59
dependent personality disorder 167
depersonalization 16, 17, 31
depersonalization–derealization syndrome 109
depression 20
assessment 21, 25
aims 25, 27–8
diff erential diagnosis 25, 27–8
history 26, 28
mental state examination (MSE) 26–7
need for 25, 28
compared with grief 101
depressive disorder 92
management 94
drug treatment 94–5
psychological treatment 95–6
prognosis 96
psychiatric referral 96
relapse prevention 96
depressive stupor 25, 93
deprivational dwarfi sm 183
derealization 16, 17, 31
dhat 104
diagnosis of mental disorders 47
alcohol and substance abuse 35
aims 35
alcohol dependence and withdrawal 36–7
alcohol psychiatric and medical complications 37
alcohol psychosocial complications 37
alcohol quantity and consumption pattern 36
need for 35–6
anxiety and stress-related disorders 29
aims 29–30
diff erential diagnosis 30
mental state examination (MSE) 30–1
need for 30
applicability 19
categories 7–8
classifi cation 8
cognitive function 19
aims 20
mental state examination (MSE) 20–1
need for 20
depression 25
aims 25
diff erential diagnosis 25

214 
Index
diagnosis of mental disorders (continued)
history 26
mental state examination (MSE) 26–7
need for 25
eating disorders
aims 33
diff erential diagnosis 33
history 33–4
need for 33
mania
aims 27–8
diff erential diagnosis 27–8
history 28
mental state examination (MSE) 28–9
need for 28
psychosis 21
aims 22
history 22
mental state examination (MSE) 22
sleep disorders 34
further assessment 35
history 34–5
need for 34
somatic symptoms and somatoform 
disorders 31
aims 31–2
diff erential diagnosis 32
history 32
mental state examination (MSE) 32
need for 32
unresponsive patients 37
aims 37–8
diff erential diagnosis 38
mental state examination (MSE) 38–9
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 
5th edition (DSM-5) 8
dialectical behavioural therapy (DBT) 79
diazepam 64, 70
diff usion tensor imaging (DTI) 61
DiGeorge syndrome 190
displacement 59
dissocial personality disorder 167, 169
dissociative disorders 31, 108
disulfi ram 64, 74
doctor–patient relationship 6
donepezil 64, 145
Down’s syndrome 188–9
drug treatments for mental disorders 63
anticholinergic agents 73
antidepressants 65
monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) 68
noradrenaline and serotonin specifi c antidepressants 
(NASSA) 67
other agents 68
selective serotonin and noradrenaline reuptake 
inhibitors (SNRIs) 66
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors 
(SSRIs) 65–6
tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) 67–8
antipsychotic agents 70–1
atypical 72–3
side eff ects 71
anxiolytics 70
dementia drugs 73
depressive disorder 94–5
mood stabilizers 68–9
NMDA receptor antagonists 73
prescribing principles and practice 63–5
specifi c group prescription
breastfeeding 74–5
children 75
elderly 75
pregnancy 74
substance abuse drugs 74
duloxetine 66
dysarthia 15
dysmorphophobia 110, 112
dyspareunia 121
dysphasia 15, 20
dysthymia 93
E
early intervention service 85
eating disorder not otherwise specifi ed (EDNOS) 115
eating disorders 115
anorexia nervosa 116–18
assessment
aims 33
diff erential diagnosis 33
history 33–4
need for 33
bullimia nervosa 118–19
echolalia 23
echopraxia 23
ecstasy (MDMA) 162–3
ego 58–9
elderly patients 75, 86
elective mutism 38
electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) 75
electroencephalography (EEC) 61
encapsulated delusions 135
encopresis 181
endogenous depression 93
enuresis 181
epidemiology 55–6
mood disorders 93–4
epilepsy 150–1
epistasis 60
Epworth Sleepiness Scale 35
erectile dysfunction 121
erotomania 136
escitalopram 65
ethnic minorities 89
evidence-based medicine 5
excessive daytime sleepiness 120
exhibitionism 123

Index 215
exposure 78
expressed emotion (EE) 129
extrapyramidal side eff ects (EPS) 71
eye movement desensitivation and reprocessing 
(EMDR) 79, 110
F
factitious disorders 32, 108, 113
family theories of mental disorders 56–7
family therapy 57, 80
FAST questions 12
fetishistic transvesticism 123
fl attened aff ect 23
fl ight of ideas 16, 29
fl ooding 78
fl umazenil 70
fl uoxetine 64, 65
folie à deux 136
forensic psychiatry 88, 89–90
fragile X syndrome 189
Fregoli’s delusion 136
frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) 146
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) 61
G
gender dysphoric disorder 122–3
gender identity disorder 122–3
generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) 107
genetic heterogeneity 60
genetics, role in mental disorder 59–61
grandiose delusions 23
grief
abnormal 101
compared with depression 101
normal 101
group therapy 79–80
H
hallucinations 16–17, 24
depression 27
schizophrenia 129
hallucinogens 163
lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) 163
haloperidol 64
side eff ects 71
head injury 151
healthcare workers 89
hebephrenic schizophrenia 125
heritability 60
hierarchy of diagnoses 8
histrionic personality disorder 167
homelessness 89
Huntingdon’s disease 146
hybrid therapies 79
hydrocephalus, normal pressure 146
hypersomnia 120
hypnogogic hallucinations 17, 120
hypnopompic hallucinations 17
hypochondriasis 32, 110, 111–12
hypomania 27, 97
hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal (HPA) axis 56
I
id 58–9
idea of reference 23
illness behaviour 57
illusions 16, 17
incidence of mental disorders 55
incongruity of mood 15
incongruous aff ect 23
insight 25
insomnia 119–20
intellectualization 59
International Classifi cation of Diseases, 10th revision 
(ICD-10) 8
interpersonal therapy (IPT) 79
J
jealousy 135
K
key workers 84
knight’s move thinking 23
koro 104
Korsakov’s syndrome 149
L
labile mood 15
lamotrigine 64, 69
bipolar disorder 99
learned helplessness 58
learning disabilities (LD) 88–9
assessment 185–6
chromosomal abnormalities 188
Down’s syndrome 188–9
fragile X syndrome 189
others 189–90
clinical features 185
defi nition 185
environmental factors 191
management 187–8
other genetic disorders 190–1
psychiatric aspects 186–7
single gene disorders 190
phenylketonuria (PKU) 190
legal highs 164

216 
Index
legal issues
capacity 200
compulsory treatment 200
Mental Capacity Act (2005) 200–1
Mental Health Act (1983, 2007) 201–4
other aspects of law and psychiatry 204
Lesch–Nyhan syndrome 190
liaison psychiatry 87
libido 59
life charts 48, 50
lithium 64, 68–9
suicide risk 44
location for assessments 10
long-term prognosis 50
lorazepam 148
lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) 163
M
magetoencephalography (MEG) 61
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 61
malingering 32, 108, 113
management of mental disorders 48–50
mania 97
mental state examination (MSE) 28–9
mannerisms 23, 24
maternity blues 100
MDMA (ecstasy) 162–3
memantine 64, 73, 145
memory 17
mental state examination (MSE) 20–1
tests 21
Mental Capacity Act (2005) 200–1
Mental Health Act (1983, 2007) 201–4
mental state examination (MSE) 10, 14
anxiety and stress-related disorders
characterization 30
obsessions and compulsions 30–1
somatic symptoms 31
appearance and behaviour 14–15
cognition 17
cognitive function 20–1
depression 26–7
appearance 26
cognition 27
mood 26
perceptions 27
speech 26
thoughts 27
ending the interview 17
insight 17
mania
appearance 28
insight 29
mood 28–9
perceptions 29
speech 28
thought 29
mood 15–16
perceptions 16–17
psychosis 22
somatic symptoms and somatoform disorders 32
speech 15
thoughts 16
unresponsive patients
consciousness level 38
facial expression and communication 38
history 38
physical examination 38–9
methadone 64, 74
methylphenidate 64
mild cognitive impairment (MCI) 139
mini-mental state examination (MMSE) 21
mirtrapine 64, 67
mixed aff ective states 27, 97
mixed anxiety and depressive disorder 93
moclobemide 68
monitored polysomnography 35
monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) 64, 68
suicide risk 44
mood assessment 15
psychosis 24
mood disorders 92
bipolar disorder 97
cyclothymia 97–8
hypomania 97
management 98–9
mania 97
mixed aff ective states 97
relapse prevention 99
children 176–7
depression 26
depressive disorder 92
aetiological factors 94
atypical depression 93
drug treatment 94–5
dysthymia 93
epidemiology 93–4
management 94
mixed anxiety and depressive disorder 93
prognosis 96
psychiatric referral 96
psychological treatment 95–6
psychotic depression 93
reactive and endogenous depression 93
relapse prevention 96
grief 101
abnormal 101
depression 101
normal 101
organic mood disorders 99
premenstrual syndrome 100
puerperal disorders 100
maternity blues 100
postpartum depression 100
puerperal psychosis 100
women 100–1

Index 217
mood stabilzers 68–9
morbid jealousy 135
morbid thoughts 16
multidisciplinary teams 84
mutism 182
N
naltrexone 74
narcissistic personality disorder 167
narcolepsy 120
negative reinforcement 58
negativism 23
neologisms 23, 24
neurasthenia 108–9
neurofi bromatosis 190
neuroleptic malignant syndrome (NMS) 71
neuropathology 61
structural and functional neuroimaging 61
neuroses 29
aetiology 105
classifi cation 104
diagnosis 104
epidemiology 104
management 104–5
prognosis 105
specifi c disorders 105
agoraphobia 106
anxiety disorders 105
generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) 107
panic disorder 106–7
phobic anxiety 105–6
social phobia 106
stress-related and somatoform disorders 104
symptoms and syndromes 103–4
neurotic disorders 103–4
neuroticism 29
nicotine 163–4
NMDA receptor antagonists 64, 73
non suicidal self-injury (NSSI) 42
noradrenaline and serotonin specifi c antidepressants 
(NASSA) 67
normal pressure hydrocephalus 146
NOTEPAD acronym 13
nurse practitioners 84
O
objective mood 15
obsessional personality disorder 167
obsessions 16
anxiety and stress-related disorders 30–1
obsessive–compulsive disorder (OCD) 107–8
symptoms 107
olanzapine 64, 72
side eff ects 71
olfactory hallucinations 17
onset insomnia 26
operant conditioning 58
opioids epidemiology and pharmacology 160–2
organic disorders, defi nition 138
organic mood disorders 99
organic psychiatric disorders 149
orientation 17
overvalued ideas 15–16
P
paedophilia 123
panic attacks 58, 106–7
panic disorder 106–7
paranoid personality disorder 167
paranoid psychosis 135
paraphilias 123
paraphrenia 124
parasomnias 120
parasuicide 42
Parkinsonism 71
Parkinson’s disease 146
passivity 23
pathoplastic eff ects 166
perceptions
depression 27
mania 29
psychosis 24
perfectionism 34
peripheral markers 61
perpetuating factors 56
persecutory delusions 23
personality, role in mental disorders 59
personality disorders 165–6
cluster A disorders (eccentric) 168
cluster B disorders (dramatic) 168
borderline 169
dissocial 169
cluster C disorders (anxious) 169–70
key aspects
aetiology 168
classifi cation 166–8
diagnosis 166
epidemiology 168
management 170
problems with the concept 170–1
prognosis 170
psychiatric disorders 166
phencyclidine (PCP) 163
phenelzine 64, 68
phenylketonuria (PKU) 190
phobias 16
physical examination 17–18
basic investigations 18
Pick’s disease 146
Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index 35
polymorphisms 60
positive reinforcement 58
positron emission tomography (PET) 61

218 
Index
post-concussion syndrome 151
postpartum depression 100
post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) 31, 110
posturing 23
Prader–Willi syndrome 189
precipitating factors 56
predisposing factors 56
pregnancy 74
premenstrual syndrome 100
prevalence of mental disorders 55
prion disease 146
prison-based psychiatry 89–90
problem lists 52, 53
problem-solving therapy 76–7
procyclidine 64, 73
prognosis for mental disorders 50
projection 59
propranolol 70
protective factors 56
pseudodementia 27
pseudoseizures 151
psychiatric assessment, basic 9
basic history 11–12
alcohol and drug use 14
basic details 12
family history 13
forensic history 14
past medical and drug history 14
past psychiatric history 13
personal history and premorbid personality 13
presenting complaints 12–13
social history 13–14
components 10
before interview 10–11
checklist 11
examples 9–10
mental state examination (MSE) 10, 14
appearance and behaviour 14–15
cognition 17
ending the interview 17
insight 17
mood 15–16
perceptions 16–17
speech 15
thoughts 16
physical examination 17–18
basic investigations 18
psychiatric comorbidities 89
psychiatric disorders in diff erent settings 193
epidemiology
A&E departments 194
general practice 193–4
medical and surgical wards 195
out-patient clinics 194–5
population 193
management in medicine 197
recognition 197
referral to specialist psychiatric services 198
treatment 198
medical comorbidities 195
presentations in medical settings 195
medical management problems 197
somatic symptoms 195–7
worsening medical disease 197
psychiatric interview 7
assessment 7
classifi cation 8
diagnostic categories 7–8
summarizing and communicating fi ndings 8
psychiatric services and specialties 82
service organization
Care Programme Approach (CPA) 84–5
community care 84
key workers 84
multidisciplinary teams 84
other services 85
trends in service delivery 82–3
special needs groups 89
ethnic minorities 89
healthcare workers 89
homeless 89
prisoners 89–90
psychiatric comorbidities 89
specialties 85
children and adolescents 86
forensic 88
general adult psychiatry 85–6
learning disabilities (LD) psychiatric 88–9
liaison psychiatry 87
old age 86
substance abuse psychiatry 87
psychiatry 5
defi nition 5
future directions 5–6
studying 6
useful attitudes 6
useful knowledge 6
useful skills 6
psychoanalysis 58–9
psychodynamic psychotherapy 77–8
psychodynamic theories of mental disorder 
58–9
psychoeducation 76
psychogeriatrics 86
psychological factors in mental disorders 57
behavioural theories 57–8
cognitive theories 58
personality 59
psychodynamic theories 58–9
psychological treatments 76
adverse eff ects 76
depressive disorder 95–6
evidence base 76
major types 77
behaviour therapy 78
cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) 79
cognitive therapy 78–9
psychodynamic psychotherapy 77–8

Index 219
other psychotherapies
family therapy 80
group therapy 79–80
hybrid therapies 79
simple forms 76–7
psychomotor poverty 125
psychomotor retardation 26
psychopharmacology 63
psychosis
assessment 21
aims 22
history 22
mental state examination (MSE) 22
psychosurgery 75–6
psychotic depression 93
puerperal psychosis 100
punishment 58
Q
quetiapine 72
bipolar disorder 99
R
reaction formation 59
reactive depression 93
reactivity of mood 26
reading disorder 181
reality distortion 125
reboxetine 68
regression 59
repression 59
Rett’s syndrome 180
risk 40
formulation 41
to others 45
assessment 45
management 45
risk assessment 40
suicide 43
risk factors for mental disorders 55
risk management 41–2
risperidone 72
side eff ects 71
S
safety considerations 10–11
salience syndrome 133
schizoaff ective disorders 134–5
schizoid personality disorder 167
schizophrenia 124
aetiology 131
dopamine hypothesis 132–3
environmental factors 132
genetic factors 131–2
neurodevelopmental model 133–4
psychological and social theories 133
clinical features 124
acute schizophrenia 124–5
chronic schizophrenia 125
clinical subtypes 125
cognitive impairment 126
diff erential diagnosis
acute schizophrenia 126–7
chronic schizophrenia 127
investigations 127
epidemiology 130–1
family theories 57
fi rst-rank symptoms 22–3
management 127
acute schizophrenia 127
chronic schizophrenia 128
early intervention 127–8
prognosis 130
related disorders 134
delusional disorders 135–6
schizoaff ective disorders 134–5
schizotypal disorder 136
treatment
antipsychotic agents 128–9
psychological treatments 129
social interventions 129–30
schizophreniform disorder 124
schizotypal disorder 136
Schneiderian symptoms 23
school refusal 176
secondary delusion 23
secondary gain 57, 108
selective mutism 182
selective serotonin and noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors 
(SNRIs) 64, 66
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) 64, 65–6
depressive disorder 94–5
suicide risk 65
self-harm (SH) 42
assessment following incident 43
defi nitions 42
management following incident
general 43–4
repeated incidents 44
separation anxiety 175
serotonin (5-HT) 61
serotonin syndrome 65
sertraline 64, 65
sexual problems 120
gender identity disorder 122–3
sexual dysfunction 120–1
dyspareunia 121
erectile dysfunction 121
psychological treatment 121–2
sexual preference disorders (paraphilias) 123
short-term prognosis 50
sick role 57
sildenafi l 121

220 
Index
single photon emission computer tomography (SPECT) 61
sleep disorders 119
assessment 34
further assessment 35
history 34–5
need for 34
children 182
depression 26
excessive daytime sleepiness 120
insomnia 119–20
parasomnias 120
sleep paralysis 120
social phobia 106
social treatments 80
acute interventions 80
interventions during psychiatric care 80
wider social environment 80
social workers 84
sociology 56
antipsychiatry 57
family theories 56–7
sick role and illness behaviour 57
solvent misuse 163
somatic symptoms and somatoform disorders
assessment 31
aims 31–2
diff erential diagnosis 32
history 32
mental state examination (MSE) 32
need for 32
somatic syndrome 92
somatoform disorders 104, 110–11
assessment and management 111
children 175
factitious disorders and malingering 113
functional somatic syndromes 112–13
hypochondriasis and dysmorphophobia 111–12
persistent pain disorder 112
somatic symptom disorders 112
specialties in psychiatry 85
children and adolescents 86
forensic 88
general adult psychiatry 85–6
learning disabilities (LD) psychiatric 88–9
liaison psychiatry 87
old age 86
substance abuse psychiatry 87
St John’s wort 65, 68
Stanford Sleepiness Scale 35
stimulants
amphetamines 162
cocaine 162
MDMA (ecstasy) 162–3
stress-related disorders 104, 109
acute reactions 109–10
adjustment disorders 110
assessment 29
aims 29–30
diff erential diagnosis 30
mental state examination (MSE) 30–1
need for 30
post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) 110
stupor 38
subcortical dementias 140
subjective mood 15
sublimation 59
substance abuse/misuse
assessment 35
aims 35
need for 35–6
general issues 154
aetiology 155
assessment 155
management 155
types of misuse 154
specialty 87
suff ering 6
suicidal ideation 16
suicide 43
as a public health problem 44
clusters and contagion 44
psychopharmacology 44
defi nitions 42
prevention strategies 44
risk assessment 43
risk factors 42
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) 65
superego 58–9
supportive psychotherapy 76
syndromes 8
T
tardive dyskinesia (TD) 71
temazepam 70
temper tantrums 182
thought block 23
thought broadcast 23
thought disorders 16, 23
thought insertion 23
thought withdrawal 23
tics 181–2
torsade de pointes 71
Tourette syndrome 182
transexualism 122–3
transference 77
transvesticism 123
tranylcypromine 68
trazodone 68
treatment 63
drug treatments 63
anticholinergic agents 73
antidepressants 65–8
antipsychotic agents 70–1
anxiolytics 70
breastfeeding 74–5
children 75

Index 221
dementia drugs 73
elderly 75
mood stabilizers 68–9
NMDA receptor antagonists 73
pregnancy 74
prescribing principles and practice 63–5
substance abuse drugs 74
other biological treatments
electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) 75
psychosurgery 75–6
psychological treatments 76
adverse eff ects 76
evidence base 76
major types 77–9
other psychotherapies 79–80
simple forms 76–7
social treatments 80
acute interventions 80
interventions during psychiatric care 80
wider social environment 80
tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) 64, 67–8
suicide risk 44
tuberous sclerosis complex 190
twin studies 59–60, 98
U
unresponsive patients assessment 37
aims 37–8
diff erential diagnosis 38
mental state examination (MSE) 38–9
V
valproate 64, 69
vanlafaxine 64
vascular dementia 145
velo–cardio–facial syndrome 190
venlafaxine 66
visual hallucinations 16–17
W
waxy fl exibility 23
weight control methods 33
Wernicke’s syndrome 157
Williams syndrome 190
women and mood disorders 100–1
Z
zaleplon 70
zolpidem 70
zopiclone 70
UPLOADED BY [STORMRG]

