Introductory Human Physiology 
 
         ©copyright Jennifer Carbrey & Emma Jakoi 
 
                                                                                            
 
3. Pressure changes and resistance 
Pressure Changes Affect Lung Volumes 
In a normal lung, air flows in and out when a pressure gradient is created. Gas always 
flows from a higher to a lower pressure. During inspiration, expansion of the thorax 
causes the intrapleural and alveolar pressures to decrease, gas flows into the lung. 
During exhalation passive recoil of the lung causes the intrapleural pressure and 
alveolar pressure to increase; gas flows out of the lung. Note that during inspiration 
and exhalation the pleural pressure is always less than the pressure in the 
alveoli.  
 
The transpulmonary pressure (Fig 1) also increases and decreases with lung volume. 
By convention, the transpulmonary pressure is always positive (Ptp = PA – Pip).   
 
At the end of an unforced exhalation when no air is flowing, then the following 
conditions exist:  
alveolar pressure = 0 mmHg 
intrapleural pressure (i.e., pressure in pleural cavity) = -5 mmHg  
transpulmonary pressure (PA- Pip) = +5mmHg.  
 
When there is no airflow in or out of the lungs, the transpulmonary pressure and 
intrapleural pressure are equal in magnitude but opposite in sign (Fig 1).  
 
Figure  1. In ventilation, air flow is determined by the difference between atmospheric 
and alveolar pressures. Lung size is determined by the balance between the 
transpulmonary pressure and elastic recoil.  
 
At rest, the volume of the lung is a balance between the expansion of the chest wall and 
the inward elastic recoil of the lungs. The lung at rest is in a partially expanded state 
(stretched).    
 
A pneumothorax, can occur with trauma or surgery. In this instance, the chest wall is 
pierced without damaging the lung. Atmospheric air enters the intrapleural space raising 
0 mmHg 
Patm = 0 mm Hg 
 
 
PA 
Patm = 0 mm Hg 
Pip 
 
 
Transpulmonary P (Ptp) = PA- Pip 
Ptp = 0 mm Hg – (-5 mm Hg) = 5mmHg 
Ptp = recoil of lung at rest 
-5 mmHg 
(Patm-PA) 
 Ptp 

Introductory Human Physiology 
 
         ©copyright Jennifer Carbrey & Emma Jakoi 
 
                                                                                            
 
its pressure to 0 mmHg. This input of air causes the lung to collapse since its elastic 
recoil is no longer opposed. Concurrently the chest wall moves outward.   
 
Airway Resistance Determined by Driving Pressure & Flow  
Thus far we have discussed the changes in pressure that are required to overcome the 
elastic recoil tendencies of the respiratory system. An additional force that must be 
overcome during normal breathing is the resistance to airflow. Measurement of airway 
resistance is an extremely useful diagnostic tool because changes in airway resistance 
accompany aging and many lung diseases.   
 
Air flow (F) will depend upon the driving pressure (P) and the resistance (R) according 
to the equation:  
 
 
 
 
F = (Patm –PA)/R 
 
Factors that influence airway resistance include airway diameter, lung volume, and 
elastic recoil of the lung.   
 
1. AIRWAY DIAMETER: It is probably intuitive that the more narrow the airway, the 
higher the resistance in that individual airway. What may not be intuitive is that most of 
the resistance to air flow is found in the mouth, trachea and large bronchi. The reason 
for this is that as the airways divide and become narrower, they also become more 
numerous. The small airways divide more rapidly than their diameter decreases, 
therefore, the resistance of each individual airway is relatively high, but their total-cross 
sectional area is so great that their combined resistance is low.  
 
2. LUNG VOLUME: The diameter of the airway lumen is affected by lung volume. The 
airways are not rigid and are capable of being distended and compressed. At high lung 
volumes, the airways such as bronchi and bronchioles, are "pulled" open and their 
resistance is lower than at low lung volumes. Patients with increased airway resistance 
frequently have high lung volumes in an attempt to compensate.  
 
3. ELASTIC RECOIL: Airway diameter will be affected by the transmural pressure 
across them (Fig 2). Although the airways are embedded in the lung, the pressure that 
they are exposed to on their outside wall is close to intrapleural pressure. If elastic recoil 
is reduced, then intrapleural pressure will be less negative than normal. The transmural 
pressure across the airways will be reduced, the airway diameter will be smaller than 
normal, and resistance will be higher than normal. Patients with emphysema often have 
destruction of lung tissue, decreased elastic recoil (increased compliance), and 
increased airway resistance. 
 

Introductory Human Physiology 
 
         ©copyright Jennifer Carbrey & Emma Jakoi 
 
                                                                                            
 
 
Figure 2. Increased resistance in the airways (bronchi) can lead to airway compression. 
The movement of air through the narrowed opening causes “wheezing”.   
At the equal pressure point, pressure inside the airway equals that in the pleural 
space. In normal lungs this occurs in the large airways which are surrounded by 
cartilage. However, in disease associated with airway obstruction, resistance to flow is 
increased and the pressure gradient for flow is reduced. Consequently the equal 
pressure point moves into airways that do not contain cartilage causing these airways 
to close completely (premature airway collapse). This premature airway closure can be 
heard as crackles. 
 
4. MUSCLE TONE Constriction of bronchial smooth muscle will decrease the diameter 
of the airways and increase airway resistance.  Parasympathetic stimulation causes 
contraction of bronchial smooth muscle; sympathetic stimulation causes 
relaxation. Asthmatics often have hyper-reactive airways and smooth muscle 
contraction. Drugs which stimulate -adrenergic receptors (βAR) in the bronchioles 
cause relaxation and are often used to treat asthmatics. 
+80 
Patm = 0 mmHg 
+60 
+60   
+60 
+70 
+90 
+80
Patm = 0 mmHg 
+60 
+60 
 
+60 
  
 
Equal Pressure  
Point 
Max Forced Expiration  
cartilage 
Obstructive Lung Disease 
50 
+60 
+20 

