

Lecture Notes:
Dermatology


Lecture Notes:
Dermatology
Robin Graham-Brown
BSc (Hons) (Lond), MB BS (Lond), FRCP, FRCPCH
Consultant Dermatologist
University Hospitals of Leicester
Honorary Senior Lecturer in Dermatology
University of Leicester
Tony Burns
MB BS (Hons) (Lond), FRCP
Emeritus Consultant Dermatologist
The Leicester Royal Inﬁ rmary, Leicester
Tenth Edition
A John Wiley & Sons, Ltd., Publication

This edition ﬁ rst published 2011, © 2011 by RAC Graham-Brown and DA Burns
© 1965, 1969, 1973, 1977, 1983, 1990, 1996, 2002, 2007 by Blackwell Science Ltd
Blackwell Publishing was acquired by John Wiley & Sons in February 2007. Blackwell’s 
publishing programme has been merged with Wiley’s global Scientiﬁ c, Technical and 
Medical business to form Wiley-Blackwell.
Registered ofﬁ ce: John Wiley & Sons Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West 
Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK
Editorial ofﬁ ces: 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 2DQ, UK
The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK
111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030-5774, USA
For details of our global editorial ofﬁ ces, for customer services and for information about 
how to apply for permission to reuse the copyright material in this book please see our 
website at www.wiley.com/wiley-blackwell
The right of the author to be identiﬁ ed as the author of this work has been asserted in 
accordance with the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, 
recording or otherwise, except as permitted by the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 
1988, without the prior permission of the publisher.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears 
in print may not be available in electronic books.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as 
trademarks. All brand names and product names used in this book are trade names, service 
marks, trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective owners. The publisher is not 
associated with any product or vendor mentioned in this book. This publication is designed 
to provide accurate and authoritative information in regard to the subject matter covered. It 
is sold on the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering professional 
services. If professional advice or other expert assistance is required, the services of a 
competent professional should be sought.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Graham-Brown, R. A. C. (Robin A. C.)
 Lecture notes. Dermatology / Robin Graham-Brown, Tony Burns. – 10th ed.
   p. ; cm.
 Other title: Dermatology
 Includes bibliographical references and index.
 ISBN 978-1-4051-9571-3 (pbk. : alk. paper) 1. Dermatology–Outlines, syllabi, etc. 
2. Skin–Diseases–Outlines, syllabi, etc. I. Burns, Tony, FRCP. II. Title. III. Title: 
Dermatology.
 [DNLM: 1. Skin Diseases. WR 140]
 RL74.3.G73 2011
 616.5–dc22
 
2010031868
ISBN: 9781405195713
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Set in 8.5 on 11 pt Utopia by Toppan Best-set Premedia Limited
1 2011

Contents
Contributor, vi
Preface, vii
Acknowledgements, viii
 1 Structure and function of the skin, hair and nails, 1
 2 Approach to the diagnosis of dermatological 
disease, 10
 3 Bacterial and viral infections, 19
 4 Fungal infections, 30
 5 Ectoparasite infections, 40
 6 Acne, acneiform eruptions and rosacea, 51
 7 Eczema, 60
 8 Psoriasis, 69
 9 Benign and malignant skin tumours, 79
10 Naevi, 95
11 Inherited disorders, 102
12 Pigmentary disorders, 110
13 Disorders of the hair and nails, 115
14 Bullous disorders, 123
15 Miscellaneous erythematous and papulosquamous 
disorders, and light-induced skin diseases, 130
16 Vascular disorders, 142
17 Connective tissue diseases, 149
18 Pruritus, 157
19 Systemic disease and the skin, 162
20 Skin and the psyche, 170
21 Cutaneous drug reactions, 175
22 Treatment of skin disease, 181
23 Emergency dermatology, 188
Case study questions, 191
Multiple choice questions, 202
Answers to case study questions, 204
Answers to multiple choice questions, 206
Glossary of dermatological terms, 207
Index, 212

 Contributor  
 Chapter 23: Dermatological emergencies 
 Matthew Graham - Brown 
 BSc (Hons) (Birmingham), 
 MB ChB (Hons) (Leicester Warwick) 
 Foundation Year 2 
 West Midlands Deanery 

 Preface  
  In this, the tenth edition of  Lecture Notes: 
Dermatology , we have updated the text, focusing 
on recent advances in the knowledge of skin dis-
eases and their treatment. We have also asked a 
junior doctor working in an acute hospital in the 
UK to help us add a new chapter on dermatologi-
cal emergencies. 
 Numerous tables of salient points provide ready 
reference but, as in previous editions, we have 
attempted to create a  ‘ user - friendly ’ readability. 
 We hope that the book will be of value not only 
to medical students, but also to general practition-
ers, and nurses involved in the care of dermatol-
ogy patients. We also hope that exposure to 
 Lecture Notes: Dermatology  will stimulate a deeper 
interest in this important medical specialty. 
 Robin Graham - Brown 
 Tony Burns 

 Acknowledgements  
 We are indebted to the late Dr Imrich Sarkany, and 
to Professor Charles Calnan, under whose guid-
ance we both learned dermatology. 
 We thank our colleagues in the Dermatology 
Department in Leicester: Drs Anton Alexandroff, 
Ian Anderson and Robert Burd, Professor Richard 
Camp and Drs Karen Harman, Ingrid Helbling, 
Peter 
Hutchinson, 
Graham 
Johnston, 
Alex 
Milligan, Joy Osborne and numerous junior col-
leagues for creating and sustaining such a stimu-
lating environment in which to work. 
 It is a pleasure to have been joined for this edi-
tion by Matthew Graham - Brown, who has pro-
vided an excellent chapter on dermatological 
emergencies, for which we thank him very much. 
 We are especially grateful to all the med ical stu-
dents who, over many years, have reminded us of 
the importance of clarity in communication, and 
that teaching should be a stimulating and enjoy-
able experience for everyone concerned. 
 Finally, we thank the staff at Wiley - Blackwell 
who have helped us through the editing and pro-
duction stages. 

 1 
Structure and  f unction of 
the  s kin,  h air and  n ails  
 Skin, skin is a wonderful thing, 
 Keeps the outside out and the inside in.   
 It is essential to have some background knowl-
edge of the normal structure and function of any 
organ before you can hope to understand the 
abnormal. Skin is the icing on the anatomical 
cake, it is the decorative wrapping paper, and 
without it not only would we all look rather unap-
pealing, but also a variety of unpleasant physio-
logical phenomena would bring about our demise. 
You have probably never contemplated your skin 
a great deal, except in the throes of narcissistic 
admiration, or when it has been blemished by 
some disorder, but hopefully by the end of this 
ﬁ rst chapter you will have been persuaded that it 
is quite a remarkable organ, and that you are lucky 
to be on such intimate terms with it.  
 Skin  s tructure 
 The skin is composed of two layers, the epidermis 
and the dermis (Figure  1.1 ). The epidermis, which 
is the outer layer, and its appendages (hair, nails, 
sebaceous glands and sweat glands), are derived 
from the embryonic ectoderm. The dermis is of 
mesodermal origin. 
Lecture Notes: Dermatology, 10th edition. © RAC Graham-Brown 
and DA Burns. Published 2011 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
 The  e pidermis 
 The epidermis is a stratiﬁ ed squamous epithelium, 
with several well - deﬁ ned layers. The principal cell 
type is known as a  keratinocyte . Keratinocytes, 
produced by cell division in the deepest layer of 
the epidermis (basal layer), are carried towards 
the skin surface, undergoing in transit a complex 
series of morphological and biochemical changes 
known as  terminal differentiation (keratinization) 
to produce the surface layer of tightly packed dead 
cells (stratum corneum or horny layer) which are 
eventually shed. In health the rate of production 
of cells matches the rate of loss so that epidermal 
thickness is constant. Epidermal kinetics are con-
trolled by a number of growth stimulators and 
inhibitors. 
 The components of this differentiation process 
are under genetic control and mutations in the 
controlling genes are responsible for a variety of 
diseases. 
 So - called  intermediate ﬁ laments , present in the 
cytoplasm of epithelial cells, are a major compo-
nent of the cytoskeleton. They contain a group of 
ﬁ brous proteins known as keratins, each of which 
is the product of a separate gene. Pairs of keratins 
are characteristic of certain cell types and tissues. 
The mitotically active keratinocytes in the basal 
layer express the keratin pair K5/K14, but during 
the differentiation process expression of K5/K14 is 
down - regulated and that of K1/K10 is induced. 

2  Structure and function of the skin, hair and nails
migrate along the dendrites of the melanocytes 
and are transferred to the keratinocytes in the 
prickle cell layer. In white people the melano-
somes are grouped together in membrane - bound 
 melanosome complexes , and they gradually degen-
erate as the keratinocytes move towards the 
surface of the skin. The skin of black people con-
tains the same number of melanocytes as that of 
white people, but the melanosomes are larger, 
remain separate and persist through the full thick-
ness of the epidermis. The main stimulus to 
melanin production is ultraviolet (UV) radiation. 
Melanin protects the cell nuclei in the epidermis 
from the harmful effects of UV radiation. A suntan 
is a natural protective mechanism, not some God -
 given cosmetic boon created so that you can 
impress the neighbours on your return from an 
exotic foreign trip! Unfortunately, this does not 
appear to be appreciated by the pale, pimply, 
lager - swilling advert for British manhood who 
dashes onto the beach in Ibiza and ﬂ ash fries 
himself to lobster thermidor on day one of his 
annual holiday. 
 Skin neoplasia is extremely uncommon in dark -
 skinned races because their skin is protected from 
UV damage by the large amounts of melanin that 
it contains. However, individuals with albinism 
are predisposed to skin cancer because their pro-
duction of melanin is impaired and they are there-
fore without its protective inﬂ uence. 
 Above the basal layer is the prickle cell/
spinous layer. This acquires its name from the 
 As cells reach the higher layers of the epider-
mis, keratin ﬁ laments aggregate into keratin ﬁ brils 
under the inﬂ uence of a protein known as  ﬁ lag-
grin (ﬁ lament - aggregating protein) — this is derived 
from its precursor  proﬁ laggrin , present in  kerato-
hyalin granules  which constitute the granules in 
the granular layer. Derivatives of the proteolysis of 
ﬁ laggrin are major components of natural mois-
turizing factor (NMF) which is important in the 
maintenance of epidermal hydration. Loss - of -
 function mutations in  FLG , the gene encoding 
ﬁ laggrin, underlie ichthyosis vulgaris and strongly 
predispose to atopic eczema; carriers of these 
mutations have reduced levels of NMF in the 
stratum corneum. 
 In the ﬁ nal stages of terminal differentiation, 
the plasma membrane is replaced by the  corniﬁ ed 
cell envelope , composed of several proteins the 
production of which is also under genetic control. 
Cells that have developed this envelope and have 
lost their nucleus and organelles constitute the 
 corneocytes of the stratum corneum. 
 Look at the layers more closely (Figure  1.2 ). The 
basal layer, which is one to three cells thick, is 
anchored to a basement membrane (see below) 
that lies between the epidermis and dermis. Inter-
spersed among the basal cells are melanocytes —
 large dendritic cells derived from the neural 
crest — that are responsible for melanin pigment 
production. Melanocytes contain cytoplasmic 
organelles called melanosomes, in which melanin 
is synthesized from tyrosine. The melanosomes 
 Figure 1.1   The structure of the skin.  
Dermal papilla
Hair shaft
Epidermis
Dermis
Sebaceous gland
Sweat gland
Arrector pili muscle
Hair bulb
Subcutaneous fat

Structure and function of the skin, hair and nails  3
their margins, and this locking together of cells, 
together with intercellular lipid, forms a very 
effective barrier. The stratum corneum varies in 
thickness according to the region of the body. It is 
thickest on the palms of the hands and soles of the 
feet. The stratum corneum cells are gradually 
abraded by daily wear and tear. If you bathe after 
a period of several days ’  avoidance of water (a 
house without central heating, in mid - winter, 
somewhere in the Northern Hemisphere, is ideal 
for this experiment), you will note that as you 
towel yourself you are rubbing off small balls of 
keratin — which has built up because of your 
unsanitary habits. When a plaster cast is removed 
from a fractured limb after several weeks  in situ 
there is usually a thick layer of surface keratin, the 
removal of which provides hours of absorbing 
occupational therapy. 
 Figure  1.3  shows the histological appearance of 
normal epidermis. 
 The  b asement  m embrane  z one 
 This is composed of a number of layers, and it is 
important to have some knowledge of these 
because certain diseases are related to abnormali-
ties in the layers. The basic structure is shown in 
Figure  1.4 . Basal keratinocytes are attached by 
 hemidesmosomes  to the epidermal side of the 
membrane, and these have an important role in 
maintaining adhesion between the epidermis and 
spiky appearance produced by the intercellular 
bridges (desmosomes) that connect adjacent 
cells. Important in cell – cell adhesion are several 
protein components of desmosomes (including 
cadherins [desmogleins and desmocollins] and 
plakins). Production of these is genetically con-
trolled, and abnormalities have been detected in 
some human diseases. 
 Scattered throughout the prickle cell layer are 
Langerhans ’  cells. These dendritic cells contain 
characteristic racquet - shaped  ‘ Birbeck ’ granules. 
Langerhans ’  cells are probably modiﬁ ed macro-
phages, which originate in the bone marrow and 
migrate to the epidermis. They are the ﬁ rst line of 
immunological defence against environmental 
antigens (see below). 
 Above the prickle cell layer is the granular layer, 
which is composed of ﬂ attened cells containing 
the darkly staining keratohyalin granules. Also 
present in the cytoplasm of cells in the granular 
layer are organelles known as lamellar granules 
(Odland bodies). These contain lipids and 
enzymes, and they discharge their contents into 
the intercellular spaces between the cells of the 
granular layer and stratum corneum — providing 
the equivalent of  ‘ mortar ’ between the cellular 
 ‘ bricks ’ , and contributing to the barrier function 
of the epidermis. 
 The cells of the stratum corneum are ﬂ attened, 
keratinized cells that are devoid of nuclei and 
cytoplasmic organelles. Adjacent cells overlap at 
 Figure 1.2   The epidermis.  
Horny layer
Granular layer
Prickle cell layer
Basal layer
Basement membrane
Langerhans’ cell
Melanocyte

4  Structure and function of the skin, hair and nails
 The inherited blistering diseases (see Chapter 
 14 ) occur as a consequence of mutations in genes 
responsible for components of the basement 
membrane zone, e.g. epidermolysis bullosa sim-
plex, in which splits occur in the basal keratinoc-
ytes, is related to mutations in genes coding for 
keratins 5 and 14, and dystrophic epidermolysis 
bullosa, in which blistering occurs immediately 
below the lamina densa, is related to mutations 
in a gene coding for type VII collagen, the major 
component of anchoring ﬁ brils. 
 Epidermal  a ppendages 
 The eccrine and apocrine sweat glands, the hair 
and sebaceous glands, and the nails, constitute 
the epidermal appendages. 
 Eccrine  s weat  g lands 
 Eccrine sweat glands are important in body tem-
perature regulation. A human has between two 
and three million eccrine sweat glands covering 
almost all the body surface. They are particularly 
numerous on the palms of the hands and soles 
of the feet. Each consists of a secretory coil deep 
in the dermis, and a duct that conveys the sweat 
to the surface. Eccrine glands secrete water, elec-
trolytes, lactate, urea and ammonia. The secretory 
coil produces isotonic sweat, but sodium chloride 
is reabsorbed in the duct so that sweat reaching 
the surface is hypotonic. Patients with cystic ﬁ bro-
sis have defective reabsorption of sodium chlo-
ride, and rapidly become salt depleted in a hot 
environment. Eccrine sweat glands are innervated 
dermis. The basement membrane is composed of 
three layers: lamina lucida (uppermost), lamina 
densa and lamina ﬁ broreticularis. A system of 
 anchoring ﬁ laments  connects hemidesmosomes 
to the lamina densa, and  anchoring ﬁ brils , which 
are closely associated with collagen in the upper 
dermis, connect the lamina densa to the dermis 
beneath.   
 The hemidesmosome/anchoring ﬁ lament region 
contains autoantigens targeted by autoantibodies 
in immunobullous disorders (including bullous 
pemphigoid, pemphigoid gestationis, cicatricial 
pemphigoid and linear IgA bullous dermatosis —
 see Chapter  14 ), hence the subepidermal location 
of blistering in these disorders. 
 Figure 1.4   Structure of the basement membrane zone.  
Anchoring fibrils
(type VII collagen)
Hemidesmosomes
(bullous pemphigoid antigens)
Anchoring filaments
Basal cells
Lamina lucida
Keratin intermediate filaments
(keratins 5 and 14)
Lamina densa
(laminins and type
IV collagen)
Sublamina densa region
 Figure 1.3   Section of skin stained with haematoxylin 
and eosin, showing the appearance of a normal 
epidermis.  ‘ Rete ridges ’ (downward projections of the 
epidermis) interdigitate with  ‘ dermal papillae ’ (upward 
projections of the dermis).  

Structure and function of the skin, hair and nails  5
tional stress ( ‘ goose ﬂ esh ’ ,  ‘ goose pimples ’ , horri-
pilation). The duct of the sebaceous gland enters 
the follicle just above the point of attachment of 
the arrector pili muscle. At the lower end of the fol-
licle is the hair bulb, part of which, the hair matrix, 
is a zone of rapidly dividing cells that is responsi-
ble for the formation of the hair shaft. Hair pigment 
is produced by melanocytes in the hair bulb. Cells 
produced in the hair bulb become densely packed, 
elongated and arranged parallel to the long axis of 
the hair shaft. They gradually become keratinized 
as they ascend in the hair follicle. 
 The main part of each hair ﬁ bre is the cortex, 
which is composed of keratinized spindle - shaped 
cells (Figure  1.5 ). Terminal hairs have a central 
core known as the medulla, consisting of special-
ized cells that contain air spaces. Covering the 
cortex is the cuticle, a thin layer of cells that 
overlap like the tiles on a roof, with the free 
margins of the cells pointing towards the tip of the 
hair. The cross - sectional shape of hair varies with 
body site and race. Negroid hair is distinctly oval 
in cross - section, and pubic, beard and eyelash 
hairs have an oval cross - section in all racial types. 
Caucasoid hair is moderately elliptical in cross -
 section and mongoloid hair is circular. 
 The growth of each hair is cyclical — periods of 
active growth alternate with resting phases. After 
each period of active growth (anagen) there is a 
short transitional phase (catagen), followed by a 
resting phase (telogen), after which the follicle 
reactivates, a new hair is produced and the old 
hair is shed. The duration of these cyclical phases 
depends on the age of the individual and the loca-
tion of the follicle on the body. The duration of 
by the sympathetic nervous system, but the neu-
rotransmitter is acetylcholine.  
 Apocrine  s weat  g lands 
 Apocrine sweat glands are found principally in the 
axillae and anogenital region. Specialized apo-
crine glands include the wax glands of the ear and 
the milk glands of the breast. Apocrine glands are 
also composed of a secretory coil and a duct, but 
the duct opens into a hair follicle, not directly on 
to the surface of the skin. Apocrine glands produce 
an oily secretion containing protein, carbohy-
drate, ammonia and lipid. These glands become 
active at puberty, and secretion is controlled by 
adrenergic nerve ﬁ bres. Pungent axillary body 
odour (axillary bromhidrosis) is the result of the 
action of bacteria on apocrine secretions. In some 
animals apocrine secretions are important sexual 
attractants, but the average human armpit pro-
vides a different type of overwhelming olfactory 
experience. 
 Hair 
 Hairs grow out of tubular invaginations of the epi-
dermis known as follicles, and a hair follicle and 
its associated sebaceous glands are referred to as 
a  ‘ pilosebaceous unit ’ . There are three types of 
hair: ﬁ ne, soft  lanugo  hair is present  in utero and 
is shed by the eighth month of fetal life;  vellus hair 
is the ﬁ ne downy hair that covers most of the body 
except those areas occupied by terminal hair; and 
thick and pigmented  terminal  hair occurs on the 
scalp, eyebrows and eyelashes before puberty —
 after puberty, under the inﬂ uence of androgens, 
secondary sexual terminal hair develops from 
vellus hair in the axillae and pubic region, and on 
the trunk and limbs in men. On the scalp, the 
reverse occurs in male - pattern balding — terminal 
hair becomes vellus hair under the inﬂ uence of 
androgens. In men, terminal hair on the body 
usually increases in amount as middle age arrives, 
and hairy ears and nostrils, and bushy eyebrows, 
are puzzling accompaniments of advancing years. 
One struggles to think of any biological advantage 
conferred by exuberant growth of hair in these 
sites. 
 Hair follicles extend into the dermis at an angle 
(see Figure  1.1 ). A small bundle of smooth muscle 
ﬁ bres, the arrector pili muscle, is attached to the 
side of the follicle. Arrector pili muscles are sup-
plied by adrenergic nerves, and are responsible for 
the erection of hairs in the cold or during emo-
 Figure 1.5   The structure of hair.  
Cuticle
Medulla
Cortex

6  Structure and function of the skin, hair and nails
glands are part of the pilosebaceous unit, and 
their lipid - rich product (sebum) ﬂ ows through a 
duct into the hair follicle. They are holocrine 
glands — sebum is produced by disintegration of 
glandular cells rather than an active secretory 
process. Modiﬁ ed sebaceous glands that open 
directly on the surface are found on the eyelids, 
lips, nipples, glans penis and prepuce, and the 
buccal mucosa (Fordyce spots). 
 Sebaceous glands are prominent at birth, under 
the inﬂ uence of maternal hormones, but atrophy 
soon after, and do not enlarge again until puberty. 
Enlargement of the glands and sebum production 
at puberty are stimulated by androgens. Growth 
hormone and thyroid hormones also affect sebum 
production. 
 Nails 
 A nail is a transparent plate of keratin derived from 
an invagination of epidermis on the dorsum of the 
terminal phalanx of a digit (Figure  1.6 ). The nail 
plate is the product of cell division in the nail 
matrix, which lies deep to the proximal nail fold, 
but is partly visible as the pale  ‘ half - moon ’ (lunula) 
at the base of the nail. The nail plate adheres 
ﬁ rmly to the underlying nail bed. The cuticle is an 
extension of the horny layer of the proximal nail 
fold on to the nail plate. It forms a seal between 
anagen in a scalp follicle is genetically determined, 
and ranges from 2 to more than 5 years. This is 
why some women can grow hair down to their 
ankles, whereas most have a much shorter 
maximum length. Scalp hair catagen lasts about 2 
weeks and telogen from 3 months to 4 months. 
The daily growth rate of scalp hair is approxi-
mately 0.45  mm. The activity of each follicle is 
independent of that of its neighbours, which is 
fortunate, because, if follicular activity were syn-
chronized, as it is in some animals, we would be 
subject to periodic moults, thus adding another 
dimension to life ’ s rich tapestry. At any one time 
approximately 85% of scalp hairs are in anagen, 
1% in catagen and 14% in telogen. The average 
number of hairs shed daily is 100. In areas other 
than the scalp anagen is relatively short — this is 
also fortunate, because, if it were not so, we would 
all be kept busy clipping eyebrows, eyelashes and 
nether regions. 
 It is a myth that shaving increases the rate of 
growth of hair and that it encourages the develop-
ment of  ‘ thicker ’  hair; nor does hair continue 
growing after death — shrinkage of soft tissues 
around the hair produces this illusion. 
 Human hair colour is principally dependent on 
two types of melanin: eumelanins in black and 
brown hair, and phaeomelanins in red, auburn 
and blond hair. 
 Greying of hair (canities) is the result of a 
decrease in tyrosinase activity in the melanocytes 
of the hair bulb. The age of onset of greying is 
genetically determined, but other factors may be 
involved such as autoimmunity — premature grey-
ing of the hair is a recognized association of perni-
cious anaemia. The phenomenon of  ‘ going white 
overnight ’  has been attributed to severe psycho-
logical stress — it is said that the hair of Thomas 
Moore and Marie Antoinette turned white on the 
night before their executions. However, this is 
physically impossible unless related to the washing 
out of temporary hair dye, but it might occur over 
a period of a few days or weeks as a result of alo-
pecia areata occurring in an individual with a 
mixture of white and pigmented hair in whom 
there was selective loss of pigmented hair. 
 Sebaceous  g lands 
 Sebaceous glands are found everywhere on the 
skin apart from the hands and feet. They are par-
ticularly numerous and prominent on the head 
and neck, the chest and the back. Sebaceous 
 Figure 1.6   The nail.  
Proximal nail fold
Nail plate
Nail plate
Cuticle
Lunula
Proximal nail
fold
Nail bed
Nail matrix

Structure and function of the skin, hair and nails  7
to collagen and elastin ﬁ bres. Mast cells are spe-
cialized secretory cells present throughout the 
dermis, but they are more numerous around 
blood vessels and appendages. They contain gran-
ules the contents of which include mediators such 
as histamine, prostaglandins, leukotrienes, and 
eosinophil and neutrophil chemotactic factors. 
Macrophages are phagocytic cells that originate in 
the bone marrow, and they act as scavengers of 
cell debris and extracellular material. The dermis 
is also richly supplied with blood vessels, lym-
phatics, nerves and sensory receptors. Beneath 
the dermis, a layer of subcutaneous fat separates 
the skin from underlying fascia and muscle. 
 Dermatoglyphics 
 Fingerprints, the characteristic elevated ridge pat-
terns on the ﬁ ngertips of humans, are unique to 
each individual. The ﬁ ngers and toes, and the 
palms and soles, are covered with a system of 
ridges that form patterns. The term  ‘ derma-
toglyphics ’  is applied to the conﬁ guration of the 
ridges. If you look closely at your hands you will 
see these tiny ridges, which are separate from the 
skin creases. On the tips of the ﬁ ngers there are 
three basic patterns: arches, loops and whorls 
(Figure  1.7 ). The loops are subdivided into ulnar 
or radial, depending on whether the loop is open 
to the ulnar or radial side of the hand. A triangular 
intersection of these ridges is known as a triradius, 
and these triradii are present not only on ﬁ nger-
tips, but also at the base of each ﬁ nger, and usually 
on the proximal part of the palm.   
 Not only are the ridge patterns of ﬁ ngerprints 
useful for the identiﬁ cation and conviction of 
those who covet their neighbours ’  goods, but char-
acteristic dermatoglyphic abnormalities frequently 
accompany many chromosomal aberrations.    
the nail plate and proximal nail fold, preventing 
penetration of extraneous material.   
 Nail growth is continuous throughout life, but is 
more rapid in youth than in old age. The average 
rate of growth of ﬁ ngernails is approximately 
1   mm/week, and the time taken for a ﬁ ngernail to 
grow from matrix to free edge is about 6 months. 
Nails on the dominant hand grow slightly more 
rapidly than those on the non - dominant hand. 
Toenails grow at one - third the rate of ﬁ ngernails, 
and take about 18 months to grow from matrix to 
free edge. 
 Many factors affect nail growth rate. It is 
increased in psoriasis, and may be speeded up in 
the presence of inﬂ ammatory change around the 
nail. A severe systemic upset can produce a sudden 
slowing of nail growth, causing a transverse groove 
in each nail plate. These grooves, known as Beau ’ s 
lines, subsequently become visible as the nails grow 
out. Nail growth may also be considerably slowed 
in the digits of a limb immobilized in plaster.    
 The  d ermis 
 The dermis is a layer of connective tissue lying 
beneath the epidermis, and forms the bulk of the 
skin. The dermis and epidermis interdigitate via 
downward epidermal projections (rete ridges) and 
upward dermal projections (dermal papillae) (see 
Figures  1.1  and  1.3 ). The main feature of the 
dermis is a network of interlacing ﬁ bres, mostly 
collagen, but with some elastin. These ﬁ bres give 
the dermis great strength and elasticity. The col-
lagen and elastin ﬁ bres, which are protein, are 
embedded in a ground substance of mucopoly-
saccharides (glycosaminoglycans). 
 The main cellular elements of the dermis are 
ﬁ broblasts, mast cells and macrophages. Fibrob-
lasts synthesize the connective tissue matrix of the 
dermis, and are usually found in close proximity 
 Figure 1.7   Dermatoglyphics: (a) arch; 
(b) loop; (c) whorl.  
(a)
(b)
(c)

8  Structure and function of the skin, hair and nails
of sebum, its constituents after puberty having 
fungistatic activity. 
 The skin is an immunologically competent 
organ and plays an important part in host 
defence against  ‘ foreign ’ material. The dendritic 
Langerhans ’  cells are antigen - presenting cells that 
take up antigens, process them, and migrate to 
regional lymph nodes where the antigens, in asso-
ciation with major histocompatibility (MHC) class 
II, are presented to receptors on T cells. A na ï ve 
T cell that interacts with an antigen proliferates 
to form a clone that will recognize the antigen 
if re - exposed to it. Such primed (memory) T 
cells circulate around the body. If the antigen is 
encountered again the primed T cells are acti-
vated, and secrete cytokines that cause lym-
phocytes, polymorphonuclear leucocytes and 
monocytes to move into the area, thereby causing 
inﬂ ammation. This mechanism also forms the 
basis of the inﬂ ammatory reaction in allergic 
contact dermatitis. 
 Cytokines are polypeptides and glycoproteins 
secreted by cells (e.g. lymphocytes, macrophages 
and keratinocytes). They include interleukins, 
interferons (INFs), tumour necrosis factor (TNF), 
colony - stimulating factors and growth factors. 
Their main role is to regulate inﬂ ammatory and 
immune responses. 
 Although detailed discussion of immunology 
and inﬂ ammation is beyond the scope of this book 
it is important for you to understand some of the 
basic mechanisms involved for a variety of reasons, 
not least because such knowledge is necessary in 
order to comprehend the modes of action of the 
increasingly 
sophisticated 
treatments 
being 
developed, e.g. biological therapies, which are 
being used to treat psoriasis (see Chapter  8 ) by 
targeting components of its pathomechanism (see 
Chapter  22 ). 
 The protective effect of melanin against UV 
damage has already been mentioned, but in addi-
tion to this there is an important system of 
enzymes responsible for repair of UV - damaged 
DNA. Such damage occurs continuously and the 
consequences of a non - functioning repair system 
can be seen in the recessively inherited disorder 
xeroderma pigmentosum (XP). In XP, cumulative 
UV damage leads to development of skin neopla-
sia in childhood. 
 The skin is a vital part of the body ’ s temperature 
regulation system. The body core temperature is 
regulated by a temperature - sensitive area in the 
hypothalamus, and this is inﬂ uenced by the tem-
 Functions of the  s kin 
   Skin is like wax paper that holds everything in 
without dripping. 
 Art Linkletter, A Child ’ s Garden of 
Misinformation, 1965 
 It is obvious from the complex structure of the 
skin that it is not there simply to hold all the other 
bits of the body together. Some of the functions of 
skin are as shown in the box. 
  
 Skin  f unctions 
  •    Prevents loss of essential body ﬂ uids  
  •    Protects against entry of toxic environmental 
chemicals and microorganisms  
  •    Immunological functions  
  •    Protects against damage from UV radiation  
  •    Regulates body temperature  
  •    Synthesis of vitamin D  
  •    Important in sexual attraction and social 
interaction  
 In the absence of a stratum corneum we would 
lose signiﬁ cant amounts of water to the environ-
ment, and rapidly become dehydrated. The 
stratum corneum, with its overlapping cells and 
intercellular lipid, blocks diffusion of water into 
the environment. If it is removed by stripping with 
tape, water loss to the environment increases 10 -
 fold or more. 
 It is also quite an effective barrier to the pene-
tration of external agents. However, this barrier 
capacity is considerably reduced if the stratum 
corneum is hydrated, or its lipid content is reduced 
by the use of lipid solvents. The structural integrity 
of the stratum corneum also protects against inva-
sion by microorganisms, and when there is skin 
loss, e.g. in burns or toxic epidermal necrolysis, 
infection is a major problem. Other factors, such 
as the acid pH of sweat and sebaceous secretions, 
antimicrobial peptides (AMPs), known as  defensins 
and  cathelcidins , that kill a variety of microbes, 
and complement components all contribute to 
antibacterial activity. The rarity of fungal infection 
of the scalp in adults is thought to be related to 
changes at puberty in the fatty acid composition 

Structure and function of the skin, hair and nails  9
perature of the blood that perfuses it. The response 
of the skin to cold is vasoconstriction and a marked 
reduction in blood ﬂ ow, decreasing transfer of 
heat to the body surface. The response to heat is 
vasodilatation, an increase in skin blood ﬂ ow and 
loss of heat to the environment. Perspiration helps 
to cool the body by evaporation of sweat. These 
thermoregulatory functions are impaired in 
certain skin diseases — patients with exfoliative 
dermatitis (erythroderma) radiate heat to their 
environment because their skin blood ﬂ ow is con-
siderably increased and they are unable to control 
this by vasoconstriction. In a cold environment 
their central core temperature drops, in spite of 
producing metabolic heat by shivering, and they 
may die of hypothermia. 
 Vitamin D (cholecalciferol) is produced in the 
skin by the action of UV light on dehydrocho-
lesterol. In those whose diets are deﬁ cient in 
vitamin D this extra source of the vitamin can be 
important. 
 The skin is also a huge sensory receptor, per-
ceiving heat, cold, pain, light touch and pressure, 
and even tickle. As you are probably still grappling 
with the conundrum of the biological signiﬁ cance 
of hairy ears in elderly men, try switching your 
thoughts to the beneﬁ ts of tickly armpits! 
 In addition to all these mechanistic functions, 
the skin plays an essential aesthetic role in social 
interaction and sexual attraction. 
 Hence, you can see that your skin is doing a 
good job. Apart from looking pleasant, it is saving 
you from becoming a cold, UV - damaged, brittle -
 boned, desiccated  ‘ prune ’ . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

10  Approach to the diagnosis of dermatological disease
 2 
Approach to the 
 d iagnosis of 
 d ermatological  d isease  
 Baglivi has said,  ‘ The patient is the doctor ’ s best 
text - book ’ . That  ‘ text - book ’ , however, has to be 
introduced to the student and those who effect 
the introductions are not always wise. 
 Dannie Abse,  Doctors and Patients 
 The dermatologist ’ s art is giving a disease a long 
Greek name  …  and then a topical steroid. 
 Anon 
 Introduction 
 Dermatology is essentially a specialty where clini-
cal information is at the forefront of the diagnostic 
process, and it is important for any aspiring clini-
cian to realize that, before prescribing treatment 
or offering prognostic information about a 
patient ’ s problem, he or she must ﬁ rst make a 
diagnosis. This chapter is about reaching a diag-
nosis in a patient with a skin disorder. 
 The  v alue of a  d iagnosis 
 The facts on which a clinician makes a diagnosis 
 must  always come ﬁ rst and foremost from the 
patient, and there is no substitute for talking to 
and examining patients. This is especially true of 
skin disease. 
 A diagnosis is a short statement about a disease 
state or condition. 
  
 Dermatological  d iagnosis 
 That which we call a rose, 
 by any other name would smell as sweet 
 Shakespeare,  Romeo and Juliet 
 Aspiring dermatologists must begin by becoming 
familiar with the diagnostic labels used in the 
description and classiﬁ cation of skin disease. This 
can seem daunting, but remember that diagnostic 
 Diagnosis 
  •    Provides a working label that will be recognized 
by others  
  •    Implies some commonality with other patients 
with the same disease state or condition: in 
aetiology; pathology; clinical features; 
responsiveness to treatment  
  •    Offers a prognosis and information about 
contagion or heredity  
  •    Gives access to treatment modalities  
Lecture Notes: Dermatology, 10th edition. © RAC Graham-Brown 
and DA Burns. Published 2011 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Approach to the diagnosis of dermatological disease  11
before. You will soon get used to assessing and 
quantifying these. For example, a severe itch will 
keep patients awake or stop them from concen-
trating at work or school. 
 Patients ’   l anguage 
 Be careful about terms that patients use to describe 
their skin problems. In Leicestershire, where the 
authors work, weals are often called  ‘ blisters ’  and 
it is easy to be misled. Always ask the patient to 
describe precisely what he or she means by a spe-
ciﬁ c term. 
 Quality of  l ife 
 It may be very helpful to assess the impact of the 
problem on the patient ’ s normal daily activities 
and self - image: work, school, sleep, self - conﬁ dence, 
personal relationships. An understanding of the 
effect of skin disease on friends and family is 
important too.  
labels in medicine are bound by convention and 
rooted in history: the nomenclature of disease, 
and its signs and symptoms, has emerged from 
hundreds of years of classiﬁ cation and categoriza-
tion. There is nothing special about dermatology, 
except perhaps in the degree to which subtle clini-
cal variations are afforded separate names. The 
fact that diagnostic terms often bear no relation-
ship to modern thinking is not of itself important. 
An apple is still an apple, even if we don ’ t know 
who ﬁ rst called it that or why! 
 Therefore, as in any other branch of medicine, 
the diagnostic terminology in dermatology has to 
be learned. This may take time, but is not as hard 
as it may at ﬁ rst seem. In the same way that 
someone moving to a foreign country has to 
become used to a new vocabulary, the dermato-
logical tyro who pays attention rapidly becomes 
acquainted with the more common skin changes 
and the diseases that cause them (e.g. eczema, 
psoriasis or warts). In time, he or she will also 
begin to recognize rarer disorders and less  ‘ classic ’ 
variants of more common ones. However, this 
remains a dynamic process that involves seeing, 
reading, asking and learning — always with the 
eyes, ears and mind open! 
 The  s teps to  m aking a 
 d ermatological  d iagnosis 
 In principle, there is nothing more difﬁ cult about 
diagnosing diseases of the skin than those of any 
other organ. The process of identiﬁ cation consists 
of taking a history, examining the patient and per-
forming investigations where necessary. In prac-
tice, many dermatologists will ask questions  after 
a quick look to assess the problem, and also during 
the formal examination. However, we should con-
sider the elements of the process separately.    
 A dermatological history contains most of the 
questions that you will be used to asking: onset 
and duration, ﬂ uctuation, exacerbating or amelio-
rating factors, nature of symptoms, past history. 
There are some differences, however, that are 
largely in the emphasis placed on certain aspects, 
shown above. 
 There are also speciﬁ c features of dermatologi-
cal histories to watch out for. 
 Symptoms 
 Patients with skin disease talk about symptoms, 
especially itching, which you may not have met 
 Dermatological  h istory 
 Past history  
 Should include: 
  •    General health problems, such as diabetes and 
TB  
  •    Past skin problems  
  •    Signiﬁ cant allergies or intolerances  
 Family history  
  •    Some disorders are infectious; others have 
strong genetic backgrounds  
 Occupation and hobbies  
  •    The skin is frequently affected by materials 
encountered at work and in the home  
 Therapy  
  •    Not only  systemic  medication but also  topical  
remedies; many patients apply multiple creams, 
lotions and ointments; topicals may be 
prescribed medicines, or self - administered, with 
or without advice from others (patients nearly 
always forget the names)  
 BUT 
  •    Topical applications  may also be part of a 
 ‘ cosmetic ’  regimen  

12  Approach to the diagnosis of dermatological disease
 Patient  p reconceptions 
 Patients often have their own ideas about the 
cause of skin problems and will readily offer 
them! For example, washing powder or detergent 
is almost universally considered to be a major 
cause of rashes, and injuries to be triggers of skin 
tumours. Never ignore what you are told, but take 
care to sieve the information in the light of your 
ﬁ ndings. 
 Watch out, too, for the very high expectations of 
many patients. They know that visible evidence 
is there for all to see: dermatology often truly 
requires a  ‘ spot ’ diagnosis! Everyone from the 
 Dermatological  a ssessment 
 1   Site(s) and/or distribution:  this can be very 
helpful, e.g. psoriasis has a predilection for knees, 
elbows, scalp and lower back; eczema favours the 
ﬂ exures in children; acne occurs predominantly on 
the face and upper trunk; basal cell carcinomas 
are more common on the head and neck  
 2   Characteristics of individual lesion(s):  
  •    The type:  some simple preliminary reading is 
essential; use Table  2.1 for the most common 
and important terms and their deﬁ nitions  
  •    The size:  size is best  measured , rather than 
being a comparison with peas, oranges or 
coins of the realm  
  •    The shape:  lesions may be various shapes, 
e.g. round, oval, annular, linear or  ‘ irregular ’ ; 
straight edges and angles may suggest 
external factors  
  •    The outline and border:  the outline is 
irregular in a superﬁ cial spreading melanoma, 
but smooth in most benign lesions; the border 
is well deﬁ ned in psoriasis, but blurred in most 
patches of eczema  
  •    The colour:  it is always useful to note 
the colour: red, purple, brown, slate - black, 
etc. 
  •    Surface features  (Table  2.1 ): it is helpful 
to assess whether the surface is smooth 
or rough, and to distinguish crust (dried 
serum) from scale (hyperkeratosis); some 
assessment of scale can be helpful, e.g. 
 ‘ silvery ’  in psoriasis  
  •    The texture  — superﬁ cial? deep?  Use your 
ﬁ ngertips on the surface; assess the depth and 
position in or beneath the skin; lift scale or 
crust to see what is underneath; try to make 
the lesion blanch with pressure  
 3   Secondary sites:  look for additional features that 
may assist in diagnosis. Good examples of this 
include: 
  •    The nails in psoriasis  
  •    The ﬁ ngers and wrists in scabies  
  •    The toe webs in fungal infections 
  •    The mouth in lichen planus  
 4   ‘ Special ’  techniques:  these are covered in the 
appropriate chapters, but there are some tricks, 
e.g. 
  •    Scraping a psoriatic plaque for capillary 
bleeding 
  •    The Nikolsky sign in blistering diseases 
  •    ‘ Diascopy ’  in suspected cutaneous tuberculosis  
  •    ‘ Dermatoscopy ’ , especially for pigmented 
lesions 
 It is fair to say that in inﬂ ammatory dermatoses a 
complication is having to decide  which lesion or 
lesions to select  for assessment and analysis. Skin 
diseases are dynamic. Some lesions in any rash will 
be very early, some very late and some at various 
intermediate evolutionary stages. 
 Try to examine as many patients as you can: 
frequent exposure to skin diseases helps you to 
develop an ability to recognize those lesions that 
provide the most useful diagnostic information. 
 The diagnostic process will gradually become one 
that you will perform increasingly easily and 
conﬁ dently as experience develops. 
patient and his or her relatives to the local green-
grocer can see the problem and express their 
opinion (and usually have).  
 Examination 
 The next step is to examine the patient. Wise 
counsels maintain that you should  always examine 
a patient from head to foot. In reality this can be 
hard on both patient and doctor, especially if the 
problem is a solitary wart on the thumb! However, 
as a general rule, and especially with inﬂ amma-
tory dermatoses and conditions with several 
lesions, you should have an overall look at the sites 

Approach to the diagnosis of dermatological disease  13
 Table 2.1   Types and characteristics of lesions (see Figure  2.1 ) 
 Lesion characteristics  
  •    Macule: a ﬂ at, circumscribed area of skin discoloration  
  •    Papule: a circumscribed elevation of the skin  < 0.5   cm in diameter  
  •    Nodule: a circumscribed visible or palpable lump,  > 0.5   cm  
  •    Plaque: a circumscribed, disc - shaped, elevated area of skin:  
 ‘ small ’ < 2  cm in diameter  
 ‘ large ’ > 2  cm in diameter  
  •    Vesicle: a small visible collection of ﬂ uid ( ≤ 0.5   cm in diameter)  
  •    Bulla: a large visible collection of ﬂ uid ( ≥ 0.5   cm)  
  •    Pustule: a visible accumulation of pus  
  •    Ulcer: a loss of epidermis (often with loss of underlying dermis and subcutis as well)  
  •    Weal: a circumscribed, elevated area of cutaneous oedema  
 Surface characteristics  
  •    Scale: visible and palpable ﬂ akes due to aggregation and/or abnormalities of shed epidermal cells  
  •    Crust: accumulated dried exudate, e.g. serum  
  •    Horn: an elevated projection of keratin  
  •    Excoriation: a secondary, superﬁ cial ulceration, due to scratching  
  •    Maceration: an appearance of surface softening due to constant wetting  
  •    Licheniﬁ cation: a ﬂ at - topped thickening of the skin often secondary to scratching  
involved. You may also ﬁ nd the unexpected, such 
as melanomas and other skin cancers. 
 Inspect  and palpate  the lesion(s) or rash. It may 
help to use a magnifying hand lens or a dermato-
scope, especially for pigmented lesions. 
 The fundamental elements of a good dermato-
logical examination are: 
 1  Site and/or distribution of the problem  
 2  Characteristics of individual lesion(s) 
 3  Examination of  ‘ secondary ’ sites 
 4  ‘ Special ’ techniques 
 Unfortunately, names and terms can appear to get 
in the way of learning in dermatology. Indeed this 
is one reason why many clinicians claim that der-
matology is a mysterious and impenetrable mix-
ture of mumbo - jumbo and strange potions. There 
is really no need for this: the terms in use have 
developed for good reasons. They provide a degree 
of precision and a framework for diagnosis and 
decision - making. Try to familiarize yourself with 
them and apply them correctly. They will provide 
the building blocks to go on and make dermato-
logical diagnoses more easily and more accu-
rately. So, in the early days, describe everything 
that you see in these terms as far as possible.      
 Investigation 
 Inevitably, history and examination alone will not 
always provide all the information required to 
produce a satisfactory working diagnosis. There 
are some skin disorders in which further investi-
gation is nearly always necessary: to conﬁ rm a 
diagnosis with important prognostic or therapeu-
tic implications (e.g. blistering disorders), to plan 
optimal management or to seek an underlying, 
associated systemic disorder (e.g. in generalized 
pruritus). These situations are covered later in the 
appropriate chapters. Advances in modern genet-
ics, too, mean that blood (or other tissues) can be 
analysed for evidence of speciﬁ c defects. 
 A number of important techniques are avail-
able that can provide further information. Some 
of these, such as appropriate blood tests and 
swabs for bacteriology and virology, should be 
familiar from other branches of medicine, and are 
fully covered in other introductory textbooks. 

14  Approach to the diagnosis of dermatological disease
(e)
(c)
(d)
(b)
(a)
 Figure 2.1   Lesion characteristics: (a) macule (pityriasis versicolor); (b) papule (molluscum contagiosum); (c) nodule 
(nodular prurigo); (d) plaque (psoriasis); (e) vesicle (herpes zoster); (f) bulla (bullous insect bite reaction); (g) pustule; 
(h) ulcer (venous ulcer); (i) weal (urticaria/dermographism).  
Others, however, are more speciﬁ c to dermato-
logical investigation. Useful tests include the 
following: 
  •   Blood tests: for underlying systemic 
abnormalities and, increasingly, for genetic 
analysis  
  •   Swabs and other samples: for infections  
  •   Wood ’ s light: some disorders/features are 
easier to see  
  •   Skin scrapes or nail clippings: microscopy and 
mycological culture 
  •   Skin biopsy: histopathology; electron 
microscopy; immunopathology; DNA 
phenotyping  
  •   Prick tests: occasionally helpful in elucidating 
type I allergies (they have little or no place in 
the investigation of eczema)  
  •   Patch tests: for evidence of contact allergy 

Approach to the diagnosis of dermatological disease  15
 Scrapings/ c lippings 
 Material from the skin, hair or nails can be exam-
ined directly under the microscope and/or sent 
for culture. This is particularly useful in suspected 
fungal infection, or in a search for scabies mites 
(see Chapters  4  and  5 ). Scraping lightly at the epi-
dermis will lift scales from the surface of the suspi-
cious area. 
 The scales are placed on a microscope slide, 
covered with 10% potassium hydroxide (KOH) and 
a coverslip. After a few minutes to dissolve some of 
the epidermal cell membranes, they can be exam-
ined. It is helpful to add some Parker Quink ink 
if an infection with  Malassezia ( Pityrosporum ) 
species (the cause of pityriasis versicolor) is 
 Wood ’ s  l ight 
 This is a nickel oxide - ﬁ ltered UV light source, used 
to highlight three features of skin disease: 
 1  Certain organisms that cause scalp ringworm 
produce green ﬂ uorescence (useful in initial 
diagnosis and helpful in assessing therapy)  
 2  The organism responsible for erythrasma 
ﬂ uoresces coral - pink 
 3  Some pigmentary disorders are more clearly 
visible in this light — particularly the pale patches 
of tuberous sclerosis and caf é - au - lait marks of 
neuroﬁ bromatosis 
 Wood ’ s light can also be used to induce ﬂ uores-
cence in the urine in some of the porphyrias.  
(f)
(h)
(i)
(g)
Figure 2.1 Continued

16  Approach to the diagnosis of dermatological disease
notyping of speciﬁ c cells or for viral DNA. For 
immunopathology the skin is usually snap fro-
zen. For electron microscopy, skin is best ﬁ xed 
in glutaraldehyde. 
 Always check the details with the laboratory 
before you start. 
 Incisional/ e xcisional  b iopsy 
 This provides good - sized samples (which can be 
divided for different purposes if required) and can 
be used to remove quite large lesions (see Figures 
 2.2 and  2.3 ). 
 1  Administer local anaesthetic:   1 – 2% lidocaine 
is usual; addition of 1  :  10  000 adrenaline 
(epinephrine) helps reduce bleeding, but never 
use on ﬁ ngers and toes 
 2  For incisional (diagnostic) biopsy:   make two 
cuts, forming an ellipse; ensure that the 
specimen is taken across the edge of the 
lesion, retaining a margin of normal 
perilesional skin (Figure  2.2 a) 
 3  For complete excision:    widen the ellipse around 
the whole lesion (Figure  2.2 b); ensure that the 
excision edge is cut vertically and  does not 
slant in towards the tumour, which can result 
in inadequate deeper excision (Figure  2.4 )  
 4  Repair the defect:   edges left by either 
incisional or excisional biopsy are brought 
neatly together with sutures; the choice of 
suture material is not critical, but for the best 
cosmetic result use the ﬁ nest possible, 
preferably a synthetic monoﬁ lament suture 
(e.g. Prolene) 
suspected. Nail clippings can also be treated this 
way, but need stronger solutions of KOH or longer 
to dissolve. 
 Microscopy of hair may also provide informa-
tion about fungal infections, reveal structural hair 
shaft abnormalities in certain genetic disorders 
and be useful in distinguishing some causes of 
excessive hair loss (see Chapter  13 ). 
 Scrape/smear preparations are also used as a 
diagnostic aid by some dermatologists for the cyto-
diagnosis of suspected viral blisters and pemphi-
gus, using a  ‘ Tzanck preparation ’ , which enables 
material to be examined directly in the clinic.  
 Skin  b iopsy 
 Skin biopsy is a very important technique in the 
diagnosis of many skin disorders. In some, it is 
critical to have conﬁ rmation of a clinical diagnosis 
before embarking on treatment. Good examples 
of this are skin cancers, bullous disorders, and 
infections such as tuberculosis and leprosy. In 
others it is necessary to take a biopsy because 
clinical information alone has not provided all the 
answers. 
 There are two methods commonly used to 
obtain a skin sample for laboratory examination: 
 1  Incisional/excisional biopsy 
 2  Punch biopsy 
 Specimens obtained by either technique may be 
sent for conventional histopathology — normally 
ﬁ xed immediately in formol – saline — and/or other 
specialized examinations, e.g. for DNA phe-
 Figure 2.2   The technique for 
incisional (a) and (b) excisional biopsy.  
(a)
(b)
Normal
Incision
Abnormal

Approach to the diagnosis of dermatological disease  17
 Figure 2.3   Equipment needed for an 
incisional/excisional biopsy: sterile 
towel; gauze squares; cotton - wool 
balls; galley pot containing antiseptic; 
needle; cartridge of lidocaine and 
dental syringe; scalpel; skin hook; 
scissors; small artery forceps; needle 
holder and suture; ﬁ ne - toothed 
forceps; needle and syringe 
(alternative to dental syringe).  
 Figure 2.4   Excisional biopsy: the correct ( ✓ ) and 
incorrect ( ✗ ) excision edge.  
 Figure 2.5   The technique for a 
punch biopsy.  
(a)
(b)
(c)
10
 Note:  if there will be signiﬁ cant tension on the 
suture line, consider asking a trained plastic or 
dermatological surgeon for advice.  
 Punch  b iopsy 
 This is much quicker, but produces small sam-
ples (usually 4 or 6   mm in diameter) and is appro-
priate only for diagnostic biopsies or removing 
tiny lesions (Figure  2.5 a – c): 
 1  Administer local anaesthesia (see above) 
 2  Push the punch biopsy blade into the lesion 
using a circular motion  
 3  Lift out the small plug, and separate with 
scissors or a scalpel blade  
 4  Achieve haemostasis with silver nitrate, 
cautery or a small suture 
 Patch  t ests 
 If a contact allergic dermatitis is suspected, a 
patch test is performed. In this process possible 
allergens are usually diluted in suitable vehicles. 
The test materials are placed in small discs in 
contact with the skin (usually on the back) for 48   h 
(Figure  2.6 a). A positive reaction (at 48  h, or occa-
sionally later) conﬁ rms a delayed hypersensitivity 
(type IV) reaction to the offending substance 
(Figure  2.6 b). 

18  Approach to the diagnosis of dermatological disease
 Figure 2.6   Patch testing: (a) metal cups containing allergens; (b) positive patch test reactions.  
(a)
(b)
 This technique can be extended to include 
testing for photoallergy. 
 Conclusion 
 You are now ready to start examining and talking 
to patients with skin disease. Attend some derma-
tology clinics and put these principles into prac-
tice. When seeing patients, try to retain a mental 
picture of their skin lesions. Ask the dermatologist 
in charge what the diagnosis is in each instance, 
and make sure that you read a little about each 
entity when the clinic is over. 
 The remaining chapters of this book are 
designed to help you to make speciﬁ c diagnoses, 
to provide your patients with information about 
their problems and to assist you in choosing 
appropriate treatment. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 3 
Bacterial and 
 v iral  i nfections  
 A mighty creature is the germ 
 Though smaller than the pachyderm 
 His customary dwelling place 
 Is deep within the human race 
 His childish pride he often pleases 
 By giving people strange diseases 
 Do you, my poppet, feel inﬁ rm? 
 You probably contain a germ 
 Ogden Nash,  The Germ 
 Bacterial infections 
 Streptococcal infection 
 Cellulitis 
 Cellulitis is a bacterial infection of subcutaneous 
tissues that, in immunologically normal individu-
als, is usually caused by  Streptococcus pyogenes . 
 ‘ Erysipelas ’  is a term applied to superﬁ cial strep-
tococcal cellulitis that has a well - demarcated 
edge. Occasionally, other bacteria are implicated 
in cellulitis —  Haemophilus inﬂ uenzae  is an impor-
tant cause of facial cellulitis in children, often in 
association with ipsilateral otitis media. In immu-
nocompromised individuals, a variety of bacteria 
may be responsible for cellulitis. 
 Cellulitis frequently occurs on the legs, but 
other parts of the body may be affected — the face 
is a common site for erysipelas. The organisms 
may gain entry into the skin via minor abrasions, 
or ﬁ ssures between the toes associated with tinea 
pedis, and leg ulcers provide a portal of entry 
in many cases. A frequent predisposing factor 
is oedema of the legs, and cellulitis is a common 
condition in elderly people, who often have leg 
oedema of cardiac, venous or lymphatic origin. 
 The affected area becomes red, hot and swollen 
(Figure  3.1 ), and blister formation and areas of 
skin necrosis may occur. The patient is pyrexial 
and feels unwell. Rigors may occur and, in elderly 
people, a toxic confusional state. 
 In presumed streptococcal cellulitis penicillin is 
the treatment of choice, initially given as ben-
zylpenicillin intravenously. If the leg is affected, 
bed rest is an important aspect of treatment. 
Where there is extensive tissue necrosis, surgical 
debridement may be necessary. 
 A particularly severe, deep form of cellulitis, 
involving fascia and muscles, is known as  ‘ necro-
tizing fasciitis ’ . This disorder achieved notoriety 
a few years ago when it attracted the attention 
of the UK media and was described as being 
caused by a  ‘ ﬂ esh - eating virus ’ . It is associated 
with extensive tissue necrosis and severe toxae-
mia, and is rapidly fatal unless urgent treat-
ment, including excision of the affected area, is 
undertaken. 
Lecture Notes: Dermatology, 10th edition. © RAC Graham-Brown 
and DA Burns. Published 2011 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

20  Bacterial and viral infections 
ops at the site of infection, and over a period of a 
few days becomes ﬂ uctuant and  ‘ points ’ as a 
central pustule. Once the necrotic central core has 
been discharged, the lesion gradually resolves. In 
some patients boils are a recurrent problem, but 
this is rarely associated with a signiﬁ cant underly-
ing disorder. Such individuals may be nasal or 
perineal carriers of staphylococci, and organisms 
are transferred on the digits to various parts of the 
body. 
 Patients suffering from recurrent boils should 
have swabs taken from the nose for culture, and if 
found to be carrying staphylococci should be 
treated with a topical antibacterial such as mupi-
rocin, applied to the nostrils. They may also be 
helped by an antibacterial bath additive, e.g. 2% 
triclosan, and a prolonged course of ﬂ ucloxacillin.  
 Carbuncle 
 A carbuncle is a deep infection of a group of 
adjacent hair follicles with  S. aureus . A frequent 
site for a carbuncle is the nape of the neck. Initially, 
the lesion is a dome - shaped area of tender ery-
thema, but after a few days suppuration begins, 
and pus is discharged from multiple follicular 
oriﬁ ces. Carbuncles are usually encountered in 
middle - aged and elderly men, and are associ-
ated with diabetes and debility. They are uncom-
mon nowadays. Flucloxacillin should be given for 
treatment. 
 Impetigo 
 This is a contagious superﬁ cial infection that 
occurs in two clinical forms: non - bullous and 
bullous. Non - bullous impetigo is caused by  S. 
aureus , streptococci or both organisms together. 
The streptococcal form predominates in warm, 
humid climates, e.g. the southern USA. Bullous 
impetigo is caused by  S. aureus . Lesions may 
occur anywhere on the body. In the non - bullous 
form the initial lesion is a small pustule that 
ruptures to leave an extending area of exuda-
tion and crusting (Figure  3.2 ). The crusts eventu-
ally separate to leave areas of erythema, which 
fade without scarring. In the bullous form, large 
superﬁ cial blisters develop. When these rup-
ture there is exudation and crusting, and the 
stratum corneum peels back at the edges of the 
lesions. 
 Streptococcal impetigo may be associated with 
poststreptococcal acute glomerulonephritis. 
 Some patients have recurrent episodes of cel-
lulitis, each episode damaging lymphatics and 
leading to further oedema. These cases should 
be treated with prophylactic oral phenoxymeth-
ylpenicillin (penicillin V) or erythromycin, to pre-
vent further episodes. 
 Staphylococcal infection 
 Folliculitis 
 Infection of the superﬁ cial part of a hair follicle 
with  Staphylococcus aureus  produces a small 
pustule on an erythematous base, centred on the 
follicle. 
 Mild folliculitis can be treated with a topical 
antibacterial agent, but if it is extensive a systemic 
antibiotic may be required.  
 Furunculosis ( ‘ boils ’ ) 
 A boil (furuncle) is the result of deep infection of 
a hair follicle by  S. aureus . A painful abscess devel-
 Figure 3.1   Cellulitis.  

Bacterial and viral infections  21
 Impetigo may occur as a secondary phenome-
non in atopic eczema, scabies and head louse 
infection. 
 In localized infection, treatment with a topical 
antibiotic such as mupirocin will sufﬁ ce, but in 
more extensive infection treatment with a sys-
temic antibiotic such as ﬂ ucloxacillin or erythro-
mycin is indicated.  
 Staphylococcal scalded 
skin syndrome 
 This uncommon condition occurs as a result of 
infection with certain staphylococcal phage types 
that produce a toxin, which splits the epidermis at 
the level of the granular layer. The superﬁ cial epi-
dermis peels off in sheets, producing an appear-
ance resembling scalded skin. Infants and young 
children are usually affected. It responds to 
parenteral therapy with ﬂ ucloxacillin. 
 Erythrasma 
 Caused by a Gram - positive organism,  Corynebac-
terium minutissimum , erythrasma occurs in inter-
triginous areas — axillae, groins and submammary 
regions. However, the most common site colo-
nized by this organism is the toe - web spaces, 
where it produces a macerated scaling appear-
ance identical to that caused by fungal infection. 
In other sites it produces marginated brown areas 
with a ﬁ ne, branny, surface scale (Figure  3.3 ). It is 
usually asymptomatic.  Corynebacterium minutis-
simum  produces a porphyrin that ﬂ uoresces a 
striking coral - pink under Wood ’ s light. 
 Figure 3.2   Impetigo.  
 Figure 3.3   Erythrasma.  

22  Bacterial and viral infections 
 Histology shows tubercles composed of epithe-
lioid cells and Langhans ’  giant cells, usually 
without central caseation. Tubercle bacilli are 
sparse. The tuberculin test is strongly positive. 
The patient should be investigated for an underly-
ing focus of TB in other organs, but this is found 
only in a small proportion of cases. 
 Treatment should be with standard antituber-
culous chemotherapy. 
 There is a risk of the development of squamous 
cell carcinoma in the scar tissue of longstanding 
lupus vulgaris.  
 Warty tuberculosis 
 This occurs as a result of direct inoculation of 
tubercle bacilli into the skin of someone previ-
ously infected, who has a high degree of immu-
nity. It may develop on the buttocks and thighs as 
a result of sitting on ground contaminated by 
infected sputum. The clinical appearance is of a 
warty plaque. It responds to standard antituber-
culous chemotherapy.  
 Tuberculides 
 This term is applied to skin lesions that occur in 
response to TB elsewhere in the body. They are 
probably the result of haematogenous dissemina-
tion of bacilli in individuals with a moderate or 
high degree of immunity. 
 Included in this group are erythema induratum 
(Bazin ’ s disease), papulonecrotic tuberculide and 
lichen scrofulosorum. 
 Erythrasma may be treated with topical imida-
zoles (e.g. clotrimazole, miconazole), topical fusidic 
acid or a 2 - week course of oral erythromycin.   
 Mycobacterial infection 
 Cutaneous tuberculosis 
 Cutaneous tuberculosis (TB) is now uncommon in 
Europe and the USA, but may be encountered in 
immigrants from other parts of the world where 
TB remains problematic.  
 Scrofuloderma 
 Scrofuloderma results from involvement of the 
skin overlying a tuberculous focus, usually a 
lymph node, most commonly in the neck. The 
clinical appearance is of multiple ﬁ stulae and 
dense scar tissue.  
 Lupus vulgaris 
 The majority of lesions of lupus vulgaris occur on 
the head and neck. The typical appearance is of a 
reddish - brown, nodular plaque (Figure  3.4 ). When 
pressed with a glass slide (diascopy), the brown 
nodules, which are referred to as  ‘ apple jelly ’  
nodules, are more easily seen. The natural course 
is gradual peripheral extension, and in many cases 
this is extremely slow, over a period of years. 
Lupus vulgaris is a destructive process, and the 
cartilage of the nose and ears may be severely 
damaged.   
 Figure 3.4   Lupus vulgaris on the chin.  

Bacterial and viral infections  23
incubation period is lengthy, probably several 
years, and it is likely that most patients acquire the 
infection in childhood. A low incidence of conju-
gal leprosy (leprosy acquired from an infected 
spouse) suggests that adults are relatively non -
 susceptible. The disease is acquired as a result of 
close physical contact with an infected person, the 
risk being much greater for contacts of leproma-
tous cases — the nasal discharges of these individ-
uals are the main source of infection in the 
community. 
 The clinical pattern of disease is determined by 
the host ’ s cell - mediated immune response to the 
organism. When this is well developed tubercu-
loid leprosy occurs, in which skin and peripheral 
nerves are affected. Skin lesions are single, or few 
in number, and are well deﬁ ned. They are macules 
or plaques that are hypopigmented in dark skin. 
The lesions are anaesthetic, sweating is absent 
and hairs are reduced in number. Thickened 
branches of cutaneous sensory nerves may be pal-
pable in the region of these lesions, and large 
peripheral nerves may also be palpable. The lep-
romin test is strongly positive. Histology shows 
well - deﬁ ned tuberculoid granulomas, and bacilli 
are not seen. The Wade – Fite stain is used to dem-
onstrate leprosy bacilli. 
 When the cell - mediated immune response is 
poor, the bacilli multiply unchecked and the 
patient develops lepromatous leprosy. The bacilli 
spread to involve not only the skin, but also the 
mucosa of the respiratory tract, the eyes, testes 
and bones. Skin lesions are multiple and nodular. 
The lepromin test is negative. Histology shows a 
 Atypical mycobacteria 
 The most common of the skin lesions produced by 
atypical mycobacteria is  ‘ swimming pool ’ or  ‘ ﬁ sh 
tank ’  granuloma. This is usually a solitary granu-
lomatous nodule, caused by inoculation of 
 Mycobacterium marinum  into the skin via an 
abrasion sustained while swimming, or in tropical 
ﬁ sh fanciers while cleaning out the aquarium —
 often after the demise of the ﬁ sh contained 
therein. Occasionally, in addition to the initial 
lesion, there are several secondary lesions in a 
linear distribution along the lines of lymphatics 
(sporotrichoid spread — because it resembles spo-
rotrichosis) (Figure  3.5 ). Most cases respond to 
treatment with minocycline or doxycycline.   
 Leprosy (Hansen ’ s disease) 
 The Norwegian Armauer Hansen discovered the 
leprosy bacillus,  Mycobacterium leprae , in 1873, 
and, if the possibility of leprosy enters into the dis-
cussion of differential diagnosis in the clinic, the 
eponymous title of this condition should always be 
used, because the fear of leprosy is so ingrained, 
even in countries where it is not endemic. 
 Leprosy has a wide distribution throughout the 
world, with most cases occurring in the tropics 
and subtropics, but population movements mean 
that the disease may be encountered anywhere. 
 Leprosy is a disease of peripheral nerves, but it 
also affects the skin, and sometimes other tissues 
such as the eyes, the mucosa of the upper respira-
tory tract, the bones and the testes. Although it is 
infectious, the degree of infectivity is low. The 
 Figure 3.5   Fish tank granuloma 
showing sporotrichoid spread.  

24  Bacterial and viral infections 
warts, and everything as you see me, otherwise I 
will never pay a farthing for it. ’  
 Oliver Cromwell to the artist Sir Peter 
Lely — origin of  ‘ warts and all ’ 
 Warts are benign epidermal neoplasms caused by 
viruses of the human papillomavirus (HPV) group. 
There are a number of different strains of HPV 
that produce different clinical types of warts. 
Warts are also known as  ‘ verrucae ’ , although the 
term  ‘ verruca ’  in popular usage is usually reserved 
for the plantar wart. 
 Common warts 
 These are raised, cauliﬂ ower - like lesions that occur 
most frequently on the hands (Figure  3.6 ). They 
are extremely common in childhood and early 
adult life. They may be scattered, grouped or per-
iungual in distribution. Common warts in chil-
dren usually resolve spontaneously. 
 Common warts are usually treated with wart 
paints or cryotherapy. Preparations containing 
salicylic acid are often quite effective, and a wart 
paint should certainly be used for at least 3 months 
before considering alternative treatment. 
 Cryotherapy with liquid nitrogen can be used 
on warts that do not respond to wart paints. A 
simple applicator of cotton wool wrapped around 
the end of an orange stick may be used. This is 
dipped in the liquid nitrogen and then applied to 
the wart until it and a narrow rim of surrounding 
skin are frozen. Alternatively, a liquid nitrogen 
cryospray may be used. This is a painful proce-
dure, and should not be inﬂ icted on children —
 however, most tiny tots will, sensibly, retreat 
under the desk protesting loudly at ﬁ rst sight of 
the nitrogen evaporating in its container. Multiple 
warts usually require more than one application, 
and the optimum interval between treatments is 
2 – 3 weeks. 
 Plantar warts 
 Plantar warts may be solitary, scattered over the 
sole of the foot, or grouped together producing 
so - called  ‘ mosaic ’ warts (Figure  3.7 ). The typical 
appearance is of a small area of thickened skin 
which, when pared away, reveals numerous small 
black dots produced by thrombosed capillaries. 
Plantar warts are frequently painful. They must be 
distinguished from calluses and corns, which 
develop in areas of friction over bony promi-
nences. Calluses are patches of uniformly thick-
diffuse granuloma throughout the dermis, and 
bacilli are present in large numbers. 
 In between these two extreme,  ‘ polar ’ forms 
of leprosy is a spectrum of disease referred to as 
borderline leprosy, the clinical and histological 
features of which reﬂ ect different degrees of cell -
 mediated response to the bacilli. There is no 
absolute diagnostic test for leprosy — the diagnosis 
is based on clinical and histological features. 
 Cases at the tuberculoid end of the leprosy 
spectrum (paucibacillary) are treated with a 
combination of monthly rifampicin and daily 
dapsone for 6 months, and those at the leproma-
tous end (multi bacillary) with monthly doses of 
rifampicin and clofazimine, and daily dapsone 
and clofazimine for 24 months. The treatment 
of leprosy may be complicated by immunologi-
cally mediated  ‘ reactional states ’ , and should be 
supervised by some one experienced in leprosy 
management. 
  
 The leprosy spectrum 
 Tuberculoid  
  •    One or two skin lesions only  
  •    Good cell - mediated immune response  
  •    Positive lepromin test  
  •    Few bacilli  
 Borderline  
  •    Scattered skin lesions  
  •    Intermediate cell - mediated immune response  
  •    Some organisms  
 Lepromatous  
  •    Extensive skin lesions and involvement of other 
organs  
  •    Poor cell - mediated immune response  
  •    Negative lepromin test  
  •    Numerous organisms  
 Viral infections 
 Warts 
 ‘ Mr Lely, I desire you would use all your skill to 
paint my picture truly like me, and not ﬂ atter me 
at all; but remark all these roughnesses, pimples, 

Bacterial and viral infections  25
 Genital warts (condylomata 
acuminata) 
 In recent years the importance of certain types 
of genital wart viruses in the aetiology of penile 
and cervical cancer has been recognized, and 
this has modiﬁ ed attitudes to what was previ-
ously considered a minor sexually transmitted 
inconvenience. It is now more appropriate that 
patients with genital warts are seen and treated in 
a department of genitourinary medicine, so that 
coexisting sexually transmitted infection may be 
detected and treated, and sexual contacts traced 
and examined.  
ened skin, and corns have a painful central plug of 
keratin that does not contain capillaries.   
 Treatment is with wart paints or cryotherapy, 
after paring down overlying keratin.  
 Plane warts 
 These are tiny, ﬂ at - topped, ﬂ esh - coloured warts 
which usually occur on the dorsa of the hands and 
the face (Figure  3.8 ). They often occur in lines due 
to inoculation of the virus into scratches and abra-
sions. Plane warts are extremely difﬁ cult to treat 
effectively, and attempts at treatment may do 
more harm than good. They will resolve spontane-
ously eventually, and are best left alone.    
 Figure 3.6   Viral warts.  
 Figure 3.7   Mosaic plantar warts.  

26  Bacterial and viral infections 
 Figure 3.9   Molluscum contagiosum.  
 Molluscum contagiosum 
 The lesions of molluscum contagiosum are caused 
by a poxvirus. They are typically pearly, pink 
papules with a central umbilication ﬁ lled with a 
keratin plug (Figure  3.9 ). The lesions may occur 
anywhere on the body, but are most common on 
the head and neck area and the trunk. They are 
frequently grouped, and may be surrounded by a 
mild eczematous reaction. They may be very 
extensive in children with atopic eczema.   
 These lesions resolve spontaneously, and in 
infants and small children are best left alone to do 
so. However, if parents of small children are 
anxious they can be advised to squeeze each 
lesion between the thumbnails to express the 
central plug — this will often speed their resolu-
tion. In older children and adults molluscum con-
tagiosum can be treated by cryotherapy.  
 Figure 3.8   Plane warts.  
 Orf 
 Orf is caused by a parapoxvirus. It is a disease of 
sheep that can be transmitted to humans. Those 
usually affected are people who bottle - feed lambs, 
and butchers and abattoir workers who handle the 
carcasses of sheep. The typical clinical picture is 
of a solitary, inﬂ ammatory papule that rapidly 
develops into a nodule of granulation tissue —
 usually on a ﬁ nger, but occasionally on the face. 
The diagnosis can be conﬁ rmed by electron micro-
scopy of smears from the granulation tissue. Orf 
lesions resolve spontaneously in 6 – 8 weeks, but 
the disease may act as a trigger for erythema 
multiforme. 
 Hand, foot and mouth disease 
 This is not related to foot and mouth disease of 
sheep and cattle, but is a harmless disease caused 
by Coxsackie virus infection, usually type A16. 
Characteristic small grey vesicles with a halo of 

Bacterial and viral infections  27
 Following a primary infection the virus settles in 
sensory ganglia, and may be triggered to produce 
recurrent lesions by a variety of stimuli. In immu-
nodeﬁ cient individuals, e.g. those who are immu-
nosuppressed after organ transplantation, or in 
association with human immunodeﬁ ciency virus 
(HIV) infection, herpes simplex infection may be 
clinically atypical and run a prolonged course.  
 Recurrent herpes simplex 
 Recurrent cold sores on the lips (herpes labia-
lis) are common. Itching and discomfort in the 
affected area precede, by a few hours, the eruption 
of a group of small vesicles. The vesicle contents 
subsequently become cloudy, and then crusting 
occurs, before resolution in about 10 days. The 
trigger for these episodes is often fever, but expo-
sure to strong sunlight and menstruation are also 
recognized precipitants. Occasionally, as a result 
of inoculation of the virus into a ﬁ nger, painful 
episodes of  ‘ herpetic whitlow ’ occur. The fre-
quency of episodes of herpes simplex usually 
declines gradually with advancing age. 
 Labial herpes simplex is usually a minor cos-
metic inconvenience, and does not require treat-
ment. However, if episodes are frequent and 
troublesome, topical aciclovir may be of beneﬁ t. 
This blocks viral replication — it is not viricidal and 
is not curative.  
erythema occur on the hands and feet (Figure 
 3.10 ), and the buccal mucosa is studded with ero-
sions resembling aphthous ulcers. The condition 
resolves within 2 weeks, and no treatment is 
required. 
 Herpes simplex 
 Herpes simplex is caused by herpesvirus hominis 
(herpes simplex virus, HSV). There are two anti-
genic types: type 1 is classically associated with 
the common  ‘ cold sore ’  on the lips and face, and 
type 2 with genital herpes. However, neither has 
rigid territorial demarcation, and lesions any-
where may be caused by either antigenic type. 
 Primary herpes simplex 
 Initial contact with type 1 HSV usually occurs in 
early childhood, e.g. adults with cold sores kissing 
children, and any lesions that develop are often 
so mild that they are not noticed. Occasionally, 
however, a severe primary herpetic gingivostoma-
titis occurs, with painful erosions on the buccal 
mucosa and lips. Primary cutaneous herpes sim-
plex may also occur, and in atopic eczema this can 
be very extensive and may be life threatening (see 
below). Genital herpes may result from sexual 
transmission of type 2 HSV or orogenital transmis-
sion of type 1 HSV. 
 Physical contact during sport provides another 
means of HSV transmission — in rugby, herpes 
simplex thus acquired is known as  ‘ scrumpox ’ , 
and in wrestling as  ‘ herpes gladiatorum ’ . 
 Figure 3.10   Hand, foot and mouth 
disease: vesicles on the hand.  

28  Bacterial and viral infections 
Middle aged and elderly people are most often 
affected, but it occasionally occurs in childhood. 
It is also more frequent in immunosuppressed 
individuals. 
 Shingles usually affects a single dermatome, 
most commonly on the thorax or abdomen. The 
eruption may be preceded by pain in the region 
of the dermatome, and this occasionally leads to 
an incorrect diagnosis of internal pathology. The 
lesions consist of a unilateral band of grouped 
vesicles on an erythematous base (Figure  3.12 ). 
The contents of the vesicles are initially clear, but 
subsequently become cloudy. There may be scat-
tered outlying vesicles on the rest of the body, and 
these tend to be more numerous in elderly people. 
However, numerous outlying vesicles (dissemi-
nated zoster) are also seen in immunosuppressed 
individuals, and their presence should prompt 
further investigation of the patient. After a few 
days the vesicles dry up and form crusts, and in 
most cases the eruption resolves within 2 weeks. 
In elderly people, shingles can produce quite 
severe erosive changes that take considerably 
longer to heal. Even in milder cases there is usually 
some residual scarring. 
 The most troublesome aspect of shingles is the 
persistence of pain after the lesions have healed 
(postherpetic neuralgia). This may be severe, and 
is particularly distressing for elderly people. 
 Sacral zoster 
 Involvement of the sacral segments may cause 
acute retention of urine in association with the 
rash. 
 Herpes simplex and 
erythema multiforme 
 Recurrent herpes simplex can trigger erythema 
multiforme. Prophylactic oral aciclovir may be of 
considerable beneﬁ t in the management of severe 
cases. 
 Eczema herpeticum (Kaposi ’ s 
varicelliform eruption) 
 This is a widespread herpes simplex infection that 
occurs in atopic eczema. The head and neck are 
frequently affected (Figure  3.11 ), but lesions may 
spread rapidly to involve extensive areas of skin. 
Lymphadenopathy and constitutional upset may 
occur. If the disease is limited in distribution and 
the patient is seen early in its course, oral aciclovir 
therapy is appropriate. However, if the lesions are 
extensive, and the patient is unwell, they should 
be admitted to hospital and treated with intrave-
nous aciclovir. If the patient is using topical steroid 
therapy to treat the eczema, this should be stopped 
until the herpes has resolved. Eczema herpeticum 
may recur, but in many cases subsequent epi-
sodes tend to be less severe. 
 Herpes zoster (shingles) 
 Chickenpox and herpes zoster are both caused by 
the varicella - zoster virus.  ‘ Shingles ’ is a distortion 
of the Latin  cingulum , meaning a girdle. 
 Following an attack of chickenpox the virus 
remains dormant in dorsal root ganglia until 
some stimulus reactivates it and causes shingles. 
 Figure 3.11   Eczema herpeticum.  

Bacterial and viral infections  29
 Figure 3.12   Herpes zoster.  
 Figure 3.13   Ophthalmic zoster.  
 Trigeminal zoster 
 Herpes zoster may affect any of the divisions of the 
trigeminal nerve, but the ophthalmic division is 
the most frequently involved (Figure  3.13 ). Ocular 
problems such as conjunctivitis, keratitis and/or 
iridocyclitis may occur if the nasociliary branch of 
the ophthalmic division is affected (indicated by 
vesicles on the side of the nose [Hutchinson ’ s 
sign]), and patients with ophthalmic zoster should 
be examined by an ophthalmologist.   
 Involvement of the maxillary division of the 
trigeminal nerve produces vesicles on the cheek, 
and unilateral vesicles on the palate.  
 Motor zoster 
 Occasionally, in addition to skin lesions in a sen-
sory dermatome, motor ﬁ bres are affected, leading 
to muscle weakness.  
 Treatment of herpes zoster 
 Many cases do not require any treatment. 
However, in severe cases, and in all cases of oph-
thalmic zoster, oral aciclovir, valaciclovir or fam-
ciclovir should be given. In disseminated zoster in 
immunosuppressed individuals, intravenous aci-
clovir can be life saving. 
 Pain relief is often difﬁ cult to achieve in posther-
petic neuralgia, and patients with severe discom-
fort should be referred to a pain relief specialist. 
 

30  Fungal infections
 4 
Fungal  i nfections  
     The fungi that may cause human disease include 
the dermatophytes (Greek, meaning  ‘ skin plants ’ ) 
and the yeast - like fungus  Candida albicans , which 
are responsible for superﬁ cial fungal infections 
conﬁ ned to the skin, hair and nails, and mucous 
membranes. Other fungi can invade living tissue 
to cause deep infections, which may remain local-
ized (mycetoma) or cause systemic disease (e.g. 
histoplasmosis). 
 The dermatophytes are a group of fungi that 
are responsible for so - called  ‘ ringworm ’ infec-
tions. The vegetative phase of dermatophyte fungi 
consists of septate hyphae which form a branch-
ing network (mycelium).  Candida albicans  is an 
organism composed of round or oval cells which 
divide by budding. Apart from its yeast form it 
may produce pseudohyphae consisting of numer-
ous cells in a linear arrangement or, in certain cir-
cumstances, true septate hyphae.  
 Dermatophyte  i nfections 
 It is very easy to become totally confused by the 
terminology employed in fungal infection, and 
end up not knowing your tinea cruris from your 
 Trichophyton rubrum.  Hence, a novice is best 
advised to stick to simple terminology. The term 
 ‘ ringworm ’ , followed by  ‘ of the feet, of the groin, 
of the scalp ’ , etc., is a simple way of indicating the 
location of the infection. If you feel in more clas-
sical mood you may use  ‘ tinea ’ (Latin, meaning  ‘ a 
gnawing worm ’ ) followed by  ‘ pedis, cruris, capitis ’ , 
etc. 
 The dermatophyte fungi are named according 
to their genus ( Microsporum ,  Trichophyton and 
 Epidermophyton ) and their species (e.g.  M. canis , 
 T. rubrum ), and they can be distinguished from 
each other in culture. An experienced dermatolo-
gist may be able to suggest that a certain fungus is 
responsible for a particular case of ringworm, but 
the only way to establish its identity precisely is by 
culture. 
 Some fungi are conﬁ ned to humans (anthro-
pophilic); others principally affect animals (zoo-
philic) but occasionally infect humans. When 
animal fungi cause human skin lesions their pres-
ence often provokes a severe inﬂ ammatory reac-
tion (e.g. cattle ringworm). Dermatophytes grow 
only in keratin — the stratum corneum of the skin, 
hair and nails. Infection is usually acquired by 
contact with keratin debris carrying fungal hyphae, 
e.g. the woman who developed ringworm on the 
buttocks as a result of her husband ’ s habit of 
cutting his toenails with his feet resting on the 
lavatory seat. 
 Tinea  p edis ( a thlete ’ s  f oot) 
 This is the most common of the dermatophyte 
infections, and usually presents as scaling, itchy 
areas in the toe webs, particularly between the 
third and fourth and fourth and ﬁ fth toes, or on 
the soles (Figure  4.1 ). It is usually acquired from 
contact with infected keratin debris on the ﬂ oors 
of swimming pools and showers. Sometimes there 
is extensive involvement of the soles and sides of 
the feet (so - called moccasin tinea pedis, because 
of its similarity to the shape of that soft leather 
shoe). The condition may also spread on to the 
dorsa of the feet.   
Lecture Notes: Dermatology, 10th edition. © RAC Graham-Brown 
and DA Burns. Published 2011 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Fungal infections  31
 Tinea  c orporis 
 Tinea on the body typically has an inﬂ ammatory 
edge with central clearing (Figure  4.3 ), but it is 
relatively uncommon. The differential diagnosis 
includes granuloma annulare and erythema annu-
lare. In the former there is a raised margin, but no 
scaling. The latter provides more diagnostic difﬁ -
culty because the inﬂ ammatory margin is scaly. If 
fungal infection is suspected, scrapings should be 
examined microscopically for hyphae. In adults, 
the source of the fungus is usually the feet, whereas 
in children it has usually spread from the scalp.    
 Tinea  m anuum 
 Ringworm on the hand is usually unilateral. On 
the palm the appearance is of mild scaling ery-
thema, whereas on the dorsum there is more 
obvious inﬂ ammatory change, with a well - deﬁ ned 
edge (Figure  4.4 ). The source of the fungus is 
almost invariably the patient ’ s feet. 
 Occasionally, athlete ’ s foot follows a pattern of 
episodic vesiculobullous lesions on the soles, 
occurring particularly during warm weather. The 
feet are frequently asymmetrically involved in 
fungal infection, in contrast with eczema, in which 
the involvement is usually symmetrical.  
 Tinea  c ruris 
 This is common in men and rare in women. The 
clinical picture is characteristic, and should be 
easy to distinguish from intertrigo, ﬂ exural psoria-
sis and ﬂ exural seborrhoeic dermatitis. A scaly, 
erythematous margin gradually spreads down the 
medial aspects of the thighs (Figure  4.2 ), and may 
extend backwards to involve the perineum and 
buttocks. The source of the infection is nearly 
always the patient ’ s feet, so they should be exam-
ined for evidence of athlete ’ s foot or fungal nail 
dystrophy. The fungus is presumably transferred 
to the groins on ﬁ ngers that have scratched itchy 
feet and then scratched groins, or on towels.    
 Figure 4.1   Athlete ’ s foot.  
 Figure 4.2   Tinea cruris.  

32  Fungal infections
 Tinea  c apitis 
 Tinea capitis is principally a disease of childhood, 
and is rare in adults. This is thought to be related 
to a change in the fatty acid constituents of sebum 
around the time of puberty. Postpubertal sebum 
contains fungistatic fatty acids. The principal 
fungi responsible for scalp ringworm vary in dif-
ferent parts of the world. In the UK, until recent 
years, most cases of scalp ringworm were the 
result of  M. canis  infection, usually acquired from 
cats, but immigration has led to the appearance of 
other scalp ringworm organisms. In the USA the 
usual causative organism is  Trichophyton ton-
surans , and in the Indian subcontinent the most 
common cause is  T. violaceum. 
 One or more patches of partial hair loss develop 
on an otherwise normal scalp (Figure  4.7 ). The 
affected scalp is scaly, and the hair is usually 
broken off just above the surface, producing irreg-
ular stubble. In some cases there is little obvious 
 Tinea  u nguium 
 Toenail fungal dystrophy is very common in 
adults, and is invariably associated with athlete ’ s 
foot. The involvement usually starts laterally as 
yellowish streaks in the nail plate (Figure  4.5 ), but 
gradually the whole nail becomes thickened, dis-
coloured and friable.  T. rubrum  is usually the 
cause. The great toenails are often the ﬁ rst to be 
affected, and pressure from footwear on the thick-
ened nails may produce considerable discomfort.   
 A less common pattern is white superﬁ cial ony-
chomycosis, in which the dorsal part of the nail 
plate shows white patches, and  T. mentagrophytes 
is usually responsible for this. 
 Rapid proximal invasion of the nail plate, pro-
ducing white discoloration, is a pattern seen in 
AIDS patients. 
 Fingernails are less commonly affected. The 
changes in the nail plate are similar to those seen 
in toenails (Figure  4.6 ). 
 Figure 4.3   Tinea corporis.  
 Figure 4.4   Tinea on the dorsum of the hand. Note 
involvement of middle ﬁ nger nail.  

Fungal infections  33
 Kerion 
 Kerion (Greek, meaning  ‘ honeycomb ’ ) is a term 
applied to severe inﬂ ammatory scalp ringworm, 
usually provoked by the fungus of cattle ring-
worm, but occasionally by other fungi. It resem-
bles a bacterial infection, with pustules and 
abscesses (Figure  4.8 ), and affected children are 
often given repeated courses of antibiotics on this 
assumption. They may also be subjected to surgi-
cal incision of the areas. 
 Cattle  r ingworm 
 In rural areas, young farm workers often have 
cattle ringworm — older farmers have usually 
had the disease, and develop immunity against 
reinfection. The face and forearms are the 
areas most frequently affected. There is a marked 
inﬂ ammatory reaction to the fungus, producing 
an appearance resembling a bacterial infection 
(Figure  4.9 ). 
 Children who visit farms may pick up the fungus 
from gates and fences where cattle have left 
keratin debris containing the organism, and sub-
sequently develop a kerion.  
 Tinea  i ncognito 
 This term is applied to a fungal infection, the 
appearance of which has been altered by inap-
propriate treatment with topical steroid prepara-
tions. Topical steroids suppress the inﬂ ammatory 
response to the fungus, and the typical scaly 
erythematous margin usually disappears, leaving 
an ill - deﬁ ned area of patchy scaling erythema 
studded with pustules. 
inﬂ ammation, but in others this is prominent and 
there is pustule formation.   
 Occasionally the area of scalp involved is more 
extensive, producing an appearance suggestive of 
seborrhoeic dermatitis.  Microsporum canis ﬂ uo-
resces yellow – green under long - wavelength ultra-
violet light (Wood ’ s light) — see Chapter  2 .  
 Figure 4.5   Tinea of the toenails.  
 Figure 4.6   Tinea of a ﬁ ngernail.  

34  Fungal infections
little experience is necessary to distinguish fungal 
mycelium (Figure  4.10 ) from cell walls and 
intercellular lipid, or ﬁ lamentous debris. Fungal 
mycelium has the appearance of long rows of 
railway wagons which branch periodically. Mate-
rial may also be sent to the mycology laboratory 
for culture. 
 Treatment 
 There are a number of topical antifungal agents 
available for the treatment of dermatophyte infec-
tions, including miconazole, clotrimazole, econa-
zole, sulconazole and terbinaﬁ ne. These can be 
used when small areas of skin are affected, but if 
a fungal infection is extensive it is preferable to 
employ an oral agent such as griseofulvin, terbin-
aﬁ ne or itraconazole — in adults, griseofulvin 
 ‘ Ide ’  r eactions 
 Patients suffering from the ﬂ orid vesicular type of 
athlete ’ s foot may develop an acute vesiculobul-
lous eruption on the hands known as an  ‘ ide ’  reac-
tion. The appearance is indistinguishable from the 
acute eczematous response known as pompholyx 
(see Chapter  7 ). The lesions on the hands do not 
contain fungus. The reaction appears to have an 
immunological basis, but the exact pathomecha-
nism is unknown. Occasionally, a more general-
ized maculopapular ide reaction accompanies a 
fungal infection.  
 Diagnosis 
 Skin scrapings, nail clippings and plucked hair 
can be examined as described in Chapter  2 . A 
 Figure 4.7   Scalp ringworm.  
 Figure 4.8   Kerion.  

Fungal infections  35
agent — griseofulvin or terbinaﬁ ne for 4 – 6 weeks. 
Although it is not licensed for use in children in 
the UK, many dermatologists prefer to use terbin-
aﬁ ne for the treatment of scalp ringworm. Dosages 
of oral agents are calculated according to the 
child ’ s weight. To reduce the risk of transmission 
of scalp ringworm organisms from child to child, 
a topical agent such as an antifungal shampoo 
(selenium sulﬁ de, ketoconazole) should be used 
in combination with oral therapy, to kill organ-
isms on the surface of the scalp. 
 The treatment of choice for nail infections is 
oral terbinaﬁ ne — 250   mg daily for 6 weeks in ﬁ n-
gernail infections and for 3 months in toenail 
infections. An alternative is itraconazole pulse 
therapy — 200   mg twice daily for 7 days; for ﬁ nger-
nails, repeat once after a 3 - week drug - free inter-
val; for toenails, repeat twice with a 3 - week 
drug - free interval between each course. Various 
combination therapies, e.g. oral terbinaﬁ ne plus 
topical amorolﬁ ne nail lacquer, have been sug-
gested in attempts to increase cure rates and 
reduce costs of treatment. 
 Mycetoma (Madura  f oot) 
 In certain parts of the world, e.g. the Indian sub-
continent, trauma to the feet may result in the 
inoculation of certain soil fungi, which produce 
a deep - seated chronic infection with abscesses 
and draining sinuses. The causative organisms 
are often unresponsive to systemic antifungal 
agents. 
 Figure 4.9   Cattle ringworm on the forearm of a farmer.  
 Figure 4.10   Fungal mycelium.  
500   mg daily for 2 – 4 weeks, terbinaﬁ ne 250  mg 
daily for 2 – 4 weeks or itraconazole 100   mg daily for 
15 – 30 days. 
 Topical agents alone are not effective in scalp 
ringworm, which should be treated with an oral 

36  Fungal infections
main factors involved in its causation, either alone 
or in combination, include infection with  Candida 
sp. or staphylococci, and the development of 
prominent creases at the angles of the mouth, 
either as a normal consequence of age or in eden-
tulous individuals who do not wear dentures or 
have ill - ﬁ tting dentures. Saliva is drawn into the 
creases by capillary action, and salivary enzymes 
macerate the skin, producing sore, moist areas.   
 In denture wearers, modiﬁ cation of the den-
tures may help. Treatment with an imidazole/
hydrocortisone combination, e.g. miconazole/
hydrocortisone, is usually of beneﬁ t. 
 Chronic  p aronychia 
 This is a chronic inﬂ ammatory process affecting 
the proximal nail fold and nail matrix. It occurs 
predominantly in those whose hands are repeat-
edly immersed in water — housewives, bar staff, 
ﬂ orists, ﬁ shmongers. A sharp decline in the inci-
dence of this disorder in recent years is probably 
related to more widespread use of mechanical 
dishwashers, rather than the human variety, and 
hand protection with washing - up gloves. 
 The clinical appearance is of thickening and 
erythema of the proximal nail fold ( ‘ bolstering ’ ), 
and loss of the cuticle (Figure  4.12 ). There is often 
an associated nail dystrophy.  Candida albicans 
plays a pathogenic role, but bacteria may also be 
involved. The absence of the cuticle allows access 
of irritant substances, such as detergents, to the 
area beneath the proximal nail fold, and this prob-
ably contributes to the inﬂ ammatory process. 
 Candida  i nfection 
 Candidiasis (moniliasis,  ‘ thrush ’ ) is a term applied 
to infections of the skin and mucous membranes 
by yeast - like fungi of the genus  Candida . The most 
common,  Candida albicans , is a normal commen-
sal of the human digestive tract, where it exists in 
balance with the bacterial ﬂ ora. In its commensal 
role,  Candida  sp. is present as budding yeasts. In 
a pathogenic role, budding and mycelial forms are 
usually present. It becomes pathogenic only when 
situations favourable to its multiplication arise. 
These include topical and systemic steroid ther-
apy, immunosuppression of any aetiology (e.g. 
lymphoma, AIDS), broad - spectrum antibiotic ther-
apy, diabetes mellitus, and the apposition of areas 
of skin to produce a warm, moist environment. 
 The diagnosis of candidiasis can be conﬁ rmed 
by culture of swabs taken from the affected areas. 
 Buccal  m ucosal  c andidiasis 
 White, curd - like plaques adhere to the buccal 
mucosa. If these are scraped off, the underlying 
epithelium is inﬂ amed and friable. It may be 
treated with nystatin oral suspension, amphoter-
icin lozenges, miconazole oral gel or itraconazole 
liquid.  
 Angular  c heilitis ( p erl é che) 
 Angular cheilitis is an inﬂ ammatory process occur-
ring at the corners of the mouth (Figure  4.11 ). The 
 Figure 4.11   Angular cheilitis.  

Fungal infections  37
 Treatment consists of advice to keep the hands 
as dry as possible by wearing cotton - lined rubber 
or PVC gloves when working, and topical anti -
 candida therapy, for example with an imidazole. 
 Balanoposthitis/ v ulvovaginitis 
 Small white patches or eroded areas are present 
on the foreskin and glans of the uncircumcised 
penis. Predisposing factors are poor penile hygiene 
and diabetes mellitus. Candida balanoposthitis 
may be a recurrent problem if a sexual partner has 
candida vaginitis. 
 Candida vulvovaginitis presents with a creamy 
vaginal discharge and itchy erythema of the vulva. 
Pregnancy, oral contraceptives and diabetes mel-
litus are predisposing factors. Balanoposthitis and 
vulvitis should be treated with a topical anti -
 candida preparation, and there are several prod-
ucts available to treat vaginal candidiasis. 
 Don ’ t forget to test the urine for sugar in anyone 
with candida balanoposthitis or vulvovaginitis.  
 Intertrigo 
  ‘ Intertrigo ’  is a term applied to maceration that 
occurs where two skin surfaces are in apposition —
 groins, axillae, submammary regions or beneath 
an abdominal fat apron. Obesity and poor hygiene 
are contributory factors. Candida superinfection 
is often present, and is suggested clinically by 
the presence of creamy  ‘ satellite ’  pustules at the 
margins of the affected areas. The pustules are 
easily ruptured, leaving a collarette of scale, and 
 This condition is quite distinct from acute bac-
terial paronychia, in which there is a short history, 
severe discomfort and ample production of green 
pus. Pressure on the swollen nail fold in chronic 
paronychia may produce a tiny bead of creamy 
pus from under the nail fold, but that is all. 
 Figure 4.12   Chronic paronychia.  
 Figure 4.13   Pityriasis versicolor.  

38  Fungal infections
this gives a characteristic scalloped edge to the 
area of intertrigo. 
 Therapy with a combined topical preparation 
containing an anti - candida agent, such as mico-
nazole, and hydrocortisone is usually beneﬁ cial, 
but attention to hygiene is also important.   
 Pityriasis  v ersicolor 
 This condition occurs predominantly in young 
adults, and is caused by yeasts of the genus 
 Malassezia , which are normal skin commensals 
present in pilosebaceous follicles. It is a common 
disorder in temperate zones and is seen even 
more frequently in tropical climates. The reason 
why these yeasts multiply and produce skin 
lesions in certain individuals is unknown. 
 On a fair skin, the lesions are light - brown mac-
ules with a ﬁ ne surface scale (Figures  4.13  and 
 4.14 ), and they occur predominantly on the trunk 
and upper arms. They are usually asymptomatic, 
but are a cosmetic nuisance. On pigmented skin 
the typical appearance is of patchy hypopig-
mentation (Figure  4.15 ). The loss of pigment is 
thought to be related to production of azelaic 
acid by the yeasts, which inhibits tyrosinase and 
thereby inter feres with melanin production. The 
colour variation, depending on the background 
skin colour, is the reason for the  ‘ versicolor ’  in 
the name. 
 The diagnosis can be conﬁ rmed by micro-
scopic examination of skin scrapings in a mixture 
of 10% potassium hydroxide and Parker Quink ink 
(Figure  4.16 ), when characteristic clumps of round 
 Figure 4.14   Close view of pityriasis versicolor showing 
ﬁ ne ‘branny’ scale.  
 Figure 4.15   Hypopigmented pityriasis versicolor on 
a pigmented skin.  
 Figure 4.16   Spores and hyphae of  Malassezia  sp. in 
pityriasis versicolor.  
spores and short, stubby hyphae can be seen (an 
appearance that has been called  ‘ spaghetti and 
meatballs ’ ). 
 A simple treatment is selenium sulﬁ de, in the 
form of a shampoo (Selsun), left on the skin for a 

Fungal infections  39
few minutes during bathing. This will usually clear 
the organism in 2 – 3 weeks. Topical imidazole 
antifungal creams and ketoconazole shampoo are 
also effective against  Malassezia sp., as is topical 
terbinaﬁ ne. Oral itraconazole is an alternative 
(200   mg daily for 7 days). Griseofulvin and oral ter-
binaﬁ ne are ineffective. 
 Pityriasis versicolor tends to recur, and treat-
ment may have to be repeated. Hypopigmented 
areas may take a considerable time to repigment, 
and their persistence should not be taken as evi-
dence of treatment failure. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

40  Ectoparasite infections
 5 
Ectoparasite  i nfections  
 Scabies 
   There ’ s a squeak of pure delight from a matey 
little mite, 
 As it tortuously tunnels in the skin, 
 Singing furrow, folly furrow, come and join me 
in my burrow, 
 And we ’ ll view the epidermis from within 
 Guy ’ s Acarus 
 Aetiology 
 Scabies (Latin  =  the scab, mange, itch) is caused 
by small, eight - legged mites ( Sarcoptes scabiei ), 
and is acquired by close physical contact with 
another individual with the disease — prolonged 
hand holding is probably the usual means of 
spread. Any age group may be affected. It is 
common in children and young adults, and in 
recent years has become troublesome in elderly 
people in residential care homes. Transient 
contact is not sufﬁ cient for spread of classic 
scabies, and anyone encountering ordinary cases 
of scabies in a healthcare setting should not be 
afraid of acquiring the disease. 
 The female scabies mite burrows in the epider-
mis, and lays eggs in the burrow behind her. The 
only function of male scabies mites appears to be 
to fertilize the females, and then they expire. 
Initially, the host is unaware of the mining activity 
in the epidermis, but after a period of 4 – 6 weeks 
hypersensitivity to the mite or its products devel-
ops, and itching begins. The asymptomatic period 
is obviously very useful to the parasite because it 
has time to establish itself before the host response 
develops. Thereafter, life becomes hazardous for 
the mites because burrows will be excoriated and 
mites and eggs destroyed. In this way the host 
keeps the mite population in check, and in most 
individuals with scabies the average number of 
adult female mites on the skin is no more than a 
dozen. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 The patient complains of itching, which is charac-
teristically worse at night. Scabies should be con-
sidered in anyone presenting with this history. 
 There are two principal types of skin lesion in 
scabies — burrows and the scabies  ‘ rash ’ . Burrows 
are found principally on the hands and feet — the 
sides of the ﬁ ngers and toes, the web spaces 
between digits, the wrists and the insteps. In 
infants, burrows are often present on the palms of 
the hands and soles of the feet, and may also be 
present on the trunk and the head and neck. 
Burrows on the trunk are a common ﬁ nding in 
immobile elderly patients, and they may also 
occur on the head and neck. Each burrow is several 
millimetres long, usually tortuous, with a vesicle 
at one end adjacent to the burrowing mite, and 
often surrounded by mild erythema (Figure  5.1 ). 
Burrows also occur on the male genitalia, usually 
surmounting inﬂ ammatory papules, and these 
papules on the penis and scrotum are pathogno-
monic of scabies. If scabies is suspected in a male, 
the genitalia should always be examined.   
 The  ‘ rash ’  of scabies is an eruption of tiny 
inﬂ ammatory papules that occur mainly around 
the axillae and umbilicus, and on the thighs 
(Figure  5.2 ). The rash is an allergic reaction to the 
mites. 
Lecture Notes: Dermatology, 10th edition. © RAC Graham-Brown 
and DA Burns. Published 2011 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Ectoparasite infections  41
natural advantage. Once a burrow, or a suspected 
burrow, has been identiﬁ ed, it should be gently 
scraped off the skin with the edge of a scalpel 
blade — dermatologists sometimes use a blunt 
scalpel known as a  ‘ banana ’ scalpel for this task 
(see Chapter  2 ). The scrapings should be placed 
on a microscope slide with a few drops of 10% 
potassium hydroxide, covered with a coverslip, 
and examined under the microscope. The pres-
ence of mites, eggs or even eggshells conﬁ rms the 
diagnosis (Figure  5.3 ). Do not attempt to scrape 
any lesions on the penis — the proximity of a 
scalpel to this area leads to understandable appre-
hension, and is in any case rarely rewarded by the 
demonstration of mites. 
 In addition to these primary skin lesions, there 
may be secondary changes such as excoriations, 
eczematization and secondary bacterial infection. 
In some parts of the world, secondary infection of 
scabies lesions with nephritogenic streptococci is 
associated with the development of poststrepto-
coccal glomerulonephritis.  
 Diagnosis 
 Absolute conﬁ rmation of the diagnosis can be 
made only by demonstrating the mites or eggs 
microscopically. In order to do this, burrows must 
be found, and this usually requires some exper-
tise. Look carefully, in good light, at the hands and 
feet. A magnifying glass or dermatoscope may be 
of considerable help, but myopia is a distinct 
 Figure 5.1   Typical scabies burrow.  
 Figure 5.2   The scabies  ‘ rash ’ .  

42  Ectoparasite infections
 Permethrin  c ream 5% 
 Wash off after 8 – 12  h. 
 A single application of malathion or permethrin 
is often effective, but a second application 7 days 
later is recommended.  
 Benzylbenzoate  e mulsion 
 Although superseded by malathion and permeth-
rin in some parts of the world, in many countries 
benzylbenzoate is still used to treat scabies 
because it is effective and inexpensive. One 
regimen involves three applications in a 24 - h 
period. On the evening of day 1 apply the emul-
sion from the neck to the toes. Allow to dry, then 
apply a second coat. The following morning apply 
a third coat, and then wash off the benzylbenzoate 
on the evening of day 2. Treatment is then com-
plete, and this should be stressed to the patient 
because repeated use will produce an irritant 
dermatitis. 
 Irritancy is its main drawback. 
 Treatment of  i nfants 
 As burrows can occur on the head and neck it may 
be necessary to extend application of topical 
therapy to these areas. The treatment of choice is 
permethrin. 
 As a result of the availability of non - irritant 
agents, benzylbenzoate is not recommended for 
use in infants, but if it is employed it should be 
diluted to reduce its irritancy.  
 Treatment 
 Scabies is treated by eating young alligators and 
washing the skin with urine. (Mexican folk 
medicine)   
 It is important to explain to patients precisely how 
to use their treatment, and written explanatory 
treatment sheets are useful. All family members, 
and close physical contacts of an affected indi-
vidual, should be treated simultaneously. Topical 
agents should be applied from the neck to the 
toes, and patients should be reminded not to wash 
their hands after applying treatment. In infants, 
and elderly and immunocompromised patients, 
in whom burrows can occur on the head and neck, 
it may be necessary to extend application to these 
areas. Itching does not resolve immediately after 
treatment, but will improve gradually over 2 – 3 
weeks as the superﬁ cial epidermis, containing the 
allergenic mites, is shed. A topical antipruritic 
such as crotamiton 10% with hydrocortisone 
0.25% can be used on residual itchy areas. It is 
not necessary to  ‘ disinfest ’  clothing and soft 
furnishings — laundering of underwear and night-
clothes is all that is required.  
 Available  t reatments 
 Malathion 0.5% 
 Aqueous preparations are preferred because they 
do not irritate excoriated or eczematized skin. 
Wash off after 24   h.  
 Figure 5.3   Scabies mite and eggs in 
potassium hydroxide preparation.  

Ectoparasite infections  43
mite population multiplies unchecked. Crusted 
scabies also occurs more frequently in individuals 
with Down ’ s syndrome. 
 The crusted skin lesions can contain millions of 
mites and eggs, and these are shed into the envi-
ronment on ﬂ akes of keratin. Anyone coming into 
contact with a patient with crusted scabies is at 
risk of acquiring ordinary scabies, and undiag-
nosed cases may be responsible for outbreaks of 
scabies in hospitals and residential homes. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 The hands and feet are usually encased in a thick 
ﬁ ssured crust, and areas of crusting may be 
present on other parts of the body, including the 
head and neck. The nails are often grossly thick-
ened (Figure  5.4 ). The changes may resemble pso-
riatic scaling or hyperkeratotic eczema, and this 
can lead to the diagnosis being missed. Burrows 
are usually impossible to identify in the crusted 
areas, but may be found on less severely affected 
parts of the body. Microscopy of the scales reveals 
numerous mites and eggs. 
 Treatment 
 The patient should be isolated, and nurses respon-
sible for their care should wear gowns and gloves. 
All medical staff and carers, and any other indi-
viduals who have been in contact with the patient 
before diagnosis and treatment, should be treated 
with a topical scabicide. 
 Crusted scabies is often difﬁ cult to cure with 
topical agents alone, and usually requires several 
 Treatment in  p regnancy 
 There is understandable concern about potential 
toxic effects on the fetus of scabicides when used 
in pregnancy. However, there is no deﬁ nitive evi-
dence that any of the currently employed topical 
scabicides has been responsible for harmful 
effects in pregnancy after appropriate use. Hence, 
in the absence of evidence of fetal toxicity, use of 
malathion or permethrin appears to be safe.   
 Crusted (Norwegian) 
 s cabies 
 This is an uncommon type of scabies in which 
enormous numbers of mites are present in crusted 
lesions on the skin. It was called Norwegian 
scabies because it was originally described in 
Norwegian individuals with leprosy, but the term 
 ‘ crusted ’  is now preferred. The mite is exactly the 
same as that causing ordinary scabies. Mites are 
present in such huge numbers because of an 
altered host response to their presence. Crusted 
scabies may develop when itching is not perceived 
because of sensory loss from neurological disor-
ders (hence its occurrence in those with leprosy), 
in individuals who are immunosuppressed, as a 
result of either disease (e.g. AIDS) or treatment 
(e.g. systemic steroids, organ transplantation), or 
when patients are unable to scratch because of 
severe rheumatoid arthritis or paresis. In these 
circumstances, when the host does not itch or 
cannot scratch, burrows are not destroyed and the 
 Figure 5.4   Crusted scabies in a 
youth with Down ’ s syndrome.  

44  Ectoparasite infections
cured. If such individuals are not identiﬁ ed there 
is a risk that they may only partially respond to 
treatment and therefore provide a source for a 
further outbreak. Ivermectin may prove to be of 
value in dealing with outbreaks of scabies in resi-
dential homes and similar communities.   
 Pediculosis 
 Head  l ice ( Pediculus  c apitis ) 
 Her ladyship said when I went to her house, 
 That she did not esteem me three skips of a louse; 
 I freely forgave what the dear creature said, 
 For ladies will talk of what runs in their head. 
 Theodore Hook 
 Head lice are wingless insects that live on the scalp 
and feed on blood. Adult head lice are 2 – 4   mm in 
length. They are acquired by head - to - head contact 
with another infected individual. It is still a com-
monly held belief that head lice are associated 
with poor hygiene, perhaps supported by the ﬁ nd-
ings of surveys in the earlier part of the twentieth 
century which showed that head louse infection 
was principally a problem of the lower classes in 
large industrial conurbations. However, in more 
recent years, the head louse has climbed the social 
ladder and taken up rural pursuits, and is now 
widely distributed in all socioeconomic groups. 
 The adult female louse lays eggs that she 
cements to hair shafts (Figure  5.5 ). The eggs are 
applications of a scabicide. The current recom-
mended treatment for crusted scabies is a combi-
nation of ivermectin (given as a single dose of 
200  μ g/kg body weight, repeated after an interval 
of 7 days) with a topical scabicide, applied to the 
whole body, including the head and neck. 
Ivermectin is not licensed for use in the treatment 
of scabies in humans, but may be obtained on a 
named - patient basis from the manufacturer. It 
has been used for many years as a treatment for 
onchocerciasis (river blindness) and other types of 
ﬁ lariasis, and is employed in veterinary practice to 
deal with several types of animal parasites.  
 Institutional  o utbreaks 
of  s cabies 
 The huge increase in the number of residential 
care and nursing homes for elderly people in the 
UK in recent years has been associated with 
numerous outbreaks of scabies in these facilities. 
Although some are related to cases of crusted 
scabies, others appear to originate from resi-
dents who have a large mite population, or from 
infected carers. Close contact between residents 
and carers in these homes is common — carers 
usually hold the hands of residents to provide 
support when walking, and this facilitates spread 
of the disease. 
 All residents, their carers and the carers ’  fami-
lies should be treated with a topical scabicide. 
Residents who have very numerous burrows, or 
have crusted scabies, will require more intensive 
treatment and preferably should be isolated until 
 Figure 5.5   Head louse eggs 
cemented to a hair shaft.  

Ectoparasite infections  45
ﬂ esh coloured and difﬁ cult to see, but once 
the louse nymph has emerged (after about 10 
days) the empty egg case (nit) is more readily 
visible. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Itching is the main symptom. Nits tend to be more 
numerous in the occipital region of the scalp and 
above the ears (Figure  5.6 ). Occasionally, ﬂ akes of 
dandruff or keratin casts around hair shafts may 
be mistaken for nits, but the distinction is obvious 
if the material is examined microscopically. Adult 
lice and nymphs will be found without difﬁ culty 
in heavier infections (Figure  5.7 ). Impetigo may 
occur as a result of inoculation of staphylococci 
into the skin during scratching; the term  ‘ nitwit ’  is 
derived from the substandard performance of 
children who had large head louse populations, 
secondary skin sepsis and probably also anaemia, 
and were chronically unwell as a result.    
 Figure 5.6   Head louse eggs and egg cases.  
 Figure 5.7   The head louse.  
 Treatment 
 The approach to treatment has changed in recent 
years, and it is now considered appropriate to 
employ a strategy that includes both physical and 
chemical methods. Chemical means of control, 
employing insecticides, have been widely used 
throughout the world, because insecticides are 
easy to use and convenient, and they have proved 
very effective. However, there is concern about 
potential adverse effects, particularly from resid-
ual insecticides such as lindane (which is no 
longer used in some parts of the world, including 
the UK), not only on humans but also on the envi-
ronment. In addition, there is evidence of wide-
spread resistance of head lice to malathion and 
pyrethroid insecticides. 
  

46  Ectoparasite infections
 Clothing  l ice ( Pediculus 
 h umanus ) 
 The louse 
 Has very little  ‘ nous ’ , 
 Its only pursuit 
 Is the hirsute. 
 I. Kenvyn Evans 
 The clothing or body louse is a parasite that thrives 
in association with poverty and poor hygiene. It 
lives on, and lays its eggs in the seams of, clothing, 
and only moves on to the body to feed on blood. 
It is still common in the poorer countries of the 
world, but in an afﬂ uent society its usual hosts are 
down - and - outs and vagrants who have only one 
set of clothes that are never removed or cleaned. 
An individual who regularly changes clothing and 
maintains a reasonable standard of hygiene will 
never harbour clothing lice because the lice do not 
survive laundering and ironing of garments. 
Clothing lice are vectors of epidemic typhus, a 
rickettsial disease that has been responsible for 
millions of deaths over the centuries. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Clothing lice usually provoke itching, and their 
host is often covered in excoriations. The itching 
appears to be the result of an acquired hyper-
sensitivity to louse salivary antigens. If clothing 
louse infection is suspected there is no point in 
searching the patient for lice — you may be lucky 
and ﬁ nd an occasional louse at lunch on the body, 
but it is the clothing you should examine (Figure 
 5.8 ). 
 Preparations with an aqueous basis are less 
likely than those with an alcohol basis to irritate 
an excoriated scalp, they do not irritate the bronchi 
of people with asthma, and they are not ﬂ amma-
ble. None of these insecticides is fully ovicidal, and 
treatment should therefore be repeated after 7 – 10 
days in order to kill any louse nymphs emerging 
from surviving eggs. 
 A new approach to topical treatment is the 
introduction of agents with a mode of action that 
is essentially to asphyxiate lice, such as dimeti-
cone. An advantage of these is that there is little 
potential for the development of resistance. 
 Several over - the - counter head louse treatments 
contain tea - tree or lavender oil, and there is anec-
dotal evidence that they are effective. However, 
they have not been formally assessed in clinical 
trials. 
 A simple physical method of treatment involves 
washing the hair with an ordinary shampoo 
followed by the application of generous quantities 
of conditioner. The hair is then combed with a 
ﬁ ne - toothed comb with closely set teeth, which 
removes any lice. This process is repeated every 4 
days for 2 weeks.   
 Figure 5.8   Clothing lice and eggs 
residing in a sock.  
 Pediculicides 
  •    Malathion  
  •    Carbaryl  
  •    Synthetic pyrethroids:  
 —   permethrin 
 —   phenothrin 

Ectoparasite infections  47
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Itching, usually nocturnal, is the symptom that 
draws the host ’ s attention to these little passen-
gers. Self - examination then reveals the reason 
for the itch, and the doctor is often presented 
with a folded piece of paper containing  ‘ speci-
mens ’ . When folded paper is opened it has a 
tendency to ﬂ ick its contents in all directions, 
leaving the unlucky recipient anxiously await-
ing signs of personal contamination for weeks 
thereafter. 
 Lice are usually visible on the affected areas, but 
sometimes their eggs, which are a brown colour, 
are easier to see. If the parasites are very numer-
ous the underclothes may be speckled with spots 
of altered blood excreted by the lice. Lice on the 
eyelids festoon the lashes with their eggs (Figure 
 5.10 ). Children may acquire crab lice as a result of 
normal close physical contact with an infected 
parent. The lice will colonize the eyelashes and 
scalp margin. As an isolated ﬁ nding, crab louse 
infection in a child should not be considered 
indicative of sexual abuse. 
 Treatment 
 The same pediculicides that are used to eradicate 
head lice are effective against crab lice, but 
aqueous preparations should be used because 
alcohol basis preparations will irritate the scrotum. 
The whole body should be treated, including the 
scalp if there is evidence of lice on the scalp 
margins. Sexual contacts should also be treated. 
 Treatment 
 All the patient requires is a bath. A complete 
change of clean clothing should be supplied and 
the infested clothing either destroyed or laun-
dered at temperatures of 60 ° C or above. Dry clean-
ing or use of a tumble drier is an alternative.   
 Crab  l ice ( Phthirus  p ubis ) 
 It ’ s no good standing on the seat 
 The crabs in here can jump 10 feet. 
 If you think that ’ s rather high, 
 Go next door, the buggers ﬂ y! 
 Toilet grafﬁ to 
 Crab lice, also known as pubic lice and love bugs, 
and in France as  papillons d ’ amour , are usually 
transmitted during close physical contact with an 
infected individual, in spite of the above allegation 
of contagion from toilet seats. At one time they 
were thought to be rather sedentary lice, but 
experiments subsequently demonstrated that 
when its host is sleeping the crab louse becomes 
quite active. It is a louse adapted to living in hair 
of a particular density. It cannot colonize scalp 
hair, except at the margins of the scalp, but pubic, 
axillary, beard and eyelash hair are perfectly 
acceptable to it, and in an extremely hairy male 
most of the body may be teeming with lice. The 
crab louse is so named because of its squat shape 
and powerful claws, resembling a crab ’ s pincers 
(Figure  5.9 ), with which it grasps hair. Female crab 
lice, similar to head lice, stick their eggs to hair 
shafts with a cement material.   
 Figure 5.9   The crab louse.  

48  Ectoparasite infections
The treatment should be repeated after an interval 
of 7 – 10 days. 
 Eyelash infection may be treated by the appli-
cation of white soft parafﬁ n (Vaseline) three 
times a day for 2 – 3 weeks. This acts by blocking 
the louse respiratory system, thereby suffocating 
the insects. 
 Papular  u rticaria 
 Often referred to as  ‘ heat bumps ’  by patients, 
papular urticaria is a typical response to the bites 
of a number of arthropods, including biting ﬂ ies, 
mosquitoes, mites, ﬂ eas and bed bugs. The lesions 
are small urticated papules (Figure  5.11 ), usually 
grouped (sometimes in groups of three, fancifully 
labelled  ‘ breakfast, lunch and dinner ’ ), and they 
may be surmounted by a tiny vesicle. They are so 
itchy that their tops are rapidly excoriated. They 
develop as a result of a hypersensitivity response 
to antigens in the arthropods ’  saliva. Eventually, 
in many people, immunological tolerance to the 
antigens develops and they subsequently do not 
react to the bites.   
 Fleas 
 May the ﬂ eas of a thousand camels infest your 
armpits! 
 Arab curse 
 The most common cause of papular urticaria 
acquired in the home environment is ﬂ ea bites. It 
is not the human ﬂ ea,  Pulex irritans , that is 
 Figure 5.11   Papular urticaria.  
 Figure 5.10   Crab louse eggs on the 
eyelashes.  
responsible, but ﬂ eas with natural hosts of house-
hold pets. A familiar clinical picture is of multiple 
lesions, some of which may form blisters, around 
the ankles of women (Figure  5.12 ). Men are rarely 

Ectoparasite infections  49
 Figure 5.12   Flea bites on the ankles.  
with the ﬂ eas in various stages of development 
scattered throughout the household. Flea eggs 
are not sticky, and when laid by ﬂ eas feeding 
on an animal they drop out of the coat into the 
surroundings — the cat - basket, the carpet, the 
sofa or the counterpane. Eggs, larvae, pupae and 
adult ﬂ eas are present in all these areas. Hence, 
the house should be treated, as well as the pets. 
There are commercially available preparations 
designed to be sprayed around the house on 
carpets and soft furnishings, and veterinary prod-
ucts to be applied topically or fed to the animal, 
usually containing synthetic equivalents of insect 
growth regulatory hormones that interfere with 
ﬂ ea development. 
 Occasionally, bird ﬂ eas will gain access to 
homes from nests under the eaves, and may be 
responsible for more extensive lesions of papular 
urticaria. 
 Bed  b ugs ( Cimex  l ectularius ) 
 The butterﬂ y has wings of gold, 
 The ﬁ reﬂ y wings of ﬂ ame, 
 The bed bug has no wings at all, 
 But he gets there just the same. 
 Perhaps this rhyme relates to the, probably inac-
curate, tale that if one attempts to stop bed bugs 
crawling up bed legs at night by placing the legs in 
bowls of water, the cunning bugs climb the walls, 
cross the ceiling, and drop on the occupants of the 
bed from above. 
 Bed bugs are not the most appealing of crea-
tures. They live in dilapidated housing behind 
peeling wallpaper and rotten skirting boards, and 
emerge during the night to feed on the sleeping 
occupants of bedrooms. They feed on blood and, 
although the process of feeding does not cause the 
host any pain, a reaction to the bites of the bugs 
usually results in papular urticaria or bullous 
lesions. These insects are 5 – 6   mm long, dark 
brown in colour and can move quite rapidly. 
Although bed - bug infestation of houses in devel-
oped countries is uncommon, there has been an 
increase in reported cases in recent years —
 thought to be related to resistance to insecticides 
and transport of the bugs in the luggage of travel-
lers returning from parts of the world where they 
are common. If infestation is suspected, pest 
control agencies should be employed to inspect 
and disinfest the building.  
affected, because socks and trousers deny ﬂ eas 
access to the ankles. 
 Cats and dogs are perambulating quadripedal 
 ‘ meals - on - wheels ’ for the ﬂ eas (Figure  5.13 ). 
However, although ﬂ eas are present on the 
animals, their numbers are small in comparison 
 Figure 5.13   A cat ﬂ ea.  

50  Ectoparasite infections
 Animal  m ites 
 Human contact with animals with sarcoptic 
mange may result in the development of scattered 
itchy papules, often on areas coming into contact 
with the animals, e.g. the abdomen and thighs if a 
mangy dog sits on its owner ’ s lap. It is highly 
unlikely that these animal mites will establish 
themselves on humans, because they are species 
speciﬁ c, but there have been a few reports in 
which it is said to have occurred. 
 Dogs, cats and rabbits are the natural hosts of 
mites of the genus  Cheyletiella , and these may 
cause skin lesions in humans. Dogs are the usual 
culprits. On the animal, the mites provoke a heavy 
scurf over the back (known in veterinary circles as 
 ‘ walking dandruff ’ ), but hardly bother it other-
wise. On the owner, itchy papules appear, princi-
pally on the abdomen, but occasionally also on 
the thighs and arms — sites of contact with the 
animal. The diagnosis can be conﬁ rmed by taking 
combings from the animal ’ s coat and demonstrat-
ing the mite microscopically. Once the animal has 
been treated by a veterinary practitioner, the 
human skin lesions resolve spontaneously. 
 Bird mites may gain access to houses from nests 
under the eaves, and can cause itchy papular 
lesions. 
 Ticks 
 Ixodid, or hard ticks, are very common, particu-
larly in wooded areas where there are deer popu-
lations. They feed on blood, and their barbed 
mouthparts are held in the skin of the host during 
feeding by a protein cement material. If a tick is 
pulled off the skin abruptly, its mouthparts may 
be left  in situ , and will provoke a foreign - body 
reaction. 
 Ixodid ticks are vectors of Lyme disease which 
is caused by the spirochaete  Borrelia burgdorferi . 
Lyme disease (named after the town in Connecticut 
where its association with ticks was ﬁ rst dis-
covered) affects the skin, joints, central nervous 
system and heart. In the early stages, oral therapy 
with amoxicillin or doxycycline for 3 weeks is 
recommended. In the later stages, with bacterial 
dissemination, treatment with intravenous ceftri-
axone or cefotaxime is required. 
 Probably the best way to remove a tick is to 
grasp it as close to the skin as possible with ﬁ ne 
tweezers or forceps, and exert gentle continuous 
traction. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 6 
Acne,  a cneiform 
 e ruptions and  r osacea  
 Out, damned spot! Out, I say! 
 Shakespeare,  Macbeth v.i 
 Introduction 
 This chapter deals with disorders that cause 
papules and pustules, often known in the vernac-
ular as  ‘ spots ’ or  ‘ zits ’ . Some are aetiologically 
related and can properly be called variants of acne 
(a corruption of the Greek  akme — a point). Others 
produce lesions closely or superﬁ cially resem-
bling  ‘ true ’ acne: the acneiform disorders and 
rosacea. A summary of the  ‘ acne family ’  is given 
below. 
  
 Acne  v ulgaris and 
 i ts  v ariants 
 Acne  v ulgaris 
 About 80% of people develop some spottiness. 
Acne may be very mild indeed, but, at its most 
severe, it can cause gross and unsightly changes. 
 Acne may be associated with underlying endo-
crinological abnormalities (see below) but this is 
rare. 
 Age of  o nset and  c ourse 
 The ﬁ rst problems are usually encountered in 
adolescence, although there are exceptions (see 
below). 
 Lesions of acne vary considerably over time, 
most patients noticing ﬂ uctuations in the number 
and severity of spots. In girls this is often related 
to the menstrual cycle. The condition frequently 
deteriorates at times of stress. 
 Acne usually gets generally worse for a while 
before gradually settling after 2 – 3 years, and usu-
ally disappearing altogether. The peak of severity 
is earlier in girls than in boys. In some individuals, 
the time course may be much more prolonged, 
with lesions continuing to develop well into adult 
life. 
 There are two groups, described below, in 
whom true acne develops outside adolescence. 
 Infantile/ j uvenile  a cne 
 Typical acne is occasionally seen in infants and 
children (especially boys), usually at 3 – 12 months 
of age. Although lesions subside after 4 – 5 years, 
 The  a cne  f amily 
 Acne vulgaris  
  •    ‘ Classical ’  
  •    Infantile and juvenile onset  
  •    Late onset  
  •    Severe (acne conglobata, nodulocystic)  
  •    With systemic symptoms (acne fulminans)  
 Secondary acne  
  •    Endocrine associated  
  •    Medicaments  
  •    Oils  
  •    Chloracne  
 Hidradenitis suppurativa  
Lecture Notes: Dermatology, 10th edition. © RAC Graham-Brown 
and DA Burns. Published 2011 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

52  Acne, acneiform eruptions and rosacea
 The  a ppearance of the  s kin 
 The ﬁ rst physical sign to note is that the face and 
upper trunk become very greasy (Figure  6.1 ) due 
to increased production of sebum. This is normal 
at puberty, but is excessive in those with acne. 
Scalp hair is often very greasy too. Greasiness 
alone may be bad enough for patients to seek 
advice. 
 The  i ndividual  l esions of  a cne 
 A cardinal feature is that there are several different 
types of lesion at any one time. 
  
adolescence often heralds a severe recrudescence. 
Endocrine abnormalities are very rare, but should 
be considered, especially in a girl with signs of 
virilism.  
 Late - o nset  a cne 
 A number of women and some men develop 
acne in their 20s and beyond. In women, this is 
often with marked premenstrual exacerbations. 
Polycystic ovary syndrome should be excluded, 
but endocrinological investigation is otherwise 
usually unremarkable. 
 The  p sychological  i mpact of  a cne 
 Acne can make life miserable, and its predilection 
for the teens and 20s means that it affects those 
least well equipped to cope. 
 The face is prominently involved which, in ado-
lescence, assumes increasing importance as self -
 image develops. At the time when acne strikes, 
major relationships outside the family and close 
circles of same - sex friends are becoming increas-
ingly crucial. However, the psychological impact 
of acne is by no means always related to the degree 
of severity as perceived by an outsider. People 
often spend just as long staring miserably into the 
mirror when there are only a few spots as when 
there are hundreds.  
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Physical  s igns 
 Acne has a characteristic distribution. 
  
 Figure 6.1   This girl ’ s face shows the typical greasy 
skin of the acne sufferer, in addition to papules and 
pustules.  
 Site and  d istribution of  a cne 
  •    Face, any part of which may be involved  
  •    Neck, especially posteriorly  
  •    Ears  
  •    Upper back  
  •    Anterior chest, in  ‘ V ’ from the shoulders to the 
xiphisternum  
  •    Shoulders  
 In severe acne, lesions may extend down the 
arms, across the whole of the central back, and on 
to the buttocks.  
 Acne  v ulgaris  l esions 
  •    Comedones:  
 —   closed ( ‘ whiteheads ’ ) 
 —   open ( ‘ blackheads ’ ) 
  •    Papules  
  •    Pustules  
  •    Nodules  
  •    Cysts  
  •    Scars  
 Comedones ( s ingular:  c omedo) 
 The presence of comedones is a key diagnostic 
aid, because they are really seen in acne only in 
young people. There are two types: closed (or 
 ‘ whitehead ’ ) and open (or  ‘ blackhead ’ ). 

Acne, acneiform eruptions and rosacea  53
 Closed comedones are more easily felt than 
seen. They are very small papules, with a central 
point or elevation (Figure  6.2 ). They are often 
most numerous on the forehead and cheeks. 
There is little or no inﬂ ammation. 
 Open comedones (blackheads) are dilated 
blocked hair follicles, but it is not clear what 
causes the characteristic black dots. Burnt - out 
inﬂ ammatory lesions may leave multiheaded 
blackheads, particularly on the shoulders and 
upper trunk. Blackheads are virtually pathogno-
monic of acne in the younger patient (although 
advanced solar damage may cause them).  
 Papules and  p ustules 
 The majority of patients with acne develop papules 
and pustules, often on a red base. They may itch 
or be quite painful. Papules develop rapidly, 
sometimes over only a few hours, and frequently 
become pustular as they evolve. They resolve over 
the course of a few days. New lesions may arise in 
exactly the same site on many occasions.  
 Nodules and  c ysts 
 With increasing severity, and as the inﬂ ammation 
extends deeper, the size of visible and palpable 
lesions increases, resulting in deep - seated nodules 
and cysts (Figures  6.3  and  6.4 ). Many patients 
develop a few, but some have large numbers: a 
situation for which the term  ‘ acne conglobata ’ is 
used. 
 Such lesions are often extremely uncomfort-
able and last much longer than more superﬁ cial 
changes. Some become chronic, and may result in 
permanent cyst formation (see Chapter  9 ). 
 Figure 6.2   Closed comedones.  
 Figure 6.3   Acne conglobata.  

54  Acne, acneiform eruptions and rosacea
 Pathogenesis of  a cne 
 The aetiopathology of acne remains to be eluci-
dated fully. However, several key factors prob-
ably contribute to the ﬁ nal picture (Figure  6.6 ), 
although we cannot fully explain every aspect of 
the disorder: the occurrence of prepubertal acne, 
for example. 
 As the inﬂ ammation subsides, a variable 
amount of ﬁ brosis occurs, which may produce 
scarring, particularly with repeated episodes at 
the same site. Sometimes epithelial remnants 
become walled off by ﬁ brosis, producing cysts. 
 Scars 
 The ﬁ nal common pathway for the inﬂ ammatory 
process of acne is scarring, which will remain as 
a lifetime ’ s legacy of adolescent anguish. Charac-
teristically, small, deep,  ‘ ice - pick ’ scars occur, 
but more severe disease can leave gross changes, 
with atrophy (Figure  6.5 ) or keloid formation (see 
Chapter  9 ). 
 Systemic  s ymptoms 
( a cne  f ulminans) 
 Very occasionally a young man (almost always) 
develops severe nodulocystic acne accompanied 
by fever, malaise, and joint pain and swelling. This 
is known as  ‘ acne fulminans ’ . 
 Figure 6.4   Severe acne on the back.  
 Figure 6.5   Atrophic scarring in acne.  

Acne, acneiform eruptions and rosacea  55
 Treatment of  a cne 
 Topical  t herapies 
 Many over - the - counter remedies simply make the 
skin ﬂ aky and unblock hair follicles (e.g. sulfur and 
other astringents). 
 Topical antiseptics are often prescribed, but are 
of little value. 
 Benzoyl peroxide is widely used. It deﬁ nitely 
reduces the number of comedones but must be 
used regularly and over a sustained period. There 
are several concentrations: start with a weaker 
preparation, applied once daily, and gradually 
progress to higher strengths. 
 Vitamin A derivatives (retinoids) also reduce 
comedones. Preparations in this category include 
 Figure 6.6   The pathogenesis of acne.  
A
c
u
t
e 
i
n
fl
a
m
m
a
t
o
ry
 r
e
s
p
o
n
s
e 
Leakage
Rupture
Sebum
P. acnes
Hyperkeratosis
The ‘comedo’
‘Zit’ or ‘pimple’
Androgen
(a)
(c)
(b)
 Pathogenesis of  a cne 
 1   Androgens (usually in normal amounts) stimulate 
increased sebum production  
 2   Hair follicles with particularly large sebaceous 
glands (on the face, neck, chest and back) 
become blocked by hyperkeratosis  
 3   This results in the closed comedo  
 4   Within the follicle, an obligate anaerobe 
( Propionibacterium acnes ) proliferates  
 5   This organism acts on sebum, releasing 
inﬂ ammatory chemicals  
 6   These leak into the surrounding dermis  
 7   The body mounts an intense acute inﬂ ammatory 
response, the result of which is the papule, 
pustule or nodule  

56  Acne, acneiform eruptions and rosacea
choice in UK secondary care, because it is availa-
ble only on hospital prescription. Over 90% of 
patients have complete clearance and in up to 
80% there is no relapse. There are several side 
effects: 
 Side  e ffects of  i sotretinoin 
  •   Dry skin, lips and eyes 
  •   Dry nasal mucosae with epistaxes 
  •   Mild alopecia 
  •   Generalised arthralgia and myalgia 
  •   Raised blood fat levels 
  •   Altered liver function tests 
  •   Teratogenicity 
  •   Possible psychological disturbances 
 The most serious problem with isotretinoin is that 
signiﬁ cant fetal abnormalities are very common. 
All female patients must therefore be advised not 
to get pregnant and should be monitored very 
carefully throughout treatment. In the UK clini-
cians and patients should adhere to an agreed 
 ‘ pregnancy prevention protocol ’ . The drug has 
developed a reputation for causing psychological 
disturbances. Whether this is a signiﬁ cant causal 
effect remains controversial, but all patients 
should be warned about mood changes, especially 
depression. 
 Dapsone may also be a useful addition in 
patients with very troublesome acne, and is safe. 
 Steroids can be used intralesionally or systemi-
cally in severe acne (they are virtually always 
needed in acne fulminans).   
 Surgical  i ntervention 
 Simple measures, such as using a comedone 
extractor on multiple comedones, may improve 
the appearance. It certainly gives great pleasure 
and satisfaction to a mother, or a girl - or boyfriend 
who likes to pop out blackheads! Large, residual 
cysts may need to be excised, but there is a risk of 
keloid scarring. Plastic and dermatological sur-
geons can sometimes help acne scarring with 
superﬁ cial laser therapy or dermabrasion, but this 
must not be attempted until the acne is fully under 
control.  
 Management of a  p atient with  a cne 
 The approach to treatment must be tailored to the 
individual, but there are some helpful guidelines. 
Let ’ s ﬁ rst dispel some myths! 
  
retinoic acid, isotretinoin (13 -  cis - retinoic acid) 
and adapalene. All may help but can be irritant. 
 Topical antibiotics (especially tetracyclines, 
erythromycin and clindamycin) are generally 
applied once daily. All have been shown to be 
useful in milder acne. However, resistance of  P. 
acnes  to topical antibiotics is a problem. Some 
preparations combine antibiotics with other 
agents such as benzoyl peroxide. 
  
 Treatments for  a cne 
 Topical  
  •    Benzoyl peroxide  
  •    Retinoids  
  •    Sulfur and astringents  
  •    Topical antiseptics, antibiotics and combination 
products  
 Systemic  
  •    Antibiotics  
  •    Cyproterone acetate  
  •    13 -  cis - Retinoic acid (isotretinoin)  
  •    Steroids  
 Surgical intervention  
 Systemic  t herapies 
 Antibiotics are the mainstay of the treatment of 
papulopustular acne in primary care in the UK. 
They reduce bacterial counts, at least initially, but 
also have direct anti - inﬂ ammatory effects. 
 The most effective are the tetracyclines, eryth-
romycin and trimethoprim. To work, antibiotics 
must be fat soluble, so penicillins are useless. 
Most tetracyclines should be taken on an empty 
stomach. Tetracyclines are contraindicated in 
children aged  < 12, and in pregnant or lactating 
women. 
 Cyproterone acetate is an antiandrogen that 
can be given only to women. It is given along with 
oestrogen (as co - cyprindiol) to prevent menor-
rhagia and to ensure contraceptive cover (as it 
feminizes a male fetus). Its effect is rather slow. 
 13 - cis  - Retinoic acid (isotretinoin) is a highly 
effective oral vitamin A derivative that dramati-
cally reduces sebum production. It is the ﬁ rst 

Acne, acneiform eruptions and rosacea  57
dose may begin at 0.5   mg/kg but may need to 
be raised to 1   mg/kg. We have already stressed 
the need for counselling and surveillance in 
females, but liver function and lipids should also 
be monitored. 
 Intralesional steroids are useful for acute inﬂ am-
matory lesions. Very rarely, systemic steroid ther-
apy may be required, especially in acne fulminans. 
 Surgical intervention may be required later to 
help overcome the devastation wreaked by this 
degree of acne. 
  
 Assessment of the  p atient 
 It is useful to consider acne in three broad severity 
bands: mild, moderate and severe. 
 Mild  a cne 
 This may respond to topical treatment alone. 
Begin with benzoyl peroxide, retinoic acid, 
isotretinoin or adapalene, and/or a topical antibi-
otic. An antibiotic/benzoyl peroxide combination 
can be a useful option.  
 Moderate  a cne 
 This should initially be treated with a combination 
of a topical agent and oral oxytetracycline or 
erythromycin (either of these in a dose of 500   mg 
twice daily), continuing for at least 3 – 6 months 
before reassessing. Alternative tetracyclines (dox-
ycycline, lymecycline, minocycline) have their 
advocates: usually on the basis of better absorp-
tion or tolerance. 
 If the response is not satisfactory, or if the 
changes are severe at the outset, acne should be 
managed as outlined below.  
 Severe  a cne 
 Girls may respond to cyproterone acetate (co -
 cyprindiol) with or without antibiotics, allowing at 
least 6 months for a response. Dapsone at a dose 
of 25   mg twice daily can be helpful. 
 However, many girls and most young men 
with severe or persistent acne eventually require 
isotretin oin, usually for 4 – 6 months. The daily 
 Common  a cne  m yths 
  •    Acne is due to fatty food or sweets  
  •    Acne is due to being dirty  
  •    Acne is due to  ‘ hormonal imbalance ’  
  •    Acne is related to excessive, absent or aberrant 
sexual behaviour  
 All rubbish! 
  •    Diet plays no role at all; there is no need to 
avoid sweets, chocolate or chips  
  •    Even hourly washing would make no difference  
  •    Hormones are normal in the vast majority  
  •    Neither too little nor too much sex makes any 
difference (thank goodness!)  
 Acne  a ssessment 
 Mild  
  •    Only comedones  and/or  only a few 
papulopustular lesions restricted to the face  
 Moderate  
  •    More papulopustular lesions on the face or over 
a wider area  and/or  occasional nodules  
 Severe  
  •    Very widespread papulopustular lesions  and/or  
nodulocystic lesions  and/or  systemic symptoms  
 or acne of moderate severity, failing to settle within 
6 months of therapy 
 or acne of whatever severity with signiﬁ cant 
psychological upset 
 Secondary  a cne 
 Acne lesions may arise as a consequence of other 
primary pathological processes. Such  ‘ secondary ’ 
acne is often monomorphic and generally mild. 
 An exception is acne occurring in patients with 
endocrine abnormalities. The most common is 
polycystic ovary syndrome, in which acne of any 
severity may accompany hirsutism, menstrual 
irregularities and infertility. Any cause of abnor-
mally high circulating androgen levels (such as 
tumours) may result in bad acne, whereas lesions 
in Cushing ’ s syndrome are milder. 
 Topical preparations (including medicaments) 
such as greasy ointments, pomades and topical 
steroids may induce comedones and papules, par-
ticularly on the face. Several drugs induce acnei-
form lesions or make pre - existing acne worse, 

58  Acne, acneiform eruptions and rosacea
 Pityrosporum folliculitis, caused by  Malassezia 
sp., features follicular papules and pustules on 
the trunk, without other features of acne. The con-
dition responds to antifungal agents such as 
miconazole. 
 In keratosis pilaris, small spiky projections 
develop at the mouth of hair follicles, especially on 
the upper, outer arms and shoulders. Lesions may 
appear on the face, especially in children, and are 
occasionally pustular. A family history is common. 
Topical retinoic acid may be helpful. 
 Rosacea is an important differential diagnosis of 
acne, and is sometimes erroneously called  ‘ acne 
rosacea ’ . It occurs in both sexes, but most fre-
quently affects middle - aged women. The sites of 
predilection are the central cheeks, forehead and 
glabellar region, end of the nose and chin (Figure 
notably systemic steroids, phenytoin, isoniazid 
and lithium. 
 Oil - induced acne occurs when mineral oils 
come into close contact with the skin. This is often 
at unusual sites, such as the lower abdomen and 
thighs. 
 Chloracne is a speciﬁ c change in which come-
dones appear after exposure to chlorinated chem-
ical compounds. Famous examples are the release 
of dioxin from an explosion at Seveso in Italy and 
the poisoning of a prominent Ukrainian politi-
cian. Systemic upsets also occur.  
 Hidradenitis  s uppurativa 
 Although uncommon, this distinctive disorder 
results in very unpleasant, chronic, relapsing 
sepsis in the apocrine areas of the axillae and 
groins (Figure  6.7 ). Many apocrine glands open 
into the upper part of pilosebaceous follicles and 
comedonal occlusion of the ducts may be the 
initial event in hidradenitis.   
 Recurrent painful abscesses and sinus tracks 
develop. Many patients with hidradenitis have 
concurrent severe acne, or have had acne in the 
past. 
 Some patients improve on long - term antibiotics 
(including agents with activity against anaerobic 
bacteria), antiandrogens and/or isotretinoin, but 
many require plastic surgery.  
 Acneiform  d isorders 
 Several conditions mimic acne, but close exami-
nation will reveal important differences. 
 Pseudofolliculitis barbae (shaving rash): pro-
duces small papules in the beard area and is more 
common in those with naturally curly hair, espe-
cially African – Caribbean individuals. Occasionally 
small keloids develop. The process may involve 
the nape of the neck, when it is usually termed 
 ‘ acne keloidalis ’ . Treatment is unsatisfactory. 
 Acne excori é e ( des jeunes ﬁ lles ) is typically seen 
in teenage girls who present with facial excoria-
tions but very few primary lesions. There are no 
comedones. This is a form of neurotic excoriation 
(see Chapter  20 ), and patients need to be given a 
clear explanation and helped to try and reduce the 
self - inﬂ icted damage. 
 Figure 6.7   Hidradenitis suppurativa of (a) axilla and 
(b) groin.  
(b)
(a)

Acne, acneiform eruptions and rosacea  59
 6.8 ). The eruption consists of small papules and 
pustules arising in crops on an erythematous, tel-
angiectatic background.   
 There are no comedones. Patients frequently 
complain of ﬂ ushing easily with heat or alcohol, 
and migraines are more common. In men, severe 
 Figure 6.8   Rosacea: (a) showing typical distribution 
and (b) inﬂ ammatory papules and pustules.  
(a)
(b)
 Figure 6.9   Rhinophyma.  
involvement of the nose leads to marked seba-
ceous hyperplasia known as rhinophyma (Figure 
 6.9 ). 
 The treatment of choice is tetracyclines, given 
for several weeks in similar doses to those for 
moderate acne (see above). Topical metronidazole 
is also effective and often combined with oral 
therapy. It may be possible to tail off the treat-
ment, but the condition often recurs. Topical ster-
oids make matters worse. Rhinophyma is best 
dealt with by plastic surgeons. Severe resistant 
rosacea may respond to oral isotretinoin. 
 Perioral dermatitis (note for classical purists: 
it should really be  ‘  circum - oral ’ [Latin] or  ‘ peri -
 stomal ’  [Greek]) produces a clinical appearance 
somewhat reminiscent of rosacea (see Figure  22.3 ). 
It is often associated with topical steroid abuse. 
(For more details see Chapter  22 .) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

60  Eczema
 7 
Eczema  
 The terms  ‘ eczema ’ (Greek, meaning  ‘ to boil over ’ ) 
and  ‘ dermatitis ’  are synonymous.  ‘ Atopic eczema ’  
is therefore the same as  ‘ atopic dermatitis ’ , and 
 ‘ seborrhoeic eczema ’ and  ‘ seborrhoeic dermatitis ’ 
are the same. Eczema/dermatitis is a type of 
inﬂ ammatory reaction pattern in the skin that 
may be provoked by a number of external or inter-
nal factors.  
 Clinical  f eatures 
 The principal symptom of eczema is itching. The 
clinical signs depend on its aetiology, site and 
duration, but usually comprise erythema, oedema, 
papules, vesicles and exudation (Figure  7.1 ). An 
acute eczema will have all these features, and 
might also have a bullous component. In a chronic 
eczema oedema is not a prominent feature, but 
the epidermis becomes thickened and the skin 
surface markings are exaggerated (licheniﬁ cation) 
(Figure  7.2 ). A common feature of eczema of the 
hands or feet is the formation of painful ﬁ ssures 
in the skin overlying joints.   
 A phenomenon that is seen with an acute der-
matitis, particularly allergic contact dermatitis, is 
secondary spread of the eczema to sites distant 
from the originally affected area. Occasionally, 
most of the body surface is affected, and eczema 
is one cause of generalized exfoliative dermatitis. 
 Other changes in the skin that may accompany 
eczema include scratch marks and secondary bac-
terial infection. Prolonged scratching and rubbing 
of the skin tend to polish ﬁ ngernails, and patients 
with chronic eczema often have nails that look as 
if they have a coat of clear nail varnish.  
 Classiﬁ cation 
 We still have a great deal to learn about the aetiol-
ogy of certain types of eczema, so any attempt at 
classiﬁ cation is based on our present state of igno-
rance. A commonly employed system of classiﬁ ca-
tion divides cases of eczema into  ‘ exogenous ’ , where 
an external agent is responsible, and  ‘ endogenous ’ , 
where the problem is principally constitutional. 
There are, however, frequent cases in which more 
than one factor may be operating, e.g. the hair-
dresser with hand dermatitis who has atopic der-
matitis and also superimposed irritant dermatitis 
from contact with shampoos. Do not be too rigid 
in your attempts to classify a particular dermatitis —
 it may not ﬁ t a recognized category, and it might 
be preferable to use a more general term such as 
 ‘ probably endogenous ’ . The classiﬁ cation in the 
box includes most of the types of eczema you are 
likely to encounter. 
  
 Eczema  c lassiﬁ cation 
 Exogenous  
  •    Primary irritant contact dermatitis  
  •    Allergic contact dermatitis  
 Endogenous  
  •    Atopic eczema  
  •    Seborrhoeic dermatitis  
  •    Discoid eczema  
  •    Varicose eczema  
  •    Endogenous eczema of the palms and soles  
  •    Asteatotic eczema (eczema craquel é )  
Lecture Notes: Dermatology, 10th edition. © RAC Graham-Brown 
and DA Burns. Published 2011 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Eczema  61
hardly likely to inconvenience her epidermis to 
the same degree. The typical appearance of house-
wives ’  hand dermatitis is dryness of the palms and 
ﬁ ngertips, often with painful ﬁ ssures in the skin 
creases and on the ﬁ nger pulps. 
 Occupational irritant dermatitis is common, 
e.g. hairdressing apprentices may spend a sub-
stantial part of the day with their hands immersed 
in shampoo on their clients ’  heads, and many 
develop irritant dermatitis. If they also have atopic 
eczema their hand problem often becomes so 
severe that they are forced to leave hairdressing. A 
similar situation is seen in machine - tool operators 
whose hands are immersed in cutting ﬂ uid (Figure 
 7.3 ). It follows that young people with atopic der-
matitis should be advised to avoid careers in occu-
pations involving contact with irritants, such as 
hairdressing, engineering, vehicle mechanics, 
nursing and catering.   
 In theory, the treatment is simple — either 
remove the patient from contact with the irritant 
or protect the hands against it. In practice it is 
often impossible to avoid contact with the irritant 
without changing jobs, and in many occupations 
the nature of the work means that wearing gloves 
is impracticable. The skin can be helped to a 
certain extent by the liberal use of emollients (see 
Chapter  22 ), but it cannot be restored to normal 
while exposure to irritants continues. What usually 
happens is that severe dermatitis eventually forces 
a change of occupation, or individuals with milder 
problems learn to tolerate them. 
 Exogenous  e czema 
 Primary  i rritant  d ermatitis 
 Primary irritants physically damage the skin, and 
include acids, alkalis, detergents and petroleum 
products. Some strong irritants will produce an 
immediate effect, whereas with weaker irritants 
the effects are cumulative. Anyone who has atopic 
dermatitis is more susceptible to the effects of 
primary irritants. The housewife with a  ‘ couch -
 potato ’  husband, eight children and no washing 
machine or dishwasher is a good candidate for a 
cumulative primary irritant dermatitis, because 
her hands will be perpetually immersed in 
washing - up liquid and soap powder. However, the 
wife of a merchant banker with 2.2 children, a 
nanny and a kitchen full of modern appliances is 
 Figure 7.1   Typical eczema.  
 Figure 7.2   Licheniﬁ ed eczema.  

62  Eczema
recent times it is the jeans stud that has become 
an important source of nickel, and a patch of 
eczema adjacent to the umbilicus is virtually 
pathognomonic of nickel sensitivity (Figure  7.4 ). 
 If nickel dermatitis is suspected, look at the skin 
on the earlobes and wrists. In spite of being aware 
that costume jewellery provokes a skin reaction, 
many women continue to wear a favourite pair of 
earrings from time to time, and will have dermatitis 
on the ears. Nickel dermatitis on the wrists is usually 
caused by the metal buckle on a watch strap. Stain-
less steel in wrist watches does not cause any prob-
lems because, although steel contains nickel, it is 
tightly bound and does not leach out. 
 The multitude of folk who have adopted the 
 ‘ fashion ’ of having their delicate bodily parts 
pierced are perhaps fortunate in that the various 
rings and barbells dangling and protruding from 
them are made of good quality steel, and do not 
usually provoke dermatitis unless further embel-
lished with costume jewellery. Anyone who is 
allergic to nickel should be advised to avoid 
costume jewellery (unless it is known to be nickel 
free), bare metal clips on underwear, metal buckles 
on shoes and metal zips. The metal stud on the 
front of jeans can be replaced by a button, and 
problems from watches can usually be avoided by 
wearing a Swatch watch, as the only metal in 
contact with the skin is the stainless steel battery 
compartment.  
 Colophony 
 This is a resin that is a component of some adhe-
sive plasters. 
 Allergic  c ontact  d ermatitis 
 This is due to a delayed hypersensitivity reaction 
to an external allergen. There are innumerable 
chemicals that can act as allergens, but most 
rarely cause problems. Some chemicals are such 
potent allergens that a single exposure will cause 
sensitization, but many require multiple expo-
sures before sensitization occurs. It is possible to 
be exposed to an allergen for years, and then sud-
denly develop hypersensitivity. 
 Frequent causes of contact dermatitis include 
nickel, colophony, rubber additives, chromate, 
hair dyes and topical medicaments — both their 
active ingredients and components of their bases.  
 Nickel  d ermatitis 
 Nickel is the most common cause of contact 
dermatitis in women, whereas contact allergy to 
nickel is uncommon in men. Sensitization to 
nickel usually occurs in childhood and early adult 
life as a result of ear piercing and the wearing of 
cheap costume jewellery. The problem usually 
begins with itchy earlobes, but it is dermatitis 
caused by the metallic components of other gar-
ments that brings the nickel - sensitive patient to 
the dermatologist. In the pre - miniskirt era, sus-
pender dermatitis was the most common presen-
tation of nickel sensitivity. Suspender belts were 
perhaps more functional than decorative in those 
days, and the bare metal clips produced patches 
of dermatitis on the thighs. With the advent of 
the miniskirt and tights, suspender dermatitis dis-
appeared from the dermatology clinic. In more 
 Figure 7.3   Hand dermatitis in a 
machine - tool operator.  

Eczema  63
 Figure 7.4   Contact dermatitis to 
nickel in jeans stud.  
margin. Hair dyes are also a cause of contact der-
matitis on the hands of hairdressers. The chemical 
usually responsible for hair dye dermatitis, para-
phenylenediamine (PPD), is also sometimes 
mixed with henna and used in temporary tattoos, 
a form of decoration that is currently quite popu-
lar, and this may be responsible for severe allergic 
contact dermatitis.  
 Topical  m edicaments 
 Medicament dermatitis is relatively common in 
dermatological practice, but perhaps not as 
common as might be expected if one consid-
ers the huge quantities of creams, lotions and 
potions used in the average household. Open 
any bathroom cabinet or bedside drawer in any 
house in the land and you will ﬁ nd creams for 
dry skin, creams for haemorrhoids, preparations 
for cuts and grazes, creams for insect bites and 
stings, and almost invariably a tube of a topical 
steroid. 
 Common causes of contact dermatitis in topi-
cal medicaments include antibiotics, particularly 
neomycin, local anaesthetics (except lidocaine, 
which is a rare sensitizer), antihistamines and pre-
servatives. Dermatoses in which contact sensitiv-
ity to some of these agents may be a complicating 
factor include otitis externa, pruritus ani and 
venous leg ulcers. In recent years, contact allergy 
to topical steroids has emerged as a problem. It is 
usually discovered in patients who fail to respond 
or experience a deterioration in their skin con-
dition while undergoing treatment with topical 
steroids. 
 Rubber  d ermatitis 
 During the manufacture of rubber, chemicals are 
used to speed up the vulcanization process (accel-
erators) and to prevent its oxidation (antioxidants), 
and these can cause allergic contact dermatitis. 
 In recent years there has been a marked increase 
in the occurrence of reactions to natural rubber 
latex protein in latex gloves. Latex protein can 
provoke an immediate hypersensitivity response, 
and reactions range from contact urticaria to rhin-
itis, asthma and anaphylaxis. Individuals affected 
are most often healthcare workers who frequently 
wear latex gloves, but patients who have under-
gone multiple procedures, most notably people 
with spina biﬁ da, may also be affected. A signiﬁ -
cant factor contributing to this problem appears 
to have been that the demand for latex gloves out-
stripped supply, and some manufacturers subse-
quently produced gloves containing large amounts 
of free latex protein. This situation has been rem-
edied, and it is hoped that latex allergy will now 
become less of a problem.  
 Chromate 
 Chromium compounds have a number of indus-
trial applications. They are also used in leather 
tanning, and are the major sensitizer in cement. 
Cement dermatitis is common in building workers.  
 Hair  d ye  d ermatitis 
 Contact sensitivity to hair dye usually presents as 
severe dermatitis affecting the face, ears and scalp 

64  Eczema
 Diagnosis of  a llergic 
 c ontact  d ermatitis 
 It is important to take a detailed history cover-
ing present occupation, previous occupations, 
hobbies and the use of topical medicaments. The 
distribution pattern of the dermatitis may suggest 
a possible allergen, and provoke further ques-
tions, e.g. eczema adjacent to the umbilicus 
prompts enquiry about previous problems with 
earrings. Certain patterns are characteristic of a 
particular allergen: in the days when  ‘ strike any-
where ’  matches were in common use contact sen-
sitivity to phosphorus sesquisulﬁ de, which is 
present in the heads of the matches, was respon-
sible for a combination of eczema on the face, in 
the ears, on the hands and on one or other thigh. 
The facial eczema was caused by contact with the 
smoke from the matches, the hand eczema by 
handling the matchbox, which had the chemical 
on the striking surface, and that on the thigh from 
carrying the box in a trouser pocket. The eczema 
in the ears was the result of using matches to clean 
them out! 
 However, when the cause is not as obvious it 
may require considerable detective work to track 
it down, and patch testing (see Chapter  2 ) is an 
essential component of the investigative process. 
Patch testing is quite different from prick or 
scratch testing. It is a delayed hypersensitivity 
response, in which the reaction takes 48   h to 
develop, whereas prick or scratch tests elicit an 
immediate hypersensitivity response that devel-
ops within minutes. A standard battery of common 
allergens is used in routine patch testing, but 
other batteries of allergens, such as components 
of topical agents or occupational allergens, are 
also available. The majority of the allergens used 
are mixed in white soft parafﬁ n to a speciﬁ c con-
centration, because many are irritant in high 
concentration and might produce false - positive 
reactions. Patients sometimes claim that they are 
 ‘ allergic ’  to materials that they use at work, and 
these may be presented to the dermatologist, 
often in unmarked jars. Such materials are often 
irritants, and should not be used for patch testing 
without obtaining further information about their 
constituents and potential toxicity, otherwise they 
might bore an untidy hole in the patient ’ s back. 
 Positive reactions must be interpreted in the 
context of the patient ’ s presenting problem — not 
all positives will be relevant. 
 Occupational  c ontact  d ermatitis 
 If occupational factors are thought to be responsi-
ble for contact dermatitis, a detailed history, 
including precise information about the nature 
of an individual ’ s work, is essential. This should 
include not only information about present occu-
pation but also details of previous employment. A 
history of signiﬁ cant improvement of the derma-
titis during holiday periods is typical of a work -
 related dermatosis. If someone tells you that he 
was a  ‘ saggar - maker ’ s bottom knocker ’ , enquire 
as to the nature of this exotic - sounding occupa-
tion (it used to be encountered in areas where 
ceramic ware was produced) — it is common to 
encounter terminology that is speciﬁ c to a certain 
occupation, and is incomprehensible to those 
outside the trade. Establish what materials are 
handled at work, and if there have been any 
changes which coincided with the onset of the 
dermatitis. It is also useful to know if any work-
mates have the same problem. Seeing a patient in 
the working environment is often important in 
determining the cause of a dermatitis.  
 Plant  d ermatitis 
 Plant dermatitis is relatively uncommon in Europe. 
In the past, reactions to household plants usu-
ally involved  Primula obconica,  and were caused 
by the allergen primin, but this has become less 
common with the introduction of allergen - free 
cultivars. Garden plants can also cause prob-
lems, and in summer exposure to the sap of cer-
tain plants and sunlight can provoke a so - called 
phytophotodermatitis — giant hogweed and other 
Umbelliferae are often implicated. A well - recognized 
scenario is the occurrence of a spattered blistering 
eruption in someone who, stripped to the waist in 
strong sunshine, has used a strimmer on weeds 
such as cow parsley (strimmer ’ s dermatitis). Chry-
santhemums also cause dermatitis, sesquiterpene 
lactones being the responsible allergens. The han-
dling of garlic and tulip bulbs is a cause of ﬁ ngertip 
dermatitis. 
 In the USA, the poison ivies ( Toxicodendron 
spp.) are the most common cause of plant derma-
titis, and in India feverfew ( Parthenium hystero-
phorus ) is the most troublesome. 
 Dermatitis caused by plants tends to present 
with a linear, vesiculobullous reaction on the 
exposed parts of the body.  

Eczema  65
inﬂ uences. Immunological abnormalities in the 
atopic state include increased serum total IgE 
and speciﬁ c IgE antibody to ingested or inhaled 
antigens (such as house - dust mite allergens), 
and preferential activation of the T - helper 2 (Th2) 
subset of CD4 +  T cells, which produce interleukin 
4 (IL - 4), IL - 5 and IL - 13, all of which are involved 
in regulation of IgE synthesis by B lymphocytes. 
Staphylococci colonize the skin of patients with 
atopic eczema, and staphylococcal exotoxins with 
superantigen properties are also thought to play a 
pathogenic role. 
 Atopic eczema is not present at birth, but fre-
quently appears in the ﬁ rst year of life. In early 
childhood the eczema is often generalized, but 
later a characteristic ﬂ exural involvement is 
seen — wrists, antecubital fossae, popliteal fossae 
and dorsa of feet (Figure  7.5 ). The skin is dry and 
intensely itchy. As a result of constant scratching 
and rubbing, the affected areas become thickened 
(licheniﬁ cation). The course is typically punctu-
ated by episodic exacerbations.   
 Atopic eczema often resolves in childhood, but 
may persist into adolescence and adult life, and 
there is no way of predicting the outcome. Those 
whose skin has apparently reverted to normal 
remain susceptible to the effects of primary irri-
tants, which may provoke a recrudescence of 
eczema. 
 The most common complication is second-
ary bacterial infection, producing folliculitis or 
impetigo. Viral warts and molluscum conta-
giosum occur more frequently in atopic indivi-
duals, and herpes simplex infection may lead to 
 Wait until an acute eczema has settled before 
patch testing — positive reactions may exacerbate 
the eczema.  
 Treatment 
 Potent topical steroids (see Chapter  22 ) should be 
used to settle the eczema before patch testing. 
Once an allergen has been identiﬁ ed as the cause 
of a problem, the patient should be advised about 
its avoidance. If components of medicaments are 
involved, the patient ’ s family doctor must be 
informed of what preparations the patient should 
avoid. 
 Endogenous  e czema 
 Atopic  e czema 
 The term  ‘ atopy ’ implies a genetic predisposi-
tion to develop eczema, asthma and hay fever. 
A family history of atopy is common in patients 
with atopic eczema. Recently, it has been demon-
strated that loss - of - function mutations in  FLG , the 
gene encoding ﬁ laggrin (see Chapter  1 ) strongly 
predispose to atopic eczema. In addition, a greater 
prevalence of atopic eczema in developed  ‘ west-
ernized ’  countries than in developing countries, 
and evidence that the prevalence of atopic disease 
is increasing, are factors suggesting that environ-
mental influences also play a part in pathogen-
esis. Other factors in its complex pathogenesis 
are immunological abnormalities and emotional 
 Figure 7.5   Flexural involvement in 
atopic eczema.  

66  Eczema
elimination diets in which dairy products, food 
additives, nuts and other foods suspected of 
exacerbating eczema are excluded, but in many 
there is no obvious beneﬁ t. Most dermatologists 
reserve dietary manipulation for severely affected 
children who fail to beneﬁ t from other treatment 
methods. It is dangerous to manipulate a child ’ s 
diet without expert advice, because this can lead 
to nutritional deﬁ ciencies. 
widespread skin lesions (see Chapter  3 ) and a 
severe illness (eczema herpeticum, Kaposi ’ s vari-
celliform eruption). 
 Treatment 
 An important aspect of the management of a child 
with atopic eczema is sympathetic explanation of 
the nature of the condition to his or her parents. 
 Emollients are essential in the management of 
the dry skin in atopic eczema. There are numerous 
emollients available, and it is often necessary to 
try a number of preparations in order to ﬁ nd one 
that is suitable for a particular individual. They 
can be used in combination at bath time, e.g. one 
as a soap substitute, a bath oil in the water and an 
emollient cream afterwards. 
 Topical steroids are invaluable in the treatment 
of atopic eczema. In young children mild steroids 
are the mainstay. In older children and adults 
more potent steroids are required, but the aim 
should always be to use the weakest prepara-
tion sufficient to control the disease. A topi-
cal steroid/antibacterial combination may be 
useful if eczema frequently becomes secondarily 
infected — obvious secondary infection should be 
treated with a systemic antibiotic such as ﬂ ucloxa-
cillin or erythromycin. Emollient/antimicrobial 
combinations may also be useful in reducing bac-
terial colonization of the skin. 
 In recent years, topical preparations of the cal-
cineurin inhibitors tacrolimus and pimecrolimus 
have become available for the treatment of atopic 
eczema. An advantage of these products is that 
unlike topical steroids they do not produce skin 
atrophy. At present they are principally used in 
patients whose eczema has not responded to con-
ventional therapy, and they can be particularly 
useful for facial eczema. 
 The wet - wrap technique is useful in the man-
agement of severe eczema, and medicated band-
ages such as zinc paste and ichthammol or zinc 
oxide and coal tar, applied over a topical steroid, 
are beneficial for eczema on the limbs. A seda-
tive antihistamine at night may help to reduce 
scratching. Ultraviolet light treatment, either UVB 
or psoralens and UVA (PUVA therapy), helps 
some atopic individuals, but the eczema often 
relapses when treatment is stopped. Ciclosporin 
may be of great beneﬁ t to patients with severe 
atopic eczema. 
 The value of dietary manipulation is contro-
versial. Some children appear to be helped by 
 Figure 7.6   Seborrhoeic dermatitis.  
(b)
(a)

Eczema  67
 Discoid  e czema 
 In this disorder, scattered, well - demarcated areas 
of exuding and crusting eczema develop on the 
trunk and limbs. A potent topical steroid is usually 
required to keep the condition controlled. Its aeti-
ology is unknown.  
 Varicose  e czema ( s tasis 
 d ermatitis;  g ravitational  e czema) 
 Chronic venous hypertension is frequently associ-
ated with eczematous changes on the legs. Sec-
ondary spread to the forearms may occur. 
 Mild or moderate potency topical steroids will 
usually suppress the eczema.  
 Endogenous  e czema of the 
 p alms and  s oles 
 Some patients develop a symmetrical pattern of 
eczema affecting the palms and soles that is 
chronic, and does not appear to be related to any 
external factors. Long - term treatment with potent 
topical steroids is usually required. 
 An episodic form of eczema of the palms and 
soles, in which bulla formation occurs, is known 
as acute pompholyx (Figure  7.7 ). This develops 
rapidly, and can be severely incapacitating. Sec-
ondary bacterial infection is common. It usually 
responds to treatment with potassium perman-
ganate soaks and a systemic antibiotic such as 
ﬂ ucloxacillin or erythromycin. The trigger for these 
episodes is unknown. Ciclosporin or the oral 
 Chinese herbal therapy is another controver-
sial issue. Undoubtedly some individuals have 
beneﬁ ted from Chinese herbal medicines, but 
there is concern about their potential for hepa-
totoxicity and nephrotoxicity, and some topical 
 ‘ herbal ’  medicines have been shown to contain 
steroids. 
 Seborrhoeic  d ermatitis 
 This is a constitutional disorder the exact patho-
genesis of which is not fully understood, but in 
recent years the role of malassezia yeasts has been 
emphasized. 
 Seborrhoeic dermatitis affects the scalp, face, 
presternal area, upper back and ﬂ exures. Scalp 
involvement presents as itchy, diffuse scaling on 
an erythematous background. On the face, there 
is scaly erythema in the nasolabial folds and on 
the forehead, eyebrows and beard area (Figure 
 7.6 ). Lesions on the chest are often marginated. 
Flexural involvement produces a moist, glazed 
erythema. Particularly severe seborrhoeic derma-
titis occurs in patients with AIDS.   
 Seborrhoeic dermatitis usually requires treat-
ment over many years, as there is no cure for this 
condition. It is important to make this clear to 
patients, who otherwise tend to try many treat-
ments in their quest for a permanent solution to 
the problem. Topical hydrocortisone is effective, 
but the problem recurs when treatment is stopped. 
Steroid lotions or gels and tar shampoos will help 
the scalp. Ketoconazole shampoo and cream, and 
imidazole/hydrocortisone combinations, are also 
effective. 
 Figure 7.7   Pompholyx.  

68  Eczema
retinoid alitretinoin may be of beneﬁ t in recalci-
trant eczema of the palms.    
 Asteatotic  e czema 
 With increasing age, the lipid content of the 
stratum corneum decreases, and elderly skin is 
parti cularly susceptible to  ‘ degreasing ’ agents. 
Asteatotic eczema (also known as eczema 
craquel é ) is usually seen on the legs, but it may 
also occur on the lower abdomen and arms, and 
occasionally it is generalized. It is common in 
elderly patients admitted to hospital and bathed 
more frequently than they bathe at home. A crazy -
 paving pattern develops (Figure  7.8 ), and the skin 
itches. Treatment with an emollient is sometimes 
adequate, but a mild topical steroid ointment is 
often necessary. 
 Juvenile  p lantar  d ermatosis 
 As its name suggests, this condition occurs in chil-
dren. It is thought to be related to wearing training 
shoes and socks made of synthetic materials, and 
may represent a form of irritant dermatitis. It 
became prevalent in the 1970s when  ‘ trainers ’  
were introduced as footwear. The weight - bearing 
areas of the feet are dry and shiny, and painful 
ﬁ ssures occur (Figure  7.9 ). Changing to cotton or 
woollen socks and leather shoes sometimes helps, 
as does the liberal use of emollients. Topical ster-
oids are usually ineffective. It almost invariably 
resolves by the early teens. 
 We are of the impression that this condition is 
becoming less prevalent — possibly as a result of 
 Figure 7.8   Eczema craquel é .  
 Figure 7.9   Juvenile plantar dermatosis.  
changes in the components of footwear, rather 
than a reduction in the number of individuals 
wearing training shoes. 
 

 8 
Psoriasis  
 Dermatologists do it on a grand scale. 
 Anon 
 Introduction 
 Psoriasis is one of the most common and most 
important of the inﬂ ammatory dermatoses: up to 
3% of the population of western countries, India 
and the Far East develop psoriasis during their 
lifetime. It is also common in parts of Africa. As 
most of those who develop psoriasis have lesions 
for the rest of their lives, it is clearly a considerable 
problem. 
 It is still not known why psoriasis develops when 
it does. There is undoubtedly a strong genetic com-
ponent, particularly if the disease begins in youth 
or early adulthood. However, although a family 
history is common, there is often no clear - cut 
inheritance pattern. What does seem clear is that 
the cascade of changes described below probably 
results from an interaction between T cells and 
keratinocytes, with the involvement of various 
cytokines and chemoattractants — notably inter-
leukins 1 and 8 (IL - 1 and IL - 8), tumour necrosis 
factor - α (TNF - α ), E - selectin and intercellular 
adhesion molecule - 1 (ICAM - 1). 
 Some well - recognized triggers may induce pso-
riasis in susceptible individuals, notably trauma 
and infection. Some authorities also maintain that 
stress may induce or exacerbate the condition. 
However, there is no clear understanding of what 
causes some areas of skin to turn into plaques of 
psoriasis while others remain normal.  
 Pathology 
 The pathological process is a combination of epi-
dermal hyperproliferation and accumulation of 
inﬂ ammatory cells. The  ‘ epidermal transit time ’ is 
markedly reduced from the normal 8 – 10 weeks to 
a few days. There is also increased vascularity of 
the upper dermis. Figure  8.1 provides a schematic 
representation of a psoriatic plaque. The cardinal 
features are given in the box.   
  
 Cardinal  f eatures 
  •    Marked thickening of the epidermis 
(acanthosis)  
  •    Absence of the granular cell layer  
  •    Retention of nuclei in the horny layer 
(parakeratosis)  
  •    Accumulations of polymorphs in the horny layer 
(microabscesses)  
  •    Dilated capillary loops in the upper dermis  
Lecture Notes: Dermatology, 10th edition. © RAC Graham-Brown 
and DA Burns. Published 2011 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

70  Psoriasis
 Classic  p laque  p soriasis 
 This is the pattern that you will encounter most 
commonly. There are single or multiple red 
plaques, varying from a few millimetres to several 
centimetres in diameter, with a scaly surface 
(Figure  8.2 ). If scraped very gently, the scale can 
be seen to reﬂ ect the light, giving a  ‘ silvery ’  effect 
(due to the parakeratotic horny layer). More vigor-
ous rubbing induces capillary - point haemorrhage 
(Auspitz ’ s sign). 
 The plaques may develop on any part of the 
body, but psoriasis has a predilection for exten-
sor surfaces: the knees, the elbows and the base of 
the spine. Lesions are often strikingly symmetri-
cal. Involvement of the face is relatively uncom-
mon, but the scalp and nails are often affected 
(Figures  8.3  and  8.4 ), and an arthropathy may also 
occur. 
 Plaques tend to be chronic and stable, with 
little day - to - day change (compared with  ‘ brittle ’ 
psoriasis — see below). However, they may enlarge 
slowly, merge with adjacent areas and also resolve 
spontaneously. Occasionally, psoriatic plaques 
appear at the site of trauma or scarring. This is 
known as the Koebner or isomorphic phenome-
non and is a characteristic, but not pathogno-
monic, feature. Exposure to ultraviolet (UV) 
radiation and natural sunlight often (but not 
always) improves psoriasis. 
 This basic picture, with some variations (e.g. 
increased size and number of polymorph abscesses 
in pustular psoriasis), unites all forms of psoriasis 
and the skin lesions of Reiter ’ s syndrome.  
 Clinical  p atterns 
of  p soriasis 
 A number of different clinical patterns are recog-
nized. Some are common, others are rarer. We 
discuss them separately, but they may be seen 
together or overlap. 
  
 Figure 8.1   Schematic representation 
of a psoriatic plaque.  
Polymorph microabscesses
Parakeratosis
Dilated upper
dermal capillaries
Marked epidermal
acanthosis
 Clinical  p atterns of  p soriasis 
  •    Classic plaque  
  •    Scalp psoriasis  
  •    Nail psoriasis  
  •    Guttate  
  •    Flexural  
  •    ‘ Brittle ’  
  •    Erythrodermic  
  •    Acute pustular  
  •    Chronic palmoplantar pustulosis  
  •    Arthropathic psoriasis  

Psoriasis  71
 Figure 8.2   Psoriatic plaque on the 
elbow.  
 Figure 8.3   Scalp psoriasis.  
 Figure 8.4   Nail pits in psoriasis.  
 It is often said that psoriasis is not itchy, but 
in our experience a signiﬁ cant number of patients 
complain of severe itching, and most experience 
some itch at times. In fact, the Greek  psora 
actually means itch. Some forms of psoriasis 
(e.g. guttate, ﬂ exural) are more prone to cause 
irritation.  
 Scalp  p soriasis 
 Scalp involvement is very common: indeed the 
scalp may be affected alone. It can be difﬁ cult to 
distinguish scalp psoriasis from severe sebor-
rhoeic dermatitis (see also Flexural psoriasis), but 
psoriasis lesions are generally thicker. As a rule of 
thumb, if you can feel scalp lesions as well as see 
them, they are probably psoriasis. 
 Involvement varies from one or two plaques to 
a sheet of thick scale covering the whole scalp 
surface (see Figure  8.3 ). Rarely, the scale becomes 

72  Psoriasis
very thick and sticks in large chunks to bundles of 
hair, a phenomenon known as  ‘ pityriasis amian-
tacea ’ . There may be temporary hair loss in severe 
scalp psoriasis.  
 Nail  p soriasis 
 Nail abnormalities are frequent and are important 
diagnostic clues if skin lesions are few, or atypical. 
Nail changes are almost always present in arthro-
pathic psoriasis. 
 Two common ﬁ ndings may occur together or 
alone: pitting and onycholysis. Psoriatic nail pits 
are relatively large and irregularly arranged (see 
Figure  8.4 ), compared with those of alopecia area-
ta. Onycholysis (lifting of the nail plate) starts as a 
red – brown area and progresses to separation of 
the nail plate from the nail bed (Figure  8.5 ). It is 
sometimes painful. These nail changes, particu-
larly onycholysis, may also occur without other 
evidence of the disease. 
 Occasionally, pustular changes occur at the ends 
of the digits and in the nail bed (sometimes known 
as  ‘ acrodermatitis continua ’ ). Similar changes may 
accompany chronic palmoplantar pustulosis (see 
below). In erythrodermic or pustular forms of pso-
riasis, the whole nail may become roughened and 
discoloured. 
 Guttate  p soriasis 
 Guttate psoriasis often develops suddenly, and 
may follow an infection, especially a streptococcal 
sore throat. It is a common way for psoriasis to 
present, particularly in young adults. 
 Gutta  is the Latin for  ‘ drop ’ . Most lesions are 
about a centimetre in diameter (Figure  8.6 ), and 
 Figure 8.5   Psoriatic onycholysis.  
 Figure 8.6   Guttate psoriasis.  
usually paler in colour than established plaque 
psoriasis, at least initially. The main differential 
diagnosis is pityriasis rosea (see Chapter  15 ), best 
distinguished by the presence of parakeratotic 
scale in psoriasis, and the shape of the lesions 
(round in guttate psoriasis, oval in pityriasis 
rosea). Guttate psoriasis may itch. 
 The lesions of guttate psoriasis often resolve 
rapidly, but in some patients the patches enlarge 
and become stable plaques.  
 Flexural  p soriasis 
 Flexural involvement in psoriasis may accompany 
typical plaque lesions, but is also commonly seen 
alone, or associated with scalp and nail changes. 
Lesions may occur in the groin, natal cleft, axillae, 
submammary folds and, importantly, umbilicus. 
Maceration inevitably occurs, and surface scale 
is often lost, leaving a rather beefy erythematous 
appearance (Figure  8.7 ). It may be difﬁ cult to 

Psoriasis  73
distinguish this from ﬂ exural seborrhoeic derma-
titis, so look for nail changes or evidence of pso-
riasis elsewhere. Some dermatologists believe in 
an overlap state between the two, and call such 
changes  ‘ sebopsoriasis ’ . 
 Flexural psoriasis is often itchy. Watch out for a 
secondary contact sensitivity from the use of pro-
prietary anti - itch preparations. 
 Brittle  p soriasis 
 Occasionally you will see patients whose psoriasis 
does not consist of thick, stable plaques, but of 
thin, irritable scaly areas (Figure  8.8 ). Lesions may 
arise anew or develop suddenly in a patient whose 
psoriasis has been stable for years. One reason for 
this is systemic steroid therapy (often for another 
condition), and potent topical steroids can also 
induce stable psoriasis to become  ‘ brittle ’ . 
 The signiﬁ cance of brittle psoriasis is that the 
lesions are highly unstable and may rapidly gen-
eralize, especially if treated with potent agents 
(see Treatment below), leading to erythroderma 
(see Chapter  15 ) or even acute pustular psoria-
sis (see below).  
 Erythrodermic  p soriasis 
 When psoriatic plaques merge to involve most or 
all of the skin, a state of erythroderma or exfolia-
tive dermatitis results. The effects of this are dis-
cussed in Chapter  15 . 
 Psoriasis may become erythrodermic by slow 
inexorable progression, or very rapidly. Occasion-
ally, new erythrodermic psoriasis may appear, and 
 Figure 8.7   Flexural psoriasis.  
 Figure 8.8   Widespread  ‘ brittle ’ psoriasis.  

74  Psoriasis
These gradually change into brown, scaly spots 
and peel off. The condition is usually uncomfort-
able or painful, rather than itchy.   
 Lesions may involve only a small area of 
one hand or foot, or cover the entire surface 
of both palms and soles, leading to considerable 
disability. 
 Figure 8.9   Acute pustular psoriasis.  
 Figure 8.10   (a) Chronic palmoplantar pustulosis; 
(b) the sterile pustules dry to form circumscribed brown 
areas that are later shed.  
(a)
(b)
may be precipitated by systemic steroids or potent 
topical steroids.  
 Acute  p ustular  p soriasis 
(of  v on Zumbusch) 
 This is a very serious condition. Patients with or 
without pre - existing psoriasis suddenly develop 
widespread erythema, superimposed on which 
are pustules. These may coalesce into lakes of pus 
(Figure  8.9 ). The pustules are sterile.   
 The patient has a high, swinging fever and is 
toxic and unwell, with a leukocytosis. If the disease 
is unchecked, patients become increasingly ill and 
may die, often of secondary infections.  
 Chronic  p almoplantar  p ustulosis 
( p ustular  p soriasis of  p alms 
and  s oles) 
 There is some debate about the relationship 
between this condition and other forms of pso-
riasis. Biopsies reveal psoriasiform pathology, but 
it is unusual for patients to have chronic palmo-
plantar pustulosis with other types of psoriasis. 
 The typical changes consist of erythematous 
patches with numerous pustules (Figure  8.10 ). 

Psoriasis  75
 Salicylic  a cid 
 Salicylic acid is a  ‘ keratolytic ’ agent and helps to 
reduce scaling. It can be used with tar in mixtures, 
and is also combined with a potent topical steroid 
in commercially available preparations.  
 Tar 
 Tar has been used for many years, particularly in 
combination with UV radiation. The most effec-
tive preparations are extracts of crude coal tar. 
Attempts have been made to reﬁ ne tar to make it 
more cosmetically acceptable, but the most effec-
tive forms still seem to be the darkest, smelliest 
and messiest. Consequently, not many patients 
will accept tar for widespread routine use. 
However, in bath oils or in ointment mixtures, tar 
may be helpful, and it is very valuable in scalp 
disease. 
 Topical  s teroids 
 Topical steroids do not eradicate psoriasis, but 
may suppress it. Some dermatologists say that 
they never use topical steroids in psoriasis because 
of the risks (they may induce  ‘ brittle ’ psoriasis). 
However, if used with care in stable disease, and 
on the scalp and in the ﬂ exures, they are undoubt-
edly useful.  
 Dithranol ( a nthralin) 
 Dithranol is a curious substance that can convert 
psoriatic plaques into completely normal - looking 
skin. The mode of action is unknown. The  ‘ Ingram 
regimen ’  — a combination of dithranol, tar and UV 
radiation — has been used for years: most patients 
can be cleared in about 3 weeks of daily treatment. 
Originally, dithranol was left on the skin for 24   h, 
but  ‘ short - contact ’ therapy has been shown to be 
as good. 
 Dithranol works best in Lassar ’ s paste (starch, 
zinc oxide and salicylic acid in white soft parafﬁ n), 
but is also available in cream and ointment bases. 
Always begin with a low concentration (0.1%) and 
increase as necessary. 
 The main complications are staining (due to 
oxidation to a dye) and burning. Skin staining is 
temporary, but baths, bedding and clothes may be 
permanently marked. Dithranol burns can be very 
unpleasant, especially around the eyes and ﬂ exu-
ral areas. Patients must be taught to use dithranol 
carefully. 
 Treatment of  p soriasis 
 The agents most widely used in the treatment of 
the skin lesions of psoriasis are given in the box. 
  
 Agents for  t reating  p soriasis 
 Topical  
  •    Emollients  
  •    Tar  
  •    Salicylic acid  
  •    Topical steroids  
  •    Dithranol (anthralin)  
  •    Vitamin D analogues (e.g. calcipotriol, tacalcitol)  
  •    Tazarotene  
  •    Ultraviolet radiation  
 Systemic  
  •    PUVA (psoralen    +  UVA)  
  •    Retinoids  
  •    Cytotoxics, e.g. methotrexate, azathioprine, 
hydroxycarbamide (hydroxyurea)  
  •    Systemic steroids  
  •    Ciclosporin  
  •    ‘ Biologicals ’ : various monoclonal antibodies  
 It is an old adage that if there are many treat-
ments for a disease, none works perfectly; this is 
certainly true of psoriasis. Although each modality 
is useful in some patients, all represent a compro-
mise in terms of safety, effectiveness and conven-
ience. Many patients require a regimen of different 
agents for different sites at different times. 
 Topical  t herapies 
 Many agents can be used topically to induce a 
remission or an improvement. Most are safe, but 
they are tedious for patients to use, as treatment 
may have to continue for months or, often, 
indeﬁ nitely. 
 Emollients 
 Some patients are prepared to tolerate plaques 
(especially on covered sites) if scaling and discom-
fort can be controlled. Emollients such as white or 
yellow soft parafﬁ n or lanolin may accomplish 
this. 

76  Psoriasis
with chronic use. Alcohol appears to exacerbate 
this tendency. Patients require regular and con-
tinuous monitoring of liver function; it is now con-
sidered best practice to measure levels of a 
circulating collagen precursor (PIIINP). Sustained 
elevation indicates the need for a liver biopsy. 
Methotrexate also inhibits spermatogenesis and is 
teratogenic. Its use should therefore be restricted 
to severely affected patients.  
 Retinoids 
 Vitamin A derivatives help some patients with 
pso riasis. The most commonly used is acitretin. 
Retinoids have a number of side effects, includ-
ing dry lips, nose bleeds, hair loss, hyperlipidae-
mia, liver function test abnormalities and 
teratogenicity. 
 Systemic  s teroids 
 In very severe psoriasis, especially erythrodermic 
or acute pustular forms, steroids may occasionally 
be necessary, but should not be used alone or for 
long.  
 Ciclosporin 
 This immunosuppressive drug works extremely 
well, even in very severe psoriasis. It is nephro-
toxic and very expensive. 
 Biologicals ( m onoclonal  a ntibodies) 
 A number of agents have been developed, aimed 
at speciﬁ c compounds, e.g. TNF - α , involved in 
immuno - inﬂ ammatory diseases such as rheuma-
toid arthritis and psoriasis. Examples include inf-
liximab, etanercept and adalimumab. These are 
expensive, and can be used only under strict cri-
teria in the UK. They all require administration by 
injection. 
 Treatment of  c linical 
 p atterns of  p soriasis 
 The choice of therapeutic regimen in psoriasis is 
dictated by the type and extent of lesions, and by 
the effects on the patient ’ s quality of life. A balance 
will often have to be struck between the need for 
improvement and the inconvenience and/or side 
effects of the agent(s) concerned. 
 Vitamin  D  a nalogues 
and  t azarotene 
 Vitamin D analogues (calcipotriol, tacalcitol, cal-
citriol) work well, and have rapidly found a place 
in routine management. They may irritate the face 
and in the ﬂ exures, and calcium levels may be dis-
turbed if large quantities of vitamin D analogues 
are applied. Tazarotene is a retinoid; patients 
using it should avoid pregnancy because of theo-
retical teratogenicity.  
 Ultraviolet  r adiation 
 The use of UV therapy is well established, the most 
effective wavelengths being in the medium (UVB) 
range — and particularly  ‘ narrow - band ’ UVB. UVB 
must be used with care because it also induces 
sunburn. Patients require doses that  just induce 
erythema but do not cause burning. The dose is 
then increased gradually. Treatment is usually 
given two or three times weekly until clearance is 
achieved. Adjunctive tar may make UVB more 
effective. 
 UVB is theoretically carcinogenic (as is tar), but 
surprisingly few psoriasis sufferers develop skin 
cancers. 
 Systemic  t herapies 
 Psoralen   +  ultraviolet  A ( PUVA ) 
 Psoralens form chemical bonds with DNA in the 
presence of UV radiation. The patient is given one 
of these agents (8 - methoxypsoralen and triox-
salen are the most common), either as a soak or 
by mouth 2  h before exposure to long - wavelength 
UV light (UVA), initially twice weekly. Protective 
glasses are worn to prevent ocular damage. There 
is a signiﬁ cant long - term risk of keratoses and epi-
thelial cancers with PUVA.  
 Cytotoxic  d rugs 
 The most effective and widely used cytotoxic is 
methotrexate, a folic acid antagonist. Most psoria-
sis responds to a once - weekly dose of 7.5 – 20  mg. 
Other drugs occasionally used include azathio-
prine and hydroxycarbamide. 
 All cytotoxics have unwanted effects, particu-
larly bone marrow suppression. This is rare with 
methotrexate, but may occur idiosyncratically, 
unrelated to dose. The major problem with meth-
otrexate is hepatotoxicity, particularly ﬁ brosis, 

Psoriasis  77
dition, but PUVA, retinoids or methotrexate may 
be needed, at least for a short time.  
 Erythrodermic and  a cute 
 p ustular  p soriasis 
 Although both of these states may settle with con-
servative management, it is more likely that sys-
temic treatment will be required. Such intervention 
can be life saving. The most common choice is 
methotrexate, but ciclosporin also works well. 
Once the condition has stabilized, the dose should 
be gradually reduced and the drug stopped if pos-
sible. However, many patients relapse and require 
long - term treatment. Biologicals may become an 
important option in such patients.  
 Chronic  p almoplantar  p ustulosis 
 Nothing really works well in this condition. Tar 
pastes, potent topical steroids or dithranol are 
often ineffective. Vitamin D analogues may be 
worth a trial, as is oral acitretin, and PUVA to the 
hands and feet may provide control, but relapse is 
common with any therapy.   
 Arthropathic  p soriasis 
 One of the most unpleasant complications of pso-
riasis is arthropathy, affecting up to 10% of people 
with psoriasis. There are four basic patterns as 
shown in the box. 
  
 Chronic  p laque  p soriasis 
 Dithranol is a theoretical ﬁ rst choice, but patients ’  
lifestyles, and treatment side effects often make it 
impractical. If so, vitamin D analogues or topical 
steroids (with or without tar and salicylic acid) are 
used. UV radiation may help. If lesions become 
very extensive, and/or if there are serious psycho-
social problems, PUVA or systemic therapy may 
be indicated.  
 Scalp  p soriasis 
 Tar shampoos are helpful, but seldom control 
thick plaques alone. Tar gels may help, but the 
best topical remedy is Unguentum Cocois Co — a 
mixture including tar and salicylic acid. This is 
massaged in at night and washed out the following 
morning. Topical steroid lotions, with or without 
salicylic acid, are also useful.  
 Nail  p soriasis 
 Nail changes do not respond to topical treatment, 
and systemic drugs are seldom justiﬁ ed for nails 
alone. 
 Guttate  p soriasis 
 This is most effectively treated with UV radiation 
together with emollients and a tar - based oint-
ment. If patients cannot ﬁ nd time to attend for 
treatment, a combination of moderately potent 
topical steroids and vitamin D analogues may be 
the best option.  
 Flexural  p soriasis 
 Psoriasis in the ﬂ exures poses problems. Mild tar/
corticosteroid mixtures may be effective, but long -
 term use of topical steroids can cause striae. 
Dithranol, used in very low concentrations, can be 
successful, but burning is common and under-
clothes are stained. UVB and PUVA generally fail 
to reach the affected areas. Vitamin D analogues 
help, but can burn. Tacrolimus and pimecrolimus 
have been used recently (and for facial lesions). 
 Brittle  p soriasis 
 Brittle psoriasis requires careful management. 
Avoid potent topical steroids, strong tar and sali-
cylic acid preparations. Emollients or very dilute 
steroids may bring the skin into a more stable con-
 Psoriatic  a rthropathy  p atterns 
  •    Distal interphalangeal joint involvement  
  •    Seronegative rheumatoid - like joint changes  
  •    Large joint mono - or polyarthropathy  
  •    Spondylitis  
 Most commonly the distal interphalangeal 
joints are involved, with the other changes listed 
in the box in descending order of frequency. 
Psoriatic arthropathy is erosive and may result in 
joint destruction if left unchecked. 
 People with psoriasis who develop spondylitis 
are usually HLA - B27 positive, and there is overlap 

78  Psoriasis
between psoriatic arthropathy and other seron-
egative arthritides. 
 Non - steroidal anti - inﬂ ammatory drugs and 
methotrexate are used. Biologicals are gaining 
particular importance in this group of patients.  
 Reiter ’ s  s yndrome 
 This disorder, which frequently follows a diar-
rhoeal illness or non - speciﬁ c urethritis in HLA -
 B27 - positive individuals, is discussed in Chapter 
 19 . Occasionally skin lesions known as  ‘ kerato-
derma blennorrhagicum ’  develop. Palmar and 
plantar lesions may become gross (Figure  8.11 ), 
and lesions elsewhere are clinically very similar to 
psoriasis. Histologically, they are indistinguishable. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 8.11   Keratoderma blennorrhagicum.  

 9 
Benign and  m alignant 
 s kin  t umours  
       Know ye not that a little leaven leaveneth the 
whole lump? 
 St Paul  ( 1  Corinthians, 5  :  6 ) 
 Introduction: 
 c lassiﬁ cation of 
 s kin  t umours 
 Lumps on or in the skin are extremely common 
and the workload associated with them is rising 
because of the following: 
 1  The age of the population is increasing (many 
skin tumours are more common in elderly 
people)  
 2  The incidence of skin cancer is increasing in 
all age groups  
 3  There is increasing public awareness of skin 
tumours and their potential importance 
 Most skin tumours are benign, often representing 
only a cosmetic nuisance. However, it is important 
to distinguish these from malignant or potentially 
malignant tumours quickly and effectively, as 
practical decisions about a lesion can be made 
only after a diagnosis to this minimum level. 
 Benign and malignant tumours are described 
for every component of the skin. Table  9.1  presents 
a simpliﬁ ed version of the wide variety that may 
be encountered. 
 General  t reatment  p rinciples for 
 s kin  t umours 
 It is worth reviewing brieﬂ y the techniques used 
to treat skin tumours to avoid repetition. 
 The ﬁ rst important principle is that, unless the 
diagnosis is certain, some tissue should always be 
preserved for histology. Failure to do this will 
mean missed malignancies, and is one explana-
tion for patients who present with mysterious 
lymphatic or distant deposits from unknown 
primary sites. 
 Surgical  r emoval or  b iopsy 
 These techniques have already been described 
and illustrated (Figures  2.2 – 2.4 ). Removal of small 
skin tumours is quick, simple and economical. If 
the tumour is too large for primary excision, a 
small incisional biopsy, crossing the edge from 
normal to abnormal tissue, should be taken. There 
is no evidence that such a biopsy adversely affects 
the outcome, although it is advisable to avoid inci-
sional biopsy of suspected invasive melanomas if 
possible (see below). 
 Curettage  a nd/or  c autery ( ‘ C & C ’ ) 
 This is a perfectly satisfactory method for the 
removal of superﬁ cial tumours. 
  
Lecture Notes: Dermatology, 10th edition. © RAC Graham-Brown 
and DA Burns. Published 2011 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

80  Benign and malignant skin tumours
 Pedunculated tumours can be removed by 
slicing with cautery across the base.  
 Cryotherapy 
 The use of cryotherapy for tumours has become 
very popular. It is ideal for superﬁ cial skin tumours 
because it is quick and leaves relatively little scar-
ring. However, histological interpretation of cryo-
biopsies is not easy and it should be used only if 
the tumour is considered to be deﬁ nitely benign. 
Cryotherapy is not appropriate for melanomas. 
The best agent is liquid nitrogen. 
  
 C & C 
 1   Anaesthetise the area  
 2   Use a curette (Volkmann spoon) to scrape off 
lesions  
 3   Touch the raw base a few times with cautery or 
a hyfrecator  * to control oozing  
 4   Apply a simple dressing and/or antiseptic  
 * A hyfrecator produces electrical haemostasis and 
desiccation. 
 Table 9.1   Tumours, benign or malignant, found in the epidermis and dermis 
 Types of tumours  
 A Epidermis (for naevi see Chapter  10 )  
 Benign  
  •    Seborrhoeic keratosis  
  •    Skin tags  
  •    Keratoacanthoma  
  •    Viral warts (see Chapter  3 )  
  •    Clear cell acanthoma  
  •    Tumours of skin appendages, e.g. sweat glands, 
sebaceous glands, hair follicles  
  •    Epidermal cysts  
 Dysplastic/malignant  
  •    Basal cell carcinoma  
  •    Actinic (solar) keratosis  
  •    Squamous cell carcinoma:  
 —   in situ  (Bowen ’ s disease)  
 —   invasive  
  •    Paget ’ s disease  
  •    Tumours of skin appendages  
 B Melanocytes (for naevi see Chapter  10 )  
 Benign  
  •    Freckle and lentigo  
 Dysplastic/malignant  
  •    Dysplastic naevus (see Chapter  10 )  
  •    Lentigo maligna  
  •    Malignant melanoma:  
 —   lentigo maligna melanoma  
 —   superﬁ cial spreading  
 —   nodular  
 —   acral  
 Types of tumours  
 C: Dermis (for naevi see Chapter  10 )  
 Benign  
  •    Fibrous tissue:  
 —   dermatoﬁ broma  
  •    ‘ Neural ’ tissue, e.g. neuroﬁ broma  
  •    Vascular tissue:  
 —   angioma/angiokeratoma  
 —   pyogenic granuloma  
 —   glomus tumour  
 Dysplastic/malignant  
  •    Fibrosarcoma  
  •    Neuroﬁ brosarcoma  
  •    Angiosarcoma, including Kaposi ’ s sarcoma  
 D Pseudo - tumours  
  •    Chondrodermatitis nodularis helicis  
  •    Hypertrophic and keloid scars  
 E Lymphomas  
  •    Cutaneous T - cell lymphoma (mycosis fungoides)  
  •    Cutaneous B - cell lymphoma  
 F Extension from deeper tissues  
 G Metastatic deposits  

Benign and malignant skin tumours  81
 Cryotherapy 
 1   Apply nitrogen with cotton - wool buds, or by 
specially designed spray or probe instruments  
 2   Wait until a halo of frozen skin 1   mm around the 
tumour is obtained  
 3   Maintain halo for 10   s for benign, 30   s for 
malignant tumours  
 4   Allow to thaw, and repeat (two  ‘ freeze/thaw 
cycles ’ )  
 The patient should be told to expect blistering, 
followed by healing with crust formation. The 
lesion should separate within 3 weeks.  
 Radiotherapy 
 Radiotherapy is an effective treatment method for 
basal (BCC) and squamous cell carcinomas (SCC), 
and may be the most practical option for very 
large tumours in elderly patients. However, it is 
not ideal for trunk and limb lesions. 
 Radiotherapy can also control secondary tumour 
deposits. 
 Lasers and  p hotodynamic 
 t herapy 
 There is an increasing interest in the application of 
laser technology to treating skin disease, especially 
for skin tumours and naevi (see Chapter  10 ), but 
also for hirsutism (see Chapter  13 ), scars, wrinkles 
and other  ‘ defects ’ . Many benign epithelial tumours 
will respond to ablation by a CO 2  laser but are 
also very easily treated by other, simpler, cheaper 
means. Pigmented lesions respond to lasers, but 
their place has yet to be fully established. 
 Photodynamic therapy (PDT) is a process 
involving the application of a porphyrin and expo-
sure to light. It is useful for widespread superﬁ cial 
lesions such as Bowen ’ s disease and superﬁ cial 
BCC. 
 Speciﬁ c  t umours 
 We ﬁ rst consider benign tumours, and then dys-
plastic and malignant processes, discussing the 
most common and most important of these. 
 Some skin lumps are hamartomatous malfor-
mations. Such a lesion in the skin is termed a  ‘ nae-
vus ’ . Naevi are discussed separately in Chapter  10 . 
 Benign  t umours — epidermal 
 Seborrhoeic  k eratoses ( s eborrhoeic 
 w arts,  b asal  c ell  p apillomas) 
 You are bound to see seborrhoeic keratoses, if 
only in passing while examining a chest. They are 
most frequent in elderly people, and may be soli-
tary or multiple. Occasionally there are hundreds 
(a tendency that may be familial). 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 A ﬂ at - topped area of skin with a  ‘ stuck - on ’ appear-
ance (Figure  9.1 ). They may be pale, but are often 
 Figure 9.1   Typical seborrhoeic warts.  

82  Benign and malignant skin tumours
central keratin plug. The base is often red and 
inﬂ amed, and may be painful. Ultimately, the 
lesion begins to shrink, often almost as quickly 
as it enlarged, and disappears completely, leaving 
a small puckered scar. 
 Sites of  p redilection 
 Head and neck, forearms and hands. 
 Differential  d iagnosis 
 Differentiation from BCC (see below) can be made 
on the basis of the history of rapid growth and the 
remarkable round architecture. 
 The challenge is to distinguish  prospectively 
between a keratoacanthoma and a SCC. By deﬁ ni-
tion a keratoacanthoma should resolve spontane-
ously, but this cannot be determined in advance. 
Incisional biopsies may not help because of the 
close similarities to SCC.  
pigmented, sometimes deeply so. The surface is 
often said to be greasy, but a more useful sign 
is the granular look occasioned by small surface 
pits and irregularities. 
 Sites of  p redilection 
 Head and neck; backs of hands and forearms; 
trunk. 
 Differential  d iagnosis 
 Usually straightforward, but darkly pigmented 
lesions can be mistaken for melanomas. On the 
face, seborrhoeic keratoses may remain vir-
tually ﬂ at, causing difﬁ culty in distinguishing 
them from senile lentigo or lentigo maligna (see 
below). Another diagnostic problem arises if 
lesions become inﬂ amed. There may be crusting 
and bleeding, and biopsy for histology may be 
necessary. 
 Treatment 
 If deemed necessary (there is no malignant poten-
tial), the best approach for smaller lesions is cryo-
therapy. Larger ones may be better treated by C  &  
C or excision.   
 Skin  t ags ( a crochordons) 
 Many people develop these small pedunculated 
lesions around the neck and in the axillae. Increas-
ing age and obesity are predisposing factors. 
 Differential  d iagnosis 
 Small melanocytic naevi may look similar, and so 
may small pedunculated seborrhoeic keratoses.  
 Treatment 
 They can be removed very easily by snip and 
cautery/hyfrecation.   
 Keratoacanthoma 
 This tumour is an oddity. Some authors classify 
keratoacanthoma as malignant because the histol-
ogy so closely resembles that of SCC (see below). 
Keratoacanthomas are much more common on 
sun - exposed skin and in elderly people. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Lesions arise rapidly, reaching a maximal size 
over the course of 6 – 8 weeks (see Figure  9.2 ). 
Tumours are round, with rolled edges and a 
 Figure 9.2   Keratoacanthoma.  

Benign and malignant skin tumours  83
some families, there is an inherited tendency 
to develop clusters on the cheeks and around 
the eyes (see Figure  9.3 ).  Treatment : milia can 
be treated by incision, pricking out or cautery/
hyfrecation 
 Benign  m elanocytic  t umours 
 Freckles ( e phelides) and  l entigines 
 Freckles are areas of skin containing melanocytes, 
normal in number but hyperresponsive to UV 
radiation. They are genetically determined: we all 
know typical freckly red heads. 
 Lentigines are ﬂ at pigmented areas composed 
of increased numbers of melanocytes. 
 Melanocytic naevi are discussed in Chapter  10 . 
 Benign  t umours — dermal 
 Dermatoﬁ bromas 
 Dermatoﬁ bromas (Figure  9.4 ) consist of a mixture 
of histiocytes, ﬁ brous tissue and blood vessels. It 
is not known why they occur, but they may follow 
minor trauma. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 More common in women; often easier to diag-
nose by touch than by sight — they feel like small 
lentils. 
 Sites of  p redilection 
 Limbs; legs more than arms. 
 Treatment 
 It is reasonable to wait expectantly for a short 
while if a lesion is very typical, especially in a frail 
patient. However, if there is any diagnostic doubt, 
keratoacanthomas are best removed and sent for 
histology. There is a case for removing such a 
lesion early, to avoid a more complex procedure if 
it becomes much larger.   
 Other  b enign  e pidermal  t umours 
 Viral warts are discussed in Chapter  3 , and 
the other benign epidermal tumours listed are 
rare. 
 Epidermal  c ysts 
 There are three common forms of epidermal 
cyst — pilar, epidermoid (frequently, but quite 
wrongly, called  ‘ sebaceous ’ ) and the milium. 
 1  Common scalp cysts are correctly termed 
 ‘ pilar ’ or  ‘ trichilemmal ’ cysts. There may 
be several, and a familial predisposition is 
usual  
 2  Epidermoid cysts may be found anywhere, 
but are most common on the head, neck 
and trunk. They often follow severe acne; 
there is a cystic swelling within the skin, 
usually with an overlying punctum.  Treatment : 
both types can be removed easily under local 
anaesthetic using a linear incision over the 
surface  
 3  Milia are extremely common. They may occur 
spontaneously or after trauma or blistering. In 
 Figure 9.3   Milia around the eyes: a 
characteristic site.  

84  Benign and malignant skin tumours
 Figure 9.4   Dermatoﬁ broma (histiocytoma).  
 Figure 9.5   Campbell de Morgan 
spots.  
 Differential  d iagnosis 
 Occasionally, heavy pigmentation can cause con-
fusion with melanoma.  
 Treatment 
 Excision may be cosmetically indicated.   
 Angiomas 
 Angiomas are collections of aberrant blood ves-
sels within the dermis and/or subcutaneous 
tissues. Some are developmental defects, com-
monly present at birth, and these are discussed 
in Chapter  10 . Others develop during adult life, 
such as the ubiquitous Campbell de Morgan spot 
(Figure  9.5 ). 
 Pyogenic  g ranulomas 
 Pyogenic granulomas are benign reactive inﬂ am-
matory masses composed of blood vessels and 
ﬁ broblasts. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 They erupt rapidly, usually have a polypoid appear-
ance (Figure  9.6 ) and a  ‘ collar ’ around the base; 
profuse contact bleeding is common. 
 Sites of  p redilection 
 Sites of an injury or infection, often on a digit. 
 Differential  d iagnosis 
 They must be differentiated from SCCs and amelan-
otic melanomas. 
 Treatment 
 Removal by curettage or excision should always be 
followed by histological examination. 
 Others 
 You may encounter several other benign dermal 
or subcutaneous lumps: e.g. neuroﬁ bromas in von 

Benign and malignant skin tumours  85
Recklinghausen ’ s neuroﬁ bromatosis (see Chapter 
 11 ); various benign ﬁ broblastic tumours; and lipo-
mas, which are readily identiﬁ ed by their soft tex-
ture and lobulated outline. 
 If there is any doubt about any dermal or sub-
cutaneous lump, it is best removed for histology.   
 Pseudo - t umours 
 Chondrodermatitis  n odularis  h elicis 
( p ainful  n odule of the  e ar) 
 This curious lesion is not a tumour, but an inﬂ am-
matory process. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 A small umbilicated nodule on the rim of the ear, 
more commonly in men (Figure  9.7 ); the clue is 
that it is painful — often exquisitely so — especially 
in bed at night.    
 Differential  d iagnosis 
 It is often confused with BCCs or other tumours. 
 Treatment 
 Cryotherapy has become popular but we pre fer 
excision, with paring down of adjacent cartilage. 
 Hypertrophic  s cars and  k eloids 
 Scar formation can be very exuberant, especially 
at some sites (see below) and in children, young 
 Figure 9.6   Side view of a typical 
pyogenic granuloma.  
 Figure 9.7   Chondrodermatitis nodularis helicis.  

86  Benign and malignant skin tumours
 Cutaneous dysplasias and malignancies are 
increasingly common, especially in ageing skin 
and in skin exposed to prolonged UV radiation. 
Other factors are also associated with dysplastic 
skin changes: 
 1  Most forms of ionizing radiation (UV, X - rays, 
 γ - rays) are powerful inducers of skin cancer 
 2  There are several known carcinogens, notably 
industrial oils, tars and bitumen; exposure to 
soot caused scrotal cancers in chimney sweeps 
 3  Skin cancers are a feature of some genetic 
diseases: a notable example is xeroderma 
pigmentosum, in which repair of UV - induced 
DNA damage is faulty  
 4  Skin cancers are more common in 
immunosuppressed individuals, especially 
after renal and cardiac transplantation and in 
HIV/AIDS 
 Dysplastic/ m alignant 
 e pidermal  t umours 
 Basal  c ell  c arcinoma 
 The most common malignant skin tumour, at 
least in white skin, is often known as a  ‘ rodent 
ulcer ’ . 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Most begin as a nodule (Figure  9.8 ) which spreads 
slowly outwards, usually leaving a central depres-
sion (creating the classic  ‘ rolled edge ’ ); usually 
skin coloured with a translucent look (often 
described as  ‘ pearly ’ ); telangiectatic vessels on the 
adults and black skin. A hypertrophic scar ﬂ attens 
after about 2 years, whereas a keloid persists and 
spreads laterally beyond the original site (keloids 
can become very large). 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Protuberant masses usually after cuts, ear pierc-
ing, burns, acne and BCG inoculations performed 
high on the shoulder; some appear to develop 
spontaneously; keloids often itch.  
 Sites of  p redilection 
 Chest, upper back, shoulder, pubic region, ear lobes.  
 Differential  d iagnosis 
 Any soft - tissue tumour, especially if there is no 
preceding history of trauma.  
 Treatment 
 Management can be extremely difﬁ cult. Biopsy 
may be necessary if there is diagnostic doubt but 
any surgery, especially excision, generally leads to 
recurrence and can make matters worse. Intral-
esional steroids and the use of silica gels have their 
advocates. 
 Dysplastic and 
 m alignant  t umours 
 The term  ‘ dysplasia ’  implies that the skin has been 
partly, or wholly, replaced by cells with neoplastic 
features. When this results in invasion of adjacent 
tissue, the process can genuinely be said to be 
 ‘ malignant ’ . 
 Figure 9.8   Basal cell carcinoma: note 
the telangiectatic vessels.  

Benign and malignant skin tumours  87
 Variants 
 Several distinctive clinical variants of the BCC are 
recognized (see below). 
 Sites of  p redilection 
 Predominantly the face, but BCCs occur on other 
sun - exposed sites, in the hair - bearing scalp, 
behind the ear and on the trunk (where the super-
ﬁ cial pattern is common). 
 Differential  d iagnosis 
 Early lesions may be confused with naevi; super-
ﬁ cial BCCs are often treated as inﬂ ammatory; 
heavy pigmentation may suggest a melanoma; 
morphoeic tumours can be very difﬁ cult to 
diagnose. 
  
 Figure 9.9   Basal cell carcinoma: such destruction 
gives rise to the term  ‘ rodent ulcer ’ .  
 Clinical  v ariants of  BCC 
  •    Nodular: nodule with central depression and a 
rolled edge; surface telangiectasia  
  •    Morphoeic: a ﬂ at growth pattern which results in 
a scar - like appearance; it can be very difﬁ cult to 
know where the tumour begins and ends, and 
local invasion is more common  
  •    Superﬁ cial: lesions grow for many years and 
may be many centimetres across; usually 
solitary; multiple tumours may indicate previous 
arsenic ingestion; characteristically, a  ‘ worm - like ’ 
edge is seen (Figure  9.10 )  
  •    Pigmented: pigmentation is usually patchy but 
may be very dark and dense  
 Figure 9.10   Superﬁ cial basal cell 
carcinoma.  
surface are very characteristic, and account for 
contact bleeding being a common symptom; 
metastasis is extremely rare, but local invasion can 
be destructive (Figure  9.9 ) and BCCs can spread 
along bony passages into the skull.    

88  Benign and malignant skin tumours
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Usually a solitary patch of red scaly skin, although 
multiple areas may occur; Bowen ’ s disease is 
asymptomatic. 
 Variant 
 Erythroplasia of Queyrat — non - invasive dysplas-
tic changes may also occur on the penis, where the 
clinical appearance is of a velvety red plaque. 
Although given a separate name, it is essentially 
the same as Bowen ’ s disease elsewhere.  
 Sites of  p redilection 
 Light - exposed skin; may occur on non - exposed 
areas such as the trunk. 
 Differential  d iagnosis 
 There is a superﬁ cial resemblance to psoriasis 
(Figure  9.12 ), but the surface scale is adherent 
rather than ﬂ aky and removal of scale leaves a 
glistening red surface, not bleeding. Arsenic was 
 Treatment 
 Excision, biopsy and radiotherapy or, for superﬁ -
cial tumours, curettage, cryotherapy or photody-
namic therapy; careful assessment of morphoeic 
tumours is needed — a technique known as  ‘ micro-
scopically controlled surgery ’ (Mohs ’ surgery) 
may be helpful because it allows prospective 
delineation of tumour extent. It is particularly 
important to deal adequately with lesions around 
the eyes, nose and ears. The use of topical thera-
pies for superﬁ cial types, notably imiquimod (a 
promoter of interferon - α ), has been pioneered 
more recently. 
 Actinic or  s olar  k eratoses 
 These are areas of dysplastic squamous epithe-
lium without invasion, but actinic keratoses do 
have low - grade malignant potential and their 
presence indicates unstable epithelium. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Red and scaly patches (Figure  9.11 ) that character-
istically wax and wane with time; many hundreds 
of lesions may occur in heavily sun - exposed 
individuals. 
 Sites of  p redilection 
 Light - exposed skin, especially the face, forearms, 
dorsa of hands, lower legs and bald scalp.  
 Differential  d iagnosis 
 Lesions of chronic discoid lupus erythematosus 
can be difﬁ cult to distinguish, and some are pig-
mented, leading to confusion with lentigo maligna 
(see below).  
 Treatment 
 Cryotherapy is best for small numbers of lesions; 
large areas on the face and scalp can be treated 
with the topical agents diclofenac sodium, 
5 - ﬂ uorouracil, imiquimod; in very elderly patients 
it may be best to do nothing.   
 Squamous  c ell  c arcinoma  in situ 
(or Bowen ’ s  d isease) 
 Bowen ’ s disease is an SCC conﬁ ned to the epi-
dermis, and is common below the knees in 
elderly women. Invasive change does occur but 
is rare. 
 Figure 9.11   Multiple solar keratoses.  

Benign and malignant skin tumours  89
 Invasive  s quamous 
 c ell  c arcinomas 
 SCCs are locally invasive, and may metastasize to 
regional lymph nodes and beyond (especially lip, 
mouth and genital lesions). UV radiation is impor-
tant aetiologically, but other factors also play a 
role: smoking in lip and mouth cancers; wart virus 
in genital lesions. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 These may be very varied, typically: 
 1  a keratotic lump 
 2  a rapidly growing polypoid mass (Figure  9.14 ) 
 3  a cutaneous ulcer 
 SCCs are often surrounded by actinic keratoses. 
 Sites of  p redilection 
 Sun - exposed sites; SCCs also develop on the lips 
(Figure  9.15 ), in the mouth and on the genitalia. 
once used to treat psoriasis, so keep an eye out 
for Bowen ’ s disease in elderly individuals with 
psoriasis. 
 Similar changes on one nipple should always 
suggest the possibility of Paget ’ s disease (Figure 
 9.13 ); a biopsy should be performed because there 
is always an underlying breast carcinoma.    
 Treatment 
 Should be treated by excision, curettage, cryother-
apy or photodynamic therapy; very large areas 
may require radiotherapy. 
 Figure 9.12   Two patches of Bowen ’ s disease.  
 Figure 9.13   Paget ’ s disease of the nipple.  
 Figure 9.14   A polypoid squamous cell carcinoma.  

90  Benign and malignant skin tumours
 Figure 9.15   Squamous cell 
carcinoma on the lip.  
 Figure 9.16   Lentigo maligna.  

Benign and malignant skin tumours  91
 Clinical  f eatures 
 A ﬂ at brown area with irregular pigmentation. 
 Sites of  p redilection 
 Almost always on the face (Figure  9.16 ). 
 Differential  d iagnosis 
 Can be difﬁ cult to distinguish from ﬂ at sebor-
rhoeic keratoses, pigmented actinic keratoses and 
simple lentigines.  
 Treatment 
 Biopsy is essential; deﬁ nitive treatment is a matter 
of debate; excision is our preferred option because 
of the risk of recurrences with cryotherapy or 
topical therapies; in very elderly patients it may be 
reasonable to do nothing and follow the patient 
carefully. 
  
 Differential  d iagnosis 
 Keratotic lesions may closely resemble hyper-
trophic actinic keratoses.  
 Treatment 
 Biopsy of any suspicious lesion; deﬁ nitive treat-
ment is by surgical removal or radiotherapy.    
 Dysplastic/ m alignant 
 m elanocytic  t umours 
 Lentigo  m aligna (or Hutchinson ’ s 
 m alignant  f reckle) 
 The term  ‘ lentigo maligna ’  describes a patch of 
malignant melanocytes, in sun - damaged skin, 
which proliferate radially along the dermoepider-
mal junction and deep around hair follicles, often 
for many years. An invasive component may 
develop at any time. 
 Malignant  m elanoma  p atterns 
 Lentigo maligna melanoma  
 The appearance of a nodule of invasive melanoma 
within a lentigo maligna. 
 Superﬁ cial spreading melanoma (SSM)  
 The most common in the UK; the tumour 
has a radial growth phase before true invasion 
begins 
  •    Clinical features:  
 —   irregularly pigmented brown/black patch with 
an irregular edge (Figure  9.17 ) 
 —   may itch or give rise to mild discomfort  
 —   may bleed  
  •    Sites of predilection: most frequently on the leg in 
women and the trunk in men, but may occur 
anywhere  
  •    Differential diagnosis: 
 —   naevi in the young  
 —   ﬂ at seborrhoeic keratoses in older 
patients 
 Nodular melanoma  
 The tumour exhibits an invasive growth pattern from 
the outset 
  •    Clinical features:  
 —   rapidly growing lumps (Figure  9.18 ) 
 —   occasionally warty (verrucous melanoma) or 
non - pigmented (amelanotic melanoma)  
  •    Sites of predilection: may occur anywhere  
  •    Differential diagnosis: other rapidly growing tumours  
 Acral melanoma  
 Rare in the UK, but much more common in other 
countries (e.g. Japan); it is virtually the only type of 
melanoma seen in Asian or African – Caribbean patients 
  •    Clinical feature: a pigmented patch on the sole or 
palm or an area of subungual pigmentation  
  •    Differential diagnosis:  
 —   can be confused with a viral wart  
 —   must be distinguished from haematoma  
 Some malignant melanomas arise in pre - existing 
melanocytic naevi, although estimates of the 
frequency of this vary from 5% to over 50% 

92  Benign and malignant skin tumours
 Malignant  m elanoma 
 This is the most dangerous of the three most 
common malignant skin tumours. Melanomas, 
other than lentigo maligna melanoma, occur in a 
 Figure 9.18   Large nodular melanoma.  
 Figure 9.17   Superﬁ cial spreading 
melanoma.  
relatively younger age group than other skin 
cancers. The incidence continues to rise, even in 
temperate climates, probably as a result of the 
intermittent sun exposure that has become so 
fashionable. Rising standards of living have per-
mitted more leisure time at home and abroad, 
during which the most important  ‘ activity ’ is 
sunbathing. 
 Exposure to very strong sunlight with sunburn 
is particularly risky and childhood sun exposure 
may be important. Some melanomas arise in 
pre - existing melanocytic naevi (see Chapter  10 ). 
It seems that the incidence of this varies from 
country to country. 
 There are four recognized patterns of malignant 
melanoma (see box). 
 Treatment of  m alignant  m elanoma 
 The prognosis in malignant melanoma is related 
to the depth of tumour invasion, regardless of 
the original type. It is standard practice to meas-
ure this using a technique known as the  ‘ Breslow 
thickness ’  (Figure  9.19 ). In tumours  < 1.5  mm at 
ﬁ rst excision, 5 - year survival rate is about 90%; if 
the depth is  > 3.5  mm this falls to 40% or less. 
 All types of melanoma should therefore be 
excised as soon as possible. Radiotherapy and 
chemotherapy have little to offer in curing the 
disease. There is some debate about how wide 
excision margins should be, but there is no harm 
in initial narrow excision. The urgency is to remove 
the melanoma — further procedures can be con-
sidered later. 

Benign and malignant skin tumours  93
 Prevention of  e pithelial and 
 m elanocytic  m alignancies 
 Both types of epithelial skin cancer, and melanoma, 
are more common in those who burn easily in the 
sun: those with fair skin, fair or red hair, and blue 
or green eyes (skin types I and II — see Chapter  12 ). 
Melanomas are also more common in individuals 
with many melanocytic naevi. 
 It is logical therefore to recommend that those 
at risk avoid excessive sun exposure: 
 1  No one should allow him - or herself to be 
sunburnt  
 2  It is best to avoid midday sun or, at least, wear 
adequate clothing and hats  
 3  Sun - screens offering a high degree of 
protection should be used 
 Those who tan easily and those with brown or 
black skin need not take such draconian precau-
tions, but for all children sun exposure should be 
restricted. 
 Dermal  m alignant  t umours 
 Malignant sarcomas may develop in the skin. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Indolent, slow - growing nodules, which become 
ﬁ xed to deeper tissues. 
 Differential  d iagnosis 
 Difﬁ cult to categorize without biopsy. 
 Treatment 
 Wide excision; in one tumour of this kind (der-
matoﬁ brosarcoma protuberans), very wide indeed.   
 In acral melanoma it may be necessary to 
perform a conﬁ rmatory biopsy before deﬁ nitive 
treatment, which may involve amputation. 
 Encouraging  e arly  p resentation 
 The most effective way of improving treatment is 
to increase public awareness of malignant melano-
mas and thereby prompt people to seek advice 
about suspicious lesions. Many doctors now use a 
checklist (see box). 
 Figure 9.19   Breslow thickness.  
Granular cell layer
Depth in mm
Extension of tumour
into dermis
 Malignant  m elanoma  c hecklist 
  •    Is an existing mole getting larger or a new one 
growing? After puberty, moles usually do not 
grow. (This sign essentially refers to adults, 
remember that naevi may grow rapidly in 
children (see Chapter  10 ).)  
  •    Does the lesion have an irregular outline? 
Ordinary moles are a smooth, regular shape  
  •    Is the lesion irregularly pigmented? Particularly, 
is there a mixture of shades of brown and 
black?  
  •    Is the lesion larger than 1   cm in diameter?  
  •    Is the lesion inﬂ amed or is there a reddish 
edge?  
  •    Is the lesion bleeding, oozing or crusting?  
  •    Does the lesion itch or hurt?  
 Any pigmented lesion, whether newly arising or 
already present, that exhibits three or more of the 
seven listed features, and especially one of the 
ﬁ rst three, should be treated as highly suspicious. 

94  Benign and malignant skin tumours
tive treatment varies with the stage, but includes 
radiotherapy, PUVA, interferon -  α  and various 
chemotherapeutic regimens. 
 Extension from  d eeper  t issues 
and  m etastases 
 Tumours of underlying structures, such as breast, 
may invade the skin. The skin may also be the site 
of metastatic deposits from internal cancers such 
as bronchogenic carcinoma (see Chapter  19 ).   
 Kaposi ’ s  s arcoma 
 This malignant vascular tumour merits special 
mention in spite of its rarity.  ‘ Classic ’ Kaposi ’ s 
sarcoma occurs in Ashkenazi Jews and northern 
Italians. A much more aggressive form is seen in 
Africans and in people with HIV/AIDS. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Purplish plaques and nodules.  
 Sites of  p redilection 
 Legs in the classic form; anywhere in the aggres-
sive form. 
 Differential  d iagnosis 
 Other vascular lesions.  
 Treatment 
 Biopsy; treatment of underlying condition; symp-
tomatic treatment with radiotherapy may help 
occasionally. 
 Lymphomas 
 Lymphomatous involvement of the skin may be 
secondary, e.g. in non - Hodgkin ’ s B - cell lympho ma. 
However, the skin may be the original site, espe-
cially in cutaneous T - cell lymphoma (often called 
 ‘ mycosis fungoides ’ ). 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Variable; some areas remain unchanged or grow 
slowly for years; red, well - circumscribed, scaly 
plaques, tumours and ulceration eventually 
develop (Figure  9.20 ). 
 Differential  d iagnosis 
 Lesions can be confused with eczema or psoriasis.  
 Treatment 
 Biopsy is essential but can be difﬁ cult to interpret. 
DNA phenotyping of cells may be of value; deﬁ ni-
 Figure 9.20   Areas of mycosis fungoides (cutaneous 
T - cell lymphoma).  

 10 
Naevi  
 Ten thousand saw I at a glance 
 William Wordsworth,  ‘ The Daffodils ’ 
 Introduction 
 Naevi are extremely common — virtually everyone 
has some. We use the word  ‘ naevus ’  to mean a 
cutaneous hamartoma (a lesion in which normal 
tissue components are present in abnormal quan-
tities or patterns). This encompasses  ‘ naevi ’ that 
are not actually present at birth, because the cells 
from which they arise are. The word can give rise 
to confusion, largely because it is used by some 
writers more loosely, e.g. the word for melanocytic 
naevi may not strictly be applied without further 
qualiﬁ cation (see below). This is complicated 
further by some  ‘ naevi ’ being called  ‘ moles ’ or 
 ‘ birthmarks ’ . Thus, a lump described as a  ‘ mole ’ 
may be a melanocytic naevus, but may also be any 
small skin lesion, especially if pigmented, whereas 
 ‘ birthmark ’  is accurate enough as far as it goes, but 
many naevi develop after birth. 
 Any component of the skin may produce a 
naevus, and they may be classiﬁ ed accordingly 
(Table  10.1 ). We need discuss only the most 
important: epithelial and organoid naevi, vascular 
naevi and melanocytic naevi.    
 Epithelial and 
 ‘ o rganoid ’   n aevi 
 These are relatively uncommon developmental 
defects of epidermal structures: the epidermis 
itself, hair follicles and sebaceous glands. There 
are two important types: the epidermal naevus 
and the sebaceous naevus. 
 Epidermal  n aevus 
 Circumscribed areas of epidermal thickening may 
be present at birth or develop during childhood; 
many are linear. Very rarely, there are associated 
central nervous system (CNS) abnormalities. 
 Becker ’ s naevus presents as a pigmented patch 
ﬁ rst seen at or around puberty, usually on the 
upper trunk or shoulder, and which gradually 
enlarges and frequently also becomes increasingly 
hairy. 
 Sebaceous  n aevus 
 Sebaceous naevi are easily overlooked at birth. 
They begin as ﬂ at, yellow areas on the head and 
neck which, in the hairy scalp, may cause localized 
alopecia. Later, the naevus becomes thickened 
and warty, and basal cell carcinomas may arise 
within it. These naevi are best excised during 
adolescence. 
 Melanocytic  n aevi 
 The most common naevi are formed from melano-
cytes that have failed to mature or migrate prop-
erly during embryonic development. We all have 
some. Look at your own skin or, better, that of an 
attractive classmate, to see typical examples! 
 It is convenient to categorize melanocytic naevi 
by clinical and histopathological features, because 
there are relevant differences (see Table  10.1 ). The 
ﬁ rst is whether they are present at birth (congeni-
tal) or arise later (acquired). 
Lecture Notes: Dermatology, 10th edition. © RAC Graham-Brown 
and DA Burns. Published 2011 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

96  Naevi
judged on its own merits. Decisions must involve 
the parents/carers and the child.  
 Mongolian  b lue  s pot 
 Most children of Mongoloid extraction and many 
south Asian and African – Caribbean babies are 
born with a diffuse blue – black patch on the lower 
back and buttocks. There are melanocytes widely 
dispersed in the dermis (the depth is responsible 
for the colour). The area fades as the child grows, 
but may persist indeﬁ nitely. Unwary doctors have 
mistaken Mongolian blue spots for bruising, and 
accused parents of baby battering.   
 Acquired 
 Acquired  m elanocytic  n aevus 
 A melanocytic naevus is  ‘ acquired ’  if it develops 
during postnatal life, a phenomenon that is so 
common as to be  ‘ normal ’ . Most only represent a 
 Congenital 
 Congenital  m elanocytic  n aevus 
 It is widely reported that 1% of children have a 
melanocytic naevus at birth. 
 These vary from a few millimetres to many cen-
timetres in diameter. There is a rare, but huge and 
grossly disﬁ guring variant, the  ‘ giant ’ congenital 
melanocytic or  ‘ bathing trunk ’ naevus (Figure 
 10.1 ). 
 Small - to - medium congenital melanocytic naevi 
may be very slightly more prone to develop 
melanomas than acquired lesions, but the giant 
type presents a high risk, even early in childhood. 
Prepubertal malignant melanoma is extremely 
rare, but nearly always involves a congenital 
naevus. The therapeutic paradox is that small, 
low - risk lesions are easily removed but surgery for 
larger lesions with unquestioned malignant 
potential is simply impractical. Each case must be 
 Figure 10.1   Giant congenital melanocytic naevus.  
 Table 10.1   A classiﬁ cation of naevi 
 Epithelial and  ‘ organoid ’ 
  •   Epidermal naevus  
  •   Sebaceous naevus  
 Melanocytic 
 Congenital 
  •   Congenital melanocytic naevus  
  •   Mongolian blue spot  
 Acquired 
  •   Junctional/compound/intradermal naevus  
  •   Sutton ’ s halo naevus  
  •   Dysplastic naevus  
  •   Blue naevus  
  •   Spitz naevus  
 Vascular 
 Telangiectatic 
  •   Superﬁ cial capillary naevus  
  •   Deep capillary naevus  
  •   Rare telangiectatic disorders  
 Angiomatous 
 Other tissues 
  •   Connective tissue  
  •   Mast cell  
  •   Fat 

Naevi  97
minor nuisance, and  ‘ beauty spots ’ were once 
highly fashionable. 
 The ﬁ rst thing to understand is that each naevus 
has its own life history. This will make the terms 
applied to the different stages in their evolution 
clearer (Figure  10.2 ). 
 The lesion (Figure  10.3 ) is ﬁ rst noticed when 
immature melanocytes proliferate at the der-
moepidermal junction (hence  ‘ junctional ’ ). After 
a variable period of radial growth, some cells drop 
into the dermis ( ‘ compound ’ ). Eventually the 
junctional element disappears and all melano-
cytic cells are within the dermis ( ‘ intradermal ’ ). 
Different melanocytic naevi will be at different 
stages of development in the same individual.   
 Most melanocytic naevi appear in the ﬁ rst 20 
years of life, but may continue to develop well into 
the 40s. They are initially pigmented, often heavily 
and even alarmingly, but later may become pale, 
especially when intradermal. Most disappear alto-
gether: very few octogenarians have many. 
 Their importance (apart from cosmetic) is 
threefold: 
 1  Some malignant melanomas develop in a 
pre - existing naevus (the chance of this 
happening in any one lesion, though, is 
inﬁ nitesimally small) 
 2  The possession of large numbers of acquired 
melanocytic naevi is statistically associated 
with an increased risk of melanoma  
 3  Melanocytic naevi can be confused with 
melanomas 
 Any melanocytic lesion that behaves oddly should 
be excised and sent for histology. Remember, 
 Figure 10.2   The phases of the 
acquired melanocytic naevus: 
(a) junctional; (b) compound; 
(c) intradermal. These stages are part 
of a continuum, and each lasts a 
variable time.  
Epidermis
Dermis
Dermoepidermal
junction
(a)
(b)
(c)
however, that by deﬁ nition all melanocytic naevi 
grow at some stage. Therefore, growth alone is 
not necessarily sinister, especially in younger 
individuals. Most naevi undergoing malignant 
change show features outlined in Chapter  9 , but 
 ‘ if in doubt, lop it out ’ ! 
 There are several variants of the acquired 
melanocytic naevus (see box). 
  
 Acquired  m elanocytic  n aevus 
 Sutton ’ s halo naevus: a white ring develops 
around an otherwise typical melanocytic naevus; 
the lesion may become paler and disappear 
(Figure  10.4 ). This is an immune response of no 
sinister signiﬁ cance and unknown cause  
 Dysplastic naevus: some lesions look unusual and/
or have unusual histopathological features; this 
may affect just one or two naevi, but some people 
have many; such individuals may be part of a 
pedigree in which there is a striking increase in 
melanoma ( ‘ dysplastic naevus syndrome ’ ) 
 Blue naevus: the characteristic slate - blue colour 
(Figure  10.5 ) is due to clusters of melanocytes 
lying deep in the dermis; they are most common 
on the extremities, head and buttocks  
 Spitz naevus: these lesions have a characteristic 
brick - red colour; Spitz naevi have occasionally 
been confused histologically with malignant 
melanoma 

98  Naevi
 Figure 10.4   Sutton ’ s  ‘ halo ’  naevus.  
 Figure 10.3   The development 
phases of an acquired melanocytic 
naevus: (a) junctional (ﬂ at, 
pigmented); (b) compound (raised, 
pigmented); (c) intradermal (raised, 
no pigment).  
(c)
(b)
(a)

Naevi  99
 Vascular  n aevi 
 Vascular blemishes are common. Some present 
relatively minor problems, whereas others are 
very disﬁ guring. The terminology used for these 
lesions can be confusing and is by no means 
uniform. We have adopted what we consider to be 
a simple and practical approach based on clinical 
and pathological features. 
 Vascular  m alformations 
 Superﬁ cial  c apillary  n aevus 
 These pink, ﬂ at areas, composed of dilated capil-
laries in the superﬁ cial dermis (Figure  10.6 ), are 
found in at least 50% of neonates. The most 
common sites are the nape of the neck, forehead 
and glabellar region ( ‘ salmon patches ’ or  ‘ stork 
marks ’ ) and the eyelids ( ‘ angel ’ s kisses ’ ). Most 
facial lesions fade quite quickly, but those on the 
neck persist, although often hidden by hair.    
 Deep  c apillary  n aevus 
 ‘ Port - wine stains ’ or  ‘ port - wine marks ’ are formed 
by capillaries in the upper and deeper dermis. 
There may also be deeper components which may 
gradually extend over time. 
 Deep capillary naevi are less common but more 
cosmetically disﬁ guring than superﬁ cial lesions. 
Most occur on the head and neck and are usually 
unilateral, often appearing in the territory of one 
or more branches of the trigeminal nerve (Figure 
 10.7 ). They may be small or very extensive. 
 Figure 10.5   Blue naevus.  
 Figure 10.6   Superﬁ cial capillary naevus.  
 At birth, the colour may vary from pale pink to 
deep purple, but the vast majority of these malfor-
mations show no tendency to fade. Indeed they 
often darken with time, and become progressively 
thickened. Lumpy angiomatous nodules may 
develop. 
 These lesions are most unattractive, and 
patients often seek help. Modern lasers can 
produce reasonable results, and a range of cos-
metics can be used as camouﬂ age. 
 There are three important complications (see 
box). 
  
 Complications of  d eep  c apillary  n aevus 
  •    An associated intracranial vascular malformation 
may result in ﬁ ts, long - tract signs and learning 
disability. This is the Sturge – Weber syndrome  
  •    Congenital glaucoma may occur when lesions 
involve the area of the ophthalmic division of the 
trigeminal nerve  
  •    Growth of underlying tissues may be abnormal, 
resulting in hypertrophy of whole limbs —
 haemangiectatic hypertrophy  

100  Naevi
 If a deep capillary naevus is relatively pale, it 
may be difﬁ cult to distinguish from the superﬁ cial 
type, especially in the neonatal period. It is there-
fore wise always to give a guarded initial prognosis 
and await events.   
 Figure 10.8   Cavernous 
haemangioma on the face.  
 Figure 10.7   Deep capillary naevus ( ‘ port - wine stain ’ ).  
 Childhood  a ngiomas 
 These are quite distinct from pure vascular mal-
formations in that they are characterized by the 
presence of actively growing and dividing vascular 
tissue, but some lesions are genuinely mixtures of 
malformation and angioma. Terminology can be 
difﬁ cult:  ‘ strawberry naevus ’ and  ‘ cavernous hae-
mangioma ’  are still terms in common use, but we 
prefer simply to call them childhood or infantile 
angiomas. 
 The majority arise in the immediate postnatal 
period, but some are actually present at birth. They 
may appear anywhere, but have a predilection for 
the head and neck and the nappy area (Figure 
 10.8 ). Most are solitary, but occasionally there are 
more, or there are adjacent/conﬂ uent areas (called 
 ‘ segmental ’  by some authorities). Lesions usually 
grow rapidly to produce dome - shaped, red – purple 
extrusions that may bleed if traumatized. The major-
ity reach a maximum size within a few months. 
They may be large and unsightly. 
 Spontaneous resolution is the norm, sometimes 
beginning with central necrosis, which can look 
alarming. As a rule of thumb, 50% have resolved by 
age 5 and 70% by age 7. Some only regress partially 
and a few require plastic surgical intervention. 
 The management, in all but a minority, is 
expectant. It is useful to show parents a series of 
pictures of previous patients in whom the lesion 
has resolved 
 Speciﬁ c indications for intervention: 
 1  If breathing or feeding is obstructed 
 2  If the tumour occludes an eye — this will lead 
to blindness (amblyopia)  

Naevi  101
natal or miliary angiomatosis and the prognosis is 
often poor. 
 Other  n aevi 
 Naevi may develop from other skin elements, 
including connective tissue, mast cells and fat. For 
example, the cutaneous stigmata of tuberous scle-
rosis are connective tissue naevi (see Chapter  11 ), 
and the lesions of urticaria pigmentosa are mast 
cell naevi. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 3  If severe bleeding occurs 
 4  If the tumour remains large and unsightly after 
the age of 10    
 For many years, the mainstay of treatment for 
complications 1 – 3 has been high - dose pred-
nisolone. This will almost always produce marked 
shrinkage, but may be replaced by propranolol 
which has very recently been reported to work 
even better. If these measures fail, and with per-
sistent tumours, complex surgical intervention 
may be required. 
 Rare  a ngiomatous  n aevi 
 Rarely, infants are born with multiple angiomas of 
the skin and internal organs. This is known as neo-

102  Inherited disorders
 11 
Inherited  d isorders  
 There is only one more beautiful thing than a 
ﬁ ne healthy skin, and that is a rare skin disease. 
 Sir Erasmus Wilson, 1809 – 84 
 A number of skin conditions are known to be inher-
ited. Many are rare, and are therefore mentioned 
only brieﬂ y. There have been major advances in 
medical genetics in recent years, and the genes 
responsible for many disorders have been identi-
ﬁ ed and their roles in disease clariﬁ ed. 
 Several diseases in which genetic factors play 
an important part, such as atopic eczema, psoria-
sis, acne vulgaris and male - pattern balding, are 
described elsewhere in the book.  
 The  i chthyoses 
 The term  ‘ ichthyosis ’  is derived from the Greek 
 ichthys , meaning ﬁ sh, as the appearance of the 
abnormal skin has been likened to ﬁ sh scales. The 
ichthyoses are disorders of keratinization in which 
the skin is extremely dry and scaly (Figure  11.1 ). In 
most cases the disease is inherited, but occasion-
ally ichthyosis may be an acquired phenomenon, 
e.g. in association with a lymphoma. There are 
several types of ichthyosis, which have different 
modes of inheritance (Table  11.1 ). 
 Ichthyosis  v ulgaris ( a utosomal 
 d ominant  i chthyosis) 
 This is the most common and is often quite mild. 
The scaling usually appears during early child-
hood. The skin on the trunk and extensor aspects 
of the limbs is dry and ﬂ aky, but the limb ﬂ exures 
are often spared. Ichthyosis vulgaris is frequently 
associated with an atopic constitution. 
 It has been demonstrated that loss - of - function 
mutations in the gene encoding for ﬁ laggrin ( FLG ) 
underlie ichthyosis vulgaris. The associated reduc-
tion of ﬁ laggrin leads to impaired keratinization. 
Loss - of - function mutations in  FLG  also strongly 
predispose to atopic eczema. 
 X - l inked  r ecessive  i chthyosis 
 This type of ichthyosis affects only males. The 
scales are larger and darker than those of domi-
nant ichthyosis, and usually the trunk and limbs 
are extensively involved, including the ﬂ exures. 
Corneal opacities may occur, but these do not 
interfere with vision. Affected individuals are deﬁ -
cient in the enzyme steroid sulfatase — the result 
of abnormalities in its coding gene. Most patients 
have complete deletion of the steroid sulfatase 
gene, located on the short arm of the X - chromosome 
at Xp - 22.3. 
 Both X - linked ichthyosis and autosomal domi-
nant ichthyosis improve during the summer 
months. 
 Ichthyosiform  e rythroderma and 
 l amellar  i chthyosis 
 A non - bullous form of ichthyosiform erythro-
derma (NBIE) is recessively inherited and is 
usually manifest at birth as a collodion baby 
appearance. Thereafter there is extensive scaling 
and redness. Lamellar ichthyosis is recessively 
inherited and affected infants also present as col-
Lecture Notes: Dermatology, 10th edition. © RAC Graham-Brown 
and DA Burns. Published 2011 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Inherited disorders  103
 Figure 11.1   Ichthyosis.  
 Table 11.1   The ichthyoses 
 Primary (congenital) ichthyosis 
 Ichthyosis vulgaris (autosomal dominant ichthyosis)  
 X - linked recessive ichthyosis  
 Non - bullous ichthyosiform erythroderma  
 Bullous ichthyosiform erythroderma (epidermolytic 
hyperkeratosis) 
 Netherton ’ s syndrome  
 Sj ö gren – Larsson syndrome  
 Refsum ’ s disease  
 Acquired ichthyosis 
 Lymphoma 
 AIDS 
 Malnutrition 
 Renal failure  
 Sarcoidosis 
 Leprosy 
lodion babies. Scaling is thicker and darker than 
in NBIE and there is less background erythema. 
These conditions are probably parts of a clinical 
spectrum caused by several different genes. 
 In bullous ichthyosiform erythroderma (epi-
dermolytic hyperkeratosis), which is dominantly 
inherited, there is blistering in childhood and later 
increasing scaling until the latter predominates. 
There is a genetic defect of keratin synthesis involv-
ing keratins 1 and 10. 
 The ichthyosiform erythrodermas are all rare, 
as are some other ichthyosiform disorders, includ-
ing Netherton ’ s syndrome (ichthyosis linearis 
circumﬂ exa and bamboo hair), Sj ö gren – Larsson 
syndrome (ichthyosis and spastic paraparesis), 
and Refsum ’ s disease (ichthyosis, retinitis pigmen-
tosa, ataxia and sensorimotor polyneuropathy).  
 Acquired  i chthyosis 
 When ichthyosis develops in adult life it may be a 
manifestation of a number of diseases, including 
underlying lymphoma, AIDS, malnutrition, renal 
failure, sarcoidosis and leprosy. 
 Treatment consists of regular use of emol-
lients and bath oils. Urea - containing creams 
are also helpful. Oral retinoid treatment may be 
of beneﬁ t in the more severe congenital 
ichthyoses. 
 Collodion  b aby 
 This term is applied to babies born encased in a 
transparent rigid membrane resembling collodion 
(Figure  11.2 ) (collodion is a solution of nitrocel-
lulose in alcohol and ether used to produce a pro-
tective ﬁ lm/membrane on the skin after its volatile 
components have evaporated, and also employed 
as a vehicle for certain medicaments). The mem-
brane cracks and peels off after a few days. Some 
affected babies have an underlying ichthyotic dis-
order whereas in others the underlying skin is 
normal. Collodion babies have increased transep-
idermal water loss, and it is important that they 
are nursed in a high humidity environment and 
given additional ﬂ uids. 

104  Inherited disorders
 Palmoplantar 
 k eratoderma 
 Several rare disorders are associated with massive 
thickening of the horny layer of the palms and 
soles. The most common type is dominantly 
inherited. Many medical texts mention an asso-
ciation of palmoplantar keratoderma (tylosis) 
with carcinoma of the oesophagus — in fact this is 
extremely rare.  
 Darier ’ s  d isease 
( k eratosis  f ollicularis) 
 This is a dominantly inherited disorder that is usu-
ally ﬁ rst evident in late childhood or adolescence. 
It is caused by mutations in the  ATP2A2  gene at 
chromosome 12q23 - 24, which encodes an enzyme 
important in maintaining calcium concentrations 
in the endoplasmic reticulum. The abnormality 
results in impaired cell adhesion and abnormal 
keratinization. 
 The characteristic lesions of Darier ’ s disease 
are brown follicular keratotic papules, grouped 
together over the face and neck, the centre of the 
chest and back, the axillae and the groins (Figure 
 11.3 ). The nails typically show longitudinal pink 
or white bands, with V - shaped notches at the 
free edges (Figure  11.4 ). There are usually numer-
ous wart - like lesions on the hands (acrokeratosis 
verruciformis). 
 Figure 11.2   Collodion baby.  
 Figure 11.3   Darier ’ s disease.  
 It is exacerbated by excessive exposure to 
sunlight, and extensive herpes simplex infection 
(Kaposi ’ s varicelliform eruption) can occur. 
 Darier ’ s disease responds to treatment with oral 
retinoids. 

Inherited disorders  105
 Figure 11.4   The nail in Darier ’ s disease. note the 
longitudinal bands and V - shaped notching.  
 Epidermolysis  b ullosa 
 This group of hereditary blistering diseases is 
described in Chapter  14 .  
 Ehlers – D anlos  s yndrome 
 There are a number of distinct variants of this 
condition, all of which are associated with abnor-
malities of collagen, principally defective produc-
tion. The most common are dominantly inherited, 
but all types of Ehlers – Danlos syndrome are rare. 
Typical features are skin hyperextensibility and fra-
gility, and joint hypermobility — some affected indi-
viduals work as contortionists and  ‘ India - rubber ’ 
men in circuses. In certain types there is a risk of 
rupture of major blood vessels because of deﬁ -
cient collagen in vessel walls.  
 Tuberous  s clerosis 
 c omplex 
 Tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC) is the preferred 
name for what was previously known as tuberous 
sclerosis or epiloia ( epi lepsy,  lo w  i ntelligence and 
 a denoma sebaceum). It is a dominantly inherited 
disorder, but many cases are sporadic and repre-
sent new mutations. In about half the cases the 
genetic abnormality occurs on chromosome 9q34 
(TSC1) and in the others it is on chromosome 
16p13 (TSC2). 
 There are hamartomatous malformations in 
the skin and internal organs. Characteristic skin 
lesions include: numerous pink papules on the 
face (Figure  11.5 ) (originally misleadingly called 
adenoma sebaceum), which are hamartomas of 
connective tissue and small blood vessels (angioﬁ -
bromas); the  ‘ shagreen ’  (having a resemblance to 
shark skin) patch on the back (a connective tissue 
naevus); periungual ﬁ bromas (Figure  11.6 ); and 
hypopigmented macules (ash leaf macules) which 
are best seen with the aid of Wood ’ s light. The 
hypopigmented macules are often present at 
 Figure 11.5   Facial angioﬁ bromas in 
tuberous sclerosis complex.  

106  Inherited disorders
 Peutz – Jeghers  s yndrome 
 In this rare, dominantly inherited syndrome asso-
ciated with mutations in a gene mapped to chro-
mosome 19p13.3 there are pigmented macules 
(lentigines) in the mouth, on the lips, and on the 
hands and feet, in association with multiple 
hamartomatous intestinal polyps with low poten-
tial for malignant transformation.  
 Hereditary  h aemorrhagic 
 t elangiectasia ( O sler –
 W eber –  R endu  d isease) 
 This is a rare, dominantly inherited disorder in 
which numerous telangiectases are present on the 
face and lips, nasal, buccal and intestinal mucosae. 
Recurrent epistaxes are common, and there is also 
a risk of gastrointestinal haemorrhage. There is an 
association with pulmonary and cerebral arterio-
venous ﬁ stulae. Visible vascular lesions can be 
treated with a laser. 
 Basal  c ell  n aevus 
 s yndrome 
( G orlin ’ s  s yndrome) 
 Gorlin ’ s syndrome is an autosomal dominant dis-
order associated with mutations of the tumour -
 suppressor gene  PTCH  on chromosome 9q22.3 - 3.1. 
Multiple basal cell carcinomas (BCCs) on the face 
and trunk are associated with characteristic palmar 
pits, odontogenic keratocysts of the jaw, calciﬁ ca-
tion of the falx cerebri, skeletal abnormalities and 
medulloblastoma. 
 The BCCs should be dealt with when they are 
small. Radiotherapy is contraindicated because 
this promotes subsequent development of multi-
ple lesions in the radiotherapy ﬁ eld. 
 Gardner ’ s  s yndrome 
 This condition is also dominantly inherited. The 
gene responsible is located on chromosome 5q21 -
birth, but the facial lesions usually ﬁ rst appear at 
the age of 5 or 6. Affected individuals may have 
learning disabilities and epilepsy. Other features 
include retinal phakomas, pulmonary and renal 
hamartomas, and cardiac rhabdomyomas.    
 Neuroﬁ bromatosis 
 There are two main forms of neuroﬁ bromatosis —
 type 1 (NF - 1 or von Recklinghausen ’ s disease) and 
type 2 (NF - 2), both of which are of autosomal dom-
inant inheritance. The gene for the more common 
type (NF - 1) is located on chromosome 17q11.2 
and that for NF - 2 on chromosome 22q11.21. Both 
normally function as tumour - suppressor genes. 
 NF - 1 is characterized by multiple caf é - au - lait 
patches, axillary freckling (Crowe ’ s sign), numer-
ous neuroﬁ bromas (Figure  11.7 ) and Lisch nodules 
(pigmented iris hamartomas). Other associated 
abnormalities include scoliosis, an increased risk 
of developing intracranial neoplasms, particularly 
optic nerve glioma, and an increased risk of hyper-
tension associated with phaeochromocytoma or 
ﬁ bromuscular hyperplasia of the renal arteries. 
 NF - 2 is characterized by bilateral vestibular 
schwannomas (acoustic neuromas), as well as 
other central nervous system tumours. It does not 
have signiﬁ cant cutaneous manifestations.  
 Figure 11.6   Periungual ﬁ broma in tuberous sclerosis 
complex.  

Inherited disorders  107
dromes is hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia in 
which eccrine sweat glands are absent or mark-
edly reduced in number, the scalp hair, eyebrows 
and eyelashes are sparse, and the teeth are widely 
spaced and conical. The absence of sweating 
causes heat intolerance. It is inherited as an X - 
linked recessive trait.  
 Pseudoxanthoma 
 e lasticum 
 This recessively inherited abnormality is now 
thought to be a primary metabolic disorder in 
 22, and it is thought that Gardner ’ s syndrome and 
familial polyposis coli are allelic disorders caused 
by mutation in the  APC  (adenomatous polyposis 
coli) gene, which is another tumour - suppressor 
gene. Affected individuals have multiple epider-
moid cysts, osteomas and large bowel adenoma-
tous polyps that have a high risk of malignant 
change. 
 Ectodermal  d ysplasias 
 These are disorders in which there are defects of 
the hair, teeth, nails and sweat glands. Most are 
extremely rare. One of the more common syn-
 Figure 11.7   Von Recklinghausen ’ s 
neuroﬁ bromatosis.  

108  Inherited disorders
 Xeroderma  p igmentosum 
 Ultraviolet (UV) damage to epidermal DNA is 
normally repaired by an enzyme system. In xero-
derma pigmentosum, which is recessively inher-
ited, this system is defective, and UV damage 
is not repaired. This leads to the early develop-
ment of skin cancers. BCCs, squamous cell carci-
nomas and malignant melanomas may all develop 
in childhood. In some cases there is also gradual 
which  MRP6 / ABCC6  gene mutations lead to meta-
bolic abnormalities that result in progressive cal-
ciﬁ cation of elastic ﬁ bres. This affects elastic tissue 
in the dermis, blood vessels and Bruch ’ s mem-
brane in the eye. The skin of the neck and axillae 
has a lax  ‘ plucked chicken ’ appearance of tiny 
yellowish papules (Figure  11.8 ). Retinal angioid 
streaks, caused by ruptures in Bruch ’ s membrane, 
are visible on fundoscopy (Figure  11.9 ). The abnor-
mal elastic tissue in blood vessels may lead to gas-
trointestinal haemorrhage. 
 Figure 11.8   ‘ Plucked chicken ’  
appearance of the skin in 
pseudoxanthoma elasticum.  
 Figure 11.9   Retinal angioid streaks 
in pseudoxanthoma elasticum 
(arrows).  

Inherited disorders  109
 Incontinentia  p igmenti 
 An X - linked dominant disorder, incontinentia pig-
menti occurs predominantly in baby girls, as it is 
usually lethal  in utero  in boys. Linear bullous 
lesions are present on the trunk and limbs at 
birth, or soon thereafter. The bullae are gradually 
replaced by warty lesions, and these in turn are 
eventually replaced by streaks and whorls of hyper-
pigmentation. The skin lesions follow Blaschko ’ s 
lines. Incontinentia pigmenti is frequently associ-
ated with a variety of ocular, skeletal, dental and 
central nervous system abnormalities.  
 Chromosomal 
 a bnormalities 
 Some syndromes caused by chromosomal abnor-
malities may have associated dermatological 
problems. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
neurological deterioration caused by progressive 
neuronal loss.  
 Acrodermatitis 
 e nteropathica 
 In this recessively inherited disorder there is 
defective absorption of zinc. The condition usually 
manifests in early infancy as exudative eczema-
tous lesions around the oriﬁ ces, and on the hands 
and feet. Affected infants also have diarrhoea. 
Acrodermatitis enteropathica can be effectively 
treated with oral zinc supplements.  
 Angiokeratoma  c orporis 
 d iffusum ( A nderson –
 F abry  d isease) 
 This condition is the result of an inborn error 
of glycosphingolipid metabolism. It is inherited in 
an X - linked recessive manner. Deﬁ ciency of the 
enzyme  α - galactosidase A leads to deposition 
of ceramide trihexoside in a number of tissues, 
including the cardiovascular system, the kidneys, 
the eyes and peripheral nerves. The skin lesions 
are tiny vascular angiokeratomas that are usually 
scattered over the lower trunk, buttocks, genitalia 
and thighs. Associated features caused by tissue 
deposition of the lipid include those in the box. 
  
 Anderson – F abry  d isease 
  •    Premature ischaemic heart disease  
  •    Renal failure  
  •    Severe pain and paraesthesiae in the hands and 
feet  
  •    Corneal and lens opacities  
 Associated  d ermatological  p roblems 
  •    Down ’ s syndrome: increased incidence of 
alopecia areata and crusted scabies  
  •    Turner ’ s syndrome: primary lymphoedema  
  •    Klinefelter ’ s syndrome: premature venous 
ulceration  
  •    XYY syndrome: premature venous ulceration; 
prone to develop severe nodulocystic acne  

110  Pigmentary disorders
 12 
Pigmentary  d isorders  
 Bold was her face, and fair, and red of hew. 
 Chaucer,  The Wife of Bath 
 The complexion of the skin and the colour of the 
hair correspond to the colour of the moisture 
which the ﬂ esh attracts — white, or red, or black. 
 Hippocrates 
 Introduction:  n ormal 
 p igmentary  m echanisms 
 Our skin colour is important, and there are many 
references to it in prose and poetry. We all note 
skin colour in our initial assessment of someone, 
and cutaneous pigment has been used to justify 
all manner of injustices. Any departure from the 
perceived norm can have serious psychological 
effects and practical implications. 
 A number of factors give rise to our skin colour 
(see the box). 
  
 Normal pigmentary mechanisms have already 
been outlined in Chapter  1 . Humans actually have 
a rather dull range of natural colours when com-
pared with chameleons, peacocks, humming 
birds or parrots: normally only shades of brown 
and red.  ‘ Brownness ’  is due to melanin, the inten-
sity varying from almost white (no melanin) to 
virtually jet - black (lots). Melanin pigmentation is 
determined by simple mendelian principles: 
brown/black is autosomal dominant. 
 Red, on the other hand, is more complex genet-
ically and is a bonus: only some people can pro-
duce phaeomelanin. Red is much more common 
in some races (e.g. Celts) than in others (e.g. 
Chinese). 
 Most human skin pigment is within keratinoc-
ytes, having been manufactured in melanocytes 
and transferred from one to the other in melano-
somes. There are racial differences in production, 
distribution and degradation of melanosomes, 
but not in the number of melanocytes (see Chapter 
 1 ). There are, however, important genetic differ-
ences, reﬂ ected in the response to ultraviolet (UV) 
radiation, conventionally called  ‘ skin types ’ . 
  
 Skin  c olour  f actors 
  •    Haemoglobin  
  •    Exogenous pigments in or on the skin surface  
  •    Endogenously produced pigments (e.g. bilirubin)  
  •    The pigments produced in the skin itself: 
melanin and phaeomelanin  
 The last two are the most important in dictating 
our basic skin colour 
 Skin  t ypes 
  •    Type I: always burns, never tans  
  •    Type II: burns easily, tans poorly  
  •    Type III: burns occasionally, tans easily  
  •    Type IV: never burns, tans easily  
  •    Type V: genetically brown (e.g. Indian) or 
Mongoloid  
  •    Type VI: genetically black (Congoid or Negroid)  
Lecture Notes: Dermatology, 10th edition. © RAC Graham-Brown 
and DA Burns. Published 2011 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Pigmentary disorders  111
 The ﬁ rst response to UV radiation is an increased 
distribution of melanosomes. This rapidly increases 
basal layer pigmentation — the  ‘ sun tan ’ . Tanning 
represents the skin ’ s efforts to offer protection 
from the harmful effects of UV radiation, such as 
premature ageing and cancers. If solar stimulation 
is quickly withdrawn, as typically happens in a 
porcelain - white Brit after 2 weeks on the Costa 
del Sol, the tan fades rapidly and peels off with 
normal epidermal turnover. If exposure is more 
prolonged, melanin production is stepped up more 
permanently. We now look at states in which these 
pigmentary mechanisms appear to be abnormal, 
leading to decreased (hypo - ) or increased (hyper - )
pigmentation.  
 Hypopigmentation 
 Among the most important causes of hypopig-
mentation are those in the box. 
  
 Hypopigmentation  c auses 
 Congenital 
  •    Albinism 
  •    Phenylketonuria 
  •    Tuberous sclerosis complex  
  •    Hypochromic naevi  
 Acquired 
  •    Vitiligo 
  •    Sutton ’ s halo naevi  
  •    Tuberculoid leprosy  
  •    Pityriasis (tinea) versicolor  
  •    Pityriasis alba  
  •    Lichen sclerosus  
  •    Drugs and chemicals:  
 —  occupational leukoderma  
 —  self - inﬂ icted/iatrogenic  
  •    Postinﬂ ammatory hypopigmentation  
 Congenital 
 Some individuals are born with generalized or 
localized defects in pigmentation. 
 Albinism and phenylketonuria are due to genet-
ic defects in melanin production. In albinos, the 
enzyme tyrosinase may be absent (tyrosinase neg-
ative), leading to generalized white skin and hair, 
and red eyes (the iris is also depigmented). Vision 
is usually markedly impaired, with nystagmus. 
 In some albinism, the enzyme is merely defec-
tive (tyrosinase positive). The clinical picture is not 
as severe, and colour gradually increases with age. 
However, skin cancers are very common in both 
forms. Albinism also illustrates the social impor-
tance of colour: in some societies, albinos are 
rejected and despised, in others they are revered. 
 The biochemical defect in phenylketonuria 
results in reduced tyrosine, the precursor of 
melanin, and increased phenylalanine (which 
inhibits tyrosinase). There is a generalized reduc-
tion of skin, hair and eye colour. 
 One of the cardinal signs of tuberous sclerosis 
complex (epiloia) is hypopigmented macules. 
These are often lanceolate (ash - leaf shaped), but 
may assume bizarre shapes. They are often the ﬁ rst 
signs of the disease. Any infant presenting with ﬁ ts 
should be examined under Wood ’ s light, as the 
macules can be seen more easily — see Chapter  2 . 
Identical areas may occur without any other abnor-
mality, when they are termed  ‘ hypochromic naevi ’ .  
 Acquired 
 Acquired hypopigmentation is common and, in 
darker skin, may have a particular stigma. This is 
partly because the cosmetic appearance is much 
worse, but also because white patches are inextri-
cably linked in some cultures with leprosy. In 
olden times, all white patches were probably 
called leprosy: Naaman (who was cured of  ‘ leprosy ’  
after bathing in the Jordan [2  Kings 5:1 – 14]) prob-
ably had vitiligo (see below). 
 Vitiligo is the most important cause of patches 
of pale skin. The skin in vitiligo becomes depig-
mented and not hypopigmented, although as 
lesions develop this is not always complete. 
 Characteristically, otherwise entirely normal 
skin loses pigment completely (Figure  12.1 ). 
Patches may be small, but commonly become 
large, often with irregular outlines. Depigmentation 
may spread to involve wide areas of the body. 
Although vitiligo can occur anywhere, it is often 
strikingly symmetrical, involving the hands, and 
perioral and periocular skin.   
 The pathophysiology is poorly understood. Early 
on, melanocytes are still present, but produce 
no melanin. Later, melanocytes disappear com-
pletely, except deep around hair follicles. Vitiligo 

112  Pigmentary disorders
 Lichen sclerosus (see Chapter  15 ) usually affects 
the genitalia. On other sites it is sometimes called 
 ‘ white spot disease ’ . 
 Drugs and chemicals may cause loss of skin 
pigment. These may be encountered at work, but 
a more common source is skin lightening creams 
which, sadly, are all too commonly used by those 
with dark skin. The active ingredient is generally 
hydroquinone, which can be used therapeutically 
(see below). 
 Many inﬂ ammatory skin disorders leave sec-
ondary or postinﬂ ammatory hypopigmentation in 
their wake, due to disturbances in epidermal 
integrity and melanin production: both eczema 
and psoriasis often leave temporary hypopig-
mentation when they resolve. However, inﬂ am-
mation can destroy melanocytes altogether: in 
is generally thought to be an autoimmune proc-
ess. Organ - speciﬁ c autoantibodies are frequently 
present (as in alopecia areata, with which vitiligo 
may coexist). 
 Treatment is generally unsatisfactory. Topical 
steroids have their advocates, and psoralen and 
UVA (PUVA) can be successful. Cosmetic camou-
ﬂ age may be helpful. Sunscreens should be used 
in the summer, because vitiliginous areas will not 
tan and will burn easily. 
 In some patients, particularly children, areas 
repigment spontaneously. This is less common in 
adults and in longstanding areas. Repigmentation 
often begins with small dots coinciding with hair 
follicles. A similar appearance occurs in Sutton ’ s 
halo naevus (see Chapter  10 ). 
 Tuberculoid leprosy is in the differential diagno-
sis of hypopigmentation, but the (usually solitary) 
patch of hypopigmented skin will also exhibit 
diminished sensation. Pale patches are also seen 
in the earliest stages: so - called  ‘ indeterminate ’ 
leprosy. 
 The organism causing pityriasis versicolor (see 
Chapter  4 ) secretes azelaic acid. This results in 
hypopigmentation, most noticeably after sun 
exposure. 
 Pityriasis alba (a low - grade eczema) is a very 
common cause of hypopigmentation in children, 
especially in darker skins. Pale patches with a 
slightly scaly surface appear on the face and upper 
arms (Figure  12.2 ). The condition usually responds 
(albeit slowly) to moisturizers, but may require mild 
topical steroids. The tendency appears to clear at 
puberty. 
 Figure 12.1   A typical patch of vitiligo.  
 Figure 12.2   Pityriasis alba on the cheek.  

Pigmentary disorders  113
LEOPARD syndrome ( l entigines,  e lectrocardio-
graphic abnormalities,  o cular hypertelorism,  p ul-
monary stenosis,  a bnormalities of the genitalia, 
 r etardation of growth and  d eafness.). 
 Incontinentia pigmenti is a rare congenital dis-
order that causes hyperpigmentation in a whorled 
pattern, following a phase of blisters and hyperk-
eratotic lesions, and sometimes accompanied by 
other congenital abnormalities.  
 Acquired 
 Urticaria pigmentosa (which is due to abnormal 
numbers of dermal mast cells) is most common in 
children, but may affect adults. There is a wide-
spread eruption of indistinct brown marks which 
urticate if rubbed. 
 Chloasma, or melasma, is more common in 
women than men. Characteristically, hyperpig-
mentation develops on the forehead, cheeks and 
chin (Figure  12.4 ). Provoking factors include sun-
light, pregnancy and oestrogen therapy, but 
chloasma may occur spontaneously. Treatment is 
difﬁ cult. Avoidance of precipitating factors (espe-
cially sunlight and oestrogens where possible) 
may help. Topical hydroquinone preparations are 
sometimes used.   
 Various drugs and chemicals cause cutaneous 
hyperpigmentation (see Chapter  21 ). 
 In postinﬂ ammatory hyperpigmentation, dis-
ruption of the epidermis results in deposition of 
melanin granules in the dermis (pigmentary 
incontinence). Many skin disorders do this, par-
ticularly in pigmented skin, but lichen planus is 
particularly troublesome. There is no useful treat-
ment, but the pigmentation gradually fades with 
time. 
scars, after burns and in areas treated with cryo-
therapy (it is the basis of the technique of 
 ‘ freeze - branding ’ ). 
 Hyperpigmentation 
 There are many causes of increased skin pig-
mentation, including excessive production of 
melanin, and the deposition in the skin of sev-
eral other pigments, such as  β - carotene, bilirubin, 
drugs and metals. The major causes are as shown 
in the box. 
  
 Causes of  h yperpigmentation 
 Congenital 
  •    Neuroﬁ bromatosis 
  •    Peutz – Jeghers syndrome  
  •    LEOPARD syndrome  
  •    Incontinentia pigmenti  
 Acquired 
  •    Urticaria pigmentosa  
  •    Addison ’ s disease  
  •    Renal failure  
  •    Haemochromatosis 
  •    Liver disease  
  •    Carotenaemia: 
 —  idiopathic 
 —  myxoedema 
 —  pernicious anaemia  
  •    Acanthosis nigricans  
  •    Chloasma 
  •    Drugs and chemicals  
  •    Postinﬂ ammatory hyperpigmentation  
 Congenital 
 Hyperpigmentation is prominent in neuroﬁ -
bromatosis: caf é - au - lait marks (Figure  12.3 ) and 
axillary freckling are common. Speckled lentigi-
nous pigmentation is seen around the mouth 
and on the hands in the Peutz – Jeghers syndrome, 
and similar but more widespread lentigines may 
accompany a number of congenital defects in the 
 Figure 12.3   Caf é - au - lait patch in neuroﬁ bromatosis.  

114  Pigmentary disorders
 Hyperpigmentation is an important physical 
sign in several systemic diseases: 
 1  Addison ’ s disease: the changes are most 
marked in skin creases, scratch marks and the 
gums 
 2  Renal failure: may cause muddy - brown skin 
colour  
 3  Haemochromatosis: causes a deep golden -
 brown hue, diabetes and liver disease 
 4  Some chronic liver diseases, e.g. primary 
biliary cirrhosis 
 β  - Carotene (a yellow pigment) accumulates 
harmlessly in the skin in some normal individuals 
who ingest large amounts of carrots and orange 
juice (rich sources). The colour is most marked on 
the palms and soles. Similar deposition is seen in 
some patients with myxoedema and pernicious 
anaemia. 
 Another important, although rare, cause of 
acquired hyperpigmentation is acanthosis nigri-
cans. This may or may not be associated with a 
systemic disease (see Chapter  19 ). 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 12.4   Typical chloasma.  

 13 
Disorders of the  h air 
and  n ails  
 If a woman have long hair, it is a glory to her. 
 St Paul (1  Corinthians , 11:15) 
 The hair takes root in the head at the same time 
as the nails grow. 
 Hippocrates 
 Introduction 
 St Paul clearly understood the importance of a 
good head of hair to human well - being and 
Hippocrates (see above) knew that hair and nails 
were intimately connected. There are conditions 
that affect both or either alone. We deal with 
abnormalities of hair ﬁ rst and then nail disorders, 
but there is some overlap.  
 Hair  a bnormalities 
 Abnormalities of hair and nails may be the result 
of: 
 1  Local factors 
 2  Generalized skin disease 
 3  Systemic disease 
 Hair is important psychologically. Disturbances 
in growth or physical characteristics, even of minor 
degree, may be very upsetting: did Kojak really 
like being bald? Remember that the distress caused 
is not necessarily proportionate to the severity 
apparent to an observer. 
 Patients 
present 
with 
three 
main 
hair 
abnormalities: 
 1  Changes in physical properties (e.g. colour or 
texture) 
 2  Thinning or loss of hair 
 3  Excessive hair growth, including growth in 
abnormal sites 
 Changes in  p hysical  p roperties 
of  s calp  h air 
 Common physical changes that are seen in hair 
are as follows:
  
 Physical  c hanges to  h air 
 Pigmentation — greying/whiteness  
  •    Genetic diseases, e.g. albinism, phenylketonuria  
  •    Premature greying:  
 —   physiological 
 —   pathological, e.g. pernicious anaemia  
  •    Ageing  
  •    Vitiligo  
  •    Alopecia areata  
 Textural abnormalities  
  •    Brittleness  
  •    Coarseness  
  •    Curliness  
Lecture Notes: Dermatology, 10th edition. © RAC Graham-Brown 
and DA Burns. Published 2011 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

116  Disorders of the hair and nails 
 When this information is combined with some 
knowledge of the disorders mentioned below, a 
preliminary diagnostic assessment can be made. 
 Telogen efﬂ uvium is often triggered by major 
illness, operations, accidents or other stress. A 
large percentage of hairs suddenly stop growing, 
enter the resting or  ‘ telogen ’  phase, and start to 
fall out about 3 months later. Therefore, ask about 
any major upset in the appropriate period. Pull 
gently on hairs on the crown or sides, and several 
will come out easily: with a hand lens, the bulb 
looks much smaller than normal. Telogen efﬂ u-
vium should settle spontaneously, but can unmask 
androgenetic alopecia (see below), and some 
patients ﬁ nd that their hair never returns com-
pletely to normal. 
 Appropriate tests will exclude important sys-
temic diseases, and correct treatment may restore 
hair growth. 
  
 Change in  c olour 
 Greying of the hair, whether or not premature, is 
permanent, including, usually, the white hair in 
scalp vitiligo. Regrowing hair in alopecia areata 
(see below) is often white initially, but repigments 
later. 
 Textural  a bnormalities 
 Brittleness or coarseness may accompany hair 
thinning in hypothyroidism and iron deﬁ ciency 
(see below). Hair may also become lack - lustre 
from hairdressing techniques (back - combing, 
bleaching and drying). In men, hair may become 
curly in the early stages of androgenetic alopecia 
(see below).   
 Scalp  h air  l oss 
 Congenital  d isorders 
 Abnormal scalp hair loss is a feature of some con-
genital disorders. 
  
 Congenital  d isorders and  s calp  h air  l oss 
  •    Ectodermal dysplasias  
  •    Premature ageing syndromes  
  •    Monilethrix  
  •    Pili torti  
  •    Marie – Unna alopecia  
  •    Disorders of amino acid metabolism  
  •    Scalp naevi (especially epithelial or organoid)  
  •    Aplasia cutis  
 Very few of these conditions are treatable, but 
they require careful assessment, including micro-
scopic examination of hair shafts.  
 Acquired  d isorders 
 Patients most commonly seek advice about hair 
loss when it is from the scalp, although other areas 
may be affected. The most effective approach to 
the diagnosis of acquired scalp hair loss is: 
 1  to consider whether the changes are diffuse or 
circumscribed  
 2  to assess the state of the scalp skin.    
 Acquired  c auses of  s calp  h air  l oss 
 Diffuse hair loss with normal scalp skin  
  •    Telogen efﬂ uvium  
  •    Thyroid disease  
  •    Iron deﬁ ciency  
  •    Drugs  
  •    Systemic lupus erythematosus  
  •    Secondary syphilis  
  •    Alopecia totalis  
 Androgenetic alopecia  
 Circumscribed hair loss with normal 
scalp skin  
  •    Alopecia areata  
  •    Traction  
  •    Trichotillomania  
 Hair loss with abnormal scalp skin  
 Without scarring  
  •    Severe psoriasis or seborrhoeic dermatitis  
  •    Tinea capitis (see Chapter  4 )  
 With scarring  
  •    Discoid lupus erythematosus  
  •    Lichen planus  
  •    Pseudopelade  
  •    Cicatricial pemphigoid  
  •    Lupus vulgaris  

Disorders of the hair and nails   117
 All of these processes can be confused with alo-
pecia areata (see below) when the latter is wide-
spread and rapidly progressive. 
 Androgenetic alopecia (or common balding) 
occurs in both men and women. It is due to the 
effects of androgens in genetically susceptible 
individuals. 
 In men, the process may begin at any age after 
puberty, but is much more common from the 30s 
onwards. By age 70, 80% of men show some hair 
loss. Hair is usually lost ﬁ rst at the temples and/or 
on the crown, but there may be complete hair loss, 
sparing a rim at the back and sides. Terminal hairs 
become progressively ﬁ ner and smaller, until only 
a few vellus hairs remain. The extent and pace of 
this vary widely. 
 In women, the process is slower and less severe, 
but causes much distress. Up to half of all women 
have mild hair loss on the vertex by age 50 and, in 
some, more severe thinning occurs. There may be 
accompanying hirsutism (see below). 
 Many drugs can induce hair loss. 
  
 Figure 13.1   A typical patch of 
alopecia areata.  
 Drugs  i nducing  h air  l oss 
  •    Cytotoxic agents  
  •    Antithyroid agents, especially thiouracil  
  •    Anticoagulants  
  •    Retinoids  
  •    Thallium  
 Until recently there was no known treatment, 
but early use of topical minoxidil may help both 
men and women, and relatively selective antian-
drogenic agents (e.g. ﬁ nasteride) are becoming 
available. 
 Circumscribed  h air  l oss with 
 n ormal  s calp  s kin 
 Alopecia  a reata 
 The cause of this disorder is unknown but it is 
probably an autoimmune process. As in vitiligo 
(see Chapter  12 ), organ - speciﬁ c autoantibodies 
(to thyroid, adrenal or gastric parietal cells) are 
often found in patients ’  sera. 
 History : one or more areas of baldness suddenly 
appear on the scalp, in the eyebrows, beard or 
elsewhere. It is most common in childhood and 
early adult life, although periodic recurrences may 
happen at any age. 
 Examination : patches are typically round or 
oval (Figure  13.1 ); the skin usually appears com-
pletely normal, although there may be mild ery-
thema; a number of areas may develop next to 
each other, giving rise to a moth - eaten appear-
ance; close examination of the edge of a patch 
reveals the pathognomonic feature — ‘ exclamation 
mark hairs ’  — short hairs that taper towards the 
base (Figure  13.2 ). 
 Prognosis : most patches regrow after a few 
weeks but further episodes are common; initial 
hair growth may be white; occasionally, the proc-
ess spreads and may become permanent — if this 
involves the whole scalp it is termed alopecia 

118  Disorders of the hair and nails 
broken hairs of different lengths. There may be 
psychological factors (see Chapter  20 ). 
 Hair  l oss with  a bnormal  s calp  s kin 
 Psoriasis, seborrhoeic dermatitis and other inﬂ am-
matory processes can cause temporary hair loss: 
an important cause is tinea capitis (see Chapter  4 ). 
 In some conditions, ﬁ brosis accompanies the 
inﬂ ammation, and this may result in permanent 
damage to hair follicles, and obvious loss of tissue 
or atrophy. This is known as scarring or cicatricial 
alopecia. 
 Examination of the rest of the skin may provide 
important clues. 
  
totalis and if the whole body is affected, the name 
alopecia universalis is applied. The nails may be 
affected in severe cases (see below). 
 Treatment : this is difﬁ cult, but topical and int-
ralesional steroids may help. Calcineurin inhib-
tors are used, and topical sensitization with agents 
such as diphencyprone is also used. 
 Chronic traction may cause circumscribed alo-
pecia, especially around scalp margins (Figure 
 13.3 ). It is seen in young girls with tight ponytails, 
Sikh boys and African – Caribbean children whose 
hair is dressed in multiple little pigtails.   
 In trichotillomania, hair is pulled, twisted or 
rubbed out, and affected site(s) are covered in 
 Figure 13.3   Traction alopecia.  
 Figure 13.2   The edge of the area 
seen in Figure  13.1 . Exclamation mark 
hairs are visible at the margin.  

Disorders of the hair and nails   119
 Treatment includes shaving, waxing, depilatory 
creams, electrolysis and laser ablation. The antian-
drogen cyproterone acetate may help. 
 Hypertrichosis 
 Excessive hair growth in a non - sexual distribution 
may occur in both sexes. There are several causes:
  
 In most of these conditions, a biopsy is essential. 
In cases where lupus erythematosus or cica-
tricial pemphigoid is suspected, immunoﬂ uores-
cence should also be performed.  
 Generalized  h air  l oss 
 Generalized hair loss is rare, but may accom-
pany endocrine disturbances, especially hypothy-
roidism or hypopituitarism. Drugs, particularly 
cytotoxics, may induce widespread alopecia. As 
has been mentioned, alopecia areata may lead to 
complete hair loss — alopecia universalis. 
 Excessive  h air and  h air in 
 a bnormal  s ites 
 Hirsutism 
 This term is applied to excessive growth of hair in 
a female, distributed in a male secondary sexual 
pattern. 
 A search for more serious causes is indicated if 
the changes are of rapid onset.   
 Causes of  c icatricial  a lopecia 
 Discoid lupus erythematosus  
  •    Prominent plugging of the hair follicles  
  •    Look for lesions on the face  
 Lichen planus  
  •    May accompany lichen planus elsewhere  
  •    Nail involvement is common (see Chapter  15 )  
 Cicatricial pemphigoid  
  •    Alopecia follows blistering  
 Lupus vulgaris (cutaneous tuberculosis)  
 Trigeminal trophic syndrome  
  •    May follow herpes zoster because of 
hypoaesthesia and chronic trauma  
 Pseudopelade  
  •    Small patches of scarring alopecia without 
distinguishing features  
 Causes of  h irsutism 
  •    Mild hirsutism is quite common in elderly 
women  
  •    It may be a genetic trait in younger females, 
when the changes may accompany a general 
reduction in scalp hair (see Androgenetic 
alopecia)  
  •    Minor endocrine disturbances, especially 
polycystic ovary syndrome  
  •    Drugs with androgenic activity  
  •    Virilizing tumours  
 Causes of  h ypertrichosis 
  •    Congenital generalized, e.g. Cornelia de Lange 
syndrome  
  •    Congenital localized, e.g.  ‘ faun - tail ’ in spina 
biﬁ da occulta  
  •    Drugs such as:  
 —   minoxidil (now used for baldness — see 
above) 
 —   ciclosporin 
 —   hydantoins 
 —   systemic steroids  
  •    Anorexia nervosa  
  •    Cachexia  
  •    Porphyria cutanea tarda: associated with 
scarring and milia  
  •    Pretibial myxoedema: overlying plaques  
 Nail  a bnormalities 
 Nail changes may be non - speciﬁ c, or characteristic 
of speciﬁ c processes. They may occur in isolation, 
but the nails are abnormal in several disorders. 
  
  

120  Disorders of the hair and nails 
 Disorders with  a bnormal  n ails 
 Congenital  
  •    Especially disorders of keratinization, e.g. Darier ’ s 
disease  
  •    Ectodermal dysplasias  
  •    Due to scarring, e.g. dystrophic epidermolysis 
bullosa  
 Acquired  
  •    Psoriasis  
  •    Eczema/dermatitis  
  •    Lichen planus  
  •    Alopecia areata/totalis  
  •    Fungal infections  
 Common  n ail  a bnormalities 
 Brittleness  
  •    Increases with age  
  •    Seen in iron deﬁ ciency (see also Koilonychia) and 
thyroid disease  
 Roughness (trachyonychia)  
  •    Common and often non - speciﬁ c  
  •    May result from widespread pitting (see below)  
 Beau ’ s lines  
  •    Horizontal grooves that follow a major illness  
 Pits  
  •    Classic feature of psoriasis  
  •    Severe alopecia areata (smaller, more evenly 
distributed than in psoriasis)  
  •    Eczema/dermatitis (coarse dents and irregular pits)  
 Onycholysis  
  •    Lifting of nail plate off nail bed  
  •    Causes:  
 —   psoriasis 
 —   fungal infection (see Chapter  4 ) 
 —   thyrotoxicosis 
 —   space - occupying lesion (e.g. exostosis or 
tumour) 
  •    May be no other identiﬁ able abnormality present  
 Clubbing  
  •    Sign of pulmonary, liver or thyroid disease; may be 
familial  
 Discoloration  
  •    White marks — common normal variant  
  •    White nails — associated with cirrhosis  
  •    Pale — anaemia  
  •    Half red/half pale — renal disease  
  •    Sulfur yellow — fungal infection  
  •    Uniform yellow — ‘ yellow nail syndrome ’  
(bronchiectasis and lymphoedema)  
  •    Green – blue — Pseudomonas infection  
  •    Brown – black — melanoma, haematoma  
  •    Linear brown — naevus  
 Koilonychia  
  •    Nails with a concave upper surface 
(spoon - shaped)  
  •    Causes:  
 —   iron deﬁ ciency  
 —   inherited 
 Washboard nails (Figure    13.4  )  
  •    Habitual picking of nail fold leads to surface 
ridging  
 Onychogryphosis  
  •    Grossly thickened, distorted nails (Figure  13.5 ) 
often due to neglect  
 ‘ Pterygium ’  
  •    Damage leads to epithelium encroaching on nail 
surface  
  •    Most common cause — lichen planus  
 Loss of nails  
  •    Causes:  
 —   pterygium 
 —   scarring, e.g. Stevens – Johnson syndrome  
 —   severe inﬂ ammation, e.g. pustular 
psoriasis 

Disorders of the hair and nails   121
 Common  d isorders of the 
 p aronychium 
 Patients may complain of disorders of the area 
around the nail — the paronychium. 
 Paronychia 
 There are two common forms: acute and chronic. 
In acute paronychia, an abscess in the nail fold 
forms, points and discharges. It is nearly always 
staphylococcal. Chronic paronychia is discussed 
in Chapter  4 . 
 Figure 13.4   ‘ Washboard ’ nails on the 
thumbs: the result of a habit tic.  
 Figure 13.5   Onychogryphosis.  
 Ingrowing  n ails 
 Over - curved nails (especially on big toes) dig into 
the lateral nail fold, leading to chronic inﬂ amma-
tion and overproduction of granulation tissue. 
Sometimes this can be prevented by trimming 
nails straight, but surgical intervention is often 
required. 
 Periungual  w arts 
 Warts are discussed in Chapter  3 . Periungual warts 
are unsightly and extremely difﬁ cult to eradicate. 

122  Disorders of the hair and nails 
 Myxoid  c yst 
 Small cystic swellings may appear on the proxi-
mal nail fold (Figure  13.6 ). The nail may develop 
a linear depression. Clear gelatinous ﬂ uid can be 
expressed, if the surface is breached (Figure  13.6 b). 
 Figure 13.6   (a) Myxoid cyst of the ﬁ nger; (b) Insertion of a needle releases crystal - clear, gelatinous contents.  
(b)
(a)
These cysts are more common in middle - aged and 
elderly people. A myxoid cyst is essentially a gan-
glion connected to the distal interphalangeal joint 
by a narrow pedicle. Treatment is with cryotherapy, 
or various surgical procedures. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 14 
Bullous  d isorders  
 All that blisters is not pemphigus. 
 Graham - Brown and Burns, 1990 
 Causes 
 The skin has a limited repertoire of changes, but 
few are more dramatic than an eruption of blisters 
or bullae. There are many causes. 
 Causes of  b ullae 
 Physical injury  
  •    Cold, heat, friction  
  •    Severe oedema  
 Infections (see Chapters    3 and    4 )  
 Bacterial  
  •    Impetigo  
 Viral  
  •    Chickenpox  
  •    Herpes zoster  
  •    Herpes simplex  
  •    Smallpox and vaccinia  
  •    Hand, foot and mouth disease  
 Fungal  
  •    Tinea pedis with pompholyx  
 Arthropods (see Chapter    5 )  
  •    Insect bites  
 Drugs (see also Chapter    21 )  
  •    Barbiturates, sulfonamides, iodides, furosemide, 
nalidixic acid (light induced)  
  •    Drug - induced pemphigus and pemphigoid  
  •    Fixed drug eruptions  
 Skin disorders  
 Congenital  
  •    Epidermolysis bullosa  
 Acquired  
 Bullae are a major feature in: 
  •    Pemphigus  
  •    Bullous pemphigoid  
  •    Cicatricial pemphigoid  
  •    Dermatitis herpetiformis  
  •    Linear IgA disease  
  •    Epidermolysis bullosa acquisita  
  •    Toxic epidermal necrolysis  
 Bullae may occur in: 
  •    Erythema multiforme (Stevens – Johnson 
syndrome)  
  •    Eczema (including pompholyx)  
  •    Lichen planus  
  •    Psoriasis (pustular)  
  •    Vasculitis  
 Metabolic disease  
  •    Porphyria cutanea tarda  
  •    Diabetes mellitus  
 This is a fairly comprehensive differential diag-
nostic list for further reading. Some disorders, 
such as impetigo and the viral causes, are men-
tioned elsewhere in this book; this chapter deals 
with the most important remaining causes of 
blistering. 
  
Lecture Notes: Dermatology, 10th edition. © RAC Graham-Brown 
and DA Burns. Published 2011 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

124  Bullous disorders
 Acquired 
 Pemphigus 
 The cardinal pathological processes in all forms of 
pemphigus are: 
 1  A split within the epidermis 
 2  Loss of adhesion of epidermal cells 
( ‘ acantholysis ’ ) 
 These changes may be just above the basal layer 
(pemphigus vulgaris; Figure  14.1 ) or higher in the 
epidermis (pemphigus foliaceus; Figure  14.2 ). 
 The most common variant is pemphigus vul-
garis, which presents with ﬂ accid blisters and 
erosions (Figure  14.3 ). These may be anywhere, 
but in over 50% of patients the mouth is affected 
(Figure  14.4 ), and perineal lesions are also com-
 Physical  c auses of  b ullae 
 Burns due to cold, heat or chemical injury may 
cause blisters, as may extreme friction (e.g. the 
feet of vigorous squash players or joggers).  
 Oedema 
 Tense bullae may arise in severe oedema of the 
lower legs. 
 Arthropods 
 Remember that insect bites very commonly 
present as tense bullae (see Chapter  5 ). In the UK, 
this is most common in late summer and early 
autumn (fall).  
 Drugs 
 Several drugs cause blistering (see above). Blisters 
caused by nalidixic acid occur on the lower legs 
after sun exposure. Fixed drug eruptions may 
blister (see Chapter  21 ). 
 Skin  d isorders 
 Primary skin disorders giving rise to bullae may be 
congenital or acquired. In some, bullae are an 
integral part of the clinical presentation. In others, 
blisters are a less prominent or constant feature, 
and the reader should consult the appropriate 
chapter for further information. 
 Congenital 
 Epidermolysis  b ullosa 
 Although very rare, this is an important group of 
disorders. Babies are born with fragile skin that 
blisters on contact. There are several variants, with 
splits at different levels in the skin; all are unpleas-
ant and some are fatal. 
 Diagnosis requires sophisticated investigation, 
including electron microscopy to determine the 
level of the blister. 
 The differential diagnosis of blistering in a 
neonate must also include a number of other 
disorders: 
 1  Impetigo (pemphigus neonatorum) 
 2  Staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome (see 
below) 
 3  Incontinentia pigmenti (see Chapter  11 ) 
 Figure 14.1   Pemphigus vulgaris: split just above the 
basal layer, with overlying acantholysis of epidermal 
cells.  
Acantholytic cells
Dermoepidermal junction
 Figure 14.2   Pemphigus foliaceus: similar changes to 
those in Figure  14.1  but higher in the epidermis.  
Dermoepidermal junction
Acantholytic cells

Bullous disorders  125
 Figure 14.3   Pemphigus vulgaris: 
ﬂ accid blisters and erosions.  
 Figure 14.4   Pemphigus: oral 
erosions.  
mon. The blisters rupture easily and the resulting 
erosions heal very slowly, if at all. A highly charac-
teristic feature is the Nikolsky sign: skin at the edge 
of a blister slides off when pushed by a ﬁ nger or 
picked up with forceps. This is only seen in pem-
phigus and toxic epidermal necrolysis (see below). 
Pemphigus vegetans is a variant of pemphigus 
vulgaris in which vegetating masses occur, espe-
cially in the ﬂ exures. 
 Pemphigus foliaceus does not always present 
with obvious blisters, because they are even more 
fragile than in pemphigus vulgaris: there may 
only be non - speciﬁ c scaly areas, and scalp and 
face involvement can closely simulate sebor-
rhoeic ecze ma. One variant known as pemphi-
gus erythematosus remains localized to the face, 
and may be confused with lupus erythematosus. 
 Investigations 
 The investigations performed in all forms of pem-
phigus are the same: 
 1     Biopsies from involved skin, preserving an early 
blister (intact if possible) for histopathology  
 2  Perilesional tissue for direct immunoﬂ uorescence  
 3  Serum for indirect immunoﬂ uorescence 
 The immunopathology of pemphigus vulgaris 
and foliaceus is identical: 
 1     Bright staining around epidermal cells with 
anti bodies directed against immunoglobulin G 
(IgG) and C3 (Figure  14.5 ) 
 2  Circulating antiepithelial antibody (in most 
patients) 

126  Bullous disorders
 Treatment 
 Treatment must be vigorous. Before the advent of 
systemic corticosteroids, most patients died, often 
after a long and debilitating illness. 
 High doses of prednisolone (60 – 120  mg daily) 
are used. The dose is gradually reduced when new 
blistering has ceased (usually in about 4 – 6 weeks). 
Immunosuppressive agents such as azathioprine, 
chlorambucil, cyclophosphamide or methotrex-
ate, and the monoclonal antibody, rituximab, are 
useful in reducing systemic steroid dosage. Good 
nursing and metabolic management are crucial 
because pemphigus patients may be systemically 
ill. Widespread erosions cause loss of protein and 
ﬂ uid, and secondary infection is common. If the 
mouth is severely involved, patients cannot eat 
and may become severely catabolic.   
 Bullous  p emphigoid and 
 c icatricial  p emphigoid 
 Bullous pemphigoid is much more common than 
pemphigus. More than 80% of patients are aged 
over 60. 
 Bullae are the key feature, but are not always 
present initially. The process may begin with a 
non - speciﬁ c phase known as  ‘ pre - pemphigoid ’ , 
characterized by intense irritation and well -
 deﬁ ned, slightly elevated, erythematous areas. 
 When bullae develop they are usually numer-
ous, tense, dome shaped and may be ﬁ lled with 
blood (Figure  14.6 ). They vary from a few millime-
tres to several centimetres in diameter, often 
arising on urticated erythema as well as on normal 
skin. Although lesions may appear anywhere, 
there is a predilection for the limbs. Oral involve-
 Figure 14.6   Bullous pemphigoid: numerous tense 
blisters.  
 Figure 14.5   Pemphigus: direct 
immunoﬂ uorescence. IgG is found 
around epidermal cells.  

Bullous disorders  127
ment may occur. When blisters burst, healing is 
usually rapid. Some blisters do not burst, and the 
ﬂ uid is simply reabsorbed. Scarring is rare, but 
there is a distinctive variant, characterized by 
marked scarring, known as cicatricial pemphig-
oid. This condition has a predilection for oral, con-
junctival and genital epithelium.   
 The diagnosis in both forms of pemphigoid 
requires: 
 1  A biopsy for histopathology 
 2  A biopsy for direct immunoﬂ uorescence 
 3  Serum for indirect immunoﬂ uorescence is a 
much less valuable investigation and is often 
omitted 
 The pathological ﬁ ndings are as shown in the 
box. 
  
 Figure 14.7   Bullous pemphigoid: the split is 
subepidermal.  
Dermoepidermal junction
 Figure 14.8   Bullous pemphigoid: 
direct immunoﬂ uorescence. IgG at 
the basement membrane zone.  
 Pathological  ﬁ  ndings in  p emphigoid 
  •    A subepidermal blister (Figure  14.7 )  
  •    A linear band of IgG and C3 at the basement 
membrane zone (Figure  14.8 ): this is attached 
to an antigen in the area of the 
hemidesmosomes and anchoring ﬁ brils  
  •    A circulating IgG antibody to basement 
membrane is found in 70% of patients with 
bullous pemphigoid but the titre is of no 
signiﬁ cance  
  •    No circulating antibody in cicatricial pemphigoid  
 Bullous pemphigoid generally responds rapidly, 
and maintenance therapy with small doses is 
usually possible. The condition appears to be self -
 limiting in some. Cicatricial pemphigoid is much 
less responsive. 
 Dermatitis  h erpetiformis 
 Dermatitis herpetiformis is uncommon. Its impor-
tance lies in its ability to cause severe itching, and 
its association with gluten - sensitive enteropathy. 
 Clinically, the cardinal features are a history of 
intense pruritus and grouped erythematous papules 
and vesicles, most typically on the elbows (Figure 
 14.9 ) and extensor surfaces of the forearms, knees 
and shins, buttocks, shoulders and scalp.   
 Itching often results in excoriations and second-
ary eczematization; it is not always possible to ﬁ nd 
intact vesicles or bullae. 
 Dermatitis herpetiformis should be con-
sidered in any patient with severe itching and 
 Treatment 
 Both variants require treatment with systemic ster-
oids, in moderate doses, usually with immunosup-
pressives such as azathioprine or chlorambucil. 

128  Bullous disorders
 The main pathological ﬁ ndings are as shown in 
the box. 
  
 Figure 14.9   Dermatitis herpetiformis: the elbow is a 
typical site.  
 Figure 14.10   Dermatitis 
herpetiformis: papillary tip 
microabscesses as well as a 
subepidermal blister.  
Papillary tip microabscess
Dermoepidermal junction
 Pathological  ﬁ  ndings in  d ermatitis 
 h erpetiformis 
  •    A subepidermal blister that is indistinguishable, 
when fully formed and intact, from that seen in 
bullous pemphigoid  
  •    However, in very early prevesicular lesions 
(hence the pink papule), or at the edge of a 
vesicle, there are small neutrophil 
 ‘ microabscesses ’  in dermal papillary tips (Figure 
 14.10 ). These are pathognomonic  
  •    Granular IgA in the dermal papillary tips on 
immunoﬂ uorescence (Figure  14.11 )  
  •    There are no circulating antibodies  
  •    Gut changes of gluten sensitivity, ranging from 
increased lymphocyte numbers to various 
grades of villous atrophy  
inﬂ ammatory skin changes in the distribution 
mentioned above. 
 The diagnosis requires: 
 1  A biopsy of a blister or, preferably, a new pink 
papule for histopathology  
 2     A biopsy of normal skin for immunoﬂ uorescence  
 3  A jejunal biopsy 
 Treatment 
 Dermatitis herpetiformis responds dramatically to 
sulfones. Dapsone is the drug of ﬁ rst choice but it 
induces haemolysis, especially at higher doses. 
Alternatives are sulfapyridine and sulfamethox-
ypyridazine (unfortunately, these can sometimes 
be difﬁ cult to obtain). A gluten - free diet is essen-
tial, not only because the condition may be con-
trolled by diet alone, but because there may be an 
increased risk of gut lymphoma (similar to coeliac 
disease). 
 Linear  I g A  d isease 
 Occasionally, patients with a pemphigoid -  or der-
matitis herpetiformis - like presentation are found 

Bullous disorders  129
Often the blisters are arranged in rows or clusters 
(a  ‘ string of pearls ’ ). 
 Rarer  b listering  d iseases 
 Porphyria  c utanea  t arda 
 This is rare, but presents as small blisters and ero-
sions on the backs of the hands, and on the fore-
arms and face, following sun exposure or minor 
trauma. In most patients there is an underlying 
liver disorder, and often alcohol abuse. It may be 
triggered by drugs, notably oestrogens. 
 Toxic  e pidermal  n ecrolysis 
 This is a term applied to an acute disorder in which 
there is loss of the epidermis, usually over wide 
areas of the body surface (Figure  14.12 ), although 
localized forms have been described. The Nikol-
sky sign is positive. Primary toxic epidermal necrol-
ysis is usually an adverse reaction to a drug. 
 Extensive epidermal loss leads to severe dehy-
dration and protein depletion. Patients require 
intensive care, and are best managed in a manner 
similar to those with burns.  
 Bullous  e rythema  m ultiforme 
(Stevens – Johnson  s yndrome) 
 This is a reactional state due to a wide variety of 
triggers (see Chapter  15 ). In severe erythema mul-
tiforme, bullae may be the most prominent clini-
cal feature. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to have a linear band of IgA at the basement mem-
brane on immunoﬂ uorescence. This is now gener-
ally considered to be a separate bullous disease, 
which may be seen in both children and adults. 
 Figure 14.11   Dermatitis herpetiformis: 
immunoﬂ uorescence of normal skin. Granular 
deposits of IgA in dermal papillae.  
 Figure 14.12   Severe skin loss in 
toxic epidermal necrolysis.  

130  Miscellaneous disorders, and light-induced skin diseases
 15 
Miscellaneous 
 e rythematous and 
 p apulosquamous 
 d isorders, and  l ight -
 i nduced  s kin  d iseases  
 Miscellaneous: of mixed composition or charac-
ter; of various kinds; many - sided. 
 Concise Oxford English Dictionary 
 This chapter is a mixed bag: it covers a number of 
common and/or important skin disorders that 
have not found a place elsewhere. 
 Urticaria and 
 a ngioedema 
 Urticaria is the clinical term for a group of disor-
ders characterized by the formation of weals —
 swellings of the skin that disappear leaving no 
visible sign. Most of us have experienced one 
common form — after falling (or being pushed) 
into nettles (the term  ‘ nettle - rash ’ is used com-
monly for urticaria). The main pathological change 
is dermal oedema due to vascular dilatation, often 
in response to histamine (and probably other 
mediators) released from mast cells. In some 
patients, there are also small numbers of lym-
phocytes, indicating an autoimmune aetiology. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 The skin itches or stings; weals develop, white 
at ﬁ rst, then pink with a white rim; lesions can 
become very extensive and appear in many sites 
at once, but  always  clear spontaneously within a 
few hours, even though new lesions may continue 
to develop. 
 Typical lesions of urticaria are shown in Figure 
 15.1 . 
 A frequent accompanying feature of urticaria is 
angioedema, in which oedema extends into sub-
cutaneous tissues, especially around the eyes, the 
lips, and in the mouth and pharynx. The swelling 
may be alarming, occasionally resulting in com-
plete closure of the eyes, swelling of the lips and 
tongue, and compromise of the airway. 
Lecture Notes: Dermatology, 10th edition. © RAC Graham-Brown 
and DA Burns. Published 2011 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Miscellaneous disorders, and light-induced skin diseases  131
 Chronic  u rticaria 
 Attacks last for weeks, months or years. Contrary 
to popular expectations, a single causative factor 
is rarely found. Chronic ingestion of food colour-
ings and preservatives may occasionally be impor-
tant, but in most patients chronic urticaria is due 
to an autoimmune process or to one of the physi-
cal stimuli discussed below.  
 The  p hysical  u rticarias 
 Several physical insults may trigger urticarial 
responses: 
 1  Dermographism: weals appear after scratch -
 marks (Figure  15.2 ); this may occur alone or 
with other forms of urticaria  
 2  Pressure (delayed): weals develop up to 24h 
after pressure is applied  
 3  Cholinergic urticaria: affects young men; 
sweating is accompanied by small white weals 
with a red halo on the upper trunk  
 Urticaria and angioedema may form part of a 
systemic anaphylactic reaction. 
 Clinical  f orms of  u rticaria 
and  a ngioedema 
 Acute  u rticaria 
 Attacks last only a few hours or days. Common 
causes include the following: 
 1  Contact with plants (e.g. nettles), animal fur 
(e.g. dogs, cats, horses) or foods (e.g. milk, 
egg - white) 
 2  Ingestion of foods, especially nuts, shellﬁ sh 
and strawberries  
 3  Ingestion of drugs, e.g. aspirin and penicillin 
 People who have atopy (with asthma, eczema or 
hay fever) are more susceptible. The reaction is 
generally triggered by immunoglobulin E (IgE) 
antibodies; some reactions, e.g. to aspirin, are due 
to direct mast cell degranulation.  
 Figure 15.1   Urticaria.  
 Figure 15.2   Dermographism.  

132  Miscellaneous disorders, and light-induced skin diseases
(CNS) depression, but several newer antihista-
mines have little or no sedative effect (e.g. 
desloratadine, levocetirizine, fexofenadine). These 
are now drugs of ﬁ rst choice. It may help to add 
an H 2 - receptor antagonist (cimetidine, raniti-
dine), but this is controversial. 
 It is sometimes necessary to use other agents, 
such as systemic steroids, ciclosporin and adrena-
line (see below). 
  
 4  Cold: contact with any cold object or blasts of 
cold air induce the formation of weals  
 5  Water 
 6  Sunlight 
 7  Heat 
 Hereditary  a ngioedema 
 In this very rare autosomal dominant condition: 
 1  C1 esterase inhibitor is lacking or defective 
 2  There are sudden attacks of angioedema that 
can be life threatening  
 3  The gut may be affected, giving rise to spasms 
of abdominal pain 
 Urticaria  p igmentosa 
 Abnormal accumulations of mast cells result in 
multiple pigmented macules that cause urticaria 
on being rubbed (see also Chapter  12 ).  
 Urticaria in  s ystemic  d isease 
 An urticarial eruption may be part of a systemic 
disorder, especially hepatitis B.   
 Treatment of  u rticaria 
 If a possible trigger can be elicited from the history, 
it should be avoided. Aspirin, and aspirin - like sub-
stances, should be avoided by anyone prone to 
urticaria. 
 Most types of urticaria respond to H 1 - receptor 
antihistamines, although some of the rarer physi-
cal forms do not. A large range of agents is avail-
able, many of which cause central nervous system 
 Figure 15.3   ‘ Target ’  lesions of 
erythema multiforme.  
 Management of  u rticaria 
  •    Acute attacks: a few days ’ treatment is usually 
sufﬁ cient  
  •    Chronic urticaria: give a dose of antihistamine 
which suppresses the eruption completely; 
maintain this dose for several months; gradually 
withdraw treatment  
  •    Angioedema: may require parenteral therapy 
with adrenaline, antihistamines and steroids  
  •    Anaphylaxis: adrenaline is required  
  •    Hereditary angioedema: does not respond to 
antihistamines or steroids; danazol works by 
increasing levels of the missing enzyme; puriﬁ ed 
enzyme preparations are available for acute 
attacks  
 Erythema  m ultiforme 
 The classic lesion of erythema multiforme is the 
 ‘ iris ’ or  ‘ target ’ lesion (Figure  15.3 ): a round or oval 

Miscellaneous disorders, and light-induced skin diseases  133
 Examination 
 The distribution characteristically includes exten-
sor surfaces of the arms and legs, but most impor-
tant diagnostically is involvement of the palms 
and soles.  
area of erythema, with a dusky, purplish centre. 
Sometimes the centre becomes paler and a blister 
forms. 
 History 
 Lesions appear suddenly, enlarge over the course 
of a few days and fade (often leaving pigmentary 
disturbances). The whole process settles in about 
3 weeks. Repeated episodes are rare, but can be 
triggered by herpes simplex virus (see below). 
 Aetiology 
 Erythema multiforme may occur out of the blue, 
but there are several recognized triggers. 
  
 Figure 15.4   Erosions on the lips in 
bullous erythema multiforme.  
 Triggers for  e rythema  m ultiforme 
  •    Herpes simplex virus: the most common trigger; 
as herpes may be recurrent, so may herpes -
 related erythema multiforme  
  •    Other viruses: orf, hepatitis, mumps  
  •    Radiotherapy  
  •    Cancers  
  •    Connective tissue diseases  
  •    A wide variety of drugs  
 Pathology 
 The histological changes are at the dermoepider-
mal junction and may represent a delayed hyper-
sensitivity reaction.  
 Treatment 
 Erythema multiforme is self - limiting, and treat-
ment is not usually required. 
 Stevens – Johnson  s yndrome 
 At its most extreme, erythema multiforme causes a 
major systemic disturbance. There is an acute 
onset, with severe inﬂ ammation of conjunctivae, 
mouth and genitalia (Figure  15.4 ), which may pre-
vent normal eating, affect micturition and cause 
ocular scarring. Patients occasionally die of severe 
bronchopulmonary involvement or renal failure.  
 Treatment 
 Close attention must be given to ﬂ uid balance and 
nutrition. The role of systemic steroids is contro-
versial, because the morbidity from steroids prob-
ably outweighs that from the disease. 
 Exfoliative  d ermatitis 
( e rythroderma) 
 These terms (either will do) are used to describe a 
state in which most of the skin becomes red, 
inﬂ amed, oedematous and scaly (Figure  15.5 ). 
 The correct management depends on the 
underlying disease process, because the optimum 

134  Miscellaneous disorders, and light-induced skin diseases
treatment is different. The following are the four 
most important causes of exfoliative dermatitis: 
 1  Psoriasis 
 2  Eczema/dermatitis 
 3  Drug reactions 
 4  Lymphomas (especially cutaneous T - cell 
lymphoma) 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 These are generally the same, regardless of the 
underlying cause: the skin is red, hot and scaly; 
there may be generalized lymphadenopathy; 
there is a loss of control of temperature regulation, 
and there are bouts of shivering as the body 
attempts to compensate for heat loss by generat-
ing metabolic heat.  
 Effects 
 Cardiac output is increased, protein is lost from 
the skin (and the gut), water loss from the skin is 
increased, patients radiate heat into their sur-
roundings, there is a rise in metabolic rate, with 
mobilization of energy sources and increased 
muscle activity, and the body cannot compensate 
for long, especially in elderly patients.  
 Complications 
 Cardiac failure; renal failure; sudden death due to 
central hypothermia.  
 Treatment 
 1  Stop any potential causative drugs (see 
Chapter  21 ) 
 2  Nurse the patient in a warm room  
 3  Attend to secondary medical problems (e.g. 
dehydration, heart failure and infections) 
 4  Biopsy the skin to obtain a deﬁ nitive diagnosis 
 5  Give a short course of systemic steroids (if the 
diagnosis is known to be psoriasis from the 
out set, commence systemic anti - psoriatic 
drugs as well as or instead of the steroids  — see 
Chapter  8 ) 
 6  Initiate appropriate treatment for underlying 
diagnosis 
 Lichen  p lanus 
 Lichen planus is a rather variable disorder, said to 
affect 1% of new referrals to a dermatologist. The 
most common pattern is an acute eruption of 
itchy papules (Figure  15.6 ). 
 Sites of  p redilection 
 Wrists, ankles and the small of the back, mouth 
and genitalia. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 1  Skin lesions: 
 (a)  ﬂ at - topped 
 (b)  shiny 
 (c)  polygonal (Figure  15.6 ) 
 2  Surface: ﬁ ne network of dots or lines called 
 ‘ Wickham ’ s striae ’ 
 3  Colour:  ‘ violaceous ’ (reddish - purple) 
 4  Oral: lacy, reticulate streaks on the lining of the 
cheeks (Figure  15.7 ), gums and lips 
 Figure 15.5   Exfoliative dermatitis.  

 Figure 15.6   (a) Typical papules of 
lichen planus and (b) papules of 
lichen planus on the wrist — a classic 
site.  
(b)
(a)
 Figure 15.7   Oral lesions in lichen 
planus.  

136  Miscellaneous disorders, and light-induced skin diseases
 2  Similar plaques may develop elsewhere 
 3  Purpura and blistering may appear 
 4  Vulval lichen sclerosus easily becomes eroded 
and haemorrhagic, with severe soreness and 
irritation 
 Complications 
 Vulvovaginal stenosis; development of squamous 
cell carcinoma. 
 Childhood  d isease 
 Lichen sclerosus in prepubertal girls often presents 
with dysuria and pain on defecation. It may be 
misdiagnosed as sexual abuse, but lesions are 
usually easy to diagnose, and parents and child 
can be reassured. The prognosis of childhood 
disease is good, as many clear at puberty.  
 Disease in  m ales 
 Lichen sclerosus may be seen on the glans and 
prepuce (sometimes called  ‘ balanitis xerotica 
 In most patients, the eruption settles over a 
period of a few months. There are a number of 
variants, some of which are more persistent.  
 Aetiology 
 Lichen planus is a T - cell - mediated attack on the 
epidermis, similar changes being seen in graft -
 versus - host reactions. However, the cause of 
lichen planus in most instances remains a mystery. 
  
 Figure 15.8   Characteristic appearance of vulval lichen 
sclerosus.  
 Variants of  l ichen  p lanus 
  •    Hypertrophic: licheniﬁ ed lumps appear on the 
legs  
  •    Atrophic: largely seen in the mouth, lesions may 
be very chronic; small risk of carcinoma  
  •    Follicular: may result in permanent scarring and 
hair loss  
  •    Nail disease: nail changes may be very slight, or 
may lead to complete nail loss  
  •    Drug induced: see Chapter  21  
 Treatment 
 Potent topical steroids usually suppress irritation; 
very extensive or severe oral disease may need sys-
temic steroids or ciclosporin. 
 Lichen  n itidus 
 Probably a variant of lichen planus, this uncom-
mon disorder produces clusters of tiny, asympto-
matic papules.  
 Lichen  s clerosus 
 Lichen sclerosus (previously called lichen sclero-
sus et atrophicus) is a disorder of unknown 
aetiology. 
 Sites of  p redilection 
 The genitalia, especially in women.  
 Clinical  f eatures 
 1  White, atrophic patches on the vulva, 
perineum and perianal skin (Figure  15.8 ), or 
glans penis and foreskin  

Miscellaneous disorders, and light-induced skin diseases  137
Christmas tree ’ (Figure  15.9 ) — but that depends 
on your image of a Christmas tree! However, 
once understood, this sign will never be 
forgotten and  no other disorder produces this 
 2  The scale on the surface of each lesion peels 
from the centre towards the edge, resulting in 
a so - called  ‘ peripheral collarette ’ (Figure  15.10 ) 
 3  If the diagnosis has still not been made, it 
becomes clear when the rash disappears (as it 
always does) in 6 – 8 weeks 
obliterans ’ ), and can give rise to phimosis and 
meatal stenosis. A signiﬁ cant number of boys 
undergo circumcision because of phimosis due to 
lichen sclerosus. There is a risk of squamous cell 
carcinoma. Extragenital lesions may also occur.  
 Treatment 
 The disease in adults generally pursues a chronic 
relapsing course. Very potent topical steroids 
provide symptomatic relief in vulval disease, and 
clobetasol propionate is the treatment of choice. 
Patients should be kept under surveillance 
because of the risk of neoplastic change.     
 Pityriasis  r osea 
 Pityriasis rosea is a self - limiting disorder, predom-
inantly affecting children and young adults. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 1  There may be a mild prodromal illness  
 2  One or more  ‘ herald patches ’ appear. A herald 
patch is large, red, oval and scaly, and usually 
appears on the trunk or upper arm (often 
misdiagnosed, especially as ringworm!)  
 3  A few days later, there is a sudden eruption of 
pink, oval patches on the trunk, upper arms 
and thighs 
 There are three especially notable features: 
 1  On the trunk, lesions largely lie with their long 
axes in lines sweeping from the back to the 
front (almost as if they were following spinal 
nerves). This is said to resemble an  ‘ inverted 
 Figure 15.9   Pityriasis rosea.  
 Figure 15.10   Pityriasis rosea: the 
 ‘ peripheral collarette ’ of scale.  

138  Miscellaneous disorders, and light-induced skin diseases
 There are also three important conditions 
related to pregnancy itself. 
  
 Treatment 
 Usually unnecessary, but mild topical steroids 
may help to relieve irritation. 
 Atypical  p ityriasis  r osea 
 There may be no gap between the herald patch 
and the generalized rash; the eruption may extend 
down the arms and legs, and occasionally spares 
the trunk altogether; lesions may be so numerous 
that the distribution described above is not appar-
ent; the inﬂ ammation may be so intense that it 
causes blisters. 
 Pityriasis  l ichenoides 
 Small brownish - red papules surmounted by a 
 ‘ plate ’  of scale appear on the trunk and limbs. 
Some patients have more acutely inﬂ amed lesions 
that heal to leave pockmarks.  
 Pityriasis  r ubra  p ilaris 
 Pityriasis rubra pilaris (PRP) occurs in localized or 
generalized forms. All types are rare. Lesions are 
reddish - orange, and hair follicles are prominently 
involved. Generalized change is a very rare cause 
of exfoliative dermatitis (see above).  
 Miliaria or  ‘ p rickly  h eat ’  
 This is the exotic name for little red bumps that 
some people develop in hot humid conditions. It 
is due to sweat duct obstruction. It should not be 
confused with polymorphic light eruption (see 
below), which is often erroneously called prickly 
heat, but in which the lesions are induced by light 
 not  heat. The condition is also seen in infants, par-
ticularly in the nappy area.  
 Pregnancy  r ashes 
 Pregnancy may alter the course of a number of 
skin disorders, such as acne, eczema, psoriasis 
and vulval warts, and it may trigger erythema 
multiforme. 
 Conditions  r elated to  p regnancy 
 Pruritus of pregnancy  
  •    Up to 20% of women; may be due to 
oestrogen - induced cholestasis  
 Polymorphic eruption of pregnancy  
  •    Blotchy, urticarial and papular rash with intense 
itching  
  •    Onset in third trimester  
  •    Lesions favour abdomen  
  •    Particular predilection for striae (Figure  15.11 )  
  •    Fades shortly after delivery  
 Herpes (pemphigoid) gestationis  
  •    Blisters on urticated background  
  •    Variant of bullous pemphigoid  
  •    Rare  
 Light - i nduced 
 s kin  d isease 
 But yet the light that led astray 
 Was light from Heaven 
 Robert Burns,  The Vision 
 Sunlight is generally thought to be beneﬁ cial: 
adverts for sunbeds, solaria and foreign holidays 
all bear witness to this twentieth - century obses-
sion. However, ultraviolet (UV) radiation (espe-
cially in excess) initiates, wholly or in part, many 
unwanted skin changes: 
  •      Some are chronic: cancers and keratoses (see 
Chapter  9 ); the yellowing, coarsening and wrin-
kling known as  ‘ photoageing ’ . Note that most of 
today ’ s tanned beauties are tomorrow ’ s wrin-
kled prunes!  
  •      Some are more acute: sunburn; reactions to a 
combination of plants or drugs and light  
  •      Some are due to metabolic disturbances, 
whereas in others the cause is quite unknown  
  •      UV radiation may also exacerbate certain pre -
 existing skin disorders (see below) 

Miscellaneous disorders, and light-induced skin diseases  139
 Figure 15.11   Polymorphic eruption of 
pregnancy.  
 Sunburn 
 Most of us are familiar with sunburn, even if only 
in others. Excessive medium - wavelength UV radi-
ation induces erythema and, if severe, blistering. 
The dose required depends on skin type (see 
Chapter  12 ), and the intensity of the UV radiation: 
skin types I and II are very prone to sunburn; sun-
light around midday is the most intense. 
 Treatment of established sunburn is difﬁ cult, 
but calamine lotion and topical steroids may help 
symptomatically. Prevention is much better than 
cure. 
 Sun care should include avoidance of intense 
exposure, hats and clothing, sunglasses and sun-
screens. Exposed surfaces should be covered as far 
as possible. Sunscreens come in a range of poten-
cies, graded by sun protection factor (SPF) 
number. This number indicates the approximate 
multiple of time to redness that the agent will 
provide: if the exposure time to redness is nor-
mally 10   min, SPF 6 sunscreen will prolong this to 
about an hour. 
  
 Unwanted  c utaneous  r eactions to  l ight 
  •    Sunburn  
  •    Polymorphic light eruption  
  •    Solar urticaria (see above)  
  •    Actinic prurigo  
  •    Juvenile spring eruption  
  •    Hydroa vacciniforme  
  •    Photosensitive eczema  
  •    Porphyrias  
  •    Pellagra  
  •    Xeroderma pigmentosum  
  •    Phytophotodermatitis  
  •    Drug reactions  
 Polymorphic  l ight  e ruption 
 Frequently misdiagnosed as  ‘ prickly heat ’ (see 
above), this affects women more often than men, 
and typically trouble starts in adolescence or early 
adulthood. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 An eruption develops on light - exposed surfaces, 
most commonly the face, arms, legs and the  ‘ V ’  of 
the neck. Individual lesions vary from papules to 
plaques. Blisters are sometimes seen. The reaction 
may occur only in very strong sunlight, but even 
mild British summer sunshine can be the trigger.  
 Treatment 
 Preseason PUVA (psoralen and UVA) is helpful. 
Antimalarials may be of some beneﬁ t, and sun-
screens and clothing will help prevent the eruption.    
 Actinic  p rurigo 
 Actinic prurigo is a rare disorder of childhood in 
which eczematous areas develop on the face and 

140  Miscellaneous disorders, and light-induced skin diseases
 The most common in northern Europe is eryth-
ropoietic protoporphyria, in which burning in the 
sun (even through glass) develops in early child-
hood. A form known as  ‘ variegate porphyria ’  is 
seen in some Dutch and South African pedigrees. 
 It is perhaps worth mentioning that one of the 
rarest porphyrias (congenital erythropoietic por-
phyria or G ü nther ’ s disease) may be the origin of 
the werewolf legend. Sufferers become disﬁ gured, 
hairy and anaemic (hence the werewolf ’ s craving 
for blood). They avoid sunlight because of severe 
photosensitivity (the werewolf prowls at night 
when the moon is full — a logical time to prowl if 
there is no other source of illumination!). 
 Pellagra 
 A photosensitive rash in malnourished individuals 
should suggest pellagra. In western societies the 
classic triad of diarrhoea, dermatitis and dementia 
is seen only in people with alcohol problems and 
those who are reclusive.  
 Xeroderma  p igmentosum 
 This rare disorder often presents with photosensi-
tivity in early childhood (see also Chapter  11 ).  
 Phytophotodermatitis 
 Every summer, we see patients who have devel-
oped a rash after contact with plants on sunny 
days. Linear, streaky dermatitis (Figure  15.12 ) 
results, and residual pigmentary disturbances are 
common. One important cause is giant hogweed, 
but there are several others.    
backs of the hands every summer, and disappear 
in the winter. The cause is unknown, and 
attempted treatment is often ineffective.  
 Juvenile  s pring  e ruption 
 Little boys occasionally develop blisters on the 
ears in spring, and this is given the grand title of 
 ‘ juvenile spring eruption ’ . It is probably a variant 
of polymorphic light eruption.  
 Photosensitive  e czema and 
 c hronic  a ctinic  d ermatitis 
 Some individuals develop eczema of light - exposed 
surfaces. In others, a pre - existing eczema becomes 
much worse on exposure to light. 
 One cause is a contact dermatitis to airborne 
chemicals, such as perfumes or plant extracts (e.g. 
chrysanthemums). A similar picture may occur 
with drugs. 
 The changes tend to become more intense until 
the skin is permanently thickened and inﬂ amed. 
This state is termed  ‘ chronic actinic dermatitis ’ . 
 Treatment 
 This is very difﬁ cult. Barrier sunscreens contain-
ing titanium may help, and azathioprine has been 
shown to be of beneﬁ t. 
 Porphyrias 
 This miscellaneous group of disorders is due to a 
variety of enzyme defects in the haem production 
pathways. Some, but not all, are associated with 
photosensitivity. 
 Figure 15.12   A phytophotodermatitis.  

Miscellaneous disorders, and light-induced skin diseases  141
 Light - i nduced  d rug  r eactions 
 Several groups of drugs are associated with pho-
toallergic and phototoxic reactions (see Chapter 
 21 ). 
 Disorders  e xacerbated by  l ight 
 A number of disorders may show a deterioration 
or provocation on exposure to light. The mecha-
nisms for this are unclear. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Disorders  e xacerbated by  l ight 
  •    Lupus erythematosus  
  •    Rosacea  
  •    Psoriasis  
  •    Darier ’ s disease  
  •    Herpes simplex  

142  Vascular disorders
 16 
Vascular  d isorders  
 Leg  u lcers 
 By far the most common type of leg ulcer is the 
venous ulcer (varicose ulcer; gravitational ulcer). 
Other causes of leg ulceration include ischaemia, 
vasculitis, skin neoplasia and certain haemato-
logical disorders. 
 Venous  l eg  u lcers 
 Venous return from the legs is dependent on the 
deep and superﬁ cial venous systems and activity 
of the calf muscles. When the calf muscles con-
tract they pump blood in the deep veins towards 
the heart against gravity. Valves in the deep veins 
prevent reﬂ ux of blood when the muscles relax. 
During relaxation of the calf muscles blood passes 
from the superﬁ cial veins into the deep veins via 
the saphenofemoral and saphenopopliteal junc-
tions and numerous perforating veins. If the valves 
in the deep veins are incompetent the calf muscle 
pump cannot function effectively and venous 
hypertension develops. Congenital abnormalities 
of the venous system, and valve damage after deep 
vein thrombosis, contribute to incompetence. 
Genetic factors are important because certain 
racial groups have a low prevalence of venous 
hypertension and venous ulcers. 
 The high pressure in the deep veins of the legs 
is transmitted via incompetent perforating veins 
to the superﬁ cial venous system (resulting in  ‘ vari-
cose ’  veins), and eventually to the capillary 
network. Skin capillaries become dilated and tor-
tuous, and there is increased transudation of ﬂ uid 
into the surrounding tissues. Fibrinogen in the 
transudate is converted to ﬁ brin, which forms 
cuffs around blood vessels. Transfer of oxygen and 
nutrients to the surrounding tissues is impeded, 
and the relatively ischaemic tissues are suscepti-
ble to ulceration, either spontaneously or after 
minor trauma. This  ‘ ﬁ brin cuff ’  theory is only one 
of the proposed mechanisms for tissue ischaemia 
in venous hypertension, and the pathomechanics 
of ulceration have not been fully elucidated. 
 Problems caused by venous hypertension usu-
ally occur in middle or old age, and women, par-
ticularly if obese, are predominantly affected. The 
clinical features are as follows. 
  
 Venous hypertension: clinical features 
  •    Varicose veins  
  •    Oedema  
  •    Lipodermatosclerosis  
  •    Hyperpigmentation  
  •    Eczema  
  •    Atrophie blanche  
  •    Ulceration  
 Lipodermatosclerosis 
 This term refers to areas of induration, caused by 
ﬁ brosis, on the lower parts of the legs, above the 
ankles (Figure  16.1 ). There is initially an area of 
erythema, and this subsequently becomes purple –
 brown in colour. On palpation, affected areas feel 
indurated. When the process is circumferential 
the tissues around the ankle are constricted and 
the leg above is oedematous, producing the classic 
 ‘ inverted champagne bottle ’ appearance. 
Lecture Notes: Dermatology, 10th edition. © RAC Graham-Brown 
and DA Burns. Published 2011 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Vascular disorders  143
 Treatment 
 Varicose eczema may be treated with mild potency 
topical steroids. Colour Doppler duplex sonogra-
phy should be performed, and assessment by a 
vascular surgeon is an important aspect of man-
agement, as some patients beneﬁ t signiﬁ cantly 
from surgery on incompetent superﬁ cial veins. In 
addition, it is essential to assess the arterial supply 
in patients with leg ulcers because they may have 
a remediable arterial abnormality. It is not uncom-
mon to discover both venous and arterial pathol-
ogy in individuals with leg ulcers. 
 Another essential component of the manage-
ment of venous ulcers is reduction of venous 
hypertension and oedema by compression band-
aging, which improves calf muscle pump function 
and opposes gravitational venous reﬂ ux. It is vital, 
however, to establish that the arterial supply to a 
limb is adequate (by assessing the ankle – brachial 
pressure index (ABPI) and by Doppler studies) 
before using compression bandaging. 
 Hyperpigmentation 
 Haemosiderin, derived from red cells extravasated 
from dilated, leaky capillaries, produces areas of 
brown discoloration.  
 Eczema 
 Areas of  ‘ varicose ’ eczema are common. 
 Atrophie  b lanche 
 This term is applied to areas of scar tissue within 
which are prominent dilated capillaries. Scattered 
pink dots are seen on a white background (Figure 
 16.2 ). Such areas are very prone to ulcerate, and 
the ulcers are usually extremely painful.    
 Ulcers 
 The most common site for a venous ulcer is the 
medial aspect of the leg, just above the medial 
malleolus (Figure  16.3 ), but the lateral malleolar 
area may also be affected.   
 Rarely, a squamous cell carcinoma may develop 
in a longstanding venous ulcer (Marjolin ’ s ulcer).   
 Figure 16.1   Lipodermatosclerosis.  
 Figure 16.2   Atrophie blanche.  

144  Vascular disorders
 Vasculitic  u lcers 
 Vasculitis associated with a number of disorders, 
including rheumatoid arthritis and systemic lupus 
erythematosus (SLE), may produce leg ulcers. 
 Neoplastic  u lcers 
 Basal cell carcinomas and squamous cell carcino-
mas arising on the legs may resemble, and be mis-
taken for, venous ulcers. However, they usually 
occur above the ankle region. If there is any sus-
picion that an ulcer is neoplastic, a biopsy should 
be performed.  
 Haematological  d isorders and 
 l eg  u lcers 
 Uncommon causes of leg ulcers include heredi-
tary spherocytosis, sickle cell anaemia and thalas-
saemia. The mechanism of ulceration in these 
conditions is related to tissue hypoxia due to 
blockage of skin capillaries by abnormally shaped 
red cells. 
 Vasculitis 
 Vasculitis is an inﬂ ammatory process affecting 
blood vessels. There have been several attempts at 
classiﬁ cation of vasculitis and none has proved 
entirely satisfactory, but systems employed are 
usually based on the size of vessel involved and 
the histological features. One proposed classiﬁ ca-
 Secondary infection, often with a mixed bacte-
rial ﬂ ora, occurs in most venous ulcers. However, 
systemic antibiotic therapy is not necessary unless 
there is associated cellulitis (see Chapter  3 ). 
 There are numerous agents that have been mar-
keted as topical therapies for leg ulcers, including 
alginate, hydrogel and hydrocolloid dressings, but 
a simple regimen of regular irrigation with saline 
and the application of a low adherence dressing is 
adequate in many cases, if combined with com-
pression bandaging. The most important concept 
to remember is that, unless an effort is made to 
deal with the primary problem by compression 
bandaging and vein surgery when indicated, it 
doesn ’ t matter what magical agent is applied to 
the ulcer because it won ’ t heal. 
 When a venous ulcer has healed it is important 
to maintain compression by wearing appropriate 
compression hosiery. 
 Ischaemic  u lcers 
 Ischaemic ulceration is usually a manifestation of 
atherosclerotic 
peripheral 
vascular 
disease. 
Typically, ischaemic ulcers occur on the dorsum 
or the sides of the foot, between the toes, or on the 
heel, in an individual with a history of intermittent 
claudication and, later, rest pain. There are usually 
associated risk factors such as smoking, hyperten-
sion and diabetes. Pedal pulses are reduced or 
absent, and Doppler studies will demonstrate 
impaired blood ﬂ ow. Ischaemic ulcers are usually 
painful. 
 The advice of a vascular surgeon should be 
sought.  
 Figure 16.3   Venous ulcer.  

Vascular disorders  145
tions cutaneous small vessel vasculitis (CSVV) is a 
term applied to any patient with small vessel vas-
culitis of the skin. Typically, the patient presents 
with numerous palpable, purpuric lesions on the 
legs, predominantly below the knees (Figure  16.4 ). 
Some lesions may develop into haemorrhagic 
vesicles or bullae. Histologically, there is ﬁ brinoid 
necrosis of small blood vessels, and a perivascular 
inﬁ ltrate composed predominantly of neutrophil 
polymorphs. The perivascular tissues also con-
tain extravasated red cells, and fragments of poly-
morph nuclei (nuclear dust). These changes are 
initiated by deposition of immune complexes in 
small vessels, complement activation and pro-
duction of polymorph chemotactic factors. Poly-
morphs attracted to the area release enzymes 
that damage the vessel wall. Drugs, or bacterial 
or viral infections may act as the antigenic trigger-
ing factor, but often the initiating factor is not 
discovered. 
 In many cases there is no evidence of involve-
ment of any organ other than the skin, but, if CSVV 
is accompanied by features suggesting a systemic 
vasculitis, such as myalgia, arthralgia, proteinuria, 
haematuria, abdominal pain and gastrointestinal 
haemorrhage, then the diagnostic label should be 
reassessed, because CSVV is a feature of other vas-
culitides, including Henoch – Sch ö nlein purpura 
and Wegener ’ s granulomatosis. 
 Treatment 
 If a trigger can be identiﬁ ed, then it should be 
eliminated. A period of bed rest and treatment 
with non - steroidal anti - inﬂ ammatory drugs often 
result in complete resolution of the skin lesions. 
Colchicine and dapsone may be of beneﬁ t in some 
cases. 
 Henoch – Sch ö nlein  p urpura 
 Henoch - Sch ö nlein purpura (HSP; anaphylactoid 
purpura) is the name given to a systemic small 
vessel vasculitis that occurs predominantly in 
children and is associated with deposition of IgA 
immune complexes in the skin (palpable purpura 
on the elbows, knees and buttocks), joints (arthri-
tis), kidneys (glomerulonephritis) and gastrointes-
tinal tract (abdominal pain and gastrointestinal 
haemorrhage). Perivascular IgA deposits are char-
acteristic of HSP. 
 Upper respiratory tract infections often precede 
HSP. 
tion has two major categories — small and larger 
vessel vasculitides. The size of vessel involved 
in the process provides an indication of the 
accompanying systemic features, in that vasculitis 
affecting small vessels is associated with glomeru-
lonephritis whereas larger vessel vasculitis is asso-
ciated with arterial aneurysms and renovascular 
hypertension. 
 Factors involved in the pathogenesis of vascu-
litis include immune complexes, in which the 
antigens are of bacterial, viral or drug origin, 
antineutrophil cytoplasm antibodies (ANCAs) and 
various cytokines. Clinically, vasculitis may 
present as urticaria, livedo reticularis, purpuric 
papules, nodules, haemorrhagic bullae or ulcers. 
 Evaluation of a patient with suspected vasculitis 
should include pathological conﬁ rmation of the 
clinical diagnosis (skin biopsy for histology and 
direct immunoﬂ uorescence), assessment of the 
extent of the disease (involvement of internal 
organs, especially the presence of proteinuria/
haematuria) and an attempt to establish the 
underlying aetiology (full blood count, antinu-
clear antibodies [ANAs], ANCAs, viral titres, 
antistreptolysin - O titres, chest radiographs). 
  
 Classiﬁ cation 
 Small vessels  
  •    Cutaneous small vessel vasculitis 
(leukocytoclastic vasculitis)  
  •    Henoch – Sch ö nlein purpura  
  •    Drug - induced vasculitis  
  •    Urticarial vasculitis  
 Larger vessels  
  •    Polyarteritis nodosa  
  •    Wegener ’ s granulomatosis  
  •    Nodular vasculitis  
  •    Temporal arteritis  
 Clinical  p resentations 
of  v asculitis 
 Small  v essel 
 Cutaneous  s mall  v essel  v asculitis 
( l eukocytoclastic  v asculitis) 
 This is the most common type of vasculitis encoun-
tered in dermatology, and in current classiﬁ ca-

146  Vascular disorders
 Figure 16.4   Cutaneous small vessel 
vasculitis.  
 Treatment 
 Systemic steroid therapy is of beneﬁ t, particularly 
for nephritis, and in patients with severe renal 
disease other immunosuppressive agents may be 
required. 
 Drug - i nduced  v asculitis 
 Many drugs can be responsible for vasculitis, often 
of immune - complex - mediated leukocytoclastic 
type, but other patterns occur (see Chapter  21 ). 
 Urticarial  v asculitis 
 The appearance is similar to that of urticaria but 
differs in that individual lesions last longer than 24 
h and often have a purpuric component. Although 
it is associated with a number of disorders it is a 
particular feature of connective tissue diseases, 
predominantly Sj ö gren ’ s syndrome and SLE. 
 Larger  v essel 
 Polyarteritis  n odosa 
 Also known as periarteritis nodosa, this is an 
uncommon type of necrotizing vasculitis that 
affects medium - sized arteries throughout the 
body. Patients with polyarteritis nodosa (PAN) 
often have underlying infection with organisms 
that include the hepatitis B virus. Manifestations 
include pyrexia, weight loss, arthralgia and 
myalgia. The most signiﬁ cant clinical sign is the 
presence of cutaneous or subcutaneous nodules 
along the course of superﬁ cial arteries. Vessel 
 Figure 16.5   Erythema nodosum.  
damage results in aneurysm formation. Livedo 
reticularis and skin ulceration are other features. 
There may be renal, gut, cardiac and nervous 
system involvement. 

Vascular disorders  147
 green — like a fading bruise. Pathologically, ery-
thema nodosum is an inﬂ ammatory process of fat 
(panniculitis).   
 It is thought to be a hypersensitivity reaction 
triggered by the causes in the box. 
  
 There is a type of PAN that affects the skin alone. 
Livedo reticularis and cutaneous nodules occur 
on the legs, usually below the knees. 
 Treatment 
 High - dose steroid therapy is used in cases not 
associated with hepatitis B. Patients with hepatitis 
B - associated PAN are treated with a combination 
of an antiviral agent and an immunosuppressant. 
Cutaneous PAN usually responds to small doses of 
systemic steroids. 
 Wegener ’ s  g ranulomatosis 
 This is a rare form of necrotizing granulomatous 
vasculitis affecting principally arteries of the res-
piratory tract, and associated with glomerulone-
phritis. Skin lesions take the form of palpable 
purpura and tender subcutaneous nodules on 
dependent areas. It is associated with the pres-
ence of ANCAs.  
 Nodular  v asculitis 
 The antigenic trigger for this form of vasculitis, 
which occurs predominantly in middle - aged 
women, is probably a bacterial infection of some 
type, but in many cases the precise aetiology is 
not discovered. Inﬂ ammatory nodules, produced 
by a vasculitis in the deep dermis and subcutane-
ous fat, occur on the legs. These may ulcerate. 
Other organs are not involved. 
 Temporal  a rteritis ( g iant 
 c ell  a rteritis) 
 Skin changes are rare, but ulceration may 
occur on the temporal and parietal regions of the 
scalp. 
 Other  d isorders  i nvolving 
 b lood  v essels 
 Erythema  n odosum 
 This condition usually affects children and young 
adults, and is characterized by the development 
of multiple, tender, erythematous nodules, usu-
ally on the shins (Figure  16.5 ), but occasionally 
also on the forearms. As each nodule regresses it 
changes colour from red to purple to yellow -
 Causes 
  •    Streptococcal infection  
  •    Drugs, particularly sulfonamides  
  •    Sarcoidosis  
  •    Primary tuberculosis  
  •    Inﬂ ammatory bowel disease  
 In some cases no precipitating factor is 
discovered 
 Investigation of a patient with erythema nodo-
sum should include culture of a throat swab, 
antistreptolysin titre, chest radiograph and tuber-
culin skin test. 
 Treatment 
 In most cases bed rest and simple analgesia are all 
that is required. The lesions will gradually resolve 
over a period of a few days. 
 Beh ç et ’ s  d isease 
 The principal features of this disorder are recur-
rent, severe oral and genital ulceration, and 
uveitis. Skin lesions include erythema nodosum 
and pustules at sites of minor trauma such as 
venepuncture sites.  
 Pyoderma  g angrenosum 
 See Chapter  19 . 
 Perniosis ( c hilblains) 
 Chilblains are painful, inﬂ ammatory lesions pro-
voked by exposure to cold. The most common 
sites for chilblains are the ﬁ ngers and toes, but 
they may also occur on fatty prominences such 
as the fat pads on the medial aspects of the 
knees, and on the thighs. A characteristic type of 
chilblains occurs on the lateral aspects of the 
thighs of female horse riders (Figure  16.6 ) — this is 
related to the chill factor produced by galloping 
along in the middle of winter.  ‘ Chilblains ’  is a 

148  Vascular disorders
rather unimpressive word, so dermatologists call 
this disorder  ‘ equestrian cold panniculitis ’ . 
 Treatment for chilblains is not very satisfactory. 
The best management is prophylaxis, by wearing 
warm gloves and thick socks, and, in the case of 
the equestrian, thermal underwear and clothing 
made of modern insulating materials. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 16.6   Chilblains on the thigh in a keen 
horsewoman.  

 17 
Connective  t issue 
 d iseases  
 Lupus  e rythematosus 
 Lupus erythematosus is an autoimmune disorder 
that occurs in two main forms — discoid lupus ery-
thematosus (DLE), in which the skin alone is 
affected, and systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), 
which affects both the skin and the internal 
organs. A small proportion of patients with DLE 
may subsequently develop SLE. A third variant, 
subacute cutaneous lupus erythematosus (SCLE), 
is characterized by distinctive skin lesions that 
may be associated with systemic features. 
 The pathogenesis of lupus erythematosus has 
not been fully elucidated, but probably involves a 
combination of genetic factors predisposing to 
autoimmunity, and environmental agents such as 
viral and bacterial antigens acting as triggering 
factors. 
 Discoid  l upus  e rythematosus 
 Classically, DLE affects light - exposed areas —
 principally the face and neck, but also the dorsa of 
the hands and the arms. Lesions may be precipi-
tated or exacerbated by sunlight. Individual 
lesions consist of scaling, erythematous plaques, 
with prominent follicular plugging. If the scale is 
lifted off, follicular plugs may be seen on its 
undersurface — the so - called  ‘ carpet - tack ’ (or  ‘ tin -
 tack ’ ) sign. There may be only a few lesions, but 
extensive, cosmetically disﬁ guring involvement of 
the facial skin can occur. Lesions heal with scar-
ring, and the typical picture is of an active, ery-
thematous scaly margin enclosing a central area 
of scarred, hypopigmented, atrophic skin (Figure 
 17.1 ). The scalp may be involved, producing areas 
of scarring alopecia in which follicles are perma-
nently destroyed. Occasionally, the buccal or nasal 
mucosae are affected. 
 Investigations 
 The diagnosis can be conﬁ rmed by skin biopsy. 
Histology shows a periadnexal lymphocytic inﬁ l-
trate, liquefaction degeneration of the basal layer 
of the epidermis, follicular plugging and hyperk-
eratosis. Direct immunoﬂ uorescence of lesional 
skin reveals granular deposits of IgG and/or IgM 
at the dermoepidermal junction.  
 Treatment 
 Potent ﬂ uorinated topical steroids are helpful in 
many cases, but, if they are ineffective, intrale-
sional injection of triamcinolone or oral therapy 
with the antimalarial hydroxychloroquine may 
be required. In severe extensive disease oral ster-
oids may be of beneﬁ t. Light - exposed areas should 
be protected by a sunscreen with a high sun pro-
tection factor (SPF). Where there is extensive 
Lecture Notes: Dermatology, 10th edition. © RAC Graham-Brown 
and DA Burns. Published 2011 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

150  Connective tissue diseases
involvement of facial skin, the use of cosmetic 
camouﬂ age can be of beneﬁ t. 
 Systemic  l upus  e rythematosus 
 This is a multisystem disorder that may affect the 
skin, joints, heart and pericardium, lungs, kidneys, 
brain and haematopoietic system. Typically, the 
disease affects women, particularly of childbear-
ing age, and progresses in a series of exacerbations 
and remissions. 
 Mucocutaneous lesions include oropharyngeal 
ulceration, diffuse alopecia, Raynaud ’ s phenom-
enon, vasculitis and photosensitivity. Often there 
is facial erythema in a  ‘ butterﬂ y ’ distribution 
(Figure  17.2 ). The  ‘ butterﬂ y ’ is represented by 
erythema on the cheeks linked by a band of ery-
thema across the nose. However, by far the most 
common cause of this pattern of facial erythema 
is rosacea (see Chapter  6 ). 
 Systemic manifestations include those in the 
box. 
  
 Figure 17.1   Discoid lupus erythematosus.  
 Figure 17.2   Facial erythema in systemic lupus 
erythematosus.  
 Manifestations of systemic 
lupus erythematosus 
 Polyserositis  
  •    Arthralgia and arthritis (usually non - erosive)  
  •    Pericarditis  
  •    Pleurisy with effusions  
 Nephritis  
 Central nervous system involvement  
  •    Psychosis and convulsions  
 Haematopoietic abnormalities  
  •    Haemolytic anaemia  
  •    Leukopenia  
  •    Thrombocytopenia  
 Pyrexia, weight loss and general malaise  

Connective tissue diseases  151
resolve as maternal antibodies disappear from the 
infant ’ s blood. 
 Drug - i nduced  s ystemic  l upus 
 e rythematosus 
 Drug - induced SLE is uncommon. The drugs most 
frequently implicated in its provocation include 
hydralazine, procainamide, anticonvulsants (pheny-
toin, primidone), isoniazid and chlorpromazine.   
 Dermatomyositis 
 Heliotrope 
 A ﬂ ower resembling the pale violet, 
 Which, with the Sun, though rooted - fast, doth move 
 And, being changed, yet changeth not her love 
 Ovid 
 Dermatomyositis is an autoimmune inﬂ amma-
tory disease of skin and muscle that may occur in 
childhood or in adult life. There are differences in 
the manifestations of the disease in these two age 
groups. Vasculitis and the late development of cal-
cinosis are features of the childhood disease that 
are not seen in adults. In some adults dermatomy-
ositis is associated with systemic malignancy, 
whereas there is no association with malignancy 
in the childhood disease. 
 Skin 
 The skin changes are as shown in the box. 
  
 Investigations 
 These should include a full blood count (FBC) and 
biochemistry, complement levels, urinalysis, ECG 
(electrocardiograph) and chest radiograph. 
 A number of autoantibodies may be found in 
individuals with SLE. Antinuclear antibodies (ANAs) 
at high titre are found in most patients with SLE, 
and anti - double - stranded DNA antibodies (anti -
 dsDNA) are characteristic. Others include anti - Ro 
(also known as anti - SSA) and anti - La (anti - SSB), 
which are associated with neonatal lupus, and 
antiphospholipid antibodies. A positive rheuma-
toid factor and biological false - positive serological 
tests for syphilis may also be found. 
 Direct immunoﬂ uorescence of involved skin 
shows the same pattern of immunoglobulin depo-
sition seen in DLE (see above).  
 Treatment 
 Systemic steroids and immunosuppressive agents 
are the mainstay of treatment. Light - exposed areas 
of skin should be protected by sunscreens with a 
high SPF. 
 Subacute  c utaneous 
 l upus  e rythematosus 
 In this  ‘ subset ’ of lupus, non - scarring, papulos-
quamous or annular lesions occur predominantly 
on light - exposed areas. Associated systemic 
features may occur, but are usually mild. Anti-
bodies to the Ro/SSA antigen are a characteristic 
ﬁ nding. 
 Antiphospholipid  s yndrome 
 This syndrome may be primary (Hughes ’  syn-
drome) or occur with SLE. The main features are 
the occurrence of recurrent miscarriage, venous 
thromboses, cerebral infarcts, thrombocytopenia 
and livedo reticularis. These clinical abnormalities 
are associated with the presence of anticardiolipin 
antibodies and lupus anticoagulant (subsets of 
antiphospholipid antibodies).  
 Neonatal  l upus  e rythematosus 
 Neonatal lupus is associated with transplacental 
passage of maternal anti - Ro and anti - La antibod-
ies. Its features include skin lesions, thrombocyto-
penia, hepatosplenomegaly and complete heart 
block. Heart block persists, but the other features 
 Skin changes 
  •    Violaceous erythema of the face and V - area of 
the neck (Figure  17.3 ). This is said to resemble 
the colour of the heliotrope ﬂ ower, and is 
referred to as  ‘ heliotrope erythema ’  
  •    Periorbital oedema  
  •    Erythema on the dorsa of the hands, and linear 
erythema on the dorsa of the ﬁ ngers (Figure 
 17.4 ). Erythematous papules (Gottron ’ s papules) 
over the knuckles  
  •    Prominent, ragged cuticles and dilated 
capillaries in the proximal nail folds (Figure  17.5 )  
  •    Erythema over knees and elbows  
  •    In childhood, cutaneous vasculitis leads to 
ulceration of the skin, particularly in the axillae 
and groins  

152  Connective tissue diseases
 Muscles 
 In some cases there is little evidence of any 
muscle disease, whereas in others there is pro-
found muscle weakness. Typically, there is sym-
metrical weakness and wasting of proximal muscle 
groups, leading to difﬁ culty combing the hair or 
standing up from a sitting position. Pharyngeal 
and oesophageal muscles may also be involved, 
leading to dysphagia. 
 Other systemic features include interstitial pul-
monary ﬁ brosis and cardiac disease (usually man-
ifest as rhythm disturbance or conduction defects). 
 The reported frequency of malignancy in asso-
ciation with adult dermatomyositis varies widely 
between series of patients studied, but the inci-
dence seems to be higher in older individuals. The 
 Figure 17.4   Linear erythema on the dorsa of the hands 
in dermatomyositis.  
 Figure 17.5   Hypertrophic cuticle, and 
nail fold telangiectasia in 
dermatomyositis.  
 Figure 17.3   Facial erythema and periorbital oedema in 
dermatomyositis.  
preferred approach to investigation appears to be 
performance of limited screening, in the form of 
careful history, thorough physical examination 
(rectal, lymph node, breast and pelvic examina-
tions), FBC, stool occult blood, cervical smear and 
chest radiograph. In female patients, ovarian 
computed tomography (CT) or magnetic reso-
nance imaging (MRI) is advisable. Further investi-
gations should be carried out in anyone with 
speciﬁ c symptomatology. 
 Investigations 
 These include skin biopsy, serum levels of muscle 
enzymes, 24 - h urine creatine level, electromyogra-
phy, muscle biopsy (the triceps muscle preferen-
tially), and ultrasonography and MRI of muscles.  

Connective tissue diseases  153
 Treatment 
 In dermatomyositis associated with malignancy, 
there is usually marked improvement when the 
neoplasm is excised. A relapse of the dermatomy-
ositis signals a recurrence. 
 The mainstay of therapy is oral corticosteroids. 
If the response to steroids is poor, immunosup-
pressives such as azathioprine, methotrexate or 
cyclophosphamide may be of beneﬁ t. Recently, 
biologic agents have been used with success. 
Where there is severe muscle involvement, physi-
otherapy is an important adjunct to drug therapy, 
in order to minimize contractures.    
 Scleroderma 
 Scleroderma means  ‘ thickening of the skin ’ , and is 
a term applied to a group of diseases in which 
there is sclerosis of the skin and destruction of hair 
follicles and sweat glands. Scleroderma may be an 
isolated cutaneous phenomenon, when it is called 
 ‘ morphoea ’ , or a cutaneous component of a mul-
tisystem disorder. 
 Morphoea 
 This is a disorder of unknown aetiology in which 
there is sclerosis of the skin. It may be subdivided 
clinically into the following types: 
 1  Circumscribed 
 2  Linear 
 3  Frontoparietal ( en coup de sabre ) 
 4  Generalized 
 Figure 17.6   A plaque of morphoea.  
 Circumscribed 
 This is the most common clinical presentation of 
morphoea. Solitary or multiple indurated plaques 
develop, predominantly on the trunk. Initially, 
affected areas of skin have a violaceous hue, but 
gradually become thickened and ivory in colour 
(Figure  17.6 ). The surface is smooth and shiny. 
Eventually, usually after many months, the scle-
rosis resolves, leaving atrophic, hyperpigmented 
areas. 
  
 Classiﬁ cation of scleroderma 
  •    Morphoea: sclerosis of the skin without systemic 
involvement  
  •    Systemic sclerosis: cutaneous sclerosis in 
association with a vasculopathy of small arteries 
producing multiorgan systemic disease  
  •    Chemically induced scleroderma: sclerosis of 
the skin as a manifestation of the toxic effects of 
certain chemicals  
  •    Pseudoscleroderma: sclerosis of the skin 
associated with a number of diseases other 
than morphoea or systemic sclerosis  
 Linear 
 Linear morphoea usually affects one limb, often 
extending its full length. In childhood, it can sig-
niﬁ cantly impair the growth of the limb, and 
produce severe ﬂ exion deformities of large joints 
and digits.  

154  Connective tissue diseases
 Atrophy and ﬁ brosis of the smooth muscle of 
the small bowel lead to impaired peristalsis, and 
the resultant relative stagnation of small bowel 
contents predisposes to bacterial overgrowth as 
colonic bacteria move upstream into the small 
intestine. Gut bacteria deconjugate bile salts 
(which are essential for micelle formation) and 
this leads to fat malabsorption and steatorrhoea. 
Occasionally, patients present with a picture sim-
ulating acute intestinal obstruction. 
 Similar pathology affects the large bowel and 
leads to the formation of multiple wide - mouthed 
pseudodiverticula. 
 Pulmonary 
 An inﬂ ammatory alveolitis is followed by pulmo-
nary ﬁ brosis, and disease of small pulmonary 
arteries leads to pulmonary hypertension and cor 
pulmonale. 
  
 Frontoparietal ( en  c oup  d e  s abre ) 
 Resembling a sabre cut across the scalp and fore-
head, this type of morphoea is a considerable cos-
metic problem. A linear, depressed, sclerotic area 
extends from the face into the scalp, and is associ-
ated with loss of hair along its length.  
 Generalized 
 There is extensive sclerosis of the skin on the trunk 
and limbs. Flexion contractures restrict limb 
movement, and if the chest is severely affected 
breathing may be impaired.  
 Treatment 
 Treatment is often of limited efﬁ cacy, but sug-
gested therapies include potent topical steroids, 
intralesional steroid, topical vitamin D analogues, 
topical calcineurin inhibitors, UVA and meth-
otrexate. In linear morphoea on the limbs, physi-
otherapy is essential to maintain joint motility, 
and orthopaedic surgery may be necessary. Plastic 
surgery can be of considerable cosmetic beneﬁ t in 
frontoparietal morphoea. 
 The natural history of morphoea is gradual 
spontaneous resolution. 
 Systemic  s clerosis 
 This is an autoimmune connective tissue dis-
ease of unknown aetiology. It is a disorder in 
which sclerotic changes in the skin occur as 
one component of a multisystem disorder asso-
ciated with a vasculopathy of small arteries. In 
the most common form (sometimes referred to 
as the CREST syndrome [ c alcinosis,  R aynaud ’ s 
phenomenon, (o) e sophageal involvement,  s cle-
rodactyly and  t elangiectasia]) skin changes affect 
predominantly the face and hands. 
 Systemic  i nvolvement 
 Gastrointestinal 
 Dysphagia is the result of oesophageal involve-
ment. Damage to the myenteric plexus leads to 
hypomotility of smooth muscle and later to atrophy 
and ﬁ brosis, resulting in impaired peristalsis. The 
gastro - oesophageal sphincter mechanism is also 
impaired, leading to gastro - oesophageal reﬂ ux, 
oesophagitis, and eventual stricture formation. 
Symptoms of oesophageal reﬂ ux are common. 
 Cutaneous features of systemic sclerosis 
 Face  
  •    The facial skin is sclerotic and bound to 
underlying structures, producing a tight, shiny 
appearance, with loss of facial wrinkles, a 
beaked nose, and restriction of mouth opening 
(Figure  17.7 )  
  •    Perioral furrowing ( ‘ purse - string mouth ’ )  
  •    Facial telangiectasia  
  •    Loss of lip vermilion  
 Hands  
  •    Raynaud ’ s phenomenon  
  •    Tight sclerotic skin producing progressive 
contractures of the digits (sclerodactyly)  
  •    Finger pulp infarcts producing small, painful 
ulcers (Figure  17.8 ). These infarctive changes 
lead to progressive pulp atrophy and resorption 
of the underlying terminal phalanges  
  •    Calcinosis (Figure  17.9 )  
 Renal 
 Fibrinoid changes in arteries and arterioles are 
associated with proteinuria and hypertension. 
Renal involvement is usually mild, but in some 
cases it is severe and rapidly progressive, and 
leads to renal failure.  

Connective tissue diseases  155
 Figure 17.7   Facial appearance in systemic sclerosis.  
 Figure 17.8   Finger pulp ulcers and scars in systemic sclerosis.  
 Figure 17.9   Radiograph showing calcinosis in a digit in 
systemic sclerosis.  

156  Connective tissue diseases
 Nervous  s ystem 
 Neurological involvement is uncommon, but 
carpal tunnel syndrome and trigeminal neuropa-
thy have been reported.  
 Cardiac 
 Myocardial ﬁ brosis, conduction disorders and a 
variety of ECG abnormalities have been described.  
 Hepatic 
 There is a signiﬁ cant association between sys-
temic sclerosis and primary biliary cirrhosis.  
 Musculoskeletal 
 Arthralgia and arthritis occur in some patients, 
and myopathy and inﬂ ammatory myositis may 
also occur. 
 Treatment 
 No therapy is known to alter the overall course 
of systemic sclerosis, but many components of 
the disease may be helped signiﬁ cantly by spe-
ciﬁ c measures. Digital ischaemia may be helped 
by electrically heated gloves and socks. Calcium 
channel blockers may help relieve Raynaud ’ s phe-
nomenon. Patients with oesophageal reﬂ ux should 
avoid lying ﬂ at, and treatment with proton pump 
inhibitors may be very effective. Broad - spectrum 
antibiotics are helpful in treating patients with gut 
bacterial overgrowth and malabsorption. The use 
of angiotensin - converting enzyme (ACE) inhibi-
tors is of signiﬁ cant beneﬁ t in renal disease. In 
interstitial pulmonary disease, cyclophosphamide 
is effective and bosentan is of beneﬁ t for pulmo-
nary arterial hypertension.  
 Prognosis 
 Severe pulmonary or renal involvement is a poor 
prognostic factor, although treatment is improv-
ing, but most patients with systemic sclerosis live 
for many years. 
 Chemically  i nduced  s cleroderma 
 Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) can induce a disorder 
resembling idiopathic systemic sclerosis, and 
 ‘ vinyl chloride disease ’  has been described in 
workers in the PVC industry, particularly reactor 
cleaners. A number of other chemicals may induce 
diseases mimicking systemic sclerosis, including 
perchlorethylene and trichlorethylene (solvents 
used in dry cleaning), and bleomycin. A disorder 
similar to systemic sclerosis occurred in 1981 in 
people poisoned by contaminated rape - seed oil 
sold as cooking oil in Madrid.  
 Pseudoscleroderma 
 Scleroderma - like changes may be seen in a 
number of unrelated conditions, including por-
phyria cutanea tarda, carcinoid syndrome and 
phenylketonuria. 
 Nephrogenic  s ystemic  ﬁ  brosis 
 This disorder has been described in recent years 
and occurs in association with renal insufﬁ ciency 
and exposure to gadolinium - based contrast 
media. Ill - deﬁ ned, indurated plaques occur on the 
trunk and limbs, and histology of these shows 
thickened collagen bundles, mucin deposition 
and increased dermal ﬁ broblast - like cells. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 18 
Pruritus  
 There was a young belle of old Natchez 
 Whose garments were always in patches  
 When comment arose 
 On the state of her clothes  
 She drawled:  ‘ When ah itchez, ah scratchez! ’ 
 Ogden Nash,  Requiem  
 Pruritus means itching.  Please  note the correct 
spelling: it is  not  spelt  pruritis , as often appears in 
student examination papers, clinical notes and 
referral letters! 
 Pruritus varies in duration, localization and 
severity. Everyone has experienced short - term, 
localized, itch, and there is a perverse joy in having 
a really good scratch. However, some individuals 
have distressing chronic irritation lasting for 
years. Itching may be restricted to one or more 
sites, or cover virtually the whole body surface. It 
may creep about, appearing ﬁ rst on an arm and 
later on the back, or in more than one site simul-
taneously. Itching can be mild or appallingly 
severe, constant and distressing. Chronic pruritus 
can completely ruin the quality of life. 
 Pruritus is prominent in many skin diseases. 
Especially itchy are the eczemas, lichen planus, 
insect bites and infestations, urticaria and derma-
titis herpetiformis. However, the skin may also 
itch when there is no rash.  
 Mechanisms of  p ruritus 
 We do not clearly understand why skin diseases 
itch, and we know very little about irritation in 
otherwise apparently normal skin. 
 The sensation that we call itch is produced, con-
ditioned and appreciated at several levels in the 
nervous system: stimulus; mediators and recep-
tors; peripheral pathways; central processing; 
interpretation. A wide variety of stimuli can induce 
an itch, and a number of chemicals may be 
involved, especially histamine, prostaglandins 
and some proteinases. However, the details 
remain obscure: although histamine can induce 
itch without producing weals, non - sedative anti-
histamines have no effect on simple pruritus. 
 More complex, central mechanisms may also be 
important in modulating and appreciating pruri-
tus. Many itch - provoking stimuli induce pain if 
applied at higher intensities. Indeed, scratching 
appears to induce pain and thereby abolish irrita-
tion. However, other sensory stimuli can also 
overcome itching, and more complex mecha-
nisms have been proposed. One theory involves a 
complicated ﬁ ltering system controlling input 
pathways to further stimuli and passing informa-
tion on to higher centres. 
 Itching can certainly be affected by the effects 
of higher - level brain activity. It is much less appar-
ent when the mind is fully occupied and much 
worse when boredom sets in.  ‘ Stress ’  and other 
psychological factors can induce or worsen 
pruritus. 
 Causes of  p ruritus 
 The term  ‘ pruritus ’ , used without qualiﬁ cation, 
implies that there is itching without a primary skin 
disorder. However, in many instances there are con-
siderable secondary skin changes from scratching 
(e.g. excoriations, scars and prurigo — see below). 
Lecture Notes: Dermatology, 10th edition. © RAC Graham-Brown 
and DA Burns. Published 2011 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

158  Pruritus
(sometimes known as  ‘ lichen nuchae ’ ); perianal 
and vulval skin may also be affected (see below). 
Prurigo nodules may accompany areas of lichen 
simplex or appear separately almost anywhere; 
they are frequently multiple. 
 Lesions are often asymmetrical. 
 But watch out! Subtle changes are easily 
obscured by scratching: a classic example of 
this is scabies (see Chapter  5 ). A full history and 
a careful examination of the skin are there-
fore important in all patients complaining of 
itching. 
 In considering causes, we look separately at 
localized itching, generalized states and so - called 
 ‘ senile ’ pruritus. 
 Localized  p ruritus 
 Localized irritation of the skin is common. The 
skin may be normal, but it is more common to ﬁ nd 
some abnormalities. 
 Two very important and troublesome forms of 
localized pruritus are lichen simplex chronicus 
and prurigo, and anogenital pruritus. 
 Lichen  s implex  c hronicus 
and  p rurigo 
 This difﬁ cult problem is sometimes called  ‘ neuro-
dermatitis ’ . It is thought that constant irritation 
leads to constant scratching which, in turn, leads 
to thickening of the skin. This may occur in 
plaques, known as lichen simplex chronicus 
(Figure  18.1 ), or in nodules, which are given the 
name prurigo (Figure  18.2 ). The areas are intensely 
irritable, and a self - perpetuating itch – scratch cycle 
develops. Patients who develop this kind of local-
ized itching are often rather tense.   
 Sites of  p redilection 
 Classic sites for lichen simplex chronicus include 
the shins, forearms, palms and back of the neck 
 Figure 18.1   Lichen simplex chronicus.  
 Figure 18.2   Nodular prurigo.  

Pruritus  159
 Treatment 
 Potent topical steroids (sometimes under occlu-
sive bandages) may help, but the problem often 
recurs. 
 Anogenital  p ruritus 
 Two very common (and least talked about) 
forms of localized itching are pruritus vulvae 
and pruritus ani. They may be encountered 
together. 
 Pruritus ani is often attributed to haemorrhoids. 
However, although haemorrhoids and tags are 
often present, their treatment alone does not 
always relieve the symptoms. The problem is also 
often dismissed as psychological, but only rarely 
is this the complete explanation. 
 Anal itching may continue for years. Irritation is 
often spasmodic and extremely intense. Most 
patients are male. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Examination often reveals little abnormality; there 
may be some excoriation and thickening of anal 
and perianal skin;  ‘ tags ’ are often present; occa-
sionally gross changes amounting to lichen sim-
plex are seen, when the charming term  ‘ mossy 
bank anus ’  may be applied; there may be an asso-
ciated ﬁ ssure. 
 Aetiology 
 Pruritus ani is probably largely a low - grade irritant 
reaction to faeces, sweat and discharge; sedentary 
occupations make matters worse. Contact allergy 
to medicaments may be a factor, especially allergy 
to local anaesthetics and preservatives. Psoriasis 
of the natal cleft and perineum may give rise to 
pruritus ani. 
 Pruritus vulvae can be very distressing. There 
are a number of causes to consider (see Table). 
 Generalized  p ruritus 
 Persistent generalized pruritus is extremely unpleas-
ant, and can either affect most of the body surface 
continuously or involve several different areas. 
By deﬁ nition, a primary skin disorder has been 
excluded. 
 Clinical  f eatures 
 Skin changes vary considerably — nothing to see at 
all; mild ﬂ akiness of the skin, with a few scratch 
marks; or the skin may be covered in excoriations, 
scars and nodules. The skin is often dry, especially 
in elderly patients. 
 Although there may be no identiﬁ able underly-
ing disorder, all patients with generalized irrita-
tion should be investigated because a number of 
potentially remediable systemic disorders may be 
responsible. 
 Haematological  d isorders 
 Chronic iron deﬁ ciency may be due to blood loss 
(e.g. from menorrhagia or a gut carcinoma). Many 
elderly patients and some vegans are iron deﬁ -
cient for dietary reasons. Polycythaemia rubra 
vera is characteristically associated with itching 
triggered by bathing. 
 Causes of pruritus vulvae 
  •    Mild incontinence (with prolapse) may cause 
irritant changes  
  •    Skin disorders: notably eczema, psoriasis 
and lichen sclerosus (et atrophicus) (see 
Chapter  15 )  
  •    Allergic contact dermatitis to medicaments (as 
in anal itch — see above)  
  •    Candidiasis (secondary to diabetes): the vulva is 
beefy red, and there may be pustules and a 
vaginal discharge  
  •    Vulval itch with no visible signs, when a true 
psychogenic origin is suspected  
 Treatment of perineal irritation 
 This depends upon the cause. 
 ‘ Irritant ’  pruritus ani  
  •    Good hygiene, a high - ﬁ bre diet and treatment 
with topical steroids are useful  
  •    Treating concomitant haemorrhoids may reduce 
discharge  
 Skin disorder and allergic contact dermatitis  
  •    Most will require topical steroids  
 Candidiasis  
  •    Antifungal creams and pessaries; check for 
diabetes  
 No changes seen  
  •    Patients seldom respond to antipruritics  
  •    Inexpert psychological probing is valueless  

160  Pruritus
Up to 30% of Hodgkin ’ s disease patients have gen-
eralized pruritus. 
 Drugs 
 Various agents induce itching, but the mecha-
nisms are poorly understood. Opiates appear to 
act centrally and on mast cells. Oestrogens and 
phenothiazines induce cholestasis.  
 Diabetes  m ellitus 
 You may come across lists quoting diabetes as a 
cause of itching, but we do not consider that this 
is the case.  
 Psychological  f actors 
 When everything else has been excluded, psycho-
logical factors may be considered. The most 
common underlying problem is an anxiety neuro-
sis, but patients with monodelusional psychoses 
such as parasitophobia also itch. These individu-
als, however, offer their own explanation only too 
readily! (see Chapter  20 ). 
   Screening procedures for generalized pruritus 
are as shown in the box. 
  
 Liver  d isease 
 The itch is probably related to bile salts in the skin. 
Irritation may precede the development of other 
features of cholestatic liver disease, especially in 
primary biliary cirrhosis.  
 Chronic  r enal  f ailure 
 Unfortunately the intractable itch of renal failure 
is largely unaffected by dialysis. Parathyroidectomy 
is said to help, but the beneﬁ t is short - lived and is 
hardly justiﬁ ed in most patients.  
 Thyroid  d isease 
 Both thyrotoxicosis and myxoedema may present 
with pruritus. In myxoedema the general dryness 
of the skin may be responsible.  
 Cancers 
 Lymphoreticular malignancies are particularly 
prone to cause itching, but pruritus may also 
occur in association with a variety of carcinomas. 
 Screening for generalized pruritus 
  •    A full history and general examination  
  •    Full blood count  
  •    Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (or plasma 
viscosity)  
  •    Liver function tests  
  •    Blood urea/urea nitrogen/creatinine  
  •    Iron studies  
  •    Serum thyroxine  
  •    Urine protein  
  •    Chest radiograph  
 If these tests are negative initially and, if the 
pruritus persists, repeat at intervals 
 Treatment 
 Treatment of generalized pruritus is that of its 
cause. When no apparent underlying reason can 
be found, a topical steroid and a sedative anti-
histamine, such as hydroxyzine, may help. Some 
 Systemic disorders causing irritation 
 Haematological disorders  
  •    Iron deﬁ ciency  
  •    Polycythaemia rubra vera  
 Cholestatic liver disease  
  •    Extrahepatic obstruction  
  •    Primary biliary cirrhosis  
  •    Hepatitis  
  •    Drug - induced cholestasis  
 Chronic renal failure  
 Thyroid disease  
  •    Thyrotoxicosis  
  •    Myxoedema  
 Malignancy  
  •    Lymphomas and leukaemias  
  •    Carcinomas  
 Drug ingestion  
  •    Especially opiates  
 Pregnancy (see Chapter    15  )  

Pruritus  161
authorities recommend opiate antagonists. UVB 
phototherapy may help, as may gabapentin. 
 ‘ Senile ’  p ruritus 
 Itching with no apparent cause is common in 
elderly people. It may be mild and localized, but 
can be very severe and generalized. The patients 
(and their carers) are often anxious and miserable, 
but this is usually secondary to the irritation rather 
than a primary cause. This state is called  ‘ senile 
pruritus ’ . It is not known what causes ageing skin 
to itch. 
 Examination 
 The skin is texturally either  ‘ normal ’ or  ‘ dry ’ . Exco-
riations, secondary eczematization and areas of 
infection are common. Localized areas of  ‘ eczema 
craquel é ’ may develop (see Chapter  7 ). 
 Treatment 
 Treatment is extremely difﬁ cult. Sedative antihis-
tamines often cause excessive drowsiness and 
confusion, and topical steroids are of limited use. 
If the skin is texturally  ‘ dry ’ , liberal use of emol-
lients may be helpful. Care has to be taken, 
however, as these agents can make both the 
patient and their surroundings very slippery! 
 Increased frequency of washing or the use of 
harsh soaps and detergents makes matters worse, 
both by removing surface lipids and by acting as 
direct irritants. Soaps should therefore be used 
sparingly and emollients employed instead. 
 
 

162  Systemic disease and  the skin
 19 
Systemic  d isease and 
the  s kin  
     The skin may be involved directly or indirectly in 
a number of systemic disease processes, and can 
provide visible diagnostic clues that could lead to 
the discovery of internal disease.  
 Endocrine  d isease 
 Diabetes 
 There are a number of cutaneous manifestations 
of diabetes, including those in the box. 
  
 1  Cutaneous infection: mucosal candidiasis, 
particularly balanoposthitis and vulvovaginitis, 
and carbuncles, occur more frequently in 
people with diabetes 
 2  Neuropathic ulcers: impaired sensation, as a 
result of sensory neuropathy, predisposes to 
the development of neuropathic ulcers on the 
soles of the feet (Figure  19.1 )  
 3  Necrobiosis lipoidica: lesions of necrobiosis 
lipoidica characteristically occur on the shins, 
although they may develop elsewhere. The 
lesions are initially erythematous, but 
subsequently become yellowish - brown and 
atrophic, and underlying blood vessels are easily 
seen through the thinned skin (Figure  19.2 ). 
Occasionally the lesions ulcerate. Good diabetic 
control does not appear to inﬂ uence the skin 
lesions. Potent topical steroids and intralesional 
steroid injections are among several treatments 
suggested for necrobiosis lipoidica, but results 
of therapy are not very impressive  
 4  Diabetic dermopathy: this term is applied to 
small, brown, scar - like lesions seen on the 
shins in some people with diabetes. The 
lesions are thought to be associated with 
diabetic microangiopathy  
 5  Diabetic bullae: in this uncommon blistering 
disorder of people with diabetes, subepidermal 
bullae occur on the hands and feet. Their 
aetiology is unknown  
 Cutaneous features 
 1   Certain cutaneous infections  
 2   Neuropathic ulcers  
 3   Necrobiosis lipoidica  
 4    Diabetic dermopathy  
 5   Diabetic bullae  
 6   Xanthomas  
 7    Acanthosis nigricans  
 8   Lipoatrophy  
 9   Cheiroarthropathy  
Lecture Notes: Dermatology, 10th edition. © RAC Graham-Brown 
and DA Burns. Published 2011 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Systemic disease and the skin   163
 8  Lipoatrophy: insulin - resistant diabetes 
associated with partial or generalized 
cutaneous lipoatrophy  
 9  Cheiroarthropathy: a scleroderma - like 
thickening of the skin of the hands in people 
with type 1 diabetes 
 Granuloma  a nnulare 
 There is no signiﬁ cant association between classic 
granuloma annulare and diabetes, but in a much 
rarer generalized form of granuloma annulare 
there is an association with diabetes. Typically, 
lesions of granuloma annulare are groups of ﬁ rm, 
skin - coloured papules, often arranged in rings, 
and commonly occurring on the dorsa of the 
hands and feet (Figure  19.3 ). The natural history 
of granuloma annulare is eventual spontaneous 
resolution, but persistent lesions may be treated 
with intralesional triamcinolone or cryotherapy. 
 Thyroid  d isease 
 Hypothyroidism 
 The skin is typically dry, and feels thickened due 
to subcutaneous mucin deposition — hence the 
designation myxoedema. A malar ﬂ ush on an oth-
erwise pale face produces what has been referred 
to as a  ‘ strawberries and cream ’ appearance. 
There may be a yellowish tinge to the skin, said to 
be due to the deposition of carotenes. There is 
often periorbital oedema. Scalp hair is diffusely 
thinned and there is loss of the outer part of the 
eyebrows. Sitting close to the ﬁ re to keep warm 
may produce severe erythema ab igne ( ‘ granny ’ s 
 6  Xanthomas: hyperlipidaemia in uncontrolled 
dia betes may be associated with the 
development of multiple small, yellow, eruptive 
xanthomas  
 7  Acanthosis nigricans: in association with 
insulin resistance  
 Figure 19.1   Diabetic neuropathic 
ulcer.  
 Figure 19.2   Necrobiosis lipoidica with a small ulcerated 
area.  

164  Systemic disease and the skin 
 Addison ’ s  d isease 
 Diffuse hyperpigmentation is the main cutaneous 
manifestation of Addison ’ s disease. The pigmen-
tation is particularly prominent on the buccal 
mucosa and in the palmar creases. Vitiligo may 
also accompany autoimmune Addison ’ s disease. 
 Rheumatic  d iseases 
 Gout 
 In addition to tophaceous deposits around affected 
joints, gouty tophi may occur on the ears. 
 Still ’ s  d isease 
 This is a disorder of childhood, although it may 
rarely occur in adults. Accompanying the pyrexial 
episodes of Still ’ s disease is a diffuse maculopapu-
lar eruption that characteristically develops in the 
late afternoon and evening, and usually resolves 
by the following morning. Some slander - mongers 
claim that dermatologists never see this eruption 
because its periodicity is outside their normal 
working day! 
 Rheumatoid  a rthritis 
 Dermatological features of rheumatoid arthritis 
include those in the box. 
  
tartan ’ ) on the shins, but since the advent of 
central heating this physical sign has become 
uncommon.  
 Hyperthyroidism 
 Cutaneous changes that may accompany thyro-
toxicosis include excessive sweating, palmar 
erythema, diffuse alopecia, generalized hyper-
pigmentation and thyrotoxic acropachy (digital 
clubbing). The nails may show onycholysis. Some 
patients develop pretibial myxoedema, which is 
produced by subcutaneous deposition of exces-
sive amounts of mucopolysaccharide, and is 
characterized by erythema and thickening of 
the soft tissues over the shins and dorsa of the 
feet. 
 Vitiligo may accompany autoimmune thyroid 
disease, and generalized pruritus may be a feature 
of both hypo - and hyperthyroidism. 
 Adrenal  d isease 
 Cushing ’ s  s yndrome 
 The cutaneous effects of Cushing ’ s syndrome 
include thinning of the skin, spontaneous bruis-
ing, prominent striae on the trunk and limbs, 
diffuse alopecia, acne and hirsutism.  
 Figure 19.3   Granuloma annulare.  

Systemic disease and the skin   165
 Pellagra 
 Pellagra is the result of nicotinic acid deﬁ ciency. 
Classically, it has three major manifestations —
 dermatitis, diarrhoea and dementia. The dermati-
tis affects light - exposed areas, and there is often a 
well - demarcated margin to the affected area on 
the neck (Casal ’ s necklace). Pellagra may occur in 
people with alcohol problems as a result of nutri-
tional self - neglect, and in food faddists. A similar 
dermatitis may be provoked by isoniazid in indi-
viduals who are slow acetylators of this drug.   
 Inﬂ ammatory 
 b owel  d isease 
 Ulcerative colitis and Crohn ’ s disease may be asso-
ciated with a number of mucocutaneous manifes-
tations including those in the box. 
  
 Rheumatic  f ever 
 Almost extinct in developed countries, rheumatic 
fever may be accompanied by a characteristic 
eruption, erythema marginatum.  
 Reiter ’ s  d isease ( r eactive 
 a rthritis) 
 Predominantly a disease of young adult males, 
Reiter ’ s disease is a reactive arthropathy usually 
precipitated by non - speciﬁ c urethritis, but occa-
sionally by bacillary dysentery. In addition to ure-
thritis, conjunctivitis/uveitis and arthritis, there 
may be an eruption that is indistinguishable from 
psoriasis. On the soles of the feet the skin lesions 
may become extremely thickened, producing so -
 called  ‘ keratoderma blenorrhagicum ’ . The buccal 
mucosa may show scattered erosions, and super-
ﬁ cial circumferential erosive changes on the penis 
are referred to as  ‘ circinate balanitis ’ . 
 Vitamin  d eﬁ ciency 
 Scurvy 
 The classic picture of vitamin C (ascorbic acid) 
deﬁ ciency is rarely seen nowadays in developed 
countries, but scurvy may be encountered in 
elderly people and in people with alcohol prob-
lems, as a result of nutritional self - neglect. The 
typical appearance is of perifollicular purpura, 
easy bruising, poor wound healing and bleeding 
gums. 
 Dermatological features 
  •    Rheumatoid nodules: subcutaneous nodules 
over bony prominences, particularly on the 
extensor aspect of the forearms and the dorsa 
of the hands  
  •    Vasculitic lesions: digital vasculitis may produce 
small infarcts around the nail folds (Bywaters ’  
lesions), or more severe digital ulceration and 
even gangrene. Vasculitic lesions may also 
occur on the legs, and contribute to the 
development of leg ulcers  
  •    Pyoderma gangrenosum  
  •    Palmar erythema  
 Mucocutaneous features 
  •    Pyoderma gangrenosum: the lesions may be 
single or multiple. They initially resemble boils, 
which subsequently break down to form 
necrotic ulcers with undermined purple edges 
(Figure  19.4 ). Pyoderma gangrenosum may also 
occur in association with rheumatoid arthritis, 
myeloma and leukaemia. The treatment of 
choice is systemic steroids, but a variety of 
other treatments including azathioprine, 
minocycline, clofazimine and ciclosporin may 
also be effective  
  •    Erythema nodosum  
  •    Perianal and buccal mucosal lesions: in Crohn ’ s 
disease, anal examination may reveal ﬂ eshy 
tags, ﬁ ssures and perianal ﬁ stulae. The buccal 
mucosa may be oedematous and ulcerated, 
and the lips may be swollen as a result of a 
granulomatous cheilitis  
 Hyperlipidaemia 
 Both primary and secondary hyperlipidaemic 
states may be associated with lipid deposits in the 
skin, known as xanthomas. There are several dif-
ferent clinical types of xanthomas. Orange – yellow 

166  Systemic disease and the skin 
in association with tendons, often involving the 
Achilles tendons and extensor tendons on the 
dorsa of the hands. Deposits of lipid in the skin 
creases of the palms of the hands (striate palmar 
xanthomas; Figure  19.7 ) appear to be particularly 
associated with primary type III hyperlipidae-
mia (broad beta disease; dysbetalipoproteinae-
mia). Eruptive xanthomas are crops of yellowish 
papules that occur in association with marked 
hypertriglyceridaemia. 
 Amyloidosis 
 In systemic amyloidosis, amyloid deposits in the 
tongue produce macroglossia, and cutaneous 
deposits are visible as yellowish, waxy, purpuric 
plaques around the eyes and in the perianal area.  
 Figure 19.5   Xanthelasma.  
 Figure 19.6   Tuberous xanthomas.  
 Figure 19.4   Pyoderma gangrenosum.  
lipid deposits in the eyelid skin are known as xan-
thelasma (Figure  19.5 ). Tuberous xanthomas 
occur as yellowish nodules, usually over bony 
prominences (Figure  19.6 ). Tendinous xantho-
mas, as their name suggests, are deposits of lipid 

Systemic disease and the skin   167
 Figure 19.7   Striate palmar 
xanthomas.  
 Sarcoidosis 
 Sarcoidosis is a multisystem granulomatous dis-
order of unknown aetiology. There are a number 
of patterns of skin involvement in sarcoidosis, 
including those shown in the box. 
  
 Skin patterns 
  •    Erythema nodosum: tender, erythematous 
nodules on the legs (see Chapter  16 )  
  •    Lupus pernio: the skin of the nose and ears 
is involved in the granulomatous process, 
and becomes swollen and purplish in 
colour  
  •    Scar sarcoid: sarcoid granulomas localize in old 
scar tissue, making the scars prominent  
  •    Papules, nodules and plaques: these often have 
an orange – brown colour  
 Liver  d isease and 
the  s kin 
 Changes in the skin and nails that occur in asso-
ciation with chronic liver disease include those in 
the box. 
  
 Skin and nail changes 
  •    Palmar erythema  
  •    Pruritus: in cholestatic liver disease  
  •    Spider naevi: in a superior vena caval 
distribution  
  •    Xanthelasma: in primary biliary cirrhosis  
  •    White nails (Terry ’ s nails)  
  •    Pigmentary changes: in addition to jaundice, 
patients with longstanding cholestatic liver 
disease may also have marked melanin 
pigmentation; patients with haemochromatosis 
have generalized bronze - brown pigmentation 
that is produced by a combination of iron and 
melanin  
 Cutaneous 
 m anifestations of 
 s ystemic  m alignancy 
 Cutaneous  m etastases 
 Malignant tumours may metastasize to the skin, 
and tumours of renal, ovarian, gastrointestinal, 
breast and bronchial origin are those most likely 
to do so. Cutaneous metastases usually present as 
pink nodules, and occur most frequently on the 
scalp and anterior trunk. Scalp metastases may 
produce areas of alopecia (alopecia neoplastica). 

168  Systemic disease and the skin 
 Lymphatic extension of carcinoma to the skin 
may produce an area of erythematous induration 
resembling cellulitis, and known as  ‘ carcinoma 
erysipeloides ’ . 
 Metastasis of ovarian or gastrointestinal carci-
noma via the ligamentum teres can present as an 
umbilical nodule (Sister Joseph ’ s nodule; Figure 
 19.8 ). 
 Miscellaneous  c utaneous  s igns 
of  u nderlying  m alignancy 
 1  Dermatomyositis (see Chapter  17 ) 
 2  Acanthosis nigricans: this is a warty, 
hyperpigmented thickening of skin in the 
ﬂ exures (Figure  19.9 ). The palms of the hands 
may also be affected, producing an appearance 
known as  ‘ tripe palms ’ . The most common 
associated malignancy is an adenocarcinoma 
of the gastrointestinal tract. However, 
 ‘ malignant ’ acanthosis nigricans is rare  
 3  Generalized pruritus: generalized itching, 
without a rash, may be associated with a 
wide variety of systemic malignancies  
 4  Thrombophlebitis migrans: this is particularly 
associated with carcinoma of the pancreas  
 5  Acquired ichthyosis: ichthyosis developing 
for the ﬁ rst time in adult life may be 
associated with a lymphoma  
 6  Pyoderma gangrenosum: this may occur with 
myeloma and leukaemia  
 7  Necrolytic migratory erythema: this is a 
dis tinctive eruption associated with 
pancreatic glucagonoma  
 Figure 19.8   Sister Joseph ’ s nodule.  
 Figure 19.9   Acanthosis nigricans.  

Systemic disease and the skin   169
 1  Oral candidiasis extending into the oesophagus  
 2  Oral  ‘ hairy leukoplakia ’ : white ridges along 
the sides of the tongue, caused by the 
Epstein – Barr virus 
 3  Seborrhoeic dermatitis: this is often severe, 
and is probably related to an altered host 
response to malassezia yeasts  
 4  Papular pruritic eruption and eosinophilic 
folliculitis are manifest as itchy papular 
lesions and are signs of advanced 
immunosuppression. They are probably part 
of the same spectrum. Their aetiology is 
unknown 
 5  Staphylococcal infection, shingles, 
molluscum contagiosum and dermatophyte 
fungal infection occur more commonly in 
AIDS patients  
 6  Episodes of herpes simplex are more frequent 
and more severe, and lesions may become 
chronic 
 7  Perianal warts tend to be more ﬂ orid and 
more difﬁ cult to treat 
 8  Kaposi ’ s sarcoma: a tumour that is thought to 
arise from vascular endothelium and is 
related to infection with human herpesvirus 
type 8 (HHV - 8). Lesions are usually multiple, 
and may affect any part of the skin, as well as 
internal organs. It is rarely the cause of death 
in AIDS patients, who usually succumb to 
intercurrent infection. It is a radiosensitive 
tumour 
 9  Pre - existing psoriasis may become severe and 
extensive in AIDS patients 
 10  Bacillary angiomatosis: caused by the bacillus 
 Bartonella henselae , these angioma - like 
lesions affect the skin, mucosae and internal 
organs. They respond to treatment with 
erythromycin  
 11  Drug - associated problems: the antiretroviral 
treatment now widely employed in treating 
HIV infection may provoke rashes and cause 
nail pigmentation. In addition, a cosmetically 
troublesome lipodystrophy, characterized by 
symmetrical loss of subcutaneous fat, that on 
the face produces a cachectic appearance, is 
associated with highly active antiretroviral 
therapy (HAART) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8  Flushing and a rosacea - like eruption are 
cutaneous features of the carcinoid syndrome  
 9  Erythema gyratum repens: this rare skin 
marker of malignancy is a bizarre eruption 
with an appearance resembling wood grain  
 10  Acquired hypertrichosis lanuginosa: the 
sudden growth of profuse vellus hair over the 
face and body is a rare sign of underlying 
neoplastic disease  
 11  Paraneoplastic pemphigus: this rare blistering 
disorder typically occurs in patients with 
lymphoproliferative diseases 
 Leukaemia and the  s kin 
 There are numerous cutaneous changes that may 
accompany leukaemia, or be provoked by the 
drugs used in its treatment. 
 Common presenting features of acute leukae-
mia include purpura, bruising and bleeding from 
the gums, and the skin may be directly involved in 
the form of leukaemic inﬁ ltrates. Disseminated 
herpes zoster (herpes zoster with numerous outly-
ing vesicles) may accompany leukaemia, as may a 
severe bullous form of pyoderma gangrenosum, 
and Sweet ’ s disease (acute febrile neutrophilic 
dermatosis).  
 Purpura 
 Purpura is produced by extravasation of red cells 
into the skin, and has numerous causes. The 
lesions do not blanch on pressure. 
 Causes of purpura include vasculitis (see 
Chapter  16 ), quantitative or qualitative platelet 
abnormalities, drugs, amyloidosis, dysproteinae-
mias and infections (e.g. meningococcaemia).  
 AIDS and the  s kin 
 Patients with the acquired immunodeﬁ ciency 
syndrome (AIDS) are at increased risk of develop-
ing a number of mucocutaneous problems: 

170  Skin and the psyche
 20 
Skin and the  p syche  
       If you happen to have a wart on your nose or 
forehead, you cannot help imagining that no 
one in the world has anything else to do but 
stare at your wart, laugh at it, and condemn 
you for it, even though you have discovered 
America. 
 Fyodor Dostoevsky,  The Idiot 
 Patients with skin disease who often ask  ‘ Is it 
caused by nerves doctor? ’  are usually trying to 
establish if they can attribute their skin condition 
to  ‘ stress ’ . In fact, few skin disorders are directly 
related to psychological disturbance. However, 
there is evidence that psoriasis and atopic eczema 
may be exacerbated by stress, and other condi-
tions in which emotional stress has been claimed 
to play a part in some cases include alopecia 
areata and acute pompholyx. 
 There is no doubt that skin disease has psycho-
logical effects on the patient, and can signiﬁ cantly 
adversely affect their quality of life. Skin disease is 
visible to others, it carries the taint of contagion, 
and affected individuals often feel stigmatized and 
have poor self - image and low self - esteem. They 
will be aware that their skin is being scrutinized, 
and that any form of physical contact, such as 
shaking hands or collecting change, may provoke 
apprehension in others. In certain ethnic groups 
where marriages are arranged, the presence of 
skin disease may compromise marriage prospects, 
and cause considerable emotional distress. 
 Infections with ectoparasites sometimes have 
marked psychological effects. Patients feel unclean, 
and these feelings can persist long after the prob-
lem has been eradicated. 
 There are some skin disorders that are directly 
related to psychological problems, and these are 
described below.  
 Dermatitis artefacta 
 Patients with dermatitis artefacta produce skin 
lesions to satisfy a psychological need, but what 
beneﬁ t they derive from their actions is usually 
not obvious. There is no rational motive for their 
behaviour. They will vehemently deny that the 
lesions are self - induced if challenged. As a group 
they are distinct from malingerers, who con-
sciously imitate or produce an illness for a deliber-
ate end. 
 Dermatitis artefacta is more common in women, 
and most of those affected are adolescents or 
young adults. However, there is a subgroup with 
an older age of onset who are more likely to be 
male. Many have some connection with the health 
professions, either directly or via family members. 
 Artefactual skin lesions may be produced in a 
number of different ways including rubbing, 
scratching, picking, gouging, puncturing, cutting, 
sucking, biting, the application of heat or caustics, 
or the injection of milk, blood and faecal material. 
Limb oedema may be simulated by the intermit-
tent application of constricting bands (Secretan ’ s 
syndrome). Lesions tend to have bizarre geomet-
ric shapes that do not conform to those seen in 
naturally occurring disease — no dermatosis has 
square, rectangular or triangular lesions. Often the 
lesions are more numerous on the side of the body 
opposite the dominant hand. If a caustic material 
such as an acid has been used to induce lesions 
Lecture Notes: Dermatology, 10th edition. © RAC Graham-Brown 
and DA Burns. Published 2011 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Skin and the psyche  171
cases there is a demonstrable personality disor-
der, and in others signiﬁ cant depression. 
 It requires considerable expertise to be able to 
make a conﬁ dent diagnosis of dermatitis arte-
facta, but even experienced dermatologists see 
cases in which they suspect the lesions are self -
 induced, but they cannot be certain. Alternatively, 
there are occasional cases in which there is a 
strong suspicion of dermatitis artefacta, but the 
lesions are discovered to be the result of naturally 
occurring disease. 
 Treatment is extremely difﬁ cult in many cases. 
Confronting the patient with the diagnosis 
achieves very little, in that it usually produces a 
categorical denial that they are producing the 
lesions, and subsequent failure to attend for 
follow - up. Strict occlusion of the traumatized 
areas may allow healing, but the lesions will reap-
pear as soon as occlusive dressings are removed. 
An alarming consequence of occlusion may be the 
appearance of lesions elsewhere, or the develop-
ment of other  ‘ symptoms ’ , as if to compensate for 
the inability to reach the usual sites. Antidepressants 
will help those who are depressed. Psychiatric 
referral is often unhelpful and, unfortunately, 
many patients refuse assistance from a psychia-
trist. The situation often remains at a stalemate. 
As long as the doctor ’ s suspicions are not voiced, 
the patient appears content to continue attending 
for follow - up. 
 The course of this disorder is often protracted. 
Recovery often has little to do with successful 
medical treatment, but occurs because of increas-
ing maturity, marriage or having children. 
However, there are some physicians who have 
this may trickle off the main area of damage to 
produce the  ‘ drip - sign ’ of tell - tale streaks at the 
margins. Even when suspected artefactual lesions 
are covered with occlusive dressings, patients will 
often manage to insert knitting needles under the 
dressings, or push sharp instruments through 
them, in order to continue damaging the skin. 
 The history obtained from these patients is 
devoid of any useful information about the evolu-
tion of their lesions. The impression conveyed is 
that one minute the skin was normal, and the next 
it was blemished. This so - called  ‘ hollow history ’ is 
characteristic, as is a striking complacency about 
what are often extremely disﬁ guring lesions ( ‘  la 
belle indifference ’ ), sometimes accompanied by 
an enigmatic  ‘ Mona Lisa ’  smile. One patient we 
have seen, who had extensive suppuration of the 
left arm, probably produced by the inoculation of 
faeces (Figure  20.1 ), said about her arm  ‘ Yes, it is 
rather unpleasant isn ’ t it. I wonder if you could 
arrange for someone to take it off ’ .   
 When they see the severity of the lesions and 
an apparent lack of progress in diagnosis and 
treatment, relatives and friends of the patient 
quite naturally rally to their support, and may be 
somewhat vocal in their criticism of a seemingly 
inept medical profession. Other doctors caring 
for the patient may also be convinced that their 
disease is naturally occurring. This situation, in 
which other individuals  ‘ support ’ a patient with 
dermatitis artefacta, is known as  ‘  folie  à deux  ’ , and 
is also encountered in delusions of parasitosis 
(see below). 
 The psychopathology of patients who produce 
artefactual lesions is not uniform, but in some 
 Figure 20.1   Dermatitis artefacta — in 
this case probably the result of 
inoculation of faeces into the skin.  

172  Skin and the psyche
 Delusions of parasitosis 
 The individual with delusions of parasitosis has an 
unshakeable conviction that his or her skin is 
infested with parasites. An experienced derma-
tologist will recognize this disorder from informa-
tion supplied in the referral letter, and will often 
arrange to see the patient at the end of a clinic, 
because the consultation is usually extremely 
lengthy. However, before seeing a dermatologist 
the patient has often consulted his or her local 
university department of zoology or a medical 
entomologist in an attempt to identify the  ‘ para-
sites ’ . They will also probably be known to com-
panies specializing in pest eradication, who will 
have been asked to disinfest their home. They may 
have isolated themselves from family and friends 
because of their fear of passing the  ‘ infestation ’ on 
to them, and because of their absolute conviction 
that they are infected they may have convinced 
their family, friends, and even the family doctor, of 
the reality of the problem (shared delusion;  folie  à 
deux ). 
 Patients often describe a feeling of itching, 
biting or  ‘ crawling ’ in the skin (formication), and 
state that when this occurs they are able to remove 
a small  ‘ insect ’ or  ‘ worm ’ from a skin  ‘ lesion ’ . 
When asked to demonstrate typical skin  ‘ lesions ’ , 
they will often point to Campbell de Morgan spots, 
freckles or other minor blemishes. Typical  ‘ speci-
mens ’  are presented to the doctor wrapped in 
pieces of paper or adhesive tape, and kept in a 
matchbox (Figure  20.2 ). These should always be 
expertise in psychocutaneous disorders, and 
referral to such a specialist is advisable.  
 Dermatological 
pathomimicry 
 Dermatological pathomimicry is distinct from 
dermatitis artefacta. Patients with this condition 
either deliberately perpetuate their skin disease, 
or reproduce a pre - existing skin disorder. Having 
been appraised of the aetiology of their skin 
disease, they use this knowledge to reproduce the 
lesions when under emotional stress, to obtain 
sympathy, or in an effort to avoid an unpleasant 
situation with which they cannot cope. Examples 
of the type of illness used by patients for pathom-
imicry include allergic contact dermatitis, drug 
reactions and chronic leg ulceration. 
 Sympathetic discussion with the patient will 
usually solve the problem.  
 Body dysmorphic 
disorder (dermatological 
non - disease; 
dysmorphophobia) 
 In this condition patients complain of severe symp-
tomatology localized to certain parts of the body, 
most commonly the face, scalp and perineum, but 
without any objective evidence of disease. The 
complaints include: dysaesthesias such as burning, 
itching or throbbing pain; too much or too little 
hair on the face or scalp, or altered texture of scalp 
hair. Perineal symptoms in men include com-
plaints of a red, burning scrotum. These delusional 
beliefs or perceptions of abnormal sensations are a 
consuming preoccupation for the patient. There is 
nothing abnormal to see on examination, but the 
perceived abnormalities often lead to consultations 
for  ‘ remedial ’  cosmetic surgery, and most are dis-
satisﬁ ed with the results of this. 
 In some cases depression is part of the picture; 
others may be have monosymptomatic hypo-
chondriacal psychosis. There is a signiﬁ cant risk 
of suicide. Management is difﬁ cult, but some 
patients respond to treatment with antidepres-
sants and cognitive – behavioural therapy. 
 Figure 20.2   Matchbox and  ‘ specimens ’  in delusions of 
parasitosis.  

Skin and the psyche  173
such as risperidone and olanzapine are prefera-
ble. As with other psychocutaneous disorders, 
physicians with a special interest in the condition 
should be consulted.  
 Obsessive – compulsive 
habits 
 Trichotillomania 
 Trichotillomania means compulsive plucking of 
hair. The scalp is involved most often, but the eye-
brows and eyelashes may be affected. A mild form 
of trichotillomania may be observed in libraries, 
where engrossed students compulsively twist locks 
of hair around their ﬁ ngers, but they rarely pull it 
out unless examinations are approaching! The 
clinical picture is of patches of hair loss containing 
hairs of varying length. Often the crown of the head 
is affected, and the hair at the margins is of normal 
length (Figure  20.3 ). The underlying scalp is usually 
normal, but may be excoriated. Occasionally, tri-
chotillomania is associated with a trichobezoar 
(hair ball in the stomach) if the plucked hair is 
swallowed.  ‘ Rapunzel ’ s syndrome ’ (named after 
the character in the Grimm Brothers ’  fairy tale) 
is applied to individuals in whom the hair forms a 
tail extending into the small intestine.   
 Trichotillomania in childhood is often tran-
sient. However, it may be a manifestation of sig-
niﬁ cant psychopathology, particularly in adults. 
examined under the microscope, because they 
just might contain parasites, but usually they 
contain fragments of cotton or skin debris.   
 It is impossible to persuade these patients that 
parasites are not responsible for their condition. If 
they are shown that their  ‘ specimens ’  are simple 
debris they remain unconvinced, and may even 
suggest that the parasites are so small that an elec-
tron microscope will be required to demonstrate 
them. In this situation the most lucid, eloquent 
discourse will fall upon deaf ears — the patient ’ s 
beliefs remain unshaken, and the doctor usually 
retires from the conﬂ ict feeling more than some-
what jaded. 
 Delusions of parasitosis has been described in 
association with a number of medical disorders, 
including organic brain disease such as senile 
dementia and cerebral arteriosclerosis, pellagra, 
vitamin B 12 deﬁ ciency and after coronary bypass 
surgery. The term  ‘ monosymptomatic hypochon-
driacal psychosis ’  may be applied to patients with 
a single, ﬁ xed delusion, and most patients with 
delusions of parasitosis ﬁ t into this category. 
 Effective treatment is very difﬁ cult, and many 
patients continue with their delusion for years. 
As with dermatitis artefacta, a confrontational 
approach rarely achieves anything. Patients often 
refuse psychiatric help because they do not accept 
that they have a mental illness, and cannot see 
how a psychiatrist could possibly help with what, 
to them, is a physical disorder. The neuroleptic 
drug pimozide was employed in the past, but it is 
now considered that newer antipsychotic agents 
 Figure 20.3   Trichotillomania.  

174  Skin and the psyche
 Pathological skin picking 
  ‘ Neurotic excoriations ’  is a term for a disorder, 
encountered 
predominantly 
in 
middle - aged 
women, in which skin lesions are produced by 
picking and gouging, and are usually scattered 
over the arms, upper trunk and face. More recent 
lesions are usually interspersed with scars from 
previous excoriations. Acne excori é e is a variant 
of this condition in which minimal acne lesions 
are repeatedly picked and gouged, leaving scars 
when the lesions heal. 
 Patients with these problems have obsessive –
 compulsive personalities, and picking the skin 
appears to provide relief of unconscious aggres-
sion and tension. Antidepressants and supportive 
psychotherapy may be of beneﬁ t. 
 
 
 

 21 
Cutaneous  d rug  r eactions 
 There are only two types of drug — those that 
don ’ t work and those that have side - effects. 
 Bruno Handel  frcs 
 Introduction 
 The skin is one of the most common sites for 
unwanted drug effects (a better term than  ‘ side 
effects ’ ), although estimates of the frequency vary 
considerably. Cutaneous drug reactions are prob-
ably under - reported and certainly often go unrec-
ognized. Note, however, that skin disorders wholly 
unrelated to drug ingestion can be labelled erro-
neously. It is important not to jump to conclu-
sions: we have seen viral infections and scabies 
diagnosed as drug reactions. There are many 
people who state that they are  ‘ allergic to penicil-
lin ’ , but who are not. 
 Cutaneous drug reactions may be due to several 
different mechanisms. Unfortunately there are no 
reliable in vitro tests for establishing that a rash is 
due to a drug. Simple in vivo tests, such as prick 
testing and patch testing, have a limited place 
in speciﬁ c situations, but usually yield no useful 
information either. However, even if the mecha-
nism(s) for a particular reaction is known (and it 
often isn ’ t), a test may not be appropriate because 
the reaction is not to the drug itself, but to a drug 
complex or metabolite that is produced in vivo 
after ingestion or administration. 
 The only deﬁ nitive test is direct challenge with 
the suspected agent, but this may be impossible 
or unethical in many circumstances. For these 
reasons, proving that a speciﬁ c eruption was due 
to a speciﬁ c drug is difﬁ cult, and judgements 
usually have to be made on clinical grounds alone. 
  
 Causes of drug reactions 
  •    Simple intolerance  
  •    Hypersensitivity: types I, II, III and IV  
  •    Pharmacokinetic disturbances  
  •    Drug interactions  
  •    Complex interactions between host, drug and 
environment (e.g. light)  
 Drugs causing skin reactions 
  •    Antibiotics (especially penicillin, semisynthetic 
penicillins and sulfonamides)  
  •    Non - steroidal anti - inﬂ ammatory drugs  
  •    Hypnotics  
  •    Tranquillizers  
 Drug  r eaction  p atterns 
 However, all is not lost! Some drugs are much 
more prone to induce cutaneous drug reaction 
patterns than others. Common offenders include 
those in the box. 
  
 Furthermore, there are a number of well - deﬁ ned 
clinical drug reaction patterns. Some of these pat-
terns are more speciﬁ c to certain drugs, and this 
may help to identify the culprit. 
  
Lecture Notes: Dermatology, 10th edition. © RAC Graham-Brown 
and DA Burns. Published 2011 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

176  Cutaneous drug reactions
 Exanthematic  e ruptions 
 The most common cutaneous drug reactions are 
itchy, widespread, symmetrical, erythematous 
and maculopapular (Figure  21.1 ): there is often a 
strong resemblance to a viral exanthem. The time 
relationship is variable: in most instances the rash 
begins a few days after starting the drug, but it may 
begin almost immediately, or be delayed for a few 
weeks. Exanthematic eruptions usually fade a week 
or so after stopping the drug, but exfoliative der-
matitis may develop (see below and Chapter  15 ).   
 Common  c auses 
 Non - steroidal anti - inﬂ ammatory drugs and anti-
biotics, particularly ampicillin, other semisyn-
thetic penicillins, sulfonamides and gentamicin.  
 Rarer  c auses 
 Gold, barbiturates and phenothiazines. 
 Urticaria and  a naphylaxis 
( s ee  a lso Chapter  15 ) 
 Drug - induced urticaria may be due to a direct 
pharmacological action on mast cells, or to type I 
or type III hypersensitivity reactions. 
 Occasionally, drugs may trigger a major anaphy-
lactic reaction, with or without urticaria, which 
can be fatal unless treated very rapidly. Unfortu-
nately, there is no way of predicting this disaster. 
 Common cutaneous drug reaction 
patterns 
  •    Exanthematic eruptions  
  •    Urticaria and anaphylaxis  
  •    Exfoliative dermatitis  
  •    Vasculitis  
  •    Fixed drug eruptions  
  •    Lichen planus - like eruptions  
  •    Erythema multiforme  
  •    Acneiform eruptions  
  •    Hair abnormalities  
  •    Pigmentary changes  
  •    Bullous reactions  
  •    Photosensitivity  
  •    Lupus erythematosus - like syndrome  
  •    Exacerbation of pre - existing skin disease  
 Common  c auses 
 Aspirin, opiates (direct), penicillins, cepha-
losporins, pollen vaccines and toxoids (immune). 
 Eczema 
 Type IV hypersensitivity reactions to topical medi-
caments are common, and give rise to a contact 
dermatitis (see Chapter  7 ). Figure  21.2 shows a 
man who was given eyedrops containing neomy-
cin (an aminoglycoside). Occasionally, a topically 
sensitized patient may receive the compound (or 
a closely related chemical) systemically. The result 
is a severe, widespread, eczematous reaction. 
 Common  c auses 
 Lanolin in creams and bandages; preservatives 
(parabens, ethylenediamine) in creams; topical 
anaesthetics ( not  lidocaine); topical antihista-
mines; topical antibiotics, especially aminoglyco-
sides, in creams and drops; increasingly, topical 
steroids. 
 Exfoliative  d ermatitis 
 Drugs are one of the four important causes of 
exfoliative dermatitis (see Chapter  15 ). 
 Common  c auses 
 Prominent 
offenders 
are 
sulfonamides 
and 
sulfonylureas, gold, phenytoin, allopurinol and 
barbiturates. 
 Vasculitis ( s ee Chapter  16 ) 
 Drug ingestion is a common trigger for vasculitis. 
 Common  c auses 
 Thiazides, 
captopril, 
cimetidine, 
quinidine, 
sulfonamides. 
 Fixed  d rug  e ruptions 
 Fixed drug eruptions are one of the most curious 
events encountered in dermatological practice. 
The reaction occurs in the same place(s) every 
time the offending drug is taken. They are often 
misdiagnosed as recurrent eczema or ringworm. 
 A round or oval patch of dusky erythema devel-
ops, often with a purplish centre (Figure  21.3 ), and 
sometimes a central bulla. This fades to leave 
postinﬂ ammatory hyperpigmentation. There may 
be only one lesion or multiple sites. Fixed erup-

Cutaneous drug reactions  177
 Figure 21.1   A typical exanthematic 
eruption due to an antibiotic.  
 Figure 21.2   Contact sensitivity to 
neomycin.  

178  Cutaneous drug reactions
 Acneiform  e ruptions 
 Skin changes resembling acne vulgaris occur with 
several drugs. The changes tend to be monomor-
phic, consisting largely of papulopustules. There 
are seldom comedones present. 
 Causes 
 Corticosteroids (both topical and systemic), 
adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH), andro-
genic drugs, lithium and iodides. Some drugs also 
exacerbate pre - existing acne (see below). 
 Hair  a bnormalities 
 As discussed in Chapter  13 , drugs may be respon-
sible for hair loss or excessive hair growth.  
 Pigmentary  c hanges 
 Several drugs cause pigmentary changes (Table 
 21.1 ). 
 Heavy metals such as silver may be deposited in 
the skin after industrial exposure or ingestion (e.g. 
in antismoking lozenges).  
 Bullous  r eactions 
 There are several ways in which drugs may induce 
blistering. 
  
tions can occur anywhere, but the limbs and geni-
talia are favoured sites.   
 Common  c auses 
 Sulfonamides, dapsone, tetracyclines, barbiturates. 
 Lichen  p lanus - l ike  e ruptions 
 Lichen planus - like (sometimes known as  ‘ lichenoid ’ ) 
reactions are rare, but can be severe. The eruption 
is occasionally indistinguishable from idiopathic 
lichen planus, but more commonly there is an 
eczematous element, with much more scaling. In 
severe cases, an exfoliative dermatitis may develop 
(see above and Chapter  15 ). 
 Causes 
 Antimalarial drugs; some  β  blockers; sulfonylu-
reas; gold. Thiazides may cause lichen planus - like 
eruptions on light - exposed surfaces. 
 Erythema  m ultiforme 
( s ee Chapter  15 ) 
 So many things seem to be able to trigger ery-
thema multiforme that it is usually difﬁ cult to be 
certain whether a drug is responsible. 
 Suggested  d rug  c auses 
 Barbiturates; 
long - acting 
sulfonamides; 
co -
 trimoxazole; rifampicin. 
 Figure 21.3   Fixed drug reaction to a 
sulfonamide.  

Cutaneous drug reactions  179
 Patients complain that exposure to the sun 
causes a burning sensation followed by erythema, 
swelling and, later, eczematous changes on light -
 exposed areas (Figure  21.4 ). 
 Common  c auses 
 Phenothiazines; sulfonamides; tetracyclines; thi-
azides. 
Demethylchlortetracycline 
can 
cause 
photo - onycholysis. Bullae due to nalidixic acid 
have been mentioned above.    
 Lupus  e rythematosus - l ike 
 s yndrome 
 A rare but important drug reaction is the induc-
tion of a syndrome closely resembling systemic 
lupus erythematosus. 
 Causes 
 Many agents have been incriminated, including 
hydralazine, isoniazid, penicillin, minocycline, 
procainamide and griseofulvin. 
 Photosensitivity 
 There are three main types of reaction (see box). 
  
 Table 21.1   Drugs causing cutaneous 
pigmentary changes 
 Colour  
  Drug  
 Characteristic 
generalized 
reddish - brown hue  
 Clofazimine (used in leprosy)  
 Yellow  
  Mepacrine  
 Carotene  
 Purplish  
  Chlorpromazine  
 Blue – black  
  Chloroquine (especially on 
shins)  
 Minocycline (in high dosage)  
 Amiodarone (on 
light - exposed sites)  
 Brown  
  Oestrogens ( = chloasma)  
 Drug - induced blistering 
  •    In ﬁ xed drug eruptions  
  •    Drugs may induce pemphigus and pemphigoid 
(see Chapter  14 )  
  •    Drugs may exacerbate porphyria cutanea tarda  
  •    Nalidixic acid may cause a dramatic phototoxic 
bullous reaction  
  •    Barbiturates may be associated with bullae on 
bony prominences, usually in patients who are 
unconscious due to overdose  
 Photosensitive reactions 
  •    Exacerbation of underlying disease  
  •    Direct phototoxic reaction  
  •    Photoallergic reaction  
 In phototoxic reactions, the dose of the drug 
and the intensity of ultraviolet exposure may both 
be important: if critical levels are not reached, 
the reaction may not develop. This can be con-
fusing if the drug has been taken on a number of 
occasions. 
 Figure 21.4   Photosensitivity to a sulfonamide.  

180  Cutaneous drug reactions
 Exacerbation of 
 p re - e xisting  d isease 
 Some drugs may produce a deterioration in cer-
tain skin disorders. Notable examples are: 
 1  Acne: androgenic drugs (e.g. danazol, 
stanozolol), oral contraceptives and 
corticosteroids  
 2  Porphyrias: all clinical features, including 
cutaneous photosensitivity, may be worsened 
by drug ingestion, particularly barbiturates 
and oestrogens  
 3  Psoriasis: lithium, antimalarials 
 4  Systemic lupus erythematosus: penicillin and 
sulfonamides may produce deterioration 
 Conclusion 
 If you use all the clinical information at your dis-
posal, it is often possible to determine if a rash is 
drug provoked, and what the causative agent 
might be. 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 Clinical information 
  •    A good history  
  •    A careful examination  
  •    Elimination of other skin diseases  
  •    Recognition of the clinical reaction pattern  
  •    Matching the reaction with the most likely 
offender  
  •    Tests, where appropriate (possibly including a 
challenge)  

 22 
Treatment of  s kin  d isease 
 If it ’ s dry, wet it. If it ’ s wet, dry it. Congratulations, 
you are now a dermatologist! 
 Anonymous 
 The above witticism is oft quoted by non -
 dermatologists as an assessment of the scope of 
dermatological therapeutics. An alternative cal-
umny relates to a dermatologist murmuring an 
unintelligible Latin name as a diagnosis and then 
prescribing a topical steroid, for everything. Apart 
from being deeply offensive to sensitive skin 
doctors, both these quips are far from the truth, as 
dermatologists have an enormous therapeutic 
armamentarium at their disposal. In days of yore, 
it must be admitted, many of the available topical 
therapies resembled witches ’  brews containing 
 ‘ Eye of newt and toe of frog, wool of bat and 
tongue of dog ’ . They were often cosmetically 
unacceptable and malodorous — if the skin disease 
did not render the patient a social pariah, the 
treatment could be relied upon to do so. However, 
in recent years, topical therapies have not only 
become more effective, but also cosmetically 
much more acceptable. 
 The treatment of individual disorders has been 
dealt with in preceding chapters, and this chapter 
is designed to provide an overview of the princi-
ples of therapy.  
 Topical  t herapy 
 With regard to topical therapy, an ideal prepara-
tion for the management of skin disease would 
penetrate well, but remain localized within the 
skin, thereby avoiding potential problems from 
systemic effects. In practice this is extremely dif-
ﬁ cult to achieve, and any agent that penetrates the 
stratum corneum is absorbed to some extent. 
 Topical preparations consist of an active ingre-
dient (or ingredients) and a material in which this 
is suspended — a base. These components must be 
compatible. There is little point in discovering a 
new base that penetrates the skin like a hot knife 
through butter if it completely inactivates every-
thing suspended in it. 
 The stratum corneum forms a natural protec-
tive barrier to penetration of externally applied 
agents. Hence, to facilitate penetration by a drug, 
this barrier function must be breached, and this 
can be achieved by hydration of the stratum 
corneum, e.g. penetration of a topical steroid may 
be markedly enhanced by occluding an area of 
skin with polythene. Unfortunately, if large areas 
of skin are occluded in this way the amount of 
steroid absorbed may be sufﬁ cient to produce sys-
temic effects. Bases containing urea also hydrate 
the stratum corneum and enhance penetration of 
their active ingredients. Dimethyl sulfoxide 
(DMSO) is a solvent that penetrates skin extremely 
rapidly, and is used as a vehicle for the antiviral 
agent idoxuridine.  
 Bases 
 Bases include creams, oily creams, ointments, 
lotions, gels and pastes. A cream is an oil - in - 
water emulsion that is relatively non - greasy and 
has only limited emollient activity. Creams are 
Lecture Notes: Dermatology, 10th edition. © RAC Graham-Brown 
and DA Burns. Published 2011 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

182  Treatment of skin disease
by the doctor. Verbal instructions are not sufﬁ -
cient if multiple topical therapies are prescribed. 
For example, a patient with psoriasis might be 
given a tar shampoo, a steroid scalp lotion, a mild 
topical steroid cream to use in the ﬂ exures, and a 
vitamin D analogue for plaques on the trunk and 
limbs. If the patient has only recently developed 
psoriasis, and is not familiar with its treatment, 
the provision of multiple therapies without clear 
instructions could easily lead to confusion. 
 Do not expect patients who depart for work at 
the crack of dawn to adhere strictly to instructions 
to wash their hair every morning and use a topical 
medication twice daily. Modify the treatment 
schedule to suit the individual. If you are prescrib-
ing a preparation that is messy to use and/or mal-
odorous, warn the patient about this, e.g. dithranol 
stains and benzoyl peroxide bleaches, and lack of 
prior warning could lead to ruined clothing and 
bedsheets. 
 It is a useful exercise to imagine how strictly you 
would adhere to a regimen if you were encum-
bered with a skin disease requiring regular 
treatment. 
 Quantities  p rescribed 
 It is important when prescribing topical therapy 
to consider the area to be covered and the fre-
quency of application before assessing the quan-
tity of a topical agent required by the patient, e.g. 
cosmetically acceptable and can be used to treat 
either moist or dry skin conditions. Oily creams 
are water - in - oil emulsions that combine good 
emollient properties with cosmetic acceptability 
and are therefore of beneﬁ t in dry skin conditions. 
Ointments are greasy preparations that have 
emollient and occlusive properties. The occlusive 
effect of an ointment results in hydration of the 
stratum corneum and enhanced penetration of 
the active ingredient of the ointment. The beneﬁ ts 
of ointments are offset by a lack of cosmetic 
acceptability. Ointments are messy and stick to 
clothing. If used on the hands they transfer to eve-
rything touched — an obvious disadvantage to 
someone employed in clerical work, for example. 
Lotions are ﬂ uid preparations that have a cooling 
effect due to evaporation. They are useful in the 
management of moist, exudative skin lesions, and 
also in dermatoses affecting the scalp. Clear, non -
 greasy gels are designed for use on hairy parts of 
the body, where they are cosmetically acceptable. 
Pastes are powders, usually mixed with soft paraf-
ﬁ n, and are protective, e.g. in the prevention of 
maceration of the skin around a discharging ulcer. 
 The choice of a particular base should be deter-
mined by the type of skin problem and the sites 
affected. It is, for example, wholly inappropriate to 
prescribe a steroid ointment for daytime use on 
the scalp, because it is too messy. A gel or lotion 
preparation should be used instead. Similarly, a 
lotion is not the correct base for ichthyotic skin, 
where an oily cream or ointment is more 
appropriate. 
 Bases are mixtures of several components, for-
mulated to provide stability and freedom from 
microbial contamination. Random dilution of a 
topical preparation will dilute the preservatives in 
the base and signiﬁ cantly shorten its shelf - life. 
 Communication and 
 p atient  c ompliance 
( a dherence) 
 Most non - topical medication involves popping 
pills of various colours into the mouth at certain 
times of the day, requiring a minimum of effort 
and only a minor feat of memory. Topical therapy 
demands a great deal more of the patient, and the 
increased effort required of the patient ought to be 
matched by the provision of precise instructions 
 Table 22.1   Steroid potency 
 Potency  
  Examples  
 Mild  
 0.1 – 2.5% hydrocortisone  
 Moderately 
potent  
 Clobetasone butyrate (Eumovate)  
 Fludroxycortide (Haelan)  
 Alclometasone dipropionate 
(Modrasone)  
 Hydrocortisone with urea (Alphaderm)  
 Potent  
 Betamethasone valerate (Betnovate)  
 Fluocinolone acetonide (Synalar)  
 Fluocinonide (Metosyn)  
 Hydrocortisone butyrate (Locoid)  
 Very potent  
 Clobetasol propionate (Dermovate)  
 Diﬂ ucortolone valerate (Nerisone Forte)  

Treatment of skin disease  183
erythematosus. In general, a severe dermatosis 
should be treated with a potent steroid, and a mild 
condition with a weak steroid. In the case of a 
chronic dermatosis subject to periodic exacerba-
tions a mild - to - moderate potency steroid can be 
used when the condition is quiescent, and a 
potent preparation when it worsens. 
 There are regional variations in the absorption 
of topical steroids through the skin and their 
potential for local adverse effects. These variations 
are determined by the thickness of the stratum 
corneum, occlusion, e.g. in the ﬂ exures where skin 
surfaces are in apposition, and the vascularity of 
the area. Most facial dermatoses should be treated 
only with mild topical steroids, although a few 
conditions such as discoid lupus erythematosus 
will require potent preparations. Skin disease 
affecting the axillae, groins and submammary 
areas should also be treated with mild topical ster-
oids. Conversely, dermatoses of the palms and 
soles, where the stratum corneum is extremely 
thick, require potent steroids, and a greater beneﬁ t 
is often obtained if polythene occlusion is used to 
enhance penetration. 
 There is a greater risk of adverse systemic effects 
from the use of topical steroids in children because 
of the high ratio of skin surface area to body 
volume, particularly in infants. For this reason 
mild topical steroids should be used in small chil-
dren. The skin of elderly people is thin, and potent 
steroids will amplify this change — their use over 
long periods of time should therefore be avoided 
or carefully supervised.  
 Side  e ffects 
 Side effects are rarely seen after the use of mild 
topical steroids, but they are encountered more 
frequently in association with potent topical 
steroid use, although much less commonly than 
in the early years of steroid availability. 
 Side effects may be divided into local, occurring 
at the site of application of the steroid, and sys-
temic, resulting from percutaneous absorption. 
 Local  s ide  e ffects 
 Atrophy of the  s kin 
 Topical steroids produce dose - related thinning of 
the dermis as a result of inhibition of ﬁ broblast 
activity. This effect is particularly noticeable in 
areas where the skin is naturally relatively thin, 
such as the axillae, medial aspect of the upper 
there is little point in prescribing a 30 - g tube of an 
emollient to be used over the entire body surface 
after bathing — this hardly constitutes a week ’ s 
supply for an ichthyotic gerbil. A repeat prescrip-
tion would be required after one application, 
because this is the approximate amount necessary 
for a single application over the whole body 
surface of an adult. Topical therapies are available 
in a variety of container sizes. You will need to 
check the available sizes before prescribing, as 
they vary from product to product. Topical ster-
oids, for example, may be marketed in 15 - , 25 - , 
30 - , 50 -  or 100 - g tubes, depending on the manu-
facturer and the steroid. Most emollients are avail-
able in 50 - and 100 - g tubes and 500 - g tubs or 
dispensers. 
 Underprescribing and overprescribing are both 
common. One does not require 100   g of cream to 
treat a small patch of eczema on the leg — most of 
the tube will languish in a drawer or bathroom 
cabinet until its shelf - life is long expired, or it may 
be inappropriately used by another member of the 
family. However, someone regularly using an 
emollient over extensive areas of skin should be 
given 500 - g dispensers. 
 Topical  s teroids 
 At ﬁ rst sight the huge number of available topical 
steroids is bewildering to the uninitiated, but with 
a little knowledge and experience their use is quite 
straightforward. They are divided into several 
groups according to potency. Hydrocortisone 
preparations are the weakest. However, hydrocor-
tisone in a base containing urea, which enhances 
penetration of the stratum corneum, is moder-
ately potent. Modiﬁ cation of the basic steroid 
skeleton by ﬂ uorination (ﬂ uorinated steroids) or 
esteriﬁ cation produces steroids of much greater 
potency (Table  22.1 ). 
 Choice of  p reparation 
 The most appropriate topical steroid for a given 
situation should be determined by the type and 
severity of the condition being treated, the sites 
affected and the age of the patient. The skin disor-
ders that are steroid responsive have been deline-
ated in previous chapters, and include various 
types of eczema, lichen planus, psoriasis of the 
scalp, ﬂ exures, hands and feet, and discoid lupus 

184  Treatment of skin disease
arm, groins and the medial aspect of the thigh. 
Prominent striae may develop in these areas 
(Figure  22.1 ). On the face, cutaneous thinning and 
telangiectasia produce prominent erythema. 
Frequent use of potent steroids on the dorsa of the 
hands and the forearms results in easy bruising, 
particularly in elderly people (Figure  22.2 ). 
 Hypopigmentation 
 Inhibition of melanocyte function leads to hypo-
pigmentation. In parts of the world where potent 
topical steroids are readily available without pre-
scription, they are sometimes used for their skin 
lightening action, leading to other damaging 
effects. Local loss of pigmentation in racially pig-
mented skin is sometimes seen after steroid 
injections. 
 Perioral  d ermatitis 
 Perioral dermatitis is a condition usually seen in 
young women who have used potent topical ster-
oids on the face for lengthy periods of time — often 
inappropriately for mild acne on the chin. The 
eruption consists of small papules and pustules 
on an erythematous background (Figure  22.3 ). 
The history is virtually identical in all cases. 
Initially the mild acne appears to improve, prob-
ably because the vasoconstrictor action of the 
steroid reduces erythema, and inﬂ ammatory 
papules become less noticeable. However, stop-
ping treatment results in a rebound ﬂ are of the 
erythema, and the patient therefore considers that 
the treatment is keeping the condition controlled 
and continues to apply the steroid; she may even 
increase the frequency of application. Eventually, 
 Figure 22.1   Prominent striae in the axilla after use of a 
potent topical steroid.  
 Figure 22.2   Severe atrophy of skin 
on the dorsa of the hands after 
excessive use of ﬂ uorinated topical 
steroids.  
as the eruption around her mouth becomes more 
noticeable, she asks her doctor for  ‘ something 
stronger ’ , and is often given a more potent topical 
steroid. 

Treatment of skin disease  185
use of topical steroids on dermatophyte fungal 
infections alters the appearance of the eruption, 
producing so - called  ‘ tinea incognito ’ (see Chapter 
 4 ). Scabies inappropriately treated with topical 
steroids becomes extremely ﬂ orid, with many 
burrows and a very numerous mite population 
(see Chapter  5 ). 
 Systemic  s ide  e ffects 
 Topical steroids are absorbed through the skin, 
and excessive use of potent steroids may result in 
inhibition of the pituitary – adrenal axis and iatro-
genic Cushing ’ s syndrome. This problem is rarely 
encountered nowadays, because doctors are 
aware of the adverse effects, and restrict the 
amounts prescribed. In children, growth retarda-
tion is an important consequence of the long - term 
use of potent topical steroids.   
 Topical  i mmunomodulators 
 In recent years the immunomodulators (cal-
cineurin inhibitors) tacrolimus and pimecrolimus, 
the mechanism of action of which is similar to that 
of ciclosporin, but which penetrate the stratum 
corneum more readily because they have a lower 
molecular weight, have emerged as useful topical 
agents. They are licensed for use in atopic eczema, 
but may also be of beneﬁ t in other conditions, 
including discoid lupus erythematosus, vitiligo 
and alopecia areata, and to date they appear to 
have a good safety proﬁ le. 
 Treatment consists of explaining the nature 
of the condition, stopping the potent topical 
steroid, warning the patient about the rebound 
ﬂ are of erythema, and prescribing a mild topi-
cal steroid (1% hydrocortisone) for 2 – 3 weeks to 
reduce its severity. In addition, oxytetracycline or 
erythromycin should be given in a dose of 500   mg 
twice daily, gradually reducing over a period of 
several weeks as the condition improves. The 
reason for their efﬁ cacy is unknown.  
 Steroid  r osacea 
 Topical steroids will worsen pre - existing rosacea, 
and can precipitate a rosacea - like eruption.  
 Allergic  c ontact  d ermatitis 
 Allergic contact dermatitis to topical steroids may 
develop, usually in patients using them long term, 
e.g. in the treatment of atopic dermatitis (see 
Chapter  7 ). 
 Pustular  p soriasis 
 If large quantities of a potent topical steroid are 
used inappropriately to treat psoriasis, and the 
treatment is then suddenly stopped, the psoriasis 
may exacerbate dramatically and pustular psoria-
sis may occur.  
 Infection 
 Folliculitis may occur in areas treated with topical 
steroids, particularly when ointments or poly-
thene occlusion are used, and the use of steroids 
on moist, warm ﬂ exural areas may encourage 
superinfection with  Candida  spp. Inappropriate 
 Figure 22.3   Perioral dermatitis.  

186  Treatment of skin disease
reduction in the size of sebaceous glands and 
reduced sebum production. This is accompanied 
by a secondary reduction in the bacterial ﬂ ora of 
the pilosebaceous follicle. 
 Potential adverse effects include dryness of the 
lips, nasal mucosae (with mild epistaxes) and con-
junctivae, decreased night vision, diffuse thinning 
of hair, myalgia and arthralgia, benign intracra nial 
hypertension (avoid concomitant tetracyclines) 
and hyperlipidaemia. Mood changes may occur in 
patients taking isotretinoin, but whether there is a 
direct relationship between the drug and depres-
sion is a controversial issue. However, if depres-
sion is identiﬁ ed the drug should be stopped. 
 Isotretinoin is a teratogen, and sexually active 
women of child - bearing age should take strict con-
traceptive precautions for at least 1 month before, 
during, and for at least 1 month after treatment —
 guidelines with regard to pregnancy testing and 
contraception are available.  
 Acitretin 
 This is the active metabolite of etretinate. It is 
useful in extensive psoriasis and pustular psoriasis 
(but less so in stable plaque psoriasis), and in the 
ichthyoses and Darier ’ s disease. Acitretin is also of 
value in tumour prevention in individuals predis-
posed to skin neoplasia such as those with xero-
derma pigmentosum and post - transplantation 
patients on long - term immunosuppression. 
 Potential adverse effects are similar to those 
associated with isotretinoin. However, with regard 
to teratogenicity, as there is reverse metabolism of 
acitretin to etretinate, and the latter has a long 
elimination half - life, women of child - bearing age 
should use contraceptive precautions for the 
duration of treatment and for at least 2 years after 
stopping the drug.  
 Alitretinoin (9 - cis - r etinoic  a cid) 
 This has recently been introduced for the manage-
ment of patients with severe chronic hand eczema. 
Adverse effects are similar to those from other oral 
retinoids, and a pregnancy prevention programme 
is mandatory in women of child - bearing age. 
 Methotrexate 
 A structural analogue of folic acid, methotrexate is 
a competitive inhibitor of the enzyme dihydro-
folate reductase that converts dihydrofolate to 
 Vitamin D  a nalogues 
 Principally used in the topical treatment of plaque 
psoriasis, vitamin D analogues are of beneﬁ t 
because of their potent antiproliferative effect 
and ability to promote normal differentiation. 
Preparations containing calcipotriol, calcitriol and 
tacalcitol are marketed for psoriasis treatment, 
but have been used with beneﬁ t in a number of 
other disorders. Recently, a combination of cal-
cipotriol and betamethasone dipropionate has 
been marketed. 
 Use of excessive amounts of these products 
leads to hypercalcaemia and hypercalciuria, and 
it is therefore important to follow prescribing 
guidelines. 
 Retinoids 
 Retinoic  a cid ( t retinoin) 
 This is used in the treatment of acne (see 
Chapter  6 ). It is particularly effective in reducing 
the number of comedones. It is also used in the 
management of photoageing and, usually in com-
bination with other agents, to reduce hyperpig-
mentation, e.g. in chloasma.  
 Adapalene 
 This is a synthetic retinoid that is used in the treat-
ment of acne.  
 Tazarotene 
 This is also a synthetic retinoid, which is used in 
the treatment of acne and psoriasis.     
 Systemic  t herapy 
 Retinoids 
 Isotretinoin (13 - cis - r etinoic  a cid) 
 The introduction of this drug transformed the 
management of severe acne, and in recent years 
many dermatologists have used it for less severe 
acne unresponsive to other forms of treatment. 
The usual treatment regimen is 0.5 – 1.0  mg/kg 
body weight per day for 16 – 24 weeks, which pro-
duces prolonged remission in many patients. If 
the acne becomes troublesome again, or is unre-
sponsive to the ﬁ rst course, then treatment may 
be repeated. The principal effect of the drug is a 

Treatment of skin disease  187
 Important in the catabolism of azathioprine is 
the enzyme thiopurine methyltransferase (TPMT), 
and some individuals have genetically determined 
low activity of this enzyme, rendering them par-
ticularly susceptible to myelosuppression. Anyone 
considered for azathioprine therapy should have 
blood TPMT levels measured.  
 Ciclosporin 
 Ciclosporin, a calcineurin inhibitor, is a potent 
immunosuppressant. In dermatology it is princi-
pally used in treating severe psoriasis and atopic 
dermatitis, but its other uses include pemphigus 
and pemphigoid, dermatomyositis and pyoderma 
gangrenosum. 
 Its main adverse effects are hypertension and 
nephrotoxicity. It interacts with numerous other 
drugs. Monitoring of therapy should include reg-
ular measurement of blood pressure and serum 
creatinine. 
 Biologic  i nterventions 
 A major development in therapeutics in recent 
years has been the introduction of  ‘ biologic thera-
pies ’ , a group of agents that block speciﬁ c molecu-
lar steps in the inﬂ ammatory process. Their 
principal dermatological use is in the manage-
ment of moderate - to - severe psoriasis, when tradi-
tional systemic treatments have failed or are 
contraindicated. The agents currently employed 
are tumour necrosis factor (TNF) antagonists (inf-
liximab, adalimumab and etanercept) and they 
are administered intravenously (inﬂ iximab) or 
subcutaneously (adalimumab and etanercept). 
TNF is a proinﬂ ammatory cytokine that plays a 
central role in the pathogenesis of psoriasis. 
Biologic therapies may have signiﬁ cant adverse 
effects, and it is essential that treatment guide-
lines be strictly followed. They are expensive. 
 
 
 
  
tetrahydrofolate, the latter being important in the 
synthesis of RNA/DNA. It is used in the treatment 
of severe psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis, where its 
beneﬁ t is thought to depend on inhibition of pro-
liferation of lymphoid cells. It may also be of 
beneﬁ t in other diseases, including sarcoidosis, 
lupus erythematosus and dermatomyositis. 
 It is usually given orally as a single weekly dose 
(7.5 – 15   mg weekly; with lower doses in elderly 
people). Concomitant folic acid administration is 
recommended (1 – 5   mg daily), as this protects 
against some of the adverse effects without affect-
ing response to therapy. 
 Major adverse effects are pancytopenia and 
hepatotoxicity (ﬁ brosis and cirrhosis). Factors 
predisposing to the latter include excessive alcohol 
intake and viral hepatitis. 
 Certain drugs elevate methotrexate levels 
and therefore increase the risk of toxicity, 
and these include NSAIDs, trimethoprim and 
sulfamethoxazole. 
 Monitoring of treatment should include initial 
frequent measurement of full blood count and 
long - term assessment of a serological marker of 
ﬁ brosis, PIIINP (the amino - terminal peptide of 
type III procollagen). If levels of PIIINP remain 
normal there is unlikely to be liver damage, but if 
levels are repeatedly raised then further assess-
ment by liver biopsy is indicated. 
 Azathioprine 
 Azathioprine is converted in the body to 6 - 
mercaptopurine, an immunosuppressive agent. It 
may be of beneﬁ t in several disorders, including 
dermatomyositis, systemic lupus erythematosus, 
immunobullous diseases and vasculitis. Dosage is 
1 – 3   mg/kg per day. Major adverse effects include 
hypersensitivity reactions, bone marrow suppres-
sion and hepatotoxicity. 

188  Dermatological emergencies
 23 
Emergency  d ermatology  
 Introduction 
 Dermatological emergencies are rare, but early 
recognition and referral are just as important in 
dermatology as in any other branch of medicine. 
You are most likely to pick up the speciﬁ cs of man-
agement if you encounter one of these situations 
while in your ﬁ rst years in medicine.  
 Toxic  e pidermal 
 n ecrolysis and Stevens –
 Johnson  s yndrome 
( s ee Chapters  14  and  15 ) 
 Although technically these are separate condi-
tions, we are considering them together for the 
purposes of this discussion. They are blistering 
diseases that occur secondary to cutaneous 
inﬂ ammation, where the inﬂ ammation of the epi-
dermis results in very serious damage. The 
changes may be so severe that the epidermal layer 
dies and is shed, leaving an exposed, oozing 
dermis. In general, Stevens – Johnson syndrome is 
restricted to mucous membranes with a mild 
bullous disorder on the skin, whereas in toxic epi-
dermal necrolysis (TEN) most of the skin is 
involved (see Figure  14.12 ). The skin can initially 
become itchy or patients may complain of a 
burning sensation and a fever. Mucosal involve-
ment is common and internal epithelial surfaces 
(gastrointestinal tract, lung, etc.) may also be 
involved. Early referral either to specialist centres 
with highly experienced dermatology nursing care 
and a general intensive care unit (ICU) or a burns 
unit gives patients the best chance of survival. 
Beyond general measures there is some debate 
as to best treatment, but intravenous immu-
noglobulin and ciclosporin can be given as addi-
tional measures.  
 Erythroderma 
( s ee Chapter  15 ) 
 If you have read the previous chapters in this text-
book, you will know that erythroderma is not a 
pathological diagnosis. However, there are only a 
few conditions that commonly cause this state to 
develop, and identiﬁ cation of the cause is essential 
to successful management. The term essentially 
refers to the clinical state of inﬂ ammation of all the 
skin. Given that the skin is the largest organ of the 
body, it is not surprising that this can result in 
haemodynamic and metabolic problems: 
  •   Hypothermia from heat loss 
  •   High - output cardiac failure 
  •   Hypoalbuminaemia 
  •   Fluid loss 
  •      Capillary leak syndrome: a very severe 
complication, where cytokines released during 
inﬂ ammation cause generalized vascular 
leakage; it most commonly occurs in 
erythroderma secondary to psoriasis; acute 
respiratory distress syndrome can result, and 
this invariably requires ICU management 
Lecture Notes: Dermatology, 10th edition. © RAC Graham-Brown 
and DA Burns. Published 2011 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Dermatological emergencies  189
urgent investigation and the involvement of senior 
colleagues. Note, too, that a strong clinical suspi-
cion of bacterial meningitis is one situation where 
immediate treatment of disease takes precedence 
over investigations. Immediate intravenous anti-
biotics may be life saving.  
 Necrotizing  f asciitis 
 This is an extremely dangerous condition, which 
can be very difﬁ cult to diagnose, as very little can 
sometimes be seen from a surface inspection. 
There are two forms of the condition: type 1 is 
caused by aerobic and anaerobic bacteria and is 
often seen postoperatively; type 2 is caused by a 
group A streptococcus and can arise spontane-
ously in healthy individuals. In both cases the 
infection spreads beyond the subcutis into under-
lying fascia and muscle: this is deeper than simple 
cellulitis infection and, contrary to popular belief, 
the two are not a continuum. Clinically affected 
areas become disproportionately painful com-
pared with other clinical signs. Necrosis is rapid 
and can result in septicaemia and death. If there 
is even the slightest suspicion of necrotizing fas-
ciitis, the involvement of senior colleagues and 
urgent surgical intervention are essential. Intrave-
nous antibiotics used alone are ineffective because 
the blood supply is compromised and vessels 
cannot deliver antibiotics to the necrotic tissues in 
sufﬁ cient concentration. Surgical debridement 
(which sometimes means amputation of part/all 
of a limb) is always indicated, combined with 
postoperative high - dose intravenous antibiotics. 
 Kaposi ’ s  v aricelliform 
 e ruption ( d isseminated 
 h erpes  s implex/eczema 
 h erpeticum) 
 This can be a very severe disease and is seen in 
patients who have large areas of broken skin. The 
most common condition that predisposes to dis-
seminated herpes simplex is atopic eczema, but it 
can also be associated with other dermatoses such 
as pemphigus foliaceus or Darier ’ s disease (a rela-
tively common genodermatosis — see Chapters  3 , 
 11  and  14 ). A typical history consists of preceding 
 The four most important causes of erythro-
derma are: 
 1  Dermatitis (eczema), including contact allergic 
 2  Psoriasis 
 3  Cutaneous T - cell lymphoma 
 4  Drugs (stopping all non - essential drugs is 
often a good idea) 
 Involving dermatological services in an attempt 
to establish the most likely cause and to advise on 
speciﬁ c management is often necessary. However, 
general treatment measures should be instituted 
immediately (Table  23.1 ). 
 Meningococcal 
 s epticaemia 
 Meningococci can cause the most severe forms of 
progressive meningitis and  ‘ sepsis syndrome ’ . 
The latter syndrome may result in disseminated 
intravascular coagulation, which gives the charac-
teristic rash that the general public associates with 
 ‘ meningitis ’ , but importantly occurs only when 
the inciting pathogen is a meningococcus. The 
classic description is of a purpuric rash that 
spreads rapidly and does not blanch when pres-
sure is applied (note in the earliest stages the rash 
can blanch). Any patient with such a rash requires 
 Table 23.1   Treatment measures for 
erythroderma 
 General  
 Keep the patient warm  
 Swab the skin for secondary bacterial infection  
 Monitor vital signs  
 Monitor serum albumin  
 Keep meticulous ﬂ uid balance charts  
 Speciﬁ c  
 Simple emollients and mild topical steroids  
 The blanket use of systemic steroids should be 
avoided in the absence of high - output cardiac 
failure: they can complicate further management of 
disease and there are obvious side - effects 
associated with their use  
 Treatment as for the underlying cause (e.g. 
methotrexate for psoriasis)  
 A similar approach should be taken in the treatment 
of pustular psoriasis (see Chapter  8 ).  

190  Dermatological emergencies
tion of 1   :   1000 (note that the concentration in 
cardiac arrest is 1  :  10  000 administered intrave-
nously), and intravenous ﬂ uid if hypotensive 
(Table  23.2 ). Antihistamines (e.g. chlorphenamine 
10   mg i.m./i.v.) and corticosteroids should also be 
administered for allergic - type reactions. Most 
importantly, given the life - threatening nature of 
angioedema and anaphylaxis, while carrying out 
your initial assessment and management it is 
imperative to contact senior doctors (including an 
anaesthetist) so that they are aware of the problem, 
and will be able to help, especially if initial man-
agement is unsuccessful.    
 Staphylococcal  s calded 
 s kin  s yndrome (SSSS) 
 Whereas staphylococcal skin infections are com-
monplace, fortunately  ‘ staphylococcal scalded skin 
syndrome ’  is extremely rare. It is a blistering disor-
der caused by exfoliative toxins that are produced 
by some types of staphylococci, and cause the skin 
to peel away, leaving a scalded/burned appearance. 
Treatment is with intravenous antibiotics and gen-
eral supportive measures such as intravenous 
ﬂ uids and good nursing and nutritional care.  
 Final  w ord 
 Dermatological emergencies need early identiﬁ -
cation and prompt management by experts, and 
nobody will expect junior doctors to manage these 
complicated conditions on their own. However, 
basic knowledge of these disorders will enable 
them to initiate swift and appropriate action, 
because it is speed of intervention that proves life 
saving in most cases. 
 
  
malaise and fever in a patient known to have 
atopic dermatitis, followed by a widespread vesic-
ular rash that quickly breaks down to leave eroded 
areas. Patients can become systemically unwell 
and a small number of cases develop a viraemia 
and/or meningoencephalitis. Management is hos-
pital based and involves general supportive meas-
ures, such as intravenous ﬂ uids and antipyretics, 
but deﬁ nitive treatment is with intravenous anti-
viral therapy in the toxic patient (it is reasonable 
to use oral aciclovir in the afebrile patient). Also 
remember to stop any non - essential therapies, 
including topical steroids. It is common practice 
to give broad - spectrum antibiotic cover to stop 
superimposed bacterial infection. Crucially, if 
there is any evidence of ocular involvement, early 
ophthalmological review is essential.  
 Angioedema (and 
 a naphylaxis) 
 Angioedema is usually a type 1 hypersensitivity 
reaction characterized by swelling of the dermis, 
subcutaneous tissues and mucosae. Triggers can be 
allergic or non - allergic, but the ﬁ nal pathway in 
both cases is the release of inﬂ ammatory mediators, 
such as histamine, from mast cells, causing ﬂ uid to 
leak from blood vessels and resulting in tissue swell-
ing. A similar process occurs in urticaria, but here 
only superﬁ cial vessels in the upper dermis are 
affected. The same picture can also result from 
non - IgE mediated reactions, (e.g. to aspirin and 
non - steroidal anti - inﬂ ammatory drugs [NSAIDs]), 
and non - allergic mechanisms (e.g. to angiotensin -
 converting enzyme [ACE] inhibitors) where the 
chemical responsible is bradykinin not histamine. 
 The key issue in managing a patient with 
angioedema is assessing the airway and ensuring 
that it remains patent. It is important to remember 
that  ‘ anaphylaxis ’ can present with life - threatening 
 a irway and/or  b reathing and/or  c irculation (ABC) 
problems and should consequently be dealt with 
via the method of assessment and treatment, as 
taught in the Advanced Life Support Guidelines 
(ALS ) by the Resuscitation Council (UK). It must 
also be pointed out that skin and mucosal changes 
are subtle/absent in 20% of reactions. 
 Management should follow the ALS guidelines, 
and involves high - ﬂ ow oxygen, an initial dose of 
0.5   mg intramuscular adrenaline at a concentra-
 Table 23.2   Management of severe 
angioedema and anaphylaxis 
 Oxygen  
 0.5   mg intramuscular 1   :  1000 adrenaline  
 Intravenous antihistamine  
 Intravenous corticosteroid  
 Intravenous infusion  

 Case  s tudy  q uestions  
 Case  s tudy 1 
 A 75 - year - old woman has had scaly patches below 
the knees for several years. They were thought to be 
plaques of psoriasis, but standard topical therapies 
for psoriasis have been ineffective. Recently, a ﬂ eshy 
tumour has developed on one of the scaly areas. 
 Examination 
 There are several pink, scaly patches on both legs 
below the knee (Figures  C1.1  and  C1.2 ), and a 
 Figure C1.1  
 Figure C1.2  
tumour on the left calf (Figure  C1.3 ). There are a 
few solar keratoses on the face and dorsa of the 
hands, but the rest of the skin is normal. The nails 
are normal. 
 What are the scaly patches, and what is the tumour?   

192  Case study questions
 Case  s tudy 2 
 A ﬁ t, 4 - year - old child has two 
asymptomatic lesions on the 
dorsum of the left foot that have 
been present for 6 months and 
have not responded to topical 
antifungal agents. 
 Examination 
 There are two annular lesions on 
the dorsum of the foot (Figure 
 C2.1 ). The slightly raised margin 
of each lesion is composed of 
pink papules. There is no scaling.   
 What is the diagnosis?   
 Figure C1.3  
 Figure C2.1  

Case study questions  193
 Figure C3.1  
 Case  s tudy 3 
 An 18 - year - old woman, an apprentice hairdresser 
with a past history of childhood eczema and 
asthma, presents with an itchy rash on both 
hands. She has been working in a hairdressing 
salon for several months, and spends most of her 
time shampooing clients ’ hair. 
 Examination 
 There is diffuse redness and scaling of the dorsa of 
the hands (Figure  C3.1 ). 
 What are the possible causes, and what investiga-
tions should be performed?   

194  Case study questions
 Figure C4.3  
 Case  s tudy 4 
 What is the likely diagnosis in 
each of these patients who have 
rashes affecting the feet? 
 (a)  A scaly, non - itchy eruption 
(Figure  C4.1 ) accompanied 
by similar lesions on the 
knees, elbows and scalp, and 
a nail dystrophy.  
 (b)  An intensely itchy, weeping 
rash on both feet (Figure 
 C4.2 ). 
 (c)  An itchy, dull red rash on 
both feet, with a scaling 
margin (Figure  C4.3 ). The 
patient also recently devel-
oped an itchy rash in the 
groins. 
 Figure C4.1  
 Figure C4.2  

Case study questions  195
 Figure C5.1  
 Case  s tudy 5 
 A 90 - year - old woman has a lesion on the nose. It 
has been present for several years, during which 
time it has slowly enlarged. 
 Examination 
 There is a ﬂ at, heavily pigmented area on the nasal 
bridge (Figure  C5.1 ). 
 What is the diagnosis, and what treatment would 
you suggest? 

196  Case study questions
 Figure C6.1  
 Figure C6.2  
(b)
(a)
 Case  s tudy 6 
 A child, who has had an itchy 
ﬂ exural rash for several years, has 
developed multiple small spots 
scattered over the body, but they 
are more numerous in areas 
affected by the pre - existing der-
matosis. Both of the child ’ s sib-
lings have similar lesions. 
 Examination 
 There are a large number of pink 
papules, each of which appears 
to have a central plug, and some 
of which are inﬂ amed (Figure 
 C6.1 ). The elbow and knee ﬂ ex-
ures are red, scaly and moist 
(Figure  C6.2 ). 
 What are the papular lesions, 
and what is the background 
dermatosis?   

Case study questions  197
 Figure C7.1  
 Case  s tudy 7 
 This man complained of an itchy rash on the 
beard area that had been present for several 
weeks. It had not been treated. 
 Examination 
 There is redness and scaling affecting the left side 
of the jaw and extending onto the neck. The 
involved area has a distinct, scaly erythematous 
margin (Figure  C7.1 ). 
 What is the diagnosis?   
 Figure C8.1  
 Case  s tudy 8 
 A 65 - year - old woman, who had complained of 
itching for several weeks with little to see, has sud-
denly developed crops of blisters. 
 Examination 
 There are extensive areas of tense bullae, some of 
which are haemorrhagic (Figure  C8.1 ). Her mouth 
is not involved.   
 What is the likely diagnosis?   

198  Case study questions
 Figure C9.1  
 Case  s tudy 9 
 A 30 - year - old man, a keen squash player, has had 
an itchy rash in the groin for several months. 
Topical therapy with several steroid preparations 
has produced some reduction in the intensity of 
itch, but the rash has gradually become more 
extensive. On further questioning he admits to a 
problem on his feet for years. 
 Examination 
 There is patchy scaling erythema on the medial 
aspects of the thighs, and numerous inﬂ ammatory 
papules and pustules (Figure  C9.1 ). 
 What is the diagnosis?   
 Case  s tudy 10 
 A 40 - year - old patient was started on an ACE inhib-
itor for elevated blood pressure. Three weeks later 
the patient awoke in the middle of the night with 
swollen lips and eyes. 
 What is the most likely diagnosis? What action 
would you take?  

Case study questions  199
 Figure C11.1  
(b)
(c)
(a)
 Case  s tudy 11 
 A 75 - year - old former sailor com-
plains of a lesion on the back that 
he has noticed because it has 
bled and marked his shirts. 
 Examination 
 Overlying the right shoulder 
there is a raised lesion that has an 
eroded central area (Figure  C11.1  
(a)  &  (b)), the source of the bleed-
ing, but there is also a pigmented 
lesion in the centre of the back, of 
which the patient had not been 
aware. The latter is an irregular 
area of dark pigmentation with 
an adjacent small erosion (Figure 
 C11.1 (c)). 
 What are the lesions most likely 
to be? 

200  Case study questions
 Figure C12.1   
 Figure C13.1   
 Case  s tudy 12 
 A 21 - year - old university student has had dandruff 
and a scaly scalp since his early teens. In the past 
3 weeks he has developed a widespread eruption 
of lesions on the trunk. These were preceded by a 
sore throat. 
 Examination 
 There are areas of thick scale on the scalp, and 
numerous small, red, scaly lesions on the trunk 
and limbs (Figure  C12.1 ). 
 What is the likely diagnosis?   
 Case  s tudy 13 
 A mother presents with her 13 - 
year - old daughter to her family 
doctor, because the young girl 
has recently developed a small 
isolated patch of hair loss on the 
back of her scalp. She is other-
wise perfectly well. 
 Examination 
 There is a circumscribed area of 
hair loss on the occiput. The 
affected area of scalp is not scaly, 
and there is no evidence of scar-
ring (Figure  C13.1 ). 
 What is the most likely diagnosis? 

Case study questions  201
 Figure C14.1   
 Figure C15.1  
 Case  s tudy 14 
 An 18 - year - old girl presents with a 
rash on her chin. Following a diag-
nosis of mild eczema 3 months 
previously, she had been applying 
a topical steroid and an emollient. 
When the rash did not improve 
the strength of the topical steroid 
was increased. 
 Examination 
 There are numerous papules 
around her mouth (Figure  C14.1 ). 
 What is the likely cause of her 
problem? 
 Case  s tudy 15 
 A 26 - year - old mother of two chil-
dren presents with her 11 - month -
 old daughter who has lesions on 
her face and right arm, ﬁ rst 
noticed 1 week ago. Her 3 - year -
 old son has similar lesions. 
 Examination 
 There are red, superﬁ cially eroded 
areas with golden crusts on the 
surface. 
 What is the diagnosis? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 Multiple  c hoice  q uestions  
 
  1.  Which of the following are potential adverse 
effects of potent topical corticosteroids? 
 A  Striae 
 B  Hypopituitarism 
 C  Tinea incognito 
 D  Alopecia 
 E 
 Seborrhoeic keratoses 
  2.  Which of the following may be associated 
with pyoderma gangrenosum? 
 A  Cholangiocarcinoma 
 B  Monoclonal gammopathy 
 C  Regional ileitis 
 D  Pancreatic glucagonoma 
 E 
 Rheumatoid arthritis 
  3.  Erythema multiforme may be triggered by 
which of the following? 
 A  Herpes simplex 
 B  Mycoplasma infection 
 C  Orf 
 D  Staphylococcal infection 
 E 
 Drugs 
  4.  The Koebner phenomenon is a feature of 
which of the following diseases? 
 A  Toxic epidermal necrolysis 
 B  Psoriasis 
 C  Vitiligo 
 D  Atopic dermatitis 
 E 
 Lichen planus 
  5.  Which of the following can indicate an 
underlying malignancy? 
 A  Dermatomyositis 
 B  Generalized pruritus 
 C  Geographic tongue 
 D  Acanthosis nigricans 
 E 
 Acquired ichthyosis 
  6.    Clothing (body) lice are responsible for 
transmission of which of the following 
diseases? 
 A  Epidemic typhus 
 B  Lyme disease 
 C  Bubonic plague 
 D  Trypanosomiasis 
 E 
 Malaria 
  7.    There is a known association between 
crusted (Norwegian) scabies and which of 
the following? 
 A  Erythrodermic psoriasis 
 B  HIV/AIDS 
 C  Down ’ s syndrome 
 D  Darier ’ s disease 
 E 
 Ichthyosis 
  8.    Which of the following are true of scabies? 
 A  Itching develops 4 – 6 weeks after initial 
infection  
 B  Mites live in the hair follicles 
  C     Contact with clothing worn by an 
infected individual often results in 
transmission of the disease 
 D  Red papules on the penis and scrotum 
are an important physical sign 
 E 
 A Scandinavian species of  Sarcoptes is 
responsible for Norwegian scabies 
  9.    Which of the following are signs of venous 
hypertension? 
 A  Ulceration between the toes 
 B  Atrophie blanche 
 C  Cold feet 
 D  Lipodermatosclerosis 
 E 
 Pigmentation of the lower leg 
 10.    Physical signs in tuberous sclerosis 
complex include which of the following? 
 A  Periungual ﬁ bromas 
 B  Crowe ’ s sign 
 C  Shagreen patch 
 D  Multiple lentigines 
 E 
 Auspitz sign 

Multiple choice questions  203
 16.    Onycholysis may be a sign of which of the 
following? 
 A  Thyrotoxicosis 
 B  Myxoedema 
 C  Calcium deﬁ ciency 
 D  Lichen planus 
 E 
 Psoriasis 
 17.    Which of the following may lead to 
exfoliative dermatitis (erythroderma)? 
 A  Lead poisoning 
 B  Cutaneous T - cell lymphoma 
 C  Psoriasis 
 D  Scurvy 
 E 
 Drug allergy 
 18.    Nail pits occur in association with which of 
the following? 
 A  Alopecia areata 
 B  Cirrhosis 
 C  Chronic renal failure 
 D  Vitamin D deﬁ ciency 
 E 
 Psoriasis 
 19.    Cutaneous vasculitis may be associated 
with which of the following? 
 A  Trichophyton rubrum infection 
 B  Rheumatoid arthritis 
 C  Streptococcal infection 
 D  Wegener ’ s granulomatosis 
 E 
 Cryoantibodies 
 20.    Which of the following are recognized 
treatments for atopic dermatitis? 
 A  Isotretinoin 
 B  Topical tacrolimus 
 C  Desensitization injections 
 D  Topical corticosteroids 
 E 
 Interferon - α 
 11.  Which of the following are recognized 
causes of erythema nodosum? 
 A  Primary tuberculosis 
 B  Rheumatoid arthritis 
 C  Ulcerative colitis 
 D  Lead poisoning 
 E 
 Typhoid 
 12.  Subepidermal blisters are seen in which of 
the following? 
 A  Porphyria cutanea tarda 
 B  Pemphigus foliaceus 
 C  Bullous impetigo 
 D  Cicatricial pemphigoid 
 E 
 Dermatitis herpetiformis 
 13.  Which of the following are recognized 
treatments for severe psoriasis? 
 A  Methotrexate 
 B  BCG vaccination 
 C  Capsaicin 
 D  Acitretin 
 E 
 Biologic agents 
 14.  The Nikolsky sign is a feature of which of 
the following diseases? 
 A  Toxic epidermal necrolysis 
 B  Psoriasis 
 C  Vitiligo 
 D  Atopic dermatitis 
 E 
 Pemphigus vulgaris 
 15.  Which of the following are cutaneous 
features of systemic sclerosis? 
 A  Calcinosis 
 B  Raynaud ’ s phenomenon 
 C  Ecchymoses 
 D  Gottron ’ s papules 
 E 
 Photosensitivity 

 Answers to  c ase  s tudy 
 q uestions  
 Case  s tudy 1 
 Diagnosis 
 The scaly lesions are patches of Bowen ’ s disease 
(squamous cell carcinoma conﬁ ned to the epider-
mis). The tumour is an invasive squamous cell 
carcinoma that has developed on one of these 
patches. 
 Case  s tudy 2 
 Diagnosis 
 This child was thought to have ringworm (tinea) 
on the dorsum of the foot, hence the topical anti-
fungal treatment. However, this would be an 
unusual infection in a child, there is no scaling 
(which would be a feature of tinea), and if this was 
indeed the diagnosis there would have been a 
response to antifungals. The diagnosis is granu-
loma annulare — the dorsa of the hands and feet 
being typical sites. 
 Case  s tudy 3 
 Diagnosis 
 Her past history of childhood eczema and asthma 
indicates that she is atopic. Although she may not 
have had any problems with eczema since child-
hood, she is susceptible not only to a recrudes-
cence of atopic eczema but also to irritant 
dermatitis, and may develop problems in any 
occupation in which she is exposed to skin 
irritants — in hairdressing she is exposed to irri-
tants on a daily basis, e.g. when shampooing 
clients ’  hair. She is also exposed to numerous 
chemicals, including hair dyes, which can cause 
allergic contact dermatitis. Patch testing will help 
to establish if she has contact allergy. Work as a 
hairdresser is contraindicated in anyone with a 
history of atopy.   
 Case  s tudy 4 
 Diagnosis 
 (a)  This is psoriasis. 
 (b)  This is eczema. Always consider contact allergy 
to components of footwear and carry out patch 
testing.  
 (c)  This is tinea — so - called  ‘ moccasin ’ - type ath-
lete ’ s foot, because the distribution suggests 
the shape of a moccasin. The recent develop-
ment of a rash in the groins suggests that the 
infection has been spread to this area. 
 Case  s tudy 5 
 Diagnosis 
 This is a lentigo maligna. A nodular melanoma 
may develop within the lentigo. The treatment 
of choice for lentigo maligna is excision, but if 
this would be difﬁ cult to perform because of 
the size or site of the lesion radiotherapy is an 
alternative — the lesion is radiosensitive. 
 Case  s tudy 6 
 Diagnosis 
 These are the papular lesions of molluscum conta-
giosum, which are often numerous in individuals 
with atopic dermatitis, the background dermatosis 
in this case. When they resolve in people with 
atopy they often leave a temporary pitted scar 
similar to that after a chickenpox lesion. 
 Case  s tudy 7 
 Diagnosis 
 This is tinea. The well - deﬁ ned inﬂ ammatory 
margin separating normal and abnormal skin is 
typical. Always check other areas of the body that 
are frequent sites of tinea infection, particularly 
the feet, because these are invariably involved.   

Answers to case study questions  205
 Case  s tudy 12 
 Diagnosis 
 This is the typical history and appearance of 
guttate (drop - like) psoriasis. It is characteristically 
seen in younger patients and often follows a strep-
tococcal infection of the throat.   
 Case  s tudy 13 
 Diagnosis 
 The diagnosis is alopecia areata. Reassurance 
should be given that it is most likely that hair will 
re - grow in the coming weeks. However, in some 
cases the hair loss will become more extensive, 
causing considerable stress and anxiety.   
 Case  s tudy 14 
 Diagnosis 
 This is a typical history of perioral dermatitis, in 
which topical steroid use is thought to be an 
important causative factor. The patient should 
stop all topical steroids and take an oral tetracy-
cline or erythromycin for 6 – 8 weeks. 
 Case  s tudy 15 
 Diagnosis 
 This woman ’ s baby has impetigo as, almost cer-
tainly, does her son. Treatment is a course of an 
anti - staphylococcal antibiotic. 
 Case  s tudy 8 
 Diagnosis 
 This is bullous pemphigoid. It often presents as 
generalized itching that lasts for weeks or months 
before the blisters appear. It typically affects older 
people, the blisters are tense because they are 
subepidermal, and oral blisters are infrequent, 
unlike pemphigus. 
 Case  s tudy 9 
 Diagnosis 
 This is tinea incognito — tinea modiﬁ ed by inap-
propriate use of potent topical steroids. 
 The clear - cut marginal erythema is replaced by 
ill - deﬁ ned areas of scaling erythema, often stud-
ded with inﬂ ammatory papules and pustules. 
Microscopy of scrapings shows an abundance of 
fungal mycelium. He also has athlete ’ s foot.   
 Case  s tudy 10 
 Diagnosis 
 This patient has developed angioedema, prob-
ably as a result of hypersensitivity to the ACE 
(angiotensin - converting enzyme) inhibitor. 
 You should check that the airway is not com-
promised, and that the patient is breathing nor-
mally and is not hypotensive. The drug should 
be stopped and treatment initiated with adrena-
line. Antihistamines do not work in this type of 
angioedema.   
 Case  s tudy 11 
 Diagnosis 
 The lesion that bled is probably a basal cell carci-
noma. The other is a malignant melanoma. The 
surrounding skin shows evidence of chronic sun 
damage. 

 Answers to  m ultiple 
 c hoice  q uestions  
 
  1.  A, C 
  2.  B, C, E 
  3.  A, B, C, E 
  4.  B, C, E 
  5.  A, B, D, E 
  6.  A 
  7.  B, C 
  8.  A, D 
  9.  B, D, E 
 10.  A, C 
 11.  A, C 
 12.  A, D, E 
 13.  A, D, E 
 14.  A, E 
 15.  A, B 
 16.  A, E 
 17.  B, C, E 
 18.  A, E 
 19.  B, C, D, E 
 20.  B, D 

 Glossary of 
 d ermatological  t erms  
 abscess:  a localized collection of pus in a cavity 
formed by disintegration or necrosis of tissues, and 
usually caused by a microorganism. 
 acantholysis (Gk  akantha —  thorn — and 
 lyein — to loosen, free):  separation of epidermal 
keratinocytes resulting from loss of intercellular 
connections (desmosomes), causing the cells to 
become rounded and resulting in clefts. As occurs 
in pemphigus and Darier ’ s disease. 
 acanthosis (Gk  akantha — thorn, prickle):  
increased thickness of the prickle - cell layer of the 
epidermis. As occurs in psoriasis and licheniﬁ ed 
eczema. 
 acro -  (Gk  akros — outermost, extreme):  tip, 
extremity or top. As in thyrotoxic acropachy. 
 acrochordon:  skin tag. 
 actinic (Gk  aktis ,  aktinos —  ray):  pertaining to 
rays or beams of light. As in actinic keratosis. 
 acuminate (L  acuminatus — pointed, 
sharpened):  tapering or sharply pointed. As in 
acuminate warts. 
 agminate (L  agmen ,  agminis — group):  
grouped lesions. 
 alopecia (Gk  al o¯  pekia — a disease similar to 
the mange of foxes):  loss of hair. 
 angiokeratoma:  a vascular lesion in which 
dilatation of blood vessels is combined with 
hyperkeratosis. 
 anhidrosis:  lack of sweating. 
 aphthae:  painful ulcers of mucosae. 
 apocrine:  relating to a gland that produces a 
secretion containing not only ﬂ uid but also cellular 
granules. 
 aquagenic:  caused by contact with water. As in 
aquagenic pruritus. 
 arborizing (L  arbor — tree):  branching, as of a 
tree, e.g. arborizing telangiectasia. 
 atopy (atopic):  predisposing to the development 
of diseases associated with excessive IgE antibody 
formation. 
 atrophy:      a wasting or shrinking of a cell, tissue or 
organ. 
 Auspitz sign:  a sign described by an Austrian 
dermatologist that features punctate haemorrhage 
from superﬁ cial dermal capillaries upon removal of 
scale in psoriasis.  
 balanitis:  inﬂ ammation of the glans penis.  
 balanoposthitis:  inﬂ ammation of the glans penis 
and prepuce.  
 balsam of Peru:  mixture of oil and resin obtained 
from the tree  Myroxolon pereirae . Used as an 
antiseptic. 
 Beau ’ s lines:  transverse depressions on the nail 
plates associated with growth arrest during serious 
illness. 
 Becker ’ s naevus:  hairy, pigmented epidermal 
naevus occurring on shoulder area.  
 Beh ç et ’ s syndrome:  named after a Turkish 
dermatologist; the main features of this syndrome 
are orogenital ulceration and iritis.  
 berloque dermatitis (Fr  berloque — a pendant):  
a streaky form of pigmented photodermatitis 
occurring on the neck and caused by psoralens, 
usually bergamot oil, in perfumes.  
 Besnier ’ s prurigo:  an alternative name for atopic 
dermatitis. 
 Blaschko ’ s lines:  a system of lines, the pattern 
of which is followed by many naevoid skin 
conditions. 
 blepharitis:  inﬂ ammation of the eyelid.  
 boil:  colloquial term for a furuncle. 
 Bowen ’ s disease:  epidermal squamous cell 
carcinoma  in situ . 
 bromhidrosis (Gk  bromos — stench — and 
 hidr o¯  s — sweat):  foul - smelling sweat, usually 
resulting from bacterial action on axillary apocrine 
secretions. 
 bulla (pl. bullae) (L  bulla — a bubble):  a blister; 
a ﬂ uid - ﬁ lled bleb. 

208  Glossary of dermatological terms
 burrow:  a tunnel in the epidermis occupied by the 
scabies mite. 
 callus (callosity):  localized thickening of the skin, 
particularly the horny layer, in response to repeated 
pressure or friction. 
 Campbell de Morgan spots:  cherry angiomas. 
Small, age - related vascular lesions. Campbell de 
Morgan was a British physician. 
 canities (L  canities — grey hair):  greying or 
whitening of hair. 
 carbuncle:  a deep infection of a group of 
contiguous hair follicles with  Staphylococcus aureus , 
resulting in the formation of a multiloculated 
abscess. 
 Casal ’ s necklace:  an area of erythema and 
pigmentation around the neck, occurring in pellagra. 
 cheilitis (Gk  cheilos — lip):  inﬂ ammation of the 
lips. 
 cheiro -  (Gk  cheiros — hand):  meaning hand. 
 cheiropompholyx:  a blistering eruption of the 
hands. 
 cheloid:  alternative spelling of keloid. 
 chilblain:  a lesion resulting from a vascular 
response to cold. Also called pernio, perniosis. 
 chloasma:  patchy pigmentation of the face. Also 
known as melasma. 
 chrysiasis:  deposition of gold in the tissues. 
 clavus:  a corn. 
 colophony:  rosin obtained from pine trees. Many 
uses, but perhaps best known as a component of 
adhesive plasters. 
 comedo:  a plug in a pilosebaceous follicle. 
 condyloma (pl. condylomata):  wart - like tumour 
or growth. Usually applied to genital warts 
(condylomata acuminata) and secondary syphilitic 
lesions in the anogenital region (condylomata lata).  
 conglobata (L  conglobare — to gather into a 
rounded form):  clumped or clustered. As used in 
a severe type of acne (acne conglobata).  
 craquel é :  cracked. Resembling crazy paving. As in 
eczema craquel é . 
 Crowe ’ s sign:  axillary freckling in 
neuroﬁ bromatosis. 
 CRST (CREST) syndrome:  most common form 
of systemic sclerosis.  c alcinosis,  R aynaud ’ s 
phenomenon, (o) e sophageal involvement, 
 s clerodactyly,  t elangiectasia. 
 cyst:      any closed cavity or sac with a lining and 
containing ﬂ uid or other material.  
 dandruff:  a popular term for pityriasis capitis. 
 Darier ’ s sign:  named after a famous French 
dermatologist, this is the occurrence of weals on 
rubbing lesions of urticaria pigmentosa.  
 Dennie – Morgan folds:  prominent folds in lower 
eyelid skin seen in atopic individuals.  
 depilation (epilation):  removal of hair. 
 depilatory:  any agent used to remove or destroy 
hair. 
 dermabrasion:      removal of skin lesions by a variety 
of abrading devices such as a rapidly turning wire 
brush. 
 dermatoglyphics:  epidermal ridge patterns on 
hands and feet.  
 dhobi itch:  colloquial term used for any itchy 
condition affecting the groins/pubic region, 
particularly ringworm. A dhobi is an Indian 
washerman. 
 diascopy:      examination of a skin lesion by applying 
ﬁ rm pressure over it with a glass slide. Used 
particularly to demonstrate  ‘ apple - jelly ’ nodules in 
lupus vulgaris.  
 dyschromatosis:  abnormal pigmentation. 
 dyskeratosis:  abnormal keratinization. 
 dysmorphophobia:  a disturbance in perception 
of body image.  
 ecchymosis:  a bruise 
 ectasia:  dilatation of a duct or vessel. As in 
lymphangiectasia.  
 ecthyma:  a heavily crusted, deep - seated, pyogenic 
infection.  
 eczema:  an inﬂ ammatory skin reaction 
characterized by itching, redness, vesiculation, 
exudation and crusting.  
 ephelis:  a freckle. 
 epidermotropism:  movement towards the 
epidermis. 
 epiloia:  derived from  epi lepsy,  lo w  i ntelligence and 
 a denoma sebaceum. An alternative name for 
tuberous sclerosis complex.  
 erysipelas:  a superﬁ cial form of cellulitis caused 
by haemolytic streptococci.  
 erythema (Gk  eryth e¯  ma — redness):  redness of 
the skin.  

Glossary of dermatological terms  209
 furuncle:  localized pyogenic inﬂ ammation in a 
hair follicle. Also known as a boil. 
 glabrous:  smooth, hairless skin. 
 Gottron ’ s papules:  erythematous papules 
overlying ﬁ nger joints in dermatomyositis. 
 Hansen ’ s disease:  leprosy. Hansen was a 
Norwegian bacteriologist who ﬁ rst demonstrated 
 Mycobacterium leprae . 
 herpetiform:  grouped vesicles resembling herpes. 
 hirsutism (L  hirsutus — shaggy):  the growth of 
hair in women in the male sexual pattern.  
 hives:  popular US term for urticaria. 
 ichthyosis (Gk  ichthys — ﬁ sh):  a group of 
disorders of keratinization characterized by scaling 
likened to ﬁ sh skin. 
 intertrigo:  nﬂ ammation of apposed skin surfaces 
such as groins, axillae and inframammary regions.  
 Kaposi ’ s varicelliform eruption:  named after a 
famous Hungarian - born dermatologist, this is 
disseminated infection with herpes simplex or 
vaccinia virus in atopic individuals. 
 keloid (cheloid):  excessive scar tissue formation 
extending beyond the original area of injury. 
 kerion (GK  k e¯  rion — honeycomb):  a severe 
inﬂ ammatory response to the presence of fungal 
infection, usually of animal origin, on hair - bearing 
areas. 
 Koebner (K ö bner) phenomenon:  the 
provocation of skin lesions by trauma, seen in 
psoriasis, lichen planus and vitiligo. K ö bner was a 
German dermatologist. 
 Koenen ’ s tumours:  periungual ﬁ bromas in 
tuberous sclerosis complex. 
 koilonychia (Gk  koilos — hollow — and 
 onychos — nail):  spoon - shaped nails, typically a 
feature of severe iron deﬁ ciency. 
 Langerhans ’ cells:  epidermal dendritic cells, 
characterized by the presence of racquet - shaped 
 ‘ Birbeck ’ granules, acting as specialized antigen -
 presenting cells. 
 Lassar ’ s paste:  zinc oxide paste with salicylic 
acid. 
 lentigo:  a pigmented macule with an increased 
number of melanocytes at the dermoepidermal 
junction. 
 leukoderma (leucoderma) (Gk  leukos — white — 
and  derma — skin):  lack of normal pigmentation 
of the skin. Non - speciﬁ c term that in lay usage is 
often applied to vitiligo.  
 leukoplakia:  persistent white patches on mucous 
membranes. 
 lichen (Gk  leich e¯  n — a tree moss):  resembling a 
tree moss/lichen. As in lichen planus.  
 licheniﬁ cation:  thickening and coarsening of the 
skin, associated with rubbing and scratching (e.g. in 
atopic eczema).  
 lichenoid:  resembling lichen planus. 
 livedo (L  livere — to be blue or bluish):  a 
cyanotic discoloration of the skin that follows the 
cutaneous vascular network.  
 lupus (L  lupus —  wolf):  applied to lesions that 
involve tissue damage likened to the gnawing of a 
wolf, e.g. lupus vulgaris and lupus erythematosus.  
 Lyell ’ s syndrome:  toxic epidermal necrolysis. 
 Lyme disease:  Lyme is a town in Connecticut 
where the association between ticks, a spirochaete 
( Borrelia burgdorferi ), and an arthropathy was ﬁ rst 
established. 
 madarosis:  loss of eyelashes. 
 Madura foot:  named after a town in southern 
India, it is another name for a mycetoma.  
 Mees ’ lines:  transverse white bands on the nails 
in arsenic and thallium poisoning.  
 melasma:  patchy hyperpigmentation of the face. 
Also known as chloasma.  
 milium (pl. milia) (L  milium — millet seed):  tiny 
white keratin cyst.  
 Mohs ’ micrographic surgery:  Named after the 
US surgeon who developed the technique, this is a 
method of layer - by - layer excision of tumours with 
histological assessment of excision margins.  
 morbilliform:  measles - like. 
 Muehrke ’ s striae:  white bands on the nail 
occurring in severe hypoalbuminaemia.  
 myiasis (Gk  myia — a ﬂ y):  invasion of tissues by 
ﬂ y larvae. 
 naevus:  a localized cutaneous malformation 
involving either an excess or relative deﬁ ciency of 
any of the normal cutaneous structures. A 
cutaneous hamartoma.  
 necrobiosis:  physiological or normal cell death 
in the midst of living tissue. As in necrobiosis 
lipoidica.  

210  Glossary of dermatological terms
 necrolysis (Gk  nekros — dead — and  lyein  to 
loosen, free):  separation of dead tissue. As in the 
epidermis in toxic epidermal necrolysis. 
 Nikolsky ’ s sign:  separation of the epidermis 
produced by ﬁ rm sliding pressure of the ﬁ nger. 
Occurs in pemphigus and toxic epidermal 
necrolysis. Nikolsky was a Russian dermatologist.  
 nitidus:  glistening, shiny. As in lichen nitidus. 
 nummular (L  nummulus  dim. of  nummus —
 coin):  in the shape of a coin. Discoid. 
 onychogryphosis (Gk  onychos — nail — and 
 grypos — curved, hooked):  thickening and 
overcurvature of the nail resembling a ram ’ s horn.  
 onychoschizia (Gk  onychos — nail — and 
 schizein — to cleave or split):  splitting of the nail 
plate into layers. 
 ophiasis (Gk  ophis — snake):  snake - like. A 
pattern of alopecia areata affecting the scalp 
margin. 
 pachyonychia (Gk  pachys —  thick — and 
 onychos — nail):  abnormally thick nails. 
 papilloma:  a nipple - like projection from the skin. 
 Pautrier ’ s abscess:  focal collection of 
lymphocytes in the epidermis in mycosis fungoides.  
 peau d ’ orange:  a dimpling appearance of the 
skin simulating orange peel. Seen in carcinoma of 
the breast. 
 pellagra:  a disorder caused by dietary deﬁ ciency of 
niacin (nicotinic acid).  
 perl é che (Fr  pourl é cher — to lick all over):  
angular cheilitis. 
 pernio (perniosis) (L 
 pernio — chilblain):  chilblain. 
 petechia (pl. petechiae):  a punctate 
haemorrhagic spot. 
 photo - (Gk  ph o¯  tos — light):  pertaining to light. 
 phyto -  (Gk  phyton — plant, tree):  pertaining to 
plants.  
 pityriasis (L  pityriasis — scurf, from Gk  pityron — 
bran):  a branny scaling of the skin. As in pityriasis 
versicolor. 
 poikiloderma (Gk  poikilos — mottled, dappled — 
and  derma — skin):  dappled pigmentation, 
usually associated with telangiectasia and atrophy.  
 poliosis (Gk  poliosis — becoming grey):  
localized patches of white hair. As in piebaldism.  
 pompholyx (Gk  pompholyx — a bubble):  acute 
vesiculobullous eruption on hands (cheiro - ) and 
feet (podo - ). 
 prurigo (L  prurigo — itching):  term used in some 
conditions associated with itching, including nodular 
prurigo and Besnier ’ s prurigo (atopic dermatitis). 
 psoriasiform:  resembling psoriasis. 
 psoriasis (Gk  ps o¯  riasis ,  ps o¯ ra — itch, mange, 
scab):  a chronic skin disease typically manifesting 
scaly plaques.  
 pterygium (Gk  pterygion — wing):  used to 
denote a web or fold of skin, e.g. pterygium colli 
(webbed neck in Turner ’ s syndrome) and the tissue 
encroaching on the nail apparatus in lichen planus 
of the nails.  
 pyoderma:  generic name for any purulent skin 
condition.  
 reticulate (L  reticulatus — net - shaped):  in a 
net - like pattern. 
 rhinophyma (Gk  rhis, rhinos — nose — and 
 phyma —  inﬂ amed swelling):  connective tissue 
and sebaceous gland hypertrophy of the nose as a 
feature of rosacea in men.  
 sclerosis (Gk  skl e¯  ros — hard):  thickening, 
induration.  
 shagreen (Fr  peau de chagrin ):  resembling 
shark skin or untanned leather with a rough surface. 
As in shagreen patches — connective tissue naevi on 
the back in tuberous sclerosis complex.  
 shingles (L  cingulum — girdle, belt):  colloquial 
term for herpes zoster.  
 Sister Joseph ’ s nodule:  umbilical metastasis 
from intra - abdominal neoplasm. Named after Sister 
Mary Joseph who worked with Dr William James 
Mayo and is said to have pointed out its signiﬁ cance 
to him.  
 squame (L  squama — a scale of a ﬁ sh or 
serpent):  a scale. 
 sycosis (Gk  sykon — a ﬁ g):  deep inﬂ ammation of 
hair follicles. As in sycosis barbae — inﬂ ammation of 
the beard area.  
 telangiectasia (telangiectasis) (Gk  telos — end, 
 angeion — vessel — and  ektasis — dilatation):  
dilatation of small blood vessels. 
 tinea (L  tinea — a gnawing worm):  a 
dermatophyte fungal infection.  
 trich - , tricho - (Gk  trichos — hair):  relating to 
hair. As in trichology.  

Glossary of dermatological terms  211
 trichotillomania:  compulsive hair pulling. 
 trichophytid:  a rash provoked by an 
immunological response to a fungal infection, e.g. 
pompholyx on the hands provoked by a severe 
inﬂ ammatory fungal infection on the foot. 
 verruca:  in common use referring to a plantar wart, 
but in fact a term applicable to a wart at any site. 
 weal:  this is the correct spelling. A transient, raised, 
itchy lesion occurring in urticaria and 
dermographism. 
 whitlow:  infection of ﬁ nger pulp. As in herpetic 
whitlow. 
 Wickham ’ s striae:  pattern of lace - like 
greyish - white lines on the surface of lesions of 
lichen planus. Louis Wickham was a French 
dermatologist. 
 Wood ’ s light:  a source of ﬁ ltered ultraviolet light 
that is used to demonstrate ﬂ uorescence caused by 
certain organisms, e.g.  Microsporum canis [tinea 
capitis] (yellow – green) and  Corynebacterium 
minutissimum  [erythrasma] (coral pink).  
 xerosis (Gk  xeros — dry):  dryness. 

Index
Page numbers in italics indicate illustrations that are not on the same page as the relevant text.
alginate dressings, for leg ulcers 144
alitretinoin (9-cis-retinoic acid) 68, 186
allergens, characteristic patterns 64
allergic contact dermatitis 62–63, 204
and anogenital pruritus 159
to nickel 62
to topical medication 185
allopurinol, cutaneous reaction 176
alopecia
androgenetic 116, 117
scarring (cicatricial) 118, 119
alopecia areata 116, 117–118, 119, 120, 
170, 205
alopecia neoplastica 167
alopecia totalis 116, 118, 120
alopecia universalis 118, 119
aminoglycosides, cutaneous reaction 176
amiodarone, pigmentary changes 179
amorolﬁ ne nail lacquer 35
amoxicillin (amoxycillin) 50
amphotericin 36
ampicillin, cutaneous reaction 176
amyloidosis 166
anagen 5–6
anaphylaxis, drug-induced 176, 190
Anderson–Fabry disease 109
androgenic drugs 119
cutaneous reactions 178, 180
angels’ kisses 99
angioedema 130–132, 190, 205
angiokeratoma corporis diffusum 109
angioma 84
childhood 100–101
angiomatosis
bacillary 169
neonatal or miliary 101
angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, 
cutaneous reactions 156, 190
angular cheilitis 36
ankle–brachial pressure index 143
anorexia nervosa 119
antiandrogens 58, 117, 119
antibiotics 56, 57, 58, 156, 189, 190
cutaneous reactions 63, 175, 176
anticoagulants 117
anticonvulsants 151
antidepressants 171, 172, 174
antifungals 34–35, 58, 159
antihistamines 63, 66, 132, 160, 161, 190
cutaneous reactions 176
acantholysis 124
acanthosis nigricans 114, 162, 163, 168
aciclovir 27, 28, 29, 190
acitretin 76, 77, 186
acne
assessment and management 57
common myths 57
drug-induced 57–58, 180
infantile/juvenile 51–52
late-onset 52
oil-induced 58
pathogenesis 54–55
psychological impact 52
scarring 54, 56
secondary 51, 57–58
surgical intervention 56
systemic symptoms 54
treatment 55–56
types 51
acne conglobata 53
acne excoriée (des jeunes ﬁ lles) 58, 174
acne fulminans 54, 56
acne keloidalis 58
acne vulgaris 51–57
acneiform disorders 58–59
drug-induced 178
acral melanoma 91, 93
acrochordons 82–83
acrodermatitis continua 72
acrodermatitis enteropathica 109
actinic dermatitis, chronic 140
actinic prurigo 139–140
actinic (solar) keratoses 88
active ingredient, in topical preparations 181
adalimumab 187
adapalene 56, 57, 186
Addison’s disease 114, 164
adhesive plasters, allergic contact dermatitis 62
adrenal disease, cutaneous features 164
adrenaline (epinephrine) 132, 190
adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH), cutaneous 
reaction 178
Advanced Life Support (ALS) guidelines 190
AIDS patients
Kaposi’s sarcoma 94
mucocutaneous problems 169
nail disorders 32
seborrhoeic dermatitis 67
albinism 2, 111
alclometasone dipropionate (Modrasone), potency 183

Index  213
antimalarials 139, 149
cutaneous reactions 178, 180
antimicrobial peptides 8
antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCAs) 145, 
147
antinuclear antibodies (ANAs) 151
antiphospholipid syndrome 151
antipsoriatic drugs 134
antipsychotics 173
antipyretics 190
antiretroviral treatment, skin and nail problems 
169
antiseptics, topical 55, 56
antithyroid agents 117
antituberculous chemotherapy 22
antivirals 190
anxiety neurosis 160
APC gene 107
aplasia cutis 116
apocrine sweat glands 6
‘apple jelly’ nodules 22
arrector pili muscle 5
arthropathic psoriasis 77–78
arthropods 124
aspirin
contraindicated in urticaria 131, 132
cutaneous reaction 176, 190
astringents 55, 56
athlete’s foot see tinea pedis
atopy 65
see also eczema, atopic
ATP2A2 gene 104
atrophie blanche 143
Auspitz’s sign 70
azathioprine 76, 126, 127, 140, 153, 165, 187
azelaic acid 112
bacterial infections 19–24
secondary 60, 65, 67
balanitis, circinate 165
balanitis xerotica obliterans 136–137
balanoposthitis 37, 162
barbiturates, cutaneous reactions 123, 176, 178, 179, 
180
Bartonella henselae 169
basal cell carcinoma 86–88, 205
multiple 106
basal cell naevus syndrome 106
basal cell papillomas 82
basal layer, anatomy 1, 2
basement membrane zone 3–4
bases, for topical preparations 181–182
Bazin’s disease 22
Beau’s lines 7, 120
Becker’s naevus 95
bed bugs (Cimex lectularius) 49
Behçet’s disease 147
belle indifference 171
benign tumours
dermal 83–85
epidermal 82–83
melanocytic 83
benzylbenzoate emulsion 42
benzoyl peroxide 55, 56, 57
benzylpenicillin 19
beta-blockers, cutaneous reaction 178
beta-carotene see carotene
betamethasone valerate (Betnovate) 183, 186
biliary cirrhosis, primary 160
bilirubin 110, 113
biologicals see monoclonal antibodies
biopsy 79, 119
incisional/excisional 16–17, 79
punch 17
Birbeck granules 3
bird ﬂ eas 49
bird mites 50
birthmarks 95
blackheads see comedones
bleomycin 156
blistering
drug-induced 123, 124, 178–179
subepidermal 4, 203
blistering diseases, inherited 4
blue naevus 97, 99
body dysmorphic disorder 172
body piercings 62
boils see furunculosis
Borrelia burgdorferi 50
bosentan 156
Bowen’s disease 88–89, 204
bradykinin 190
Breslow thickness 92, 93
bromhidrosis 5
Bruch’s membrane 108
buccal mucosal candidiasis 36
bullae
causes 123–129
deﬁ nition 13, 15
bullous disorders 123–129
burns, blistering 124
Bywaters’ lesions 165
cachexia 119
cadherins 3
calcineurin inhibitors 118, 154, 185
calcinosis 154, 155
calcipotriol 186
calcitriol 186
calcium-channel blockers 156
Campbell de Morgan spot 84
Candida albicans
hyphae 30
imidazole therapy 36
normal and pathological occurrence 36
superinfection 185

214  Index
candidiasis 36–38, 159, 162, 169
canities 6
capillary leak syndrome 188
capillary naevus
deep 99–100
superﬁ cial 99
captopril, cutaneous reaction 176
carbuncle 20, 162
carcinoid syndrome 169
carcinoma erysipeloides 168
cardiac involvement, in systemic sclerosis 156
career advice 61
carotene 113, 114, 179
Casal’s necklace 165
carpet-tack (tin-tack) sign 149
catagen 5–6
cathelcidins 8
cattle ringworm 33, 35
cefotaxime 50
ceftriaxone 50
cell envelope, corniﬁ ed 2
cellulitis 19–20
cephalosporins, cutaneous reaction 176
cheiroarthropathy 162, 163
chickenpox 28
chilblains 147–148
children
acne 56
adverse effects of steroids 183
angiomas 100–101
growth retardation 185
scabies 42
Chinese herbal therapy, for eczema 67
chloasma (melasma) 113, 114, 179, 186
chloracne 58
chlorambucil 126, 127
chloroquine, pigmentary changes 179
chlorphenamine 190
chlorpromazine, cutaneous reactions 151, 179
cholestasis 160
cholinergic urticaria 131
chondrodermatitis nodularis helicis 85
chromium compounds, allergic contact dermatitis 63
chromosomal abnormalities 109
ciclosporin (cyclosporin) 66, 67, 76, 77, 132, 136, 165, 
187, 188
cutaneous reactions 119
cimetidine 132
cutaneous reaction 176
cirrhosis, primary biliary 160
clindamycin 56
clippings, investigation 15–16
clobetasol propionate (Dermovate) 137
potency 183
clobetasone butyrate (Eumovate), potency 183
clofazimine 24, 165
cutaneous reactions 179
clothing lice (Pediculus humanus) 46–47, 202
clotrimazole 34
coal tar see tar preparations
cognitive–behavioural therapy 172
colchicine 145
cold sores 27
collodion baby 103, 104
colophony, allergic contact dermatitis 62
comedones 52–53
compression bandaging/hosiery 143, 144
condylomata acuminata see warts, genital
connective tissue disorders 146, 149–156
connective tissue naevi 101
Cornelia de Lange syndrome 119
corneocytes 2
corticosteroids see systemic steroids; topical steroids
Corynebacterium minutissimum 21
cosmetic camouﬂ age 99, 112, 150
costume jewellery 62
cotrimoxazole, cutaneous reaction 178
Coxsackie virus 26
crab lice (Pthirus pubis) 47–48
creams 181–182
CREST syndrome 154
Crohn’s disease, mucocutaneous features 165
crotamiton/hydrocortisone 42
Crowe’s sign 106
crust/deﬁ nition 13
cryotherapy
for actinic (solar) keratoses 88
for chondrodermatitis nodularis helicis 85
for granuloma annulare 163
for molluscum contagiosum 26
for myxoid cyst 122
for tumours 80–81
for warts 24, 25
curettage and/or cautery 79–80
Cushing’s syndrome 164
iatrogenic 185
cutaneous drug reactions 175–180
cuticle 6–7
cutting ﬂ uid 61
cyclophosphamide 126, 153, 156
cyproterone acetate 56, 57, 119
cytokines 8, 69, 145
cytotoxic agents 76, 117, 119
danazol 132, 180
dapsone 24, 56, 57, 128, 145, 178
Darier’s disease 104, 105, 120, 141, 189
defensins 8
degreasing agents 68
delusional beliefs 172–173
demethylchlortetracycline 179
depression 171, 172
dermal papillae 4, 7
dermatitis see mainly eczema
dermatitis artefacta 170–172
dermatitis herpetiformis 127–128, 129

Index  215
dermatitis, perioral 59, 184–185, 205
dermatoﬁ broma 83–84
dermatoﬁ brosarcoma protuberans 93
dermatoglyphics 7, 15
dermatological disease
assessment 12
bullous reactions 124
diagnosis 10–18
drug-induced exacerbation 180
history 11, 171
light-induced 138–141
psychological factors 170–174
stigmatizing 170
treatment 181–187
dermatological non-disease 172
dermatological pathomimicry 172
dermatology, nomenclature and terminology 10–11, 
13
dermatomyositis 151–153, 168
dermatophyte fungi, nomenclature 30
dermatophyte infections 30–35
dermis
anatomy 7
benign tumours 83–85
malignant tumours 93–94
dermographism 131
desloratadine 132
desmosomes 3
detergents 12, 61, 161
diabetes 159, 160, 162–163
diagnosis, deﬁ nition 10
diascopy 12, 22
diclofenac sodium 88
diet, high ﬁ bre 159
dietary manipulation 66
diﬂ ucortolone valerate (Nerisone Forte), potency 183
dihydrofolate reductase 186–187
dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) 181
dimeticone 46
diphencyprone 118
discoid lupus erythematosus 116, 119, 149–150
dithranol (anthralin) 75, 77
DNA, repair 8
Doppler sonography 143, 144
Down’s syndrome, associated dermatological problems 
43, 109
doxycycline 23, 50, 57
drugs, cutaneous reactions 175–180
dysmorphophobia 172
dysphagia 152, 154
ear, painful nodule see chondrodermatitis nodularis 
helicis
eccrine sweat glands 4–5
econazole 34
ectodermal dysplasias 107, 116, 120
ectoparasite infections 40–50
psychological effects 170
eczema 60–68, 204
asteatotic 68
atopic 65–67, 170, 189, 203, 204
classiﬁ cation 60
clinical features 60
discoid 67
drug-induced 176
endogenous 60, 65–68
exogenous 60, 61–65
nail disorders 120
photosensitive 140
varicose 67, 143
eczema craquelé 68, 161
eczema herpeticum 28, 189–190
efalizumab 76
Ehlers–Danlos syndrome 105
elderly people
adverse effects of topical steroids 183
asteatotic eczema 68
cellulitis 19
pruritus 161
scabies in residential/care homes 40, 43, 44
emergency dermatology 188–190
emollients 66, 68, 75, 77, 103, 161, 189
endocrine disease 119
and acne 51, 52, 57
cutaneous features 162–163
epidermal appendages 4–7
epidermal cysts 83
epidermal naevus 95
epidermal transit time 1, 69
epidermis
anatomy 1–7
benign tumours 82–83
dysplastic/malignant tumours 86–91
epidermoid cysts 83
epidermolysis bullosa 124
dystrophic 4, 120
epidermolysis bullosa simplex, mutation 4
Epidermophyton 30
epiloia see tuberous sclerosis complex
Epstein–Barr virus 169
equestrian cold panniculitis 148
erysipelas 19
erythema 150, 151, 152
palmar 165, 167
erythema ab igne (‘granny’s tartan’) 164
erythema gyratum repens 169
erythema induratum 22
erythema marginatum 165
erythema multiforme 28, 132–133, 202
bullous 129
drug-induced 178
erythema nodosum 146, 147, 166, 167, 203
erythrasma 15, 21–22
erythroderma 9, 133–134, 203
drug-induced 176
emergency management 188–189

216  Index
erythromycin 20, 21, 22, 56, 57, 66, 67, 169
erythroplasia of Queyrat 88
etanercept 76, 187
ethylenediamine, cutaneous reaction 176
eumelanins 6
examination 12–13
exanthematic eruptions, drug-induced 176, 177
exclamation mark hairs 117, 118
excoriation 13, 157, 174
exfoliative dermatitis see erythroderma
facial hair, crab lice 47, 48
famciclovir 29
family history 11
fexofenadine 132
ﬁ brin cuff theory 142
ﬁ broblasts 7
ﬁ laggrin 2, 102
ﬁ nasteride 117
ﬁ ngernails see nails
ﬁ ngerprints 7
ﬁ sh tank granuloma 23
ﬁ xed drug eruptions 124, 176–178
ﬂ eas 48–49
ﬂ ucloxacillin 20, 21, 66, 67
ﬂ udroxycortide (Haelan), potency 183
ﬂ uocinolone acetonide (Synalar), potency 183
ﬂ uocinonide (Metosyn), potency 183
ﬂ uorinated topical steroids 149, 183, 184
5-ﬂ uorouracil 88
folic acid 186, 187
folie à deux 171, 172
folliculitis 20
formication 172
freckles (ephelides) 83
freeze-branding 113
friction, blistering 124
frusemide (furosemide), blistering 123
fungal infections 30–39, 120
fungal mycelium 30, 34, 35
fungi, anthropophilic and zoophilic 30
furunculosis 20
fusidic acid 22
gabapentin 161
Gardner’s syndrome 106–107
gastrointestinal involvement, in systemic sclerosis 154
gels 181, 182
gentamicin, cutaneous reaction 176
giant cell arteritis 145, 147
giant hogweed 64, 140
glaucoma, congenital 99
gloves and socks, electrically heated 156
gluten-sensitive enteropathy 127, 128
gold, cutaneous reaction 176, 178
Gorlin’s syndrome 106
Gottron’s papules 151
gout 164
granular layer 3
granuloma, pyogenic 84, 85
granuloma annulare 163, 164, 204
griseofulvin 34–35, 39, 179
growth retardation, in children 185
Günther’s disease 140
haemangiectatic hypertrophy 99
haemangioma, cavernous 100
haematological disorders 144, 159, 160
haemochromatosis 114, 167
haemoglobin 110
Haemophilus inﬂ uenzae 19
haemorrhoids 159
haemosiderin 143
hair
abnormalities 115–119
colour 6, 116
distribution, structure, and growth 5–6
drug-induced abnormalities 178
psychological importance 115
hair dye dermatitis 63
hair follicles 5
hair loss 116–119
drug-induced 116, 117, 119
partial 32, 34
hairdressers, occupational irritant dermatitis 61
hairy leukoplakia, in AIDS patients 169
hand, foot and mouth disease 26–27
hands, involvement in dermatomyositis 151, 152
Hansen’s disease see leprosy
head lice (Pediculus capitis) 44–46
heliotrope erythema 151, 152
hemidesmosomes 3–4
Henoch–Schönlein purpura 145–146
hepatic involvement, in systemic sclerosis 156
hepatitis
and generalized pruritus 160
urticarial eruptions 132
hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia 106
herpes, genital 27
herpes gladiatorum 27
herpes labialis 27
herpes (pemphigoid) gestationis 138
herpes simplex 27–28, 133, 141, 169
disseminated 189–190
herpes zoster 28, 29, 169
herpesvirus hominis (HSV) 27
hidradenitis suppurativa 51, 58
highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART), skin and 
nail problems 169
hirsutism 57, 117, 119
histamine 157, 190
Hodgkin’s disease, and generalized pruritus 160
horn, deﬁ nition 13
household pets
source of ﬂ eas 48–49
source of mites 50

Index  217
Hughes’ syndrome 151
human herpesvirus type 8 (HHV-8) 169
human papillomavirus (HPV) 24
Hutchinson’s malignant freckle see lentigo maligna
hydantoins 119
hydralazine, cutaneous reaction 151, 179
hydrocolloid dressings, for leg ulcers 144
hydrocortisone 36, 38, 67, 183, 185
hydrocortisone butyrate (Locoid), potency 183
hydrocortisone with urea (Alphaderm), potency 183
hydrogel dressings, for leg ulcers 144
hydroquinone 112, 113
hydroxycarbamide 76
hydroxychloroquine 149
hydroxyzine 160
hypercalcaemia 186
hypercalciuria 186
hyperkeratosis, epidermolytic 103
hyperlipidaemia 165–166
hyperpigmentation 113–114, 143, 164, 168, 176, 186
hypersensitivity reactions 63, 175, 176
hyperthyroidism 164
hypertrichosis 119
hypertrichosis lanuginosa, acquired 169
hypnotics, cutaneous reactions 175
hypochromic naevi 111
hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia 107
hypopigmentation 111–113, 184
hypopituitarism 119
hypothyroidism 119, 163–164
ichthammol 66
ichthyoses 102–103
acquired 103, 168
autosomal dominant 102
ichthyosis vulgaris 102
ichthyosiform erythroderma 102–103
‘ide’ reactions 34
idoxuridine 181
imidazole 22, 36, 39
with hydrocortisone 36, 38, 67
imiquimod 88
immunocompromised individuals
cellulitis 19
crusted (Norwegian) scabies 43
herpes simplex 27
herpes zoster 28, 29
skin cancers 86
skin manfestations 169
see also AIDS patients
immunoﬂ uorescence 119, 125, 127, 128, 129, 149, 151
immunoglobulin, intravenous 188
immunomodulators, topical 66, 185
immunosuppressive agents 126, 146, 147, 151, 153, 187
impetigo 20–21, 205
incontinence 159
incontinentia pigmenti 109, 113
infants see children; neonates
infections, as side-effect of topical steroids 185
inﬂ ammatory bowel disease 165
inﬂ ammatory reaction, mechanism 8
inﬂ iximab 76, 187
inherited disorders 102–109
insect bites 124
insecticides 45
intermediate ﬁ laments 1
intertrigo 37–38
intralesional steroids, for alopecia 118
investigations, common 13
iodides, cutaneous reaction 123, 178
iron deﬁ ciency 116, 120, 159, 160
irritants 61
ischaemic ulcers 144
isomorphic phenomenon, in psoriasis 70
isoniazid, cutaneous reaction 151, 165, 179
isotretinoin (13-cis-retinoic acid) 56, 57, 58, 59, 186
itch 157–158
see also pruritus
itraconazole 34, 35, 36, 39
ivermectin 44
jeans stud, dermatitis 62, 63
juvenile plantar dermatosis 68
juvenile spring eruption 140
Kaposi’s sarcoma 94, 169
Kaposi’s varicelliform eruption 28, 104, 189–190
keloids 85–86
keratin 1
keratinization disorders 102, 103, 104, 120
keratinocytes 1, 110
keratoacanthoma 81, 83
keratoderma blennorrhagicum 78, 165
keratohyalin granules 2, 3
keratosis follicularis 104
keratosis pilaris 58
kerion 33, 34
ketoconazole 39, 67
Klinefelter’s syndrome, associated dermatological 
problems 109
Koebner phenomenon 70, 202
koilonychia 120
lamellar granules 3
lamellar ichthyosis 102–103
Langerhans’ cells 3, 8
lanolin, cutaneous reaction 176
lanugo hair 5
laser treatment
for deep capillary naevi 99
for tumours 81–82
for vascular lesions 106
latex, hypersensitivity response 63
lavender oil 46
leg ulcers 142–144
lentigines 83

218  Index
lentigo maligna 90, 91, 204
lentigo maligna melanoma 91, 92
LEOPARD syndrome 113
leprosy (Hansen’s disease) 23–24, 111, 112
leukaemia, cutaneous changes 169
leukocytoclastic vasculitis 145, 146
levocetirizine 132
lice see clothing lice; crab lice; head lice; pediculosis
lichen nitidus 136
lichen nuchae 158
lichen planus 116, 119, 120, 134–136
lichen planus-like eruptions, drug-induced 178
lichen sclerosus (et atrophicus) 112, 136–137
lichen scrofulosorum 22
lichen simplex chronicus 158–159
licheniﬁ cation 13, 60, 61, 65
lichenoid reactions 178
light-induced skin disease 138–141
lindane 45
linear IgA disease 128–129
lipoatrophy 162, 163
lipodermatosclerosis 142, 143
Lisch nodules 106
lithium, cutaneous reaction 178, 180
liver disease
chronic 114
and generalized pruritus 160
skin and nail changes 167
local anaesthetics, contact dermatitis 63
lotions 181, 182
lumps, doubtful 85
lupus erythematosus 141, 149–151
drug-induced 179
neonatal 151
see also discoid lupus erythematosus; systemic lupus 
erythematosus
lupus pernio 167
lupus vulgaris (cutaneous TB) 22, 116, 119
Lyme disease 50
lymecycline 57
lymphomas 94
maceration, deﬁ nition 13
machine-tool operators, occupational irritant 
dermatitis 61, 62
macrophages 7
macule, deﬁ nition 13, 14
Madura foot 35
Malassezia yeasts 15–16, 38, 39, 58, 67, 169
malathion 42, 43, 45
male-pattern balding 5
malignancy
common in albinism 111
cutaneous manifestations 167–169
and generalized pruritus 159, 160
indication 202
see also tumours
malignant melanoma 91, 92–93, 205
malignant tumours 86–94
dermal 93–94
epidermal 86–89
Marie–Unna alopecia 116
Marjolin’s ulcer 143
mast cell naevi 101
mast cells 7
melanin 2, 8, 110
melanocytes 2, 110
melanocytic naevus
acquired 96–97, 98–99
congenital 96
melanocytic tumours, dysplastic/malignant 91–93
melanosomes 2, 110
meningococcal septicaemia 189
mepacrine, pigmentary changes 179
metabolic disorders, scalp hair loss 116
metals
causing hyperpigmentation 113
skin deposits 178
metastases, cutaneous 94, 167–168
methotrexate 76, 77, 126, 153, 154, 186–187
metronidazole 59
miconazole 34, 36, 38, 58
Microsporum spp. 30, 33
milia 81, 83
miliaria 138
minocycline 23, 57, 165
cutaneous reactions 179
minoxidil 117, 119
mites (Cheyletiella) 50
Mohs’ surgery 88
moisturizers 112
moles 95
molluscum contagiosum 26, 204
Mongolian blue spot 96
monilethrix, scalp hair loss 116
moniliasis see candidiasis
monoclonal antibodies 8, 76, 126, 187
morphoea 153–154
morphoeic tumours 87, 88
mosaic plantar warts 24, 25
mossy bank anus 159
motor zoster 29
MRP6/ABCC6 genes 108
mupirocin 20, 21
musculoskeletal involvement
in dermatomyositis 152
in systemic sclerosis 156
mycetoma 35
mycobacterial infection 22–24
mycosis fungoides 94
myxoedema 160, 163, 164
myxoid cyst 122
naevi 95–101
classiﬁ cation 95, 96
congenital 96

Index  219
deﬁ nition 95
epithelial and ‘organoid’ 95
melanocytic 95–99
scalp hair loss 116
vascular 99–101
naevus, dysplastic 97
nails
abnormalities 119–122, 167, 203
in alopecia 118
in dermatomyositis 151, 152
fungal infections 31, 32, 33, 35
growth 7
ingrowing 121
in psoriasis 70, 71, 72, 77
structure 6–7
nalidixic acid 123, 124, 179
necrobiosis lipoidica 162, 163
necrolytic migratory erythema 168
necrotizing fasciitis 19, 189
neomycin 176
contact dermatitis 63
neonates
differential diagnosis of blistering 124
lupus erythematosus 151
see also collodion baby
neoplastic ulcers 144
nephrogenic systemic ﬁ brosis 156
nervous system involvement, in systemic sclerosis 
156
Netherton’s syndrome 105
nettlerash see urticaria
neurodermatitis 158–159
neuroﬁ bromatosis 106, 113
neuropathic ulcers 162, 163
neurotic excoriations 174
nickel dermatitis 62, 63
Nikolsky sign 12, 125, 129, 203
nits see head lice
nodular melanoma 91, 92
nodular vasculitis 145, 147
nodule, deﬁ nition 13, 14
non-bullous ichthyosiform erythroderma (NBIE) 
102
non-steroidal anti-inﬂ ammatory drugs
cutaneous reactions 175, 176, 190
methotrexate toxicity, risk of 187
nystatin 36
obsessive–compulsive habits 173–174
occupation/hobbies, importance in diagnosis 
11, 64
occupational contact dermatitis 64
occupational irritant dermatitis 61
Odland bodies 3
oedema
causes of bullae 124
periorbital 151, 152
simulated 170
oestrogens
exacerbate existing disease 180
and generalized pruritus 160
pigmentary changes 179
oily creams 181, 182
ointments 181, 182
olanzapine 173
onychogryphosis 120, 121
onycholysis 72, 120, 203
onychomycosis 32
ophthalmic zoster 29
opiate antagonists 161
opiates 160, 176
oral contraceptives, exacerbating existing disease 180
orf 26
Osler–Weber–Rendu disease 106
oxytetracycline 57, 185
Paget’s disease 89
palmoplantar endogenous eczema 67–68
palmoplantar keratoderma 104
palmoplantar pustulosis 72, 77
palpation 13
pancreatic malignancies, cutaneous manifestations 168
papular urticaria 48–50
papule, deﬁ nition 13, 14
papulonecrotic tuberculide 22
parabens, cutaneous reaction 176
parasitophobia see parasitosis, delusional
parasitosis, delusional 171, 172–173
paronychia
acute 121
chronic 36–37
paronychium, common disorders 121–122
pastes 181, 182
patch testing 17–18, 64, 65
patients
communication and compliance 182
expectations 12
preconceptions 12
reports of symptoms 11
pediculicides 47
pediculosis 44–48
pellagra 140, 165
pemphigoid 116, 119, 126–127, 205
pemphigus 124–126
paraneoplastic 169
pemphigus foliaceus 189
penicillins
for cellulitis 19
cutaneous reaction 175, 176, 179, 180
useless for acne 56
perchlorethylene 156
perléche see angular cheilitis
permethrin 42, 43
perniosis 147–148
personal hygiene 159
Peutz–Jeghers syndrome 106, 113

220  Index
phaeomelanins 6, 110
phenothiazines 160, 176, 179
phenoxymethylpenicillin (penicillin V) 20
phenylketonuria 111
phenytoin, cutaneous reaction 151, 176
phimosis 137
phosphorus sesquisulﬁ de, contact sensitivity 64
photodynamic therapy 81–82
photoonycholysis 179
photosensitivity see light-induced skin disease
phototoxic drug reactions 179
physiotherapy
for dermatomyositis 153
for morphoea 154
phytophotodermatitis 64, 140
pigmentary disorders 110–114
drug-induced 178, 179
PIIINP 76, 187
pilar cysts 83
pilosebaceous unit 5, 6
pili torti, scalp hair loss 116
pimecrolimus 66, 77, 185
pimozide 173
pituitary–adrenal axis, steroid side-effect 185
pityriasis alba 112
pityriasis amiantacea 72
pityriasis lichenoides 138
pityriasis rosea 72, 137–138
pityriasis rubra pilaris 138
pityriasis versicolor 38–39, 112
Pityrosporum, see also Malassezia yeasts
Pityrosporum folliculitis 58
plakins 3
plant dermatitis 64
plaque, deﬁ nition 13, 14
pollen vaccines and toxoids, cutaneous reaction 176
polyarteritis nodosa 145, 146–147
polycystic ovary syndrome 52, 57, 119
polycythaemia rubra vera, and generalized pruritus 
159, 160
polymorphic eruption of pregnancy 138, 139
polymorphic light eruption 139
polyvinyl chloride (PVC) see vinyl chloride disease
pompholyx, acute 67, 170
porphyria 140
drug-induced exacerbation 180
porphyria cutanea tarda 119, 129
port-wine mark see capillary naevus, deep
postherpetic neuralgia 28, 29
poststreptococcal acute glomerulonephritis 20
potassium permanganate 67
prednisolone 101, 126
pregnancy prevention protocol 56
pregnant or lactating women
acne treatment 56
pruritus 138, 160
rashes and related conditions 138, 139
scabies treatment 43
premature ageing syndromes 116
preservatives, cutaneous reaction 63, 176
pretibial myxoedema 119
prickle cell layer 2–3
prickly heat 138
primary irritant dermatitis 61, 62
primidone 151
Primula obconica, dermatitis 64
procainamide 151, 179
proﬁ laggrin 2
Propionibacterium acnes 55, 56
prostaglandins 157
proteinases 157
proton-pump inhibitors 156
prurigo 157, 158–159
pruritus 157–161, 167
anogenital 159
generalized 159–161, 168
of pregnancy 138
senile 161
and thyroid disease 164
pseudofolliculitis barbae 58
pseudopelade 116, 119
pseudoscleroderma 153, 156
pseudo-tumours 85–86
pseudoxanthoma elasticum 107–108
psoriasis 69–78, 204
in AIDS patients 169
and anogenital pruritus 159
brittle 73, 77
clinical features 70
clinical patterns 70–74
drug-induced 180, 185
erythrodermic 73–74, 77
ﬂ exural 71, 72–73, 77
guttate 71, 72, 77, 205
hair loss 116, 118
itch 71, 72, 73
light-exacerbated 141
nail involvement 70, 71, 72, 77, 120
pathology 69–70
plaque 70, 71, 77
prevalence 69
psychological factors 69, 170
pustular 74, 77, 185, 189
scalp 71–72, 77
treatments 8, 75–77, 203
triggers 69
psoriatic arthropathy 77–78
psychological factors
in pruritus 157, 158, 159, 160
in psoriasis 69
in skin disease 170–174
psychoses 172
monodelusional 160
monosymptomatic hypochondriacal 173
psychotherapy 172, 174
PTCH gene 106

Index  221
pterygium 120
Pulex irritans 48
pulmonary involvement, in systemic sclerosis 154
punch biopsy 17
purpura 169
anaphylactoid 145–146
pustular psoriasis 74, 77, 189
drug-induced 185
pustule, deﬁ nition 13, 15
PUVA therapy 66, 76, 77, 112, 139
pyoderma gangrenosum 165, 166, 168, 169, 202
pyrethroid insecticides 45
quality of life, assessing 11
quinidine, cutaneous reaction 176
radiotherapy 81, 89
contraindicated in Gorlin’s syndrome 106
ranitidine 132
rape-seed oil, contaminated 156
Rapunzel’s syndrome 173
Raynaud’s phenomenon 154, 156
Refsum’s disease 103
Reiter’s syndrome 78, 165
renal failure 114, 160
renal involvement, in systemic sclerosis 154
residential/care homes, scabies 40, 43, 44
rete ridges 4, 7
9-cis-retinoic acid see alitretinoin
13-cis-retinoic acid see isotretinoin
retinoids 55–56, 767, 103, 104, 117, 186
rheumatic diseases, cutaneous features 164–165
rhinophyma 59
rifampicin 24, 178
ringworm see tinea
risperidone 173
rituximab 126
rodent ulcer see basal cell carcinoma
rosacea 58–59, 141, 185
in SLE 150
rubber dermatitis 63
sacral zoster 28
salicyclic acid 24, 75, 77
salmon patches 99
sarcoidosis 167
sarcomas 93–94
scabicides 43–44
scabies 40–44, 202
crusted (Norwegian) scabies 43–44, 202
inappropriate steroid treatment 185
signs obscured by scratching 158
scalded skin syndrome 21, 190
scale, deﬁ nition 13
scalp
abnormal skin 118–119
hair loss 116–119
psoriasis 71–72, 77
scars
hypertrophic 157
from scratching 85–86
sclerodactyly 154
scleroderma 153–156
chemically induced 153
scrapings, investigation 15–16
scratch marks, accompanying eczema 60
scratching, secondary skin changes 157
scrofuloderma 22
scrumpox 27
scurvy 165
sebaceous glands 6
sebaceous naevus 95
sebopsoriasis 73
seborrhoeic dermatitis 66, 67, 116, 118, 119
seborrhoeic keratoses 82
sebum 6, 8, 52, 55
Secretan’s syndrome 170
selenium sulﬁ de shampoo (Selsun) 38
sepsis syndrome 189
septicaemia, meningococcal 189
shaving rash 58
shingles see herpes zoster
shoes and socks, synthetic materials 68
silver, skin deposits 178
Sister Joseph’s nodule 168
Sjögren–Larsson syndrome 103
Sjögren’s syndrome 146
skin
biopsy 16–17
colour 110
dysplastic changes 86
functions 8–9
greasy 52
occlusion with polythene 181
sensory reception 9
structure 1–7
and systemic disease 159, 162–169
thermoregulatory function 8–9
thinning 183–184
types 110
skin disease see dermatological disease
skin lesions
artefactual 170–171
assessment 12
types and characteristics 13, 14–15
skin lightening creams 112
skin tags 82–83, 159, 165
skin tumours see malignancy; tumours
soaps see detergents
spider naevus 167
spina biﬁ da occulta 119
Spitz naevus 97
spottiness see acne
squamous cell carcinoma
in situ 88–89
invasive 89–91

222  Index
stanozolol 180
staphylococcal infection 20–22
steroid rosacea 185
steroid-sparing agents 126
steroid sulfatase 102
steroids see mainly systemic steroids; topical steroids
Stevens–Johnson syndrome 120, 129, 133, 188
Still’s disease 164
stork marks 99
stratum corneum 1, 2, 3, 8, 68, 181
strawberry naevus 100
streptococcal infection 19–20
stress see psychological factors
Sturge–Weber syndrome 99
subacute cutaneous lupus erythematosus 149, 
151
suicide risk 172
sulconazole 34
sulfamethoxazole 187
sulfamethoxypyridazine 128
sulfapyridine 128
sulfonamides, cutaneous reactions 123, 175, 176, 178, 
179, 180
sulfones 128
sulfonylureas, cutaneous reactions 176, 178
sulfur 55, 56
sun exposure 89, 92, 93, 104, 111, 138–139, 179
sun protection factor (SPF) 139
sunscreens 93, 112, 139, 140, 149, 151
superﬁ cial spreading melanoma 91, 92
surgical intervention, for acne 56
Sutton’s halo naevus 97, 98, 112
sweat glands, anatomy 4–5
Sweet’s disease 169
swimming pool granuloma 23
symptoms, patients’ reports 11
syphilis, secondary 116
systemic disease, skin involvement 132, 159, 
162–169
systemic ﬁ brosis, nephrogenic 156
systemic lupus erythematosus 116, 146, 149, 
150–151
drug-induced 151, 180
systemic medicaments 11
systemic sclerosis 153, 154–156, 203
systemic steroids
for acne 56, 57
blanket use contraindicated in erythroderma 189
cutaneous reactions 58, 73, 119
for exfoliative dermatitis 134
immunosuppressive 43
for lichen planus 136
for pemphigoid 127
for polyarteritis nodosa 147
for psoriasis 76
for pyoderma gangrenosum 165
for SLE 151
for small vessel vasculitis 146
for Stevens–Johnson syndrome 132
for urticaria 132
systemic therapy 186–188
T-cell activation 8
tacalcitol 186
tacrolimus 66, 77, 185
tar preparations 66, 75, 77
tazarotene 76, 186
tea-tree oil, for head lice 46
telogen 5–6, 116
temperature regulation 8–9
temporal arteritis 145, 147
terbinaﬁ ne 34, 35, 39
terminal differentiation 1, 2
terminal hair 5
Terry’s nails 167
tetracyclines 56, 57, 59
cutaneous reactions 178, 179
thallium 117
thiazides, cutaneous reactions 176, 178, 179
thiopurine methyltransferase (TPMT) 187
thiouracil 117
thrombophlebitis migrans 168
thrush see candidiasis
thyroid disease
cutaneous features 163–164
and generalized pruritus 160
nail disorders 120
scalp hair loss 116
thyrotoxicosis 160
ticks 50
tinea 204
tinea capitis (ringworm) 32–33, 34, 35, 116, 118
tinea corporis 31, 32
tinea cruris 31
tinea incognito 33, 185, 205
tinea manuum 31, 32
tinea pedis 30–31, 204, 205
tinea unguium 32, 33
toenails see nails
topical medicaments 11
allergic contact dermatitis 63, 176, 177
cutaneous reaction 176
preparations 181
topical steroids
abuse 59
adverse effects 183–185, 202
for atopic eczema 66
cessation in Kaposi’s varicelliform eruption 190
choice of preparation 183
contact allergy 63
cutaneous reactions 57, 59, 73, 75, 176, 178, 
180, 185
for dermatomyositis 153
for discoid lupus erythematosus 149
for eczema 65, 66, 67, 68
for erythema 189

Index  223
ﬂ uorinated 149, 183, 184
for generalized pruritus 160
ineffective 68, 161, 162
for lichen planus 136
for lichen sclerosus 137
for lichen simplex chronicus and prurigo 159
for morphoea 154
for perineal irritation 159
for pityriasis alba 112
for pityriasis rosea 138
potency 183
for psoriasis 75, 77
quantity to prescribe 182–183
for seborrhoeic dermatitis 67
skin thinning 183–184
for sunburn 139
systemic effects in children 183
for tinea incognito 33
for varicose eczema 143
for vitiligo 112
topical therapy
demands on the patient 182
quantities prescribed 182–183
toxic epidermal necrolysis 129, 188
trachyonychia 120
traction alopecia 116, 118
tranquillizers, cutaneous reactions 175
triamcinolone 149, 163
trichilemmal cysts 83
trichlorethylene 156
Trichophyton spp. 30, 32
trichotillomania 116, 118, 173
triclosan 20
trigeminal trophic syndrome 119
trigeminal zoster 29
trimethoprim 56, 187
tripe palms 168
tuberculides 22
tuberculoid leprosy 112
tuberculosis, cutaneous 22
tuberous sclerosis 101
tuberous sclerosis complex 105–106, 111, 202
tumour necrosis factor (TNF) antagonists 187
tumours
classiﬁ cation 79, 80
extension from deeper tissues 94
incidence increasing 79, 86
surgical removal or biopsy 79
treatment 79–82
virilizing 119
see also malignancy
Turner’s syndrome, associated dermatological problems 
109
tyrosinase 111
Tzanck preparation 16
ulcer, deﬁ nition 13, 15
ulcerative colitis, mucocutaneous features 165
ultraviolet light treatment
for eczema 66
for generalized pruritus 161
for morphoea 154
for psoriasis 76, 77
ultraviolet radiation
response to 111
unwanted skin changes 138–139
Umbelliferae, phytophotodermatitis 64
Unguentum Cocois Co. 77
urea 103, 181
urticaria 130–132, 190
drug-induced 176
urticaria pigmentosa 101, 113, 132
urticarial vasculitis 145, 146
valaciclovir 29
varicella-zoster virus 28
varicose veins 142
vascular disorders 142–148
vascular malformations 99–101
vasculitic lesions, in rheumatoid arthritis 165
vasculitic ulcers 144
vasculitis 144–147, 203
drug-induced 145, 146, 176
vellus hair 5, 169
venous hypertension 142, 202
venous ulcers 142–144
verruca, popular usage 24
vesicle, deﬁ nition 13, 14
vinyl chloride disease 156
viral infections 24–29
vitamin A derivatives see retinoids
vitamin D (cholecalciferol) 9
vitamin D analogues 76, 77, 154, 186
vitamin deﬁ ciency 165
vitiligo 111–112, 164
von Recklinghausen’s disease 106, 107
vulvovaginitis 37, 162
Wade–Fite stain 23
wart paints 24, 25
warts 24–26
common 24, 25
genital 25
perianal, in AIDS patients 169
periungual 121
plane 25, 26
plantar 24–25
warty tuberculosis 22
washboard nails 120, 121
washing powder see detergent
weals 13, 15, 130
Wegener’s granulomatosis 145, 147
werewolf legend 140
wet-wrap technique 66
whitlow, herpetic 27
Wickham’s striae 134

224  Index
women
scalp hair loss 117
see also pregnant or lactating women
Wood’s light 15
X-linked recessive ichthyosis 102
xanthelasma 166, 167
xanthomas 162, 163, 165–166, 167
xeroderma pigmentosum 8, 108–109, 140
XYY syndrome, associated dermatological problems 
109
yellow nail syndrome 120
zinc oxide 66
zinc supplements 109
UPLOADED BY [STORMRG]

