STAR DRIVER
A Novel by
Lee Correy
A Del Rey Book
BALLANTINE BOOKS    •    NEW YORK   

TO: 
THE REST OF THE CAT PACK:
W. O. Davis
E. L. Victory
S. A. Korff
J. W. Campbell
H. M. Coanda

Chapter One
"What do you mean, my project's been canceled?"
"Just that,  Mike.  The money didn't  come  through. NASA  has  been  cut back  pretty  severely."  Dr.
Albert Halstead didn't look at me as he spoke, but averted bis eyes as he fumbled with his ever-present
pipe. "We've all been expecting it, and I'm sure it must come as no surprise to you . . ."
"It sure as hell does!" I didn't return to the chair I had been sitting in, but continued to pace in front of
his desk. "How long have I been on staff here at Lowell? Three years, right? How  many Mars  papers
have I published? Seven, right? Is NASA unhappy with my work? Has my research been trivial? Is my
research no longer relevant? . . ."
"Mike, please sit down. It isn't that at all." Halstead wasn't a man to become  emotional, but I could
see that he was upset right then. He acted as though he didn't relish this meeting. "We've been hit with a
real crunch here. The Lowell trust funds don't begin to cover the operating expenses these days. And the
NASA funds just aren't  there  any more.  So  I'm afraid there's  more  to  it than just your project  being
canceled, Mike. I'm sorry to say that I must ask you to take a temporary leave of absence . . ."
That was certainly a civilized way of telling me that I was fired. I just stopped dead in my tracks.
"Mike, I truly regret this," Halstead went on, still fumbling absentmindedly with his pipe.  "I'm certain
that it isn't permanent . . .  at least as far as I am con-cerned . . ."
What could I say? I sat down, tore my eyes away from Halstead's nervous hands, and stared out the
win-dow at the ponderosas surrounding the building.
"I've asked the business office to make out a check for an extra  month's salary to  sort  of help
you along . . ."
I don't remember  too  much more  about  that  meet-ing,  just platitudes  and  regrets  and  embarrassed
com-ments from both of us. I walked out into the afternoon sunshine and didn't even look  back  at  the
domed build-ing that had once been a shrine to me.
I stopped in the driveway and took a deep breath. Well, Mike Call, I told myself, you may now be a
slightly unemployed astronomer, but there must be work around here somewhere for an astronomer and
a  teacher.  I  was  still  a  commercial  pilot.  Surely  I  could  find  temporary  work  as  a  flight  instructor,
clenching my teeth while some student wallowed around the sky in a Cessna 152.
But, damn! Having to leave Lowell Observatory chewed at my insides! I was just beginning to get a
handle on Martian meteorology, the surface  wind pat-terns,  and  the genesis factors  for the great  dust
storms. I'd have to leave that work now—and I hate incom-plete work with loose ends hanging out all
over it like festoons of moss.
I didn't need to get very much out of my office. My programmable  calculator  would come  in handy
what-ever I did. But the drawings, the photographs, the Mars globe, and other paraphernalia that had to
do with my former work were useless. I could replace them later if and when I got into astronomy again.
I didn't even have the usual mementos that I would care to take with me.
I  have  always  operated  with  the  philosophy  that  I  should  be  prepared  to  abandon  my  personal
belongings at any time, so I've never collected much. When I was  flying as  an agricultural pilot—what
you might call a "crop duster"—I lived with whatever clothing and per-sonal belongings would fit into a
small bag that would, in turn, fit under the pilot's seat in a Grumman Ag Cat or a Piper Pawnee. I have
never lost that habit.

I left my office without closing the door. I didn't even say good-bye to Chick and my colleagues. Most
of them were still in bed because they were scheduled on the various instruments that night. Well, they'd
find out about me tomorrow, if they were still on the staff then themselves.
I began to lay some plans as I drove down Mars Hill in the White Whale, a four-wheel-drive Travelall
that I had coaxed up that steep road on many a snowy night.
First of all, there are more astronomers and observa-tories in the state of Arizona than anywhere else
in the  world.  When  I  got  to  my  apartment,  it  took  only  one  telephone  call  to  the  nearby  Naval
Observatory to learn that they, too, were in the midst of a "reduction in force." But Clive Thomas told
me that things looked  better  down  at  Kitt  Peak  and  suggested  that  I  call  Dr.  Brad  Johnson  at  the
University of Arizona.
"Hell, Mike, I didn't think that you'd be one of those caught in the cut-back at Lowell," Brad Johnson
said after I'd gotten him on the phone. "Listen, when could you come down for a chat? I don't know if
there's any-thing here, but it might not hurt to talk about it."
"Can you meet me in about two and a half hours?"
"What? Mike, it's two hundred and fifty miles down here from Flagstaff! The cops have radar out all
over interstates Seventeen and Ten!"
"Not at ten thousand feet!"
"Can you get an airline reservation that fast?"
"I've got my own airliner. Can you pick me up at Tucson International?"
Ten minutes later, I was at Pulliam Field undoing the tie-down  chains on Piper  Cherokee  N1422T,
affec-tionately known as Two To Tango. I had picked her up four years ago when I was still an ag pilot
and had managed to get a good deal because her former owner had folded her nose gear in a cornfield
outside of Nor-folk, Nebraska. I also have my airframe and power-plant mechanic's license, so with that
A&P ticket  I put her back  together,  put  a  big  180-horsepower  engine  in  her,  fitted  her  out  for
instrument flight, and had a $30,000 airplane to call my own for less than half that sum. She was my
personal magic carpet.
Sure,  I know  that my astronomical  astronomer's  sal-ary  of $15,000  per  year  doesn't  buy  a  fancy
airplane, but I had made good money as an ag pilot.
Brad picked me up at the base of the tower at Tuc-son and took me home for supper. We didn't say
too much during the drive to his house.
Ginny Johnson  was  not  only  a  computer  program-mer,  but  she  was  also  a  great  cook.  "Kitchen
chemis-try," Brad called it, which was a fair statement because Ginny also had a degree in chemistry.
It wasn't until after supper that the subject of my situation came up.
"I did some checking around after you called," Brad began. "I've got a certain amount of clout with the
de-partment head, and we're somewhat short-handed. But there is one big problem . . ."
I sighed because I had run into it before. In fact, I think it was one of the reasons why I was one of the
first to  go at  Lowell. "Let me guess,  Brad.  It  is because  I am Mike  Call, B.S.,  M.S.,  but  no  Ph.D.
Right?"
"That's the problem," Brad admitted. "To teach at the university level in astronomy today, a doctorate
is mandatory.  Without it, a  person  might  become  an  asso-ciate  professor  after  twenty  years  and  a
Nobel  Prize.  But he would never  make  it to  full  professorship  be-cause  of  all  the  new  astronomers
getting their Ph.D. un-ion cards these days."
Ginny Johnson, who is usually very quiet, spoke up at this point as she loaded the last of the supper
dishes into the dishwasher.  "Mike, why don't  you try for the astronaut  corps?  NASA  is  hiring  some

again. Seems to me that you'd be a natural astronaut."
That really struck a sensitive spot with me. The only reason I have maintained a  current  commercial
pilot license with instrument rating, a current first class med-ical certificate, and a certified flight instructor
(Instru-ment) rating is that I really wanted to be an astronaut. I'd make a good astronaut because I stand
5-foot-4 in my stockinged feet and weigh almost 125 wringing wet.
There was only one factor that was keeping me out of NASA  astronaut  corps:  I didn't  have 1,000
hours of  flight  time  in  high-performance  jet  aircraft—just  4,500  hours  of  flying  aircraft  with  big  old
propellers in front, sometimes inches above  the ground or  the telephone  wires at  the end  of the field.
Those 4,500 hours don't count, not a single one.
When I didn't say anything in reply, Brad spoke up, "What do you know about electronics, Mike? I
need an electronics engineer up at Kitt Peak."
"Brad, I used to hire technicians to handle my own electronic telescope control equipment at Lowell."
I was so rusty that I really didn't know what was going on in modern electronics technology any more.
"I've been an R&D type when it comes to electronics. The only place I really like to get my hands dirty is
on air-planes . . ."
"Brad, how about Bill Osbourne?" Ginny piped up. "Didn't he tell you that he was thinking of hiring a
pilot-astronomer one of these days?"
The astronomer scratched his head. "When did Wild Bill tell us that?"
"Don't you remember? At the AIAA meeting at JPL last May."
"Oh, yes!" Johnson brightened. "But as I recall, he was a little vague about it."
"We were all a little vague at that WRT party."
"You're right. It was a little drunk out that night."
"Why don't you give him Bill's telephone number, dear? Mike could call him tomorrow and find
out . . ."
"Excuse me," I interrupted, "but who is Bill Os-bourne? I thought I knew everybody in the astronomy
field."
"Don't tell me you never met Wild Bill Osbourne?"  Brad  asked.  "Well, of course  you haven't!  That
was before your time at Lowell . . . Maybe six years ago."
"Wild Bill left the Air Force five years ago, dear," Ginny reminded her husband.
"Uh, yeah,  well, I haven't  been  keeping  score  over  on the Air Force  side  of the house  for several
years  now," Brad  admitted.  "But Colonel  Bill Osbourne  used  to  be  the chief  space  cadet  in  the  Air
Force Office of Basic Research." He took a sip of the coffee from the big mug he had to  hold in both
hands. "You might say that Wild Bill stepped on some toes at NASA when it came to the Department of
Defense  participation  in  the  NASA  space  program.  So  he  ended  up  flying  a  desk  in  some  dying
laboratory at Holloman Air Force Base be-fore he retired after twenty-three years in the Air Force."
"They must have really put him under," I remarked.
"They did. I don't know whether or not I'd have the guts to quit after twenty-three years like Bill did."
The astronomer finished off the contents of the huge coffee mug, got up, and started rummaging through
the clut-tered  contents  of a  small desk  in the kitchen.  "Yeah, he might like  to  hear  from  you,  Mike.
Ginny! Where did you put Bill's address?"
"Stay the hell out of my desk!" his wife snapped at him. "Don't you know better than to go rummaging
through a woman's drawers?"
"I'll overlook that remark," her husband muttered. "Why don't you get things organized in here?"

"What? Like your  office, Doctor?"  she taunted  him. "It is organized!" Within a  few  seconds,  she
found a  3-by-5  file card  with an address  and  telephone  number on it. As  she  was  copying it on her
electric  typewriter,  she  muttered,  "When  are  you  going  to  get  me  that  ter-minal  so  I  can  use  the
computer  down  at  the univer-sity? Then we  can  put all this data  on  disk  and  forget  these  ridiculous
pieces of paper."
Brad didn't say anything. Ginny finally handed him the card, which he looked at  and  then handed  to
me. "Give him a call tomorrow, Mike," Brad suggested. "I really don't know if there's anything there or
not . . . and it's a long way from here."
I looked at the card.
Dr. WILLIAM D. OSBOURNE 
Director of Research
NEMECO Corporate Research Center
430 Factory Drive
Bridgeport CT 06603
(203) 784-7667
I must have had a big question mark on my face because Brad added, "I don't know anything about
this NEMECO outfit. But I've known Bill Osbourne for more than ten years because he was involved in
a lot of the Air Force basic research that I was doing then. I lost track of him after he retired. Ginny and
I hap-pened to run into him at JPL in May."
"I'll call him tomorrow morning," I promised. "I never heard of this outfit, either, and it sounds vaguely
mysterious, which intrigues me. In addition, it may be a job."
Brad suddenly glanced at his watch. "Speaking of jobs, I'd better pay attention to mine. I'm scheduled
on the four-meter at Kitt Peak in forty minutes!"
"Migawd, Kitt Peak must be a two-hour drive from here!" I blurted out. "Brad, I'm sorry if I caused
you to miss your observing schedule—"
Brad  did  more  than  chuckle.  He  guffawed.  "Mike,  you  guys  up  there  at  Flag  must  be
nineteenth-century astronomers!  I'll bet  you even looked  through the eye  pieces  of  those  telescopes!
Hey, it will take  me five minutes to  get  to  my  office  where  I've  got  remote  con-trols  rigged  on  the
four-meter along with a TV screen and an image intensifies Hardly anyone is needed at Kitt Peak for my
program except two technicians to keep things working. We let a  computer  do  it all, in-cluding image
intensification. I haven't looked at a piece of photographic film since I left Las Graces!"
"Progress!" I snorted. "Come up to Flag sometime if you want to learn how real astronomers work!"
"What? And freeze my ass off? The university listens to  the Chamber  of Commerce  here,  and  they
would never admit to the reality of a medical claim for frost-bitten buttocks!"

Chapter Two
The next morning, after  a  somewhat  sleepless  night, I  made  a  long  distance  telephone  call  to  Dr.
Osbourne at 7:45 A.M. Arizona time so I'd get the night rate.
"Dr. Bradford Johnson suggested that I call you," I told him when he came on the line. "My name is
Mike Call. I'm in Flagstaff, Arizona, right now. We had a layoff at Lowell Observatory yesterday. I was
involved in some planetary  work  there.  I am also  a  current  instrument-rated  commercial pilot with an
A&P and a CFII . . ."
"Hold it!" a deep voice with touches of Southern drawl came back over the phone. "Say again slowly,
please. You caught me completely off guard."
So I went back through it in more detail.
Dr.  Osbourne's  voice  came  back  over  the  2,500-mile  telephone  link,  "Doctor  Call,  frankly,  I'm
fascinated, but—"
"Just Mister Call," I corrected him.
"Sorry. Uh, I did have some rather vague plans down the line that might require a pilot-astronomer. I
happened  to  mention  it  to  Brad  Johnson  because  I  know  there  are  damned  few  pilot-astronomers
around. I figured it would be a long time before one sur-faced . . ."
"There aren't  very many of us," I admitted.  "But I am one.  If you need  one,  I'd  like  to  set  up  an
interview with you."
"Well, I couldn't justify bringing you all the way from Arizona right now . . ."
"I'm not asking for travel expenses. I'll fly my Cher-okee  there  out of my own pocket,"  I told  him.
What the hell? Sometimes, you've got to take a risk on your own! "If we have a pleasant conversation,
you don't lose anything. If something jells, We'll worry about  a  couple  hundred  bucks  for aviation gas
then."
There was an immediate change in Osbourne's tone of voice. "Wait, this is your nickle. Give me your
tele-phone number and let me call you back on our WATS line."
The conversation picked up two minutes later.
"I would like to talk with you, Mr. Call. My sched-ule is rather hectic for the next few days, but could
you be in Bridgeport by Thursday morning?"
"No sweat. I'll plan to arrive at Bridgeport on Wednesday evening. Can you recommend a reasonable
motel close to the airport or to your offices?"
"I'll do better than that. The company maintains rooms at the New Barnum because we get so many of
our people in here from subsidiaries all over the coun-try. If you're willing to fly more than two thousand
miles to talk to me, I can arrange to put you up on the company."
"Well, that will help, although I am not exactly des-titute."
"Okay. When you arrive at  Sikorski  Memorial in Bridgeport,  ask  Ground  Control  to  direct  you to
NEMECO's  hangar.  Ask  for Jake  Stock,  our  chief  corpo-rate  pilot,  or  Pete  Kukowski,  or  Wimpy
Winfield. I'll pass the word to them."
"Got a corporate air force, huh?"
"NEMECO's scattered all over the country, and so are our customers. We  use  our  corporate  ships
not only for our executives, but also to get some of our stuff to our customers in a hurry. Every once in a

while, I get to log some time if they are short a pilot and some of the executives have to get somewhere.
Keeps me cur-rent. Nice fringe benefit." He suddenly brought the conversation to a close. "I'll see  you
here on Thursday morning. Give me a  call  from  the  airport  when  you  ar-rive  on  Wednesday.  I  am
looking forward to meeting you, Mr. Call."
It was only after I had hung up that it occurred to me that it was one of the damndest telephone calls
that I had ever made. Osbourne had started out very cool and cautious. But the conversation had grown
rather  cordial.  Was  it  because  we  each  found  out  the  other  was  a  pilot?  I  know  that  the  aviator's
camaraderie often cuts through a lot of social ice.
Whatever was there was certainly worth looking into.
If for no other reason than to take a trip in Two To Tango.
It suddenly occurred to me that, once on the East Coast, why shouldn't I spend a little time there and
look around if nothing panned out at NEMECO? Why should I think about coming back to Flagstaff at
all? This whole episode was over and there didn't seem to be anything left for me here anyway. Why not
pull up stakes, get flexible, and be able to move as quickly as Two To  Tango  would allow? Why not
really look for that pilot-astronomer's job if Osbourne had nothing?
It took  me about  an hour to  figure it all out,  then I spent  the rest  of  the  day  making  it  happen.  I
canceled the lease on the apartment, paying a penalty . .  .  but there  was  money in the sock  for those
contingencies. The apartment was furnished, so I had to worry about nothing but clothes, books, dishes,
table and bed linens, cooking utensils, and other housekeeping gear. I packed those up and toted them
down to a local mini-storage. Then I swallowed  hard,  steeled  myself, and  sold  the White Whale at  a
used  car  lot—Cash  For  Your  Car;  Buyer  On  Duty.  I  got  something  less  than  Kelley  Blue  Book
wholesale for it, but a couple of thou wasn't chicken feed and would keep  me going for a  long time if
necessary.  I took  a  cab  out to  Pulliam Field and  threw  my two  bags  into Two  To  Tango.  I fixed  a
cou-ple of nagging little problems—a wing-tip light that was intermittent, plus an upper  door  latch that
had a ten-dency to pop open in flight. I made the check of my two navigation receivers and got the ship
legal for in-strument flight rules operation.
I had planned originally to stay in a motel in Flag that night and get started at dawn the following day
after a night's rest. But I had everything ready to go, and I was eager and keyed up. The weather briefing
I got by phone from Prescott Flight Service  told  me that  the weather  between  Flag and  Albuquerque
was clear so that I need not fly IFR. As usual, visual flight rules were the order of the day in Arizona, so
I filed a VFR flight plan and was on my way to Albuquerque thirty minutes before sunset.
Many flatland pilots do not like the idea of mountain flying at  night in a  single-engine airplane,  but it
never bothered me. Night flying in the West is better anyway because the air is a lot smoother then.
And it was a nice night to fly.
But, boy, I was sure going a long way!
Well, Mike  Call, you have always enjoyed  adven-ture,  I told  myself as  we  winged  our  way  over
Winslow toward Gallup. I talk to myself when I am flying alone. It relieves the boredom.
The  old  astronomical  observatory  was  getting  too  staid  and  stuffy,  anyway.  After  all,  Martian
meteorology is a rather  abstract  and  academic  subject  that  won't  be  very useful  until  somebody  like
myself goes flying through the atmosphere of Mars someday.
I stretched it to Tucumcari, refuelled, and went on to  Tulsa where  I had  to  sack  out because  I got
tired even with my autopilot flying most of the time. I can sit in that seat only about eight hours without
getting cramped. When I got up, it was morning, and I discov-ered that  I had  left the American West
behind me. As the day wore on, I bored eastward over the Midwest, flying by instruments on an IFR
flight plan because that was the only way I was going to get anywhere. I made an instrument approach
into Alton, Illinois, across the river from St. Louis, flying down the invisi-ble radio beam of the instrument

landing system for a perfect ILS approach and landing. Then on toward Pittsburgh.
As I flew in the beauty of towering cloud masses with only an occasional glimpse of the ground in a
never-never  land  that  few  nonpilots  ever  experience,  I  kept  asking  myself  why  I  was  going  to
Connecticut? What did I expect to find there? The end of the rainbow, maybe? I didn't really know. The
shock of having a professional career in astronomy shot out from under me was beginning to take effect.
Maybe  I could  find some  way to  combine my educa-tion  as  an  astronomer  with  my  training  and
experience as a pilot. I'm a good pilot. Never had  an accident  that  I didn't  walk away  from, which is
saying  plenty  for  an  old  ag  pilot!  One  of  my  instructors  once  told  me  that  I  was  a  natural
three-dimensional person.  I  have  never  experienced  vertigo,  and  I  always  know  where  I  am,  even
shooting  the  back-course  ILS  approach  down  to  minimums  at  a  high  altitude  airport  between  two
moun-tain ranges with blowing snow and a twenty-knot cross-wind.
Maybe I should have gone after that Ph.D. in-stead . . .
But there wasn't time!
I was already over thirty years old. I felt the sands of time running out on me because I couldn't find
time to do everything that I wanted to do.
What I really wanted were the stars . . . somehow . . . any way that I could get them.
But how? When you want to do far-out things, you can't plan a career. You move with the breaks,
hoping that the zigs and  zags along the  way  will  somehow  find  a  least-squares  solution  and  end  up
pointing you in the direction you wanted to go in the first place.
I felt very lonely up there  at  9,000  feet  in  Two  To  Tango  heading  eastward.  I  really  don't  mind
loneliness. No, let me put it another way: I have had to get used to loneliness.
I reflected that at my age, most men had already set-tled down into a job, a career, or a profession.
They were  busy raising families, paying  off  mortgages,  and  clawing  their  way  up  the  ladder.  Was  I
missing some-thing by not doing that?
I seriously doubted it. I had enjoyed myself doing what I had done.
My introspection went to hell over the Alleghenies. I had to go to 11,000 feet to clear icing conditions.
Even at that, I picked up some clear ice that didn't improve the flying characteristics of Two To Tango. I
was very fortunate  that she  was  lightly loaded  and  had  180  horses  in her nose.  I ran  into  imbedded
thunderstorm cells, and New York Air Traffic Control Center wasn't very helpful in radar vectoring me
around them. I didn't rate with New York Center; I didn't have swept-back wings, four jet engines, and
400 people aboard.
The weather  cleared  over  Allentown, and  I could  see  the ground most of the time as  I went over
White Plains because I did not want to say howdy to any of the thick jet traffic around New York City.
But  I  still  had  to  fly  an  instrument  approach  into  Sikorski  Memorial  Airport  at  Bridgeport  under  a
cloudless blue sky because the haze over Long Island Sound had the visibility down to one mile with an
indefinite ceiling.
If eastern pilots do not like to fly over mountains, I as a western pilot do not like to fly a single-engined
airplane over water out of sight of land. Coming down the ILS runway 6 approach, I picked up the high
in-tensity runway lights at about 400 feet out over the Sound and above the water . . . and that was my
first sight of land!
I got it on the ground, got directions to the NEMECO  hangar from Ground  Control,  and  taxied  on
over with their help in giving me the proper turns.
An ancient Douglas DC-4 was parked in the open hangar, and an Aero Commander sat on the ramp
in front.  As  I taxied  up,  a  lanky pilot who was  doing a  preflight inspection on the Aero  Commander
waved his arms violently, trying to shoo me away. I paid no atten-tion to him, but taxied Two To Tango

next to the Aero Commander and shut her down.
The pilot was over to my ship immediately. "Parking for transient aircraft  is further down  the ramp!
This is a private hangar!"
"This is NEMECO's hangar, isn't it?" I asked as I climbed out onto the wing.
"Yeah, but you don't work for us."
"Didn't you get the word?"  I asked  politely as  I bounced  down  to  the ground.  "Where's  your rest
room?"
At this point, a short, stocky, balding man in greasy coveralls came out of the hangar. He completed
this Mutt and Jeff team. As he wiped beads of sweat from his face with a rag, he called out, "Pete, is this
Mr. Call from Arizona?"
Well, somebody had gotten the word after all! The hostility vanished from the tall man's face and he
thrust out a hand. "Sorry. I'm Pete Kukowski. This is Wimpy Winfield, our chief mechanic, who didn't
bother to give me the word about you or I would have provided a warmer welcome. But Wimpy's okay
. . . for an A&P."
"I'll  remember  that  remark  the  next  time  you  blow  an  engine  on  the  Four!"  Wimpy  growled  at
Kukowski and shook hands with me. "Glad to have you here, Mike. Osboume said to call him when you
got in, and I'm supposed to take you over to the Front Office or the New Barnum . . . whatever."
"Thanks, but where's your bathroom? The last time I touched the ground was in Pittsburgh . . ."
"Follow me," Wimpy said. Over his shoulder as we walked away, he called to Kukowski, "Pete, let
me know if that right engine pulls rated manifold pressure,  will you? I had  trouble  timing those  mags."
The pilot merely waved and went back to his preflight inspection.
Wimpy Winfield was the talkative kind. "You flew that Cherokee all the way from Arizona, eh? How
long did it take?"
"Sixteen hours  in the air," I told  him as  he showed  me the  rest  room.  As  I  relieved  my  hydraulic
pressure, I continued, "IFR all the way from Tulsa. I think I might have blown the exhaust gasket  on
number two cylinder. Is there a Piper dealer on the field?"
"You can get it right across the street  from the com-pany  that  made  your engine in the first place,"
Wimpy pointed out. "Matter of fact, let me pick it up for you."
"Thanks, Wimpy, but I do my own work. It's my pink body strapped into that ship."
"You an A&P?"
"Yup. Also Inspection  Authorized.  Commercial ticket  with instrument rating, and  a  Certified  Flight
Instructor to boot."
"If Osbourne doesn't hire you, I can use you here!"
I called Obourne's office from the hangar lounge, which was pretty plush and belied the ratty exterior
of the hangar—but everything looked raunchy and well-used here in the East.
A soft female voice told me, "Dr. Osbourne had to go into New York City on short notice, Mr. Call.
He  asked  me  to  give  you  his  apologies.  Wimpy  Winfield  will  take  you  to  the  New  Barnum.  Dr.
Osbourne will be in his office tomorrow morning and looks forward to seeing you at nine-thirty."
I couldn't get upset over the polite and mannered way she put it. But it meant that I had the rest of the
day to kill. It was still early afternoon but I hadn't had lunch yet. I mentioned it to Wimpy.
"Get your bags. We'll grab lunch before I drop you at the New Barnum. As a matter of fact, let's haul
your Cherokee into the hangar for the night."
Wimpy asked Kukowski if he wanted to join us, but the lanky pilot said that he wanted  to  test-hop

the Com-mander because he had to take it to Detroit tomorrow morning. I got the distinct impression
that the NEMECO corporate air force was busy all the time. And Wimpy confirmed my suspicions as
we drove off in the NEMECO airport vehicle, an old but clean van that was beginning to rust out along
the quarter panels.  "Yeah, we've  got a  DC-6B,  too.  She's  out in Montana  right now.  The Bonanza's
down in Raleigh today with some sales types."
Wimpy drove. It was a good thing.
I hadn't been to New England before except to Bos-ton on a commercial flight many years ago. But I
had never been in New England. The place seemed cramped and crowded. I got the feeling that it was
old. Bridgeport  looked  duty and  well-used.  I got lost be-cause  the streets  were  not  square  with  the
world the way they are in western cities, and I could not see the sun through the gray haze of smog and
clouds. I had difficulty maintaining my sense of direction, which is unusual for me.
There wasn't a square foot of unused land anywhere. And the buildings on that land were right out of
the First Industrial Revolution. A movie company  could  have shot  a  Charles  Dickens  script  here  with
very little set trimming. And the place was busy, almost frantic.
Wimpy managed to find a place to park the van on one of the narrow streets. He took me into a cafe.
I haven't been  in a  place  like Mama's  since my ag pilot days.  We  sat  down  in a  vinyl-upholstered
booth with a linoleum-covered table.  The menu was  hecto-graphed  in blue on a  single sheet  of white
paper en-closed in a celluloid folder trimmed in red plastic. Nothing fancy on the menu—chili, chowder,
chicken-fried steak, hamburger, BLT, and a list of other basic dishes that I had not encountered in years.
The Special was liver and onions. "Take it," Wimpy suggested. I ordered a Special with coffee, pulled
a pa-per napkin out of the spring holder on the table, and did not lace my coffee  with cream  from the
little chromed pitcher on the table; Wimpy did.
"I could have taken you to a fancy place," Wimpy said apologetically, "but this is where all our pilots
eat. None of the corporate types ever show up here, so we can talk. Mama's food has never caused any
trouble in the air." He was right. The food was good. Nothing fancy, but it stuck to the ribs.
I got to know Wimpy Winfield. He  didn't  tell me much about  NEMECO.  Only about  himself. "I'm
chief airframe and  powerplant  man  and  spare  pilot,"  he  said.  "I  don't  bother  myself  with  corporate
politics and all that stuff. It's my job to keep the airplanes flying and to fill in as pilot when needed. Good
job. Been here two years. Got one other A&P, and I need a third. Come see me if Osbourne  doesn't
have a slot."
"How long you been at this?" I wanted to know.
"Too long. Got my ticket back in the war . . . the Big One, World War Two. Kept it afterwards. I got
my A&P and did a lot of work  for fixed base  operators  here  and  there,  but I don't  like to  work  for
FBO's.  I answered  a  classified ad  in Trade-A-Plane  one day,  got hired  by  a  small  company  in  the
midwest that had a fleet of eight Cherokees. I discovered that working for corporate outfits was the way
to go. I can handle the big NEMECO birds okay, but I'm a Cherokee man. Guess I've flown just about
every one of the three mil-lion different kinds they've  made  in Vero  Beach.  And you wouldn't  believe
some of the things I've done with a Cherokee. I know them inside and out. You have any trouble with
that bird, you come see me."
He liked NEMECO. "They pay well, and they stay the hell out of my way and let me run my shop.
The company seems to be run by people who know what they're  doing. Never  any panic.  Never  any
hassle. The Front Office trusts me to do my job, and there isn't a one of us who's going to step out of
line and screw up this good thing . . . Oh, sure, the comptroller  gives me a  hard  time every  once  in a
while, but that's his job. Company makes money. Always has. Wish I had some more stock, but I've got
two in college."
Wimpy waited for me to volunteer my interest in NEMECO. When I didn't, he asked,  "You joining

Cor-porate Research?"
"That's what I'm here to talk to Osbourne about. But I haven't the foggiest notion what they're doing."
"Neither do I. They don't talk about it. I catch some rumors, but . . ." And he let it drop at that.
Wimpy left me at the New Barnum in the rejuve-nated downtown area. I was left with the rest of the
af-ternoon to kill in a typical All-American Plastic Hotel that looks like every other hotel in America so
you have to write yourself a note telling yourself where you are before you go to bed at night.
I decided I would try to find out something about NEMECO.
I put on my suit and tie so that I looked like an East-erner. A stockbroker was located on the street
floor of the hotel.  There  I settled  down  with Standard  & Poor's.  The broker  even had  recent  annual
reports because NEMECO was headquartered in Bridgeport.
"A good buy," he advised  me. "Selling well below  earnings. Excellent cash  position.  Well-managed
outfit. The stock doesn't move very much because it is still closely held by employees and the Cranmer
family. It is an old and very respected firm."
That was the understatement of the hour.
The  New  England  Mill  Equipment  Company  had  been  founded  in  1877  by  the  three  Cranmer
brothers. Two of them had gone out to Montana during the gold strikes and managed to lose what they
had  of  their  inheritance.  But  they  learned  about  mining.  They  came  back  to  Bridgeport  with  the
knowledge that the way to make money was to make equipment that the mining industry needed. They
persuaded  their older  brother  to  come  in with  them  and  find  some  venture  capital.  That  came  from
England. Since the turn of the century, the firm had shown continuous growth and careful diversi-fication
into  solid,  industrially  oriented  products.  The  company  went  public  in  1937  when  the  Cranmers
man-aged to buy out the descendants of the original English investors. Then they went over-the-counter
to raise ad-ditional working capital. Now they were listed on the New York Stock Exchange.
NEMECO no longer made just mining equipment. It made mill equipment, but "mill" is a New England
word for "factory." The corporate name had been changed to  NEMECO  in 1963  in keeping  with the
ris-ing wave of corporate image modernization.
NEMECO  had  six  divisions  scattered  all  over  the  country  making  specialized  heavy  construction
equip-ment, marine equipment for large ocean-going vessels such as  oil tankers,  airborne  controls  and
electronics, steel mill equipment, and special ceramics.
The most recent  P&L  statement  and  balance  sheet  were  shining  textbook  examples  of  a  well-run
"small company." Gross sales in the preceding year were a shade over $74 million, and it paid $3.75 a
share.
The broker  thought he might be  able  to  pick  me up a  hundred  shares  at  27  if I would give him a
couple of days.
It occurred to me that there were probably thousands of successful "little" companies like this all over
Amer-ica doing good business, meeting their payrolls, paying their bills, providing a return on investment
for stock-holders, making good jobs available to skilled people, and being very quiet and  professional
about  it.  Every-one  has  heard  of  the  Fortune-500  companies,  and  the  spotlight  is  always  on  the
fast-rising high-technology firms. Very few people pay much attention to compa-nies like NEMECO.
Since I didn't  have any plans for the evening and  did not want to  venture  out  into  the  Bridgeport
streets alone, I borrowed the annual reports from the broker, grabbed supper in the hotel, and retired to
my room to digest the contents of the annual reports.
I read the three-year-old annual report announcing that Dr. Osbourne had joined the firm as Director
of Research.  The following year's  report  announced  the formation of the Corporate  Research  Center
Laborato-ries in Bridgeport. And that was all. Period. No talk about new products, new research, nor

new development work in progress. There was no possible way to tell from the balance sheet how much
money was going into the corporate research effort.
I gave up in disgust because there was no way that I was going to find the data I was looking for.
If General Dynamics or Rockwell International had wanted to hire a pilot-astronomer, it would have
been  understandable.  Even in a  small high-technology com-pany,  a  pilot-astronomer  could  provide  a
capability to cope in advance with the problems of an astronaut us-ing the firm's Mark Umpty-Ump fully
automated giz-moscope.
But here  was  a  firm  without  a  single  visible  NASA  or  Department  of  Defense  contract.  Its  only
connection with aviation was in the manufacture of jet engine con-trol components and special switches
to "original equip-ment manufacturers"—known as "OEMs" in the trade.
I ran into an  inconsistency.  The  NEMECO  Airborne  Controls  Division  was  located  in  Tempe,  a
suburb of Phoenix. Osbourne had been unwilling to foot the bill for travel expenses, but why hadn't  he
suggested that I go to Phoenix and hop aboard the next corporate air-plane returning to Bridgeport? It
didn't make sense.
I put the annual reports away because they weren't telling me anything. I switched on the TV. It wasn't
un-til later while I was watching a TV spy drama that it suddenly hit me.
Suppose NEMECO Corporate Research was being used as a cover-up for some top-secret scientific
devel-opment project for the government?
Why not? The government could never again use the Manhattan District—or "Manhattan Project," as
it was incorrectly known—approach; it would leave far too many tell-tale signs in this day and age. Even
at Lowell I would have caught some rumors about it.
Something  like  the  legendary  Lockheed  "Skonk  Works"  wouldn't  be  useful  either.  It's  now  too
obvious.
But nobody would ever think of looking at NE-MECO!
If so, why me! If an outfit wanted a pilot-astronomer, where would they start looking? Not on
the roster of the USAF or the commercial airlines, but among the astronomers  who couldn't  care  less
about se-crecy! And things could be more easily arranged.  Said  pilot-astronomer  could  suddenly lose
his job because of a "tight budget." One of his colleagues handling gov-ernment research contracts on the
university level could be asked to put said pilot-astronomer in touch with the covert operation. And the
pilot-astronomer could be quietly transferred without getting in touch with the nearby corporate division.
The only people  who knew  where  I was  were  the  Flagstaff  postmaster  and  the  Federal  Aviation
Adminis-tration  which  had  routinely  recorded  my  various  cross-country  flight  plans  and  radio
communications. In thirty days, the FAA would wipe its tapes and com-puter records to save money. In
six months, the Flag-staff postmaster would no longer forward my mail.
Something very interesting was cooking quietly at NEMECO Corporate Research Center.  I had  to
find out what was going on! Tomorrow I would . . .

Chapter Three
NEMECO's corporate offices were housed on the fourth floor of a clean, unobtrusive office building
in downtown Bridgeport. The building itself was not one of those flashy new aluminum-and-glass boxes,
but a solid and respectable brick edifice.
I almost missed the door to the lobby of NEMECO because of the small Gothic letters  announcing,
"New England Mill Equipment Company—NEMECO."
Inside,  the receptionist  took  my name and  told  me Dr.  Osbourne  was  expecting me. Unlike  some
corporate receptionists I've seen, she was neither seductive nor dazzling. She was just all there.
I was  led down  a  corridor  past  several  doors,  some  open  to  reveal  their  occupants  were  absent,
others  that  were  discreetly  closed,  and  still  others  that  showed  very  ordinary-looking  men  working
quietly  at  their  desks.  It  seemed  much  too  quiet  and  sedate  with  far  too  few  peo-ple  to  be  the
headquarters of a corporation grossing $75 million per year. There was no hustle, just effi-ciency.
The office into which I was led was no flashier than the rest of the place. No door had had a name on
it, and this was no exception.  A short,  heavy-set  man with intense eyes,  bushy black  moustache,  and
short-cropped hair got up from behind the desk and thrust out his hand.  "Hi, I'm Bill Osbourne.  Glad
you're here, Mike! Sit down."
The receptionist left, closing the door behind her. Os-bourne leaned back in his chair and looked me
over with a smile on his face. It was  a  rather  handsome  face,  and  I could  not picture  this man as  the
research director of a corporation. He did not have the pontifical bearing of the usual academic scientist.
Nor did he have the ordinary, noncommittal appearance of a corporate scientist.
There were the usual scientific union cards hung in plain black frames on the wall behind him—Ph.D.
from  NYU,  Phi  Beta  Kappa,  membership  scrolls  from  sev-eral  scientific  societies,  scattered
photographs of people whom I did not recognize, and a small plastic model of the old Saturn  V moon
rocket bearing the small label, "The Hard Way."
There was a framed motto lettered in engineering LeRoy style:
TRIVIALITY No. 43: 
If you try, you will know; 
If you fail, you will learn.
I indicated this motto. "Why do you call it a trivial-ity? It seems reasonably nontrivial to me. And what
are the other forty-two?"
"A conversation piece," Osbourne replied with a smile. "Many offices and labs have profound mottoes
such as this tacked up on their walls. Most of them are trivial."
"The labs or the mottoes?" I wanted to know.
Osbourne looked pensive. "I've never really thought about that. The lab gang comes  up with a  new
one ev-ery  so  often.  We  keep  a  book  full of them down  at  the  lab.  Sometimes,  they  are  not  trivial
mottoes at all . . ."
"For example?"
"How about: 'One cannot possibly begin to learn that which he thinks he already knows.' "

"Come on, now! That's Epictetus!"
"I'm going to have to watch myself around you, Mike. You know too much."
"Is that a threat or a compliment?"
"Neither."  Osborne  turned  to  the  credenza  behind  his  desk  and  flipped  a  switch  on  a  piece  of
complex-looking electronic equipment. It began to buzz. Lights flashed. Every so often, it would make a
little hop.
"Looks impressive. What does it do?"
"Just looks impressive," Osburne explained and shut it off. "That makes  it very functional because  it
does exactly what it was designed to do. The lab gang came up with it one day in a fit of creativity."
I was  beginning to  become  a  little  bit  suspicious.  The  meeting  was  swinging  far  wide  of  where  I
thought it would be heading. "This came from a bunch of research scientists?"
"Nope.  We  are  a  bunch  of  technical  con  men.  Frus-trated  inventors.  Radio  hams.  Hot  rodders.
Freaks who have grown up with technology and  like the things that  can  be  done  with it. People  who
want  the  Universe  to  work  for  them.  Hard  to  find  them  these  days,  I'm  afraid,  and  they  are  real
individualists. But we must tag ourselves with socially acceptable titles or people  won't  know  what we
do . . .  which means they will think we are practicing black magic . . . which we are anyway."
I was having a great deal of difficulty in getting the measure of Dr. William D. Osbourne. I began  to
sense that the man was complex, that there was a great deal of iceberg about him because only a small
percentage of him was showing, and that he was  exceedingly adept  at  playing whatever  game he and
NEMECO were engaged in.
"Well, I guess us rugged individualists have got to stick together these days," I remarked.
"I like that."
I decided to get right to the point. "Although I enjoy this sort of bull session, Doctor, I've come a long
dis-tance. I'm interested that you may want to hire a pilot-astronomer. If so, I'm your man. What's up?"
"I told you: magic."
"What?"
"Really! Remember Arthur C. Clarke's observation than any sufficiently advanced technology may be
indis-tinguishable from magic?"
"Okay, so what sort of magic are you currently en-gaged in?"
"Well,  the  Department  of  Black  Magic  hasn't  made  much  progress  because  of  the  shortage  of
hellebore root, but we seem to have made significant controver-sial breakthroughs that may shed some
light on some  important aspects  of white magic." Osbourne  said  it in a  serious  tone,  but there  was  a
twinkle in his eye.
"Does the sorcerer's union know about this?" I asked.
"Speaking of that, what does your sorcerer's union card say?" he suddenly asked, getting right down
to the basics as quickly as I had tried to do.
"Star gazer and airplane driver. Actually, my present  task  involves finding a  job  that  exists for both
titles si-multaneously."
I had managed to draft a resume in my best hand lettering in the hotel room last night. I gave this to
him without apologizing for not having it typed. He took it without a further word and began to read it. I
tried not to fidget.
"Well!" he finally exclaimed. He put down the paper and leaned back in his chair again, gazing silently
at the ceiling. Then he straightened up, looked at me, and said, "I didn't expect to find a man like you this

quickly. I can't use both of your talents . . . yet. I may never be able to. I can't accurately forecast if or
when the requirement will really jell . . ."
Well, Mike, I told myself, at least you had a nice airplane trip and a good bull session.
"But, since my crystal ball is very cloudy and I can-not therefore forecast very clearly," Osborne went
on, "I sometimes have to operate opportunistically . . .  or with gut feel, if you will. I know it's not very
scientific or rational, but it usually works." He leaned forward and put bis hands on his desk in front of
him. "Mike, you've got precisely the credentials I was looking for. But let me ask you something that you
didn't tell me in your resume. Why did you quit crop dusting? It pays pretty good, doesn't it? Better than
astronomy, at any rate?"
I told him why. There  was  this hot,  steamy morning in Kansas.  I was  bombing along in a  Pawnee
loaded with herbicide  about  one  foot  above  the alfalfa. Two  kids  squatting between  the rows  tossed
rocks up as I went past. The prop parted company with the engine. I got the plane over the wires at the
end of the field, managed to pancake it into the next field, popped my harness, and got out just before
the wing tanks blew. We never caught the kids.
Then I asked him, "Why did you quit the Air Force? I thought they paid fighter jocks pretty good."
Without batting an eye, Osbourne said, "I was mak-ing a run on a  target  drone  in an F-4  at  Indian
Springs when my own Sidewinder chased me right up my tail pipe."
"I didn't think that could happen."
"Anything can happen, especially when it's not sup-posed to. Sort of took the tiger out of me. So  I
went the science route. Air Force paid for the Ph.D. from NYU. I thought it would help me talk to the
scientists working for the Air Force."
"Did it?"
"Nope! The scientists distrusted me because I was an Air Force officer, and the Air Force distrusted
me be-cause I was a scientist. Q.E.D.: I couldn't win and I couldn't even break even. So I quit the game
while I could."
"How did you come to NEMECO?"
"Well, one gets to know a lot of people  in the sort  of overview position that  I had  in the Office of
Basic Re-search.  Hayward  Newcomb,  one  of our  top  research  managers  at  Wright-Pat,  full colonel,
USAF  Academy,  Ph.D.  from MIT,  he got the message  about  two  years  before  I did.  He  knew  the
President of NEMECO and went to work for the outfit. When I got out, he brought me aboard to set up
a corporate research operation, the first one that NEMECO has ever had."
"NEMECO  seems  to  have  been  around  for  a  long  time.  Why  did  it  suddenly  need  a  corporate
research lab?" I was trying to get to the bottom of this because it was sounding more  and  more  like a
new Skonk Works.
"True, NEMECO has been around for a century more or less. And it wants to be around for another
century. Did you ever  have a  look  at  who the Fortune-500  companies  were  twenty  years  ago  and
compare them to the Fortune-500 list of today? How many com-panies held their position? And why?
I'll tell you the answer to that one because it answers  your question.  Only those  companies  who have
managed to move with high technology have managed to stay in there. Those who kept right on making
the same  old saleable  product  slowly but surely slipped  right off the Fortune-500  list. It's  my job  to
keep that from happening to NEMECO, even though we are far from Fortune-500 material."
"So why do you need a pilot-astronomer?" I tried to press the point home.
"I told you: I don't. But if I did, I'd hire you. Come to think of it, I might anyway."
"What are you going to need a pilot for? Don't you have a hangarful over at Sikorski Memorial?"

"I don't need a pilot. If I did, I would be the one because I, too, carry a commercial ticket, Mike." He
looked at  me for a  moment. "I may be  able  to  use  the scientist part  of your astronomer's  education.
You're  smart,  bright, unafraid,  and  yet  you've  got  the  discipline  of  both  an  academic  degree  and  a
commercial instru-ment ticket. You're also sassy and suspicious and cu-rious. You'd have to be curious
to come more than two thousand miles to find out what's going on here. You are  the kind of person  I
need." He paused for a moment as though he felt he had perhaps said too much, but then he went on, "I
want you to meet the lab crew, Mike. I might have to share you with Jake Stock for a while if the pilot
situation gets tight. But, before talking turkey, I must find out if you will be  able  to  get along with the
crazy crew I've got. Let's go to the lab."
I was totally unprepared for the NEMECO Corpo-rate Research Center Laboratories. I guess I have
been  spoiled  by  seeing  too  many  beautiful  research  centers  of  giant  corporations—acres  of  lovely
landscaping with modernistic buildings scattered  around  in a  campus  atmosphere  to  provide  research
minds with the artifi-cial, quiet, pastoral, academic atmosphere in which to do their thinking.
The research center was smack between two of the biggest, dirtiest, raunchiest factories that I've ever
seen.  There  wasn't  a  blade  of grass  or  a  tree  to  be  seen  any-where,  just red-brick  factory  buildings
jammed tightly together in an apparent random array. Trucks,  cars,  and  industrial vehicles clogged  the
narrow streets.
I almost said, "Thanks, it's been a great gag, but I'll be  going now." But then I thought, what better
place to hide a Skonk Works?
Osbourne slid his TR-7 sports car into an impossibly small parking slot in front of the building, jerked
on the parking brake, and advised me, "Don't let it throw you."
"Well, it sort of blows the image," I admitted.
"It's supposed to. Can you guess why it's here?"
"Sure. You want to hide it."
"Nope."
"Positive?"
"Positive. Look down the street. There's a good junk yard and the best  machine shop  in town.  The
other way up the street you will find the best electronic supply shop around. Across the street  is a  lab
supply house. When we need something, we can get it in a moment. And when you're being technically
creative, you can't wait."
He had a point there. But I looked around and ob-served, "Seems like one hell of an environment in
which to do research."
"On  the  contrary  it  is  the  very  best  possible  environ-ment  for  doing  industrial  research.  'I  am
surrounded by the roar of the world; thank God for the roar of the world.' The joint jumps, Mike. There
is an aura of ac-complishment, of doing things, of making the world go, and of making money . . . literally
 making  the stuff of money. Mike,  I can  afford  only an occasional  romantic program  because  every
dollar of my research budget comes out of company earnings and means a dollar that the stockholders
will not get as part of a dividend. In the long run, I must produce new ideas and new things to keep the
company in business as technology progresses. I'll let you in on a secret . . ."
Here it comes, I thought.
"We don't do scientific research. We do technological research of the Edisonian type whose true end
product must make money for NEMECO. Our output must eventually pay back every dollar NEMECO
invests in us. And it will."
"How long is the 'long run' for NEMECO?" I wanted to know. "When do they expect the first
pay-off?"

"Hayward Newcomb told me ten years."
"Do you really think you have ten years?"
"How much do you know about NEMECO?" Osbourne wanted to know.
"Only as much as you were willing to admit in the last three annual reports, Doctor. I do not go into
things blindly. Never fly without getting a weather briefing, right?"
"Right!" Osbourne grabbed the door handle and opened bis side of the car. "Let's go in and take the
tour."
"You'd let an outsider go through your labs? Suppose I twigged to the competition?"
"You won't. Do you really think that I'd let you see anything that the competition doesn't already know
about?"
The inside of the building didn't match the outside at all. It was reasonably new and up-to-date once
we got past the door. I have seen more than a few research labs in my time, but this one was just slightly
different.
The difference started with the first person  we  met in the small entrance  lobby.  She  was  an elderly
woman, snowy-haired, with rimless glasses. She was surrounded by a telephone, a couple  of intercom
boxes, a micro-phone, and assorted pieces of electronic equipment whose purpose was not immediately
apparent. She also had a typewriter and looked up from working on it as she saw us enter.
"Good morning, Dr. Osbourne! You have several telephone calls. Mr. Halden called,  and  Professor
Korsinski called from Hoboken." She handed him two pink telephone call slips.
"Thank you, Ruth. Meet Mike Call who flew all the way from Arizona to see  us.  Mike,  this is Ruth
Morse who is officially the Chief Laboratory Administrative Director . . .  but that's  too  long a  title, so
everybody just calls her the house mother . . ."
Ruth looked the part, she acted the part, and I later found out that she was indeed the house mother
of NEMECO Corporate Research Center Laboratories in more ways than one. "Shall I bring coffee into
the con-ference room for the two of you? I hope you'll stay for lunch; I've brought chili today."
"Whether we stay for lunch or not, we'll sample it," Osbourne told her. "Never  mind the coffee.  I'm
going to show Mike around."
We started down a hallway, and I could hear the ar-gument all the way. I didn't catch all of it because
I didn't know what it was all about, but it sounded some-thing like this:
"Hell, Len, why can't you throw it together out of stuff Mac has on hand in the shop?"
"Damn it, Vic! I don't like those numbers! If it works—which  I doubt—the  whole building will
go ..."
"There's nothing wrong with my equations! All you gotta do is put it together!"
"It cannot be assembled the way you've sketched it on the back of that envelope! Why the hell didn't
they teach you MIT idiots to dream up stuff that could be put together in the first place?"
Osbourne stepped into the office first. "Who's win-ning?" he wanted to know.
A thin, sallow man with jet black hair, a trim mous-tache that contrasted with Osbourne's bushy one,
and attired in a natty business suit looked up, grabbed a handful of papers from the desk, thrust them in
front of Osbourne,  and  jabbed  them  with  a  pencil.  "You  re-member  that  tensor  I  derived  from  the
Hamiltonian? Well, the radiation term does work out! But I can't get Len to build something that would
test  .  .  ." He  sud-denly  became  aware  of me and  stopped  short.  "Who's  this?" he wanted  to  know,
suspicion sticking out all over him.
"This is Mike Call," Osbourne introduced us. "Mike, this vitriolic refugee from the Mid-East oil patch

is Vic-tor  Aboud,  my Assistant  Director  for Contracts  and  Analysis and,  by his  own  admission,  our
resident math-ematical genius."
Aboud stuck out his hand. "Howdy, Mike Call. And who in the hell are you?"
"You'll have to excuse Vic," the other man spoke up. "He's been in America only about ten years, and
he still thinks his cousins own everything here, too. One of these days, we'll get him housebroken . . ."
"Len, get the hell off my back!" Vic was quick and sharp, all right.
The other  man turned  with a  grin and  also  thrust out his hand.  "I'm  Len  Marshall,  the  Laboratory
Director." Len Marshall was a stout, puckish man who still wore his hair in the close-cropped fashion of
the 1950s. He was obviously a technologist because he was in uni-form: dark slacks, red tie, and clean
white shirt with double breast pockets filled with pens. Just another hardware man, I thought, but my first
impression was quite incorrect.
"Bill, we'll discuss this problem with you later," Vic snapped, picking up the papers  and  heading for
the door. Obviously, he wasn't too happy about my pres-ence. "I've got some data to massage. Len, I'll
prove to you that I'm right! Good to meet you, Mr. Call." And he was gone.
Osbourne glanced at me, expecting some reaction, so I gave it to him  "He acts just like most of the
math geniuses I've ever known . . . except for the intro-verted ones who are impossible to work with."
"Can you work with guys like Vic?" Osbourne wanted to know.
"Yes. It's difficult, but barely possible."
Osbourne laughed. "Mike, you'll do all right here!"
"Mike's joining us?" Len asked, plumping back into the chair behind the desk.
"Maybe," Osbourne replied, taking one of the side chairs and motioning me to another  one.  "Mike's
an astronomer,  so  maybe he knows  enough math to  stay  even with Vic. And he's  a  pilot  and  A&P
mechanic, which means he's not afraid to get his hands dirty."
"Sounds like a combination I could use right now," Len said, tapping his pencil on the desk top.
"We may have to share him with Jake Stock."
"I don't  see  why,"  Len  said.  "I  haven't  had  a  chance  to  tell  you,  but  Ron  walked  out  yesterday
afternoon."
"I was afraid of that, but I'm not sorry to lose him," Osbourne said, shaking his head sadly.
"This gives me two open technician slots, and I could fill both of them with one professional like Mike
here on the Dynamics project . . . which I definitely need. Those calculations are a grind, and Tammy's
getting be-hind. Think we could afford some more computer time?"
"Is it getting to be more than our microcomputer can handle?"
"Yes.  But  we  can  get  a  modem  for  a  couple  hundred  and  then  tie  in  with  Korsinski's  big
general-purpose ma-chine in Hoboken."
"How much time might you need?"
"I'll find out." Len punched an intercom button and said into the device, "Tammy, this is Len. Can you
drop in for a moment?"
In less than thirty seconds, the room seemed to light up.  I turned  to  behold  a  real  rarity: a  beautiful
woman who is shorter than I am. She couldn't have topped five feet. A lot of small women tend to be on
the dumpy side—short on height, but not short on other dimen-sions. She was proportioned according
to her petite height.
Len  performed  the  usual  introductions,  and  Tammy  Dudley  destroyed  forever  my  mental  image,

gained  from  years  of  experience  in  grad  school  and  at  Lowell,  that  most  women  scientists  and
mathematicians got into the game because of what they lacked in appearance.
"Tammy, can you use some help?" Len asked.
"Oh, can I!" she replied in a sort of whispery voice that almost caused me to melt into the floor. "Len,
I've got some of Vic's data reduction to do, and I've gotten behind on the Dynamics project . . ."
The lights went dim. The building shook slightly, rat-tling the old windows in their double-hung frames.
I heard the cough of a fire extinguisher.
Len Marshall almost trampled over me, and he col-lided with Bill Osbourne as both tried to get out of
the office door at the same time. Tammy Dudley managed to get out of the way of the onrush.  "Come
on!" Len shouted. "It sounded like it came from the dynamics lab!"
I followed them out the door and pounded down a corridor behind them. I guess  Tammy was  right
behind me. I didn't know where I was going. I just followed Osbourne.
Len stopped before a closed door. Wisps of smoke were curling from under it. He simply kicked the
door open, and all of us burst in.
The room was jammed with equipment, and it was a mess. It was full of smoke and stank of burned
electri-cal insulation. There was a  large hole in the wall leading to  the outside.  Something had  hit that
double-bonded brick wall hard.
"Carl! Are you all right?" Len asked the blond-haired lab technician in the dirty white smock who was
standing over some of the wreckage, an exhausted fire extinguisher in his hands.
"Huh? Oh, yeah! Yeah! I'm okay! I'm okay!" The man nodded, speaking in a  high-pitched voice of
shock. Then he snapped  out of it and  turned  to  Len.  "It worked!  It  worked!  Len, you were  right! I
adjusted the phasing and tapered the field strength the way we talked about . . . and it swung right out
and went clean through the wall. It woulda kept going except the wires tore loose!" He was jubilant now.
"But are you all right?" Osbourne repeated Len's question. It is often surprising how people react in an
emergency. They forget. They repeat. Somehow, the cerebrum becomes disconnected and all functions
are programmed through the cerebellum.
"Sure! Had  a  little electrical fire, but I got that  out." Carl  was  breathing  heavily  now  as  the  room
cleared itself of smoke through the gaping hole. "But the unit smashed on the ground outside."
Osbourne's face was radiant. His eyes sparkled. "Did you get the data?"
"You betcha! My lab notes are right on the bench over there. Fire didn't get to them."
"Hot damn!" Osbourne whirled to face me. "Mike, you're hired! As a pilot-astronomer! We're going
to go a long way!"
"Where?" I wanted to know.
"To Mars! We've got a space drive!"

Chapter Four
"You've gotta be kidding!" was the most brilliant re-mark I could muster.
"On the contrary!" Osbourne shot back. He walked over  to  the gaping hole in the wall. "This is an
open door to the Solar System." He looked down at the ground. "Carl,  get out there  and  pick  up the
pieces right away! And make sure you get all the pieces."
The lab tech crawled through the hole. From outside, Carl's voice came back, "Doctor, it doesn't look
like it was dinged up too badly. Hey, Mac, come out here and give me a hand!"
I hadn't noticed the tall, gangling technician who had come into the dynamics lab behind us.  He  too
crawled out the hole, grumbling as he did so, "Damn it, Carl, I'll bet you bent those coils . . . and they're
a bitch to make!"
"Hell, Mac, if you have to fix them, it will just keep you out of trouble!"
The two technicians lifted something long and  slen-der  and  began  working it back  through the hole
into the lab. It was a totally nondescript collection of parts with broken wires leading out of it at various
points. There was some broken glass in the unit, but neither end seemed to be damaged. Carl remarked
about this, "Doctor, I don't know how it happened, but it isn't badly damaged."
Bill Osbourne squatted down to inspect the unit closely as Mac and Carl set it on the floor of the lab.
"How long to fix it up, Carl?"
Carl was poking at it. "Oh . . . maybe two days with Mac's thumb-fingered help."
"Speak for yourself, electron-pusher," Mac growled. "Three days  at  the very most.  The coils aren't
bent. They're the parts I was worried about."
Tammy was also inspecting the unit. "Carl, what did you do here in the middle with the phasing coil?"
"Made it like the drawing, Tam."
"But you didn't!" She stretched her hand alongside the unit, roughly measuring the parts with the span
of her hand. "You made the coil about nineteen inches long. Vic's sketch said fourteen inches."
Carl stood up and took a sheet of paper from a nearby lab bench. "Here it is. It says nineteen point six
seven five inches."
Tammy looked at it. "That dimension's fourteen point six seven five inches, Carl."
Carl squinted at it. "Vic's fours look like nines. I made it nineteen inches. I figured if it's too long, it's
easier to cut it off to fourteen inches than to try to stretch it from fourteen to nineteen."
"Hold everything!" Osbourne interrupted  them. "That may be  why we  haven't  been  able  to  get any
ac-tion out of this thing!"
"Serendipitous lab accident," Len Marshall added.
"Exactly!"
The discussion was interrupted by the arrival of a Bridgeport Police cruiser, siren blaring and red lights
flashing as it pulled into the parking lot behind the lab and became visible through the hole in the wall.
"Great!" Osbourne sighed. "Somebody reported this as an industrial accident!"
Len peered through the hole in the wall. "That's Roger Catlin and Tom Baker. I'll go have a talk with
them." The lab director ducked out through the hole and went over to the patrol car.

"I'm sort of curious, Doctor," I put in. "Little lab accident. Hole in the wall. You tell me it's  a  space
drive and I'm going to fly it to Mars. What the hell is this pile of junk?  It  doesn't  look  like any rocket
motor to me!"
"It isn't. It's a sky hook," the research director said. "What Carl did here today was to produce motion
through space without the ejection of mass."
"A massless rocket? Come on now!"
The two  technicians were  looking  at  me,  aware  of  my  presence  at  last,  and  there  was  suspicion
sticking out all over them.
Osbourne noticed it. "Sony, gang. Meet Mike Call, star gazer and airplane driver. Mike, this tall drink
of water  is  Mac  Roston,  our  chief  mechanical  tech.  Carl  Curley  here  is  our  dynamics  lab  tech,  an
electron-pusher by trade because there are so many electronic gadgets connected with the sky hook." I
shook hands with both of them as Osbourne went on, "Mike is prac-tically aboard, and I see no reason
to withhold informa-tion about this from him. After all, he's seen it, and he'll be working with it . . ."
"You mean, you're not afraid I'll run out of here and sell it to the Russians?" I quipped, still reaching for
the reaction that would confirm for me that this was a gov-ernment Skonk Works operation.
"No,  I  am  more  worried  that  you  might  take  it  over  to  Caterpillar  or  International  Harvester,"
Osbourne told me levelly. He  indicated  the broken  unit with a  sweep  of his hand.  "And just because
you've seen it doesn't mean that you know how it works."
"Uh, well, you're  sort  of right about  that," I admit-ted.  "But look,  I'm a  hardware  type,  and  I  can
usually duplicate something after I've seen it, providing I have a basic understanding of how it works . . ."
"But you can't duplicate a fluorescent light tube  after  seeing one  if you don't  understand  phosphors,
plasmas, ballasts, and so forth," Len Marshall told me. He was right.
"Well, it's really pretty simple," Osbourne tried to explain. He  pointed  to  the shattered  remains of a
glass tube. "This is—or was—a simple glass tube filled with neon at a fraction of a torr. There are other
gases that might have worked better and given us a more efficient plasma, but neon is cheap and readily
available. We es-tablished a plasma in the tube. Then we accelerated the charged plasma particles with a
very high frequency saw-tooth wave shape. The sharp-rising leading edge of the sawtooth wave smacks
the plasma hard,  and  it reacts  by moving and  accelerating.  Before  the system has  time to  react  as  a
whole,  the  plasma  is  then  socked  with  the  trailing  edge  of  the  sawtooth  wave  at  a  much  lower
rate-of-change of acceleration. Now, if we hang the unit ballistically with the thrust axis horizontal, any
thrust that shows up will displace the pendulum . . ."
"But if it does anything, it should just oscillate back and forth around its rest point," I argued.
"If we'd driven it with a sine wave, it would. But we're using an asymmetrical sawtooth wave to drive
it. Different rates-of-change  of acceleration  in different di-rections.  All the early experiments with this
sort of sys-tem were  made  with mechanical devices  working at  a  hundred  Hertz  or  less,  and  they all
tended to come apart once the reaction force was properly phased with the action force. So we went to
electromagnetic, driving at several megaHertz . . ."
"You're getting 'way beyond me here," I objected, "and what you're  saying doesn't  make  any sense
from the standpoint of physics. Action and reaction are equal and opposite  .  .  .  and  that's  the way
it's been  since long before Sir Isaac Newton wrote the equation  for the Third Law of Motion.  This
whole thing—if it does  work  the way you are  trying to  explain it  to  me—would  violate  most  of  the
energy conservation laws, the princi-ples of thermodynamics, and most of Newtonian phys-ics that has
been thoroughly checked out in practice for more than four hundred years!"
"And  Newton  worked  fine  until  Faraday,  Maxwell,  Einstein,  and  Planck  came  along,  Mike,"
Osbourne pointed out. "Give me thirty minutes at a chalkboard, and I'll explain it in mathematical terms

that you'll un-derstand perfectly . . ."
"Mathematics will only give you the logical conse-quences of your initial assumptions," I told him.
"But when you use  the math to  design working de-vices,  wouldn't  you  say  that  the  math  bears  a
one-to-one relationship to the real Universe?"
"Well, yes, but . . ."
Osbourne stood up. "Carl, Mac, let's get this thing swinging again. Rebuild it. Carl,  let Len and  me
know when you get ready to turn it on the next time."
"Sorry, Doctor, I didn't mean to run an experiment without letting you know. I was just trying to adjust
the phasing," Carl attempted to apologize.
Osbourne waved his hand. "Never mind! The fact that you misread Vic's rough sketch  plus the fact
that you were diddling around to get it to work gave us the keys to success. Congratulations on making it
work!"
That accolade from Osbourne seemed to make the lab tech very proud indeed. He grinned from ear
to ear as though it were the highest honor that anyone could pay him.
Len Marshall ducked back through the hole in the wall. "No trouble," he reported. "Roger and  Tom
were just responding to a call from United Telecom next door. Thought we might need some help."
"Good enough. Mike, let's go up front and get you signed up on the payroll right away."
"Uh, Doctor, could I talk with you privately first?"
Obviously, Osbourne thought that I wanted to dis-cuss salary. "Mike, I don't haggle. But if you want
to discuss it in private, okay by me." He turned to his lab director. "Len, let me borrow your office for a
few minutes. Tell Ruth to bring in all the necessary em-ployment forms."
Once settled in Len Marshall's office with the door closed, Osbourne said, "Okay, Mike, shoot!"
"I want to know exactly what's going on here."
"Fair enough. What's bothering you?"
"You've got a cleverly hidden covert research opera-tion going on here, another Manhattan District or
a new type of Skonk Works," I told him directly. "I must compliment you. It's very, very well done. But,
if I'm going to work for NEMECO, I want to know who's really paying my salary. Is it the Department
of De-fense? The CIA?"
Bill Osbourne started to laugh. He laughed for al-most a full minute.
"What's so funny?" I wanted to know.
"Mike,  you're  overly  suspicious  because  of  some  inci-dent  in  your  background  that  you  haven't
revealed to me."
"Hardly.  Look,  everything  just  happens  to  fall  neatly  into  place.  Here's  a  well-run  little  industrial
company  with  an  impeccable  record  and  a  far-out  research  lab  working  on  a  gadget  that  hasn't  a
damned thing to do with the company's historic product line . . ."
"And that's where you're dead wrong," Osbourne cut in. He lit up another of his dark cigarettes in its
long filter holder. "We have some far-out stuff going on here. You haven't seen any of it except for the
sky hook. But every damned bit of it is related to the com-pany's future product lines twenty years from
now . . . I hope."
"Okay, then tell me what a basic industrial firm like NEMECO is going to do with a space drive? Are
you going into competition with Rockwell or Thiokol in the space business?"
"Maybe  we'll  license  that  use.  It  could  well  be  that  NEMECO  doesn't  have  the  capital  or  the

marketing know-how  to  properly  exploit the space  side  of the sky  hook,"  Osbourne  admitted.  "That
remains to  be  seen.  But  it's  really  a  sky  hook,  and  our  Heavy  Industrial  Equipment  Division  out  in
Roseville, Michigan, will probably end up making the units for industrial use."
"I don't follow you."
"You've just come from the milieu where all high-technology is government stuff. No wonder you have
a tendency to think that we're a Skonk Works operation.  Boy,  I could  sure  use  some  of that  kind of
money if it weren't for the strings attached to it. Anyway, there are lots of applications in industrial and
extractive opera-tions where you have to lift something. So you get a crane, or a chain hoist, or a gantry,
or a jack. But sup-pose none of those will do the job? Suppose you can't get a heavy crane into the site?
Suppose the item to be lifted is in a mine tunnel with a seven-foot overhead clearance? Suppose you've
got to cantilever the rollers on a rolling mill without taking the whole damned ma-chine apart to do it? So
you get a NEMECO sky hook, which will be the registered trade name of the unit. That is why Grant
Halden and Hay Newcomb are back-ing the research on our dynamic systems project, the sky hook. I
could never sell them on backing research on a space drive, as you know very well, having studied the
annual reports of this company . . ."
"Then why do you want to hire a pilot-astronomer?"
"Because I am going to build a space vehicle for pea-nuts powered by the sky  hook  that  will go to
Mars and back with a pilot-astronomer on board. It will give us publicity that will let us license the sky
hook for what-ever the traffic will bear. It will also boost the price of NEMECO stock right through the
ceiling . . ."
"And you've got stock options."
"You're damned right I do! And so will you, along with everybody else who works in this lab. 'Do not
bind the mouths of the kine who tread the grain.' "
"The mouths of the what?"
"The modern word is 'swine.' And that's the way it's got to be done  because  the objective  is to
make money ..."
"And to vindicate your career."
"Yes, that too. The reason I'm going to send a space drive vehicle to Mars on a shoestring is because
I've  fought  tooth  and  nail  against  our  overpriced,  overengineered,  overtested,  and  overrated  space
program for years. It's run by a bunch of Brahmin high priests who've set it aside  as  their own private
preserve.  Every  low-cost,  privately  financed  project  that's  come  down  the  pike—things  like
OTRAG—have been killed by them. I'm going to beat them." Osbourne stopped  for a  mo-ment,  then
snuffed out his cigarette and blew residual smoke out of his cigarette holder. "Yes, I'm thinking about my
career  too,  because  the sky  hook  is  going  to  make  it  for  me.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  anybody  who's
as-sociated  with  our  work  here  is  going  to  have  his  career  made.  Now,  knowing  all  this,  do  you
understand why your suggestion that this is a covert government project was so hilarious? How would a
government organiza-tion handle this, even if it were a covert operation?"
"It would be classified so high that nobody could ex-ploit it," I guessed.
"Or it would be parceled out to a favorite aerospace company  with a  wad  of million-dollar bills for
addi-tional development work to tide them over  the transi-tion  from rocket  propulsion  to  space  drive
propulsion,  which  might  take  as  long  as  twenty  years,  or  at  least  long  enough  to  enable  the  lead
managers and engineers to retire with successful careers in rocketry behind them and without having to
learn  new  things.  And  long  enough  to  legally  write  off  all  the  tooling  and  other  cap-ital  equipment
associated with rocket propulsion work." Osbourne stuffed his cigarette holder in his shirt pocket. "No,
Mike, there isn't one penny of government money involved in this work . . . and we could've had all the
government money we wanted."

"Yeah, I guess that you and Hay Newcomb probably have some  good  contacts  with the Air Force
..." I observed.
"You bet we do, and we also know how they think and how they work . . . and we don't want a bit of
it. We have even better contacts through the NEMECO Board of Directors to any government agency
you want to name, but we don't want to suggest such a course of action to the Board . . ."
"Why not?"
"They might prefer to use somebody else's money to finance the R&D, even knowing that NEMECO
might wind up holding the short and dirty end of the stick, but with enough of the action to make a few
bucks any-way."
"Won't you eventually have to face that possibility?"
"Not if we do it right after you have flown to Mars and back . . . and  then it's  too  late because  the
exis-tence of the sky hook is public knowledge around the world."
I decided that Osbourne and NEMECO were for real . . . and I also decided that I wanted to be a
part of it in the very worst way. "Doctor, I'll fly your gadget to  Mars  and  back  if there's  a  reasonable
probability that I can make it in one piece. But I have to have a say in how the vehicle is designed and
built. After all, I'll be the guy who's going to strap his pink bod into it . . ."
"Welcome aboard!"
Ruth Morse showed up with a whole pile of forms that  I had  to  fill out.  Len gave me a  little office
about six by eight feet, just enough room for a desk, a file cabinet, and two chairs. Fortunately, it had a
window because I don't like being bottled up in the usual engi-neering cubicle found in aerospace plants.
It was right next to Tammy's office, but I didn't get the chance to talk to Tammy at all. I spent the rest
of the day filling out forms.
It  gets  worse  and  worse  to  go  to  work  for  somebody.  Not  only  is  there  the  usual  company
employment  form  that  lays  one's  personal  life  bare  before  some  unknown  (and  probably  uncaring)
company personnel officer, but there  are  uncountable government forms as  well— FICA,  withholding
tax,  workmen's  compensation,  ad  nauseam.  Then  there  were  additional  lengthy  company  forms  for
hospitalization insurance, medical insurance,  executive life insurance,  retirement plan,  stock  option  and
stock purchase plans, and a "corporate information disclosure" form. I read this last one over and  then
went to see Len Marshall about it.
"Bill told me that you were to be brought aboard on the professional level, so that gives you some neat
perks such as the stock option plan . . ."
"Yeah, that doesn't bother me, but it's this other  one,  the 'corporate  information disclosure'  form. It
sounds very nasty," I said, looking it over. "It locks up every-thing that I do—all scientific and technical
work,  all patents  and  patent  rights, all copyrightable  material, ev-erything.  It  says  that  I  can't  talk  to
anybody  or  write  anything  about  what  I  do  for  NEMECO  under  any  cir-cumstances  without  prior
written  approval  from  the  chief  executive  officer  of  the  company.  That's  pretty  broad  and  pretty
restrictive, Len. And there's no time limit on it."
"Look, Mike," Len said quietly, "all of us signed that. It's a small thing to give up in order  to  do  this
kind of work for this kind of a company.  NEMECO  has  to  protect  itself against body-snatchers  who
raid brain-power for the competition. We're in a competitive mar-ketplace. I don't know of any instance
in the history  of  the  company—and  NEMECO's  been  around  for  many  years—that  the  company's
gotten nasty about things like that."
"Yeah, but there's always a first time," I pointed out.
"True, but what sort  of image would that  give this  company?  This  is  no  shlock  outfit,  Mike.  Ask
anybody here. They'll all confirm the fact that NEMECO treats its people right. This is a  very paternal

company. It didn't get to where it is by screwing its employees."
"I don't like it. Suppose I don't sign it?"
Len sighed deeply. "Then I'd have to show you to the front door, Mike. This is policy, and I've got to
carry it out. It's part of my job. Just sign it. If any problem does come up, you can always discuss it with
the legal de-partment or, in the extreme, take NEMECO to court about it. Everybody's always got that
right."
So I signed it. Len witnessed my signature. Ruth Morse put her notary seal on it.
Ruth gave me a  time card.  "I'll come  by every  Friday  afternoon  and  pick  it up so  that  the Payroll
department  up  at  headquarters  gets  it  that  evening.  Then  you'll  get  your  check  the  following
Wednesday."
"But this is a time-clock card!" I objected. "I don't punch a time clock. I never have, and I never will."
"Nobody at the lab does, so don't fret. We use it be-cause it's a corporate form, and it makes it easier
for Payroll. Fill it out anytime. Here's a list of charge num-bers."
"Well, I guess I am assigned to Dynamic Systems," I remarked.
"You should put down G&A for today,"  Ruth sug-gested.  "Actually, nobody  really cares  what you
charge your time to, except don't lay too much on G&A or Ad-ministrative. The Front Office gets upset
and questions it."
"So I should use G&A when I go apartment hunt-ing?"
"If you want to save some time, why don't you have a look at the room at my place? Ron Miller just
vacated it."
It turned out that Ruth had been left a large home by her late husband. Her own children were off on
their own. So she rented rooms to "NEMECO people and other nice technical types." She  also  had  a
breakfast and dinner boarding deal available to "hold down the awful cost of food these days; I can buy
things in large quantities down at the wholesale market, and all of us make our paychecks go farther."
When the lab doors closed at  five o'clock,  I found myself riding home with Ruth Morse  in her old
Plym-outh to have a look at the room and to decide whether or not I wanted to take it. She car-pooled
with Tammy Dudley and Carl Curley, both of whom also boarded with her.
Ruth chattered on in an almost absent  fashion as  we  cleared  the industrial and  downtown  area  and
drove out Park Avenue to the older, residential part of town.
Except for the modern automobiles on the streets, it was like returning to the early twentieth century.
The homes were huge by modern standards, mostly big, wood-framed  structures  with porches  and  at
least three stories, one of which was a windowed attic with dor-mers. These homes must have been built
in the early 1900s, and they were in beautiful condition. It was comfortable, almost traditional American
living of the sort one remembers with warm fondness from one's own youth.
Morse  Manor,  as  Carl  called it, was  a  big old brute  of a  place  with  white  shingled  siding,  a  bay
window, a  window-enclosed  porch,  and  a  genuine porte  cochere.  Green  canvas  awnings shaded  the
windows. A white picket fence surrounded the grassy front yard with its huge oak trees that shaded the
house. Morse Manor had personality, and so did each room.
Mine  was  a  corner  bedroom  with  two  windows,  one  of  which  faced  the  street  with  a  small  air
conditioner in it. Its walls were covered with print wallpaper and there were honest pictures in frames on
the walls—not some hack artist's impressionistic paint-two-per-day for the motel market. The bathroom
was between my room—it was my room the moment I saw it—and Carl Curley's, and it was tiled with
real ceramic and dominated by a huge enameled bathtub perched off the floor on cast-iron clawed feet.
I paid a month in advance, kicked in for a week's groceries, found out which bank I should open an
ac-count at, got checked out on all the light switches, was given a  key  to  the back  door,  and  learned

how to hit the window whose sash weight would occasionally stick.
The rest of Morse Manor was just as comfortable be-cause we were treated by Ruth as "her family."
I met Peter Wilding as Tammy, Carl, and I were sit-ting in the living room  watching the six o'clock
news on TV.  He  was  an  older  man,  bustling  and  stocky,  with  horn-rimmed  glasses.  A  devout  and
confirmed bache-lor, he worked for United Telecommunications Labora-tories in Trumbull and told me
that he was a specialist in vacuum tubes.
This sort of set me back. "Vacuum tubes? I didn't think there were any of those left around any more."
"That's why vacuum tube engineers are in such high demand," Peter Wilding explained, settling himself
into a chair with a thump. "There are a lot of applications in electronics where the good  old thermionic
vacuum tube does the job better, cheaper, and more efficiently. After all, we're sitting here watching TV
on a big vacuum tube!"
Dinner was family style. It had been a long time since I had had a genuine family meal. It was pleasant,
like coming home.
Wilding volunteered to take me down to the New  Barnum to  pick  up my things from the company
room after supper. Carl said he wanted  to  go along for the ride.  Wilding chattered  and  talked  all the
way. He wanted to know what I did and  where  I'd  come  from and  what schools  and  universities I'd
attended. I told him.
After we got back, I unpacked my things and began to hang them up. There was a discreet knock at
the bathroom door, and I opened it to see Carl Curley standing there.
"Hi! Come in!"
"Not for long. Gotta get to bed," Carl said quietly. "I just wanted to tell you to be careful."
"Why?"
"Peter Wilding is one of the best industrial spies we've ever run up against."

Chapter Five
I bounded into the lab the next morning with Ruth, Carl, and Tammy, all eager to go to Mars.
Osbourne wasn't there. It was Friday, and Len told me that the research director usually spent the day
writ-ing up weekly reports and briefing the NEMECO exec-utives.
I wanted to find out more about the sky hook. So I asked Len.
"According to Bill's instructions, you are assigned to the dynamic systems project," Len told me. "I've
been handling the experimental aspect of it. Vic is the theo-retical man and the math shark."
"Let me get something straight," I said. "Who's running the show? If Vic comes in and tells me to do
some-thing, do I tell him to shove it?"
"No, at least not that way. Do it gently and diplomat-ically. Vic has a short fuse. So use t-a-c-t tact.
Remem-ber, he comes from a different culture where he was part of the elite who could order everyone
else around. Basically, he's a nice guy and wants to get along."
"I've worked with other mathematicians. I'll cope. But you're  the boss,  and  that's  what I wanted  to
find out." I had been working in the strict pecking order of scientific academia where the important thing
is to find out who's boss and, equally important, who has the ear of the Top Man.
Len went on, "We'll more or less work together for a while as  you become  familiar with the theory
and the hardware. You know of Bill's long-range plan for the sky hook ..."
"We discussed it . . ."
"Good.  Don't  talk  about  it."  Len  paused  for  a  mo-ment,  then  added,  "And  be  careful  of  Peter
Wilding."
"Carl warned me about him."
"We are  pretty  sure  he was  planted  at  Morse  Manor,  although  he's  been  a  for-real  vacuum  tube
engineer at  United Telecom Labs  for years."  Len paused  and  looked  thoughtful for a  moment. "Ever
been associated with any classified government programs?" 
"No. Astronomy was an open field."
"Then you won't have to unlearn things. Around here, we don't talk to anybody except  the lab gang
con-cerning  anything that we  do  here.  I'll give you some  cover-up  false data  that  is intended  to  lead
industrial spies down the garden path in the opposite direction."
"That's fine, except I don't even know where we're going, and I work here now," I told him. "I'd like
to find out about the sky hook."
Len got up from his desk and went over to a file cabinet. "That's the next order of business," he said
as he opened  the second  drawer.  He  pulled out  several  large  documents  bound  with  orange  plastic
spines; the covers were an innocuous blue. "If you ever see a re-port like this with an orange binding and
a blue cover lying unattended on a desk  or  lab bench,  pick  it up and  bring it to  me immediately. We
don't put big secret stamps all over our sensitive stuff. That'd tell people what's the most important stuff
to steal. You'll see a lot of cover-and-binding color combinations here in the lab, but this combination of
orange binding and blue cover means that the information's hot-hot-hot. It's never left unattended except
in a locked file cabinet or in the locked lower left hand drawer of your desk. What I'm telling you isn't
written down anywhere. It's passed to each employee by word of mouth only. Just remem-ber it."
"Gotcha!"

"Although Carl could probably use some help back in the dynamics lab cleaning up and rebuilding the
unit, you can more profitably spend your time coming up to the same level of ignorance and  confusion
that the rest of us enjoy." I was beginning to get a feeling for this stocky laboratory director who spoke
so seriously and yet interlarded his talk with unexpected bits of humor delivered with a straight face. He
was obviously dedi-cated.  He  was  not a  leader,  but a  very good  Number  Two  Man—an  executive
officer, so to speak. I guessed that he used his humor to maintain his sense of perspec-tive. Some people
might consider  Len to  be  flippant, but I understood  that  he  was  using  humor  as  a  tool  for  handling
people. He went on, "I'm not enough of a mathematician or theorist to  give you the full dog-and-pony
show that Osbourne  and  Vic can  put on.  With  your  background,  you'd  be  asking  me  embarrassing
questions that I couldn't answer, so I don't care to be put on the spot, thank you. It's quite likely that Bill
will have Grant Halden and Hay Newcomb down here for a full briefing within the next few days,  and
you'll get the full treatment. But you won't be able to keep up with the show unless you've got the basic
background."
"As I told you, it seems to me that you're violating a lot of basic conservation laws."
"That's the first reaction  most physicists have," Len said  with a  smile. "You should've  heard  Serge
Korsinski and Ted Mayan try to tear Bill apart that first time!"
"Pardon me, but who are they?"
"Professor  Serge  Korsinski  is  from  the  Engineering  Physics  Department  of  Stevens  Institute  of
Technology  in  Hoboken,  and  Dr.  Theodore  Mayan  is  with  the  Phys-ics  Department  of  the  State
University of New York. Korsinski is one of the world's top authorities on the photon and attacked Bill
pretty  strongly when Bill gave the first paper  on this at  a  New  York  Academy  of Sci-ences  meeting
about a year ago."
"I didn't think you were talking about this work."
"Back then, we were. Bill was using the NYAS paper to convince the academic types that NEMECO
had a legitimate corporate research effort going here. Unless you've got the recognition of academia, you
aren't going to get papers published and you can't attract good research people as the effort expands."
"Tell me all about it!" I muttered.
"Huh?"
"Never mind. I've been down that road."
"Oh.  On  the  other  hand,  Ted  Mayan  was  Bill's  thesis  advisor  once  .  .  .  Top-notch  man,
probably  the  world's  greatest  authority on hyperstrength  gravi-tational fields.  Both  men  are  on  our
consulting staff. Bill brings them up here about once a month to  look  things over,  to  ask  embarrassing
questions, and to keep us honest." He pushed a pile of reports across the desk at me. "Here's something
you can start on, a collection of papers on the theoretical background beginning with copies from Bill's
research notebook and including the landmark NYAS  paper—which  has  been  forgotten,  by the way.
There are also a bunch of internal reports and unpublished papers. They should give you the theoreti-cal
background."
He then pushed another stack of documents across the desk to me. "And here are the regular monthly
progress  reports.  They'll  tell  you  all  about  the  blind  al-leys  we  went  down.  Should  keep  you  from
inventing the square wheel." He then pushed a third volume toward me. "And this is the far-out stuff, the
implications of the work assuming that certain portions of the hypothe-sis are correct. You should take
this last report with a very large dose of salt. It's pretty far out, maybe some-thing our grandchildren will
be working on."
I groaned  under  the load  that I carried  back  to  my office, got  myself  a  cup  of  coffee,  sat  down,
looked out the window at the gray New England sky, and started to read.

I was looking forward to a boring day or two reading dry, dull, uninspiring scientific documents filled
with  page  after  page  of  partial  differential  equations  and  ten-sor  calculus—"banjo  music,"  Physical
Review stuff.
I was dead wrong.
The first volume I opened  began  with a  photocopy  of Osbourne's  research  notebook  written  very
carefully in a round, legible script  as  though he were  thinking at  the time that  perhaps  a  lot of people
might be reading it someday. He started off:
"It has  occurred  to  me, based  upon  my own  ob-servations  of  the  behavior  of  real
systems and upon a great deal of information of both classified and open nature which I
have had occasion to obtain during the past twenty-seven years, that the basic principles
of  both  classical  (Newtonian)  and  modern  (relativistic)  physics  have  never  been
compared with many of the empirical findings and  know-how  of the engineer-ing arts.
This is not to say that either the physicists or the engineers are wrong, but only that their
views of the Universe are  different.  Physicists  use  the  ubiqui-tous  'Constant  K'  while
engineers use various finagle factors' in order to make their math match the reality of the
Universe. Of great  interest  to  me in this  regard  is  the  behavior  of  real  systems  when
subjected to sudden change.
"The very nature of the relativistic space-time con-cept, the quantum nature of matter
and energy, and the reaction of real systems leads me to a postulate that both physicists
and engineers will generally agree to without argument:
"The characteristics of any given system cannot be changed in zero time, and a definite
period of time must elapse between the instant of onset of a change and the moment at
which the entire system responds to the change as a total system. In a period of time less
than this, the system does not and cannot behave as it does with constant inputs.
"If one accepts the hypothesis that one cannot change a given system in zero  time, a
number of fas-cinating consequences follow.
"Let us go back to the classical Newtonian equa-tion of motion . . ."
It was fascinating! At that point, Osbourne began to investigate the logical consequences of his initial
as-sumption.  I  had  observed  and  used  some  of  them  for  years.  His  mathematical  analysis  and
development were quite straightforward. In several places,  I could  see  where  his logic started  to  lead
him down a blind alley. But the notebook pages showed that he brought himself up short with his own
realization that he was  on the wrong path.  He  backtracked,  picked  up  the  train  of  logic  again,  and
followed it down another path.
The reprint of the NYAS paper was an innocuous little monograph  presented  at  one  of the NYAS
me-chanical engineering symposia.  It  was  entitled,  "Some  Characteristics  of  Transient  Phenomena  in
Real Sys-tems." Obviously, it had been intended as a landmark to indicate to those who might follow, "I
was  here  first!"  The  paper  was  a  more  concise  and  technical  treatment  of  the  speculative  and
experimental rationales of Osbourne's notebook.
I borrowed a pad of ruled paper from Tammy and began to make notes. On several occasions, I had
to work through the derivations of the equations just to satisfy myself that Osbourne  was  following the
proper rules of mathematics.
It was obvious as the writing proceeded that Os-bourne realized he was getting beyond his depth  in
mathematics. I could begin to see the abilities of Victor Aboud enter the picture.
I forgot lunch until Tammy stuck her pretty face in the door  and  asked,  "Do you want a  sandwich?
Mac is going down to the corner deli."

"Huh? Well, I guess so. What kinds of sandwiches are available?"
"It's Friday, so the Special is hot pastrami on a hard roll with cole slaw on the side."
"Sounds good. I'll take it."
I put the reports away in the lower left hand drawer of my desk as instructed, turned upside-down the
paper with my math, and wandered out into the lab.
Government regulations require  that  an  employer  provide  a  separate  eating  room  with  tables  and
chairs for all employees, and there was indeed one such room in the lab. It even had a sign on the door
that said, "Employee Lunch Room." But nobody was in there. The tables were stacked high with piles of
trade jour-nals, technical magazines, and newspapers.
Where was the lab gang if they weren't in the special room that had been set aside for them? I found
them in Mac's machine shop next to the coffee maker. Carl had spread a drop cloth over the horizontal
bed of the mill-ing machine. Others were gathered around the big gran-ite leveling block.
Mac  showed  up  with  a  paper  sack  full  of  big  sand-wiches  wrapped  in  waxed  paper  and  paper
cartons of cole slaw. Ruth Morse dug out a supply of washed plas-tic forks and spoons, plus a  roll of
paper towels for nap-kins. And I got initiated to the NEMECO lab-gang lunch hour.
Today, the subject was me. They wanted to know where I had come from, what I had done, and why
I was here. I tried to tell them as best I could. In the process, I met Wendell Stone, a gaunt and acerbic
engi-neer from the "Northeast Kingdom of Vermont" who spoke in the clipped, concise accents of the
region and possessed an astringent sense of humor.
"Pray tell," I asked Stone, "what is a lowly mechani-cal engineer such as yourself doing in the midst of
this gang of wild researchers?"
"Done a bit of research myself in my time," Stone replied casually. "But I'm a development engineer. In
the old days back on Stone Hill in Vermont, they would have called me the local fix-it man. I'm on loan
from the Mill Equipment Division in Trumbull and working out the final bugs of the shot-alloying process
so we can eventually get the pilot plant set up . . ."
"Providing we can get all the bugs out," Len Mar-shall added.
"There are always bugs in anything," Stone pointed out. "The closer one comes to full production, the
fewer bugs there are, but they are bigger and nastier and more expensive. And even when in production
there are bugs . . . and it bothers me more than a little bit when the newspapers make a big thing about
automobile re-calls, airplane crashes, minor nuclear plant accidents, and all the rest. There comes a point
in development where the engineers with calculators must turn a gadget over to a person like myself who
can diddle with it, tune it, and make it run in spite of everything. Real en-gineering has  always been  an
art. It disturbs me when universities give engineering degrees that are really sci-entific union cards. At the
same time, they down-grade honest engineers to a level they call 'engineering tech-nologists,' who are in
reality the hands-on engineers."
"I thought you called yourself an inventor," Mac Roston interjected as he poured himself another cup
of coffee from the big urn.
"That was last week," Stone replied.
"What's  the  difference?"  I  wanted  to  know.  I  was  be-ginning  to  like  this  Vermont  engineer  who
appeared  to  have  his  feet  solidly  on  the  ground  with  a  pragmatic  ap-proach  to  the  application  of
technical know-how.
"Between what?"
"Between an engineer and an inventor?"
"Inventors lead  technology.  They figure out some-thing that  works  and  leave  it  to  the  scientists  to

explain why and  the engineers to  make  it bigger, better,  faster,  and  cheaper.  Invention  is  the  bridge
between research and engineering. Except it sometimes doesn't work out as neatly as I've indicated . . ."
"Wouldn't the sky hook blow a huge hole in your hypothesis?" Len Marshall asked.
"Not at all. Bill and Vic think that Carl made it work because of the equations and calculations. Carl
and I know better," Stone said quietly.
"So you've had your heavy hand in that project, too?" Len said.
Wendell Stone looked back at him. "Len, stop think-ing that it's possible to partition off the projects in
this lab by Sheetrock walls or special rules. That's a fiction for the Front Office."
"I know that!"
"Which is  why  I  enjoy  working  over  here.  Bob  Destry's  shop  in  Trumbull  runs  like  a  militarized
produc-tion outfit."
"That's what it's supposed to be," Len pointed out.
"Yup, guess you're right. Somebody's got to put product out the back  door  to  pay  for our  hobbies
over here."
"Which Destry doesn't like at all," Len added.
"You are very correct. This whole lab is the target of a great deal of envy on the part of some divisions
who would rather have the budget divided up among them-selves for their own in-house work."
"But that would involve only development work on their own product lines," Tammy objected.  "Our
job here is to come up with things that are different from their current products and yet in line with their
capabil-ities."
"Tell Destry that," Stone growled. "You're all very fortunate in having Bill Osbourne to hold off Destry
and the rest of the division managers . . . with no small amount of help from Newcomb."
"And don't forget Halden," Len commented. "He loves the stuff we're doing here."
"Great until he stumbles. Just let earnings drop for three quarters in a row, then start to sweat," Stone
warned.  "I've been  through  it  before.  The  minute  things  get  tight,  the  controller  will  start  yelling  for
economy moves . . . And what are the two things that always get cut in a corporate economy move?"
"Research and advertising," Mac Roston said.
"You bet!" Len Marshall added to that. "I'd hate to have to  stop  work  on the sky  hook  right now!
Speaking of the sky hook, how's it coming, Carl?"
"Not bad," Carl replied in between bites of his sand-wich. "Busted the glass tube, but I blew a  new
one this morning and got the electrodes sealed in. I'll have it filled with neon-argon today, and she should
be swing-ing again early next week."
"I'm still having trouble believing that it'll work," I put in.
"Not difficult when you think about it," Carl Curley replied in an offhanded manner as though he were
privy to all the secrets of the Universe. "Think of it as a ver-sion of the old rope trick."
"What do you mean?"
"Take a piece of rope and throw it into the air. Be-fore it has a chance to fall back down, climb it in
one hell of a hurry. Then as it starts to fall back, throw it up again and climb like hell. If you do  it fast
enough and keep at it long enough, you'll end up in the strato-sphere."
"If it were that easy, somebody would have done it long ago," I snapped.
"But it isn't easy, and we're conditioned to think that it's impossible. But it would work perfectly well
on a low-gravity planetoid, wouldn't it?" Len put in gently.

"I don't know about that," I mused. "I'd have to check the math."
"And that's  the problem  with modern  engineering," Stone  observed.  "Too  much  dependence  upon
science."
The back door to the shop opened and Bill Osbourne strode in with a big grin on his face. "Howdy,
gang!" He was greeted by a chorus of voices. "Carl, can you have the sky  hook  swinging by Monday
afternoon? Halden, Newcomb, and Sanatella want to see a demonstra-tion as quickly as possible."
Carl groaned. "There's a lot of work there, Doctor. Maybe by Wednesday. I've got about two days'
work just to rebuild it, plus about a day to hang it and get it tuned up."
"I hate  to  push you, but this  is  important.  Can  you  possibly  get  it  ready  by  Monday  afternoon?"
Osbourne wanted to know as he stepped to the coffee cup rack and took down his cup.
"It would mean working all weekend," Carl pointed out.
"Carl, can I help?" I wanted to know.  "I'll spend  a  little time this afternoon  going over  some  of the
nuts-and-bolts stuff in the reports, then I'll give you a hand if it'll do any good."
"Extra hands are always a help," Carl said.
"I've got family plans tonight," Stone put in, "but I'll be here tomorrow if you need another ten fingers
to stir the pot."
"Well, with help from Mike and Wendell, I might be able to make your deadline, Doctor," Carl  told
the re-search director. "But it'll mean a lot of overtime."
Osbourne looked at Len. "How's the budget?"
"Tight, but Carl would be the only hourly person in-volved. Mike and Wendell are salaried."
"Oh, the woes of a professional salaried engineer! The company owns us body and soul twenty-four
hours a day and seven days a week," Stone remarked.
Osbourne said, "Keep track of the time and let Len know. You and Mike can take off compensatory
time . . . provided you don't tell Destry about it, Wendell."
"I'm an engineer, but that doesn't mean I'm crazy," Stone observed.
"Okay, Carl, go to it! Overtime authorized. This is important, so anybody else who's involved
and who can work on it this weekend is also authorized to come in," Osbourne announced. "R&D is not
done on a nine-to-five basis . . ."

Chapter Six
I went back to reading and going over the equations. I had a hard time satisfying myself that the basic
theory was sound. However, I began to make some sense out of the mathematical banjo music of Vic's
tensors  and  field  equations  after  it  dawned  on  me  that  Bill  and  Vic  had  taken  the  basic  Maxwell
equations  that tied to-gether  electricity and  magnetism and  had  extended  the analogy of the  Maxwell
electromagnetic field equations to gravity and  inertia. I hoped  that  they were  right be-cause  it was  so
mathematically neat.
Out of their analogy came the hypothesis that a grav-itational field was  a  consequence  of a  moving
gravita-tional charge as opposed to a static electric charge pro-ducing an electric field. The analogy to
the magnetic field  produced  by  a  moving  charged  particle  was  the  accelerated  gravitational  charge
producing an "inertial field." And when a gravitational charge was subjected to a change of acceleration,
a "surge" or a jolt—such as when a  gyro is processed—a  new form of radiation  should be  produced
analogous to  electromagnetic  radia-tion  of charged  particles.  Osbourne  labeled  this new ra-diation  as
"gravito-inertial radiation," or GI radiation for short.
It was a logical consequence of Osbourne's unassail-able basic assumption. But I couldn't get into the
field equations deeply enough to  grasp  the basic  characteris-tics  of GI radiation.  It  was  a  whole new
concept.
But I began to see how a sky hook could be built. On a basic level, it was somewhat like encountering
the theories  of alternating electric  current  for the first time after  you've  worked  for  years  with  direct
current.
Back in the nineteenth century, it was generally be-lieved by scientists that alternating current couldn't
do any work because the positive and negative cycles aver-aged out to zero. It took Steinmetz to get out
of that cul-de-sac and introduce the use of a purely imaginary number that does not exist in the Universe
at all and  without which alternating current  won't  work:  the square-root  of minus-one or  "i."  And  he
introduced such concepts as "capacitance," "inductance," and "impedance."
There  were  analogies  to  AC  theory  in  Osbourne's  work,  and  I  began  to  see  where  it  might  be
possible  to  utilize an alternating  or  cyclic  force  to  produce  work  in  an  unbalanced  system  that  was
properly tuned so that the reaction force was out of phase with the action force.
A quick  look  through the lab reports  showed  that  Osbourne  had  quickly  given  up  on  mechanical
devices and gone to experimental units that were driven at very high cyclic frequencies  in order  to  get
above  mechanical  res-onance  points.  To  get  high  frequencies  required  electro-magnetic  devices
operating in the megaHertz range,  and  Osbourne,  Vic, Len,  and  Carl  had  gone to  oscillating plasmas
which, at first, expended all their radiant en-ergy into the electromagnetic spectrum, that being the easiest
path for excess energy to leave the system. To make the sky hook work, Len and Carl figured out the
sawtooth  wave  concept  that  drove  the  system  asymmet-rically.  The  unit  then  also  radiated  into  the
electromag-netic spectrum as before, but had so much excess en-ergy to get rid of that it had to escape
the system as GI radiation, or so Bill and Vic surmised.
What  really  surprised  me  was  the  small  amount  of  input  energy  required  to  make  the  sky  hook
perform  at  all.  I  should  have  expected  it  because  there  was  no  mass  being  expelled.  Some  clever
gadgeteering by Carl and Wendell Stone produced a system in which nearly all of the electromagnetic
radiation was picked up and fed back into the system through a positive phase-shifting feedback loop. A
small amount of electromagnetic ra-diation from unshielded parts still leaked out.
The sky hook was supposed to displace itself by emit-ting GI radiation. But nobody in the lab had yet
figured out how to measure or even detect GI radiation.

By the end  of the afternoon,  I was  in  the  dynamics  lab  with  Carl.  It's  rough  when  you  step  into
somebody  else's  lab or  workshop.  You don't  know  where  the tools  are,  you don't  know  where  the
spare parts are kept, and you don't know what spare parts are on hand.
I simply told  Carl,  "I've soaked  up all the theory  that  I can  manage.  Use  me as  somebody  with a
strong back and a weak mind."
Carl did.
But he explained as we went along.
It didn't take me long to find out where everything was. We broke for supper, rode home with Ruth,
then came back to the lab after dinner to work some more.
Basically, the sky  hook  looked  like something right out of  a  Hollywood  science-fiction  movie:  the
planet-busting death ray gun with all the coils, adjustments, cooling fins, flashing and flickering lights, and
glowing  neon  tubes.  It  was  about  four  feet  in  length  with  a  one-meter  glass  tube.  Osbourne  had
suggested  the  one-meter  tube  to  simplify  some  of  the  data  reduction  and  calcula-tions.  Maximum
diameter over the coils was about six inches. The whole unit weighed about twenty kilograms.
But the electronic gadgetry needed to make the sky hook operate filled a whole lab bench with pulse
gener-ators, amplifiers, buffers, phase-lock units, and assorted power supplies.
I noticed the Federal Communications Commission radio transmitting license on the lab wall. "Yeah,"
Carl explained, "we get some leakage of about two or three watts up around  nine hundred  megaHertz
when we're running. So we had to get an experimental scientific radio station license."
"Does the FCC know what you're doing?"
"We  stated  that  we  needed  it  for  legitimate  scientific  purposes,  the  end  product  of  which  was
proprietary in-formation . . ." Carl remarked in an offhanded man-ner as he took a meter measurement
of one of the sky hook electrical circuits. "They don't seem to care; they just want to make  sure  we're
legal . . . and it seems Newcomb has some friends in Washington," he said, reading the digital display of
the voltmeter and entering the numbers in his ever-present laboratory notebook in a careful fashion. "I'm
a ham, and we could have worked this unit in one of the ham bands  .  .  .  except  that  it didn't  want to
work at anything except nine-hundred megaHertz with these dimensions."
That evening amounted to just plain hard technical work. I didn't learn much. I helped with assemblies,
helped stringing wires, helped make a few measure-ments, and held tools.  By midnight, we  were  both
worn out and went back to Morse Manor.
Saturday was not much different except that Wendell Stone was there. The engineer wasn't as good at
elec-tronics as Carl. I might have been Wendell's equal in that area myself. But when it came to out and
out engineering, the Vermonter was indeed ingenious with mechanical things. He was right out of the old
sealing  wax  and  string  days  of  1890  physics.  His  favorite  phrase  was,  "That's  close  enough  for
government work!"
"But this isn't government work," I reminded him.
"Okay, then tighten that bolt to a Curley fit."
"Huh? What's that?" Carl Curley wanted to know.
"The famous Curley fit, used  by all and  sundry around  the NEMECO  Corporate  Research  Center
Lab-oratories. I am surprised that you don't know about it, Carl, since it bears your name." Stone was
kidding him, and we both knew it. "The famous Curley fit: finger-tight, then back-off half a turn!"
This sort of banter went on constantly as we worked. It was interspersed with technical jargon while
we checked this, measured that, and connected something else. If someone had bugged that lab with the
idea of learning something about the sky hook, it would have sounded a lot like this:

"Throw me that seven-eighths open-end box . . . On second thought, just hand it gently to me . . ."
"Goddam miserable gawdforsaken lousy no-good  .  .  ." .
"Hit it with a bigger hammer!"
"Yeah, force to fit, file to hide, and paint to cover . . ."
"You sound more like Mac Roston every day!"
"Slide in there, you no-good lousy forking . . ."
"Now, now! Temper, temper!"
"Eyeball this and tell me how well you think it lines up . . ."
"Want me to get the theodolite and give you an hon-est answer?"
"Naw, just eyeball it."
"Excuse me while I put in my calibrated eye-ball . . ."
"Okay, looks good! Nudge it a little more. Little more! Little more! Whoa, too much! Back it off an
R-C-H! Easy! Okay, make it a half R-C-H!"
"Best I can do is one R-C-H. Can't expect much bet-ter than that without micrometers."
"Okay, turn it on and see if it passes the smoke test . . ."
"Power on!"
"I'll get another fuse from the electronics lab."
"Never mind! The power transistor protected the fuse by blowing first!"
"Think we ought to file for a patent on that one?"
"Naw, it happens all the time. The function of tran-sistors is to protect the fuses in the circuit!"
By late Saturday afternoon, the three of us had the basic sky  hook  unit back  together  and  checked
out.
"Let's call it a day," Carl sighed. "I'm plumb tuck-ered out and I don't relish having to hang that mother
tonight."
"I propose that we hit it with a great exuberance to-morrow morning," Wendell Stone suggested.
"It's still hard to believe," I remarked, glancing at the unit on the floor with wires festooned all over and
around it where we had been making electrical checks. "It will never fly!"
"It had better not!" Wendell Stone added. "One hole in the lab wall was enough." 
"Aw, we've got a good line item in the dynamic sys-tems budget for bricks and mortar," Carl put in.
We locked up and I drove home with Carl.
I was  worn  out  at  dinnertime,  and  apparently  both  Carl  and  I  showed  it  because  Peter  Wilding
remarked, "Gee, you guys look tired. Did you work down at the lab all day?"
"What ever gave you that idea?" I asked.
"You've  got  solder  splattered  all  over  your  pant  legs,  which  means  that  you  were  working  on
electronic gear."
"Mike offered  to  help me trouble-shoot  the new ham rig I'm building down  at  the lab in my spare
time," Carl lied.
Nothing more was said about our whereabouts that day. Conversation was the usual small talk around
the dinner table.  Afterward,  it was  Carl's  turn to  wash  the dishes  and  Peter  Wilding had  the  task  of

drying them. I collapsed in the living room with Tammy and Ruth.
I looked at Tammy. She was just as attractive as she had been yesterday . . . and the day before that,
too. I took the plunge and asked her, "Hey, Tammy, let's go see a movie."
She smiled and said, "No, thank you, Mike." And that was that. It sort of shocked me.
"Why not,  Tammy?" Ruth popped  up.  "You've just been  sitting around  the house  all day.  Do  you
good to get out."
"I think I'll just take a hot bath and read in bed," Tammy said, getting up and starting up the stairway.
"Ruth, will you yell up when Carl and Peter have fin-ished using the hot water on the dishes?"
"Certainly, Tammy." Ruth shook her head and clucked sadly as Tammy disappeared up the stairs. "In
all the months she's been living here, I still haven't been able to figure that girl out. She is very attractive,
but she never goes out on dates. And practically every bachelor at the lab has asked her. So don't feel
badly, Mike."
"Thanks for the consolation, Ruth. Maybe I'll ask her to go flying with me. She might find that different
and interesting. I don't imagine there are many people around here who fly."
"Tammy does."
"Tammy's a pilot?"
"That's what she  told  me once."  Ruth reached  down  to  pick  up her sewing basket.  She  extracted
needle, thread, and a few items that needed mending. This was unusual because hardly anybody I knew
mended  mod-ern  clothes  any  more;  once  they  were  worn  out,  they  were  thrown  out.  Then  I
remembered that I was in par-simonious New England.
"What's Tammy's background,  Ruth?"  I  knew  that  Ruth,  in  her  role  as  laboratory  house  mother,
would have access to all the personnel records.
"She has a degree in math from some little liberal arts college in the Midwest," Ruth said absently as
she began sewing. "I guess  she's  also  some  kind of photog-rapher  because  she's  got a  lot of camera
equipment in her room."
"Has she been married?"
"Yes, but she doesn't talk about it. A very strange girl."
I let the whole thing drop at that Just because I couldn't get a date with Tammy Dudley on the first try
didn't make me feel that this Saturday night was the loneliest night for the weak. I sat around reading until
Carl and Peter had finished the dishes.
"How about a rubber of bridge?" Peter Wilding sug-gested as he bustled into the living room.
"I'm not very good at bridge," I told him.
"Then how about a hand or two of poker?" the vac-uum tube engineer suggested.
"I'm in," I told him. Carl nodded, too. Tired as I was, poker was something that I wouldn't pass up. It
relaxed me and got my mind off other things.
But Ruth, when asked, said, "My husband used to play poker, but I never learned because he always
played with cronies. Why don't the three of you go ahead and use the dining room  table?"  She  got up
and resurrected an ancient set of poker chips from a  closet  along with a  few old decks  of cards.  But
Wilding pro-duced a new deck of Bicycles.
"Dollar ante?" Wilding asked as we sat down.
"They must pay better over at UTL," Carl remarked. "I'd say  dime ante  and  limit. Payday  isn't until
next Wednesday. Go ahead and break the seal, and we'll cut for deal."

I ended up with the deal. "Five-card draw," I an-nounced as I shuffled. I threw a chip and passed the
deck to Carl to cut. Poker was one of the games I had played when we sat around in the evenings after
a day of ag flying. I liked poker; it was an aggressive game, and I knew the odds pretty well.
First hand was piddling. I won a pot worth all of sixty cents. But it wasn't hard work.  Carl  shuffled,
Wilding cut, and I ended up with a pat hand.
"Incidentally, welcome  to  the club," Carl  remarked  as  he dealt  two  cards  to  Wilding,  but  he  was
talking to me. "I'll take three," he added and flipped three cards off the top of the deck onto his hand.
"What are you congratulating me for?" I wanted to know. "Fifty cents." I threw chips on the table and
glanced down at three jacks, a trey, and a ten in my hand.
"The club of them who has been spurned by Tammy Dudley," Carl announced. "I'll see you and raise
you fifty cents."
"I'll see your raise and call. Yeah, Carl, what's with Tammy?"
"Two pair! Sorry, chaps!"
"Beats three of a kind any day, damn it! As I said, what's with Tammy?"
"Your deal,  Peter.  One  day  Vic and  I were  working and  Vic bitched  about  the fact  that  he could
never get a date with Tammy. He was wondering whether or not she was a real girl."
"Let's make a change just for the hell of it. Seven-card  stud,"  Peter  Wilding said,  rippling the cards
through a  shuffle. The older  man was  very good  with cards.  It  warned  me  that  he  was  probably  as
shrewd as they came. That evaluation may have been correct for poker, but it didn't necessarily hold for
industrial espio-nage because Wilding had thoroughly blown his cover. But his bumbling bumpkin style
would certainly put people off-guard.
"Gawd, Peter, what a mess!" I sputtered as I looked. Deuce showing. Seven showing. And a mess of
garbage underneath. But I decided  it would be  worth  the money and  the fun to  see  if I could  bluff it
through. It would at least help me psych Wilding and get a better handle on the man.
But I couldn't do it. Wilding out-bluffed me on the hand. I got the deal and we went back to five-card.
As I shuffled, I asked Carl, "Well, what did any of you find out about it?"
"Tammy's been married once before."
"That's  what  Ruth  told  me."  I  let  Carl  cut.  Sweeping  the  cards  back,  I  started  to  deal.  "What
happened to turn her off?"
"I don't know. Apparently her marriage left a great deal to be desired because it didn't last very long."
"And it soured her on all men, is that it?" I won-dered.
"You could sort of say that. I guess her husband was an airline pilot . . ."
"That  tells  the  whole  story,"  I  remarked  with  a  sigh.  Airline  transport  pilots  have  a  notorious
reputation, most of it unearned and undeserved, as macho men of the sky because of those layovers with
the stews.
"Not really. Ante-up, Mike! I'm standing."
"You're standing pat?"  I  asked  incredulously,  look-ing  at  my  own  outstanding  hand.  I  threw  in  a
buck's worth of chips.
"Give me two," Wilding put in. "I'll see you, Carl, Mike deals better hands."
"Well, I'd expect an ATP to adhere  to  their tradition of 'anything goes  if more  than fifty miles from
home,' " I observed.
"I guess it was more than that," Carl told him. "The guy wasn't good enough to  make  the passenger

flights and ended up flying cargo. He'd come home full of frustrations, get drunk because he didn't have
to fly again for three days, and beat the hell out of Tammy . . ."
Wilding exploded with an expletive I had heard only occasionally among migrant farm workers  who
were of-ten coarse in their language. "I hope that I never meet up with him!" he went on.
"You won't. Tammy walked out on him, and he flew into a cloud full of mountains two days later."
I had almost forgotten my poker hand. "Well, that certainly explains some of it. I fold!"
"Read 'em and weep!" Wilding laid out his hand, a diamond flush. He started to rake in the pot when
Carl laid down his hand.
"How about that?" Carl chuckled. "Four queens!" He reached for the pot himself. As he stacked chips
and started to shuffle, he looked around to make sure that Ruth was out of earshot  in the living room.
"No, that doesn't fully explain it, Mike."
"Huh? Why?"
"Well, this is a  little lab  gossip,"  Carl  admitted,  throwing  a  very  quick  glance  at  Wilding.  I  knew
damned good and well that all of this was going into Wilding's obviously excellent memory for possible
later use. "I don't know whether you've been aboard long enough to know that Bill Osbourne goes into
New York City at least once a week . . ."
"He was in the city when I showed up."
"It's a very strange thing," Carl went on as he passed the deck to Wilding to cut. "Tammy usually isn't
in the lab on most of those days, either . . ."
That set me back. "Kind of circumstantial, isn't it?" I had trouble believing that  Bill Osbourne  would
dally with one of his laboratory employees. He had a great deal riding on the success of the laboratory
and its pro-grams. Although I didn't know the corporate officers yet, I had  the feeling that  NEMECO
might not look favorably upon such carryings-on. "If he's ever caught, there would be hell to pay up at
headquarters," I pointed out.
"Not only at headquarters. Osbourne's got a wife at home and three kids in high school . . ."

Chapter Seven
Personal  indiscretions don't  bother  me the way  they  used  to.  I  was  brought  up  in  Roswell,  New
Mexico, which is a small town where everybody knows what ev-erybody else is doing. I've been taught
and have always believed that I shouldn't go messing around in a way that fouls up other persons' lives.
One thing for certain: if I were Bill Osbourne, I would definitely not do some-thing as transparent as the
rumors indicated. There are a lot slicker ways to get your kicks so that nobody knows at all.
Therefore, I don't think that my actions betrayed any belief in the rumor when Bill Osbourne dropped
into the lab on the following day as Carl, Wendell, and I had just completed hanging the sky hook as a
ballistic pendulum.
"Hey, it looks good!" Osbourne bubbled as he walked into the dynamics lab. "You guys have done a
really fantastic job!"
"Thanks. It will show up on my time card," Carl re-marked with a grin.
"Well worth  it, too,"  Bill added,  surveying the instal-lation. The drive unit was  hanging horizontally,
sup-ported at both ends by cotton cord attached to the ceil-ing twelve feet above. The cord at each end
was in a "V" shape with two points of attachment on the ceiling; this kept  the unit from swinging from
side to side. It was a common arrangement used in the freshman physics laboratory  experiment where
momentum is measured  by how far the pendulum is displaced  by an impacting force.  The  unit  could
swing back and forth, and it main-tained its horizontal attitude as it did so.
"Excuse me, Doctor," Wendell asked, "but why did you specify that the sky hook be supported  this
way? Why not put it on rollers and let it push against a spring or a strain gauge to measure its thrust?"
"Because this sort  of arrangement  completely elimi-nates any possibility of rate-dependent  frictional
forces such as 'stick-slip' phenomena that we might get if we used rollers or ball bearings to support it,"
the research director pointed out. "Any horizontal force  produced  by the unit will displace  it from the
vertically hanging rest position. As long as it produces thrust, it will maintain itself displaced from the rest
position. Knowing the weight of the unit, the length of the pendulum supports, and the local gravitational
force, we can calculate how much thrust it's producing by measuring how far it dis-places itself."
Wendell nodded. "I recall doing something like this in my physics courses at the University of Maine."
"Precisely. By using this method and by leading the power into the unit with wires along the pendulum
sup-ports, we've got a free suspension," Osbourne went on. "I don't want any supercilious scientist trying
to  shoot  us  out  of  the  saddle  by  claiming  we're  the  victims  of  stick-slip  or  mechanical  resonance
phenomena. In addi-tion, attaching the sky hook to any external measuring system such as strain gauges
will probably change the tuning of the system . . . and that's something we don't know very much about
yet."
"Uh, boss, I think I'd better go a little easy on the power input when I try to tune it up this time," Carl
suggested. "Can you give me any indication of just how much power input we should use to get about a
foot of pendulum displacement in the horizontal direction?"
"Not off the top of my head,"  Osbourne  admitted.  "I can  give you a  good  estimate  in about  fifteen
minutes."
"Okay, because we're about ready to begin tuning .  .  .  and  I don't  want to  have to  patch  that  wall
again," Carl told him.
"Take five when you get to the point of putting power to it. I'll see what I can get the computer to tell
me," Osbourne said and disappeared in the direction of Tammy's office where the microcomputer  was

located.
Thirty minutes later, we were  ready  to  go.  But Os-bourne  wasn't  back  yet.  I went up to  Tammy's
office and found him seated before the microcomputer ter-minal, quietly cursing to himself.
"Problems?" I asked.
"Can't get the program to run."
"Let me try," I suggested. "I've had some experience out at Lowell. What language are you using?"
"BASIC. We bought this thing so we wouldn't have to learn how to program in exotic languages."
"Where's the program?"
"On this minifloppy."
"Have you listed the program to check the steps?"
"No. I hardly ever work this thing," Osbourne admit-ted. "I've got other people to do it."
"Okay, let me give it a try." I got to work as he relin-quished the chair to me.
A half-hour later, no luck. The program would not load properly. By this time, Carl and Wendell were
looking over my shoulder.
"Something's  locking  us  out  of  that  program,"  I  pointed  out.  "It  should  boot-strap  into  working
mem-ory, but it doesn't."
Osbourne got up, saying, "I'm going to see if I can reach Vic or Tammy on the phone."
"Tammy said she was going out this afternoon," Carl remarked.
"And you'll be lucky to find Aboud unless you know  the telephone  number of his latest  girl friend,"
Wendell pointed out.
I sighed. "Well, back to Square One. If you've got the equations, Bill, I'll run them by hand."
"That'll take hours!" Osbourne objected.
"Not exactly. I'll run them on my programmable."
I had almost as much computing power in my hand programmable calculator as in the microcomputer
ex-cept I didn't have the memory capacity. As I was writ-ing a program, Osbourne got on the phone to
call Vic or Tammy. He acted as though I might not even get to first base  with my little programmable.
But I had the program written and debugged by the time he came  back,  shaking his head.  "You were
right. Tammy is gone, and Vic is nowhere to be found. Damned frustrat-ing!"
"Well, it's Sunday afternoon," Wendell reminded him.
My program checked out. "Okay, Wendell, stand by for numbers," I told him.
In fifteen minutes, we had our answers.
"I'm glad I hired you," Osbourne admitted.
"At least I'm good for something around here," I re-plied, turning off my calculator.
"I  don't  believe  your  numbers,"  Carl  said,  looking  at  what  Wendell  had  written  down  on  the
quad-ruled pad. "I'm not even sure that I can cut the power that low. Vic told me to have lots of power
available just in case."
I scrooched the pad around so that I could get a look at the numbers. In technical work, I can get a
feeling  for  "ballpark"  numbers.  If  I  slip  a  decimal  point—a  dif-ficult  thing  to  do  these  days  with
floating-point pocket calculators—it can be very obvious.
"These numbers say  we  should start  out with about  twenty watts  of drive power,"  Carl  explained,

indicating the sheet. "Vic told me we'd need about two hundred watts."
"He must have assumed a much lower efficiency," I told him, "because it got away from you the other
day. So I assumed  a  hundred  percent  efficiency as  a  point of departure.  We're  not going to  get  one
hundred percent efficiency. But if we measure how far it swings with twenty-two watts on it, we can then
calculate the actual efficiency."
"I'll  buy  that.  Good  experimental  procedure,"  Osbourne  said  and  turned  to  Carl.  "Vic  said  two
hundred watts?"
"He said that's what his equations indicated."
"But you didn't wind the front phasing coils the way he designed  them. So  you got better  efficiency
than Vic was  counting on," Osbourne  observed.  "It begins to  make  sense  now.  But  Vic  will  have  a
hemorrhage when he finds out he was wrong."
"We were all wrong," Wendell Stone pointed out. "Carl made a serendipitous mistake  and  mis-read
the numbers."
Osbourne sighed. "Well, that's what happens when you plow fresh ground. You never know what the
plow is going to turn up. Let's go give her a try."
"I'd  suggest  somewhat  more  stringent  safety  proce-dures  because  of  what  happened  Thursday
afternoon," I added.
"What do you mean?" Carl wanted to know.
"When you're operating a complex machine, it's a good idea to have a check list just to make sure that
you don't forget something. If we make out a check list of what to turn on, when to turn it on and how it
should be set, we may prevent this monster from going through the wall again . . .  or worse."
So we sat down and worked one up. It covered twenty-three items to be checked in sequence. Later
we could modify it as we learned more about it, but it was a start.
Back in the dynamics lab, Carl began switching on equipment. "I've gotta admit something to you all,"
he said as he was powering-up. "When Vic said to build it powerful, Len suggested that I should double
Vic's esti-mate just in case. And I ended up doubling that because I wanted to be absolutely certain that
we had  enough power  to  make  this thing work.  So  we've  got about  four times the actual full-power
capability here than we really need . . ."
"Did you ever work in the Air Force space pro-gram?" Osbourne asked. "That sounds like the way
they do it."
"If we've got that much power lurking around, let's run with dummy loads first to see if we can throttle
it down to the level we need," I suggested.
"You're quite an experimentalist," Osbourne ob-served.
"What do you think astronomy is all about? And have you ever repaired ag planes in the field?"
A dummy electrical load is usually just a resistance element like the heating unit in an electric toaster or
a hot plate. It turned out that we couldn't use such a sim-ple approach because some of the equipment
operated  at  very high frequencies.  No  resistance  element  is  a  pure  electrical  resistance  at  very  high
frequencies. There are inductance and capacitance to consider as well, and these factors can screw up a
system by pre-senting some very wild loads to the equipment in terms of phase shift, for example. By the
time the four of us got through making several lash-ups, it was late after-noon.
I was amazed at Wendell Stone's simple approaches  and  elegant solutions to  many of the complex
problems. For example, we needed a very large heat sink to dissi-pate some of the electrical power that
was converted to heat by one  of the dummy loads.  Wendell simply ran tap  water  through the hollow
ceramic tube on which the big resistive load was wound.

It took some time to get all the equipment adjusted. We had a lot of redundant stuff on that first sky
hook because it was a very crude first unit. Even as  we  began  to  set  things up for the first test  run, I
could  see  where  it  would  be  possible  to  combine  several  pieces  of  equip-ment  and  where  several
controls could be converted into one adjustable lever or knob.
It was about six o'clock when we decided we were ready to make the first test run at very low input
power.
"Just to make damned sure," Osbourne said, "let's run it with only about ten watts to start."
Carl made some adjustments. I used my calculator to recompute some voltage settings.
"To paraphrase  Lord  Kelvin,  'When  you  measure,  you  know!'  Hand  me  that  roll  of  paper  tape,
Wendell. I am going to make a simple measurement. Carl, let me have that pencil." Osbourne taped the
pencil to the side of the sky hook in a vertical position so that it just cleared the floor under the device.
He taped a wooden meter stick to the floor so that when the apparatus swung, he could use the pencil as
a pointer indicating how far the unit had swung.
"Is everybody ready?" Carl asked.
"Everybody get out from behind the unit . . . and from in front of it, too!" Osbourne warned.
We gathered  on both  sides  of the sky  hook.  It  hung there  on its strings,  forty-four  pounds  of  the
wildest-looking scientific gadgetry imaginable. Each of us had some knob to twist, some switch to throw,
or some me-ter to watch. Bill Osbourne acted as commander-in-chief of the experiment.
"Main switch on?" Osbourne called, reading from the check list.
"Main switch on!" Carl called back.
"High voltage on?"
"High voltage on!"
"Drive plasma energized?"
"Plasma on!"
"Thirty-four-thousand volts on the plasma," I re-ported.
"Check! Front phasing coil on?"
"Front phaser on!" Wendell called back. "I read thirty-four volts peak-to-peak."
"Rear phasing coil on?"
"Rear phaser on! Eighteen-point-seven volts peak-to-peak!"
"Main drive frequency on! Check wave shape and frequency!"
"Drive frequency  on!  Nine-oh-seven  megaHertz!  Nice  sawtooth!  Lemme check  rise  time  .  .  .  ten
nano-seconds! Looks good!" Carl's voice was excited.
"E-M radiation feedback coils?"
"E-M feedback loop on!"
"Check phasing!"
Carl busied himself looking into the black plastic hood of an oscilloscope. "Mike, give me about  ten
de-grees positive shift on the front phaser."
"Ten degrees positive!"
"Wendell, readjust that peak-to-peak front phaser voltage."
"Okay, she's back where she should be."

"Ready to energize?" Osbourne sang out
"Ready!" Carl replied.
The sky hook was just hanging there, the neon plasma tube giving off a  bright orange-red  glow that
threw shadows on the walls of the brightly lit labora-tory. There was no noise, no hum, no vibration.
"Okay, let's have ten watts on it," Osbourne ordered.
"Ten watts!"
Nothing happened. The unit just hung there.
"Something's wrong! How about your readings, Mike?" Osbourne wanted to know.
"Everything copasetic here!"
"Wendell?"
"Looks fine!"
"Carl?"
"It should be swinging out."
"What the hell? . . ." Osbourne wondered out loud.
"Uh, Carl," I ventured, not wanting to take my eyes off the instruments in front of me, "let me diddle
with the phasing just a shade. It acts like it might not be tuned."
"Go ahead! When we rebuilt it, we might have changed some component just enough to throw her out
of tune," Carl replied. "I'll hold ten watts. You did-dle."
"Don't take forever," Wendell warned. "This feed-back circuit is getting pretty damned hot . . ."
"Let me know if it starts to smoke," Carl told him.
I  made  a  couple  of  delicate  adjustments,  trying  to  phase  the  reactive  force  generated  during  the
trail-off slope of the sawtooth so that it reinforced the input jolt. "A little on the front . . . Check it . . .
Looks good here . . .  A little change in back  .  .  .  Whoops!  Went the wrong way!" I talked out
loud as I worked. "Phasing on the front and back coils are not the same. Acts like the ends are behaving
differently. Okay, some-thing's peaking on the phase voltage . . .  It acts like it's coming up on some sort
of resonance point . . . adjust the voltage there . . . Hey, it's coming into phase fast now! Wow! Just like
tuning into resonance . . ." Everything peaked.
I turned and looked.
The sky hook was hanging away from the vertical!
I looked down at the pencil and meter stick. The unit had swung about four centimeters away from the
verti-cal, and it was staying there . . . silently, with no noise or vibration.
The four of us just stood there and looked at it.
It was  a  puny force  that  was  holding  that  forty-four-pound  unit  about  two  inches  away  from  the
vertical on its suspension. But it was a force that  had  been  gener-ated  only once  before:  on Thursday
when it had gotten away from Carl and gone through the wall. Now we had it tamed.
"I suppose,"  Bill Osbourne  said,  breaking  the silence, "that  I  should  make  some  sort  of  profound
historic statement. And I can't think of anything profound to say. But I believe we've got it, gentlemen!"
"Let's find out for certain," I suggested.  "Carl,  run it up to  twenty-two  watts.  I  want  to  see  if  my
calculations are right."
"Okay! Coming up . . .  fifteen watts . . . twenty watts . . . twenty-two watts right on the nose."
Osbourne was down on his knees, watching the pen-cil in reference to the meter stick. "Stabilized just

short of eight centimeters!"
I  grabbed  my  calculator  and  began  punching  num-bers  into  it.  "Would  you  believe
seventy-two-point-one percent efficiency?"
Over all the intervening years, the image of that strange glowing unit hanging only three  inches away
from the vertical in that laboratory with four of us clus-tered around it remains indelibly engraved in my
mind. I was there. I saw it. And it was just the beginning.

Chapter Eight
In the car pool the following morning, we brought Tammy up-to-date. We hadn't breathed a word of
it at Morse Manor on Sunday evening after Bill had taken us all out for a steak to celebrate. But Tammy
and Ruth knew that something had happened. It's hard to hide enthusiasm. So I suspect that Wilding also
got the drift that something big had occurred, although we maintained that we were just working on new
amateur radio gear that Carl had built.
Tammy was very quiet as Carl and I explained what had happened. Then she  asked,  "You couldn't
get the microcomputer working?"
"Nope. You and Vic have some sort of lock-out on the program," I told her. "But I managed to work
it out on my small programmable."
"That's remarkable," Tammy said. "I thought more computer power would be required."
"I sort of simplified a few equations and linearized them where I had to," I admitted. "We were looking
for ballpark numbers anyway. What really surprised me was the efficiency of the sky hook."
"What did you measure?"
"About seventy-two percent."
"Oh, that's very good! Vic had anticipated only about twenty percent." Tammy smiled, brightening up
the entire car. Then her face got somber. "But Vic will have a fit. He  convinced  Osbourne  to  buy that
micro-computer to run the programs for the sky hook design. We'll have to  be  very careful not to  tell
him that your hand programmable did the job just as well."
"Osbourne already knows it. He watched me do it," I admitted. "If Aboud is in hot water, it's his own
fault."
"He'll also be upset about the higher efficiency," Tammy remarked.
"For God's sake, why?" I wanted to know.
"Vic gets upset when anything doesn't work accord-ing to the Word of Aboud," Carl explained from
the front seat.
"It's good for him," Ruth interjected. "Vic needs to have somebody like you around, Mike. He's been
able to snow everybody with his math, including Dr. Osbourne."
"Well, I'm a better programmer than Vic," Tammy said.
"I know that, dear, but don't let him know," Ruth pointed out.
When  we  got  to  the  lab,  I  went  to  Len's  office  to  report  to  him.  When  he  arrived,  cursing  the
Bridgeport traffic, he told me, "Good morning, Mike! Nice work yesterday!"
"Oh, so Osbourne called you."
"Yes. Let's wait until Vic gets here, then I'd like to have you give us both  a  brief rundown on what
hap-pened. And, Mike, please let me handle Vic."
"Len, I appreciate your concern for the tranquility of personal relationships in the lab,  but sooner  or
later I'm going to have to face up to Victor Aboud and have it out with him," I said. "If it happens to be
this morning, I will not let you shoot my dog for me."
Len looked at me, then just grinned.
Vic did not show up for another thirty minutes. In the meantime, Len and I got coffee and had a look

at the sky hook. Ruth finally called over the intercom that Vic had arrived.
"Hi, Vic!" Len greeted  him as  we  walked  back  into  Len's  office.  "Hey,  Bill  and  Mike  had  a  big
break-through here yesterday."
"Why didn't you call me?"
"We tried. We couldn't get an answer at your home phone," I told him.
Vic grinned. "I thought I heard the phone ring late in the afternoon, but I was otherwise  occupied  at
the time."
"New girl friend?" Len asked.
"New carpet."
"I don't get you," Len admitted.
"I  got  a  new  carpet  for  my  apartment  living  room,"  Aboud  explained.  "We  have  a  tradition  that
requires a new carpet be properly broken in."
"I thought they did that by driving a Rolls-Royce over them for a month," I remarked.
"They do. But when you put the carpet down where you live, you must properly initiate it with your
very best woman right in the middle of it. Sorry, but I was breaking in a new carpet when you called."
"How was it?" Len wanted to know.
"It's a great carpet," Aboud fired back with a straight face.
"Okay, then who was it?" Len persisted.
"Remember Joyce?"
"The dancer with the New York City Ballet?"
"Right! All muscles and limber as a willow wand . . ."
"I thought you liked them plump," Len said.
"Not when I can get an odalisque."
"How come you're so oversexed?" Len asked.
Obviously, this was  one  of Vic's  favorite subjects.  "I have some  similar questions  about  American
men: How come you're so undersexed? Don't tell me; I've had many Americans try to proselyte me into
their sexually sinful religions. On the other hand, it's part of our reli-gion. When I turned fifteen, my father
gave me a credit card to the best whore house in the city and instructed the madam to have me properly
taught . . ." Then, as rapidly as if he had never been bull shooting with us, he changed  the subject  and
was all business. "What hap-pened yesterday?"
So I started at the top and went through a rather complete verbal report on rebuilding the sky  hook
and getting it hung. I told them about rebuilding the phasing coils exactly as  Carl  had  mistakenly done
earlier in the week.
"I can't figure that one out," Vic mused, doodling on a pad of paper. "There must be something there
we didn't anticipate."
"It could be due to the fact that the plasma dynamics are different at opposite ends of the tube," I tried
to point out.
"Probably." Vic began jotting down equations. "Okay, tell me about  setting it up for the low-power
test."
So I gave him the details on that.
"How did you get the microcomputer to run your numbers?" he wanted to know. "We've got a lock

code on that program."
"We found that out," I told  him. "So I made  a  lot of simplifying assumptions  and  ran  the  ballpark
numbers on my programmable."
Vic looked up. "You managed to do it on a hand programmable?"
"Only  with  a  lot  of  linearization,  and  with  considera-bly  less  memory  than  if  I'd  used  the
microcomputer," I pointed  out,  trying to  be  diplomatic.  "Had  to  use  pencil  and  paper  as  a  memory
register occasionally.  Took  Bill and  me together  to  work  the  problem  after  I  managed  to  write  and
debug a program."
"Why did you set the values so low?"
"Since it had gone through the wall on Thursday, I decided we'd better start  out at  very low power
and in-crease by incremental steps until we  got measureable  deflection.  At that  point,  we  could  make
some crude measurements, figure the actual efficiency, and deter-mine the power level that would give us
a definite and convincing deflection without having to repair the wall and the sky hook again."
Vic looked  at  Len and  remarked,  "At last we've  got a  good  experimentalist  who  understands  the
analytical side."
Len looked aside at me and I just smiled.
"Mike, I want you to  work  with Tammy and  me today  on the analysis of the  rough  data  you  got
yesterday,"  Vic went on.  "We need  to  know  exactly how much power  to  put into the  sky  hook  for
various thrust levels and how we should go about tuning it for various loads."
"Vic, we've got Halden and Newcomb coming in right after lunch to see the sky hook in action," Len
put in quickly. "Since Mike was primarily responsible for working out the test run yesterday, don't  you
think it would be a good idea to let him get everything checked out in the lab this morning and  maybe
make a few dry runs? After all, you've only got one computer terminal to work with . . ."
Len was right. If you handled Vic properly, he was a pussy cat.
With Len watching, Carl and I spent the rest of the morning checking out the sky  hook  and  making
addi-tional tests and dry runs.
By doing a  certain  amount of fine tuning that  we  hadn't  had  time to  carry  out yesterday  and  didn't
know how to  carry  out at  that time, we  peaked  the unit and  were  able  to  increase  the  efficiency  to
slightly more than 79 percent. The displacement went out to about 67 centimeters, which displaced the
entire length of the sky hook from the vertical rest position with the rear end well ahead of the rest point.
I particularly wanted to get it to swing that far because it proved beyond a shadow of a doubt that we
were creating a true thrust force. The electromagnetic feedback circuitry began to get hot at that power
level, so we couldn't hold it out there for more than three minutes before  having to  shut it down  to  let
things cool off.
Carl told me that he could  beef-up  that circuitry be-cause  Vic's  computer  had  given a  power  level
dissipa-tion for the feedback circuit that was in error. I quietly reminded myself not to tell Vic about it;
we'd just go ahead and beef it up. It wasn't Vic's fault. In any exper-imental design calculation where you
can't get a firm grip on all the numbers, there are bound to be errors that creep into the equations from
assumptions. That's why you build an experimental gadget.
Carl began to think about miniaturizing the circuitry. Since things were under control in the dynamics
lab, I went up front to see if I could give Vic and Tammy any help with the analytical work. I found the
two of them at loggerheads . . . which was not totally unantici-pated.
They were arguing over programming, and Tammy was  the better  programmer.  On  the other  hand,
Vic was the better mathematician.

"Damn it, Tammy!" Vic was  shouting. "Step  1130  is wrong!  That's  where  you've  got  to  GOSUB
5600 and start the integration loop."
The way Vic treated Tammy sort of grated on me, but I tried to hold my own temper. Tammy seemed
to be in control anyway. "Run it that way, and you'll see that we'll get an error message at 1130! Just go
ahead and try running it! Here! Sit down and type RUN!"
"Would a third party help?" I asked from the door. "Why don't you let me check the program?"
"No need to do that!" Aboud maintained.
"Okay, I'll input RUN," Tammy snapped and did so.
"ERROR 1130" flashed on the screen.
Vic reached down, reset, reloaded from the diskette, typed RUN . . .  and watched  while "ERROR
1130" flashed on the screen.
Tammy glanced up at Vic with a look that said, "I told you so!"
It was time I got into the loop. "Tammy, turn on the printer and list the program for me. While Vic's
fighting it, maybe I can debug it."
I got the print-out, and Vic himself left the console to go over  it with me on one  side  while Tammy
stood on the other.  At step  1130,  everything was  okay,  but I found two  problems  in step  1110  and
1120  where  both  Vic and  Tammy had  overlooked  a  basic  command.  I  corrected  the  program  and
turned to Vic. "Five bucks says it'll run now!"
"Come  on,  let's  be  sporting!"  Vic  snorted.  He  with-drew  a  slim  wallet  and  extracted  a  crisp
one-hundred-dollar bill.
I did not want to get into the habit of high-roller bet-ting with a guy from the Mid-East petrol patch.
So I made a suggesttion: "If I'm wrong, it's a free ride in my airplane so that you and a girl friend can join
the Mile-High Club."
"What's that?" Vic wanted to know. Tammy had a trace of a smile.
"To be initiated into the Mile-High Club, you and your favorite girl have to do it in an airplane one mile
above mean sea level."
Vic brightened. "How about it, Tammy?"
"Forget it! I'm already a member," Tammy told him icily.
"Okay, you're on!" Vic chortled. "A hundred bucks against that special airplane ride!"
"It's your money if you really want to throw it away," I sighed.
"No, it's your money, but we filter it through an oil field."
I inserted my program, booted-up, and ran it with only one minor correction in syntax in the next to
last step. So Vic insisted that I'd lost and that he was due an airplane ride. Tammy tried to mediate but
was unsuc-cessful. The controversy was broken when Len stuck  his head  in the door  and  announced
that Mac was going to the deli for sandwiches as usual.
I was keyed-up over the afternoon's demonstration coming up and elected to stay in the lab. But Vic
talked Len into going out.  As  Tammy and  I walked  back  to  the machine shop,  she  remarked  to  me,
"Thanks."
"No sweat," I replied. "I didn't like the way Vic was  treating you when I walked  in. In spite  of his
cultural background where women are treated like dirt beneath his camel's hooves, I don't think anybody
should treat a woman that way. Especially you."
"Bully is the proper term," Tammy said. Then, to-tally unexpectedly, she asked, "Would you check me

out in your plane?"
"Uh, well . . . sure! Ruth told me you were a pi-lot."
"Sometimes Ruth talks too much."
"Not about you she doesn't."
She looked askance at me. "Mile-High Club, in-deed!"
"I understand the latest federal air regulations re-quire that a member get an annual review."
"I don't need to get current right now," she told me flatly as we walked into the shop, bringing an end
to our conversation.
Bill Osbourne showed up at two o'clock with Grant Halden, NEMECO president and chief executive
offi-cer; Hayward Newcomb, the executive vice-president; Robert Destry, the division vice-president of
the NE-MECO Mill Equipment Division in Trumbull; and Phil Sanatella, the corporate marketing expert.
Osbourne in-troduced us all as we met in the lab conference room.
The president of NEMECO struck me as a man who was completely at home with and enjoyed all of
the au-thority and responsibility that went with the job of chief executive of a small corporation. He had a
hawk-like face with a gentle smile and an extremely cultured man-ner. He was also a very large man . . .
large all over  and  proportioned  accordingly.  Because  of my own  di-minutive  stature,  a  person's  size
always seems to be the first thing that I notice about them. But Grant Halden made me feel as big as he
was. That's the sort of man he was.
Dr. Hayward  J.  Newcomb,  on the other  hand,  was  a  balding middle-aged  man with  horn-rimmed
glasses and a very broad mouth. He was polite, but not elegant the way Halden was. He spoke precisely
with deliberate slowness as though he were constantly thinking out and evaluating each sentence before
he uttered it. He had a preoccupied air about him as though he were partly present but partly somewhere
else as well.
I didn't quite know what to make of Robert Destry. He was a handsome middle-aged man with wavy
hair and an air of relentless drive about him. He was cordial when he spoke, but he seemed  to  have a
no-nonsense air about him that bothered me.
On the other hand, I didn't like Phil Sanatella the moment I met him. He  was  about  my size, but he
wore elevator shoes to increase his height. This told me a great deal about him: he didn't like himself, and
there-fore he didn't like other people. And it showed. He was obnoxious to everyone except Halden and
Newcomb,  and  only a  trifle obnoxious  to  Destry.  He  was  making up for his small size by noise  and
bustling action. I knew that Sanatella was very vulnerable, but I didn't know where. Only a person who
is totally insecure will act as Sanatella did.
I was  introduced  to  the  four  men  as  the  new  project  director  for  the  dynamic  systems  program.
Osbourne told them about my background in physics and astron-omy, but said absolutely nothing about
my experience in aviation, which I thought was strange. "Mike is sit-ting in on the briefing today to help
him get up to speed on the project, although he spent this last weekend here in the lab helping to get the
sky hook in shape for the demonstration today. As a matter of fact, he has come up with a large number
of outstanding experimental procedures for it already, and he has the sort of back-ground in mathematics
that will give Vic Aboud the help he needs."
Whereupon Bill Osbourne launched into a semi-technical briefing on the sky hook,  much of which I
had  already  read  in  reports  and  other  papers  in  the  lab.  However,  Bill  added  his  own  brand  of
enthusiasm and advocacy of the sort that was not evident in the written materials. He was also a bit more
venturesome in what he said.  "It appears  that  we  may have identified a  whole new  type  of  radiative
energy although we have not yet been able to build a detector to sense or mea-sure what the theoretical
equations tell us must be there. Vic has worked out the equations describing this type  of energy.  Both

Dr. Mayan and Professor Korsinski  have checked  them over  and  found no place  where  our  logic or
methodology  is  faulty.  By  proper  definition  of  the  field  vectors,  we've  found  it  possible  to  apply
Maxwell's equations to predict the behavior of this new type of radiation. But we have a lot of work to
do in this area. The potentials are mind-bog-gling, and  we're  certain  to  end  up with a  whole series  of
completely new proprietary  products.  It's  too  early yet to  be  able  to  describe  these  products  in  any
detail. I don't want to give you the impression that  we  are  working on a far-out project that has
no immediate applications  in the classical product  mix of the com-pany,  but we  may have  something
more than a mere lifting device here. If we do indeed have a new form of radiation, we should be able to
figure out how to  di-rect  and  focus it.  We  might  be  able  to  transmit  me-chanical  power  over  great
distances with no mechani-cal connections; this includes the possibilities of energy beams that will push
or pull. Obviously, there will be many commercial applications . . ."
"And military implications," Hayward Newcomb in-terjected.
"We recognize that, Hay," Osbourne told him.
"Why don't we go after some military R&D money to pay for this research? Why should we spend the
compa-ny's money on R&D that may eventually benefit the Department  of Defense  when they've  got
millions wait-ing to be put to use for this sort of thing?" Destry wanted to know.
"We want to control all of the patent rights," Hay Newcomb pointed out. "If we go to DOD too soon,
they'll slap government security on this whole thing and put out a security directive to the Department of
Com-merce that would prevent us from obtaining any pat-ents."
"Besides, the costs involved at this stage are very small," Osbourne commented. "It's not as though we
were ready to go into direct product development as we're doing with the shot-alloying process. When
devel-opment toward a product begins to overshadow the re-search, we bring in development engineers
from the rel-evant corporate divisions to work with the people here."
"That appears to be successful," Destry remarked. "Stone reports that he has very good relationships
with your people."
"I would like to keep this sky hook work here as long as  possible,"  Halden said  quietly. "Bill hasn't
men-tioned  a  lot of the implications  of  the  work,  probably  because  they  would  sound  unbelievable.
Matter of fact, I don't even want to let the other division vice-presi-dents know about it. Bob, you're in
on it because your division will probably be working on the first products. But, in any event, this is to be
kept absolutely quiet and must not go beyond this room."
Osbourne  then turned  the conference  over  to  Vic  who  stepped  to  the  chalkboard  and  began  by
saying, "I'll not bore you with all of the mathematical details." He then proceeded to do so, quite unaware
of the fact  that his  corporate  executive  audience  was  probably  un-acquainted  with  any  mathematics
higher than college al-gebra, with the exception  of Dr.  Hayward  Newcomb.  Or  the whole show  may
have been for the benefit of Newcomb.
I could follow Vic. It was a brilliant display of eru-dite mathematical logic, and I learned a great deal
more about the Dynamics Systems project.
Vic thundered onward until he had to stop to catch his breath, and Bill brought him up short with, "I
think you can all see that we appear to have developed a rea-sonably good theoretical foundation for the
work. Thank you, Vic."
Vic started to give Bill a dirty look and opened his mouth as if to remark that he wasn't finished yet.
Then he shut his mouth, nodded formally to his audience, and sat down.
Osbourne got up and began, "I'd like to bring you all up-to-date  on what has  happened  in the past
few days here. Some of our highly speculative speculations no longer look quite as speculative . . ." He
went on to describe what had happened on Thursday and Sunday.  Then he invited everyone  to  come
down to the dynam-ics lab for a demonstration.

Carl was waiting with everything warmed  up.  I stepped  in to  give Carl  a  hand on the adjustments,
re-marking  to  the  corporate  people,  "I  hope  you  all  realize  this  is  strictly  an  experimental
proof-of-principle de-vice. Anything that would be developed out of this in the form of a product would
be quite different . . ." Halden seemed to understand this. I am not sure that Destry or Sanatella did.
We put the sky hook through its paces, and it per-formed exactly as we predicted that it would.
"The unit is now seventy-six percent  efficient in con-version  of input energy into energy required  to
main-tain its position displaced from the vertical rest posi-tion," I explained. "Carl, let's show them how
much control we've developed over the performance of this device. Let's give it enough energy to swing
it out to sixty centimeters and hold it."
And we did.
Osbourne put in, "We're developing this quite rap-idly.  Our  calculations are  very predictive.  I think
our work will pass the Schwartzberg test."
"What's that?" Sanatella wanted to know.
"A simple test developed by Harry Schwartzberg at RCA many years ago," Osbourne explained. "It
states that the validity of a science is its ability to predict."
Grant Halden and Hay Newcomb were greatly ex-cited. I am not sure that Destry was impressed at
all. It was Phil Sanatella who asked, "Okay, so what else will it do?"
I was greatly taken aback at this remark. "What you're seeing is the production of a force without a
re-action force or the expulsion of mass. There is no other way that pendulum could be displaced from
its rest po-sition without . . ."
"So?" Sanatella interrupted. "It pushes itself. Will it push a load?"
"Probably."
"Then let's see it do it!" Sanatella demanded. "It's no good if it can just push itself. It's got to be able to
do useful work . . ."
Bill stepped into the breach at this point. "We're not to that point yet, Phil. What  we've  managed  to
accom-plish here is highly unusual and completely new. There's no other device on Earth that will do this
. . ."
"Doctor, I realize that this may be a scientific mira-cle," Sanatella said. "But I'd  like to  see  it push a
box across the floor."
"I'm not sure that we are ready to do that sort of thing yet," I put in. "It'll require that we retime the unit
 and . . ."
But Bill Osbourne acceded to Sanatella's stupid request. "Carl,  grab  that  cardboard  box  over  there
and stick about twenty pounds of junk in it."
Carl fired back, "Doctor, that'll change the charac-teristics of the system, and it takes a long time to
retune this unit."
"Yes, I know that, but let's just give it a try to see what might be involved," Osbourne replied. "We're
going to have to do something like this sooner or later. So let's treat it as an experiment."
I helped Carl fill the box with assorted electronic components and some of the damaged  parts  from
the previous sky hook unit. We both estimated that it weighed about twenty pounds. Carl set it on the
floor in front of the deenergized sky hook so that the front face of the unit was  against the side  of the
box. "Bill, this isn't going to work!" I warned.
"It  may  not.  Uh,  Grant  and  Hay,  I  want  you  to  un-derstand  that  the  sky  hook  unit  here  wasn't
designed to push things. When we try to push the box, we will have changed the system and its reaction

times and tun-ing . . ."
"I realize that this is just an experiment," Halden said.
I ran some quick calculations which Vic verified, but I could see that Aboud was upset, too. "Give me
about seventy-three watts on the drive," I told Carl. "I'll try to keep an eye on the phasing here. Maybe
we can tune it as we come up to power."
Carl powered-up  as  Bill read  off the check  list. But I couldn't  get the  phasing  to  adjust  properly.
"We're way out in left field!"
"Try it anyway!" Osbourne told me.
"Okay, full power on the drive. I'll do my best to adjust phasing as we come up to full power . . ."
"Coming up!" Carl called. "Forty watts . . . forty-five watts . . . fifty watts . . ."
Nothing happened. My phasing was getting com-pletely out of hand.
Then the sawtooth drive circuit went up in a cloud of smoke.

Chapter Nine
"Screwed by Murphy again!" Bill Osbourne re-marked.
I was about to say something a lot more pithy.
"What do you mean?" Phil Sanatella snapped.
Bill sighed. "Phil, this experiment wasn't designed to do what we just tried."
"Well, I don't see that it's anything except an inter-esting toy," Sanatella  griped.  "I can't  see  a  single
mar-ket for it!"
"There isn't any market  for this. It's  a  test  instrument to  prove  out the foundations for  lots  of  new
products," Osbourne tried to explain.
"Well, how soon will you have a working product that I can get my teeth into?"
"That was not the purpose for bringing you along, Phil," Grant Halden reminded him with considerably
more diplomacy than I was capable of mustering at that moment. I hoped that he would follow up as a
good  manager  should  and  have  some  very  private  words  with  this  marketing  jerk.  The  NEMECO
president turned to Bill. "In spite of the fact that something burned out, I understand  perfectly  that  you
were trying to oblige Phil by attempting something that you weren't pre-pared to demonstrate. But I am
very encouraged by this work, Bill. I want you to keep it up."
"Thank you, Grant."
"Bill, what's your next step?" Hay Newcomb wanted to know as Carl began turning off electronics.
"First of all, we've  got to  get on with the usual work  of an experimenter: rebuilding equipment that
failed and analyzing why," the research director explained.
"As Triviality Number  Fourteen  says,  'Experience  gained is  directly  proportional  to  the  amount  of
equip-ment  ruined.'  We'll  get  this  working  again  in  a  matter  of  days.  Then  we'll  make  some  more
measurements and either modify the sky hook so that it pushes loads or build another one that will."
"When do you think you might have a sky hook that will push loads?" Bob Destry wanted to know.
"We don't invent on schedule, Bob," Osbourne ex-plained carefully. "It could  be  weeks  or  it
could be months."
"What seems to be the basic problem with hitching it to loads?" Hay Newcomb wanted to know.
Vic stepped into the fray at this point. "The nature of the load changes the nature of the system." He
grabbed a pad of paper and began writing equations with Newcomb looking over his shoulder. The rest
of us stood around for a moment and tried not to look bored. But Newcomb  was  following what Vic
was doing and was nodding his head and grunting in agreement as Vic's pencil flew across the paper.
After about a minute, Bill broke in with, "Vic, why don't you continue to explain this to Hay up in the
con-ference room? Let's let Carl get busy cleaning up and repairing things."
The corporate types left about thirty minutes later. Hay Newcomb was either satisfied that Vic was on
top of the theoretical reasons for the failure of the sky  hook  to  push the box  of junk . . .  or  he was
covering his lack of understanding of Vic's math.
I guess I looked completely defeated because Bill slapped me on the shoulder and said, "Mike, it all
went beautifully!"
"But we shouldn't have tried the experiment that Sanatella suggested! One should never, never run a

demonstration experiment without testing it before-hand . . ."
"I know that!"
"Then why did you tell us to go ahead?"
"Many reasons, most of them having to do with cor-porate politics that you don't see from here in the
lab. . . but I'm involved in them every  day  at  the Front  Office," Osbourne  explained.  We  were  in the
quiet of my office now, and Osbourne lit up one of his stinky brown cigarettes in his long holder. I didn't
have an ash tray in my office, but Osbourne didn't seem to care. Well, if the corporate research director
wanted to flick his cigarette ashes on the floor of my office, he was welcome to do it! "Ah, that's better!
Halden doesn't like people to smoke around him."
"Neither do I, but in this case you're the boss," I re-marked quietly.
"I know. Sorry, but rank has some privileges, Mike."
"Can you clue me in to  some  of this corporate  poli-tics?"  I wanted  to  know.  "I might not make  a
complete ass of myself someday or hurt our work here if I was briefed a bit . . ."
"I thought most of it would be pretty obvious," Os-bourne said. He took a blank sheet of quad-ruled
paper from a pad on my desk and proceeded to fold it origami style until he had manufactured himself an
ash tray. "Did you watch Grant Halden's face when he saw the sky hook swing out from the vertical?"
"I was sort of busy watching my meters and the unit."
"Halden was like a kid with a new toy! He may have to be a hard-nosed bottom-line executive to run
this company, make a profit, and pay a dividend to the stockholders. But inside, the man is an incurable
ro-mantic. Do you know anything about his background?"
"Not very much," I admitted.
"He conies from a very old and well-off New York family of lawyers, and he was the second son. He
got  his  B.A.  and  M.A.  from  Yale  in  English  literature  with  his  graduate  thesis  on  the  work  of  the
nineteenth-century romantic poets."
"How did he ever get to be president of NEMECO?" I wanted to know.
"When his father died, most of the estate went to his older brother who was a lawyer, following in the
old man's footsteps. Naturally, the older brother got the majority of the estate  because  of the way he
worked  things with Father.  Halden discovered  that  he couldn't  get much of a  job  with a  specialty  in
romantic English poetry. So he took what he had of his inheritance plus the considerable  clout that  he
couldn't help but inherit, and he went through Wharton, sometimes working when his cash ran low. He
got  an  M.B.A.,  his  key  to  executive  management  ranks."  Osbourne  snuffed  out  his  cigarette  in  his
origami ash tray, folded it up, and tossed  it into my wastebasket.  Blowing out his cigarette  holder,  he
replaced it in his shirt pocket and continued, "So we've got an unusual man running this company, and he
is doing very well at it."
"I guess so!"
"Right now, Halden's mind is preoccupied about what he's going to do with the sky hook . . . which he
fully understands is a major scientific breakthrough. He knows we'll get the bugs worked out! And Hay
Newcomb  is  congratulating  himself  because  the  basic  research  policy  he's  always  championed  is
beginning to pay off. Both of these men are on our side, they are the top people in the company, and we
gave them encour-agement today."
"Yeah, Bill, but I'm worried about Sanatella," I told him.
"Why?"
"Phil Sanatella is out for Phil Sanatella. In the long haul—or even over the short haul if he can  figure
out some way to do it—he's out to scramble up the greasy pole of management and to hell with who he

steps  on or  the company  he happens  to  screw  in the process.  NEMECO's  only a  stepping  stone  to
further his career . . . and the only way he is going to further his career is not by success but by his track
record advancing through corporate ranks. When I was an ag pilot, we'd run into his kind all the time.
They've got beautiful re-sumes that appear they've really got something on the ball . . . until you look into
the companies and  find out that these  guys never  really did anything at  all. In fact,  they go through a
company wreaking havoc." I stopped for a moment, then added, "Believe me, Bill, Sanatella doesn't give
a damn about us, and he'll side with anybody in the company who doesn't like Corpo-rate Research and
wants to economize by disbanding this operation."
Bill Osbourne scratched his bushy moustache for a moment in reflection, then added, "Pretty shrewd
eval-uation, Mike. But I wouldn't worry about Sanatella. Both Halden and Newcomb  knew  good  and
well that he was showing off. Sanatella didn't make any points here today."
"Maybe. Maybe not." I tried to convince my boss. "But he's up in the front office. He can get the ear
of anybody in the company or its divisions because he's marketing manager. He's got a lot of clout. He
calls the shots on how much of what can be sold to whom and when. The company  treasurer  and  the
controller are going to listen to him, and they sign the checks. And he obviously has some clout with the
division managers like Destry who are also bottom-line men."
"I think you've put your finger on the man who should worry us most," Bill Osbourne pointed out. "We
started this operation sharing some of Destry's plant space up in Trumbull even though he flatly opposed
a corporate  research  outfit because  he wanted  to  control  it himself. Destry  came  to  us from General
Electric, and  he's  been  thoroughly trained  by GE.  GE's  R&D is di-vided  among  its  divisions.  Destry
knows the GE system works. He wants it implemented in NEMECO. Further-more, if it was, he would
get his percentage of the cur-rent  corporate  research  budget  to  plow  into his own di-vision's  product
development work."
"But, Bill, he's got his engineer down  here  right now working on a  new industrial process  that  he's
going to take over in a couple of months . . ."
"You don't understand the man," Bill told me. "He wants to be the next president of NEMECO."
"That makes sense."
"But the ladder is blocked  by Newcomb.  The only way Destry  can  get to  the presidency  is to  get
Newcomb out of the way . . ."
"And the best way to do that is to discredit New-comb's corporate research policy," I added.
"More than that," Bill said.  "If Destry  can  get Cor-porate  Research  discredited,  it  may  also  affect
Grant Halden who has  supported  it . . .  and  it might mean that  Halden would be  eased  out  by  the
Board."
"You know, Bill, from the external appearance of NEMECO, I wouldn't guess that all of this political
ma-neuvering  was  going  on.  NEMECO  gives  the  appear-ance  of  being  such  a  stable,  well-run
company."
"It is stable and well-run, and the Board will see to it that it maintains that image for the sake  of the
security analysts," Osbourne  pointed  out.  "The corporate  image isn't there  for the sake  of customers;
they only care whether or not NEMECO products work. The image is there for the boys on Wall Street
who can  make  or  break  the stock  of the company  .  .  .  and  the majority of the stock  is held by  the
Cranmer  family plus the ex-ecutives  and  employees  of NEMECO."  Osbourne  got  up  and  stretched.
"Rough day! Afternoon's just about shot to hell, so it's not worth it for me to go back  up to  the Front
Office. Good time to go down to the chan-dler's and get those fittings for my boat ..."
"Yeah, I'm bushed, too," I admitted. "I've been four solid days on that sky hook,  and  I can't  face  it
right now . . . not after what happened."

"Take the rest of the day," Bill told me. "And tomor-row, if you want."
"No, I don't need that much time. I have to buy a car."
"Why don't you get Mac Roston to go with you?"
"I don't want to take somebody away from their work here."
"In astronomy, did you always work an eight-hour day?"
"Well, no, but . . ."
"Mac was trained in Stuttgart and Wolfsburg," Bill explained. "He runs Formula Vee cars as a hobby.
Mac knows every car  lot between  Greenwich and  New  Ha-ven.  Have  a  good  time, and  get a  good
car!"
Mac  Roston  not only acquiesced  to  my request  but seemed  to  thoroughly enjoy  doing it. When  it
came to automobiles, Mac Roston knew what he was  about.  He  had  the same  involvement with cars
that I did with planes.
"I'd suggest a VW Bug if you can find a good one," Mac suggested as we tooled out on 1-95 toward
Milford where he knew of a "reasonably honest used car dealer."
"How about mechanics that will work on them? I've had mechanics in Arizona flatly refuse to work on
any foreign car."
"Just bring it to the lab on Saturday."
"That's right! You were trained in Wolfsburg."
"And Stuttgart," Mac reminded me.
We chatted as Mac drove, and he surprised me. His father was a top corporate executive in one of
the large multi-national conglomerates headquartered in Green-wich.  He  was  raised  in Westport  in an
environment of achievers . . . except that he found out he liked cars. Mac had turned down a chance to
go to Harvard. "I'm not the type who likes to run people. I much prefer working with good  machinery
and getting it to run right."
"Yeah, Mac, but the world is run by people who run other people," I pointed out.
"I don't want to run the world," Mac said flatly. "Unlike a lot of other people, I think the world's being
run better than it ever has been in history. I'm content to live in it . . . Okay, here is a reasonably honest
lot. I've had fair dealings with the Hungarian . . . not that he is any more honest than most other used car
sales-men. Let's look for a Bug about six years old; they were the best that Wolfsburg ever turned out
for the Ameri-can market."
I left the Hungarian's used car lot driving a light green VW Bug with a sun roof. Furthermore, Mac got
Harry the Hungarian to agree to a conditional sale pro-vided we did not put more than 100 miles on the
car. Mac could check it over completely and had a week in which to do it.
Mac didn't take that long. I bought him supper, and we spent the evening with the VW pulled into the
deliv-ery entrance at the back of the lab that just "happened" to be a double garage door at grade level.
There just "happened" to be a hydraulic jack, a drip pan, and a few other necessities right there, too. I
recalled what Bill had said about binding the mouths of the kine who tread the grain.
Mac told me he didn't want to take chances  because  his reputation  with me was  riding on the line.
Actually, I think he wanted  to  get that VW  apart  to  find out for himself if it was  really as  good  as  it
appeared to be.
It was. I learned a  lot about  my new car  that  night, and  it pleased  me because  I don't  like to  ride
around  in  any  piece  of  machinery  of  my  own  unless  I  am  intimate  with  it.  More  than  once,  this
idiosyncracy has saved my life.

When I got back to Morse Manor, Ruth fretted that I hadn't  gotten  a  good  supper.  She  offered  to
warm up left-overs,  but I declined  and  munched on a  couple  of oatmeal  cookies  she  had  made  that
evening.
Peter Wilding was excited about my VW. He drove an ancient Porsche  that  needed  a  lot of work.
"Do you think Mac Roston would be willing to work on my Porsche? It needs new brakes, and there's
something that goes clunk clunk when I down-shift from third to second,"
"Why don't you take it to a Porsche shop?" I wanted to know.
"Thieves and con artists! Liars!" Wilding exploded. "Why, the last time I took it in for work, do you
know what they did to me and what they charged me to do it?" This led to a long and rambling diatribe
on how much it had cost for them not to fix it.
As Wilding rambled, I thought that Mac would know better than I about how to handle this situation.
Al-though we had spent the evening in the NEMECO Cor-porate Research Center Laboratories fixing
my car, and although I knew that there was no prohibition against doing such a thing as long as it was not
done during working hours when somebody from the Front Office— say, the controller—might happen
to drop by, I strong-ly doubted that it would be okay for Mac to work on the car of a known industrial
spy there.
With great pride, I drove the Morse Manor lab car pool the following morning.
I found Wendell Stone sitting in my office making sketches on a  couple  of sheets  of my quad-ruled
paper.
"I heard about yesterday," Wendell told me in his clipped nasal manner. "Got to thinking about it last
night. My eldest issue, Lowell, knows more than I do about electronics although he's only in high school.
Got  his  ham  license.  Gear  all  over  the  place,  and  the  roof  covered  with  antennae.  He  suggested
something that might work . . ."
Wendell Stone had absolutely no theoretical grasp of Osbourne's work, but he had an intuitive feel for
the sky hook concepts. He couldn't work the math, but he could design things with a ballpark feel for the
size, speed, and so forth.
He'd come up with a concept for automatically tun-ing the system for changing conditions!  What  he
sketched out on my desk that morning was incredibly crude. He didn't specify the electronic circuits, but
out-lined them by using a functional flow chart diagram. He didn't know what should go in each box to
make it do its job, but he certainly knew  how to  make  his whole device  operate.  I didn't  even know
what should go in-side some of the flow chart boxes, but I felt sure that Carl would.
Basically, Wendell's device was a feedback system that compared  the desired  characteristics  of the
sky hook against the moment-by-moment actual operating conditions, and then proceeded to change the
operating values to bring the sky hook back into the desired range. It sounds complicated to describe in
words; the equations make it much simpler to understand.
"Wendell, let's write this up as a patent disclosure, and I'll witness it," I told him as I studied it. "This is
undoubtedly going to be one of the key aspects of get-ting sky hooks to work."
"Only  on  one  condition,  in  spite  of  what  the  yellow-dog  patent  rights  contract  says,"  Wendell
muttered.
"What's your condition?"
"The company gets the patent rights under the agreement we all sign when we come to work for this
pater-nalistic outfit," Stone  explained.  "I'll get the usual hundred-dollar  check  so  that  there  have been
tokens of value exchanged to make the contract binding. But I demand  and  I get the ribboned  patent
document. It should be mine because I did it. The company has only the rights to it."
"Has there been some problem with this in the past?" I wanted to know.

"Yes. John Whiteside, the legal eagle in the Front Office who handles patent matters for NEMECO,
likes to frame the ribboned copies for his office wall."
"That sounds like an ego-trip."
"I agree."
Wendell and I worked over the concept for about an hour and then went back to the dynamics lab to
let  Carl  look  it  over.  The  technician  suggested  several  changes  because  of  his  special  expertise  in
electronics. "Hell, yes, it'll work! Let me get a photocopy of this, and I'll get busy with catalogs to figure
out what I can get that's already built."
Once Carl had his copy, we took the papers up to Len's office to  discuss  it. Vic and  Tammy were
there.  This gave us the opportunity  to  bring everyone  but Bill up to  date.  Vic managed  to  get  in  his
early-morning licks.
"Where the hell have you been?" Aboud wanted to know in no uncertain terms. "I've been looking all
over for you! I want you to help Tammy run the numbers on the phasing matter."
"We've been working on the phasing matter," I re-ported. "It's not a matter of phasing at all. Wendell
came up with the answer at home last night."
"You did?" Vic asked in disbelief, pointing at Stone.
"I did . . . with some help from Lowell."
Vic snorted. "Rubber bands and staples again?"
"Now, don't start with that sort of a bias, Vic," Len warned him. "What have you got, Wendell?"
We explained it. Tammy and Len nodded in under-standing as Wendell and I presented the details. It
be-came patently obvious that Vic did not believe in the empirical approach.  And it was  also  obvious
that Wen-dell Stone did not believe in the theoretical approach. I could sense that there was  very little
love  lost  between  the  vitriolic  mathematician  and  the  desiccated  Vermont  engineer.  The  thinking
processes  of  the  two  men  were  so  enormously  different  that  understanding  each  other  was  almost
impossible.
"How in the world did you manage to  come  up with this concept,  Wendell?  It's  a  brilliant piece  of
work." Len told the engineer.
"Flattery will get you everywhere; keep talking."
"Seriously,  how  do  you  manage  to  keep  coming  up  with  these  elegant  solutions  to  the  complex
problems we always run into around here?" the lab director wanted to know.
"Common sense plus a lot of ESP."
"Come on, now! Extra-sensory perception?" Len asked with a grin.
"Nope. ESP stands for exaggeration  of system para-meters,"  Wendell explained.  "It's  a  very useful
trick in development work. Ask yourself such questions as, 'What happens if I make this part  very big
. . .  or very small . . .  or very fast . . .  or very slow?' When you take one part of a gadget and blow it
completely out of proportion, you can usually get a  good  idea  of what to  do  and  in what direction  to
proceed. I just asked myself what would happen if we wanted to build a sky hook that would push the
whole world."
"Oh, that's easy enough to do!" Aboud snapped. "Given enough time, we could move the world with
the sky hook hanging in the lab . . ."
"Maybe in a couple of million years," Len pointed out. "But I see what you mean, Wendell. When you
make the load very large, it will drastically change the response time of the system. So you don't change
the phasing. You change the driving frequency . . ."

Tammy squinted at the rough sketches. "This is sim-ple! I should be able to write a program for this in
thirty minutes or less." 
"But you're neglecting any possible GI radiation effects," Vic objected. "Those field equations are not
easy to program!"
"We don't need field equations for this," Tammy told him. "We're working with an operating  device,
and the GI radiation is something totally theoretical. We can't measure it. In fact, we can't even detect it.
If the equa-tions will work without the radiation terms, I'd rather use them because they're simpler."
"You mean you want to go back to the simple tran-sient theory that Osbourne worked out last year?"
Vic asked.
"If it works, why not?" Len put in.
"I'd expect that out of you!" Vic snapped at Len. "Well, go ahead if you think it will speed things up.
I'll work it through on the microcomputer using the field equations."
"Hold on, Vic!" Len put in quickly as Tammy started to object as well. "I can't let you monopolize the
micro for theoretical  work  when  there's  an  urgent  re-quirement  that  it  be  available  for  experimental
design work!"
Vic got to his feet. "That microcomputer doesn't be-long to the laboratory department. It's mine!" He
tapped  himself  in  the  middle  of  his  chest  with  his  fore-finger.  "It  was  purchased  for  the  use  of  my
theoretical department. I proposed getting the micro, and I came up with the justification that resulted in
the  purchase  approval!  I'm  going  into  Tammy's  office,  sit  down  at  the  terminal,  and  run  my  field
equations for the design. Len, if you want to pull Tammy off my work and put her on lab work,  that's
your privilege. She's on the lab payroll. But that microcomputer is here in the lab only because there isn't
room for it in my office up at  corpo-rate  headquarters.  I'll let you know  when I am finished using it!"
With that, he stomped out the door.
Nobody  said  anything. Tammy, Wendell,  and  Len  just  sat  there  for  a  moment.  Then  Len  quietly
re-marked, "Mike, will you let Tammy use your hand pro-grammable?"
"Sure! I'll even help her out because it's sometimes short on memory, and we'll have to resort to pencil
and paper recording of some data. Besides, I'm also handy at programming it."
"Okay, we'll make do," the lab director said.
"I'll give Carl a hand on the nuts-and-bolts end of things," Wendell volunteered.
"Uh, Wendell, I appreciate that, but can you do it without neglecting the shot-alloying project?"  Len
asked.  "Your paycheck  comes  over  from Bob  Destry's  division.  If  Destry  ever  suspects  that  you're
spending time on some of our research programs here, Osbourne will have a lot of explaining to do."
"I can take care of my boss," Wendell assured him. "I am making very good progress, the process is
work-ing well, and  we  are  well ahead  of schedule.  In any event,  Destry  has  other  problems  that  are
keeping him occupied right now, so  I'm the least  of his worries  be-cause  I'm not adding to  his G&A
expense over there with a desk, a drawing board, and all the rest."
"Okay, Wendell, please keep it that way," Len ad-vised him. He sighed. "Let's get to work."
Tammy and Wendell got up to leave, but I remained seated  and  leaned  across  Len's  desk.  "Hey! I
don't ob-ject to having to use my hand programmable. But are you going to  let Aboud  get away  with
what he just did? We could really use the micro! It would speed things up enormously. But that's beside
the point. Aboud just walked all over you on a matter that should be brought up to Bill Osbourne for a
decision. Aren't you going to call Bill?"
"No, I'm not," Len Marshall admitted.
"But why?"

"Who has the office next to Bill Osbourne at corpo-rate headquarters?"
"What do you mean?"
"I mean that Victor Aboud and I are supposedly both on the same level of the Corporate  Research
totem pole when you look at the organizational chart," Len went on to explain. His hands  were  quietly
folded on the desk in front of him. "Aboud not only has Osbourne's  ear,  but also  Hay Newcomb's
. .  .  and  Aboud has Newcomb convinced that Aboud is one hell of a research scientist with his MIT
degrees and fancy footwork with mathematics at the chalkboard."
"So?"
"So Bill Osbourne is going to find out about this, probably when he comes  down  later  today  to  see
how things are going. I won't go running to him like a little kid whose brother has taken candy away. I'll
wait for Bill to find out for himself and see that we did our best here to keep things working on a level
keel in spite of it. In other words, I'm giving Aboud all the rope he is cap-able of taking."
"Why are you giving him rope?" I wondered.
"Don't you know that the only thing you can count on in this world is change? This set-up isn't going to
last forever. As I said, I will cooperate with Vic to the ut-most except for cooperating with him toward
one goal."
"Keep talking. I am beginning to get the picture."
Len Marshall looked at Wendell Stone, Tammy Dud-ley, and me in turn. "I don't want Victor Aboud
to be my boss as the Director of Research someday."

Chapter Ten
The intricacies of NEMECO  corporate  politics were  no less  complex than those  of the various ag
aviation companies  that I had  flown for,  and  certainly  different  only  in  kind  and  not  in  degree  from
academia and the astronomical observatories that dotted the mountains of the world. I wanted to ignore
these ins and outs of NE-MECO corporate politics and just do my job, but that was impossible.
Tammy and I spent the rest of that day plus half of the next working with my programmable and a pad
of paper. I kept waiting for Bill Osbourne to show up, but he didn't. I worked out an excuse to call him
at corpo-rate headquarters to ask him a question about an equa-tion, but Helen, his secretary, told me
Osbourne was in New York City.
That certainly blew a  huge  hole  in  Carl's  rumor.  Os-bourne  was  in  New  York  City  and  Tammy
Dudley was sitting right next to me crunching numbers on a com-puter.
Vic stuck his head into my office where we were working. "Aren't you finished yet?" he asked.
"Thanks to you, no," I told him.
"Well, I've got my data, and we've  got to  add  some  additional equipment to  Stone's  glue-and-tape
system," Vic reported smugly. "I want to check a couple of these figures with you."
I looked  up at  him. "Vic, when we  get some  numbers to  compare  with yours,  we'll do  so.  In  the
meantime, please get the hell out of here so that we can go back to work."
"I thought your approach was so simple?"
"It would be if we had the microcomputer to work with."
"Well, I'm finished with it now, so you can go and use it if you need to." And he was gone.
Tammy sighed. "And just when we were ready to run some of these tables!"
I looked at her. "We could rewrite this program, but it would take another couple of hours ..."
Tammy looked pensive, then said, "I think I can do it faster directly in machine language. We've got an
aw-fully good assembler-editor  program.  Anyway, let's  try! It's  better  than having to  write everything
down every time we want to go around the loop in the feedback system again!"
We had missed lunch, and I felt my blood sugar level going down. Tammy produced a box of cookies
from the lower drawer of her file cabinet, and we munched cookies while the microcomputer crunched
numbers.
It took us longer than we had figured. So we went home to Morse Manor in the car pool for dinner.
After-ward, I asked Tammy, "Are you game to go back to the lab?"
"Yes. I won't be able to  sleep  until we've  run the program  a  couple  of times and  know  that  we've
de-bugged it."
Peter Wilding noticed the two of us leaving Morse Manor. "Two of you going out, eh?"
"Yes," Tammy told him. And then she went on, "Going to a movie."
"Oh, really? Can I get Ruth and join you?"
"No," I told him.
He looked at me over the top of his horn-rimmed glasses with a sly smile. "Have fun, kids!"
Tammy laughed as  we  drove  away  from  Morse  Manor  in  my  VW.  "And  this  is  driving  Wilding
ba-nanas!"

"I'll bet you," I said, "that Peter Wilding will drive past the NEMECO lab in about an hour to see if my
car is there . . . just checking. Of course, it won't be there."
Tammy looked quickly at me and started to say something.
I went on before she could speak, "Oh, don't worry! I'll park it alongside the equipment supply house
across the street after I drop you off . . .  just to make good our story.  I'm aware  of the fact  that  you
want to keep your relationship with me on a professional level. I think I know why, so it doesn't bother
me . . . much. I'll respect your wishes, Tammy, because you've got reasons for them."
"But, you . . ." she began, then fell silent.
I let her out in front of the lab. It was lit up because somebody was working there this evening. Then I
parked the VW in the darkened lot next to the supply house. I let myself into the lab and found out that
Mac Roston was working on Wilding's Porsche . . . but without Wilding's being present!
We got through the program,  debugged  it, and  ran it twice with the same  variables.  Got  the same
answer  both  times.  So  we  ran  several  variables  and  got  a  handle  on  the  parameters  of  the  load
compensator system. After that, it was a matter of minutes until the micro-computer had it all laid out for
us.
"Beautiful!" I chortled as I looked over the print-out. "Carl should be able to begin putting this together
tomorrow morning. Nice piece of work, Tammy."
"You certainly deserve some of the credit," she said.
I put the hard copy print-out down. "Incidentally, you should have bet with me; you would have won."
"What are you talking about?"
"Wilding isn't going to drive down here to check on us.  Mac's  working on Wilding's Porsche  in the
bay right now. I never thought Mac would work on any car ex-cept one belonging to the lab gang."
"Oh, Mac works  on almost anybody's  car  down  here.  Besides,  I enjoyed  fibbing to  Wilding. He's
such a blus-tery old bumpkin who's far too nosy for his own good. It was fun to see his expression when
I told him I was going out to a movie with you."
"It was a nice cover, Tammy, but I didn't get my water hot over it." I signed, pushed my chair back,
and got up to put the hard copy in the locked file for over-night security. Looking over my shoulder at
her, I told her, "Tammy, you're a sexy woman, but you don't have a social life. You won't go out with
me, even though I've asked you."
"Once," Tammy reminded me. "And you forget that I asked you to check me out in your plane."
"Yeah, but to be honest with you, I didn't pay too much attention because of   . . .    because of  .   .
well . . ."
"Because of the lab rumors?" she put in.
"Well, yes," I admitted.
Tammy got up, shut the door to my office, and came over to me. She looked up at me, put her arms
around my neck, and told me, "Mike, kiss me."
So I did.
I put my heart into it and some body English as well. It was about a quarter of an inch off-center, but
we rec-tified that quickly. I was gentle with her . . .  very gentle.
She finally buried her head on my shoulder and whis-pered, "I've been so afraid ..."
"Nothing to be afraid of . . .  not now," I told her.
"You don't know . . ."

"Probably not. Maybe someday you'll want to tell me . . .  in your own good  time. There's  no rush,
Tam."
"My God, it's been so long . . . and you're so different and so careful." She looked up at me. "Mike,
do you ever get angry, frustrated?"
"Sure I do. Who doesn't?"
"But you're not violent about it. I have never seen a man as angry as you at  both  Phil Sanatella  and
Vic. I thought you were going to hit Vic."
This woman had obviously seen far too much vio-lence in her life. "Look, Tam, I'm a little guy . . . and
a lot of people in the world try to push us small types around," I explained, although I really didn't think I
needed  to.  Anyway, it would serve  to  reinforce  some  things and  maybe  help  give  Tammy  back  her
confi-dence. "When I was thirteen and knew that I wasn't going to get any bigger, I got tired  of being
pushed around. I went out for Tae Kwan Do, Korean self-defense. Good thing I was still a rookie when
the guy who first pushed me hard after that lived so  I didn't  get a  manslaughter charge  on my record.
Then I took up judo and karate because I had to temper my self-defense. So I've got a strong  built-in
restraint against anger accompanied by violence . . ."
Tammy smiled . . gorgeously, lighting up the whole room. "Well, Mike Call, you can forget the stories
of the rumor mongers . . ."
"I don't really pay too much attention to people who mong rumors. There are too many other things to
do."
"Such as?"
"Such as this." I kissed her again.
The second time was even better . . . and longer . . . and much more fervent.
She finally broke it off and pushed back to look up at me. It's refreshing to be with a woman who has
to look up at me. "You're impossible!" she whispered.
"What do you mean?"
"Never mind. Do you know how difficult you're making things for me?"
"I think so."
"No, you don't. You couldn't." She sighed and  disen-tangled  herself from me with great  reluctance.
"Mike, we'd better get back to Morse Manor, please. Things are . . .  Things are sort of getting out of
hand for me . . . and it's not really your fault . . . except for be-ing you . . ."
"Tammy, you'll work it out . . . And I'll help you, if you'll let me."
"Dear Mike!" She caressed my cheek. "You don't have the foggiest notion of what's involved. And I
can-not tell you."
"However you want it, Tammy."
We went to the front door, and I called back to Mac on the intercom, "Hey, Mac, you still working
on Wild-ing's car?"
His voice came back with the echoing resonance of the rear shop, "Yeah, I'm about finished. Wilding
said he'd pick it up in about fifteen minutes."
"Okay, Tammy and I are going back to Morse Manor. Lock up when you leave."
"Will do!"
I turned to Tammy. "You wait here. I'll get the car out of the lot across the street and bring it by."
Tammy looked uncomfortable. "I'm not afraid of the dark!"

"Well, I'd rather not have you walking into dark parking lots in the middle of Bridgeport  at  night," I
told her.
I  went  out  of  the  front  door  of  the  lab.  The  street  was  deserted.  There  wasn't  a  car  moving.  I
sauntered across, walked around the lab supply house to the lot, and started to unlock my Bug.
I heard a noise behind me. I didn't stop to think about it. I moved fast, turning as I did so.
There were two of them, and they were big. I don't remember what they looked like. It was too dark.
But they were coming at me.
Some people believe they can describe blow-by-blow what happens in a fight. I can't. In fact, I don't
even remember what I did. Tae Kwan Do was so thoroughly indoctrinated in my mind that I didn't have
to think about what I did. That's one of its principles. You don't have time to think.
I do recall one of them saying, "That's him!"
Then I was standing next to my VW and looking down at  two  big men who were  sprawled  on the
ground. One  of them had  a  right arm that was  strangely bent.  The other  was  either  bleeding  or  had
landed in a puddle of oil; in the darkness, I couldn't make out the color of the puddle.
My left forearm  hurt where  I had  apparently  warded  off the swing of the cast-iron  pipe  that
now lay on the ground at my feet. I didn't think my arm was broken.
I wasn't even breathing hard.
I unlocked the VW, climbed in, started it, and drove across the street to park in front of the lab where
there was some light. I got out, rubbing my forearm which now had an ugly red bruise rising on it.
Tammy noticed it. "Mike, what happened?"
"Couple of goons tried to get me in the lot. They'll keep until the cops arrive." I went right to the phone
and dialed the police.
Tammy got cold, wet towels for the bruise, but it was still hurting when the police showed up. I told
them what happened and went with them to the parking lot.
Both men were gone, and so was the cast-iron pipe.
"You been drinking, sir?" one of the officers asked me.
"Not at all. I've been working at the NEMECO labs all evening. Look at my arm here! And I know I
laid those two slobs out cold enough that they shouldn't be gone by now.  It  was  only about  fifteen
minutes ago . . ."
One  of the officers was  shining his flashlight around.  "Well, they're  gone now,  but  you  were  right.
Here's a puddle of blood. What did you do to them?"
"I don't know. They came at me, and I reacted. I'm black belt plus Tae Kwon Do," I explained.
"Well, that tells the story. Not much we can do at this point. Let's go back over to the NEMECO lab
so you can answer a few questions for the report we have to file on this. How's your arm? Need to go to
the hos-pital?"
"It hurts, but it isn't broken. If it isn't better by to-morrow, I'll see a doctor."
Tammy was upset. She was almost in tears as we sat there,  answering questions  for the two  police
officers. They finished and  one  of them snapped  the  metal  cover  back  over  his  report  board  as  he
admonished me, "Mr. Call, Flagstaff, Arizona, was probably a well-run town with a pistol-totin' sheriff to
keep law and order. But I'd suggest that you don't go alone into any dark areas in this part of Bridgeport
at night. You were lucky . . ."
There was  a  knock  on the front door.  I got up,  opened  it, and  saw  Peter  Wilding standing  there.
"Come in, Peter," I told him.

Wilding turned  and  waved  to  the taxi that  was  double-parked next to the police cruiser.  The
cab sped off, its driver obviously anxious to get out of this part of town at this hour. Wilding looked at
the two police offi-cers. "What happened, Mike?"
"Couple of guys tried to mug me across the street."
The  police  officers  were  mildly  interested  in  Wilding  and  asked  him  a  few  questions,  requested
identification, then left.
"You all right? Can I drive you home?" Wilding asked.
"Arm hurts like hell, but I can make it okay," I told him. "Let me call Mac on the intercom and tell him
you're waiting up here. He'll drive your car  around.  I don't  want you walking around  outside  the lab.
Somebody might try to mug you, too."
Mac didn't answer the intercom.
Instead, he walked through the front door and handed Wilding the keys to the Porsche.
Tammy was very quiet on the way to Morse Manor. Once there, she insisted on tending to my arm . .
. and  I didn't  object  because  she  was  taking some  of the hurt out of it.  I  tried  to  tell  her  what  had
happened, but kept running up against the block of not remembering my every move.
"Tammy, I didn't  go berserk  or  anything like that.  It's  like flying and  having an emergency.  I  react
without thinking when emergencies happen."
"But you put them both out cold!"
"Apparently not as cold as I wanted. They were gone when I went back with the police fifteen minutes
later. I must be out of practice. But I'm damned sure I broke one guy's arm. I'm surprised that they could
get up and move out of there that quickly."
"Maybe they didn't," she observed. "Maybe they had somebody waiting in a car nearby."
"That could be. I think I heard one of them say something like, "That's him!' " I stopped for a moment.
"Tammy, I wonder if they were after more than just mugging me and lifting my wallet?"
"What do you mean?"
"I wonder if they were after me?"
"There's no reason why they might want you," she pointed out.
I was bushed, and the reaction of the mugging had finally set in. I went up and went to bed.
My arm hurt. I lay there in the dark for what seemed an interminable time, unable to  sleep  with my
throbbing arm.  If I hadn't  broken  the radius,  it  was  certainly  badly  bruised.  I  got  up,  went  into  the
bathroom, took two aspirin, came back to bed, turned out the light, and tried to get to sleep.
All sorts of psychological fantasies were running through my mind. My memory played  back  what I
knew one of the goons said: "That's him!" They weren't out to mug just anybody in a darkened parking
lot. They were out to get somebody specific: me! Why? The sky hook? Who knew of it except the lab
gang and some people at the corporate offices? And why me?
I lay there in the dark, trying to puzzle it all out.
I heard the door to my room open very quietly.
I couldn't see who it was.
I didn't move, but I was ready, tensed and prepared.
Then I smelled the perfume.
"Tammy?" I whispered.

"Shhhh!"
There was a rustle of a garment falling to the floor.
Then she was there next to me, warm and soft. Her hair brushed across my face.
"Tammy? Wh? . . ."
"Do you have a compulsion to talk while making love?" she whispered.
"No, but . . ."
"Then be quiet so the others don't hear us!" She didn't whisper but blew the words softly into my ear.
"Look, I'm ..."
"I don't need to look. I can feel."
"You change your mind? Why?"
"You turned me on, Mike! The way you handled yourself tonight did something to me! I liked that . . .
and I like this!"
I was not in top condition, but the fight had pumped me full of adrenaline and hyped me considerably.
It started slowly, carefully, gently. It was as though she were releasing years  of pent-up  emotions.  But
she was responsive, eager, exciting, and enduring.
My arm didn't hurt a bit the rest of the night. But I really didn't have an opportunity to think about it.

Chapter Eleven
Len Marshall sent me over to see his family physi-cian. My left forearm was  not broken,  but it was
badly  bruised.  The  doctor  prescribed  fifty  milligrams  of  meperidine  to  take  at  night  if  ordinary
acetamenophen, which I was to take during the day, didn't kill the pain. He also prescribed some sleepy
pills and told me to check back in three days if things hadn't improved.
I never had to use the sleepy pills. And I took only one of the meperidine capsules.
Bill Osbourne was at the lab when I got back, and he wanted a full report.
"What do you make of it?" I asked him when I had wound it up.
Osbourne blew a cloud of smoke from one of his long brown cigarettes. "Park in front of the lab at
night after this, regardless of whether you think Wilding may come by to check you out. I'd rather that he
knows some of us are working late at night than to have you or any of the lab gang get mugged."
"Do you really think it was just an ordinary mugging, Bill?" I wondered. "After all, one of those guys
said, "That's him!'"
Bill thought about that for a moment. "Mike, we've got the industrial espionage types spotted. Frank
Weldon, the controller, handles counter-intelligence quietly on the side. I'll report this to him, but I'm sure
that he'll tell me that it was just the usual sort of thing one can expect in this part of town at night . . ."
Apparently, I looked unconvinced, because the re-search director went on, "If I had any indication or
even the slightest suspicion that last night's incident was connected in any way with industrial espionage, I
would be the first to tell you because you deserve to know . . . especially when you're involved."
I sighed and looked down at my sore arm. "Bill, if you say so . . ."
"I  do.  I  would  rather  have  you  thinking  about  the  sky  hook  than  about  industrial  spies.  Now,  I
understand that you and Tammy got it together last night . . ."
"Huh?" I looked up quickly at him, thinking that news travels very fast. Who had heard us?
"You got the load compensating system worked out."
"Oh, yeah, we did! Sorry, I haven't gotten it to Carl this morning yet because I had to go to see the
doctor."
"Well, Tammy did after showing it to me. Nice work."
"Thanks."
"How come it differs from the one Vic worked up?" Osbourne wanted to know.
"Tammy and I were using your old transient ap-proach."
"We thought that was pretty well out-dated. How come you used it?"
"It was easier to work out on my hand programma-ble."
Bill didn't say anything for a moment. "Why didn't you use the microcomputer?"
"Vic has priority on it because it's part of his Analy-sis and Contracts department, and he wanted to
run out the design with the  GI  radiation  equations.  So  Tammy  and  I  had  to  use  my  programmable
instead."
Bill looked  at  the end  of his cigarette  stump,  snuffed it out,  and  dropped  the remains in the waste
basket. Blowing the smoke out his holder, he said, "Didn't you talk to Len about it?"

"Len was there when Vic preempted the microcom-puter."
"I see . . ."
"And I didn't want to make waves. Someday I'll have sufficient reason but I didn't think this was it."
"Where did you learn all the diplomacy, Mike?" Bill Osbourne asked rhetorically.
"I save my violence for when I need it."
"Yeah, I guess you do. Okay, I've approved  the sys-tem  that  you and  Tammy designed.  Both Len
and I feel that it is closer to being in the ballpark than Vic's."
"I hope you don't tell him that . . ."
"You let me worry about it. How long will it take you and Carl to put the load compensating system
to-gether so that the sky hook will push a load?"
I ran through some mental calculations. I had ex-plicit faith in Carl's ability, but I didn't know exactly
how long it would take. I finally made a guess. "We might have it ready by the middle of next week. It
might be sooner if we worked through the weekend again . . ."
"I won't ask you to do that. You worked all last weekend  and  most of the nights this week.  If you
think you might have it in operation by next Thursday, I want to ask Dr. Serge Korsinski and  Dr.  Ted
Mayan to come up."
"Good! I want to meet them!"
"You may not feel that way after you've tangled with Mayan!"
I didn't get to see Tammy except at lunch in the lab that day. It didn't make any difference; I had been
with her a lot in the last twenty-four hours. She was working on some of Vic's stuff, and I was trying to
steer clear of the situation with Vic.
Carl and I got busy on the load compensator, and things progressed slowly.
During lunch hour, I had  to  recount  my encounter  of the previous  night in vivid detail.  I have been
liberally educated in the fine art of hangar flying by some of the best aeronautical raconteurs in the world:
American ag pilots. What else do you do when the weather is foul and you sit around the hangar all day?
"There I was, flat on my back, thirty feet above the cotton field, noth-ing between me and the ground but
the farmer's daugh-ter . . ." I think that has come down through the dec-ades of aviation, being changed
from time to time depending on whether or not there was a war on at the time. I didn't tell any outright
lies because that is considered highly unethical by the Association of American Hangar Pilots. But one is
permitted to stretch the truth as far as one thinks one can without breaking some-thing. In any event,  I
utilized my hangar flying training to its utmost and stuck in a lot of violence . . . but I left out the sex.
Tammy was very quiet that evening as the two of us sat alone in the living room at Morse Manor. Carl
and Peter were doing the dishes, and Ruth was downstairs in the cellar.
"Want to go to a movie?" I asked her.
"No, Mike, not tonight. But thank you for asking."
"If it will make you feel any better, I can give you the old cliche."
"Pardon me?"
"You know, the one where I say, 'But I still respect you!' "
After  a  moment's  hesitation—I  think  it  was  difficult  for  her  to  realize  that  my  sense  of  humor  is
sometimes a little wacky—she laughed. Then, with mock serious-ness, she replied, "Oh, you don't know
how relieved I am to hear you say that!"
"I've never met anyone like you," I told her.

"I have the same feeling, Mike."
"I haven't figured you out yet, but that doesn't bother me."
"Someday, I hope that I can tell you all about it." She paused for a moment, then added, "Do you love
anyone, Mike?"
That  was  very  surprising.  "Uh  .  .  .  Tammy,  I'm  not  sure  that  I  know  what  love  really  is.  I've
experienced puppy love as a teen-ager. But I haven't had anybody to 'love' for more than half my life.
Just airplanes and as-tronomy. What about you?"
"I loved somebody once. It turned out that he wasn't a real man; he was a beast. But I loved him . . .
and it hurt a great deal. I'm not anxious to fall in love again," she admitted softly. "I like you, Mike, and I
enjoy being with you . . ."
"I'm patient."
"Oh, Mike, there're so many things that you don't know ..."
We broke it off because Ruth came up from the base-ment. She was concerned about my arm. "Let
me see how it is tonight, Mike. Does it still hurt?"
"A little."
"What did that doctor tell you to do?"
"Take aspirin and call him in three days. Gave me some pain killers to use."
"That's what I thought! You should soak it in epsom salts. I found some in the basement."
It helped. House mother Ruth played her role very well.
But I felt stupid as hell sitting in the kitchen with my left arm soaking in a dishpanful of hot water and
ep-som salts. Inconvenient.
Saturday morning, I just had to go flying. In the first place, it helps keep a plane in good running order
if it's flown at least thirty minutes a week at 75 percent power. Cleans the rust off the cylinder walls and
boils the water out of the engine oil. I crawled  into my grungy old coveralls  and  headed  for Sikorski
Memorial.
Wimpy Winfield was in the hangar. "Got the word you'd come aboard," he told me, "so I stuck your
Cher-okee back in the corner there. Jake Stock raised hell about it until I told him that this hangar was
my turf."
"Gripes, Wimpy, I'll go rent a tie-down. I don't want to get you in trouble," I told him.
"Don't tie-down this plane outside . . . unless you want to  end  up with a  pile of corrosion.  We  got
plenty of room in here, and your Cherokee's a little bitty thing off in one corner,"  Wimpy replied.  "Tell
you what might help, though. Jake  Stock  took  up cigar smoking back  in the days  when all hot pilots
chewed stogies when they flew . . . like Joe Foss and Curt LeMay. 'Win' a box of panatellas at a church
bazaar or some-thing, and tell him you think he'd enjoy them more than you becuz you don't smoke 'em."
I got the message loud and clear.
I rolled Two To Tango out on the apron in the wan sunlight of the hazy sky  of Long Island  Sound.
The old girl was filthy. After the trip, there were cheese cracker crumbs, a couple of old paper cups, and
two empty soft drink cans in the cabin. I got her cleaned out. Then I borrowed some Stoddard solvent
from Wimpy, scrubbed the engine down, and got the accumulated grime off it. The leading edges of the
wings and hori-zontal stabilator were coated with a fine black scum where they had met the crud-filled
air over Pennsyl-vania and New York. So I washed her down, too.
Although NEMECO had its own fuel storage and pumping facility for its aircraft, I felt it would be too
much to ask for some sort of arrangement for fuel with Wimpy. So I went to the nearby FBO, plopped

down my gasoline credit card, and arranged for an account for 100-octane.
Tammy Dudley was waiting for me when I got back to the NEMECO hangar.
"Flight review for the Mile-High Club?" I asked her.
She smiled. "You promised to check me out in this bird."
"That I did. You current?"
Whereupon Tammy Dudley pulled out her wallet and  displayed  her FAA  commercial pilot's  license
with  in-strument  rating,  current  second  class  medical  certifi-cate,  FCC  third  class  radiotelephone
operator's permit, and Connecticut pilot's license. She also handed me her log book.
Damn if she didn't have more than 1,500 hours, some of it in heavy multiengine stuff like the Douglas
DC-3. That didn't surprise me; there are still thousands of old Gooney Birds flapping their wings along
the air-ways of the world.
She also had a camera bag and two flight bags with her.
"Going somewhere?" I asked her.
"Martha's  Vineyard," she  told  me. "We can  shoot  the ILS  approach  up there.  I need  to  get some
instru-ment time. So I packed an overnight kit for you, too."
"You figure on staying overnight?"
"We've been working pretty hard. We need the change. Ever been to Martha's Vineyard?"
"Nope. How are the grapes?"
"It's a pretty place. You'll like it."
"If you let me see any of it . . ." I told her.
It was only about an hour's flight. I got her checked out in the Cherokee, but she checked me out on
flying in the East Coast environment with its low visibility and high humidity. I was used to flying high in
the West. Tammy taught me to cruise about a thousand feet above the water in order to stay away from
the jet traffic between New York and Boston.
We spent Saturday night in a little old colonial type inn. It had a genuine feather bed. Feather beds do
in-deed have a great deal to recommend them.
The fog had rolled in overnight. We filed IFR for return to Bridgeport, and I took off under zero-zero
visibility conditions. I had filed for a more-or-less direct flight, but Center had their own ideas of where I
ought to go. So  I canceled  IFR,  and  cruised  above  the fog bank  to  Bridgeport,  where  the gunk had
burned off by the time we arrived.
I found that the trip, short as it had been, left me completely relaxed and feeling six feet broad across
the shoulders. Turned out that Tammy was a good pilot. "You can fly the right seat with me any time you
want," I told her after she had shot a perfect ILS Runway 6 approach, not letting the instrument needles
drift a frac-tion off center during the approach.
As we  got out of Two  To  Tango  in front of the NEMECO  hangar,  we  met Bob  Destry  and  Phil
Sanatella about to go aboard the Aero Commander with Pete Ku-kowski.
"Hi!" Destry called out. "Your plane, Mike?"
"Yeah. Where you headed?"
"Pittsburgh. Mill Controls Division joint marketing conference with Mill Equipment Division tomorrow
morning," Sanatella remarked. "Where'd you fly to?"
"Oh, we just went up to the Vineyard on a sight-seeing flight," Tammy put in. Well, she was right, even
though it sounded like we'd been out for a couple of hours or so.

I pushed Two To Tango over to the corner of the apron and left it there. "Let's not unload quite yet,"
I remarked to Tammy. "Wait until they've gone. Let's go to Mama's and have some lunch."
The Aero Commander was gone by the time we got back.
Carl and I got well along on the sky hook on Mon-day until Vic dropped by to see what was going
on. "That doesn't look right," he said as he checked the equipment. He went over and looked in Carl's
lab note-book. "What are you two building here?"
"The load compensator circuit," Carl told him. I kept my mouth shut.
"This isn't the system I designed!" Vic complained.
"I don't know anything about that, Vic. It's the one Len said for us to put together."
"What about this, Mike? Who changed my design?"
"It isn't your design," I told him flatly.
"What?"
"Like Carl told you, Bill and Len told us to build this one ..."
Vic growled  several  phrases  in  Arabic  that  I  did  not  understand.  He  started  to  storm  out  of  the
dynamics lab, then stopped short and turned to me. "Mike, did you and Tammy enjoy Saturday night at
Martha's Vine-yard?" And without another word, he left.
Carl looked at me. There was a certain amount of admiration as well as envy in his expression.
"Now, how do these rumors get started?" I asked no-body in particular..
"I don't know," Carl remarked, "but it's a good one, Mike! If it's true, I want to find out what you've
got that I ain't got!"
I decided to joke my way out of it. "Sex appeal! She likes them six feet tall and built accordingly!"
Carl laughed, and I hoped that it would be the end of that.
How did Vic know?
Osbourne checked in later in the day. "Going to make Thursday?"
"Should have it cooking tomorrow, boss," Carl re-marked.
"No troubles foreseen unless it doesn't pass the smoke test," I added.
"Good! Mike, let's go up to Tammy's office. I want to check something with you."
Once in Tammy's office with the two of us, Bill closed the door, turned to me, and asked, "Did you
two go to Martha's Vineyard over the weekend?"
Tammy almost came unglued. But I looked Osbourne straight in the eye and softly told him, "Doctor,
what we do with our private lives is none of your busi-ness."
"I thought so." He sat down on a corner of Tammy's desk and told us, "Look, I really don't care who
does what to whom outside this lab. But, for God's sake,  don't  make  the mistake  of being obvious  in
front of cor-porate headquarters types. I don't mean to intrude in your private affairs, but sometimes they
might have im-plications that affect all of us in Corporate Research. End of lecture."
"Bill, who told  you this? I want to  find out where  such a  rumor could  get started,"  I snapped.  If I
sound-ed a little angry, I was. But not for the reason I hoped Osbourne would expect.
"Never mind."
"Dr. Osbourne," Tammy put in, vexed. "I want to know who's spreading ugly rumors involving
me."

The research director sighed. "Here's the way I got it. Sanatella and Destry were on the NEMECO
ramp when the two of you landed yesterday . . ."
"Yeah, I remember them when we landed. Tammy asked me to check her out in my Cherokee.  So
we went up the Sound to Martha's Vineyard," I explained.
"Sanatella went over to look inside your ship while you two went for lunch. Claims he saw overnight
bags in the back seat. He called Vic this morning from Pitts-burgh to  have Vic check  some  marketing
numbers for him, and  he told  Vic. Vic—out  of no malice on his part,  mind  you,  but  recognizing  the
possibilities—told me, as he should have."
Tammy put her face in her hands. I just sighed.
"As I told you, I don't care," Osbourne went on. "Purely circumstantial evidence insofar as I'm
concerned. Ugly rumor passed along by a man who's going up the ladder by running over  people  with
his  track  shoes  on.  But  Destry's  a  prude  and  Sanatella's  a  sneak.  Both  of  them  are  on  the  make.
Sanatella now has a juicy tidbit on you, Mike, and he'll use it if he can at the most inappropriate time for
you and with the best timing for him. I don't know when and  where  such an occasion  will take  place.
Now, I don't care if you two are sleeping with each other or not. And you don't have to tell me. Frankly,
however,  I  would  be  very  surprised  if  you  were  not.  You're  both  young,  and  neither  of  you  are
unattractive. You've got plenty of opportunities. I would worry if either of you didn't have a private sex
life of some  sort  because  nearly  all  creative  people  have  exceedingly  strong  sex  drives  .  .  .  myself
included, by the way."
Osbourne got up. "Look,  you are  both  adults.  But I want to  point out something to  you.  This is a
paternalis-tic company. It has a long history of being run by straight-laced New England Puritan types.
We may have a romantic as president right now, but it won't al-ways be that way. There are still a lot of
Puritans in corporate headquarters. Some of them are out to get Halden. Some of them are  out to  get
whatever they can get. Some of them are out to hoist themselves up the ladder,  using whatever  means
they've got at hand to do it. And some of them do not like Corporate Research. If we get in a crunch, if
we get into a cash flow bind, or if the country goes into a major recession, Corporate Research will be
the first to go. But, being a paternalis-tic company, NEMECO will find jobs in other divisions for most of
the people here . . .  except  those  whose  moral integrity is suspect  . . .  in spite  of the fact  that  hardly
anybody  at  corporate  headquarters  is lily white in that  regard.  They've managed  to  cover  it  up.  But,
please. Be as discreet as you can . . ."
I didn't say anything. Neither did Tammy.
"That's all," Bill added.
"Fine. Now, let me ask you something else," I put in. "Do you want Carl and I to continue building our
version of the load compensator circuits, or do we build Vic's?"
"What were my instructions to you?"
"Build the Tammy-and-Mike version."
"So? Carry on! Vic is my problem."
"That's what you think!" I told him.

Chapter Twelve
We decided on a twenty-kilogram load for the sky hook to push, this being the same  weight as  the
unit.  We  also  had  to  select  the  dimensions,  so  we  made  it  one  meter  long.  Mac  hogged  a  bar  of
three-inch-diameter  steel  down  to  a  diameter  of  about  two  and  a  quarter  inches  on  the  lathe  and
mounted two supports fore and aft. This permitted us to hang it as a ballistic pendulum directly in front of
the sky hook.
We also had  him build a  load  consisting of a  twenty-kilo  steel  load  two  meters  long, and  it was  a
willowy rod a little over an inch in diameter.  And he made  a  forty-kilo  rod  load  one  meter  long. The
purpose of the three loads of differing weights and dimensions was to give us some handle on the validity
of the equations we had used.
 Insofar as the sky hook was concerned, the charac-teristics of the load that should theoretically affect
it were a combination of mass and dimensions.
By Wednesday afternoon, we had the twenty-kilo meter rod hung in front of the sky hook with its rear
face just touching the front face of the drive. The fol-lowing morning, with Wendell Stone's help, we set
up a very simple position-measuring system consisting of a photocell on the load looking at a light source
along the thrust axis of the pendulum system. As the position of the pendulum changed, the output of the
photocell changed  because  of the inverse-square  law relating  to  the  amount  of  light  it  saw  from  the
fixed-position light. As a measurement system,  it didn't  have any direct  me-chanical  connection  to  the
experiment and  it was  ex-tremely  accurate,  the  output  of  the  photocell  being  proproportional  to  the
position of the unit. We could swing the pendulum system by hand and watch the electric output of the
photocell write a sine wave on a recording oscilograph.
Even Vic had to admit that it was elegant.
I met Dr. Ted Mayan in a most unusual way. I was flat on my back underneath the sky hook making a
fi-nal adjustment of the photocell when I heard somebody say, "You're right, Bill! If it doesn't work, you
can probably sell it to Hollywood for their next science-fantasy epic!"
I looked up to see a heavy-set man in his fifties sporting a short crew cut—a rarity in those days—and
brandishing with great arrogance a cigarette holder that was  even longer than Bill Osbourne's.  I rolled
out from under the sky hook and was about to throw this out-sider out when I saw Bill standing behind
him.
Carl called out, "Hi, Dr. Mayan!"
That was  my formal introduction to  one  of the most amazing men I have ever  met.  I shook  hands
tentatively with him and found my hand in a powerful grip.
"Does Mike stand for Michael or Micro?" Mayan asked me. "If it's  Michael, it means 'you  are
like God.' "
"Doctor, I'll let you figure that one out for yourself if I don't set fire to a bush first," I shot back with a
grin, not really knowing how to handle this obviously ego-powerful man about  whom Len had  warned
me.
Len's  warning had  been  simple: "Never  get into an  argument  with  Mayan  and  grant  him  his  initial
assump-tion;  he'll  end  up  leading  you  down  the  garden  path  un-til  you  must  logically  agree  with
something that is to-tally ridiculous!"
Bill gave Mayan a quick briefing, adding, "I'll give you the full treatment when Serge gets here."

"Whatever you  wish.  I'm  on  your  time  now."  The  big  man  turned  back  to  me.  "Since  you're  an
astronomer, how do you think this work will eventually affect your discipline?"
"I'm not really sure, Doctor," I told him. "If there really is GI radiation and the fourth or inertial field,
it'll create problems for the relativists."
"That's putting it mildly! See here, have you worked through the equations as applied to the instabilities
of satellite orbits?"
"That's more in Vic's line," I admitted. "I was strictly an observational planetary astronomer."
We adjourned to  the conference  room.  Within a  few minutes, we  were  joined  by Professor  Serge
Korsinski who turned out to be a very impressive looking man, partly bald, with a definite Slavic accent
and a very proud bearing. But his noble looks betrayed a very per-sonable and cultured manner. "Well!
A distinct plea-sure to meet you, Dr. Call. Bill has told me a great deal about you!"
"Just plain Mister Call, Professor," I corrected him.
"In view of what Bill says you have managed to ac-complish with the sky hook in the past few weeks,
I rather suspect that either Dr. Mayan or I can correct that situation in due course of time. Tell me: How
did you happen to come up with this wholistic approach to load impedance matching?"
"I didn't. It was Wendell Stone, the engineer from the Mill Equipment Division who's  working over
here getting the shot-alloying process  ready  to  go on-line,"  I  confessed.  "I'm  just  an  experimentalist,
gentlemen. Vic handles the theory and the math."
"From what I've heard, you're belittling yourself," Mayan broke in. "Didn't you stop  Aboud  cold  on
the load matching matter?"
"Not really. It's pretty hard to stop Vic. He just bull-dozes ahead and gets his way no matter what you
do."
Mayan roared. Even Bill Osbourne laughed at this. Korsinski smiled knowingly.
At that point, Vic showed up in the figurative cloud of dust. "Sorry! I forgot that we had this meeting
this morning!" he said, trying to be apologetic.
"That's all right," Korsinski told him. "We'll manage to get it out of your hide in some  fashion today,
Vic."
Len also  showed  up with Vic. The conference  room  door  was  closed.  And  I  found  myself  in  an
intellectually exhausting activity. Bill and Vic got up and gave a gen-eral briefing of what had happened in
the last thirty days. But these two academicians were not from the typical mold. They were real thinkers,
teachers, and searchers, each in his own individualistic way.
Mayan was  an incredibly intelligent physicist with a  broad  spectrum  of knowledge  outside  his own
field of expertise. He was one of the best generalists I've ever run into.
Korsinski, on the other hand, had a very thorough and in-depth knowledge of modern physics. He'd
made the original attack  on  Bill's  first  NYAS  paper,  pointing  out  some  serious  discrepancies  in  the
rationale, logic, and mathematics. Korsinski didn't attack now; he com-mented. He behaved simply as a
classically  educated  scientist  would  be  expected  to  behave,  searching  for  in-consistencies  and
demanding complete  derivations  and  logical  rationales  for  every  step.  "I  am  convinced  that  you  are
correct,"  he  mentioned  in  his  mannered  voice  at  one  point,  "but  we  must  approach  this  properly
accord-ing  to  the well-established  and  long-used  scientific method.  It  will  not  withstand  peer  review
otherwise."  He  exhibited  no  advocacy  at  any  point,  but  he  did  dis-play  an  astounding  depth  of
understanding of the inter-nal politics of the scientific community.
"We  must  be  very  careful,"  Korsinski  pointed  out  during  an  argument  over  a  minor  point  in  the
construc-tion and interpretation of one of Vic's field equations, "that we do not directly negate any of the

current  be-liefs  of  the  relativists  or  the  particle  physicists  because  they  are  firmly  in  control  of  the
publications  and  of  the  peer  review  process.  While  it  is  entirely  possible  that  your  hypothesis  will
probably reveal many new aspects to subnuclear physics, the data must be presented in such a manner
that these specialists can easily adjust their own beliefs and findings to live more comfortably with your
hypotheses than with the ones they are pres-ently enmeshed in."
"Serge,  if  Bill  and  his  people  have  a  working  experi-mental  demonstration  in  the  laboratory,  the
scientific community's going to have to sit up and take notice," Mayan objected. "They'll have one hell of
a time wishing away Bill's theories when anybody can buy an oper ating sky hook!"
"No, they will ignore it and think it will eventually go away . . . which is precisely the reverse of what
will actually happen," the Stevens professor pointed out. "In ten years,  we  will see  the next generation
coming along and presenting their scientific papers on it because the Old Guard will have retired by then.
Right now, the Guard is sitting there with tenure . . ."
"Baloney!" Mayan exploded. "I've got tenure, and I'll put up one hell of a fight over this. Serge, I'll be
teaching this at  the freshman level during the next aca-demic year because I'll have to . . .  just as  my noble
predecessors had to drop teaching vacuum-tube elec-tronics because the students were walking around
be-tween classes with transistor radios held to their ears."
"I hadn't expected to get to this subject this early in the game," Bill Osbourne remarked. "Our first job
is to make a working product; then we can afford the luxury of scientific acceptance."
"Ah, but,  Bill," Korsinski  pointed  out,  "a trip to  Stockholm  would undoubtedly  be  viewed by your
mar-keting people as outstanding publicity that is otherwise unobtainable at any price!"
"If the Stockholm trip happens at all," Mayan ob-served, "I believe it'll be the first time that the Nobel
Prize has  gone to  investigators from an industrial re-search  organization since  Bardeen,  Brattain,  and
Shock-ley won it in 1956 ..."
"I had in mind," Osbourne mused, "that we'd make our work known by means of a tour de force that
no-body could ignore and that would result in the total in-ability of the government to classify our work.
That's  why  I  brought  Mike  aboard.  In  addition  to  being  a  good  astronomer  and  an  even  better
experimentalist, he's a pilot. When Mike lands on Mars in a space vehicle driven by a sky hook, it'll be
very hard to ignore or classify our work."
"Have you discussed this with your management yet?" Mayan wanted to know.
"Of course not."
"Good!  I  like  the  idea!  It  has  shock  value!  It'll  un-stuff  a  lot  of  stuffed  shirts  and  unscrew  the
inscrutable," Mayan said with a grandiose gesture. "I'll enjoy watch-ing some of my esteemed colleagues
getting their noses rubbed in it!"
"I believe you are being a bit harsh on our esteemed colleagues," Korsinski pointed out quietly.
"I don't doubt for a second that Bill and his crew here can manage to pick up enough surplus NASA
and Air Force equipment to build the basic vehicle. I have a graduate student, George Rockledge, who
wanders around the surplus yards between Boston and Washing-ton buying and swapping bits of space
hardware. And there's a surprising amount of it available! George once managed to collect enough parts
to assemble a complete Titan-I ICBM . . . except for the nuclear materials for the warhead . . ."
"Do you have his address?" Bill wanted to know.
"Not with me. I'll call you and give it to you. But he may not be available; I'm never certain when he's
going to  be  in class.  He  disappeared  for about  three  weeks  a  short  time ago.  The CIA  brought  him
back.  Seems  he was  dickering with a  Middle Eastern  nation for  that  Titan-I  missile  before  the  CIA
stepped in."
"I won't trust my life to a piece of surplus gear," I interjected. "We can probably get by with standard

gen-eral  aviation equipment in most cases.  After all, it's  not going to  be  a  very long flight .  .  .  about
twenty days if we boost at one-tenth gee."
"And how do you propose to provide energy for your space vehicle?" Korsinski asked, directing his
question mainly at Bill Osbourne.
But I answered. "Probably the superbattery we've got under development here."
"Oh, that! Do you really believe it will be ade-quate?" the professor went on.
Mayan was working with a pocket calculator. "I fig-ure about thirty-two million kilowatts, assuming a
thousand kilogram vehicle mass and an eighty percent effi-ciency."
Osbourne and Vic immediately brought out pocket calculators. "You're close," Bill told him.
"Check your numbers again!" Mayan fired back. "You always had a tendency to get sloppy with your
numbers as a graduate student!"
"That's thirty-two gigawatts," I pointed out. "Think we can steal a nuclear reactor from somebody?"
Len looked confused. "What are you talking about? We've got a space drive. Once it's working, there
are plenty of energy sources for it."
Korsinski went to the chalkboard and began to write the ballistic and  acceleration  formulas and  the
basic en-ergy equations. "Mike assumed a constant-boost flight at an acceleration of one-tenth of a gee
or zero point nine eight meters per second squared. Let's figure that  the distance  is roughly a  hundred
million kilometers— although the distance  to  Mars  is about  fifty million kilo-meters  at  opposition,  you
might not want to wait around as long as twenty-six months. Work out the energy change required. Any
of my undergraduates could do it."
"Oh, cripes, yes! Of course!" Len smacked his fore-head.
"It will therefore require that you supply about three point two times ten to the ninth watts of energy to
go to Mars . . . and the same to get back," Korsinski said, nodding at the equations on the board.
Mayan squinted through his rimless glasses. "Going to Mars with a space drive is a noble goal . . . and
the pun was intended. Len, how's it coming in the superbattery  department?  Have  you achieved  three
million joules per kilogram of battery weight yet?"
"Not anywhere near it, Doctor. We've  got to  solve the electrode  disintegration problem  at  the high
temper-atures  generated  by the discharge  rates.  We  might be  able  to  get  about  two  megajoules  per
kilogram."
"Okay, then how about low-earth orbit instead? That's less energy," I remarked. I saw the Mars trip
going down the drain because  every  one  of us had  been  so  engrossed  in the sky  hook  itself that  we
forgot that it would need a very long extension cord.
Vic looked up from his calculator. "Three mega-joules per kilogram of mass placed in a two hundred
kilometer orbit," he announced.
Osbourne was shocked. "We can't even make a unit that will lift itself plus its energy source . . . much
less any payload!"
"That's why rockets are used," Mayan pointed out.
"I don't see what you mean, Ted? A rocket has to throw away mass," Osbourne said.
"True, but in order to get the energy density re-quired," Mayan explained, "you must work at very high
temperatures. Batteries that work at, say, two seventy-three degrees Kelvin have a lot less  energy per
kilogram because  that energy comes  from the breaking  of  chemi-cal  bonds.  At  higher  temperatures,
there is more energy available because you break more bonds quicker. This is why chemical combustion
is  used  in  rocket  engines,  and  at  the  highest  possible  pressures  and  temperatures.  Nuclear  rocket

engines would have been better because of the higher temperatures possible."
"Do you mean we're going to have to go nuclear in order to get the energy densities  required?"  Len
won-dered. "Mike, do you have any lead underwear?"
"Forget nuclear!" I snapped. "Even if we wanted to go that route, I don't think anybody in this room
could pull enough strings to get the materials."
Osbourne looked whipped. "It sounded like such a great idea!"
"It is!" Mayan said.
"Why did I  let  you  two  in  the  door  this  morning?"  the  research  director  asked.  It  was  strictly  a
rhetorical question.
"Because you hired us to keep you honest, Bill," Korsinski told him smoothly.
"All right!  We're  paying,  top  dollar  here!  Anybody  got  any  bright  ideas  where  we  might  get  the
energy, even for a limited mission of low-earth orbit?" Os-bourne suddenly asked.
"Magic," Mayan suggested.
"I'm paying for brilliance, not humor," Osbourne said.
"I mean what I said," Dr. Ted Mayan retorted.
"How is magic going to give us enough energy den-sity to get enough lift out of the sky  hook?"  Vic
re-marked.
Lift! Wings! Flying!
I stood  up.  "Gentlemen, we  may have an answer.  We're  thinking in rocket  terms: lifting  something
straight up against gravity. We don't need to take that approach."
"What are you suggesting, Mike?" Osbourne wanted to know.
"That we don't try to lift something into space. Let's try flying into space!"
There was dead silence in the conference room. I could almost hear the thinking going on.
"Look," I added, "the service ceiling on my little Cherokee is nineteen thousand feet. I can't fly it any
higher than that for one simple reason: the internal combustion engine that  turns the prop  that  provides
the thrust has lost so much power at that altitude there is no excess power available to continue making
the airplane climb. If I had an engine that could  put out a  constant  hundred  horsepower  regardless  of
altitude or air dens-ity, there are only two things that would limit how high I could go: one, the speed of
sound, and two, myself. Unless I could get a full pressure suit, I'm limited to  about  forty-five thousand
feet with a full pressure oxy-gen system; above that altitude, I need a pressure suit. My aircraft probably
has a limiting Mach number of about  seventy-five percent  of the speed  of sound,  and  just above  stall
which is sixty-five indicated airspeed, I would probably get to . . .  Vic, gimme your calcula-tor!"
"Never mind! I figured it. Your bird would reach about ninety-five thousand feet before it ran into its
limiting Mach number."
"See what I mean? I just happened to choose my plane because I'm familiar with the numbers. But, if
you were to take, say, a high performance sailplane with a low wing loading and low stalling speed and
give it about a hundred horsepower thrust all the way to  space,  you could  fly it into orbit,  neglecting
heating  ef-fects.  If  we  built  one  with  a  very  low  wing  loading,  we  could  probably  even  keep  the
temperatures  down  below  two  hundred  Celsius .  .  .  which means  aluminum  con-struction."  I  looked
around. There were a couple of doubting faces—Len Marshall and Serge Korsinski. Neither flew. But
Mayan probably didn't fly either, yet he seemed  ecstatic,  but that  could  probably  be  due  to  his sheer
enthusiasm for this project in the first place.
"Hundred horsepower,  huh?" Osbourne  was  musing, pulling at  his moustache.  "Len,  that  could  be

done with two hundred kilograms of superbattery, couldn't it?"
"Depends on how long you need the energy."
"Gentlemen," Mayan intoned as though he were de-livering a lecture in his class on the philosophy of
sci-ence, "new propulsion systems usually require a new approach to their use.  One  must take  a  fresh
look at methods of application. That's what we have just done. We cannot possibly apply the concepts
of rocket flight into orbit with the sky hook. The sky  hook  requires  a  source  of electrical energy.  The
only  such  source  with  adequate  energy  density  to  permit  the  vertical  takeoff  rocket  approach  is
magnetohydrodynamic power gener-ation, which is a complex and heavy technology at the moment. The
obvious answer  is Mike  Call's: Fly into space  at  constant  indicated  airspeed,  using  the  atmo-sphere
instead of fighting it as drag force or neglecting it entirely."
"What we're looking for is a sailplane powered by the sky hook," Bill Osbourne mused. "When I was
in the Air Force, Kelly Johnson at Lockheed solved a similar problem that way: He designed and built a
very high-performance jet-powered sailplane. We called it the U-2. Okay, we may not have the energy
sources to go directly to Mars, Mike, but we can sure get you into orbit!"
Vic was squirming. "I want to go run some numbers on this. It's a whole new ball game. Not  that  I
distrust your ballpark figures, Mike. You're damned good at that sort  of thing. But I want to  add
the decimal points." Coming from Vic Aboud, that was extremely high praise indeed.
We adjourned to the dynamics lab while Vic disap-peared in the direction of Tammy's office and the
com-puter terminal.
Carl was ready. I made a couple of excuses. "Dr. Mayan, Dr. Korsinski, last week . . ."
"I detest such formality between colleagues," Mayan broke in. "It's a lot easier if you just call me Ted.
Time we were on a first name basis, Mike. And you're bright-er than most of the Ph.D.s  being turned
out these days. I'm certainly going to do something . . ."
"Uh, thank you, Ted." I felt very uncomfortable being on a first name basis. I had been too thoroughly
indoctrinated by years in academia. "Anyway, as I was about to say, don't expect success here  today.
We ran something like this last week and it didn't pass the smoke test. Now I think we've got it solved.
At any rate, this is a pure and simple experiment . . ."
"We are well aware of experimental success ratios, Mike," Korsinski said. "It would indeed make my
life easier if all experiments succeeded. Tell me what you're doing here ..."
Between Bill and myself, we explained the sky hook set-up to the two consultants. We told them of
the ser-endipitous  mistake  that Carl  had  made  in building the phasing coil. And  I  explained  the  load
compensating circuit and why it was needed. "First thing we'll try this morning is just to show you that we
did achieve a rather significant breakthrough last week. We'll run the sky hook without a  load.  Ready,
Carl?"
"Ready, Mike."
Carl had pulled the first load rod away from the sky hook and fastened it up against the wall where the
sky hook would not push on it.
"Okay, let's repeat our twenty-watt experiment."
This time, it was done with Wendell Stone's photocell light intensity measurement system working into
a re-cording  oscillograph.  Carl  and  I had  the settings well under  control  now.  We  went  through  our
check list, got powered-up  and  stood  back  while the sky  hook  displaced its entire length from
the vertical rest position . . . and stayed there.
I thought that Dr. Ted Mayan was going to suffer a seizure, he got so excited. He was down  on his
hands and knees, passing his hands  around  and  under  the unit, checking for air jets.  Professor  Serge
Korsinski just walked around and around it, looking carefully.

It was Korsinski who finally spoke. "I believe that this is one of the significant experiments in physics
of this century. There is no doubt about it. The device is producing a constant force of some sort that is
holding it displaced  from the vertical.  I see  no trace  of magnets,  air jets,  or  anything  that  might  lead
anyone to claim fraud.  However,  Bill, I would suggest that  you install some  magnetometer  sensors  at
critical places around the unit to prove that there is no displacement caused by electromagnetic forces. I
will run an analysis on where you should place them so that it will be most convinc-ing."
Then we tried the twenty-kilogram load. "This is the untried experiment, gentlemen," I remarked. "If it
works, it means that the sky hook will do useful work."
We went through the check-out on this one very carefully. We knew more or less  what the phasing
should be  and  what sort  of power  settings we  should have.  Again,  because  I  was  slightly  unsure  of
precisely what we were working with, I started out at very low power . . . about five watts.
"Gently, gently!" I admonished Carl as we brought the power up. "How's the compensator doing?"
"Beautifully! But something's skewing the drive wave shape!"
"That's the compensator adjusting for the reaction forces," Osbourne observed.
"Four watts should just about  move it ..."  I said.  "Okay,  we're  adjusting into resonance  here  .  .  .
com-ing in fast . . . Hold it! Cut her back to two watts!"
The sky hook plus load was now hanging out almost as far as it had all by itself with twenty-five watts
on the drive.
"Son of a gun!" I erupted as I looked at it. "It works better when it's pushing a load!"
"Sure you want to go only as far as orbit?" Ted Mayan asked.

Chapter Thirteen
The sky hook turned out to be weird. It had a "reso-nance point" when it was pushing a load. Up to a
point, the heavier the load  became—about  fourteen  times the weight of the sky  hook  unit  itself—the
more  efficient  the  unit  became,  approaching  an  unbelievable  95.6  per-cent  efficiency  pushing  a
282-kilogram load. Above that load level, its efficiency fell off slowly. But that wasn't  the whole story.
The dimensions of the load were critical. The longer we made the load up to a certain  point,  the more
effi-cient the sky hook became!
We thought we were going to end up with a two-dimensional matrix array that would tell us how to
han-dle loads with various weights and dimensions, but a third variable suddenly surfaced: The point of
attach-ment of the load to the skyhook was also critical! When we coupled the load to the mid-point of
the sky hook  unit, a  completely different set  of operating  character-istics  manifested themselves! And
when we coupled to the rear phasing coil, it was different still!
Osbourne and I were baffled. Vic became annoyed and even more irritable than normal. Tammy was
purely mystified.
This  took  a  couple  of  weeks.  We  couldn't  run  a  whole  series  of  tests  of  this  sort  in  an
afternoon. Mac had to make  new loads  for us,  and  that  took  time. In addition,  Tammy and  I had  to
wrestle with the numbers to figure out what was going on. I don't think Tammy ever did get a grip on it.
Vic claimed he did, but at that point he was so deep in mathematical theory and field equations that he
existed almost in another world.
Most industrial research and development work  is downright boring,  just as  any R&D work  is. To
paraphrase  an  old  aviation  saying,  it's  hours  of  sheer  boredom  punctuated  by  moments  of  brilliant
inspiration. Edison said it was 10 percent inspiration and  90  per-cent  perspiration.  But I think he was
being overly optimistic on the 10 percent. It's more like 1.
In the meantime, my relationship  with  Tammy  Dud-ley  continued  to  grow.  We  did  not  make  the
mistake of being seen together at the NEMECO hangar again. And we were careful about going places
where we might be seen under less than platonic conditions.
Actually, our relationship had ceased to be platonic and had become increasingly plutonic.
I detected that Tammy was slowly getting a sense of humor back, as if she had had to suppress it for
years.  Not  only  was  she  a  very  bright  and  intelligent  woman  whose  appearance  totally  belied  the
everyday image of a female technical type, but she was beginning to blos-som in the most amazing ways.
She still maintained her reserve around others,  but with me and  those  at  Morse  Manor,  she  began  to
effervesce and to exhibit a growing joy of living.
Ruth remarked on this to me privately one day in my office when she picked up my time card. "You'll
think me an old snoop, Mike," she said, "but I can't help but notice  a  growing closeness  between  you
and Tammy . .  .  Not  that I object,  mind you! I think it's  about  time, because  Tammy was  so
withdrawn. Anyway, I wanted you to know that I think you're doing wonders for that girl, because I was
very concerned about her and I like her very much."
"Ruth," I said, looking up from my papers, "I do, too."
"I know it. And I don't think it will surprise you to learn that most of the rest of the lab gang knows it,
too. There's a certain amount of envy, Mike, because Tammy is really a very beautiful person. There isn't
a young bachelor here who wouldn't want to date her. However, if I may say so, you are  handling the
affair with a great deal of tact and gentleness."
"Ruth," I told  her with a  smile, "there is no other  way to handle Tammy . . .  or any woman,

for that matter. Remember the movie Camelot where King Ar-thur sings about  his concern,  'How
to Handle a Woman?' Well, that's what I'm trying to do. There's still a lot I don't know about Tammy,
but that doesn't matter ..."
"There's a lot most of us don't know, Mike. She still has far too many closed doors in the hallways of
her mind." Ruth started to leave, then stopped in the door-way,  looked  back,  and  added,  "And don't
think I don't  appreciate  the most  careful  way  both  of  you  have  han-dled  the  affair."  She  didn't  say
another word, but left.
That made my day, but it still didn't explain the crazy results  we  were  getting with the load-pushing
characteristics of the sky hook.
The practical  Vermont  engineer,  Wendell  Stone,  con-templated  the  situation  for  a  period  of  time
before  he finally told  Carl  and  me, "I think you're  running up against a  phenomenon of the  nature  of
matter itself. What have you been using for load material?"
"Cold-rolled steel," Carl replied.
"I think you may have fun when you try to push ma-terial with various crystalline structures," Wendell
sug-gested.
"What happens  when we  start  working  with  directionally  oriented  materials  such  as  fiberglass?"  I
won-dered.
"Or wood," Wendell added.
"Or a colloid?" I said.
So  we  tried.  On  top  of the three-dimensional  matrix, we  had  to  add  a  fourth  dimension  that  was
dependent upon the material and its stress-strain characteristics in different directions.
"This is getting out of hand!" Vic Aboud  com-plained  loudly in one  of our  meetings in Len's  office
where most of the meetings seemed to take place in spite of the conference room, which appeared to be
used only for VIP's.
"Not at all," Bill Osbourne observed calmly. "It's just the sort  of thing you expect  to  run into in
basic research. After all, if we knew all the answers, we wouldn't have to do basic research. Well, we
know enough answers now to call in the Front Office again and ask them in which direction they want us
to take this development."
"You're not going to let Sanatella into the act, are you?" I wanted to know. If anything, I did not want
that little jerk involved at all. I was not jealous of him for being small like I was; but I detested the fact
that he tried to cover it up.
"We've got to," the research director pointed out "We now have an operating unit. It can push a load,
just as Sanatella asked for. I want to put the monkey on Sanatella's back, gentlemen, because we'll give
him a to-tally new product for NEMECO, and he must come up with the market that will be best suited
for it." Bill Osbourne sensed the anxiety in the faces of those of us present in Len's office—Len, Vic, and
myself. "I be-lieve that it's time for another dog-and-pony show, gang. We've reached the point where
we could go off into a protracted research program determining just how to push various kinds of loads.
Since the number and variety of loads are legion, we cannot possibly in-vestigate them all. And I couldn't
justify doing it any-way.  Since  we  now  have  a  device  that  works,  it's  up  to  our  vaunted  marketing
department to tell us how to aim our efforts. Except I want Ted Mayan and Serge Korsinski here as the
heavy artillery . . . which is not necessary for Halden and Newcomb, but we may well need with Destry
and Sanatella."
"Does this mean that our little flying project is off?" I wanted to know.
"Not at all. As a matter of fact, Mike, now that you've completed most of the experimental work on
the sky hook, get on the flight project to the full extent your time will allow," Osbourne ordered. "Figure

out what you're going to fly into orbit, what kind of sky hook is going to be required, how much power
it's going to take, and what it's going to cost. Len, will you back him up with all of the data we have on
the superbattery?  Vic, although Mike's  going to  be  riding the beast,  I want you  to  double-check  his
numbers just in case be-cause the flight program cannot be permitted to fail."
"You're damned right it can't!" I put in.
"I'll check Mike . . . but I'm going to be pretty busy on the systems design work of whatever Sanatella
comes up with," Vic remarked.
"My numbers will be simple, Vic. Aerodynamics isn't that complex," I told the mathematician.
"We need a good cover name for the project," Len pointed out. "Something that won't give it away,
since it's a covert lab activity until you decide to pop it on the company and the world."
"Well, how about the Model Twenty-Two Thruster?" I suggested. "That sounds obscure enough that
we ought to be able to dream up all sorts of reasons for calling it that."
"I like that," Vic said. "Sometimes, your English lan-guage swings."
It was becoming autumn in New England, and I could feel the nip in the air every morning when we
drove to the lab. The big oak trees in front of Morse Manor began to turn. Ruth suggested that it would
be a good time to go up to Vermont to see the colors. I asked Tammy on Friday if she wanted to fly up
to Montpelier over the weekend.
I was a little dismayed  when she  replied,  "Oh, Mike,  I have something else  planned  this weekend.
You don't know how much I'd like to, but I have to go over to New Jersey. It's an . . .  invitation that I
accepted months ago, and there's no way that I can get out of it."
It was going to be a lonely weekend. Len had house repair work to do, putting up the storm windows
against the coming winter. Carl  wanted  to  finish up his kilowatt ham rig. Vic  had  other  plans  with  a
Rockette in New York. I asked Wendell Stone and got a very surprising answer: "I never go up in those
things!" So I asked Ruth, "How long has it been since a young man has propositioned you?"
Ruth blushed, then shot back, "Just what did you have in mind, sir?"
"You suggested that I fly up to Vermont this weekend and see the colors. Would you like to go with
me?"
Ruth's eyes sparkled and she replied with a sense of humor that I didn't suspect she possessed, "Shall
I call ahead and get reservations for twin beds or a double?"
"Suit yourself!"
I have no Oedipus complex. It was like taking my mother on an airplane ride. We even had separate
rooms  in  the  Holiday  Inn  up  there.  It  was  a  beautiful  flight,  the  colors  were  magnificent,  but  the
"mountains" of Vermont were sand piles compared to the giants I had flown over in the West. Coming
back, it was a per-fectly clear autumn day with the best visibility I'd en-countered since leaving Arizona.
So I took Two To Tango right down on the deck as low as I could manage to go, and we flew down
the valleys back to Bridgeport, sometimes slightly below the FAA minimum altitudes.
It was  beautiful, and  it  relaxed  me  completely  for  the  week  that  was  to  follow.  Ruth  was  a  fine
companion. I would have preferred Tammy, but at least I got a good night's sleep for a change.
I also had the chance to think about what I was  doing. As  we  tooled  down  the beautiful valleys of
Ver-mont and western Massachusetts—the states back here are so small!—I marveled at the landscape
slipping un-der the wings of Two To Tango. This was a beautiful planet. Perhaps I had not seen enough
of it. Did I really want to go to the stars?
Yes, as long as I could come back occasionally!
And I had the chance to talk to Ruth.

"Things are going very well," I told her. "I'm very happy with my life right now."
"That's certainly a change from when you arrived here in August," she pointed out. "Mike, your ears
were dragging the ground like a bassett hound's, as my husband was fond of saying."
"I have work that is interesting and challenging," I told her as Two To Tango sped down a gorgeous
valley where the tall white steeples of New  England churches  poked  up through the trees  as  beacons
warning me of little towns  that I should not flat-hat  at  low altitudes.  "I've found some  very wonderful
people . . . and a very wonderful girl that I'm becoming very fond of. I would like to do this kind of work
for the rest of my life as long as I had someone like Bill Osbourne to keep the corporate politicians off
my back. You don't know how much that disturbs a creative person, Ruth! Some of us are interested in
power over the universe; others want power over people. The two types don't mix. It's unfor-tunate that
'universe' people have to work for 'power' people. Some of this internal politics is such a waste of time
when we have a whole universe out there to dig into and use . . ."
"We do have a unique place," Ruth admitted.
"Do you ever get the feeling that it's too good to last?" I wanted to know.
"I've been around a long time and I watched my hus-band go through similar experiences. We could
pull some incredible blunders at the lab, and it probably wouldn't change things very much. On the other
hand,  we  could  end  up  doing  a  fantastic  job  for  NEMECO  only  to  have  something  change  in  the
corporate head-quarters that would close the lab in less than a week . . . and all on the word of one
person. We should enjoy it while we can, Mike, and hope it will last. The chances are against it."
"Maybe we  can  manage to  hold  something  together  in  NEMECO,  come  what  may.  It's  a  pretty
paternalistic company, and I don't think they'd just turn us out on the street  on a  moment's notice  .  .  .
Sorry, got to get back to work now. Springfield up ahead, and there's Westover Air Force Base traffic
area that I don't want to fly through without talking to Approach Control on the radio."
"You're a very fine pilot, Mike. Of course, I don't know too much about it, since this is my first flight in
a small plane."
"I figured you were an old hand because of the way you acted!"
"No,  I was  scared  to  death,"  Ruth admitted.  "But I was  going to  do  it because  I've  never  done  it
before. I will admit that it was a very beautiful way to see the fall colors in Vermont." She smiled. "The
fact that the two of us spent the night in Montpelier should cause some interesting lab rumors, don't you
think?"
Ruth Morse was one hell of a woman . . .
Tammy  didn't  come  back  to  Morse  Manor  that  Sun-day  night.  This  was  strange  since  she  had
planned to. Both Ruth and  I became  concerned  when Tammy hadn't  arrived  by ten o'clock,  so  Ruth
called the num-ber Tammy had left. I heard only one side of the con-versation:
"Is Tammy Dudley there? . . . This is Ruth Morse, her landlady in Bridgeport . . .  I see. Well, if she
can't come to the phone, can you tell me when she  might be  back?  She  had  planned  to  be  home this
eve-ning, and I grew concerned when she hadn't arrived . . . Oh, then she'll be coming up on an early
train? Well, just tell her I was concerned and that I'll see her at work tomorrow morning." Ruth hung up
looking strangely at the receiver.
"It was a man's voice," Ruth said quietly. "And he didn't introduce himself. I didn't think Tammy had
any family over in New Jersey . . ."
I bit my lip. Well, I certainly had no exclusive with Tammy. But I decided I would ask about this when
the time was ripe to do so.
Bill Osbourne called a staff meeting almost immedi-ately the following morning. Tammy was not there,
and Bill inquired about her. Ruth told him Tammy had gone to New Jersey over the weekend and was

due in on the morning train from New York.
"Damned thing's probably late again if it didn't break down in Stamford as usual," the research director
growled,  then  got  down  to  business.  "We've  got  a  big  dog-and-pony  show  coming  up  here  on
Wednesday," he told all of us there in the machine shop, which was the only area large enough for the
whole crew of twenty. "We're  going to  demonstrate  the sky  hook  pushing loads.  Halden,  Newcomb,
Sanatella, and probably Destry will be here from Corporate. I've asked Mayan and Korsinski to come
in as well. Len, they may also ask for a review of the superbattery program as well."
"We'll be ready for anything," Len Marshall replied confidently.
"Okay, then the big push this week will be on those projects in addition to staying on schedule with the
shot-alloying program. By the way, Wendell, how's that coming?"
"We're slipping," Stone admitted.
"Why? What's the problem?"
"It just isn't working right. I can't  control  the impact  velocities  closely  enough  to  obtain  a  uniform
penetra-tion of the secondary alloying material, and . . ."
"Never mind the details right now," Osbourne cut in. "Vic and I will get with you and Tom after  this
meet-ing. Destry is going to want to see results or be told why the process  is behind schedule.  Okay,
figure Wednesday  about  ten in the  morning.  Mac,  please  put  on  a  clean  shop  coat  just  before  ten
o'clock! And, Mike, if you've got a tie, please wear it this time even though I know it's apparently against
your religion or something . . ."
Bill Osbourne walked into my office about an hour later, asking, "How's it going, Mike?"
I looked up from where I was doing some basic cal-culations. "I'm beginning to get a  handle on the
num-bers  for orbit.  Critical factors  seem  to  be  the wing load-ing,  the wing aspect  ratio,  and  the stall
speed. Beyond that, we've got to have enough useful load to carry the sky hook and its power supply,
plus life support  equip-ment  for me." I tossed  my pen  down  on  the  pad  of  pa-per  that  was  rapidly
becoming  filled  up  with  numbers.  "We  have  to  keep  the  wing  loading  low  because  that  not  only
determines the minimum speed required to climb and maintain less than Mach-One, but also how much
heating we're going to get when I have to bring that mother back through the atmosphere."
"Which means keeping  it very light on the same  prin-ciple  as  the  Lockheed  U-2  and  the  General
Dynamics  WB-57F  high-altitude  weather  reconnaissance  plane,"  Osbourne  mused.  "How  about  a
modified sailplane?"
"Not enough useful load, although the wing loading is low," I told  him. "Usually wood  or  fiberglass
wing structure, which won't stand up to what we want to do."
"The Czechs make a good all-metal sailplane, the Blanik . . ."
"Bill, how much trouble do you think you're going to have buying an airplane for Corporate Research,
much less one from Czechoslovakia?" I asked.
"Yeah, and Czechoslovakia doesn't even have 'most favored nation' status," Osbourne  mused.  "You
are right. Some of the all-American types in the Front Office would get up-tight about that. Well, do you
have any other ideas?"
"Yeah. A Pilatus Porter  PC-6  would do  it. So  would  a  Helio  Stallion.  Or  a  DeHaviland  DHC-2
Beaver. Or, if all else fails, we can ask Wimpy Winfield to let us use  the Aero  Commander  for about
two weeks . . ."
"What?"
"Strip that Aero Commander of all the plush interior, and it will haul the mail for us," I pointed out.
"Um-m-m. Well, let me investigate that possibil-ity ..."

"If that doesn't work, Bill, let me go out to Arizona and see what I can find in the old airplane yards at
Tucson and Falcon Field . . . Incidentally, can you give me some idea of my budget on this? I would love
to have a pressurized airplane, but that may be too rich for our blood."
"Everything's going to be too rich for our blood," Bill replied quietly. "I have no budget for it at all. I'm
going to have to sneak it out of various other budget cubbyholes,  and  we're  going to  have to  become
very creative when we write up the purchase requests . . . But, please let me worry  about  that.  Work
with some ballpark numbers with the aircraft you've mentioned, plus the NEMECO Aero Commander.
Try to get us some costs, too."
"By Wednesday?"
"No time limit. Wednesday, I'll want you on deck for that lab demo because you're the guy who really
under-stands what's going on with the sky hook."
"ButVic . . ."I began.
"Vic has a theoretical grasp, but you combine both theoretical and experimental aspects, Mike. I think
at this point you probably know more about this whole thing than anybody because you've been thinking
about applications all along."
High compliments do not come my way every day, and I relished that one for quite some time.
Tammy walked into my office shortly before lunch. "Hi!"
She looked gorgeous, but also somewhat distressed.
"Hi! Train late?"
"Yes. Let's go to lunch, and then you can take me over to Morse Manor so I can drop off my bag,"
she suggested.
We went to Mama's because I knew nobody from NEMECO except the pilots would be there . . .
and they didn't care about corporate politics.
Tammy was very quiet, almost subdued. It was as though part of her inhibitions had returned over the
weekend. We ordered lunch, and she toyed with her napkin.
"Did you have a good weekend, Tam?" I finally asked in an attempt to break the ice.
"No."
"I'm sorry."
"I felt I needed to talk to you about it. I'm afraid I disappointed you."
"You had a previous engagement. Family?" I asked.
She nodded. "An uncle, you might say."
"Don't let the weekend worry you. There will be oth-ers . . .  I hope."
"So do I."
It was  just small talk the rest  of the lunch. She  wanted  to  know  how  the  colors  were  up  around
Montpelier, and I told her. We discussed the sky hook, the forthcoming corporate dog-and-pony show,
and the work I was doing on Model Twenty-Two Thruster.
"That number sounds familiar," she remarked. "Did you suggest it?"
"Seems I have a soft spot in my heart for a number ending in two two T."
"Two To Tango. Yes, it always does require two."
"I guess you might call it wishful thinking on my part."
"Are you sure it's still wishful?" she asked.

We drove back to Morse Manor, and Tammy got her bag out of the front of the Bug. "Come in a
minute. I want to show you something."
She let herself in with her key, and I followed. In the middle of the day nobody was there, of course.
The liv-ing room was strangely dark.
"Stay here. I'll bring it down," she told me.
I  picked  up  a  copy  of  National  Geographic,  turned  on  a  light,  and  started  to  leaf  through  the
magazine. A few minutes went by, then I heard a soft, whispery voice ask, "Forgive me?"
She was in the doorway, and she was wearing one of the sexiest black lace baby-doll nighties I had
ever seen.  It  was  one  advertised  by those  Hollywood  lingerie  out-fits,  a  design  that  shaped  without
covering. And Tammy didn't need shaping at all.
She walked over to me. "I stopped in one of those shops on Forty-second Street  on the way back
this morning," she said as she sat in my lap. "I thought you would like this. Forgive me for the weekend?"
I didn't get the chance to answer because her mouth covered mine.
"Tammy . . . The lab . . .  It's the middle of the afternoon ..." I managed finally to say.
"Haven't we got some compensatory time com-ing? Let's find out if it's better in the afternoon ..."
We did.
It was.

Chapter Fourteen
The Big Day arrived. Mayan and Korsinski showed up at nine o'clock.
I wore a tie. It felt like a noose.
Mac put on a clean shop coat.
Len  and  I  entertained  Mayan  and  Korsinski  while  we  waited  for  the  contingent  from  corporate
headquarters to arrive.
"I suspected as much," Mayan observed when I told him about the problems we had matching various
types of loads to the sky hook. "Every object in the universe is essentially unique. I doubt  if there  are
even two pho-tons alike. Even two supposedly identical automobiles made at the same time on the same
production line will be different in small ways . . ."
"That is just the result of variations in tolerances of parts," Korsinski pointed out. "But I think we can
say,  to  some  extent,  that your observation  holds true  down  to  the  subatomic  level,  at  any  rate.  The
proper state-ment of that is perhaps inherent in the Heisenberg Prin-ciple."
"Just because you can hang a name on it, Serge, doesn't mean that you can explain or even understand
it," Mayan fired back.
I could see that Mayan was playing his usual role of "hair shirt." If it bothered Korsinski, who seemed
to be  considerably  more  straight-laced  and  proper  as  a  scien-tist,  the  Stevens  professor  didn't  let  it
show. He ap-peared to be unflappable. I knew he wasn't, because I had watched him become flapped
when he first saw the sky hook work. But Korsinski was a man very much in control of himself and very
conscious of the fact that, in the presence of his peers, he had  to  maintain image-even though beneath
that image lay a mind and an im-agination at least the equal of Mayan's.
Mayan would make a fantastic undergraduate phys-ics prof, the kind who would be  able  to  inspire
and  ex-cite  his  students,  the  sort  of  teacher  who  made  science  and  technology  out  as  something
fascinating and full of wonder.
On the other hand, Korsinski would be the perfect thesis advisor, capable of leading the now-jaded
gradu-ate  student  through the maze of  erudition  and  buzz-worded  jargon  of  an  acceptable  oral  and
thesis.
They made a perfect pair to advise us on the sky hook. I had grown to respect and to listen carefully
to both of them.
Korsinski, true to form, wanted to know how the Model Twenty-Two Thruster project was coming.
"For a  three-ton  gross  weight aircraft  with a  reason-able  wing-loading,  we'll  need  only  about  two
hundred horsepower," I reported. "I'll fly the bird  always at  the maximum lift-over-drag  configuration,
right at the bot-tom of the power curve, which means I'll be almost at full stall all the way."
"But why are  you worried  about  Mach-One?"  Mayan  wanted  to  know.  "You'll  be  flying  up  at  a
constant sub-sonic indicated airspeed."
"True," I explained, "but you must remember that the air density falls off with altitude and temperature.
Thus although indicated airspeed remains the same, true airspeed increases. No matter  which subsonic
air-frame I use,  I'll be  pushing the limiting Mach  number of  the  airframe  shape  somewhere  between
seventy-five and a hundred thousand feet . . ."
"I see! Which means you're going to get some rather nasty changes in the flow field around the plane.
Have you calculated what it will take to ram the airframe past Mach-One?"

"A lot of extra horsepower," I remarked, "if the plane doesn't come apart around me . . .  if I don't get
 all sorts of control reversals ...  if I don't run into a whole series of other problems that face any
subsonic airframe trying to get through Mach-One."
"Why not buy a supersonic airframe to begin with?"
"Occasionally, I see an F-86 Sabrejet advertised in Trade-A-Plane, but I've never seen a supersonic
aircraft  available,"  I  told  him.  "We  can  forget  supersonic,  al-though  that  may  be  the  way  to  go
eventually."
The corporate delegation showed up with Osbourne and Vic shortly after ten. We took them into the
dy-namics lab, where Carl and I put the sky hook  through its paces  pushing loads  of various masses,
sizes, and ma-terials. We explained that we could now design a  sky  hook  to  push or  to  lift  any load
provided we knew what the load was. Grant Halden, Hayward Newcomb, and Bob  Destry  appeared
impressed with the progress made in a few short weeks. I couldn't tell from Sanatella's face what he was
thinking, but I was very careful not to make any remark that harked of smugness on my part for getting
the sky hook to produce useful work in accordance with Sanatella's  previous  demands.  That was  not
the way to handle that twerp.
Professor Serge Korsinski added after we concluded our demonstration, "Gentlemen, I am speaking
from the purely scientific standpoint, and I realize that you have economic factors in mind. Nevertheless,
what we have seen this morning amounts to one of the most sig-nificant technical breakthroughs of this
century. This could well lead to a Nobel Prize for those who partici-pated in its development. I am not
an experienced in-dustrialist, and I therefore hesitate to express an opin-ion outside my field of expertise.
But I would venture to say that this device and its developments  will have pro-found  effects upon  the
industrial world."
Bill Osbourne added to that, "According to John Whiteside, NEMECO is in a good situation to hold
the basic patents."
Mayan was hunkered down near the front end of the sky hook. "Mike, there's one experiment that I
want to try. It won't give you much data, but it will convince me and nearly everyone else who tries it
that there's no trickery involved here . . . and that's one of the first things that will enter the minds of any
scientific review panel. Mike, will you set this up so that it will give about  a  five kilogram push on my
bare palm?"
I swallowed. Here was another unanticipated experi-ment. "We'll try," I gulped. After all, we now had
the load compensator in the circuit. It should be able to handle the phasing involved with a five kilo push
on a colloidal mass resting on the ground.
Bill was apprehensive. "Ted, we're not sure what the GI radiation might do to your hand."
"Well, let's find out. You certainly haven't detected any gravitational radiation  coming from this thing
yet! And I'm perfectly willing to act as the human guinea Pig."
"If you get hurt . . ." Hayward Newcomb began.
"If I get hurt, I'll waive damages. Get me the re-quired papers to sign."
"Go ahead, Dr. Mayan," Grant Halden put in. "If something goes wrong, NEMECO will take care of
things. But please use your left hand!"
"No, I'll use my right. I'm left-handed!" Mayan re-plied.
This was the first time the sky hook had pushed against a human subject. Mayan was just the sort of
wild card who would want to do something like this, and I should have anticipated it.
We set things up, but I insisted that Mayan wear an insulating vinyl glove because of the possibility of
some high-voltage leakage that we had not anticipated. I pointed out the high-frequency electromagnetic
radia-tion  leakage  that  might  cause  some  heating  effects,  but  Vic  made  a  rapid  calculation  and

determined that it would not exceed the accepted industrial maximums for a single exposure.
Everything was ready.  "Okay,  Dr.  Mayan,  put your palm against the front of the sky  hook.  We're
coming up with the drive frequency ..."
Mayan's  face  lit up in a  broad  smile. "It's  pushing! I can  feel it pushing my  hand!  That's  the  most
convinc-ing instrumentation in the world! Serge, come try it!"
In the next few minutes, all of us tried it. There were no apparent ill effects and no strange sensations,
just the feeling that the sky hook was pushing hard. It was there. It was real. It was a force that could be
felt.
"Very convincing!" was Halden's accolade.
Even Bob Destry had to admit that this was not some far-out Buck Rogers gadget and  that  it could
really do something.
We retired to the conference room.
Bill did  not  stand  up  as  he  began  the  presentation.  He  had  taken  the  seat  at  the  far  end  of  the
conference table from Grant Halden. The rest of us were scattered down both sides of the table, seated
in no particular or-der. I did make a point not to sit near Phil Sanatella.
"We've reached  the stage  where  basic  research  on  the  sky  hook  is  nearly  concluded,"  Osbourne
began.  "Our scientific consultants,  Dr.  Mayan  and  Professor  Korsinski,  have  carefully  monitored  the
scientific aspect  of our  work  and  have done  an excellent  job  of  guiding  us  in  the  proper  theoretical
directions. We've instituted all the necessary patent filing actions through John Whiteside. We have a unit
that can  perform  in a  predictable  fashion within the limitations of its size, design,  and  power  handling
capabilities. It will push a load, as we've all witnessed in a very dramatic fashion this morning. It's now a
matter of design to make a sky hook that will not only lift itself straight up, but also do it with a load. We
can design a unit to meet nearly any requirement . . . but we cannot design a univer-sal unit that will
do  everything!  It must be  designed  for a  job,  for a  specific load  or  a  specific  range  of  loads."  The
research director paused and looked at both Grant  Halden and  Hayward  Newcomb.  "Gentlemen, we
are now ready to develop to a market. Where do we go from here? What do you want the sky hook to
do?  This is a  marketing function  outside  our  responsibility  al-though  we've  thought  about  it  and  are
prepared to make some concrete recommendations about markets."
It was obvious that the president of NEMECO was enthusiastic and excited. The vice-president, Dr.
Hayward Newcomb, managed, as usual, to keep his emotions under control as he had learned to do so
well in the Air Force.
"We have here," Newcomb  began  in terse,  clipped  tones,  "a force-generating  device  that  does  not
produce a reaction force. It appears that we  have two  options  open  to  us vis-a-vis  products  that  will
have some sort of fit with our existing lines . . ."
I noticed that Sanatella was making notes frantically.
Newcomb went on in his terse yet quiet tone, "We have a potential propulsion device. One first thinks
of it as a replacement for the rocket propulsion system, but I would like to voice a strong opinion that we
do not at-tempt to market it in this fashion until after  we have received  issued  patents  that  cannot  be
classified under a secrecy order from the Department of Defense."
"This leaves  out the possibility of a  potential  product  for  the  Marine  Engineering  Division  in  New
London," Halden put in.
"Correct. This would also eliminate any involvement by the Airborne Controls Division in Tempe  for
an air-craft or spacecraft propulsion system."
"That leaves my division," Destry added, "and Max Keller's Heavy Construction Equipment Division.
Why not give pushers to one of us and lifters to the other?"

"I'm not sure  at  this stage  that we  can  make  that  sort  of  an  arbitrary  division  between  functions,"
Osbourne pointed out.
"Well, we've certainly got a pusher," Destry went on. "Why not give me a  crack  at  turning it into a
product? If we spin off some other products with different appli-cations, we can certainly bring Max into
the act."
Destry moved quickly and smoothly! I could see how he figured that this would help him consolidate
his bid for Halden's job.
"You've certainly developed a workable arrangement  with Corporate  Research  on the shot-alloying
process," Halden mused, thinking about the implications of what Destry had suggested. But Halden was
no fool. "I'd like to see Max brought in at this point, however. He may have some inputs from his people
that could be very important. As a matter of fact, I want to bring this be-fore the Board at our meeting in
a few weeks."
"Do you think that it's wise at  this point,  Grant?" Newcomb  asked.  "It could  present  a  conflict  of
interest  to  some  of  the  Board  members  .  .  .  and  we  may  want  to  license  some  of  this  to,  say,
Consolidated Industries' Great Western Aero down the line. The Federal Trade Commission might get
upset  if there  were  any record  of revealing the  sky  hook  to  Hettinger  or  Mather  ahead  of  a  public
announcement. Technically, from the patent  point of view, it's  unwise to  reveal  this at  all until we  are
certain of the patent position."
"But that could be years!" Bill Osbourne pointed out.
"True," the NEMECO president said, nodding. "I don't want to wait that long before getting a return
on our investment. The Board will certainly ask questions long before that."
"Gentlemen!" Dr. Ted Mayan boomed. "Excuse me, but you don't have any time to spare! You may
not even have a year!"
"What do you mean?" Halden asked.
"The history of science and technology is rife with examples of parallel developments,"  the generalist
ex-plained, waving his arms. One thing for certain: When Ted Mayan wanted the attention of everyone in
the room, he certainly knew the histrionics required. "Both Newton and Liebnitz worked out the calculus
indepen-dently.  People  think that  Darwin  was  responsible  for  the  Theory  of  Evolution,  but  Wallace
actually preceded Darwin into publication! In more recent times, Shockley, Brattain, and Bardeen were
not  the  only  persons  working  on  solid-state  electronic  devices,  which  were  actually  invented  and
patented years previously . . . but they were the first to  announce.  Give me a  few min-utes and  I can
present you with a list of several dozen developments in the past decade that have been  carried  out in
complete isolation independent of one another, and yet were nearly identical in scope and content.
"Mark my words: Somewhere, at this very moment, there  is a  high probability that  someone  else  is
working on this! I don't  know  who it is. I don't  know  the ap-proach  they're  taking. But  if  the  basic
anomalies of the universe were there for Bill Osbourne, Vic Aboud, Len Marshall, and Mike Call to see
and work with, they are there for others to see and work with too!"
"Dr.  Mayan  is  quite  correct  in  his  assessment,"  Pro-fessor  Korsinski  broke  in  with  his  quiet,
measured, slightly accented tones. "Once the basic patent applica-tions have been submitted, you must
move at once to make a public disclosure."
Hayward Newcomb suddenly began to nod in agree-ment. "Grant, I believe that our consultants are
right."
"Do you have any suggestions, gentlemen?" Halden asked.
"Both Dr. Mayan and I can arrange for suitable early publication, if not in Physical Review Letters,
then at one of the New York Academy's many sym-posia. This would be coordinated, of course, with

the submittal of the significant patent applications."
"This still wouldn't prevent the Department of De-fense from coming in and slapping a secrecy order
on our  work  .  .  .  and  from stopping  the publication of any articles," Newcomb  observed  with  some
agitation. "If there is anything that I would not want to see, it's government security classification of this
work!"
"But that wouldn't necessarily mean that NEMECO couldn't make any money from sky hook work,"
Robert Destry pointed out. "There will undoubtedly  be  con-tracts  available to  do  further work  on the
principle if the government classifies it."
"Bob, listen to me and believe me," Newcomb told  him. "I used  to  work  for those  people.  I know
them well. NEMECO might get some government contract money, but more as a sop to keep us quiet
and under control. The big money would go to their bosom  bud-dies  in the aerospace  industry whom
they've supported for a couple of decades now."
Bill Osbourne added, "I can second that and add something as well. If it happens, the sky hook work
will  take  back  seat  to  other  propulsion  work  because  the  aerospace  firms  involved  in  propulsion
activities— turbojets,  ramjets,  and  rockets,  for example—will be  given time to  write  off  their  capital
investments in those areas and to retire their engineers who are specialists in those fields. In twenty years
we might see the sky hook mature into something more than we've got now. There would be more than
a hundred and twenty tons of very expensive research reports to show for it, if you could get access to
them, much less read all of them."
"But, gentlemen, if the security of this nation is at stake . . ." Destry began.
"That statement has been used to cover a multitude of sins, Bob," Newcomb said, interrupting him.
"Naturally, there will be some aspects of the sky hook work that will be of interest to the Department
of  Defense,"  Grant  Halden  remarked,  "and  NEMECO  is  certainly  not  unpatriotic  in  that  regard.
Applications that might be useful in weapons technology would cer-tainly be discussed  thoroughly with
the government and if necessary, turned over to them for their use in na-tional security."
"Mr. Halden!" Mayan thundered. "I don't wish to seem impertinent. I know that NEMECO holds no
gov-ernment contracts whatsoever and acts only as an OEM supplier to firms working on government
contracts. But, sir, if you believe that the federal government will simply come in and calmly discuss with
you those aspects of this work it feels will affect national security, you'll find that they'll appropriate it all
just to be on the safe side! I've been down this road. I've seen some of my colleagues  fall prey  to  the
same rationale, and I've seen it destroy them. Fortunately, I have the inclination to run like hell shouting
loudly when such things happen to me."
"I would tend to agree with my colleague," Profes-sor Korsinski added quietly.
"Do you have any suggestions regarding what we might be able to do?" Halden asked.
"Yes!" Mayan  stated  flatly. "The thing that  they will not want is publicity! They will not be  able  to
classify it once it becomes public knowledge . . . and I don't mean publication in some obscure journal of
a scientific society where it can be conveniently hidden and forgot-ten for a quarter of a century or more.
Therefore, if I were in your shoes, President Halden, I would get Bill Osbourne and his crew of inventive
geniuses working at  once  on some  manner of airborne  or  space  vehicle in which someone  like Mike
would  orbit  the  world  in  the  blinding  light  of  publicity.  And  I  would  do  it  immedi-ately  after  your
attorneys file the patent applications . . . immediately afterward! Professor Korsinski and I will follow
up at once with a special symposium on the sky hook at NYU, Stevens, or the New York Academy of
Sciences."
Serge Korsinski was nodding in agreement.
I sat there dumbly. Mayan was getting away with it! If Osbourne or I had approached Newcomb or

Halden with the proposal, it might have been our necks. But Mayan could get away with it, and he was
doing it! And with the full support of Korsinski!
Halden turned to Osbourne. "Bill, how about it?"
"We can do it."
"How quickly? What will it cost?"
"Can I give you an answer Friday? And, Grant, I think it may cost considerably less than we think."
"Give me a  verbal  report  on Friday  morning," Hal-den  told  him. I could  see  that  the proposal  had
struck home with the NEMECO president. It was just the sort of romantic activity that he would enjoy .
. . and Mayan had given him the full rationale for doing it and justifying it to the Board of Directors and
the stock-holders.
"If we're going to lock  this up for ourselves  and  also  gain all this fine publicity," Bob  Destry  put in
carefully, "I think we should also be prepared to move on the product  end  as  quickly as  possible  and
firm up as many of the industrial applications as we can."
"Quite true," Newcomb remarked. "But this may set us up for a raid, Grant. And it will certainly send
our stock value sky-high . . ."
"Especially since there is so little of it available on the market," Destry added.
"We'll be ready for that," Halden said quietly. "Hay, once this meeting is over, we'll get together with
the other officers and staff at headquarters. In the mean-time: products. Phil, how about it?"
It was the first time Phil Sanatella had spoken. He had been watching and listening carefully. I could
al-most  feel the man's mind working,  trying to  determine  the best  way that  he could  profit from  this.
"Sir?"
"Bill and his people have had some thoughts on ap-plications," Halden told him. "Please get with him.
Also get with Bob Destry and his people. If you want to call in Max Keller, check with me first. I want
an analysis of the potential markets for the various indus-trial applications of the sky  hook  as  both
a pusher/puller and as a lifter."
"No defense applications?" the little man asked.
"No, we'll get those for free as soon as this breaks," Newcomb reminded him.
"How soon do you want it, Grant?" the marketing man asked.
"As quickly as you can get the numbers together."
"I could  give you some  market  analysis on a  super-ficial level in a  couple  of weeks  after  I get the
chance  to  come  up  to  speed  on  the  implications  of  this,  but  I  can't  give  you  any  analysis  in  depth
quickly."
"Phil, I brought  you in on this early so  that  you could  get up to  speed  on it," Halden pointed  out,
looking  di-rectly  at  the  marketing  man.  "I  want  some  preliminary  market  estimates  of  the  various
immediately obvious applications by next week. By the time of the next Board meeting, I want in-depth
analyses."
Sanatella may have been slightly cowed by that at-tack, but he didn't show it, and  he bounced  right
back. "You'll have it, Grant! Bill, can  I get with you and  your people  starting right after  this meeting?
And, Bob, will you have some of your people available in a few days . . . say, by Friday?"
"We'll talk to you any time, Phil," Osbourne told him. "We're right here,  and  you know  how to  find
us."
"Give me a call," Destry told Sanatella.
"Very well!" Halden looked around the table. "Do we have our ducks set up on this? Bill?"

"Plan and cost estimate for a dramatic public opera-tion to you by Friday!"
We had most of it already!
"Dr. Mayan? Professor Korsinski?"
"We  will  be  in  touch  with  Bill  regarding  suitable  fo-rums  and  publications,  but  we  will  want  to
coordinate thoroughly with Bill regarding the timing. It is most im-portant!" Korsinski pointed out.
"Phil?"
"Yes,  sir!  Preliminary  marketing  plan  to  you  by  a  week  from  Friday.  In-depth  marketing  studies
before the next Board meeting!"
"Good. Hay, I want you to monitor the patent aspect of this thing with John Whiteside."
"I think I should also evaluate some options in case we happen to be stymied by DOD. I know that
game fairly well."
The president of NEMECO looked around the con-ference room, "I want to thank you, Bill, and the
rest of you here at Corporate Research. You have done an outstanding job on what I consider to be one
of the most significant pieces of pure industrial research  of our  time. I have always had  faith that  Hay
Newcomb and Bill Osbourne would produce, given the people  and  the facilities to  do  so.  The results
have  far  exceeded  my  most  sanguine  expectations.  And,  Dr.  Mayan  and  Professor  Korsinski,  I'm
encouraged to know that there are two  academicians  who are  real  scientists." He  paused  and  looked
around.  "You all have my  full  support  and  that  of  NEMECO.  But  I  cannot  emphasize  the  extreme
importance of moving rapidly with the tightest possible  security.  Bill, you always were  a  space  cadet.
Now you've got your chance!"
"Not  me,"  Osbourne  said.  "Mike  Call  . . .  star  gazer  and  airplane  driver.  This  is  exactly  what  I
brought him aboard to do! Fortunately, he has turned out to be more than I bargained for!"

Chapter Fifteen
"Wimpy, we need the Aero Commander."
Wimpy Winfield pulled his head  and  shoulders  out of an inspection hatch in the lower  wing of the
DC-4, looked at Bill Osbourne and me, and said, "Did you get it scheduled with Jake?"
"Nope," I told the old pilot. "We'll need it for a cou-ple of months and we want to strip most of the
interior out of it temporarily . . . starting right away."
Wimpy almost fell off the ladder. Regaining his com-posure,  he clambered  down  and  peered  at  the
two of us. "I've been flying that DC-4 too high without oxygen! Would you tell me that again, please?"
"Corporate Research needs the use of the Aero  Com-mander  for about  a  month, maybe two,"  Bill
Osbourne told him. "We've got approval from Halden for this."
"Waalll, now!" Wimpy drawled. "If you guys just wanted to go for a  jaunt for a  few hours,  I could
ar-range  it. But if you want that airplane for a  couple  of months, you'll have to  clear  that  with  Jake,
approval or not."
"Where is he?" Osbourne wanted to know.
"Beyond the blue horizon somewhere, as usual. Let's go look at the dispatch board."
Inside the flight lounge of the NEMECO hangar, the board said that Jake Stock and George  Pound
were in Denver with the DC-6B. "Guess he's at the Ceramics Division. Said something about having to
deliver twenty thousand little ceramic potties to Airborne Controls in Tempe."
Thirty minutes later, Bill and I came to the conclu-sion that Jake Stock and his co-pilot were airborne
somewhere over the Great Divide. Nobody at either Denver or Tempe seemed to know. They had been
in Denver; they were not there now. They were not in Tempe. Bill thought about  calling the FAA,  but
Wimpy said, "If Jake is in the air, he's working Denver Center or Albuquerque Center on IFR. If he is
not on instru-ments,  he isn't listening to  the Flight Service  Station  broadcasts;  he's  got the  Automatic
Direction Finder tuned to a broadcast station listening to a ball game."
"Okay, we need the Aero Commander. We have to start working on it immediately. What do I need
to get you to release it to me?" Osbourne asked.
"An act of God."
"Will a letter from Grant Halden do?"
"If it's countersigned  by Jake  Stock,"  Wimpy replied.  "Look,  Bill, Jake  is my boss,  and  I have no
authority to turn the Aero Commander over to you, even if you were to fly it to the Moon and bring it
back full of diamonds for everybody." He put money in the Coke machine. "What are you drinking? I'm
buying."
We sat down with cans of soft drink, and Wimpy said, "Tell me what the problem is. Maybe I can do
something until we get Jake Stock back long enough to make a decision."
"Wimpy," Osbourne told him, "this is a project of the highest secrecy. Destroy Before Reading stuff . .
."
"So you finally got the gadget working and you're on the Mars trip kick again, eh?"
"How did you know that?" I wanted to know.
"Heard Sanatella talking to Destry yesterday on the ramp here when they didn't think anybody could
hear them. Jake took them as far as Detroit to get together with Max Keller. Supposed to pick them up

coming back, I guess."
"Wimpy, you'd damned well better not let that  infor-mation go any further than this!" Bill Osbourne
snapped.
"You think I'm nuts? I like it here, Bill!" He sat down, drained the last of the orange pop, and expertly
tossed the empty can into the wastebasket. "Tell me what the problem is, and I will do my damndest to
help you out . . ."
Bill filled him in on the Model Twenty-Two Thruster project enough to give him the picture insofar as
the Aviation Department was concerned.
Wimpy thought about  this for a  minute. He  got up and  got himself another  can  of  orange  pop  by
opening the machine, taking thirty cents out, closing the ma-chine, putting thirty cents back into the coin
slot, and extracting the aluminum can. Then he said, "Look, that Commander's in constant use because it
doesn't require a co-pilot and has a deluxe executive interior. Along with the Bonanza, it's flying most of
the time. But that DC-4 out there—November one three seven eleven, and she's really a damned good
old ex-Air  Force  C-54E,  not a  DC-4—she's  already  stripped  for  cargo.  She's  not  pressurized.  But
there're less than four hundred hours on all four of those engines. She's stand-by for the DC-6B. We've
got four pilots in the depart-ment—five with me on stand-by. That means that we can fly the DC-6B, the
Commander,  and  the  Bonanza.  But  even  with  me  as  stand-by  pilot,  we  cannot  get  all  four  aircraft
airborne at once. Not  enough pilots be-cause  the DC-4  requires  a  co-pilot.  So  Jake  will not scream
about Seven-Eleven. I can turn her over to you today."
Bill glanced at me. "How about it, Mike?"
I looked out across the ramp at that big monster sit-ting out there, big three-bladed props on all four
Pratt  &  Whitney  1400-horse  Twin  Wasps.  Not  what  I  had  counted  on.  My  license  says  "airplane
single—and multi-engined land," but the  biggest  plane  I  had  ever  wrestled  was  an  old  twin-engined
Convair 240. "I'll have to go back and refigure, Bill. And I've never flown a DC-4. I'd have to get type
qualified."
"That's no problem," Wimpy muttered. "Come on, let's see if you can fly it and  if it'll do  the job  for
you. Mike, we'll get you some heavy time while we're at it."
It was like flying a bus! It clanked, it banged, it groaned, it roared. But that old reliable Four flew.
Wimpy filed a flight plan for Buffalo at 14,500 feet. After landing for a Coke in Buffalo, Wimpy put
me in the left seat and Bill in the right coming back. I had to grab a cushion from the bunk in order to see
over the instrument panel, but I could fly it. Wimpy put us through our paces—engines out, feathering the
props, turns away from two dead engines on one  side,  and  stalls with various combinations of engine
power set-tings and flaps. Both Bill and I were sweating profusely by the time we  began  our  letdown
over Pawling. I had  never  handled  twenty tons  of airplane before.  I bounced  it twice  after  a  ragged
descent into Bridgeport.
Wimpy remarked, "Bill, give me about eight hours with this squirt, and he'll be flying this like he drives
that Cherokee."
I still had to see what we could do in the way of putting a sky hook in that flying subway car, so I took
the flight manuals with me. I made the mistake of taking them back to Morse Manor with me because it
was too  late to  drop  them by the lab.  And,  like any pilot learning a  new machine, I couldn't  put the
manuals down. I found myself reading through them in the living room after Carl and I finished washing
the supper dishes.
"Poker?" Peter Wilding asked as he bustled  into the room.  "Whatcha  reading?" He  came  over,  the
DC-4 manuals being something new.
"We're  short  of pilots  in  the  Aviation  Division,"  I  told  him.  It  wasn't  a  lie;  we  were.  "I'm  getting

checked out in the DC-4 we keep out at Sikorski. I may be spending some nights away from home."
"Flying the corporate brass around, huh?"
"Not exactly, Peter. This is a cargo plane used to haul NEMECO equipment around to customers."
Tammy was sitting there, but she just listened. She tossed me a look that said, "So you didn't get the
Aero Commander, eh?"
"Well, how about some poker?" Wilding persisted.
"I'm game!" Carl called as he walked out of the kitchen.
I put down the flight operations manual. "Okay, I've had it with this anyway. How about it, Tammy?"
Tammy looked up. "Are you sure you want me in your game?"
There was a bit too much sarcasm in her tone, and I detected the fact that she was trying to pull my
leg. "Know how to play?"
"A little. But you may have to answer a couple of questions now and then."
"Aw, we'll teach you, Tammy!" Wilding told her with bravado.
Tammy Dudley was indeed coming out of her shell. And she didn't need lessons from any of us. She
cleaned us out of more than a hundred dollars that  night. I caught on to  her sweetness-and-innocence
ploy, played to it, and together we took Peter Wilding for quite a pile. Wilding finally huffed off to bed.
When he had gone up the stairs, Tammy giggled, turned to Carl, and said, "Sorry you had to be the fall
guy."
"Where did you learn to play poker? The Marines?" Carl wanted to know.
"Never mind! Here!" She expertly peeled back a sheaf of bills and handed them to Carl.
"What's this? I lost fair and square!" Carl com-plained.
"Well, let's  just say  that it's for last  night,"  Tammy  told  him  sweetly,  got  up,  and  walked  upstairs
leaving Carl gaping at the money in his hand.
I was learning more and more about the woman that I frankly was beginning to care a great deal for.
Tammy Dudley had more sides to her than a cut crystal bowl. And every side that kept revealing itself to
me told me that she was one terrific woman.
"Look, gang," I told Ruth, Carl and Tammy the next morning, "I may have to go out to the airport this
after-noon, and there's no telling where Wimpy Winfield's going to have me drive that DC-4 . . . maybe
to Greenland,  for all I know.  Anyway, I'd  better  take  my own car  down  so  I  don't  get  stranded  at
Sikorski."
"I'll ride with you," Tammy volunteered. "Bring me up to date."
So I did during the drive down to the lab.
"That's a pretty big airplane!" Tammy remarked.
"Yeah,  but  we  can  get  it,  and  we  can't  get  the  Com-mander.  So  we  recrunch  the  numbers  this
morning."
The numbers looked bigger than anything we had worked with on the sky hook project.
Fully loaded, the DC-4 in her cargo configuration had a gross weight of 94,300 pounds. Empty, she
weighed 40,000 pounds. She could cruise at full power  at  36,000  feet  with superchargers  blowing all
four 1400-horsepower engines.
"It's going to take a damned big sky hook," I de-cided, leaning back in the chair and tossing the pencil
at the computer terminal. "About five thousand  horse-power  .  .  .  which is almost thirty-eight hundred

kilo-watts of electrical power."
"Yes, but that's  at  ninety-four thousand  pounds,  Mike.  How  much can  we  strip  it down?"  Tammy
sug-gested.
"Well, at full power,  one  gallon per  minute per  en-gine,  that's  two  hundred  forty  gallons  per
hour or fourteen-forty pounds of gas. Let's say we put two thou-sand pounds of fuel aboard, plus my
one-twenty-five pounds as pilot . . . What does that leave us in the way of margins within which we've
got to build a sky hook plus its power supply?"
"How about the co-pilot?"
"Huh?"
"A C-54E or DC-4—whatever you want to call it— requires a co-pilot," she reminded me.
"Well, I guess we'll have to add in about one-eighty-five pounds for Bill Osbourne."
"How about me?"
"What?"
"I weigh one-oh-four. That's a saving of eighty-one pounds that we can use for something else."
"Tammy, you can't fly a DC-4!"
"Why not? I've got more than four hundred hours of heavy time in a DC-3!"
"Okay, okay! Incidentally, how did you manage all that heavy time?"
"I once worked for an outfit that had DC-3's for hauling things around."
I sighed. I hadn't exactly figured on going into orbit in this lash-up with Tammy. It made me feel rather
queasy. I don't mind taking a lot of chances in the air when I'm alone. But I've always felt extra cautious
when I've had someone important to me along.
We got the numbers, and I presented them to Vic about lunch time.
"Are you sure?" he asked.
"No. That's why I'd like you to double-check. Here's the operational manual with the basic numbers. I
hope to God I haven't made a mistake!"
"The numbers look pretty big," Vic noted. "Why couldn't you get the Commander?"
"We just couldn't, and we'll have to leave it at that."
He quickly glanced down the pages of figures, then came to a stop. "Tammy? As co-pilot?"
"She's  qualified,  and  she  weighs  a  lot  less  than  any-body  else  around  here  who  is,  such  as  Bill
Osbourne."
Bill Osbourne didn't bat an eyelash when I told him later in the day. "I'd hoped to be able to go, but
Tammy weighs less. Every pound is going to count. My God, this sky hook unit for the DC-4 is big!"
"Yeah, I don't even know if we can provide the en-ergy to run it or not," I admitted.
"Vic and Len will work on that end of it. They'll get you a sky hook and an energy source. You and
Tammy let Wimpy get you both type-rated in the DC-4." He looked down again at the photocopy of my
calculations. "By the beard of my sacred aunt, fifteen hundred horsepower just to keep that thing in the
air!"
The next two weeks were probably the most halcyon days of my life. I was flying most of the time.
Further-more, I was flying with Tammy. True, Seven-Eleven was an ancient clunker, but it flew. It was
sound, solid, and secure. Wimpy did an excellent job of checking Tammy and me out in the bird. When
he signed us off, he called the FAA office and told them we were ready for the check ride. We took a

boring flight up over the hills of Connecticut with a bored FAA check pilot rid-ing in the flight engineer's
seat  between  us.  He  pulled  a  couple  of  engine-out  emergencies  on  us,  had  us  shoot  a  landing  at
Westchester  County  Airport,  and  said  "Wimpy,  you  always  do  a  good  job.  And  these  two  have
enough time that I don't have to worry." He signed-off our type-rating.
I wouldn't say that Jake Stock was exactly pleased that Corporate Research was taking over one of
his air-planes, and he insisted on being absolutely certain that Tammy and I were type-rated by giving us
a check  ride  himself, much to  the visible disgust of Wimpy Winfield who knew  more  about  that  old
DC-4  than the Chief Corporate  Pilot. Jake  Stock  was  indeed  an ancient peli-can,  lean  and  grizzled,
radiating competence and self-assurance, chewing on his ever-present cigar. He had his own way to fly a
DC-4 and claimed to have had several thousand hours in the type during World War II when he flew as
an airline contract pilot for the Air Corps on the African run. After a  couple  of hours  of a  real  check
ride, Jake Stock pronounced us qualified to fly Seven-Eleven, but added, "I want you to take good care
of  this  bird.  She's  my  spare.  I  know  that  Bill  Osbourne  got  a  letter  from  Halden  authorizing  the
tempo-rary loan of an aircraft to Corporate Research, but I fully expect to get this airplane back  from
you in the same excellent condition as when we signed it over. Any reconditioning to bring it up to our
standards is not going to come out of our budget in the Aviation Di-vision!"
Tammy and  I then proceeded  to  "explore the per-formance  envelope" of the old bird.  We  had  to
know what the ship would do. For many pilots, this is just an excuse to log some time. In our case, we
needed the data and the experience of hours in the air with Seven-Eleven.
Seven-Eleven was equipped with a demand regulator oxygen system, so Tammy and I flew the ship to
its maximum altitude—full throttles, maximum manifold pressures on all engines, and as light as we could
ar-range it. The book was wrong; this DC-4  would sail along at  38,500  feet.  True,  she  was  mushing
through the sky right on the edge of a stall. But she would do it.
We kept  feeding this data  back  to  Vic and  Len.  I also  told  them, "Look,  this is not a  pressurized
airplane. Somewhere you've got to come up with full pressure suits for Tammy and me."
"Where are we going to get space suits?" Vic wanted to know.
"Easy!" Len Marshall said with a smile. "We get in touch with Ted Mayan, and he gets that  surplus-
scrounging graduate student of his to find two of them!"
That  was  a  slim  chance.  I  was  therefore  surprised  when  Ted  Mayan  showed  up  in  his  Lincoln
Continental  at  Sikorski  one  morning  with  big  boxes  sealed  in  the  usual  imperishable,  unpenetrable
government shipping and  storage  materials. They were  surplus U.S.  Navy  MK  IV  full  pressure  suits
capable  of working in a  vac-uum.  And he had  the necessary  auxiliary equipment to  pressurize  them.
They didn't fit perfectly. They were not fireproof nomex built to the latest  NASA  specifica-tions.  They
wouldn't keep us alive more than about six hours in orbit. But they would work. We tested them on the
ground and put them away.
Tammy  and  I  took  some  long  cross-country  flights  in  Seven-Eleven.  We  practiced  single-engine
landings on short landing strips, simulating emergencies. We flew single-engine at the maximum altitudes
we could man-age with that amount of power. We even performed the most dangerous and deadly of all
maneuvers in a  large,  heavy, multi-engine airplane: complete  dead-stick  land-ing  with  all  four  motors
stopped, their propellers feath-ered, and no chance of making a go-around if you didn't hit it dead-nuts
on the first try. Now I know what the Space Shuttle pilots go through!
Tammy was a no-nonsense, capable, cool, and quite competent  co-pilot.  The controls  in the DC-4
are not hydraulically boosted, yet she  exhibited strength that  belied  her minute size by wrestling those
controls suc-cessfully.
Naturally, we had to perform a critical test on the autopilot, and the DC-4 was built with a  forward
cabin in which a relief crew could sack out during long trans-oceanic  flights. Both of us requalified
our memberships in the Mile-High Club, statute and nautical, sev-eral times at several altitudes, just to

make sure that we did qualify.
Back  at  the lab,  a  new sky  hook  was  taking  shape.  Vic  had  managed  to  find  the  original  design
manuals for the DC-4  in the National  Air  and  Space  Museum  and  the  MacDonnell-Douglas  library
archives in Santa Monica. To get copies of those old documents gave us an excuse to take some  very
long cross-country flights in Seven-Eleven. Carrying no cargo and only fuel, Tammy, Vic, and myself, we
made it to California non-stop.
It was an experience for Vic. He had ridden airplanes only as a passenger in the cabin of jet airliners.
In spite of the fact that he didn't really know what was going on, he spent most of the time in the flight
engineer's jump seat behind the center throttle console, watching with obvious enjoyment.
He also  told  me something that took  some  rough edges  off  our  relationship.  "Mike,  I  had  lots  of
trouble understanding you when you joined the lab. I'll never understand Tammy here; she's a woman."
Tammy thumbed her nose at Vic, but the mathematician went on, "You try to be good at whatever you
do, but I could never understand what turned you on about fly-ing. Now I know. This is probably  the
closest thing to sex I've ever experienced. The view, the smoothness, the feeling that we are surrounded
and secure and warm because of technology . . ." He grinned. "It's an aerial orgasm!"
The new sky hook unit was designed around the spe-cific structural characteristics of the DC-4—its
reso-nances,  bending  moments,  mass  distribution,  and  inter-faces  between  various  components  and
subassemblies. It wasn't an easy job for Vic. There were many days when Tammy and I didn't fly; we
worked with the microcomputer tied in on a time-sharing net with Serge Korsinski's big general-purpose
computer.
Things were just going beautifully!
Then we had the marketing meeting.
It  was  another  dog-and-pony  show,  this  time  orchestrated  by  Phil  Sanatella  up  at  corporate
headquarters. Bill Osbourne insisted that Len, Vic and myself be present.
The conference room was the one  used  for meetings of the NEMECO  Board  of Directors.  It  was
plush in comparison to our lab conference facilities. Sanatella passed around a bound document about an
inch thick, took a position on the right of Grant Halden at the head of the huge table,  and  began  with,
"Gentlemen, I believe we  are  going to  have trouble  finding a  market  for the Corporate  Research  sky
hook!"
Bill exploded. "What?"
Sanatella held up his hand pontifically. "Please  let me finish my opening remarks.  Then I'll be  more
than pleased to answer any detailed questions regarding my methodology, approach, or data. I've spent
all my time since the last conference working on the marketing for this device. In short,  I've  concluded
that there are no apparent industrial applications for a lifting or pushing device that are not currently being
satisfactorily han-dled by other devices and systems which, in the long run, may be less expensive. My
study has also conclud-ed that it will require a large capital outlay to  move this device  into production
status, to establish suitable marketing strategies and sales teams, and to  come  head-to-head  with firms
making other devices that are now on the market and doing satisfactory jobs."
Bill Osbourne was doing a magnificent job restrain-ing himself. Vic and Len looked dumbfounded. It
was the executive vice-president,  Dr.  Hayward  Newcomb,  who quietly asked,  "Can you tell us what
markets and applications you surveyed?"
"They're listed in detail in my report. All of you have copies."
Osbourne  finally  could  no  longer  withhold  comment.  "Phil,  why  didn't  you  work  with  Corporate
Research on this?"
"I did."

"You talked with me for one hour, most of that over lunch. Vic, how long did Phil talk with you?"
"About ten minutes," the mathematician replied. "I tried to explain the theory to him, but he . . ."
"I'm not interested in the theory of how or why the device operates. From a marketing point of view,
my main concerns  must be  applications,  the value of the device  in doing  those  jobs,  and  how  many
devices we can anticipate selling before we reach market satura-tion," Sanatella explained rapidly.
Bill ignored him. "Len, how long did Phil talk with you?"
"About a half-hour. I gave him a  photocopy  of all the memos we'd  generated  on applications,  plus
copies of my special applications laboratory notebook," the lab director remarked, obviously disturbed
and disgusted.
"Those  applications  notes  were  far-out  dreaming  with  little  relationship  to  the  realities  of  .  .  ."
Sana-tella tried to put in.
Osbourne turned to me. "Mike, how much time did Phil spend with you? You've probably come  up
with some of the most prosaic applications in the agricultural industry because of your background as an
ag pilot."
I looked Grant Halden straight in the eye and said, "Mr. Sanatella didn't talk with me at all."
Osbourne lifted the inch-thick report. "Grant, how can  this be  worth  the paper  it's  printed  on?  We
have had applications in mind since Day One of this project! Hay, you know how often you and I have
talked about it!"
"I suggest you read the report," Sanatella told him. "I have to deal with the realities of the marketplace.
I can't put credence in projections of inventors who have always historically overestimated the value of
their in-ventions. I spent a great deal of time with Bob Destry at the Mill Equipment Division and  with
Max Keller  here  up at  the Heavy Construction  Equipment Division in Roseville, Michigan."  Sanatella
indicated the man sitting next to  Destry,  a  sandy-haired,  heavy-set,  solid "construction engineer" type
who,  obviously,  must  be  Max  Keller.  "I  worked  for  weeks  with  the  market-ing  people  from  Mill
Equipment  and  Heavy  Construc-tion  Equipment.  We  thoroughly  surveyed  the  marketplace  and  the
various pieces of equipment currently performing lifting and pushing jobs—everything  from fork  lifts to
heavy extension cranes to . . ."
"How about our tech reps?" I broke in.
"Pardon me?"
"Did  you  spend  any  time  out  in  the  field  with  our  technical  representatives  where  NEMECO
equipment is being used?" I asked. "Did you find out what the prob-lems of our  customers  were?  Did
you . . ."
"There was no time for that," Sanatella put in. "I had to depend upon the inputs I received  from the
marketing people at Mill Equipment and Heavy Con-struction Equipment . . ."
Bill Osbourne had calmed down a little bit. "Grant and Hay, we haven't discussed this before because
I didn't want to make enemies among the people Corpo-rate Research is designed to serve. But, as you
know, one of the reasons we have Corporate Research is be-cause of the very factors that Phil has run
up against in the various divisions."
Hayward Newcomb knew that he was also in trouble at the moment. He answered with his customary
calm-ness, coolness, and rationality, "What Bill refers to, gentlemen, are two factors that  exist in every
sales and marketing group and, as a matter of fact, even in the Department of Defense as well. One of
these is the so-called 'NIH factor' which stands for 'not invented here.' It means that one has such blind
and implicit faith in one's abilities and the abilities of one's subordinates that if it wasn't invented in your
shop, it isn't worth a damn . . .  to put it bluntly. Now, Bob, let me finish before you attempt rebuttal! The
second factor is the ordinary 'sales force hype.' A sales force without sales force hype isn't a good sales

force  and  cannot  sell.  It's  a  philosophy  that  says,  in  essence,  that  our  competitors  are  a  nice  but
incompetent bunch of guys who have a good product, but it isn't as  good  as  ours.  And .  .  .  Hold  on,
Bob! You'll get your innings! And on top of that is the fact that such organizations are so overcon-fident
that there  is a  better  than a  ninety-five percent  chance  that  they  haven't  even  seen  the  competition's
product, much less even tested it against their awn! I have not read this report, Grant, but I feel that
this is what Bill has in mind."
"Grant, I know what's in this report because my peo-ple and I worked  with Phil in getting the data
together." Bob Destry quickly stepped into the breach. "We tried to do  an honest  job.  I cannot  agree
with Hay's posi-tion."
"Nor can I!" Max Keller growled. "I haven't seen this scientific miracle from Corporate Research, but
I  find  it  difficult  to  accept  that  it's  an  actual  working  em-bodiment  of  that  old  fraud,  the  so-called
'reactionless  drive.'  I  have  to  assume  it's  real  because  I'm  told  that  it  is.  But  I  can't  foresee  any
applications for it in the heavy construction equipment marketplace where there  are  perfectly  adequate
devices for lifting and pushing and pulling already. What I would like to see from Corporate Research is
a development that would greatly improve the efficiency of what we have or new pro-cesses that would
permit us to make existing products better or with less  cost  in terms  of labor  and  material .  .  .  Labor
costs are eating me up, and I don't need a brand new invention! I need significant improvements on what
we've got . . .  improvements, I might add, that are coming out of my own development teams reg-ularly
. . ."
Halden looked  pained.  Open  warfare  had  erupted  be-tween  his  operating,  money-making  division
chiefs and  his ace-in-the-hole  hedge  against the future in Corpo-rate  Research.  "Gentlemen,"  he  said
quietly, looking around the room, "this is obviously a highly emotional issue. We don't run NEMECO on
emotions or gut feel. A business must be run rationally with just the right amount of gambling in certain
areas where costs are low, probability of success  is reasonable,  and  potential  payoff can  be  high. I'm
rather surprised at the brief conclusions of this marketing survey; I had  fully anticipated  some  market,
and  I'm  still  prepared  to  back  this  as  a  gamble  worth  taking.  However,"  the  NEMECO
president  emphasized,  "a rational decision  cannot  be  made  in this environment. Perhaps  some  of you
have read Phil's report." He looked at Destry and Keller. "I haven't. Nor has Hay Newcomb who has
pri-mary responsibility to me for Corporate Research. Nor, obviously, has Dr. Osbourne. I require the
time to read and digest the contents of this voluminous report which appears to be exceedingly thorough.
I will make no de-cision on this today. I suggest that all of you read it carefully. I'll call another meeting
on this matter  when I've  had  the opportunity  to  study this report."  He  took  off  his  glasses,  carefully
folded them, and placed them in the inner pocket of his suit coat. Halden was upset. I could tell that in
the testy way he snapped, "Meeting is adjourned. Thank you for coming, Max. Let's get back to work."
And he strode out.
Bill, Vic, Len, and I did not go back to the lab. Bill felt we should not because our  expressions  and
tones would decimate the morale on this project since nearly everyone in the lab knew that a marketing
meeting of great importance was going on. I suggested we go to Mama's for the usual reasons.
We sat down and all ordered coffee.
"Vic, you haven't said much," Len observed.
"Phil Sanatella has a point," Vic mused. "We tend to forget it in our cerebral work at the lab. If the sky
hook  can't  be  sold,  it's  nothing  more  than  a  nifty  technical  trick  .  .  .  and  we'd  better  get  on  with
something useful to NEMECO!"
"It is useful to NEMECO!" I blurted out. "That was a fantastic hatchet  job  by Phil Sanatella  for the
benefit of Robert Destry and with the full support of Max Keller!"
"You're both right in a way," Osbourne said. "Before the automobile existed, the horse and buggy did
fine, and nobody wanted an automobile. Now, nobody seems to be able to do without one. The same

holds true of the telephone. We did our marketing with Halden and Newcomb, but we didn't do it with
Destry and Keller. We have to figure out how to sell our work to them."
"What's our plan of action?" Len Marshall wanted to know in his pragmatic manner. "Where do we go
from here?"
"Damn the torpedoes! We have not yet begun to fight! You may fire when ready, Gridley!" Osbourne
snapped suddenly. "We get that DC-4 in orbit, and we do it as fast as we can . . . And if we can't get it
into orbit,  we  get it as  high as  we  can,  higher than any DC-4  was  ever  designed  to  go!  Finish  your
coffee, gang! There's more coffee at the lab, and we have one hell of a lot of work to do in one hell of a
hurry if we are going to save our asses!"

Chapter Sixteen
It was a lash-up if I ever saw one!
The DC-4 sky hook was about ten feet long and was bolted through the floor directly to the fuselage
struc-ture over the aircraft's center of gravity in the cavern-ous cabin.
Carl had done a magnificent job of miniaturizing the electronics. The hundreds of pounds of electrical
equip-ment  that had  accompanied  the original sky  hook  had  been  reduced  to  about  forty  pounds  of
solid-state elec-tronics whose major weight was in the aluminum frame-work that held it all together.
The superbatteries were Len's department. I wanted to know more about them, but Len just told me,
"Look, we're working around the clock to put each one to-gether by hand. Someday, I'll have the time
to go into the most minute detail with you. But not now!"
I persisted. I like to know what's in the airplanes I fly.
"Briefly, they use high energy density chemical cou-ples with a solid ionic conductor as an electrolyte.
They're good for a little over a megajoule per kilo, which is many times what's available from any other
low-temperature  primary battery.  Now,  please  let  me  out.  I  have  to  get  back  to  the  lab  and  build
another one!"
The  fuselage  of  Seven-Eleven  was  getting  crowded  with  wiring,  plastic  tubs  that  contained
superbatteries,  and  the liquid oxygen system that  Wimpy  was  installing  for  the  pressure  suits.  I  was
weighing everything as it was installed, and Tammy kept up with the weight and balance calculations.
There were nights when we didn't go back to Morse Manor. We worked until we got tired, then tried
to find someplace to sleep. "Look," I told everyone, "Tammy has first call on the crew bunk up forward.
She has to help me fly this thing."
I  didn't  get  the  chance  to  read  Sanatella's  marketing  report.  I  might  get  that  chance  later  if  the
Twenty-Two Thruster project was successful. Otherwise, it would make little difference. Osbourne was
spending his time up at corporate headquarters running interference. He showed up from time to time to
report progress or lack of it.
On one such visit, Tammy and I confronted him. "Bill, we must test fly this plane before we commit to
the all-out operation," I told him.
"We've got enough superbatteries aboard now to cruise with aerodynamic lift," Tammy pointed out.
"Will it set back the schedule?" Osbourne wanted to know.
"It may set it forward," I said. "We need to tune, and we can't do that on the ramp . . . only in the air."
Osbourne thought a moment. "If it fails . . ."
"Then we'll just have more time to either correct it or start looking for new jobs," I said.
"I was thinking of what might happen if you dropped her into Long Island Sound on takeoff."
"Don't worry," Tammy told him. "We could climb out with only two engines. We're not switching to
sky hook power until we have lots of altitude."
"When do you want to go?" Osbourne wanted to know.
"As soon as Len gets that next cell in place. That'll be tonight. Let's make it dramatic: Dawn tomorrow
morning, if the weather's okay."

Bill grinned. "Okay, dawn it is, right out of the old test-pilot movies!"
I didn't go home that night. Neither did Tammy. We were too busy. We decided we wouldn't exceed
36,000 feet during the test  flight, and  therefore  wouldn't  wear  the pressure  suits. But we'd  wear  seat
pack  parachutes  not only for safety but because  they eliminated the need  for both  of  us  to  use  seat
cushions to see over the in-strument panel.
The nights were cold and clammy on the ramp at Sikorski with the damp air from the Sound forming
little pockets  of fog on the ground where  it was  wetter  than elsewhere.  I checked  the outside  of the
aircraft. About eleven o'clock, Wimpy lumbered over to me. "Mike, are you an Authorized Inspector?"
He was referring to the special authorization on my airirame and power-plant mechanic's  license which
permitted me to certify the airworthiness of an aircraft.
"Sure am, Wimpy."
"Well, I didn't want to take any chances.  I noted  you don't  think that  the sky  hook  installation is a
'major al-teration' according to Federal Air Regulation Forty-three."
"We made no changes to the airframe, powerplants, controls, weight-and-balance, or performance. I
went over those regulations pretty carefully." I looked at him. "You've been  at  this longer than I have.
What do you think?"
"Waall," Wimpy drawled, "some pass-gauge FAA inspectors might feel we were stretching those regs
if they claim the sky hook's an auxiliary powerplant."
"We bolted something to the basic fuselage structure that doesn't affect the basic performance of the
ship. She'll still fly according to the book," I pointed out. "I'm willing to sign it off on the logs. I've made
more serious modifications than this to ag planes. Most of the time, the alterations  were  overlooked  in
any accident investigation because the engine quit and caused the crash . . .  so the FAA and National
Transportation Safety Board never bothered to look any further."
"Tell you, Mike, I'll sign off the log book as A&P for NEMECO . . . and because I've got something
you don't have. I'm an FAA Designated Engineering Repre-sentative, and I don't think you've made any
changes requiring a Form Three-thirty-seven to be filed and ap-proved. How about that!"
"Thank you, Wimpy. You don't need to take the re-sponsibility for this pile of junk. I'll do it."
"Well, let me . . .  because if anybody asks, I'll tell them I knew what you were doing . . . because you
do. Chances are that the FAA will never question it anyway unless you prang the airplane . . .  in which
case, you'll have other things to worry about."
"Wimpy, thanks."
"Just bring it back. Jake Stock'll have my hide for a door mat if you don't."
Carl clambered down the temporary boarding stairs rigged against the rear cargo door and stumbled
up to me. He was nearly exhausted. "Mike, she's tuned the best I can do it on the ramp. It'll be different
in the air. You may have to make some adjustments to the load compensating circuit."
"Go home and get some sleep, Carl."
"No, Wilding will have questions if I do. He's been bugging me to find out what's going on out here. I'll
just sack out in the hangar. I want to be around tomor-row morning." He stumbled off across the ramp.
It was cold. I finished the external inspection, climbed up the stairs, and threaded my way down  the
littered cabin toward the flight deck.
I tried to sneak, quietly through the crew compart-ment where Tammy was stretched out on the lower
bunk, clad in the duly coveralls we now all sported be-cause we had been working too hard to do more
than take a shower in the hangar from time to time. But a  little voice came  to  me. "Mike?" She  rolled
over to face me.

"Sorry, I was trying to get through without waking you."
"I wasn't sleeping, just resting."
"I thought I'd try to get some shut-eye up in the left seat."
"Everything okay outside?"
"Best I can tell, it ought to fly."
"Come here," she told me. "It's too cold in here to-night for you to sleep in that seat. Keep me warm,
hon."
We kept each other warm. The bunk in a DC-4 isn't very big, but we weren't big people.
After much exchanged warmth, she said in her whispery voice, "Mike, suppose it doesn't work?"
"It'll work okay," I tried to reassure her. "This your first real flight as a test pilot?"
"Yes. I'm a little scared."
"Don't be. Or don't be too much scared. If anything goes wrong, you go out that cockpit side window
as fast as  you can  just the way I showed  you.  And don't  wait for me  because  I'll  be  holding  things
together long enough for you to clear before I go out my own win-dow."
"I've never jumped before."
"You've done something comparable to it."
"Huh?"
"That first night you came into my room in the dark. I think that was probably  harder  for you to  do
than make a parachute jump."
"I'm ready to make that kind of a jump again any time . . ."
"Tammy, my dear,  I know  that."  The  conversation  was  not  proceeding  as  quickly  as  this;  it  was
interrupted for long periods at random moments when our  lips were  doing other  things that  prevented
talking. "When this is over, I want to take a bigger jump. I don't want to lose you . . . ever."
"The same, Mike. But there will be some things that I have to do first so that you don't become upset .
. ."
"Why, Tammy? Nothing in your past makes the slightest difference to me now."
"Oh, Mike, just hold me! Dawn is coming too soon. And we'll work all this out when this is over. I'm
glad I'll be with you, because if you didn't come back . . ."
"But we're coming back!"
"Shush! And keep me warm!"
Light broke  through the cockpit  windows.  I  realized  it  was  dawn.  I  got  to  my  feet.  Tammy  was
asleep.  I  crawled  through  the  cabin  and  clambered  down  the  steep  temporary  Starrs  to  see  Bill
Osbourne driving up in his TR-7. He got out with a picnic basket, grinning as he said,  "Hot pilots ain't
worth a damn without a hot breakfast!"
Both Tammy and I felt better after orange juice, a couple of sweet rolls, ham and scrambled eggs, and
lots of hot coffee. We ate in the crew compartment just aft of the flight deck.
"Thank your wife for this," I told Bill.
"I will. She wants us all to get together soon. We haven't gotten to know one another socially."
"We've been busy," Tammy remarked.
"That we have. Maybe there will be some time . . ."

"There's never enough time," I said.
The  wan  disk  of  the  sun  was  well  above  the  horizon  when  we  closed  the  cargo  door,  buckled
ourselves into our  parachute  harnesses,  fastened  our  safety harnesses,  and  went  through  the  prestart
check list. I pushed back my cockpit window. Wimpy was standing on the ramp  next to  the fire cart,
giving us the "all clear." He then pointed to an engine and rotated his hand.
"Starting Number Three!" I called. Tammy engaged the starter.
"Four blades  . . .  six . . .  seven  .  .  ,  nine . . . twelve! Ignition both! Boost  pump low!" she
called back. I flipped the magneto switch and  hit the primer.  "Auto rich!" she  called and  I moved  the
mix-ture control accordingly. Engine Number 3 coughed, shuddered, blew a cloud of white smoke, and
settled down to run. Fuel, oil, hydraulic pressures . . .  all normal. We got the other three engines started
without trouble.
"External power?"
"Removed!"
"Radios?"
"On!"
"Vacuum?"
"Within limits!"
"Gyros?"
"Set and uncaged!"
"Flaps?"
"Down!"
"Bridgeport Ground Control, Douglas November one three seven eleven at NEMECO ramp, taxi for
take-off!"
"November Seven-Eleven, Ground. Good morning, Mike! Taxi to runway Two Four. Wind two three
zero at five. Altimeter two niner seven seven. Where you and Tammy going today?"
It may sound coolly professional and technical, but there are times on the radio  when there  is some
warmth. And this morning we needed it.
"We'd like a right turn out after takeoff. Going up over Pawling, Albany, and Hartford to check some
new equipment," I told the voice from the control tower.
"Worked kind of late last night, didn't you?"
"Airlines have schedules, and we've got deadlines."
We did our pre-takeoff engine run-up at the ap-proach end of runway 24, and Number 4 engine was
rough as hell. Tammy looked worried. "Forget it," I told her. "Wimpy said we fouled the plugs on that
last low-power approach. It's got new plugs in it. Valve may be  sticking. It'll burn the lead  out under
takeoff pow-er."
"Well, we're light enough to climb out on three en-gines," she observed.
We got takeoff clearance from a female voice from the tower, wheeled out onto runway 24, and lined
up with the center line. Those four throttles are a handful, and I inched them forward as Tammy steadied
the con-trol yoke.
"Vee-One!"  Tammy called over  the roar  of four en-gines.  We  were  past  the  critical  engine  failure
speed. We could now continue the takeoff on three engines if nec-essary.

"Vee-Two!" I eased back on the big wheel, and Seven-Eleven broke with the Earth.
"Gear up!"
"Gear coming up! Three lights!"
"Climb power!"  I felt  Tammy  reduce  power  to  2300  rpm  and  33  inches  of  manifold  pressure.  I
reached over and hit the flap switch. "Flaps coming up, five degrees at a time!"
"November Seven-Eleven, Bridgeport Tower. Right turn on course approved!  Contact  Westchester
Ap-proach on one two zero point five five. Have a nice flight!"
"See ya later!" I replied and settled down to making the ship fly. "Tammy, switch to  Approach  and
then turn on the multicom frequency so we can talk with Wimpy and Bill."
I took up a heading toward Pawling, contacted West-Chester Approach, told them we were VFR out
of two  going to  10,500  and  would be  maneuvering at  that  alti-tude  on  a  test  flight.  A  definite  New
Yorker  told  us  to  "maintain  VFR  on  your  own  navigation!"  In  other  words,  he  saw  our  radar
transponder blip on his screen, but he didn't want to be bothered with us.
We levelled off at  10,500  feet  and  set  up  cruise  power—1600  rpm  and  24  inches.  "NEMECO
Bridge-port, this is NEMECO Seven-Eleven on multicom fre-quency one two two point nine. How do
you read?"
Osbourne's voice crackled back, "Loud and clear, Seven-Eleven!"
"We're level at ten-five, pulling sixteen hundred and twenty-four, one ninety one indicated," I told him.
"Warming up the unit now!"
We had a separate check list for the sky  hook,  and  we'd  changed  the terminology so  that  nobody
would suspect  that  we  were  trying  a  new  propulsion  system.  Carl  had  rigged  up  a  "kilowatt-hours
remaining"  digital  count-down  indicator  on  the  drive  control  panel  so  we  could  keep  track  of  the
superbattery power. It wasn't critical on this flight because we also had the capability of recharging the
superbatteries from the aircraft electri-cal system.
We powered-up the drive. Plasma voltage on . . .  and I could  see  the flickering glow in the cabin
through the aft doorway. Phasing on. Drive voltage on. Load compensator on. Slowly, I turned the knob
that ad-vanced power to the unit.
There was a slight bucking of the airplane that I de-tected through the parachute pack  and  the seat.
"Out of phase slightly!" I said. "Tammy, take it! I'm going back to make an adjustment!"
It was perhaps the strangest sight I'd ever seen in an airplane: those banks of plastic bucket shapes, a
maze of heavy cables, and that glowing drive unit bolted to the floor. I got rid of the bucking by a slight
adjustment to the load compensating circuit and a readjustment of the driving wave shape. I went back
to the cockpit and strapped in.
"Next time, wear your parachute!" Tammy snapped. "I don't want to lose you!"
"Next  time,"  I  told  her,  "don't  make  personal  com-ments  over  an  open  microphone!  You're  so
up-tight you've got your thumb clamped down on the push-to-talk switch!"
"Oops!"
"Never mind, Seven-Eleven!" Bill's voice came back. "You're just adding a little spice . . ."
"Easy, hon! She's running smooth now. Let's see if it'll push this bird!" I gently advanced the sky hook
power controls.
I got  an  immediate  increasing  indication  on  airspeed,  rate  of  climb,  and  altimeter.  "Unit's  on  and
adjusted," I reported over the multicom radio to Bridgeport. "Re-ducing as planned." I turned to Tammy.
"Kill the out-board engines and feather the props!" She pulled the mixture controls to "Idle Cut Off" and

killed the igni-tion on engines One and Four.
The nose dropped slightly and airspeed reduced to 190 miles per hour. But the altitude held.
"NEMECO   Bridgeport,   Seven-Eleven!   One   and Four are shut down. We're holding airspeed
and alti-tude as anticipated with the calculated power settings on the unit!"
"Roger, Seven-Eleven! Sounds good! Will it steer?"
"Stand by!" I did a  gentle  fifteen-degree  bank  to  the  left,  then  to  the  right,  and  then  turned  to  a
due-north heading. "Bridgeport, Seven-Eleven. Flies like a  dream.  We're  going to  Procedure  Number
Two!"
I increased  the sky  hook  power  again.  The  glow  from  the  drive  unit  was  bright  now.  I  watched
altitude, air-speed, and rate of climb increase. "Cut Two and Three and feather them, Tam!"
N13711 continued to fly, the props on all four en-gines stationary and feathered. Airspeed settled in
at 195. Altitude held at 10,500 feet. I called, "Bill, are you recording this?"
"Roger!"
"We should make  another  profound  historical state-ment.  We've  got four  shut  down  and  a  DC-4
flying nor-mally!"  I  released  the  mike  button,  leaned  across  the  center  throttle  pedestal,  and  kissed
Tammy.
The ship was just as maneuverable  as  ever.  I reached  down,  picked  up the flight manual, thumbed
through it, and  found that at  this weight I could  safely pull about  three  gee's  acceleration.  "Hang  on,
Tam," I told her, "and don't get shook up. This isn't in the flight plan."
I slow-rolled the DC-4 with four dead engines.
It was kind of sloppy, and I let the nose fall off a little bit as we came around. But, since I had never
rolled a DC-4 before, I thought it was passable per-formance.
Tammy had gone dead white. "Don't ever do that again with a ship this big!"
"No problem! Tex Johnson rolled the Boeing 707 prototype at five hundred feet in front of a crowd of
airline presidents!"
"This is no 707! Just don't do that again!"
I didn't report it to Bridgeport. I called New York Center and requested an IFR clearance to 30,000
feet direct to Albany, then via Victor 2  airway to  Gardner,  Victor  229  to  Hartford,  and  Victor  99  to
Bridgeport. New York Center came back with the approval.
"Roger, Center, Douglas Seven-Eleven leaving ten five for Flight Level three zero zero!" To Tammy I
said, "Let's start 'em up!"
I shut down the sky hook once we had all four en-gines set for climb power. At 12,000 feet,Tammy
and I donned oxygen masks. New York Center handed us off to Boston Center, transferring control and
surveillance to the other Air Traffic Control Center. We were outbound on Victor 2 airway from Albany
before we got altitude,and I called Bridgeport again on multicom. "Bill, we're level at thirty indicating two
fifty. Proceed-ing with Procedure Three."
Again, I turned on the drive, brought it on line, had a slight tuning problem because we had burned off
sev-eral hundred pounds of fuel during our climb, then shut down all four engines.
High in the cloudless blue sky of the stratosphere, we sailed along with all four engines dead and  no
sound in the cabin except the boundary layer whispering past the windshield at more than two hundred
miles per hour.
"Boston Center, Douglas Seven-Eleven requesting Flight Level three six zero for test purposes."
"Douglas Seven-Eleven,  Center.  Climb  and  maintain  Flight  Level  three  six  zero.  Report  reaching.

That's close to your absolute altitude, isn't it?"
"Roger, Center. We won't be up there long."
"Okay, let me know when you want to come back down."
"Appreciate your cooperation, Center."
On drive power  alone,  we  climbed Seven-Eleven  to  36,000  feet.  I  kept  an  eye  on  the  remaining
battery power. It was dropping rapidly, but we still had plenty to get us back to Bridgeport. We stayed
up there where no DC-4  with dead  engines should rightfully be  until we  approached  Hartford  on the
southbound leg. I re-quested a lower altitude, got permission to descend "at pilot's discretion," and  left
36,000 feet for 17,000 feet.
Over Hartford, we ran into trouble, and I should have anticipated it.
We couldn't get engines One, Three, and Four to start. They'd gotten too cold at  minus 70  degrees
Fah-renheit up in the stratosphere, and the oil had con-gealed. Number Two started reluctantly.
Tammy was a cool number. "Knock  off trying to  start  them, Mike!  We're  so  light we  can  make  it
back on one with the drive helping! Cancel IFR clearance and get us down where  we've  got some  lift
and some warmth!"
I didn't report the trouble to Center or to Bill. I didn't want the fire trucks waiting along the runway at
Sikorski. I got us below  controlled  airspace,  cancelled  our  IFR  clearance,  and  let Seven-Eleven  drift
down. We stabilized at 4,000 feet with full power on Number Two and the drive unit pulling the rest of
the load. "No sweat, Tammy! There's Bridgeport!"
"Roger! No emergency, Mike!"
"It'll look  strange  making a  landing with only one  en-gine,"  I  remarked,  "but  we  won't  declare  an
emer-gency."
"Better let them know," she advised.
"Bridgeport Tower,  NEMECO  Seven-Eleven  with you,  ten miles northeast  on Victor  Ninety-nine!
Re-quest straight-in approach to runway Two Four. We have an engine problem, but no emergency."
"NEMECO  Seven-Eleven,  Bridgeport  Tower.  You're  cleared  for  straight-in  approach  to  runway
Two Four. Wind calm, altimeter two niner seven five. Need the fire trucks?"
"Ah, negative! Couple dead engines, but we're runnin' light!" I replied in my best  professional,  calm,
and bored airline captain's voice with just the slight drawl they all affected.
"Seven-Eleven, advise when you have the airport in sight. Show us a landing light, please."
Tammy flipped the two landing light switches on the overhead panel.
I picked up the localizer back course radio signal. Then I saw the bright strobe  lights of the runway
end identifiers. "Bridgeport Tower, Seven-Eleven has run-way in sight."
"Roger, Seven-Eleven. Cleared to land!"
We  kept  the  wheels  and  flaps  up  until  the  last  possi-ble  moment  to  reduce  drag  and  power
requirements. As soon as the tires  touched  the concrete,  I turned  off the sky  hook  so  we  could  stop
Seven-Eleven.
"NEMECO Seven-Eleven, Bridgeport Tower! Need any help getting back to NEMECO ramp?"
"Thanks, Tower. We can taxi okay on one engine."
"Roger. Contact Ground point nine leaving the runway
There was concern and worry on everyone's faces as we calmly taxied up to the NEMECO ramp and
shut down the one operating engine.

Tammy grinned at me. "Nice work!"
"Easy, with your help. Think we'd make a good team?"
"I think we already have it made!" she grinned back at me. "Except you've got to learn not to sweat
those engine-out approaches!"
I discovered that I was wringing wet with perspira-tion. "Well, you ain't no antiperspirant ad yourself!"
I slid my cockpit window open and yelled down to Wimpy, "No sweat, Wimpy! The oil congealed and
we couldn't get 'em started again! Everything else is copasetic!"
We started back through the cabin. In the privacy of the crew compartment, Tammy turned around,
grabbed me by the ears, and kissed me soundly. "And that is for aerobatics in a DC-4 at ten thousand
feet without any engines!"
"Would you like to review inverted flying procedures tonight?" I asked her.
Once on the ground,  my first thought was  to  get that  airplane into the hangar and  locked  away  as
quickly as possible. The tower people had seen us working last night. Who else had been watching? Bill
agreed. But he wanted a full debriefing.
"We'll give you a full report at Mama's. I'm hungry! Then I want to sleep for about a week," I told Bill.
"I used to feel that way after a mission over Hanoi. But we need your verbal reports while it's fresh in
your minds . . . particularly what happened after you started to descend."
It wasn't  as  historic as  that day  in 1903  when the first powered  airplane  flew,  but  we'd  flown  an
airplane with a totally new form of propulsion system that might take that old DC-4 into orbit around the
Earth.
The sky hook was more than a laboratory experiment now.

Chapter Seventeen
"How can Sanatella possibly say there's no market for the sky hook now?" I chortled  in the lab the
next morning. "Even if we don't do anything else, we've done something nobody's done before!"
Left and I were having coffee together in his office. I was still high. Len wasn't.
"Well, Mike, we did something in the lab here that nobody else  had  done,  either .  .  .  and  Sanatella
didn't even bat an eye. In fact, he's trying to shoot us down."
"Why? Why?" I couldn't understand this. Why would this one little man try to screw up the technical
break-through of the century?
'Tin not sure it's Sanatella alone," Len remarked, pulling his copy  of the marketing report  out of his
desk drawer. "Have you read it?"
"Haven't had time!"
"Before you go flying that DC-4 into orbit, you'd better. I'm not up on all the latest in-fighting, but you
and I both know what Destry's up to." Len held up his hand as I started to say something. "Now, don't
worry! It will be done in the most gentlemanly way possible! There will be  no public recriminations or
name calling. Just a smooth and gentle transition of power. I don't  know  how Destry's  working it, but
he's got Max Keller on his side. And he probably has an arrangement with Sanatella . . ."
"Len, does Vic figure into this in any way that you can determine?"
"No, and it bothers me. Vic's an enigma, even though I manage to get along with him. You're doing a
much better job of that than I am," Len grinned.
"I've always respected Vic for his prowess with mathematics and women, although the latter may be
sheer bravado on Vic's part," I admitted. "At any rate, I think Vic now respects me for possessing some
ex-pertise in his field, mathematics, as well as my avia-tion activities."
"I think he also respects you for what you've done for Tammy."
"For Tammy?"
"Do you remember the way she was when you came?"
"Yeah. But, Len, I didn't change Tammy. She did it herself."
"Have it your own way. When are you getting mar-ried?"
"Tammy still has a hang-up somewhere. I'm patient. She'll work it out. I'll be there when she does."
"I hope you're not disappointed," Len warned me.
"Why?"
"You may not be around when she works it out. She may be somewhere else."
"Wherever she is, I'll be there."
"My dad was right: Never comment on a person's religion or  love life. Okay,  you'd  better  get busy
and read  Sanatella's  report,"  Len indicated  the bound  docu-ment,  "because  it's  important  to  the  sky
hook's future."
"Not any more!" It  was  Bill Osbourne  standing in  the  door.  His  small,  dark,  deep-set  eyes  were
angry, and he almost bristled. "Len, where's Vic?"
"He hasn't come in yet. What's the matter, Bill? You look like you've been in an accident! Are you all
right?"

"I'm not all right, but I haven't been in an accident. Mike, sit down! This concerns you!" The research
di-rector closed the door to Len's office, strode over to the desk, punched the intercom button, and said
to  Ruth,  "This  is  Dr.  Osbourne.  When  Vic  comes  in,  send  him  down  to  Len's  office  Immediately.
Otherwise, hold all calls and don't disturb us!"
"Yes, sir!" Ruth's voice came back. "Shall I bring in coffee?"
"We won't  need  it!" He  turned  the intercom off, then whirled to  us.  "We're  in  deep  trouble!  John
Whiteside filed our patent applications on the sky hook. He informed me late yesterday  afternoon  that
the Patent Office has declared an interference. Somebody was there ahead of us! I was called over  to
Halden's house last night at seven o'clock, and I didn't get home until three this morning! And I've been
on the carpet up at corporate headquarters this morning!"
"You've gotta be kidding!" Len exploded.
"I can't believe it!" I shook my head.
"Why not?  There's  even been  an interference  on  the  load  compensator  invention!"  Osbourne  was
more than angry. I'd never seen him in that state before. "And the interfering applications were not filed
until after I hired you, Mike! What have you got to say for yourself?"
"Only that I didn't  break  your confidence  and  didn't  peddle  NEMECO  lab data  or  information  to
anybody else!" I said vehemently, still on my feet.
"Then, who?  We know  who's  penetrated  us and  who they're  working for.  We've  eliminated  them
from con-sideration because their clients were not the ones who filed!"
"It sure as  hell wasn't  me!" I had  to  look  up at  Bill Osbourne  standing in front of me. "I work  for
NE-MECO  .  .  .  period!  If  you're  accusing  me  of  stealing  NEMECO  secrets  and  selling  them  to
somebody else, you know something I don't know!"
"Bill, it couldn't be Mike," Len put in. "I checked him out personally because, believe it or not, I was
wor-ried that you were being taken by an industrial spy! Mike is not your spy. If he is, I'd better go out
that door with him because I'll not be worth a damn to you or NEMECO after this! Let's get back to the
basics. Who are we in interference with?"
Bill sighed, then the anger seemed to dram out of him. He plopped into a chair, took  out one  of his
dark cigarettes, and lit it without bothering to use his holder. "Sorry. It's been a long night, and there's a
lot of pres-sure . . . Universal American AeroSpace filed before we did."
"You-Ass?" I blurted  out,   using the unflattering nickname the company  had  earned  in the  aviation
field.
"That rules out Peter Wilding," Len observed.
"And Mac Roston, who's reporting to his father in Greenwich."
"Mac Roston?" This sounded incredible to me. Good old Mac?
"We knew it two weeks after he joined us," Len pointed out to me. "There was a lot of stuff going out
the back door with Mac's Formula Vee race cars. He was down here when nobody else  was.  But he
didn't know that we knew what he was taking."
"How  about  Vic?"  I  asked.  "He  knows  more  about  the  theory  of  the  sky  hook  than  anybody,
including you, Bill."
"What about Vic? He isn't here yet," Bill said.
"We don't know where he is half the time. He comes in late. He doesn't show up at all some days . .
." Len pointed out.
"Vic has other responsibilities up at corporate head-quarters."

"Bill, Vic Aboud obviously has lots of Middle-East oil money. He has a new Mercedes every year . . .
and a Mercedes is the kind of a car that if you have to worry about what it costs to operate it, you can't
afford it." Len drummed his fingers on his desk. "Who owns Universal American AeroSpace?"
"I don't know."
"Did anybody  in the Front  Office think  to  check  it  out?  They've  got  the  contacts  on  Wall  Street
through  the  NEMECO  Board.  Winthrop  Dykmann  has  a  seat  on  the  New  York  Exchange,"  Len
Marshall pointed out to his boss. "How much of Universal American Aero-space is owned by Mid-East
oil money?"
Bill Osbourne didn't say anything for a long minute. Then he did say, "Mike, I apologize. I haven't had
much sleep, and I'm under pressure to find the leak. Sorry. I'd figured out that it was you. My profound
and abject apologies. I should never have suspected you at all . . ." Bill Osbourne looked very tired.
"Your apology accepted, Bill. You couldn't be any more shook up or dismayed than I am."
"You  don't  know  the  whole  story  yet,"  Osbourne  went  on.  "Halden  has  elected  not  to  fight  the
interfer-ence. He's falling back on Sanatella's report to hold the support of Destry and Keller.  It's  Hay
Newcomb  whose  neck's  really  on the  line  at  the  moment!  I  was  given  two  orders  by  Halden  and
Newcomb just minutes ago. I was first told to find the industrial spy in my operation. My second order
was even worse: We are to cease all work on the sky hook and everything to do with it because: a, we
will have no patent position; b, we are in no condition to fight Universal American AeroSpace; c, we are
told there is no market for the sky hook among our classical NEMECO product lines."
"Bill!  You  can't!  NEMECO  can't!"  I  was  on  my  feet  again.  "We've  got  a  working  device  that
propelled a twenty-ton airplane through the air at more than two hundred miles per hour . . . and it's just
a lash-up prototype!. That airplane with the sky hook in it can go higher than it should be able to by all
the rules of flight! It can go into orbit! Give us a week, and we will be in orbit with it!"
"And we'll be facing potential litigation from Univer-sal American AeroSpace for patent  infringement
when their patents issue," Osbourne pointed out.
"To hell with patent rights and infringements and in-terferences! We can prove we did it first! We've
got the data right here! NEMECO can have the Moon, it can have Mars, it can  have the whole Solar
System! We're giving up the stars to one  of the classical government-supported  aerospace  companies
without a fight? We're going to let them diddle around, get it classified, keep researching it, and maybe
utilize it twenty-five years from now?"
I leaned over Len's conference table toward Bill Os-bourne. "Bill, an airplane with NEMECO painted
on its side can be in Earth orbit next week. Let me do it, and then the lawyers can fight about it later. But
let's do it!"
"I wish it were  that simple," Osbourne  said  deject-edly.  "But I've  been  given a  direct  order  by my
boss and by the president of this company. If I disobey or ignore it, I'll lose my job, we'll lose this lab,
and all of you will lose your jobs, too. Then everything is down the tubes."
Len sighed. "Well, Bill, we could always go to work for Universal American  AeroSpace  after
we did it . . ."
"Not if we disobeyed management orders at NEMECO," Bill warned. "No corporation will take the
risk of hiring a person who's done that once, because if he did it once, he's capable of doing it again."
"Me work for that outfit?" I put in. "Not on a bet, whether they'd have me or not! I flew one of their
ag planes once . . .  for twenty minutes until it started to fall apart when I pulled up at the end of the field!
Bill knows what they'll do with the sky hook. Len, you know what they'll do with the sky hook! And I
know what they'll do with the sky hook. I won't sit around on my ass  for twenty years  collecting their
paychecks and letting the sky hook molder in their so-called develop-ment group!"

"You're right, Mike. That's exactly what would hap-pen," Len Marshall said.
At that point, Victor Aboud walked in.
When Bill told him, Vic just shrugged his shoulders.
I had expected an explosion.
"Vic, tell me something, and tell me the truth," Bill Osbourne asked him. "Did you sell out to Universal
American  AeroSpace?  Or  to  anybody  who  might  have  given  the  data  to  Universal  American
AeroSpace?"
"Why should I?" Aboud said with another shrug. "What would I have gained? You know  that  I can
quit right now, walk out of here, and still have enough money every month to spend a hundred bucks a
night on a  fancy Park  Avenue call girl with a  couple  of thou left over  to  play with.  I  was  doing  this
because it was fun!"
"Then why are you shrugging your shoulders and writing the whole thing off?" Len wanted to know.
"Because what else can I do? This isn't the end of the world. In my country, if you manage to hold on
to what you've got for more than one generation without somebody taking it away from you, you're rich
and re-spected! For centuries,  we've  had  armies come  through every  few years,  looting everything in
sight and leaving us to build it all up again so that we could enjoy it for a little while before another army
came through or some dictator took over in a coup. This sort of thing has happened to my ancestors so
many times that what can I do but shrug my shoulders, pick up what I can, and go on from here?"  He
got up and started for the door. "You aren't going to get any work done around here today. And neither
am I. I'll be in New York at Jan's place. Ruth has the number." And he left.
"Maybe he's got the right idea after all," Bill Osbourne observed.
"The hell he has!" I exploded.  "His people  may own half the oil in the world,  but  it  just  lay  there
beneath them for centuries until somebody risked everything and started pumping it out of the ground!"
"So what are you going to do?" Len Marshall wanted to know.
"I may go out and get a little time in a DC-4."
"You're not going anywhere  in  a  DC-4,"  Osbourne  told  me.  "Jake  Stock  has  been  told  already.
Wimpy has the airplane locked up. Their instructions are to  let Tom, Carl,  and  Mac  in to  remove  the
equipment. Sorry, but it wasn't my decision, and I didn't give those orders. Halden is simply protecting
this company against the very real possibility of a future patent infringement suit for what we've already
managed to do!"  Osbourne  looked  completely defeated,  his confidence  gone,  his enthusiasm sapped,
and his effectiveness as a leader of a research team completely destroyed for some time to come. "Let
me repeat the orders I was given: NEMECO is no longer interested  in pursuing the dynamics systems
program or  the  sky  hook  development.  We  are  to  cancel  the  program  immediately.  The  sky  hook
equipment is to be disposed of as surplus equipment. No further funds are authorized or will be spent on
the  dynamics  systems  or  sky  hook  program.  The  techni-cians'  time  removing  the  equipment  from
Seven-Eleven is to be charged off against G&A. Understand, Len?"
"Yes, sir."
"Understand, Mike?"
I sighed and nodded.
"Len, call Tammy in and tell her. It would probably help if you were here, too, Mike."
"Len," I broke  in, "let me tell her.  This is likely to  cause  her  to  come  all  unglued  just  when  she's
beginning to put herself back together again. But you'd better fig-ure that we're going to take the rest of
the day off. I'm still beat from yesterday."
I wasn't as beat as I looked. But I knew  it would do  no more  good  to  sit around  Len's  office and

commiser-ate.
I had roughly formulated two plans of action  in my mind, Plan A and  Plan B,  because  of what Bill
Osbourne had just said. If the first one wouldn't work, the second one  would.  I was  damned  if I was
going to stand idly by and  let the stars  get away  from me for the sec-ond  time in less  than a  year!  I
needed some help on Plan A. If Plan A didn't work, I'd fall back on Plan B. But I couldn't discuss either
plan with Osbourne or Len. If I failed, it had to be my ass in the sling, not theirs. In the meantime, I had
to hold off the jackals.
I didn't go see Tammy first. I found Carl and ex-plained to him what had happened. He didn't believe
it at first, either. I told him, "Carl, when you take those electronics out of Seven-Eleven, for God's sake
don't sell them to the junk yard down the street or bust them up!  Bust something else  up instead,  and
stick that good stuff quietly away up in the storage space above the of-fices. Don't tell anybody about it.
We're going to need that gear again. It's now officially surplus,  unwanted,  unneeded,  and  unaccounted
for. Do you get my drift?"
Carl didn't really understand what or why, but he said, "Hell, Mike, whatever you want, you've got!"
"I can count on you?"
"You bet! I think we've been screwed!"
"Right to  the  wall,  buddy!  What  have  you  done  with  the  experimental  sky  hook  that  was  in  the
dynamics lab?"
"I took it down and stole some parts off it for the DC-4 unit."
"Okay, we haven't been told to destroy it. Put it back in working shape, then hide it. We're going to
need it too."
Then I went to see Tammy. "Come on, hon. We've got to get out to the airport."
"Mike, what's wrong?" Tammy had spotted some-thing in the way I looked or my tone of voice.
"Grab your coat. It's cold out today."
I didn't stop at the turnoff for the NEMECO hangar but kept on driving out to Lordship Point.
"Why are we going this way?" Tammy wanted to know, "We passed the NEMECO hangar."
"I know. But we've got to talk." I pulled the Bug up next to the breakwater overlooking the Sound.
"About what?"
"About us."
"What's happened, Mike? You look like the world just caved in on you."
"It did. I told Bill Osbourne and Len Marshall that I'd like to tell you, but you've got to  promise  me
some-thing . . ."
"Anything, Mike."
"Promise me that you're not going to come apart, be-cause what happened had absolutely nothing to
do with what we did."
"What happened in Len's office this morning, Mike?"
"You knew about the meeting?"
"Everybody in the lab did. What was it about?"
"Halden and Newcomb told Bill to cancel all work on the sky hook project immediately."
She just looked at me without saying a word.
"Aren't you going to ask why?"

She tried to say something but couldn't.
"I'll tell you, then. Universal American AeroSpace filed patent applications on a sky hook before we
did. NEMECO's in interference and facing a possible in-fringement suit if and when the patents issue to
Uni-versal American AeroSpace."
I can't  describe  Tammy's expression.  It  seemed  to  be  a  combination of extreme  distress,  disbelief,
physical shock, and grief. "No!" she moaned. "Oh, no!"
"The reason I came out here today was to get my Cherokee out of the NEMECO hangar . . ."
"Mike, did they fire you? Did anybody lose their jobs?"
"Not yet. But Halden has ordered Jake Stock and Wimpy to lock up Seven-Eleven and only let Carl,
Tom, and Mac inside to remove the sky hook equip-ment. I want to get my Cherokee out of there . . .
right now!"
"What's going to happen at the lab?"
"I  don't  know.  We  still  have  other  projects.  But  Osbourne  looks  and  acts  like  a  defeated  man.
Newcomb's suffered a serious set-back over this. So has Halden. We've lost a very important round. I
think we're all right unless and until something changes in corporate  headquarters  .  .  .  although I don't
know how effective Bill Osbourne will be from now on."
She huddled  into the fur collar of her cloth coat  and  stared  out  at  the  gray  waters  of  the  Sound.
Suddenly, she looked small and vulnerable and frightened. I didn't like to see her that way. I liked her the
way she was yesterday, clad in a dirty orange coverall that was much too big for her and rolled up at the
sleeves and ankles, confident, professional,  cool  even when scared,  and  absolutely unflappable during
the single-engine let-down and landing.
"Len was going to tell you, but I persuaded him to let me do it," I went on. "NEMECO doesn't  feel
they can afford to fight Universal American AeroSpace over the patent thing, and they fell back on the
Sanatella mar-keting report. Halden had no choice. So You-Ass—as Universal American AeroSpace is
unaffectionately  known  in  the  aviation  field—is  probably  going  to  sit  on  the  sky  hook  for  at  least
seventeen years until the patent rights expire." I reached over and took her hand in both of mine. It was
cold.
In a very small and vulnerable voice, Tammy asked, "How did Universal American AeroSpace do it?
Was it a duplicate research effort as Dr. Mayan suspected might happen?"
"No, You-Ass stole it from us. Bill was told to find the industrial spy who leaked the data. It  wasn't
Peter Wilding, and it wasn't Mac Roston, because Len knows what Mac took . . ."
"Mac was an agent?" she asked in disbelief.
"That's what I'm told. Osbourne  thought it might have been  me because  the dates  on the You-Ass
appli-cations  coincided  with my employment at  NEMEOO.  But  Len  checked  me  out  independently
because he thought I was an industrial spy. And Vic just doesn't  fit the bill at  all. So  Osbourne  is still
looking for the leak . . ."
Tammy  looked  over  at  me.  Tears  were  streaming  down  her  cheeks  and  her  beautiful  face  was
screwed into an expression of extreme grief. "Mike! Oh, Mike! I kept telling you there were . . . things
you didn't know! But I had to do it! I had no alternative .  .  .  and  I didn't  know  where  the data  were
going . . ."
"Tammy, what are you saying?"
"Mike, I'm your spy!  My uncle in New  Jersey  isn't  my  uncle.  He's  the  head  of  a  large  industrial
espionage group . . ."
It was  a  long  and  tearful  confession,  and  I  had  trou-ble  believing  most  of  it.  I  knew  there  were

international  espionage  organizations,  but  this  wasn't  one  of  them.  Its  business  was  sometimes
international, but most of its clients were within the United States. Tammy admitted it all to me between
sobs that racked her small body bundled in her bulky cloth coat.
She had  fed them all the sky  hook  data  on her trips  to  New  Jersey.  But she  was  certain  that  the
information had gone to Universal American AeroSpace  because  of remarks  that  had  slipped  into the
conversations with her "uncle."
"I didn't believe . . .  I can't believe . . . that this is the outcome!" she sobbed. "The people at the lab
are the best friends . . .  the only real friends . . . I've ever had . . .  I didn't mean to hurt them . . . And I
didn't mean for them to hurt you, Mike . . ."
"Those two goons in the parking lot?"
"I found out later  after  .  .  .  after  I had  learned  to  care  a  great  deal  for you .  .  .  which  I  was  not
sup-posed to do! They wanted you because you knew more about it than I could tell them."
"They would have had one hell of a time making me talk . . ."
"Oh, no, Mike! Within minutes, you would have been so full of psychodrugs that you wouldn't know
where you were or what you were doing. They would've drained you dry! I've seen them do it to others
. . .  If  you  were  lucky  and  if  they'd  gotten  what  they  wanted  quickly  and  easily,  you  would  have
probably come to in some back alley somewhere  with little knowledge  of what had  happened  to  you
. . .  if you were lucky. They destroy people . . .  I hated them . . . I hated them!"
"Then why did you do this, Tammy?"
"Because I had to . . ."
"Did they pay you well?"
"No. I didn't get paid."
"What have they got hanging over your head, Tam?"
"I'm an illegal alien, Mike."
"You're what?'
"I was an English translator with a trade mission . . . and I just walked away in New York City one
day. But somehow, the espionage organization found where I was. They track defectors like me and use
us. I think the trade delegation passed the word to them to watch  for me .  .  .  and  they eventually
found me . . ."
"But you could have requested political asylum!" I pointed out.
"You don't understand. How could you understand? My father, my mother, my brothers . . . They're
still over there. If I asked for asylum, they would become unpersons. They would never starve, but they
would never be able to lead even the normal lives of people  over  there.  If I just disappeared  into the
crowds here in America, it could be considered that I'd been mugged, raped, and murdered. The police
here aren't  as  thorough as  they are  there,  and  America is considered  a  very  dangerous  place  full  of
criminals. At least, it is a convenient excuse to use when someone like me disap-pears. They don't have
to make retribution back home, and they've got a piece of good propaganda for domes-tic use. So here
I am. Every paper I have is forged, obtained for me by my 'uncle,' who has the option of informing your
immigration authorities about me or re-porting back that I secretly sought political asylum here to protect
my family."
This was the side of Tammy Dudley that I had nei-ther known nor suspected.  How  could  she  have
told me? How could she have broken through the wall of guilt and fear that surrounded her life?
Strangely, even though she was the person who was responsible for losing my chance at the stars, it
did not change my feelings toward her. Now I knew. So  what?  The important thing was  to  figure out

where the two of us could go from here.
Gently, I told her, "Tammy, all of those  documents  cannot  be  forged.  You couldn't  have flown that
DC-4 the way you did yesterday. You couldn't have handled my Cherokee like a real pro if that FAA
license had been forged . . ."
"It's forged," she admitted. "The DC-3 heavy time was logged in an exact copy of it the Soviets  call
the  Li-2.  I  learned  English  because  it's  required  for  both  air  force  and  state  airline  pilots.  I  was
transferred  to  the trade  commission because  I was  a  better  pilot than most of the  men  . . .  so  don't
believe all they tell you about female equality over there." She didn't say anything for a time, and we both
watched the dull gray rollers wash up the sides of the breakwater at Lordship Point. Fi-nally, she broke
the silence with, "Well, Mike, shall we get back to the lab so you can  report  me, or  do  you intend to
drive right over to the Federal Office Build-ing?"
At that moment, I discovered for the first time in my life what "love" really was.  The happiness,  the
well-being, and the security of Tammy Dudley was abso-lutely  essential to  me over  everything else.  It
was not that I couldn't go on without her; it was that I would not! My whole life changed.
"Neither!" I said without hesitation. "It doesn't make any difference anyway! We're going to  get our
Cherokee out of the NEMECO hangar and put it in our hangar, probably up at Waterbury, Meriden, or
some other airport that is out of the way. We've got some things to  do  with that  bird  .  .  .  and  I have
al-ready taken care of most of the necessary arrange-ments. Tammy, my dearest, I am basically mean
and nasty, and I fight dirty. I'm not going to roll over and play dead for a bunch of corporate politicians.
I'm go-ing to do the one thing they dread most. Correction: We're going to do it!"
I reached down through the fur of her collar that she had turned up and took that beautiful face in my
hands. "In the meantime, I also have a solution to your prob-lem, and we'll do that right away. It will not
only make it difficult for the federal immigration service to do any-thing to you, but it may also get your
spy organization off your back."
"What do you mean, Mike?"
I kissed her tear-stained face. "Tammy, my love, you are about to marry an American citizen, and by
the time the lawyers and the bureaucrats and the politicians get it all figured out, it will be too late . . .  if
they can figure it out at  all! The Cherokee  will get us to  Provi-dence  in less  than an hour.  Under  the
circumstances, ' 'twere well it were done quickly,' as Shakespeare said. We're going to  act  faster  than
they can move to stop us!"
Tammy  managed  a  wan  smile.  "Mike!  Dear  Mike!  Why  Providence?  Why  not  just  go  to  the
Bridgeport City Hall?"
"Because in Rhode  Island,  there's  no waiting period!  Don't  you  think  I  have  been  checking  these
things out, Tammy?"
"I . . .  I didn't think that this could ever happen to me . . ."
"What's that, hon?"
"I shouldn't tell you, but I must. I have to. I can't keep it bottled up. You did turn me on that first night
after you beat off those  goons  of my 'uncle.'  But after-wards,  I was  operating  under  instructions .  .  .
includ-ing the afternoon in Morse Manor when I wore that sexy little piece of lace . .  .  But, Mike,  my
dearest, you started to do more than just turn me on, and you started to become something more  than
another job I had to  do  for my 'uncle'  . . .  I love you,  Mike!  We were instructed to never let it
happen . . . but it happened to me. Mike, I'll marry you forever and ever with all the love I've got, but
you must forgive me for what I did . . ."
"For what you did? Tammy, do you know how it makes me feel to be treated as a cold business deal
at the start and be able to change that into real affection? Dearest, you don't know what a  compliment

that is to me! And what difference does it make now? You have absolutely nothing to be ashamed of,
and I'm going to fix things up so that you will never be afraid of anybody for anything again!"
"Mike, how did I ever manage to find you?"
"Maybe someday we'll have time enough to find the answer."
I never really liked a VW Bug: the front seats  are  bucket  seats  with a  brake  lever and  a  gear  shift
be-tween. I made up my mind that after I had arranged for a wife here, I would also arrange for a good
old Ford or Chevy with a bench seat in front and the gear shift on the steering column where it belongs.
That sort of thing makes for easier closeness . . .

Chapter Eighteen
We signed our names in a full round hand in the book in the Township of Warwick, County of Kent,
State  of Rhode  Island.  I wanted  it to  be  as  public  as  possible.  I  wanted  to  be  sure  that  numerous
skeptical clerks and the judge who performed the civil ceremony had seen all the documents—driver's
licenses, Social Security cards, pilot's licenses, and all the assorted ID's—and had acted on the basis of
their authenticity. I wanted to leave a trail as broad and conspicuous as the Connecticut  Turnpike.  We
checked in for our honey-moon night in the Sheraton Motor Inn in Warwick where I paid for everything
with American Express so that there would be record of our stay.
We called Bill Osbourne from the motel room, told him where we were and that we had been married
that afternoon. He managed to convey his congratulations and wishes for future happiness. I told him we
would be in the lab late tomorrow. "No, take a couple days, if you want. You deserve it."
We  took  a  whole  week.  I  knew  that  Tammy  required  it.  I  didn't  think  I  did,  but  I  discovered
otherwise. It had been months of very hard work.
The  colors  were  long  gone,  and  the  barren  shades  of  gray  that  characterize  the  New  England
countryside with the coming of winter did not provide the most spectacular of sights. But we took a little
aerial jaunt around New England anyway. Everywhere we landed  and  refueled,  I paid  with a  gasoline
credit card so there would be a record.
And I found that the name of my Cherokee was very apropos. It does take two.
I didn't give Tammy time to crawl back into her shell of suspicion, fear, guilt, and anxiety. I don't know
whether her former husband  was  an American pilot or  not,  but he had  mistreated  her.  I gave her no
reason to fear our  relationship, and  she  responded  with a  growing eagerness  and  aggression  that  had
only briefly and halt-ingly surfaced on a few occasions before.
Knowing what I did, I realized why she always seemed to dress  in severe  clothing without color  or
style. Well, any bride should have a proper trousseau, and we'd left Bridgeport in Two To Tango with
nothing  but  the  clothes  on  our  backs.  So  I  bought  her  clothes  that  began  to  bring  out  the  bright,
intelligent, happy person that she had become.
In a little colonial inn near Lebanon, New Hamp-shire, I explained to Tammy what we were going to
do.
"We have to do it! We can't stand by and do noth-ing!" She had some excellent suggestions to add.
What would a couple of scientist-types do on their honeymoon? Buy a new programmable calculator
and spend hours working over complex equations! Actually, we did more than that, but that is nobody's
business but our own.
There was a big celebration when we got back. They needed something to celebrate.
"Damn it, Mike, you didn't give me the chance to give you a proper bachelor's party!" Vic bubbled,
slap-ping me on the shoulder. "We went ahead anyway with the dancing girls and all the rest . . ."
"Initiate any new carpets in the process?"
Ruth  was  lovely.  "Now,  Mike,  I  see  no  reason  for  you  and  Tammy  to  look  for  an  apartment
somewhere else. I have room at the house to give you plenty of privacy. And I'm not a prude."
"You never were," I reminded her.
The gaiety did not last.  We  had  to  face  the NE-MECO  Corporate  Research  Center  Laboratories

with-out the sky hook and with a badly demoralized Bill Osbourne. I went to work on the superbattery
develop-ment  project,  to  which  Carl  was  also  reassigned.  Tom,  the  little  technician  who  had  been
working on it with Len, was moved over to the shot-alloying process full-time.
The superbattery program didn't excite me but it kept me at NEMECO Corporate Research Center
Lab-oratories with facilities that I could use, a paycheck coming in regularly, and everyday contact with
my col-leagues. Plan A required co-conspirators, and I re-cruited them using the best covert techniques.
They in-cluded Tammy, Carl, Wendell, Wimpy, Mayan, and Korsinski.
It was a big risk, and some of us could  lose  our  jobs  because  of it. But all of us felt very strongly
about the sky hook.
It didn't bother Carl. "A good electronic technician can always find a job."
Wendell approached it with his usual dry rationality: "Damned shame that the company won't fight for
the inventive rights of its employees. I'm an engineer; there's always work for an engineer to  do  in this
world."
In Mayan's case, it was a political disaster  of the highest sort  that  he wouldn't  let anyone get away
with.  And  Korsinski  was  disturbed  over  the  possibility  that  the  sky  hook  work  would  never  be
published. "I was once told by a colleague that he hoped Bill's Academy paper was never published. I
do not like people who do not play by the rules."
Wimpy Winfield's approach  was  different. "Mike, you gotta  have a  good  A&P  besides  yourself. I
know Cherokees.  I want to  tag along so  you don't  kill your-self.  What  I do  in my spare  time is  my
business; I didn't have to sign that yellow-dog disclosure agreement be-cause I'm just a mechanic in this
outfit."
Carl and Wendell got the equipment out of the lab in dribs and drabs. Len never knew that Carl had
squir-reled it away anyway. Bill Osbourne didn't know, and Vic never noticed. That was good because I
didn't want to implicate them.
There were two tough problems. One of them was checking the calculations for Two To Tango. The
other was getting the superbatteries out without leaving evi-dence that they were gone. So we used the
old trick of putting something in place of each superbattery as we removed it. If Len had asked  for an
inventory audit, it would have shown up immediately. But Len never asked for such things.
We didn't need many superbatteries to power the old laboratory sky hook that we installed in Two To
Tango at Waterbury.
We had to move as fast as possible, but we could work only on weekends  and  an occasional  night
when the weather wasn't too bad. When it snowed,  we  didn't  want to  be  stranded  in Waterbury  and
have to call in from there to the lab.
It gets cold inland away from the water of the Sound! We rigged infrared lamps in the Tee-hangar, but
that uninsulated steel building wouldn't hold the heat. It was the longest, coldest winter of my life. I may
have been frustrated by the cancellation of the sky hook project, but we were well along with Plan A.
"Honey, don't  you think you'd  better  make  contact  with your 'uncle'  pretty  quick?"  I  happened  to
mention one day as  we  were  driving up to  Waterbury.  "Won't  they think something's wrong if you're
silent this long?"
"No," she said quietly. Then she turned to me and smiled. "They got what they wanted. An agent can't
be used constantly because they burn out or lose their cover . . ."
"You've certainly lost yours!"
"Yes, dear, but only with you!"
"So what do you think we should do if you get an-other call?"

"I won't," she said with a smile that radiated her aura throughout the Chevy El Camino.
By mid-February,  Plan  A  was  almost  ready  to  go.  Thank  God  for  Wendell  Stone!  He  came  to
understand aircraft technology very well and  worked  out so  many shortcuts  that  I lost track  of all his
contributions. With Wimpy's help, Wendell became a passable A&P. Wimpy tried to talk him into going
for an A&P  rating, but  Wendell  declined,  saying  he  was  an  engineer  and  didn't  need  to  become  a
mechanic.
"And you'll never get me up in one of those things," he added.
"That's what the caterpillar said when he saw the butterfly fly over," Wimpy told him.
Together, we managed to strip everything out of the Cherokee that wasn't required. We left the cabin
insula-tion in place; it didn't weigh very much, and we'd need some insulation. The back seats came out,
as did the platform on which they were normally bolted. The bag-gage compartment floor came out. We
removed the aft cabin bulkhead;  that made  it easier  to  install equipment.  I took  the oil cooler  off the
engine; it was too cold to require it, and the engine would be frozen solid halfway into the flight anyway.
We  even  ditched  the  ash  tray  and  the  cigarette  lighter,  causing  Wendell  to  exclaim,  "Why,  that's
downright un-American!"
We scheduled a go-date, and I called Ted Mayan.
We planned the flight for a Sunday morning so that we wouldn't be absent from work.  The weather
was perfect: sky overcast, ceiling 2,000 feet,  three  middle-level cloud  decks  above  that,  thin cirrus at
30,000 feet. The runway temperature was a chilly 12 degrees Fahr-enheit, and it was damp. The wind
was light and vari-able.
The briefer on the phone at Windsor Locks Flight Service Station was rather surprised when I asked
for the winds at 24,000, 30,000, and 36,000 feet. The jet stream was north of us that day, and winds at
those alti-tudes were  less than 70  knots.  I filed an instrument flight plan for a  "PA-28  Cherokee"—a
designation that covers more than a dozen models of the basic air-plane—at Flight Level two two zero,
test flight at ex-treme altitudes. I got an IFR clearance, but not my re-quested routing. That didn't make
any difference. I expected that. It was Sunday, and the airspace was busy.
That meant everything we did in the air was going to be on the FAA  voice tapes  and  the computer
records  of  their  radar  scans.  And  we  had  an  academic  observer  on  hand  whose  reputation  was
unblemished and unassail-able.
Tammy and I bundled up. We couldn't afford the en-ergy  for heated  flying suits. We  needed  every
kilowatt-hour for the sky hook. We finally crawled into the cabin of Two  To  Tango  and squeezed  in
next to the sky hook bolted lengthwise through the cabin and attached firmly to the main wing spar that
went right behind both front seats. We closed the door and latched it. Wendell and Carl rolled back the
Tee-hangar doors and pushed Two To Tango clear of the hangar.
Wimpy had preheated the engine in the hangar so that we would not have to waste a moment of time
from start-up  to  takeoff.  "Clear  prop!"  I yelled, quickly shut the storm  window,  and  cranked  up  the
Lycoming.
"You've got vacuum! You've got alternator!" Tammy called out.
"And I've got fuel pressure and oil pressure. Radios on!"
We taxied immediately to Runway 36 through the slush. I tried to go slowly to  keep  from splashing
slush up under  the wings where  it would freeze  and  create  additional drag.  We  made  a  quick  engine
check  at  the end  of the runway, ran through the instrument panel,  gave a  takeoff  call on  the  unicorn
frequency—one rea-son we had chosen Waterbury-Oxford was the absence of a  control  tower—and
taxied out on the runway.
I was glad it was cold because it made the air denser. We must have used nearly 4,000 feet  of that

runway, and Two To Tango literally crawled into the air.
"Off at three five past the hour!" Tammy sang out.
"What did you figure this plane weighs?"
"Twenty-five hundred and ten pounds."
"A little over maximum permissible gross, wouldn't you say?" I asked as I struggled to maintain a climb
at 85 miles per hour.
"It's flying, isn't it, dear?" Tammy replied.
"Barely! Westchester Approach, Cherokee one four two two tango  with you out of fifteen hundred
feet, off Waterbury at three five!"
"Cherokee two two Tango, Westchester. You're still too low for my radar. Climb on course. Report
Pawl-ing."
We went into the overcast at 2,000 feet, and I flew the gauges while Tammy set radios. "Plan A Base,
Plan A Bird with you!" she called to Carl and Wendell on the aeronautical multicom frequency.
"Plan A Bird, where are you?"
"Somewhere over  Planet  Earth!"  Tammy  shot  back.  "We're  climbing  in  the  clouds.  Stand  by  the
frequency for reports."
Westchester Approach handed us off to Boston Cen-ter,  who got us in radar  contact,  asked  us to
verify alti-tude, and requested better rate of climb. "Negative on climb rate," I told them. "We're loaded,
and this is a test flight to maximum altitude."
They were peeved, but we were the ones with our tails in the clouds.
Tammy made regular reports to the ground crew at Waterbury.
The climb rate improved slowly as Two To Tango burned off fuel. At 12,500 feet, both Tammy and I
donned the oxygen masks that I had bought, a standard full-flow system with a  50-cubic-foot  cylinder
that would give us both about five and a half hours of oxy-gen.
At 17,250 feet, I couldn't get another foot of altitude out of the overloaded Two To Tango.
"Let's get the drive on, Tam. We've been cleared to twenty-two thousand, so we've got to have some
push. You take it. I'll get things cranking."
We were about 2,000  feet  below  the altitude that  had  been  calculated  for starting drive operation.
And  I  had  some  brief  problems,  as  usual,  phasing  the  unit.  But  they  weren't  as  bad  as  with
Seven-Eleven.
We leveled at 22,000 feet, and the Lycoming was gasping. Had it not been for the thrust of the sky
hook unit maintaining about  90  miles per  hour indicated  air-speed  and  creating some  breeze  past  the
prop, I am sure the engine would have stopped from sheer  lack  of oxy-gen.  I reported  level at  Flight
Level two two zero, and Tammy reported conditions to the crew at Waterbury. Then I requested Flight
Level three two zero from Cen-ter.
"Uh, what model Cherokee are you?" Center wanted to know.
"One-eighty with special power mod," I told them. "We're going for maximum altitude test."
"Okay, Cherokee two two Tango is cleared to  Flight Level three  two  zero.  Report  reaching . . .  if
you do."
"Two two Tango out of Flight Level two two zero for three two zero."
I reached  down  and  turned  off the Lycoming's igni-tion. There  would be  little  chance  of  getting  it
started again on this flight. The outside air temperature was al-ready minus-40 degrees Fahrenheit.

"Plan A Base, this is Plan A Bird. Main shutdown at twenty-two  on schedule.  Running on stand-by
unit now," Tammy reported to Waterbury.
Without the engine, we lost our cabin heater and the vacuum pump that  drove  the attitude  indicator
and the directional gyro. "Sweetie," I told Tammy, "you're going to have to operate  the drive unit. I've
got my hands  full flying partial panel." It's  possible  to  fly an airplane under  instrument conditions with
nothing  but  the  turn-and-bank  indicator  which  is  electrically  driven,  the  magnetic  compass,  and  the
airspeed indicator— "partial panel."
We made 32,000 feet, but the windows were so fogged and frozen up with the condensed moisture
ex-haled from our oxygen masks that I couldn't see any-thing. It  was  strictly full gut-tearing instrument
work on a partial panel.
There we were,  higher than any Cherokee  had  ever  been  before,  and  we  couldn't  see  anything! It
must have been beautiful out there.
"Plan A Base,  this is Plan A Bird,  level at  thirty-two,  getting ready  to  go up to  thirty-six," Tammy
reported. "We have seventy percent power left, but the windows are frosted up and we can't see. We're
operating partial panel under full instrument conditions."
"Okay, Plan A Bird. I'm glad we stayed on the ground!"
"Center, Cherokee two two Tango requests Flight Level three six zero."
Boston Center came back at me with, "Please say again. Did you request Flight Level three six zero?"
"Affirmative!"
"And you're a Cherokee One-eighty?"
"Affirmative."
"Can you estimate time to climb to Flight Level three six zero? We have considerable jet traffic at that
flight level. We've got to fit you in."
"We can make four hundred feet per minute, Cen-ter."
"What have you got in that thing?"
"Special power mod."
"Center clears Cherokee two two Tango to Flight Level three six zero. Report reaching!"
"Two two  Tango  leaving  Flight  Level  three  zero  zero  for  Flight  Level  three  six  zero.  Will  report
reach-ing."
I remarked through my oxygen mask to  Tammy, "I'll bet  half the supervisors  at  Center  are  hanging
over the controller's shoulder not believing their own equip-ment!" As required, Two  To  Tango  had a
unit capable of responding to a radar pulse from the ground with a coded reply giving our identification
as well as our alti-tude.
I could see the twinkle in her eyes over the top edge of the oxygen mask.  She  just nodded.  It  was
difficult to talk with the oxygen masks on.
"How's power?"
"Sixty-two percent."
So we went up another 6,000 feet into the tropopause, a place where Bill Piper and Fred Weick had
never guessed that one of their Cherokees would ever fly. But we were flying . . . right on the edge of a
stall, but with sky hook power to spare.
Two To Tango could have gone higher, but we  wouldn't  be  able  to  avoid  hypoxia, even breathing
100 percent oxygen. We needed a system that would force oxygen into our lungs under pressure at any

higher alti-tude.
"Center, Cherokee two two Tango, reporting Flight Level three six zero!"
"Jet traffic six o'clock, ten miles, will overtake you on the right, an American 727."
"Roger. He's in our blind spot."
"American Flight Six Nineteen,  traffic twelve o'clock,  now nine miles, same  direction,  Cherokee  at
Flight Level three six zero."
"Center,  American  Six  Nineteen."  Another  drawl  came  from  the  cabin  loudspeaker.  "Say  again
please. A Cherokee at this flight level?"
"Affirmative! Now twelve o'clock, five miles."
"Center, tally-ho! American Six Nineteen has the traffic. All three of us on the flight deck see it! To be
honest, I don't believe it! We're right under him now, and his prop is stopped dead!"
"American Six Nineteen, Center. Say again!"
"American Six Nineteen just went past that Chero-kee. His prop is stopped dead and he's maintaining
alti-tude."
"Affirmative,  we  show  him  maintaining  altitude,  Six  Nineteen.  Thank  you  for  the  information.
Cherokee two two Tango, Center. Confirm your engine is inopera-tive."
"Center,  two  two  Tango.  Our  normal engine is shut down,  but our  auxiliary test  propulsion  unit  is
function-ing normally. We're maintaining assigned altitude and eighty knots I-A-S!" I told them, glancing
at the airspeed indicator.
"Are you in any trouble?"
"Center, two two Tango, negative! We're proceeding according to flight plan."
"Uh . . . Ah, roger, two two Tango." It was a con-fused tone from the air traffic controller sitting in his
warm and comfortable darkened room in Boston.
We were getting very cold.
"Forty percent on power reserves," Tammy informed me.
I made my south turn over the Albany VOR. "Okay, let's go down."
"Yes, please! I'm beginning to freeze to death!"
"Center, two two Tango has completed flight test at altitude, request descent to eighteen thousand."
"Two two  Tango,  descend  at  pilot's  discretion,  main-tain  one  eight  thousand.  Contact  New  York
Center on frequency one three one point five."
That was a special Center frequency, and I knew I was going to be talking to some high brass there.
"Plan A Base, Plan A Bird descending blind out of thirty-six, and New York Center wants to talk to
us on their special frequency. We're cold and the windows are getting worse. We can't see a thing!"
"New York Center, Cherokee two two Tango with you on one three one point five!"
"Two two Tango, this is New York Center. Please confirm you're on IFR flight plan for a test!"
"Affirmative, sir, flight plan filed through Windsor Locks, clearance received and  acknowledged  two
hours ago."
"Two two Tango, just curious, but you were a little high for a Cherokee! Care to tell us what's running
that airplane?"
"Negative! Proprietary information. Sorry, Center!"

"Roger, two two Tango. We had a telephone call from an upstate newspaper who was monitoring the
frequency, plus a report from an American Airlines jet  westbound  out of Boston.  Couple  of reporters
are here now wanting to know what kind of UFO you're flying."
I took a deep breath of 100 percent oxygen, then re-plied, "Center, this flight crew is not authorized
to make  statements  to  the press.  Contact  Grant  Halden,  president  of  New  England  Mill  Equipment
Company in Bridgeport."
"Roger, thanks much. Safe flight, two two Tango. Looks like you've got some sort of altitude record
there. Contact Westchester Approach frequency one two zero point seven."
"Two two Tango to one two zero point seven."
"Plan A Base, this is Plan A Bird descending through twenty thousand. We made thirty-six."
Westchester cleared us down to 4,000 feet and the ILS Runway Three Six approach to Waterbury,
cross-ing the outer marker radio beacon southbound at 4,000 feet.
"We gonna make it?" I asked Tammy as I shucked off my mask at 12,000 feet. It was frozen to my
face, and it hurt when I pulled it off.
"We've got slightly more than twenty percent. Can we get the engine started?"
"I'll try."
It was frozen solid.
"Mike, can you land if we don't clear the windows?"
"I doubt it."
"Let me try something I learned flying in a very cold part of the world," Tammy said. She took off her
heavy gloves and began to scratch away the frost with her fin-gernails.
Scratch and fly. Both of us kept at it until, at 5,000 feet, the temperature had warmed up to zero, and
there was a clear patch about a foot square that I could see through.
"I'll make it now. Thanks, hon."
Tammy was sucking on a finger. "Broke a nail."
"I'll buy you a new one," I promised her. A light flashed on the instrument panel and a series of long
beeps came over the cabin loudspeaker. "Almost home! There's the outer marker!"
I really didn't need the hole in the frost of the wind-shield until we were coming down  the ILS  glide
slope and I saw the runway at 1,500 feet. It was a lousy land-ing. I had to open the storm window to
see  to  turn  off  on  the  taxiway  and  head  for  the  Tee-hangar.  There  was  enough  power  left  in  the
batteries—about 7 percent—to use the sky hook to taxi to the Tee-hangar. That had been cutting it just
a little bit close!
It seemed so much warmer here!
Wendell, Wimpy, Mayan,  and  Carl  were  waiting  for  us.  We  were  extremely  cold.  And  Two  To
Tango  was frozen solid.  "Let's  get it started  and  moved  out of here!" I told  them. "Then we  can  go
somewhere and celebrate!"
"And get warm," Tammy added.
"I'll get you as warm as you want," I told her softly.
"I'll have this engine ready in less than five minutes," Wimpy said, moving quickly. "Wendell, hand me
those infrared lamps! Now put one here, and the other one there! I'll work on the other side. Carl, get
those pro-pane heater hoses jammed into the cowl openings up front!" Wimpy knew what he was doing.
True to his boast, he knew a lot about Cherokees!

"Did it go right?" Mayan wanted to know.
"Perfect. We got to thirty-six thousand feet and a Boeing 727 went past us, reporting to the FAA that
our prop was stopped!"
"Good! We couldn't ask for better confirmation!" Mayan said, overjoyed.
"It'll be on the FAA tapes, too!" Tammy added.
"Fine, but let's get moving!" I put in quickly. "We haven't got much time! The cops and reporters and
God knows who else will be here any moment. And Plan A doesn't call for us to be here when they get
here!"
We did it. Carl and Wendell had already cleaned up the hangar. We poured two five-gallon cans of
100-oc-tane  av-gas  into  Two  To  Tango's  tanks.  It  took  about  five  minutes  for  Wimpy  to  get  the
Lycoming thawed out. A little deicer fluid from the windshield washers on Wen-dell's van got the cabin
windows clear. And a battery jump from the van got the Lycoming started.
There was nothing to show we had been at Waterbury an hour after we landed. By that time we were
all over at  the Meriden  Airport  seventeen  miles to  the east  where  we  rolled Two  To  Tango  into the
hangar rented  in Mayan's  name. Only when we  knew  that  Two  To  Tango  was  locked  away  in  an
obscure Tee-hangar on an airfield smaller than Waterbury did we feel secure enough to head on down
the Wilbur Cross Parkway for a quiet celebration.
Plan A was well under way.

Chapter Nineteen
The next morning down at the lab, we waited for the other shoe to drop.
And nothing happened.
Tammy began to fret. She didn't like waiting for the other shoe to drop.
Wendell was  stoic  and  went  about  his  work  on  the  shot-alloying  process  as  though  nothing  had
happened.
Ruth knew that something was going on, but she kept quiet about it.
Len sensed  it, too,  and  it bothered  him. "I can't  reach  Bill on the phone.  He's  in a  meeting and  is
un-available. Ruth just got a call from Helen in the Front Office instructing Ruth to accept no telephone
calls ex-cept those that came in on the tie-line from corporate headquarters. But I can't get through to
corporate  headquarters  to  talk with Vic because  all six lines have been  jammed  all  morning  and  the
tie-line is busy or not working! What's going on?"
The other shoe was getting ready to drop! "Why don't we wait to see what happens? As  Vic said,"
and I shrugged as the mathematician had done months ago, "what else can we do?"
One of the most important aspects of Plan A was to let the pot come to a boil while we waited.
The very last thing that would help Destry,  Keller,  Sanatella,  and  those  involved  in  the  Corporate
Re-search  Hatchet  Job  was  public  disclosure,  exposure,  or  attention.  But  I  hated  having  Halden,
Newcomb, and Osbourne involved.
It was tough to wait. I wanted to run out and shout to the world that we had a new device that opened
the universe to mankind. But I couldn't.
The whole day went by. Nothing happened.
After work  at  Morse  Manor,  I sat  down  with the Bridgeport  Post  and looked  at  the  New  York
Stock Ex-change closings. NEMECO had risen 7 points to 34, but only 2,000 shares had been traded.
There  was  no  comment  about  this  stupendous  rise  in  the  closely  held  stock  of  a  medium-sized
corporation. But a 26 percent rise in a stock's price in one day was  certainly indicative that  something
was going on. I knew what it was. I had NEMECO stock  accumulating in my retirement plan,  plus  a
stock option to purchase at twenty-five!
We played  poker  at  Morse  Manor  that night. Wilding saw  that  I was  edgy  and  that  Tammy  was
upset. Carl, on the other hand, seemed to be talking it in stride. As a result, Wilding managed to take us
for a wad. So he knew that something was going on. He tried to probe it out of us, but we wouldn't talk.
With the way NEMECO stock was behaving, I didn't mind dropping a few quid at poker. All of us
were going to be even better off than Vic was.
If Plan A worked . . .
As for Plan B, I hoped that I'd never have to use it. I was in a fighting mood. Plan B was rough. But
Tammy would manage to come out all right. That I'd made cer-tain of!
Later that night, Tammy became almost hysterical with fear which she had kept under control all day
long. I held her tight while I tried to explain, "Tammy, it's going to be all right."
"Oh, Mike, they'll find us! They'll come after us!"

"There will be no midnight knock on the door. We don't do that here."
"I wish I could believe that, darling!"
"Look,  everything  we  did  on  the  flight  was  properly  carried  out  according  to  the  Federal  Air
Regulations. We don't have to worry about the government. It's strictly between us and our employer."
"But that can be just as bad . . ."
"No, because NEMECO is working very hard to try to keep what we've done out of the public eye.
They want it to be completely internal. If you become in-volved, you know there's a plan to protect you .
. ."
"Oh, I know about it. We've been over  it time after  time. But, Mike,  I'm still afraid of what 'uncle'
might do! You don't know those people! You have no idea how utterly evil they are! Or how violent!
They don't care a thing for a human life! They must also know what we did . . . and that makes you and
me very val-uable to them! I know what they would do to me, but I can't bear to think of what they'd do
to you!"
"They're not going to get the chance  to  do  anything  to either of us because  I'm not going to  let it
happen. They're vulnerable just like everyone and everything. Even the biggest person or organization in
the world has one  or  more  vulnerable  spots  .  .  .  and  that's  where to  hit them. As  for size, if
they're big, it just means that they move slower; they've got a longer reac-tion time. Sociological analogy
of the sky hook theory, Tammy."
"Mike, someday I may understand you . . . Why are you willing to stand and fight when the odds are
stacked so high against you?"
"Well, I can't  just shrug my shoulders  like Vic does.  I wasn't  brought  up that  way.  But I've  got  a
suggestion that may make you feel better . . ."
"What's that?"
"Sometimes I don't understand  you any better!  How  do  you feel about  some  mutual understanding
right about now?"
One thing about Tammy: I never had to wait at all for her to drop the other shoe!
But when the other shoe was not dropped by corpo-rate headquarters the following morning, I began
to get a bit worried.
It came  to  a  head  as  Tammy and  I  were  walking  back  from  getting  a  sandwich  at  the  deli.  The
classical long black car pulled up to the curb alongside us and two very big men jumped out.
Tammy screamed, "Mike! It's uncle!"
I was suddenly very busy. After I put the closest goon through the windshield, the fellow behind the
wheel tried to get out. I saw out of the corner of my eye as Tammy slammed the heavy door on both his
hands. The scream of agony told me Tammy had scored. I must have broken ten ribs in the second goon
when I kicked in his chest with both feet.
The whole thing lasted less than five seconds.
I picked myself up off the sidewalk, scuffed but un-hurt.
There was considerable blood . . . theirs. The guy who had  gone through the windshield was  badly
cut; I did something to ease the pain and to put him out for at least an hour. I performed the same Tae
Kwan Do pro-cedure on the man whose  hands  Tammy had  ruined. I didn't  know  whether  or  not I'd
killed the gorilla whose chest I'd kicked in; I didn't check to see whether or not he was breathing. I didn't
care.
Tammy looked like a cat who'd just fought and  won.  No  frightened, cowering,  fearful little girl she.

Some-thing had happened. "Mike, help me get his gun! He always carries one! I'll kill him! So help me,
I'll kill him right here and now while I've got the chance!"
I had to restrain the tigress my wife had become. "Tammy! No! There are other ways!"
Wendell, Len,  Mac,  and  Carl  were  running toward  us from the lab.  "We're  all  right!"  I  told  them
quickly. "Get the cops. Have them hold these three. I'm prefer-ring charges! Tammy and I will be up at
corporate headquarters."
"But they haven't called us yet!" Tammy pointed out.
"That part of Plan A is changed. We're going to drop the other shoe on them!"
We burst into the NEMECO lobby. The very effi-cient receptionist was still there, the same one who
had greeted me when I first walked through that door. "Hi, we're  the Calls from Corporate  Research.
Mr. Halden and Dr. Newcomb want to see us right away!"
The  receptionist  looked  surprised.  "They're  both  in  a  meeting  of  the  Board  of  Directors  in  the
conference room, and they didn't leave any message with me to . . ."
"Tell me," I asked her, "have they put all their mes-sages through you since yesterday morning?" She
was just as  confused  as  all the other  employees  about  all the things that  I knew  had  to  be  going  on
around  the Front  Office. "We know  where  the board  room  is. Don't  bother."  And before  she  could
collect her wits, we were past her, into the hallway, and into the board room.
I closed the door  behind me. There  was  a  meeting of the full Board  of Directors  of NEMECO  in
session.  I  didn't  know  most  of  them  personally,  but  I'd  studied  the  annual  reports,  where  their
photographs had ap-peared. I thought I could recognize most of them. I'd tried to do my homework.
The white-shocked  man in the dark  suit  at  the  head  of  the  table  had  to  be  J.  Willard  Mclntosh,
chairman of the board and former president of NEMECO.  The aristocratic  woman had  to  be  the last
member of the founding Cranmer family on the Board, the spinster Marion A. Cranmer. I could tie faces
with names for a couple more.  There  was  Lieutenant General  Maxwell J.  Hettinger,  USAF  (Retired),
because I'd seen him years before. Winthrop G. Dykmann of Dykmann and Roberts, members NYSE,
had a very expensive look. I knew who was Saul M.  Rothstein of Rothstein,  Roth-stein  & Feinmann,
attorneys at law, New York City. Obvious as well was Diogenes Konstantinos Generales, the head  of
Aegean Trading Corporation. I knew who these people were, but the others had used photos that had
been taken when they were younger.
Halden was at the opposite end of the table from Mclntosh, and Hay Newcomb was next to Halden.
Be-hind them both sat Bill Osbourne.
"Please excuse the intrusion, ladies and gentlemen." I interrupted the complete silence that greeted our
en-trance.  "I knew  that we'd  want to  talk together  sooner  or  later.  And,  since  we  just  thwarted  an
attempt to ei-ther kill us or kidnap us, Tammy and I felt we should get over here right away."
Grant Halden arose from his chair smoothly. "Welcome, Tammy. And you, too, Mike! I didn't expect
to  get  with  you  quite  this  soon  and  under  quite  these  cir-cumstances.  But  perhaps  it's  just  as  well
because the Board was discussing the situation you've put us into . . . and we therefore might as well talk
about it to-gether." Grant Halden looked fatigued, and I knew the strain he'd been under since Sunday
night because  I'd  created  that strain with great  care.  But, in spite  of it  all,  Grant  Halden  remained  a
gentleman.
Tammy and I were introduced to everyone around the table. They were polite—not always friendly,
but polite. This was not a group of people who interacted every day with the rank and file of the human
race; they operated on their own level far above everyone else, turning the crank  that  ran the world.  I
knew it. I could sense it. And I knew from Tammy's face that she knew power, too, when she  saw  it.
But now she seemed unafraid of it.

It was a big table, the same that the few of us had sat around during Sanatella's infamous marketing
presenta-tion. So there was room for Halden to have the two of us seated on one  side  of him without
requiring any di-rector to move an inch.
I knew they'd been here all day. There were plastic cups on the table. They'd had coffee and  sweet
rolls earlier at mid-morning; the coffee urn and the crumbs were still on the linen-covered table  on one
side of the room. They'd had lunch sent in because I got a glimpse of the contents of a wastebasket.
It was obvious why the other shoe hadn't dropped yesterday. One cannot get people like those on the
NE-MECO Board to drop what they're doing at the mo-ment and run up to Bridgeport for a meeting. In
fact, it was rather amazing that Halden had managed to con-vene them by Tuesday! That told me we'd
done a su-perb job of throwing a great deal of it into the fan.
"You mentioned something about an attempt to kill or kidnap the two of you," Halden said.  "Would
you explain what happened?"
I gave them the details and told them that it had hap-pened  before  with the same  goons  . . .  I
thought.
"They tried to get me then because of what I'd learned about the sky hook. They tried to get Tammy
and me now because  we  both  knew  a  great  deal  about  it.  One  of  them  is  the  chief  kingpin  of  an
extensive industrial espi-onage operation. The police will hold them temporarily,  and  I expect  a  phone
call shortly. We know how the NEMECO sky hook data got to Universal American AeroSpace.  The
agent is a loyal NEMECO employee who was threatened under unbelievable circumstances and will fully
cooperate  with you.  With  the  arrest  of  the  chief  of  this  operation  and  with  our  notebooks  and  lab
records, the Universal American AeroSpace theft of the sky  hook  data  will clear  the complete  patent
rights mat-ter  in NEMECO's  favor.  There's  one  condition: the agent  requests  full  pardon.  There  are
more than twenty NEMECO employees who will vouch for her . . ."
"Her?" Grant Halden asked.
I started to say something, but Tammy stood up. "Yes! Me! I'll give you all the details of what I did!
I'll tell you what they did to me! I'll tell you how they tried to kill my husband . . . and then me! I'll tell you
how they forced me to work against the only people who've ever cared for me at NEMECO Corporate
Re-search labs. I'll work with you to put these thieves in jail where  they belong.  I'll help you set  up a
counter-intelligence  system  that  can't  be  penetrated.  And  I'll  testify  against  Universal  American
AeroSpace  so  that any interference  action  they take  will collapse  in their faces.  In  the  meantime,  I'll
program computers and fly sky hook machines the way only one other person in this company can: my
husband, Mike Call, who had the guts to walk in here and face all of you to get the truth to you before it
was too late." There were tears in her eyes, but they were the fierce tears of emotion, of defi-ance, of a
complete woman I knew had been Tammy all the time. "I'll cooperate fully, but I want to keep work-ing
for you. However, I have learned from my current husband not to put up with being bullied . . ."
There was dead silence in the board room. Tammy sat down, proudly.  Grant  Halden looked  at  her
kindly and  said,  "Mrs.  Dudley-Call,  I accept  your  offer  with  its  conditions.  Since  it's  an  operational
matter,  we'll dis-cuss  it later.  No  need  to  involve  the  Board  members  un-less  they  wish  to  become
involved. And, thank you, Tammy!"
Newcomb spoke up. "Grant, perhaps we'd better ar-range for the personal security of Mr. and Mrs.
Call."
"Thank  you,  Hay,"  I  put  in  at  once,  "but  Tammy  and  I  are  perfectly  capable  of  taking  care  of
ourselves."  I  didn't  want  to  find  myself  suddenly  sequestered  by  NEMECO.  I  didn't  think  that  the
NEMECO  president  would  do  such  a  thing,  but  Tammy  and  I  were  in  the  lions'  den,  literally  and
figuratively, and I didn't know what some of these other people were capable of doing to us.
I only knew that we had to be very, very careful.

I was amazed at my wife and at Halden's reply, but we still had to complete Plan A. We had a couple
of  very  good  hole  cards.  I  didn't  think  they  knew  where  Two  To  Tango  was.  And  they  hadn't
summoned  us;  we  had  instead  bluffed  and  blustered  our  way  in,  literally  forcing  their  hand.  I  was
gambling that they hadn't  made  up their minds yet what to  do  about  us  or  with  us  because  of  their
protracted silence. The news media must be hounding them, to say nothing of the Wall Street analysts.
"Nevertheless," said John van der Hayden, the NE-MECO secretary, "we can't have thugs molesting
our employees, Grant. I'll have a chat with the Bridgeport Police about this."
"Please do, sir," I told him. "They're holding the es-pionage boss right now."
I could  see  Tammy blink at  this. It  would take  her some  time yet to  become  a  real  American—a
person who dislikes cops but who is damned glad they're there.
"Be that as it may," Willard Mclntosh broke in, "let's get on with the primary reason for our meeting."
The chairman of the board removed his glasses, wiped them with a white handkerchief he removed from
his breast  pocket,  and  looked  at  me as  he said,  "Mr. Call, according  to  the  records  of  the  Federal
Aviation Ad-ministration, you made an aircraft flight on Sunday."
"My wife and  I made  a  flight in our  plane from Waterbury-Oxford  Airport.  It  was  a  nice  Sunday
after-noon once we got above the clouds."
"Mr. Call," Mclntosh went on, "we have reason to suspect that you and your wife utilized proprietary
NEMECO information and equipment to propel your air-craft during that flight."
"No sir, we did not!"
"Damn  it!"  Emory  C.  Mather  exploded,  getting  to  his  feet.  He  was  president  of  Consolidated
Industries, Inc., a large conglomerate that included Great Western Aircraft, a highly respected aerospace
firm with a fine reputation stretching back several decades to the years before World War II. He pointed
a finger at me, ob-viously not used  to  taking any guff whatsoever  from em-ployees,  as  was  typical in
even  the  best  aerospace  firms.  "We've  been  told  that  you  and  several  unknown  accomplices  stole
experimental equipment from the NEMECO Corporate Research Center Laboratories and installed it in
your airplane without permission from your supervisors  and  without the knowledge  of the NEMECO
officers.  You  then  proceeded  to  operate  your  airplane  far  above  its  absolute  ceiling  using  that
equip-ment. We have incontrovertible proof of this! Van der Hayden, play the tapes . . . that part over
Albany!"
Somehow, they'd gotten a  copy  of the FAA  tape  re-cordings  of the air-to-ground  communications
during our  encounter  with  the  American  Airlines  727  over  Al-bany  at  36,000  feet.   "Grant,"  I
broke  in,  "that's  unquestionably the tape recording of our air-to-ground communications during our
flight. But, tell me: The FAA routinely records this sort of thing for their own use and for possible use by
the National Transportation Safety Board in case of an accident. How'd you get a copy?"
"Young man!" General Hettinger rumbled, "Don't you believe that some of us might have a few friends
around Washington?"
"Oh, undoubtedly,  General!  However,"  and  I  looked  at  Emory  Mather,  "you've  made  some  very
strong and possibly damaging statements against us, Mr. Mather. Can you prove your contentions?"
"No Cherokee can possibly fly that high! Bill Piper would have been delighted to know that it could!
You stole and used what Dr. Newcomb and Dr. Osbourne have described  to  us as  a  'sky  hook'  that
you helped develop at the NEMECO laboratories!"
I maintained a polite, mannered voice and appear-ance. "Do you have proof that we had NEMECO
pro-prietary equipment in my airplane?"
"Young man, you're being very immature!" It was Generales of Aegean Trading Corporation,  a  man
who was  at  the top  of the world  transportation  industry but  with  little  known  about  exactly  how  he

managed to  get there.  "We know  that you've  done  this, and  you've  placed  the corporation  in a  very
difficult position be-cause of your dramatic actions and youthful dreams without thought of the way the
real world has to work . . ."
"Mr. Generales, if the real world works the way it did about an hour ago when my wife and  I were
openly attacked in public by goons bent on violence, I'm proud to be immature enough to believe it can
and should be changed!"
"You're naive," Generales remarked, imperturbably. "Such an attempt as you described is only done
by small men . . ."
"Yes, Mr. Generales, but big men can hire small men to shoot dogs for them no matter where."
"I assure you that NEMECO doesn't use such meth-ods," the Greek transportation tycoon reminded
me. "I believe that both Willard and Grant are trying to deal with you as any of us here would deal with
one  another.  But  you're  showing  extremely  immature  judgment,  which  appears  to  be  your  prime
weakness."
"You must remember that I'm an idealist. General Hettinger will tell you I'm like my father, whom I'm
certain he remembers because I remember a  Captain  Hettinger visiting us a  long time ago." I looked
around the room. "You have many idealists working at NEMECO. Bill Osbourhe, Hay Newcomb, my
wife,  my-self,  and  a  group  of  people  you  know  only  as  NEMECO  Corporate  Research  Center
Laboratories are idealists doing what we were told to do and what we enjoyed doing. Our dreaming and
'immature'  judgment  gave  you  the  sky  hook  which  means  the  Solar  System  and  perhaps  the  stars
themselves. Somebody in your company decided that NEMECO shouldn't take what was being offered.
So  the  whole  project  was  simply  can-celed.  I  know  the  decision  was  not  made  by  this  Board.
NEMECO middle management people were the ones afraid to take the slightest risk. Through corporate
po-litical maneuverings, they forced your president to cancel it. The details are too tawdry to drag  into
the open now. Their middle management credo is: Play it safe,  it's  too  new,  it'll change things, it's  too
risky! Well, Tam-my and I were willing to take some pretty hairy risks not only with my airplane but with
our lives to show what the sky hook could do . . .  If that's immaturity, we probably need a whole hell of
a lot more of it!"
"Mike, where is the airplane?" Hay Newcomb sud-denly asked . . . and I knew I had them! "As I'm
cer-tain  you anticipated,  we  obtained  a  search  warrant  and  went looking for it yesterday  .  .  .  and  it
wasn't at Waterbury airport. Where is it, Mike?"
"Hay, it's my airplane. I own it outright. It's properly licensed, certificated, and inspected. I can store it
wher-ever I please, and I don't have to tell anybody where it is—not under these circumstances. It's my
airplane!"
"Yes, but it has  equipment belonging to  NEMECO  in it," Newcomb  said.  His voice was  level and
con-trolled.  He,  too,  had  been  under  a  lot  of  pressure,  but  NEMECO  couldn't  have  had  a  better
executive VP capable of standing up to pressure the way he did.
"It does not!" I interjected and turned to Bill Os-bourne. "Bill, you gave instructions to Len Marshall
and myself to cancel the laboratory's Dynamics Systems  project  under  which we  were  developing the
sky hook. Right?"
"That's right, Mike!"
"You told us to cease work on it and surplus all equipment, right?"
"Those were the orders I was given, and I relayed them to you."
"You also told us that NEMECO had no further in-terest in the sky hook because of two things. One:
Uni-versal American AeroSpace managed to steal the sky hook right out from under us and beat us to
the Patent  Office with applications,  thereby  putting NEMECO  into a  possible  interference  which you

told me NE-MECO was not prepared or anxious to contest. Two: You were  told  to  do  this with the
justification that an internal NEMECO  marketing report  said  that  there  was  absolutely no  market  for
any device that produced a unidirectional, reactionless force . . .  a classical sky hook, in other words."
Bill Osbourne looked around the room, brightening as he suddenly realized what game I was playing.
"That's precisely what I told you and precisely the rea-sons I was given for the action!"
I stood up. I don't stand very high, but I stood up anyway, "I did install a  sky  hook  in my personal
air-plane.  My  wife  and  I  flew  my  personal  airplane,  shut  the  engine  off  when  climbing  through
twenty-three  thousand  feet,  and  climbed  to  thirty-six  thousand  feet  under  a  legal  ATC  clearance,
propelled  only  by  the  sky  hook  device."  Then  I  said  very  slowly,  "Since  I  was  in-formed  by  my
superiors that NEMECO did not choose to fight for something that had been stolen from it and  which
they therefore had no further interest in, I didn't steal a thing!"
I looked at Saul Rothstein, one of the top corporate lawyers in America, a man who had come from
the death camp of Belsen without a  penny after  World  War  II,  one  who had  survived the Holocaust
because he was a survivor type, and a man who was where he was solely because of his brains.  "Mr.
Rothstein, can there be theft if there is nothing of value taken?"
I didn't  wait for the answer.  I knew  what it  was.  I  sat  down  and  added,  "If  NEMECO  is  really
interested in the sky hook after all, I'll be more than happy to re-move that equipment from my airplane
and return it to you. Maybe I can go back to work on it then, and maybe we can turn NEMECO into
the General Motors of the Solar System. But that's up to you here! I still work for you, and I'm a loyal
employee because, of all the companies and organizations I've ever worked for, NEMECO has treated
me like a human being instead of someone to be exploited and thrown away when his use-fulness came
to an end or when the money ran out. I've hidden the airplane and its equipment not from you, but from
other organizations who might like to find out exactly what's in it. If NEMECO  is not interested,  there
are academic organizations interested in scientific re-search into the basic nature of the Universe . . ."
Grant Halden sighed. "Mike, why did you put us un-der all this pressure by telling the FAA  to  have
the press contact me?"
"Grant, I  signed  an  agreement  when  I  came  to  work  for  NEMECO  that  says  that  I  can't  make
statements of any sort to the news media without the approval of the NEMECO chief executive officer.
That's you. You know what the FAA tapes contain. I was unprepared for any attention from our nation's
news media since they appear to be ignoring technology these days. Un-der the NEMECO agreement, I
had no recourse but to tell them to get in touch with you so that you could give me permission to talk to
them . . ."
"Why didn't you call me about it?"
"Sir, you're a busy man with a seventy-five-million-dollar company to run. I felt that  you'd  call me if
the  press  contacted  you.  If  I  was  wrong  about  that,  I  apolo-gize.  But  that's  the  way  I  read  the
agreement." I looked directly at Halden. "It was not my intention to cause you any problems and I don't
want to make trouble. If NEMECO still maintains its interest in the sky hook, I contend that Tammy and
I made our flight Sunday with the understanding that NEMECO was not interested. The worst  we  felt
we might have to confront was Universal American AeroSpace when and if their stolen patents issue to
them  .  .  .  and  neither  Tammy  nor  I  felt  that  You-Ass—pardon  me,  Universal  Ameri-can
AeroSpace—would be upset over the resultant pub-licity of two people doing something on their own
that had never before been done. At least, we felt there would be as much approval for what we did as
for the people of Double Eagle II and the Gossamer Albatross."
I sat back in the big leather-covered chair. Tammy was looking at the Board members, waiting, pride
shin-ing  on  her  face—a  most  unusual  expression  for  her.  I  looked  up  that  long  table  to  Chairman
Mclntosh. "There you have it—all of it, as  straight as  I can  tell it to  you.  I'm still your employee,  and
you're still my em-ployer. I don't intend to say one further word about this whole matter; Tammy and I

can manage, on our own, to drop well out of sight if you wish for a few days or a few months, as long as
necessary for this to blow over . . ."
"Do you think you can get away with this by a  simple apology?  You've  caused  us a  lot of trouble,
Call!" That was Humphrey A. Jackson of Ajax Steel Company. "We could make things very difficult for
you."
"Probably! But I don't believe that we did anything wrong. And I won't be bullied any longer! I'll fight
and I'll win because we're two ordinary people against a corporation. I don't mean to threaten you with
that statement . . . although you did threaten me!"
It was  Grant  Halden who put in hastily, "Now,  let's  not  waste  our  time  talking  about  threats  and
recrimina-tions, Hump! Let's get a solution to our problem, since Mike and Tammy are cooperative. It
appears  that  be-cause  of  a  number  of  rather  small  and  innocuous  deci-sions,  internal  political
maneuverings at middle manage-ment level, and poor data, we may have almost thrown away the most
important product development in the company's history. Mike has taken a great risk to bring this fact to
our attention in a highly dramatic fashion. I'm curious, though. Mike, why did you do it?"
"Grant, I'm an astronomer and a pilot. I'm also a dreamer. I want to see us go to the stars. It can be
done soon. NEMECO can do it and make a lot of money doing it. All of you in this room can make a
lot of money in the process.  As  a  matter  of fact,  each  of you  with  any  NEMECO  stock  is  at  least
twenty-five percent richer today because of what Tammy and I did Sunday.
"Or NEMECO can sit back and watch somebody get rich because of what they really stole from us:
the whole Solar System and everything that's in it! There  was  only one  way to  get these  facts  to  the
attention of the Board of Directors of this company, who could do something about it. And we did it."
I'd played my hand. I could only hope that I'd played it properly. I felt I knew these people, and I felt
that they were honest and human. A company  like NE-MECO-—and  there  are  thousands  of them in
Amer-ica—isn't the fat, greedy J. Pierpont Morgan caricature, interested only in money at the expense
of people.  Not  at  this level. Not  these  days!  Maybe  lower  down  in  NE-MECO  among  people  like
Sanatella and Destry, but not at the top . . .  not in a company more than a hundred years old that had
the  guts  to  try  to  do  something  differ-ent  with  a  bunch  of  crazy  inventors  called  the  NE-MECO
Corporate Research Center Laboratories.
And I was right.
"Mr. Call." It was the quiet and cultured voice of Marion A. Cranmer. "Your enthusiasm encourages
me. I'm glad to know that there are still people like you and Tammy who are willing to work and  take
risks for a dream. My forefathers had a dream, too, you know; they worked hard and they took risks,
and we're sitting here today because of that legacy. Perhaps we on the Board have been far too insistent
upon immediate re-turns and a bigger dividend, most of which ends up as taxes in Washington anyway.
Perhaps it's time we looked as far as you are  presently  seeing .  .  ." She  shifted in her chair and
turned to the chairman. "Willard, there's  been  too  much incrimination and  suspicion here  today  to  suit
me. That doesn't make a business grow. I'd like us to spend a little time this afternoon looking into the
circumstances that forced good men like Grant  Halden and  Dr.  Newcomb  to  make  the deci-sion  to
abandon this sky hook thing . . .  a device which sounds impossible to me, except for the fact that
Tammy and Mike apparently made it work very well indeed. I'd like to see this report that says there's
no market for such a device. Why, I could think of a dozen myself! And I'd like to meet the people who
talked Grant and Hay into this course of action. Then, per-haps tomorrow after a good night's rest—we
have a great deal of work to do, it seems to me—we should let Dr. Newcomb, Dr. Osbourne, Tammy
Dudley-Call, and Mike Call tell us what we might do to keep NEMECO in business twenty-five years
from now .  .  ." J.  Willard Mclntosh adjusted  the glasses  on the bridge  of his thin nose.  "You  know,
Marion, you've always had that admirable trait of being able  to  get right to  the important heart  of the
matter. Mr. and Mrs. Call, I invite you to stay as our guests. I think you along with Dr. Osbourne may

be able to advise us on a few mat-ters. Now, my fellow directors, I've been with the New England Mill
Equipment Company  since 1935,  and  I've  seen  many things happen  here  and  in other  companies.  It
sounds to me as if we have a classic case of covert internal corporate politics epidemic in this company
at the moment . . . and  we  weren't  aware  of it—and  no fault of Grant's  in this regard,  by the way.  I
suggest that we follow up on Marion's suggestion and authorize Grant to cut this cancerous growth out
as quickly as possible. Ambition to achieve, excel, and succeed is an admirable  and  desirable  thing to
have  in  middle  man-agement,  but  it  can  get  completely  out  of  control  unless  we,  as  the  Board  of
Directors  responsible  for  policies,  take  action  to  bring  it  under  control  as  it's  always  been  in  this
company. I've also found that the only way to get an accurate picture of what's  going on is to  ask  the
peo-ple  down  in  the  working  levels  of  the  company  who  are  most  affected  by  such  political
maneuverings. Mr. Call, would you tell us what you believe led to the decision to cancel the sky hook?"

Chapter Twenty
Neither  Tammy  nor  I  was  really  prepared  for  the  press  conference  in  the  main  ballroom  of  the
Waldorf the following Friday night.
Two To Tango sat in the middle of the stage where Guy Lombardo used to make "the sweetest music
this side of Heaven" on New Year's Eve because  it had  flown closer  to  this side  of Heaven  than any
other Cher-okee in the world. My blue-and-white plane was  illumi-nated by brilliant spotlights, and  in
that environment, it didn't look very big at all. Its wing spanned only 30 feet. As I looked at my airplane
there, I wondered to myself if I'd really flown it across America and taken it up to 36,000 feet as well.
It's such a simple little ma-chine to have permitted me to do that!
It came apart with nuts and bolts, and it had been easy to move it down from Meriden and reassemble
it inside the ballroom. Brinks' guards were posted around it. Photographers and reporters were allowed
to look and photograph anything they pleased, but no one laid a finger on that ship! Not only was this at
the insistence of NEMECO, but I didn't want my airplane torn apart by souvenir hunters.
The whole NEMECO Corporate Research Center Laboratory staff was there (including Mac Roston
be-cause  Tammy Dudley-Call,  NEMECO's  counter-intelli-gence  chief, said  he was  a  good  machinist
and harmless to have around because he didn't know that he'd blown his cover).
The NEMECO  Board  of Directors  and  the  complete  roster  of  NEMECO  executive  officers  and
division managers were on hand.
Phil Sanatella was not present. To this day, I don't know where he went.
Naturally, Dr. Theodore Mayan was there, relishing every moment. Professor Serge Korsinski had in
tow the officers of the New York Academy of Sciences. The presence of highly respected scientists did
a great deal to prevent people from snorting, "Impossible!" Even without them that would've been very
difficult,  how-ever,  because  NEMECO's  public  relations  firm  had  lo-cated  the  crew  of  American
Airlines Flight Six Nineteen, who were there as NEMECO's  guests  in addition to  the controllers  from
New York and Boston air traffic con-trol centers who'd worked our flight that Sunday after-noon. Of all
the people present, the airline crew and the controllers were the most interested in the little, inex-pensive,
low-powered general aviation sparrow that had flown up there with the professional jet-powered eagles.
(I got some guff out of the FAA, who claimed that Wimpy and I had exceeded our authority in certifying
the airworthiness of Two To Tango with the sky hook installed; but they had  two  things going against
them: we were heroes, and Hettinger had friends in high places.)
It helps to be a hero.
For the sky hook, it was just the sort of glaring pub-lic exposure that was necessary.
Bill Osbourne was right: you can do anything and get away with it if you're able to move faster  than
the sys-tem  can  react.  That's  the philosophy I'd  used  in Plan A.  And the principle was  also  used  by
NEMECO  in Wash-ington.  At  first,  the  bureaucrats  believed  our  flight  was  a  hoax  because  it  was
"impossible." Then, they decided  to  send  a  scientific  review  board  to  look  into  the  matter  in  a  few
weeks. Friday afternoon before the NEMECO press conference to which General Hettinger invited the
Secretary  of  Defense  while  Diogenes  Generates  invited  the  Secretary  of  Commerce,  somebody
panicked and tried to ram a secrecy order through. But the secretaries had gone home by the time they
got everything coordi-nated, and there was no one to type it up! It took them four days to "staff it," and
by then it was too late.

NEMECO put out far too much information far too quickly for the government to put a lid on it. The
gen-eral details, the basic principle of operation, and the photographs  were  in the papers  on Saturday
with big Sunday spreads that followed.
But, as Len Marshall once observed, just because you know what it looks like doesn't mean you can
du-plicate it and make it work. There were a couple of things we didn't reveal or talk about and things
that I don't ever  discuss  because  they're  keys  to  highly pro-prietary  NEMECO  products.  Some  later
aspects of our work are government secrets, and they have to be . . .  like how to put a gravitational lid
over a city, and a couple or twenty or so other goodies that make science-fiction rnovies and TV shows
look old-fashioned to those of us who know. Like any technology, the sky hook bred both peaceful and
military applications. Un-til we manage to expand further into space, it looks like we will have to put up
with such dichotomies because Earth continues to produce "men on horseback" who would rather take it
than make  it. My esteemed  col-league  Victor  Aboud  gave  it  to  us  straight  that  day  in  the  lab,  and
unfortunately that's the way a lot of the world  thinks and  operates.  We've  got  to do  something about
that! In the meantime, we're prepared to fend off the bullies.
It was a very good party . . .  and Tammy and I were at  the center  of it. Or,  I should say,  Tammy
was, because when she gets gussied-up for an occasion such as that, she's a real knockout. I don't mind
taking a back seat to a gorgeous wife. After all, even though we could do many things in common, she
was also busy at the moment doing something she alone could do ...  and it didn't show, being only two
months along.
Tammy had been prepared to go to the figurative gallows when we sat down after the Board meeting
to talk with Grant Halden. We were both surprised when the entire Board wanted to hear the full story
and sat in along with Bill Osbourne. Tammy told her story, and she did it proudly with head  held high,
unafraid and undaunted. Everyone listened, often stupefied. When it was over, there was only one thing
that Grant Halden could do: set a spy to catch spies. Besides,  no company  president  in his right mind
could or would fire, repri-mand, or discipline someone like Tammy Dudley-Call, who not only had  the
whole Corporate Research  staff behind her but who was  about  to  become  the darling of the world's
press as well. (Things were worked out with the immigration authorities, quietly and privately be-cause
of Tammy's family. It pays to be a heroine, too. And to have Friends In High Places.)
I was handed two surprises at the Waldorf press con-ference. I didn't have time to check over all the
press releases and backgrounders and stuff that the NE-MECO PR firm had put out about me.
The first surprise  came  when Dr.  Theodore  Mayan  stepped  up to  me before  the press  conference
began and handed me an envelope on which was written: "To Dr. Michael Cochran Call." The letter was
very short. The Board  of Regents  said  it was  honored  to  inform me of their award  of a  degree  as  a
Doctor of Philosophy in Physics.
Looking at it, I said to a broadly grinning Ted Mayan, "I feel like the little dog chasing the big diesel
switch engine down at the railroad yards."
"How's that?" Mayan wanted to know.
"Once he catches that switch engine, what's he go-ing to do with it? Now that I'm Doctor Call, what
am I going to do that's different? Seriously, thanks, Ted!"
"Oh, you'll use it!" Mayan replied, unoffended be-cause he was the sort of person who could not be
of-fended anyway. "When you get through flying things all over hell and gone with sky hooks,  you can
always get a job . . ."
"In an astronomical observatory . . . I know!"
The second surprise came during the formal news briefing. Grant  Halden introduced  me as  the new
"Chief  of  the  Aviation  Division  of  NEMECO  with  an  additional  special  assignment  as  head  of
experimental flight operations  for the sky  hook."  I  hadn't  read  the  NEMECO  press  releases,  and  it

served me right for not doing my homework!
I managed to get through my portion of the presenta-tion and all the news media questions, including
the stu-pid ones from reporters who could probably never solve a simple equation much less understand
what keeps the Moon from falling. And I did it without losing either my temper or my composure.
But I did approach Grant Halden and Bill Osbourne privately after  the party  started  to  wind down.
Bill knew what my question was going to be. "I'm glad I hired you, Mike. But you're  a  lousy research
employee be-cause you think you know more than the Director of Research I'm going to be much more
comfortable working with you as a division head."
"I don't really know which of us is going to be more comfortable!" I kidded him back. Then I turned
to the NEMECO president. "Grant, thank you, but what hap-pened to Jake Stock?"
"Oh, 1 suspect you didn't hear about it in all the fuss. Jake, our crusty old pelican, failed to  pass  his
First Class physical . . ."
"That's too damned bad! ..." "No, be can still fly, but not as  our  Chief Corporate  Pilot. He's  got a
Third Class medical certificate, so he isn't out of the air. He's going out to Airborne Controls Division in
Tempe for about  six months, then he'll take  over  that  division when we  move Vern  Bates  up  to  the
Trumbull operation."
"Well, is Bob Destry moving up to corporate level, then?" I wanted to know.
Grant Halden's face was totally emotionless. "Mr. Destry is no longer with us."
I blinked and changed the subject. "I'll have to re-staff and reorganize the Aviation Division, then. I'd
like to have two special people as my assistants, Grant. Wimpy Winfield's the best pilot I've ever known,
and he's being wasted as a mechanic. Wendell Stone won't fly—yet—-but he's one hell of an engineer . .
. and I'll need them both!"
"Mike, it's your show," Grant reminded me. "Run it your way "
Bill Osbourne and I found ourselves alone in a corner shortly thereafter. The research director pulled
at his bushy moustache and quietly remarked, "Mike, I don't think anybody but Len and I recognized the
superbatteries in Two To Tango . . ." And nothing more was ever said.
The relativists claim that it'll take years to get to the stars. They're right. But we'll probably make the
trip in a few weeks when we go. No technology can come to fruition overnight. The breakthrough—such
as  the  orig-inal  sky  hook  hanging  there  as  a  ballistic  pendulum  to-tally  displacing  itself  from  the
vertical—is only the be-ginning. It takes years of hard work  to  get from that  point to  having a  mature
technology working for you the way you want. Once the romantic research and de-velopment  work  is
done,  the elegant experiments are  car-ried  out,  and  the  exciting  trials  are  complete,  it's  a  matter  of
grinding numbers and fiddling for months or years to get the preproduction units to work the way they're
supposed to. Then production problems arise, followed by problems in the field. Wendell Stone  had  a
better  idea  of what was  to  come  than all of us dreamers  at  NEMECO  Corporate  Research  Center
Laboratories. As Vic said one day in complete exasperation, "If I had to do it all over again, I'd do it all
over somebody else!" There are set-backs, things that don't work out the way you'd hoped or theorized
or checked out in the lab. There are slow-downs because the company has to make a buck on prosaic,
everyday products to pay for the far-out stuff. And there are still those who try to grasp and connive and
steal. But Bill Osbourne,  Vic Aboud,  Len Marshall,  Wendell Stone,  Tammy Dudley-Call,  and  myself
didn't worry about them because we knew how to handle them.
Osboume was fond of quoting from Kipling's The Mary Gloster:
"They copied all they could follow, but they
couldn't copy my mind.

So I left 'em sweatin' and schemin', a year and
a half behind ..."
We're going to the stars.
It's inevitable now.
We don't know yet whether the sky hook's progeny will be able to propel anything faster  than light.
All of Vic's field equations say  "maybe," but Ted  Mayan  says  Vic missed the equivalent of a  decimal
point, a "small error" that Mayan claims will raise  the ultimate velocity of a  gravitation charge  to  more
than 30,000 times the speed of light. Korsinski argues with him, but Serge interested in what goes on at
the other end of the universal scale where he's working on a theory of the quantization of time that has its
roots in our  work.  Between  Mayan  with his grand  view of cosmology and  Korsinski  delving into the
basics  of matter  itself—two  doors  that  were  opened  by  Bill  and  Vic—we'll  get  the  answer
someday. And "someday" isn't an indeterminate time in the far future; I'm betting on no more than ten to
fifteen years before one of Mayan's or Korsinski's graduate students makes that trip to Stockholm. Any
of us would be proud and honored to be a laureate, but we don't have time for all the scientific papers
and meet-ings  that  lead  up  to  a  nomination;  we're  far  too  busy  putting the sky  hook  and  its
various modifications to work. We know how bread is made, and if we're going to go where we want to
go, NEMECO has to make lots of bread. It will. The stock just split for the fifth time, and it was up to
215 before the split. There are a lot of ways to make money. As Dr. William D.  Osbourne  once
said, "Do not bind the mouths of the kine who tread the grain!"
With luck and gerontology, I might make it to the stars.  But Wendell Victor  Call has  a  much
better chance. And, because his son will probably be born in space, my grandson will be a natural-born
starman who never knows planetary gravity except during brief visits.
But I've come further than I thought I would.  We  all have.  I went through what might be  termed  a
change-over point and Tammy did too.
It was a change-point for Dr. William D. Osbourne, as well. When I first met him, I felt I was seeing
only the tip of the iceberg that was Osbourne. We were much alike, fellow dreamers and schemers for
the future. I'd been running without considering why I should have fought for that job  in Flagstaff. And
Osbourne had been running from the Sidewinder that went up his F-4's tail pipe and the people who had
chased him out of his mili-tary profession.  The difference came  when I learned  at  NEMECO  to  stop
running and  fight for what I knew  could  be  done.  Bill eventually  became  a  very  good  pro-fessor  of
physics in the academic  environment of NYU  where,  because  of  NEMECO's  success  with  the  sky
hook,  he  finally  stopped  running,  stood  firm,  fought  for  what  he  had  done,  and  years  later  got  the
Stockholm trip he certainly deserved.
Because of his weakness, he made me overcome mine. He was a much better teacher than a leader . .
. and taught me a great deal.
Len  Marshall  changed,  too.  He  became  a  leader  when  the  vacuum  was  created  by  Bill's
demoralization. It sucked him right into the position where he was the obvious Director of Research long
before Bill left for his professor's chair.
As for Vic, he just kept right on having fun.
And this old ag pilot never thought he'd routinely cruise above a million feet with something resembling
a cluster of glowing fluorescent lights in the rear cabin. Star Driver I carries N1422T on her tail because
the Cherokee  now rests  in retirement at  Silver Hill, Mary-land,  in storage  with  the  National  Air  and
Space Mu-seum.
At a million feet, which is good orbital altitude, there's beauty in the sunset over the Earth's  rim, and

there's  beauty  in the not-so-distant  stars  that  shine both  through  the  windshield  and  the  optically  flat
ceiling panes where Brad Johnson occasionally makes mea-surements because we can now get up there
quickly and cheaply. That's the outward-looking beauty.
Tammy says I've changed greatly. She may be right. She usually is. She says I once thought of nothing
but  astronomy  and  airplanes  but  have  since  discovered  something  else.  I  know  that  Tammy  looks
outward into the universe as we both see it from Star Driver I, but she and I together have learned to
see inward into our-selves as well. If I have changed, so has she, but always for the better.
I'll probably never be able to combine my talents as a star gazer with those  of an airplane driver to
become a star driver. But, since I got things started, perhaps it isn't as vitally important for me to do it as
it once seemed when nobody believed we would ever do it!
Tammy, my inward love who shares my outward loves, understands this. If there's a chance we aren't
going to be around long enough to go to the stars in a future Two To Tango, we came to the conclusion
that there was only one thing that the two of us could do about it:
We could make star drivers.
It's more fun, anyway.

About the Author
This  is  Lee  Correy's  fourth  science-fiction  novel,  but  the  first  he's  written  in  over
twenty years. Better known under his real name, G. Harry Stine, he's a rocket pioneer, a
futurist,  an  expert  in  space  indus-trialization  and  high-technology  marketing,  and  the
author of or contributor to more than twenty books on science and technology. He uses
his pen-name "Lee Correy" for fiction to separate it from his nonfiction.
He's been the director of an industrial research laboratory and marketing manager for
a small in-dustrial company. He is an instrument-rated private pilot with over a thousand
hours,  owns  his  own  Chero-kee  (N95439),  and  is  an  aerospace  historian  and  a
consultant to the National Air and Space Museum.
He lives in Phoenix, Arizona, with his  wife,  a  cat  with  twenty-four  toes,  and  three
Golden Retrievers.

A Del Rey Book
Published by Ballantine Books
Copyright © 1980 by Lee Correy
All  rights  reserved  under  International  and  Pan-American  Copy-right  Conventions.  Published  in  the
United States by Ballantine Books, a division of Random House, Inc., New York, and simultaneously in
Canada by Random House of Canada, limited, Toronto, Canada.
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 80-80236
ISBN: 0-345-28994-3
Manufactured in the United States of America
First Edition: July 1980
Cover art by Atila Hega
ebook scanned & proofed by MOS1

